TITLE: Collecting and Interpreting Qualitative Materials
YEAR: 2012
TOPIC: politics
OPENALEX_ID: https://openalex.org/W1582770597

Preface - Norman K. Denzin and Yvonna S. Lincoln About the Editors About the Contributors 1. Introduction: The Discipline and Practice of Qualitative Research - Norman K.Denzin and Yvonna S. Lincoln I. Methods of Collecting and Analyzing Empirical Materials 2. Narrative Inquiry: Still a Field in the Making - Susan E. Chase 3. Critical Arts-based Inquiry: The Pedagogy and Performance of a Radical Ethical Aesthetic - Susan Finley 4. Oral History - Linda Shopes 5. Observations on Observation: Continuities and Challenges - Michael Angrosino and Judith Rosenberg 6. Visual Methodology: Toward a More Seeing Research - Jon D. Prosser 7. Performative Autoethnography: Critical Embodiments and Possibilities - Tami Spry 8. The Methods, Politics, and Ethics of Representation in Online Ethnography - Sarah Gaston 9. Analyzing Talk and Text - Anssi Parakyla and Johanna Ruusuvuori 10. Focus Groups: Contingent Articulations of Pedagogy, Politics, and Inquiry - George Kamberelis and Greg Dimitriadis II. The Art and Practices of Interpretation, Evaluation, and Presentation 11. Qualitative Research, Science, and Government: Evidence, Criteria, Policy, and Politics - Harry Torrance 12. Reflections on Interpretive Adequacy in Qualitative Research - David L. Altheide and John M. Johnson 13. Analysis and Representation Across the Continuum - Laura L. Ellingson 14. Post Qualitative Research: The Critique and the Coming After - Elisabeth Adams St. Pierre 15. Qualitative Research and Technology: In the Midst of a Revolution - Judith Davidson and Silvana diGregorio 16. The Elephant in the Living Room, or Extending the Conversation About the Politics of Evidence - Norman K. Denzin 17. Writing into Position: Strategies for Composition and Evaluation - Ronald J. Pelias 18. Evaluation as a Relationally Responsible Practice - Tineke Abma and Guy A.M. Widdershoven, Norman K. Denzin and Yvonna S. Lincoln Author Index Subject Index