TITLE: Social psychology: handbook of basic principles
YEAR: 2008
TOPIC: politics
OPENALEX_ID: https://openalex.org/W1603542031

Part I: Biological System. Caporael, Evolutionary Theory for Social and Cultural Psychology. Blascovich, Seery, Visceral and Somatic Indexes of Social Psychological Constructs: History, Principles, Propositions, and Case Studies. Ochsner, Social Cognitive Neuroscience: Historical Development, Core Principles, and Future Promise. Part II: Cognitive System. Dunning, Prediction: The Inside View. Roese, Sherman, Expectancy. Kruglanski, Sleeth-Keppler, The Principles of Social Judgment. Andersen, Moscowitz, Blair, Nosek, Automatic Thought. Fiedler, Information Ecology and the Explanation of Social Cognition and Behavior. Forster, Liberman, Knowledge Activation. Hilton, Causal Explanation: From Social Perception to Knowledge-Based Causal Attribution. Petty, Brinol, Tormala, Wegener, The Role of Metacognition in Social Judgment. Wyer, Jr. Principles of Mental Representation. Biernat, Eidelman, Standards. Shafir, Decisions Constructed Locally: Some Fundamental Principles of the Psychology of Decision Making. Liberman, Trope, Stephan, Psychological Distance. Part III: Personal Motivational System. Schwarz, Clore, Feelings and Phenomenal Experiences. Strack, Deutsch, The Role of Impulse in Social Behavior. Oyserman, Social Identity and Self-Regulation. Higgins, Value. Pittman, Zeigler, Basic Human Needs. Fishbach, Ferguson, The Goal Construct in Social Psychology. Baumeister, Schmeichel, Vohs, Self-Regulation and the Executive Function: The Self as Controlling Agent. Van Lange, De Cremer, Van Dijk, Van Vugt, Self-Interest and Beyond: Basic Principles of Social Interaction. Part IV: Interpersonal System. Maio, Haddock, Attitude Change. Simpson, Foundations of Interpersonal Trust. DeDreu, Beersma, Steinel, Van Kleef, The Psychology of Negotiation: Principles and Basic Processes. Semin, Grounding Communication: Synchrony. Shaver, Mikulincer, Attachment Theory and Research: Core Concepts, Basic Principles, Conceptual Bridges. Fiske, Berdahl, Social Power. Part V: Group and Cultural System. Brewer, The Social Psychology of Intergroup Relations: Social Categorization, Ingroup Bias, and Outgroup Prejudice. Hogg, Social Psychology of Leadership. Vallacher, Nowak, Dynamical Social Psychology: Finding Order in the Flow of Human Experience. Levine, Kerr, Inclusion and Exclusion: Implications for Group Processes. Chiu, Hong, Cultural Processes: Basic Principles. Part VI: Applications of Social Psychology. Tyler, Jost, Psychology and the Law: Reconciling Normative and Descriptive Accounts of Social Justice and System Legitimacy. Rothman, Salovey, The Reciprocal Relation between Principles and Practice: Social Psychology and Health Behavior. Strauman, Costanzo, Jones, McLean, Merrill, Contributions of Social Psychology to Clinical Psychology: Three Views of a Research Frontier. Johnson, Pham, Johar, Consumer Behavior and Marketing. Tetlock, Psychology and Politics: The Challenges of Integrating Levels of Analysis in Social Science. Thompson, Pozner, Organizational Behavior. Snyder, Omoto, Social Action.