TITLE: Super-diversity and its implications
YEAR: 2007
TOPIC: politics
OPENALEX_ID: https://openalex.org/W2005637604

Abstract Abstract Diversity in Britain is not what it used to be. Some thirty years of government policies, social service practices and public perceptions have been framed by a particular understanding of immigration and multicultural diversity. That is, Britain's immigrant and ethnic minority population has conventionally been characterized by large, well-organized African-Caribbean and South Asian communities of citizens originally from Commonwealth countries or formerly colonial territories. Policy frameworks and public understanding – and, indeed, many areas of social science – have not caught up with recently emergent demographic and social patterns. Britain can now be characterized by ‘super-diversity,’ a notion intended to underline a level and kind of complexity surpassing anything the country has previously experienced. Such a condition is distinguished by a dynamic interplay of variables among an increased number of new, small and scattered, multiple-origin, transnationally connected, socio-economically differentiated and legally stratified immigrants who have arrived over the last decade. Outlined here, new patterns of super-diversity pose significant challenges for both policy and research. Keywords: DiversitymulticulturalismimmigrationUnited KingdomLondon Acknowledgements I am grateful to numerous colleagues for their generous and critical feedback surrounding the ideas and material in this article (although of course any remaining flaws are mine alone). These particularly include Robin Cohen, Alisdair Rogers, Susanne Wessendorf, Andreas Wimmer, Gerd Baumann, Danny Sriskandarajah, Sarah Kyambi, Dan Hiebert, David Ley and the staff and students of the ESRC Centre on Migration, Policy and Society (COMPAS) at the University of Oxford – where I also appreciate Alessio Cangiano's help with data. A joint fellowship from the Economic and Social Research Council (UK) and Social Science Research Council (USA) also importantly supported this work. Finally, for a range of helpful responses, I wish to thank participants in seminars at Harvard University and the University of British Columbia, and at conferences of the Swedish Anthropological Association and European Association of Social Anthropologists. Additional informationNotes on contributorsSteven VertovecSteven Vertovec is Professor of Transnational Anthropology at the University of Oxford and Director of the ESRC Centre on Migration, Policy and Society (COMPAS)