TITLE: World Commission on environment and development
YEAR: 1985
TOPIC: politics
OPENALEX_ID: https://openalex.org/W2015442086

The definition of sustainability has always been discussed by experts. In 1972, definitions stressed restrictions on ecological systems, carrying out functions such as absorption and recycling of waste of anthropogenic activities, with the concomitant problems of improving social, educational, health, and employment. In 1987, sustainable development was defined as “development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs.” In 2019, it was defined as satisfying the needs of current and future generations, depending on appropriate circumstances of human, natural, and economic capital to provide for human welfare.The concept of sustainable development has become a widely recognized goal for human society in the 21st century. The idea of sustainable development came to light in 1987 with the publication of “Our Common Future,” which firmly established sustainable development as a critical component of international development. Because inequalities that had been anomalies were increasing within and among nations, increasing poverty, especially in developing countries, depleting the ozone layer and causing global warming, depleting natural resources and endangering some species of animals and plants, and causing water and air pollution, and so forth, sustainable development came about as an effort to change the way of thinking about the planet. Behind this lies the reason for why the concept of development is now preferred instead of growth. Growth is believed to reflect only a quantitative aspect of countries without considering other qualitative items such as education, health, and equality. The argument is that growth is a quantitative increase in physical scale whereas development is qualitative improvement or the unfolding of potentialities. This research analyzes why and how the concept of sustainable development has emerged, how it should be conceptualized, and what should be done to achieve it.In addition, the idea of sustainable development was first thought to be a strategy to against ecological disaster resulting from the extreme commercial exploitation of sources and the deterioration of the environment. The main awareness was to maintain an exceptional environment. Today the idea has been extended. It is has first-rate economic and social complexity. The evaluation of financial techniques in many countries has proven that fast financial growth precipitated critical issues from the viewpoint of sustainable development consisting of social, economic and environmental sustainability.