TITLE: Critical Discourse Analysis: The Critical Study of Language
YEAR: 1995
TOPIC: sociology
OPENALEX_ID: https://openalex.org/W2063460205

General Introduction: Section A Language, ideology and power Introduction 1. Critical and descriptive goals in discourse analysis 2. Language and ideology 3. Semiosis, mediation and ideology: a dialectical view Section B Discourse and social change Introduction 4. Critical discourse analysis and the marketization of public discourse: the universities 5. Discourse, change and hegemony 6. Ideology and identity change in political television Section C Dialectics of discourse: theoretical developments Introduction 7. Discourse, social theory and social research: the discourse of welfare reform 8. (with R Jessop, A Sayer) Critical realism and semiosis Section D Methodology 9. A dialectical-relational approach to critical discourse analysis in social research 10. (with Eve Chiapello) Understanding the new management ideology. A transdisciplinary contribution from Critical Discourse Analysis and New Sociology of Capitalism 11. Critical Discourse Analysis in researching language in the New Capitalism: overdetermination, transdisciplinarity and textual analysis 12. (with Phil Graham) Marx as a Critical Discourse Analyst: The genesis of a critical method and its relevance to the critique of global capital 13. Critical discourse analysis, organizational discourse, and organizational change Section E Political discourse Introduction 14. New Labour: a language perspective 15. Democracy and the public sphere in critical research on discourse 16. (with Simon Pardoe & Bronislaw Szerszynski) Critical discourse analysis and citizenship 17. Political correctness Section F Globalization and 'transition' Introduction 18. Language and Globalization 19. Global capitalism, terrorism and war: a discourse-analytical perspective 20. Discourse and 'transition' in Central and Eastern Europe Section G Language and education Introduction 21. Critical language awareness and self-identity in education 22. Global capitalism and critical awareness of language References Index