TITLE: Encyclopedia of Materials: Science and Technology
YEAR: 2001
TOPIC: sports
OPENALEX_ID: https://openalex.org/W170728373

Subject areas: Functional Phenomena. Electrical and thermal transport in normal solids. Physics and application of superconductors. Lattice properties and thermodynamics. Metal-gas reactions and electrochemistry. Magnetism and electronic properties and bulk solids. Hard and soft magnetic materials, manufacturing and applications. Magneto-optical and optical recording. Magnetic recording magnetic fluids. Physical properties of thin films and artificial multilayers. Optical and dielectric phenomena. Fundamental Core Theory. Fundamentals of materials science. Amorphous materials. Nuclear materials and irradiation effects. Biomedical and dental materials. Natural products and biomimetics. Carbon. Wood and paper. Characterization of materials. Surfaces: structure and properties. Miscellaneous. Structural Materials. Metal extraction, melting and refining. Metal processing. Structure, transformations and properties, light metals. Structure, transformations and properties, ferrous metals. Ceramic processing. Structure, transformations, properties in ceramics. Composites: MMC, CMC, PMC. Applications: aerospace automotive, sports, other. Applications: building. Modeling: atomic, microscale, large scale. Materials selection, life cycle costs, environmental tradeoffs, etc. Corrosion. Structural Phenomena. Elasticity-residual stress. Brittle fracture. Plastic deformation in static loading. Microscopic models of plasticity. Deformation and damage under cyclic load. Creep, strength and fatigue at elevated temperature. Mechanical properties of surfaces and in micro-dimensions. Deformation-related processing. Mechanical testing and nondestructive inspection. Polymers and Materials Chemistry. Crystalline polymers. Glassy amorphous and liquid crystalline polymers. Conducting and semiconducting polymers and organics. Elastomers, networks and gels. Block copolymers. Industrial polymerization chemistry. New synthesis methods for speciality polymers. Polymer processing. Inorganic materials chemistry. Organic/inorganic hybrid materials. Self-assembling materials chemistry. Liquid crystals. Functional Materials. Physics and chemistry of semiconductors. Semiconducting devices. Defects in semiconductors. Evaluation of semiconductors. Crystal growth. Epitaxial growth. Semiconductor processing and IC fabrication. Nonlinear optical materials. Electroceramics. Packaging.