

----- Page 1 (native) -----
THE BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (1978), 49 515-526
Printed in the United States of America
Oawlel Premack
Department of Psychology,
University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, Penna. 19104
Guy Wooclryff
University of Pennsylvania Primate Facility,
Honey Brook, Penna. 19344
Abstract: An individual has a theory of mind if he imputes mental states to himself and others. A system of inferences of this kind is
properly viewed as a theory because such states are not directly observable, and the system can be used to make predictions about the
behavior of others. As to the mental states the chimpanzee may infer, consider those inferred by our own species, for example, purpose
or intention, as well as knowledge, belief, thinking, doubt, guessing, pretending, liking, and so forth. To determine whether or not the
chimpanzee infers states of this kind, we showed an adult chimpanzee a series of videotaped scenes of a human actor struggling with a
variety of problems. Some problems were simple, involving inaccessible food - bananas vertically or horizontally out of reach, behind
a box, and so forth - as in the original Kohler problems; others were more complex, involving an actor unable to extricate himself from a
locked cage, shivering because of a malfunctioning heater, or unable to play a phonograph because it was unplugged. With each
videotape the chimpanzee was given several photographs, one a solution to the problem, such as a stick for the inaccessible bananas, a
key for the locked up actor, a lit wick for the malfunctioning heater. The chimpanzee's consistent choice of the correct photographs can
be understood by assuming that the animal recognized the videotape as representing a problem, understood the actor's purpose, and
chose alternatives compatible with that purpose.
Keywords: chimpanzee communication; cognition; consciousness; intentionality; language; mind; primate intelligence.
Fifty years ago Kohler (1925) carried out his now widely known
studies demonstrating problem solving and simple tool use in
the chimpanzee. He confronted his chimpanzees with food that
was inaccessible in a variety of ways - out of reach overhead,
outside the cage mesh, locked in a box, and so forth - and found
that in nearly all cases the animals would use existing cage ma-
terials to obtain the food. In other studies, Kohler set fruit-laden
baskets into motion and then observed the animals leap to a
ledge on the wall and arrive just in time to be met by the basket,
suggesting that they could extrapolate future positions of the
basket from current ones. Indeed, the animal may reveal his
comprehension of physical relations even as he casually diverts
himself. When the chimpanzee Elizabeth (Premack, 1976) sat in
the hall waiting for her "language" lesson, she often recovered a
ball that rolled away from her, not by reaching for it directly, but
by pulling in the blanket on which it had come to rest. She
pulled with the "right" force: the ball did not roll off the blanket
but came steadily toward her. The chimpanzee's evident
comprehension of physical relations makes it of interest to de-
termine at what level these relations are available to the animal
and whether there is a sense in which he can be regarded as a lay
physicist. But questions of this kind are only indirectly relevant
to our present concerns. We are less interested in the ape as a
physicist than as a psychologist (every layman, of course, is
both); we are interested in what he knows about the physical
world only insofar as this affects what he knows about what
someone else knows.
In this paper we speculate about the possibility that the chim-
panzee may have a "theory of mind," one not markedly different
from our own. In saying that an individual has a theory of mind,
we mean that the individual imputes mental states to himself and
to others (either to conspecifics or to other species as well). A
system of inferences of this kind is properly viewed as a theory,
first, because such states are not directly observable, and second,
because the system can be used to make predictions, specifically
about the behavior of other organisms. We will not be concerned
at this time with whether the chimpanzee's theory is a good or
complete one, whether he infers every mental state we infer and
does so accurately, that is, makes the inferences on exactly the
same occasions we do. These questions are not out of order, but
they are, for the moment at least, too difficult to deal with experi-
mentally. It will be sufficient now to consider whether or not the
chimpanzee imputes mental states to others at all. If we succeed
with that claim, we may later seek to determine how accurate
and complete his inferences are.
As to tne states of mind the chimpanzee may infer, let us look
at some of those that members of our own species infer. It seems
beyond question that purpose or intention is the state we impute
most widely; several other states are not far behind, however.
They include all those designated by the italicized term in each
of the following statements: John believes in ghosts; he thinks he
has a fair chance of winning; Paul knows that I don't like roses;
she is guessing when she says that; I doubt that Mary will come;
Bill is only pretending. This list is in no way exhaustive. Promise
and trust, for example, are important states not on the list, and
there are other, more exotic ones, belonging to the novelist; we
will not be concerned with them in this paper. We will also leave
aside for the moment the embedded inference, for example,
"Mary knows that John thinks he will win," "Harry doubts that
Mary knows that John thinks he will win." A great deal of com-
plexity can be imparted, if even only a small inventory of dif-
ferent states is linked together in this fashion. Human limits on
® 1978 Cambridge University Press
0140-525X/78/DPRE/011$04.00
515
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00076512 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 2 (native) -----
Premack and Woodruff: Chimpanzee theory of mind
embedding are not impressive: only about four steps make our
species uncomfortable. And, of course, it would be a surprise if
the ape could approximate even this limit. In the rest of this
paper we will describe the experiments that defend the present
thesis (more in principle than in fact, for as yet only a few of them
have been done), discuss alternative positions, showing how
these can be countered either by existing or potential evidence,
and conclude by examining the implications of the present view
for theories of intelligence and mind.
Basic approach: problem comprehension,
not problem-solving performance
Rather than confronting a chimpanzee with an inaccessible ob-
ject and observe his possible problem solving, we have instead
shown him a human actor confronting inaccessible objects, and
asked the animal to indicate how he thought the human actor
would solve his problem. Specifically, we made four thirty-
second videotapes of a human actor in a cage similar to the chim-
panzee's struggling to obtain bananas that were inaccessible in
one of four different ways: They were (1) attached to the ceiling
and thus out of reach overhead, or (2) outside the cage wall and
thus horizontally out of reach, (3) outside the cage, but with the
actor's reach impeded by a box inside the cage, located between
him and the bananas; in the last case (4), not only was the actor's
reach impeded by a box, but the latter was laden with heavy ce-
ment blocks.
In addition to the four videotapes, we took still photographs of
the human actor engaged in the behaviors that constituted solu-
tions to the four problems. In one case, he was photographed
stepping onto a box; in a second case, [lying on his side and
reaching out of the cage with a rod;]a in a third case, moving a
box to the side, and in the last case, removing cement blocks
from a box.
A comprehension test for the animal (Sarah) consisted of show-
ing her each of the videotapes in turn, putting the last five
seconds of the tape on hold, and then offering her a pair of the
photographs, one constituting a solution to the problem and the
other not.
Sarah, a fourteen-year-old African-born chimpanzee, was less
than a year old when received in the laboratory and has since
been trained and tested in a number of ways (Premack, 1976).
When she was between 4.6 and 6.5 years of age, she was taught a
simplified visual language. In addition, she has been tested on a
variety of cognitive tasks: reconstruction of disassembled ob-
jects, causal inference, and so forth, five days a week for the last
ten years. She had had no formal experience with the present
tests, although she had had extensive prior experience with com-
mercial television, which doubtless contributed to her ability to
comprehend televised representations.
In the tests with the present material, Sarah was given each
videotape on [four? occasions, each time with a [different? pair
of alternatives. Each alternative was used equally often with
each other one, and, of course, the left-right position of the cor-
rect alternatives was counterbalanced over problems and over
trials. The general manner of testing, described in detail
elsewhere (Premack & Woodruff, 1978), was designed to control
for inadvertent social cues. Briefly, the trainer showed Sarah the
videotape and then put the last five seconds on hold. He then
presented two alternatives in a cardboard box and left the room.
Sarah's task was to take out the alternatives, choose one, and
identify her selection by placing it in a designated location
alongside the television set; she was then to ring a bell, which
summoned the trainer, who re-entered the room, recorded
Sarah's choice, and told her either, "Good Sarah, that's right," or
"No, Sarah, that's wrong" in a tone of voice like the one we
would use with a young child. At the end of each session, he gave
her yogurt, fruit, or some other favorite food. She was correct on
twenty-one out of twenty-four trials (p < .001), all of her errors
confined to one problem: removing blocks from the block-laden
box.
Probably it is not a coincidence that this is the problem with
which Kohler's apes had the greatest difficulty. The strength of
the chimpanzee is such that she is not likely to appreciate the ad-
vantage (or the necessity) of removing the heavy cement blocks
before attempting to move the box. In any case, this is the
problem in which Kohler's apes largely failed, and the only
problem with which Sarah had any difficulty. She made three er-
rors in a row on this problem, but succeeded on the last three
trials. She could easily have learned the correct solution in the
course of being tested, but this would be an unlikely interpreta-
tion of her overall performance. She chose correctly from the be-
ginning on the other three problems, and was correct six out of
six times on each (p = .013 binomial test).
Three interpretations of chimpanzee
comprehension of problem solving
Now consider three interpretations of this outcome, the first of
which is easily eliminated. On this first interpretation, the
animal simply matches physical elements in the correct alterna-
tive to the corresponding physical elements in the videotape.
The possible elements here are the human actor, bananas, ce-
ment blocks, sticks, a rope, and a box. It was possible to rule out
this alternative quite directly by arranging to include every one
of the elements involved in every videotape. Consider Figure 1,
which shows in the left column the last scene in each videotape,
and in the corresponding right column the correct solution to the
problem. It can be seen that every element is present in every
scene. Figure 1 also shows that the posture of the human actor
could have contributed to the definition of the problems. The ac-
tor was decidedly more upright in one case than in the three
others (both in the videotape defining the problem and in the
photographic alternatives constituting solutions). Yet matching
the actor's posture in the problem to his posture in the solution
cannot account for the animal's performance. She was correct on
three of the four problems, whereas "upright" versus "nonup-
right" will only distinguish one problem from the other three.
Moreover, the possibility of physical matching is ruled out not
only by this series, but even more so by others we will report
later. In general, physical matching is too weak a device to ac-
count for the results. Not only chimpanzees, but probably lesser
species as well, can solve problems with strategies more so-
phisticated than simply matching physically identical or similar
items.
We turn now to two families of alternatives more in keeping
with the power or complexity of the primate mind, and between
which it will be necessary to decide.
Associationism. The first of these is some version of classical
associationism. One solves problems of the present kind, on this
view, through familiarity with the sequences in question. When
shown a sequence that one recognizes, but that is incomplete,
one chooses the element that has the effect of completing the se-
quence. An even simpler version of this general view might be
derived from a theory of interrupted action. If an animal is inter-
rupted when carrying out an act, he will recommence and com-
plete the act as soon as possible. An animal shown an interrupted
action will do the same, as long as he is intelligent enough to
recognize representations of actions. Species such as chim-
panzees will thus do at a representational level what lesser
species can only do at the level of direct action. But in both cases
nothing more is involved than producing the next step in a
known sequence. To apply this theory to the present results, we
need only assume that the animal is familiar with the problems
shown in the videotapes. And this is not an unreasonable
assumption. Even though the animal has never seen either a
human subject or a conspecific facing problems of the kind
516
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00076512 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 3 (native) -----
Premack and Woodruff: Chimpanzee theory of mind
&,
Figure 1. Photographic reproductions from the last 5 sec. of each of the 
tions. For example, in Problem 1, the human actor attempts to reach up
four 30-sec videotaped problem scenes in Test 1 appear in the left column. 
toward bananas suspended by a rope from the ceiling, and in Solution 1,
In the right column are shown the still photographs of the correct solu- 
the human actor steps on a box. See text for fuller description.
517
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00076512 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 4 (native) -----
Premack and Woodruff: Chimpanzee theory of mind
depicted in the videotape, she has herself encountered versions
of similar problems informally in her daily life. It is hardly possi-
ble to prevent a chimpanzee from engaging in problem solving.
As Kohler remarked, the first official problem solving his apes
performed was certainly not the first in which they had ever en-
gaged. In the course of her daily life, Sarah has had occasion to
reach out for inaccessible objects and to climb onto structures in
her cage in order to reach objects on the ceiling. The items she
used were never boxes or sticks, nor were the objects she sought
bananas. And of course it was Sarah who sought the objects, not
the trainer whom she observed in the videotapes. Nevertheless,
there was probably enough similarity between the form of her
direct experience and the form of what she was shown in the
videotape to grant the associationist argument. She was familiar
with at least some of the sequences involved, so that when
shown an incomplete version of them, she was capable of select-
ing the alternatives that completed the sequences.
The weakness of the associationist view has always been its
difficulty in dealing with the future. How does the animal
predict the next event in sequences that are not familiar? The
associationist reply is well known: Success comes from the simi-
larity between old and new cases, a similarity that allows
generalization to do its job. The generalization proposal is ap-
pealing - but only so long as the data are vague and the se-
quences in question are ill defined. Under such conditions one
has no alternative but to take the generalization proposal
seriously. However, once the sequences are as well defined as
they are, for example, in language, it is immediately evident that
generalization is a vacuous proposal. No theory of generalization
will explain the comprehension and production of structurally
novel sentences. Instead, in cases of this degree of clarity we see
not only the vacuity of the generalization proposal, but also, and
more important, the form of the kind of theory that is needed.
Rules that have the power to generate the well-defined se-
quences in question, not generalization gradients, are what
would account for the productivity.
In the present article, however, we are not in the admirable
position of the linguist. We will be concerned with many
varieties of problem solving, for most of whose sequences a well-
formed structural description is not yet possible. Consequently,
we cannot convincingly rule out generalization: there exists just
enough vagueness to allow the proposal its appeal. That is, we
cannot rule out generalization on the basis of well-defined se-
quences; but there are other, equally compelling grounds on
which we can eliminate an associationist interpretation, and
when we reach that stage in the argument, we will point them
out.
Theory of mind. The view we recommend, and will attempt to
support here, is that the chimpanzee solves problems such as the
present one (and others a good deal more complicated) by imput-
ing states of mind to the human actor. In looking at the
videotape, he imputes at least two states of mind to the human
actor, namely, intention or purpose on the one hand, and
knowledge or belief on the other. The chimpanzee makes sense
of what he sees by assuming that the human actor wants the ba-
nana and is struggling to reach it. He further assumes that the ac-
tor knows how to attain the banana, so that when the animal is
shown photographs depicting solutions to the problem, he
chooses correctly in three out of four cases.
Empathy. In addition to the two major alternatives, there is the
empathy alternative. The animal sees the human actor struggling
to reach the bananas, "puts himself in the place of the actor," and
chooses an alternative in keeping with what he would do were
he in the actor's predicament. The animal's choice, on this view,
is not a prediction of what the actor will do, based on inferences
that the animal makes about what the actor knows, but is simply a
prediction of what he would do were he in the actor's situation.
It is clear enough how to distinguish the two interpretations. The
empathy view will be supported if the identity of the actor has no
effect on the animal's choices. Conversely, the empathy view
cannot be correct if the actor's identity does affect the animal's
choices. We will return to this point. In the meantime, it is im-
portant to note that empathy and "theory of mind" are not
radically different views; they are in part identical. The empathy
view starts by assuming that the animal imputes a purpose to the
human actor, indeed understands the actor's predicament by im-
puting a purpose to him. The animal takes over the actor's pur-
pose, as it were, and makes a choice in keeping with that
assumed purpose. The empathy view diverges only in that it
does not grant the animal any inferences about another's
knowledge; it is a theory of mind restricted to purpose. It might
be called a theory of mind concerning the other's motivation, as
opposed to a more nearly complete theory that takes into account
not only the other's motivation, but his cognition as well.1
Ultimately, however, we should avoid the impression that
associationism and theory of mind are mutually exclusive. We
have no objections to the former, except inasmuch as it is
proposed as a sufficient and exclusive mechanism. Certainly, in
highly familiar situations, one's expectancies are based on exist-
ing associations; they are not rule-generated. In novel situations,
however, one's expectancies are generated, we think, from
theories, and are not the product of associative generalization.
This seems clearly the case in language, and is so, we believe, in
other realms; language is not the only realm in which one builds
theories. There may also be both developmental and inter-
species differences in this regard. Young children and lower
species may form expectancies by associative mechanisms, the
former having yet to build any theories and the latter probably
unable to build them; whereas adults and higher species may
largely generate them from theory.
Experiments to decide among the alternate interpretations
Since the experiment that opened the way to the present theory
cannot itself decide among the alternative interpretations, we
will describe some other experiments that have more resolving
power. No single experiment can be all things to all objections,
but the proper combination of results from these experiments
could decide the issue nicely. In one or two cases the results are
already at hand, but unfortunately in many cases the tests are
waiting in the rather long line of studies that remain to be done.
Problems not restricted to physical inaccessibility
The first type of experiment broadens the definition of what
constitutes a problem, increasing its scope, giving us much more
room to work in. Notice that "problem" has so far been restricted
to food (or some prepotent item) that is physically inaccessible.
Compared to the human concept of problem, this is an almost un-
thinkable restriction. Problems, in the human case, can be
instantiated in indeterminately many ways: by an intractable
mathematical derivation, a car that will not start, a recalcitrant
spouse, and so forth. Is the chimpanzee's concept of problem
really as narrow as the existing experiments suggest? Or is the
narrowness attributable to experimenters who have not tested
the ape in ways that would disclose the abstractness of which he
is capable?
NOTE
1. Empathy can be formulated in either of two ways. The chimp picks an
alternative that describes what he would do (1) if he were in the actor's
position, or (2) if he were a three-year-old child, a juvenile chimpanzee, a
human adult, and so forth. It is not clear that the second formulation can
be differentiated from theory of mind. To behave as a three-year-old child
would presuppose a knowledge of what a three-year-old child knows, and
this seems equivalent to making inferences about the knowledge of
another.
518
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00076512 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 5 (native) -----
Premack and Woodruff: Chimpanzee theory of mind
Figure 2. Photographic reproductions from the last 5 sec. of each of the
four 30-sec videotaped problem scenes in Test 1 appear in the left column.
In the right column are shown the still photographs of the correct solu-
tions. For example, in Problem 5, the human actor struggles to escape
from a locked cage, alternately grasping the bars of the cage and the pad-
lock on the door, and Solution 5 shows a key. See text for fuller descrip-
tion.
519
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00076512 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 6 (native) -----
Premack and Woodruff: Chimpanzee theory of mind
To escape the usual definition of animal problem, we tested
Sarah on four cases quite different from the usual variety. She
was shown (1) a (human) actor struggling to escape from a locked
cage, (2) a malfunctioning heater (as witnessed by an actor who
glanced wryly at the heater, even kicked it a little, and at the
same time shivered and clasped his arms to his chest), (3) an ac-
tor seeking to play an unplugged phonograph, and (4) an actor
unable to wash down a dirty floor because the hose he held was
not properly attached to the faucet. It is clear that in these cases
"problem" has taken on a richer meaning. No longer a banana
that is out of reach, "problem" now ranges from a human actor
locked in a cage to a human actor "registering" cold, and thus
suggesting that a heater has gone out.
Sarah was tested on these cases in the same way that she was
tested on the first set. The last five seconds of the videotape de-
picting each problem was put on hold, and she was given pairs of
photographs between which to choose (Figure 2). We ran this set
of problems first with gross alternatives and then with
substantially more discriminating ones.
On the first series the alternatives consisted of a key, an at-
tached hose, an electric cord properly plugged into a socket, and
a lit cone of paper (of a kind normally used as a wick to light the
pilot). With alternatives of this kind, Sarah made no errors what-
soever. She paired the key with the locked-up human actor, the
burning wick with the unlit heater, the plugged-in cord with the
unplugged phonograph, and the attached hose with the discon-
nected one (Premack & Woodruff, 1978). Two of these cases -
the nonfunctioning hose and the disconnected electric cord -
could be accounted for by physical matching and are therefore
not interesting as such. But two could not be accounted for in this
uninteresting way: there is no physical match whatever between
a key and an actor struggling to escape from a cage, nor between
a flaming paper cone and an actor shivering and glancing wryly
at a heater.
In the next series we presented the same problems, but now
with greatly refined alternatives. Sarah was no longer required
simply to choose among such grossly different alternatives as
keys, hoses, cords, and flaming paper. Instead, she was
presented with three versions of each of the four cases. For
instance: key intact, twisted, or broken; hose (or electric cord) at-
tached, not attached, or attached but cut; roll of paper unlit, lit, or
burnt out. On this series she made one error in [twelve choices,]*1
choosing the twisted rather than the intact key. This error was at-
tributable to the quality of the photography. In the original 8" x
10" photographs, it was easy to see the difference between the
intact and twisted key, but when we had the phptographs
reduced to 3" x 4" as an economy measure, it was difficult to de-
tect the twisted key.
None of her answers in this second series could be attributed
to simple physical matching. She could not simply match a hose
to an unconnected hose but had to be able to discriminate an at-
tached hose from one that was attached but cut off at the bottom;
likewise for the electric cord. Similarly, she had to be able to ap-
preciate the advantage of the burning paper over paper that was
either not yet lit or had once been lit but had since burnt out. In
brief, to pass these tests, she had to recognize not only the correct
item, but the correct item in the correct state.
Could Sarah have solved these problems simply by choosing
old or familiar scenes over new or unfamiliar ones? Even if we
grant her visual memory of human quality, so that she could
readily have distinguished old from new, she could not have
used this distinction to differentiate between correct and incor-
rect alternatives. She could have rejected a few cases as unfa-
miliar, for example, the cut off hose and electric cord, but not the
majority of cases. Hoses that are disconnected and electric cords
that are not plugged in must have been familiar sights to her.
Even more impressive, in the choice between the three condi-
tions of the paper wick, the not-yet-lit wick and the burnt-out one
must have been no less familiar than the lit one.
Notice that her success on this series was based entirely on
observational learning. While she had often seen trainers play
the phonograph, wash the floor, and the like, she had never car-
ried out any of these acts herself. Moreover, the observational
learning here is of a special kind. Each act, of course, is actually a
complex sequence involving a series of acts, as in playing the
phonograph: bringing the device into Sarah's room, plugging in
the cord, turning on the machine, putting on a record, adjusting
the head, and so forth. The acts were never segmented for her.
For instance, we had never made a little ceremony out of plug-
ging in the cord, one that would have pulled it out of the be-
havioral stream and didactically highlighted it. On the contrary,
all these acts were part of the daily routine, so removed from be-
ing seen as pedagogic material that we never even called Sarah's
attention to them, as one does routinely in teaching or training.
Trainers came and went, lighting the heater, washing the floor,
and the like. Sarah watched them from her cage, and in the
course of watching, evidently segmented the acts herself.
This series established that the chimpanzee's concept of
problem is not the restricted one suggested by earlier tests. And
in all likelihood these tests do not begin to exhaust the possible
abstractness of the animal's concept of problem. Yet even by
themselves they show how nice the animal's physical knowledge
can be. Of course we are not interested primarily in the animal's
grasp of physical relations. But the fact that the chimpanzee has
such a grasp makes possible a kind of test in which we are
interested.
Modalities; "would," "should," and "would like"
When Sarah chooses a photographic alternative in experiments
of the kind thus far described, she may intend it as an answer to
any of three questions: What would the human actor do if in this
situation? What should he do? What would I like to see him do?
It is possible, of course, that she is not answering these, or any
other questions, but is simply choosing the photograph she
prefers. If we adopt that position, however, we must explain why
her preferences bear the relations they do to particular
videotapes. For, as a matter of fact, she does not choose a picture
of a key, someone standing on a box, or anything else, on simply
any occasion whatsoever, but exclusively on those occasions
when the picture constitutes what we call the "solution" to the
problem shown in the videotape. For this reason, it makes sense
to try to understand Sarah's choices not as simply reflecting
preference for pictures, but as answering one question or
another.
It is clear that the human adult can operate in any of the above
modalities, and that simply by asking him, "What would the ac-
tor do if in this situation?" "What should he do?" "What would
you like to see him do?," we could obtain answers specific to the
modalities. Not only could the human adult answer each of these
questions, but he can apparently shift from one to the other with
impressive ease. Changing from "would" to "should" to "would
like" and back to "would" does not resemble shifting gears or
moving pins in a plugboard. What seems notable, in part, about
the human capacity for operating in different modalities is the
evident ease with which the change is made (although admit-
tedly this is based on impression, not actual study).
Can the chimpanzee distinguish among the modalities, operat-
ing first in one and then the other, shifting among them with
greater or lesser ease? We cannot answer on the basis of the tests
described so far, for they have been noncommittal with regard to
these distinctions. It may be possible later to introduce markers
that will make these distinctions explicit, but for the moment the
tests have been no more discriminating than they need to be in
order to yield data capable of deciding between competing
theories.
[Moreover, for the time being, rather than attempting to in-
troduce markers for "would/should" and so forth, we took a dif-
ferent approach. We returned to the problems illustrated in
520
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00076512 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 7 (native) -----
Premack and Woodruff: Chimpanzee theory of mind
Figure 1 and reproduced them with another human actor. The
actor shown in Figure 1 is Keith, Sarah's favorite trainer. We also
produced an identical series of four problems in which the actor
was Bill (fictitious name), an acquaintance of Sarah's but one for
whom she displayed no affection. In addition, we made a double
set of alternatives for each problem. The "good" alternatives had
already been made, and are those illustrated in Figure 1. We now
made up "bad" alternatives for each problem, (the same ones for
both actors). In one case, this alternative merely consisted of an
inappropriate object: a rod that was too short to reach the
bananas.]6 But in the other three cases, the "bad" alternative
depicted a mishap that could have occurred to the actor in the
course of attempting to solve the problem. The actor was shown
stepping through the box, falling over the box, or lying on the
floor with the cement blocks strewn over him. Of course, the
point of the second series was to see whether Sarah's choice of
alternatives would vary with the actor. Would she assign "good"
alternatives to Keith, whom we had reason to believe she liked,
and "bad" alternatives to Bill, for whom we had reason to doubt
her affection?
We used the same procedure in these tests as in those
described above, except that the trainer did not respond dif-
ferentially to Sarah's choices but approved of all of them. In each
of four sessions, Sarah was shown four videotapes, two of each
actor in a counterbalanced order. A "good" and a "bad" alterna-
tive were presented with each videotape.
For the problems in which Keith was the actor Sarah chose the
"good" alternatives eight out of eight times, but with Bill, only
two out of eight [times.]f If we designate a "good" photograph
with Keith and a "bad" photograph for Bill as "appropriate,"
then the run of ten consecutive "appropriate" responses in
thirteen trials that Sarah made on this test is [highly]8 significant
(p < .01, Grant's test). On this test at least, Sarah's choices could
be interpreted as answering the question, "What would I like to
see happen to agents whom I do and do not like?" We cannot
rule out, of course, that she regards Bill as less able than Keith,
and that her choices answered the question, "What would hap-
pen to agents who were and were not competent?" But this
seems even less likely than the first interpretation, which is al-
ready unlikely enough. Moreover, before we can seriously
defend either interpretation, it is necessary to rule out a still
simpler one. These data do not by themselves rule out that Sarah
simply prefers the "good" photographs of Keith and the "bad"
ones of Bill.
To determine whether or not Sarah's choices were affected by
the intrinsic content of the photograph, independent of its rela-
tion to the videotape, we tested her again on the same material,
but now with three alternatives for each videotape. These were
the "good" alternative, the "bad alternative, and a second "bad
alternative, irrelevant to the problem in the videotape. Each
"bad" alternative was used equally often as an irrelevant alterna-
tive and was presented with the same pairs of relevant alterna-
tives for each actor. Sarah was given sixteen trials, eight in each
of two sessions.
Sarah chose the "good" alternative seven out of eight times for
the problems in which Keith was the actor and only one out of
eight times for those in which Bill was the [actor.]h This is in
keeping with her previous results. However, of the seven "bad"
alternatives she assigned to Bill, three were irrelevant. This sug-
gests that she is affected by the immediate content of the
photographs, independent of the videotape with which they ap-
pear. This does not say, however, that she is not also affected by
the relation between the contents of the photograph and the
videotape. To assess the possible role of these two factors, we
must be able to control or eliminate one of them. In the next step
we managed to control her simple preference for the
photographs per se.
The total frequency of her photograph choices in the previous
two tests showed that she chose some more often than others,
confirming the suggestion of preference at the level of the
photograph. Her favorite "bad" alternatives were the prone actor
strewn with cement blocks and the actor using the short rod
(twelve choices), compared to the actor either stepping through
the box or falling over it (three choices). We divided the "bad"
alternatives into high and low preference on the basis of these
frequencies and used this simple classification to control for
preference.
This time, in retesting Sarah on the same material, we
restricted the pairing of "bad" alternatives to those of compara-
ble preference. As before, we gave her three alternatives with
each videotape, a "good" one and two "bad" ones, but now each
pair of relevant and irrelevant "bad" alternatives was of roughly
equal preference. That is, we never paired a high and low
preference "bad" alternative, but gave her only pairs in which
both members were either high or low. In addition, we tested
her only on the videotapes with Bill, for it was essentially only
on those problems that she chose "bad" alternatives.
Even this relatively crude control was sufficient to reveal the
effect of the relation between the content of the videotape and
that of the photograph. She chose the "bad" alternative ten out of
twelve times, nine of them relevant and only one irrelevant
(p < .05). Incidentally, the role played by preference in these
results is hardly unique. Preference can affect not only presump-
tive answers to implicit questions that are contained in visual
material but also explicit answers given to linguistic questions.
Preference has been shown to affect both the comprehension
and production of language (Premack, 1976). In general, the role
of nonverbal factors in both verbal and nonverbal tests deserves
wider recognition.
Before closing this section, a word in Sarah's "defense" may
be advisable. Because she favors pictures of untoward outcomes
for an actor whom we suspect she dislikes, we cannot be certain
that she would choose to inflict the same actual outcomes on the
person in question. She might, but we do not know; and it is not
an easy question to answer. Finally, regardless of how these
results are ultimately interpreted with regard to the modality
question, notice that they provide no support for the empathy
view. Sarah is not simply choosing alternatives in keeping with
what she should do if she were in the actor's position. Her choice
of alternatives depends on who the actor is.
Agent-specific knowledge and belief
Although in the tests above, Sarah's choice was affected by the
actor's identity, we do not know whether she could use the ac-
tor's identity in more demanding ways. Could she assign dif-
ferent purposes to different agents? Could she assign different
knowledge or beliefs? The former is easier to picture than the
latter, for motivational states seem more primitive than cognitive
ones (though, to be sure, separating the two kinds of states is
problematic).
Suppose Sarah were shown both an adult and a young child
facing a relatively complex device such as an unlit heater. She
could then be called upon to indicate by her choice of
photographs which of the two agents could light the heater, how
they would proceed, and whether one of them would be more
likely to make errors (such as applying a lit match to the wrong
place or an unlit match to the right place, applying a lit match for
too short a time, etc.). If Sarah imputes not only purpose, but also
knowledge (and her inferences about knowledge are even ap-
proximately correct), then the alternatives that she chooses for
the adult and for the young child should differ appreciably.
Of course, we cannot expect Sarah to make accurate inferences
about knowledge and belief without appropriate experience. She
must know something about the complexity of heaters relative to
the competence of adults and children. In one sense, her success
on problems of this kind might be of limited interest. If she ob-
served adults and children succeed and fail respectively on a
particular task and then chose photographs in keeping with these
521
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00076512 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 8 (native) -----
Premack and Woodruff: Chimpanzee theory of mind
observations, we would be relatively unimpressed, having been
jaded by some of the more mystifying results we had already
seen. Performance of this kind would be of interest mainly for
demonstrating the animal's ability to recognize correspondences
between "real" experience and two-dimensional representations
of that experience. This ability is surely not universally dis-
tributed over species. But in the present tests, rather than study-
ing that capacity, we are taking it for granted and using it to ad-
dress other questions.
[Results will be of interest only if there is an appreciable dif-
ference between Sarah's experience inside and outside the test
situation. In the ideal case, we consider it possible to explain her
success in a novel situation by claiming her choices were
derived from a theory, in the same sense that one claims
sentences are derived from a theory of grammar. In this case,
however, instead of a grammar, an individual would have a
system of imputations about: the knowledge and beliefs, the in-
ferences, the problem-solving ability, and so forth, of an other in-
dividual. Such a theory is not likely to be elegant or even ac-
curate when found in the child or chimpanzee. Certainly the
theory will reflect systematic errors or biases peculiar to the
operating characteristics of the species. We assume that the
theory would be learned, in the same sense that natural language
theory is learned; but what precisely is that sense?
Are theories built up out of such items as "the bait is on the
right side," "triangle is correct," "light and food are positively
correlated?" These rather typical examples of laboratory learn-
ing are not helpful, either in clarifying the kind of information
that goes into making a theory, or in showing how such informa-
tion would be learned. For instance, in stating relations between
classes, theories presuppose a knowledge of class properties, and
ability to identify class members. But laboratory exemplars of
learning do not illustrate how classes are learned, or help us to
understand why the individual forms particular classes or draws
particular generalizations, when in any situation he can learn
indeterminately many classes or generalizations (cf. Premack,
1973).]1
To determine whether or not Sarah would choose different
photographs for different agents confronting the same problems,
we made two series of videotapes, one with a four-year-old fe-
male child and another with a female adult (neither of whom
were known to Sarah) as the actresses. Each series consisted of
six tasks: object match-to-sample, shape match-to-sample, a
memory task, and completion, causal inference, and spatial
matching tasks. We photographed a correct and an incorrect solu-
tion for each videotape with both actresses. For example, on the
memory problem the videotape showed one of the actresses
watching the trainer place an apple under one of three
containers; the correct photograph showed the same actress
pointing to the correct container while the incorrect photograph
showed her pointing to the incorrect container. All photographs
were alike in the important sense that they showed not only the
correct outcome (e.g., a ball placed with another identical ball, in
the case of object matching) but also the appropriate agent carry-
ing out the act.
Sarah was tested as before, one trial on each problem, with the
order of the problems for the two agents counterbalanced over
trials. On each videotape she was given two photographs, one
depicting a correct act and another an incorrect one, by the ap-
propriate agent. The trainer approved of all of her choices.
Sarah chose the correct photograph on ten out of twelve trials,
five for the adult and five for the child. Unfortunately, this nega-
tive outcome is rather indeterminate. First, Sarah has had little
experience with children (and none in recent years), whereas
she has had appreciably more with young chimpanzees; new
tests will contrast young and old chimpanzees as actors, as well
as people versus chimpanzees. Second, and probably more im-
portant, the six tasks are not well graded in terms of difficulty.
(They are listed above in the order of the presumptive difficulty;
even though Sarah now has a bit more trouble with some than
with others, in future studies it will be possible to include more
sharply differentiated tasks, such as reassembling diagonally
bisected photographs, which, unlike horizontally or vertically
bisected ones, she is still unable to reassemble.) Indeed, four-
and-a-half-year-old children can (as we recalled in retrospect) do
all six of them. Thus, if we ignore Sarah's two errors, we could
regard her choice of alternatives as an accurate assessment of the
competence of both the adult and child. We propose this face-
tiously, of course, and will correct for the indeterminacy in future
tests.
Embedded videotape; observing a viewer observe. An espe-
cially discriminating test, which we have not yet used, is based
on the embedded videotape. The virtue of this test is that.it
removes all possible unclarity as to what is the basic question
that we are trying to answer. Sometimes it may seem that our
question is merely "what does the chimpanzee (or child) know
about the world?" Information of this kind can be of interest, of
course, but only as a preliminary to a deeper question. The
embedded videotape makes clear that what we are testing is not
"what does the subject know about the world," but rather "what
does the subject know about what someone else knows (guesses,
believes, thinks, etc.) about the world?"
To make this kind of test we prepare a videotape in which an
observer O is shown watching a participant P. We use two
cameras in making this videotape, for P is not acting in O's im-
mediate world, but is an actor in a videotape. Thus O is
essentially playing Sarah's role, that is, watching an actor on tele-
vision; and Sarah, in using this tape, is watching O watch a
videotape of P.
On the embedded videotape, P is shown locked in a cage,
desperately trying to select the right key from a large assortment
as a lion slowly edges forward. As O watches this scene, the
videotape of P is put on hold, and O is presented with two
photographs. In one, P finds the right key and escapes in the nick
of time; in the other, P is not so lucky and succumbs to the lion.
Sarah's videotape is put on hold at this moment, and she is
given two photographs in the usual way, one showing O pick the
photograph in which P escapes, a second in which O picks the
photograph in which P is not so fortunate. Sarah's task is the
usual one, to choose between the alternatives.
Sarah is given this test not only with the actors O and P, but for
many pairs, for each of which she has the same information: does
O like or dislike P? A wide variety of contents could be used to
provide this information to Sarah. To assure that we affect what
the animal knows about each agent's attitude toward the other,
rather than her attitude toward them, we do well to avoid actual
trainers and use instead anonymous actors in videotapes. In this
way we can also avoid content that is at all like that of the test it-
self; then the animal could not be predicting simply that O
would do something to P that was part of the original evidence
on which it based its inferences about O's attitude toward P.
(Moreover, recall that in the test the animal does not predict
what O will do to P, but only what outcome O would choose for P
when shown a videotape of P.)
If, for those cases in which Sarah has been shown that Ol dis-
likes PI, she selects photographs showing Ol assigning un-
toward outcomes to PI, and for the opposite case, photographs
showing O2 assigning benign outcomes to P2, we can conclude
that she believes that Ol dislikes PI, and that O2 likes P2. In
other words, we can assume that Sarah imputes states of mind to
the agents in question, states consisting of either positive or
negative atitudes.
The embedded videotape is, of course, not restricted to the
present material but can be applied to any sort of content. For
example, P, who can be either a child or an adult, is shown being
given a standard conservation test. O, who can also be either a
child or an adult, is showing observing the videotape that shows
the testing of P. O is asked to choose between photographs that
show P making a correct conservation judgment in one case and
522
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00076512 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 9 (native) -----
Premack and Woodruff: Chimpanzee theory of mind
an incorrect judgment in the other. Sarah's task is to choose the
alternative that O would choose. In doing so, Sarah must decide
not merely, "are children or adults capable of conservation," but
rather, "do children or adults know that children or adults are ca-
pable of conservation?" That is, correct performance in this case
would show not merely knowledge of what an adult or child can
do, but knowledge of what a child or adult knows a child or adult
can do.
the animal's grasp of the distinction would lie in the transfer
performance data, in terms of either sorting new cases correctly,
or applying proper markers to them. The sorting and language
approach are not basically different. One would choose the latter
only if the animal had already been taught other aspects of lan-
guage, for then he might be able to combine the new words guess
and know with existing ones, forming strings that he could not
otherwise form.
The chimpanzee as learning theorist. Any animal who ascribes
different 
states of knowledge to naive and experienced
organisms must know about either learning or maturation: some
process that will account for the transition from ignorance to
knowledge. So far, we have asked "What mental states does the
animal infer?" But with appropriate experiments we can also ask
"What process does the animal infer as accounting for the transi-
tions from one mental state to another?" Should the animal prove
to assign different knowledge to the child and the adult, what
kind of experience or process might the animal believe changes
the child (who cannot properly reach inaccessible items or re-
store nonoperative devices) into the adult (who can readily do all
these things)? What must the chimpanzee observe of a child and
an adult before he assigns different general competences to
them? Besides these questions, we may ask the phylogenetic
question, "If the animal regards the adult as a transformed child,
could he also be seeing the human as a transformed chim-
panzee?" Perhaps in comparing species, he will reject all possi-
bilities of transformation (thus contrasting with our own assump-
tions about evolutionary transformation). All these questions
remain to be answered. They would follow quite directly should
it turn out that the chimpanzee can recognize not only different
mental states, but also the role of developmental and organismic
variables in accounting for differences among mental states, and
in some cases for the transition from one mental state to another.
Epistemic states: a program for their experimental investigation
The distinctions between know versus guess on the one hand,
and truthfulness versus deceit on the other, can have great
practical weight in human social affairs. Your choice as to
whether or not to accept information from a potential informant
is often filtered through these distinctions. For instance, you are
lost in a city and seek directions. But something in the manner of
your informant suggests that he is merely guessing, or that he is
only pretending to know when he really does not, or that he
knows very well, but is misleading you. You may also encounter
the informant who relieves you of the burden of assessing his
mental state, for he knows that he is guessing and tells you as
much. In all these cases, you are likely to move on, even at some
risk, and to look for the acceptable informant. The ideal infor-
mant is one whom essentially you could substitute for yourself
without loss: he knows as much about the matter in question as
you would know if you had had the benefit of his experience, and
his account is impeccable. These distinctions play a vital role in
human communication; we accept or reject information, depend-
ing on our assessment of them. Unfortunately, whether they play
any role in the communication of other species is still largely un-
known.
As yet we do not know whether Sarah distinguishes between
guess and know, or between pretend and real. It may be of value,
however, to describe how we are finding this out, if only to show
how amenable mental states are to study.
To determine whether the chimpanzee distinguishes between
guess and know, we can use either of two approaches: sorting or
language markers. In both cases we select the clearest possible
exemplars of the two states and then use them either to introduce
the markers guess and know, or simply to establish two cate-
gories (differentiated by their location in space). Evidence for
"Guess" versus "know"
In an experimental program currently in progress we use three
different contrasts to exemplify guess and know: a naive and a so-
phisticated rat at a choice point; a human actor drawing marbles
from an opaque and a transparent urn; a judge in a recognition
experiment identifying items on the basis of viewing times that
are hopelessly brief in some cases, comfortably long in others.
In the first case, the animal is shown a naive rat at a choice
point - its vacillation, long latency, and frequent errors. Later in
the videotape, the same rat is shown at a more advanced state of
learning, choosing correctly and doing so with a short latency.
The early and later behaviors of the rat are intended to exemplify
guess and know, respectively.
In the second videotape, the animal observes a human actor
drawing black and white marbles from an urn. Sarah is shown
that the urn contains an equal number of black and white mar-
bles, that the urn is opaque, and that the actor cannot see what he
is drawing. Later in the tape she is shown a transparent urn, and
that now the actor can readily see the marble he selects. In both
cases, the actor predicts which color marble he will draw, mak-
ing his predictions by pointing to either a white or black card
before choosing a marble. Both the actor's choices and predic-
tions in the two cases are taken to exemplify guess and know,
respectively.
In the last c^ise, Sarah is shown a human actor looking at the
faces of different people through a porthole, trying to identify
them. On some trials, the judge is given only a glimpse of the
person, on other trials, a long inspection. The videotape gives
Sarah a side view of the proceedings, enabling her to see both
the judge sitting at the desk and the target person behind the
screen. As a result, Sarah always knows who the target is. She is
also shown the view that the judge has of the target individual,
and can see that this view is sometimes painfully brief, at other
times comfortable long. On each trial, the judge chooses one of
the three photographs placed before him. When the judge is cor-
rect, a light below the porthole goes on; otherwise it remains
dark. Sarah is in a good position to learn the significance of the
light: she can observe the correlation between the individual
who stood behind the screen and the photograph the judge
chose.
If Sarah is successful on either the marker or sorting task, can
we be certain that she is truly distinguishing between guess and
know, as opposed to merely distinguishing between accurate
and inaccurate prediction or choice? The recognition experiment
can make a nice contribution to this problem. We can require
Sarah to evaluate only those cases in which the judge was suc-
cessful. Those cases are identified by the agreement between the
individual Sarah saw behind the screen and the photograph the
judge chose, plus the onset of the feedback light. If Sarah can dif-
ferentiate between those cases in which the viewing time is im-
possibly brief versus those in which it is comfortably long, then
she cannot be discriminating merely between successful and
unsuccessful prediction, for in all cases the prediction is success-
ful. Neither can she be discriminating short versus long viewing
time, for these parameters have nothing in common with either
transparent and opaque urns, or with vacillating and unhesitant
rats. Know and guess are instantiated by indeterminately many,
physically diverse conditions, and the question is, Can Sarah dis-
criminate among them?
523
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00076512 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 10 (native) -----
Premack and Woodruff: Chimpanzee theory of mind
"Pretend" versus "real"
Pretend may be yet another state of mind that the chimpanzee
will ascribe to himself and others, as many anecdotal claims have
suggested. We now have laboratory evidence that points in this
direction. Although the evidence is not definitive - more than
one test will be needed - it is a step beyond the anecdote. The
test is quite simple. A room is divided by a mesh partition. On
one side is a pair of containers, one of them baited, and on the
other side, cut off from the containers by the mesh partition, a
chimpanzee. The chimpanzee knows which container is baited,
having observed the baiting, whereas the trainer who stands on
the side of the containers does not know. The animal can obtain
the bait, however, for if the trainer is able to judge from the
animal's behavior which container is baited, and can thus choose
correctly, the chimpanzee is given the bait.
In a second version of this experiment, the trainer is villainous
or selfish, for when he succeeds in choosing the correct
container, he keeps the bait for himself. The two types of trainers
wear highly discriminable costumes, so that the animals can
know which condition obtains. We have combined a reversal of
roles with these two basic conditions, so that the chimpanzee has
served as a "receiver" on some occasions and as a "sender" on
others. As receiver, the animal was uninformed (as was the
trainer when he played this role), standing by the containers,
waiting for the informed sender on the other side to direct him to
the baited container.
True to form, the villainous trainer was selfish not only as
receiver but as a sender as well, for as sender he invariably
pointed the animal to the incorrect container. The benevolent
trainer was equally consistent; as receiver, he not only gave the
animal food, but as sender, he consistently pointed the animal to
the correct container.
A simple strategy for coping with this situation is to tell the
truth to the benevolent trainer and to take his guidance as truth-
ful; conversely, be untruthful to the selfish trainer and take his
guidance as untruthful. Lying or untruthfulness can take two
forms (since the two containers constitute a mutually exclusive
dichotomy): false negatives or false positives. In the former, one
simply withholds information, that is, one does not make any of
those responses that enable a receiver to judge which container
is baited. In the latter, one directs the receiver to the incorrect
container, either by using the very same response one uses to tell
the truth, or by a response different from the one used for truth
telling (which, of course, would be a detectable, and hence
inadvisable strategy).
With four sexually immature chimpanzees who have been
tested and retested on this problem in a longitudinal study of
nearly two years' duration, we have at this time all possible out-
comes (Woodruff & Premack, in preparation). The oldest animal
is a successful liar in both production and comprehension; the
youngest (but also probably the smartest) lies in comprehension
but not yet in production; the one male lies in production but not
in comprehension; and the fourth animal, who is a kind of social
isolate, does not lie in either modality. (By lying, we mean false
positives: all animals have shown false negatives to some degree
and this form of behavior typically precedes the false positive.)
Although we have spoken of "lying," we do so for con-
venience. The observed behavior may well be a precursor to ly-
ing, but we know too little about the inferences the animals may
be making to be assured that they are indeed lying. What we
would need to know would be that the animal believes that the
selfish trainer knows which containers is baited, and is purpose-
fully directing him to the unbaited one. If we could be sure of
that, we would be justified in calling the animal's false positives
lying. We are testing that now in the following way.
The animal is allowed to make a choice from among 100
opaque containers placed before him. Before he chooses, he is
told which one to choose, in one case by a liar (L) and in another
by a well-intentioned fool (F). The consequence of this advice
for the animal is about the same. L, who knows which one of the
100 containers is baited, never directs the animal to the correct
one; F does little better. There are 100 containers, and since the
F is guessing, he is seldom correct.
Despite the fact that F serves the animal no better than L,
there is the possibility that the animal will nonetheless react dif-
ferently to them. First of all, there is the opportunity to observe
that the two parties do not have the same knowledge about the
containers. The baiting is carried out in a room adjacent to the
animal's. And through a window, the animal can recognize the
100-container device that is subsequently brought to his room.
He can see that baiting is going on, but not which container is
baited. He can also see that trainer L, identified by a prominent
red hat, is invariably present during the baiting.
In contrast, trainer F, identified by a green hat, is never
present during the baiting. Indeed, while the baiting is going on,
F is standing at the rear of the animal's room, with even less
chance than the animal to know which container is baited.
Once the device is located in the animal's room, it is of course
exactly L and F who offer the animal advice: L on some trials, F
on others. What we are interested in is the animal's response to L
and F. Will he dislike L while tolerating F? He may dislike them
equally for, as we have seen, their advice is about equally bad.
However, he might regard them differently, for, from the
human point of view, only L is a liar, that is, only L knows which
container is baited and is intentionally misleading him. F is
simply uninformed. As the animal can see, F is never present
during the baiting, and cannot therefore be accused of de-
liberately misleading him.
Why should F participate at all? We might make the whole
situation more plausible by putting it in a social frame. Normally
the animal is guided by a benevolent trainer, who not only baits
the 100 containers and carries them into the animal's room, but
never fails to direct the animal correctly. That is what usually
happens. But on some trials the phone rings and he is called
away. Then L and F, who are almost always at hand, essentially
fill in for the benevolent trainer, L with lies and F with well-
intentioned misinformation.
We are running, this experiment now, with the hope that the
animal may make a distinction, comparable to our own, between
someone who is guilty by intent and someone who is guilty by
ignorance. We had been encouraged by an earlier finding. Al-
though the young animals have shown little open animosity
toward the selfish trainer, this was not so with Sarah. After only
two or three experiences with the selfish trainer, her aggressive
displays toward him were such that we thought it dangerous to
continue the experiment. Toys and other objects lying about the
cage, many of them sharp and hard, sailed out under the mesh at
dangerously high speeds, narrowly missing the selfish trainer.
But is this Sarah's response to a liar, or simply to anyone who
misguides her? Moreover, in the first experiment one might
question whether Sarah knew that the selfish trainer was a liar.
Since she never actually saw him watch the baiting, which was
done out of her view, how could she know that he knew which
one was baited? On the other hand, there were only two
containers, and no one can consistently guide you to the empty
one without knowing which one is baited (but does Sarah know
that?). In addition, Sarah's experience with trainers was like the
child's with teachers: teachers and trainers are always informed,
they always knew the answer (cf. Milgram, 1974). So if a trainer
has consistently directed you to the wrong container, he must be
lying. In any event, the present experiment will distinguish
between the two alternatives: Sarah responds with hostility
toward anyone who misguides her; and she responds with
hostility to a liar: someone who misguides her intentionally.
Lying, however, is only one form of pretending. Like guessing
or knowing, pretending can take many forms. The interest in this
case is accordingly also like that in the others: can Sarah label or
group together the several forms of pretending despite dif-
ferences in their form? To generate some further cases of pre-
524
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00076512 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 11 (native) -----
Premack and Woodruff: Chimpanzee theory of mind
tending, we can return to the Kohler type problem. Even in this
simple case, "problem" is instantiated by two factors, a physical
and a psychological one: food is out of reach (physical factor) and
an actor is trying to get it (psychological factor). Combining these
factors of course yields four cases. In one, food is out of reach and
the actor is trying to get it; positive on both factors: a full-fledged
problem. In a second, food is neither out of reach nor does the ac-
tor try to get it; negative on both factors: not even the possibility
of a problem.
However, pretend-problems can be instantiated by all com-
binations of the two factors, because the value of the
psychological factor need not be real, but can be simulated. For
instance, an apple hangs just above the actor's head, and yet
somehow he "cannot" reach it. Or a hungry actor shows no
interest in the inaccessible fruit, until a second party leaves,
whereupon he directs his full attention to it. Or a nonhungry ac-
tor jumps repeatedly for an inaccessible apple because a moment
earlier he had noticed Burt, a chimpanzee escape-artist, sneaking
along the wall heading for the door; the actor's sudden intense
interest in the apple fools Burt, who runs by and is easily
grabbed.
But Sarah may be less easily fooled, especially when shown a
videotape of the whole proceedings, enabling her to see both the
actor's and Burt's points of view. When Sarah is tested on these
cases, with either a sorting or marker approach, her success on
the transfer material would demonstrate her ability to distin-
guish between genuine and simulated problem solving. Of addi-
tional interest would be the nature of the information Sarah must
be given in order to draw this distinction correctly. For instance,
if she is shown why an actor is simulating, will she be helped, as
we would be, to "see through" the behavior and detect the
simulation?
Self-knowledge. This same approach can be used to determine
not only whether the chimpanzee attributes mental states to
another, but also whether she attributes them to herself. Does
Sarah know when she is truth-telling or lying, when her decision
is based on knowledge or when she is merely guessing? Just as
she can be required to apply markers ("truth/lie," "know/guess")
to the acts of others, can she be required to apply them to her
own acts? Will she be as successful in learning to apply markers
to herself as she is in learning to apply them to others? Com-
parisons of this general kind can be used to answer the perennial
question of how self-knowledge grows. Does it develop pri-
marily from observation of others, from the observation of
oneself, from introspection, or from subtle interactions, among
all these cases, and differently at different developmental
stages?
The second group who might give a "description" quite
surprisingly like the positivist's would be young children, so
young that they did not understand the scene. Since the material
in question is very simple, we may find it necessary to encourage
the children's failure to understand by chopping up the scene
and presenting it out of sequence. This makes understanding
difficult, and in some cases even impossible. In studying
children's comprehension of picture stories, we have found that
older children, and of course adults, are able to make sense of
picture stories even when the pictures are out of order, but that
children, younger than about four cannot (Poulsen, Kintsch,
Kintsch and Premack, in press). Young children's descriptions of
out-of-sequence pictures are very reminiscent of the kind of
description we have ascribed to the positivists. The young
child's account does not attribute any purpose or intention to the
actors. Indeed, it is exactly the absence of these inferences that
makes the description senseless and disjointed; for example, "a
man, a dog, a tree, the dog is running." In normal perception, the
elements are joined together by imputing mental states to the ac-
tors; for example, "the dog is afraid of the man and is running
away," and so forth. It is inferred mental states that "organize"
scenes, holding together the disparate elements into which
scenes otherwise threaten to dissolve.
The important point here is that assigning mental states to
another individual is not a sophisticated or advanced act, but a
primitive one. Only on two occasions are the inferences not
found: when there is not enough understanding of the scene to
permit the inference, as in the young, confused child, or when
the inference indeed occurs, but is quite deliberately sup-
pressed, as by a sophisticated adult who, having been taught the
differences between data and inference, elects on this occasion
to give what he calls an objective "description."
We think that an analogy can be drawn with causal inference,
in which the conditions seem much the same. Whenever A
precedes B, the belief that A causes B is, we think, the primitive
one. This is a belief that would occur under all conditions except
the two described above. The sophisticated human adult has
been taught to demand more than co-occurrence as a basis for
assuming causality. He will block the primitive inference and
impose further tests. Are there any occasions when A occurs and
B does not? When A does not occur and yet B does? When B oc-
curs and A does not? When B does not occur and yet A does? If
the answers to these four questions are appropriate, the sophisti-
cated adult will drop the barrier and allow the primitive in-
ference of causality to go through. The actual content of a so-
phisticated causal inference may not differ 
importantly,
however, from the content of a primitive one: what differs is the
process whereby the inference is reached.
Two parties that would hold a eoelnferential view:
positivists and young children
We have urged that when the adult chimpanzee watches the film
showing the trainer struggling to reach inaccessible bananas, he
makes sense of the scene by imputing a purpose to the trainer.
The reader, we suspect, will find it so natural to read the scenes
in this same way that he may ask, "who would not read them in
this way?" We can think of two groups, one sophisticated and the
other naive. Positivists and other highly trained parties would
not read them in this manner. Having learned to distinguish data
from inference, they will, we think first read the scene in an in-
ferential manner, like everyone else, but then go on to inhibit or
suppress the inference. Having inhibited their natural tendency,
they could then provide a description roughly along these lines:
"Keith is in a cage-like area. Bananas are above his head. Keith is
jumping up and down. He extends his arm above his head, in the
direction of the bananas." The exact form of the description is
unimportant; it is simply the lack of inference to which we wish
to call attention.
Concluding remarks
In assuming that other individuals want, think, believe, and the
like, one infers states that are not directly observable and one
uses these states anticipatorily, to predict the behavior of others
as well as one's own. These inferences, which amount to a theory
of mind, are, to our knowledge, universal in human adults. Al-
though it is reasonable to assume that their occurrence depends
on some form of experience, that form is not immediately ap-
parent. Evidently it is not that of an explicit pedagogy. In-
ferences about another individual are not taught, as are reading
or arithmetic; their acquisition is more reminiscent of that of
walking or speech. Indeed, the only direct impact of pedagogy
on these inferences would appear to be suppressive, for it is only
the specially trained adult who can give an account of human be-
havior that does not impute states of mind to the participants. All
this is to say that theory building of this kind is natural in man.
Are we to believe, however, that we are the only species in
which it is natural? Our series of comparative studies is devoted
to this and related questions. Although here we have talked only
525
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00076512 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 12 (native) -----
Premack and Woodruff: Chimpanzee theory of mind
about the chimpanzee, the same videotapes, with only a few ex-
ceptions, are used with two other populations: normal and
retarded children. The group of studies is designed to answer the
questions: Does a chimpanzee make inferences about another
individual, in any degree or kind? Are at least some retarded
children deficient in specifically this form of theory building?
What is the developmental course of such theory building in the
normal child?
Since there are many points to cover, the data are only now ap-
pearing, and we cannot yet describe the distribution of
mentalistic inference, cross-specifically or developmentally. It is
all the more difficult, therefore, not to venture just a little further
speculation: Of all possible guesses, we find the most compel-
ling one to be that inferences about motivation will precede
those about knowledge, both across species and across develop-
mental stages. Not even the chimpanzee will fail tests that re-
quire him to impute wants, purposes, or affective attitudes to
another individual, but he may fail when required to impute
states of knowledge. For instance, the ape may have no difficulty
deciding that in a certain situation the child will seek its
mother's arms, whereas the adult will seek food. But he may
have appreciably more difficulty in deciding that the adult will
seek food by masterful acts: appropriately opening a locked
chest, stationing a ladder below a perch, and so forth; whereas
the child will seek its mother by decidedly less masterful means.
The predicted results will leave us with a tricky question.
Does the chimpanzee simply fail to impute knowledge to others,
all his inferences being of the motivational variety, or does he
indeed impute such states, but poorly, making gross errors in the
content of the knowledge that he imputes? We may make some
progress with this question once we know definitively whether
or not the chimpanzee distinguishes guess from know. For if he
makes this distinction, while at the same time distinguishing
poorly between the acts children and adults would bring to bear
on a common problem, this cannot be simply because he does
not impute states of knowledge. It would rather seem to be a
deficiency in the accuracy with which he discriminates between
different possible contents of knowledge.
On the other hand, the ape may be incapable of differentiating
between guess, and know, doubt and believe, and so forth. Then
it may make more sense to consider that he does not make in-
ferences outside the motivational realm. The immature child
may resemble the ape in this regard. We may even wish to
consider that the distinction between motivation and cognition,
between want and know, is deeper, more biologically real, than
that implied by textbook headings.
Having decided that behaviorism is unnatural because it re-
quires suppressing primitive inferences, whereas theories of
mind are natural, can we conclude that mentalism is, therefore,
preferable, and more likely to lead to valid theories? Regretably,
there seems to be no way of answering this question that will
grant major catharsis to either camp. On the one hand, beliefs
cannot be extolled simply because they are natural; naturalism
does not guarantee validity. Indeed, some quite interesting
recent work is concerned exactly with deciphering the miscal-
culations to which human reasoning is naturally prone (Tversky
& Kahneman, 1977). Certainly, holding causal inferences in
check, until all four cells in the contingency table (described
above) have been tallied, is a highly unnatural but excellent
idea.
On the other hand, if mental theories are indeed natural, this
fact must have untoward consequences for behaviorism. After
being shown that not only man but also apes had theories of
mind, suppose a behaviorist were to reply, "Yes . . . and they are
both wrong." Would this save behaviorism? We think not, for to
.admit that animals are mentalists compels the admission that be-
haviorist accounts of animals are at best profoundly incomplete.
Moreover - and we add this with more than facetious intent - it
would waste the behaviorist's time to recommend parsimony to
the ape. The ape could only be a mentalist. Unless we are badly
mistaken, he is not intelligent enough to be a behaviorist.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The research reported here was supported by National Science Founda-
tion grants BMS 75-19748 and BMS 77-16853, National Institutes of
Health grant 1-PO1-HD-10965, and a facilities grant from the Grant Foun-
dation. We thank Sarah's trainer, Keith Kennel, for his collection of the
data, and A. J. Premack for helpful comments on an earlier version of the
manuscript.
REFERENCES
Kohler, W. The Mentality of Apes. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul,
1925.
Milgram, S. Obedience to Authority: An Experimental View. New York:
Harper & Row, 1974.
Poulson, K., Kintsch, E., Kintsch, W., and Premack, D. Children's
comprehension and memory for stories. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology, in press.
Premack, D. Cognitive principles? In: F. J. McGuigan and D. B. Lumsden
(eds.), Contemporary Approaches to Conditioning and Learning,
pp. 287-319, 1973.
Premack, D. Intelligence in Ape and Man. Hillsdale, N. J.: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates, 1976.
Premack, D., and Woodruff, G. Problem-solving in chimpanzee: Test for
comprehension. Science. 202:532-5.1975.
Tversky, A., and Kahneman, D. Causal schemata in judgments under un-
certainty. In: M. Fishbein (ed.), Progress in Social Psychology.
Hillsdale, N. J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1977.
Woodruff, G., and Premack, D. Intentional communication in chim-
panzee: the development of deception. In preparation.
EDITOR'S NOTE
The Commentary process makes it impossible to alter a target article once
it has been circulated to commentators (as indicated in the Instructions to
Authors and Commentators). The following errata are accordingly listed
separately. The commentators saw only the original text as it appears
above (square brackets and superscripts were added in proof):
a re aching out with a rod
bsix
c[delete]
deight choices (p < .05),
e[types of problems illustrated in Figure 1 and made eight new
videotapes, using new props and one of two human actors in each scene.
One actor was Keith (the person shown in Figure 1), Sarah's favorite
trainer, and the other] was Bill (fictitious name), an acquaintance of
Sarah's, but one for whom she displayed no affection. We also made 16
new photographs, one "good" alternative (similar in theme to that shown
in Figure 1 for each problem) and one "bad" alternative for each actor in
each problem. In one case, this "bad" alternative merely consisted of an
inappropriate object: a rod that was too short to reach the food.
ftimes (z = 2.58, p < .01).
galso
hactor (z = 2.50, p < .05).
'[delete]
526
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00076512 Published online by Cambridge University Press