

----- Page 1 (native) -----
Sisvar: a computer statistical analysis system
1039
Ciênc. agrotec., Lavras, v. 35, n. 6, p. 1039-1042, nov./dez., 2011
REVIEW
SISVAR:  A  COMPUTER  STATISTICAL  ANALYSIS  SYSTEM
Sisvar: um sistema computacional de análise estatística
Daniel Furtado Ferreira1
ABSTRACT
Sisvar is a statistical analysis system, first released in 1996 although its development began in 1994. The first version was
done in the programming language Pascal and compiled with Borland Turbo Pascal 3. Sisvar was developed to achieve some specific
goals. The first objective was to obtain software that could be used directly on the statistical experimental course of the Department
of Exact Science at the Federal University of Lavras. The second objective was to initiate the development of a genuinely Brazilian
free software program that met the demands and peculiarities of research conducted in the country. The third goal was to present
statistical analysis software for the Brazilian scientific community that would allow research results to be analyzed efficiently and
reliably. All of the initial goals were achieved. Sisvar gained acceptance by the scientific community because it provides reliable,
accurate, precise, simple and robust results, and allows users a greater degree of interactivity.
Index terms: Multiple comparisons, analysis of variance, regression, hypothesis tests.
RESUMO
O Sisvar é um sistema de análise estatística que foi lançado em 1996, embora o seu desenvolvimento tenha sido iniciado em
1994. A primeira versão foi desenvolvida em linguagem de programação Pascal e compilada com o Borland Turbo Pascal 3. O Sisvar
foi desenvolvido em virtude de algumas razões específicas. O primeiro objetivo foi o de obter um software que pudesse ser usado
diretamente no curso de estatística experimental do Departamento de Ciências Exatas da Universidade Federal de Lavras. O segundo
objetivo foi o de iniciar o desenvolvimento de um software genuinamente brasileiro, gratuito que atendesse às demandas e peculiaridades
das pesquisas realizadas no país. O terceiro objetivo foi o de apresentar um software de análise estatística para a comunidade científica
brasileira que permitisse que os resultados da pesquisa pudessem ser analisados de forma eficiente e confiável. Todos os objetivos
iniciais foram atingidos. O motivo da aceitação Sisvar pela comunidade científica é decorrente do fato de que ele é capaz de permitir
uma maior interatividade com o usuário e produzir análises confiáveis, pelo fato de elas serem exatas, precisas, simples e robustas.
Termos para indexação: Comparações múltiplas, análises de variância, regressão, testes de hipóteses.
(Received in september 15, 2011 and approved in november 30, 2011)
1Universidade Federal de Lavras/UFLA – Departamento de Ciências Exatas/DEX – Lavras – MG – Brasil – danielff@dex.ufla.br
INTRODUCTION
Statistics are admittedly an essential part of the
scientific method and it is (in general) not possible that any
article would be accepted by the scientific community
without its results have been confirmed by statistical
analysis. New statistical methods are proposed every year,
and researchers from different fields can use them to develop
their scientific works, testing their hypotheses and solving
problems of economic importance and technological
innovation. But to use these new methods, researchers need
new computer programs or routines to be developed and
incorporated into the existing computer programs for
statistical analysis. However, many analyses are made using
traditional methods. The analysis of variance (anova) of
linear models resulting from data observed on experiments
is the most common of them. Models with simple, hierarchical
and cross classified effects are very common. In this context,
computer programs for statistical analysis which slice the
interaction or hierarchical effects into their component parts
and apply multiple comparison procedures and adjust
regression models are required.
Statistical analysis systems such as SAS and R, when
dealing with the problem of slicing the crossover or
hierarchical effect of a linear model do not properly apply
multiple comparisons for the means or F tests for the
parameters of fitted regression models. Multiple comparison
procedures and tests for the adjusted regression models
should be redone manually. Many errors are unconsciously
published annually, since many researchers are unaware of
the limitations related to those programs.
The statistical analysis computer program Sisvar
was developed to circumvent these limitations and is
currently used as a tool for teaching and research at the

----- Page 2 (native) -----
FERREIRA, D. F.
1040
Ciênc. agrotec., Lavras, v. 35, n. 6, p. 1039-1042, nov./dez., 2011
Federal University of Lavras (UFLA) and many other
educational and research institutions (public and private)
throughout the country. Moreover, Sisvar is free software
(the same as R). Researchers can use it for free by
downloading and installing directly from the address:
www.dex.ufla.br/~danielff.
The aim of this paper is to present the computer
statistical program Sisvar, illustrating its advantages,
limitations and analysis capabilities. In addition, a
secondary objective is to introduce the new Sisvar version
in Java that is under development. The new features under
implementation will be emphasized.
THE SISVAR SYSTEM
The Sisvar was first released in 1996, although its
development was initiated in 1994. The first version was
developed in the programming language Pascal and
compiled with Borland Turbo Pascal 3.0 for the generation
of an executable program. Initially, the database was
implemented using unique features of the Pascal
programming language. As the computer mouse was rarely
used at that time, the navigation system across the data
records was done via shortcut keys, also with
implementations using only features of Pascal. The report
used a similar text editor to Notepad in Windows. In this
version, only the first module of an analysis of variance
was developed. This is where the program’s name came
from, in that “Sis” refers to the abbreviation of system in
Portuguese and “var”, the abbreviation of variance. Thus
the Sisvar system consists of an analysis of variance
statistical program. It was possible to apply multiple
comparison procedures and regression analyses for
quantitative effects in the same way Sisvar do in the
current version. Moreover, interaction effects could be
sliced into their component parts and the same tests and
analyses as applied to the main dataset could be re-applied
in at this level.
Sisvar was developed to achieve specific goals.
The first objective was to obtain software that could be
used directly on the statistical experimental course of the
Department of Exact Sciences at UFLA. It was expected
that there would be an improvement of learning and
teaching processes. This was achieved. The second
objective was to initiate a development of genuinely
Brazilian free software that met the demands and
peculiarities of research conducted in the country. There
was a fear that non-free programs were becoming
increasingly inaccessible to researchers, teachers and
students from Brazil. There were some Brazilian programs
for statistical analysis at the time such as Sanest, SOC and
Saeg. The limitations inherent in these programs were the
reasons why the Sisvar project was initiated, intending to
overcome them. The third goal was to introduce statistical
analysis software for the Brazilian scientific community
that would allow the research results to be analyzed
efficiently and reliably. Because Sisvar was being developed
by only one researcher, it took approximately two and a
half years to release the first version.
Later, with the advent of Windows and with the
release of the Borland Delphi 1.0, the first version of Sisvar
for Windows was launched. In this version and in its
updates several analysis modules were incorporated and
the bugs were corrected as they arose. Sisvar’s popularity
grew more and more, with the program becoming
increasingly well-known by the Brazilian scientific
community and also by the Portuguese scientific
community. This wide acceptance of Sisvar is due to many
factors. The main thing is its great interactivity with users.
Analyses are performed in Sisvar with mouse clicks only,
in an almost self-explanatory sequence until results are
obtained. The reliability, accuracy and robustness of the
software can be highlighted in that it rarely freezes or
displays error messages and by the richness and detail of
results. In the first version of Sisvar, the inspiration of the
construction of the interfaces was my master’s supervisor,
who at the time had many difficulties with the use of
computers. Thus, it was thought that the interface should
be accessible to users less familiar with computers to aid
them in performing their statistical analysis. In fact this
aspect was very successfully implemented in Sisvar. Many
details and deficiencies still exist and should be improved
further.
During the development of new versions for
Windows, statistical analysis modules were implemented
such as: descriptive statistics, hypothesis testing for
various parameters, interval estimation for several
population parameters, normality tests, kernel density
estimation, simple and multiple linear regression
adjustments, methods of model selection as stepwise,
backward and forward and multiple comparisons using
bootstrap. The current Sisvar release is 5.3. With these
new implementations, basic statistics courses can now use
Sisvar in classroom practice, which could already be done
on experimental statistics courses.
Some features of Sisvar’s analytical functions
should be mentioned so that the user knows exactly what
the advantages and disadvantages of this program are. As
mentioned previously, the main analysis module is the
analysis of variance (anova) of experimental linear models.
Although very powerful, this option can only be used for

----- Page 3 (native) -----
Sisvar: a computer statistical analysis system
1041
Ciênc. agrotec., Lavras, v. 35, n. 6, p. 1039-1042, nov./dez., 2011
balanced data in Sisvar. The exception is the case of one
way anova design with only one factor. Sisvar cannot
perform an analysis if there are empty cells in the database.
When there is missing data, the user should simply omit
the line corresponding to the missing portion during the
process of file creation.
Sisvar accepts a maximum of 200 variables, columns
in the data. The linear regression and models selection
modules can be used with a maximum of 100 regression
variables. Finally, one can observe that Sisvar can only
deal with fixed Gauss-Markov linear models. There are no
limits on the number of records, except for limitations of
space in the user’s hard drive.
Among the advantages that Sisvar has over its
competitor’s statistical analysis systems is the ability to
slice the interactions and nested effects amongst fixed
factors of linear models. Besides the analysis of variance
of this process, there is the possibility to apply multiple
comparison procedures and contrast of the sliced means
of one factor into settled levels of the other including the
Scott-Knott test, absent in most of Sisvar’s competitors.
For quantitative effects, the sliced crossover or
hierarchical effects could be done by regression analysis.
Besides Sisvar, no other statistical analysis program is
known to apply appropriate tests of hypothesis for the
parameter of regression models when it is performed in
one quantitative factor to settled levels of the other effects
of interaction or hierarchical effects.
The ability to perform the Scott-Knott test is one of
the great advantages of using Sisvar, as mentioned earlier.
This test has no ambiguous results. In addition it has high
power and good control of type I experiment error rates
under partially H0. The R and SAS statistical analysis
systems have not implemented such tests in their basic
analysis routines. Another major advantage is that Sisvar
allows a high level of user interactivity, as pointed out
before, providing a statistical analysis environment that is
easier to use. Moreover, the robust, easily interpreted and
highly accurate results make Sisvar one of the most
attractive statistical analysis systems.
THE  SISVAR  SYSTEM  IN  JAVA
A new version in Java is under development. This
Java version resulted from the need to surpass the
limitations of the current release, enhancing the program’s
interactivity and solving incompatibility issues with the
current Sisvar database. The current version of Sisvar uses
Paradox and dBase databases, which are considered
obsolete. Microsoft, since the release of Windows Vista,
failed to support these databases. Numerous cases of such
problems were reported. Using Sisvar 5.3 with compatibility
module of Windows XP Service Pack 2 solves the problem.
Anticipating the possibility of this issue getting worse
with new releases of Windows, the idea of implementing
Sisvar in a cross-platform language with wide support for
the database came up. Hence, the first Sisvar Java version
which will be release 6.0 is under development. The
database db4o (which is implemented in Java) was chosen,
because it occupies little space on the hard drive, is efficient
and does not require installation by the user. The database
module of the new Sisvar is ready and is much friendlier
than the 5.3 version file manager. CSV files can be used for
passing data from different statistical analysis systems,
database or spreadsheet into Sisvar. This represents a big
improvement and makes the program more attractive and
offers more interactivity with other files system or
databases available nowadays. Many other improvements
have been implemented.
The great advantage of having a Java version is to
make Sisvar multiplatform, i.e., the software will run on
Windows, Solaris, Mac OS X and Unix/Linux and others
that run Java Virtual Machine. The current version is
implemented in Pascal/Delphi and can run specifically in
Windows environment. Still, with installation through
Wine, the user can run Sisvar on Linux platforms. The first
priority is to maintain and expand the interactive features
of the existing version. The Java Programming Language
is very powerful and allows the creation of computer
systems capable of performing different tasks feasible to a
computer. Java uses the powerful tools of object-oriented
programming, OOP. It was developed by Sun Microsystems
and is currently one of the languages most popular for
software development (DEITEL; DEITEL, 2007). The
reasons for such popularity are the portability and free
compilers. Portability is the ability of a developed program
to run on several platforms. The Java compilers and other
tools for developing computer programs are freely
available on the Oracle website. Another advantage is the
ability to develop systems for the Internet and technologies
such as mobile devices, as for instance mobile phones.
During the implementation of the Java version of
Sisvar, the multiplatform release, several specific problems
that need solutions or generalizations related to increased
efficiency and improvement of the quality of the existing
techniques are addressed. Among them, the multivariate
statistical methods will have a special attention. The new
release will focus on multivariate methods (JOHNSON;
WICHERN, 1998; FERREIRA, 2008) involving the Behrens-
Fisher problem, normality multivariate tests, and
computational methods for calculating non central

----- Page 4 (native) -----
FERREIRA, D. F.
1042
Ciênc. agrotec., Lavras, v. 35, n. 6, p. 1039-1042, nov./dez., 2011
distributions. Moreover, several classical univariate
(FERREIRA, 2009) and multivariate (FERREIRA, 2008)
statistical analysis techniques that are not available in the
current release are being implemented in the new version
of Sisvar. Many methods have been proposed during this
process that are partially or fully subjects of dissertations
and PhD theses of the experimental statistics program of
the Department of Exact Sciences at UFLA.
The major barrier preventing the use of
computational intensive methods in agriculture and plant
breeding is the lack of user-friendly software associated
with the small diffusion of methods of this nature among
researchers from agricultural sciences or other areas.
Because of these difficulties and the need that the major
computer-intensive statistical methods are available to
scientists from various fields of knowledge, the idea to
include of such innovation in Sisvar was now real.
Constant updates are still held in the Pascal/Delphi
releases of Sisvar and they are available for download at
www.dex.ufla.br/~danielff.
Sisvar in Java will be available online for download
at the same address above. The greatest innovation will
be making available the source code, beside the executable
program. It will be necessary to create a developers core.
All interested persons may be able to contribute to improve
and develop new routines. This core, the Sisvar core team,
will be responsible to approve the new routines and for
releasing new versions. This is the first Brazilian seed for
developing of a statistical analysis system totally free, in a
similar manner to that performed by the R program (R
DEVELOPMENT CORE TEAM 2011).
CONCLUSION
Sisvar’s acceptance by the scientific community is
due to the fact that this statistical analysis system produces
reliable analyses, in that they are accurate, precise, simple
and robust and allow greater interactivity for the user. Many
tests carried out by Sisvar are difficult to reproduce directly
when using other software of statistical analysis, requiring
artifice to be obtained. It is expected that the new version
will minimized limitations. The main courses of action to
achieve these goals might be to solve compatibility issues,
to expand the analytical capabilities of the program, to
increase the efficiency of their routines, and to enhance
the portability of the program to other operating systems
besides Windows.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The author would like to thank CNPq, CAPES and
FAPEMIG for the financial support during these 15 years
of development of Sisvar.
REFERENCES
DEITEL, H. M.; DEITEL, P. J. Java: como programar.
Pearson Prentice Hall, São Paulo, 6th edition, 2007.
1110 p.
FERREIRA, D. F. Estatística multivariada. Lavras:
Editora Ufla, 2008. 662 p.
FERREIRA, D. F. Estatística básica. Lavras: Editora Ufla,
2a ed. ampliada e revisada. 2009. 664 p.
JOHNSON, R. A.; WICHERN, D. W. Applied multivariate
statistical analysis. Prentice Hall, New Jersey, 4th
edition, 1998.
R Development Core Team. R: A language and
environment for statistical computing. R Foundation for
Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria, 2011. Available in:
<http://www.r-project.org>. Access in: 31 Jan. 2011.