

----- Page 1 (native) -----
Reversed graph embedding resolves complex single-cell 
trajectories
Xiaojie Qiu1,2, Qi Mao3, Ying Tang4, Li Wang5, Raghav Chawla2, Hannah A. Pliner2, and 
Cole Trapnell1,2,*
1Molecular & Cellular Biology Program, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, 98195, USA
2Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, 98195, USA
3HERE company, Chicago IL 60606, USA
4Department of Physics and Astronomy, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China
5Department of Mathematics, Statistics and Computer Science, University of Illinois at Chicago, 
Chicago, USA
Abstract
Single-cell trajectories can unveil how gene regulation governs cell fate decisions. However, 
learning the structure of complex trajectories with two or more branches remains a challenging 
computational problem. We present Monocle 2, which uses reversed graph embedding to describe 
multiple fate decisions in a fully unsupervised manner. Applied to two studies of blood 
development, Monocle 2 revealed that mutations in key lineage transcription factors diverts cells 
to alternative fates.
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use: http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
*Corresponding author: coletrap@uw.edu. 
Author Contributions
X.Q., Q.M., and C.T. designed and implemented Monocle 2. X.Q. performed the analysis. Y.T. and L.W. contributed to technical 
design. R.C. and H.P. performed testing. C.T. conceived the project. All authors wrote the manuscript.
Competing Final Interests Statement
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Code availability. A version of monocle 2 (version: 2.2.0) used in this study is provided as Supplementary Software. The newest 
Monocle 2 is available through Bioconductor as well as GitHub (https://github.com/cole-trapnell-lab/monocle-release). DDRTree, 
SimplePPT, SGL-tree/L1 graph are implemented in DDRTree (version: 0.1.5), simplePPT (version 0.1.0) and L1Graph (version: 
0.1.0), respectively (Available (DDRTree) or will be (simplePPT, L1Graph) available from CRAN). Density peak algorithm is 
available from https://github.com/Xiaojieqiu/densityClust/tree/knn_dp (densityClust: version 0.3). All those packages are included in 
Supplementary Software, which also includes a helper package, xacHelper, containing helper functions as well as all other analysis 
code that can be used to reproduce all figures and data in this study. Jupyter notebooks for reproducing analysis related Olsson and 
Paul datasets are included in Supplementary Software too. In addition, we deposited the same data at https://github.com/cole-trapnell-
lab/monocle2-rge-paper.
Data availability. Four public sc RNA-seq data sets are used in this study. HSMM dataset: GSE525291; Lung dataset: GSE525837; 
Paul et. al dataset9 : http://compgenomics.weizmann.ac.il/tanay/?page id=649. Olsson dataset8: synapse id syn4975060. Data for 
neuron simulation, results of least action paths as well as the complicate tree structure are included as Supplementary Data 1, 2, 3, 
respectively.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 21.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Methods. 2017 October ; 14(10): 979–982. doi:10.1038/nmeth.4402.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 2 (native) -----
Introduction
Most cell state transitions, whether in development, reprogramming, or disease, are 
characterized by cascades of gene expression changes. We recently introduced a 
bioinformatics technique called “pseudotemporal ordering”, which applies machine learning 
to single-cell transcriptome sequencing (RNA-Seq) data to order cells by progression and 
reconstruct their “trajectory” as they differentiate or undergo some other type of biological 
transition1. Despite intense efforts to develop scalable, accurate pseudotime reconstruction 
algorithms (recently reviewed at2), state-of-the-art tools have several major limitations. Most 
pseudotime methods can only reconstruct linear trajectories, while others such as Wishbone3 
or DPT4 support branch identification with heuristic procedures, but either are unable to 
identify more than one branch point in the trajectory or require that the user specify the 
number of branches and cell fates as an input parameter.
Here, we describe Monocle 2 (Supplementary Software and https://github.com/cole-trapnell-
lab/monocle-release), which applies reversed graph embedding (RGE)5,6, a recently 
developed machine learning strategy, to accurately reconstruct complex single-cell 
trajectories. Monocle 2 requires no a priori information about the genes that characterize the 
biological process, the number of cell fates or branch points in the trajectory, or the design of 
the experiment. Monocle 2 outperforms not only its previous version but also more recently 
developed methods, producing more accurate, robust trajectories.
Results
Monocle 2 begins by identifying genes that define biological process using an unsupervised 
procedure we term “dpFeature”. The procedure works by selecting the genes differentially 
expressed between clusters of cells identified with tSNE dimension reduction followed by 
density peak clustering. When applied to four different datasets1,7–9 most of the genes 
returned by dpFeature were also recovered by a semi-supervised selection method guided by 
aspects of the experimental design and were highly enriched for Gene Ontology relevant to 
myogenesis, confirming that dpFeature is a powerful and general unsupervised feature 
selection approach. (Supplementary Figures 1–3)
We next sought to develop a pseudotime trajectory reconstruction algorithm that does not 
require the number of cell fates or branches as an input parameter. To do so, we employed 
reversed graph embedding5,6, a machine learning technique to learn a parsimonious 
principal graph. Informally, a principal graph is like a principal curve10 that passes through 
the “middle” of a dataset but is allowed to have branches11. However, learning a principal 
graph that describes a population of single-cell RNA-Seq profiles is very challenging 
because each expressed gene adds an additional dimension to the space. In general, learning 
geometry is dramatically harder in high-dimensional spaces12. Reversed graph embedding 
solves this problem by finding a mapping between the high dimensional gene expression 
space and a much lower dimensional one while simultaneously learning the structure of the 
graph in this reduced space.
Qiu et al.
Page 2
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 3 (native) -----
Monocle 2 uses DDRTree5,6, a scalable RGE algorithm, to learn a principal tree on a 
population of single cells by default, asserting that it describes the sequence of changes to 
global gene expression levels as a cell progresses through the biological process under study 
(Figure 1A). In contrast to other methods1,3,4,13, Monocle 2 identifies branch points that 
describe significant divergences in cellular state automatically. Monocle is also equipped 
with alternative RGE methods5,6 including one that in principle can learn cyclical or disjoint 
trajectories, though doing so requires some degree of parameter optimization on behalf of 
the user.
To assess the Monocle 2’s accuracy, we first applied it to myoblasts, which we previously 
reported to differentiate along a linear trajectory1 (Figure 1B). Surprisingly, Monocle 2 
reconstructed a trajectory with a single branch point leading to two outcomes (Figure 1C). 
Some genes associated with mitogen withdrawal, such as CCNB2 showed similar kinetics 
on both branches, but a number of genes required for muscle contraction were strongly 
activated only on one of the two branches of the Monocle 2 trajectory (Supplementary 
Figure 4). A global search for genes with significant branch-dependent expression using 
Branch Expression Analysis Modeling (BEAM)14 revealed that cells along these two 
outcomes, F1 and F2, differed in the expression of 887 genes (FDR < 10%), including 
numerous components of the contractile muscle program. The BEAM analysis suggested 
that only outcome F1 represented successful progression to fused myotubes (Supplementary 
Figure 4), consistent with immunofluorescence measurements of MYH2, which show a 
substantial fraction of isolated nuclei lacking MYH2 and that are not incorporated into 
myotubes (ref. Figures 1 and 4 of1).
A simulation of differentiation driven by a set of stochastic differential equations controlled 
by a hypothetical gene regulatory network15 demonstrated that Monocle 2 robustly and 
accurately reconstructed trajectories with up to three fates (Supplementary Figure 5–8, 
Supplementary Data 1, 2)16. In contrast to other methods, Monocle 2 also accurately learned 
a complex tree with five branches in a fully automatic fashion (Supplementary Figure 6B, 
Supplementary Data 3).
We next sought to compare Monocle 2 to state-of-the art algorithms for inferring single-cell 
trajectories, including Monocle 11, Wishbone3, Diffusion Pseudotime (DPT)4, and 
SLICER13. Unlike Monocle 2, these methods do not construct an explicit tree. Instead they 
order cells based on pairwise geodesic distances between them as approximated by a 
nearest-neighbor graph (Wishbone and SLICER) or minimum spanning tree (Monocle 1) or 
calculated analytically (DPT). Wishbone, SLICER, and DPT identify branches implicitly by 
analyzing patterns in the pseudotime orderings that are inconsistent with a linear trajectory. 
Furthermore, Wishbone assumes the trajectory has exactly one branch point, while DPT can 
detect more than one, but provides no means of automatically determining how many 
genuine branches exist in the data. We hypothesized that Monocle 2’s explicit trajectory 
structure would yield more robust pseudotimes and branch assignments than alternative 
algorithms.
We tested each algorithm using data from Paul et al, who analyzed transcriptomes of several 
thousand differentiating blood cells9. Monocle 2, DPT, and Wishbone produced qualitatively 
Qiu et al.
Page 3
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 4 (native) -----
similar trajectories, with CMP cells residing upstream of a branch at which GMP and 
erythroid cells diverge (Supplementary Figure 9–11). SLICER generated a branched 
trajectory in which the branch occurs within the erythroid population to bifurcate into either 
CMPs or GMPs. Monocle 2, Wishbone, and DPT produced orderings that were highly 
correlated with a “reference ordering”, constructed using a panel of markers similar to the 
approach introduced by Tirosh et al17, while SLICER and Monocle 1 were less so. Monocle 
2 assigned cells to branches as or more accurately than other methods (Figure 1D, 
Supplementary Figure 10), but Monocle 2’s assignments were far more consistent when 
provided with subsampled fractions of the cells (Figure 1E, Supplementary Figure 9F,G). 
When run on the myoblast data, DPT positioned most fully differentiated cells along a major 
branch, with incompletely differentiated cells split along a minor branch or not assigned to 
either, while Wishbone failed to discriminate correctly between the two outcomes 
(Supplementary Figure 12). Although Monocle 2 can be tuned for several user-specified 
parameters, its results were similar to the defaults over widely varying values 
(Supplementary Figures 13–14). Monocle 2’s running time scaled linearly in the number of 
input cells, consistent with its linear algorithmic complexity, processing 8365 cells in 9 
minutes (Supplemental Figures 13C) These benchmarks demonstrate that Monocle 2 
produces trajectories that are as accurate and more robust than state-of-art methods and yet 
makes fewer assumptions regarding the number of cell fates generated by the trajectory.
We also assessed Monocle 2’s alternative algorithms for dimensionality reduction and graph 
learning. DDRTree, SimplePPT and SGL-tree, which implement RGE to learn principal 
trees reported highly concordant trajectories when the data was initially reduced with PCA, 
ICA, and diffusion maps (Supplementary Figure 15. LLE, a reduction technique known to 
be highly sensitive to tuning parameters, sometimes led to incorrect reconstructions with 
SimplePPT. L1-graph, an RGE algorithm that can learn graphs with multiple components or 
cycles, often reported less refined graphs with numerous minor branches, but captured the 
overall trajectory structure accurately.
Because Monocle 2 can in principle learn complex trajectories with many branches, we 
reanalyzed the data from Paul et al. in 10 dimensions (selected based on variance explained 
by PCs) rather than the default of two. This higher-dimensional trajectory contained five 
branching events leading to six different outcomes, with cells classified by Paul et al. as 
fully differentiated monocytes, neutrophils, eosinophil, basophils, dendritic cells, 
megakaryocytes, and erythrocytes confined to distinct outcomes (Supplemental Figure 16). 
Thus, Monocle 2 can resolve complex branching processes.
Although Monocle 2’s trajectories for differentiating myoblasts and common myeloid 
progenitors were broadly consistent with the known sequence of regulatory events governing 
those processes, we sought further experimental means of validating the structure of the 
algorithm’s trajectories. Recently, Olsson et al profiled several hundred FACS-sorted cells 
during various stages of murine myelopoeisis, i.e. LSK, CMP, GMP and LKCD34+ cells. 
We analyzed these cells with Monocle 2 and reconstructed a trajectory with two major 
branches and three distinct fates (Figure 2, Supplementary Figure 17, 18). Lin−/Sca1+/c-Kit
+ (LSK) cells were concentrated at one tip of the tree, which we designated the root, with 
Qiu et al.
Page 4
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 5 (native) -----
CMP, GMP, and LKCD34+ cells distributed over the remainder of the tree (Figure 2A, 
Supplementary Figure 17A).
Monocle 2 placed cells classified as erythrocytes or megakaryocytes on a path to outcome 
FE, while granulocytes and monocytes by Olsson et al were confined to outcomes FG and 
FM respectively. Genes associated with the granulocytic and monocytic programs became 
progressively more differentially expressed following the second branch (Supplementary 
Figure 17B, C). Many of the genes with significantly branch-dependent expression (BEAM 
test14, FDR < 1%), were bound at their promoters by Irf8 or Gfi1, key activators of the 
monocytic and granulocytic expression programs, respectively (Supplementary Figure 17D, 
E).
Providing cells from mice lacking Gfi1 or Irf8 to Monocle 2 did not substantially alter the 
structure of the myeloid differentiation trajectory (Figure 2B). However, cells from Gfi1−/− 
mice were largely excluded from the branch occupied by wild-type granulocytes, and Irf8−/
− cells were depleted from the wild-type monocyte branch. That is, the loss of a gene known 
to activate a fate-specific expression program appeared to divert cells to the opposite fate. 
Cells from double knockout mice (Gfi1−/− Irf8−/−) were present on both monocyte and 
granulocyte branches, but concentrated closer to the branch point and away from the tips of 
the tree, suggesting that they did not fully differentiate (Supplementary Figure 19A).
Testing whether Gfi1−/− or Irf8−/− had fully adopted the monocyte and granulocyte 
expression programs, revealed that Gfi1−/− cells on the branch to FM express higher levels 
of genes from normally associated with granulocytes than wild-type monocytes 
(Supplementary Figure 19, Methods). Likewise, cells from Irf8−/− mice on the branch to FG 
showed aberrantly high levels of monocytic genes. Analysis of genetic perturbations from 
the large-scale transcriptomic study of hematopoiesis reported by Paul et al also revealed 
diversions of cells onto specific branches of the trajectory, suggesting that diversion of cells 
from one fate to another may be a consequence of losing a key fate regulator 
(Supplementary Figure 19G, H).
In addition to known differentiated cell types, Olsson et al. detected cells that express a mix 
of genes specific to different terminal cell fates. They also reported rare, transient cell states 
that mix hematopoietic/multipotent markers with differentiated markers. They concluded 
that both types of “mixed lineage” cells reside in the developmental hierarchy downstream 
of long-term and short-term HSCs but upstream of cells that have committed to a lineage. 
Consistent with this interpretation, Monocle 2 positioned mixed-lineage cells and rare 
transient cells (Supplementary Figure 20) upstream of the the granulocyte-monocyte branch.
Discussion
Single-cell RNA-Seq has spurred an explosion of computational methods to infer the precise 
sequence of gene regulatory events that drive transitions from one cellular state to another. 
However, most current methods rely on strong assumptions about the structure of a 
biological trajectory. Many also require the user to supervise trajectory inference, inject 
large amounts of a priori biological knowledge, or both.
Qiu et al.
Page 5
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 6 (native) -----
Monocle 2 learns complex cellular trajectories with multiple branches in a fully data-driven, 
unsupervised fashion with only limited assumptions regarding its structure. It employs a 
class of manifold learning algorithms that aim to embed a principal graph amongst the high-
dimensional single-cell RNA-seq data. In contrast to previous methods that infer branch 
structure using heuristic analyses of pairwise distances between cells, Monocle 2 can use 
this graph to directly identify developmental fate decisions. We have demonstrated through 
extensive benchmarking that Monocle 2 compares favorably with other tools such as 
Wishbone without requiring the user to specify the structure of the trajectory.
Analysis of multiple real and synthetic datasets demonstrated that Monocle 2 reconstructs 
trajectories that faithfully characterize cellular differentiation. Previously, we showed that 
loss of interferon signaling can create a new branch in an otherwise linear trajectory that 
reflects the response of dendritic cells to antigen14. Here, we show that cells from mice that 
lack transcription factors required for establishing specific myeloid fates were diverted onto 
alternative fates of the same trajectory without altering its structure. Why some loss of 
function mutations create branches while others divert cells along existing ones is unclear, 
but this question underscores the increasing power of analyzing single-cell trajectories. We 
also anticipate that Monocle 2 will be useful not just for expression data, but for single-cell 
chromatin accessibility18 or 3D structure19 analysis as well. We are confident that Monocle 
2 will help reveal how various layers of gene regulation coordinate developmental decision 
making within individual cells.
Online Methods
Reversed graph embedding
Monocle 2 uses a technique called reversed graph embedding5,6, 20 (RGE) to learn a graph 
structure that describes a single-cell experiment. RGE simultaneously learns a principal 
graph that represents the cell trajectory, as well as a function that maps points on the 
trajectory (which is embedded in low dimensions) back to the original high dimensional 
space. RGE aims to learn both a set of latent points 
 where 
 is the 
number of the set (or cell numbers) and an undirected graph  that connects these latent 
points. The latent points 
 in the low-dimensional space corresponds to the input data 
 in the high-dimensional space. The graph 
 contains a set of 
vertexes 
 and a set of weighted, undirected edges , where each 
corresponds to latent point , so the graph also resides in the latent, low-dimensional space.
In the context of the single-cell trajectory construction problem, 
 is typically a vector of 
the feature genes’ expression values (for example, based on dpFeature selection, see 
Supplementary Notes) of the th cell in a single-cell RNA-Seq experiment,  is the learned 
trajectory (for example, a tree) along which the cells transit, and  is the principal point on 
 corresponding to the cell 
.
RGE learns the graph  as well as a function that maps back to the input data space. Let 
denote the weight of edge 
, which represents the connectivity between  and . In 
other words, 
 means that edge 
 exists in , and 0 otherwise. Define 
 as the 
Qiu et al.
Page 6
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 7 (native) -----
projection function from  to some point in the high-dimensional space. To learn , 
 and 
, we need to optimize
where 
 is a set of feasible graph structures parameterized 
, and 
 is a set of 
functions mapping a latent, low-dimensional point to a point in the original, high-
dimensional space.
As shown in5, the above optimization will learn graph structures in the latent space, but it 
does not measure the deviations of latent points to the observed data. That is, no effort is 
made to ensure that the graph nodes are embedded in a way relevant to the cloud of observed 
data points. To ensure the graph describes the overall structure of the observed data, RGE 
aims to position the latent points such that their image under the function  (that is, their 
corresponding positions in the high-dimensional space) will be close to the input data while 
also ensures neighbor points on low dimensional principal graph be “neighbors” in the input 
dimension. The optimization problem is formulated as
where  is a parameter that adjusts the relative strength of these two summations. In practice, 
implementing reversed graph embedding requires that we place some constraints on 
 and 
, as summarized briefly in the following sections.
SimplePPT: A simple principal tree algorithm
SimplePPT is the first RGE technique proposed by Mao et al for learning a tree structure to 
describe a set of observed data points. The tree can be learned in the original space or in 
some lower dimension retrieved by dimensionality reduction methods such as PCA20. 
SimplePPT makes some choices that simplify the optimization problem. Notably, 
 is 
optimized as one single variable instead of two separate sets of variables. Moreover, the loss 
function in the reversed graph embedding is replaced by the empirical quantization error, 
which serves as the measurement between the 
 and its corresponding observed points 
. The joint optimization of 
 is efficient from the perspective of optimization with 
respect to 
, which is solved by simply finding the minimum spanning tree.
The principal 
 graph algorithm
Mao et al later proposed an extension of SimplePPT that can learn arbitrary graphs, rather 
than just trees, which describes large datasets embedded in the same space as the input6. An 
 graph is a sparse graph which is based on the assumption that each data point (or cell) 
has a small number of neighborhoods in which the minimum number of points that span a 
low-dimensional affine subspace21 passing through that point. In addition, there may exist 
Qiu et al.
Page 7
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 8 (native) -----
noise in certain elements of  and a natural idea is to estimate the edge weights by tolerating 
these errors. In general, a sparse solution is more robust and facilitates the consequent 
identification of test sample (or sequenced single-cell samples). Unlike SimplePPT, this 
method learns the graph by formulating the optimization as a linear programming problem.
In the same work6, they also proposed a generalization of SimplePPT, which we term as 
SGL-tree (Principal Graph and Structure Learning for tree), to learn tree structure for large 
dataset by similarly considering clustering of data points as in DDRTree. Principal 
 graph 
and SGL-tree are all treated as SGL in this study.
DDRTree: Discriminative dimensionality reduction via learning a tree
DDRTree5, the default RGE technique used by Monocle 2, provides two key features not 
offered by SimplePPT learning framework. First, DDRTree does not assume the graph 
resides in the input space, and can reduce its dimensionality while learning the trajectory. 
Second, it also does not require that there be one node in the graph per data point, which 
greatly accelerates the algorithm and reduces its memory footprint.
Like SimplePPT, DDRTree learns a latent point for each cell, along with a linear projection 
function 
, where 
 is a matrix with columns that form 
an orthogonal basis 
 (  is the dimension of feature genes,  is the dimension 
of latent space). DDRTree simultaneously learns a graph on a second set of latent points 
. These points are treated as the centroids of 
 where 
 and the 
principal graph is the spanning tree of those centroids. The DDRTree scheme works by 
optimizing
In effect, the algorithm acts as soft 
-means clustering on points 
, and jointly learns a 
graph on the 
 cluster centers. The matrix 
 with the 
th element as 
 transforms the 
hard assignments used in 
-means into soft assignments with 
 as a regularization 
parameter. The above problem contains a number of analytical steps, and can be solved by 
alternating optimization until convergence. Moreover, because some of the more expensive 
numerical operations involve matrices that are 
 dimensional (instead of 
 dimensional), 
they have complexity that is invariant of the size of the input data for a small fixed 
. In 
Qiu et al.
Page 8
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 9 (native) -----
Monocle 2, we provide a procedure to automatically chooses a value of 
 that should work 
well for a wide range of datasets based on the number of cells 
 in the experiment:
During the first optimization iteration, these 
 centroids are initialized by using -mediods 
clustering in the low-dimensional space.
Pseudotime calculation and branch assignment
By default, Monocle 2 calls DDRTree to learn the principal tree describing a single cell 
experiment, and then projects each cell onto its nearest location on the tree. Monocle 2 
allows users to conveniently select a tip of the tree as the root and then transverses the tree 
from the root, computing the geodesic distance of each cell to the root cell, which is taken as 
its pseudotime, and assign branch or segment simultaneously.
DDRTree returns a principal tree of the centroids of cell clusters in low dimension. To 
calculate pseudotimes, Monocle 2 projects the cell’s latent points 
, to the principal graph 
formed by principal points, 
. For latent points not near tip principal points (end nodes of 
the principal tree), Monocle 2 finds the nearest line segment on the principal tree and then 
project them to the nearest point on that segment. More formally, we can define a vector 
between a cell 
, where 
 denotes the coordinates of the cell in the latent 
space, to the nearest principal point  by 
. The line segment formed by the two nearest 
principal points 
 is 
. Then we can calculate  as 
. The projection can be calculated as:
For latent points near the tip principal points, we will orthogonally project the latent point to 
the line segment formed by extending the tip principal point and its nearest neighbor 
principal point in the graph to obtain the projection point, that is, 
.
We then calculate the distance between all the projection points and construct a minimal 
spanning tree (MST) on the projection points. To avoid zero values of distance between cells 
projected to the same principal points, which prevents the calculation of a MST, the smallest 
positive distance between all cell pairs is added to all distance values. This MST is used to 
assign pseudotime for each cell (See below).
To encode the position of each cell within the branching structure of the trajectory, Monocle 
2 performs a depth-first traversal of the principal tree learned during RGE. Without loss of 
Qiu et al.
Page 9
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 10 (native) -----
generality, we assume one principal point corresponds to one latent point (for example, in 
the case we set 
 or each cell corresponds to its own cluster). Following the 
definition introduced in1, an ordering of cells (principal points) is obtained through a depth 
first search (DFS) of the learned principal tree starting from the root cell. We can then assign 
each cell to a trajectory segment, 
 which specifies the segment  by where the cell 
 is located based on the ordering list, , and the graph structure, . We set 
 at the root 
cell and increase a segment counter  every time we reach a new branch point. More 
formally, we can write the formula of segment assignment as:
where 
 represents all precedents  of  in the ordering , 
represents the degree of 
cell . T. For the general cases where the principal points is less than the cell numbers, cells 
will inherit the segment assignment of their nearest principal point.
Similar to our previous definition of pseudotime1, Monocle 2 calculates pseudotime based 
on the geodesic distance of each cell to the root cells on the MST of the projection points. 
Define pseudotime of cell  from a branching biological process  with branches given by 
as 
, we can calculate its pseudotime recursively by adding the pseudotime of its 
parent cell on the MST of the projection points (closest cell on the same branch) with the 
Euclidean distance, 
, between current and the parent on the 
MST, by setting the root cell as pseudotime 0. That is,
Assessing accuracy or robustness of pseudotime and branch assignments
We assessed the accuracy and robustness of each algorithm’s pseudotime assignment against 
the reference ordering by two measures of correlation (Pearson’s Rho (default) and 
Kendall’s Tau) between their pseudotime values.
We used adjusted Rand index (ARI)22, a common metric used for measuring clustering 
accuracy, to measure the accuracy or robustness of tree segment assignment. Given the 
number of common cells, denoted as , between the reference ordering and the ordering 
based on an algorithm (Monocle 2, Monocle 1, DPT, Wishbone or SLICER (when 
available)), and corresponding trajectory segment assignments for reference ordering and 
ordering based on a different algorithm, 
 and 
, namely, 
 and 
. The overlap between cells from segment  ( 
) and cells from 
segment  ( 
) in each of the two orderings is represented by the number 
 of cells in 
common, i.e. 
. Define the number of cells with segment  from reference 
Qiu et al.
Page 10
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 11 (native) -----
ordering is 
 and the number of cells with segment  from ordering based on an 
algorithm is 
. The adjusted Rand Index is then formulated as
which is a measure of the similarity between two data clusterings (or segment assignment in 
this case). When ARI is closer to 1, the segment assignment is more consistent between the 
two orderings.
For calculating the accuracy of pseudotime and branch assignment of the simulation 
(neuron/astro-genesis) and Paul dataset, the reference ordering corresponds to the real 
simulation and branches assignment based on manual assessment (see Supplementary 
Notes) or the pseudotime and branch (or cell type suggested from the original study17) from 
the marker-based ordering (see next section).
For calculating the robustness, the reference ordering is defined in the context of 
downsampling. We apply two different downsampling strategies. First, we downsample the 
full dataset, including the simulation data for neuron/astro-genesis, Paul dataset and the lung 
dataset, selecting 
 of the cells from the full dataset 25 times without replacement. Then 
we run Monocle 2, Monocle 1, DPT, and Wishbone to construct branched trajectory. 
SLICER was excluded from the downsampling analysis on account of its long running times 
and instability on occasional down-sample runs. Then we compare all pairs of downsamples 
by the metrics discussed above. We also progressively downsample all the full dataset over a 
range of increasing fractions of cells from the full dataset. Sampling is performed without 
replacement and three different subsets are generated for each proportion to serve as 
replicates. Then we run each software, including Monocle 1, Monocle 2, DPT, Wishbone, to 
construct branched trajectories for each fraction, which are compared to the corresponding 
trajectory built from the full dataset. ARI, Pearson’s Rho, Kendal’s Tau for all cases are then 
calculated as above.
In order to assess the robustness of Monocle 2 over different parameters choices, we run 
Monocle 2 and sample a large range for each parameter used in DDRTree, including, 
Dimension, lambda, maxIter, ncenter, param:gamm, sigma while keeping other parameters 
as default and compare the result to the ordering obtained by running Monocle 2 with all 
default parameters. Pearson’s Rho and ARI are used to calculate the robustness.
Comparing different algorithms to a marker-based ordering
In order to test the accuracy of each trajectory reconstruction algorithm, we compared their 
trajec-tories to an empirical ordering based on marker genes. Relying on results from Paul et 
al [8], we first select Pf4, Apoe, Flt3, Cd74 as CMP specific genes, Hba-a2, Car2, Cited4, 
Klf1 as MEP specific genes and Mpo, Prg2, Prtn3, Ctsg as GMP specific genes. Following 
the approach of Tirosh et al [9], we then select 100 other genes with expression correlated to 
Qiu et al.
Page 11
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 12 (native) -----
these marker genes to calculate a stemness score and GMP or MEP lineage score. We define 
cells with stemness score larger than 0 as CMP cell and any cells with positive lineage score 
as MEP cells and negative score as GMP cells. This grouping of cells is used for branch 
assignment accuracy evaluation in Supplementary Figure 9. We then define the reference 
pseudotime for each cell as:
where  corresponds to the origin 
  corresponds to the stemness score and  the 
lineage score for the lineage to which each cell is assigned, 
represents the Euclidean 
distance between two points, and 
 indicates the set of CMP cells.
Pseudotime correlations were computed on the paths from the root to each fate based on the 
reference ordering separately and then averaged. Since the empirical ordering based on 
marker genes is not perfect, we also investigate the accuracy of the ordering in terms of the 
absolute lag-1 autocorrelation of fitted spline curve for the selected marker genes. We first 
select the trajectory segments corresponding to the transition from the CMP cells to either 
MEP or GMP cells and then fit a kinetic curve for each marker gene for each transition with 
a spline curve with three degree of freedom. We then calculate the the absolute lag-1 
autocorrelation r, which is defined as following:
where  represents the gene expression at time stamp 
 is the mean expression across the 
pseudotime series for that gene. Higher autocorrelation value implies smoother gene 
expression dynamics based on the ordering. Those 300 cells are also used to calculate the 
accuracy of branch assignment with the branch assignment from the marker-based ordering.
Although a reference ordering based on markers from literature can serve as a reasonable 
gold-standard, it also introduces bias in a benchmarking analysis. Algorithms that order cells 
based on a small set of informative genes (which include or correlate the marker genes) will 
likely match it better than algorithms that order cells based on all genes. We therefore 
explored orthogonal means of measuring accuracy of each programs ordering based on the 
neuron simulation data (see Supplementary Notes).
Reconstruct complex haemopoiesis hierarchy
We check the scree plot to choose ten dimension as the intrinsic dimensions to reconstruct 
the developmental trajectory for the Paul dataset (cells used in Figure 1 of the original 
study9). Five branch points and six terminal lineages (monocytes, neutrophils or eosinophil, 
basophils, dendritic cells, megakaryocytes, and erythrocytes) are revealed. We ordered the 
cells using genes Paul et al. used to cluster their data rather than the genes from dpFeature, 
Qiu et al.
Page 12
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 13 (native) -----
for the sake of consistency with their clusetering analysis. Similarly, we reconstruct Olsson 
datasets in four dimensions. The major bifurcation between the granulocyte and monocyte 
branch (GMP) as well as the intricate branch between GMP and megakaryocyte/erythrocyte 
(Ery/Meg) are revealed. Top 1, 000 genes from dpFeature based on WT cells are used in 
both of the WT and full datasets. The distribution (related to confusion matrix) of 
percentages of cells in each cluster from the original papers over each segment (state in 
Monocle 2) of the principal graph are calculated and visualized in the heatmap.
We applied BEAM analysis to identify genes significantly bifurcating between Ery/Meg and 
GMP branch on the Olsson wildtype dataset. We then calculate the instant log ratios (ILRs) 
of gene expression between Ery/Meg and GMP branch and find genes have mean ILR larger 
than 0.5. The ILRs are defined as:
So 
 is calculated as the log ratio of fitted value at interpolated pseudotime point  for 
the Ery/Meg lineage and that for the GMP lineage. Those genes are used to calculate the 
lineage score (simply calculated as average expression of those genes in each cell, same as 
stemness score below) for both of the Olsson and the Paul dataset which is used to color the 
cells in a tree plot transformed from the high dimensional principal graph (see 
Supplementary Notes). The same genes are used to create the multi-way heatmap for both of 
the Paul and Olsson dataset (see plot multiple_branches_heatmap function). Critical 
functional genes from this procedure are identified. Car1, Car2 (important erythroid 
functional genes for reversible hydration of carbon dioxide) as well as Elane, Prtn3 
(important proteases hydrolyze proteins within specialized neutrophil lysosomes as well as 
proteins of the extracellular matrix) are randomly chosen as example for creating multi-
lineage kinetic curves in both of the Olsson and Paul dataset (see 
plot_multiple_branches_pseudotime function).
In addition, pseudotime dependent genes for the Ery/Meg and GMP branch are identified in 
the Olsson wildtype dataset. All genes that always have lower expression from both lineages 
than the average in the progenitor cells are selected. Those genes are used to calculate the 
stemness score for both of the Olsson and the Paul dataset which is used to color the cells in 
the tree plot.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank I. Tirosh for discussion on marker-based ordering, F. Theis and F. A. Wolf for discussion on Paul et. al 
data analysis with DPT, and members of the Trapnell laboratory for comments on the manuscript. This work was 
supported by US National Institutes of Health (NIH) grant DP2 HD088158. C.T. is partly supported by a Dale. F. 
Frey Award for Breakthrough Scientists and an Alfred P. Sloan Foundation Research Fellowship. H. A. P. is 
supported by a National Science Foundation (NSF) Graduate Research Fellowship (grant: DGE-1256082).
Qiu et al.
Page 13
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 14 (native) -----
References
1. Trapnell C, et al. The dynamics and regulators of cell fate decisions are revealed by pseudotemporal 
ordering of single cells. Nat Biotechnol. 2014; 32:381–386. [PubMed: 24658644] 
2. Kumar P, Tan Y, Cahan P. Understanding development and stem cells using single cell-based 
analyses of gene expression. Development. 2017; 144:17–32. [PubMed: 28049689] 
3. Setty M, et al. Wishbone identifies bifurcating developmental trajectories from single-cell data. Nat 
Biotechnol. 2016; 34:637–645. [PubMed: 27136076] 
4. Haghverdi L, Büttner M, Wolf FA, Buettner F, Theis FJ. Diffusion pseudotime robustly reconstructs 
lineage branching. Nat Methods. 2016; 13:845–848. [PubMed: 27571553] 
5. Mao, Q., Wang, L., Goodison, S., Sun, Y. Proceedings of the 21th ACM SIGKDD International 
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. ACM; 2015. Dimensionality Reduction Via 
Graph Structure Learning; p. 765-774.
6. Mao Q, Wang L, Tsang I, Sun Y. Principal Graph and Structure Learning Based on Reversed Graph 
Embedding. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell. 2016; doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2016.2635657
7. Treutlein B, et al. Reconstructing lineage hierarchies of the distal lung epithelium using single-cell 
RNA-seq. Nature. 2014; 509:371–375. [PubMed: 24739965] 
8. Olsson A, et al. Single-cell analysis of mixed-lineage states leading to a binary cell fate choice. 
Nature. 2016; 537:698–702. [PubMed: 27580035] 
9. Paul F, et al. Transcriptional Heterogeneity and Lineage Commitment in Myeloid Progenitors. Cell. 
2015; 163:1663–1677. [PubMed: 26627738] 
10. Hastie T, Stuetzle W. Principal Curves. J Am Stat Assoc. 1989; 84:502–516.
11. Gorban AN, Zinovyev AY. Principal graphs and manifolds. Handbook of Research on Machine 
Learning Applications and Trends: Algorithms, Methods and Techniques. 2009:28–59.
12. Bellman R. The theory of dynamic programming. DTIC Document. 1954
13. Welch JD, Hartemink AJ, Prins JF. SLICER: inferring branched, nonlinearcellular trajectories from 
single cell RNA-seq data. Genome Biol. 2016; 17:106. [PubMed: 27215581] 
14. Qiu X, et al. Single-cell mRNA quantification and differential analysis with Census. Nat Methods. 
2017; doi: 10.1038/nmeth.4150
15. Qiu X, Ding S, Shi T. From understanding the development landscape of the canonical fate-switch 
pair to constructing a dynamic landscape for two-step neural differentiation. PLoS One. 2012; 
7:e49271. [PubMed: 23300518] 
16. Tang Y, Yuan R, Wang G, Zhu X, Ao P. Potential landscape of high dimensional nonlinear 
stochastic dynamics and rare transitions with large noise. 2016 arXiv [cond-mat.stat-mech]. 
17. Tirosh I, et al. Single-cell RNA-seq supports a developmental hierarchy in human 
oligodendroglioma. Nature. 2016; 539:309–313. [PubMed: 27806376] 
18. Cusanovich DA, et al. Multiplex single cell profiling of chromatin accessibility by combinatorial 
cellular indexing. Science. 2015; 348:910–914. [PubMed: 25953818] 
19. Ramani V, et al. Massively multiplex single-cell Hi-C. Nat Methods. 2017; doi: 10.1038/nmeth.
4155cc
20. Mao Q, Yang L, Wang L, Goodison S, Sun Y. SimplePPT: A Simple Principal Tree Algorithm. 
Proceedings of the 2015 SIAM International Conference on Data Mining. :792–800.
21. Boyd, S., Vandenberghe, L. Convex Optimization en. Cambridge University Press; 2004. 25 03
22. Rand WM. Objective Criteria for the Evaluation of Clustering Methods. J Am Stat Assoc. 1971; 
66:846–850.
Qiu et al.
Page 14
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 15 (native) -----
Figure 1. Monocle 2 discovers a cryptic alternative outcome in myoblast differentiation
(A) Monocle 2 learns single-cell trajectories by reversed graph embedding. Each cell can be 
represented as a point in a high-dimensional space where each dimension corresponds to the 
expression level of an ordering gene. The high dimensional data are first projected to a lower 
dimensional space (Z) by any of several dimension reduction methods such as PCA 
(default), diffusion maps, etc. Monocle 2 then constructs a spanning tree on an automatically 
selected set of centroids of the data. The number of centroids (black diamonds) is 
determined using a formula that scales sublinearly in the number of cells. These centroids 
are chosen automatically using k-medoids clustering in the initialized low-dimensional 
space. The algorithm then moves the cells towards their nearest vertex of the tree, updates 
the positions of the vertices to “fit” the cells, learns a new spanning tree, and iteratively 
continues this process until the tree and the positions of the cells have converged (see 
Equation 3 in Methods). Throughout this process, Monocle 2 maintains an invertible map 
between the high-dimensional space and the low-dimensional one, thus both learning the 
Qiu et al.
Page 15
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 16 (native) -----
trajectory and reducing the dimensionality of the data. In effect, the algorithm acts as soft K-
means clustering on points Z that maps them to the centroids, and jointly learns a graph on 
the centroids. Once Monocle 2 learns the tree, the user selects a tip as the “root”. Each cell’s 
pseudotime is calculated as its geodesic distance along the tree to the root, and its branch is 
automatically assigned based on the principal graph. (B) Monocle 1 reconstructs a linear 
trajectory for differentiating human skeletal myoblasts (HSMM)1. (C) Monocle 2 
automatically learns the underlying trajectory and detects that cells from 24–72 hours are 
divided into two branches. The same genes selected with dpFeature (Supplementary Figure 
1; Methods) were used for ordering for both of Monocle 1 and Monocle 2. (D) Accuracy of 
pseudotime calculation or branch assignments from each algorithm under repeated 
subsamples of 80% of the cells on the Paul dataset9. A marker based ordering (see 
Methods) is used as ground truth for results from each software in all downsamplings to 
compare with. (E) Consistency of pseudotime calculation or branch assignments from each 
algorithm under repeated subsamples of 80% of the cells on the Paul dataset9. All pairwise 
downsamplings are used to calculate the Pearson’s Rho and adjusted Rand index (ARI). 
Monocle 2, DPT, and Wishbone all use the full dataset for benchmark while Monocle 1 only 
uses a random downsampled 300 cells as for benchmarking.
Qiu et al.
Page 16
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 17 (native) -----
Figure 2. Genetic perturbations divert cells to alternative outcomes in Monocle 2 trajectories
(A) Monocle 2 trajectory of differentiating blood cells collected by Olsson et al8. Each 
subpanel corresponds to cells collected from a particular FACS gate in the experiment. Cells 
are colored according to their classification by the authors of the original study. (B) Cells 
with a single knockout of Irf8 or Gfi1 are diverted into the alternative granulocyte or 
monocyte branch, respectively. Double knockout cells are localized to both granulocyte and 
monocyte branches but concentrated near the branch point. Two branch points are identified, 
one that divides the erythroid or megakaryocyte outcome (FE) from the granulocyte/
monocyte progenitors (GMP), which then branches to the monocyte (FM) and granulocyte 
(FG) outcomes. All trajectories are reconstructed in four dimensions selected based variance 
explained by each PCA but rendered in two dimensions using layout_as_tree() from 
the igraph package.
Qiu et al.
Page 17
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript