

----- Page 1 (native) -----
(~) ~ 
Computer Graphics, Volume 21, Number 4, July 1987 
Flocks, Herds, and Schools: A Distributed Behavioral Model 
Craig W. Reynolds 
Symbolics Graphics Division 
1401 Westwood Boulevard 
Los Angeles, California 90024 
(Electronic mail: cwr@Symbolics.COM) 
Abstract 
The aggregate motion of a flock of birds, a herd of land ani- 
mals, or a school of fish is a beautiful and familiar part of the 
natural world. But this type of complex motion is rarely seen in 
computer animation. This paper explores an approach based 
on simulation as an alternative to scripting the paths of each 
bird individually. The simulated flock is an elaboration of a 
particle system, with the simulated birds being the particles. 
The aggregate motion of the simulated flock is created by a 
distributed behavioral model much like that at work in a natu- 
ral flock; the birds choose their own course. Each simulated 
bird is implemented as an independent actor that navigates ac- 
cording to its local perception of the dynamic environment, the 
laws of simulated physics that rule its motion, and a set of 
behaviors programmed into it by the "animator." The aggre- 
gate motion of the simulated flock is the result of the dense 
interaction of the relatively simple behaviors of the individual 
simulated birds. 
Categories and Subject Descriptors: 1.2.10 [Artificial Intelli- 
gence]: Vision and Scene Understanding; 1.3.5 [Computer 
Graphics]: Computational Geometry and Object Modeling; 
1.3.7 [Computer Graphics]: Three-Dimensional Graphics and 
Realism--Animation; 1.6.3 [Simulation and Modeling[: Appli- 
cations. 
General Terms: Algorithms, design. 
Additional Key Words, and Phrases: flock, herd, school, bird, 
fish, aggregate motion, particle system, actor, flight, behav- 
ioral animation, constraints, path planning. 
Introduction 
The motion of a flock of birds is one of nature's delights. 
Flocks and related synchronized group behaviors such as 
schools of fish or herds of land animals are both beautiful to 
watch and intriguing to contemplate. A flock* exhibits many 
contrasts. It is made up of discrete birds yet overall motion 
seems fluid; it is simple in concept yet is so visually complex, 
Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material is granted 
provided that the copies are not made or distributed for direct 
commercial advantage, the ACM copyright notice and the title of the 
publication and its date appear, and notice is given that copying is by 
permission of the Association for Computing Machinery. To copy 
otherwise, or to republish, requires a fee and/or specific permission. 
© 1987 
ACM-0-89791-227-6/87/007/0025 
$00.75 
it seems randomly arrayed and yet is magnificently synchro- 
nized. Perhaps most puzzling is the strong impression of inten- 
tional, centralized control. Yet all evidence indicates that flock 
motion must be merely the aggregate result of the actions of 
individual animals, each acting solely on the basis of its own 
local perception of the world. 
One area of interest within computer animation is the de- 
scription and control of all types of motion. Computer anima- 
tors seek both to invent wholly new types of abstract motion 
and to duplicate (or make variations on) the motions found in 
the real world. At first glance, producing an animated, com- 
puter graphic portrayal of a flock of birds presents significant 
difficulties. Scripting the path of a large number of individual 
objects using traditional computer animation techniques would 
be tedious. Given the complex paths that birds follow, it is 
doubtful this specification could be made without error. Even 
if a reasonable number of suitable paths could be described, it 
is unlikely that the constraints of flock motion could be main- 
tained (for example, preventing collisions between all birds at 
each frame). Finally, a flock scripted in this manner would be 
hard to edit (for example, to alter the course of all birds for a 
portion of the animation). It is not impossible to script flock 
motion, but a better approach is needed for efficient, robust, 
and believable animation of flocks and related group motions. 
This paper describes one such approach. This approach 
assumes a flock is simply the result of the interaction between 
the behaviors of individual birds. To simulate a flock we simu- 
late the behavior of an individual bird (or at least that portion 
of the bird's behavior that allows it to participate in a flock). To 
support this behavioral "control structure" we must also simu- 
late portions of the bird's perceptual mechanisms and aspects 
of the physics of aerodynamic flight. If this simulated bird 
model has the correct flock-member behavior, all that should 
be required to create a simulated flock is to create some in- 
stances of the simulated bird model and allow them to inter- 
act. ** 
Some experiments with this sort of simulated flock are de- 
scribed in more detail in the remainder of this paper. The suc- 
*In this paperflock refers generically to a group of objects that 
exhibit this general class of polarized, noncolliding, aggregate 
motion. The term polarization is from zoology, meaning align- 
ment of animal groups. English is rich with terms for groups of 
animals; for a charming and literate discussion of such words see 
An Exultation of Larks. [16] 
**This paper refers to these simulated bird-like, "bird-old" objects 
generically as "boids" even when they represent other sorts of 
creatures such as schooling fish. 
25

----- Page 2 (native) -----
~ 
SIGGRAPH '87, Anaheim, July 27-31, 1987 
cess and validity of these simulations is difficult to measure 
objectively. They do seem to agree well with certain criteria 
[25] and some statistical properties [23] of natural flocks and 
schools which have been reported by the zoological and behav- 
ioral sciences. Perhaps more significantly, many people who 
view these animated flocks immediately recognize them as a 
representation of a natural flock, and find them similarly de- 
lightful to watch. 
Our Forefiocks 
The computer graphics community has seen simulated bird 
flocks before. The Electronic Theater at SIGGRAPH '85 pre- 
sented a piece labeled "motion studies for a work in progress 
entitled 'Eurythmy'" [4] by Susan Amkraut, Michael Girard, 
and George Karl from the Computer Graphics Research Group 
of Ohio State University. In the film, a flock of birds flies up 
out of a minaret and, passing between a series of columns, flies 
down into a lazy spiral around a courtyard. All the while the 
birds slowly flap their wings and avoid collision with their 
flockmates. 
That animation was produced using a technique completely 
unlike the one described in this paper and apparently not spe- 
cifically intended for flock modeling. But the underlying con- 
cept is useful and interesting in its own right. The following 
overview is based on unpublished communications [3]. The 
software is informally called "the force field animation sys- 
tem." Force fields are defined by a 3 x 3 matrix operator that 
transform from a point in space (where an object is located) to 
an acceleration vector; the birds trace paths along the "phase 
portrait" of the force field. There are "rejection forces" 
around each bird and around static objects. The force field 
associated with each object has a bounding box, so object in- 
teractions can be culled according to bounding box tests. An 
incremental, linear time algorithm finds bounding box inter- 
sections. The "animator" defines the space field(s) and sets 
the initial positions, orientations, and velocities of objects. The 
rest of the simulation is automatic. 
Karl Sims of MIT's Media Lab has constructed some be- 
haviorally controlled animation of groups of moving objects 
(spaceships, inchworms, and quadrupeds), but they are not or- 
ganized as flocks [35]. Another author kept suggesting [28, 
29, 30] implementing a flock simulation based on a distributed 
behavioral model. 
Particle Systems 
The simulated flock described here is closely related to parti- 
cle systems [27], which are used to represent dynamic "fuzzy 
objects" having irregular and complex shapes. Particle systems 
have been used to model fire, smoke, clouds, and more re- 
cently, the spray and foam of ocean waves [27]. Particle sys- 
tems are collections of large numbers of individual particles, 
each having its own behavior. Particles are created, age, and 
die off. During their life they have certain behaviors that can 
alter the particle's own state, which consists of color, opacity, 
location, and velocity. 
Underlying the bold flock model is a slight generalization 
of particle systems. In what might be called a "subobject sys- 
tem," Reeves's dot-like particles are replaced by an entire geo- 
metrical object consisting of a full local coordinate system and 
a reference tO a geometrical shape model. The use of shapes 
instead of dots is visually significant, but the more fundamen- 
tal difference is that individual subobjects have a more com- 
plex geometrical state: they now have orientation. 
Another difference between bold flocks and particle sys- 
tems is not as well defined. The behavior of boids is generally 
more complex than the behaviors for particles as described in 
the literature. The present bold behavior model might be about 
one or two orders of magnitude more complex than typical 
particle behavior. However this is a difference of degree, not of 
kind. And neither simulated behavior is nearly as complex as 
that of a real bird. 
Also, as presented, particles in particle systems do not in- 
teract with one another, although this is not ruled out by defini- 
tion. But birds and hence boids must interact strongly in order 
to flock correctly. Bold behavior is dependent not only on in- 
ternal state but also on external state. 
Actors and Distributed Systems 
The behavioral model that controls the boid's flight and flock- 
ing is complicated enough that rather than use an ad hoc ap- 
proach, it is worthwhile to pursue the most appropriate formal 
computational model. The behaviors will be represented as 
rules or programs in some sense, and the internal state of each 
bold must be held in some sort of data structure. It is conve- 
nient to encapsulate these behaviors and state as an object, in 
the sense of object-oriented programming systems [10, 11, 
21]. Each instance of these objects needs a computational 
process to apply the behavioral programs to the internal data. 
The computational abstraction that combines process, proce- 
dure, and state is called an actor [12, 26, 2]. An actor is 
essentially a virtual computer that communicates with other 
virtual computers by passing messages. The actor model has 
been proposed as a natural structure for animation control by 
several authors [28, 13, 29, 18]. It seems particularly apt for 
situations involving interacting characters and behavior simula- 
tion. In the literature of parallel and distributed computer sys- 
tems, flocks and schools are given as examples of robust 
self-organizing distributed systems [15]. 
Behavioral Animation 
Traditional hand-drawn eel animation was produced with a me- 
dium that was completely inert. Traditional computer anima- 
tion uses an active medium (computers running graphics 
software), but most animation systems do not make much use 
of the computer's ability to automate motion design. Using 
different tools, contemporary computer animators work at al- 
most the same low level of abstraction as do eel animators. 
They tell their story by directly describing the motion of their 
characters. Shortcuts exist in both media; it is common for 
computer animators and eel animators to use helpers to inter- 
polate between specified keyframes. But little progress has 
been made in automating motion description; it is up to the 
animator to translate the nuances of emotion and characteriza- 
tion into the motions that the character performs. The animator 
cannot simply tell the character to "act happy" but must tedi- 
ously specify the motion that conveys happiness. 
Typical computer animation models only the shape and 
physical properties of the characters, whereas behavioral or 
character-based animation seeks to model the behavior of the 
character. The goal is for such simulated characters to handle 
many of the details of their actions, and hence their motions. 
These behaviors include a whole range of activities from sim- 
ple path planning to complex "emotional" interactions be- 
tween characters. The construction of behavioral animation 
characters has attracted many researchers [19, 21, 13, 14, 29, 
26

----- Page 3 (native) -----
(~ ~ 
Computer Graphics, Volume 21, Number 4, July 1987 
ii llll 
ii 
30, 41, 40], but it is still a young field in which more work is 
needed. 
Because of the detached nature of the control, the person 
who creates animation with character simulation might not 
strictly be an animator. Traditionally, the animator is directly 
responsible for all motion in animation production [40]. It 
might be more proper to call the person who directs animation 
via simulated characters a meta-animator, since the animator is 
less a designer of motion and more a designer of behavior. 
These behaviors, when acted out by the simulated characters, 
lead indirectly to the final action. Thus the animator's job be- 
comes somewhat like that of a theatrical director: the charac- 
ter's performance is the indirect result of the director's 
instructions to the actor. One of the charming aspects of the 
work reported here is not knowing how a simulation is going to 
proceed from the specified behaviors and initial conditions; 
there are many unexpected, pleasant surprises. On the other 
hand, this charm starts to wear thin as deadlines approach and 
the unexpected annoyances pop up. This author has spent a lot 
of time recently trying to get uncooperative flocks to move as 
intended ("these darn boids seem to have a mind of their 
own! "). 
speed. A minimum speed can also be specified but defaults to 
zero. A maximum acceleration, expressed as a fraction of the 
maximum speed, is used to truncate over-anxious requests for 
acceleration, hence providing for smooth changes of speed and 
heading. This is a simple model of a creature with a finite 
amount of available energy. 
Many physical forces are not supported in the current bold 
model. Gravity is modeled but used only to define banking 
behavior. It is defined procedurally to allow the construction of 
arbitrarily shaped fields. If each bold was accelerated by grav- 
ity each frame, it would tend to fall unless gravity was coun- 
tered by lift or buoyancy. Buoyancy is aligned against gravity, 
but aerodynamic lift is aligned with the boid's local "up" di- 
rection and related to velocity. This level of modeling leads to 
effects like normally level flight, going faster when flying 
down (or slower up), and the "stall" maneuver. The speed 
limit parameter could be more realistically modeled as a fric- 
tional drag, a backward pointing force related to velocity. In 
the current model steering is done by directing the available 
thrust in the appropriate direction. It would be more realistic to 
separately model the tangential thrusting forces and the lateral 
steering forces, since they normally have different magnitudes. 
Geometric Flight 
A fundamental part of the bold model is the geometric ability 
to fly. The motion of the members of a simulated school or 
herd can be considered a type of "flying" by glossing over the 
considerable intricacies of wing, fin, and leg motion (and in 
the case of herds, by restricting freedom of motion in the third 
dimension). In this paper the term geometric flight refers to a 
certain type of motion along a path: a dynamic, incremental, 
rigid geometrical transformation of an object, moving along 
and tangent to a 3D curve. While the motion is rigid, the ob- 
ject's underlying geometric model is free to articulate or 
change shape within this "flying coordinate system." Unlike 
more typical animated motion along predefined spline curves, 
the shape of a flight path is not specified in advance. 
Geometric flight is based on incremental translations along 
the objecrs "forward direction" its local positive Z axis. 
These translations are intermixed with steering--rotations 
about the local X and Y axes (pitch and yaw), which realign 
the global orientation of the local Z axis. In real flight, turning 
and moving happen continuously and simultaneously. Incre- 
mental geometric flight is a discrete approximation of this; 
small linear motions model a continuous curved path. In ani- 
mation the motion must increment at least once per frame. 
Running the simulation at a higher rate can reduce the discrete 
sampling error of the flight model and refine the shape of mo- 
tion blur patterns. 
Flight modeling makes extensive use of the object's own 
coordinate system. Local space represents the "boid's eye 
view;" it implies measuring things relative to the boid's own 
position and orientation. In Cartesian terms, the lefl/right axis 
is X, up/down is Y, and forward/back is Z. The conversion of 
geometric data between the local and global reference frames is 
handled by the geometric operators localize and globalize. It is 
convenient to use a local scale so that the unit of length of the 
coordinate system is one body length. Biologists routinely 
specify flock and school statistics in terms of body lengths. 
Geometric flight models conservation of momentum. An 
object in flight tends to stay in flight. There is a simple model 
of viscous speed damping, so even if the bold continually ac- 
celerates in one direction, it will not exceed a certain maximum 
Banking 
Geometric flight relates translation, pitch, and yaw, but does 
not constrain roll, the rotation about the local Z axis. This 
degree of freedom is used for banking--rolling the object to 
align the local Y axis with the (local XY component of the 
total) acceleration acting upon it. Normally banking is based 
on the lateral component of the acceleration, but the tangential 
component can be used for certain applications. The lateral 
components are from steering and gravity. In straight flight 
there is no radial force, so the gravitational term dominates and 
banking aligns the object's -Y axis with "gravitational down" 
direction. When turning, the radial component grows larger 
and the "accelerational down" direction swings outward, like a 
pendulum hanging from the flying object. The magnitude of 
the turning acceleration varies directly with the object's veloc- 
ity and with the curvature of its path (so inversely with the 
radius of its turn). The limiting case of infinite velocity resem- 
bles banking behavior in the absence of gravity. In these cases 
the local + Y (up) direction points directly at the center of 
curvature defined by the current turn. 
Direclion of Ftighl 
4 
Bank 
Figure 1. 
With correct banking (what pilots call a coordinated turn) 
the object's local space remains aligned with the "perceptual" 
or "accelerational" coordinate system. This has several advan- 
tages: it simplifies the bird's (or pilot's) orientation task, it 
27

----- Page 4 (native) -----
~/~ 
SIGGRAPH '87, Anaheim, July 27-31, 1987 
keeps the lift from the airfoils of the wings pointed in the most 
efficient direction ("accelerational up"), it keeps the passen- 
gers' coffee in their cups, and most importantly for animation, 
it makes the flying boid fit the viewer's expectation of how 
flying objects should move and orient themselves. On the other 
hand, realism is not always the goal in animation. By simply 
reversing the angle of bank we obtain a cartoony motion that 
looks like the object is being flung outward by the centrifugal 
force of the turn. 
Boids and Turtles 
The incremental mixing of forward translations and local rota- 
tions that underlies geometric flight is the basis of "turtle 
graphics" in the programming language Logo [5]. Logo was 
first used as an educational tool to allow children to learn ex- 
perimentally about geometry, arithmetic, and programming 
[22]. The Logo turtle was originally a little mechanical robot 
that crawled around on large sheets of paper laid on the class- 
room floor, drawing graphic figures by dragging a felt tip 
marker along the paper as it moved. Abstract turtle geometry is 
a system based on the frame of reference of the turtle, an ob- 
ject that unites position and heading. Under program control 
the Logo turtle could move forward or back from its current 
position, turn left or right from its current heading, or put the 
pen up or down on the paper. The turtle geometry has been 
extended from the plane onto arbitrary manifolds and into 3D 
space [1]. These "3d turtles" and their paths are exactly equiv- 
alent to the boid objects and their flight paths. 
Natural Flocks, Herds, and Schools 
"... and the thousands of fishes moved as a huge beast, piercing 
the water. They appeared united, inexorably bound to a common 
fate. How comes this unity?" 
--Anonymous, 17th century (from Shaw) 
For a bird to participate in a flock, it must have behaviors 
that allow it to coordinate its movements with those of its 
flockmates. These behaviors are not particularly unique; all 
creatures have them to some degree. Natural flocks seem to 
consist of two balanced, opposing behaviors: a desire to stay 
close to the flock and a desire to avoid collisions within the 
flock [34]. It is clear why an individual bird wants to avoid 
collisions with its flockrnates. But why do birds seem to seek 
out the airborne equivalent of a nasty traffic jam? The basic 
urge to join a flock seems to be the result of evolutionary 
pressure from several factors: protection from predators, statis- 
tically improving survival of the (shared) gene pool from at- 
tacks from predators, profiting from a larger effective search 
pattern in the quest for food, and advantages for social and 
mating activities [33]. 
There is no evidence that the complexity of natural flocks 
is bounded in any way. Flocks do not become "full" or "over- 
loaded" as new birds join. When herring migrate toward their 
spawning grounds, they run in schools extending as long as 17 
miles and containing millions of fish [32]. Natural flocks seem 
to operate in exactly the same fashion over a huge range of 
flock populations. It does not seem that an individual bird can 
be paying much attention to each and every one of its flock- 
mates. But in a huge flock spread over vast distances, an indi- 
vidual bird must have a localized and filtered perception of the 
rest of the flock. A bird might be aware of three categories: 
itself, its two or three nearest neighbors, and the rest of the 
flock [23]. 
These speculations about the "computational complexity" 
of flocking are meant to suggest that birds can flock with any 
number of flockmates because they are using what would be 
called in formal computer science a constant time algorithm. 
That is, the amount of "thinking" that a bird has to do in order 
to flock must be largely independent of the number of birds in 
the flock. Otherwise we would expect to see a sha W upper 
bound on the size of natural flocks when the individual birds 
became overloaded by the complexity of their navigation task. 
This has not been observed in nature. 
Contrast the insensitivity to complexity of real flocks with 
the situation for the simulated flocks described below. The 
complexity of the flocking algorithm described is basically 
O(N2). That is, the work required to run the algorithm grows 
as the square of the flock's population. We definitely do see an 
upper bound on the size of simulated flocks implemented as 
described here. Some techniques to address this performance 
issue are discussed in the section Algorithmic Considerations. 
Simulated Flocks 
To build a simulated flock, we start with a boid model that 
supports geometric flight. We add behaviors that correspond to 
the opposing forces of collision avoidance and the urge to join 
the flock. Stated briefly as rules, and in order of decreasing 
precedence, the behaviors that lead to simulated flocking are: 
1. Collision Avoidance: avoid collisions with nearby 
flockmates 
2. Velocity Matching: attempt to match velocity with nearby 
flockmates 
3. Flock Centering: attempt to stay close to nearby flockmates 
Velocity is a vector quantity, referring to the combination of 
heading and speed. The manner in which the results from each 
of these behaviors is reconciled and combined is significant 
and is discussed in more detail later. Similarly, the meaning 
nearby in these rules is key to the flocking process. This is also 
discussed in more detail later, but generally one boid's aware- 
ness of another is based on the distance and direction of the 
offset vector between them. 
Static collision avoidance and dynamic velocity matching 
are complementary. Together they ensure that the members of a 
simulated flock are free to fly within the crowded skies of the 
flock's interior without running into one another. Collision 
avoidance is the urge to steer away from an imminent impact. 
Static collision avoidance is based on the relative position of 
the flockmates and ignores their velocity. Conversely, velocity 
matching is based only on velocity and ignores position. It is a 
predictive version of collision avoidance: if the boid does a 
good job of matching velocity with its neighbors, it is unlikely 
that it will collide with any of them any time soon. With veloc- 
ity matching, separations between boids remains approximately 
invariant with respect to ongoing geometric flight. Static colli- 
sion avoidance serves to establish the minimum required sepa- 
ration distance; velocity matching tends to maintain it. 
Flock centering makes a boid want to be near the center of 
the flock. Because each boid has a localized perception of the 
world, "center of the flock" actually means the center of the 
nearby flockmates. Flock centering causes the boid to fly in a 
direction that moves it closer to the centroid of the nearby 
boids. If a boid is deep inside a flock, the population density in 
its neighborhood is roughly homogeneous; the boid density is 
28

----- Page 5 (native) -----
~' 
Computer Graphics, Volume 21, Number 4, July 1987 
approximately the same in all directions. In this case, the cem 
troid of the neighborhood boids is approximately at the center 
of the neighborhood, so the flock centering urge is small. But 
if a boid is on the boundary of the flock, its neighboring boids 
are on one side. The centroid of the neighborhood boids is 
displaced from the center of the neighborhood toward the body 
of the flock. Here the flock centering urge is stronger and the 
flight path will be deflected somewhat toward the local flock 
center. 
Real flocks sometimes split apart to go around an obstacle. 
To be realistic, the simulated flock model must also have this 
ability. Flock centering correctly allows simulated flocks to 
bifurcate. As long as an individual boid can stay close to its 
nearby neighbors, it does not care if the rest of the flock turns 
away. More simplistic models proposed for flock organization 
(such as a central force model or a follow the designated leader 
model) do not allow splits. 
The flock model presented here is actually a better model 
of a school or a herd than a flock. Fish in murky water (and 
land animals with their inability to see past their herdmates) 
have a limited, short-range perception of their environment. 
Birds, especially those on the outside of a flock, have excellent 
long-range "visual perception." Presumably this allows widely 
separated flocks to join together. If the flock centering urge 
was completely localized, when two flocks got a certain dis- 
tance apart they would ignore each other. Long-range vision 
seems to play a part in the incredibly rapid propagation of a 
"maneuver wave" through a flock of birds. It has been shown 
that the speed of propagation of this wavefront reaches three 
times the speed implied by the measured startle reaction time 
of the individual birds. The explanation advanced by Wayne 
Ports is that the birds perceive the motion of the oncoming 
"maneuver wave" and time their own turn to match it [25]. 
Potts refers to this as the "chorus line" hypothesis. 
Arbitrating Independent Behaviors 
The three behavioral urges associated with flocking (and others 
to be discussed below) each produce an isolated suggestion 
about which way to steer the boid. These are expressed as 
acceleration requests. Each behavior says: "if I were in 
charge, I would accelerate in that direction." The acceleration 
request is in terms of a 3D vector that, by system convention, 
is truncated to unit magnitude or less. Each behavior has sev- 
eral parameters that control its function; one is a "strength," a 
fractional value between zero and one that can further attenuate 
the acceleration request. It is up to the navigation module of 
the boid brain to collect all relevant acceleration requests and 
then determine a single behaviorally desired acceleration. It 
must combine, prioritize, and arbitrate between potentially 
conflicting urges. The pilot module takes the acceleration de- 
sired by the navigation module and passes it to the flight mod- 
ule, which attempts to fly in that direction. 
The easiest way to combine acceleration requests is to aver- 
age them. Because of the included "strength" factors, this is 
actually a weighted average. The relative strength of one be- 
havior to another can be defined this way, but it is a precarious 
interrelationship that is difficult to adjust. An early version of 
the boid model showed that navigation by simple weighted av- 
eraging of acceleration requests works "pretty well." A bold 
that chooses its course this way will fly a reasonable course 
under typical conditions. But in critical situations, such as po- 
tential collision with obstacles, conflicts must be resolved in a 
timely manner. During high-speed flight, hesitation or indeci- 
sion is the wrong response to a brick wall dead ahead. 
The main cause of indecision is that each behavior might 
be shouting advice about which way to turn to avoid disaster, 
but if those acceleration requests happen to lie in approxi- 
mately opposite directions, they will largely cancel out under a 
simple weighted averaging scheme. The boid would make a 
very small turn and so continue in the same direction, perhaps 
to crash into the obstacle. Even when the urges do not cancel 
out, averaging leads to other problems. Consider flying over a 
gridwork of city streets between the skyscrapers; while "'fly 
north" or "fly east" might be good ideas, it would be a bad 
idea to combine them as "fly northeast." 
Techniques from artificial intelligence, such as expert sys- 
tems, can be used to arbitrate conflicting opinions. However, a 
less complex approach is taken in the current implementation. 
Prioritized acceleration allocation is based on a strict priority 
ordering of all component behaviors, hence of the consider- 
ation of their acceleration requests. (This ordering can change 
to suit dynamic conditions.) The acceleration requests are con- 
sidered in priority order and added into an accumulator. The 
magnitude of each request is measured and added into another 
accumulator. This process continues until the sum of the accu- 
mulated magnitudes gets larger than the maximum acceleration 
value, which is a parameter of each boid. The last acceleration 
request is trimmed back to compensate for the excess of accu- 
mulated magnitude. The point is that a fixed amount of accel- 
eration is under the control of the navigation module; this 
acceleration is parceled out to satisfy the acceleration request 
of the various behaviors in order of priority. In an emergency 
the acceleration would be allocated to satisfy the most pressing 
needs first; if all available acceleration is "'used up," the less 
pressing behaviors might be temporarily unsatisfied. For exam- 
ple, the flock centering urge could be correctly ignored tempo- 
rarily in favor of a maneuver to avoid a static obstacle. 
Simulated Perception 
The bold model does not directly simulate the senses used by 
real animals during flocking (vision and hearing) or schooling 
(vision and fishes' unique "lateral line" structure that provides 
a certain amount of pressure imaging ability [23, 24]). Rather 
the perception model tries to make available to the behavior 
model approximately the same information that is available to a 
real animal as the end result of its perceptual and cognitive 
processes. 
This is primarily a matter of filtering out the surplus infor- 
mation that is available to the software that implements the 
boid's behavior. Simulated boids have direct access to the geo- 
metric database that describes the exact position, orientation, 
and velocity of all objects in the environment. The real bird's 
information about the world is severely limited because it per- 
ceives through imperfect senses and because its nearby flock- 
mates hide those farther away. This is even more pronounced in 
herding animals because they are all constrained to be in the 
same plane. In fish schools, visual perception of neighboring 
fish is further limited by the scattering and absorption of light 
by the sometimes murky water between them. These factors 
combine to strongly localize the information available to each 
animal. 
Not only is it unrealistic to give each simulated boid perfect 
and complete information about the world, it is just plain 
wrong and leads to obvious failures of the behavior model. 
Before the current implementation of localized flock centering 
behavior was implemented, the flocks used a central force 
model. This leads to unusual effects such as causing all mem- 
bers of a widely scattered flock to simultaneously converge 
29

----- Page 6 (native) -----
~ 
SIGGRAPH '87, Anaheim, July 27-31, 1987 
toward the flock's centroid. An interesting result of the experi- 
ments reported in this paper is that the aggregate motion that 
we intuitively recognize as "flocking" (or schooling or herd- 
ing) depends upon a limited, localized view of the world. 
The behaviors that make up the flocking model are stated 
in terms of "nearby flockmates." In the current implementa- 
tion, the neighborhood is defined as a spherical zone of sensi- 
tivity centered at the boid's local origin. The magnitude of the 
sensitivity is defined as an inverse exponential of distance. 
Hence the neighborhood is defined by two parameters: a radius 
and exponent. There is reason to believe that this field of sensi- 
tivity should realistically be exaggerated in the forward direc- 
tion and probably by an amount proportional to the boid's 
speed. Being in motion requires an increased awareness of 
what lies ahead, and this requirement increases with speed. A 
forward-weighted sensitivity zone would probably also im- 
prove the behavior in the current implementation of boids at 
the leading edge of a flock, who tend to get distracted by the 
flock behind them. Because of the way their heads and eyes are 
arranged, real birds have a wide field of view (about 300 de- 
grees), but the zone of overlap from both eyes is small (10 to 
15 degrees). Hence the bird has stereo depth perception only 
in a very small, forward-oriented cone. Research is currently 
under way on models of forward-weighted perception for 
boids. 
In an early version of the flock model, the metrics of at- 
traction and repulsion were weighted linearly by distance. This 
spring-like model produced a bouncy flock action, fine per- 
haps for a cartoony characterization, but not very realistic. The 
model was changed to use an inverse square of the distance. 
This more gravity-like model produced what appeared to be a 
more natural, better damped flock model. This correlated well 
with the carefully controlled quantitative studies that Brian 
Partridge made of the spatial relationships of schooling fish 
[23]; he found that "a fish is much more strongly influenced 
by its near neighbors than it is by the distant members of the 
school. The contribution of each fish to the [influence] is in- 
versely proportional to the square or the cube of the distance." 
In previous work he and colleagues [23, 24] demonstrated that 
fishes school based on information from both their visual sys- 
tem and from their "lateral line" organ which senses pressure 
waves. The area of a perspective image of the silhouette of an 
object (its "visual angle") varies inversely with the square of 
its distance, and that pressure waves traveling through a 3D 
medium like water fall off inversely with the cube of the dis- 
tance. 
The boid perception model is quite ad hoc and avoids actu- 
ally simulating vision. Artificial vision is an extremely com- 
plex problem [38] and is far beyond the scope of this work. But 
if boids could "see" their environment, they would be better at 
path planning than the current model. It is possible to construct 
simple maze-like shapes that would confuse the current boid 
model but would be easily solved by a boid with vision. 
Impromptu Flocking 
The flocking model described above gives boids an eagerness 
to participate in an acceptable approximation of flock-like mo- 
tion. Boids released near one another begin to flock together, 
cavorting and jostling for position. The boids stay near one 
another (flock centering) but always maintain prudent separa- 
tion from their neighbors (collision avoidance), and the flock 
quickly becomes "polarized"--its members heading in ap- 
proximately the same direction at approximately the same 
speed (velocity matching); when they change direction they do 
it in synchronization. Solitary boids and smaller flocks join to 
become larger flocks, and in the presence of external obstacles 
(discussed below), larger flocks can split into smaller flocks. 
For each simulation run, the initial position (within a speci- 
fied ellipsoid), heading, velocity, and various other parameters 
of the boid model are initialized to values randomized within 
specified distributions. A restartable random-number generator 
is used to allow repeatability. This randomization is not re- 
quired; the boids could just as well start out arranged in a 
regular pattern, all other aspects of the flock model are com- 
pletely deterministic and repeatable. 
When the simulation is run, the flock's first action is a 
reaction to the initial conditions. If the boids started out too 
closely crowded together, there is an initial "flash expansion" 
where the mutual desire to avoid collision drives the boids 
radially away from the site of the initial over-pressure. If re- 
leased in a spherical shell with a radius smaller than the 
"neighborhood" radius, the boids contract toward the sphere's 
center; otherwise they begin to coalesce into small flockettes 
that might themselves begin to join together. If the boids are 
confined within a certain region, the smaller flocks eventually 
conglomerate into a single flock if left to wander long enough. 
Scripted Flocking 
The behaviors discussed so far provide for the ability of indi- 
vidual birds to fly and participate in happy aimless flocking. 
But to combine flock simulations with other animated action, 
we need more direct control over the flock. We would like to 
direct specific action at specific times (for example, "the flock 
enters from the left at :02.3 seconds into the sequence, turns to 
fly directly upward at :03.5, and is out of the frame at :04.0"). 
The current implementation of the bold model has several 
facilities to direct the motion and timing of the flock action. 
First, the simulations are run under the control of a general- 
purpose animation scripting system [36]. The details of that 
scripting system are not relevant here except that, in addition to 
the typical interactive motion control facilities, it provides the 
ability to schedule the invocation of user-supplied software 
(such as the flock model) on a frame-by-frame basis. This 
scripting facility is the basic tool used to describe the timing of 
various flock actions. It also allows flexible control over the 
time-varying values of parameters, which can be passed down 
to the simulation software. Finally the script is used to set up 
and animate all nonbehavioral aspects of the scene, such as 
backgrounds, lighting, camera motion, and other visible ob- 
jects. 
The primary tool for scripting the flock's path is the migra- 
tory urge built into the boid model. In the current model this 
urge is specified in terms of a global target, either as a global 
direction (as in "going Z for the winter") or as a global 
position--a target point toward which all birds fly. The model 
computes a bounded acceleration that incrementally turns the 
boid toward its migratory target. 
With the scripting system, we can animate a dynamic pa- 
rameter whose value is a global position vector or a global 
direction vector. This parameter can be passed to the flock, 
which can in turn pass it along to all boids, each of which sets 
its own "migratory goal register." Hence the global migratory 
behavior of all birds can be directly controlled from the script. 
(Of course, it is not necessary to alter all boids at the same 
time, for example, the delay could be a function of their 
present position in space. Real flocks do not change direction 
simultaneously [25], but rather the turn starts with a single 
bird and spreads quickly across the flock like a shock wave.) 
30

----- Page 7 (native) -----
(~ ~ 
Computer Graphics, Volume 21, Number 4, July 1987 
We can lead the flock around by animating the goal point 
along the desired path, somewhat ahead of the flock. Even if 
the migratory goal point is changed abruptly the path of each 
boid still is relatively smooth because of the flight model's 
simulated conservation of momentum. This means that the 
boid's own flight dynamics implement a form of smoothing 
interpolation between "control points." 
Avoiding Environmental Obstacles 
The most interesting motion of a simulated flock comes from 
interaction with other objects in the environment. The isolated 
behavior of a flock tends to reach a steady state and becomes 
rather sterile. The flock can be seen as a relaxation solution to 
the constraints implied by its behaviors. For example, the con- 
flicting urges of flock centering and collision avoidance do not 
lead to constant back and forth motion, but rather the boids 
eventually strike a balance between the two urges (the degree 
of damping controls how soon this balance is reached). Envi- 
ronmental obstacles and the boid's attempts to navigate around 
them increase the apparent complexity of the behavior of the 
flock. (In fact the complexity of real flocks might be due 
largely to the complexity of the natural environment.) 
Environmental obstacles are also important from the stand- 
point of modeling the scene in which we wish to place the 
flock. If the flock is scripted to fly under a bridge and around a 
tree, we must be able to represent the geometric shape and 
dimension of these obstacles. The approach taken here is to 
independently model the "shape for rendering" and the "shape 
for collision avoidance." The types of shapes currently used for 
environmental obstacles are much less complicated than the 
models used for rendering of computer graphic models. The 
current work implements two types of shapes of environmental 
collision avoidance. One is based on the force field concept, 
which works in undemanding situations but has some short- 
comings. The other model called steer-to-avoid is more robust 
and seems closer in spirit to the natural mechanism. 
The force field model postulates a field of repulsion force 
emanating from the obstacle out into space; the boids are in- 
creasingly repulsed as they get closer to the obstacle. This 
scheme is easy to model; the geometry of the field is usually 
fairly simple and so an avoidance acceleration can be directly 
calculated from the field equation. These models can produce 
good results, such as in "Eurythmy" [4], but they also have 
drawbacks that are apparent on close examination. If a boid 
approaches an obstacle surrounded by a force field at an angle 
such that it is exactly opposite to the direction of the force 
field, the boid will not turn away. In this case the force field 
serves only to slow the boid by accelerating it backwards and 
provides no side thrust at all. The worst reaction to an impend- 
ing collision is to fail to turn. Force fields also cause problems 
with "peripheral vision" The boid should notice and turn away 
from a wall as it flies toward it, but the wall should be ignored 
if the boid is flying alongside it. Finally, force fields tend to be 
too strong close up and too weak far away; avoiding an obstacle 
should involve long-range planning rather than panicky correc- 
tions at the last minute. 
Steer-to-avoid is a better simulation of a natural bird guided 
by vision. The boid considers only obstacles directly in front 
of it. (It finds the intersection, if any, of its local Z axis with 
the obstacle.) Working in local perspective space, it finds the 
silhouette edge of the obstacle closest to the point of eventual 
impact. A radial vector is computed which will aim the boid at 
a point one body length beyond that silhouette edge (see figure 
2). Currently steer-to-avoid has been implemented for several 
obstacle shapes: spheres, cylinders, planes, and boxes. Colli- 
31

----- Page 8 (native) -----
~ 
SIGGRAPH '87, Anaheim, July 27-31, 1987 
sion avoidance for arbitrary convex polyhedral obstacles is be- 
ing developed. 
Figure 2. 
Obstacles are not necessarily fixed in space; they can be 
animated around by the script during the animation. Or more 
interestingly, the obstacles can be behavioral characters. Spar- 
rows might flock around a group of obstacles that is in fact a 
herd of elephants. Similarly, behavioral obstacles might not 
merely be in the way; they might be objects of fear such as 
predators. It has been noted [25] that natural flocking instincts 
seem to be sharpened by predators. 
Other Applications of the Flock Model 
The model of polarized noncolliding aggregate motion has 
many applications, visual simulation of bird flocks in computer 
animation being one. Certain modifications yield a fish school 
model. Further modifications, such as limitation to a 2D sur- 
face and the ability to follow the terrain, lead to a herd model. 
Imagine a herd of PODA-style legged creatures 19], using Karl 
Sims' techniques for locomotion over uneven, complex terrain 
|35]. Other applications are less obvious. Traffic patterns, 
such as the flow of cars on a freeway, is a flock-like motion. 
There are specialized behaviors, such as being constrained to 
drive within the lanes, but the basic principles that keep boids 
from colliding are just as applicable on the freeway. We could 
imagine creating crowds of "extras" (human or otherwise) for 
feature films. However the most fun are the offbeat combina- 
tions possible in computer graphics by mixing and matching: a 
herd of pogo sticks, a flock of Pegasus-like winged horses, or a 
traffic jam of spaceships on a 3D interplanetary highway. 
One serious application would be to aid in the scientific 
investigation of flocks, herds, and schools. These scientists 
must work almost exclusively in the observational mode; ex- 
periments with natural flocks and schools are difficult to per- 
form and are likely to disturb the behaviors under study. It 
might be possible, using a more carefully crafted model of the 
realistic behavior of a certain species of bird, to perform con- 
trolled and repeatable experiments with "simulated natural 
flocks." A theory of flock organization can be unambiguously 
tested by implementing a distributed behavioral model and sim- 
ply comparing the aggregate motion of the simulated flock 
with the natural one. 
Algorithmic Considerations 
A naive implementation of the basic flocking algorithm would 
grow in complexity as the order of the square of the flock's 
population ("O(N~)"). Basically this is because each bold must 
reason about each of the other boids, even if only to decide to 
ignore it. This does not say the algorithm is slow or fast, 
merely that as the size of the problem (total population of the 
flock) increases, the complexity increases even faster. Dou- 
bling the number of boids quadruples the amount of time 
taken. 
However, as stated before, real birds are probably not as 
sensitive to the total flock population. This gives hope that the 
simulated boid could be taught to navigate independently of the 
total population. Certainly part of the problem is that we are 
trying to run the simulation of the whole flock on a single 
computer. The natural solution is to use distributed processing, 
as the real flock does. If we used a separate processor for each 
boid, then even the naive implementation of the flocking al- 
gorithm would be O(N), or linear with respect to the popula- 
tion. But even that is not good enough. It still means that as 
more boids are added to the flock, the complexity of the prob- 
lem increases. 
What we desire is a constant time algorithm, one that is 
insensitive to the total population. Another way to say this is 
that an N 2 algorithm would be OK if there was an efficient way 
to keep N very small. Two approaches to this goal are cur- 
rently under investigation. One is dynamic spatial partitioning 
of the flock; the boids are sorted into a lattice of "bins" based 
on their position in space. A boid trying to navigate inside the 
flock could get quick access to the flockmates that are physi- 
cally nearby by examining the "bins" near its current position. 
Another approach is to do incremental collision detection 
("nearness testing"). General collision detection is another N ~ 
algorithm, but if one does collision detection incrementally, 
based on a partial solution that described the situation just a 
moment before, then the algorithm need worry only about the 
changes and so can run much faster, assuming that the incre- 
mental changes are small. The incremental collision detection 
algorithm used in Girard's PODA system [9] apparently 
achieves constant time performance in the typical case. 
Computing Environment 
The boids software was written in Symbolics Common Lisp. 
The code and animation were produced on a Symbolics 3600 
Lisp Machine, a high-performance personal computer. The 
flock software is implemented in Flavors, the object-oriented 
programming extensions to Symbolics Common Lisp. The ge- 
ometric aspects of the system are layered upon S-Geometry, an 
interactive geometric modeler [37]. Boids are based on the 
flavor 3D:OBJECT, which provides their geometric abilities. 
The flock simulations are invoked from scripts created and 
animated with the S-Dynamics [36] animation system, which 
also provided the real-time playback facility used to view the 
motion tests. The availability of this graphical toolkit allowed 
the author to focus immediately on the issues unique to this 
project. One example of the value of this substrate is that the 
initial version of the flock model, including implementation, 
testing, debugging, and the production of seven short motion 
tests was accomplished in the ten days before the SIGGRAPH 
'86 conference. 
The boid software has not been optimized for speed. But 
this report would be incomplete without a rough estimate of the 
actual performance of the system. With a flock of 80 boids, 
using the naive O(N ~) algorithm (and so 6400 individual boid- 
to-boid comparisons), on a single Lisp Machine without any 
special hardware accelerators, the simulation ran for about 95 
seconds per frame. A ten-second (300 frame) motion test took 
about eight hours of real time to produce. 
32

----- Page 9 (native) -----
~ 
Computer Graphics, Volume 21, Number 4, July 1987 
Future Work 
This paper has largely ignored the internal animation of the 
geometrical model that provides the visual representation of 
the bold. The original motion tests produced with these models 
all show flocks of little abstract rigid shapes that might be 
paper airplanes. There was no flapping of wings nor turning of 
heads, and there was certainly no character animation. These 
topics are all important and pertinent to believable animation of 
simulated flocks. But the underlying abstract nature of flocking 
as polarized, noncolliding aggregate motion is largely indepen- 
dent of these issues of internal shape change and articulation. 
This notion is supported by the fact that most viewers of these 
simulations identify the motion of these abstract objects as 
"flocking'" even in the absence of any internal animation. 
But doing a believable job of melding these two aspects of 
the motion is more than a matter of concatenating the action of 
an internal animation cycle for the character with the motion 
defined by geometrical flight. There are important issues of 
synchronization between the current state of the flight dy- 
namics model, and the amplitude and frequency of the wing 
motion cycle. Topics of current development include internal 
animation, synchronization, and 
interfaces between the 
simulation-based flock model and other more traditional, inter- 
active animation scripting systems. We would like to allow a 
skilled computer animator to design a bird character and define 
its "wing flap cycle" using standard interactive modeling and 
scripting techniques, and then be able to take this cyclic mo- 
tion and "plug it in" to the flock simulation model causing the 
boids in the flock to fly according to the scripted cycle. 
The behaviors that have been discussed in this paper are all 
simplistic, isolated behaviors of low complexity. Tile boids 
have a geometric and kinematic state, but they have no signifi- 
cant mental state. Real animals have more elaborate, abstract 
behaviors than a simple desire to avoid a painful collision; they 
have more complex motivations than a simple desire to fly to a 
certain point in space. More interesting behavior models would 
take into account hunger, finding food, fear of predators, a 
periodic need to sleep, and so on. Behavior models of this type 
have been created by other investigators [6, 19, 21], but they 
have not yet been implemented for the bold model described 
here. 
Conclusion 
This paper has presented a model of polarized, noncolliding 
aggregate motion, such as that of flocks, herds, and schools. 
The model is based on simulating the behavior of each bird 
independently. Working independently, the birds try both to 
stick together and avoid collisions with one another and with 
other objects in their environment. The animations showing 
simulated flocks built from this model seem to correspond to 
the observer's intuitive notion of what constitutes "flock-like 
motion." However it is difficult to objectively measure how 
valid these simulations are. By comparing behavioral aspects 
of the simulated flock with those of natural flocks, we are able 
improve and refine the model. But having approached a certain 
level of realism in the model, the parameters of the simulated 
flock can be altered at will by the animator to achieve many 
variations on flock-like behavior. 
Acknowledgments 
I would like to thank flocks, herds, and schools for existing; 
nature is the ultimate source of inspiration for computer graph- 
ics and animation. I would also like to acknowledge the contri- 
butions to this research provided by workers in a wonderfully 
diverse collection of pursuits: 
To the natural sciences of behavior, evolution, and zoology: 
for doing the hard work, the Real Science, on which this com- 
puter graphics approximation is based. To the Logo group who 
invented the appropriate geometry, and so put us in the driver's 
seat. To the Actor semantics people who invented the appropri- 
ate control structure, and so gave the bold a brain. To the many 
developers of modern Lisp who invented the appropriate pro- 
gramming language. To my past and present colleagues at 
MIT, III, and Symbolics who have patiently listened to my 
speculations about flocks for years and years before I made my 
first bold fly. To the Graphics Division of Symbolics, Inc., 
who employ me, put up with my nasty disposition, provide me 
with fantastic computing and graphics facilities, and have gen- 
erously supported the development of the work described here. 
And to the field of computer graphics, for giving professional 
respectability to advanced forms of play such as reported in 
this paper. 
References 
I. Abelson, H., and diSessa, A., "Maneuvering a Three Dimen- 
sional Turtle" in Turtle Geometry: The Computer as a Medium for 
Exploring Mathematics, The MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachu- 
setts, 1981, pp. 140-159. 
2. Agha, G., Actors: A Model of Concurrent Computation in Distrib- 
uted Systems, The MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1986. 
3. Amkraut, S., personal communication, January 8, 1987. 
4. Amkraut, S., Girard, M., Karl, G., "motion studies for a work in 
progress entitled "Eurythmy' " in SIGGRAPH Video Review, Issue 
21 (second item, time code 3:58 to 7:35), 1985, produced at the 
Computer Graphics Research Group, Ohio State University, Colum- 
bus, Ohio. 
5. Austin, H., "The Logo Primer," M|T A.I. Lab, Logo Working 
Paper 19, 1974. 
6. Braitenberg, V., Vehicles: Experiments in Synthetic Psychology, 
The MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1984. 
7. Burton, R., Bird Behavior, Alfred A. Knopf, Inc., 1985. 
8. Davis, J. R., Kay, A., Marion, A., unpublished research on be- 
havioral simulation and animation, Atari Research, 1983. 
9. Girard, M., Maciejewski, A. A., "Computational Modeling for 
the Computer Animation of Legged Figures," in Computer Graphics 
V 19 #3, 1985, (proceedings of acre SIGGRAPH '85), pp. 263-270. 
10. Goldberg, A., Robson, D., SMALLTALK-80, The Language and 
its Implementation, Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Reading 
Massachusetts, 1983. 
11. Goldberg, A., Kay, A., SMALLTALK-72 Instruction Manual, 
Learning research group, Xerox Palo Alto Research Center, 1976. 
12. Hewitt, C., Atkinson, R., "Parallelism and Synchronization in 
Actor Systems," acm Symposium on Principles of Programming Lan- 
guages 4, January 1977, Los Angeles, California. 
33

----- Page 10 (native) -----
~ 
SIGGRAPH '87, Anaheim, July 27-31, 1987 
13. Kahn, K. M., Creation of Computer Animation from Story De- 
scriptions, MIT Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Technical Report 
540 (doctoral dissertation), August 1979. 
14. Kahn, K. M., Hewitt, C., Dynamic Graphics using Quasi Paral- 
lelism, May 1978, proceedings of ACM SIGGRAPH, 1978. 
15. Kleinrock, L., "Distributed Systems," in Communications of the 
ACM, V28 #11, November 1985, pp. 1200-1213. 
16. Lipton, J., An Exaltation of Larks (or, The Venereal Game), 
Grossman Publishers, 1977. Reprinted by Penguin Books 1977, 
1980, 1982, 1983, 1984, 1985. 
17. Maciejewski, A. A., Klein, C.A., "Obstacle Avoidance for 
Kinematically Redundant Manipulators in Dynamically Varying 
Environments," to appear in International Journal of Robotic Re- 
search. 
18. Magnenat-Thalmann, N., Thalmarm, D., Computer Animation: 
Theory and Practice, Springer-Verlag, Toyko, 1985. 
19. Marion, A., "Artificially Motivated Objects;' [installation 
piece], ACM SIGGRAPH art show, 1985. 
20. Moon, D. A., "Object-oriented Programming with Flavors" in 
Proceedings of the First Annual Conference on Object-Oriented Pro- 
gramming Systems, Languages, and Applications, ACM, 1986 
21. Myers, R., Broadwell, P., Schaufler, R., "Plasm: Fish Sample," 
[installation piece], ACM SIGGRAPH art show, 1985. 
22. Papert, S., "Teaching Children to be Mathematicians vs. Teach- 
ing Them About Mathematics" International Journal of Mathemati- 
cal Education and Sciences, V3, pp. 249-262, 1972. 
23. Partridge, B. L., "The Structure and Function of Fish Schools," 
Scientific American, June 1982, pp. 114-123. 
24. Pitcher, T. J., Partridge, B. L.; Wardle, C. S., "Blind Fish Can 
School," Science 194, #4268 (1976), p. 964. 
25. Potts, W. K., "The Chorus-Line Hypothesis of Manoeuver Co- 
ordination in Avian Flocks," letter in Nature, Vol 309, May 24, 
1984, pp. 344-345. 
26. Pugh, J., '~ctors--The Stage is Set," acre S1GPLANNotices, 
VI9 #3, March 1984, pp. 61-65. 
27. Reeves, W., T., "Particle Systems--A Technique for Modeling a 
Class of Fuzzy Objects," acm Transactions on Graphics, V2 #2, 
April 1983, and reprinted in Computer Graphics, V17 #3, July 
1983, (acm S[GGRAPH '83 Proceedings), pp. 359-376. 
28. Reynolds, C. W., Computer Animation in the World of Actors 
and Scripts, SM thesis, MIT (the Architecture Machine Group), 
May 1978. 
29. Reynolds, C. W., "Computer Animation with Scripts and Ac- 
tors," Computer Graphics, V16 #3, July 1982, (acm SIGGRAPH 
'82 Proceedings), pp. 289-296. 
30. Reynolds, C. W., "Description and Control of Time and Dy- 
namics in Computer Animation" in the notes for the course on Ad- 
vanced Computer Animation at acm SIGGRAPH '85, and reprinted 
for the notes of the same course in 1986. 
31. Selous, E., Thought-transference (or what?) in Birds, Constable, 
London, 1931. 
32. Scheffer, V. B., Spires of Form: Glimpses of Evolution, Harcourt 
Brace Jovanovich, San Diego, 1983 (reprinted 1985 by Harvest/ 
HBJ), p. 64. 
33. Shaw, E., "Schooling in Fishes: Critique and Review" in Devel- 
opment and Evolution of Behavior. W. H. Freeman and Company, 
San Francisco, 1970, pp. 452-480. 
34. Shaw, E., "Fish in Schools," Natural History 84, no. 8 (1975), 
pp. 40~16. 
35. Sims, K., Locomotion of Jointed Figures Over Complex Terrain, 
SM thesis, MIT Media Lab, currently in preparation, April 1987. 
36. Symbolics Graphics Division, S-Dynamics (user's manual), 
Symbolics Inc., November 1986. 
37. Symbolics Graphics Division, S-Geometry (user's mafiual), 
Symbolics Inc., October 1986. 
38. Pinker, S. (editor), Visual Cognition, The MIT Press, Cam- 
bridge, Massachusetts, 1985. 
39. Thomas, F., Johnson, O., Disney Animation: The Illusion of 
Life, Abbeville Press, New York, 1981, pp. 47-69. 
40. Wilhelms, J., "Toward Automatic Motion Control," IEEE Com- 
puter Graphics and Applications, V7 #4, April 1987, pp. ! 1-22. 
41. Zeltzer, D., "'Toward an Integrated View of 3-D Computer Ani- 
mation," The Visual Computer, V1 #4, 1985, pp. 249-259. 
34