

----- Page 1 (native) -----
AutoDock Vina: improving the speed and accuracy of docking
with a new scoring function, efficient optimization and
multithreading
Oleg Trott and Arthur J. Olson*
The Scripps Research Institute, Molecular Biology, La Jolla, CA
Abstract
AutoDock Vina, a new program for molecular docking and virtual screening, is presented.
AutoDock Vina achieves an approximately two orders of magnitude speed-up compared to the
molecular docking software previously developed in our lab (AutoDock 4), while also
significantly improving the accuracy of the binding mode predictions, judging by our tests on the
training set used in AutoDock 4 development. Further speed-up is achieved from parallelism, by
using multithreading on multi-core machines. AutoDock Vina automatically calculates the grid
maps and clusters the results in a way transparent to the user.
Introduction
Molecular docking is a computational procedure that attempts to predict noncovalent
binding of macromolecules or, more frequently, of a macromolecule (receptor) and a small
molecule (ligand) efficiently, starting with their unbound structures, structures obtained
from MD simulations, or homology modeling, etc. The goal is to predict the bound
conformations and the binding affinity.
The prediction of binding of small molecules to proteins is of particular practical importance
because it is used to screen virtual libraries of drug-like molecules in order to obtain leads
for further drug development. Docking can also be used to try to predict the bound
conformation of known binders, when the experimental holo structures are unavailable.1
One is interested in maximizing the accuracy of these predictions while minimizing the
computer time they take, since the computational resources spent on docking are
considerable. For example, hundreds of thousands of computers are used for running
docking in FightAIDS@Home and similar projects.2
Theory
In the spectrum of computational approaches to modeling receptor-ligand binding,
a.
molecular dynamics with explicit solvent,
b.
molecular dynamics and molecular mechanics with implicit solvent, and
c.
molecular docking
*olson@scripps.edu.
NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
J Comput Chem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 February 18.
Published in final edited form as:
J Comput Chem. 2010 January 30; 31(2): 455–461. doi:10.1002/jcc.21334.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 2 (native) -----
can be seen as making an increasing trade-off of the representational detail for
computational speed.3
Among the assumptions made by these approaches is the commitment to a particular
protonation state of and charge distribution in the molecules that do not change between, for
example, their bound and unbound states. Additionally, docking generally assumes much or
all of the receptor rigid, the covalent lengths and angles constant, while considering a chosen
set of covalent bonds freely rotatable (referred to as active rotatable bonds here).
Importantly, while molecular dynamics directly deals with energies (referred to as force
fields in chemistry), docking is ultimately interested in reproducing chemical potentials,
which determine the bound conformation preference and the free energy of binding. It is a
qualitatively different concept governed not only by the minima in the energy profile, but
also by the shape of the profile and the temperature.4, 5
Docking programs generally use a scoring function, that can be seen as an attempt to
approximate the standard chemical potentials of the system. When the superficially physics-
based terms like the 6–12 van der Waals interactions and Coulomb energies are used in the
scoring function, they need to be significantly empirically weighted, in part, to account for
this difference between energies and free energies.4, 5
The aforementioned considerations should make it rather unsurprising when such
superficially physics-based scoring functions do not necessarily perform better than the
alternatives.
We see our approach to the scoring function as more of ”machine learning” than directly
physics-based in its nature. It is ultimately justified by its performance on test problems
rather than by theoretical considerations following some, possibly too strong, approximating
assumptions.
Scoring function
The general functional form of the conformation-dependent part of the scoring function
AutoDock Vina (referred to as Vina here) is designed to work with is
(1)
where the summation is over all of the pairs of atoms that can move relative to each other,
normally excluding 1–4 interactions, i.e. atoms separated by 3 consecutive covalent bonds.
Here, each atom i is assigned a type ti, and a symmetric set of interaction functions ftitj of the
interatomic distance rij should be defined.
This value can be seen as a sum of intermolecular and intramolecular contributions:
(2)
The optimization algorithm, described in the following section, attempts to find the global
minimum of c and other low-scoring conformations, which it then ranks.
The predicted free energy of binding is calculated from the intermolecular part of the
lowest-scoring conformation, designated as 1:
Trott and Olson
Page 2
J Comput Chem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 February 18.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 3 (native) -----
(3)
where the function g can be an arbitrary strictly increasing smooth possibly nonlinear
function.
In the output, other low-scoring conformations are also formally given s values, but, to
preserve the ranking, using cintra of the best binding mode:
(4)
For modularity reasons, much of the program does not rely on any particular functional form
of ftitj interactions or g. Essentially, these functions are passed as a parameter for the rest of
the code. Additionally, the program was designed so that alternative atom typing schemes
could potentially be used, such as the AutoDock 4 atom typing6 or SYBIL-based types.7
The particular implementation of the scoring function that will be presented here was mostly
inspired by X-Score,8 and, like X-Score, was tuned using the PDBbind.9, 10 However, some
terms are different from X-Score, and, in tuning the scoring function, we went beyond linear
regression. Additionally, it should be noted that Vina ranks the conformations according to
Eq. 2, or, equivalently, Eq. 4, whereas X-Score only counts intermolecular contributions.8
As far as we are aware, X-Score has not been implemented in a docking program, and
ignoring internal constraints may potentially lead the optimization algorithm to find severely
internally clashed structures.
The derivation of our scoring function combines certain advantages of knowledge-based
potentials and empirical scoring functions: it extracts empirical information from both the
conformational preferences of the receptor-ligand complexes and the experimental affinity
measurements. The scoring function derivation will be described in a separate publication.
This section merely defines it.
The atom typing scheme follows that of X-Score. The hydrogen atoms are not considered
explicitly, other than for atom typing, and are omitted from Eq. 1.
The interaction functions ftitj are defined relative to the surface distance dij = rij − Rti − Rtj,
as in Jain:11
(5)
where Rt is the van der Waals radius of atom type t.
In our scoring function, htitj is a weighted sum of steric interactions (the first three terms in
table 1), identical for all atom pairs, hydrophobic interaction between hydrophobic atoms,
and, where applicable, hydrogen bonding.
The weights are shown in table 1. The steric terms are:
(6)
Trott and Olson
Page 3
J Comput Chem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 February 18.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 4 (native) -----
(7)
(8)
The hydrophobic term equals 1, when d < 0.5Å; 0, when d > 1.5Å, and is linearly
interpolated between these values. The hydrogen bonding term equals 1, when d < −0.7Å; 0,
when d > 0, and is similarly linearly interpolated in between. In this implementation, all
interaction functions ftitj are cut off at rij = 8Å.
Figure 1 shows the weighted steric terms alone, or combined with the hydrophobic or H-
bonding interactions.
The conformation-independent function g was chosen to be
(9)
where Nrot is the number of active rotatable bonds between heavy atoms in the ligand, and w
is the associated weight.
Optimization algorithm
In the development of Vina, a variety of stochastic global optimization approaches were
explored, including genetic algorithms,12 particle swarm optimization,13, 14 simulated
annealing15 and others, combined with various local optimization procedures and
special ”tricks” to speed up the optimization. Eventually, we settled on the Iterated Local
Search global optimizer16, 17 similar to that by Abagyan et al.18
In this algorithm, a succession of steps consisting of a mutation and a local optimization are
taken, with each step being accepted according to the Metropolis criterion. In our
implementation, we use Broyden-Fletcher-Goldfarb-Shanno (BFGS)19 method for the local
optimization, which is an efficient quasi-Newton method.
BFGS, like other quasi-Newton optimization methods, uses not only the value of the scoring
function, but also its gradient, i.e. the derivatives of the scoring function with respect to its
arguments. The arguments, in our case, are the position and orientation of the ligand, as well
as the values of the torsions for the active rotatable bonds in the ligand and flexible residues,
if any.
These derivatives would have a simple mechanical interpretation, if the scoring function
were an energy. The derivatives with respect to the position, orientation and torsions would
be the negative total force acting on the ligand, the negative total torque and the negative
torque projections, respectively, where the projections refer to the torque applied to the
branch ”moved” by the torsion, projected on its rotation axis.
While it may take longer to evaluate the gradient in addition to the value of the scoring
function itself, using the gradient can speed up the optimization significantly.
Trott and Olson
Page 4
J Comput Chem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 February 18.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 5 (native) -----
The number of steps in a run is determined adaptively, according to the apparent complexity
of the problem, and several runs starting from random conformations are performed.
These runs can be performed concurrently, using multithreading, in Vina. This allows taking
advantage of the shared-memory hardware parallelism, such as the now ubiquitous multi-
core CPUs. The optimization algorithm maintains a set of diverse significant minima found
that are then combined from the separate runs and used during the structure refinement and
clustering stage.
Usability
Vina was designed to be compatible with the file format used for AutoDock 46 structure
files: PDBQT, which can be seen as an extension of the PDB file format. This makes it easy
to use Vina with the existing auxilliary software developed for AutoDock, such as
AutoDock Tools, for preparing the files, choosing the search space and viewing the results.
Additionally, manually choosing the atom types for grid maps, calculating grid map files
with AutoGrid, choosing the ”search parameters” and clustering the results after docking is
no longer necessary, as Vina calculates its own grid maps quickly and automatically, and
does not store them on the disk. It also clusters and ranks the results without exposing the
user to intermediate details.
A frequently encountered source of issues for AutoDock 4 users has to do with the fixed
data structure sizes in the program: the maximum number of atoms, the maximum number
of rotatable bonds, the maximum grid map size, etc. These limits are fixed at compile time,
and setting them higher might waste memory and time. To change these limits to meet their
needs, the users are required to alter them in the source code and recompile AutoDock 4 - a
task too daunting and error-prone for many users. In contrast, Vina does not have any such
limitations, for practical purposes. The program adapts itself to the input.
Implementation
Scientific software, especially of the ”numerical” type, generally pursues the opposing goals
of being
a.
a product of exploratory programming,
b.
robust,
c.
fast,
d.
developed within a reasonable time-frame.
To illustrate the need for exploratory programming: when work started on Vina, it was not
clear what optimization algorithms or what scoring functions would be most suitable.
Significant changes had to be made half-way through the development to, for example,
change the atom-typing scheme from AutoDock 4 to X-Score, and to build in a framework
for selecting the atom typing scheme. Exploring different optimization approaches required
breaking preconceived abstraction barriers, such as when partial evaluations of the sum in
Eq. 1 were investigated.
To achieve these four opposing goals, modern C++ programming techniques were
employed. The way C++ is typically used, it spans a spectrum of languages: from C, to an
object-oriented and Java-like language, to a language focused on generic programming,
exception-safety and automatic resource management via the special support for the RAII
(Resource Acquisition Is Initialization) pattern in C++.20
Trott and Olson
Page 5
J Comput Chem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 February 18.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 6 (native) -----
One attractive feature of generic programming in C++ that is worth noting is that ”higher-
level” programming does not normally have to come at a cost in performance relative to
what would be achieved with a much ”lower-level” and labor-intensive C solution.20, 21
The well-known downside to these techniques, within the framework of the language, is that
they take dedication and years of experience applying them to master.
In Vina development, heavy emphasis was placed on utilizing generic programming,
exception-safety, RAII, and, to a lesser extent, object-oriented programming, using STL21
and Boost22 libraries, where appropriate. Importantly, Boost::Thread library was used to
abstract over the differences in multithreading among the supported architectures, allowing
the development of platform-independent code.
In all, little more than a year was spent developing the docking program, with some extra
time devoted to the scoring function derivation method that will be described in a separate
publication.
Results and Discussion
The scoring function used in Vina was derived using the PDBbind data set, and the
performance of Vina has been compared to that of AutoDock 4.0.1 (referred to as AutoDock
here) on a set of 190 protein-ligand complexes that had been used as a training set for the
AutoDock scoring function.6
In this set, the receptors are treated as rigid, and the ligands are treated as flexible molecules
with the number of active rotatable bonds ranging from 0 to 32.
Both Vina and AutoDock require a specification of the ”search space” in the coordinate
system of the receptor, within which various positions of the ligand are to be considered.
To select the search spaces for the test, for each complex, we started with the experimental
bound ligand structure and created the minimal rectangular parallelepiped, aligned with the
coordinate system, that includes it. Then, its sizes were increased by 10Å in each of the 3
dimensions. Additionally, for each of the 3 dimensions, one of the 2 directions was chosen
randomly, in which another 5Å were added. Finally, if the size of the search space in any
dimension was less than 22.5Å, is was increased symmetrically to this value. Thus, the size
of the search space in each dimension was no less than 15Å larger than the size of the
ligand, and no less than 22.5Å total.
The final step of increasing the size of the search space in all dimensions to 22.5Å is for
consistency with the earlier tests of AutoDock on this set, where 22.5Å sizes were chosen,
and because the developers of AutoDock recommend making sure that the search space is
large enough for the ligand to rotate in.23
The preceding step of adding 5Å in a random direction in each of the 3 dimensions is done
to make sure the search space is not centered on the experimental structure, which, in case of
a bias in a docking program, may artificially help it find the correct ligand conformation.
For the same reason, the conformation of the ligand, including its position, orientation and
torsions, is randomized to be unrelated to the experimental structure, yet avoiding creating
self-clashes.
These randomized ligand structures, the receptor structures and search spaces were then
given to AutoDock and Vina.
Trott and Olson
Page 6
J Comput Chem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 February 18.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 7 (native) -----
For AutoDock, the same parameters were used as the ones normally used during its testing:
23 50 genetic algorithm runs were performed with 25 million evaluations in each, with all
other parameters consitent with the defaults provided by the AutoDock GUI, AutoDock
Tools. The results were clustered using an AutoDock Tools script and the largest cluster24
taken to be the predicted bound ligand structure.
For Vina, the default optimization parameters were accepted, and single-threaded execution
was requested (parameter ”cpu = 1”). After this Vina run, for each complex, Vina was rerun
with the same random seed and 8-way multithreading (parameter ”cpu = 8”). This latter
Vina run produced identical results, but executed faster.
To compare the accuracy of the predictions of the experimental structure, we use a measure
of distance between the experimental and predicted structures that takes into account
symmetry, partial symmetry (e.g. symmetry within a rotatable branch) and near-symmetry in
a simple heuristic way. We refer to it as simply RMSD throughout the paper, and its
defintion is given in the Appendix.
Figure 2 shows the RMSD values for Vina plotted against those for AutoDock, with the
color of the points encoding the number of active rotatable bonds. The same data are shown
differently in Figure 3.
The RMSD cutoff of 2Å is often used as a criterion of the correct bound structure prediction.
25 Using the same cutoff value, the fractions of accurate predictions for AutoDock and Vina
are summarized in Figure 5.
It should be pointed out that, while the training set for Vina is the PDBbind refined set, and
the training set for AutoDock is this much smaller 190-complex set, 74 of these 190
structures are also in PDBbind. To assay to what extent Vina’s scoring function is
overfitting its training set, separate statistics were collected just for the remaining 116
complexes not in PDBbind. These showed 53% and 80% success rates for AutoDock and
Vina, respectively, suggesting that no significant overfitting occurred, likely thanks to the
large size of PDBbind and the sufficiently small number of adjustible parameters used in
Vina.
Figure 6 summarizes the average time taken by AutoDock, Vina and multithreaded Vina,
per complex. The single-threaded runs show that Vina ran the benchmark 62 times faster
than AutoDock. The multithreaded Vina run shows that Vina ran 7.25 times faster when
using all 8 cores available on the test machines.
Figure 4 shows how the time of the multithreaded Vina run varied with the number of heavy
atoms in the ligand and the number of active rotatable bonds. While the average time was
1.16 minutes per complex for the set, Vina can be considerably slower for the more complex
ligands, both because the evaluation of the scoring function is clostlier, and because more of
these evaluations are performed.
Figure 7 shows the predicted and experimental free energies of binding for the data set,
using the predicted bound conformations. Vina achieves a comparatively low standard error
of 2.85 kcal/mol, likely due to the ligands with many active rotatable bonds, for which
AutoDock has difficulty finding the correct bound conformation, as can be seen in Figure 3.
The standard error for the 116 complexes not in PDBbind was 2.75 kcal/mol.
Trott and Olson
Page 7
J Comput Chem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 February 18.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 8 (native) -----
Availability
The software is available from http://vina.scripps.edu. User manuals, video tutorials and
links to discussion forums can also be found on the web site.
Conclusion
AutoDock Vina, a new program for molecular docking and virtual screening, has been
presented. Vina uses a sophisticated gradient optimization method in its local optimization
procedure. The calculation of the gradient effectively gives the optimization algorithm
a ”sense of direction” from a single evaluation. By using multithreading, Vina can further
speed up the execution by taking advantage of multiple CPUs or CPU cores.
The evaluation of the speed and accuracy of Vina during flexible redocking of the 190
receptor-ligand complexes making up the AutoDock 4 training set showed approximately
two orders of magnitude improvement in speed and a simultaneous significantly better
accuracy of the binding mode prediction. In addition, we showed that Vina can achieve
near-ideal speed-up by utilizing multiple CPU cores.
Future work
It may be worth investigating whether making the hydrogen bonding interaction smoother
can make the optimizer even more efficient, and if adding directionality can further improve
the scoring function.
We are also interested in developing target-sepecific scoring functions for receptors with
extensive experimental information about holo structures and binding affinities.
As massively many-core CPUs become available, we would be interested in seeing how the
multithreaded performance scales with the much higher number of cores, and what, if any,
adaptations to the software need to be made.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the NIH grant 2R01GM069832. The authors are indebted to William Lindstrom for
vital early encouragement, and would would like to thank Sargis Dallakyan, Alex Gillet and Stefano Forli for
computer-administrative assistance, and The Scripps Research Institute Research Computing for providing
supercomputer time. Helpful and stimulating discussions with Andrey Nikitin (Microsoft, Qualcomm), Dmitry
Goryunov (Columbia University), William Lindstrom, David S. Goodsell, Michel Sanner, Stefano Forli, Ruth
Huey, Garrett M. Morris and Michael E. Pique are gratefully acknowledged.
Appendix
RMSD definition
For two structures, a and b, of an identical molecule, we define RMSD as follows:
(10)
where
(11)
Trott and Olson
Page 8
J Comput Chem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 February 18.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 9 (native) -----
and the summation is over all N heavy atoms in structure a, the mininum is over all atoms in
structure b with the same element type as atom i in structure a.
References
1. Sousa SF, Fernandes PA, Ramos MJ. Protein-ligand docking: Current status and future challenges.
Proteins-Structure Function and Bioinformatics 2006 Oct 1;vol. 65:15–26.
2. Chang MW, Lindstrom W, Olson AJ, Belew RK. Analysis of HIV wild-type and mutant structures
via in silico docking against diverse ligand libraries. Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling
2007 May–Jun;vol. 47:1258–1262. [PubMed: 17447753]
3. Gilson MK, Zhou H-X. Calculation of protein-ligand binding affinities. Annual Review of
Biophysics and Biomolecular Structure 2007;vol. 36:21–42.
4. Gilson M, Given J, Bush B, McCammon J. The statistical-thermodynamic basis for computation of
binding affinities: A critical review. Biophysical Journal 1997 Mar;vol. 72:1047–1069. [PubMed:
9138555]
5. Chang, C-eA; Chen, W.; Gilson, MK. Ligand configurational entropy and protein binding.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 2007 Jan 30;vol.
104:1534–1539. [PubMed: 17242351]
6. Morris G, Goodsell D, Halliday R, Huey R, Hart W, Belew R, Olson A. Automated docking using a
Lamarckian genetic algorithm and an empirical binding free energy function. Journal of
Computational Chemistry 1998 Nov 15;vol. 19:1639–1662.
7. Vanopdenbosch N, Cramer R, Giarrusso F. SYBYL, The integrated molecular modeling system.
Journal of Molecular Graphics 1985;vol. 3(no. 3):110–111.
8. Wang R, Lai L, Wang S. Further development and validation of empirical scoring functions for
structure-based binding affinity prediction. Journal of Computer-Aided Molecular Design 2002
Jan;vol. 16:11–26. [PubMed: 12197663]
9. Wang R, Fang X, Lu Y, Wang S. The PDBbind database: Collection of binding affinities for
protein-ligand complexes with known three-dimensional structures. Journal of Medicinal Chemistry
2004 Jun 3;vol. 47:2977–2980. [PubMed: 15163179]
10. Wang R, Fang X, Lu Y, Yang C, Wang S. The PDBbind database: Methodologies and updates.
Journal of Medicinal Chemistry 2005 Jun 16;vol. 48:4111–4119. [PubMed: 15943484]
11. Jain A. Scoring noncovalent protein-ligand interactions: A continuous differentiable function tuned
to compute binding affinities. Journal of Computer-Aided Molecular Design 1996 Oct;vol.
10:427–440. [PubMed: 8951652]
12. Holland, JH. Adaptation in Natural and Artificial Systems. Ann Arbor: The University of Michigan
Press; 1975.
13. Eberhart, R.; Kennedy, J. A new optimizer using particle swarm theory. Proceedings of the Sixth
International Symposium on Micro Machine and Human Science; 1995 Oct 4. p. 39-43.
14. Kennedy, J.; Eberhart, R. Particle swarm optimization. Proceedings of the IEEE International
Conference on Neural Networks; 1995 Nov. p. 1942-1948.
15. Kirkpatrick S, Gelatt C, Vecchi M. Optimization by simulated annealing. Science 1983 May;vol.
220:671–680. [PubMed: 17813860]
16. Baxter J. Local optima avoidance in depot location. Journal of the Operational Research Society
1981;vol. 32(no. 9):815–819.
17. Blum, ARC.; Blesa, M.; Sampels, M., editors. Hybrid Metaheuristics: An Emerging Approach to
Optimization. Springer-Verlag; 2008.
18. Abagyan R, Totrov M, Kuznetsov D. ICM - A new method for protein modeling and design -
applications to docking and structure prediction from the distorted native conformation. Journal of
Computational Chemistry 1994 May;vol. 15:488–506.
19. Nocedal, J.; Wright, SJ. Numerical optimization. Berlin: Springer Series in Operations Research,
Springer Verlag; 1999.
20. Stroustrup, B. The Design and Evolution of C++. Addison-Wesley; 1994.
21. Austern, MH. Generic Programming and the STL. Addison-Wesley; 1999.
Trott and Olson
Page 9
J Comput Chem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 February 18.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 10 (native) -----
22. Boost Organization. Boost C++ Libraries: http://www.boost.org/. 2008.
23. Morris G, Huey R, Lindstrom W, Sanner M, Belew R, Goodsell D, Olson A. AutoDock4 and
AutoDockTools4: Automated Docking with Selective Receptor Flexibility. Journal of
Computational Chemistry. 2009 (In press).
24. Chang MW, Belew RK, Carroll KS, Olson AJ, Goodsell DS. Empirical entropic contributions in
computational docking: Evaluation in APS reductase complexes. Journal of Computational
Chemistry 2008 Aug;vol. 29:1753–1761. [PubMed: 18351616]
25. Bursulaya B, Totrov M, Abagyan R, Brooks C. Comparative study of several algorithms for
flexible ligand docking. Journal of Computer-Aided Molecular Design 2003 Nov;vol. 17:755–763.
[PubMed: 15072435]
Trott and Olson
Page 10
J Comput Chem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 February 18.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 11 (native) -----
Figure 1.
Weighted scoring function term combinations. Steric interactions; steric and hydrophobic
interactions; and steric and hydrogen bonding interactions, using weights from table 1
Trott and Olson
Page 11
J Comput Chem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 February 18.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 12 (native) -----
Figure 2.
RMSD of the predicted bound ligand conformation from the experimental one, showing the
values for Vina and Autodock. The color encodes the number of active rotatable bonds
Trott and Olson
Page 12
J Comput Chem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 February 18.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 13 (native) -----
Figure 3.
RMSD of the predicted bound ligand conformation from the experimental one. (Red +)
Autodock; (Green ×) Vina. Abscissa shows the number of active rotatable bonds
Trott and Olson
Page 13
J Comput Chem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 February 18.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 14 (native) -----
Figure 4.
Time, in minutes, taken by the multi-threaded Vina run, as a function of the number of
heavy atoms in the ligand. The color encodes the number of active rotatable bonds
Trott and Olson
Page 14
J Comput Chem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 February 18.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 15 (native) -----
Figure 5.
The fraction of the 190 test complexes for which RMSD < 2Å was achieved by AutoDock
and Vina
Trott and Olson
Page 15
J Comput Chem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 February 18.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 16 (native) -----
Figure 6.
Average time, in minutes per complex, taken by AutoDock, single-threaded Vina and Vina
with 8-way multithreading. Machines with two quad-core 2.66GHz Xeon processors were
used in the experiment. The time for AutoDock does not include the necessary initial
AutoGrid run
Trott and Olson
Page 16
J Comput Chem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 February 18.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 17 (native) -----
Figure 7.
Experimental and predicted free energies of binding (kcal/mol) for (a) AutoDock, (b) Vina.
The color encodes the number of active rotatable bonds
Trott and Olson
Page 17
J Comput Chem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 February 18.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 18 (native) -----
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Trott and Olson
Page 18
Table 1
Scoring function weights and terms
Weight
Term
−0.0356
gauss1
−0.00516
gauss2
  0.840
repulsion
−0.0351
hydrophobic
−0.587
hydrogen bonding
0.0585
Nrot
J Comput Chem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 February 18.