

----- Page 1 (native) -----
http://www.jstor.org
A Simple Model of Herd Behavior
Author(s): Abhijit V. Banerjee
Source: The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 107, No. 3, (Aug., 1992), pp. 797-817
Published by: The MIT Press
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2118364
Accessed: 27/05/2008 02:04
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=mitpress.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit organization founded in 1995 to build trusted digital archives for scholarship. We enable the
scholarly community to preserve their work and the materials they rely upon, and to build a common research platform that
promotes the discovery and use of these resources. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

----- Page 2 (native) -----
THE 
QUARTERLY JOURNAL 
OF 
ECONOMICS 
Vol. CVII 
August 1992 
Issue 3 
A SIMPLE MODEL OF HERD BEHAVIOR* 
ABHIJIT V. BANERJEE 
We analyze a sequential decision model in which each decision maker looks at 
the decisions made by previous decision makers in taking her own decision. This is 
rational for her because these other decision makers may have some information 
that is important for her. We then show that the decision rules that are chosen by 
optimizing individuals will be characterized by herd behavior; i.e., people will be 
doing what others are doing rather than using their information. We then show that 
the resulting equilibrium is inefficient. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
There are innumerable social and economic situations in 
which we are influenced in our decision making by what others 
around us are doing. Perhaps the commonest examples are from 
everyday life: we often decide on what stores and restaurants to 
patronize or what schools to attend on the basis of how popular 
they seem to be. But it has been suggested by Keynes [1936], for 
example, that this is also how investors in asset markets often 
behave (the famous "beauty contest" example).' In the literature 
on fertility choices it has frequently been suggested that various 
fertility decisions (how many children to have, whether or not to 
use contraception, etc.) are heavily influenced by what other people 
in the same area are doing.2 It has also been suggested that the 
same kind of factor also influences the decision to adopt new 
*I thank Aniruddha Dasgupta, Mathias Dewatripont, Bob Gibbons, Tim 
Guinnane, Sandy Korenman, Eric Maskin, Andreu Mas-Colell, Barry Nalebuff, 
Klaus Nehring, Avner Shaked, Lin Zhou, and two anonymous referees for helpful 
comments and suggestions. 
1. See Scharfstein and Stein [1990] for some evidence suggesting that this is 
indeed how managers behave. 
2. See Cotts Watkins [1990]. 
?) 1992 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College and the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology. 
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 1992

----- Page 3 (native) -----
798 
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS 
technologies.3 Voters are known to be influenced by opinion polls to 
vote in the direction that the poll predicts will win; this is another 
instance of going with the flow.4 The same kind of influence is also 
at work when, for example, academic researchers choose to work 
on a topic that is currently "hot." 
The aim of this paper is to develop a simple model in which we 
can study the rationale behind this kind of decision making as well 
as its implications. We set up a model in which paying heed to what 
everyone else is doing is rational because their decisions may reflect 
information that they have and we do not. It then turns out that a 
likely consequence of people trying to use this information is what 
we call herd behavior-everyone 
doing what everyone else is doing, 
even when their private information suggests doing something 
quite different. 
But this suggests that the very act of trying to use the 
information contained in the decisions made by others makes each 
person's decision less responsive to her own information and hence 
less informative to others. Indeed, we find that in equilibrium the 
reduction of informativeness may be so severe that in an ex ante 
welfare sense society may actually be better off by constraining 
some of the people to use only their own information. 
A common real world example may make our basic argument 
clearer.5 Most of us have been in a situation where we have to 
choose between two restaurants 
that are both more or less 
unknown to us. Consider now a situation where there is a 
population of 100 people who are all facing such a choice. 
There are two restaurants A and B that are next to each other, 
and it is known that the prior probabilities are 51 percent for 
restaurant A being the better and 49 percent for restaurant B being 
better. People arrive at the restaurants in sequence, observe the 
choices made by the people before them, and decide on one or the 
other of the restaurants. Apart from knowing the prior probabili- 
ties, each of these people also got a signal which says either that A 
is better or that B is better (of course the signal could be wrong). It 
is also assumed that each person's signal is of the same quality. 
Suppose that of the 100 people, 99 have received signals that B 
is better but the one person whose signal favors A gets to choose 
first. Clearly, the first person will go to A. The second person will 
now know that the first person had a signal that favored A, while 
3. See, for example, Kislev and Shchori-Bachrach [1973]. 
4. See, for example, Cukierman [1989]. 
5. I am indebted to an anonymous referee for this very transparent example.

----- Page 4 (native) -----
A SIMPLE MODEL OF HERD BEHAVIOR 
799 
her own signal favors B. Since the signals are of equal quality, they 
effectively cancel out, and the rational choice is to go by the prior 
probabilities and go to A. 
The second person thus chooses A regardless of her signal. 
Her choice therefore provides no new information to the next 
person in line: the third person's situation is thus exactly the same 
as that of the second person, and she should make the same choice 
and so on. Everyone ends up at restaurant A even if, given the 
aggregate information, it is practically certain that B is better. 
To see what went wrong, notice that if instead the second 
person had been someone who always followed her own signal, the 
third person would have known that the second person's signal had 
favored B. The third person would then have chosen B, and so 
would have everybody else. 
The second person's decision to ignore her own information 
and join the herd therefore inflicts a negative externality on the 
rest of the population. If she had used her own information, her 
decision would have provided information to the rest of the 
population, which would have encouraged them to use their own 
information as well. As it is, they all join the herd. 
The identification of this externality, which we call "herd 
externality," and the investigation of what it implies, is the main 
contribution of this paper. The model we present is extremely 
simple and does not aspire to capture any specific institutional 
detail. There is a set of options represented by a line segment, and 
within this set there is one correct option. The aim of the game is to 
find the correct option. All those who find the correct option get z, 
while all others get 0. There is a population of N people who take 
their decisions in a fixed order; each person moves knowing the 
choices made by those before her but not the information these 
choices were based on. Each individual may either be uninformed, 
in which case she has no signal, or informed, in which case she has 
a signal about what the right option is. This signal, however, may 
not be correct. It is correct only with probability 1; otherwise it is 
completely uninformative. Everybody is rational in the Bayesian 
sense, and the equilibrium 
we look at is a Bayesian-Nash 
equilibriums 
Because of the extreme simplicity of this model, using quite 
6. This formulation is somewhat more complicated and somewhat less natural 
than the two-restaurant setting discussed above, but it turns out that deriving a 
general result about the equilibrium decision rule which holds for all parameter 
values is actually simpler in this setting.

----- Page 5 (native) -----
800 
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS 
elementary arguments we are able to derive a number of rather 
striking results that derive directly from the presence of the herd 
externality. These results are summarized below. 
1. The equilibrium pattern of choices may be (and for a large 
enough population, will be) inefficient in the ex ante welfare sense. 
Before people know the order in which they are choosing, they may 
all agree to prevent the first few decision makers from observing 
the choices made by anyone else. This is a direct consequence of the 
herd externality and suggests why herd behavior may be undesir- 
able from the social point of view. 
2. The probability that no one in the population chooses the 
correct option is bounded away from zero for any size of the 
population. Indeed, by making the probability 3 small, we can 
make this probability as large as we like. This contrasts with the 
case where the decision makers choose without looking at each 
other (i.e., they follow their own information). Since the informa- 
tion they have is independent, as long as the population is large 
enough, someone must choose the right option in this case. 
3. Since the herd externality is of the positive feedback type (if 
we join the crowd, we induce others to do the same), the equilib- 
rium pattern of choices will be very volatile across several plays of 
the same game. The signals (which are partly random and need not 
be correct) that the first few decision makers have will determine 
where the first crowd forms, and from then on, everybody joins the 
crowd. This may shed some light on observations of "excess 
volatility" made in the context of many asset markets7 and the 
frequent and apparently unpredictable changes in fashions. 
The emphasis on the herd externality also distinguishes our 
work from two other explanations of clustering behavior that have 
been suggested before. One is an explanation based on strong 
complementarities: some things are more worthwhile when others 
are doing related things.8 Examples of such complementarities are 
fashions in consumption (see, for example, the analysis of fashions 
in Karni and Schmeidler [1989]) and network externalities in 
production (see Arthur [1989], Farrell and Saloner [1985], and 
Katz and Shapiro [1985]). Whether or not it is as important in 
7. The idea that informational externalities may explain observations of excess 
volatility is also discussed in Banerjee [1988]. 
8. As far as we know, there is actually no formal model that tries to explain 
herd behavior in these terms; what exists in the literature is the idea that if 
complementarities are sufficiently large, then people will do what the crowd is doing 
even if left to themselves they would have done something else. Under suitable 
conditions this could clearly lead to herd behavior.

----- Page 6 (native) -----
A SIMPLE MODEL OF HERD BEHAVIOR 
801 
other contexts where we observe herd behavior is an open question. 
In any case, there is no contradiction between this view and ours; 
our point is that many aspects of herd behavior can be explained 
quite plausibly without invoking these kinds of gains from 
association. 
A different explanation of herd behavior, which, like the 
present work is based on informational asymmetries, was sug- 
gested in an interesting recent paper by Scharfstein and Stein 
[1990]. The key difference between their explanation and the one 
suggested here is that their explanation is based on an agency 
problem; in their model the agents get rewards for convincing a 
principal that they are right. This distortion in incentives plays an 
important role in generating herd behavior in their model. By 
contrast, in our model agents capture all of the returns generated 
by their choice so that there is no distortion in incentives.9 
In any case, this approach is not inconsistent 
with our 
approach. This kind of principal agent problem (trying to con 
someone else into believing that you know something) seems 
common enough, especially in the context of asset markets. On the 
other hand, in many of the other potential instances of herd 
behavior, such as fertility choices, adoption of innovations, voting 
etc., there is no obvious principal agent problem. It is therefore 
useful to establish that inefficient herd behavior can arise even 
when the individuals themselves capture the rewards from their 
decisions. 
The strategy of this paper is as follows: the basic model is 
presented in Section II and analyzed in Section III. The results are 
discussed in Section IV. Several extensions and modifications of the 
basic model are presented in Section V. We conclude in Section VI. 
The essential ideas in this paper are generally quite straightfor- 
ward. Nonetheless, a fully rigorous treatment of the results derived 
here will certainly be very cumbersome and repetitive. To prevent 
the paper from being too unreadable, we have omitted some proofs 
9. There are two other important differences between the two models. In the 
Scharfstein and Stein model unlike in ours, all agents get a signal. However, only 
some of these signals are potentially informative (though not necessarily correct): 
the rest are duds; and the agents cannot distinguish between the two types of signals. 
In our model this would amount to assuming that agents do not know whether they 
have a signal or not. The decision to herd and not use one's signal is therefore 
somewhat less significant (since they actually may not have a signal) than it is in our 
model (where they know they have a signal). On the other hand, it is possible to 
generate instances of herd behavior in their model even if there are only two agents. 
In the model given here the equilibrium is always (second-best) optimal if there are 
two agents.

----- Page 7 (native) -----
802 
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS 
and presented others informally. More rigorous proofs were pre- 
sented in an earlier version of this paper [Banerjee, 1989], which is 
available from the author. 
II. THE BASIC MODEL 
There is a population of agents of size N each of whom 
maximizes the identical risk-neutral utility function VNM10 de- 
fined on the space of asset returns. For convenience we shall just 
assume that this utility is the same as the monetary amount 
received by the person. 
There is a set of assets indexed by numbers in [0,1] . Call the ith 
asset a(i). The physical return to the ith asset to the nth person 
investing in that asset is z(i) E R. Let us assume that there is a 
unique i* such that z(i) = 0 for all i ? i* and z(i*) = z, where z > 0. 
This is essentially the assumption that the excess return on one 
asset to the people investing in it is strictly greater than that on all 
other assets. 
Of course, everybody, given these payoffs, would want to invest 
in i*. The trouble is no one knows which one it is. We assume 
uniform priors so there is not even a likely candidate for i*. 
However, some people have an idea of which one it might be. 
Formally, there is a probability x that each person receives a signal 
telling her that the true i* is i'. The signal need not, of course, be 
true, and the probability that it is false is 1 - P. If it is false, then 
we assume that it is uniformly distributed on [0,1] and therefore 
gives no information about what i* really is. 
The decision making in this model is sequential; one person 
chosen at random takes her decision first (she cannot decide to 
delay her decision). The next person, once again chosen at random, 
takes her decision next but she is allowed to observe the choice 
made by the previous person and can benefit from the information 
contained in it. However, she is not allowed to find out whether or 
not the person before her actually got a signal.11 
The rest of the game proceeds in the same way, with each new 
decision maker making her decision on the basis of the history of 
the past decisions and their own signal if they have one. After 
everybody has made her choice, all the alternatives that have been 
10. It will be evident that for much of what we say it is irrelevant whether we 
take our utility function to be risk neutral or risk averse. The only point where we 
need the assumption is when we measure ex ante welfare. 
11. And a fortiori she cannot observe the signal observed by her predecessor.

----- Page 8 (native) -----
A SIMPLE MODEL OF HERD BEHAVIOR 
803 
chosen are tested, and if any of these turn out to work, those who 
have chosen it receive their rewards. If no one has chosen an option 
that works, the truth remains undiscovered, and no one gets 
rewards. 
It will be assumed that the structure of the game and Bayesian 
rationality are common knowledge. Each person's strategy is a 
decision rule that tells us for each possible history what that person 
will choose. We are looking for a Bayesian Nash equilibrium in 
these strategies. The nature of the equilibrium play, however, 
turns out to depend on certain critical tie-breaking assumptions. 
Some of these assumptions may be dispensed with by strengthen- 
ing the equilibrium concept, but it seems more natural to introduce 
these as explicit assumptions. These assumptions are listed below; 
the relevance of these assumptions 
will become clear in the 
appropriate context. It should also be possible to see that each of 
these assumptions is made to minimize the possibility of herding. 
ASSUMPTION 
A. Whenever a decision maker has no signal and 
everyone else has chosen i = 0, she always chooses i = 0. 
ASSUMPTION 
B. When decision makers are indifferent between 
following their own signal and following someone else's choice, 
they always follow their own signal.12 
ASSUMPTION C. When a decision maker is indifferent between 
following more than one of the previous decision makers, she 
chooses to follow the one who has the highest value of i. 
III. THE EQUILIBRIuM DECISION RULE 
The first decision maker's decision will clearly depend on 
whether or not she has a signal. If she has a signal, she will 
certainly follow her signal. While if she has no signal, by our 
Assumption A she will choose i = 0. This choice minimizes 
12. This assumption is not entirely innocuous. If the third decision maker 
decides to follow the second independently of her informational situation, the fact 
that she follows provides no information to the next decision maker. The next 
decision maker who has a signal, now faces the same choice; she is indifferent 
between following her own signal and joining the second and the third decision 
maker. If she too ignores her own signal, the next decision once again has the same 
choice and so on. There could, for example, be an equilibrium in which almost 
everybody follows either the first decision maker or the first deviant. Since this 
involves even more herding than the equilibrium we describe above, its welfare 
properties will typically be worse; and in this sense by making the above tie- 
breaking assumption, we are choosing to focus on the best of the set of possible 
equilibria.

----- Page 9 (native) -----
804 
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS 
misinformation: the only case where this will cause confusion is 
when i* = 0, but since this happens with probability 0, we can 
ignore this possibility.13 
If the second decision maker has no signal, then she will of 
course imitate the first decision maker and invest in the same 
asset. However, if she has a signal and the first person has not 
chosen i = 0, she has a problem. She knows that the first decision 
maker had a signal and this signal is as likely to be right as her own 
signal. She is therefore indifferent between following the first 
decision maker's signal and following her own signal. In this 
situation our Assumption B becomes relevant.'4 By invoking this 
assumption, we determine that the second person will, in this case, 
follow her own signal. 
The third decision maker can observe four possible histories: 
one or both of her predecessors may have chosen i = 0, and if 
neither of them had chosen i = 0, they could have still either agreed 
or disagreed. If they both chose i = 0, the third person should 
follow them if she has no signal and follow her signal otherwise. In 
all the other cases, if she does not have a signal, she should follow 
the person who has not chosen i = 0. If both the others have chosen 
i ? 0 but have not agreed with each other, of course this does not 
determine a course of action. Since she is indifferent, however, we 
can invoke our third tie-breaking rule, Assumption C, which tells 
us that she should follow the person with the highest i. 
On the other hand, if the third decision maker does have a 
signal i', she will follow her own signal, unless both people before 
her have chosen the same option and this option is neither i = 0 nor 
i = i'. When both of her predecessors have chosen i = 0, this is 
obvious. When only one of them has chosen something different 
from i = 0 and i = i' and the other has chosen i = 0, this is a 
consequence of our Assumption B. And, of course, when the third 
person's signal matches the choices made by one or both of her 
predecessors, she must choose to follow her own signal since this 
could not happen unless her signal was correct. 
The last point is much more general than this specific situa- 
tion and deserves to be emphasized. Whenever some person's 
signal matches the choice made by one of her predecessors, she 
should always follow her signal. This follows from the fact that the 
probability that two people should get the same signal and yet both 
13. Of course, there is nothing special about the point 0. The person could just 
as well choose some other point i as long as everybody knows what i is. 
14. Once again, this assumption is not entirely innocuous.

----- Page 10 (native) -----
A SIMPLE MODEL OF HERD BEHAVIOR 
805 
be wrong is zero. To deal with the remaining case, we prove the 
following simple lemma. 
LEMMA 1. If the first and the second decision makers have both 
chosen the same F X 0, the third decision maker should choose 
to follow them. 
Proof of Lemma 1. Note that 
prob[i* = TIH] = {a332(1 - 
A) + a23(1- 
)(1 - oa}/prob[H] 
prob[i* = i' H] = {a2,8(1 - p)(1- 
o)/prob[H], 
where H represents the event in which the first two people have 
both chosen I and the third person has the signal i'. 
Clearly, the first term is greater than the second. The third 
person should therefore choose i. 
Q.E.D. 
This has a simple intuitive explanation: the third person 
knows that the first person must have a signal, since otherwise she 
would have chosen i = 0. The first person's choice is therefore at 
least as good as the third person's signal. Further, the first person 
has someone who has followed her. This is some extra support for 
the first person's choice, since it is more likely to happen when the 
first person is right than when she is wrong. It is therefore always 
better to follow the first person. 
The same intuition tells us what should happen in any 
situation when several options other than i = 0 have been chosen 
but only one of them has been chosen by two people. Assume that 
the next person does not have a signal that matches any of the 
options that have already been chosen (if she has a signal that 
matches someone else's choice, she should, of course, follow her 
own signal). In the situation where this option is not the one with 
the highest i, it is of course clear (by our Assumption C) that both 
those people must have the same signal and therefore they must be 
right. In the situation where it is the one who has the highest i, the 
argument in the previous paragraph applies, and therefore once 
again this option is the best. In either case, therefore, the next 
person should choose the option that has been chosen by two 
people. 
Once one option has been chosen by two people, the next 
person should always follow that option unless her signal matches 
one of the options that have been already chosen; in that case she

----- Page 11 (native) -----
806 
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS 
should follow her own signal. A combination of this decision rule 
with Assumption C tells us that the next person will observe one of 
three alternative histories. 
i) One option (other than i = 0) has been chosen by more than 
one person, and this is the one that has the highest i. 
ii) One option (other than i = 0) has been chosen by more than 
one person, and this is not the one with the highest i. 
iii) Two options (other than i = 0) have been chosen by more 
than one person, one of which is the one with the highest i. 
In the second and the third scenarios, it is clear that the option 
which is not the highest value of i is the correct option, and all 
subsequent decision makers should choose it. The argument in the 
first case is very similar to the argument for Lemma 1. The next 
decision maker should decide to follow the option that has already 
been chosen by more than one person. 
The same argument can now be extended to all subsequent 
decision makers. This yields the following proposition which 
summarizes all the arguments we make above.15 
PROPOSITION 1. Under Assumptions A, B, and C, the unique 
(Nash) equilibrium decision rule that everyone will adopt is 
decision rule D16 given below. 
1. The first decision maker follows her signal if she has one 
and chooses i = 0 otherwise. 
2. For k > 1, if the kth decision maker has a signal, she will 
choose to follow her own signal either if and only if (a) holds or 
if (a) does not hold, (b) holds, where (a) and (b) are given below. 
(a) Her signal matches some option that has already been 
chosen. 
(b) No option other than i = 0 has been chosen by more than 
one person. 
3. Assume that the kth decision maker has a signal. If any 
option (among those already chosen) other than the one with 
15. A formal proof is available from the author on request. 
16. Actually this is not the full decision rule. Technically we have to specify the 
optimal decision in other parts of the decision tree. In particular, we have to specify 
the decision rule in the following scenario: one person finds that his option matches 
someone else's and chooses that option. In the equilibrium specified it is known that 
he would not choose that option unless his signal matches that option. Therefore, 
everybody else follows him expecting that no one else will deviate. However, now 
someone else deviates and chooses another of the options that have already been 
chosen. 
It is true that this can happen only with probability zero, but when it happens, 
we need to say what the subsequent decision makers will choose. However, it turns 
out that agents are actually indifferent between sticking to the original path and 
deviating to the new one, and we can make any assumption we like.

----- Page 12 (native) -----
A SIMPLE MODEL OF HERD BEHAVIOR 
807 
the highest i has been chosen by more than one person, the kth 
decision maker will choose this option, unless her signal 
matches one of the other options that has already been chosen. 
In this case she chooses the latter option. 
4. Assume that the kth decision maker has a signal. If the 
option with the highest i (among those already chosen) has 
been chosen by more than one person and no other option 
(except i = 0) has been chosen by more than one person, she 
will choose this option unless her signal matches one of the 
options already chosen. In this case she chooses the latter 
option. 
5. Assume that the kth decision maker does not have a signal. 
Then she will choose i = 0 if and only if that is what everyone 
else has chosen. Otherwise, she chooses the option with the 
highest value of i that has already been chosen unless one of 
the other options (excluding i = 0) has been chosen by more 
than one person. In this case, she chooses the latter option. 
The only part of the statement of this proposition that is not 
explained above is the uniqueness. Because each person's payoff is 
completely independent of the choices made by everyone coming 
after her in the decision process, there are no strategic elements 
here, and we can solve this game by moving forward in the game 
tree. The uniqueness of the solution is therefore automatically 
guaranteed. 
The equilibrium decision rule as stated above is somewhat 
complicated and potentially confusing. In Figure I the decision rule 
for decision maker k (for k > 2) is presented in a schematic form 
that may be easier to follow. 
IV. DISCUSSION OF RESULTS 
A. Description of the Equilibrium 
The equilibrium decision rule in the above model is character- 
ized by extensive herding; agents abandon their own signals and 
follow others even when they are not really sure that the other 
person is right. The first person always follows her own signal if 
she has one, and so does the second person, but we cannot 
guarantee that even the third person follows her own signal. If the 
first person chooses i ? 0 and the second person follows her, the 
third person will always follow them. All subsequent decision 
makers will also choose the same option.

----- Page 13 (native) -----
808 
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS 
Has no signal 
Has a signal 
ik 
signal 
Everybody 
all options 
only one 
two options 
some 
other 
no one else 
no other 
no other 
history 
else 
has 
already 
option 
other than 
person 
has 
has chosen 
person 
has 
person 
chosen 
chosen 
other than 
i = 0 have 
chosen 
i = ik 
and 
chosen 
i = ik 
has 
i 
0 
except 
i = 
i = 0 has 
been 
chosen 
i = ik 
no option 
but one 
chosen 
have 
been 
been chosen 
by more than 
other than 
option other 
=k 
chosen 
by 
by more than 
1 person 
i = 0 has 
than i = 0 
but 
1 person 
1 person 
been 
chosen 
has been 
two 
by more 
chosen 
hy 
options 
than 
more than 
other than 
1 person 
1 person 
0 have 
heen 
chosen hy 
more than 
1 person 
choose 
choose 
the 
choose 
choose 
the 
choose 
choose 
choose 
choose 
choice 
i = 0 
highest 
of 
that 
lower 
of 
i = ik 
i = ik 
that 
the lower 
the options 
option 
the two 
option 
of the 
already 
options 
two 
chosen 
options 
FIGURE I 
The kth decision maker's choice problem (k > 2) 
Herding can also happen when the first and second person, 
and for that matter the third and fourth person, choose different 
options. After k different options have been chosen, for any positive 
k, if the next decision maker does not have a signal, she will choose 
the option with the highest value of i (among those already 
chosen). Following this, all subsequent decision makers will choose 
the same option unless one of their signals matches one of the 
options already chosen. This can happen only if the correct option 
has already been chosen. So, there will be herding at an incorrect 
option unless the first decision maker to have a signal or someone 
coming after her but before the first subsequent decision maker 
without a signal, made the correct choice. 
We can actually calculate the expression for the probability 
that no one in the population chooses the right option, however 
large the population. A simple calculation establishes that this 
probability is 
[1 - 
(1 
- 
)]-1(1 
- &(1 
- 
A). 
This probability is clearly decreasing in both a and 3 which 
makes intuitive sense. Further, if 3 is sufficiently small, this 
probability will be very close to one. 
To see why this is worth a remark, note that if all the decision 
makers took their decisions without observing the choices made by 
others, some people will always end up choosing the correct option 
(in fact, for a large enough population, the proportion of the

----- Page 14 (native) -----
A SIMPLE MODEL OF HERD BEHAVIOR 
809 
population who will choose the correct option will almost certainly 
be close to (up). 
It is also important to note that just the fact that people 
observe the decisions made by others does not guarantee that there 
will be herd behavior. Consider, for example, the following modi- 
fied version of the Normal Learning Model: there is a Normal 
(Gaussian) distribution with known variance but unknown mean. 
The distribution of the mean is known. In each period a different 
agent gets a signal that is a random drawing from this distribution. 
The agent then chooses her best guess for the mean of the 
distribution (he is minimizing a loss function that is quadratic in 
distance from the mean) given her signal and the choices made by 
her predecessors. It is quite easy to show that this sequence of 
choices converges to the mean for almost every sequence of signals. 
Therefore, the result we get contrasts sharply with the result from 
this superficially quite similar model. 
The key reason why we get a different result is that in our 
model the choices made by agents are not always sufficient 
statistics for the information they have. If the choices are always 
sufficient statistics, future agents always know what information 
their predecessors had acted upon, and therefore there is no herd 
externality and no inefficiency. It is when the choices made by some 
agents affect the information that subsequent decision makers 
have that there is a potential for herd externality. 
The fact that the choices in our model do not have this 
sufficient statistic property clearly has to do with how we specify 
the payoffs. It is evident that, for a wide range of signals, the agents 
in our model will always choose the same option; this lack of 
invertibility is what causes the sufficient property to fail. We 
conjecture that typically whenever the space of choices and the 
space of signals are of comparable dimension and the payoff 
function is continuous, we shall have this kind of invertibility. So, 
for example, in the model presented above, we are more likely to 
have invertibility if the agents could (and would want to) vary the 
size of their investment in different informational settings. On the 
other hand, there are many real reasons why it may not be possible 
to vary one's choice enough to register all the information one 
has-machines, 
for example, come in only a small number of sizes. 
B. Welfare Properties 
The welfare question here is motivated by the herd external- 
ity. While joining the herd is optimal for the current agent given

----- Page 15 (native) -----
810 
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS 
the play of the game, it reduces the chance that future agents may 
discover the truth. So if we consider an ex ante measure of welfare, 
imagining that in some primeval state before the game begins all 
agents have an equal chance of being at any position in the 
sequence of arrivals, we may be able to show that social welfare is 
lower in the equilibrium we have described than in other plays of 
the game. 
This is in fact what we find. Consider another play of the game 
in which agents follow the decision rule D* given below. 
1. If an agent has a signal, she follows that signal, unless 
someone before her has already followed someone else. In that case 
she follows suit. 
2. If an agent does not have a signal, she picks some option that 
has not been picked by anyone else, unless someone before her has 
already followed someone else. In that case she follows suit. 
This play of the game is set up to ensure that the right choice 
always gets revealed as long as there are enough people in the 
population. With a very large population it is easy to see that this 
would mean that an arbitrarily large fraction of the population will 
always make the right choice. Formally, the probability that at 
least two people have not received the true signal by the time we get 
to the nth person is 
1 - (1 - ap)n 
1 - (n - 1)(1 - 
z43)n-2o43. 
For any e> 
0, it is easy to see that we can choose an n(E) large 
enough that this probability is at least 1 - e. Now this tells us that 
a lower bound for the ex ante expected utility for agents following 
this rule is 
z[N - n(E)](1- E)-N, 
where N is the size of the population. Notice that by making N 
large we can make this arbitrarily close to N(1 - e). 
By contrast, the probability that no one will discover the right 
choice in the herding equilibrium we described before is 
H 
[1 - 
OL1 - 
1)]-1(1 
- &)(1 - 
1), 
and therefore the ex ante expected utility is bounded above by 
zN[1 - H]. 
Since we can choose e to be as small as we would like to by making

----- Page 16 (native) -----
A SIMPLE MODEL OF HERD BEHAVIOR 
811 
N large, it is easy to see that we can make the above expression 
larger than this expression. There is at least one decision rule that 
for large enough N does better than the equilibrium we described. 
It may be objected here that we have simply described a 
strategy and not explained how it will be implemented and the 
equilibrium may yet be constrained Pareto optimal. However, this 
is not true. This decision rule may be implemented by using a 
number of different incentive schemes.17 One way that works is to 
punish heavily anybody who is a follower at any option that turns 
out to be the incorrect one, while equally rewarding everybody who 
chooses the right option. Given these rewards, no one will choose to 
be a follower unless they were absolutely sure that the option that 
they were choosing was the right one. But this is, of course, exactly 
what we want. 
Indeed, even if D* cannot be implemented, 
some of its 
advantages can be captured simply by not allowing the first n 
agents to observe anybody else's choice when they are making their 
own choice. The rest of the population is then allowed to choose 
sequentially, with each person observing the choices made by all 
her predecessors. 
The first n people will, of course, choose to follow their own 
signals if they have one and choose at random if they have no 
signal. The only way that more than one of these people will choose 
the same option is if they are both right. Thus, as long as at least 
two of the first n people have chosen the same option, the rest of 
the population will realize that this must be the correct option and 
choose it. 
But an argument exactly paralleling the one given above in the 
case of D* can now be used to establish that for a large enough 
population, by choosing n suitably, we can make the fraction of the 
population who do not choose the correct option arbitrarily small. 
In other words, in terms of ex ante welfare, the economy may be 
better off if the early decision makers are not allowed to observe the 
choices made by the other decision makers than in our original 
equilibrium. In other words, destroying information (in this lim- 
ited sense), can be socially beneficial.18 
17. This question is discussed in more detail in an earlier version of this paper 
which is available from the author. 
18. This is, of course, only in terms of ex ante welfare; in terms of ex post 
welfare this is certainly not true.

----- Page 17 (native) -----
812 
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS 
V. EXTENSIONS AND MODIFICATIONS 
A. Alternative Payoff Structures 
In the model we analyzed in the last section, everyone who 
chooses the right outcome gets the same reward irrespective of how 
many others chose this option before and after them. This may be 
approximately the correct model of the rewards we get for choosing 
the right restaurant, but in many other real world examples the 
rewards will depend on the number of people who have chosen this 
option and our rank among them. The total amount of the reward 
may be fixed, or at least it may not increase as fast as the number of 
people who choose the correct option. And in many instances there 
are extra rewards for being first or second to choose the correct 
option. 
To the extent that we have ignored these possibilities, our 
analysis may overstate the extent to which there will be herding. 
Both of these possibilities suggest that it pays more to choose the 
correct option when most others have chosen something else. This 
kind of reward for originality clearly discourages herd behavior. 
To make this idea precise, consider a model that is identical to 
the previous one except that in this case the first person to choose 
the right option gets a bigger output than all the others, who are all 
assumed to get the same amount. A real world institution where 
exactly these rewards are not too implausible is academia; the 
emphasis is on being first to do something. If you are not first, the 
rank does not matter very much. 
A little reflection should persuade the reader that this model is 
not really that different from our basic model. It is true that the 
relative incentives for being first versus being second are greater 
now, which should discourage agents from choosing to be second 
but people without signals and people with signals that exactly 
match that of someone else, will still be followers. Consequently, it 
is possible that the number of people behind someone becomes so 
large and the evidence of their numbers so convincing, that 
informed agents will decide to ignore their information and the 
attraction of the large first prize and join the herd. 
Formally, we have Proposition 2. 
PROPOSITION 2. If the return to the first person choosing the right 
option is z1 and the return to everybody else who chooses that 
option is Z2, and 0 < Z2 /Z1 < 1, then the unique equilibrium

----- Page 18 (native) -----
A SIMPLE MODEL OF HERD BEHAVIOR 
813 
decision rule19 under Assumptions A, B, and C, is described by 
an integer k * > 0 and the following rules. 
1. The first decision maker follows her signal if she has one 
and chooses i = 0 otherwise. 
2. For k > 1, if the kth decision maker has a signal, she will 
choose to follow her own signal either if and only if (a) holds or 
if (a) does not hold, (b) holds, or if (b) does not hold, (c) holds, 
where (a), (b), and (c) are given below. 
(a) Her signal matches some option that has already been 
chosen. 
(b) No option other than i = 0 has been chosen by more than 
one person. 
(c) The option with the highest i (among those already 
chosen) has not been chosen by more than k* people for some 
k* > 1, and no other option other than i = 0 has been chosen 
by more than one person. 
3. Assume that the kth decision maker has a signal. If any 
option (among those already chosen) other than the one with 
the highest i has been chosen by more than one person, the kth 
decision maker will choose this option, unless her signal 
matches one of the other options that have already been 
chosen. In this case she chooses the latter option. 
4. Assume that the kth decision maker has a signal. If the 
option with the highest i (among those already chosen) has 
been chosen by more than k* people and no other option 
(except i = 0) has been chosen by more than one person, she 
will choose this option unless her signal matches one of the 
options already chosen. In this case she chooses the latter 
option. 
5. Assume that the kth decision maker does not have a signal. 
Then she will choose i = 0 if and only if that is what everyone 
else has chosen. Otherwise she chooses the option with the 
highest value of i that has already been chosen unless one of 
the other options (excluding i = 0) has been chosen by more 
than one person. In this case she chooses the latter option. 
The proof of this result is omitted since it is a straightforward 
extension of arguments used in Section III. In fact, it should be 
evident that the result in Section III is a special case of this result 
19. Once again we have not actually provided the complete decision rule here; 
for this would need to say what happens at all the unreached information sets. 
However, this can be done in a straightforward way.

----- Page 19 (native) -----
814 
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS 
for the case where Z2 = zj. What is striking about that special case is 
that k*, which we leave as an undetermined integer in this result, is 
one in that special case. 
What is more, if Z2/Zl 
is not much smaller than one, it is easy to 
see that the value of k* will still be one. As Z2/Zl goes to zero, k* of 
course increases, but at least for values of Z2/z1 
relatively close to 
one, there will be a substantial degree of herding. Therefore, some 
of the basic welfare intuitions are going to be quite similar to the 
previous case. For N large enough, it will still be true that the 
decision rule D* will do better than this rule though the margin of 
gain will be less substantial. 
While this exercise suggests that the results we got from our 
basic model are robust, it also suggests a criticism of our approach. 
What we have done is to take an exogenously given payoff structure 
and then argue that as long as the payoff structure falls within a 
certain class we will get socially inefficient herding. It may be 
argued that this is misleading because if the social costs of herding 
were large enough, they would automatically bring into place 
mechanisms that will modify the payoff structures and reduce 
herding. In fact, a message of the first part of this section is that 
one can always reduce and even eliminate herding by having very 
high rewards for originality. One might then take the presence of 
the institution of patent laws (which rewards being first) as proof 
that society can always find ways of preventing inefficient herding. 
In our opinion, however, this would be going too far. We feel 
that in many of the cases we consider there are substantial 
informational and transactions costs as well as institutional con- 
straints which prevent the use of the appropriate incentives to 
eliminate herding. In some cases, like the restaurant example we 
considered in the introduction, it is difficult to think of how one 
could put any incentive scheme into place. But even in cases where 
there is a mechanism for rewarding originality, as patent protec- 
tion for example, the degree to which the incentives can be changed 
may be quite limited. Anecdotal evidence suggests, for example, 
that the amount of protection patents provide varies a lot from case 
to case. 
If decreasing returns (average payoffs decline as the number of 
people who choose it increases) tends to reduce herding, one would 
expect increasing returns, which rewards doing what a lot of others 
are doing, to increase the tendency to herd. This is indeed what we 
find. In an earlier version of this paper (which is available from the 
author), we present a detailed analysis of this case which shows

----- Page 20 (native) -----
A SIMPLE MODEL OF HERD BEHAVIOR 
815 
among other things that if the increasing returns are very strong, 
the unique equilibrium decision rule chosen by backward program- 
ming in the game tree involves everyone choosing the same option. 
B. Alternative Information Structures 
Another possible criticism of our basic model is that it is based 
on rather demanding informational assumptions. We assumed that 
each person knows the entire history of choices made by people 
before her. This is clearly a strong assumption that may be valid in 
some cases (like academic research) but not in others. Examples 
where one would like to make a weaker assumption include the 
restaurant example suggested in the introduction. In that case we 
can usually observe how many people have chosen each restaurant 
but not in which order they have made these choices. 
However, inspection of the equilibrium decision rules suggests 
that in fact they do not make use of any information about the 
order of choice so that the same results apply as long as the 
distribution of choices is observable. It should be noted, however, 
that this is possible only under an assumption like our Assumption 
C, which is specified in terms of a location ("choose the highest 
among the options already chosen") rather than in terms of some 
order information ("follow the last decision maker"). 
C. Endogenizing the Order of Choice 
In this model we have assumed that the order of choice is 
exogenously fixed: a more natural assumption (but one which 
complicates matters immensely) is to assume that choose when to 
move taking into account the fact that waiting is costly. When this 
cost is high, we shall have a game that is similar to the one we 
analyzed; when it is low, however, a new and interesting set of 
possibilities arises. A key question here is whether, if the waiting 
costs are low enough, all the agents with signals choose before all 
the agents without signals and whether this results in an efficient 
outcome. It turns out, somewhat surprisingly perhaps, that it is 
possible to have situations with low waiting costs where some of 
the uninformed move before some of the informed and the outcome 
is inefficient.20 However, the overall analysis is rather complicated, 
and we do not yet have very precise ideas about what happens in 
the general case. 
20. To see the intuition behind this result, note that it is the marginal and not 
the absolute value of information that matters in the decision of whether or not to 
wait.

----- Page 21 (native) -----
816 
QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS 
VI. CONCLUSIONS 
We conclude with remarks on deficiencies of our model and 
possible directions of research. 
The most serious departure of our model from reality is 
probably our assumption that signals to the agents are essentially 
free; a more realistic analysis would combine the question of 
incentives for obtaining these signals with the kinds of consider- 
ations we discuss. However, it would seem that dropping this 
assumption will encourage people to try to "free ride" on other 
people's ideas and this would only exacerbate the herding problem. 
In this direction, at least, our results seem robust. 
Our assumption that there is a continuum of options and 
payoffs exhibit a discontinuity at the true value, is defensible but 
somewhat unorthodox. Notice, however, that this assumption 
would be quite standard if there were only a large but finite 
number of options (then there would no discontinuity, for exam- 
ple). Preliminary investigations show that the results we get for 
the case where there are a large but finite number of options are 
much more complicated but quite similar. We therefore feel 
justified in working with this much more tractable model which we 
see as an approximation to the other case. 
However, it may still be objected that what is missing from our 
model is the fact that options which are in some sense close to the 
true option are often better than the other options. By assuming 
that all options other than the right one get the same return, we 
have not allowed for this possibility. This is clearly an important 
direction for future research. 
We have implicitly assumed that the agents in this model 
cannot actually trade in signals. This may be partly due to the 
problem of enforcing contracts describing the exchange of an idea, 
and partly due to the presence of transactions costs. Also, if there 
are some (perhaps very small) gains to having others choose what 
you are choosing, everybody will have the incentive to claim that 
they had a signal and that it matched the option they had chosen. 
However, since the absence of this kind of trade has serious welfare 
consequences, it is probably worthwhile to examine this assump- 
tion more closely. 
Also, since people gain information by choosing later than 
others, there may be strategic aspects of timing that may be worth 
investigating. Some current work by the author attempts to extend 
this analysis in this direction.

----- Page 22 (native) -----
A SIMPLE MODEL OF HERD BEHAVIOR 
817 
The assumption that there are only two types of decision 
makers-those 
who have a signal and those who do not-though 
quite strong, can be easily relaxed to allow for decision makers with 
signals of different quality. As long as there are only a few different 
types whose signals differ substantially in quality, the results are 
quite similar. 
PRINCETON UNIVERSITY 
REFERENCES 
Arthur, W. B., "Competing Technologies, Increasing Returns, and Lock-In by 
Historical Events," Economic Journal, XCIX (1989), 116-3 1. 
Banerjee, A. V., "The Economics of Rumors," mimeo, 1992 (revised version). 
, "Herd Behavior and the Rewards for Originality," mimeo, Princeton Univer- 
sity, 1989. 
Cotts Watkins, S., "From Local to National Communities: The Transformation of 
Demographic Regions in Western Europe 1870-1960," Population and Devel- 
opment Review, XVI (1990), 241-72. 
Cukierman, A., "Asymmetric Information and the Electoral Momentum of Public 
Opinion Polls," mimeo, Princeton University, 1989. 
Farrell, J., and G. Saloner, "Standardization, Compatibility and Innovation," Rand 
Journal of Economics, XVI (1985), 70-83. 
Karni, E., and D. Schmeidler, "Fixed Preferences and Changing Tastes," mimeo, 
1989. 
Katz, M., and C. Shapiro, "Network Externalities, Competition and Compatibility," 
American Economic Review, LXXV (1985), 424-40. 
Keynes, J. M., The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money (London: 
Macmillan, 1936). 
Kislev, Y., and V. Shchori-Bachrach, 
"The Process of an Innovation Cycle," 
American Journal of Agricultural Economics, LV (1973), 28-37. 
Scharfstein, D., and J. Stein, "Herd Behavior and Investment," American Eco- 
nomic Review, LXXX (1990), 465-79.