

----- Page 1 (native) -----
Specialized Information System for Support of the Process of 
Recruiting Securities  
 
Taras Dubyniaka, Oleksandra Manziyb, Tomasz Gancarczykс, Andriy Senykb and             
Yurii Futrykb  
 
a Ternopil Ivan Puluj National Technical University, Ruska str., 56, Ternopil, 46001, Ukraine  
b Lviv Polytechnic National University, Stepan Bandera str., 12, Lviv, 79013, Ukraine 
c University of Bielsko-Biala, Willowa St. 2, Bielsko-Biala, 43-300, Poland 
 
 
Abstract  
The development technologies and functional capabilities of the information system created 
by the authors aimed at decision-making support of the formation of a set of securities, which 
enables potential investors with little experience to assess independently the effectiveness of 
the investment portfolio by simulating the dynamics growth of assets available on the 
financial market are described. The proposed information system uses visualization methods 
that present available tabular information in the structured form of schemes, graphs, and 
charts. The web-oriented solution provides an opportunity to analyze and forecast portfolios 
in real time based on the available types of shares of various companies. 
 
Keywords  1 
Information and communication technologies, mathematical methods, visualization, risk, data 
science, Python 
1. Introduction 
Due to the significant increase in interest in investment activities not only by specialized 
organizations and professional investors, but also by private individuals, there is a need for accessible 
instrument for monitoring the financial securities market. Specialized software products for financial 
risk management by means of carrying out the in-depth analysis, generating reports and investment 
scenarios simulation are available in the Internet. 
It is known that most of information faced by the investor is presented in ordered tabular format, 
and according to the cognitive methodology, a person perceives visualized methods of presenting 
information. An accessible presentation of information about financial product makes it possible to 
assess by the consumer whether the chosen asset meets the needs and or the consumer is ready to 
accept the risks inherent in such a product. All this confirms the relevance of creating the information 
system to support decision-making for the formation of securities portfolio available for non-
professional investor. 
2. Analysis of available researches 
At present, the investments in securities are one of the priority areas of any financial market, both 
within separate developed country and at the global level. The proposed MPT portfolio theory (Modern 
Portfolio Theory) [1] consists in the diversification by means of weakly correlated assets [2]. One of 
                                                   
CITI’2023: 1st International Workshop on Computer Information Technologies in Industry 4.0, June 14–16, 2023, Ternopil, Ukraine 
EMAIL: d_taras@ukr.net (A. 1); oleksandra.s.manzii@lpnu.ua (A. 2); tgan@ath.bielsko.pl (А3); andrij.p.senyk@lpnu.ua (A. 4); 
yurii.futryk.mpmkm.2021@lpnu.ua (A. 5) 
ORCID: 0000-0003-1529-6951 (A. 1); 0000-0002-6480-2307 (A. 2); 0000-0002-9709-0860 (А.3) 0000-0002-1614-512X (A. 4);          
0000-0001-5271-9883 (A. 5) 
 
©️  2023 Copyright for this paper by its authors. 
Use permitted under Creative Commons License Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0).  
CEUR Workshop Proceedings (CEUR-WS.org)

----- Page 2 (native) -----
the means of effective optimization of portfolio solution is the application of mathematical methods 
and information and communication technologies [3-5]. 
Analysis of information makes it possible to eliminate the need of making assumptions while 
taking important decisions and instead to develop investment strategies with greater confidence. A 
similar toolkit of financial market analysis and effective optimization of work with securities is used 
in the investment activity assessment [6, 7]. 
Such information and analytical systems include: 
1. Riskalyze platform (https://www.riskalyze.com) provides tools for investment risk analysis, plan 
execution, creation and execution of investment portfolios as the service to financial advisors in the 
USA. Riskalyze platform is flexible, making it possible for the users to connect and integrate with any 
budget in real-time on any device. Due to easy dynamic interface and adaptive design the users are 
able to create and view their portfolios and mobile reports to them. 
2. Risk management system Arbor Portfolio Manager (https://arborfs.com) is the portfolio, asset 
and fund management software that provides institutional investors with detailed trade and position 
management. The system includes in-depth portfolio analysis, as well as extensive reporting on clear 
activity on own funds. 
3. The platform LogicManager (https://www.logicmanager.com) is the solution for SaaS (Software 
as a service) that supports multiple users making it possible to build it within five working days. This 
platform serves many industries which require the hidden risk management system. The platform 
LogicManager enables organizations to make decisions based on data comparisons and set goals. The 
programs include enterprise risk management, IT management, compliance management, external 
risk management and financial reporting compliance. The software main functionalities, which extend 
to different areas of decisions are: detection, assessment, mitigation, monitoring and reporting of risk. 
4. The platform CammsRisk (https://cammsgroup.com) is software for comprehensive integrated 
approach to the management of risks, incidents, audits and portfolio filling. This solution can be used 
by personnel for the combination of all the requirements of risk management and their forecasting. 
5. The platform Sharesight (https://www.sharesight.com) is awarded investment portfolio tracker 
used by thousands of self-employed investors and financial professionals. Sharesight uses 20-year 
historical data and is synchronized with brokers for for automatic tracking of trades, dividends and 
corporate actions. The app also makes it possible for the customers to get online access to all the data 
required for their tax reporting, including foreign investment calculations. 
6. The platform Looker (https://looker.com) is browser-based and cloud-based business analytics 
platform designed for data investigation and analysis. This platform helps corporations collect and 
analyze data and then make considered decisions taking into account comprehensive risks. 
7. The platform FundCount (https://fundcount.com) is investment and portfolio accounting 
software that tracks, analyzes and reports the value of composite investments in different portfolios. 
The software supports a wide range of asset types and portfolio evaluation methodologies. The 
environment enables you to create flexible reports according to user requirements, and carry out 
analytical research on available data. 
8. The platform HiddenLevers platform (https://www.hiddenlevers.com) is risk technology 
analysis platform that provides safe investment management. HiddenLevers offers solutions for 
individual users and companies that are designed primarily for executives, financial advisors, asset 
managers and portfolio managers. 
3. Description of the created information system  
Owing to the significant increase of interest in the investment activities not only by specialized 
organizations and professional investors, but also by private individuals, there is the need for 
accessible instrument for monitoring the financial securities market [8-11]. In this paper, the 
information system for decision-making support for the formation of securities portfolio, accessible to 
non-professional investor is proposed. Based on the well-known rule that visually presented 
information is perceived by users better than organized tabular information [12-14], the developed

----- Page 3 (native) -----
system provides the opportunity to carry out comparative analysis of the dynamics of changes in the 
value of shares of various companies in the form of graphs and charts. 
The main page of the presented platform provides introductory information for beginner, which 
will help to understand how to weigh correctly the risk and make decisions during the formation of 
the investment portfolio. The main theses described on the initial page, will promt the user how 
exactly to reduce risks and manage the investment process. 
The novelty of the presented information system for decision-making support for the securities 
portfolio formation is the possibility to carry out visual comparison of the assets available on the 
financial market in order to fill the investment portfolio with the corresponding equity participation. 
The service is aimed at Ukrainian audience, and the interface of the application program enables the 
customer, to determine the price of shares on the basis of historical data of the value of assets and to 
create a set of assets based on the forecasts offered in the system. 
A. The process of information system creation 
In order to select the working programming language of the information system, the review and 
analysis of the capabilities of modern information technologies and programming languages Python, 
R, C#, GoLang(https://towardsdatascience.com) is carried out and the decision to choose Python to 
perform the set task is made. It is due to the powerful libraries that Python [15, 16] provides 
predominant opportunities in the development of software application while working with investment 
risks. Additionally, the interactive JupyterNotebook web environment can also be used for faster data 
analysis and visualization. It is also decided to deploy the product on the basis of Dash web 
framework by Plotly company, which provides interactive web environment for writing web-oriented 
system, and also provides a powerful toolkit for visualization and construction of dynamic graphs. In 
turn, this tool provides flexibility and interactivity to the system during the use. During the creation of 
the information system, mathematical and graphic Python libraries, such as: Pandas, Matplotlib, 
Seaborn, Numpy, Datetime, Plotly, Scipy, Statsmodels, Sklearn, Pathlib are used. These libraries 
provide a wide range of tools for data analysis, visualization and machine learning. In particular, 
Pandas provides convenient interface for data processing that makes them easy to read, process, and 
store. Numpy makes it possible to work with multidimensional arrays of data, Matplotlib and Seaborn 
provide tools for visualizing data in the form of graphs and charts, which makes it easy to analyze 
data and find useful information. Scipy and Statsmodels provide tools for statistical analysis of data 
and performing various statistical tests. Sklearn provides machine learning tools that enables you to 
develop machine learning models, perform classification and prediction. And in turn, Pathlib 
simplifies the work with file system. 
For convenient and fast data analysis and their visualization, JupyterNotebook included in 
Anaconda distribution is used. This interactive web environment makes it possible to work with code 
and data in a user-friendly format quickly. Input data are downloaded in .csv format for information 
processing in Jupyter environment. The processed data are automatically integrated into PyCharm 
environment in the form of python code. For visualization of the data characterized by the companies 
shares, the capabilities of the Pandas libraries, Matplotlib and the data visualization library on the 
Dash web framework from the Plotly company are used. Dash is a new, easy-to-use Python 
framework for building dynamic web applications. It is built on top of Flask, Plotly.js, ReactJs. This 
product makes it possible to create dashboards using pure code in Python programming language. 
Dash has open source and stores real-time statistics and price forecasts for selected assets on web 
pages. The application of these libraries helps make charts dynamic and enables you to store 
information about selected assets in user-friendly and readable format. In general, application of 
Jupyter Notebook, PyCharm, Pandas, Matplotlib, and the data visualization library on Dash web 
framework makes it possible to work efficiently with Big Data, carry out analysis and visualization of 
results, and even create dynamic web applications based on pure Python programming language code. 
Application of these tools in data science projects can increase work efficiency, simplify the 
development process, and save data researchers time and effort. It is also important to note that these 
tools have active community of users, which allows you to get support and help in solving problems 
during the projects development. In general, the use of such technologies makes it possible to expand 
the opportunities of data researches and provide more accurate results and forecasts in the field of 
finance and other industries.

----- Page 4 (native) -----
In order to carry out data analysis, the function which downloads stock data from the information 
source of the financial information provider YahooFinance (https://finance.yahoo.com) by means of 
Pandas library in .csv format is created. It should be noted that this type of data is available from 
many sources, such as Yahoo Finance, Google Finance, Quandl. In the course of work the given APIs 
are compared, and it is concluded that the use of Yahoo Finance in combination with Python libraries 
is the best way. API Yahoo is the gold standard for API stock data, used by both individual and 
corporate users. This source quickly and conveniently uploads data in real time. To download 
financial data from Yahoo Finance, we can use the pandas_datareader library, which enables us to 
receive conveniently and quickly the data in real time. Moreover, we can use yahoo_finance library to 
retrieve financial data from this source. To access the data, we can use the function that downloads 
stock data from Yahoo Finance by means of Pandas in CSV format. This makes it possible to store 
and process conveniently the data from the previous session. The application of Jupyter Notebook and 
PyCharm enables us to work efficiently with Pandas and other Python libraries for data analysis and 
visualization. For example, due to Matplotlib we can display graphs and charts for more effective data 
understanding and drawing the conclusions. 
Furthermore, application of data visualization library in Dash web framework makes it possible to 
create interactive and dynamic data visualizations that can be useful while. presenting the results of 
data analysis. Dash is an open Python library for creating web applications with high-quality 
graphical interfaces that supports interactivity, animation, and dynamic data change. It runs on Flask 
and React, and enables developers to create quickly web applications that can be accessed in any web 
browser. Dash provides high-quality graphical interfaces using Python programmer-friendly syntax. 
The library has many built-in components for creating graphs, tables, forms, interactive control 
elements that can be easily easily configured and modified to display data by request. The 
interactivity and dynamic change of the data makes it possible to create data visualizations that can be 
easily understood and enjoyable for the user. Additionally, Dash enables to add functionality to data 
visualizations, such as filtering and sorting, allowing users to gain additional information and make 
conclusions based on real-time data display. 
The created product is a web-based system for risk analysis in theinvestment portfolio of shares or 
cryptocurrencies. 
B. Application of the information system for data analysis 
Data from the stock market such as some securities of large technical companies Аpple 
(https://www.apple.com); Google (https://www.google.com); Microsoft (https://www.microsoft.com); 
Amazon (https://www.amazon.com); Tesla (https://www.tesla.com); Oracle (https://www.oracle.com) 
are selected for the development and testing of the information system. 
The user has the opportunity to assess visually the shares growth dynamics for selected technical 
companies (Figure 1) as well as analyze the given charts taking into account the moving average 
overlay. 
 
Figure 1: Growth dynamics for 6 companies in recent years

----- Page 5 (native) -----
Besides the basic analysis, the system provides the opportunity to visualize the risk of lack of 
profit of each asset based on the analysis of the daily trend of share price changes. Graphs of the 
percentage change of daily returns are constructed using pct_change() on AdjClose(adjusted stock 
closing price) data column. While compiling the optimal tools portfolio, the indicator of tools 
correlation with each other, as well as their volatility, are used [17]. On the basis of analysis of the 
lines shown on the graph (Figure 2) for each asset as a separate part of the total investment portfolio, 
it is possible to predict the movement of the share price based on expected profits and risks. 
 
Figure 2: The graph of selected shares volatility 
 
 
Apple will bring a large income in comparison with others, but it is quite a risky stock. 
 
Google will bring less profit, but it is less risky. 
 
Microsoft will bring little profit, but the risk is sufficiently small. 
 
Amazon will bring less profit, but more risky than Microsoft. 
 
Tesla will bring the maximum return compared to other companies, but it is the most risky stock. 
 
Oracle will give the least profit, but it is the least risky investment. 
4. Overview of the results of the information system operation 
An important functionality of the system is the ability to forecast the price of financial instrument. 
ARIMA stationary series forecasting methods are used, while two the most common stationarity 
testing methods are implemented that is visualization and Dickey-Fuller (ADF) test [18]. 
The evaluation metric used to search the set of parameters, the so-called grid, is AIC (Akaike 
Information Criterion) value. The resulting model clearly recorded the seasonality as well as the 
upward trend in the share price. We consider it to be a good result, because the average absolute 
percentage error gave the low percentage of error. This metric is a measure of accuracy of the 
methods performing forecasting in statistics. Due to it, we obtained the result of data forecast error 
(Figure 3).

----- Page 6 (native) -----
Figure 3: ARIMA time series forecasting. Comparison of forecasts with actual prices 
 
Since the system downloads data from the arbitrary web information source of open access, for 
better analysis of the investment portfolio, it is worth adding the comparison with more risky 
investments - cryptocurrencies, such as Bitcoin and Ethereum, which have shown a large increase 
since the end of 2020. Therefore, in order to determine the overall riskiness of investments, we will 
create the portfolio from a set of the above-mentioned stocks and cryptocurrencies. 
Cryptocurrencies Bitcoin and Ethereum have the highest returns, but also the highest volatility, as 
expected, because the cryptocurrency market is quite volatile in comparison with the shares or 
securities market. 
While calculating the efficiency of portfolio, Sharpe ratio is used, which is the ratio of the 
expected excess return of the portfolio to its volatility. 
𝑆𝑅= 
𝐸[𝑅] −𝑅𝑓
𝜎
 = 
𝐴𝑃𝑅− 𝑅𝑓
𝜎
 
The system provides the opportunity to create different sets of portfolios in order to select the best 
of them for further analysis. 
The next stage of the investigation is analysis of the ratio of profit and risk. An effective 
representation of the result is their visualization (Figure 4), where the data points (portfolios) are 
colored based on the intensity of the corresponding color (the greater is the saturation of the tone, the 
denser are the predicted results are). 
 
Figure 4: Application of Monte Carlo method for investment portfolio modeling

----- Page 7 (native) -----
According to the results of technical and information analysis, we conclude that investing in the 
diversified portfolio is better option than investing individually in the risk-free asset or in individual 
instruments. Data analysis shows that selected cryptocurrencies increase the riskiness of our portfolio. 
Visualization of the optimal portfolio selection and calculation of its profitability and distribution of 
assets in the portfolio are shown in Figure 5. 
 
Figure 5: Updated expected returns and risk for the selected investment portfolio 
 
As the result, the optimal filling of the investment portfolio is visualized in Figure 6 in the form of 
the diagram. 
 
Figure 6: Diagram of the result of rational distribution of portfolio assets  
 
The web-oriented solution provides the opportunity to analyze and forecast portfolios in real time 
by the available types of shares of various companies. 
5. Conclusion 
An overview of existing systems of the leading specialized data visualization and business 
intelligence software products used to analyze large volumes of data is offered. The global idea is 
designing computer algorithms, and computational informational high-level systems, which aim to 
minimize risk and maximize return based on the historical performance of the financial data. 
Furthermore, dynamic portfolio optimization and diversification are also considered as the target for 
further research that allows the designing of a flexible informational system to make profit 
maximization. This paper described the functionality and used technologies of the created information 
system. The visualization and forecasting methods used for analyzing investments in the financial

----- Page 8 (native) -----
market in different time intervals, allow to support the dynamic diversification for different sets of 
financial assets. A collection of investment assets management refers to the process of investment 
decision making based on customized tactical investment strategies to match and maximize the return 
for each investing time horizon. The article has illustrated the usage of the proposed information 
system for analysis and forecasting while supporting dynamic diversification, of the investment process 
and to obtain the optimal set of financial assets in the selected time frame. The created information 
system is proposed to use as an advisory tool for individual non-professional or inexperienced 
investors with low financial stability. The results of the information system demonstrate that 
individuals who do not own significant finances can easily invest in a well-diversified set of financial 
assets, even if the risks are not fully diversified. When using a limited set of assets and a strict 
restriction on diversification, the results show that the application of such information systems is 
efficient and profitable. The following Python libraries were used in the process of complete creation 
for this information system: Pandas, Matplotlib, Seaborn, Numpy, Datetime, Plotly, Scipy, 
Statsmodels, Sklearn, Pathlib. In general, the use of such technologies as Jupyter Notebook, PyCharm, 
Pandas, and the Dash web framework for data visualization made it possible to efficiently work with 
large volumes of data to perform analysis and dynamic visualization of investment results. 
6. References 
[1] H. 
Markowitz, 
Portfolio 
selection, 
Journal 
of 
Finance 
7(1) 
(1952) 
77–91, 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-6261.1952.tb01525.x 
[2] Kuzmin O., Alekseev I., Kolisnyk M. Problems of financial and credit regulation of 
innovative development of production and economic structures: monograph . Lviv 
Polytechnic National University Publishing House, 2007. - 152 p. 
[3] J. 
Lu, 
D. 
RuanandG. 
Zhang 
(eds.), 
E-ServiceIntelligence: 
Methodologies, 
TechnologiesandApplications 
(Springer-Verlag, 
Berlin, 
Heidelberg, 
2007), 
https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.5555/1203907. 
[4] T. Stoilov, How to integrate complex optimal data processing in information services 
ininternet, in Proc. 20th Int. Conf. Computer Systems and Technologies, ACM 
DigitalLibrary, 2019, pp. 19–30, https://doi.org/10.1145/3345252.3345254. 
[5] V. D. Ta, C. M. Liu and D. A. Tadesse, Portfolio optimization-based stock predictionusing 
long-short term memory network in quantitative trading, Applied Sciences 10(2020) 437, 
https://doi.org/10.3390/app10020437. 
[6] Kalnyi, S. V. and Vysotskyi, V. A. (2019), “Management formation of investment portfolio 
enterprises in 
Ukraine”, Efektyvna ekonomika, [Online], vol. 3, available 
at: 
http://www.economy.nayka.com.ua/?op=1&z=6953. 
https://doi:10.32702/2307-2105-
2019.3.39 
[7] Medynska, Tetyana V., Rushchyshyn, Nadiia M., and Nikonenko, Uliana M. (2020) “Tax 
Regulation of Investment Activity of Ukrainian Banks.”, Business Inform 11:316–324. 
https://doi.org/10.32983/2222-4459-2020-11-316-324  
[8] M. García-Galicia, A. A. Carsteanu and J. B. Clempner, Continuous-time mean 
varianceportfolio 
with 
transaction 
costs: 
A 
proximal 
approach 
involving 
time 
penalization,International Journal of General Systems 48(2) (2019) 91–111, https://doi: 
10.1080/03081079.2018. 1522306. 
[9] X. Huang and X. Wang, Portfolio investment with options based on uncertainty 
theory,International Journal of Information Technology & Decision Making 18 (2019) 929-
952,https://doi.org/10.1142/S0219622019500159. 
[10] 
E. Allaj, The Black–Litterman model and views from a reverse optimization 
procedure:An out-of-sample performance evaluation, Computational Management Science 
17(2020) 465–492, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10287-020-00373-6. 
[11] 
A. Palczewski and J. Palczewski, Black–Litterman model for continuous 
distributions,European 
Journal 
of 
Operational 
Research 
273(2) 
(2019) 
708–720, 
https://doi:10.1016/j.ejor.2018.08.013, 
https://www.sciencedirect.comscience/article/pii/S0377221718306933.

----- Page 9 (native) -----
[12] 
A. Rutkowska and M. Bartkowiak, Exertion approach to vague information in 
portfolioselection problem with many views, 2019 Conf. Int. Fuzzy Systems Association and 
theEuropean Society for Fuzzy Logic and Technology (EUSFLAT 2019) (Atlantis 
Press,Paris, France, 2019), pp. 142–149, https://www.atlantis-press.comproceedings/eus°at-
19/125914792. 
[13] 
F. Wen, L. Xu, G. Ouyang and G. Kou, Retail investor attention and stock price 
crashrisk: Evidence from China, Journal of International Review of Financial Analysis 
65(2019) 1–15, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.irfa.2019.101376. 
[14] 
G. Kou, Ö. Akdeniz, H. Dinçer and S. Yüksel, Fintech investments in European 
banks: Ahybrid IT2 fuzzy multidimensional decision-making approach, Journal of Financial 
Innovation 7(39) (2021) 1–28, https://doi.org/10.1186/s40854-021-00256-y. 
[15] 
Wes McKinney. Python for Data Analysis / Wes McKinney, Julie Steele and Meghan 
Blanchette. – United States of America: O’Reilly, 2018. – 470 с. 
[16] 
Jake VanderPlas. Python Data Science Handbook.Essential Tools for Working with 
Data / Jake VanderPlas. – United States of America: O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005. Gravenstein 
Highway North, Sebastopol, CA 95472., 2017. – 548 с 
[17] 
YaroshkoS., ManziyO. Financial mathematics. Part 1.Lviv, ZUKC Publishing House, 
2021. - 209 p. 
[18] 
Dickey, D. A.; Fuller, W. A. (1979).Distribution of the Estimators for Autoregressive 
Time Series with a Unit Root. Journal of the American Statistical Association 74 (366): 427–
431. JSTOR2286348.https://doi:10.1080/01621459.1979.10482531