

----- Page 1 (native) -----
1. Introduction to the problem of mental 
storage capacity
One of the central contributions of cognitive psychology has
been to explore limitations in the human capacity to store
and process information. Although the distinction between
a limited-capacity primary memory and an unlimited-
capacity secondary memory was described by James (1890),
Miller’s (1956) theoretical review of a “magical number
seven, plus or minus two” is probably the most seminal pa-
per in the literature for investigations of limits in short-term
memory (STM) storage capacity. It was, in fact, heralded as
one of the most influential Psychological Review papers
ever, in a 1994 centennial issue of the journal. Miller’s ref-
erence to a magical number, however, was probably a
rhetorical device. A more central focus of his article was the
ability to increase the effective storage capacity through the
use of intelligent grouping or “chunking” of items. He ulti-
mately suggested that the specific limit of seven probably
emerged as a coincidence.
Over 40 years later, we are still uncertain as to the nature
of storage capacity limits. According to some current theo-
ries there is no limit in storage capacity per se, but a limit
in the duration for which an item can remain active in STM
without rehearsal (e.g., Baddeley 1986; Richman et al.
1995). This has led to a debate about whether the limitation
is a “magic number or magic spell” (Schweickert & Boruff
1986) or whether rehearsal really plays a role (Brown &
Hulme 1995). One possible resolution is that the focus of
attention is capacity-limited, whereas various supplemen-
tary storage mechanisms, which can persist temporarily
without attention, are time-limited rather than capacity-
limited (Cowan 1988; 1995). Other investigators, however,
have long questioned whether temporary storage concepts
are necessary at all, and have suggested that the rules of
learning and memory could be identical in both the short
and long term (Crowder 1993; McGeoch 1932; Melton
1963; Nairne 1992; Neath 1998).
At present, the basis for believing that there is a time
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2000) 24, 87–185
Printed in the United States of America
© 2000 Cambridge University Press
0140-525X/00 $12.50
87
The magical number 4 in short-term
memory: A reconsideration 
of mental storage capacity
Nelson Cowan
Department of Psychological Sciences, 
University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211
cowanN@missouri.edu
www.missouri.edu/~psycowan
Abstract: Miller (1956) summarized evidence that people can remember about seven chunks in short-term memory (STM) tasks. How-
ever, that number was meant more as a rough estimate and a rhetorical device than as a real capacity limit. Others have since suggested
that there is a more precise capacity limit, but that it is only three to five chunks. The present target article brings together a wide vari-
ety of data on capacity limits suggesting that the smaller capacity limit is real. Capacity limits will be useful in analyses of information
processing only if the boundary conditions for observing them can be carefully described. Four basic conditions in which chunks can be
identified and capacity limits can accordingly be observed are: (1) when information overload limits chunks to individual stimulus items,
(2) when other steps are taken specifically to block the recoding of stimulus items into larger chunks, (3) in performance discontinuities
caused by the capacity limit, and (4) in various indirect effects of the capacity limit. Under these conditions, rehearsal and long-term
memory cannot be used to combine stimulus items into chunks of an unknown size; nor can storage mechanisms that are not capacity-
limited, such as sensory memory, allow the capacity-limited storage mechanism to be refilled during recall. A single, central capacity limit
averaging about four chunks is implicated along with other, noncapacity-limited sources. The pure STM capacity limit expressed in
chunks is distinguished from compound STM limits obtained when the number of separately held chunks is unclear. Reasons why pure
capacity estimates fall within a narrow range are discussed and a capacity limit for the focus of attention is proposed.
Keywords: attention; enumeration; information chunks; memory capacity; processing capacity; processing channels; serial recall; short-
term memory; storage capacity; verbal recall; working memory capacity
Nelson Cowan (Ph.D. 1980, University of Wiscon-
sin–Madison) is Professor in the Department of Psy-
chological Sciences at the University of Missouri–
Columbia. He has written one book (Cowan, N. 1995.
Attention and memory: An integrated framework. Ox-
ford University Press) and edited another (1997. The
development of memory in childhood. Psychology Press),
and has 100 other publications on working memory, and
its relation to attention. He is former Associate Editor
of the Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition (1995–1999) and current As-
sociate Editor of the Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology (section A). He won the 1998 University of
Missouri Chancellor’s Award for Research and Creative
Activities.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 2 (native) -----
limit to STM is controversial and unsettled (Cowan et al.
1997a; 1997b; Crowder 1993; Neath & Nairne 1995; Ser-
vice 1998). The question is nearly intractable because any
putative effect of the passage of time on memory for a par-
ticular stimulus could instead be explained by a combination
of various types of proactive and retroactive interference
from other stimuli. In any particular situation, what looks
like decay could instead be displacement of items from a
limited-capacity store over time. If the general question of
whether there is a specialized STM mechanism is to be an-
swered in the near future then, given the apparent unre-
solvability of the decay issue, general STM questions seem
more likely to hinge on evidence for or against a chunk-
based capacity limit.
The evidence regarding this capacity limit also has been
controversial. According to one view (Wickens 1984) there
is not a single capacity limit, but several specialized capac-
ity limits. Meyer and Kieras (1997) questioned the need for
capacity limits to explain cognitive task performance; they
instead proposed that performance scheduling concerns
(and the need to carry out tasks in the required order) ac-
count for apparent capacity limits. The goal of this target ar-
ticle is to provide a coherent account of the evidence to date
on storage capacity limits .
One reason why a resolution may be needed is that, as
mentioned above, the theoretical manifesto announcing
the existence of a capacity limit (Miller 1956) did so with
considerable ambivalence toward the hypothesis. Although
Miller’s ambivalence was, at the time, a sophisticated and
cautious response to available evidence, a wealth of subse-
quent information suggests that there is a relatively con-
stant limit in the number of items that can be stored in a
wide variety of tasks; but that limit is only three to five
items as the population average. Henderson (1972, p. 486)
cited various studies on the recall of spatial locations or of
items in those locations, conducted by Sperling (1960),
Sanders (1968), Posner (1969), and Scarborough (1971), to
make the point that there is a “new magic number 4 6 1.”
Broadbent (1975) proposed a similar limit of three items on
the basis of more varied sources of information including,
for example, studies showing that people form clusters of
no more than three or four items in recall. A similar limit in
capacity was discussed, with various theoretical interpreta-
tions, by others such as Halford et al. (1988; 1998), Luck
and Vogel (1997), and Schneider and Detweiler (1987).
The capacity limit is open to considerable differences of
opinion and interpretation. The basis of the controversy
concerns the way in which empirical results should be
mapped onto theoretical constructs. Those who believe in
something like a 4-chunk limit acknowledge that it can be
observed only in carefully constrained circumstances. In
many other circumstances, processing strategies can in-
crease the amount that can be recalled. The limit can pre-
sumably be predicted only after it is clear how to identify
independent chunks of information. Thus, Broadbent
(1975, p. 4) suggested that “The traditional seven arises . . .
from a particular opportunity provided in the memory span
task for the retrieval of information from different forms of
processing.”
The evidence provides broad support for what can be in-
terpreted as a capacity limit of substantially fewer than
Miller’s 7 6 2 chunks; about four chunks on the average.
Against this 4-chunk thesis, one can delineate at least seven
commonly held opposing views: (View 1) There do exist ca-
pacity limits but they are in line with Miller’s 7 6 2 (e.g.,
still taken at face value by Lisman & Idiart 1995). (View 2)
Short-term memory is limited by the amount of time that
has elapsed rather than by the number of items that can be
held simultaneously (e.g., Baddeley 1986). (View 3) There
is no special short-term memory faculty at all; all memory
results obey the same rules of mutual interference, distinc-
tiveness, and so on (e.g., Crowder 1993). (View 4) There
may be no capacity limits per se but only constraints such
as scheduling conflicts in performance and strategies for
dealing with them (e.g., Meyer & Kieras 1997). (View 5)
There are multiple, separate capacity limits for different
types of material (e.g., Wickens 1984). (View 6) There are
separate capacity limits for storage versus processing
(Daneman & Carpenter 1980; Halford et al. 1998). (View
7) Capacity limits exist, but they are completely task-spe-
cific, with no way to extract a general estimate. (This may
be the “default” view today.) Even among those who agree
with the 4-chunk thesis, moreover, a remaining possible
ground of contention concerns whether all of the various
phenomena that I will discuss are legitimate examples of
this capacity limit.
These seven competing views will be re-evaluated in sec-
tion 4 (sects. 4.3.1–4.3.7). The importance of identifying
the chunk limit in capacity is not only to know what that
limit is, but more fundamentally to know whether there is
such a limit at all. Without evidence that a consistent limit
exists, the concepts of chunking and capacity limits are
themselves open to question.
1.1. Pure capacity-based and compound STM estimates
I will call the maximum number of chunks that can be re-
called in a particular situation the memory storage capac-
ity, and valid, empirically obtained estimates of this num-
ber of chunks will be called estimates of capacity-based
STM. Although that chunk limit presumably always exists,
it is sometimes not feasible to identify the chunks inasmuch
as long-term memory information can be used to create
larger chunks out of smaller ones (Miller 1956), and inas-
much as time- and interference-limited sources of infor-
mation that are not strictly capacity-limited may be used
along with capacity-limited storage to recall information. In
various situations, the amounts that can be recalled when
the chunks cannot be specified, or when the contribution
of non-capacity-limited mechanisms cannot be assessed,
will be termed compound STM estimates. These presum-
ably play an important role in real-world tasks such as prob-
lem-solving and comprehension (Daneman & Merikle
1996; Logie et al. 1994; Toms et al. 1993). However, the the-
oretical understanding of STM can come only from knowl-
edge of the basic mechanisms contributing to the com-
pound estimates, including the underlying capacity limit.
The challenge is to find sound grounds upon which to iden-
tify the pure capacity-based limit as opposed to compound
STM limits.
1.2. Specific conditions in which a pure storage
capacity limit can be observed
It is proposed here that there are at least four ways in which
pure capacity limits might be observed: (1) when there is an
information overload that limits chunks to individual stim-
ulus items, (2) when other steps are taken specifically to
Cowan: The magical number 4
88
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2000) 24:1
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 3 (native) -----
block the recoding of stimulus items into larger chunks, (3)
when performance discontinuities caused by the capacity
limit are examined, and (4) when various indirect effects of
the capacity limit are examined. Multiple procedures fit un-
der each of these headings. For each of them, the central
assumption is that the procedure does not enable subjects
to group items into higher-order chunks. Moreover, the
items must be familiar units with no pre-existing associa-
tions that could lead to the encoding of multi-object groups,
ensuring that each item is one chunk in memory. Such as-
sumptions are strengthened by an observed consistency
among results.
The first way to observe clearly limited-capacity storage
is to overload the processing system at the time that the
stimuli are presented, so that there is more information in
auxiliary or time-limited stores than the subject can re-
hearse or encode before the time limit is up. This can be ac-
complished by presenting a large spatial array of stimuli
(e.g., Sperling 1960) or by directing attention away from the
stimuli at the time of their presentation (Cowan et al. 1999).
Such manipulations make it impossible during the presen-
tation of stimuli to engage in rehearsal or form new chunks
(by combining items and by using long-term memory in-
formation), so that the chunks to be transferred to the
limited-capacity store at the time of the test cue are the
original items presented.
The second way is with experimental conditions de-
signed to limit the long-term memory and rehearsal pro-
cesses. For example, using the same items over and over on
each trial and requiring the recall of serial order limits sub-
jects’ ability to think of ways to memorize the stimuli
(Cowan 1995); and rehearsal can be blocked through the
requirement that the subject repeat a single word over and
over during the stimulus presentation (Baddeley 1986).
The third way is to focus on abrupt changes or disconti-
nuities in basic indices of performance (proportion correct
and reaction time) as a function of the number of chunks in
the stimulus. Performance on various tasks takes longer and
is more error prone when it involves a transfer of informa-
tion from time-limited buffers, or from long-term memory,
to the capacity-limited store than when it relies on the con-
tents of capacity-limited storage directly. This results in
markedly less accurate and/or slower performance when
more than four items must be held than when fewer items
must be held (e.g., in enumeration tasks such as that dis-
cussed by Mandler & Shebo 1982).
Fourth, unlike the previous methods, which have in-
volved an examination of the level of performance in the
memory task, there also are indirect effects of the limit in
capacity. For example, lists of items tend to be grouped by
subjects into chunks of about four items for recall (Broad-
bent 1975; Graesser & Mandler 1978), and the semantic
priming of one word by another word or learning of con-
tingencies between the words appears to be much more po-
tent if the prime and target are separated by about three or
fewer words (e.g., McKone 1995).
1.2.1. Other restrictions on the evidence. Although these
four methods can prevent subjects from amalgamating
stimuli into higher-order chunks, the resulting capacity es-
timates can be valid only if the items themselves reflect in-
dividual chunks, with strong intra-chunk associations and
weak or (ideally) absent inter-chunk associations. For ex-
ample, studies with nonsense words as stimuli must be ex-
cluded because, in the absence of pre-existing knowledge
of the novel stimulus words, each word may be encoded as
multiple phonemic or syllabic subunits with only weak as-
sociations between these subunits (resulting in an underes-
timate of capacity). As another example, sets of dots form-
ing familiar or symmetrical patterns would be excluded for
the opposite reason, that multiple dots could be perceived
together as a larger object with non-negligible inter-dot as-
sociations, so that each dot would not be a separate chunk
(resulting in an overestimate of capacity). It also is neces-
sary to exclude procedures in which the central capacity’s
contents can be recalled and the capacity then re-used (e.g.,
if a visual array remains visible during recall) or, conversely,
in which the information is not available long enough or
clearly enough for the capacity to be filled even once (e.g.,
brief presentation with a mask). In section 3, converging
types of evidence will be offered as to the absence of inter-
item chunking in particular experimental procedures (e.g.,
a fixed number of items correctly recalled regardless of the
list or array size).
Finally, it is necessary to exclude procedures in which the
capacity limit must be shared between chunk storage and
the storage of intermediate results of processing. One ex-
ample of this is the “n-back task” in which each item in a
continuous series must be compared with the item that oc-
curred n items ago (e.g., Cohen et al. 1997; Poulton 1954)
or a related task in which the subject must listen to a series
of digits and detect three odd digits in a row (Jacoby et al.
1989). In these tasks, in order to identify a fixed set of the
most recent n items in memory, the subject must continu-
ally update the target set in memory. This task requirement
may impose a heavy additional storage demand. These de-
mands can explain why such tasks remain difficult even with
n 5 3.
It may be instructive to consider a hypothetical version
of the n-back task that would be taken to indicate the exis-
tence of a special capacity limit. Suppose that the subject’s
task were to indicate, as rapidly as possible, if a particular
item had been included in the stimulus set previously. Some
items would be repeated in the set but other, novel items
also would be introduced. On positive trials, the mean re-
action time should be much faster when the item had been
presented within the most recent three or four items than
when it was presented only earlier in the sequence. To my
knowledge, such a study has not been conducted. However,
in line with the expectation, probed recall experiments have
resulted in shorter reaction times for the most recent few
items (Corballis 1967).
The present view is that a strong similarity in pure ca-
pacity limits (to about 4 chunks on average) can be identi-
fied across many test procedures meeting the above four
criteria. The subcategories of methods and some key refer-
ences are summarized in Table 1 (see sect. 3), and each area
will be described in more detail in section 3 of the target ar-
ticle.
1.3. Definition of chunks
A chunk must be defined with respect to associations be-
tween concepts in long-term memory. I will define the term
chunk as a collection of concepts that have strong associa-
tions to one another and much weaker associations to other
chunks concurrently in use. (This definition is related to
concepts discussed by Simon 1974.) It would be assumed
Cowan: The magical number 4
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:1
89
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 4 (native) -----
that the number of chunks can be estimated only when 
inter-chunk associations are of no use in retrieval in the 
assigned task. To use a well-worn example inspired by
Miller (1956), suppose one tries to recall the series of let-
ters, “fbicbsibmirs.” Letter triads within this sequence
(FBI, CBS, IBM, and IRS) are well-known acronyms, and
someone who notices that can use the information to assist
recall. For someone who does notice, there are pre-existing
associations between letters in a triad that can be used to
assist recall of the 12-letter sequence. If we further assume
that there are no pre-existing associations between the
acronyms, then the four of them have to occupy limited-
capacity storage separately to assist in recall. If that is the
case, and if no other optional mnemonic strategies are in-
volved, then successful recall of the 12-item sequence indi-
cates that the pure capacity limit for the trial was at least
four chunks. (In practice, within the above example there
are likely to be associations between the acronyms. For ex-
ample, FBI and IRS represent two U.S. government agen-
cies, and CBS and IBM represent two large U.S. corpora-
tions. Such associations could assist recall. For the most
accurate pure capacity-based limit, materials would have to
be selected so as to eliminate such special associations be-
tween chunks.) Notice that the argument is not that long-
term memory fails to be involved in capacity-based esti-
mates. Long-term memory is inevitably involved in
memory tasks. The argument is that the purest capacity es-
timates occur when long-term memory associations are as
strong as possible within identified chunks and absent be-
tween those identified chunks.
If someone is given new material for immediate recall and
can look at the material long enough before responding, new
associations between the original chunks can be formed, re-
sulting in larger chunks or, at least, conglomerates with
nonzero associations between chunks. McLean and Gregg
(1967, p. 455) provided a helpful description of chunks in
verbal recall, as “groups of items recited together quickly,”
helpful because recall timing provides one good indication
of chunking (see also Anderson & Matessa 1997). McLean
and Gregg (p. 456) described three ways in which chunks
can be formed: “(a) Some stimuli may already form a unit
with which S is familiar. (b) External punctuation of the stim-
uli may serve to create groupings of the individual elements.
(c) The S may monitor his own performance and impose
structure by selective attention, rehearsal, or other means.”
The practical means to identify chunks directly is an im-
portant issue, but one that is more relevant to future em-
pirical work than it is to the present theoretical review of al-
ready-conducted work, inasmuch as few researchers have
attempted to measure chunks directly. Direct measures of
chunks can include empirical findings of item-to-item as-
sociations that vary widely between adjacent items in a list,
being high within a chunk and low between chunks; item-
to-item response times that vary widely, being relatively
short within a chunk and long between chunks; and sub-
jective reports of grouping. For studies in which the main
dependent measure is not overt recall, measures of chunk-
ing for a trial must follow the trial immediately if it cannot
be derived from the main dependent measure itself. Schnei-
der and Detweiler (1987, pp. 105–106) provide an excel-
lent further discussion of how chunks can be identified
through convergent measures.
For most of the research that will be summarized in sec-
tion 3 below, however, the researchers provided no direct
evidence of chunking or its absence. The present assump-
tion for these studies is that chunk size can be reasonably
inferred from the presence of the task demands described
above in section 1.2, which should prevent inter-item
chunking. The present thesis is that the great similarity of
empirically-based chunk limits derived using these guide-
lines, reviewed in section 3, supports their validity because
the guidelines yield a parsimonious, relatively uniform de-
Cowan: The magical number 4
90
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:1
Table 1. Types of evidence of a capacity limit of about four items, with selected key references 
(numbered according to the relevant section of the article)
3.1. Imposing an information overload
3.1.1. Visual whole report of spatial arrays (Sperling 1960)
3.1.2. Auditory whole report of spatiotemporal arrays (Darwin et al. 1972)
3.1.3. Whole report of unattended spoken lists (Cowan et al. 1999)
3.2. Preventing long-term memory recoding, passive storage, and rehearsal
3.2.1. Short-term, serial verbal retention with articulatory suppression (see Table 3 references; also Pollack et al. 1959; Waugh & 
Norman 1965)
3.2.2. Short-term retention of unrehearsable material (Glanzer & Razel 1974; Jones et al. 1995; Simon 1974; Zhang & Simon 1985)
3.3. Examining performance discontinuities
3.3.1. Errorless performance in immediate recall (Broadbent 1975)
3.3.2. Enumeration reaction time (Mandler & Shebo 1982, Trick & Pylyshyn 1993)
3.3.3. Multi-object tracking (Pylyshyn et al. 1994)
3.3.4. Proactive interference in immediate memory (Halford et al. 1988; Wicklegren 1966)
3.4. Examining indirect effects of the limits 
3.4.1. Chunk size in immediate recall (Chase & Simon 1973; Ericsson 1985; Ericsson et al. 1980; Ryan 1969; Wickelgren 1964)
3.4.2. Cluster size in long-term recall (Broadbent 1975; Graesser & Mandler 1978)
3.4.3. Positional uncertainty in recall (Nairne 1991)
3.4.4. Analysis of the recency effect in recall (Watkins 1974)
3.4.5. Sequential effects in implicit learning and memory (Cleeremans & McClelland 1991; McKone 1995)
3.4.6. Influence of capacity on properties of visual search (Fisher 1984)
3.4.7. Influence of capacity on mental addition reaction time (Logan 1988; Logan & Klapp 1991)
3.4.8. Mathematical modeling parameters (Halford et al. 1998; Kintsch & van Dijk 1978; Raaijmakers & Shiffrin 1981)
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 5 (native) -----
scription of capacity limits of three to five chunks as the
population average (with a maximum range of two to six
chunks in individuals).
2. Theoretical framework
The most important theoretical point here is the identifica-
tion of conditions under which a capacity limit can be ob-
served (see sect. 1); reasons for this limit also are proposed.
The theoretical model in this section provides a logical way
to understand the empirical results presented in section 3.
A fuller analytic treatment, consideration of unresolved is-
sues, and comparison with other approaches is provided in
section 4.
The basic assumptions of the present theoretical frame-
work are (1) that the focus of attention is capacity-limited,
(2) that the limit in this focus averages about four chunks in
normal adult humans, (3) that no other mental faculties are
capacity-limited, although some are limited by time and
susceptibility to interference, and (4) that any information
that is deliberately recalled, whether from a recent stimu-
lus or from long-term memory, is restricted to this limit in
the focus of attention. This last assumption depends on the
related premise, from Baars (1988) and Cowan (1988;
1995), that only the information in the focus of attention is
available to conscious awareness and report. The identifi-
cation of the focus of attention as the locus of the capacity
limit stems largely from a wide variety of research indicat-
ing that people cannot optimally perceive or recall multiple
stimulus channels at the same time (e.g., Broadbent 1958;
Cowan 1995), although most of that research does not pro-
vide estimates of the number of chunks from each channel
that occupy the focus of attention at any moment. There is
an additional notion that the focus of attention serves as a
global workspace for cognition, as described, for example,
by Cowan (1995, p. 203) as follows:
Attention clearly can be divided among channels, but under the
assumption of the unity of conscious awareness, the perceived
contents of the attended channels should be somehow inte-
grated or combined. As a simple supporting example, if one is
instructed to divide attention between visual and auditory
channels, and one perceives the printed word “dog” and the
spoken word “cat,” there should be no difficulty in determining
that the two words are semantically related; stimuli that can be
consciously perceived simultaneously can be compared to one
another, as awareness serves as a “global workspace.” (Baars
1988)
Cowan (1995) also suggested two other processing lim-
its. Information in a temporarily heightened state of activa-
tion, yet not in the current focus of attention, was said to be
time-limited. Also, the transfer of this activated information
into the focus of attention was said to be rate-limited. Im-
portant to note, however, only the focus of attention was as-
sumed to be capacity-limited. This assumption differs from
approaches in which there are assumed to be multiple ca-
pacity limits (e.g., Wickens 1984) or perhaps no capacity
limit (Meyer & Kieras 1997).
The assignment of the capacity limit to the focus of at-
tention has parallels in previous work. Schneider and Det-
weiler (1987) proposed a model with multiple storage
buffers (visual, auditory, speech, lexical, semantic, motor,
mood, and context) and a central control module. They
then suggested (p. 80) that the control module limited the
memory that could be used:
50 semantic modules might exist, each specializing in a given
class of words, e.g., for categories such as animals or vehicles.
Nevertheless, if the controller can remember only the four
most active buffers, the number of active semantic buffers
would be effectively only four buffers, regardless of the total
number of modules. . . . Based on our interpretations of em-
pirical literature, the number of active semantic buffers seems
to be in the range of three to four elements.
The present analysis, based on Cowan (1988; 1995), ba-
sically agrees with Schneider and Detweiler, though with
some differences in detail. First, it should be specified that
the elements limited to four are chunks. (Schneider & Det-
weiler probably agreed with this, though it was unclear
from what was written.) Second, the justification for the
particular modules selected by Schneider and Detweiler
(or by others, such as Baddeley,1986) is dubious. One can
always provide examples of stimuli that do not fit neatly into
the modules (e.g., spatial information conveyed through
acoustic stimulation). Cowan (1988; 1995) preferred to
leave open the taxonomy, partly because it is unknown and
partly because there may in fact not be discrete, separate
memory buffers. Instead, there could be the activation of
multiple types of memory code for any particular stimulus,
with myriad possible codes. The same general principles of
activation and de-activation might apply across all types of
code (e.g., the principle that interference with memory for
an item comes from the activation of representations for
other items with similar memory codes), making the iden-
tification of particular discrete buffers situation-specific
and therefore arbitrary. Third, Cowan (1995) suggested
that the focus of attention and its neural substrate differ
subtly from the controller and its neural substrate, though
they usually work closely together. In particular, for reasons
beyond the scope of this target article, it would be expected
that certain types of frontal lobe damage can impair the
controller without much changing the capacity of the focus
of attention, whereas certain types of parietal lobe damage
would change characteristics of the focus of attention with-
out much changing the controller (see Cowan 1995). In the
present analysis, it is assumed that the capacity limit occurs
within the focus of attention, though the control mecha-
nism is limited to the information provided by that focus.
In the next section, so as to keep the theoretical frame-
work separate from the discussion of empirical evidence, I
will continue to refer to evidence for a “capacity-limited
STM” without reiterating that it is the focus of attention
that presumably serves as the basis of this capacity limit.
(Other, non-capacity-limited STM mechanisms that may be
time-limited contribute to compound STM measures but
not to capacity-limited STM.) Given the usual strong dis-
tinction between attention and memory (e.g., the absence
of memory in the central executive mechanism as discussed
by Baddeley 1986), the suggested equivalence of the focus
of attention and the capacity-limited portion of STM may
require some getting used to by many readers. With use of
the term “capacity-limited STM,” the conclusions about ca-
pacity limits could still hold even if it were found that the
focus of attention is not, after all, the basis of the capacity
limit.
A further understanding of the premise that the focus of
attention is limited to about four chunks requires a discus-
sion of working assumptions including memory retrieval,
the role of long-term memory, memory activation, main-
tenance rehearsal, other mnemonic strategies, scene co-
Cowan: The magical number 4
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:1
91
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 6 (native) -----
herence, and hierarchical shifting of attention. These are
discussed in the remainder of section 2. In section 3, cate-
gories of evidence will be explained in detail. Finally, in sec-
tion 4, on the basis of the evidence, the theoretical view will
be developed and evaluated more extensively with particu-
lar attention to possible reasons for the capacity limits.
2.1. Memory retrieval
It is assumed here that explicit, deliberate memory retrieval
within a psychological task (e.g., recall or recognition) re-
quires that the retrieved chunk reside in the focus of atten-
tion at the time immediately preceding the response. The
basis of this assumption is considerable evidence, beyond
the scope of this article, that explicit memory in direct
memory tasks such as recognition and recall requires at-
tention to the stimuli at encoding and retrieval, a require-
ment that does not apply to implicit memory as expressed
in indirect memory tasks such as priming and word frag-
ment completion (for a review, see Cowan 1995). There-
fore, any information that is deliberately recalled, whether
it is information from a recent stimulus or from long-term
memory, is subject to the capacity limit of the focus of at-
tention. In most cases within a memory test, information
must be recalled from both the stimulus and long-term
memory in order for the appropriate units to be entered
into the focus of attention. For example, if we attempt to
repeat a sentence, we do not repeat the acoustic waveform;
we determine the known units that correspond to what was
said and then attempt to produce those units, subject to the
capacity limit.
A key question about retrieval in a particular circum-
stance is whether anything about the retrieval process
makes it impossible to obtain a pure capacity-based STM
estimate. A compound STM estimate can result instead if
there is a source of information that is temporarily in a
highly accessible state, yet outside of the focus of attention.
This is particularly true when a subject’s task involves the
reporting of chunks one at a time, as in most recall tasks. In
such a situation, if another mental source is available, the
subject does not need to hold all of the to-be-reported in-
formation in the focus of attention at one time. In a trivial
example, a compound, supplemented digit capacity limit
can be observed if the subject is trained to use his or her
fingers to hold some of the information during the task
(Reisberg et al. 1984). The same is true if there is some in-
ternal resource that can be used to supplement the focus of
attention.
2.2. The role of long-term memory
Whereas some early notions of chunks may have conceived
of them as existing purely in STM, the assumption here is
that chunks are formed with the help of associations in long-
term memory, although new long-term memory associa-
tions can be formed as new chunks are constructed. It ap-
pears that people build up data structures in long-term
memory that allow a simple concept to evoke many associ-
ated facts or concepts in an organized manner (Ericsson &
Kintsch 1995). Therefore, chunks can be more than just a
conglomeration of a few items from the stimulus. Gobet
and Simon (1996; 1998) found that expert chess players dif-
fer from other chess players not in the number of chunks
but in the size of these chunks. They consequently invoked
the term “template” to refer to large patterns of informa-
tion that an expert can retain as a single complex chunk
(concerning expert information in long-term memory, see
also Richman et al. 1995).
The role of long-term memory is important to keep in
mind in understanding the size of chunks. When chunks are
formed in the stimulus field on the basis of long-term mem-
ory information, there should be no limit to the number of
stimulus elements that can make up a chunk. However, if
chunks are formed rapidly through new associations that
did not exist before the stimuli were presented (another
mechanism suggested by McLean & Gregg 1967), then it is
expected that the chunk size will be limited to about four
items because all of the items (or old chunks) that will be
grouped to form a new, larger chunk must be held in the fo-
cus of attention at the same time in order for the new intra-
chunk associations to be formed (cf. Baars 1988; Cowan
1995). This assumption is meant to account for data on lim-
itations in the number of items per group in recall (e.g., see
section 2.7). It should be possible theoretically to increase
existing chunk sizes endlessly, little by little, because each
old chunk occupies only one slot in the capacity-limited
store regardless of its size.
2.3. Memory activation
It is assumed that there is some part of the long-term mem-
ory system that is not presently in the focus of attention but
is temporarily more accessible to the focus than it ordinar-
ily would be, and can easily be retrieved into that focus if it
is needed for successful recall (Cowan 1988; 1995). This ac-
cessible information supplements the pure capacity limit
and therefore must be understood if we are to determine
that pure capacity limit.
According to Baddeley (1986) and Cowan (1995), when
information is activated (by presentation of that informa-
tion or an associate of it) it stays activated automatically for
a short period of time (e.g., 2 to 30 sec), decaying from ac-
tivation unless it is reactivated during that period through
additional, related stimulus presentations or thought pro-
cesses. In Baddeley’s account, this temporary activation is
in the form of the phonological buffer or the visuospatial
sketch pad. As mentioned above, there is some question
about the evidence for the existence of that activation-and-
decay mechanism. Even if it does not exist, however, there
is another route to temporary memory accessibility, de-
scribed by Cowan et al. (1995) as “virtual short-term mem-
ory” and by Ericsson and Kintsch (1995), in more theoret-
ical detail, as “long-term working memory.” For the sake of
simplicity, this process also will be referred to as activation.
Essentially, an item can be tagged in long-term memory as
relevant to the current context. For example, the names of
fruits might be easier to retrieve from memory when one is
standing in a grocery store than when one is standing in a
clothing store because different schemas are relevant and
different sets of concepts are tagged as relevant in memory.
Analogously, if one is recalling a particular list of items, it
might be that a certain item from the list is out of the focus
of attention at a particular point but nevertheless is tem-
porarily more accessible than it was before the list was pre-
sented. For example, if one is buying groceries based on a
short list that was not written down, a fruit forgotten from
the list might be retrieved with a process resembling the
following stream of thought: “I recall that there were three
Cowan: The magical number 4
92
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:1
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 7 (native) -----
fruits on the list and I already have gotten apples and ba-
nanas . . . what other fruit would I be likely to need?” The
data structure in long-term memory then allows retrieval.
One difference between this mechanism and the short-
term decay and reactivation mechanism is that it is limited
by contextual factors rather than by the passage of time.
If there is no such thing as time-based memory decay, the
alternative assumption is that long-term working memory
underlies phenomena that have been attributed to the
phonological buffer and visuospatial sketchpad by Badde-
ley (1986). In the present article, the issue of whether short-
term decay and reactivation exists will not be addressed. In-
stead, it is enough to establish that information can be made
temporarily accessible (i.e., in present terms, active), by one
means or another and that this information is the main data
base for the focus of attention to draw upon.
2.4. Maintenance rehearsal
In maintenance rehearsal, one thinks of an item over and
over and thereby keeps it accessible to the focus of atten-
tion (Baddeley 1986; Cowan 1995). One way in which this
could occur, initially, is that the rehearsal could result in a
recirculation of information into the focus of attention, re-
activating the information each time. According to Badde-
ley (1986), the rehearsal loop soon becomes automatic
enough so that there is no longer a need for attention. A
subject in a digit recall study might, according to this no-
tion, rehearse a sequence such as “2, 4, 3, 8, 5” while using
the focus of attention to accomplish other portions of the
task, provided that the rehearsal loop contains no more than
could be articulated in about 2 sec. In support of that no-
tion of automatization, Guttentag (1984) used a secondary
probe task to measure the allocation of attention and found
that as children matured, less and less attention was de-
voted to rehearsal while it was going on.
It appears from many studies of serial recall with rehearsal-
blocking or “articulatory suppression” tasks, in which a
meaningless item or short phrase is repeated over and over,
that rehearsal is helpful to recall (for a review, see Badde-
ley 1986). Maintenance rehearsal could increase the ob-
served memory limit as follows. An individual might recall
an 8-item list by rehearsing, say, five of the items while hold-
ing the other three items in the focus of attention. There-
fore, maintenance rehearsal must be prevented before pure
capacity can be estimated accurately.
2.5. Other mnemonic strategies
With the possible exception of maintenance rehearsal,
other well-known mnemonic strategies presumably involve
the use of long-term memory. In recoding, information is
transformed in a way that can allow improved associations.
For example, in remembering two lines of poetry that
rhyme, an astute reader may articulate the words covertly
so as to strengthen the temporary accessibility of a phono-
logical or articulatory code in addition to whatever lexical
code already was strong. This phonological code in turn al-
lows the rhyme association to assist retrieval of activated in-
formation into the focus of attention. Another type of re-
coding is the gathering of items (i.e., chunks corresponding
to stimuli as intended by the experimenter) into larger
chunks than existed previously. This occurs when an indi-
vidual becomes aware of the associations between items,
such as the fact that the 12-letter string given above could
be divided into four 3-letter acronyms. Elaborative re-
hearsal involves an active search for meaningful associa-
tions between items. For example, if the items “fish, brick”
were presented consecutively, one might form an image of
a dead fish on a brick, which could be retrieved as a single
unit rather than two unconnected units. Recoding and elab-
orative rehearsal are not intended as mutually exclusive
mechanisms, but slightly different emphases on how long-
term memory information can be of assistance in a task in
which memory is required. These, then, are some of the
main mechanisms causing compound STM limits to be pro-
duced instead of pure capacity-based STM limits.
2.6. Scene coherence
The postulation of a capacity of about four chunks appears
to be at odds with the earlier finding that one can compre-
hend only one stream of information at a time (Broadbent
1958; Cherry 1953) or the related, phenomenologically-
based observation that one can concentrate on only one
event at a time. A resolution of this paradox was suggested
by Mandler (1985, p. 68) as follows:
The organized (and limited) nature of consciousness is illus-
trated by the fact that one is never conscious of some half dozen
totally unrelated things. In the local park I may be conscious of
four children playing hopscotch, or of children and parents in-
teracting, or of some people playing chess; but a conscious con-
tent of a child, a chess player, a father, and a carriage is unlikely
(unless of course they form their own meaningful scenario).
According to this concept, a coherent scene is formed in the
focus of attention and that scene can have about four sepa-
rate parts in awareness at any one moment. Although the
parts are associated with a common higher-level node, they
would be considered separate provided that there are no
special associations between them that could make their re-
call mutually dependent. For example, four spices might be
recalled from the spice category in a single retrieval (to the
exclusion of other spices), but salt and pepper are directly
associated and so they could only count as a single chunk in
the focus of attention.
This assumption of a coherent scene has some interest-
ing implications for memory experiments that may not yet
have been conducted. Suppose that a subject is presented
with a red light, a spoken word, a picture, and a tone in rapid
succession. A combination of long-term memory and sen-
sory memory would allow fairly easy recognition of any of
these events, yet it is proposed that the events cannot eas-
ily be in the focus of attention at the same time. One possi-
ble consequence is that it should be very difficult to recall
the serial order of these events because they were not con-
nected into a coherent scene. They can be recalled only by
a shifting of attention from the sensory memory or the
newly formed long-term memory representation of one
item to the memory representation of the next item, which
does not result in a coherent scene and is not optimal for
serial recall.
2.7. Hierarchical shifting of attention
Attentional focus on one coherent scene does not in itself
explain how a complex sequence can be recalled. To un-
derstand that, one must take into account that the focus of
attention can shift from one level of analysis to another.
Cowan: The magical number 4
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:1
93
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 8 (native) -----
McLean and Gregg (1967, p. 459) described a hierarchical
organization of memory in a serial recall task with long lists
of consonants: “At the top level of the hierarchy are those
cueing features that allow S to get from one chunk to an-
other. At a lower level, within chunks, additional cues en-
able S to produce the integrated strings that become his
overt verbal responses.” An example of hierarchical organi-
zation was observed by Graesser and Mandler (1978) in a
long-term recall task. The assumption underlying this re-
search was that, like perceptual encoding, long-term recall
requires a limited-capacity store to operate. It was expected
according to this view that items would be recalled in bursts
as the limited-capacity store (the focus of attention) was
filled with information from long-term memory, recalled,
and then filled and recalled again. Studies of the timing of
recall have indeed found that retrieval from long-term
memory (e.g., recall of all the fruits one can think of) oc-
curs in bursts of about five or fewer items (see Broadbent
1975; Mandler 1975). Graesser and Mandler (1978, study
2) had subjects name as many instances of a semantic cate-
gory as possible in 6 min. They used a mathematical func-
tion fit to cumulative number of items recalled to identify
plateaus in the response times. These plateaus indicated
about four items per cluster. They also indicated, however,
that there were lengthenings of the inter-cluster interval
that defined superclusters. Presumably, the focus of atten-
tion shifted back and forth between the supercluster level
(at which several subcategories of items are considered)
and the cluster level (at which items of a certain subcate-
gory are recalled). An example would be the recall from
the fruit category as follows: “apple–banana–orange–pear
(some common fruits); grapes–blueberries–strawberries
(smaller common fruits); pineapple–mango (exotic fruits);
watermelon–cantaloupe–honeydew (melons). By shifting
the focus to higher and lower levels of organization it is pos-
sible to recall many things from a scene. I assume that the
capacity limit applies only to items within a single level of
analysis, reflecting simultaneous contents of the focus of at-
tention.
3. Empirical evidence for the capacity limit
3.1. Capacity limits estimated with information overload
One way in which long-term recoding or rehearsal can be
limited is through the use of stimuli that contain a large
number of elements for a brief period of time, overwhelm-
ing the subject’s ability to rehearse or recode before the ar-
ray fades from the time-limited buffer stores. This has been
accomplished in several ways.
3.1.1. Visual whole report of spatial arrays. One study
(Sperling 1960) will be explained in detail, as it was among
the first to use the logic just described. It revealed evidence
for both (1) a brief, pre-attentive, sensory memory of un-
limited capacity and (2) a much more limited, post-attentive
form of storage for categorical information. Sperling’s re-
search was conducted to explore the former but it also was
informative about the latter, limited-capacity store. On
every trial, an array of characters (e.g., 3 rows with 4 letters
per row) was visually presented simultaneously, in a brief
(usually 50-msec) flash. This was followed by a blank screen.
It was assumed that subjects could not attend to so many
items in such a brief time but that sensory memory out-
lasted the brief stimulus array, and that items could be re-
called to the extent that the information could be extracted
from that preattentive store. On partial report trials, a tone
indicated which row of the array the subject should recall
(in a written form), but on whole report trials the subject
was to try to recall the entire array (also in written form).
The ability to report items in the array depended on the de-
lay of the partial report cue. When the cue occurred very
shortly after the array, most or all of the four items in the
cued row could be recalled, but that diminished as the cue
delay increased, presumably because the sensory store de-
cayed before the subject knew which sensory information
to bring into the more limited, categorical store.
By the time the cue was 1 sec later than the array, it was
of no value (i.e., performance reached an asymptotically
low level). Subjects then could remember about 1.3 of the
cued items from a row of 4. It can be calculated that at that
point the number of items still remembered was 1.3 3 3
(the number of rows in the array) or about 4. That was also
how many items subjects could recall on the average on tri-
als in the “whole report” condition, in which no partial re-
port cue was provided. The limit of four items was obtained
in whole report across a large variety of arrays differing in
the number, arrangement, and composition of elements.
Thus, a reasonable hypothesis was that subjects could read
about four items out of sensory memory according to a
process in which the unlimited-capacity, fading sensory
store is used quickly to transfer some items to a limited-
capacity, categorical store (according to the present theo-
retical framework, the focus of attention).
One could illustrate the results of Sperling (1960) using
Figure 1, which depicts the interaction of nested faculties
in the task in a manner similar to Cowan (1988; 1995).
Within that theoretical account, sensory memory is as-
sumed to operate through the activation of features within
long-term memory (an assumption that has been strength-
ened through electrophysiological studies of the role of re-
activation in automatic sensory memory comparisons; see
Cowan et al. 1993). The nesting relation implies that some,
but not all, sensory memory information also is in the focus
of attention at a particular moment in this task. In either the
whole report condition or the partial report condition, the
limited capacity store (i.e., the focus of attention) can be
filled with as many of the items from sensory memory as the
limited capacity will allow; but in the partial report condi-
tion, most of these items come from the cued row in the ar-
ray. Because the display is transient and contains a large
amount of information, subjects have little chance to in-
crease the amount recalled through mnemonic strategies
such as maintenance or elaborative rehearsal. Part A of the
figure represents whole report and shows that a subset of
the items can be transferred from activated memory to the
capacity-limited store. Part B of the figure, represent-
ing partial report, shows that the items transferred to the
capacity-limited store are now confined to the cued items
(filled circles), allowing a larger proportion of those items
to be reported.
A word is in order about the intent of this simple model
shown in Figure 1. It is not meant to deny that there are im-
portant differences between more detailed structures such
as the phonological store and the visuospatial sketch pad of
Baddeley (1986). However, the model is meant to operate
on a taxonomically inclusive level of analysis. It seems likely
that there are other storage structures not included in Bad-
Cowan: The magical number 4
94
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:1
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 9 (native) -----
deley’s model, such as memory for nonverbal sounds and
for tactile stimuli. In principle, moreover, these separate
structures could share important functional properties
(e.g., incoming stimuli requiring a particular kind of coding
interfere with the short-term retention of existing repre-
sentations using similar coding) and could operate based on
similar neural mechanisms of activation. Given that we do
not know the taxonomy of short-term stores, they are rep-
resented together in the model according to their common
principle, that they are activated portions of the long-term
memory system. This activated memory includes both
physical features and conceptual features. What is critical
for the present purposes is that all of the storage structures
making up activated memory are assumed not to have ca-
pacity limitations. Instead, they are assumed to be limited
because of memory decay, interference from subsequent
stimuli, and/or some other basis of temporary accessibility.
Only the focus of attention is assumed to have a fixed ca-
pacity limit in chunks, and it is that capacity limit that is of
primary concern here.
There are also a number of other theoretical suggestions
that are consistent with the present approach but with dif-
ferent terminology and assumptions. For example, the ap-
proach appears compatible with a model proposed recently
by Vogel et al. (1998). Their “conceptual short-term mem-
ory” would correspond to the activated portion of long-term
memory in the model of Cowan (1988), whereas their “vi-
sual working memory” would correspond to the focus of at-
tention. Potential differences between the approaches ap-
pear to be that what they call conceptual memory could,
according to Cowan (1988), include some physical features;
and what they call visual working memory would, accord-
ing to Cowan (1988), prove to be one instance of the focus
of attention, a central structure that represents conscious
information from all modalities. The most critical similarity
between the models for present purposes is that the capac-
ity limit shows up in only one place (the visual working
memory or focus of attention), not elsewhere in the model.
With these theoretical points in mind, we can return to a
consideration of Sperling’s study. The observed limit to
about four items in whole report theoretically might be at-
tributed to output interference. However, studies by Pash-
ler (1988) and Luck and Vogel (1997), in which output in-
terference was limited, militate against that interpretation.
In one experiment conducted by Luck and Vogel, for ex-
ample, subjects saw an array of 1 to 12 small colored squares
for 100 msec and then, after a 900-msec blank interval, an-
other array that was the same or differed in the color of one
square. The subject was to indicate whether the array was
the same or different. Thus, only one response per trial was
required. Performance was nearly perfect for arrays of one
to three squares, slightly worse with four squares, and much
worse at larger array sizes. Very similar results were ob-
tained in another experiment in which a cue was provided
to indicate which square might have changed, reducing de-
cision requirements. Some of their other experiments clar-
ify the nature of the item limit. The four-item limit was
shown to apply to integrated objects, not features within ob-
jects. For example, when objects in an array of bars could
differ on four dimensions (size, orientation, color, and pres-
ence or absence of a central gap), subjects could retain all
four dimensions at once as easily as retaining any one. The
performance function of proportion correct across increas-
ing array size (i.e., increasing number of array items) was
practically identical no matter how many stimulus attri-
butes had to be attended at once. This suggested that the
capacity limit should be expressed in terms of the number
of integrated objects, not the number of features within ob-
jects. The objects serve as the chunks here.
Broadbent (1975) noted that the ability to recall items
from an array grows with the visual field duration: “for the
first fiftieth of a second or so the rate of increase in recall is
extremely fast, and after that it becomes slower.” He cites
Sperling’s (1967) argument that in the early period, items
are read in parallel into some visual store; but that, after it
fills up, additional items can be recalled only if some items
are read (more slowly) into a different, perhaps articulatory
store. Viewed in this way, the visual store would have a ca-
pacity of three to five items, given that the performance
function rapidly increases for that number of items. How-
ever, the “visual store” could be a central capacity limit (as-
sumed here to be the focus of attention) rather than visu-
Cowan: The magical number 4
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:1
95
Figure 1.
Illustration of the processing in (A) whole report pro-
cedures and (B) partial report procedures according to the nested
processes framework suggested by Cowan (1988; 1995). In each
figure, information is elevated from activated storage (jagged
lines) to the limited-capacity store, which is the focus of attention
(large circle), until the latter is full. Small circles represent items
in the array, and those with arrows enter the focus of attention.
With partial report (B), the cued items (filled circles) preferen-
tially enter the limited-capacity focus of attention.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 10 (native) -----
ally specific as the terminology used by Sperling seems to
imply.
A related question is what happens when access to the
sensory memory image is limited. Henderson (1972) pre-
sented 3 3 3 arrays of consonants, each followed by a mask-
ing pattern after 100, 400, 1,000, or 1,250 msec. This was
followed by recall of the array. Although the number of con-
sonants reported in the correct position depended on the
duration of the array, the range of numbers was quite sim-
ilar to other studies, with means for phonologically dissim-
ilar sets of consonants ranging from about 3 with 100-msec
exposure times to about 5.5 with 1250-msec exposure
times. This indicates that most of the transfer of informa-
tion from sensory storage to a limited-capacity store occurs
rather quickly.
A similar limit may apply in situations in which a scene is
changed in a substantial manner following a brief interrup-
tion and people often do not notice the change (e.g., Simons
& Levin 1998). Rensink et al. (1997) proposed that this limit
may occur because people can monitor only a few key ele-
ments in a scene at one time.
3.1.2. Auditory whole report of spatiotemporal arrays.
Darwin et al. (1972) carried out an experiment that was
modeled after Sperling’s (1960) work, but with stimuli pre-
sented in the auditory modality. On each trial, subjects re-
ceived nine words in a spatiotemporal array, with sequences
of three spoken items (numbers and letters) presented over
headphones at left, center, and right locations simultane-
ously for a total array size of nine items. The partial report
cue was a visual mark indicating which spatial location to re-
call. The results were quite comparable to those of Sperling
(1960). Once more the partial report performance declined
across cue delays until it was equivalent to the whole report
level of about four items though, in this experiment in the
auditory modality, the decline took about 4 sec rather than
1 sec as in vision, and the last item in each sequence was re-
called better than the first two items. In both modalities,
the whole report limit may suggest the limited capacity for
storage of item labels in a consciously accessed form.
3.1.3. Whole report of ignored (unattended) spoken lists.
In all of the partial report studies, the measure of short-
term memory capacity depended upon the fact that there
were too many simultaneously presented items for all of
them to be processed at once, so that the limited-capacity
mechanism was filled with items quickly. If items were pre-
sented slowly and one at a time, the subject would be able
to use mnemonic processes such as rehearsal (e.g., Badde-
ley 1986) to expand the number of items that could be held,
and therefore would be able to exceed the constraints of the
limited-capacity store. If a way could be found to limit these
mnemonic processes, it could allow us to examine pure ca-
pacity in a test situation more similar to what is ordinarily
used to examine STM (presumably yielding a compound
STM estimate); namely immediate, serial verbal list recall.
Cowan et al. (1999) limited the processing of digits in a
spoken list by having subjects ignore the items in the spo-
ken list until after their presentation. Subjects played a
computer game in which the name of a picture at the cen-
ter of the screen was to be compared to the names of four
surrounding pictures to indicate (with a mouse click) which
one rhymed with the central picture. A new set of pictures
then appeared. As this visual game was played repeatedly,
subjects ignored lists of digits presented through head-
phones. Occasionally (just 16 times in a session), 1 sec af-
ter the onset of the last spoken word in a list, the rhyming
game disappeared from the screen and a memory response
screen appeared shortly after that, at which time the sub-
ject was to use the keypad to report the digits in the spoken
list. Credit was given for each digit only if it appeared in the
correct serial position. Relative to a prior memory span task
result, lists were presented at span length and at lengths of
span-1 (i.e., lists one item shorter than the longest list that
was recalled in the span task), span-2, and span-3. A control
condition in which subjects attended to the digits also was
presented, before and after the ignored-speech session. In
the attended-speech control condition, the number of dig-
its recalled was higher than in the unattended condition,
and it increased with list length. However, in the ignored-
speech condition, the mean number of items recalled re-
mained fixed at a lower level regardless of list length. The
level was about 3.5 items in adults, and fewer in children.
This pattern is reproduced in Figure 2. It is important that
the number correct remained fixed across list lengths in the
ignored-speech condition, just as the whole-report limit re-
mained fixed across array sizes in Sperling (1960). It is this
pattern that is crucial for the conclusion that there is a fixed
capacity limit.
It is important also to consider individual-subject data.
Sperling’s (1960) data appeared to show that his very few,
highly trained individuals had capacity limits in the range of
about 3.5–4.5. In the study of Cowan et al. (1999), results
from 35 adults are available even though only the first 24 of
these were used in the published study. Figure 3 shows
each adult subject’s mean number correct in the unat-
tended speech task, as well each subject’s standard error
and standard deviation across unattended speech trials. It
is clear from this figure that individuals did not fit within a
very narrow window of scores; their individual estimates of
capacity ranged from as low as about 2 to as high as almost
6 in one participant. One might imagine that the higher es-
timates in some individuals were owing to residual atten-
tion to the supposedly ignored spoken digits, but the results
do not support that suggestion. For example, consider the
subject shown in Figure 3 who had the best memory for ig-
nored speech. If that subject attended to the spoken digits
that were to be ignored, then the result should have been a
positive slope of memory across the four list lengths, simi-
lar to the attended-speech condition shown in Figure 2. In
fact, however, that subject’s scores across four list lengths
had a slope of 20.35. Across all of the adult subjects, the
correlation between memory for ignored speech and slope
of the ignored speech memory function was r 5 2.19, n.s.
The slight tendency was thus for subjects with better recall
to have less positive slopes than those with poorer recall.
The slopes were quite close to zero (M 5 0.05, SD 5 0.32)
and were distributed fairly symmetrically around 0. An-
other possible indication of attention to the supposedly ig-
nored speech would be a tradeoff between memory and vi-
sual task performance during the ignored speech session.
However, such a tradeoff did not occur. The correlation be-
tween memory for unattended speech and reaction times
on the visual task was 2.33, n.s., the tendency being for sub-
jects with better memory for ignored speech also to display
slightly shorter reaction times on the visual task. The same
type of result was obtained for the relation between mem-
ory and visual task reaction times on a trial-by-trial basis
Cowan: The magical number 4
96
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:1
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 11 (native) -----
within individuals. The mean within-subject correlation
was 2.08 (SD 5 .25), showing that the slight tendency was
for a subject’s trials that produced better memory to be ac-
companied by shorter mean reaction times on the preced-
ing visual task. Thus, the memory capacity of up to six items
in certain individuals as measured in this technique and the
individual differences in capacity seem real, not owing to
attention-assisted encoding. Figure 3 shows that individu-
als’ standard errors (rectangles) were relatively small, and
that even the standard deviations (bars) of the best versus
the worst rememberers did not overlap much.
The study of Cowan et al. (1999) is not the only one yield-
ing individual difference information. For example, the
data set reported as the first experiment of Luck and Vogel
(1997), on visual storage capacity, resulted from individ-
ual subject estimates of storage capacity ranging from 2.2
to 4.7, and a graduate student who spent months on the
capacity-estimation tasks developed a capacity of about six
items (Steven Luck, personal communication, January 18,
1999). These estimates are quite similar to the ones shown
in Figure 3 despite the great differences in procedures.
Similar estimates can be obtained from the study of Hen-
derson (1972), in which each consonant array was followed
by a mask. For example, with a 400-msec field exposure du-
ration (long enough to access sensory memory once, but
probably not long enough for repeated access) and no sup-
plementary load, the six subjects’ mean number correct
ranged from 3.0 to 5.1 items.
Cowan: The magical number 4
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:1
97
Figure 2.
The number of items recalled in attended and unattended lists of digits. The flat pattern of recall of unattended digits as a
function of list length is taken as evidence of a capacity limit analogous to what Sperling (1960) reported. After Cowan et al. (1999).
Figure 3.
Number of items recalled in a memory for unattended speech task for each adult used in the procedure reported by Cowan
et al. (1999). Error bars depict trials within an individual.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 12 (native) -----
All of these results appear to require a modification of
conclusions that could be drawn from the previous litera-
ture. In his ground-breaking review of memory span,
Dempster (1981, p. 87) concluded that “there is little or no
evidence of either individual or developmental differences
in capacity.” In the previous literature only processing
speeds were found related to span, but none of the previ-
ous developmental investigations examined memory with
strategic processing during reception of the list minimized
so as to examine capacity. There do appear to be individual
and developmental differences in capacity.
Figure 4 illustrates another intriguing point about Cowan
et al. (1999). In this scatterplot of memory for unattended
versus attended speech in individuals within each age
group, the equation line represents the case in which mem-
ory was equal in the two tasks. What the plot shows is that
memory was always better in the attended speech task, but
that the amount of improvement in the attended speech
task relative to the unattended speech task was indepen-
dent of the level of performance on the unattended task. In
the attended condition the means (and SDs) were: for 35
adults, 5.43 (0.78); for 26 fourth graders, 4.31 (0.88); and
for 24 first graders, 3.48 (0.69). In the ignored speech con-
dition the comparable means were: for the adults, 3.51
(0.94); for the fourth graders, 2.99 (0.86); and for the first
graders, 2.34 (0.69). Notice that, among all groups, the ra-
tio of mean attended to unattended numbers correct fell
within a narrow range, between 1.4 and 1.6. This pattern
suggests that attention at the time of reception of the list
may add a process that is independent of the processes in-
volved in memory for unattended speech. That process pre-
sumably is independent of the pure capacity limit and could
reflect the use of attention to form larger chunks.
It should be noted that the main scoring procedure used
by Cowan et al. (1999) credited correct recall of a digit only
if it appeared in the correct serial position. Cowan et al. also
examined results of a scoring procedure in which credit was
given for any correct digit, regardless of the serial position.
Such results cannot be compared across list lengths because
the probability of guessing correctly increases dramatically
with list length (given that each digit could occur only once
per list). Nevertheless, it is noteworthy that recall at all ages
was more like a constant proportion correct across lists
lengths in this free scoring, not a constant number correct
as in the serial position scoring. Adults and fourth-grade
children were over 90% correct on lists of length 4 through
6, the lengths examined with this scoring procedure, and
first-grade children were correct on 83, 80, and 83% of the
lists at these three lengths. The item scoring raises the ques-
tion of what it is that is held in a capacity-limited mech-
anism. It cannot simply be the items that are held, as the
free scoring does not show the limited-capacity pattern of
a constant number correct across list lengths. The digits
themselves may be stored in activated memory (e.g., audi-
tory sensory or phonological memory) and drawn from it
into the focus of attention as needed. Instead, it might be
the mapping between the digits in memory and the serial
positions in the list that would have to be held in capacity-
limited storage.
3.2. Capacity limits estimated by blocking long-term
memory recoding, passive storage, and rehearsal
Verbal materials can be used under conditions that dis-
courage recoding and rehearsal, or materials that are in-
trinsically difficult to recode, store, and rehearse can be
used. These methods force subjects to rely primarily on
capacity-limited storage of chunks that were learned out of
the laboratory or, at least, before the experimental trial in
question.
Cowan: The magical number 4
98
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:1
Figure 4.
Scatterplot of memory for unattended versus attended speech in each age group in the experiment of Cowan et al. (1999).
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 13 (native) -----
3.2.1. Short-term, serial verbal retention with articulatory
suppression. The contribution of long-term memory can
be minimized by drawing the stimuli from the same, small
set on every trial and requiring the correct recall of serial
order. Because the same items recur over and over, it is dif-
ficult to retain long-term associations that help in the re-
tention of serial order of the items on a particular trial. That
is, in fact, the nature of the stimuli in most immediate, ser-
ial recall experiments that have been conducted. Further,
the contribution of rehearsal can be minimized by impos-
ing articulatory suppression (Baddeley 1986; Murray 1968),
a secondary task in which the subject repeats, whispers, or
mouths a rote utterance over and over during the presen-
tation of items (e.g., “the, the, the . . . ”) and sometimes
throughout recall itself if a nonspeech recall mode is used.
Cowan et al. (1998) offered an account of what these vari-
ables do when used together. They proposed that when new
words are presented on every trial in a serial recall task, the
phonological portion of activated memory includes a
phonological representation of the word sequence. How-
ever, when the same words are used over and over on every
trial, all of the representations of items from the memory
set become active in memory, so that the memory items in
the current list cannot necessarily be distinguished from
items used in previous trials. Rehearsal may allow a special
representation of the to-be-recalled list to be constructed
in active memory even under these circumstances in which
a small set of items is used over and over. Cowan et al. of-
fered these assumptions to explain why articulatory sup-
pression has a much larger effect on performance for a
small set of words than for large sets of words that are not
repeated from trial to trial. A small set of words used over
and over, along with articulatory suppression, may minimize
the contribution of articulatory and passive phonological
storage factors in recall. It is only under these conditions,
for example, that the “word length effect,” or advantage for
lists composed of short words, is eliminated (LaPointe &
Engle 1990). Word length effects that remain even with ar-
ticulatory suppression when a large set of items is used can
be explained on the grounds that phonological representa-
tions of these items are generated from long-term mem-
ory (Besner 1987) and remain active despite articulatory
suppression. (An alternative interpretation of articulatory
suppression effects would state that suppression works by
taking up processing capacity rather than by blocking re-
hearsal. However, if that were true, suppression should im-
pair performance even when a large set of words is used.
Given that it does not, the alternative interpretation seems
wrong.)
Before describing results of serial recall experiments
with spoken stimuli and articulatory suppression, it is nec-
essary to restrict the admissible serial recall data in a few
other ways. Memory for multisyllabic words was excluded
because these often might be retained as separate segments
rather than integrated units (e.g., fire-man if morphemic
segments are used; um-brel-la if syllabic segments are
used). Memory for nonwords also was excluded because
one might retain them in terms of separate phonemic or syl-
labic series even if they are monosyllabic. Only spoken
words were included because articulatory suppression
seems to interfere with the retrieval of the phonological
representation of printed words, but not of spoken words.
For example, articulatory suppression during the presenta-
tion of a list eliminates phonological similarity effects for
printed words, but not for spoken words (Baddeley et al.
1984). Finally, conditions with highly unusual stimulus pa-
rameters were eliminated. Unusually slow stimulus presen-
tations (. 4 sec per word) were excluded because it might
be possible to insert rehearsals despite the articulatory sup-
pression, as were unusually fast presentations (, 0.5 sec per
word) because of encoding difficulty; and grouped presen-
tations were omitted because they encourage long-term re-
coding of the list.
Table 2 shows the results for all studies meeting these
constraints. I was able to find nine studies that included at
least one experimental condition involving the immediate
recall of spoken, monosyllabic words from a small set in the
presence of articulatory suppression. Among these studies
I was able to derive 17 independent estimates of memory
storage. There appears to be a striking degree of conver-
gence among the 17 estimates. All but one of the estimates
fell within the range of three to five items, and most fell in
the three- to four-item range. The only outlier was an esti-
mate of 2.4 items from Longoni et al. (1993). That low es-
timate is difficult to understand because the stimulus con-
ditions were almost identical to another experimental
condition in Longoni et al. that yielded an estimate of 3.4
items.
The methods of estimation are described briefly in Table
2. The most commonly applicable method was to take the
proportion correct at each serial position (or, when neces-
sary, an estimate of this proportion based on a figure) and
add the proportions across serial positions to arrive at the
number correct. In a probed recall experiment (e.g., Mur-
ray 1968) there is an initial list item for which the procedure
produces no memory estimate; based on past research on
primacy effects, the available proportion at this first serial
position always was estimated at 0.8. For some studies, al-
ternative assumptions led to alternative estimates of stor-
age. For example, in the study of Peterson and Johnson
(1971), the dependent measure reported was the number
of lists recalled correctly, and to estimate items recalled one
must make assumptions about the number of errors within
the lists recalled incorrectly. Estimates of capacity are given
in the table under a “high” assumption that at least four
items were recalled within each 5-item list, and under a
more “moderate” assumption that erroneous lists contained
1 or 2 errors (i.e., 4 or 3 correct items) equally often. It is
the more moderate estimate that appears in the rightmost
column of the table. When the measure was memory span,
the estimate was taken as the span in conditions in which
the articulatory suppression task can be presumed to have
been most effective (e.g., in Cowan et al. 1987).
Waugh and Norman (1965) impeded rehearsal in a dif-
ferent way, through instructions to the subjects not to re-
hearse. In their experiment, each list contained 16 spoken
digits and the last digit was accompanied by a tone. It was
to serve as a probe, the same digit having occurred once be-
fore somewhere in the list. The subject was to respond with
the digit that had followed the probe digit when it was pre-
sented earlier, in the list. Results with an ordinary, 1-per-sec
presentation rate (e.g., Waugh & Norman 1965, p. 91)
showed that performance levels were much higher with 3
or fewer items intervening between the target pair and the
response (. .8) than it was with 4 or more intervening items
(, .6). The transition between 3 and 4 intervening items
was abrupt. Note that with 3 intervening items in this task,
successful performance would require that the subject’s
Cowan: The magical number 4
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:1
99
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 14 (native) -----
memory extend back far enough to remember 4 items: the
target pair and two intervening items. (The last intervening
item was the probe, which did not have to be remembered.)
Thus, this task leads to an estimate of four items in capacity-
limited short-term storage. (Performance levels with a very
fast, 4-per-sec presentation decreased rather more contin-
uously as a function of the number of intervening items,
which possibly could reflect the heavier contribution of a
time-limited source of activation, such as sensory memory,
that was the most vivid for more recent items and faded
gradually across items.)
Another way to limit rehearsal is to use a “running mem-
ory span” procedure, in which a long list of items is pre-
sented and the subject is unaware of the point at which the
test is to begin. Pollack et al. (1959) devised such a proce-
dure. In their Experiment 1, lists of 25, 30, 35, and 40 dig-
its were presented. When the list ended, the task was to
write down as many of the most recent items as possible,
Cowan: The magical number 4
100
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:1
Table 2. Estimates of capacity from studies of immediate verbal memory with auditory presentation and articulatory suppression
Reference
Data Source
Method of Calculating Items in Storage
Est.
Murray (1968)
Figure 1, p. 682. Cued recall; auditory 
Add the proportions correct across probed serial 
presentation with suppression. 6 letters.
positions and assume recall of the first, unprobed 
3.1
item in the list 5 .8. Thus, as List Length 6: .4 1
.2 1.4 1 .5 1 .8 5 2.3; 1 1 5 3.3.
same
7 letters
same
3.2
same
8 letters
same
3.0
same
9 letters
same
3.1
Peterson & Johnson
Table 2, p. 349 (5 letters, serial recall; 
5 items, 45% of lists correct. High assumption 
(1971)
count during presentation, low-
is that on the other 55% of trials, subjects get
similarity condition) Data 5 proportion 
4 correct, for a mean of 5(.45) 1 4(.55) 5 4.45. 
4.2
of lists recalled correctly.
A more moderate assumption is 5(.45) 1 4(.28) 
1 3(.27) 5 4.18.
Levy (1971)
Table 1, p. 126. Neutral articulation
7 ser. posit. 3 .39 items/s.p. 5 2.73 items correct.
condition cued recall, simultaneous
Add 0.8 items for the first, unprobed position
3.5
auditory presentation. 7 serial positions.
5 3.53 items.
same
Table 2, p. 130. 9 serial positions
9 ser. posit. 3 .34 5 3.06, add 0.8 for first, 
3.9
unprobed position 5 3.86 items.
Baddeley et al. (1975b)
Figure 6, p. 585. Serial recall, mono-
5 serial positions 3 .7 items/s.p. correct 5 3.5
3.5
syllabic words, auditory presentation
items.
with suppression.
Baddeley et al. (1984)
Table 1, p. 236. Serial recall, mono-
5 serial positions 3 .64 items/s.p. correct 5 3.2
3.2
syllabic words, dissimilar items with
items in each case.
suppression. Fast presentation
same
Slower presentation
Same
3.2
Cowan et al. (1987)
Table 1, p. 514. Monosyllabic words,
Span 5 estimate. (Omitted conditions in which
serial recall, span procedure, dis-
articulatory suppression task was presumably
similar items with articulatory
ineffective; whisper same letter once after each
4.0
suppression. Artic. Task: Whisper
item, span 5 4.81; whisper same letter continu-
alphabet
ously throughout study, span 5 4.86.)
same
Task: Whisper next letter on each
same
4.0
trial.
Longoni et al. (1993)
Table 3, p. 17. Serial recall, distinct
6 serial positions 3 .57 correct 5 3.42 (Additional
items, suppression task = Whisper 
data from a very slow presentation rate of 5 sec
“the.” Presentation rate of 0.5 sec
per item condition were omitted because rehearsal
3.4
per item.
was possible; for that cond., 6 serial positions 3 .78
correct 5 4.68.)
same
Table 4, p. 19. Whisper “hiya”
6 serial positions 3 .40 correct 5 2.40. It is not clear
during presentation and recall
why such discrepant results obtained in these two
2.4
experiements.
Avons et al. (1994)
Table 1, p. 215. Short words,
5 serial positions 3 .69 items/s.p. correct = 3.45 
3.5
immediate recall (all had suppression).
items.
Serial recall condition
same
Probed recall condition. (Probed by the
5 serial positions 3 .72 items/s.p.
3.6
serial position of the item.)
correct 5 3.60.
Hitch et al. (1996)
Figure 4, p. 125. Auditory presentation
Dependent measure 5 items correct 5 about 
of items, suppression, recall in correct
4.0. (Omitted results for grouped lists, about
4.0
serial positions.
6.0).
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 15 (native) -----
making sure to write them in the correct serial positions
with respect to the end of the list. Under these conditions,
the list was too long and continuous for rehearsal to do any
good, and the obtained mean span was 4.2 digits. (Theo-
retically, it might be possible for the subject continually to
compute, say, what were the last 5 items; but there is no task
demand that would encourage such difficult work even if it
were feasible. The absence of on-line task requirements
makes this task very different from the n-back tasks, which,
as discussed earlier, do not meet the criterial for inclusion.)
It is possible to prevent rehearsal in yet another way, by
requiring processing between items rather than during the
presentation of items. Consider, for example, the working
memory span task of Daneman and Carpenter (1980) in
which the subject must read sentences and also retain the
final word of each sentence. The reading should severely
limit rehearsal of the target words. Daneman and Carpen-
ter (1980, p. 455) reported a mean span of 3.15 words in this
circumstance. It is at first puzzling to think that subjects
could do this well, inasmuch as they might need some of the
capacity-limited storage space for processing the sentences
(unless storage and processing demands are totally separate
as suggested by Daneman & Carpenter 1980 and by Hal-
ford et al. 1998). Notice, however, that the word memory
load does not reach 3 until after the third sentence has been
processed. This might well leave some of the limited stor-
age capacity available for sentence processing until the very
end of the trial.
3.2.2. Short-term retention of unrehearsable material. A
second way that time-limited stores can be eliminated from
a measure of storage is with materials that, by their nature,
cannot be rehearsed and thereby refreshed in active mem-
ory. It is unlikely that items that cannot be rehearsed lend
themselves easily to long-term recoding, either. An analysis
of one early study illustrates this distinction. Some verbal
materials are too long to be rehearsed (Baddeley 1986). Si-
mon (1974) examined this in an informal study using him-
self as a subject, and tried to remember well-known ex-
pressions such as “four score and seven years ago,” “To be
or not to be, that is the question,” and “All’s fair in love and
war.” He concluded that “lists of three such phrases were
all I could recall with reliability, although I could some-
times retain four.” Of course, the number of words and syl-
lables contained in these phrases was much larger. Else-
where in the article, for example, it was noted that seven
one-syllable words could be recalled. The present theoret-
ical assumption is that, in the recall of phrases, each phrase
served as a previously learned chunk and also was too long
to allow effective rehearsal; thus, by aiming the focus of at-
tention at the phrase level, four such phrases could be re-
called despite their inclusion of many more units on a sub-
chunk level. In the recall of isolated words, in contrast,
given that each word was much shorter than a phrase, it was
presumably possible to use rehearsal to reactivate memory
(and possibly to form new chunks larger than a single word)
and therefore to increase the number of words recalled
above what would be expected if each word were a separate
chunk. This reasoning is supported by the fact that about
four unconnected spoken words can be recalled when re-
hearsal is blocked, as shown in Table 2.
Jones et al. (1995) carried out an experiment that reveals
a capacity limit, though that was not the purpose of the ex-
periment. On each trial, a series of dots was presented one
at a time at different spatial locations on the computer
screen. After a variable test delay, the response screen in-
cluded all of the dots and the task was to point to them in
the serial order in which they had been presented. There
was very little loss of information over retention intervals of
up to 30 seconds. The authors suggested that this stability
of performance across test delays indicates that some sort
of “rehearsal” process was used. I would suggest that the so-
called rehearsal process used here does not contaminate
the estimate of storage because it is not a true rehearsal
process. Instead, it may be a process in which some of the
items, linked to serial position or order, are held in the ca-
pacity-limited store. Each list presented by Jones et al. in-
cluded 4, 7, or 10 dots. It can be estimated from their pa-
per (Jones et al., Fig. 2, p. 1011) that these three list lengths
led to means of 3.5, 3.8, and 3.2 items recalled in a trial, re-
spectively. These estimates were obtained by calculating
the mean proportion correct across serial positions and
multiplying it by the number of serial positions.
Several studies of the memory for unrehearsable mater-
ial produce estimates lower than 3.0. Glanzer and Razel
(1974) examined the free recall of proverbs and estimated
the short-term storage capacity using the method devel-
oped by Waugh and Norman (1965), based on the recency
effect. The estimate was 2.0 proverbs in short-term storage
on the average. Glanzer and Razel also estimated the con-
tents of short-term storage for 32 different free recall ex-
periments, and found a modal value of 2.0–2.4 items in
storage, very comparable to what they found for the prov-
erbs. However, there is a potential problem with the Waugh
and Norman (1965) method of estimating the contents of
short-term storage. They assumed that the most recent
items are recalled from either of two sources: short-term
storage or long-term storage. The estimate of short-term
storage is obtained by taking the list-medial performance
level to reflect long-term memory and assuming that the re-
cency effect occurs because of this same memory plus the
additional contribution of short-term memory. This as-
sumption is problematic, though, if the items in the recency
positions are not memorized in the same way but are more
often recalled only with the short-term store and not with
the same contribution of long-term storage that is found for
the earlier list items. This possibility is strengthened by the
existence of negative recency effects in the final free recall
of lists that previously had been seen in immediate recall
(Craik et al. 1970). Glanzer and Razel consequently may
have overcorrected for the contribution of long-term mem-
ory in the recency positions.
Another low estimate was obtained for unrehearsable
material by Zhang and Simon (1985) using Chinese. In their
Experiment 1, the mean number of items recalled was 2.71
when the items were radicals without familiar pronounce-
able names, and 6.38 (like the usual English memory span)
when the items were characters with pronounceable, re-
hearsable names, within which radicals were embedded. A
lower estimate for unrehearsable items is to be expected.
However, the fact that it was lower than three would not be
expected if, as the authors asserted, there are over 200 such
radicals and “educated Chinese people can recognize every
radical” (p. 194), making each radical a single visual chunk.
It seems possible that there are visual similarities among
three or more radicals that tend to make them interfere
with one another in memory when radicals are presented in
a meaningless series, preventing them from serving as in-
Cowan: The magical number 4
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:1
101
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 16 (native) -----
dependent chunks. Although this analysis is speculative, the
basis of the discrepancy between these few estimates below
3.0 and the estimates obtained in the many other experi-
ments taken to reflect a capacity limit (in the 3–5 chunk
range) is an important area for future research.
3.3. Capacity limits estimated with 
performance discontinuities
Although subjects in some procedures may be able to per-
form when there are more than four items, the function de-
scribing the quality or speed of performance sometimes
shows a discontinuity when one reaches about four items
(e.g., a much longer reaction time cost for each additional
item after the fourth item). Presumably, in these circum-
stances, some optional processing mechanism must be used
to supplement the capacity-limited store only if the stimuli
exceed the capacity. This can occur in several ways as shown
below.
3.3.1. Errorless performance in immediate recall. Broad-
bent (1975) noted that we usually measure span as the num-
ber of items that can be recalled on 50% of the trials. How-
ever, he cites evidence that the number of items that can be
recalled reliably, with a very high accuracy, is about three or
four and is much more resistant to modifications based on
the nature of the items (Cardozo & Leopold 1963; see also
Atkinson & Shiffrin 1968). That is, there is a flat perfor-
mance function across list lengths until three or four items.
It stands to reason that when items beyond four are re-
membered, it is through the use of supplementary mne-
monic strategies (such as rehearsal and chunking), not be-
cause of the basic storage capacity.
3.3.2. Enumeration reaction time. The ability to appre-
hend a small number of items at one time in the conscious
mind can be distinguished from the need to attend to items
individually when a larger number of such items are pre-
sented. This point is one of the earliest to be noted in psy-
chological commentaries on the limitations in capacity.
Hamilton (1859) treated this topic at length and noted (vol.
1, p. 254) that two philosophers decided that six items could
be apprehended at once, whereas at least one other (Abra-
ham Tucker) decided that four items could be appre-
hended. He went on to comment: “The opinion [of six] ap-
pears to me correct. You can easily make the experiment for
yourselves, but you must be aware of grouping the objects
into classes. If you throw a handful of marbles on the floor,
you will find it difficult to view at once more than six, or
seven at most, without confusion; but if you group them
into twos, or threes, or fives, you can comprehend as many
groups as you can units; because the mind considers these
groups only as units, – it views them as wholes, and throws
their parts out of consideration. You may perform the ex-
periment also by an act of imagination.” When the experi-
ment actually was conducted, however, it showed that
Hamilton’s estimate was a bit high. Many studies have
shown that the time needed to count a cluster of dots or
other such small items rises very slowly as the number of
items increases from one to four, and rises at a much more
rapid rate after that. Jevons (1871) was probably the first ac-
tual study, noting that Hamilton’s conjecture was “one of
the very few points in psychology which can, as far as we yet
see, be submitted to experiment.” He picked up handfuls
of beans and threw them into a box, glancing at them briefly
and estimating their number, which was then counted for
comparison. After over a thousand trials, he found that
numbers up to four could be estimated perfectly, and up to
five with very few errors.
Kaufman et al. (1949) used the verb “subitize” to de-
scribe the way in which a few items apparently can be ap-
prehended and enumerated in a very rapid fashion (as if
these items enter the focus of attention at the same time).
In contrast, when there are more items, the reaction time
or the time necessary for accurate counting increases
steeply as the number of items increases (as if these items
must enter the focus of attention to be counted piecemeal,
not all at once). Mandler and Shebo (1982) described the
history of the subitizing literature. As they note, subitizing
has been observed via two main procedures: one in which
the duration of an array is limited and the dependent mea-
sure is the proportion of errors in estimating the number of
items in the array, and another method in which the array
stays on and the primary dependent measure is the reaction
time to respond with the correct number. The results from
the first of these methods seem particularly clear. For ex-
ample, in results reported by Mandler and Shebo (1982, p.
8), the proportion of errors was near zero for arrays of 1–4
items (or for 1–3 items with a presentation duration as short
as 200 msec) and increased steeply after that, at a rate of
about 15% per additional item until nearly 100% error was
reached with an array size of 11. The reaction time in-
creased slowly with array sizes of 1–3 and more steeply for
array sizes of 5–8. After that it leveled off (whereas it con-
tinued to increase at the same rate, for much higher array
sizes, in procedures in which the array stayed on and the de-
pendent measure was the time to produce the number).
The average response was identical to the correct response
for array sizes of 1–8, with an increasing degree of under-
estimation as array size increased from 9 to 20. From the
present viewpoint, it would appear that three or four items
were subitized initially and about three or four more could
be added to the subitized amount without losing track of
which items had been counted.
Alternative hypotheses about enumeration and related
processes must be considered. Trick and Pylyshyn (1994a)
put forth a theory of subitizing suggesting that it is ca-
pacity-limited (hence the limit to four items), but still not
attention-demanding, and that it takes place at a point in
processing intermediate between unlimited-capacity auto-
matic processes and serial or one-at-a-time attentive pro-
cesses. It was called the FINST (finger of instantiation) the-
ory in that there are a limited number of “fingers” of
instantiation that can be used to define individual items in
the visual field. This theory is specific to vision, and it was
contrasted with a working memory theory in which subitiz-
ing is said to occur because of a limit in the number of tem-
porary memory slots.
The evidence used by Trick and Pylyshyn (1994a) to dis-
tinguish between the theories is open to question. First, it
was shown that items could be subitized only if they were
organized in a way that made them “pop out” of the sur-
roundings (the evidence of Trick & Pylyshyn 1993). Cer-
tainly, this suggests that there is a pre-attentive stage of item
individuation, but perhaps the subitization occurs only af-
terward, contingent not only on this rapid item individua-
tion as Trick and Pylyshyn said, but contingent also on the
availability of slots. One reason to make this distinction is
Cowan: The magical number 4
102
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:1
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 17 (native) -----
that the phenomenon of popout clearly is not limited to four
items; it obviously occurs for much larger numbers of items.
For example, when one looks inside a carton of eggs, all of
the eggs appear to pop out against the surrounding carton.
It is the inclusion of individuated items in the enumeration
routine that is limited to about four. Another type of evi-
dence used by Trick and Pylyshyn (1994a) was that there
was said to be no effect of a memory load on subitization,
unlike counting. Logie and Baddeley (1987) were the main
authors cited in this regard, though subitization was not the
focus of their study. Logie and Baddeley did find that two
distractor tasks (articulatory suppression from repetition of
the word “the,” and tapping) had little effect in the subitiz-
ing range, whereas articulatory suppression had an effect in
the counting range. However, these tasks can be carried out
relatively automatically and would not be expected to re-
quire much working memory capacity (Baddeley 1986).
For example, unlike counting backward as a distractor task,
which causes severe forgetting of a consonant trigram over
an 18-sec distractor-filled period (Peterson & Peterson
1959), articulatory suppression causes almost no loss over a
similar time period (Vallar & Baddeley 1982). Interference
with articulatory processing can explain why articulatory
suppression interfered with counting, for items over four in
the array task and also for every list length within another
task that involved enumeration of sequential events rather
than simultaneous spatial arrays. The data of Logie and
Baddeley thus do seem to support the distinction between
subitizing and counting, but they do not necessarily support
the FINST theory over the working memory limitation the-
ory of subitizing.
Another type of evidence (from Trick & Pylyshyn 1994b)
involved a cue validity paradigm (a variation of the proce-
dure developed by Posner et al. 1980). On each trial in most
of the experiments, two rectangles appeared; dots were to
appear in only one rectangle. The task was to count the dots.
Sometimes, there would be a cue (an arrow pointing to one
rectangle or a flashing rectangle) to indicate slightly in ad-
vance which rectangle probably would contain the dots.
The cue was valid (giving correct information) on 80% of
the cued trials and invalid (giving incorrect information) on
20% of the cued trials. On other trials, no informative cue
was given. The validity of the cue affected performance in
the counting range more than in the subitizing range, lead-
ing Trick and Pylyshyn (1994a) to view the results as sup-
portive of the FINST theory. However, there was still some
effect of cue validity in the subitizing range, so the result is
less than definitive in comparing the FINST and working
memory accounts of subitizing.
Atkinson et al. (1976a) and then Simon and Vaishnavi
(1996) investigated enumeration within afterimages so that
subjects would be unable to shift their gaze in a serial fash-
ion using eye movements. Both studies found that the
subitizing limit remained at four items, with errors in enu-
meration only above that number, even though subjects had
a long time to view each afterimage. Therefore, it seems
that a focal attention strategy involving eye movements is
important for visual enumeration of over four items, but not
at or below four items, the average number that subjects may
be able to hold in the limited-capacity store at one time.
3.3.3. Multi-object tracking. Another, more recent line of
research involves “multi-object tracking” of dots or small
objects that move around on the computer screen (Pyly-
shyn & Storm 1988; Yantis 1992; for a recent review see Py-
lyshyn et al. 1994). In the basic procedure, before the ob-
jects move, some of them flash several times and then cease
flashing. After that all of them wander randomly on the
screen and, when they stop, the subject is to report which
dots had been flashing. The flavor of the results is described
well by Yantis (1992, p. 307): “Performance deteriorated as
the number of elements to be tracked increased from 3 to
5 [out of 10 on the screen]; tracking three elements was
viewed by most subjects as relatively easy, although not ef-
fortless, while tracking 5 of 10 elements was universally
judged to be difficult if not impossible by some subjects.”
As in subitizing, one could use either FINST or working
memory theories to account for this type of finding.
3.3.4. Proactive interference in short-term memory. One
can observe proactive interference (PI) in retrieval only if
there are more than four items in a list to be retained (Hal-
ford et al. 1988). This presumably occurs because four or
fewer items are, in a sense, already retrieved; they reside in
a limited-capacity store, eliminating the retrieval step in
which PI arises. Halford et al. demonstrated this storage ca-
pacity limit in a novel and elegant manner. They used vari-
ant of Sternberg’s (1966) memory search task, in which the
subject receives a list of items and then a probe item and
must indicate as quickly as possible whether the probe ap-
peared in the list. In their version of the task, modeled af-
ter Wickens et al. (1981), lists came in sets of three, all of
which were similar in semantic category (Experiment 1) or
rhyme category (Experiment 2). Thus, the first trial in each
set of three was a low-PI trial, whereas the last trial in the
set was a high-PI trial. Experiment 1 showed that with lists
of 10 items, there were PI effects. With a list length of four,
there was no PI. Experiment 2 showed that PI occurred for
lists of six or more items, but not lists of four items. Pre-
sumably, the items within a list of four did not have to be re-
trieved because they all could be present within a capacity-
limited store at the same time. Also consistent with this sort
of interpretation, in 8- to 9-year-old children, PI was ob-
served with 4 items, but not 2 items in a list. The magnitude
of growth of a capacity limit with age in childhood matches
what was observed by Cowan et al. (1999) with a very dif-
ferent procedure (see Fig. 2).
In the Halford et al. (1988) study, it was the length of the
target list that was focused upon. We can learn more by ex-
amining also the effect of variations in the length of the list
causing PI. Wickelgren’s (1966) subjects copied a list of PI
letters, a single letter to be recalled, and then a list of
retroactive interference (RI) letters. The subject was to re-
call only the target letter. There were always eight letters in
one of the interference sets (the PI set for some subjects,
the RI set for others), whereas the other interfering set
could contain 0, 4, 8, or 16 letters. There was a large effect
of the number of RI letters, with substantial differences be-
tween any two RI list lengths. In contrast, when it was the
PI set that varied in length, there was a difference between
0 and 4 PI letters but very little effect of additional PI let-
ters beyond 4. Wickelgren suggested that PI and RI both
generate associative interference, whereas RI additionally
generates another source of forgetting (either decay or stor-
age interference). Thus, associative interference would have
been limited primarily to the four closest interfering items
on either side of the target.
A mechanism of PI in these situations can be suggested.
Cowan: The magical number 4
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:1
103
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 18 (native) -----
It seems likely that excellent, PI-resistant recall occurs
when the active contents of the limited-capacity store are
to be recalled. When the desired information is no longer
active, the long-term memory record of the correct former
state of the limited-capacity store can be used as a cue to
the recall of the desired item(s). If several former limited-
capacity states were similar in content, it may be difficult to
select the right one. Moreover, if the limited-capacity store
serves as a workspace in which items become associated
with one another (Baars 1988; Cowan 1995), then it might
be difficult to select the correct item from among several
present in the limited-capacity store simultaneously. The PI
results described above could then be interpreted as fol-
lows. For studies in Halford et al. (1988), target lists of more
than four items could not be held entirely within limited-
capacity storage, so that a former state of the store had to
be reconstituted. This could cause PI because some of the
target items may have shared a former limited-capacity
state with nearby items from a prior list, or because some
of the other former limited-capacity states would have con-
tained items resembling the correct item. For subjects in
Wickelgren’s (1966) study who received a variable number
of PI letters, the target item would have been removed
from the limited-capacity store by the presentation of eight
following RI letters. Therefore, at the time of recall, the
subject would have had to identify the former state of the
limited-capacity store that contained the single target let-
ter. This same former state may also have included several
of the adjacent letters, which could become confused with
the target letter. Only three or so letters adjacent to the tar-
get letter usually would have been in the limited-capacity
store at the same time as the target letter, and thus only
those letters would contribute much to associative interfer-
ence. In a broader context, this analysis may be one instance
of a cue-overload theory of PI (cf. Glenberg & Swanson
1996; Raaijmaker & Shiffrin 1981; Tehan & Humphreys
1996; Watkins & Watkins 1975) asserting that recall is bet-
ter when fewer test items are associated with the cue used
to recall the required information.
3.4. Capacity limits estimated with indirect effects
So far we have discussed effects of the number of stimulus
items on a performance measure directly related to the sub-
ject’s task, in which recall of items in the focus of attention
is required. It is also possible to observe effects that are re-
lated to the subject’s task only indirectly by deriving a the-
oretical estimate of capacity from the presumed role of the
focus of attention in processing.
3.4.1. Chunk size in immediate recall. The “magical num-
ber 4” lurks in the background of the seminal article by
Miller (1956) on the magical number 7 6 2, which empha-
sized the process of grouping elements together to form
larger meaningful units or “chunks.” The arrangement of
telephone numbers with groups of three and then four dig-
its would not appear to be accidental, but rather an indica-
tion of how many elements can be comfortably held in the
focus of attention at one time to allow the formation of a
new chunk in long-term memory (Baars 1988; Cowan
1995). Several investigators have shown that short-term
memory performance is best when items are grouped into
sublists of no more than three or four (Broadbent 1975;
Ryan 1969; Wickelgren 1964).
The grouping limit seems to apply even for subjects who
have learned how to repeat back strings of 80 or more dig-
its (Ericsson 1985; Ericsson et al. 1980). These subjects did
so by learning to form meaningful chunks out of small
groups of digits, and then learning to group the chunks to-
gether to form “supergroups.” At both the group and the
supergroup levels, the capacity limit seems to apply, as de-
scribed by Ericsson et al. (1980, p. 1182) for their first sub-
ject who increased his digit span greatly: “After all of this
practice, can we conclude that S.F. increased his short-term
memory capacity? There are several reasons to think not . . .
The size of S.F.’s groups were almost always 3 and 4 digits,
and he never generated a mnemonic association for more
than 5 digits . . . He generally used three groups in his su-
pergroups and, after some initial difficulty with five groups,
never allowed more than four groups in a supergroup.” Er-
icsson (1985) reviewed details of the hierarchical grouping
structure in the increased-digit-span subjects and he re-
viewed other studies of memory experts, which also re-
vealed a similar grouping limit of 3–5 items. This limit to
the grouping process would make sense if the items or
groups to be further grouped together must reside in a
common, central workspace so that they can be linked. A
limited-capacity store might be conceived in this way, as a
workspace in which items are linked together (Baars 1988;
Cowan 1995). The focus of attention, the presumed locus
of limited-capacity storage, presumably must shift back and
forth from the super-group level to the group level.
3.4.2. Cluster size in long-term recall. As Shiffrin (1993)
pointed out, in a sense every cognitive task is a STM task
because items must be active in a limited-capacity store at
the time of recall, even though sometimes that can come
about only through the reactivation of long-term memories.
Assume, therefore, that it is necessary to represent items in
the limited-capacity store to prepare them to be recalled.
That sort of mechanism should apply not only to immedi-
ate recall, but also to long-term recall. Bursts of responses
should be observed as an individual fills the limited short-
term capacity, recalls the items held with that capacity, and
then refills it with more information retrieved from long-
term storage.
Broadbent (1975) used similar reasoning to motivate a
study of grouping in long-term recall. He asked subjects to
recall members of a learned category: the Seven Dwarfs,
the seven colors of the rainbow, the countries of Europe, or
the names of regular television programs. There were some
important differences in the fluency of recall for these cat-
egories. However, measurement of the timing of recall
showed bursts of 2, 3, or 4 items clustered together, and oc-
casionally 5 items in a cluster. One of the 10 subjects pro-
duced a run of 6 rainbow colors, but otherwise the cluster
sizes were below 6. Thus, this study provides evidence for
a short-term memory capacity limit even as applied to re-
call from a category in long-term memory. Wilkes (1975) re-
viewed similar results in a more detailed study of pausing
within recall. Bower and Winzenz (1969, cited in Wilkes
1975) showed that repetitions of a digit string within a
longer series resulted in improved recall over time only if
the grouping structure did not change each time the repe-
tition occurred.
Mandler (1967) suggested that the size of the limited-
capacity store is 5 6 2 items. He focused on a number of
experiments in which the items to be recalled could be di-
Cowan: The magical number 4
104
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:1
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 19 (native) -----
vided into a number of categories (e.g., fruits, clothing, ve-
hicles). Recall is superior when a list is recalled by cate-
gories; in a free recall task, subjects tend to recall clusters
organized by category even when the items were not or-
dered by category in the stimulus list. Mandler suggested
that subjects left to their own devices typically could recall
5 6 2 categories and 5 6 2 items from each category that
was recalled (e.g., “apple, orange, banana, grape; shirt,
pants, hat,” and so on). (Mandler also relied on Tulving &
Patkau 1962; and Tulving & Pearlstone 1966.)
The recall of separate items from a higher-level category
in memory might be considered analogous to the retrieval
of separate items from an array represented in sensory
memory. In the case of the sensory array, the items are re-
lated in that they all are part of a common visual field, but
are nevertheless separate perceptually (assuming they are
not organized into larger perceptual objects such as a clus-
ter of rounded letters surrounded by angular letters). In
memory, the items are related in that they are associated to
a common semantic category, but are nevertheless separate
conceptually (assuming they are not organized into clusters
such as salt-and-pepper within the spice category). The
clustering of items in recall presumably depends on the ab-
sence of an automatized routine for recall. Thus, one should
not expect clustering into groups of about four items for a
task like recitation of the alphabet. The same applies to ex-
tensive intra-category knowledge that can result in the re-
call of large chunks structures or templates (Gobet & Simon
1996; 1998).
When one focuses on flawless recall, the number is closer
to three or four. Thus, Mandler’s (1967, Fig. 7) summariza-
tion of recall per category shows that when there were only
1–3 items in a category, these items were recalled flawlessly
(provided that the category was recalled at all). The num-
ber recalled within the category declined rather steadily
thereafter, from about 80% recalled from categories with
4–6 items to about 20% recalled from categories of about
80 items. The growing absolute number of items recalled
from larger categories might be attributed to covert sub-
categorization or to long-term learning mechanisms, but
these will not allow the recall of all items.
Why should similar constraints apply to the recall of
items within a category and to the recall of categories? One
explanation is that the limited-capacity store can be used in
more than one iteration. At one moment the categories are
drawn into mind, and at the next moment the capacity is
consumed with items within the first category to be re-
called. An obvious question about such an account is how
the categories are retained while the limited capacity is be-
ing used for items within a category. Presumably the im-
mediate consequence of the limited capacity store is to
form a better-organized long-term representation of the
stimulus set. Thus, once a set of categories is brought into
mind, these categories are combined into a long-term
memory representation that can be accessed again as
needed in the task. Ericsson and Kintsch (1995) provided a
detailed account of that sort of process.
Finally, it should be noted that the capacity limit provides
only an upper bound for the clustering of items in recall. If
the rate of retrieval from memory is too slow, it might make
sense for the individual to recall the items deposited in a
capacity-limited store before that capacity has been used
up. Gruenewald and Lockhead (1980) obtained a pattern of
results in which the long-term recall of category exemplars
occurred (according to their criteria) most often without
clustering and in clusters of two, three, four, or five in de-
creasing order of frequency. In contrast, Graesser and Man-
dler (1978, p. 96) observed a limit in items per cluster hov-
ering around 4.0 throughout a long recall protocol. A
prediction of the present analysis is that if a particular pro-
cedure results in a limit smaller than about four items, ex-
tended practice with the task should eventually lead to a
plateau in performance at about four items per cluster.
3.4.3. Positional uncertainty in recall. In a theoretical
mechanism discussed above and used earlier by Raaijmak-
ers and Shiffrin (1981), items held simultaneously in the
limited-capacity store become associated with one another.
Additionally, their serial positions may become associated
with one another. In free recall, the associations can be
helpful because the thought of one item elicits the associ-
ated items. However, in serial recall, the associations can
present a problem because it may be difficult to retrieve the
order of simultaneously held items. This type of account
might explain positional uncertainty in serial recall. It pre-
dicts that an item typically should be recalled no more than
three positions away from its correct position (assuming that
sets of at most four items are present in limited-capacity
storage at any moment). This prediction matches the data
well. For example, Nairne (1991) presented words aloud
with 2.5-sec onset-to-onset times between the words. Five
lists of 5 words each were followed by a 2-min distractor
task and then a test in which the words were to be placed
into their correct lists and locations within lists. The results
showed that when an item was placed within the correct list,
its serial position was confused with at most three other se-
rial positions in the list. Nairne (1992) found a flattening of
the error functions with delayed testing. This change over
time is compatible with increased difficulty of accessing
information from a particular prior state of the limited-
capacity store, but with no evidence of a spread of uncer-
tainty to a larger range of serial positions. Within-list con-
fusions still occurred across about three items.
3.4.4. Analysis of the recency effect in recall. Watkins
(1974) reviewed research in which a long list of verbal items
was presented on each trial and the subject was to recall as
many of those items as possible, without regard to the or-
der of items. In such studies, recall is typically best for the
most recent items. This recency effect has been viewed as
the result of the use of dual memory mechanisms, with a
short-term memory mechanism used only for the last few
items (which typically are recalled first). Underlying this
view is the finding that the recency effect is quickly eroded
if a distractor-filled delay is imposed between the list and
the recall cue (Glanzer & Cunitz 1966; Postman & Phillips
1965), whereas the rest of the recall function is unaffected.
Several investigators have reasoned that it would be possi-
ble to estimate the contents of short-term memory by sub-
tracting out the contribution of long-term memory, but it is
not clear exactly what assumptions one should make in or-
der to do so. Watkins ruled out some methods on the basis
of logical considerations, and compared the results of sev-
eral favored methods (Tulving & Colotla 1970; Tulving &
Patterson 1968; Waugh & Norman 1965). Under a variety
of test situations, these methods produced estimates of
short-term memory capacity ranging from 2.21 to 3.43
(Watkins 1974, Table 1). For the method judged most ade-
Cowan: The magical number 4
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:1
105
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 20 (native) -----
quate (Tulving & Colotla 1970) the estimates ranged from
2.93 to 3.35.
One apparent difficulty for this interpretation of the re-
cency effect is that one can obtain it under filled test delays
that are too protracted to permit the belief that a short-term
store is still in place. Bjork and Whitten (1974) presented a
series of printed word pairs for immediate free recall, with
the pairs separated by silent intervals of 12 sec and with up
to 42 sec following the last item pair. These silent intervals
were filled with a distracting arithmetic task to prevent re-
hearsal. Under these conditions, a recency effect of 3–5
items emerged. The theoretical framework for understand-
ing these results, further developed by Glenberg and Swan-
son (1986), was one having to do with the ratio between the
inter-item interval and the retention interval, which could
influence the temporal distinctiveness of the items at the
time of recall. The temporal distinctiveness is higher under
Bjork and Whitten’s conditions for the last few item pairs
than for previous item pairs, and the same can be said of the
last few list items within the immediate recall conditions
that Watkins (1974) had considered. Although the long-
term recency effect challenges a time-limited memory ex-
planation of the recency effect, it need not challenge a tem-
porary memory capacity limit. A capacity-limited store
could work in combination with the distinctiveness princi-
ples. The recall process could proceed in phases, each of
which may involve the subject scanning the memory repre-
sentation, transferring several items to the capacity-limited
store, recalling those items, and then returning to the rep-
resentation for another limited-capacity “handful” of items.
It would make sense for the subject to recall the most re-
cent, most distinctive items in the first retrieval cycle so as
to avoid losing the distinctiveness advantage of those items.
Assuming that a capacity-limited store (presumably the fo-
cus of attention) must intervene between a memory repre-
sentation and recall, it is consistent with the long-term re-
cency effect.
3.4.5. Sequential effects in implicit learning and memory.
Implicit learning is a process in which information is
learned without the awareness of the subject, and implicit
memory is learned information that is revealed in an indi-
rect test, without the subject having been questioned explic-
itly about the information. The role of a limited-capacity
store in implicit learning and memory exists, though its na-
ture is not yet clear (see Frensch & Miner 1994; Nissen &
Bullemer 1987; Reber & Kotovsky 1997). It is possible that
the role of a limited-capacity store depends on whether
learning and memory require associations between items
that go beyond a simple chain of association between adja-
cent items. There are data supporting this conjecture and
suggesting that implicit learning can take place if one need
hold no more than four items in the capacity-limited store
at one time.
Lewicki et al. (1987) examined one situation in which
contingencies were spread across seven trials in a row, but
the capacity-limited store need not encompass all of those
items. Lewicki et al. presented sets of seven trials in a row
in which the subject was to indicate which quadrant of the
screen contained the target item, the digit 6 (using a key-
press response). The first six trials in the set included only
the target, but the seventh trial also included 35 foils dis-
tributed around the screen. Moreover, unbeknownst to the
subject, the locations of targets on Trials 1, 3, 4, and 6, taken
together, indicated where the target would be on the sev-
enth, complex trial. Under these circumstances, subjects
succeeded in learning the contingencies and there was a
drop in performance when the contingencies were changed.
However, as Stadler (1989) pointed out, any three of the
four critical trials were enough to determine the location of
the target on Trial 7 in a set. If subjects remembered the
outcomes of Trials 3, 4, and 6 and considered them to-
gether, they theoretically could predict the outcome of Trial
7. Given that subjects probably did not know which trials
were predictive, they might only be able to use Trials 4, 5,
and 6, the last three trials, for prediction of Trial 7. These
trials by themselves were predictive on a probabilistic,
though not an absolute, basis. Thus, a limited-capacity store
of four items could serve for this purpose. Stadler (1989) ex-
tended the result and verified that the learning was implicit
and not available to subjects’ awareness.
Cleeremans and McClelland (1991) demonstrated more
precisely that a sequence of four items in limited-capacity
storage at one time may be enough to allow learning of the
contingencies between those items. The task was to press
one of six keys corresponding to stimuli at six screen loca-
tions. These locations were stimulated according to a finite
state grammar on 85% of the trials, of which subjects were
unaware. However, on the remaining, randomly selected
15% of the trials, the expectations according to the gram-
mar were violated. The nature of the grammar was such
that a prediction could be made only if one took into ac-
count a sequence of several previous stimuli. A sequential
analysis of the reaction times showed that, after 13 experi-
mental sessions, subjects became able to use a series of
three stimuli to predict the location of the next, fourth stim-
ulus. Even after 20 sessions, though, they remained unable
to use a series of four stimuli to predict the location of the
next, fifth stimulus. Thus, four seems to be the asymptotic
value. (The authors presented a different theoretical ac-
count based on the diminishing predictive value of remote
associations. However, the two accounts may not be mutu-
ally exclusive.)
McKone (1995) demonstrated a capacity limit in the se-
quences that can contribute to repetition priming in lexical
decision or word naming. Series of words or nonwords were
presented and there were repetitions of items with a vari-
able number of different items intervening between the
two instances of the repeated word (ranging from 0 to 23
intervening items). The measure of priming was a decrease
in reaction time for the repeated word, suggesting that the
representation of the first instance of that word was still ac-
tive in memory. McKone concluded (p. 1108) that “for
words, a large short-term priming component decayed
rapidly but smoothly over the first three items” intervening
between the instances of the repeated word, and then
reached “a stable long-term value.” This appears to be evi-
dence of a series of about four consecutive items present in
a limited-capacity store at any time, though a long-term
store also contributes to priming as shown by the asymp-
totic level of residual priming at longer repetition lags.
An unresolved question stemming from McKone (1995)
is why the priming declined smoothly over the last few
items. When the presentation is sequential and there is no
deliberate effort to retain any but the current item, as in this
study, it is possible that the more recent items tend to be
more strongly represented in the limited-capacity store. It
also is possible that some of the most recent four items
Cowan: The magical number 4
106
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:1
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 21 (native) -----
sometimes are replaced in the limited-capacity store by
items from elsewhere in the list or from extraneous
thoughts.
3.4.6. Influence of capacity on the properties of visual
search. Fisher (1984) observed what appears to be a limit
in the ability to examine items in a visual array in search of
a well-learned target item. In previous work, Shiffrin and
Schneider (1977) and Schneider and Shiffrin (1977) distin-
guished between variably-mapped searches (in which a foil
on one trial might become the target on another trial) and
consistently-mapped searches (in which the items that
serve as targets never serve as foils). On each trial in their
experiments, the subject knows what target or targets to
search for, and indicates as rapidly and accurately as possi-
ble the presence or absence of the target item(s) in a visual
array of items. It was proposed that variably-mapped
searches require capacity-limited or “controlled” process-
ing, whereas over many trials, a consistently-mapped search
task comes to be performed automatically, without using
controlled processing. Under those circumstances, it was
shown that processing took place on all items in parallel, so
that the reaction time to detect a target item was nearly un-
affected by the number of items in the array.
Fisher (1984) proposed that capacity limits still might ap-
pear if the required rate of perceptual processing were fast
enough. He re-examined this assumption using a task in
which there were 20 stimulus arrays in rapid succession on
each trial (with a pattern mask preceding the sequence of
20 and another following it). The duration of each array var-
ied across trial blocks (with 10 durations between 40 and
200 msec per array), as did the array size (with 4 or 8 stim-
uli per array). The arrays were letters except for a single tar-
get item within one array, which was always the digit “5.”
The task was to indicate the spatial location of this target
item out of eight possible locations. This is a type of consis-
tently-mapped task situation in which little practice is
needed to achieve an automatic search because the digit
and letter categories have been learned before the experi-
ment. The results were analyzed in light of a mathematical
model, the “steady-state limited-channel model,” based on
the following defining assumptions (Fisher 1984, p. 453):
(1) Encoded stimuli in the visual cortex are scanned once for
placement on a comparison channel; (2) the time between ar-
rivals of stimuli to the comparison channels is exponentially dis-
tributed with rate parameter l; (3) the time to compare a stim-
ulus with a prespecified target is exponentially distributed with
rate parameter m; (4) at most k comparison channels can exe-
cute in parallel; (5) stimuli in iconic memory are equally likely
to be replaced by the characters or masks which appear next to
the input streams; (6) masks are not placed on the comparison
channels; and (7) the system is in a steady state. Note that it is
assumed that the two dimensional coordinates of a stimulus are
retained in the visual cortex.
The critical idea is that the representation of a stimulus is
lost if that stimulus is offered to the comparison process at
a time when there are no comparison channels free. Thus,
the capacity limit in this situation is defined by the number
of comparison channels, k. Within the field of queuing the-
ory, Erlang’s Loss Formula describes the problem and, us-
ing that formula, Fisher found that the data fit the formula
best with k 5 4. Assuming that the comparison channels
are actually slots within some short-term storage mecha-
nism, this result serves as another indication of its limited-
capacity nature (also see Schweickert et al. 1996).
3.4.7. Influence of capacity on mental addition reaction
time. Logan (1988, Experiment 4) developed a task in which
subjects had to verify equations like “B 1 3 5 E” (true in
this example because E is 3 letters after B in the alphabet).
The addend could be 2, 3, 4, or 5. Practice effects in this
novel task followed a power function for addends of 2
through 4. However, for an addend of 5, the fit was much
worse, and there was a discontinuity in the learning curves
after about 24 presentations in which the reaction times for
this addend dropped sharply. This discontinuity was linked
to a strategy shift that many subjects reported. They re-
ported that problems with an addend of 5 were much
harder and led to a more deliberate learning strategy in
which particular instances were memorized. Logan and
Klapp (1991) replicated this finding. It might be further
speculated that the discontinuity could occur because the
numbers 1–4 can be visualized more clearly during the
problem, serving as a place-holder during the adding
process. Numbers of 5 and above may be difficult because
the visualization of items to be added is hindered by the ca-
pacity limitation.
3.4.8. Mathematical modeling parameters.Attesting to the
potential importance of the pure capacity limit, various ar-
ticles presenting mathematical models of various complex
cognitive processes have used the assumption that four
items can be saved in a short-term store. These include, for
example, the Kintsch and van Dijk (1978) model of text
comprehension, the Raaijmakers and Shiffrin (1981) model
of memory search (SAM), and the recent model of pro-
cessing capacity by Halford et al. (1998). These models pre-
sumably use a limit of four because it maximizes the ability
of the model to fit real data.
3.5. Empirical summary 
In this review, care was taken to exclude situations in which
the chunking of items was unclear (yielding compound
STM estimates). The results of the surviving experimental
situations, a wide variety of situations in fact, suggest that
about four chunks can be held in a pure capacity-limited
STM (presumably the focus of attention). The experimen-
tal means for groups of adults generally range from about 3
to 5 chunks, whereas individual subject means range more
widely from 2 to 6 chunks.
3.6. Testability of the theoretical analysis 
There are several ways in which, in future research, one
could invalidate the capacity estimates of 3 to 5 chunks that
have been derived from the many theoretical phenomena
described above. First, one could show that performance in
these studies results from a grouping process in which mul-
tiple items contribute to a chunk. In many cases the argu-
ment against this was limited to a theoretical rationale why
such chunking should be absent in particular circumstances
(see sect 1.2); few studies actually have provided direct ev-
idence of chunk size. Second, one could develop conditions
in which more is done to limit chunking and find smaller
capacity estimates. Third, one could find that there are 
hidden storage demands and that, when they are elimi-
nated, substantially larger capacity estimates arise (e.g., 
. 6 chunks). Fourth, in a different vein, one could find low
or zero correlations between different estimates of storage
Cowan: The magical number 4
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:1
107
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 22 (native) -----
capacity despite large individual differences in the esti-
mates. This last finding would not necessarily challenge the
notion that there are fixed capacity limits in a given domain,
but it would challenge the concept of a central capacity
mechanism (e.g., the focus of attention) that is the seat of
the capacity limit across all domains.
4. Theoretical account of capacity limits:
Unresolved issues
Below, I will address several fundamental theoretical ques-
tions about capacity limits. (1) Why does the capacity limit
occur? (2) What is the nature of this limit: Is there a single
capacity limit or are there multiple limits? (3) What are the
implications of the present arguments for alternative theo-
retical accounts? (4) Finally, what are the boundaries of the
central-capacity-limit account? An enigma in Miller (1956),
regarding absolute judgments, will be touched upon to ex-
amine the potential breadth of the present framework.
4.1. Why the capacity limit? 
Future research must establish why there is a limit in ca-
pacity. One possible reason is that the capacity limit has be-
come optimized through adaptive processes in evolution.
Two relevant teleological arguments can be made on logi-
cal grounds. Recently, as well, arguments have been made
concerning the physiological basis of storage capacity lim-
its. Any such account must consider details of the data in-
cluding the individual variability in the capacity limit esti-
mates that have been observed as discussed in section 3.1.3.
These issues will be addressed in turn.
4.1.1. Teleological accounts. Several investigators have
provided mathematical arguments relevant to what the
most efficient size of working memory would be. Dirlam
(1972) asked if there is any one chunk size that is more ef-
ficient than any other if it is to be the basis of a memory
search. He assumed that STM is a multi-level, hierarchi-
cally structured system and that the search process is ran-
dom. The nodes at a particular level are searched only un-
til the correct one is found, at which time the search is
confined to subnodes within that node. This process was as-
sumed to continue until, at the lowest level of the hierar-
chy, the searched-for item is identified. In other words, the
search was said to be self-terminating at each level of the
hierarchy. Dirlam then asked what rule of chunking would
minimize the expected number of total node and item ac-
cesses regardless of the number of items in the list, and cal-
culated that the minimum would occur with an average
chunk size of 3.59 items at each level of the hierarchy, in
close agreement with the capacity of short-term memory
that has been observed empirically in many situations (see
above).
MacGregor (1987) asked a slightly different question:
What is the maximal number of items for which a one-level
system is more efficient than a two-level system? The con-
sequences of both self-terminating search and exhaustive
search assumptions were examined. A concrete example
would help to explain how. Suppose that one received a list
that included eight items. Further suppose that one had the
option of representing this list either in an unorganized
manner or as two higher-level chunks, each containing four
items. With a self-terminating search method, if one had to
search for a particular letter in the unorganized list, one
would search on the average through 4.5 of the items (the
average of the numbers 1 through 8). If one had to search
through the list organized into two chunks, one would have
to search on the average through 1.5 chunks to find the
right chunk and then an average of 2.5 items within that
chunk to find the right item, or 4.0 accesses in all. On the
average, the hierarchical organization would be more effi-
cient. With an exhaustive search method, if one had to
search for a particular letter in the unorganized list, one
would have to search through eight items. For the orga-
nized list, one would need two searches to find the right
chunk and then four searches to find the right item within
that chunk, or six accesses in all. On the average, again, the
organized list would be more efficient. In contrast, consider
a self-terminating search for a list of four items that could
be represented in an unorganized manner or as 2 chunks of
2 items each. The unorganized list would require an aver-
age of 2.5 searches whereas the organized list would require
that 1.5 clusters and 1.5 items in that cluster be examined,
for a total of 3.0 searches. In this case, the unorganized list
is more efficient on average. MacGregor calculated that or-
ganizing list items into higher-level chunks is beneficial
with an exhaustive or a self-terminating search when there
are more than 4 or 5.83 items, respectively.
Although these theoretical findings depend on some
untested assumptions (e.g., that the difficulty of search is
the same at every level of a hierarchy), they do provide use-
ful insight. The empirically observed capacity limit of about
four chunks corresponds to what has been predicted for
how many items can be advantageously processed in an un-
grouped manner when the search is exhaustive (MacGre-
gor 1987). These theoretical and empirical limits may cor-
respond because very rapid searches of unorganized lists
are, in fact, exhaustive (Sternberg 1966). However, slower,
self-terminating searches along with more elaborate men-
tal organization of the material also may be possible, and
probably are advantageous if there is time to accomplish
this mental organization. That possibility can help to ex-
plain why the empirically observed limit of about four
chunks is close to the optimal chunk size when multiple lev-
els of organization are permitted in a self-terminating
search (Dirlam 1972).
Another teleological analysis can be formulated on the
basis of Kareev (1995). He suggested that a limited work-
ing memory is better than an unlimited one for detecting
imperfect correlations between features in the environ-
ment. To take a hypothetical example, there could be a pop-
ulation with a 70% correlation between the height of an in-
dividual and the pitch of his or her voice. In a statistical
procedure, when one uses a limited sample size to estimate
the correlation (e.g., an observation of 4–8 individuals), the
modal value of the observed correlation is larger than the
population value. The smaller the sample size, the higher
the modal value. Thus, a smaller sample size would increase
the chances that a moderate correlation would be noticed
at all. In human information processing, the limit in the
sample size could be caused by the capacity limit of the ob-
server’s short-term memory; more samples may have been
observed but the observer bases his or her perceived esti-
mate of the correlation on only the number of examples that
fit into the focus of attention at one time. Kareev et al.
(1997) showed that, in fact, low-working-memory subjects
were more likely to notice a population correlation of .2–.6.
Cowan: The magical number 4
108
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:1
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 23 (native) -----
In this regard, it bears mention that in the statistical sam-
pling procedure, the modal value of the sample correlations
for sample sizes of 6 and 8 were shown to be only moder-
ately greater than the true population value (which was set
at .6 or .7); but for a sample size of 4, the modal value of the
sample correlations was almost 1.0. Here, then, is another
reason to believe that a basic capacity limit of four could be
advantageous. It could take a moderate correlation in the
real world and turn it into a perceived strong correlation. At
least, this could be advantageous to the extent that deci-
siveness in decision-making and definiteness in the percep-
tion of stimulus relationships are advantageous. For exam-
ple, it makes sense to walk away from someone displaying
traits that are moderately correlated with injurious behav-
ior, and it makes sense to perceive that people usually say
please when they are asking for a favor.
There is a strong similarity between the theoretical analy-
sis of Kareev and earlier proposals that a large short-term
memory capacity can be a liability rather than a strength in
the early stages of language learning. Newport (1990) dis-
cussed a “less is more” hypothesis to explain why language
learners who are developmentally immature at the time of
initial learning have an advantage over more mature learn-
ers for some language constructs. An alternative to the na-
tivist theory of language learning, this theory states that im-
mature language learners grasp only small fragments of
language at a time, which helps them to break up a complex
language structure into smaller parts. Consistent with this
proposal, Elman (1993) found that a computer implemen-
tation of a parallel distributed processing model of cogni-
tion learned complex language structure more easily if the
short-term memory capacity of the model started out small
and increased later in the learning process, rather than tak-
ing on its mature value at the beginning of learning.
Below, neurophysiological accounts of capacity limits will
be reviewed. The teleological arguments still will be im-
portant to the extent that they can be seen as being consis-
tent with the physiological mechanisms underlying capac-
ity limits (or, better yet, motivating them).
4.1.2. Neurophysiological accounts. In recent years, a
number of investigators have suggested a basis of capacity
limits that can be traced back to information about how a
single object is represented in the brain. In a theoretical ar-
ticle on visual shape recognition, Milner (1974, p. 532) sug-
gested that “cells fired by the same figure fire together but
not in synchrony with cells fired by other figures . . . Thus,
features from a number of figures could be detected and
transmitted through the network with little mutual inter-
ference, by a sort of time-sharing arrangement.” In support
of this hypothesis, Gray et al. (1989), in an experiment on
cats, found that two columns of cortical cells that repre-
sented different portions of the visual field were active in a
correlated manner only if they were stimulated by different
portions of the same object, and not if they were stimulated
by different objects. This led to the hypothesis that the syn-
chronization of activity for various features represents the
binding of those features to form an object in perception or
STM. More recently, these findings have been extended to
humans. Tiitinen et al. (1993) found that the 40-Hz oscilla-
tory cycle, upon which these synchronizations are thought
to ride, is enhanced by attention in humans. Rodriguez et
al. (1999) reported electrical synchronizations between cer-
tain widely separated scalp locations 180–360 msec after a
stimulus was presented when an object (a silhouetted hu-
man profile) was perceived, but not when a random field
(actually an upside down profile not detected as such) was
perceived. The scalp locations appeared to implicate the
parietal lobes, which Cowan (1995) also proposed to be ar-
eas involved in the integration of features to form objects.
Miltner et al. (1999) further showed that the binding can
take place not only between perceptual features, but also
between a feature and an activated mental concept. Specif-
ically, cyclic activity in the gamma (20–70 Hz) band was
synchronized between several areas of the brain in the time
period after the presentation of a conditioned stimulus
(CS1), a color illuminating the room, but before the pre-
sentation of the unconditioned stimulus (UCS), an electric
shock that, as the subjects had learned, followed the condi-
tioned stimulus. No such synchronization occurred after a
different color (CS-) that did not lead to electric shock.
If objects and meaningful events can be carried in the syn-
chronized activity of gamma wave activity in the brain, then
the question for STM capacity becomes, “How many objects
or events can be represented simultaneously in the brain?”
Investigators have discussed that. Lisman and Idiart (1995)
suggested that “each memory is stored in a different high-
frequency (‘40 Hertz’) subcycle of a low-frequency oscilla-
tion. Memory patterns repeat on each low-frequency (5 to
12 Hertz) oscillation, a repetition that relies on activity de-
pendent changes in membrane excitability rather than re-
verberatory circuits.” In other words, the number of subcy-
cles that fit into a low-frequency cycle would define the
number of items that could be held in a capacity-limited
STM. This suggestion was intended by Lisman and Idiart to
motivate the existence of a memory span of about seven
items (e.g., [40 subcycles/sec] / [5.7 cycles/sec] 5 7 subcy-
cles/cycle). However, it could just as well be used to moti-
vate a basic capacity of about 4 items (e.g., [40 subcycles/
sec]/[10 cycles/sec] 5 4 subcycles/cycle). This proposal also
was intended to account for the speed of retrieval of infor-
mation stored in the capacity-limited STM but, again, just as
well fits the 4-item limit. If 40 subcycles occur per second
then each subcycle takes 25 msec, a fair estimate of the time
it takes to search one item in STM (Sternberg 1966). Luck
and Vogel (1998) made a proposal similar to Lisman and
Idiart but made it explicit that the representation of each
item in STM would involve the synchronization of neural fir-
ing representing the features of the item. The STM capac-
ity limit would occur because two sets of feature detectors
that fire simultaneously produce a spurious synchronization
corrupting memory by seeming to come from one object.
Other theorists (Hummel & Holyoak 1997; Shastri & Aj-
janagadde 1993) have applied this neural synchronization
principle in a way that is more abstract. It can serve as an
alternative compatible with Halford et al.’s (1998) basic no-
tion of a limit on the complexity of relations between con-
cepts, though Halford et al. instead worked with a more
symbolically based model in which “the amount of infor-
mation that can be represented by a single vector is not sig-
nificantly limited, but the number of vectors that can be
bound in one representation of a relation is limited”
(p. 821). Shastri and Ajjanagadde (1993) formulated a phys-
iological theory of working memory very similar to Lisman
and Idiart (1995), except that the theory was meant to ex-
plain “a limited-capacity dynamic working memory that
temporarily holds information during an episode of reflex-
ive reasoning” (p. 442), meaning reasoning that can be car-
Cowan: The magical number 4
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:1
109
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 24 (native) -----
ried out “rapidly, spontaneously, and without conscious ef-
fort” (p. 418). The information was said to be held as con-
cepts or predicates that were in the form of complex
chunks; thus, it was cautioned, “note that the activation of
an entity together with all its active superconcepts counts
as only one entity” (p. 443). It was remarked that the bound
on the number of entities in working memory, derived from
facts of neural oscillation, falls in the 7 6 2 range; but the
argument was not precise enough to distinguish that from
the lower estimate offered in the present paper. Hummel
and Holyoak (1997) brought up similar concepts in their
theory of thinking with analogies. They defined “dynamic
binding” (a term that Shastri & Ajjanagadde also relied
upon to describe how entities came about) as a situation in
which “units representing case roles are temporarily bound
to units representing the fillers of those roles” (p. 433).
They estimated the limit of dynamic binding links as “be-
tween four and six” (p. 434). In both the approaches of
Shastri and Ajjanagadde (1993) and Hummel and Holyoak
(1997), these small limits were supplemented with data
structures in long term memory or “static bindings” that ap-
pear to operate in the same manner as the long-term work-
ing memory of Ericsson and Kintsch (1995), presumably
providing the “active superconcepts” that Shastri and Aj-
janagadde mentioned.
One problem for the interpretation of synchronous os-
cillations of nervous tissue is that they can be observed even
in lower animals in situations that appear to have little to do
with the possibility of conscious awareness of particular stim-
uli (e.g., Braun et al. 1994; Kirschfeld 1992). This, in itself,
need not invalidate the role of oscillations in binding to-
gether the features of an object or the objects in a capacity-
limited store in humans. It could be the case that mecha-
nisms already present in lower animals form the basis of
more advanced skills in more advanced animals, just as the
voice apparatus is necessary for speech but is present even
in non-speaking species. Thus, von der Malsburg (1995, p.
524) noted that “As to the binding mechanism based on
temporal signal correlations, its great advantage [is] being
undemanding in terms of structural requirements and con-
sequently ubiquitously available and extremely flexible.”
4.1.3. Reconciliation of teleological and neurophysiolog-
ical accounts. One concern here is whether the teleologi-
cal and physiological accounts of capacity limits are consis-
tent or inconsistent with one another. The process of
scanning through the items in STM has been employed the-
oretically by both the teleological and the physiological the-
orists. For example, the teleological argument that Mac-
Gregor (1987) built using an exhaustive scan resulted in the
conclusion that the scan would be most efficient if the num-
ber of items per group were four. This conclusion was based
on the assumption that the amount of time it takes to access
a group to determine whether a particular item is present
within it is equal to the amount of time it then takes to ac-
cess each item within the appropriate group once that
group is selected, so as finally to identify the probed item.
This concept can be mapped directly onto the concept of
the set of items (or chunks) in capacity-limited STM being
represented by a single cycle of a low-frequency oscillation
(5 to 12 Hz) with each item mapped onto a different cycle
of a 40-Hz oscillation, riding on top of the 5 to 12 Hz oscil-
lation. These figures are in line with the teleological data
and memory capacity data reviewed above if the rate for the
slow oscillation is close to about 10 Hz, so that four items
would fit in each of the slower cycles. As suggested by Shas-
tri and Ajjanagadde (1993) and others, the cyclic search
process could be employed recursively. For example, at one
point in a probed recognition process there could be up to
four chunks in the capacity-limited store. Once the correct
chunk is identified, the contents of STM would be replaced
by the items contained within that chunk, now “unpacked,”
so that the contents of the chunk can be scanned in detail.
In present theoretical terms, the focus of attention need not
focus on multiple levels of representation at the same time.
4.1.4. What is the basis of individual differences? We will
not have a good understanding of capacity limits until we
are able to understand the basis of the marked develop-
mental and individual differences in measured capacity that
were observed by Cowan et al. (1999) and comparable in-
dividual differences observed in other procedures (Hen-
derson 1972; Luck & Vogel, personal communication, Jan-
uary 18, 1999). One possible basis would be individual
differences in the ratio of slow to fast oscillatory rhythms.
Miltner et al. (1999) found most rapid oscillatory activity at
37–43 Hz, but some residual activity at 30–37 and 43–48
Hz. One can combine a 12-Hz slow cycle with a 30-Hz rapid
cycle to predict the low end of the range of memory capac-
ities (12/30 5 2.5 items), or one can combine an 8-Hz slow
cycle with a 48-Hz fast cycle to predict the high end of the
range (8/48 5 6 items). According to these figures, how-
ever, one would not expect the slow cycle to go below 8 Hz,
given the capacity limits observed empirically. Here, then,
is a physiological prediction based on a combination of ex-
isting physiological and behavioral results. An important
next step may be the acquisition of data that can help to
evaluate the psychological plausibility of the theoretical
constructs surrounding this type of theory. As one promis-
ing example, the finding of Tiitinen et al. (1993) that the 40-
Hz neural cycle is enhanced by attention is consistent with
the present suggestion that the fundamental storage capac-
ity limit of about four items is based on the 40-Hz cycle and
is in essence a limit in the capacity of the focus of attention.
It is easy to see how research on this topic also could clar-
ify the basis of individual differences in capacity. Specifi-
cally, one could determine if individual differences in oscil-
latory rates mirror behavioral differences in the limited
storage capacity.
It remains to be explained why attended speech shows
such an intriguing, simple relationship to unattended
speech (Fig. 4) in which attended speech is increased above
the unattended speech limit by a variable amount. This fig-
ure makes it apparent that individuals use the same pro-
cesses in both conditions, plus supplementary processes for
attended speech. This difference might be accounted for
most simply by the process of chunking (formation of inter-
item associations) during attended list presentations.
It is important not to become too reductionistic in the in-
terpretation of biological effects. It is possible that stimulus
factors and/or behavioral states modulate biological cycle
frequencies under some circumstances. Some studies with
an automatized response or a rapid response have resulted
in smaller individual differences. The highly trained sub-
jects of Sperling (1960) appeared to produce capacity
(whole report) estimates deviating from the population
mean by no more than about 0.5 items, although there were
few subjects. In an enumeration task in which a reaction
Cowan: The magical number 4
110
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:1
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 25 (native) -----
time measure defined the subitizing range, Chi and Klahr
(1975) found no difference between 5- and 6-year-olds ver-
sus adults in the subitizing range. Perhaps there is an in-
trinsic, baseline capacity of the focus of attention that shows
few differences between individuals, and perhaps under
some circumstances but not others, the level and direction
of effort at the time of recall modulate that capacity. Fur-
ther study of individual differences in memory capacity is
thus likely to be important theoretically.
4.2. Central capacity or separate capacities?
In most of the research that I have discussed, the capacity
limit is examined with a coherent field of stimulation. I have
not directly tackled the question of whether there is one
central capacity limit or whether there are separate limits
for domains of cognition (e.g., separate capacities for the vi-
sual versus auditory modalities; for verbal versus spatial
representational codes; or, perhaps, for two collections of
items distinguished by various other physical or semantic
features). According to the models of Cowan (1988; 1995)
and Engle et al. (1999), the capacity limit would be a cen-
tral one (the focus of attention). Some fine points must be
kept in mind on what should count as evidence for or
against a central limit.
Ideally, evidence for or against a central capacity limit
could be obtained by looking at the number of items re-
called in two tasks, A and B, and then determining whether
the total number of items recalled on a trial can be in-
creased by presenting A and B together and adding the
number of items recalled in the two tasks. For example,
suppose that one can recall three items in Task A and four
items in Task B, and that one can recall six items all together
in a combined, A 1 B task. Although performance on the
component tasks is diminished when the tasks are carried
out together, the total number of items recalled is greater
than for either task presented alone. This savings would
serve as initial evidence for the existence of separate stor-
age mechanisms (with or without an additional, central
storage mechanism). Further, if there were no diminution
of performance in either task when they were combined,
that would serve as evidence against the central storage
mechanism or capacity limit.
This type of reasoning can be used only with impor-
tant limitations, however. As discussed above, several dif-
ferent mechanisms contribute to recall, including not only
the capacity-limited focus of attention, but also the time-
or interference-limited sources of activation of long-term
memory (sensory stores, phonological and spatial stores,
etc.). If the focus of attention could shift from examining one
source of activation to examining another dissimilar source,
it would be possible to recall items from Task A and then
shift attention to activated memory representations of the
items in Task B, bringing them into the focus of attention
for recall in turn. If all of the information need not be en-
tered into the focus of attention at one time, performance
in the combined task would overestimate central storage
capacity. This possibility contaminates many types of evi-
dence that initially look as if they could provide support
for multiple capacity-limited stores. These include various
studies showing that one can recall more in two tasks with
different types of materials combined than in a single task,
especially if the modalities or types of representations are
very different (Baddeley 1986; Frick 1984; Greene 1989;
Henderson 1972; Klapp & Netick 1988; Luck & Vogel
1997; Martin 1980; Penney 1980; Reisberg et al. 1984;
Sanders & Schroots 1969; Shah & Miyake 1996).
Theoretically, it should be possible to overcome method-
ological problems in order to determine if there are true
multiple capacity limits. One could make it impossible for
the subject to rehearse items during presentation of the ma-
terials by using complex arrays of two types concurrently;
perhaps concurrent visual and auditory arrays. It would also
be necessary to make sure that the focus of attention could
not be used recursively, shifting from one type of activated
material to the next for recall. If the activated representa-
tions were sensory in nature, this recursive recall might be
prevented simply by backward-masking one or both of the
types of materials. These requirements do not seem to have
been met in any extant study. Martin (1980) did use simul-
taneous left- and right-sided visual and auditory lists (4
channels at once, only 2 of them meaningful at once, with
sequences of 4 stimuli presented at a fast, 2/sec rate on each
of the 4 channels). She found that memory for words pre-
sented concurrently to the left and right fields in the same
modality was, on the average, 51.6% correct, whereas mem-
ory for pairs containing one printed and one spoken word
was 76.9% correct. However, there was nothing to prevent
the shifting of attention from visual to auditory sensory
memory in turn.
Another methodological possibility is to document the
shifting of attention rather than preventing it. This can be
accomplished with reaction time measures. One enumera-
tion study is relevant. Atkinson et al. (1976b) presented two
sets of dots separated by their organization into lines at dif-
ferent orientations, by two different colors, or by their or-
ganization into separate groups. Separation by spatial ori-
entation or grouping was capable of eliminating errors
when there was a total of five to eight dots. Color separa-
tion reduced, but did not eliminate, errors. However, the
grouping did not reduce the reaction times in any of these
studies. It seems likely that some sort of apprehension
process took place separately for each group of four or
fewer dots and that the numbers of dots in each group were
then added together. Inasmuch as the reaction times were
not slower when the items were grouped, one reasonable
interpretation is that subitizing in groups and then adding
the groups is the normal enumeration process for fields of
five or more dots, even when there are no physical cues for
the groups. The addition of physical cues simply makes the
subitizing process more accurate (though not faster). This
study provides some support for Mandler’s (1985) sugges-
tion that the capacity limit is for sets of items that can be
combined into a coherent scheme. By dividing the sensory
field into two coherent, separable schemes, the effective
limit can be increased; but different schemes or groups can
become the limit of attention only one at a time, explaining
why perceptual grouping cues increase accuracy without al-
tering the reaction times.
Physiological studies also may help if they can show a rec-
iprocity between tasks that do not appear to share specific
processing modes. One study using event-related potentials
(ERPs) by Sirevaag et al. (1989) is relevant. It involved two
tasks with very little in common, both of which were ef-
fortful. In one task, the subject controlled a cursor using a
joystick, in an attempt to track the movement of a moving
target. The movement could be in one or two dimensions,
always in discrete jumps, and the cursor could be controlled
Cowan: The magical number 4
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:1
111
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 26 (native) -----
by either the velocity or the acceleration of the joystick, re-
sulting in four levels of task difficulty. In the second task,
administered concurrently, the subject heard a series of
high and low tones and was to count the number of occur-
rences of one of the tones. The P300 component of ERP
responses to both tasks was measured. This component is
very attention-dependent. The finding was that, across con-
ditions, the P300 to the tracking targets and the P300 to the
tones exhibited a reciprocity. The larger the P300 was to the
tracking targets, the smaller it was to the tones, and vice
versa. The sum of the P300 amplitudes was practically con-
stant across conditions. The simplest interpretation of these
results is that there is a fixed capacity that can be divided
among the two tasks in different proportions, and that the
relative P300 amplitudes reflect these proportions.
In sum, the existing literature can be accounted for with
the hypothesis that there is a single capacity-limited store
that can be identified with the focus of attention. This store
is supplemented with other storage mechanisms that are
not capacity limited although they are limited by the pas-
sage of time and/or the presentation of similar interfering
material. The focus of attention can shift from one type of
activated memory to another and will recoup considerable
information from each type if the materials represented are
dissimilar.
4.3. Implications for alternative accounts of information
processing
In light of the information and ideas that have been pre-
sented, it is important to reconsider alternative accounts of
information processing and the question of their continued
viability and plausibility.
4.3.1. The magical number seven, plus or minus two. Al-
though Miller (1956) offered his magical number only as a
rhetorical device, the number did serve to characterize per-
formance in many tasks. It has been taken more literally as
a memory limit by many researchers (e.g., Lisman & Idiart
1995). The present stance is that the number seven esti-
mates a commonly obtained, compound capacity limit,
rather than a pure capacity limit in which chunking has
been eliminated. It occurs in circumstances in which the
stimuli are individually attended at the time of encoding
and steps have not been taken to eliminate chunking. What
is needed, however, is an explanation of why this particular
compound limit crops up fairly often when rehearsal is not
prevented. One possibility is that this number reflects a cer-
tain reasonable degree of chunking. Most adults might be
able to learn at most three chunks of information rapidly,
each with perhaps three units, leading to a span of nine. The
slightly lower estimates that are often obtained could result
from the inability to learn the chunks quickly enough. How-
ever, these speculations are intended only to provoke fur-
ther research into the basis of commonly obtained com-
pound capacity limits. What is essential to point out in the
present account is that these compound limits are too high
to describe performance in the situations in which it can be
assumed that the combination of items into higher-order
chunks was severely limited or prevented.
4.3.2. The time-limitation account. The view that working
memory is limited by the duration of unrehearsed informa-
tion in various short-term buffers is exemplified by the
model of Baddeley (1986). The research reviewed in the
present article leaves open the question of whether time
limitations exist (as explained in sect. 1). Whereas some
have assumed that time limits can take the place of capac-
ity limits, the evidence described in this article, however,
cannot be explained in this manner. In Baddeley’s theory,
memory span was said to be limited to the number of items
that could be rehearsed in a repeating loop before their rep-
resentations decay from the storage buffer in which they
are held (in about 2 sec in the absence of rehearsal). If re-
hearsal is always articulatory in nature, though, this notion
is inconsistent with findings that the memory span for id-
ioms would imply a much longer rehearsal time than the
memory span for individual characters (e.g., see Glanzer &
Razel 1974). Something other than just the memory’s dura-
tion and the rate of articulatory rehearsal must limit recall.
The time-based account might be revived if a different
means of rehearsal could be employed for idioms than for
words. For example, subjects might be able to scan seman-
tic nodes, each representing an idiom, and quickly reacti-
vate them in that way without articulatory rehearsal of the
idioms. According to a modified version of Baddeley’s ac-
count, this scanning would have to be completed in about
2 sec to prevent decay of the original memory traces. How-
ever, even that modified time-based theory seems inade-
quate to account for situations in which the material to be
recalled is presented in an array so quickly that rehearsal of
any kind can contribute little to performance (e.g., Luck &
Vogel 1997). Also, any strictly time-based account has diffi-
culty explaining why there is an asymptotic level of recall in
partial report approximating four items with both auditory
and visual presentation of characters, even though it takes
much longer to reach that asymptote in audition (at least 4
sec: Darwin et al. 1972) than in vision (at most 1 sec: Sper-
ling 1960). The only way to preserve a time-based account
would be to assume that the rate of extraction of informa-
tion from sensory storage in the two modalities is a limiting
factor and is, for some mysterious reason, inversely pro-
portional to the duration of sensory storage, resulting in an
asymptotic limit that does not depend on the duration of
storage. It seems far simpler to assume a capacity limit.
4.3.3. The unitary storage account. Some theorists (e.g.,
Crowder 1993) have assumed that there is no special short-
term memory mechanism and that all memory may be ex-
plained according to a common set of rules. In one sense
the present analysis is compatible with this view, in that the
capacity limit applies not only to the recall of recently pre-
sented stimuli, but also to the recall of information from
long-term memory (see sect. 3.4.2). However, any success-
ful account must distinguish between the vast information
potentially obtainable from an individual, on one hand, and
the small amount of information that can be obtained from
that individual, or registered with the individual, in a short
segment of time; the capacity limit. The focus of attention,
which serves as the proposed basis of the capacity limit in
the present approach, has not played a major role in unitary
accounts that have been put forward to date, though it
could be added without contradiction.
Given a unitary memory view expanded to consider the
focus of attention, one could account for the 4-chunk limit
on the grounds that every chunk added to the focus dimin-
ishes the distinctiveness of all the chunks. Such a mecha-
nism of indistinctiveness would be analogous to the one that
Cowan: The magical number 4
112
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:1
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 27 (native) -----
has been used previously to account for the recency effect
in serial recall (e.g., Bjork & Whitten 1974); except that the
dimension of similarity between chunks would be their con-
current presence in the focus of attention, not their adja-
cent serial locations within a list. One article written from a
unitary memory view (Brown et al. 2000) does attempt to
account for the number of chunks available in one situation.
Specifically, their account, based on oscillatory rhythms
that become associated with items and contexts, correctly
predicted that the serial recall of a nine-item list with overt
rehearsal is optimal when the list is rehearsed in groups of
three items. The explanation offered was that “This repre-
sents the point at which the optimal balance between
across-group errors and within-group errors is reached in
the model.” The account of the 4-chunk limit offered ear-
lier in this target article on the basis of neural oscillatory
rhythms (sect. 4.1.2) is similar (albeit on a neural level of
analysis). It states that, with the neural representation of too
many chunks simultaneously, the representations begin to
become confusable (cf. Luck & Vogel 1998). The critical
difference between explanations is that the neural account
offered by Luck and Vogel and the present article refers to
particular frequencies of neural oscillation, whereas Brown
et al. allowed various oscillators and did not make predic-
tions constrained to particular frequencies of oscillation.
4.3.4. The scheduling account. It has been proposed that
supposed capacity limits might be attributable to limits in
the rate at which subjects can produce responses in a multi-
task situation without risking making responses in the in-
correct order (Meyer & Kieras 1997). That theory appears
more applicable to some situations than to others. In situa-
tions in which the limit occurs during reception of materi-
als and fast responding is not required (e.g., Luck & Vogel
1997), the theory seems inappropriate. That seems to be
the case with most of the types of phenomena examined in
the present article. It is unclear how a scheduling account
could explain these phenomena without invoking a capac-
ity notion.
4.3.5. The multiple-capacity account. Some theorists have
suggested that there is not a single capacity limit, but rather
limits in separate capacities (e.g., visual and auditory or spa-
tial and verbal; see Wickens 1984). I would suggest that, al-
though there may well be various types of distinct processes
and storage facilities in the human brain, there is no evi-
dence that they are limited by capacity per se (as opposed
to other limitations such as those imposed by decay and in-
terference). Sections 1 and 3 of the present article should
illustrate that strict conditions must apply in order for
chunk capacity limits to be clearly observed at all, free of
other factors. Moreover, the finding of Sirevaag et al. (1989)
of a tradeoff between tasks in the the P300 response mag-
nitude in event-related potentials (discussed in sect. 4.2)
seems to indicate that very disparate types of processes still
tap a common resource. Even the left and right hemi-
spheres do not appear to operate independently. Holtzman
and Gazzaniga (1992) found that split brain patients are im-
peded in responses made with one hemisphere when a con-
current load is imposed on the other hemisphere, despite
the breakdown in informational transmission between the
hemispheres through the corpus collosum. There thus ap-
pears to be some central resource that is used in disparate
tasks, and by both hemispheres.
4.3.6. The storage versus processing capacities account.
Daneman and Carpenter (1980), like many other investi-
gators, have noted that a working memory storage load does
not interfere with processing nearly as much as would be
expected if storage and processing relied upon a common
workspace. Halford et al. (1998) noted the storage limit of
about four items but also proposed, parallel to that limit but
separate from it, a processing limit in which the complexity
of relations between items being processed is limited to
four dimensions in adults (and to fewer dimensions in chil-
dren). Thus, within processing, “complexity is defined as
the number of related dimensions or sources of variation”
(p. 803). For example, transitive inference is said to be a
ternary relation because it can be reduced to such terms:
“the premises ‘Tom is smarter than John, John is smarter
than Stan’ can be integrated into the ternary relational in-
stance monotonically-smarter (Tom, John, Stan)” (p. 821),
an argument with three fillers. The parallel between pro-
cessing and storage was said to be that “both attributes on
dimensions [in processing] and chunks [in storage] are in-
dependent units of arbitrary size” (p. 803). However, the
model did not explain why there was the coincidental sim-
ilarity in the processing and storage limits, to about four
units each.
According to the present view, both processing and stor-
age would be assumed to rely on a common capacity limit.
The reason is that, ultimately, what we take to be stored
chunks in short-term memory (and what I have, for sim-
plicity, described as such up to this point) actually are rela-
tions between chunks. It is not chunks per se that have to
be held in short-term memory (as they in fact are part of
long-term memory), but rather chunks in relation to some
concept. For example, “in-present-array (x, q, r, b)” could
describe the quaternary relation leading to a whole report
response in Sperling’s (1960) procedure. “Monotonically-
later (3–7, x, 2, 4–8)” could describe a quaternary relation
leading to partially correct serial recall of an attended list of
digits for which 3–7 is a memorized initial chunk; x repre-
sents a placemarker for a digit that cannot be recalled; 2
represents an unchunked digit; and 4–8 represents another
memorized chunk.
If this analysis is correct, there is no reason to expect a
separation between processing and storage. The reason
why a storage load does not much interfere with processing
is that the storage load and the process do not have to be
expanded in the focus of attention at the same time. Al-
though both are activated at the same time, there is no ca-
pacity limit on this activation, only with its use (cf. Schnei-
der & Detweiler 1987). The subject might only hold in the
focus of attention a pointer to the activated, stored infor-
mation while carrying out the processing, and then the sub-
ject could shift the focus to the stored information when
necessary to recall the memory load.
4.3.7. The task-specific capacities account. A skeptic
might simply assume that although there are capacity lim-
its, they vary from situation to situation for reasons that we
cannot yet understand. This type of view probably cannot
be answered through reasoned discourse as it depends on
a different judgment of the presented evidence. Further as-
sessment of the view that there is a fixed underlying capac-
ity could be strengthened by subsequent research in which
new conditions are tested and found to conform to or vio-
late the capacity limit. Numerous examples of novel condi-
Cowan: The magical number 4
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:1
113
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 28 (native) -----
tions leading to the predicted limit can be given, but two of
them are as follows. First, in the research by Cowan et al.
(1999), a capacity limit for ignored speech was expected to
be similar to those that have been obtained for attended vi-
sual arrays (Luck & Vogel 1997; Sperling 1960) on the
grounds that the task demands were logically analogous,
even though the materials were very different. That expec-
tation was met. Second, it was expected that one could ob-
serve the capacity limit by limiting rehearsal for spoken
lists, and that expectation provided a very similar limit in
numerous published experiments (as shown in Table 2). A
third example has yet to be tested. Specifically, it was pre-
dicted (in sect. 1.2.1) that the capacity limit could be ob-
served in a modified n-back task in which subjects must
only indicate, as rapidly as possible, if a particular item has
been included in the stimulus set previously, and in which
some items would be repeated in the set but other, novel
items also would be introduced.
4.4. Boundaries of the central-capacity-limit account
The boundaries of the present type of analysis have yet to
be examined. For example, Miller (1956) indicated that ab-
solute judgments in perception are limited in a way that is
not clear; apparently not in chunks as for other types of phe-
nomena. For unidimensional stimuli the limit appears to be
up to about seven categories that can be used consistently,
but the limit in the number of total categories is consider-
ably higher for multidimensional stimuli (e.g., judgments of
tones differing in both intensity and pitch). One possibility
is that the subject need only retain, in short-term memory,
pointers to the dimensions while accessing category divi-
sions one dimension at a time. Because faculties that are not
specifically capacity-limited, such as sensory memory, can
be used for supplementary storage, the focus of attention is
free to shift to allow the sequential use of the capacity limit
to judge the stimulus on different dimensions, one at a time.
This analysis might be tested with absolute judgments for
backward-masked stimuli, as backward masking would pre-
vent sensory storage from holding information while the fo-
cus of attention is shifted from one dimension to another.
Thus, as in this example, the capacity concept potentially
might have a broad scope of application indeed.
5. Conclusion
In this target article I have stressed several points. The first
is the remarkable degree of similarity in the capacity limit
in working memory observed with a wide range of proce-
dures. A restricted set of conditions is necessary to observe
this limit. It can be observed only with procedures that al-
low assumptions about what the independent chunks are,
and that limit the recursive use of the limited-capacity store
(in which it is applied first to one kind of activated repre-
sentation and then to another type). The preponderance of
evidence from procedures fitting these conditions strongly
suggests a mean memory capacity in adults of three to five
chunks, whereas individual scores appear to range more
widely from about two up to about six chunks. The evidence
for this pure capacity limit is considerably more extensive
than that for the somewhat higher limit of 7 6 2 stimuli;
that higher limit is valid nevertheless as a commonly ob-
served, compound STM limit for materials that allow on-
line rehearsal, chunking, and memorization, for which the
exact number of chunks in memory cannot be ascertained.
The fundamental capacity limit appears to coincide with
conditions in which the chunks are held in the focus of at-
tention at one time; so it is the focus of attention that ap-
pears to be capacity-limited.
When the material to be remembered is diverse (e.g.,
some items spoken and some printed; some words and
some tones; or some verbal and some nonverbal items), the
scene is not coherent and multiple retrievals result in con-
siderably better recall. This all suggests that the focus of at-
tention, as a capacity-limited storage mechanism, can shift
from one type of material to another or from one level of or-
ganization to another, and that the individual is only aware
of the handful of separate units of a related type within a
scene at any one moment (Cowan 1995; Mandler 1985).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This project was supported by NICHD Grant R01 21338. I thank
Monica Fabiani, Gabriele Gratton, and Michael Stadler for help-
ful comments. Address correspondence to Nelson Cowan, De-
partment of Psychology, University of Missouri, 210 McAlester
Hall, Columbia, MO 65211, USA. Electronic mail: cowanN@
missouri.edu.
Open Peer Commentary
Commentary submitted by the qualified professional readership of this
journal will be considered for publication in a later issue as Continuing
Commentary on this article. Integrative overviews and syntheses are es-
pecially encouraged.
The dangers of taking capacity limits 
too literally
S. E. Avons, Geoff Ward, and Riccardo Russo
Department of Psychology, University of Essex, Colchester CO7 6SJ, United
Kingdom. {savons; gdward; rrusso}@essex.ac.uk
www.essex.ac.uk/psychology/people/{sa; gw; rr}.html
Abstract: The empirical data do not unequivocally support a consistent
fixed capacity of four chunks. We propose an alternative account whereby
capacity is limited by the precision of specifying the temporal and spatial
context in which items appear, that similar psychophysical constraints limit
number estimation, and that short term memory (STM) is continuous with
long term memory (LTM).
In his target article, Cowan makes a brave attempt to unify atten-
tion and short term memory (STM) by stressing the similarity of
capacity estimates across various paradigms. His evidence is
drawn from four broadly defined sources: (1) the number of cor-
rect reports in whole report paradigms; (2) the size of memory
span when rehearsal and recoding are discouraged; (3) perfor-
mance discontinuities in various attentional and STM tasks; (4) a
miscellany of indirect measures including recency in free recall,
implicit memory, and visual search. The capacity estimates cited
by Cowan are less consistent than he claims. If four of the most
recently presented items exist within the attentional focus, then
recall of about four of the most recent items would be expected.
This is true for enumeration, whole report, and alphanumeric
Commentary/Cowan: The magical number 4
114
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:1
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 29 (native) -----
span tasks under certain conditions. However, performance fails
to reach this level in other studies, such as recall of familiar visual
stimuli (Zhang & Simon 1985), multi-object tracking (Yantis
1992), free recall of the most recently rehearsed items (Tan &
Ward, in press), and, as Cowan acknowledges, in repetition prim-
ing (McKone 1995).
Our main objection is more fundamental and takes the follow-
ing form: (a) these data indicate memory for events rather than
items, (b) the notion of a fixed capacity limit, restricted to three or
four memory elements is misleading, and (c) that these consider-
ations, taken together, question the qualitative distinction be-
tween STM and LTM that Cowan advocates.
Memory for events, not items (or chunks). Cowan propose that
the capacity of STM is not 7 chunks, as proposed by Miller (1956),
but about 4 chunks. The earlier estimate was inflated because it
was based on rehearsal-dependent immediate serial recall, and
also because the span measure estimated the 50% probability of
recall. In fact, many STM tasks require recall not only of recent
items, but also of their temporal or spatial context. This is true for
studies of whole report, serial recall, and serial-order reconstruc-
tion (sects. 3.1 and 3.2 of the target article), and applies also to the
Steinberg paradigm (sect. 3.3.4). The apparent limit of four items
could arise in two ways. It may be the case that only four items
may be represented in immediate memory (i.e., within the focus
of attention), or that contextual information can only be preserved
for about four items. Since order and position errors are common
in span tasks, and memory span is more closely related to order
memory than item memory (e.g., Martin 1978), it is likely that the
demands of the contextual component, rather than the number of
activated items, set a limitation on capacity.
Against magical numbers. It has long been known that in dot
enumeration studies, RT increases linearly as the display size
increases above 4 items, suggesting that some serial counting
process is taking place. One account of the processing disconti-
nuity is that the error in number estimation increases systemati-
cally with array size (Vos 1982). Hence, there is following Weber’s
Law (Van Oeffelen & Vos 1982). Hence, there is no discontinuity
in number estimation between small values within the subitizing
range, and larger values. Rather, when estimating small numbers
of discrete items, the estimation error is sufficiently small to allow
a response of the nearest corresponding integer. With larger num-
bers, the error range may encompass several integers, and thus to
maintain accurate performance at larger array sizes requires re-
cruitment of a new algorithm, counting. To treat error-prone per-
formance as an indication that certain items have not been
processed results in the imposition of an artefactual capacity limit.
This concern haunts all models which propose a fixed integer
number of slots, pointers or entities which govern STM capacity
(e.g., Conrad 1965; Trick & Pylyshyn 1994). Capacity is clearly
limited, because increasing the information load degrades perfor-
mance. But this does not imply dedicated mechanisms in 1:1 cor-
respondence with small arrays.
Continuity of STM and LTM. This argument can be extended,
given the case made above, that the limitation of span-type stud-
ies arises from temporal and spatial ordering of items. The preci-
sion with which discrete values can be classified on any dimension
is limited, as was demonstrated by many of the early psychologi-
cal applications of information theory.
With small numbers of categories, classification is precise, but
as the categories increase in number, errors will occur. There is no
reason here to consider that there is an abrupt discontinuity, and
that beyond some limit, events are discarded from STM. An al-
ternative conception proposes that over small ranges, ordering is
precise and retrieval rapid, whereas, with longer lists temporal
precision breaks down, and alternative encoding and retrieval pro-
cesses are employed. If the requirement for temporal precision is
relaxed, for example, as in the studies of Jahnke et al. (1989), then
performance improves. This could not occur if items were dis-
carded from lists exceeding some arbitrary limit. If this position is
accepted, then the need to define a rigid partition between STM
and LTM (one consequence of Cowan’s theory) is reduced, al-
though the strategies and processes useful for memory may in-
deed change as a function of elapsed time, and the labels may be
convenient and pragmatically useful.
A biocognitive approach to the conscious
core of immediate memory
Bernard J. Baars
The Wright Institute, Berkeley, CA 94704
baars@cogsci.berkeley.edu
Abstract: The limited capacity of immediate memory “rides” on the even
more limited capacity of consciousness, which reflects the dynamic activ-
ity of the thalamocortical core of the brain. Recent views of the conscious
narrow-capacity component of the brain are explored with reference to
global workspace theory (Baars 1988; 1993; 1998). The radical limits of im-
mediate memory must be explained in terms of biocognitive brain archi-
tecture.
I am pleased that Cowan finds my global workspace theory useful
in understanding the limited item capacity of immediate memory
(Baars 1988; 1997; Baars & Newman, in press). Without propos-
ing a specific solution to the complex arguments adduced in this
paper, I would like to suggest a somewhat different way of think-
ing about the problem, based on an emerging understanding of
the brain basis of consciousness (e.g., Baars 1993; 1998; Crick
1984; Damasio 1989; Destexhe et al. 1999; Engel et al. 1999; Hob-
son 1997; Newman et al. 1997; Steriade 1993; Tononi & Edelman
1998). The “magic number 7 plus or minus 2,” which Cowan per-
suasively maintains is really about half that size, has become so fa-
miliar to scientists that we rarely pause to think how extraordinar-
ily small it is, given a brain with hundreds of billions of neurons,
each firing at 10 Hz or faster, and each densely connected to all
the others in only a few steps.
Limited capacity, which is always associated with consciousness,
presents a great paradox: How could it make sense for it to be so
small? Humans and animals must often run into danger because
of their tiny capacity for immediately retrievable information. It is
simply implausible to think that a larger memory capacity could
not evolve over hundreds of millions of years of brain evolution.
When a giraffe bends down to drink at a water hole, it cannot at
the same time keep track of its young, pay attention to possible
predators, check for competing giraffes in the herd’s dominance
hierarchy, and see if some sexual competitor is making eyes at its
mate. If we add the need to make choices among action alterna-
tives, which also loads limited capacity, real-life situations like this
must be informationally overwhelming at times. Being so easily
overwhelmed with information must reduce our ability to respond
rapidly and effectively to predators and other dangers. Like sleep,
which also exposes animals to danger, limited capacity is a biolog-
ical puzzle, because it appears to increase the risk to survival and
reproductive fitness.
Indeed, the capacity for unrelated items in focal consciousness
is even smaller than the size of immediate memory. I have sug-
gested that conscious capacity is limited to only one single inter-
nally consistent event at any given instant – one coherent “chunk”
at a time (Baars 1988; 1998). The evidence comes from numerous
studies of ambiguous figures and words, in which only one in-
terpretation can be conscious at any instant. This is bolstered by
evidence from dual-input tasks such as dichotic listening and
binocular rivalry, and more recent experimental paradigms like
inattentional blindness (see Baars & Newman, in press). Other
factors like visual scene complexity, which involves scenes that are
hard to organize into coherent conscious units, also degrade our
ability to detect and respond to events.
It should be noted that very few items in short term memory
are conscious at any moment. Immediate memory has both con-
Commentary/Cowan: The magical number 4
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2000) 24:1
115
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 30 (native) -----
scious and unconscious components, as becomes obvious simply
by considering how many items are reportable at any given instant
as conscious. In a rehearsed set of unrelated items, the Sternberg
task suggests that only one can be retrieved and reported as con-
scious at any given moment (Sternberg 1966). Thus, the momen-
tary capacity of consciousness may be even smaller than that of
immediate memory. It can be argued that immediate memory
“rides” on the function of consciousness in the brain. Both have
radical limits, in sharp contrast to such things as longterm episodic
memory or linguistic knowledge. In humans, immediate memory
is enhanced by internal rehearsal and the “visual sketchpad” (Bad-
deley 1993). But the apparatus of consciousness is not limited to
humans; indeed, the most basic substrate of conscious states may
exist in all vertebrates, and certainly in mammals.
Such a built-in capacity limit suggests a biological tradeoff. In
exchange for this radical limit, vertebrate species must gain some
compensating advantage. Such trade-offs are routine in living or-
ganisms and engineered machines alike. But what could be the ad-
vantage? The only plausible answer, it seems to me, is to consider
the brain as a system architecture, a society of vast numbers of
complex, specialized neurons, which cluster in anatomical
columns, arrays, and pathways with both fixed and variable con-
nectivities controlled by neurochemical modulation (Hobson
1997). The most obvious circadian modulation of systemwide con-
nectivity has to do with the changes due to conscious waking,
dreaming, and unconscious slow-wave sleep. During conscious
states, massive reentrant adaptive resonance takes place in the
thalamocortical core, yielding a distinctive electrical field signa-
ture (Destexhe et al. 1999; Steriade et al. 1993).
Wolf Singer et al. have made a persuasive case in recent years
that conscious perceptual states are associated with synchronized
oscillatory activity in the 40 Hz range (e.g., Engle et al. 1999), while
others suggest that thalamocortical firing is shaped by an
information-theoretic parameter called complexity (Tononi &
Edelman 1998). These integrative features of the massive “dyna-
mic core” presumably underlie conscious limited capacity; but
they also make possible global access between conscious contents
and unconscious processes involved in learning, memory, motor
control, executive processes, and the like. Further, the thalamo-
cortical core shows remarkable moment-to-moment adaptive
changes as a function of attentionally selected incoming stimula-
tion. Thus consciousness combines limited focal contents with
massive brainwide adaptation to selected input. These general fea-
tures command wide agreement (see Baars & Newman, in press).
What could be the functional basis for a narrow coordinative ca-
pacity in a massively parallel society of specialized neuronal ar-
rays? A long theoretical tradition in psychology suggests an an-
swer. Cognitive architectures were first developed in the 1950s by
scientists including Alan Newell and Herbert A. Simon, and have
since been developed by many others, notably John R. Anderson
(see Baars 1988). All cognitive architectures combine a parallel-
interactive set of memory elements with a narrow-capacity chan-
nel, which allows the memory elements to interact and be coordi-
nated for the purpose of problem solving. Some artificial
intelligence researchers have suggested that such “global work-
space” systems provide a general purpose problem-solving archi-
tecture. When predictable problems are encountered, such an ar-
chitecture can rapidly retrieve a “canned” response; and when an
unpredictable situation must be faced the architecture allows
coalitions of specialized knowledge sources to generate potential
solutions. It is striking that all our integrative models of human
cognition have these basic features; A massive parallel-interactive
memory with a narrow-capacity channel used for interaction, co-
ordination and control. I have suggested that in fact the brain has
found a similar architectural solution to its distinctive biological
challenges (Baars 1988; 1993; 1998). The dynamic activity of the
thalamocortical core described above may be the brain version of
a cognitive architecture.
While these points do not directly yield a numerical estimate for
the size of immediate memory, they suggest a framework for such
an answer. First, the primary function of the limited capacity com-
ponent associated with consciousness is to allow coordination, in-
tegration, and global access between elements of the massively
parallel-distributed society of neural nets. Second, I would sug-
gest that a crucial aspect of the problem is the way in which con-
scious cues may be used to index and retrieve unconscious chunks
of information in immediate memory. Only within such a system
architecture can we begin to make sense of the radically small size
of immediate memory in a brain of extraordinary size, complexity,
and moment-to-moment adaptive flexibility.
The magical number 4 5 7: Span theory 
on capacity limitations
Bruce L. Bachelder
Psychological and Educational Service, Morganton, NC 28655-3729.
brucebachelder@hci.net
Abstract: According to span theory, a behavioral theory of the magical
numbers, Cowan’s 4 and Miller’s 7 are simply two different points on the
same ogive describing the relation between performance and span load, a
fundamental task characteristic. Span theory explains the magical num-
bers in terms of a unitary limited span ability, a mathematical abstraction
from that ogive.
With this paper, cognitivist Cowan becomes something of a
“strange bedfellow” in efforts to assert span theory (Bachelder &
Denny 1977a; 1977b). Cowan is right, there is a magical number,
it is unitary, and developmental and individual differences are im-
portant (sect. 4.1.4); but he is wrong (sect. 4.3.1) that Miller’s idea
was mere rhetoric. Miller (1956) evaluated a unitary channel ca-
pacity hypothesis but his analyses failed (Bachelder 2000). The no-
tions of span ability and a capacity-limited focus of attention
promise to fare better.
Figure 1 plots performance in the magical number tasks as a
function of numbers of items in a stimulus set. The curve, an in-
verse ogive, suggests there is no fundamental difference between
Cowan’s 4 and Miller’s 7; both are simply different points on the
same curve.
The similar performance limitations in these tasks are usually
presumed to be coincidental. Cowan’s notion of a capacity-limited
focus of attention undermines that presumption (sect. 4.3.3). Sec-
tion 3.3.2 extends the theory to span of apprehension (known at
Commentary/Cowan: The magical number 4
116
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2000) 24:1
Figure 1 (Bachelder).
The probability of a correct response as a
function of size of stimulus set in the magical number tasks.
Miller’s 7 corresponds to a 50% criterion, Cowan’s 4 to a 100% cri-
terion. Pollack’s data have been corrected. Mean performances on
single stimuli were raised to the power of span load to estimate
performance on a full stimulus set considered collectively.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 31 (native) -----
one time as span of attention). Section 4.4 sketches an extension
to absolute judgment which would complete a unitary account.
Span theory accounts for all three limits via a mathematical
proposition, an empirical generalization from data such as shown
in Figure 1: In any task the probability of a correct response is an
inverse ogival function of span load. Span load is the number of
stimuli jointly relevant for the target response. Span ability, oper-
ationalized as the 500 threshold of the Performance X Span Load
ogive, is the ability to cope with span load. This definition closely
parallels Miller’s definition of channel capacity as “the upper limit
on the extent to which the observer can match his responses to the
stimuli we give him” (p. 82).
Span theory analyses may help Cowan avoid a cul-de-sac in an
extension of his theory to uni- and multidimensional absolute
judgment. First, Figure 1 shows that at Cowan’s 100% criterion
the magical number in absolute judgment is 4, not 7. Second, the
principle that increasing the number of dimensions overcomes the
magical number may be an artifact of the information metric.
Miller relied largely on a study by Pollack and Ficks (1954). Bach-
elder (1978, Part 2) translated their data from information terms
back to probability of a correct response, then modeled their task
as a combination of serial recall and unidimensional absolute judg-
ment. Subjects judged the values in each of multiple dimensions
then retained and reported the values as in serial recall. Mathe-
matical models, presuming unitary magical number limitations
typical for college students, generate the published data accu-
rately (mean error 5 2.7%).
Span ability is a g-like trait construct. Figure 1 presents just one
of a family of parallel curves starting at the left for the develop-
mentally young (retarded and nonretarded). Memory span and
span of absolute judgment have been found to correlate .78 (60
adults: college students, average, and retarded [IQ 5 47.8]; sum-
marized in Bachelder & Denny 1977a, pp. 139–42). All three
magical numbers of mildly retarded adults are smaller (5 6 2) than
those of college students (Spitz 1973).
Cowan’s concepts map to some extent onto span theory. A ca-
pacity-limited focus of attention is not that different from the no-
tion of span ability, which can be characterized as the ability to at-
tend to several stimuli simultaneously. Chunks usually correspond
to responses. Recoding corresponds to changes in response reper-
toire.
Span theory tightly integrates psychometric concepts and meth-
ods into S-R style analyses of cognitive tasks. A true competition
of cognitive and behavioral approaches in the analysis of the same
tasks promises to enrich both traditions.
The magic number and the episodic buffer
Alan Baddeley
Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Bristol, Bristol 
BS8 1TN, United Kingdom. alan.baddeley@bristol.ac.uk
www.psychology.psy.bris.ac.uk/psybris
Abstract: Cowan’s revisiting of the magic number is very timely and the
case he makes for a more moderate number than seven is persuasive. It is
also appropriate to frame his case within a theoretical context, since this
will influence what evidence to include and how to interpret it. He pre-
sents his model however, as a contrast to the working memory model of
Baddeley (1986). I suggest that this reflects a misinterpretation of our
model resulting in a danger of focusing attention on pseudo-problems
rather than genuine disparities between his approach and my own.
In proposing their model of working memory, Baddeley and Hitch
split the earlier concept of the unitary short-term memory into a
tripartite system: a sound or language-based phonological loop, a
visuo-spatial sketchpad, and an attentionally limited controlling
system, the central executive (Baddeley 1986; Baddeley & Hitch
1974). Within this model, the central executive (CE) maps most
closely onto Cowan’s capacity-limited attentional system. In the
original model, as in Cowan’s, the system was assumed to have
both attentional and storage capacity. This issue will be discussed
below. An important difference however, is that Cowan’s model
concerns short-term memory (STM), and as such is concerned
with explaining how people remember small amounts of material
over brief time intervals, while the working memory model tries
to emphasise the functional role of a complex memory system
across a wide range of cognitive tasks.
It is probably this narrower focus that has caused Cowan to con-
centrate in his contrasts between the two systems on one compo-
nent of working memory, the phonological loop. The loop does in-
deed, as Cowan emphasizes, have a time-limited component, the
phonological store. Cowan does, however, appear to ignore the
overall attentional control system, the CE, the component that re-
sembles his limited capacity model most closely.
Cowan himself assumes a range of other systems, which need
to incorporate trace decay or interference, but dismisses those of
our own model as “dubious” on the grounds that “one can always
find examples that don’t fit in” giving as an instance “spatial infor-
mation conveyed through acoustic stimulation.” Given that the
core studies on which the concept of a visuo-spatial sketchpad
were based involved the auditory presentation of visuo-spatially
codeable material (Baddeley et al. 1975), this is somewhat sur-
prising. It presumably stems from his confounding the sketchpad,
an integrative system which explicitly combines visual and spatial
information from a range of modalities, with modality-specific
sensory memory. Cowan’s claim that the components of our model
are “situation-specific and therefore arbitrary” is also puzzling,
given the extensive use of converging operations to define the
working memory model, and its very wide application outside the
memory laboratory (Baddeley & Logie 1999; Gathercole & Bad-
deley 1993).
Cowan’s claim that apart from his attentional control system “no
other mental faculties are capacity limited” is also puzzling. Can
he really mean that every other cognitive system has infinite ca-
pacity? Surely not. Perhaps he means that they are limited by fac-
tors other than attentional capacity. However, if one takes this
claim with a pinch of salt, and identifies Cowan’s limited capacity
system with the central executive, then his model resembles the
1974 working memory model, with under-specified slave systems.
As Miyake and Shah (1999) suggest, most current models of work-
ing memory, whether explicit, or like Cowan’s, implicit, have a
great deal in common. There are however, differences between
my own current model, and that implied by Cowan, including:
1. Cowan, in common with a number of other theorists, regards
short-term memory as simply the currently activated areas of long-
term memory. While this proposal has the advantage of simplicity,
it is inconsistent with neuropsychological data. Deficits in long-
term memory are found which have no apparent impact on im-
mediate memory, or on working memory more generally (Wilson
& Baddeley 1988), while both patient data and neuroradiological
evidence indicator-specific short-term storage capacities (Basso et
al. 1982; Smith & Jonides 1995).
2. Conceptualization of Cowan’s limited capacity system differs
somewhat from our view of the CE, although both are relatively
loosely specified. Cowan appears to regard his attentional system
as unitary, involved in most aspects of memory, and anatomically
as depending principally on the parietal region. I regard the CE
as a fractionable system that is less involved in retrieval than in en-
coding (Baddeley 1996; 1999; Baddeley et al. 1985; Craik et al.
1996). I also assume that it depends principally on the frontal
lobes (Baddeley & Logie 1999).
3. Cowan seems to assume that his attentional system has stor-
age capacity, otherwise, how are the sources of information inte-
grated and maintained? While this assumption was made by our
1974 model, it was later abandoned, with the CE regarded as a
control system using storage from elsewhere in WM or LTM (Bad-
deley & Logie 1999). Very recently, I have become convinced of
the value of postulating a fourth component of working memory,
Commentary/Cowan: The magical number 4
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2000) 24:1
117
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 32 (native) -----
the episodic buffer which serves specifically as a limited capacity
store in which information can be integrated from the slave sys-
tems and long-term memory and represented in a multi-feature
code. As in Cowan’s model, this is assumed to have a limited ca-
pacity determined by number of chunks, and to involve a retrieval
component that is associated with conscious awareness. In addi-
tion to serving as a store, it is assumed to provide the modelling
space where information can be combined and manipulated in or-
der to plan future actions or interpret recollected experience
(Baddeley 2000). It is thus assumed to be a temporary memory
storage system. As such, it differs from the CE, an attentional con-
trol system that operates across many tasks other than memory.
The episodic buffer is assumed to combine and store information
from different sources, allowing active manipulation so as to cre-
ate new representations that serve to solve novel problems. As
such it provides the temporary storage needed for mental model-
ling.
I therefore welcome Cowan’s review of evidence relating to the
limited capacity of immediate memory. I prefer to attribute it
however to the limited capacity of the central executive and its re-
lated storage system, the episodic buffer.
The size and nature of a chunk
C. Philip Beaman
Department of Psychology, University of Reading, Whiteknights, Reading
RG6 6AL,United Kingdom. c.p.beaman@reading.ac.uk
www.rdg.ac.uk/acadepts/sx/Psych/people/beaman.html
Abstract: The data presented in the target article make a persuasive case
for the notion that there is a fundamental limit on short term memory
(STM) of about four items. Two possible means of further testing this
claim are suggested and data regarding scene coherence and memory ca-
pacity for ordered information are reviewed.
Given the current state of knowledge, it is difficult (but not im-
possible) to argue against the idea that there is some fundamen-
tal, architectural constraint on processing capacity (Just et al.
1996; Young 1996; Young & Lewis 1999). It may be even harder,
however, to point to exactly what that constraint is. The com-
pound” STM limits Cowan refers to in the target article reflect
functional rather than architectural constraints on what consti-
tutes processing capacity, leaving Cowan with the unenviable job
of defining the fundamental “pure” STM capacity limit in terms
of chunks of information. As with Miller’s classic article on the
same topic, however (Miller 1956), there is no satisfactory, inde-
pendent definition of a chunk.
The circularity of the logic becomes apparent thus: chunks can
be identified with individual stimulus items when information
overload or other experimentally induced conditions prevent cod-
ing of the stimulus items into larger or, arguably, higher-level
chunks. How can one identify a chunk in any particular situation?
When steps have been taken to prevent coding of an item to a
higher level, the item will be the chunk. How do we know whether
the experimental conditions have been successful at preventing
recoding? Because the item will act like a chunk. In other words
an item will act as a chunk when it has not been recoded. We know
it has not been recoded because it is acting like a chunk.
In fact, Cowan provides a way round this problem by his analy-
sis of the conditions under which a chunk size of 4 emerges, his
four basic conditions. His argument therefore stands. As an argu-
ment. It is, and should be, open to empirical test. There appear to
be two obvious ways of going about this. The first way is to imple-
ment the constraint in some formal model that also includes the
four basic conditions for identifying a chunk. Are chunk sizes of 4
really observed when information overload in some (as yet un-
specified) way prevents higher level recoding in simulation stud-
ies? Or when other steps are taken specifically to block the coding
of items into larger chunks? The emergence of the chunk size will
be identifiable by performance discontinuities and various indi-
rect effects of the capacity limits (Cowan’s final two basic condi-
tions). Performance discontinuities and other effects of a limited
capacity should then be predictable on the basis of the ways in
which recoding has been impeded.
What is clear from this analysis is that Cowan’s argument would
benefit from a stricter definition of how to prevent higher level re-
coding than he currently provides. This may also require further
work in investigating the nature and limitations of the processes
contributing to compound STM limits in order to definitively rule
out their involvement.
The second way of testing Cowan’s argument is, at first blush,
the simplest. In addition to studies cited by Cowan there are nu-
merous others in the literature that address the question of pro-
cessing limitations. Any that conform to Cowan’s basic conditions
but do not demonstrate signs of a 4-chunk capacity limitation will,
in effect, falsify Cowan’s thesis. Once again, there is the problem
of ensuring that high-level recoding has been adequately impeded
but if a procedure is available that impeded recoding in an earlier
experiment it is reasonable to assume that recoding was equally
well impeded even if measured capacity exceeds 4 chunks.
Finally, consider the following intriguing scenario suggested by
Cowan in relation to scene coherence. Given a 4-chunk capacity-
limited STM we must assume that scenes may have up to 4 sep-
arate parts, or events, in awareness at any given moment that,
although associated with a common higher-level node, do not nec-
essarily have any common level of association beyond this. To con-
nect them will require shifting attention from one event to another
in a manner sub-optimal for later serial recall. Within the auditory
domain experiments of this nature have in fact been conducted.
Performance is worse when untrained listeners are required to re-
port the order of a recycled sequence of four unrelated sounds
than when the sequence contains sounds of a similar type (War-
ren & Obusek 1972; Warren et al. 1969). These studies suggest
that order information is indeed impaired when items are not as-
sociated.
A further study from a different domain, that of thought sup-
pression (Wegner et al. 1996) also concludes that memory for or-
der requires some level of association. Wegner et al. found that if
participants were required to suppress memory for the sequence
of events in a film sequence, information was lost but not item in-
formation (as measured by free and cued recall and by recogni-
tion). These studies, although they do not speak directly to the is-
sue of capacity, confirm Cowan’s intuition that shifts of attention
between different events are necessary to set up sequence infor-
mation for events which otherwise are not associated. Such se-
quence information can be destroyed by active attempts to sup-
press the memory of the events. The studies, however, also raise
questions about the nature of an association. If the processing
limit on STM is 4 chunks, what makes information about the or-
der of those chunks easier or harder to recall? The question is one
that is of more importance than might immediately appear. A
number of studies which Cowan takes as evidence for his 4-chunk
capacity limit were serial recall studies in which items were only
marked correct if they were recalled in the correct serial order
(e.g., Table 2 in target article). It seems therefore that the capac-
ity limit reflects not a limit on capacity to recall individual items
but a combined limit on recall of the items and the (order) rela-
tions between them. In serial recall, correct recall of items is in-
terdependent. If an item is misrecalled early in the list it is unlikely
to be correctly recalled later in the list as well as blocking recall of
the correct item at the earlier position. If capacity as measured by
serial recall studies is indeed 4 chunks, then capacity is for 4
chunks plus some extra information connecting those chunks. It is
then necessary to determine the nature of this “extra” information
and its relation to chunk capacity.
Commentary/Cowan: The magical number 4
118
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2000) 24:1
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 33 (native) -----
There is no four-object limit on attention
Greg Davis
Department of Psychology, Birkbeck College, London WCIE 7HX, United
Kingdom. g.davis@psyc.bbk.ac.uk
www.psyc.bbk.ac.uk/staff/gid.html
Abstract: The complex relationship between attention and STM forms a
core issue in the study of human cognition, and Cowan’s target article at-
tempts, quite successfully, to elucidate an important part of this relation-
ship. However, while I agree that aspects of STM performance may reflect
the action mechanisms that we normally consider to subserve “attention”
I shall argue here that attention is not subject to a fixed four-object capacity
limit as Cowan suggests. Rather, performance in attention tasks as well as
STM may be best accounted for in terms of decay and interference.
Many previous studies have concluded that observers can track or
enumerate up to four small items efficiently, but cannot do so for
more than five objects, this restriction reflecting a four-object
limit on our visual attention (e.g., Pylyshyn 1989; Trick & Pylyshyn
1993). However, these studies have largely employed displays
such as those in Figures 1A and 1B, where several other display
variables co-vary with the number of relevant objects. For exam-
ple, the five objects in Figure 1B constitute a greater overall sur-
face area than do three objects in Figure 1A, and presumably com-
prise a greater number of visual “features” overall. Accordingly,
any costs for attending more versus fewer objects in such displays
may not reflect the number of relevant objects per se, but might
alternatively result from the greater amount of relevant percep-
tual information comprised by larger numbers of objects.
In order to remove this ambiguity in their own study, Davis et
al. (submitted) have compared attention to displays of three large
objects (Fig. 1C) versus six small objects (Fig. 1D), in which only
the number of objects varied. Note that although the two display
types comprise different numbers of objects, they are otherwise
very much alike, so that the six objects comprise approximately the
same surface area and number of “features” as do the three ob-
jects. If there is indeed a fixed four-object limit on attention, then
attending the six-object displays should entail performance costs
relative to attending the three-object displays. Conversely, if ap-
parent four-object limits in previous studies reflected the overall
surface area and number of features that co-varied with the num-
ber of objects there, the two displays should now yield equivalent
performance.
To measure how efficiently the two displays could be attended,
Davis et al. employed a “divided-attention” task similar to those in
many previous studies of visual attention. In each trial, the six or
three objects were initially presented for 2.4 seconds to give sub-
jects ample time to focus their attention on the objects. Next, two
notches were removed from the objects in the display. The
notches were either square or jagged and the position of one notch
in no way predicted the position of the second notch, with every
possible combination of notches and notch-positions being
equiprobable. The task was simply to determine whether the two
notches were of the same type (i.e., both jagged or both square)
or of different types (i.e., one jagged, one square), and to press the
appropriate key on a computer keyboard as quickly as possible.
Performance was indistinguishable for the six- versus three-
object displays, suggesting that no four-object limit had operated,
and that six objects can be attended as efficiently as three objects,
once other display variables are equated in the two cases. How-
ever, one valid objection to this new study might be that observers
had not perceived the six-object displays to contain six separate
objects. Rather they may have perceived each pair of objects in
those displays to comprise a single object or Gestalt, and thus per-
ceived only three objects in the six-objects displays. To preclude
this possibility, Davis et al. examined performance on some spe-
cific trials within the three- and six-object displays. For six-object
displays they compared RTs when the two features by chance ap-
peared on a single small object (i.e., were horizontally-displaced
from each other) versus appearing on two separate neighboring
objects (vertically-separated within a single “pair” of objects as in
Fig. 1D). For three-object trials they conducted an identical com-
parison of horizontally- versus vertically-displaced feature-pairs,
except that the features now always appeared upon a single large
object.
Many previous studies have demonstrated that comparison of
features within pairs of objects is more efficient when they appear
on the same object than on two separate objects (e.g., Davis 2000;
Duncan 1984; Lavie & Driver 1996; Watson & Kramer 1999).
Thus if the six-object displays had indeed been perceived to com-
prise six objects, and the three-object displays, three objects, the
following patterns of performance should be expected. First, hor-
izontally separated features (on the same small object) in the six-
object displays should be responded to faster than vertically-
separated features in those displays (lying on different, neighbor-
ing objects). Second, if these differences reflected whether the
two features were on same versus different objects, rather than
simply resulting from other differences between vertically and
horizontally-separated features, this pattern of results should not
hold in the single large objects of the three-object displays. Pre-
cisely this predicted pattern of results was found, validating Davis
and colleagues’ comparison of six versus three objects.
Accordingly, Davis et al. suggested that no four-object limit
holds for visual attention. Indeed, attention may not be limited to
any “magica1” number of objects, but rather may reflect the same
properties of decay and interference that Cowan ascribes to STM.
Recent evidence points to the existence of two distinct binding
mechanisms in vision: within-object “links” that bind together fea-
tures from the same perceptual objects and between-object links
that bind features from separate objects. These two types of “link”
appear to be coded in anatomically separate visual streams, so 
that there may be substantial mutual interference between links
of the same type, but very little interference between the two
types of link (see Humphreys 1998). Davis et al. suggested that
this possible mutual interference between links might explain
both the equivalent performance found for their six- versus three-
object displays, and a range of other findings previously ascribed
to a four-object limit. First, since their six- versus three-object dis-
plays comprised approximately equal numbers of features, pre-
sumably bound by the same number of links, interference should
have been approximately the same in the two cases, correctly pre-
dicting the equivalent performance found. However, in more con-
ventional displays, such as those in Figures 1A and 1B, where the
number of features increases with the number of objects, mutual
interference between links should increase, decreasing the effi-
Commentary/Cowan: The magical number 4
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2000) 24:1
119
Figure 1 (Davis).
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 34 (native) -----
ciency with which the objects can be attended. In fact, when Davis
et al. calculated how within and between-object links might be ex-
pected to increase for 2–4 objects versus for 5–7 objects, this
yielded expected performance decrements of 37 and 235 msec/
item-1 respectively, closely approximating previously reported
values of 40 and 240 msec/item-1. Clearly, this very simple ac-
count models only performance rather than underlying cognitive
processes. However, it does provide an existence proof that ap-
parent four-object limits in previous studies can in principle be ac-
counted for in terms of interference alone.
I conclude that there is no four-object limit on attention, and
that the Davis et al. view of attention limitations may generate far
more biologically plausible models than accounts that assume a
“magic” number of objects. However, the absence of a four-object
limit on attention does not invalidate attempts to ascribe aspects
of STM performance to attention processes. Indeed, a common
interference-based framework for understanding STM and atten-
tion may assist such efforts.
The search for fixed generalizable limits 
of “pure STM” capacity: Problems 
with theoretical proposals based 
on independent chunks
K. Anders Ericsson and Elizabeth P. Kirk
Department of Psychology, Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL
32306-1270. {ericsson; kirk}@psy.fsu.edu
www.psy.fsu.edu/~ericsson
Abstract: Cowan’s experimental techniques cannot constrain subject’s re-
call of presented information to distinct independent chunks in short-term
memory (STM). The encoding of associations in long-term memory con-
taminates recall of pure STM capacity. Even in task environments where
the functional independence of chunks is convincingly demonstrated, in-
dividuals can increase the storage of independent chunks with deliberate
practice – well above the magical number four.
Cowan is continuing the search for a magical number that mea-
sures the universal limit for the pure capacity-based STM (“pure
STM”). Miller (1956) first proposed the magical number seven to
describe the remarkable invariance in performance on laboratory
tests of short-term memory (STM). He discovered that individu-
als encoded stimuli as familiar distinct patterns (chunks) already
stored in long-term memory (LTM) and could recall roughly the
same number of chunks regardless of type of presented items,
such as letters or words. When no associations are formed be-
tween chunks each chunk must reside independently in transient
STM to be accurately recalled. Consequently, Miller proposed
that the storage capacity of STM had an invariant general limit that
could be expressed as approximately seven independent chunks.
Subsequent research has shown that the fixed capacity limit of
independent chunks does not constrain STM after extended prac-
tice (Chase & Ericsson 1982; Richman 1995), and for skilled and
expert performance (Ericsson & Kintsch 1995; Gobet & Simon
1996). In domain-specific tasks, experts are able to encode and
store presented information in LTM and expand the capacity of
working memory (WM).
Ericsson and Kintsch (1995) showed that skilled individuals can
store information in long-term working memory (LTWM) by in-
tegrating two encoding mechanisms. First, they are able to gen-
erate associations between different presented chunks of infor-
mation and build new integrated structures in LTM. If experts can
encode associative relations between virtually all chunks within
their domain of expertise, then the concept of chunk indepen-
dence would not apply. Second, and more important, skilled in-
dividuals acquire skills to associate chunks of presented infor-
mation with internal cues organized in retrieval structures. LTM
storage mediated by this mechanism would not require associa-
tions formed between presented chunks. More recently, Ericsson
et al. (2000) showed how LTWM mechanisms developed to sup-
port expert performance can transfer and lead to superior perfor-
mance in traditional memory tasks involving domain-related in-
formation.
Cowan acknowledges that traditional STM tests can be influ-
enced by LTM storage and techniques such as rehearsal, and sug-
gests that this type of performance yields compound, “not pure”
estimates of STM capacity. He claims that it is possible to experi-
mentally control for these contaminating influences, using exper-
imental procedures that have been designed to prevent partici-
pants from rehearsing and encoding presented items and their
associations in LTM. Cowan argues that memory testing with
these experimental procedures will uncover pure STM with a uni-
versal capacity of four independent chunks.
We question the effectiveness of procedures advocated by
Cowan to eliminate storage in LTM and restrict recall to inde-
pendent chunks from pure STM. Many of the “prototypical” pure
STM studies Cowan cites in Table 2 involve recall of meaningful
stimuli, such as unrelated words, presented while subjects are en-
gaged in rehearsal suppression. To test how effectively these pro-
cedures control encoding, we examined how skilled and expert
participants performed under such conditions. In contrast to the
studies cited by Cowan, rehearsal suppression during encoding
had little or no effect on skilled and expert performers. They were
able to encode and to form associations between different pieces
of presented information in LTM (see Ericsson & Kintsch 1995
for a review), even when the information was auditorily presented
(Chase & Ericsson 1981; Ericsson & Folson 1988).
Another approach proposed by Cowan for minimizing storage
in LTM and assessment of pure STM involves examining memory
for presented material that cannot be easily be rehearsed. How-
ever, studies of expert performance are replete with examples of
experts who exhibit superior recall for information that cannot be
easily rehearsed, such as chess positions.
The ability to rapidly encode and integrate information in LTM
is not restricted to skilled performers and experts in their domains
of expertise. During the initial trials of memory testing (prior to
the build-up of practice interference), storage in LTM is consid-
erable even with typical stimuli and college students (Ericsson &
Kintsch 1995). With more sensitive recognition based techniques
relational storage in LTM is observed even during repeated test-
ing (Jiang et al. 2000). It is doubtful whether Cowan’s recom-
mended procedure can reliably prevent relational encoding of
presented information with storage in LTM during a memory test
and thus indirectly guarantee independence of recalled chunks.
To rigorously test the validity of Cowan’s fixed chunk limit of
“pure STM,” we must identify task environments in which suc-
cessful performance requires independence of chunks. When
tasks prevent individuals, including highly skilled performers,
from relying on associations between chunks, the evidence is in-
consistent with Cowan’s fixed limit of four independent chunks.
For example, during mental addition of long sequences of num-
bers individuals must maintain the running sum as individual dig-
its that can be updated and changed independently of each other.
Skilled abacus operators hold running sums of three or four digits
while performing mental computation. This number of indepen-
dent chunks is consistent with Cowan’s estimate of “pure STM”
yet when operators engage in deliberate practice they can increase
the number of digits of the running sum by one digit per year
(Stigler 1984). Skilled abacus operators can expand their memory
performance to 14–16 digits with minimal disruption by rehearsal
suppression or preloading STM with unrelated information (Ha-
tano & Dsawa 1983). They maintain efficient access to indepen-
dent digits and can recall up to 10 digits equally fast in forward or
backward order. This large expansion of the functional capacity is
consistent with the second type of acquired mechanism of LTWM
that involves recency-based encodings (Ericsson & Kintsch 1995).
Expert performers’ ability to modify their functional “pure
STM” capacity in a specific domain raises issues about the gener-
Commentary/Cowan: The magical number 4
120
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2000) 24:1
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 35 (native) -----
alizability of fixed limits of capacity measured by independent
chunks. And our point is not restricted to experts. Expert perfor-
mance results from years of gradual skill acquisition (Ericsson
1996). Similar types of LTWM mechanisms, albeit in less refined
form, mediate the extended development of many types of skills.
Ericsson and Kintsch (1995) showed that the same type of LTWM
mechanisms mediate reading and other everyday activities medi-
ated by comprehension. When individuals perform tasks involv-
ing comprehension, they encode relevant, associatively related in-
formation to guide their performance. Associative encoding and
integration of encountered information is an essential part of this
process. If most cognitive activities in ecologically valid situations
do not involve storage of independent chunks, it is unlikely that
“pure STM” capacity limits based on independent chunks will be
relevant predictors of performance.
Working memory capacity and the
hemispheric organization of the brain
Gabriele Gratton,a Monica Fabiani,a
and Paul M. Corballisb
aDepartment of Psychology, University of Missouri-Columbia, Columbia, MO
65203; bCenter for Cognitive Neurosciences, Dartmouth College, Hanover,
NH 03755. {grattong; fabianim}@missouri.edu
paul.m.corballis@dartmouth.edu
www.missouri.edu/{~psygg; ~psymf}
Abstract: Different hypotheses about the mechanisms underlying work-
ing memory lead to different predictions about working memory capacity
when information is distributed across the two hemispheres. We present
preliminary data suggesting that memory scanning time (a parameter of-
ten associated with working memory capacity) varies depending on how
information is subdivided across hemispheres. The data are consistent
with a distributed model of working memory.
The Cowan target article emphasizes the limited capacity of work-
ing memory, and presents a varied and significant body of evi-
dence indicating that working memory capacity is approximately
four items. Over the last two decades, researchers have become
increasingly interested in understanding the relationship between
cognitive function and the brain. A way to begin addressing the is-
sue of what type of brain mechanisms underlie the fundamental
limitation of working memory capacity emphasized by Cowan and
previous investigators (e.g., Miller 1956) is to consider the inter-
action between working memory capacity and the hemispheric
organization of the brain.
This interaction may take different forms. According to one idea
working memory is a single, unified resource, or “module.” This
suggests that working memory may be “localized” in one hemi-
sphere only (for instance, in the left hemisphere) rather than be-
ing distributed across the two hemispheres (“unitary view”). If this
were the case, distributing information to be held in working mem-
ory across the two hemispheres would not be advantageous, and
may in fact be deleterious in some cases. A variant of this view is
that a number of working memory systems – each specialized for
different types of materials – coexist, and each of them is localized
(absolutely or relatively) in one hemisphere (e.g., left hemisphere
for verbal material and right hemisphere for spatial material).
A different idea is that working memory can be envisioned as a
distributed system (“distributed view”). In this case, the circuit
supporting working memory function could be partly imple-
mented in one hemisphere and partly in the other, even for the
same type of stimulus material. Hence, distributing information
across the two hemispheres may facilitate its activation and/or
maintenance, leading to an increase in working memory capacity.
Finally, as indicated by Cowan, the limitation of working mem-
ory capacity may not be due to a specific limitation in the mecha-
nisms used to activate and/or maintain information. Rather, this
limitation may result from a general property of information
processing systems related to the computational requirements
needed to achieve distinguishable mental representations of ob-
jects (“computational view”). According to this view, whereas each
hemisphere may independently have a memory capacity of four,
the combined memory capacity across the two hemispheres would
still be four (at least in normal, neurologically intact young adults).
These three views of working memory (which are neither mu-
tually exclusive nor exhaustive) lead to different predictions about
what would happen if a working memory task involved presenting
the information exclusively to one or the other hemifield (and
therefore to one hemisphere) or distributing it across both hemi-
fields (thus dividing the information between the hemispheres).
Specifically, the distributed view would predict an increase in ca-
pacity when information is distributed across the two hemifields,
whereas the unitary and computational views would not. In addi-
tion, large differences in capacity between left and right visual
field presentations would be more consistent with the unitary than
with the computational view.
For this logic to be applicable it is important to be able to ma-
nipulate the hemisphere in which the information is activated
and/or maintained. Various approaches to this problem can be
considered, including the type of material to be maintained (e.g.,
verbal vs. spatial) and the location in space where the stimulus is
presented (e.g., left vs. right visual field–divided field paradigm).
In a series of recent studies (Fabiani, in press; Gratton et al. 1998)
we have obtained evidence for the hemispheric organization of vi-
sual memory. The basic paradigm used in this work involved: (1)
the presentation of information to one visual hemifield at study
(and therefore, at least initially, to one hemisphere of the brain);
and (2) the subsequent testing of memory for the item when it is
presented at different locations within the same or the opposite
hemifield. Typically, in these studies we observed a reduction in
performance when the stimulus was presented in a different
hemifield during study and test, compared to conditions in which
the stimulus was presented within the same hemifield during both
study and test. Further, if the stimulus was presented centrally
(and therefore to both hemispheres) at test, the brain activity
elicited during the test phase was systematically lateralized (i.e.,
larger on the left or on the right) depending on the hemifield
where the stimulus had been studied.
These data suggest that the divided field paradigm can be used
Commentary/Cowan: The magical number 4
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2000) 24:1
121
Figure 1 (Gratton et al.).
Average reaction times for correct pos-
itive trials in the divided visual field memory-search paradigm, as
a function of the distribution of memory set items across the left
and right visual field (2–3: two items in one hemifield and three
in the other; 1–4: one item in one hemifield and four in the other;
0–5: zero items in one hemifield and five in the other). Error bars
indicate the standard error of the mean for each condition.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 36 (native) -----
to manipulate the hemisphere that holds information to be main-
tained in working memory. In a pilot study, we applied this logic
to the question of whether distributing information across the two
hemifields may improve working memory performance. We used
a variant of the memory search paradigm (Stemberg 1966) in
which the memory set stimuli were presented one item at a time,
either to the left or to the right of a central fixation cross, in an un-
predictable fashion. The stimuli consisted of patterns of randomly
oriented lines to minimize verbal rehearsal. Each item was pre-
sented for 200 msec, with 800 msec ISI.
Following the presentation of the memory set, a test stimulus
was presented centrally. This could be one of the five memory-set
stimuli or a similar unstudied stimulus. The average reaction times
for the correct positive(“yes”) responses to test items are pre-
sented in Figure 1. The data indicate a performance advantage
(i.e., faster reaction time) when the memory set items were di-
vided across the two hemifields compared to those conditions in
which the memory set items were all presented to the same hemi-
field.
In interpreting these data, it is important to note that the test
stimuli were physically similar for the three conditions presented
in Figure 1, and that the total memory set always consisted of five
items.
Although preliminary, these data suggest that dividing informa-
tion between the two hemifields may improve memory-scanning
time, which has been traditionally considered as related to work-
ing memory capacity. These data are consistent with a distributed
view of working memory.
A temporal account of the limited 
processing capacity
Simon Grondin
École de psychologie, Université Laval, Québec GIK 7P4, Canada.
simon.grondin@psy.ulaval.ca
www.ulaval.psy.ca
Abstract: A temporal account of the mental capacities for processing in-
formation may not be relevant in a context where the goal is to search for
storage capacity expressed in chunks. However, if mental capacity and in-
formation processing is the question, the time issue can be rehabilitated.
A very different temporal viewpoint on capacity limit is proposed in this
commentary.
Using a reasonable set of boundary conditions for testing the
chunk “capacity,” Cowan has helped distinguish between what be-
longs to a pure storage estimate and what is a compound measure
of storage. His impressive review of evidence defending the 4-
chunk thesis comes from direct and indirect empirical facts in cog-
nitive psychology, along with evidence from mathematical models
and physiological data. Beyond the overall convincing support for
the 4-chunk notion, Cowan returns the reader to the cause of this
capacity limit, which is reported to be attention. In the process
however, time-based interpretations were quickly discarded. It is
argued below that the temporal option should and can be used for
describing the capacity limit.
What are the magical chunk number and chunking for? We are
getting closer to a pure estimate of the capacity limit, as expressed
by the number of chunks. From 7 6 2 which was indeed 3 to 15,
in Miller (1956), it passed to 4 6 1, which remains nevertheless 2
to 6, in the target article. The numbers have changed and the mar-
gin of error is narrower, but scientists eager to have a reliable law
or a constant for mental life to work with will probably remain un-
satisfied.
However, although the numbers have changed, the chunking no-
tion has not. Indeed, beyond any estimation of maximum chunks
that can potentially be processed simultaneously (perhaps in very
rapid, but tractable, succession), we are dealing with a fundamen-
tal principle of mental processes: fragmenting information. We
are looking for a magical number, an integer, perhaps because we
actually have a simple mind that imposes simplicity on the under-
standing of phenomena, and also perhaps because it would be
more useful to work on firm ground rather than rely on the capri-
cious fluctuations of malleable chunk sizes or content.
We may not have a definite magical number yet, but we do
have a magical principle to offer to answer the basic capacity
question, which is: How can the connection between what is
made available by the sensory systems and the organization of it
by the brain (or higher processing structures) become as efficient
as possible in capturing the essence of available information?
Miller (1956) promoted this fundamental chunking/recoding
principle: “when . . . we want to remember, we usually try to
rephrase [it] ‘in our own words’” (p. 95). This is not without re-
calling notions such as the assimilation mechanism assumed by
Piaget in the adaptation process; or the use of field theory in
Gestalt, where the brain’s electrochemical forces, which underlie
structured fields, transform sensory data and are transformed in
the simplest way possible.
Representations of mental capacity. Between what is already
stored in the system and new inputs, it looks like something oc-
curs, and that an intermediate variable is needed to describe this
state. The name of this variable indicates the researchers’ stand.
They call it memory – short-term memory, in the target article –
and the question that they most often address concerns its storage
capacity. In this context, a capacity hypothesis such as the dura-
tion of an item in this memory without rehearsal may simply be ir-
relevant. The idea here is that terms like storage and capacity 
often refer to the notion of volume, that is, to a spatial represen-
tation. Duration cannot express a notion having a spatial connota-
tion. If mental abilities or mental processes are the issue, then
storage space is only one of a number of potential answers, and 
a duration hypothesis – which may or may not involve storage time
– can possibly be rehabilitated. It is indeed somewhat ironic to
discard a duration explanation from a short-term memory issue,
given that the word “term” itself expresses duration. This “term”
should, instead, be quantified, if not with a time unit, at least with
a descriptor of a fading rate.
Whether they are Working/Active/Immediate/Short-Term
(WAIST?), all such varieties are in fact called memory. The word
“memory” makes sense if information is viewed as being retained
or stored for some duration, rather than being present, available
or circulating. However, although “WAIST memory” favours per-
manent storage, storing within “WAIST memory” is not the pur-
pose: processing is.
In Cowan’s theoretical framework, the capacity issue enters a
new phase once the limit is said to depend on attention, more
specifically, on the focus of attention. There are several ways of ex-
pressing the involvement of attention in information processing.
Focus is one, but one that may also carry a “spatial” connotation,
that is, visuo-spatial attention, which, along with the storage ca-
pacity notion, serves to reinforce spatial representation.
Attention limits are ultimately reported to be responsible for
producing chunk limits. If anything, chunking reveals more about
attention than about memory. Chunking is the principle by which
attention mechanisms are accommodated, and processing is made
easier.
Duration as information, rather than duration of information.
Another vein in the literature of experimental psychology may en-
liven a debate on capacity limits, where considerations about du-
ration decay remain a persisting potential explanation. Because 
rehearsal provokes interference, either proactive or retroactive,
Cowan reports the decay issue to be unresolvable. Nevertheless,
this should not totally disregard attempts to provide a temporal ac-
count of the state occurring at some point between sensory stim-
ulation and permanent storage.
In the literature on time perception, there is a concept called
the psychological present for describing this state. This can be de-
fined as a highly flexible tuning process that is dynamically fitting
the temporal width of the field of attention and its phase relations
Commentary/Cowan: The magical number 4
122
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2000) 24:1
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 37 (native) -----
to the sequential structure of the pattern of events.” (Michon
1978, p. 89); or “ . . . the temporal extent of stimulations that can
be perceived at one given time, without the intervention of re-
hearsal during or after the stimulation” (Fraisse 1978, p. 205).
These authors propose that the present has an average value of 2
or 3 sec, with an upper limit of 5 (Fraisse 1978) or 7 or 8 sec (Mi-
cho 1978). The wide variability of estimates is at least as disap-
pointing as is that surrounding a maximum chunk number. Nev-
ertheless, a 2-sec value is at least interesting in terms of recalling
the memory span estimate of Baddeley (1986).
Just as for the variability in estimating maximum chunks, vari-
ability in estimating the psychological present (in time units) de-
pends on boundary conditions adopted. One way to look at the
problem is to refer to the discrimination law of Weber (Grondin,
in press). This law states that, for one given sensory continuum,
difference threshold (Dø) should increase as a function of the
magnitude of the stimulus (ø), with Dø/ ø being a constant, k, the
Weber fraction. It is well-known that for very small sensory mag-
nitudes, this fraction is large and gradually becomes smaller, and
then stabilizes.
At this point, it is worth taking a look at Weber’s law for time
perception, more specifically concerning duration discrimination
under a condition where the only processing required is to judge
the duration of a sensory signal or the empty duration between two
brief sensory signals. For duration discrimination, the Weber frac-
tion presents a degree of constancy, but at some point, with longer
intervals, some discontinuity also occurs (as in boundary condition
3 in Cowan’s target article): the fraction becomes higher (see for
instance, Fig. 1 in Fraisse 1978). This discontinuity occurs at some
point between 1 and 2 sec, and can be interpreted as a point mark-
ing the upper limit of the psychological present span, that is, as
temporal factor accounting for capacity limit.
Another operational definition can also be adopted for describ-
ing a critical limit in temporal processing. One strategy for reduc-
ing difference threshold when the time intervals to be discrimi-
nated are long is to adopt a counting strategy, that is, using chunks.
One way of defining the upper limit of psychological present is to
look at the point from which chunking becomes a useful strategy.
This point can be estimated by examining two functions relating
difference threshold and time, one when counting (chunking) is
permitted, and one where subjects refrain from counting. Such
functions intersect at about 1.18 sec (Grondin et al. 1999). When
intervals are longer than that value, using chunks is a more valu-
able option; and this critical point can be viewed as an upper limit
of the psychological present span. With optimal chunking, this
value may be lower, but this remains to be demonstrated. A for-
mal analysis of the consequences of fragmenting intervals into
subintervals, thus, of adopting chunking strategies in estimating
time, is presented in Killeen and Weiss (1987).
Concluding remarks. Cowan has made a commendable contri-
bution to current investigations of processing capacity by con-
necting multiple evidence of the 4-chunk storage. Nevertheless,
although the amount of information expressed in stored chunks is
dimensionless, it may suggest a type of representation of mental
capacity that is advanced so as to rule out viewing potential tem-
poral interpretations for processing capacity. Both views talk about
a “limited span of apprehension of reality” or an “active state of
consciousness.” Confusion may arise from calling it a memory.
Using terminology such as short-term memory, in opposition to
long-term memory, is certainly an oversimplification of physical
time (term), which is a continuous variable. Information is in a
state varying from 0 to 100% of processing availability. Attention
mechanisms, which probably respond to sensory-mode require-
ments and particularities, activate pieces of information for mak-
ing it available, present. Four such pieces of information can po-
tentially become available without impairing performance.
Processing capacity limits are 
not explained by storage limits
Graeme S. Halford,a Steven Phillips,b
and William H. Wilsonc
aSchool of Psychology, University of Queensland, Brisbane 4072, Australia;
bInformation Science Division, Electrotechnical Laboratory, Tsukuba 305, Ja-
pan; cDepartment of Computer Science and Engineering, University of New
South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia. gsh@psy.uq.edu.au
stevep@etl.go.jp
billw@cse.unsw.edu.au
www.psy.uq.edu.au/gshm
www.cse.unsw.edu.au/~billw
www.etl.go.jp/etl/ninehi/stevep@etl.go.jp/welcome.html
Abstract: Cowan’s review shows that a short-term memory limit of four
items is consistent with a wide range of phenomena in the field. However,
he does not explain that limit, whereas an existing theory does offer an ex-
planation for capacity limitations. Furthermore, processing capacity limits
cannot be reduced to storage limits as Cowan claims.
In his excellent review, Cowan concludes that short-term memory
storage is limited to four items, noting that this corresponds to the
limit in processing capacity defined by Halford et al. (1998). Fur-
thermore, his conclusion that the limit is in the number of inte-
grated objects, independent of the complexity of each, agrees well
with the observation of Halford et al. (1998) that humans are lim-
ited to relating four entities, irrespective of their complexity. How-
ever, these correspondences do not imply that processing limits
can be subsumed under storage limits, as Cowan claims.
The fact that the size of the limit is four in both cases is not a
strong argument for identification because, given that the limit is
small, the same number could occur in both contexts by coinci-
dence. Alternatively, storage and processing systems could be dis-
tinct but with equal capacities to facilitate transfer from one to the
other. There are a number of reasons why processing cannot be
subsumed under storage. To take a straightforward example, there
clearly is a difference between simply holding the numbers 7 and
4 in short term store, and adding them to yield the sum, 11. In gen-
eral storage, in the sense of internal representation, is a prerequi-
site for processing, but cognitive processing cannot be reduced to
storage. Furthermore higher cognitive processes require repre-
sentations that have properties beyond those required for storage,
including omni-directional access and analogical mapping (Hal-
ford et al. 1998).
Cowan’s position is that a concurrent short term memory load
can be held in the activated portion of long term memory while
other information is being processed in the focus of attention.
Lack of interference between processing and short-term storage
is explained because the focus of attention can be devoted to ei-
ther storage or processing, but need not be devoted to both at
once. However this still implies that storage and processing are
distinct, and also implies there would be no tradeoff between the
two. It is not fundamentally different from the position of Halford
et al. (1998).
Cowan offers no explanation for the limit he observes in stor-
age capacity, whereas Halford et al. (1998) offer a natural expla-
nation for processing capacity limits. In this model, conceptual
complexity is defined by the arity, or number of arguments that
can be bound into a single relation. Human adults are typically
limited to processing one quaternary relation in parallel. Each
component of the relation is represented by a vector, and the bind-
ing is represented by the tensor product of the vectors. Thus, the
binary relational instance larger (elephant, mouse) is represented
by vlarger 3 velephant 3 vmouse. The rank of the tensor product is
one more than the arity of the relation. The more complex rela-
tions are represented by tensor products of higher rank, the
greater complexity of which explains why more complex relations
are associated with higher processing load. However, the size of
the component vectors has much less effect on processing load, so
the fact that the limit is not related to the size of the entities is also
explained. Thus, in terms of our relational model, there is a limit
Commentary/Cowan: The magical number 4
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2000) 24:1
123
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 38 (native) -----
on tensor rank entailed by the rapid growth of the number of ten-
sor units as rank increases. Given that a short-term memory store
of capacity 4 is connected to a tensor-like system for processing,
the limit of 4 on store size is a consequence of the fact that for most
cognitive tasks, processing of the objects in the store is a necessity.
The links between storage and processing phenomena are
worth exploring. In section 2, Cowan argues that the unity of con-
scious awareness implies the contents of attended channels should
be integrated or combined. Similarly, category clusters (discussed
in sects. 2.7 and 3.4.2) imply a link between instances of the cate-
gory. Cowan further contends, in section. 3.1.3, that the short term
storage limit is observed only with items recalled in correct serial
positions. Given that the slots of relation are identified, serial po-
sition can be coded as a relation ordered-items (item 1, item 2,
item 3, item 4 ). The observation of no limit with free recall would
then suggest that it is ability to represent the relation, rather than
the items, that is subject to the limit. This would appear to be con-
sistent with the relational complexity theory of Halford et al.
(1998). Furthermore, it clearly points to explaining storage limits
in terms of complexity of relations that can be represented. This
would also explain the finding of Nairne (1991, referred to by
Cowan in sect. 3.4.3) that errors occur up to three positions from
the correct position. The reason would be that the items are rep-
resented as a quaternary relation, which contains only four slots.
The further finding, in section 3.4.5 that participants could pre-
dict the seventh item from items 3, 4, 6 may also indicate that the
task is represented as a quaternary relation.
These phenomena indicate links between entities that are im-
portant, but the nature of these links is not really clear, and the is-
sue is clouded by the lack of a well specified theory in Cowan’s pa-
per. Some properties of relational knowledge defined by Halford
et al. (1998) seem to be involved in the phenomena discussed
above, but it is not clear that they all are. We could define the re-
lational instances fruit (apple, banana, orange, pear) and fruit (ly-
chee, pineapple, passionfruit, guava), and so on. Organizing mem-
ory storage as quaternary relations in this way would account for
recall of items in clusters of four. However, it would also predict a
lot of other properties of relational knowledge that Cowan has not
demonstrated. For example, relational knowledge has the prop-
erty of omni-directional access (Halford et al. 1998) which means
that, given any n21 components of a relational instance, the re-
maining component can be retrieved. Thus, given the quaternary
relation proportion (4, 2, ?, 3) we can determine that the missing
component must be “6” because it is necessary to complete the
proportion 4/2 5 6/3. However, it is far from clear that category
clusters share this property. If given a list [apple, banana, ? pear]
there is no particular reason why we should recall “orange.” Thus
category clusters do not entail the kind of constraints that are en-
tailed in relations. Another property of relational knowledge is
that analogical mappings can be formed between corresponding
relational instances (Holyoak & Thagard 1995). Again, it is not
clear that analogies can be formed between category clusters.
Storage is not a simple, unitary matter, but can take many forms.
Furthermore, the form in which information is stored affects the
form in which it is processed. Some of the possibilities, together
with possible implementation in neural nets, are:
1. Item storage – implemented as a vector of activation values
over a set of neural units.
2. Associative links between items, implemented as connection
weights between units in different vectors.
3. Superposition of items – implemented as summation of item
vectors. This is tantamount to a prototype.
4. Superimposed items bound to a category label, such as
fruit(apple) 1 fruit(banana) 6 fruit(orange) 1 fruit(pear). This is
equivalent to a unary relation and can be represented by a Rank 2
tensor:
vfruit 3 vapple 1 vfruit 3 vorange 1 vfruit 3 vorange 1 vfruit 3 vpear
Item-position bindings: ordered-fruit (first, apple) 1 ordered-
fruit {(second, orange) 1, . . . , 1 ordered-fruit (fourth, pear)}.
This is a binary relational instance and can be implemented by the
tensor product
vordered-fruit 3 vfirst 3 vapple 1 vordered-fruit 3 vsecond 3 vorange
1 . . . 1 vordered-fruit 3 vfourth 3 vpear
Binding items into n-ary relations where n has a maximum value
4. This can be implemented by a tensor up to Rank 5:
vfruit 3 vapple 3 vorange 3 vpear
These representations have different characteristics. They per-
mit different retrieval operations, and impose different process-
ing loads. More important, at least some of these properties can
be captured by neural net models. The Rank n tensor would ex-
plain why processing load increases with the number of entities
related, and consequently suggests why the capacity limit tends to
be low. However, the earlier representations are not sensitive to
processing load in this way. It should be clear from these examples
that storage and process are intimately related, and that a theory
of capacity must include both aspects of computation. However,
while their interaction may be complex, it is not arbitrary. Our the-
ory specifies a unique set of properties for processes involving re-
lations of different antics.
Conclusion. Cowan has done the field a great service by show-
ing that a broad range of observations is consistent with the limit
of four entities that had been proposed previously by Halford et
al. (BBS, 1998). However his claim to reduce processing capacity
to storage capacity is not substantiated. Furthermore he offers no
explanation for the limit, and glosses over the fact that at least one
existing theory offers a potential explanation as to why the limit
should be small.
Pure short-term memory capacity has
implications for understanding 
individual differences in math skills
Steven A. Hecht and Todd K. Shackelford
Division of Science, Department of Psychology, Florida Atlantic University,
Davie, FL 33314. {shecht; tshackelford}@fau.edu
www.uni-bielefeld.de/ZIF/heiko.html
Abstract: Future work is needed to establish that pure short-term mem-
ory is a coherent individual difference attribute that is separable from tra-
ditional compound short-term memory measures. Psychometric support
for latent pure short-term memory capacity will provide an important
starting point for future fine-grained analyses of the intrinsic factors that
influence individual differences in math skills.
Cowan presents a clear and convincing theoretical case for the
fixed capacity limit of three to five chunks in the focus of atten-
tion. Cowan has significantly advanced the field of memory re-
search by providing a cogent analysis of the conditions that must
be met in order for memory storage capacity to be measured ac-
curately. Cowan presents an organized and impressive array of
empirical data corroborating his theoretical claims. Cowan’s
claims rely on the idea that “purer” estimates of storage capacity
in adults can be derived from existing sources of evidence. These
sources of evidence come from various methodologies, and con-
verge on the conclusion that a smaller than previously thought
chunk limit exists in the focus of attention.
Cowan’s analysis provides researchers with a promising tool for
relating capacity limits to individual differences in various kinds of
human abilities; in this commentary, we address mathematical
thinking. Cowan distinguishes between memory measures that
do, or do not, control for noncapacity-limited mechanisms. “Com-
pound short-term memory” tasks capture both memory storage
capacity and other sources of variance, such as strategic process-
ing. An important limitation of traditional compound short-term
Commentary/Cowan: The magical number 4
124
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2000) 24:1
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 39 (native) -----
memory tasks is that the relative contributions of both pure short-
term memory and other noncapacity limited mechanisms to vari-
ability in math skills are usually not readily determined. Only com-
pound memory tasks have been systematically investigated as
capturing memory processes that contribute to individual differ-
ences in math skills (see Geary 1993, for a review)
There are at least three aspects of a complete account of indi-
vidual differences in math skills (Hecht 1998). First, it is neces-
sary to focus on specific subdomains of math skills (e.g., simple
arithmetic, fraction estimation), because different factors may in-
fluence each subdomain of math ability. Second, the unique math-
ematical knowledge (e.g., counting knowledge) needed to carry
out specific problems in a subdomain should be determined.
Third, the contributions of intrinsic factors such as memory ca-
pacity on the efficiency with which mathematical knowledge is ac-
quired and carried out should be investigated. Another character-
istic of a complete account of variability in math skills is a
description of the relative contributions of biological and envi-
ronmental mechanisms that influence the development of math
skills (Geary 1995). As Cowan alluded, pure short-term memory
capacity may be determined solely by biological factors optimized
by adaptive processes in human evolution. Quality of math in-
struction would be an example of an environmental mechanism.
Cowan’s target article suggests important avenues of future re-
search that might lead to a complete account of variability in math
skills. The first suggested line of research is the nature of individ-
ual differences in pure short-term memory capacity. The relations
between pure short-term memory capacity and variability in aca-
demic performance can be investigated only if pure estimates of
capacity can be measured as a distinct individual difference at-
tribute. Cowan notes that individual differences in capacity limits
appear to exist in seemingly disparate tasks such as Sperling’s
(1960) full report task, Cowan et al. (1999) unattended speech task,
and Luck and Vogel’s (1997) visual storage capacity task. Perfor-
mance on these seemingly disparate tasks should correlate if they
measure the same underlying pure short-term memory construct.
Confirmatory factor analysis (CPA) can be used to support em-
pirically pure short-term memory capacity as a unique domain of
memory ability. Based on Cowan’s analysis, it is likely that pure
short-term memory and compound memory tasks will yield sepa-
rate, though correlated, factors. The constructs should be corre-
lated to the extent that compound short-term memory task per-
formance is influenced by pure short-term memory capacity. An
important benefit of using latent variables is that correlations
among factors can be observed while controlling for sources of
variance associated with task specific level and direction of effort
or attention. CPA also can be used to determine whether separate
versus central pure short-term memory capacity exists. For exam-
ple, CPA can be used to determine if visual versus verbal pure ca-
pacity tasks yield separate or singular constructs of memory stor-
age capacity.
If the construct validity in the psychometric sense of pure short-
term memory tasks is empirically established, then another line of
research could examine whether individual differences in the ca-
pacity limit of chunks in the focus of attention contributes to math
ability. Although relations between memory-related latent factors
and emerging variability in math outcomes have a been demon-
strated (see Hecht et al., in press), these predictors are nor as fine-
grained as the measures suggested by Cowan. That is, an impor-
tant limitation of extant research relating memory processes to
variability in math skills is that observed correlations do not indi-
cate which aspects of memory performance influence specific as-
pects of math ability (Geary 1993). Once separate latent variables
for pure short-term memory capacity and compound short-term
memory have been identified, the relative contributions of these
factors to individual differences in math skills can be assessed.
Thus, Cowan’s analysis suggests important starting points for
finegrained investigations of relations between intrinsic memory
abilities and variability in specific aspects of mathematical ability.
One place to start is suggested by Cowan’s speculations regarding
pure short-term capacity size and performance on Logan’s (1988,
experiment 4) alphabet arithmetic task. The alphabet arithmetic
test is considered to be an analog measure of the acquisition of
simple arithmetic knowledge (Logan 1988). Cowan speculated
that problems with addends of 1–4 can be visualized (i.e., held in
the focus of attention) more clearly while problem solving, be-
cause the addend sizes correspond to the number of chunks of in-
formation that can be held in the focus of attention. In contrast,
performance on problems with addends of five or more may be
hindered by pure short-term capacity limitations. Presumably, in-
dividual differences in pure short-term memory capacity should
be associated with the effects of addend size on alphabet arith-
metic performance.
Obtained relations between pure short-term memory capacity
and variability in math skills also may help disentangle the influ-
ences of biological and cultural factors on math attainment. Geary
(1995) makes a distinction between biologically primary abilities
and biologically secondary abilities. Biologically primary abilities
are found cross-culturally and are designed by natural selection in
our evolutionary past. Biologically secondary abilities are not
found in all cultures and require sustained formal training (e.g.,
reading, advanced calculus). It is likely that mean estimates of
pure short-term memory capacity size, and degree of individual
differences in that construct, are uniformly found across cultures.
In his description of teleological accounts of a pure short-term
memory capacity limit, Cowan reviews evidence from several
sources suggesting a plausible evolutionary function of a very lim-
ited capacity of chunks in the focus of attention. For example,
Cowan summarizes evidence by Kareev (1995) that a limited pure
short-term memory capacity assists in the efficient detection of
correlations between features in the physical world. A limited
pure short-term memory capacity, shaped by evolutionary forces,
may currently be “co-opted” for many contemporary tasks such
as biologically secondary mathematical problem solving skills.
Cowan’s analysis suggests a line of research for investigating po-
tential indicators of co-optation in the domain of math skills. Co-
optation of biologically primary memory ability would be sug-
gested by observed correlations between pure short-term memory
capacity and biologically secondary math skills.
Cowan’s target article should stimulate important avenues of fu-
ture research toward demonstrating psychometric support for
separate constructs of pure short-term memory and compound
memory capacity. Current research focusing on individual differ-
ences in mathematical thinking has much to gain from the kind of
fine-grained analyses of memory capacity suggested by Cowan.
The predictive validity of latent pure short-term memory capacity
would provide important progress toward understanding the bio-
logically primary factors that influence variability in math skills.
Commentary/Cowan: The magical number 4
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2000) 24:1
125
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 40 (native) -----
Dual oscillations as the physiological 
basis for capacity limits
Ole Jensena and John E. Lismanb
aBrain Research Unit, Low Temperature Laboratory, Helsinki University of
Technology, Helsinki 02015 HUT, Finland; bDepartment of Biology, Volen
Center for Complex Systems, Brandeis University, Waltham, MA 02254.
ojensen@neuro.hut.fi
lisman@brandeis.edu
www.boojum.hut.fi/ojensen
www.bio.brandeis.edu/lismanlab/faculty.html
Abstract: A physiological model for short-term memory (STM) based on
dual theta (5–10 Hz) and gamma (20–60 Hz) oscillation was proposed by
Lisman and Idiart (1995). In this model a memory is represented by
groups of neurons that fire in the same gamma cycle. According to this
model, capacity is determined by the number of gamma cycles that occur
within the slower theta cycle. We will discuss here the implications of re-
cent reports on theta oscillations recorded in humans performing the
Sternberg task. Assuming that the oscillatory memory models are correct,
these findings can help determine STM capacity.
In reading the target article by Cowan it is evident that it is prob-
lematic to determine the STM capacity from psychophysical ex-
periments alone. The main problem is to design experiments in
which the influence of chunking and long-term memory are con-
trolled. The framework of oscillatory memory models (Jensen &
Lisman 1996; 1998; Lisman & Idiart 1995) may allow the capac-
ity of STM to be tested more directly. In these models multiple
representations are assumed to be kept active by a multiplexing
network where the dynamics are controlled by nested theta (5–10
Hz) and gamma (20–80 Hz) oscillations. A memory is represented
by a group of neurons that fire in the same gamma cycle. The set
of memory representations is sequentially reactivated, one repre-
sentation per gamma cycle, in each theta cycle. Hence, the num-
ber of gamma cycles per theta cycle determines the capacity of the
memory buffer.
The retrieval time from STM is measured by the Sternberg
method in which a set of S items is presented to a subject. After a
few seconds retention the subject must press a button to indicate
whether a probe item matched one of the items on the list. The
models predict that the gamma period, Tgamma, determines the in-
crease in reaction per item (the Sternberg  slope).
In the initial model it was proposed that the Sternberg  slope
equaled Tgamma (Lisman & Idiart 1995). In later work, which at-
tempted to account for the full distribution of the reaction time
data, a correction term was introduced (Jensen & Lisman 1998).
Since memory scanning cannot be initiated in the period of the
theta cycle when the S items are activated a wait-time comes into
play. The average wait-time is !sSTgamma. Hence the corrected 
contribution to the retrieval time is  !sSTgamma 1 Tgamma S 5
#sTgammaS resulting in the Sternberg  slope: #sTgamma. The Sternberg
slope has been determined to 35–40 msec/item, hence Tgamma <
25msec ( fgamma 5 40 Hz) in multiple psychophysical studies.
While this strategy may make it possible to estimate Tgamma psy-
chophysically, there are not yet clear strategies for determining
the frequency of theta psychophysically. Thus, we cannot suggest
how the framework of oscillatory models would provide an inde-
pendent way of measuring storage capacity on the basis of purely
psychophysical data.
The great advantage of the oscillatory memory models is that
they can be tested by recording brain rhythms in humans per-
forming STM tasks. So far there are no reports on ongoing gamma
activity measured during the Sternberg  task. However, in several
recent studies it has been possible to measure ongoing theta ac-
tivity in subjects performing the Sternberg task (Jensen & Tesche
2000; Raghavachari et al. 1999). In these studies the theta fre-
quency during the retention interval of the Sternberg task was
measured at 7–8 Hz. The on- and offset of the theta activity cor-
related with the events of the task, whereas the frequency was in-
dependent of the memory load. Applying the theta frequencies
measured in these experiments and the gamma frequency esti-
mated from the Sternberg slope, the upper limits of STM is about
5–6 items. Future studies in which both theta and gamma are
measured simultaneously will allow a more precise estimate. Sev-
eral studies hint that this will be possible in the future. In a recent
EEG study, Tallon-Baudry et al. (1999) have reported ongoing
gamma activity during the retention period of a delayed-match-
ing-to-sample task. The frequency of the gamma activity ranged
from 24 to 60 Hz which is too broad to be used for estimating the
STM capacity. There have also been attempts to manipulate the
frequency of the gamma rhythm. By delivering periodic auditory
stimuli in the gamma range (or half the gamma frequency), Burle
and Bonnet (2000) sought to entrain the gamma generators in hu-
mans performing the Sternberg task. Consistent with the oscilla-
tory memory model they were able to increase or decrease the
Sternberg slope by supposedly driving the gamma generators to
higher or lower frequencies.
In conclusion, it is now possible to envision experiments which
will rigorously test oscillatory models of STM. It may be possible
to determine by direct measurement how many gamma cycles oc-
cur during a theta cycle while a subject is actually performing a
STM task. If this number correlates with storage capacity, as mea-
sured psychophysically, it would lend credence to oscillatory mod-
els and provide insight into the absolute magnitude of capacity, in-
dependent of assumptions about chunking.
The magic number four: Can it explain
Sternberg’s serial memory scan data?
Jerwen Jou
Department of Psychology and Anthropology, University of Texas-Pan
American, Edinburg, TX 78539-2999. jjou@panam.edu
www.w3.panam.edu/~jjou
Abstract: Cowan’s concept of a pure short-term memory (STM) capacity
limit is equivalent to that of memory subitizing. However, a robust phe-
nomenon well known in the Sternberg paradigm, that is, the linear in-
crease of RT as a function of memory set size is not consistent with this
concept. Cowan’s STM capacity theory will remain incomplete until it can
account for this phenomenon.
After almost half a century of being imbued in the doctrine of
magic number 7, one is reminded by Cowan’s target article that
this number may not be as sure a thing as most people have be-
lieved it to be. Cowan’s target article poses some serious chal-
lenges to a long established tenet about memory and provides the
field with new ideas and the vigor necessary for the continued ad-
vancement of our discipline. However, some well established facts
in the short-term-memory (STM) literature seem to be incom-
patible with Cowan’s characterization of the pure STM capacity
limit. The concept of pure capacity limit of 4 has to account for
these well known STM facts if it is to become a serious competi-
tor of, and a possible alternative to Miller’s (1956) theory of STM
capacity of 7 6 2.
Cowan argues that a pure measure of STM storage capacity,
uncontaminated by rehearsal (or the use of other mnemonic de-
vices such as chunking) or the mental processing sometimes re-
quired beyond simple retaining, can be obtained. The size of this
capacity is 4. One crucial defining property of the information
held in this pure STM storage capacity, according to Cowan, is its
being the target of the momentary focus of attention. Any infor-
mation within this window of attentional focus is fully activated
and fully accessible. In other words, Cowan’s concept of a pure
STM storage is a memory version of the perceptual process known
as subitizing (Jensen et al. 1950; Jou & Aldridge 1999; Kaufman
et al. 1949; Klahr 1973; Logie & Baddeley 1957; Mandler & Shebo
1982), which is defined as a rapid, effortless, and yet highly accu-
rate immediate apprehension of the numerosity of a small num-
ber (typically under five) of items. It is also in essence the same as
Commentary/Cowan: The magical number 4
126
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2000) 24:1
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 41 (native) -----
what Ebbinghaus called the window of simultaneous conscious-
ness (cited in Slemecka 1954). Cowan implies in many parts of the
target articles and indicates, with support from empirical data,
that the reaction time (RT) for retrieving information from mem-
ory sets within the size of the pure STM limit remains relatively
low and constant, but shows a sudden large increase as the mem-
ory set size (MMS) exceeds 4, in parallel with the finding in per-
ceptual quantification of a discontinuity in RT functions from the
subitizing range to the counting range (beyond 3 or 4 items)
(Mandler & Shebo 1982). But, is there such a parallel?
The concept of a smaller-sized STM storage, which is the mo-
mentary focus of attention, or the window of simultaneous con-
sciousness, must account for a very robust phenomenon in STM
literature if it is to become a viable theory of STM. The phenom-
enon is the linear increase of RT as a function of MMS, first
brought forth by Sternberg’s seminal papers (Sternberg 1966;
1969) and later replicated by countless studies conducted in dif-
ferent contexts and with different test materials (Sternberg 1975).
If items reside within the attention-focused window of simultane-
ous consciousness, why does the time required to access or re-
trieve an item from this range increase linearly with MMS so con-
sistently and reliably? Cowan presents some cases where the RT
for memory retrieval increases little until the MMS exceeds 4.
How can the concept of memory subitizing and the data cited by
the author in support of it be reconciled with the even larger body
of data that is consistent with the Sternberg’s concept of serial
memory scan?
Furthermore, contrary to the finding cited in the target article
of a shallow slope of RT functions associated with MMS of 4 or
smaller, and a steeper slope for MMS past 4, a considerable num-
ber of studies have shown the opposite pattern of results. In these
studies, the RT functions for MMS of 6 or smaller are typically
characterized by steep linearity. But as the MMS exceeds 6, the
functions become essentially flat (Baddeley & Ecob 1973; Bur-
rows & Okada 1975; Okada & Burrows 1978) Those results were
interpreted as suggesting that a serial access mode was in opera-
tion for small MSSs, but that a direct access mode is adopted when
MSS exceeds 6. Jou (1998) used a fixed set version of the Stern-
berg task with MMSs varying from 1 to 20 and memory-set items
randomly and repeatedly sampled from the 50 U.S. state names.
RT increased at about 66 msec/item up to the MMS of 6 and then
1eve1ed off to an insignificant 7 msec/item past MSS 6. This was
consistent with the findings of the above-noted studies. The at-
tention focus theme emphasized throughout Cowan’s target arti-
cles would have predicted results of reversed pattern.
Jou and Aldridge (1999) had subjects estimate the serial posi-
tions of letters in the alphabet and the alphabetic distances be-
tween two letters. This task can be considered to involve a form of
memory quantification of some overlearned magnitude facts. The
results were that, for the serial position estimation, the RT/alpha-
betic serial position functions were linear and steep up to the se-
rial position of 6 or 7, past which the RT functions turned essen-
tially flat. The RT functions for the alphabetic distance judgment
showed basically the same pattern except that the steep linear por-
tion was reduced to a magnitude of about 4. Although these re-
sults are highly counterintuitive in that memory quantification
seems to operate in a serial fashion for small values, but in a par-
allel fashion for large values, they are consistent with Burrows and
Okada (1975), Okada and Burrows (1978), and Baddeley and
Ecob (1973) findings. Jou and Aldridge (1999) concluded that
there is no memory subitizing, unlike in the perceptual domain.
They suggested that there is a fundamental difference between
quantification in memory and that in perception because in per-
ception, stimuli are physically present whereas in memory they
have to be internally represented, which consumes resources and
prevents subitizing from taking place. Perceptual subitizing, ac-
cording to Jou and Aldridge (1999), is a result of having an over-
abundance of attentional resources available. In memory, this
rarely occurs because of the resource demands made by the men-
tal representation process (the only exception perhaps being when
the memory representation and retrieval processes are automa-
tized through overlearning).
Again, Cowan’s concept of a small STM window of direct and
simultaneous access of information must explain the above data to
be a viable theory. Specifically, it has to account for (1) the robust
linear increase of RT up to a MSS of 6 (a phenomenon suggesting
a lack of simultaneous consciousness for the information) and (2)
the leveling off of the RT functions as MSS exceeds 6 (which is the
opposite of what Cowan’s theory would predict).
Also incompatible with the author’s view was the serial position
confusion pattern, ironically cited (Nairne 1991; 1992) by Cowan
to support his concept of STM capacity. That is, the confusion oc-
curred mostly within 3 or 4 positions of the target item. This con-
tradicts the basic concept of subitizing. If the information process-
ing within the small range of 4 items is like perceptual subitizing,
then no errors, or at most a minimum number of errors should oc-
cur, because “perfect performance” is a hallmark of subitizing.
Finally, Cowan attempts to define a condition under which a
pure STM storage capacity can be measured, that is, one in which
the memory system is neither overburdened nor under-taxed. This
seems to involve a very delicate balance between too much and too
little resource demand. For the theory to be formalized, this deli-
cate balanced condition has to be more clearly spelled out. It is pos-
sible that a MMS of 4 is not the STM limit, but an optimal work-
ing range of STM. Capacity is the largest possible amount of
information that STM can hold. If the focus of attention can be
switched, as the author suggested, between two or three blocks of
three items each (assuming the chunking is not formed by relying
on long-term-memory knowledge, but by using temporal proxim-
ity), and if all three chunks are available within a certain short pe-
riod of time (though not necessarily simultaneously as in the case
of focused attention), why can’t all three chunks be considered
parts of the STM? What is the a priori basis for limiting the STM
capacity to the span of focused attention, or simultaneous con-
sciousness? Grouping several numbers together into a chunk by
reading these numbers faster as a unit or delivering items at an
overall faster rate (as in Waugh & Norman 1965, cited in the target
article) increases the total amount of information that can be held
in STM by minimizing the loss of information over time. Why can’t
it be justified to push the STM limit to its maximum by delivering
the items at a faster rate? Cowan states that the presentation rate
should not be too slow, either. Again, concerning the presentation
rate, there seems to be a delicate balance in order to demonstrate
a capacity of 4. What this exact rate of presentation is did not seem
to have been clearly specified in the target article either.
“Magical number 5” in a chimpanzee
Nobuyuki Kawai and Tetsuro Matsuzawa
Section of Language and Intelligence, Department of Behavior Brain
Science, Primate Research Institute, Kyoto University, Kanrin, Inuyama City,
Aichi Pref. Japan 484-8506. {nkawai; matsuzaw}@pri.kyoto-u.ac.jp
www.pri.kyoto-u.ac.jp/koudou-shinkei/shikou/index.html
Abstract: One of our recent studies has revealed that a numerically
trained chimpanzee can memorize a correct sequence of five numbers
shown on a monitor. Comparative investigations with humans show very
similar patterns of errors in the two species, suggesting humans and chim-
panzee share homologous memory processes. Whether or not 5 is a pure
capacity limit for the chimpanzee remains an empirical question.
Cowan has proposed a new “magical number 4” in human adults
from a careful reconsideration of short-term memory processes.
In his theoretical account of the capacity limit, Cowan suggests
that the “capacity limit might have become optimized through
adaptive processes in evolution” (sect. 4.1). If this is the case, we
can expect to find similar memory processes in non-human ani-
Commentary/Cowan: The magical number 4
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2000) 24:1
127
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 42 (native) -----
mals. Chimpanzees are good candidates for investigating the ori-
gins of our cognitive evolution, being the closest relatives of hu-
mans among living creatures.
Recently, we found that a numerically trained chimpanzee had
a memory for numbers in several aspects similar to humans
(Kawai & Matsuzawa 2000b). The chimpanzee called Ai, has more
than 20 years of experimental experience. Prior to the memory
test, Ai learned to count dots on computer monitor or real ob-
jects and to select the corresponding Arabic numerals on a touch-
sensitive monitor (Matsuzawa 1985). Ai also learned to order the
numbers from zero to nine in sequence, regardless of the inter-in-
teger distance (Biro & Matsuzawa 1999; Tomonaga & Matsuzawa
2000). Utilizing her numerical skills, we set up a memory task. A
set of numbers (e.g., 1, 3, 4, 6, and 9) was spatially distributed on
a screen. Ai was required to touch the numbers in an ascending
order. Immediately after the selection of the lowest number (i.e.,
1), all the remaining numbers were masked by a white square.
Hence Ai had to memorize the numbers (now masked) accurately
to select the correct sequence. She reached more than 95% cor-
rect with four numbers and 65% with five, significantly above
chance in each case (17 and 4%, respectively). This indicates that
she could memorize the correct sequence of any five numbers
(Kawai & Matsuzawa 2000b).
The most interesting result concerned Ai’s response time. The
longest response times were obtained for the first number of the
sequence. Response times were shortest for the other numbers,
and did not differ from one number to another. Thus, her mean
reaction time of first response to a set size of five was 721 msec,
and then 446, 426, 466, and 41, respectively, for the remaining
four, (now masked) numbers. This pattern of responses is similar
to that of humans. For example, mean reaction times of five adult
humans in the test were 1,430, 524, 490, 741, 672 msec, for each
response, suggesting that both Ai and humans memorize the num-
bers and their locations before the first response (Biro & Mar-
suzawa 1999; Kawai, in press).
One may argue that both Ai and humans might use a rehearsal
strategy during the longest reaction time preceding the first
choice. The accuracy of humans decreased when the numbers
were masked 750 msec after the initiation of the trial. However,
Ai’s reaction times were almost half of those of humans, and they
remained approximately the same for the masked and unmasked
trials. Although rehearsal constitutes a major cause of compound
STM estimate, rehearsal was impossible because Ai’s fast reaction
times seem incompatible with rehearsal. Thus, Ai’s performance
in memorizing five items may reflect a “pure capacity limit.”
There is a possibility that other mnemonic strategies were in-
volved in the task. For instance, one might suspect that Ai used
the configuration of the numbers as possible spatial cues for re-
sponding. The procedure ruled out this possibility however, be-
cause locations were randomized across trials and all trials were
unique in each session, thereby demonstrating that long-term
memory did not contribute to the performance. In addition, a de-
tailed analysis of error trials confirmed that neither Ai nor the hu-
mans used spatial cues. The majority of errors (84.1% for Ai,
84.5% for humans) consisted in skipping one number only (e.g.,
selecting 1–3–6 instead of 1–3–4–6–9). The remaining errors
were also independent of spatial factors. Most (87.5% for Ai, and
82.0% for humans) consisted of selecting the highest number in
the sequence (i.e., 1–9 or 1–3–9 instead of 1–3–4–6–9), regard-
less of the spatial arrangement of the numbers on the screen.
These trials were regarded as showing a recency effect because
the highest numbers were the last to be processed in the pre-
planned sequence. Even more interesting, the frequency of these
last numbers was proportional to the size of the greatest number:
more errors of this type were made when the sequence contained
a 9 as the last number than when it contained an 8, and that ten-
dency remained for the lowest numbers. All these results suggest
that, like humans, Ai built up a linear representation of numbers,
from 0 to 9, and referred to it in performing the task. Similarity in
the error patterns for the two species moreover suggests that their
memory systems may share homologous mechanisms (Kawai &
Matsuzawa 2000a; in press).
Because masking occurred at the first touch, one might argue
that the memory span of the chimpanzee is four instead of five. As
demonstrated above, both Ai and the humans had already planned
their response at the onset of each trial: there is thus the possibil-
ity that the first number was included in the memorized sequence.
Even more, according to our recent test for six numbers Ai’s per-
formance was about 30%, significantly higher than the chance
level (0.8%). We do not deny the possibility that the “pure capac-
ity limit” of the chimpanzee might be less than four. Further ex-
perimental studies will be required determine this. Nevertheless,
because comparable data were obtained in Ai and the humans, our
study strongly suggests that if there are any “pure capacity limit”
differences between the two species, they should be quantitative
rather than qualitative. The essential point is that humans share
quite a similar memory process with chimpanzees.
What forms the chunks in a subject’s
performance? Lessons from the CHREST
computational model of learning
Peter C.R. Lane, Fernand Gobet, and Peter C-H. Cheng
ESRC Centre for Research in Development, Instruction and Training, 
School of Psychology, University of Nottingham, Nottingham NG7 2RD,
United Kingdom. {pcl; frg; pcc}@psychology.nottingham.ac.uk
www.psychology.nottingham.ac.uk/staff/{Peter.Lane; Fernand.Gobet;
Peter.Cheng}
Abstract: Computational models of learning provide an alternative tech-
nique for identifying the number and type of chunks used by a subject in
a specific task. Results from applying CHREST to chess expertise support
the theoretical framework of Cowan and a limit in visual short-term mem-
ory capacity of 3–4 looms. An application to learning from diagrams illus-
trates different identifiable forms of chunk.
Cowan’s theoretical framework (sect. 2) assumes that the “focus of
attention is capacity-limited,” and that “deliberately recalled [in-
formation] is restricted to this limit in the focus of attention.” This
framework is compatible with the EPAM/CHREST family of
computational models, and this commentary highlights the role
that a model of learning can play in clarifying the nature of chunks.
CHREST (Chunk Hierarchy and REtrieval STructure) is a com-
putational model of expert memory in chess players (Gobet 1998;
Gobet & Simon, in press), and is based on the earlier EPAM model
(Feigenbaum & Simon 1984) of perceptual memory. CHREST
possesses an input device (simulated eye), a visual short-term
memory (STM) for storing intermediate results (equivalent to
the focus of attention), and a long-term memory (LTM) based
around a discrimination network for retrieving chunks of infor-
mation. Each chunk is learnt from information in the visual field,
using the STM to compose information across one or more eye
fixations.
The classic recall task (Chase & Simon 1973; Cowan, sect. 3.4.1;
De Groot 1946; 1978) has been used to show that subjects recall
information in chunks. The task requires the model/subject to ob-
serve a display for a set time period, and then reconstruct the stim-
ulus from memory; in simulations, the chunks within the model’s
STM are used as the reconstructed response. In a study of chess
expertise, Gobet (1998) showed how the accuracy of the recon-
structed position depends on the number and size of chunks
which the model identifies; the size of chunk depends on the level
of expertise, but the number can be systematically varied, and a
value of 3 or 4 was found to best match the performance of differ-
ent levels of player, providing further empirical support for the
findings of Cowan. Also significant is that the better performance
of experts is explained by their use of larger chunks (typically, mas-
ter chess players recall chunks of twice the size of average club
Commentary/Cowan: The magical number 4
128
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2000) 24:1
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 43 (native) -----
players), and the number and content of these chunks may be ex-
tracted from the model (see also Gobet & Simon 1998; in press)
Chase and Simon (1973) did, however, find that expert chess
players appeared to recall more chunks than novices. As discussed
in Gobet and Simon (1998), these findings do not contradict the
existence of a fixed capacity limit, because additional factors affect
the subject’s performance; in this case, the number of pieces which
the player can pick up. So, are the chunks observed in the subject’s
performance due to previously learnt information or to other fac-
tors relating to the task or cognitive performance? This question
may be answered through a simulation of the learning process. The
role of learnt knowledge in producing chunks in performance is
currently being explored in a problem-solving version of CHREST
(Lane et al. 2000a) which learns a diagrammatic representation 
for solving electric circuit problems. In Lane et al. (2000b) differ-
ent computational models were analysed based on their respec-
tive representational, learning, and retrieval strategies for hand-
ling high-level information. From these two studies, it is clear that
chunks observed in the model’s performance may arise from a
number of causes. Three of the more apparent are as follows:
(1) A chunk may be observed in the output because of an ex-
plicit representation in the system’s LTM, which is the underlying
representation used in the EPAM/CHREST family of computa-
tional models. For example, Richman (1996) describe a chunk as
“any unit of information that has been familiarised and has be-
come meaningful.”
(2) A chunk may be observed in the output because the input
has matched a stored chunk based on some similarity-based crite-
rion; this is familiar from neural network approaches.
(3) A single chunk may be observed although it is based on a
functional composition/decomposition of the stimulus and its sub-
components. For example, subjects may retrieve and store multi-
ple chunks within their STM, but the performance based on these
multiple chunks may then give the appearance of a single chunk.
The presence of three distinct processes yielding chunk-like be-
haviour in such models clarifies how the observational character-
istics of chunks inter-relate with learnt knowledge, and hence clar-
ifies the connection between observed and learnt chunks. This
connection assists in developing a deeper understanding of the ca-
pacity limit, especially in areas where the subject is continuously
learning new chunks for composite objects. Most importantly,
only by modelling the entire learning history of each subject can
we really attempt to probe the content and format of chunks ma-
nipulated in STM, and thereby estimate STM capacity.
The focus of attention across space 
and across time
Brian McElreea and Barbara Anne Dosherb
aDepartment of Psychology, New York University, New York, NY 10003;
bCognitive Science, University of California, Irvine, CA 92717;
bdm@psych.nyu.edu
bdosher@uci.edu
www.psych.nyu.edu/dept/faculty/mcelree/research.html
www.aris.ss.uci.edu/cogsci/personnel/dosher/dosher.html
Abstract: Measures of retrieval speed for recently presented events show
a sharp dichotomy between representations in focal attention and repre-
sentations that are recently processed but no longer attended. When in-
formation is presented over time, retrieval measures show that focal at-
tention and rapid privileged access is limited to the most recently
processed unit or chunk, not the last 3–5 chunks that Cowan estimates
from various recall procedures.
Cowan presents a diverse array of evidence to support the claim
that the focal attention has a capacity of 3–4 chunks. Much of this
evidence comes from studies examining processing limits in multi-
element displays in which all elements are simultaneously dis-
played. These studies may provide good evidence for the claim
that there is a 3-to 4-item limit on the simultaneous coding and re-
production of elements, at least in some domains. Cowan believes
the same limit holds for sequentially displayed elements, namely,
elements distributed over time rather than space. However,
Cowan’s estimates are based largely on indirect measurements.
Crucially, measures of retrieval speed from studies using sequen-
tial presentation provide direct evidence for a distinct representa-
tional state associated with the focus of attention that is limited to
the most recently processed unit. These measures indicate, con-
tra Cowan, that only one chunk is maintained across a dynamically
changing environment. One possibility is that the capacity of focal
attention differs for simultaneously available elements arrayed in
space, and for representations encountered over time. If Cowan’s
analysis is correct, perhaps we can attend to more than one si-
multaneously presented element; however, we do not appear to be
able to process more than one temporally extended event.
Cowan’s evidence. Cowan forwards, as an estimate of the ca-
pacity of focal attention, findings that the number of recalled
items often converges on 3–4. However, recall performance is de-
termined by a confluence of factors other than the capacity of fo-
cal attention. Undoubtedly, these estimates partly reflect the re-
call of representations outside focal attention, analogous to the
way that serial position functions were classically argued to reflect
output from both long-term and short-term. Further, recall is lim-
ited by forgetting that occurs over the learning phase and during
the recall process (e.g., Dosher & May1998). The number of items
recalled, even when the preconditions enumerated by Cowan
(sect. 1.2) are met, provides at best an indirect estimate of the ca-
pacity of focal attention, and is equated with focal attention pri-
marily by assumption.
Retrieval speed. The claim that focal attention is distinct from
more passive memory representations implies that information in
focal attention is accessed more immediately than information in
a passive state. Measures for access speed can provide direct evi-
dence for distinct representational states if access speed can be
measured for memories with different strengths (or probability of
access). Unfortunately, RT does not provide pure estimates of re-
trieval speed because it is affected by memory strength (e.g.,
Dosher 1984; McElree & Dosher 1989; Wickelgren et al. 1980).
However, retrieval speed can be directly measured with the re-
sponse-signal speed-accuracy tradeoff (SAT) procedure. In this
procedure, subjects are cued to respond at some time after the on-
set of a test probe. With a suitable range of cue times, the full time
course of retrieval is evaluated, providing measures of when in-
formation first becomes available, the rate at which information
accrues over retrieval time, and the asymptotic level of observed
performance. The asymptote reflects the probability of retrieval,
and provides an estimate of memory strength. When accuracy de-
parts from chance, the rate at which it grows to asymptote jointly
measure retrieval speed. More accessible information should be
associated with an earlier intercept or faster rate, irrespective of
differences in asymptotic accuracy.
Wickelgren et al. (1980) used a probe recognition task to ex-
amine SAT time-course profiles for accessing representations in a
list of 16 sequentially-presented items. Asymptotic accuracy de-
creased monotonically with the decreasing recency of the tested
item, indicating that memory strength systematically declines as
time or activity is interpolated between study and test. Crucially,
however, retrieval speed was constant across all serial positions save
the last, most recently studied position. Retrieval speed was 50%
faster when no items intervened between study and test. The most
recently studied item received privileged access. This finding has
been replicated with different procedures and materials, including
a Sternberg task (McElree & Dosher 1989), a forced-choice recog-
nition task (McElree & Dosher 1993), a paired-associate recogni-
tion task (Dosher 1981), and even when the task required judging
whether a test item rhymed or was synonymous with a studied item
(McElree 1996). Related effects are found in judgments of re-
cency (McElree & Dosher 1993) and the n-back task (McElree, in
press).
Commentary/Cowan: The magical number 4
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2000) 24:1
129
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 44 (native) -----
This sharp dichotomy in retrieval speed – fast access for the
most recently processed item and a slower, but constant retrieval
speed for all less recently processed items – provides direct evi-
dence for two representational states, one associated with focal at-
tention, and the other associated with memory representations
outside of the focus of attention. Although rapid access is usually
reserved for the most recently processed single item, McElree
(1998) found that rapid access accrues to multiple items if they
form a chunk or unit: the retrieval advantage extended to three
items if they were members of the most recently experienced cat-
egory. Further, the retrieval advantage is not bound to the last po-
sitions in a list, but instead reflects the last cognitive operation
(McElree 1997): an advantage is found for a non-recent category
when a category cue is used to retrieve and restore items to focal
attention.
Conclusions. Collectively, direct measures of retrieval speed
indicate that focal attention, associated with especially rapid re-
trieval, is more limited than the three or four items suggested by
the indirect analysis forwarded by Cowan. Measures of retrieval
indicate that we are only able to maintain one temporally extended
event or epoch in focal attention.
Capacity limits in continuous old-new
recognition and in short-term 
implicit memory
Elinor McKone
Division of Psychology, Australian National University, ACT 0200, Australia.
elinor.mckone@anu.edu.au
www.psyc.anu.edu.au/staff/elinor.html
Abstract: Using explicit memory measures, Cowan predicts a new cir-
cumstance in which the central capacity limit of 4 chunks should obtain.
Supporting results for such an experiment, using continuous old-new
recognition, are described. With implicit memory measures, Cowan as-
sumes that short-term repetition priming reflects the central capacity
limit. I argue that this phenomenon instead reflects limits within individ-
ual perceptual processing modules.
Cowan makes a prediction (sects. 1.2 and 4.3.7) regarding a new
circumstance in which the capacity of short-term explicit memory
should be limited to 4 chunks. This is where subjects must only in-
dicate, as rapidly as possible, if a particular item had been included
in the stimulus set previously, and in which some items would be
repeated in the set but other, novel items also would be intro-
duced.” Experiment 4 of McKone (1995) used such a design. Each
trial presented a single word or pseudoword (e.g., mave), in con-
tinuous sequences of 250–300 trials. Approximately 65% of trials
presented items new to the experiment; the other 35% were a re-
peat of an item seen earlier in the list. Repeats occurred at vari-
ous “lags” (i.e., number of intervening items: range 0–23). The
task was old-new recognition to every trial in the sequence, with
reaction time for correct old responses as the dependent measure.
This experiment appears to satisfy Cowan’s general criteria for
producing a pure, rather than compound, capacity measure: the
fact that half the items were nonsense words and the lack of par-
ticular semantic associations between successive words, should
limit chunking across items; the presentation rate (2 secs per trial)
and the very long lists should limit active rehearsal.
Results (see Fig. 1) were both consistent and inconsistent, with
Cowan’s predictions. A basic capacity limit of 4 items was sup-
ported. In calculating the capacity, my logic is that (1) to be com-
pared with previous items, the current stimulus must be in the fo-
cus of attention, (2) any previous item still in the focus of attention
should be recognised more quickly as old than an item which has
been pushed out, and (3) some sort of discontinuity in RTs should
therefore appear at the point at which the capacity limit is
reached. Figure 1 indicates that repeats at 0, 1, and 2 intervening
items produce noticeably faster RTs than repeats at 3–9 inter-
vening items. This discontinuity between lags 2 and 3 corresponds
to a short-term memory capacity of 4 items: at lag 2, the contents
of short-term memory are the current word, its first presentation,
and two intervening items.
Cowan’s exact prediction for the old-new recognition experi-
ment, however, was that “the mean reaction time should be much
faster when the item had been presented within the most recent
3 or 4 items than when it was presented only earlier in the se-
quence.” This suggests that the discontinuity in RTs should take
the form a flat function up to 4 chunks (i.e., all items within the
focus of attention show equally fast RTs), followed by decay. The
data, in contrast, show smooth and rapid decay up to 4 items, fol-
lowed by much slower decay. Thus, while Cowan’s prediction
seems to presume that all items in the focus of attention are
equally strong, the RT data instead suggest that older items fade
from the limited capacity mechanism (at least without active re-
hearsal). This would seem to reconcile a capacity limit with the
demonstrated importance of time-based factors when rehearsal is
allowed (e.g., effects of articulation rate on word span tasks).
Turning to implicit, rather than explicit, memory tasks, Cowan
cites my demonstration of short-term implicit memory (i.e., an ad-
ditional short-lived repetition priming advantage in tasks such as
lexical decision or word naming) as supporting evidence for a ca-
pacity limit. However, it is not at all clear to me that short-term
implicit memory is affected by the central capacity limit, rather
than by module-specific processing factors. Theoretically, each
item in turn in a lexical decision or naming task must fall within
the focus of attention to allow a response to be made to that item.
Unlike explicit memory tasks, however, no overt comparison of
more than one item is ever required, and so it is not necessary that
both presentations of the target are simultaneously held in Con-
scious awareness. Using Cowan’s terminology (sect. 4.3.6), an im-
plicit memory task requires only “chunks” (e.g., x,y,z,x), and not
“chunks in relation to some concept” (e.g., recently seen [x,y,z,x]),
as does explicit memory.
Empirically, McKone (1995) dissociated the apparent “capac-
ity” of short-term repetition priming from that of short-term ex-
plicit memory. With written stimuli, the explicit recognition mem-
ory experiment described above obtained the 4 chunk capacity
limit for both words and pseudowords; however, implicit mem-
ory in lexical decision and naming, produced a purported capac-
ity limit of 5 items for words but only 2 items for pseudowords.
McKone and Dennis (2000) then demonstrated that implicit “ca-
pacity” varies consistently with the demands of visual versus audi-
Commentary/Cowan: The magical number 4
130
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2000) 24:1
Figure 1 (McKone).
Explicit short-term memory in continuous
old-new recognition (data from McKone, 1995, Experiment 4; av-
eraged across high frequency and low frequency word conditions).
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 45 (native) -----
tory word identification. Unlike (type) written words, the ambi-
guity of a continuous speech signal is so severe that a word can of-
ten be understood only following the arrival of several successive
speech segments. Thus, the auditory word identification system
might need to retain more items simultaneously active than does
the visual word identification system and, since real words often
initially sound like nonsense words, pseudowords might need to
be retained as long as real words. Consistent with these proposals,
short-term repetition effects indicated “capacities” of 4 for words
and 2 for pseudowords with written presentation, but at least 5–
6 (and possibly more) for both words and pseudowords with spo-
ken presentation. It is not obvious why a single central capacity
should be responsible for these very different limits.
Overall, Cowan has provided convincing evidence of a central
capacity limit (of 4 chunks) in short-term explicit memory, pre-
sumably corresponding to the focus of attention. The data he re-
views, however, do not directly address the question of whether or
not individual processing modules (perceptual, cognitive or mo-
tor) also have their own “capacity” limits outside the focus of at-
tention. Clear theoretical reasons exist for limits on the number of
items thatcan be simultaneously active within a single domain
since left over activation from previous items will interfere with
identification of the currently-presented item: in visual word
recognition, many models in fact assume a “capacity limit” of only
one item (the current stimulus kills all traces of previous words).
Magical attention
Peter M. Milner
Department of Psychology, McGill University, Montreal, QC, H3A 1B1,
Canada. pmilne@po-box.mcgill.ca
Abstract: Cowan postulates that the capacity of short-term memory is lim-
ited to the number of items to which attention can be simultaneously di-
rected. Unfortunately, he endows attention with unexplained properties,
such as being able to locate the most recent inputs to short-term memory,
so his theory does little more than restate the data.
Cowan’s thorough review of memory-span data provides convinc-
ing evidence that in the absence of rehearsal the span is about 4
items. This information is useful, but how much does it further our
knowledge to be told that the span is limited because the “focus
of attention” can hold only about 4 items at a time?
Cowan adopts Lisman and Idiart’s (1995) theory that attention
is dependent on oscillations of cortical potentials. A cortical wave
of about 10 Hz is supposed to select items from an unlimited
short-term store; other wavelets at a frequency of about 40 Hz
then select one item each. Assuming that such a process were neu-
rally feasible, it still does not explain why successive waves select
the same items, moreover the wave frequencies vary considerably,
as Cowan points out. Apart from his uncritical recourse to this the-
ory of attention to explain the magical figure of 4, Cowan confines
his discussion to cognitive models, so it may be unfair to criticise
the theory on neural grounds. Nevertheless, I believe that con-
sideration of the constraints imposed by neurophysiology may be
helpful.
In the first place, it is unlikely that sensory information can be
moved to a focus of attention except in a metaphorical sense. At-
tention may change the intensity with which visual neurons re-
spond to a stimulus (Fuster et al. 1985; Moran & Desimone 1985),
but not their location. Furthermore, neurons fired by objects in
different parts of the visual field are spatially segregated only in
the primary visual cortex. At higher levels of the visual system,
neurons have large overlapping fields (Gross et al. 1974; Miyashita
1993). The relative positions in space of the objects they represent
do not determine the cortical location of the neurons. Thus indi-
vidual items in the visual field cannot be selected by spatially di-
rected attention. At this level of the visual path, selective attention
must be delivered, presumably via learned connections, to widely
scattered neurons. In other words, if attention is to be directed to
a book, the attention signal must find the diffuse cloud of neurons
that represent visual features common to books.
It is, thus, clear that the neural substrate of attention is not a
unitary system that can be pointed like a spotlight or a camera,
much less a static process into which peripatetic images can be di-
rected. Apparently it must be a highly organized system of cen-
trifugal paths, every bit as specific as the centripetal sensory paths
that it modulates (Milner 1999). At least some of the neural activ-
ity corresponding to attention originates in the response planning
mechanism where the intentions of the subject are elaborated.
Neural representations of objects, related either innately or
through prior experience to the task in hand, need to be selected
by specific facilitation as part of the planned response.
According to the above account, what Cowan calls the focus of
attention must vary widely depending on motivation, or the task.
Thirst, for example, facilitates the sensory input from all sources
of water known to the subject, increasing the probability that if
one of them happens to be present it will gain control of the re-
sponse mechanism. In the absence of a matching sensory input,
the dominant thirst-quenching intention facilitates items in long-
term memory with which it has acquired associations. The more
objects that have been associated with slaking thirst, the more
widespread the initial attentional facilitation. Any input amplified
by attentional facilitation is then likely to determine the response
that is released.
In most memory-span measurements, the subject’s task is to re-
call recently heard or read words. These must be distinguished
from all the other words in the subject’s vocabulary by short-term
changes in the thresholds or connections of corresponding neu-
rons. At a given moment during recall only one word is being re-
leased to the motor system for pronunciation (or writing). One
problem is to discover why it is not the most recently heard word
(which presumably retains the strongest trace), another is to dis-
cover why the system can cope with no more than about 4 or 5
words. Are the later words of a series less effectively tagged at the
time of storage or does recall of the earlier words interfere with
retrieval of the later ones? How important a factor is decay of the
trace with time? Can rehearsal of the earlier words ever be com-
pletely prevented? It seems to me that the limit of four words is
at least as much to do with decay and interference of the short-
term synaptic changes than anything related to attention.
Another datum cited by Cowan in support of his theory is that
the subitizing limit is about 4. He bypasses the difficult problem
of how items simultaneously present within his postulated span of
attention are summed to elicit a numerical response. Of course he
is not alone in not having solved that problem, but it is at least pos-
sible that the process involves discriminating a signal generated by
x objects from that generated by x 6 1 objects. The ratio of x to x
6 1 may become too small to permit discrimination when x is
greater than about 4. I am confident that most people are able to
discriminate instantly between 10 objects and 20 objects without
eye movements or counting, which might be interpreted as indi-
cating that at least 20 objects can simultaneously lie within
Cowan’s focus of attention in some circumstances.
Commentary/Cowan: The magical number 4
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2000) 24:1
131
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 46 (native) -----
Nothing left in store . . . but how do we
measure attentional capacity?
Sergio Morra
Università di Genova, DISA-Sezione Psicologia, 16126 Genova, Italy.
morra@nous.unige.it
Abstract: I compare the concepts of “activation” and “storage” as founda-
tions of short-term memory, and suggest that an attention-based view of
STM does not need to posit specialized short-term stores. In particular, no
compelling evidence supports the hypothesis of time-limited stores. Iden-
tifying sources of activation, examining the role of activated procedural
knowledge, and studying working memory development are central issues
in modelling capacity-limited focal attention.
Cowan’s main thesis is that short-term memory depends on at-
tention. “The focus of attention is capacity-limited . . . Any infor-
mation that is deliberately recalled, whether from a recent stimu-
lus or from long-term memory, is restricted to this limit in the
focus of attention . . . The same general principles of activation
and de-activation might apply across all types of code” (sect. 1). So
far, so good.
However, Cowan often calls “store” the capacity-limited focus
of attention (whereas Cowan 1988, made it clear that it is an acti-
vated portion of long-term memory), and leaves as an open issue
the existence of “supplementary storage mechanisms, which . . .
are time-limited rather than capacity-limited” (sect. 1). I think that
an attention-based view of STM entails that it is regarded as an ac-
tivated part of LTM, which is in turn incompatible with the con-
cept of short-term storage. (Connecting an activation-based cen-
tral executive with specialized slave stores has been a long-standing
problem for Baddeley’s [1986] theory.)
“Storage” and “activation” are obviously metaphors, but not so
innocent and vague as to be interchangeable. They have empiri-
cally distinguishable consequences.
(1) If there are short-term stores, performance should never be
improved by occupying them with irrelevant materials (unless this
prevents use of inadequate strategies: Brandimonte et al. 1992).
In an activation-based system, instead, an irrelevant memory load
may sometimes pre-activate structures and thus enhance perfor-
mance. The latter proved to be the case (e.g., Hellige & Cox 1976;
van Strien & Bouma 1990).
(2) Storage models must specify flow of information transfer,
whereas activation models must specify time course of activation.
Numerous priming paradigms lend themselves to an activation ac-
count. Detailed models have been proposed for the time course
of activation in both positive and negative priming (e.g., Houghton
& Tipper 1994; Neely 1991). I am not aware of equally powerful
models of priming as information transfer among stores. As An-
derson (1983, p. 21) put it: “The results on associative priming
have shown us that the amount of information brought into work-
ing memory, at least temporarily, is very large.”
(3) If supplementary stores exist, then one should specify ei-
ther their capacity or duration. Numerous short-term stores had
been proposed in the literature, but only for one was a clear ca-
pacity estimation made. This was the “articulatory loop,” deemed
to hold as much phonological material as can be uttered in about
2 seconds (Baddeley et al. 1975; for converging evidence see Bad-
deley 1986; Hulme & Tordoff 1989; Schweickert & Boruff 1986).
Because this seems to be the only advantage gained by the stor-
age view, it is worthwhile to examine it more closely.
Early claims of falsification of a time-limited articulatory store
(Morra 1989, 1990; Morra & Stoffel 1991) remained unpublished.
Journal reviewers discarded them, sometimes even on the grounds
that the results were not credible, although some authors (e.g.,
Anderson & Matessa 1997) trusted them well and quoted them
extensively. However, evidence has continued to accumulate indi-
cating that, contrary to Baddeley et al.’s (1975) prediction, the ra-
tio of verbal recall to articulation rate is not a constant (e.g., Henry
1994; Hulme et al. 1991; Morra 2000). The few available cross-lin-
guistic estimates of the articulatory loop suggest that its capacity
is larger in Chinese than in English (Cheung & Kemper 1993),
and in turn, larger in English than in Italian (Morra et al. 1993) –
this seems rather paradoxical, for a supposedly universal compo-
nent of the mind’s architecture.
Explanatory alternatives to the articulatory loop have been sug-
gested for the word-length effect, such as output interference,
proactive interference, and complexity of speech programming
(see Brown & Hulme 1995; Caplan Rochon & Waters 1992;
Cowan et al. 1992; Henry 1991; Nairne et al. 1997; Service 1998).
In addition, various studies have found that verbal STM span is af-
fected by variables that have little effect on articulation rate, such
as word familiarity, frequency, grammar class, semantic variables,
and order of stimulus words. Hence, the articulatory loop model
has either been dismissed, or transformed (e.g., by Burgess &
Hitch 1997) into something radically different from the original
time-limited store. Furthermore, estimates of loop capacity are af-
fected by use of span procedure versus supra-span lists (Morra
1990; Mona & Stoffet 1991; Nicolson & Fawcett 1991). Thus, the
only supposedly precise estimate of a supplementary storage mech-
anism may have been an artifact, obtained fortuitously from supra-
span lists of English words.
At this point, I think, we can abandon the idea of specialized
short-term stores, and retain instead the view of working memory
as the activated part of LTM. Apparently separate STM modules
can be regarded as epi-phenomena of LTM modularity. Instead of
searching for different supplementary stores, we can think of dif-
ferent sources of activation; that is, working memory must be seen
as broader than the capacity-limited focus of attention, because
LTM units may also be activated by other sources. These may in-
clude current perceptual input, associative learning, top-down
processes from higher-order cognitive structures (e.g., Case 1974;
Pascual-Leone 1987), and of course, residual activation of items
that have recently been activated by the capacity-limited atten-
tional mechanism.
If we construe in this manner working memory and its relation
to the capacity-limited focal attention, then we can ask further
questions. One is whether this view accounts for short-term mem-
ory phenomena traditionally explained in terms of storage. It seems
so; for instance, Morra (2000) has presented a neo-Piagetian
model of verbal STM that does not include any time-limited spe-
cialized store.
A second question concerns the content of working memory.
Cowan implicitly suggests that it only includes declarative knowl-
edge, as one can infer from his mention of parietal lobes. How-
ever, LTM includes procedural as well as declarative knowledge,
and one may assume that procedural knowledge also needs to be
activated by attentional resources. In a neuropsychological per-
spective, Moscovitch and Umiltà (1990) conceived working mem-
ory as “whatever processes are currently active” (without distin-
guishing between anterior or posterior parts of the brain) and
suggested that its limits are set by the resources necessary for
mantaining information and operating on it. A corollary is that, if
also procedural information is considered (as some neo-Piagetian
theoreticians suggested; e.g., Pascual-Leone & Johnson 1991),
then the estimated size of focal attention may be more than 4
chunks.
A third question concerns individual and developmental differ-
ences and their measurement. An answer to measurement prob-
lems partly depends also on the assumptions one makes regarding
whether only declarative or also procedural information is
counted. These questions are central to neo-Piagetian theories.
Different positions have been expressed in the debate on capac-
ity measurement, for instance on whether an average person at the
highest point of cognitive development has a capacity of 4 or 7
units (Case 1985; 1995; Ha1ford 1993; Morra 1994; Morra et al.,
in press; Pascua1-Leone 1970; Pascual-Leone & Baillargeon
1994). Clearly, the last word in this debate has not yet been spo-
ken. Some results of my own research (Morra et al. 1988; 1991)
suggest, however, that early adolescents have a capacity of 5 or 6
Commentary/Cowan: The magical number 4
132
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2000) 24:1
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 47 (native) -----
units. This sort of developmental results may suggest that an av-
erage adult’s capacity possibly spans over 6 or 7 chunks of infor-
mation.
Partial matching theory 
and the memory span
David J. Murray
Department of Psychology, Queen’s University, Kingston, Ontario K7L 3N6,
Canada. murrayd@psyc.queensu.ca
Abstract: Partial matching theory, which maintains that some memory
representations of target items in immediate memory are overwritten by
others, can predict both a “theoretical” and an “actual” maximum memory
span provided no chunking takes place during presentation. The latter is
around 4 6 2 items, the exact number being determined by the degree of
similarity between the memory representations of two immediately suc-
cessive target items.
Cowan’s wonderful target article suggests that there is a “pure”
limit of about four items in immediate memory. He notes that we
do not, as yet, have an explanation for this limit. In this commen-
tary, I shall suggest that an explanation can be derived from par-
tial matching theory as described by Murray et al. (1998).
This theory was developed with the intention of predicting hit
and false alarm rates in immediate probed recognition tasks of the
type investigated by Wickelgren and Norman (1966) and Stern-
berg (1966), among others. In this task, a sequence of L target
items is presented, followed by a probe item that is either old or
new with respect to the target list. The participant’s task is to judge
whether the probe is indeed “old” or “new.”
In partial matching theory, m is defined as the probability that
two adjacent target items share a predetermined feature of im-
portance in memory encoding. Following Neath and Nairne
(1995), it was assumed by Murray et al. (1998) that the presence
of this common feature would entail that the second target would
overwrite the memory representation of the first target. Murray
et al. defined x to be the number of memory representations of
targets available at the time of onset of the probe and predicted
that:
x 5 S(1 2 m)i for i 5 0 to i 5 (L 2 1)
(1)
Equation 1 can be written alliteratively as
x 5 (1/m) [1 2 (1 2 m)L]
(2)
As L tends to infinity, it can be seen from Equation 2 that x tends
to (1/m). According to partial matching theory therefore, the 
maximum possible number of memory representations available,
at the time of the probe, of a very long list would tend towards 
(1/m).
Experimental evidence that the theory can predict hit and false
alarm rates in immediate probed recognition tasks was provided
by Murray et al. (1989; 1999). Preliminary evidence that the the-
ory might also predict recognition latencies in this task was pro-
vided by Boudewijnse et al. (1999) in the course of their exposi-
tion of Herbart’s (1824/1890) theory of how mathematics can be
applied to the prediction of how Vorstellungen (ideas) enter and
leave consciousness.
However, the terms (1/m) and x can also be considered to be
measures of accuracy in immediate memory tasks generally. The
term (1/m) could represent a “theoretical maximum memory
span,” given a memory system subject to overwriting. If L itself
were set to be (1/m) the corresponding value of x would represent
an “actual maximum memory span,” namely, the number of target
items out of (1/m) target items that had left memory representa-
tions that had not been overwritten, and were therefore, still ac-
cessible to consciousness when an old probe appeared. This par-
ticular value of x, derived by letting L 5 (1/m) in Equation 2, will
be labeled A, standing for “actual maximum memory span.”
An example will illustrate these numerical values. If the target
material consisted of digit trigrams (for example, 2 1 8 or 6 3 9),
in which each individual digit has been drawn (randomly, with re-
placement) from the population of the ten digits 0 to 9, then the
probability, m, that a target trigram will be immediately followed
by a target trigram bearing the same first digit will be .10 (one-
tenth). Murray et al. (1999) argued that the memory encoding of
digit trigrams by participants in this task was indeed often in terms
of the first digits of those trigrams, especially if presentation were
purely visual with no auditory components. According to Equa-
tion 2, even if a list were extremely long, the theoretical maximum
number of (non-overwritten) memory representations of those
targets at the time of the probe would be approximately (1/m),
that is, approximately ten. But the actual number of memory rep-
resentations available to the participant at this time, as determined
by constraints on conscious experience that are not yet under-
stood, would be obtained by setting L 5 (1/m) 5 10 in Equation
2, yielding an x-value of 6.5132. That is, the value of A, the actual
maximum memory span, would be 6.5132.
Figure 1 shows predicted values of the theoretical maximum
memory span (1/m) and the corresponding actual maximum
memory span (A) for values of m ranging from .1 to .5. The range
of in-values from m 5 .1 to m 5 .3 has been boxed off to show
that, in this range, the predicted A-values lie between approxi-
mately 2 and 6, that is, they lie in the range 4 6 2.
For single randomly selected digits, it was shown above that A
5 6.5132. But other measures of memory span for single digits
usually provide estimates of the memory span for digits that ex-
ceed 6.5132; for example, Cavanagh (1972), on the basis of a meta-
analysis of previous reports, gave the traditional memory span for
digits as 7.7. But, as Cowan has documented in impressive detail,
most participants, upon hearing or seeing a sequential list of dig-
its, will bring to bear, on the process of the memorizing of that list,
various techniques of chunking and associating that will expand
the number correctly recalled in order, after one presentation,
from 4 6 2 to 7 6 2 or even more.
Cavanagh’s estimate that the traditional memory span for digits
is 7.7 is therefore almost certainly based on data that were not free
from having been grouped. The actual maximum memory span for
Commentary/Cowan: The magical number 4
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2000) 24:1
133
Figure 1 (Murray).
The theoretical and actual maximum mem-
ory spans as predicted by partial matching theory. The variable-
name x on the ordinate denotes the number of non-overwritten
memory representations at the time of the probe. The variable-
name m on the abscissa denotes the probability that the memory
representation of a target item T shares a common feature (pre-
determined by the experimenter) with the memory representa-
tion of the target item immediately following. The value of the
variable named A is given by (1/m)[1 2 (1 2 m)(12m)], as ex-
plained in the text.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 48 (native) -----
digits of 6.5132 estimated by partial matching theory is a measure
that presumes a minimum of chunking as the participant hears or
views the target list under investigation. In practice, participants
usually do report more than A target items because the partici-
pants have succeeded in grouping or chunking the target items at
the time of their presentation. To the references on grouping and
chunking given in Cowan’s target article, we can add contributions
by Slak (1970), Thompson et al. (1993), and Murray (1995, pp. 92–
105).
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Preparation of this manuscript was supported by Social Science and Hu-
manities Research Council of Canada grant 410–99–0831. The author is
most grateful to Andrea Kilgour and Louise Wasylkiw for research assis-
tance, and to R. Kalin, Chair of the Department of Psychology at Queen’s
University at the time this research was initiated, for providing the neces-
sary computer facilities.
The nature of forgetting 
from short-term memory
Paul Muter
Department of Psychology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S 3G3,
Canada. muter@psych.utoronto.ca
www.psych.utoronto.ca/~muter
Abstract: Memory and forgetting are inextricably intertwined. Any ac-
count of short-term memory (STM) should address the following ques-
tion: If three, four, or five chunks are being held in STM, what happens
after attention is diverted?
Assuming that the central thesis of Cowan’s target article is cor-
rect, the question remains: Given that three, four, or five chunks
are in STM, are negligibly registered in long-term episodic mem-
ory, and have been erased from sensory memory, what will be the
nature of the forgetting when attention is diverted? In the third
paragraph of his paper, Cowan raises the issue of the nature of for-
getting from STM, and somewhat peremptorily dismisses it as
“nearly intractable” (para. 3), and beset with difficulties, such as
the “apparent unresolvability of the decay issue” (para. 3). Is the
question of the nature of forgetting from STM any more in-
tractable than the question of the capacity of STM?
Of course, some issues regarding the nature of forgetting from
STM are covered, both explicitly and implicitly, in Cowan’s paper,
but the above question is largely ignored, and is a remarkable la-
cuna in the discussion. Memory and forgetting are always inextri-
cably intertwined.
Over the decades there have been hundreds of attempts to an-
swer approximations to the above question. Many of these at-
tempts have been concerned with the rate of forgetting from
STM. A study by Peterson and Peterson (1959) was quite typical:
As Cowan mentions in passing, in a serial recall task Peterson and
Peterson found severe forgetting of three letters after 18 seconds
of distracting activity. This study is often cited as indicating the
“duration” of short-term memory (e.g., Solso 1995). Muter (1980),
however, argued that in the Peterson and Peterson experiments
and experiments like them, participants were relying on more than
STM, because they knew that they were going to be asked to re-
call the to-be-remembered items after an interval filled with dis-
tracting activity. Theory (e.g., Craik & Lockhart 1972) and data
(e.g., Jacoby & Bartz 1972; Watkins & Watkins 1974) suggest that
if participants know they are going to be tested after a retention
interval filled with distracting activity, secondary memory traces
are likely to be formed. When subjects expect to be tested after a
filled retention interval rarely or never, there is evidence that se-
vere forgetting occurs after approximately 2 seconds, (Marsh et al.
1997; Muter 1980; Sebrechts et al. 1989), though this finding re-
mains controversial (Cunningham et al. 1993; Healy & Cunning-
ham 1995; Muter 1995).
If the experiments of Peterson and Peterson and others like
them did indeed tap more than STM, then many questions remain
unanswered regarding the nature of forgetting from STM, and are
not covered in Cowan’s target article. What is the typical rate of
forgetting? (This will undoubtedly depend on various circum-
stances, just as the capacity does, but it may tend to be at a certain
level, just as capacity tends to be a certain chunk-size.) What is
the shape of the forgetting curve, and how does it compare to the
shape in long-term memory (Rubin & Wenzel 1996)? Does the
forgetting curve depend on the nature of the information re-
membered (e.g., Murdock & Hockley 1989)? What are the roles
of decay, displacement, and interference (Laming 1992)? What is
the role of inter-chunk similarity (Posner & Konick 1966)? How
important are the expectations and needs of the rememberer (An-
derson et al. 1997)? What is the effect of the nature of the dis-
tracting activity (e.g., verbal vs. nonverbal, level of difficulty)? Can
forgetting from STM be instant, if an extremely salient multi-
modal event occurs? Almost all of the research on such questions
has been performed under conditions in which secondary mem-
ory contamination was likely, because the participants expected to
be tested after a filled retention interval.
Cowan’s paper usefully elucidates many issues regarding STM.
However, a comprehensive account of STM should surely include
treatment of the nature of forgetting after attention has been di-
verted.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I thank Bennett B. Murdock, Jr. and Jay W. Pratt for helpful comments.
Long-term memory span
James S. Nairne and Ian Neath
Department of Psychology, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907-
1364. {nairne; neath}@psych.purdue.edu
www.psych.purdue.edu/{~nairne; ~neath}
Abstract: Cowan assumes that chunk-based capacity limits are synony-
mous with the essence of a “specialized STM mechanism.” In a single ex-
periment, we measured the capacity, or span, of long-term memory and
found that it, too, corresponds roughly to the magical number 4. The re-
sults imply that a chunk-based capacity limit is not a signature character-
istic of remembering over the short-term.
Long-term memory span. As advocates of unitary approaches
to memory, we applaud Cowan’s efforts to identify general
mnemonic principles. His heroic review of the literature has pro-
duced what appear to be remarkably consistent short-term mem-
ory capacity estimates. Although it would easy to quibble with the
selective nature of his review – for example, Tehan and Hum-
phreys (1996) report data counter to the claim that one can ob-
serve proactive interference only if there are more than four items
in a list – we have chosen to focus our limited attention here on
more general issues.
Cowan defines memory storage capacity operationally as the
maximum number of chunks that can be recalled in a given situa-
tion. Given this definition, a few concerns arise. First, almost all
the cited studies measure the number of items that can be re-
trieved rather than “the number of items that can be stored” (sect.
1. 1). As a result, bottlenecks in the retrieval process could well
lead to an underestimation of true storage capacity. Second, in vir-
tually every case Cowan examines, the tasks require some form of
order or relational processing. For example, in the prototypical
case of memory span it is necessary to remember both the pre-
sented items as well as their ordinal positions in the list. It is un-
clear, as a consequence, whether the capacity limits apply to item
information, order information, or to some combination of both.
Commentary/Cowan: The magical number 4
134
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2000) 24:1
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 49 (native) -----
Third, and most relevant to the remainder of our discussion,
Cowan assumes that chunk-based capacity limits are synonymous
with the essence of a “specialized STM mechanism” (sect. 1.1). Al-
though it is certainly possible that STM has such a limit, how can
we be certain that the same sort of capacity limits are not charac-
teristic of other memory systems? Does the magical number 4 ap-
ply only to the specialized STM mechanism, or might it apply as
well to other memory systems, such as long-term memory? To the
majority of memory theorists, Cowan included, the capacity of
long-term memory is assumed to be essentially unlimited. How-
ever, to our knowledge long-term memory span has never been
measured precisely, at least using the procedures and inclusion
criteria adopted by Cowan. What then is the storage capacity of
long-term memory?
In the typical memory span experiment, capacity is estimated
by requiring subjects to recall lists of various lengths and then pin-
pointing the list length that produces correct performance on 50%
of the trials. In principle, there is no reason why this procedure
cannot be adapted to a long-term memory environment. So, we
presented lists of various lengths to subjects and tested their abil-
ity to remember the lists 5 minutes later. To obtain a valid estimate
of storage capacity, Cowan argues, chunk size needs to be con-
trolled. Mnemonic strategies, such as rehearsal, can lead to hid-
den “higher-order” chunking that produces an overinflated esti-
mate of capacity. To prevent such strategies, we used unrelated
word lists under incidental learning conditions.
Method.
Subjects. Two hundred and five Purdue University undergrad-
uates volunteered to participate in exchange for credit in intro-
ductory psychology courses.
Materials and design. The stimuli were 22 concrete nouns from
Paivio et al. (1969) with approximately equal length and ratings of
concreteness, imageability, and frequency. The subjects were as-
signed to one of two groups: Group 1 (N 5 105) received list
lengths of 2, 4, 7, and 9, whereas Group 2 (N 5 100) received list
lengths of 3, 5, 6, and 8.
Procedure. Subjects were tested in small groups and were in-
formed that we were interested in obtaining pleasantness ratings
for several lists of items. Each word was pronounced out loud by
the experimenter at a rate of 1 word every 3 seconds, and each list
was separated by 5 seconds at the end of which the experimenter
said “Next 1ist.” Order of list length was partially counterbalanced
and the order of the words was random and different for each
group. After rating the words, a geometric filler task was per-
formed for 5 minutes. Following this, subjects were given a sheet
with all the words in their appropriate lists, with the words in al-
phabetical order. The subjects were asked to write down a num-
ber below each word to indicate its original presentation order.
Subjects were free to work on any list at any time and were allowed
much time as necessary to complete the task.
Results and discussion.
The relevant data are shown in Figure 1. Each data point rep-
resents average recall performance, collapsed across serial posi-
tion, for a given list length. Note that the performance function
looks very similar to what you would find in a typical short-term
span experiment. Performance declines with list length in a nearly
linear fashion – in fact, a straight line fit of the data accounts for
over 95% of the variance. To calculate long-term memory span,
we simply estimated the list length that produces 50% correct per-
formance – in this case, the value is 5.15. It is also possible to cal-
culate long-term span when correct recall of the entire list is re-
quired – under these scoring conditions, long-term memory span
drops to 3.75. Both of these estimates are within the range of val-
ues typically seen in short-term memory span tasks (Schweickert
& Boruff 1986).
What do these data mean? The major implication is that a
“chunk-based capacity limit” – specifically, the magical number 4
– is not a signature characteristic of remembering over the short-
term; as a result, the capacity limitations identified by Cowan say
little, if anything, about whether there is a specialized short-term
memory system. Instead, span limitations (the magical number 4)
might simply be a characteristic of information load – there is only
so much information that we can order correctly regardless of the
time scales involved.
Where the magic breaks down: Boundaries
and the “focus-of-attention” in schizophrenia
Robert D. Oades and Boutheina Jemel
Biopsychology Group,University Clinic of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry,
45147 Essen, Germany. oades@uni-essen-de; bjemel@excite.com
www.biopsychology.uni-essen.de
Abstract: The boundaries, the influences on, and consequences of a short-
term memory (STM) capacity of 4 leads us to consider global versus local
processing. We argue that in schizophrenia cognitive problems can lie
partly in pre-conscious automatic selective attention and partly with the
speed of processing in later controlled processes (including compound
STM). The influence of automatic attentional mechanisms may be under-
estimated in normal psychology and explain the loss of the magic 4 in schiz-
ophrenia.
Cowan’s arguments for a memory store with a capacity limited to 4,
or thereabouts are persuasive: they are most eloquent in tests of se-
rial recall, using articulatory suppression and involving articulated
responses. It is a sort of explicit, short-term memory (STM). To call
it the focus-of-attention does an excellent service by emphasizing
that the store (and by implication attention) are terms and concepts
applicable not only for information of exogenous origin but also for
information with endogenous sources (recall and inter-cortical
monitoring activities). However, the need to define in and define
out certain methodological (e.g., use of 0.5 sec presentation times
in serial recall, sect. 3.1.1, para. 7) and conceptual considerations
(e.g., what makes up a chunk? Cf. Shyns et al. 1998) points to some
limits and consequences (see question 4) concerning the imprint of
the arrow of information flow on the arrow of time.
The limit of 0.5 sec in tests of serial recall is remarkably conve-
nient and reminiscent of Libet et al.’s (1964) report that a stimu-
lus should last 500 msec to enter consciousness. Yet, Libet et al.
also remind us that the information is there to be used when it
Commentary/Cowan: The magical number 4
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2000) 24:1
135
Figure 1 (Nairne & Neath).
Long-term memory span: the pro-
portion of words correctly recalled for long-term memory as a
function of list length.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 50 (native) -----
reaches the cortex after less than 100 msec. Although processing
at this early stage could literally be regarded as implicit, Cowan
suggests that “implicit memory” stores are also limited to about 4
items. So the sensory buffer or icon remains conceptually intact.
This has been clear, at least since Sperling’s (1960) account that
cues at short intervals (,1 sec) can elicit correct recall of any of 4
rows of 4 letters. The buffer may contain up to 16, or even more
items. Creation of this buffer also involves selective attention as it
will occur only if the subject is not concentrating on the experi-
menter’s tie or distracted by some fluff on the floor.
The separate influences of these 161 and 4-item stores is a mat-
ter of daily experience. Faces (250 msec) can be recognised, holis-
tically, by an automatic process up to 300 msec later. Only then can
they be decomposed into the elements of eyes, mouth, and so on
(ca. 4), by a controlled process (George et al. 2000). Global pro-
cessing occurs faster than that for local information, with a peak
of excitation in the range of 2001 msec, led by temporo-parietal
areas on the right (Sugase et al. 1999; Yamaguchi et al. 2000). The
efficiency of the early (automatic) selective process, in part, de-
termines the performance of the “focus-of-attention.”
But we need to look closely at the influences of efficiency and
the speed of processing. Increases of the speed of processing im-
prove the accuracy of recall and the number of items recalled. This
applies, among controlled conscious processes, to the more su-
perficial encoding of items in pure STM (as in the digit span) as
well as deeper processing in compound STM (as in word lists).
This holds also for patients with schizophrenia (Brebion et al.
2000), for whom there is abundant evidence of impaired STM,
controlled processing and slowed information processing (Straube
& Oades 1992). However, it should not be overlooked that con-
trolled selective attention mechanisms are also required, at the
least to inhibit interfering associations (e.g., Stroop colour-word
interference). It is of interest, here, to note that Brebion and col-
leagues reported that Stroop indicators of selective attention
would predict superficial but not the deeper (compound STM)
performance. Yet, Stroop interference performance is not dispro-
portionately impaired in schizophrenia (except for those with pre-
dominantly disorganised symptoms), although compound (and
pure) STM measures are reduced in size. This implies that one
problem for patients with schizophrenia lies in making associa-
tions beyond the temporal and strategic bounds of pure STM and
incurs the speed of processing.
But having emphasized the pure STM store and a selective at-
tention mechanism at the level of controlled processing, we come
to the sensory buffer and automatic processing of the through-put
to pure STM. While latencies of later event-related potentials
(ERPs) such as the P300 (around 400 msec) are usually delayed,
the latencies of P50 (marking the thalamo-cortical arrival of in-
formation), N1 (excitatory cortical registration of sensory infor-
mation) and mismatch negativity (sensory memory for deviance)
are not consistently different among patients with schizophrenia
and healthy subjects (e.g., Bender et al. 1999; Gades et al. 1996).
It appears that the speed of automatic (e.g., MMN) as opposed to
controlled processing (e.g., P300) is not delayed, even though the
content marked by the amplitude of the ERPs recorded is often
reduced in both cases.
Thus it would seem that at short latencies automatic selective
mechanisms may make a larger contribution to impaired process-
ing (exaggerated by the state of attention, Oades et al. 1997) than
speeds of processing, but the opposite holds for controlled strate-
gic processing. This idea is supported by the finding that the mag-
nitude of sensory gating, a selective process, is impaired in schiz-
ophrenia around 100 msec post-stimulus (650 msec: Bender et
al. 1999) and may contribute to the frequently reported phenom-
enon of sensory overload. In contrast, local speeds of processing
in different regions (frontal and temporal lobe latencies) may ac-
count for apparent deficits in the later “negative difference”
marker of controlled selective attention (Oades et al. 996).
Cowan suggests that the apparent pure-STM capacity can be in-
creased by forming inter-chunk relations, perhaps by automatic
processes (e.g., priming). This suggests to us the prediction that
patients with schizophrenia, renown for their “loose associations”
(see Spitzer 1997) should average a larger capacity than normal:
Why is there ample evidence that this is not true (e.g., Brebion et
al. 2000)? We return to global percepts. These activate the right
temporo-parietal junction, as emphasised by Frith and Dolan
(1997) in their imaging study, especially during sustained atten-
tion with few switches of attention. Granholm et al. (1999) found
not only that processing of local stimuli was impaired in patients
with schizophrenia but (perhaps because of this) under condi-
tions of divided attention (requiring switches of attention between
global and local conditions in the search for a target) were actu-
ally at an advantage compared to their controls when global pro-
cessing was required. Switching requires inhibition of the alter-
native, selective attention the inhibition of the irrelevant: its 
under-use resulted in the identification of fewer local items. It is
this automatic mechanism of selective attention and its impover-
ished use that restricts the patients’ STM capacity, not just to “nor-
mal” but below normal levels.
We conclude that the automatic/pre-conscious application of
selective attention is not only a source of schizophrenic cognitive
problems, but has a determining influence on the normal appear-
ance of 4 in Cowan’s pure STM, that he has perhaps underesti-
mated in his worthy review.
If the magical number is 4, how does one
account for operations within 
working memory?
Juan Pascual-Leone
York University, Toronto, Ontario M3J 1P3, Canada. juanpl@yorku.ca
www.yorku.ca/dept/psych/people/faculty/pasleone.htm
Abstract: Cowan fails to obtain a magical number of 7 because his analy-
sis is faulty. This is revealed by an alternative analysis of Cowan’s own tasks.
The analysis assumes a number 7 for adults, and neoPiagetian mental-
capacity values for children. Data patterns and proportions of success (re-
ported in Cowan’s Figs. 2 and 3) are thus quantitatively explained in detail
for the first time.
Hausman and Wilson (1967) criticized Nelson Goodman (1951)
for his formal-logic model of humans’ construction of experience.
He did so because Goodman represented objects (“entities”) as
collections (“sums”) of predicates (“qualia”) that mysteriously com-
bined into objects of phenomenal experience without the need of
a combinator or nexus, which integrates this collection into a sin-
gle object. This omission, characteristic of empiricist theoreti-
cians, is harder to imagine today; Computer science and neuro-
science have recognized the need for a nexus that dynamically
combines simple or compound predicates to instantiate objects.
This nexus problem is currently called “the binding problem”
(Kolb & Wishaw 1996; Robin & Holyoak 1995). Cowan acknowl-
edges the binding problem, but does not seem to draw its episte-
mological implications for task analysis. Indeed, as many do, he es-
timates attentional capacity (working memory) by counting
distinct schemes that mental-attentional mechanisms must hy-
peractivate to cause their coordination. He fails, however, to count
the binding nexus: operative schemes (procedures, combinators)
and parameters needed to produce integration or performance
(cf. Robin & Holyoak 1995). Because of this omission, Cowan, like
Halford (1993; Halford et al. 1998; Pascual-Leone 1998) and oth-
ers, estimates active working memory (attentional capacity) as 3 to
5 chunks, rejecting Miller’s insightful “number 7.”
I have analyzed all paradigms that Cowan shows, and results are
consistent with the number 7 when nexus is counted. I now illus-
trate these analyses using one paradigm. More refined modeling,
with theoretical probability calculations, can yield more exact
quantitative predictions confirmed in studies (Burtis 1982; Morra
Commentary/Cowan: The magical number 4
136
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2000) 24:1
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 51 (native) -----
2000; Pascual-Leone 1970; Pascual-Leone & Baillargeon 1994;
Pascual-Leone et al., in preparation). There are also develop-
mental capacity data of constructivist neoPiagetians, consistent
with Miller’s number when extrapolated to adults (Case 1998;
Case & Okamoto 1996; Johnson et al. 1989; Morra 1994; 2000;
Pascual-Leone 1970; 1995; Pascual-Leone & Baillargeon 1994;
Stewart & Pascual-Leone 1992).
Consider now Cowan’s experiment reported in section 3.1.3 of
the target article. In this experiment, there are two ongoing sub-
tasks: a visual-rhyme task and an auditory-digit task. One is a com-
puter game where the picture at the center of the screen tells
which of four surrounding pictures the subject must click; the one
whose name rhymes with the name of the central picture. New
items of this subtask are presented while participants hear (but
must ignore) lists of digits presented through headphones. Occa-
sionally the screen shifts to the digit’s game, and asks for digit re-
call in the appropriate order. Call *pict.cent a subject’s figurative
scheme for the picture at the center, and *pict.surr:x (where x 5
1, . . . ,4) the surround picture currently attended to. Call CLICK-
MATCH:RHYME the procedure for clicking the matching pic-
ture; it has a name-recalling subprocedure (operative parameter)
that I call NAME, which may be chunked with the first one. Fi-
nally, the concurrent auditory subtask consists in hearing, without
intentionally attending, the digit series. Because hearing and vi-
sion do not interfere with each other, auditory schemes, released
by an automatic orienting reaction (OR), produce concurrent im-
plicit hearing. The eliciting situation is facilitating, because no in-
terfering auditory scheme is activated by the situation (Pascual-
Leone 1987; 1995; in press; Pascual-Leone & Baillargeon 1994).
Call *digit1, *digit2 . . . *digits, etc., figurative schemes (symbol-
ized by a prefixed *) that encode digits being presented; and call
OR:AUDIT the innately-automatic orienting reaction. With this
terminology we symbolize; in a mental strategy formula the ex-
plicit visual-rhyme part as follows:
[CLICKMATCH :RHYME(NAME(*pict.cent, *pict. surr:x))
(1)
& OR:AUDIT(*digit1, *digit2, *digit3, *digit4, *digit5 . . . )]
The first segment has a mental demand of 3 or 4 symbolic schemes
processed simultaneously (it can be 3 when CLICKMATCH:
RHYME and NAME are chunked). The second concurrent seg-
ment is automatic; but on the assumption that adults have a pro-
cessing capacity of 7 (Pascual-Leone 1970; 1987; 1998; Pascual-
Leone & Baillargeon 1994), we infer that they also allocate
attention to 3 digits in this implicit subtask (OR:AUDIT does not
need attentional boosting). Thus, when the explicit auditory-digit
part arrives, most adults should remember at least 3 digits. In-
deed, Figure 3 of Cowan’s article shows that 80% of his adult sub-
jects do so. But before modeling this explicit auditory-digit part,
I will state three principles/postulates of the neoPiagetian con-
structivist theory (Pascual-Leone 1987; in press; Pascual-Leone &
Baillargeon 1994). Cowan’s theoretical framework is fully com-
patible with them (see his whole sect. 2). I list them in 3 points:
(1) When mental attention (M-capacity) is allocated to schemes
in the subject’s repertoire (making them part of working memory),
other activated schemes which are not being attended to (i.e., not
placed in the M-space or focal-attentional region of WM), are gen-
erally automatically inhibited (attentionally interrupted) by the
mental-attentional system; this automatic attentional interruption
produces the focal “beam of attention” (Crik 1994; Pascual-Leone
1987).
(2) When the subject’s executive processes are sophisticated
enough, task-relevant schemes may be exempted from the atten-
tional interruption (automatic inhibition) discussed in point (1).
(3) Unless they have been so interrupted, some activated cur-
rently in an unattended state (i.e., placed outside M-space) can be
retrieved and brought into focal attention. At least one or two
schemes should be so recovered, and, one by one, boosted with
M-capacity. Notice that recovery is not possible when schemes
have decayed too much or were previously interrupted along with
misleading schemes.
These three postulates help to explain data that Cowan reports
in Figure 2. I discuss only span data. During recall of unattended
list of digits, in the explicit digit part, adults (on the assumption
that their real attentional capacity is 7) will be very likely to RE-
CALL 3 digits, as explained above, and RETRIEVE one or two
schemes from outside M-space. But against this happening is the
fact that overtly recalling three digits that are inside M-space de-
mands focussing attention on linguistic schemes of the corre-
sponding numerals, and this selective allocation of M capacity
might lead, with some probability (which increases with the num-
ber of digits – Morra 2000), to interruption/inhibition of digit
schemes that have remained outside M-space. This is what Figure
3 of Cowan confirms: 80% of subjects recall 3 digits, 48.5% recall
4 digits, 11.4% recall 5 digits, and only 1 subject (i.e., 2.8%) recalls
6 digits. Notice that if we assume that 3 is the demand of the ex-
plicit visual-rhyme task, 4 digits could still be attended to concur-
rently; and the problem would then be to recall them in order
when the unattended-digits task arrives. Ordinal positions of the
first and last digits are easily recalled because of perceptual
saliency (this is a known anchor effect); but the relative position of
digit 2 and digit 3 would have to be guessed with probability of 1/
2 (550% correct), which agrees with Cowan finding 48.5% sub-
jects recalling 4 digits. If there were 5 digits to be recalled (i.e., 4
from inside M-space plus 1 retrieved from outside M-space), then
the probability of guessing positions 2, 3, and 4 is 1/6 (6 combina-
tions of 3 positions 16 %); close enough to Cowan’s 11.4%. Finally,
if there are 6 digits available for recall (4 held inside M-space and
2 retrieved from outside M-space), the probability of guessing po-
sitions 2 to 5 is 1/24 (4%) – again very close to Cowan’s 2.8%.
The situation is very different in the attended-digits task. In this
task subjects’ full attention is devoted to digits; and attention may
not be needed to recall digit order because forward serial order
(natural to language!) was considerably practiced during the span
pretest task (Cowan et al. 1999).
Consequently, when adults are ready to recall, and a RECALL
operative scheme is placed inside M-space to begin to voice the
numerals, 6 digit schemes will also be there. And when the corre-
sponding 6 numerals are voiced, the digit schemes that are out-
side M-space will be interrupted automatically by virtue of postu-
late (1) – unless adults’ are sophisticated and postulate (2) applies,
which is unlikely. Consequently, 6 digits should be recalled on av-
erage (see Cowan’s Fig. 2).
The same model explains children’s data, as reported in Figure
2, when we use theoretical levels of M-capacity predicted for the
different age-groups (Pascual-Leone 1970; 1987; Pascual-Leone
& Baillargeon 1994). According to these levels, grade-4 children
(i.e., 9- and 10-year-olds) have a magical number equal to 4; and
grade 1 children have a magical number of 3 if they are 7-year-
olds, as they were in Cowan’s study (1999), who report their mean
age in months and SD). Thus grade-4 children will be able to cope
easily with the visual-rhyme part of the unattended digits task, and
in addition they may retain 1 digit inside M-space during the vi-
sual-rhyme process. Then, during the explicit digit part, children
should retrieve from outside M-space two digits at least.1 The
task-analysis representation of this step is as follows:
[*digit 1, RETRIEVE(*digit2, *digit3)]
(2)
Thus we expect that grade-4 children will recall, in the unattended
digit task, no more than 3 digits on average. Figure 2 shows this to
be the case. As for Cowan s grade-1 children, because their “mag-
ical” number is 3, they cannot keep any digit inside M-space dur-
ing the visual-rhyme part. Therefore they should recall only digits
they can retrieve from outside M, that is, usually 2 digits. Figure
2 confirms this expectation.
In the case of the attended digit task, however, grade-4 children
can at first consciously attend to 4 digits, but one must then be
placed outside M-space to make room for the operative RECALL.
Then, after the three numerals have been voiced, children are still
able to retrieve the momentarily dropped (but highly activated)
digit, plus two other ones from outside M-space to a total of 5 –
Commentary/Cowan: The magical number 4
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2000) 24:1
137
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 52 (native) -----
as shown in Figure 2. In the case of Cowan’s grade-1 children,
however, the same argument yields an average number of 4 digits
recalled, which is in agreement with data from Figure 2.
The task analysis summarized here illustrates, in a simplified
manner, why operative schemes (procedures and their parame-
ters) should be counted to estimate the demand on working mem-
ory. In doing so, experimental psychologists might find more con-
genial Pascual-Leone’s (1970) original proposal, which models
developmental emergence of Miller’s number 7. This proposal of-
fers two distinct advantages over the magical-number-4 model of
Cowan and others: (1) It can explain, in a manner congruent with
modern neuroscience, the developmental growth of working
memory from infancy to adulthood, and then its regression in later
years; (2) It can eliminate the many anomalies, in adults’ working-
memory performance, that magical-number-4 theoreticians cus-
tomarily explain away by vaguely appealing to “chunking.” Indeed,
in Cowan’s paper, I count 14 occasions when the author’s scrupu-
lous review acknowledges research results that suggest a magic 
estimate of 6 or 7 – but chunking can be used to explain this inter-
pretation away. I discuss this problem further in a BBS commen-
tary (Pascual-Leone 1998) that complements the present one.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Research informing methods and ideas summarized in this commentary
were supported by Operating Research Grants from the Social Sciences
and Humanities Research Council of Canada.
I am grateful to Dr. Janice Johnson, Dr. Sergio Morra, and Antonio
Pascual-Leone for insightful comments that found their way into the final
manuscript.
NOTE
1. We expect that digit-schemes from outside M-space will be recalled
with higher probability whenever shorter lists are presented, because in-
terference among digit-schemes increases with their number; and with
this number so does the possibility of error in encoding and retrieval op-
erations. For this reason, and because the length of lists changes with age
in Cowan’s study, we expect that younger children recall more digits from
outside M-space than adults.
Linguistic structure and short term memory
Emmanuel M. Pothos and Patrick Juola
aSchool of Psychology, University of Bangor, Bangor LL57 2DG, United
Kingdom; bDepartment of Mathematics and Computer Science, Duquesne
University, Pittsburgh, PA 15282. e.pothos@bangor.ac.uk
juola@mathcs.duq.edu
www.bangor.ac.uk/~pss41b
www.mathcs.duq.edu/~juola
Abstract: We provide additional support for Cowan’s claim that short term
memory (STM) involves a range of 3–5 tokens, on the basis of language
correlational analyses. If language is at least partly learned, linguistic de-
pendency structure should reflect properties of the cognitive components
mediating learning; one such component is STM. In this view, the range
over which statistical regularity extends in ordinary text would be sugges-
tive of STM span. Our analyses of eight languages are consistent with STM
span being about four chunks.
Introduction. We take the view that language learning involves
a major component of automatically identifying regularities in se-
quentially presented material. While there has been an influential
research tradition arguing that language learning must be guided
by a substantial innate component (Chomsky 1975; Pinker 1994;
see Gold 1967 or Pinker 1979 for a mathematical analysis of this
problem and Wharton 1974 for important qualifications on Gold’s
results), considerable evidence has accumulated recently that lan-
guage can be largely inferred on the basis of experience (Elman
1996; reviews of statistical models of language and, in particular,
connectionist ones are given respectively in Charniak 1993, and
Chater & Christiansen 1999).
If language is (at least partly) learned, then we expect language
structure to reflect the properties of the cognitive learning sys-
tems likely to be involved. The STM span can be related to lan-
guage learning. For example, first, it determines the linguistic ma-
terial that is immediately available to memory for comprehension.
Jarvella (1971) had participants listen to various passages of nor-
mal discourse, interrupting them at various points to ask how
much they could remember of what they had just heard. His main
finding was that there was almost perfect recall for up to seven
words before the point of interruption. Second, partly motivated
by Newport’s (1988; 1990) observations in developmental psy-
chology, Elman (1993) showed that artificial languages could not
be learned by a simple recurrent neural network model, unless the
STM of the model started “small” and was only gradually in-
creased to adult size (to reflect abstraction of regularities of in-
creasing complexity).
Language learning is likely to be partly mediated via STM (al-
ternatively, language is likely to have co-evolved with STM). Thus,
we would expect the language statistical structure to reflect prop-
erties of STM, and, in particular, STM size. This is not to say that
we cannot process linguistic contingencies that exceed STM size,
but if the cognitive system is optimized to process automatically
statistical associations only within a certain range (namely STM
span), we would likewise expect language structure to be consis-
tent with this limitation.
Cowan presents a compelling line of evidence to argue for an
STM span range between three and five chunks. Consistent with
this observation and relevant to language learning, Cleeremans
and McClelland (1991) showed that in learning regularities in se-
quentially presented material, participants could not identify con-
tingencies involving stimuli separated by more than about three
other stimuli.
In this work we look at the statistical correlational properties in
text from eight languages. On the basis of the above finding that
language structure involves contingencies between word tokens
that are separated by about four other word tokens would provide
additional support for Cowan’s proposal in the important area of
language learning and processing.
Mutual information and linguistic structure. All the analyses
presented are based on the notion of mutual information (MI), a
measure of relatedness between different probability distribu-
tions. “Range” is defined as the number of words between two
given word tokens, x and y. For instance, a range of 1 will indicate
that words x and y are separated by only 1 other word; word to-
kens x and y are separated by range 0 if and only if x and y are ad-
jacent. We ask whether our expectation of obtaining word y at a
particular location is affected by the knowledge that we have word
x in an earlier location. A measure of this is the mutual informa-
tion (MI) between P(x) and P(y), the probabilities of obtaining
word x and word y respectively. Mutual information indicates how
much the uncertainty involved in predicting y is reduced by knowl-
edge that we have x, and is given by Sum [all x, y] (P(x, y)/(P(x)/
P(y)). For different ranges, P(x, y) is the probability of having
words x and y separated by a number of words equal to the range.
Commentary/Cowan: The magical number 4
138
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2000) 24:1
Table 1 (Pothos & Juola). SE is the standard error of the 
mean sample size, for each language
Language
Mean Words
SE
Samples
Bulgarian
1,468
256
4
Czechoslovakian
27,591
860
29
Dutch
181,407
33,483
35
English
97,272
11,805
12
Estonian
19,944
15,043
2
French
166,620
202
26
Gaelic
200,239
–
1
German
129,270
96,532
8
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 53 (native) -----
By MI profile, we mean the way MI varies with increasing range.
This we take to be an indicator of statistical structure in language.
Analyses. We investigated samples from eight different lan-
guages, all from the CD-ROM database of the European Corpus
Initiative Multilingual Corpus 1 (ECI/MCl), distributed by the
Association for Computational Linguistics. In all analyses, the lin-
guistic tokens examined are words (however, the same type of 
investigation can be conducted on, e.g., phonemes; see Pothos
1998). Table 1 shows the number of samples and average number
of words in each language.
The MI profiles for each language were averaged and standard-
ized; standardization enables us to compare MI values for each lan-
guage regardless of sample size differences. Figure 1 shows the re-
sults of this calculation. One can see that the mutual information
dependence “elbows” at about four items for all the languages. We
take this observation to be compatible with the idea that linguistic
dependency structure is contained primarily within a range of not
more than about five word tokens, which would be consistent with
the capacity of STM span being of the order of 3–5 chunks. This
provides an additional source of evidence for Cowan’s proposal.
With additional work we aim to extend the present MI computa-
tions to take into account more directly sample size variation, and
also introduce a mathematical model for the MI profiles.
A neurophysioiogical account of working
memory limits: Between-item segregation
and within-chunk integration
Antonino Raffone,a Gezinus Wolters,b and Jacob M. Murrec
aDepartment of Psychology, University of Rome “La Sapienza,” I 00185
Rome, Italy; bDepartment of Psychology, Leiden University, 2300 RB Leiden,
The Netherlands; cDepartment of Psychology, University of Amsterdam, 1010
WB Amsterdam, The Netherlands. raffone@uniromal.it
wolters@fsw.leidenuniv.nl
jaap@murre.org
Abstract: We suggest a neurophysiological account of the short-term
memory capacity limit based on a model of visual working memory (Raf-
fone & Wolters, in press). Simulations have revealed a critical capacity
limit of about four independent patterns. The model mechanisms may be
applicable to working memory in general and they allow a reinterpretation
of some of the issues discussed by Cowan.
Why the capacity limit? As Cowan points out, the reasons for a
short-term memory capacity limit are not clear. Neurophysiologi-
cal accounts often mention the role that could be played by neural
oscillations and synchrony. For example, Lisman and Idiart’s (1995)
model might account for a four-item limit of short-term memory,
given an appropriate frequency ratio of nested oscillations.
As an alternative, we present a recently developed cortical net-
work model accounting for the limited capacity of visual working
memory (Raffone & Wolters, in press). A critical capacity of about
four independent patterns showed up in our simulations, consis-
tent with the results of Luck and Vogel (1997) and with Cowan’s
conclusions. This capacity was proven to be independent of the
number of features making up objects (Luck & Vogel 1997). The
model mechanism may be applicable to any type of information in
working memory, and not only to visual information. In the fol-
lowing we present some details of this model, and relate it to some
of the functional aspects of working memory discussed by Cowan.
Retention in the cortical circuits of working memory. In the
model, we assume that the cortical circuits of visual working mem-
ory are implemented in prefrontal (PF) cortex and visuo-tempo-
ral areas (e.g., the inferotemporal cortex, IT), as well as in their
mutual connections. Oscillations were induced by external input
and maintained after input offset through delayed feedback from
PF to IT (see Fig. 1A) In Lisman and Idiart’s model persistent fir-
ing is due to a slowly rising after-depolarization (ADP) state in
combination with a sub-threshold oscillatory modulation in the
theta range. In our view, reverberatory oscillations are more likely
to occur as a result of cooperative interactions among many neu-
rons, involving both prefrontal assemblies and assemblies located
in higher-level perceptual areas.
Between-item segregation in working memory. Assuming that
time-resolved neural coding plays a key role in (visual) working
memory processing, the limited capacity of working memory may
be explained in terms of spurious synchronizations of neuronal
spike trains coding different unrelated features or items (Luck &
Vogel 1997). It is unclear, however, how such spurious synchro-
nizations of to-be-retained features could give rise to critical ca-
pacity limits, even if averaged across trials and subjects. We be-
lieve a more satisfactory explanation of the limited capacity of
visual working memory is provided by a between-item segregation
hypothesis. According to this hypothesis, neural assemblies in
high-level visual areas, coding unrelated features or objects, exert
mutual inhibitory or desynchronizing actions. The network auto-
matically scales the phase-lag between the different reverbera-
tions in order to maintain an optimal phase segregation (see Fig.
1B). Between-item segregation depends on the inhibitory synap-
tic parameters. The essence of the model is that its limited capac-
ity depends on the functional balance of a sufficiently high oscil-
lation frequency (firing rate) and sufficient phase-segregation
between disjoint assemblies. The same desynchronizing mecha-
nism optimizing phase-segregation between assemblies coding for
separate items, poses a limit to the number of oscillatory rever-
berations. Thus, our model suggests plausible neurocomputa-
tional reasons of the short-term memory (STM) capacity limit. As
the model operates in a stochastic manner, it exhibits a psycho-
logically plausible variability across trials of the number of objects
retained, given the same number of to-be-retained objects as in-
put.
Within-chunk integration in working memory. As is clear from
Cowan’s discussions, the notion of a capacity limitation is inextri-
cably interwoven with the concept of chunking. In our view,
chunking is related to neural binding processes, which may origi-
nate from bottom-up attentive operations or may be guided by
long-term memory. Following the suggestion of Luck and Vogel
(1997), we modeled intra-chunk integration or binding in short-
term memory retention in terms of synchrony. Chunking may be
based on pre-existing neural assemblies (“chunking fields”), with
synchronizing connections between assemblies coding bound fea-
tures, or on correlated input from earlier processing stages.
In the model, within chunk integration coexists with between-
chunk segregation (see Fig. 1C). Such a property cannot be ac-
counted for by delay activity defined in terms of firing rate attrac-
Commentary/Cowan: The magical number 4
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2000) 24:1
139
Figure 1 (Pothos & Juola).
Mutual information profile when MI
values were standardized for the different languages.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 54 (native) -----
Commentary/Cowan: The magical number 4
140
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2000) 24:1
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 55 (native) -----
tors (Amit 1995). However, the network capacity for single- and
multiple-feature chunks is equivalent only when there is a high
“chunk stability.” This functional scheme can potentially account
for the different degrees of chunking effectiveness in short-term
memory retention discussed by Cowan.
Central capacity versus separate capacities. In several places
Cowan discusses the “central versus separate capacity” contro-
versy. Our proposal can account for various degrees of domain
specificity in processing limitations, by the assumption that com-
petition and desynchronizing actions between neural assemblies
coding for unrelated features are stronger within than between
specific representational domains.
Storage versus processing in working memory. In section
4.3.6, Cowan discusses the storage versus processing capacity ac-
count, concluding that there is no reason for a separation between
processing and storage in working memory. We fully agree with
this view. In the cerebral cortex, a bi-directional interaction be-
tween short-term reverberations and long-term structured neural
assemblies is likely to occur. In such a scheme, time-resolved syn-
chronization (related to firing rate enhancement) and Hebbian
learning may functionally interact.
The focus of attention. Cowan’s proposal of a central capacity
limit of the “focus of attention” leads to some neurophysiological
problems. That is, how does a mechanism both collect and read
out information from other sub-systems? Is it centralized or distrib-
uted in structure? How does it access and operate on the distrib-
uted representations in long-term memory? Cowan repeatedly
refers to the widely shared idea of “activation” of memory repre-
sentations. However, such an idea can lead to coding problems
when multiple distributed neural representations are active, lead-
ing to the so-called “superposition catastrophe” (Engel et al. 1992;
Von der Malsburg 1901). We suggest that a neural mechanism
based on both activation (firing rate) and coherence (neural syn-
chrony) is more plausible for the “central read-out bottleneck.”
We endorse Varela’s notion of “resonant assemblies” in the brain
(Varela 1995). In terms of our model, this would imply that only
four “magical” neural assemblies can dominate the brain at any
given time, saving other domain-specific active neural represen-
tations through selective synchronization.
Four-sight in hindsight: The existence 
of magical numbers in vision
Ronald A. Rensink
Cambridge Basic Research, Nissan Technical Center North America, Inc.,
Cambridge, MA 02171-1494. rensink@cbr.com
www.cbr.com/~rensink/
Abstract: The capacity of visual attention/STM can be determined by
change-detection experiments. Detecting the presence of change leads to
an estimate of 4 items, while detecting the absence of change leads to an
estimate of 1 item. Thus, there are two magical numbers in vision: 4 and
1. The underlying limits, however, are not necessarily those of central
STM.
In his target article, Cowan provides a wide-ranging review of data
supporting the existence of a “magical number 4” – a common
limit on the capacities of various perceptual and cognitive mech-
anisms. He suggests (sect. 3.1.1) that a similar limit may apply to
change blindness, the finding that large changes become difficult
to see when information about the location of the change is
swamped by concurrent transients elsewhere in the visual field
(Rensink et al. 1997; Simons 1996).
In a typical change-blindness experiment, an original and a
modified image of a real-world scene are presented in succession,
with a brief blank field between them; alternation continues until
observer detects the change. Even though the changes are large
and the observer knows they will occur, several seconds are often
required before a change is seen. This has been explained by the
hypothesis that focused attention is needed to see change (Ren-
sink et al. 1997). Given that focused attention can be largely iden-
tified with visual STM (vSTM), and that vSTM has a limited ca-
pacity, only a few items can be attended at any time. Thus, the
detection of change requires a time consuming attentional scan of
the image.
But how many items can be attended at any one time? (Or,
equivalently, how many can be held in vSTM?) This can be deter-
mined from change-detection experiments based on arrays of sim-
ple items (Rensink 2000a). The critical parameter here is on-time
(the length of time each array is visible during a cycle). The time
needed to detect a changing target item among nonchanging dis-
tractors depends linearly on the number of items in the display.
For orientation change, the slope of this function (i.e., search
speed) is much the same for all on-times up to 600 msec, indicat-
ing that the rate-limiting step is one of processing rather than
memory. But for on-times of more than 600 msec, speed becomes
proportional to alternation rate, indicating that only a limited
amount of information can be held in vSTM at each alternation –
more display time does not allow more items to be entered into
memory. When the interstimulus interval (ISI) between displays is
120 msec, this limit is 5–6 items (Rensink 2000a). Further exper-
iments have shown this to be a compound limit: when a short-term
– presumably iconic – component is eliminated by increasing ISI
to 360 msec, the estimate falls to 3–4 items (Rensink et al. 2000).
As Cowan points out, it is important to establish the absence of
rehearsal or recoding processes that might cause estimates to be
artificially high. For change detection, this is straightforward.
First, the situation is one of information overload: not all the visi-
ble items can be placed into memory. Second, little recoding or re-
hearsal can occur (at least for cycle times of a second or less), since
most of the available time is spent either loading items into mem-
ory or comparing them with the current input. Third, capacity is
determined by a genuine discontinuity in performance, namely, a
proportionality constant that appears when on-times are 600 msec
or greater (Rensink 2000a). Finally, the estimate is largely unaf-
fected by temporal decay: if ISI is greater than 360 msec, there is
little further decrease, even for intervals as high as 8 sec (Schnei-
der et al. 1999). Thus, the magical number 4 does seem to exist.
But the story does not stop here. If targets and distractors are
switched so that the subject must detect a nonchanging target
among changing distractors, a different limit is reached: 1.4 items
(Rensink 1999; 2000b). This suggests that attended items are not
independent but are instead pooled into a single collection point,
or nexus (Rensink 2000b). Such a “magical number 1” may corre-
spond to the limit alluded to by Cowan in his proposal that “the [4
separate] parts are associated with a common higher-level node”
(sect. 2.6).
Therefore, there is considerable support for the claim of at least
Commentary/Cowan: The magical number 4
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2000) 24:1
141
Figure 1 (Raffone et al.).
(A) Individual assembly dynamic behavior with feature input in IT and active feedback from PF. The panel
shows the evolution and continuation of the average activity of one IT assembly (100 interconnected model neurons coding a single fea-
ture). Stimulus onset and offset times are marked by the vertical lines. (B) Phase segregation of IT assemblies coding for disjoint fea-
tures. Four out of five reverberations remain active. Due to mutual inhibitory activity, the assemblies become spaced in the oscillatory
phase, thus allowing a markedly discriminative oscillatory reverberation and retention of the coded features. Assemblies are shown in an
order allowing easy inspection of phase segregation. (C) The combination of within-chunk integration and between-item segregation.
Objects (chunks) consist of four interconnected assemblies. Four out of five objects are retained in terms of internally synchronized and
mutually desynchronized oscillatory chunks, whereas all features coding a fifth object are suppressed.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 56 (native) -----
two magical numbers in vision. However, there is less support for
the claim that these are due entirely to limitations on a central
working memory. To begin with, the long-term memory units (or
chunks) accessed by STM need not be the same as the vSTM units
(or parts) obtained from the visual input. A particular configura-
tion might be a unit for purposes of memory retrieval, but not for
visual operations such as tracking or attentional suppression. Dif-
ferent kinds of processes are likely to be involved, and thus, dif-
ferent kinds of units.
As an illustration of this, consider the detection of change in
contrast sign. Whereas capacity for orientation is 3–4 items, ca-
pacity for contrast sign is at least 10 items (Rensink 2000a; 2000c).
This is likely to be a compound limit, resulting from the grouping
of items of similar contrast sign. But note that such groups are
purely short-term visual structures – there is little likelihood that
any particular arrangement had been seen before and became a
chunk in long-term memory.
More generally, perception and cognition rely on systems which
interact with each other to a high degree, making it difficult to de-
termine the locus of performance limits. Indeed, there may not
even be a single locus: performance on a visual task may involve
both visual structures (parts) and memoric structures (chunks); a
magical number might represent the number of degrees of free-
dom on a structure linking the two levels. Given that there are no
compelling a priori grounds which can be appealed to, this mat-
ter will have to be settled by experiment. (The issue of individual
differences would seem to be a particularly good candidate in this
regard.) Until such experiments are carried out, it may be best to
keep our options open as to what causes the magic in our visual
world.
Which brain mechanism cannot 
count beyond four?
Pieter R. Roelfsemaa and Victor A. F. Lammea,b
aGraduate School Neurosciences Amsterdam, Department of Visual System
Analysis, Academic Medical Center (UvA), 1100AA Amsterdam, The
Netherlands; bThe Netherlands Ophthalmic Research Institute, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands. p.roelfsema@ioi.knaw.nl
v.lamme@amc.uva.nl
www.ioi.knaw.nl/vsa.iwo
Abstract: Cowan makes an intriguing case for a fundamental limit in the
number of chunks that can be stored in short term memory (STM).
Chunks are collections of concepts that have strong associations to one an-
other and much weaker associations to other chunks. A translation of this
definition for the visual domain would be that a visual chunk is a collec-
tion of features that belong to the same perceptual group (see also Ma-
honey & Ullman 1988). Here, we will first address the neuronal mecha-
nisms that may demarcate visual chunks. Then we critically evaluate to
what extent these mechanisms might be responsible for the limit on the
number of chunks that can be held in STM. We conclude that the clarity
with which the psychophysical data point to the number four is not
matched by a similarly clear limit imposed by physiological mechanisms.
It is important to distinguish between two types of grouping: base
grouping and incremental grouping (Roelfsema et al. 2000). Base
groupings are formed rapidly and automatically after the appear-
ance of a novel image, because they are based on the tuning of in-
dividual neurons. Many single neurons in early (e.g., Leventhal et
al. 1995) as well as in higher visual areas (e.g., Kobatake & Tanaka
1994) are tuned to multiple stimulus attributes, such as color, ori-
entation, and motion direction. The activation of a neuron tuned
to, for example, red and vertical provides a base grouping between
these features. Most neurons in all of these visual areas are acti-
vated within 100 msec after stimulus presentation (e.g., Oram &
Perret 1992). Thus, base groupings are rapidly available, and do
not depend on elaborate processing. There is no clear limit on the
number of base groupings that can be computed in parallel dur-
ing stimulus presentation.
The scope of base groupings has to be limited. It is unlikely that
there are cells in higher visual areas that are tuned to arbitrary fea-
ture constellations (von der Malsburg 1995). This implies that an
additional type of grouping, called incremental grouping, is re-
quired if base grouping fails to do the job. This may be necessary
if relationships need to be established between feature domains
that are not available as base groupings. In this case separate neu-
ronal populations encode the different feature domains, and the
binding problem lurks. To avoid binding problems, assemblies of
neurons that respond to the various features of the same percep-
tual group have to be demarcated from other neurons that re-
spond to different groups. This can be achieved by the use of as-
sembly labels that are shared among neurons belonging to the
same assembly. Previous theories have proposed two possible as-
sembly labels: synchrony and firing rate modulations (reviewed by
Roelfsema & Singer 1998). According to the first possibility, neu-
rons that belong to the same assembly fire in synchrony. The sec-
ond possibility is that neurons of the same assembly are labeled
with an enhanced firing rate. The distribution of either of these
assembly labels across neurons takes time, and incremental group-
ings therefore do not form automatically (Roelfsema et al. 2000).
Let us now address the limits that are imposed by these assembly
labels on the number of objects that can be stored in STM.
When synchrony is used as an assembly label, multiple assem-
blies can coexist. Neurons within each of these assemblies may fire
synchronously, but they need not be synchronized to neurons of
the other assemblies. Thus, multiple incremental groupings can
form during stimulus presentation and they can, in principle, also
be stored in STM. The target article embraces the synchrony la-
bel and suggests that the number 4 emerges as the ratio between
brain rhythms, such as the 40 Hz gamma rhythm, and the 10 Hz
alpha rhythm, as was first suggested by Lisman and Idiart (1995).
The underlying idea is that four assemblies that are synchronized
at the higher frequency can just stay out of phase in a single cycle
of the low frequency oscillation. However, this line of reasoning
neglects another result of studies on cortical synchronization.
Neurons that respond to different objects do not have a tendency
to stay out of phase. Instead, neurons that respond to different ob-
jects usually have weaker synchronization, or fire independently
(Gray et al. 1989; Livingstone et al. 1995). This invalidates argu-
ments that are based on the ratios between brain rhythms (e.g.,
Lisman & Idiart 1995). Because different assemblies do not stay
out of phase, spurious synchronization between cells that belong
to different assemblies will occur. This may also account for the
interference between multiple items that are stored in STM.
However, in this case the number 4 does not immediately fall out
of the theory.
The other label that can be used to demarcate neurons that re-
spond to the various features of a single object is an enhancement
of their firing rate. Such response enhancements have often been
documented as the correlates of visual attention that is directed to
the respective object (reviewed by Desimone & Duncan 1995;
Maunsell 1995). Grouping of features by attention has first been
suggested in Treisman’s feature integration theory (e.g., Treisman
& Gelade 1980). The enhanced firing rate label can, however, only
be used by one assembly at a time. If two assemblies responding
to different objects are simultaneously labeled, the binding prob-
lem reappears, because neurons in both assemblies have an en-
hanced firing rate. This implies that rate modulations only allow a
single incremental grouping at a time (Roelfsema & Singer 1998).
What happens to base- and incremental groupings when the
stimulus is removed and bottom-up activation declines? The inti-
mate relationship between STM and attention that is discussed in
the target article, is also present at the physiological level. For
many neurons, the enhancement of neural responses to attended
features persists during intervals in which the visual stimulus is re-
moved (Chelazzi et al. 1993; Fuster 1997; Rainer et al. 1998).
Thus, the very same neurons that carry the attentional label are
also involved in STM. The largely unexplored mechanisms that
are responsible for persistent firing during memory episodes may
Commentary/Cowan: The magical number 4
142
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2000) 24:1
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 57 (native) -----
impose a limit on the number of neurons that can maintain their
activity. It is unclear, at present, whether such a limit would affect
the number of base groupings or rather the number of incremen-
tal groupings that can be stored. In any case, the number 4 also
does not seem to fall out of the theory here.
In summary, synchrony allows the coexistence of multiple in-
cremental groupings, whereas rate modulations only accommo-
date a single incremental grouping at a time. Four is not a clear-
cut prediction of either mechanism. The data of Luck and Vogel
(1997) show that feature conjunctions of 4 objects are held in
STM. It is, however, left open by this study whether these con-
junctions go beyond base grouping, since individual neurons in
early visual areas can also be tuned in multiple feature domains.
Moreover, the four visual objects that are held in STM cannot have
arbitrary complexity. Thus an exciting arena for future psy-
chophysical and physiological experimentation is defined, to in-
vestigate how many incremental groupings can be held in visual
STM.
Functional neuroimaging of short-term
memory: The neural mechanisms 
of mental storage
Bart Rypmaa and John D.E. Gabrielib
aUniversity of California, Department of Psychology, Berkeley, CA 94720-
1650; bDepartment of Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 19001.
rypma@socrates.berkeley.edu
gabrieli@psych.stanford.edu
Abstract: Cowan argues that the true short-term memory (STM) capac-
ity limit is about 4 items. Functional neuroimaging data converge with this
conclusion, indicating distinct neural activity patterns depending on
whether or not memory task-demands exceed this limit. STM for verbal
information within that capacity invokes focal prefrontal cortical activation
that increases with memory load. STM for verbal information exceeding
that capacity invokes widespread prefrontal activation in regions associ-
ated with executive and attentional processes that may mediate chunking
processes to accommodate STM capacity limits.
Cowan provides a thoughtful integration of broad literature sup-
porting the view that: (1) “4 6 1” represents the true capacity limit
of STM, and (2) supracapacity maintenance (i.e., more than 4–5
items) of information occurs as a result of additional “executive” 2
processes that expand capacity by strategic data-compression (i.e.,
“intelligent grouping” or “chunking” e.g., Baddeley 1986; Waugh
& Norman 1965) of to-be-maintained information. This funda-
mental idea about the structure of the human mind is, however,
controversial because, as Cowan reviews, alternative interpreta-
tions of relevant experimental results are possible.
Cognitive neuroscience can offer independent and convergent
constraints upon such a theory of STM functional architecture.
One functional neuroimaging study that we performed (Rypma et
al. 1999) offers remarkable support for Cowan’s argument.
That study examined the neural correlates of STM with func-
tional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), a neuroimaging tech-
nique that allows detection of hemodynamic changes associated
with regional neural activity that accompanies cognitive perfor-
mance. Subjects performed a verbal STM task, based on Stern-
berg’s (1969) item-recognition task, in which STM load was var-
ied from 1 to 3 to 6 letters. Thus, the 1-letter and 3-letter loads fell
within the putative true capacity of STM, whereas the 6-letter load
exceeded that capacity. Subjects saw memory-sets of 1, 3, or 6 let-
ters per trial, kept those letters in mind for 5 seconds, and then
pressed a key, if a probe-letter was part of the memory-set. As is
typically found, subjects were highly accurate and reaction times
increased linearly with increasing memory load.
One fMRI analysis examined the difference between 3-letter
and 1-letter loads, a difference that may be conceptualized as an
increase in STM demand, but within capacity limits. In prefrontal
cortex (PFC), the only observable difference was increased activ-
ity for the 3-letter load in inferior (ventrolateral) parts of the left
hemisphere (around Broca’s area) (Fig. 1). The second fMRI
analysis examined the difference between 6-letter and 1-letter
loads, a difference that not only increased STM demand, but also
exceeded capacity limits, thus invoking executive processes. In-
deed, there was a dramatic activation increase, not only around
Broca’s area, but in many additional areas, including superior (dor-
solateral) regions of the PFC, in both hemispheres, and in cingu-
late gyrus. Altogether, there was a 75-fold increase in the spatial
extent of PFC activation as subjects moved from subcapacity to
supracapacity SIM performance. Thus, during supracapacity mem-
ory performance, we observed a greatly disproportionate increase
in PFC activation, and activation of multiple PFC regions.
These results can be readily interpreted to support the view
that distinct STM processes, mediated by separable neural sys-
tems, carry out information retention, depending on the extent of
memory-demand (i.e., whether or not the memory demand ex-
ceeds a “4 6 1” capacity limitation). In PFC, variation within that
capacity (1 vs. 3 letters) resulted in focal left ventrolateral activa-
tion that increased with load. This activation may reflect a STM
system that mediates subcapacity maintenance (i.e., less than 4
items) of verbal information, possibly through verbal rehearsal
(e.g., Vallar & Baddeley 1984). STM loads exceeding that capac-
ity (6 letters) invoked widespread bilateral dorsolateral PFC acti-
vation in areas not activated by subcapacity STM loads. These ac-
tivations may reflect the additional “executive” involvement in
memory maintenance tasks with supracapacity memory loads dis-
cussed by Cowan (e.g., Baddeley & Hitch 1974) Indeed, multiple
studies suggest that dorsolateral PFC is activated whenever exec-
utive processes are required (Cohen et al. 1994; D’Esposito et al.
1995; Petrides 1996; Prabhakaran et al. 2000; Smith & Jonides
1999). Further, concomitant activation in dorsolateral PFC and
cingulate gyrus have been observed in attention-demanding tasks
(e.g., Corbetta et al. 1991), supporting Cowan’s contention that at-
tention is one component of the additional mechanisms that sup-
port chunking.
Commentary/Cowan: The magical number 4
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2000) 24:1
143
Figure 1 (Rypma & Gabrieli).
Two axial (horizontal) slices show-
ing averaged neural activity across all subjects in the 3-and 6-
letter memory load conditions. A 5 anterior, P 5 posterior, L 5
left, R 5 right. Gray arrows indicate dorsolateral PFC, white ar-
rows indicate ventrolateral PFC. FMRI results indicated ventro-
lateral PFC activity in the 3-letter condition and additional dorso-
lateral PFC activity in the 6-letter condition.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 58 (native) -----
The behavioral results reviewed by Cowan and our fMRI results
together indicate that verbal STM loads below a “4 6 1” capacity
limit invoke a specific STM system mediated in part by left infe-
rior PFC. Supracapacity verbal STM loads invoke multiple addi-
tional executive and attentional systems mediated by bilateral dor-
solateral prefrontal and cingulate cortices. STM circuitry extends
beyond these areas to at least parietal and cerebellar regions, but
these prefrontal findings offer independent, convergent evidence
for Cowan’s persuasive argument.
Characterizing chunks in visual short-term
memory: Not more than one feature 
per dimension?
Werner X. Schneider, Heiner Deubel, 
and Maria-Barbara Wesenick
Institute of Psychology, Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, D-80802
Munich, Germany. {wxs; deubel; wesenick}@psy.uni-muenchen.de
www.paed.uni-muenchen.de/mip/psych/deubel/wwwdocs/index.htm
Abstract: Cowan defines a chunk as “a collection of concepts that have
strong associations to one another and much weaker associations to other
chunks currently in use.” This definition does not impose any constraints
on the nature and number of elements that can be bound into a chunk. We
present an experiment to demonstrate that such limitations exist for visual
short-term memory, and that their analysis may lead to important insights
into properties of visual memory.
To determine the capacity limit of short-term memory (STM) can
be a tricky business with a number of potential pitfalls. Cowan
provides a careful and much needed analysis of these pitfalls that
can confound estimates of the real memory capacity with other
limitations in the system. After reviewing a large number of stud-
ies that try to avoid these problems, Cowan concludes that the
limit of (STM) is about 4 chunks, rather than the classical 7 6 2.
Concerning visual working memory, this capacity estimate has in-
deed been put forward by several authors for quite some time.
Based on experimental evidence from studies on transsaccadic
memory (e.g., Irwin 1992) and on visual STM (e.g., Shibuya &
Bundesen 1988), one of us reached a similar conclusion in a the-
oretical analysis of visual working memory (Schneider 1999).
However, knowing how many chunks can be retained is by no
way sufficient if we want to know how much information can be
stored in STM – to answer this question, it is absolutely necessary
to know more precisely how a visual chunk can be characterized.
Indeed, we think that a central and important issue of future re-
search will be to analyse the limits of STM in terms of the mech-
anisms by which more basic elements are formed into chunks, and
also to study how attention and specific tasks determine this
chunking.
Imagine a scene consisting of four “objects,” each being a
square made up of a 3*3 raster of differently coloured parts. An
intuitively obvious prediction would be that these four objects can-
not be retained as well as four homogeneously coloured squares.
Amazingly, the data from one of Luck and Vogel’s (1997) experi-
ments seemed to suggest otherwise. In this experiment, subjects
had to retain such stimuli as shown in Figure 1 that were defined
by various colour-colour-conjunctions. The results seemed to
show that objects that are made of a conjunction of two colours
could be retained equally well as objects with just one colour value
per object. This implies that visual chunks may contain at least two
feature values for the colour dimension.
For storage of visual information such an analysis is possibly
somewhat easier than for verbal material, which is the focus of
Cowan’s article. In the visual format it is intuitively plausible to as-
sume that chunks are direct reflections of consciously perceived
visual “objects.” A frequent assumption in vision is that an object
can be described in terms of its basic visual dimensions, such as its
colour, shape, or motion. Within each dimension, the stimulus can
be specified by “features” or “feature values” (e.g., Treisman &
Commentary/Cowan: The magical number 4
144
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2000) 24:1
Figure 1 (Schneider et al.).
Left: Stimuli used in the experiment. Subjects had to memorize configurations of 2, 4, or 6 coloured squares
for 900 msec. After the retention period, either the same display or a display with one of the squares differing in colour reappeared; sub-
jects were asked whether they had detected a change. Squares could be large (0.75*0.75 deg) or small (0.35*0.35 deg), or conjunctions
of both. Right: Percent correct report as a function of the number of items presented.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 59 (native) -----
Gormican 1988) For instance, the dimension “colour” of an object
can be characterized by one of the features “red,” “blue,” “purple,”
and so on. After breaking down a visual object into these more
basic elements, the question arises as to whether the above defi-
nitions of “dimensions” and “features” in vision constitute an ap-
propriate basis for characterizing chunks in visual memory. In
other words, one may ask (1) whether chunking in visual working
indeed functions by binding features into integrated visual ob-
jects, and (2) analyse the rules and limitations of this binding.
With regard to the first question there is recent evidence from
Luck and Vogel (1997, also referred to in sect. 3.1.1), suggesting
that the capacity limit of visual STM indeed refers to feature bun-
dles in the form of objects. In their experiments, subjects were re-
quired to retain simple geometrical visual objects made up of fea-
ture conjunctions such as of a certain colour, orientation, and
length. The data showed that objects defined by conjunctions of
two or more dimensions (e.g., a line of a certain orientation,
colour, and length) can be retained as well as objects defined by
only a single dimension (e.g., orientation only). For any of these
combinations, the estimated memory capacity was about four ob-
jects.
The second question is strongly related to the problem of how
many of these basic elements can be bound into a single chunk,
and whether there exist limitations as to the possible combination
of features.
In our own experiments, we attempted to replicate this sur-
prising finding (Deubel et al., in preparation). We used the same
stimuli as Luck and Vogel (1997), and identical experimental pa-
rameters such as presentation and retention times. Our experi-
mental results (Fig. 1) clearly show that retention of objects de-
fined by a conjunction of two colours leads to a strong drop in
performance, as compared to the condition in which the objects
consisted of one colour only. So, external objects with two colours
seem to require two chunks for the internal coding. This finding
is in obvious contrast to the result of Luck and Vogel (1997). The
reason why we could not replicate their data is unclear to us, how-
ever, in an independent study, Wheeler and Treisman (submitted)
recently reported a finding similar to ours.
These data are clear evidence that there exist prominent limi-
tations to chunking in visual memory. As a possible, preliminary
rule of thumb suggested by the result, one may assume that a vi-
sual chunk can consist of not more than one feature per dimen-
sion, that is, one colour, one shape primitive, and so on. A further,
yet unresolved important issue in this context is the question
whether there is also a limit in the number of possible dimensions
that define a chunk. Luck and Vogel (1997) found no limit (i.e., no
drop in memory performance) up to a conjunction of four differ-
ent dimensions (colour, orientation, length, gap). However, it
might be that a limitation larger than that can indeed be found.
The empirical task of the future will be to determine more pre-
cisely the limitations of chunking and how they relate to visual fea-
tures and dimensions. Indeed, we think that the paradigm pre-
sented here offers a promising experimental approach to answer
questions about the nature of chunks in vision. Measuring mem-
ory performance for a variety of stimuli and features could reveal
the basic dimensions and features in vision in a very straightfor-
ward way: If adding the feature in question to the stimuli leaves
the memory capacity (in terms of number of objects) unaffected,
one may conclude that it is really a basic visual feature, forming an
elementary part of a visual chunk.
Cowan defines a chunk as “a collection of concepts that have
strong associations to one another and much weaker associations
to other chunks currently in use.” This definition does not impose
any constraints on the nature and number of elements that can be
bound into a chunk. Our experiment is a demonstration that such
limitations exist, and that their analysis may lead to important in-
sights into properties of visual memory.
The magical number 4 in vision
Brian J. Scholla and Yaoda Xub
aDepartment of Psychology, Vision Sciences Laboratory, Harvard University,
Cambridge, MA 02138; bDepartment of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Mas-
sachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139.
scholl@wjh.harvard.edu
yaoda@psyche.mit.edu
www.wjh.harvard.edu/~scholl
Abstract: Some of the evidence for a “magical number 4” has come from
the study of visual cognition, and Cowan reinterprets such evidence in
terms of a single general limit on memory and attention. We evaluate this
evidence, including some studies not mentioned by Cowan, and argue that
limitations in visual processing are distinct from those involved in other
memory phenomena.
Cowan’s discussion of the “magical number 4” synthesizes evidence
from domains which are rarely discussed together. In particular,
Cowan draws on work from the study of visual cognition – such as
studies of subitizing (sect. 3.3.2) and multiple object tracking
(sect. 3.3.3) and attempts to reinterpret such evidence in terms of
a general memory limitation, which he suggests is a reflection of
the underlying capacity of the “attentional focus” (a thesis which
is discussed in Cowan 1995, but which he does not argue for in his
target article). Here we note additional evidence for a limit of ap-
proximately 4 objects in certain types of visual processing, and dis-
cuss why these limits are probably distinct from those involved in
other (e.g., verbal) tasks.
Additional evidence from visual cognition. Additional evi-
dence for a “magical number 4” in visual processing comes from
studies of infants, normal adults, and neuropsychological syn-
dromes. Recent looking-time studies with infants have suggested
that they are able to keep track of arrays of objects through addi-
tions and subtractions, but only if there are less than 4 objects in
these arrays (e.g., Uller et al. 1999; Wynn 1992), and this evidence
has been interpreted in terms of developing mechanisms of visual
attention (e.g., Carey & Xu, in press; Scholl & Leslie 1999). In nor-
mal adults, there appears to be a limit of 4 on the number of ob-
jects which can receive prioritized processing due to attentional
capture (Yantis & Johnson 1990), and the number of items which
can be simultaneously examined in a visual search for a change
(Rensink 2000).
Finally, it has been shown that bilateral lesions of the parietal
lobes in Balint’s syndrome can reduce visual processing capacity.
Patients with Balint’s syndrome have great deficits in perceiving
complex visual scenes, although their ability to recognize individ-
ual objects is usually preserved (for a review, see Rafal 1997). De-
haene and Cohen (1994) studied visual enumeration in 5 Balint’s
patients and found that these patients could enumerate sets of 1,
2, and sometimes 3 items correctly, but not sets comprising more
than 3 items. Reaction time slopes for these patients were flat for
set sizes of 1 and 2 items, but increased sharply for set sizes of 3
or more items. Treisman and colleagues (Friedman-Hill et al.
1995; Robertson et al. 1997) reported another Balint’s patient who
could not correctly enumerate more than one or two objects even
when he was aware that more were present. In rare and extreme
cases, Balint’s patients report seeing only one object when pre-
sented with multiple objects (e.g., Coslett & Saffran 1991).
Specific visual limits or general memory/attention limits?
Cowan views such evidence as continuous with data concerning
the number of chunks which can be simultaneously active in short
term memory (STM). In contrast, we think there are good reasons
to resist this reinterpretation, and to view the limits on visual pro-
cessing as separate from those involving verbal and other non vi-
sual material. (In this respect we take a position similar to that of
Miller 1956 who suspected that STM limits and subitizing limits
were independent.) Given space restrictions, we will largely re-
strict our discussion of this issue to the evidence which Cowan
does discuss in his target article: subitizing (wherein observers can
determine the cardinality of sets with less than 5 items roughly in
parallel and without errors) and multiple object tracking (MOT;
Commentary/Cowan: The magical number 4
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2000) 24:1
145
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 60 (native) -----
wherein observers can attentionally track up to 4–5 indepen-
dently and unpredictably moving identical items in a field of iden-
tical distractors).
Cowan presents only a few arguments for interpreting these
phenomena in terms continuous with general STM limits. For
MOT he provides no arguments, simply stating that one could use
a general STM-based theory to explain performance. (Such an ex-
planation, it seems to us, could not easily account for the strong
dependency of MOT performance on subtle visual details such as
the type of accretion and deletion behind occluders; Scholl &
Pylyshyn 1999). For subitizing, he notes the vision-based theory
of Trick and Pylyshyn (1994a), and argues against it mainly by ap-
peal to two phenomena. First, he suggests that the “pop-out” al-
luded to by Trick and Pylyshyn can also occur for larger numbers
of items, for example “when all of the eggs [in a carton] pop out
against the surrounding carton” (sect. 3.3.2). This, however, is
clearly not the type of pop-out that Trick and Pylyshyn (and oth-
ers who have investigated visual search) have in mind, since the
eggs in this case do not pop out as individuals, but as a group. Sec-
ond, Cowan suggests that focused central attention is more im-
portant to enumeration than is suggested by Trick and Pylyshyn’s
theory, since other researchers (Atkinson et a1. 1976; Simon &
Vaishnavi 1996) studying the enumeration of dots in afterimages
have claimed that observers cannot enumerate sets greater than 4
without eye movements. This claim is false, however, and the lim-
its these investigators found were due to the confounding effects
of crowding (He et al. 1997).
Beyond Cowan’s arguments, we think there are several addi-
tional reasons to view these limits as distinct from those involved
in verbal STM. First, viewing them as identical seems to necessi-
tate a prediction that one should not be able to track 4 targets
in the MOT task and simultaneously acquire and hold 4 verbally-
presented items in STM. However, this is trivial to do, and such
tasks seem not to interfere at all. (In an informal test, two ob-
servers tracked 4 in 8 items for 10 sec with an accuracy of 87.5%
averaged over 10 trials. When they also had to remember 4 ran-
dom digits presented auditorily as the targets were being speci-
fied, they tracked with an accuracy of 92.5%, and made no errors
on the memory task.) Cowan notes in section 4.2 of the target ar-
ticle that such evidence against a single capacity limit could be ex-
plained away by appeal to attentional switching back and forth be-
tween the two tasks, but in this respect MOT is an ideal foil, since
one can succeed in the task only by continuous tracking (Pylyshyn
& Storm 1988). Second, an explanation based on a single general
limitation of memory or attention predicts that these limits should
stand or fall together in neuropsychological impairments, which
they do not. For example, none of the Balint’s patients mentioned
above exhibited deficits in short-term memory span. There are pa-
tients who, after lesions in the left hemisphere language areas, ex-
hibited reduced STM span despite normal speech production in
some cases (e.g., Baddeley 1986; Shallice & Warrington 1970).
However, none of these patients showed any signs of Balint’s
symptoms or deficits in visual processing. Moreover, although
these patients showed very poor retention of auditorily presented
digits, with a span in the region of two items, they usually showed
better retention of visually presented digits, with a span in the re-
gion of 4 or 5. These double dissociations in lesion sites and pa-
tient performance argue strongly against the notion that a com-
mon capacity limitation underlies capacity limited performance in
both verbal and visual tasks.
Visual objects vs. chunks in memory. The view that these lim-
itations in visual processing are distinct from those involved in
other memory phenomena is further strengthened by the fact that
the “units” of processing in each case are quite different. The
“chunks” of memory can be almost infinitely flexible in their com-
position, and are thus defined by Cowan and others simply in
terms of association networks (see sect. 1.3). This flexibility is in
marked contrast to the units of visual attention – visual objects –
which appear to be characterized by highly constrained and in-
flexible rules (Scholl, in press). In MOT, for instance, observers
can track 4 dots in a field of 8 dots, but completely fail when try-
ing to track 4 line endpoints in a field of 4 lines (and thus, 8 end-
points). In general, very specific rules involving connectedness
and part-structure seem to determine whether a feature cluster
can be tracked in MOT (Scholl et al., in press). Similarly, in visual
short-term memory studies using a change detection paradigm,
color and orientation features are best remembered if they belong
to the same part of an object and less well remembered if they be-
long to different parts of an object (Xu, submitted). All of these
constraints are in marked contrast to the robustness and flexibil-
ity of potential STM chunks with verbal materials.
We think the considerations discussed here provide good rea-
sons for thinking that the limits of approximately 4 involved in var-
ious types of visual processing are distinct from other similar STM
limits. We remain agnostic on the question of why there should ex-
ist similar independent limits. It could be for the teleological and
computational reasons discussed by Cowan (in sect, 4.1), or it
could be – as George Miller (1956) suspected of the similarity of
memory capacity and subitizing limitations – “nothing more than
a coincidence.”
How unitary is the capacity-limited 
attentional focus?
Torsten Schubert and Peter A. Frensch
Department of Psychology, Humboldt-University Berlin, D-10117 Berlin,
Germany. {torsten.schubert; peter.frensch}@psychologie.hu-berlin.de
Abstract: Cowan assumes a unitary capacity-limited attentional focus. We
argue that two main problems need to be solved before this assumption
can complement theoretical knowledge about human cognition. First, it
needs to be clarified what exactly the nature of the elements (chunks)
within the attentional focus is. Second, an elaborated process model needs
to be developed and testable assumptions about the proposed capacity
limitation need to be formulated.
One of the main contributions of Cowan’s important target article
is the assumption of a unitary limitation of the attentional focus.
Cowan’s arguments in favor of this assumption should reinforce
the current discussion about the nature of unitary (e.g., Baddeley
1986; Norman & Shallice 1986) or distributed attentional mecha-
nisms (Allport 1987; Meyer & Kieras 1997; Neumann 1987). Al-
though we agree that this assumption is intriguing, we are some-
what disappointed by its theoretical elaboration and by the
absence of significant support advanced in its favor by Cowan.
As supporting evidence for his assumption, Cowan lists differ-
ent studies that all yield performance restrictions of about 4 items
in different experimental contexts and over a wide range of stim-
ulus materials, for example, dots, digits, screen locations, auditory
signals, and so forth. Because all these studies somehow yield the
number “4,” Cowan’s main argument is that there should be a uni-
tary mechanism underlying this limitation. However, for this ar-
gument to be convincing, it needs to be shown, first, that the items
across the different reported experimental contexts are compara-
ble entities. Second, one would need to describe an elaborated
process model with a set of mechanisms formulated that allows an
integrated understanding of the findings.
Unfortunately, the present work falls somewhat short on both
of these points. For example, Cowan uses the concept of chunks
in stressing the equality of items in different experimental con-
texts. However, he does not formulate a convincing operational
definition of what exactly a chunk is. How do we know that 4 dots,
screen locations, or digits correspond to 4 chunks as, for example,
4 words might? The main question is: How can we measure or de-
fine chunks independently of the experimental context we are
dealing with in a concrete experimental situation? If there is no
sufficiently constraining definition, what prevents us from arguing
Commentary/Cowan: The magical number 4
146
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2000) 24:1
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 61 (native) -----
that 4 items held in visual short-term memory (STM) and 4 legs
of a chair have a common causality in the limitation of subjects’ at-
tentional focus?
Furthermore, Cowan does not formulate an elaborated process
model to explain the findings in different experimental contexts on
the basis of a common set of mechanisms. Lacking such a model,
Cowan’s position is descriptive but not explanatory. Thus, one
could argue that the reported results concerning STM (Sperling
1960), articulatory loop (Baddeley 1986), visual search (Fisher
1984), enumeration (Trick & Pylyshyn 1993), and so on, are best
explained by different (sometimes even computational) models as-
suming separate attentional and memory mechanisms (Allport
1987; Neumann 1987). The alternative assumption of a unitary at-
tentional mechanism as a common cause for the reported results
must remain highly speculative until tested.
On the basis of an elaborated process model, one could formu-
late specific predictions for an empirical test of the common-cause
hypothesis. For example, if a process or mechanism A (e.g., the at-
tentional focus) is identified as essential for tasks 1, 2, 3, . . . , and
n, then one should be able to find a factor X, the manipulation of
which will have equal consequences on subjects’ performance in
tasks 1, 2, 3, . . . , and n. In contrast the manipulation of a process
B, essential only for tasks 1 and n, should influence performance
only in tasks 1 and n, and not in the remaining tasks. Converging
evidence of this kind would provide most valuable to support for
assumption of a unitary capacity limited attentional focus.
If these caveats can be resolved, the assumption could signifi-
cantly deepen our theoretical understanding of the human cogni-
tive system. To illustrate, consider a different research area that
also deals with capacity limitations, research on dual tasks. Stud-
ies using the psychological refractory period (PRP) paradigm, in
which subjects perform two choice-reaction tasks simultaneously,
have yielded rather contradictory results on capacity limitations.
Many studies with this paradigm have provided support for a
capacity-limited central mechanism related to response selection
(McCann & Johnston 1993; Pashler 1994; Schubert 1999; Welford
1980). These studies suggest that only one response selection can
take place at a time, thus limiting the capacity of a central atten-
tion mechanism to 1 item (chunk) contrary to Cowan’s proposal of
4 chunks. However, other contradictory findings with the PRP
paradigm suggest no capacity limitation at response selection at all
(Hazeltine et al. 2000; Schumacher et al. 1998). The latter results
stimulated Meyer and Kieras (1997) to propose a scheduling ac-
count (EPIC) for dual-task situations in particular and sensori-
motor tasks, as well as working memory tasks in general. Accord-
ing to EPIC, elements of the task to be performed are maintained
in a working memory system without any limiting attentional ca-
pacity. Executive processes allow the scheduling of task processes
according to subject’s specific instructions and goals. Cowan ex-
presses doubts that this “scheduling theory” can account for the
findings on attentional and memory limitations. However, looking
at the contradictory evidence and theoretical positions, the ques-
tion arises whether there are different task-specific working mem-
ories with different capacity limitations, for example, one for dual
tasks and one for storage tasks, or whether there exists no central
capacity limitation at all.
We assume that the assumption of a capacity-limited atten-
tional focus may account for the contradictory results in dual-task
research if one localizes the capacity limitation strictly at the level
of conscious information processing. A plausible explanation is
that in dual-task studies a capacity limitation of the central mech-
anism can be observed only when subjects carry out the tasks in a
relatively unlearned state. In this case, subjects probably make a
conscious decision which response to map to which stimulus when
performing the task. The conscious decision requires maintaining
a set of different stimuli and different responses in working mem-
ory together with a set of S-R mapping rules. One could easily
imagine that, in this case, the number of chunks in working mem-
ory exceeds the proposed limit of 4, thus causing a deterioration
of dual-task processing.
What about studies suggesting no dual-task costs at all (e.g.,
Hazeltine et al. 2000; Schumacher et a1. 1998)? One important
feature of such studies appears to be that the reduction of dual-
task costs emerges after long, specialized training. It is thus plau-
sible that training leads to an over learned mapping of stimuli and
responses and consequently to automatic activation of the re-
sponse when a stimulus is presented. In this case, no conscious de-
cision is necessary to select the appropriate response for a special
stimulus, and the proposed capacity limit on the attentional focus
is not observed (see also Greenwald & Shulman 1973).
The above conjectures show that the assumption of a unitary ca-
pacity limit on conscious information processing may shed new
light on different and, even, contradictory findings in other fields,
that have been investigated in isolation. Given this and given an
understanding of the elements of consciousness (chunks) as well
as an elaborated process model, the assumption of a unitary ca-
pacity limitation could be fruitfully included in a broader theory
of the human cognitive system.
Dispelling the magic: Towards memory
without capacity
Niels A. Taatgen
Department of Artificial Intelligence, University of Groningen,
9712 TS Groningen, Netherlands. niels@tcw2.ppsw.rug.nl
www.tcw2.ppsw.rug.nl/~niels
Abstract: The limited capacity for unrelated things is a fact that needs to
be explained by a general theory of memory, rather than being itself used
as a means of explaining data. A pure storage capacity is therefore not the
right assumption for memory research. Instead an explanation is needed
of how capacity limitations arise from the interaction between the envi-
ronment and the cognitive system. The ACT-R architecture, a theory with-
out working memory but a long-term memory based on activation, may
provide such an explanation.
The goal of science has always been to show that things in the
world that appear to be accidental can be explained by a set of sys-
tematic and fundamental principles. Miller’s (1956) magical num-
ber seven and subsequent theories based on the idea are attempts
to find such principles. Cowan tells us that the magical number is
not seven, but actually four. Still the word “magical” lingers
around this mysterious capacity. My proposal is not to attack the
“seven” aspect of the principle, but rather the “magical” part of it,
since we all know that magic doesn’t really exist. Whereas in
Miller’s original article short-term capacity was just an empirical
fact, it has subsequently grown into a theory that people actually
have a pure storage capacity.
Let us elaborate on this idea. If we take capacity seriously, the
number of items that can be stored by an individual has to be an
integer. A capacity of 3.5 only makes sense as a group average, not
as a property of an individual. An individual can either retain three
items or four items, not three-and-a-half. An individual capacity
of 3.5 only has meaning if the individual can sometimes remem-
ber three items, and sometimes four items. But this is hard to rec-
oncile with the idea of a fixed capacity. It becomes even harder to
explain development. Even according to Cowan’s own data, the
capacity of adults is larger than the capacity of children. But how
then does this capacity grow? Are there sudden increases in which
the capacity is incremented by one?
The problem with the target article is that it already assumes
there is a capacity limit, and that it can be studied separately from
the rest of memory. If one wants to prove there is indeed a limit-
capacity short-term store, the relation to long-term memory
(LTM) has to be taken into account. When something drops out
of short term memory (STM), is it really gone? Sometimes the ex-
act information is irretrievable, but the vast literature on implicit
learning and priming suggests that everything that happens in
Commentary/Cowan: The magical number 4
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2000) 24:1
147
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 62 (native) -----
STM has some long-term impact. So what of the alternative ac-
count, that STM is no separate entity, but just a part of LTM? This
would be a much more parsimonious solution, provided it can ex-
plain the empirical facts of a limited short-term store.
I would like to argue that an explanation of short-term store
based on properties of LTM is much more interesting than as-
suming a separate entity. Why is the capacity four, and not five? A
theory that proposes a buffer of limited size does not provide any
answers. Take for example the subitizing phenomenon, the fact
that people seem to be able to recognize up to four dots in the vi-
sual field, but have to count if there are more. One could postu-
late the theory that the visual system has an built-in capacity to
recognize up to four things, and be done. Peterson and Simon
(2000) offer an alternative account. According to their theory, the
visual system can immediately recognize a set of dots, if it has seen
these dots in the same array before often enough. The number of
possible configurations of dots increases exponentially by the
number of dots. Therefore, the human visual system receives
enough examples of four-dot configurations to recognize any of
them instantly, but not of five or more. Except of course when a
particular configuration occurs often enough: anyone can recog-
nize the five-dot pattern on a die instantly. The advantage of the
Peterson and Simon account is that they show how the seemingly
magical number four can be explained by an interaction between
environment and the cognitive system.
Short-term memory capacity is not something that can be used
to explain the outcomes of experiments, but is rather something
that needs to be explained itself. One possible explanation is the
one offered by the ACT-R architecture (Anderson & Lebiere
1998). ACT-R has a long-term declarative memory that also serves
as working memory. To keep track of the current context, a single-
item focus of attention is used. All items that have to be memo-
rized are stored in declarative memory. Since declarative memory
is activation-based, interference and decay can produce the same
sort of effects usually assumed to be produced by limited STM.
These limitations are, however, context dependent: if there are as-
sociations between the items to be memorized or with other items
in memory, it is easier to retrieve the information. Short-term
memory without context is only important if one presumes its ca-
pacity is a fundamental property. Short-term memory within a
context is much more useful. I have demonstrated (Taatgen 1999a;
1999b) that individual differences on simple memory task might
be used to explain individual differences in skill acquisition.
Figure 1 shows some results from an ACT-R model of short-
term store that I have adapted from an earlier version (Taatgen
1999a). The original model memorized a list of up to ten digits,
and attempted to reproduce them. It neatly reproduced Miller’s 
7 6 2 effect. Since the original model was allowed to rehearse, I
removed the rehearsal, and obtained the results in Figure 1: the
magical number four, but without any internal capacity limita-
tions. The figure shows three curves, a simulated low, average and
high capacity individual. The individual differences were pro-
duced by variation of an ACT-R parameter that controls the
spread of activation (based on Lovett et al. 1997). The reason why
the curve drops off so dramatically at around four items has noth-
ing to do with the number four itself. It rather has do to with the
fact that as the string of numbers grows, the effects of decay, in-
terference, and the increased probability of doing something
wrong if more responses are required are multiplied, and cause
performance to drop suddenly at this point.
How to interface cognitive psychology 
with cognitive neuroscience?
Hannu Tiitinen
Department of Psychology, University of Helsinki, Helsinki FIH-00014,
Finland. hannu.tiitinen@helsinki.fi
www.helsinki.fi/hum/ylpsy
Abstract: Cowan’s analysis of human short-term memory (STM) and at-
tention in terms of processing limits in the range of 4 items (or “chunks”)
is discussed from the point of view of cognitive neuroscience. Although,
Cowan already provides many important theoretical insights, we need to
learn more about how to build further bridges between cognitive psy-
chology and cognitive neuroscience.
Cowan’s target article on the limits of mental storage capacity de-
lineates experimental observations on short-term memory (STM)
into either pure or compound limits with an average of 4 chunks
and equates this limit with human attentional mechanisms. In my
view, this is exactly what is needed in cognitive psychology and
even more so in cognitive neuroscience today.
In cognitive psychology, the quest for an understanding of hu-
man attentional processes has its roots in the groundbreaking
work of Cherry (1953), Miller (1956), and Broadbent (1958). As
Cowan points out, sometimes these major findings become such
a major influence, far beyond the expectations of individual re-
searchers, that they can distort scientific progress. Over the past
decades, observations have accumulated at such a rapid rate that
it is very important to evaluate related findings and try to find
some common denominators in the data. Cowan’s target article is
an important theoretical organizer and a logical continuation of his
previous work (1988; 1995).
Current brain research has a tendency to focus on the study of
a given response and its dynamics, obtained with a given method,
but it is the theory, not the method, that should guide the re-
searcher. This brings us to a few specific comments on the target
article.
First, I would like to question the assumption of human brain
oscillations, especially in the gamma (ca. 40 Hz) range, serving as
a “binding mechanism” for sensory input and, in the present con-
text, as the neuronal mechanism underlying chunking of informa-
tion. The role of gamma activity is still under debate and, although
the linking of STM and chunking with oscillatory brain activity is
an attractive new idea, one must be very cautious in interpreting
the data, such as those of Lisman and Idiart (1995), or as suggested
by Cowan (sect. 4.1.2). As Cowan shows, one can calculate and
show correlations in “cycles” and “subcycles,” and estimate the ra-
tio of slow and fast oscillatory rhythms in various ways, ad infini-
tum. Furthermore, 40-Hz oscillations are actually much more
widespread in the frequency domain than is generally assumed
and highly susceptible to, for example, the use of recording and
filtering settings. Is this line of correlative research fruitful and
promising enough? More specifically, can Cowan envision other
prospective avenues of research which might help bridge the the-
oretical concepts of cognitive psychology and the measures of cog-
nitive neuroscience?
In bridging the gap between these two domains in the research
of STM and attention, at least two issues suggest themselves for
Commentary/Cowan: The magical number 4
148
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2000) 24:1
Figure 1 (Taatgen).
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 63 (native) -----
further inspection. (1) Experiments explicitly designed within the
theoretical framework provided by Cowan and (2) the inherent
limitations in brain research techniques.
Most of the neurophysiological studies cited in the target arti-
cle do not seem to specifically address STM. For example, Gray
et al. (1989) studied cats using invasive measures, and Tiitinen et
al. (1993), using EEG, focused only on the attentional effects re-
flected in the human transient 40-Hz response. The latter obser-
vations were extended by Cowan (sect. 4.1.4) as consistent with
the idea of a STM storage capacity of 4 chunks when taken to-
gether with Cowan et al.’s (1999; Fig. 4) very interesting simple
relationship between attended and unattended speech, with at-
tentional allocation presumably drawn from the same processes in
both conditions.
This interpretation is however complicated by the fact that Ti-
itinen et al. (1993), using sinusoidal stimulation only, observed not
only the attentional enhancement in the 40-Hz range, but a promi-
nent response under passive (reading) conditions too. This already
poses two variables that need to be taken into account in the quest
for pure STM limits: the type of stimulation used (sinusoids vs.
speech) and brain activity related solely to attention versus that ob-
served in passive conditions (such as reading). Sensory-specific,
task-independent brain processes (easily observable in passive con-
ditions) might actually have a much more crucial role in “higher-
order” stages of information processing than previously assumed
(Tiitinen et al. 1994; Tiitinen & May, preprint). This, I feel, must
be emphasized despite the fact that our understanding of sensory-
level memory processes is still evolving (see, e.g., May et al. 1999).
A more straightforward way to understand the STM limitation
might be the design of experiments based on the framework pro-
vided by Cowan. This impressive target article already suggests
several interesting research avenues for brain research: For ex-
ample, the results of Cowan et al. (1999) could be further ex-
tended in the context of EEG and MEG measurements, in which
one could also take into account the problems mentioned above.
An equally interesting issue is that of the flexible use of chunk
sizes, which can range from small groups to “supergroups” (Erics-
son et al. 1980; Ericsson 1985) or “active superconcepts” (Shastri
& Ajjanagadde 1993). These not only provide humans with a pow-
erful operating advantage in complex cognitive environments, but
might even help explain the observed individual differences in
STM limits. These observations can readily be made in fMRI and/
or PET measurement, which might then shed light on where in
the brain the STM chunks of varying size are located. These, and
similar attempts, should eventually provide us with a map of the
“architecture of cognition” and one of its important aspects: flex-
ible memory storage and attentional influences.
Studies of STM properties in animals may
help us better understand the nature 
of our own storage limitations: 
The case of birdsong acquisition
Dietmar Todt
Institute of Biology: Behavioural Biology, FU Berlin, D-12163 Berlin,
Germany. todt@zedat.fu-berlin.de
www.verhaltensbiologie.fu-berlin.de
Abstract: I like Cowan’s review of STM properties and especially his sug-
gestions on the role of attention. I missed, however, a consideration of
studies which provide evidence for STM properties in animals. In my com-
mentary, I argue that such evidence can elucidate the biological basis of
storage limitations, validating this view by discussing mechanisms which
constrain the acquisition of serial information in songbirds.
In the introduction to his target article (sect. 1, para. 2) Cowan em-
phasises that “we are still uncertain as to the nature of storage ca-
pacity limits.” The essence of this statement is substantiated in
other parts of his paper, and I admit that I fully agree with it. Nev-
ertheless, I would like to submit a proposal which is guided by a
comparative perspective, suggesting that we should extend the re-
search focus from the STM mechanisms of human beings to those
of animals.
Several studies on animals have shown that limitations in the ca-
pacity to process acquired information are not unique to humans,
but found in nonverbal organisms as well (Chen et al.; Koehler
1954; Roitblat et al. 1991; Terrace 1987; 1998; Todt et al. 2000). It
may therefore be wise to select animal models that either allow in-
quiries into STM mechanisms which are difficult to address in hu-
mans, or that permit us to uncover memory properties which are
biologically basic and thus point to precursors of accomplishments
regarded as human characteristics. A paradigm for such an ap-
proach was recently published by Hultsch (1992; 1993). She stud-
ied acquisition of serially structured information in the nightin-
gale (Luscinia megarhynchos), a songbird who is able to learn and
memorise a vocal repertoire of more than 200 different sound pat-
terns (5 songs). In the following, I first recapitulate some back-
ground facts, then outline the methods and results of Hultsch’s ex-
periments, and finally discuss implications for special issues
treated in the target article.
When singing, most songbirds produce a series of well-struc-
tured vocal patterns that typically have a duration of a few seconds
and are called “songs” (Fig. 1). Although each single song encodes
information about several biological details, for example, both in-
dividual and species-specific cues, many species develop and use
repertoires of several different types of songs (Catchpole & Slater
1995; Kroodsma & Miller 1996). Song development is a matter of
vocal learning (Hultsch 1991; Marler 1976; 1991; Nottebohm
1993). This accomplishment covaries, however, with the hierachy
level of learning stimuli: Whereas birds normally copy the acousti-
cal patterns of single songs, they appear less precise when learn-
ing at a higher level of song organisation. That is, their acquisition
of information encoded in a series of different songs can be con-
strained by a mechanism called “package formation” (Hultsch et
al. 1995).
The phenomenon of “package formation” reflects properties of
STM involved in the acquisition of songs and indicates that this
achievement is mediated by a process reminiscent of the chunk-
ing of items in human serial item learning. The phenomenon was
discovered by analyses of groups of sequentially associated songs,
or “song packages,” respectively. These were developed by night-
ingales, who during their first weeks of life had been exposed to
long strings of stimulus songs. Such packages had a mean size of
4 6 2 songs (Hultsch & Todt 1989). After several studies on this
matter, it became evident that the packages were not a result of
song recall or memory retrieval, but induced by STM properties
upon early auditory exposure to learning stimuli. In addition,
“package formation” is explained by a model postulating a joint 
operation of the STM and a battery of submemories: When a
young bird is exposed to a succession of several new songs, his STM
processes information of about 2–6 different songs, and then
transmits the information to a specific submemory where the sec-
ond step, that is, a longterm storage of song material, takes place.
It was hypothesised that, only after the transmission is the STM
ready to process a further number of songs, which are then stored
in a different submemory (Todt & Hultsch 1996; 1998). In other
words, the model predicts that the STM segments a given se-
quence of learning stimuli and the battery of submemories con-
solidates this effect by processing the segments as different pack-
ages of songs.
To further test the memory model and, in particular, to clarify
whether the segmentation would be a genuinely unit related (i.e.,
information constrained) process or whether time related effects
could also play a role, Hultsch examined how young nightingales
would cope with learning programs that differed in the rate of
stimulus songs (Hultsch 1992). Programs were prepared by mod-
ifying the duration of silent intervals between successive stimulus
Commentary/Cowan: The magical number 4
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2000) 24:1
149
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 64 (native) -----
songs. In one test series, the normal intervals (duration: 4 sec)
were shortened to just 1 sec; thus 1 min included 13 learning stim-
uli here (“dense designs”). In a second test series, such intervals
were prolonged up to 10 sec; thus 1 min included only 5 learning
stimuli here (“spaced design”). For a contro1, the subjects were
also exposed to temporally unmodified series (“norma1 design”
that is, 8 learning stimuli per min). In order to adjust the experi-
mental design to the methods of former studies, each of the three
stimulus sequences was composed of 20 different types of songs
which the birds could not experience in any other sequence or
learning program. Analyses of singing behaviours performed by
the trained birds yielded results that can make an interesting con-
tribution to the issues raised by the target article (Fig. 2).
Above all, the study showed that the early segmentation song
stimulus sequences is controlled by two components: a unit (or in-
formation) based capacity buffer (evidence: constraints uncov-
ered by the “dense” program) and a time window based gating
mechanism (evidence: constraints uncovered by the “spaced” pro-
gram). The capacity buffer limited the sizes of stored packages at
3–5 songs. The time related component, on the other hand, lim-
ited such sizes by a time window of ca. 32 sec. Based on new evi-
dence (Hultsch et al. 1999). This window indicates a specific span
of attention as suggested in Cowan’s article.
The good accord between properties of song acquisition in
birds and properties of STM in humans, prompts three final com-
ments. First, it seems evident that a study of STM properties in
animals can help to elucidate the nature of our own storage limi-
tations (Roitblat et al. 1991). Second, song acquisition is a useful
biological model for comparative studies, for example, one can
test memory mechanisms by applying learning stimuli that are
completely new for a young subject and do not produce cognitive
problems as do so many learning stimuli in human serial item
learning (Todt et al. 2000). Third, the finding that birds use mem-
ory mechanisms which operate similarly to ours points to inter-
esting parallels in the evolution. Since the brains of birds are not
homologous to the those of mammals (Konishi 1989; Pepperberg
1993), similar operational properties suggest that they have evolved
because they allow an optimal solution to a given problem; that is,
here, a strategic acquisition of perceptional information.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The memory research on nightingales is supported by DFG grants.
Memory limits: “Give us an answer!”
John N. Towse
University of London, Egham, Surrey, TW20 OEX, United Kingdom.
j.towse@rhbnc.ac.uk
www.pc.rhbnc.ac.uk/jt/jt.html
Abstract: Cowan has written a meticulous and thought-provoking review
of the literature on short-term memory. However, reflections on one area
of evidence, that of working memory span, shows the extent to which the
research debate can be circumscribed by choice of experimental para-
digms.
In the entertaining radio series, “The hitch-hiker’s guide to the
galaxy,” Douglas Adams recounts how, many millions of years ago,
a race of hyper-intelligent, pan-dimensional beings became so an-
noyed at all the constant bickering over the meaning of life, that
they decided to solve the arguments once and for all (Adams
1985). They created Deep Thought, the most awesome computer
imaginable and then gave him the task of finding the Ultimate An-
swer To Life, The Universe, and Everything. Deep Thought took
his time to consider this challenge (seven and a half million years),
but in the end he was ready. To the hushed anticipation of the uni-
verse, Deep Thought reluctantly announced that The Answer was
in fact “42.”
This produced understandable commotion. It was hardly a sat-
isfactory pronouncement, a judgment that would allow everyone
to sleep easy at night. But as Deep Thought pointed out, “I think
the problem such as it was was too broadly based. You never ac-
tually stated what the question was.” He had found the answer, but
what exactly did the ultimate question ask? Deep Thought
couldn’t say, and therefore he had to design an even more power-
ful computer which could formulate the question to the ultimate
answer (sadly, this computer, Earth, was destroyed just before it
had completed the job, but that’s another story).
Commentary/Cowan: The magical number 4
150
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2000) 24:1
Figure 2 (Todt).
Illustration of package sizes (number of associ-
ated song types) that nightingales (n58) developed under three
different learning programs. Filled circles show: Packages devel-
oped from the “dense” program (left) were not larger than those
developed from the “normal” program (middle). This suggested
unit-related capacity constraints on data processing to account for
package formation. On the other hand, packages developed from
the “spaced” program (right) were significantly smaller (see open
circle) than predicted by a genuinely unit-controlled limitation
process. This suggested that the postulated segmentation was con-
currently controlled by time factors (see Hultsch 1992).
Figure 1 (Todt).
Frequency spectrograms of three nightingale songs (section of a longer singing episode). These songs are developed
by vocal imitation, and during their early acquisition processed analogous to “chunks” (see text).
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 65 (native) -----
The relevance of this whimsy lies in the illustration of how we
can lose sight of the question that we’re asking when searching for
an answer. Cowan has amassed an impressive array of data that
leads him to believe that The Ultimate Answer to Memory is “4.”
By constraining the circumstances for admissible evidence bear-
ing on this question, Cowan has refined Miller’s earlier conjecture
that the answer is “7.” In fact, whether you prefer “4” or “7” or
some other number probably relates to whether you feel the var-
ious measurement conditions are appropriate or not, and Cowan’s
line of reasoning certainly needs to be taken seriously.
In the case of short-term memory, though, surely the question
is quite transparent – “What is the limit of mental storage capac-
ity?” So where’s the fuss? Well, although we can ask this question
and find an answer (even perhaps find a coherent answer) does
that help us identify whether it is the best or only question to be
asking? Unfortunately, this is less clear.
This problem is hardly Cowan’s fault. Consider, for example, the
area of working memory capacity, covered in the target article.
Working memory capacity is conventionally estimated via working
memory span tasks. These are supposed to require the simultane-
ous combination of “processing” and “retention.” They exist in
several forms such as reading span where individuals read a series
of unrelated sentences for comprehension and afterwards attempt
to recall each sentence-terminal word (Daneman & Carpenter
1980). Reading span is calculated on the basis of the number of
sentences that can be presented and followed by correct recall of
the relevant words. Now, one can argue about one or other theo-
retical account of performance (e.g., Towse & Houston-Price, in
press) and doing so can certainly lead to a richer appreciation of
working memory. It is important to recognise, however, that these
theoretical debates all centre around what happens to span scores,
that is, the maximum number of “things” that can be remembered.
Under such circumstances, therefore, there are few options avail-
able to the scholar other than to do what Cowan has and derive an
average value for memory capacity.
So although the target article briefly considers alternatives to
the storage capacity account and finds them wanting (sect. 4.3),
the evidential basis on which to evaluate the different accounts
simply is not balanced. With so many studies of short-term mem-
ory, let alone working memory, based on span scores or their
equivalent, we run the danger of rigging the contest. That is, pre-
determining the sort of answer we will look for and therefore find.
Recent, as yet unpublished collaborative work with Graham
Hitch, Una Hutton, and Zoë Hamilton has begun to explore other
ways of asking questions about working memory. Rather than fo-
cus on (just) the number of items that children can remember, we
have asked whether, in variants of working memory span tests,
children show meaningful and reliable variations in the temporal
endurance of their memory traces. Potentially at least, some cog-
nitive skills may rely more on the extent to which representations
can be preserved, as opposed to the number of stimulus neigh-
bours that can be tolerated in memory tests. Early indications of
this research programme seem promising, but in the present con-
text, it is perhaps the attempt to seek alternative dependent vari-
ables that is most relevant. Even if endurance measures turn out
to be redundant, or ineffective, that itself seems an important con-
clusion to reach because thus far one must assume span gives all
the information one needs. Strong faith in measures of memory
size alone may permit us to find The Answer, but at what cost to
a full understanding of immediate memory?
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The commentary is underpinned by support from the ESRC, grant
R000222789 (awarded to John Towse, Graham Hitch, and Una Hutton).
Discussions with Robin Walker are also appreciated.
Neural mechanism for the magical number 4:
Competitive interactions and nonlinear
oscillation
Marius Usher,a Jonathan D. Cohen,b Henk Haarmann,c
and David Hornd
aSchool of Psychology, Birkbeck College, University of London, London
WCJE 7HX, United Kingdom; bDepartment of Psychology, Princeton
University, Princeton, NJ 08544; cDepartment of Hearing and Speech
Sciences, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742; dDepartment of
Physics, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel. m.usher@bbk.ac.uk
jdc@princeton.edu
hhaarmann@hesp.umd.edu
horn@neuron.tau.ac.il
www.psyc.bbk.ac.uk/staff/homepage/mu.html
www.bsos.umd.edu/hesp/haarmann.html
www.neuron.tau.ac.il/~horn
Abstract: The aim of our commentary is to strengthen Cowan’s proposal
for an inherent capacity limitation in STM by suggesting a neurobiologi-
cal mechanism based on competitive networks and nonlinear oscillations
that avoids some of the shortcomings of the scheme discussed in the tar-
get article (Lisman & Idiart 1995).
Cowan interprets the capacity limitation of 4 6 1 items, in rela-
tion to a bottleneck on the focus of attention. While this may be a
plausible explanation, it is somehow paradoxical that recall of un-
attended material should provide a measure for the capacity of the
focus of attention; with diverted attention, recall may be mediated
by the residual decay limited components in STM. Nevertheless,
we believe that the rest of the reviewed data provides convincing
support for a capacity limitation of about 4 items in STM. This
raises the challenge of providing a plausible neurobiological mech-
anism for it. Cowan adapted the model of Lisman and Idiart
(1995), explaining the capacity limitation in terms of two wave fre-
quencies. While this adaptation needs to be tested, its likelihood
for confirmation is low, as the g and u waves used in the original
schemes were based on empirical estimates of neurophysiological
data. Moreover the frequency of these oscillations is broad and
therefore their ratio is likely to fluctuate widely rather than pro-
vide a stable value corresponding to a specific capacity.
An alternative neurobiological account does not rely on precise
frequency values but explains the capacity limitation in terms of
inherent properties of competitive networks (Horn & Usher 1991;
1992; Usher & Cohen 1999). The main idea for consideration is
that while LTM is mediated by structural changes in connectivity,
STM (which is associated with awareness) is mediated by neuro-
electric reverberations (Hebb 1949), subject to competitive inter-
actions, whose need has often been discussed in experimental and
computational neuroscience (Desimone 1998; Grossberg I976;
Usher & Cohen 1999; Usher & McClelland 1995) in relation to at-
tentional selection. Typically selection is implemented in compet-
itive models by a mechanism of strong lateral inhibition, resulting
in a winner-take-all system. We have recently presented a model
which proposed that the lateral inhibition can be modulated in re-
lation to task demand (Usher & Cohen 1999). The model is de-
scribed by the following equation:
dxi/dt 5 2xi 1 aF(xi) 2 bSj? i F(xj) 1 Ii 1 noise
where xi is the activation of the i representation, F(x) 5 x/(11x)
is the “activation-functions” (see e.g., Tsodyks et al. 1998), Ii is the
sensory input to each representation, a corresponds to recurrent
self excitation and b to lateral inhibition. The self excitation al-
lows the maintenance of activation after the input Ii is turned off.
The inhibition parameter is set high when selection is required
and moderate when multiple items need to be maintained to-
gether, as in immediate recall tasks. In this model we showed that
moderate levels of lateral inhibition allow the coactivation of sev-
eral memory representation. More interestingly, the system
shows a sharp capacity limitation where only a small number of
items can be simultaneously maintained. This capacity depends
on the excitation and inhibition parameters and is within the
Commentary/Cowan: The magical number 4
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2000) 24:1
151
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 66 (native) -----
range of 3–5 items when these parameters are chosen as a 5 2
and .15 , b , .20.
Functional considerations demonstrate the system cannot in-
crease its capacity beyond this range by diminishing the inhibition
b parameter even further. Due to the recurrent excitation and to
small overlaps in the input (or in the representations themselves)
a minimal amount of lateral inhibition is required to prevent the
activation to spread to all the memory representations. Assume,
for example, that when the representation i receives input, Ii is rel-
atively high (.33 in the simulations reported), while other repre-
sentations j ? i receive a much diminished input (Ij 5 .05, due to
overlaps). In this situation, we find that when the inhibition is
small (b , .19) activity spreads to nonsensory-activated units,
even when only a single unit, i, receives input. This unreliable re-
lation to its inputs would make the system useless. Increasing the
inhibition to b 5 .19 prevents this problem, but limits the num-
ber of co-active units to 3–4 items. Changes in the excitation pa-
rameter do not affect those considerations. If a is increased alone,
the capacity increases, however, increasing the excitation requires
a simultaneous increase in the minimal inhibition to prevent the
unbounded spread of activation within the system. When the two
parameters are changed together to preserve reliability the ca-
pacity remains in the 3–4 items range.
Does then the capacity result from a specific layout of biologi-
cal parameters that characterize the system or is there a magical
number 4 to be found? Two tentative answers can be suggested.
In the model described so far, the capacity can be increased only
by reducing the representational overlap. Such reductions may be,
however, bounded due to another trade-off (Cohen 1996). Rep-
resentational overlap is essential for computations that perform
generalization. Thus it is possible that the system evolved so as to
optimize the functions of active maintenance and generalization,
providing another teleological motivation for the STM capacity
(cf. Kareev et al., in the target article).
Another answer which explains a magical number 4 is suggested
if one assumes that maintenance in STM requires not only the si-
multaneous activation of representations, but also their segmenta-
tion from each other. This can be performed by a system based on
staggered oscillations as described here, but with higher inhibition,
and with the addition of an adaptation/recovery variable that
makes each representation oscillate (Horn & Usher 1991; 1992).
Due to the lateral inhibition one can generate a situation where
each representation is activated in a different phase of the tempo-
ral oscillation, as illustrated in the Figure 1 (showing segmentation
with 3 units oscillating out of a background of non-active units).
Computational and mathematical analysis of this system dem-
onstrated a fixed capacity of 3–5 items in the ability of this system
to perform segmentation (Horn & Opher 1996). The system has
maximal stability for 3 out-of-phase oscillations. For more than 5
oscillations the system is unable to keep each of these oscillations
in a distinct phase. This characteristic does not depend on the pre-
cise values of parameters (except that they need to be within the
range leading to staggered oscillations) and is a result of the fact
that it is not possible to compress more than 5 narrow non-linear
oscillations (one for each activated representation) within each cy-
cle of the whole system. This mechanism explains the 4 6 1
capacity limitation, however, unlike the model described in the
target article (Lisman & Idiart 1995). It is robust to parameter
changes and can function for a wide range of frequencies, result-
ing from competitive interactions between nonlinear oscillators.
Over the top: Are there exceptions 
to the basic capacity limit?
John Wilding
Department of Psychology, Royal Holloway, University of London, Egham
Hill, Egham, Surrey TW20 0EX, United Kingdom.
j.wilding@rhbnc.ac.uk
Abstract: Can we identify individuals with a larger basic capacity than
Cowan’s proposed limit? Thompson et al. (1993) claimed that Rajan Ma-
hadevan had a basic memory span of 13–15 items. Some of their support-
ing evidence is reconsidered and additional data are presented from study
of another memory expert. More detailed analysis of performance in such
cases may yield different conclusions.
Cowan argues for a capacity limit on short term memory of about
four items (possibly rising to a maximum of six); this raises the
question of whether some individuals have still larger capacity.
Thompson et al. (1993) studied the memory ability of Rajan Ma-
hadevan. His digit span before he began deliberate practice at
memory tasks was recorded as 15 items and other evidence sup-
ported this estimate.
Thompson at al. (1993) argued that the lag between the end of
list presentation and response initiation should remain constant
until list length exceeds the basic span and rehearsal becomes nec-
essary. In support of this, they found that individuals with normal
digit span showed a constant lag until list length exceeded 7 items;
lag then rose steadily as list length increased. Rajan, however,
showed no rise until list length exceeded 13 items. These data ex-
emplify one of Cowan’s acceptable methods for measuring limited
capacity; the discontinuity in lag is assumed to reflect the point at
which basic span is exceeded. However, the data indicate a dis-
continuity at seven items in normal memorizers, rather than at
Cowan’s proposed limit of four items. Rajan’s basic span of 13
items suggests that some individuals may have much greater ca-
pacity. With colleagues, I have attempted to identify other such in-
dividuals, using a computerised version of the task and recording
additional measures, which clarify whether lag is a valid indicator
of basic span.
Lists of digits were presented visually at 2 items per sec; an as-
terisk indicated the end of the list and requested recall, which was
achieved by typing numbers on the keyboard. Time to initiate re-
call and to input each item was measured, plus the positions of er-
rors. Initially a five-item list was presented and 1ist length in-
creased by one item following a correct response and decreased
by one item following an error, matching Thompson et al.’s (1993)
ascending method. Twenty trials formed a run. Data have been
collected from two memory experts, but results are discussed here
only from MB, who comp1eted 50 runs on the task. MB held the
world record for reciting the expansion of pi in 1977 and later
achieved correct recall to 7,769 places. He can recite the first
1,000 digits of pi in 170 sec. He claims special memory ability only
for numbers and uses none of the standard mnemonics, relying
only on his knowledge of mathematics, which he teaches at sec-
ondary school level. If his digit span depends on chunking based
on mathematical knowledge, we would expect a discontinuities in
the lag measure around the normal span and between chunks in
the inter-item recall latencies.
Commentary/Cowan: The magical number 4
152
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2000) 24:1
Figure 1 (Usher et al.).
Segmentation of three units oscillating
out of a background of non-active units.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 67 (native) -----
The mean of the longest span achieved on each run was 14.96
(range 12–18, s.d. 1.4), less outstanding than Rajan, but about
twice the norm. Table 1 gives the time to initiate recall at each list
length (successful recalls only) for MP and corresponding figures
for Rajan (estimated from Thompson et al., Fig. 2.1; absolute
times are not comparable, due to the different methods of record-
ing used). While Rajan certainly shows a steep rise in times for lists
of more than 13 items, there is also some suggestion of an increase
at 11 items; no data are given for lists of five or six items and pre-
sumably measurement of times by stopwatch was imprecise for
short intervals. MP, however, shows a gradual increase, with pos-
sible stops at 10, 13, and 17 items. There is, however, no clear dis-
continuity, which would unambiguously indicate a basic span lim-
itation. The other expert we tested, who overtly converted
numbers into images, showed a sharp discontinuity at 9 items, fol-
lowed by a continuous rise in times, like Thompson et al.’s (1993)
subject GN, who also developed a mnemonic method, so the pat-
tern shown by MP was not some artefact of the measurement
method.
Inter-item latencies for successful recall, however, provided un-
ambiguous evidence for chunking in MP’s recall; however, the pat-
tern obtained was only partly consistent with Cowan’s argument.
Figure 1 gives cumulative recall times for lists of 5 to 16 items.
Once lists exceeded 7 items, a pause occurred after the fourth
item, once lists exceeded 11 items, another pause occurred after
the eighth item, and once lists exceeded 15 items, a third pause
occurred after the twelfth item. MP apparently divided the lists
initially into groups of four items (though lists of 14 items seem to
be divided 4–4–3–3), but the final group could be as large as
seven items before it was further subdivided. MP confirmed that,
though he does not have a deliberately practised strategy for mem-
orisation, he tried to find some mathematical pattern or relation,
normally in each group of four.
While any conclusions clearly need data from other individuals
before they can be firmly established, these results imply that: (1)
Thompson et al.’s (1993) response lag measure is not decisive as
an indication of basic span. Though no clear discontinuity in MP’s
data indicated a basic span limit, discontinuities in inter-item la-
tencies suggested chunking was occurring. (2) items were in gen-
eral grouped into fours, but such grouping was not mandatory and
up to seven items were treated as a group in some circumstances.
Such flexibility may explain the long running argument as to
whether the limit is four or seven items and raises further ques-
tions about the mechanisms involved.
Attention is not unitary
Geoffrey F. Woodman, Edward K. Vogel, 
and Steven J. Luck
Department of Psychology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242-1407.
{geoff-woodman; steven-luck}@uiowa.edu
vogel@sdepl.ucsd.edu
www.psychology.uiowa.edu/Faculty/{woodman/woodman; luck/
luck}.html
Abstract: A primary proposal of the Cowan target article is that capacity
limits arise in working memory because only 4 chunks of information can
be attended at one time. This implies a single, unitary attentional focus or
resource; we instead propose that relatively independent attentional mech-
anisms operate within different cognitive subsystems depending on the
demands of the current stimuli and tasks.
Cowan’s model of working memory posits that the limited capac-
ity of working memory is entirely caused by the limited capacity
of attention. He further proposes that a unitary mechanism of
attention operates across cognitive subsystems, with a single ca-
pacity that must be shared across subsystems. Here, we argue in
favor of an alternative view in which the brain makes use of a col-
lection of loosely interconnected attention mechanisms that op-
erate in different cognitive subsystems and that reflect the prop-
erties of the individual subsystems. We will focus specifically on
the operation of attention in three coarsely defined cognitive sub-
systems, namely perceptual analysis, working memory, and re-
sponse selection.
We would expect that different mechanisms of attention would
operate in visual perception and in visual working memory for the
simple reason that these subsystems appear to operate at very dif-
ferent rates. For example, Potter (1976) showed that observers
can identify pictures of complex real-world scenes at rates of up
to 8 pictures per second, but much slower presentation rates were
required for observers to store the scenes in working memory.
More recent studies have used a combination of psychophysical
and electrophysiological measures to demonstrate that attention
shifts at different rates in visual perception and in visual working
memory. Specifically, studies of the attentional blink phenome-
non, which reflects the operation of attention in working memory,
indicate that hundreds of milliseconds are required to shift work-
ing memory-level attention from one stimulus to another (Vogel
et al. 1998). In contrast, studies of visual search, which empha-
Commentary/Cowan: The magical number 4
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2000) 24:1
153
Figure 1 (Wilding).
Mean cumulative recall times by MP for
each item in lists of 5 to 16 items. Numbers on the left indicate list
length for each function. As list length increases, each function has
been displaced upward by 1 sec to avoid overlap.
Table 1. (Wilding). Time to initiate recall(s) for lists of 5 to 17 items in a visual digit span task
List
Length
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
MP
1.1
1.3
1.3
1.3
1.3
1.6
1.5
1.5
2.1
2.1
2.3
2.1
2.6
Rajan
—
—
0.2
0.3
0.2
0.3
0.7
0.7
1.4
4.2
3.0
8.4
11.2
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 68 (native) -----
sized the operation of attention in perception, have indicated that
shifts of perceptual-level attention can occur every 50–100 msec
(Woodman & Luck 1999). Horowitz and Wolfe (1998) and col-
leagues have also provided evidence that the operation of atten-
tion in perception is relatively independent of memory.
Given that attention operates at different speeds in perception
and in working memory, it would be sensible if these mechanisms
of attention operated asynchronously; otherwise, the fast percep-
tual system would be continually waiting for the slow working
memory system to catch up. We have recently provided evidence
for asynchronous operation of perception and working memory
by showing that shifts of attention during visual search are not
slowed when visual working memory is full (Woodman et al., in
press). In this study, participants were required to maintain a set
of object representations in visual working memory while per-
forming a visual search task. We observed that subjects could per-
form a difficult visual search task just as efficiently when working
memory was full as when working memory was empty, indicating
that perceptual-level attention can be allocated and shifted very
efficiently even when working memory-level attention is operat-
ing at maximal capacity.
It is also reasonable to suppose that visual perception and visual
working memory might differ in their spatial properties as well as
in their temporal properties. In particular, visual perception relies
on topographically mapped representations, but there is no evi-
dence that the representation of objects in working memory is
topographic. Thus, perceptual-level attention might be expected
to have various spatial properties that are absent from working
memory-level attention. A recent study by Vogel (2000) supports
this hypothesis. Specifically, Vogel found that working memory-
level attention can be divided among multiple noncontiguous lo-
cations without being allocated to the regions between these lo-
cations, whereas perceptual-level visual attention must be focused
on a contiguous region of the visual field. Thus, perceptual-level
and working memory-level mechanisms of attention differ in both
their spatial and temporal characteristics.
It also appears that the mechanisms of attention that operate
during response selection and initiation are different from those
that operate at earlier stages. The operation of attention during re-
sponse-related processes has been studied by means of the psy-
chological refractory period (PRP) paradigm. In this paradigm,
two stimuli are presented to subjects in rapid succession and the
subjects make separate speeded responses to each stimulus. Re-
action time to the second stimulus is slowed when the delay be-
tween the two targets is short, and several studies indicate that this
is due to capacity limitations at the stage of response selection
(Pashler 1994). Pashler (1991) and Johnston et al. (1995) have pro-
vided evidence that shifts of visual-spatial attention do not oper-
ate at the same stage as the capacity limits that are observed in the
PRP paradigm.
In conclusion, there are now many forms of evidence indicat-
ing that there are different mechanisms of attention that operate
with different properties within different cognitive subsystems.
Moreover, it is worthwhile to ask what is gained by proposing that
the limited capacity of working memory arises from the limited
capacity of attention. The real question is why there are limits at
all, whether we call them limits of attention or limits of working
memory-specific resources.
Author’s Response
Metatheory of storage capacity limits
Nelson Cowan
Department of Psychology, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211.
cowann@missouri.edu
www.missouri.edu/~psycowan
Abstract: Commentators expressed a wide variety of views on
whether there is a basic capacity limit of 3 to 5 chunks and, among
those who believe in it, about why it occurs. In this response, I con-
clude that the capacity limit is real and that the concept is
strengthened by additional evidence offered by a number of com-
mentators. I consider various arguments why the limit occurs and
try to organize these arguments into a conceptual framework or
“metatheory” of storage capacity limits meant to be useful in fu-
ture research to settle the issue. I suggest that principles of mem-
ory representation determine what parts of the representation will
be most prominent but that limits of attention (or of a memory
store that includes only items that have been most recently at-
tended) determine the 3- to 5-chunk capacity limit.
R1. General reaction to commentaries
In BBS’s first round of refereeing of the target article, it
seemed to several of the referees that the paper was not
controversial enough to generate useful commentaries. I
think that the present set of commentaries has proven to be
very interesting, diverse, and thought-provoking after all. 
By my count, about 15 of the 39 commentaries solidly 
accepted the hypothesis that some core working memory
faculty is limited to about 4 separate chunks of information.
Indeed, at least 8 commentaries (Lane et al.; Nairne &
Neath; Pothos & Juola; Rensink; Rypma & Gabrieli;
Todt; Usher et al.; Wilding) presented additional evi-
dence for a 4-chunk limit in many circumstances. However,
at least seven other commentaries seemed strongly op-
posed to that concept and the remaining 17 seemed less
committed either way. Many of the commentators who
more or less agreed with the 4-chunk hypothesis offered al-
ternative theoretical explanations.
R1.1. Self-justification
I believe the target article has made three main contribu-
tions. First, principles were offered as guidelines for iden-
tifying experimental situations in which the number of sep-
arate chunks can be estimated. Second, a diverse field of
evidence was shown to yield similar estimates of capacity in
those identified situations; specifically, 3 to 5 chunks on the
average, among normal adult humans. Third, various plau-
sible theoretical explanations for the capacity limit were de-
scribed.
The eligibility of evidence often depended upon the ap-
plication of critical theoretical assumptions. For example,
one theoretical assumption provides an answer to Usher et
al., who commented that “it is somehow paradoxical that
recall of unattended material should provide a measure for
the capacity of the focus of attention”. It is not so paradox-
ical if one considers that, ordinarily, attention exerts effects
broadly across the perceptual encoding, mnemonic storage,
and retrieval processes so that any one particular effect of
Commentary/Cowan: The magical number 4
154
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2000) 24:1
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 69 (native) -----
attention is difficult to separate from others. By diverting
attention during encoding and storage phases, the limita-
tions of attention during retrieval, in particular, can be iso-
lated and identified. Under these circumstances, chunking
processes are limited and attention can be seen to have a
limit of about 4 chunks of information.
It now seems likely that further, interesting cases of the
capacity limits will emerge. For example, Jinks and Laing
(1999) investigated capacity limits in odor processing, stat-
ing in their literature review (p. 311) that “the discrimina-
tion and identification of components in odor mixtures is a
difficult task for humans, with 3–4 odorants being the
limit.”
Although I argued for particular fixed capacity limits, I
did not offer a precise, detailed theory of these limits. Some
commentators (especially Halford et al.; Pascual-Leone;
Milner; Schubert & French) seemed disappointed that
the rules for determining chunks or storage requirements
were not worked out with more theoretical precision, and
that a clear theory of the capacity limits was not proposed.
I agree that such clarity would be desirable if the resulting
theory were correct. However, I disagree with these com-
mentators’ prescriptions for reaching that goal. In the 45 or
so years since Miller’s (1956) article, this may be the first ex-
tensive discussion in which an attempt is made to consider
the relevance of the burgeoning cognitive literature, taken
whole, to the notion of capacity limits. It seems most im-
portant now to sort out and compile the basic messages
from diverse paradigms in order to provide guidance for
theory, and it would seem unwise to attempt too much the-
oretical precision at the same time.
Many of the commentaries offered theoretical views that
were more precise than my own but those theoretical views
conflict with one another (as discussed in sect. R4), and
therefore cannot all be correct. If I had foreclosed on a par-
ticular theoretical explanation of the 4-chunk hypothesis, I
suspect that the empirical generalization would tend to be
ignored as soon as the particular theoretical explanation of
it was disproved, as it most likely would be. Therefore, I
staunchly continue to view the theoretical indecision of the
target article as a strength, not a weakness. It took 45 years
for the field to advance from the notion of chunking as an
aid to remembering, given an unknown capacity limits
pegged at about 7 items (Miller 1956), to an earnest quan-
tification of those limits and the generation of some testable
explanations of the limits. If the result of this article is a new
surge of research and theoretical debate on the reasons for
capacity limits, I believe that the field will be well-served.
If a fundamental branch of the tree of possible hypothe-
ses (Platt 1964) could be ruled out, that would be the
soundest gain that reasonably could be made at this time.
Toward this end, a taxonomy of capacity theories will be
suggested as a “metatheory” of capacity, and I will consider
how theories might be compared and assessed.
R1.2. Organization of the responses 
to specific commentaries
Considering the commentaries can take us a fair distance
toward understanding capacity limits: Toward that end, I
will first consider evidence for and against the 4-chunk hy-
pothesis (sect. R2). In the process, arguments for alterna-
tive formulations will be considered, including the hypoth-
esis that there is a capacity limit of only 1 chunk, the
hypothesis that there is a capacity limit of 7 chunks as Miller
(1956) suggested, and the hypothesis that the number of
chunks that can be brought into working memory concur-
rently is unlimited. The next section (sect. R3) will be di-
rected at alternative cognitive theoretical accounts of ca-
pacity limits. A taxonomy of theoretical positions will be
described; it is this taxonomy that serves as a basic cognitive
“metatheory” of capacity limits alluded to in the title of 
this response. Biological underpinnings of the capacity limit
will be discussed (sect. R4) and, finally, I will attempt to
reach a tentative verdict as to the reason for capacity limits
(sect. R5).
R2. Validity of the 4-chunk hypothesis
The target article has put forward considerable evidence
that, in situations in which a reasonable assumption can be
made about how many separate chunks are in the focus of
attention, a consistent capacity estimate of 3 to 5 chunks
emerges. Naturally, this evidence hinges on the ability to
identify chunks correctly. This section first presents a para-
ble that helps to illustrate the nature of controversies like
the 4-chunk hypothesis (sect. R2.1). Next, the key issue of
how to identify chunks is taken up (sect. R2.2). This is fol-
lowed by a detailed discussion of alternative hypotheses
about capacity limits (sect. R2.3). Finally, there is a discus-
sion of a new method for the quantification of capacity lim-
its in visual array comparison tasks (e.g., Luck & Vogel
1997), which is capable of adding considerable strength to
the theoretical framework.
R2.1. Capacity limits and methods in science: A parable
Naturally, a capacity limit would be only one of several fac-
tors influencing memory performance; another, for exam-
ple, would be the contribution of information that can be
replaced into the focus of attention from long-term mem-
ory (i.e., the information within each chunk). Such other
factors will cause apparent departures from the 3- to 5-
chunk limit that certainly allow room for doubters. It might
prove helpful to provide an analogy from an area of physics,
illustrating how one would expect the 4-chunk hypothesis
to be criticized even if it were true. Such an illustration can-
not prove the hypothesis, of course, but it can at least en-
courage further research designed to identify and explain
capacity limits.
Thus, consider the case of a now-proven concept in phys-
ics, gravity, and how it might have become established in
science (though many of these historical details may be fic-
titious). Everyone could plainly see that most objects thrown
into the air fall down again. Moreover, some saw that objects
fall at an accelerating rate that could be roughly estimated
even though the correct equation was unknown. Although
most scientists informally talked of gravity-related ideas,
they could not measure gravity exactly. Some argued that it
is not a law because some objects do not come down (stars
and planets) or come down at much slower, unpredictable
rates (birds, bats, flying squirrels, leaves, and dust). Propo-
nents of gravity then admitted that other considerations
such as distance (in the case of planets) and air resistance
have to be taken into consideration. Formulation of a com-
plete model taking into account acceleration, size, distance,
and air resistance was a long way off. Some believed in the
Response/Cowan: The magical number 4
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:1
155
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 70 (native) -----
theoretical concept that there was a certain rate of acceler-
ation at which objects tend to fall, even though it only pro-
vides an approximation and there are boundary conditions
to its use. Given that some of the boundary conditions were
unknown, many people remained agnostic and a few denied
the existence of gravity as a general rule. It may only be
through hindsight that the concept of gravity has come to
seem obvious and universal. We have some detailed mod-
els of it now, but perhaps we must wait for a future gener-
ation to determine exactly why gravity occurs.
The known history of the discovery of gravity seems con-
sistent with this progression of thinking. Tycho Brahe estab-
lished a wealth of observations on planetary movement, an
arena in which there is little wind resistance unlike earthly
applications of gravity. Johannes Kepler used Brahe’s ob-
servations to establish regularities or laws of planetary mo-
tion, though without really understanding the general prin-
ciples behind the laws; and later, Isaac Newton “stood on
the shoulders” of Brahe and Kepler to establish more gen-
eral laws of gravitational force. Albert Einstein later refor-
mulated the law of gravitation in a more penetrating man-
ner that tied it to other forces in the universe, representing
it as curvatures in space; and surely the final word is yet to
come.
The history of the memory capacity concept arguably
could be similar to this. On this topic we may have Brahe,
and this target article reaches toward Kepler, while merely
speculating about Newton and Einstein. Of course, the
force of this analogy would quickly break down were I to
choose a shakier concept (e.g., the concept of ether occu-
pying empty space, or of a life force). However, it is worth
contemplating that apparent exceptions to a causal princi-
ple such as capacity do not automatically rule it out if a plau-
sible case can be made as to why the exceptions occur. The
fact that we do not yet have a complete theoretical model
of capacity (at least, not a confirmed one) does not rule it
out, either.
It is with this parable in mind that I would address criti-
cisms such as the one Avons et al. made, that “The capac-
ity estimates cited by Cowan are less consistent than he
claims.” We may not have a clear enough understanding of
the “wind resistance” type factors in psychological perfor-
mance, but we know enough to support a “gravity” type
concept (i.e., the capacity concept). So, for example, when
Avons et al. state, “If four of the most recently presented
items exist within the attentional focus, then recall of about
four of the most recent items would be expected.” I do not
fully agree. The recall can sink below 4 not only because
some individuals have a lower span than that (e.g., see Fig.
3), but also because some attention may be allocated ear-
lier in the stimulus sequence or elsewhere entirely. This
type of variation is bound to depend on factors such as the
motivational level of subjects, the amount of diligence and
vigilance that the task requires, the task complexity, and so
on.
R2.2. Can we identify chunks?
Obviously, if chunks cannot really be identified, one cannot
quantify the capacity limit in terms of chunks. Several
commentaries (Beaman; Schubert & Frensch) ques-
tioned the target article’s ability to determine chunks. Un-
doubtedly, this is a key issue. The theoretical definition of a
chunk offered in section 1.3 was “a collection of concepts
that have strong associations to one another and much
weaker associations to other chunks concurrently in use”
(mathematically, an equivalence class). To apply that defi-
nition without direct measurements of chunks, one needs a
task analysis of every procedure. It is difficult to see how it
would be possible to do better than to analyze each task in
a logical manner, taking into account what is known about
the task. The fact is that when I used this case-by-case
method, the result was a capacity estimate that remained
fairly consistent at 3 to 5 chunks across a wide variety of sit-
uations. This constancy in the results itself lends credibility
to the method, except in the eyes of those who suspect an
unfair use of the method. They must try it themselves.
R2.2.1. A strategy for research to identify chunks. Clearly
what is needed in the future is an attempt to determine
chunks more empirically in many relevant procedures. This
would be a major shift of emphasis for researchers of work-
ing memory. Measures of reaction time may be of limited
usefulness because chunking of two elements, A and B, is
only one possible reason why these elements are recalled
together quickly. Supplementary types of relevant evidence
that two elements are chunked together may include (1) re-
call of A and B consistently near each other, and (2) the high
probability of recalling B conditional on recall of A, or vice
versa. Another promising strategy would be to begin with
unconnected units and teach the subjects new chunks (with
learning assessment), so that the chunks are known to the
experimenter before they are used in a working memory
task.
Kleinberg and Kaufman (1971) carried out one proce-
dure in which the role of chunking in recall was tackled
rather directly. Subjects were presented with clusters of 13
dots, each forming a complex, symmetrical pattern. The vo-
cabulary for a particular group of subjects consisted of 2 or
4 such distinct patterns. Half of the subjects learned to
group pairs of patterns together to form larger chunks that
had verbal labels. Each test array consisted of an 8 3 8 ma-
trix of such dot patterns. Recall depended on the exposure
duration, which also was varied, but asymptotically high
performance levels were obtained with an exposure dura-
tion of 6 or 8 sec. For those exposure durations, recall
amounted to about 3–5 of the designated chunks on day 2
for subjects who received 4-pattern vocabularies, or for
subjects who received 2-pattern vocabularies and learned
to chunk them. Recall was at about 8 alleged “chunks” for
subjects who received a 2-pattern vocabulary but were not
able to chunk them; but one could well imagine that these
subjects learned to chunk the patterns into pairs even with-
out training in that condition (there being only 4 possible
pairs, AA, AB, BA, and BB). On days 3–4, there was a slight
increase in performance in all groups, which could indicate
further chunking.
Illustrating how much work is left to be done, there may
be subtle strategic modes that subjects can adopt to alter
the ways in which chunking takes place. Schneider et al.
failed to replicate an instance of grouping observed by Luck
and Vogel (1997), who found that subjects could recall as
many items in arrays of dual-color squares (composed of
one color peripherally and a different color centrally) as
they could single-colored squares. According to the evi-
dence of Luck and Vogel, each dual-colored square was
perceived as a chunk. Schneider et al. instead found, using
a very similar procedure, that memory for dual-colored
Response/Cowan: The magical number 4
156
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:1
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 71 (native) -----
squares was considerably poorer, suggesting that any such
chunking does not take place automatically. The simplest
kind of explanation is that subtle differences in instructions,
subjects, or materials promoted chunking in one case but
not the other. We do not yet know what they are.
Schubert & Frensch emphasized the need for an op-
erational definition of chunks, saying, “what prevents us
from arguing that 4 items held in visual short-term memory
(STM) and 4 legs of a chair have a common causality in the
limitation of subjects’ attentional focus?” Obviously, in the
absence of a detailed model (and not just a model, but a cor-
rect detailed model), one must use educated judgment.
(Beaman put the situation in its proper light by calling the
task of determining the number of chunks “unenviable.”
Certainly, it is the entire field of investigators interested in
capacity limits who must share this burden.) Schubert &
Frensch suggested an experimental approach in which one
would identify a process or mechanism (such as the atten-
tional focus) that is essential for various tasks showing an ap-
parent capacity limit, susceptible to manipulation of a Fac-
tor X. The key finding would be that manipulating Factor X
would affect all of the tasks similarly. This is indeed a key
research strategy. However, I would emphasize that one
must be careful to distinguish between the 4-chunk capac-
ity limit (that only 4 separate chunks can be held in the fo-
cus of attention at one time) and the theoretical explanation
for this limit. The latter topic will be taken up in detail in
section R5 but requires a brief discussion now. According
to the type of theoretical account that I favored in the tar-
get article, the limit is in the capacity of the focus of atten-
tion itself. If this is the case, X could be a manipulation of
the amount of supplementary material that must be held in
the focus of attention during the working memory task.
However, according to an alternative theoretical account,
there is something about the representations of information
of various kinds that prevents the focus of attention from
taking in all of the information. For example, perhaps the
most distinct or prominent 4 or so chunks in the field of
stimuli somehow overshadow the others, making them un-
available to conscious awareness. In that case, the same re-
search strategy applies but the successful X might be some
manipulation that affects the distinctiveness of chunks in
the stimulus field.
R2.2.2. Further clarification of chunking: Binding and
chunking in working memory tasks. Commentator Bea-
man made the important observation that “A number of
studies which Cowan takes as evidence for his 4-chunk ca-
pacity limit were serial recall studies in which items were
only marked correct if they were recalled in the correct se-
rial order.” Nairne & Neath commented similarly, as did
Avons et al. I completely agree that this is important in un-
derstanding the capacity limit. In the experiments of serial
recall, a small number of items were used over and over on
every trial (e.g., spoken digits in the study of memory for
unattended speech by Cowan et al. 1999). Presumably, all
of the items remained active in memory (or readily accessi-
ble in the test context). It was instead the binding of items
to particular serial positions within lists that comprised the
material that must be held in the focus of attention. It would
be easy to guess that a particular item was a member of the
current list, so it was the binding of items to their serial po-
sitions that was most indicative of working memory. Simi-
larly, in tasks involving the presentation of a simultaneous
array of items (e.g., the color squares of Luck & Vogel
1997), it is not difficult to guess colors that were presented
so it is the binding of colors to spatial locations that is criti-
cal.
Given the importance of binding, a chunk might be de-
scribed in these procedures as a direct association between
adjacent items, which together become bound to only one
higher-order serial position or spatial location in the stimu-
lus array, as a group. For example, in a visually presented
letter span experiment, upon seeing F-B-I-C-I-A, one
might attach the chunk FBI to a first serial position and the
chunk CIA to a second serial position. In a color-array
memory task, if one were allowed to study the color array
for some time, chunks would consist of multi-color patterns
(most likely composed of three or four colors) assigned to
spatial locations in the array. Perhaps this type of consider-
ation will help to provide the narrower definition of chunks
that Schubert & Frensch craved.
Beaman also noted the use of serial-position-specific
scoring and suggested that “If capacity as measured by se-
rial recall studies is indeed 4 chunks, then capacity is for 4
chunks plus some extra information connecting those
chunks.” No, because the items themselves (presumably
the chunks in the relevant procedures) do not have to be
held in a limited-capacity store. Stated more precisely, they
are automatically activated or accessible and only their
binding to serial positions within a list (or spatial locations
within an array) have to be held in the limited-capacity
store. We (J. Lacey, R. Brunner, J.S. Saults, and I) have pre-
liminary evidence against a capacity-limited account of per-
formance in a modification of the color-array task (Luck &
Vogel 1997) in which it is the presence or absence of a color
anywhere in the array that is tested.
In understanding the demands of another type of task,
running memory span, it is important to realize that serial
positions in a list are not defined on an absolute basis start-
ing from the beginning of the list and numbered 1, 2, 3, and
so on. If they were, then inter-list confusions would occur
between the same numerical positions of lists differing in
length. Instead, relative position seems more important.
For example, the last item of a j-item list is most likely to be
confused with the last item of a k-item list, not with the jth
item of the k-item list (Henson 1999). Until the relative po-
sition of an item is known, it may not be possible to execute
an efficient grouping process. If the length of the list is
known in advance then the relative position is known; but
such is not the case in a running memory span task (Pollack
et al. 1959). It may be for that reason that running span re-
sults in memory of about 4 items per trial, not 7. Items can-
not be grouped efficiently as they can in a regular span task
because they cannot be assigned to relative serial positions
until the list has ended.
R2.2.3. Chunking and scene coherence. The principle of
scene coherence (sect. 2.6) adds a bit of complexity to the
notion of capacity limits in terms of chunks, but it may be a
necessary complexity. Its most basic contribution is that it
shows how the 4-chunk limit could be compatible with the
subjective impression (and behavioral finding) that only
one channel of information can be processed attentively at
one time (Broadbent 1958). As noted above, the idea is that
one can hold in mind about 4 chunks only if they can be in-
tegrated into a coherent scene; only one coherent scene can
be held at one time. It is interesting because it is the oppo-
Response/Cowan: The magical number 4
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:1
157
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 72 (native) -----
site of a similarity principle. One might propose that two
chunks will tend not to reside in the focus of attention at the
same time if they are too similar and therefore easily con-
fused. However, another possibility is that two chunks will
tend not to reside in the focus of attention at the same time
if they are too dissimilar and therefore difficult to meld into
a coherent scene. This is a completely open question that
has not been empirically studied, to my knowledge. Bea-
man suggests that the work on rapidly recycled sequences
of four sounds (e.g., Warren & Obusek 1972) shows this ef-
fect inasmuch as memory for the serial order is much bet-
ter when the four sounds are similar to one another than
when they are dissimilar. However, this difference can be
attributed to perceptual stream segregation of dissimilar
sounds (Bregman & Campbell 1971; Bregman & Dannen-
bring 1973) and it remains to be seen if there is also a “con-
ceptual stream segregation” that comes into play even in
conditions in which the perceptual factors do not operate.
For example, I can think of no work indication whether an
array consisting of a color, a tone, a tactile sensation, and a
printed or spoken word could be held in mind for compar-
ison with a second, identical or slightly different stimulus
array.
Schneider et al. referred to Luck and Vogel’s (1997)
finding that four features of a visual object can be held in
working memory as easily as one and suggested that there
may be a limit of four; that, say, six features per object could
not be held in this way. I personally would not expect such
a limit, provided that the features are truly integrable. I
would not expect it because I would think that the binding
of features into objects occurs in parallel once the appro-
priate stimulus location has been attended. If there were
such a limit it would suggest that the possible dimensions
of difference themselves have to take up space in the lim-
ited-capacity store, in which case the storage limit might
have to be revised upward. It seems difficult to think of rel-
evant evidence in the literature to date.
R2.3. Critiques of alternative hypotheses regarding
capacity
R2.3.1. The 1-chunk hypotheses. Commentators Baars
and McElree & Dosher placed their stock in the opinion
matching the common subjective impression, that one can
hold in mind only one chunk at a time (see also Taatgen).
These investigators do not deny that some faculty of the
mind is limited to about 4 chunks, but they consider that to
be a separate organizing principle for activated information
outside of awareness. A variety of evidence was adduced in
favor of this alternative, 1-chunk hypothesis, which de-
serves a detailed discussion.
These commentators do not mention the concept of
scene coherence (sects. 2.6 and R2.2.3), which logically
could have made them feel better about the 4-chunk hy-
pothesis. Given scene coherence, the subjective impression
of concentrating on only one thing at a time may be real but
deceptive. The global broadcasting function of conscious-
ness (Baars 1988) ensures that all items that are present si-
multaneously in awareness are linked together and, by dint
of that, are experienced as a single chunk. However, this
linkage is new and can be accomplished only through the
momentary collection of these items all at once in aware-
ness. The true capacity limit can be observed in that the
new chunk that is formed can be constructed out of no more
than about 4 previously existing chunks; not, say, 7 or more
(at least, not without a reiterative use of attention over time
to build up larger chunks). In the four-chunk view, the sin-
gle channel held in mind comprises a small collection of
chunks that are newly linked together (see sect. 2.2 in the
target article). The force of this thesis will be explained be-
low in relation to a number of ostensible counterexamples
to the four-chunk hypothesis that commentators brought
up.
Baars appealed to the case of ambiguous figures, evi-
dence of the inability to hold in mind two alternative orga-
nizations of a stimulus at once. Examples include ambigu-
ous figures and binocular rivalry. However, these examples
should be disqualified because the alternative organizations
of the stimulus field are logically inconsistent with one an-
other. This inconsistency should be viewed as a form of spe-
cific interference. Consider, for example, the Necker Cube,
which can be perceived in either of two orientations (but
not both simultaneously). If the reason for the limit were
that capacity is limited to one chunk then it should be pos-
sible to perceive only one Necker Cube in one orientation
or, at maximum, a field of Necker Cubes all in the same ori-
entation (presumable forming a chunk). In contrast to this
suggestion, though, I was able to demonstrate to my own
satisfaction that it is perfectly possible to draw two Necker
Cubes side by side and to see them in different orientations
at the same time. If this is correct, the inability to hold con-
tradictory forms in mind all at once should not be viewed as
a capacity limitation.
Another common objection to the 4-chunk hypothesis,
brought up by Baars, is the case of multiple channels of
stimulation. People can attend to only one channel of stim-
ulation at once (e.g., not both channels in a dichotic listen-
ing task). That certainly seems true if the channels are com-
plex messages to be understood. However, each channel
then contains multiple propositions that must be processed
and integrated. It is therefore important to discuss task de-
mands in a cautious way so as to be sure not to confuse a
channel with a chunk and, as well, not to confuse a percep-
tual limitation with a working memory limitation.
Darwin et al. (1972) presented characters in three differ-
ent spoken channels at once and the task required that all
three be processed. Recall that the whole-report limit in
this experiment was about 4, suggesting that more than one
chunk of information could be held in mind at once. It
could be argued that there are other factors to consider
such as output interference, which will be discussed below.
Nevertheless, this experimental result with relatively sim-
ple channels illustrates that the results of studies with more
complex channels are difficult to analyze theoretically for
capacity limits inasmuch as we do not know how many
chunks are present in each channel.
Commentators McElree & Dosher brought up the case
of retrieval dynamics. They presented evidence from very
interesting probed recall tasks in which the speed criterion
was varied so that they could plot the increase in accuracy
of recall as a function of the speed of recall. In an unstruc-
tured list, this retrieval dynamic shows the fastest retrieval
for the most recent item and no difference between the re-
maining list positions. In a list composed of strings of three
consecutive items from a single semantic category, with a
category shift between strings of three, the retrieval dy-
namic was fastest for the entire last category (which was as-
sumed to be represented as a single chunk in memory). A
Response/Cowan: The magical number 4
158
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:1
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 73 (native) -----
category cue was capable of conferring this advantage on a
non-final category. On the basis of these findings they pro-
posed that one chunk is in the focus of attention in these
tasks, resulting in the fast retrieval dynamic.
There are at least three problems with the interpretation
of this evidence. First, assuming that the most recently pre-
sented or cued chunk is in awareness, the advantage seen
for this chunk may not indicate that it is the only chunk in
awareness. For example, in a list of six unrelated items (pre-
sumable separate chunks), perhaps the last item is consis-
tently in awareness and the rest of the available capacity is
used up with a rehearsal set that includes a subset of items
from anywhere else in the list. Sometimes it would include
early items, sometimes it would include medial items, and
sometimes it would include penultimate items. If this were
the case, one could well obtain exactly the pattern that was
observed: a retrieval speed advantage for the final serial po-
sition compared to all other serial positions, which need not
differ from one another.
Second, it may be that subjects do not always fill their ca-
pacity, sometimes choosing instead to include only one
chunk in the focus of attention even though they are capa-
ble of including more (though perhaps capacity can be
filled only at a cost to the strategic processing that can be
done).
Third, and finally, there is a potential problem in the des-
ignation of a chunk. Above, chunks were described as sets
of items with strong intra-chunk associations and weak in-
ter-chunk associations. Presenting three items from the
same category does not automatically make them into a
chunk, although it does produce some degree of associa-
tions between them. For example, if the related items oc-
cupy serial positions j, j 1 1, and j 1 2, it is possible that
within the retrieval context, item j 2 1 (not in the categor-
ically related set) is more closely related to item j than item
j 1 2 is, as a result of the adjacency of j 2 1 and j in the list.
If one rejects the notion that the categorically related items
form a chunk, the alternative account is that the associa-
tions between items are enough to induce subjects to hold
all three of the items from a category in mind indepen-
dently. One critical prediction of this alternative account
would be that one could not get the enhanced retrieval dy-
namic with, say, seven items in a row from one category fol-
lowed by seven from another category because the items
from a category then could not be kept in the focus of at-
tention concurrently.
It is not altogether clear how performance should be af-
fected if the three items from the most recent category
were held in that focus of attention as a single chunk. One
would think that this would provide strong enough infor-
mation to distinguish members of a category that were pre-
sented, from other similar members that were not pre-
sented and therefore were not part of the chunk. Yet, for
the most recently-presented category, false alarms to non-
presented members of the most recent category (e.g., re-
ceiving pig, dog, and mouse and false-alarming to cat) oc-
cur relatively frequently (McElree 1998, Fig. 4). Another
possible prediction is that, if the three recent members of
a category really do form a single chunk in the focus of at-
tention, there should not only be an advantage arising from
their presence within that focus; there also should be a dis-
advantage arising from the need to unpack the chunk in or-
der to access its individual members. This could be tested
in a procedure in which the number of consecutive items
from a category is either 1 or 3. According to the single-
chunk hypothesis, a single ungrouped item in list-final po-
sition should be retrieved more quickly than any of the
items within a three-item list-final category because the iso-
lated item avoids an unpacking stage. Failure to find this
would seem to indicate that items are held in memory as
separate (though associated) chunks, not as one chunk.
Last, there is an alternative interpretation (mentioned by
McElree 1998) in which the advantaged items are not nec-
essarily in the focus of attention but are simply more in
keeping with the contextual cues of retrieval. If this is the
case, or if the true capacity limit is greater than one chunk,
it should be possible to achieve a faster retrieval dynamic
for more than one category at once. If such a result were
apparently obtained, though, one would have to look at the
distribution of responses to ensure that subjects did not
simply choose one category to keep in the focus of attention
on each trial; this presents a thorny problem to be ad-
dressed in future research.
McElree & Dosher also mentioned the simultaneous
versus sequential array distinction. They suggested that the
four-chunk hypothesis may be valid only when the chunks
are presented simultaneously (e.g., Luck & Vogel 1997).
Apparently, they dismissed the sequential evidence, such as
the memory-for-unattended-speech procedure of Cowan
et al. (1999). It is not clear why they would consider it in-
valid but one could argue that there is output interference
from each item being recalled in that procedure, reducing
the ability to recall subsequent items. Indeed, that is a com-
plaint lodged by Milner and by Nairne & Neath. An un-
published experiment (by N. Cowan, J.S. Saults, E.M. El-
liott, and L.D. Nugent) allays that particular concern. Lists
of nine digits were presented in an unattended channel and
only occasionally were tested, in order to minimize the role
of attention. In this particular experiment, recall was to be-
gin at any of the nine serial positions and was to continue to
the end of the list and then starting back at the beginning,
in a circular manner, until all nine items were recalled. One
can look at the proportion correct for any of the nine serial
positions for the first-recalled items, for which there was no
output interference. The results examined in this way were
bow-shaped with a relatively weak primacy effect and a
stronger recency effect. Summing the proportion correct
for first-recalled items across serial positions produced an
estimate of the number correct in the absence of output in-
terference. This sum came to 3.2 items, consistent with the
4-chunk hypothesis as elaborated above. There at least does
not appear to be any strong evidence against the hypothe-
sis that attention focused on auditory sensory memory can
result in the apprehension of roughly 4 chunks of informa-
tion. Thus, this study suggests that one can extract 4 chunks
from a sequential presentation. In principle, moreover, it
should be possible to use one’s faculties of mental imagery
to recast sequential arrays as simultaneous arrays.
In partial defense of the suggestion by McElree &
Dosher that the 4-chunk limit could apply only to simulta-
neous presentations, though, one possibility is that attended
sequential presentations do not typically result in the load-
ing of the focus of attention with four consecutive chunks
of information. Instead, perhaps rehearsal processes (of an
elaborative nature?) use up some of the capacity. One thing
that favors this possibility is that, as pointed out by Nairne
& Neath, there is a study that contradicts the finding of
Halford et al. (1988), discussed above, indicating that
Response/Cowan: The magical number 4
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:1
159
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 74 (native) -----
proactive interference does not occur for a memory test in
which the target list is only four words long. Tehan and
Humphreys (1996) did find such proactive interference.
There are numerous differences between the studies that
need to be explored but one potentially critical difference
is that Halford et al. presented the words within each list as
a simultaneous array, whereas Tehan and Humphreys pre-
sented each list sequentially. It may be that, because of this
difference, 4 chunks entered the focus of attention at once
in the Halford et al. study but not in the Tehan and Hum-
phreys study. (However, the situation may be different in
free recall, where proactive interference is not found for
the recency portion of the serial position curve; see Craik &
Birtwhistle 1971.)
Another comparison of hypotheses has to do with the ca-
pacity and function of the focus of attention and with how
comparisons of chunks are carried out. For example, in a
probed recognition task like the one that McElree &
Dosher often use, it is necessary to compare the various
targets to the probe until a match is found or none can be
found. If only one chunk can be held in the focus of atten-
tion at a time, that implies that the probe and target cannot
both be held in the focus of attention at the same time.
Therefore, the comparison process must take place outside
of that focus. It is difficult to understand why a process
should be strategically controlled and yet take place outside
of attention, and why the probe itself should not be consid-
ered part of the focus of attention at the same time as at
least one target item. Similarly, the global workspace idea
mentioned by Baars seems useful largely because it pro-
vides a mechanism whereby independent chunks can come
together within the focus of attention to form a new chunk
that reflects the present episode (a theory that also provides
a teleological argument for the between-object links hy-
pothesized by Davis and consistent with the episodic
buffer of Baddeley). If multiple chunks cannot be present
in the focus of attention long enough for them to be linked
together, it is not clear how or where in processing this
chunking process can be carried out or why newly formed
chunks are limited to a combination of about 4 pre-existing
chunks (see sect. 2.2 in the target article).
McKone reviewed results that appear to be at odds with
those of McElree and Dosher. Recognition judgments were
to be made for items presented at various points within a
long list; the reaction times were faster for the most recent
4 items, in keeping with a prediction made in the target ar-
ticle. However, this experiment also showed that the reac-
tion times were shorter for stimuli presented more recently
within the last 4 lags. This suggests that the more recent
items were fresher in mind, not equally accessible within a
focus of attention. The implications of this finding will be
discussed further in section R2.3.5. However, for now it is
worth noting that more work must be done to reconcile
these findings. McKone’s experiment did not examine re-
trieval dynamics (changing accuracy as a function of re-
sponse time criterion), so it cannot be directly compared to
the test situation described by McElree and Dosher; but
the two experimental procedures may well differ in how
much rehearsal they allow. In McElree and Dosher’s situa-
tion, rehearsal may displace some specific items (e.g., the
three penultimate items) from the focus of attention.
Data basically similar to McKone’s can be seen in Atkin-
son and Shiffrin (1968, Fig. 24). Lag judgments were to be
made for stimuli presented in a long, running list, with test
lags varying from 1 item to 16 items. For this sort of list, it
is impossible to assign items to specific serial positions, so
grouping and rehearsal become difficult or impossible. The
results show facilitated (fairly accurate) lag judgments for
lags of 1 through 4, with an asymptotic average judgment of
about 5–7 items applied indiscriminately to items with an
actual lag of 5–16. It is as if the capacity-limited processing
system is capable of noting only 1, 2, 3, 4, and many.
It is going to take additional work before we will under-
stand exactly what testing procedures best index informa-
tion in the focus of attention. Oberauer (in press) has de-
vised a modified probe reaction time testing method that
seems very promising for distinguishing between informa-
tion that is in the focus of attention versus information that
is activated, yet outside of the attentional focus (Cowan
1988; 1995; 1999). Oberauer presented two lists of items
(digits or words in different experiments) concurrently on
each trial, in different colors. The set sizes of both lists var-
ied. A postlist cue indicated which list would be tested. Af-
ter a variable interval, a recognition test probe followed the
cue. The measure of the irrelevant list remaining activated
in memory was an intrusion effect: specifically, the slowing
effect that occurred when a negative probe was an item
from the irrelevant list rather than a nonpresented item.
However, the measure of the irrelevant list remaining in the
focus of attention was modification of the intrusion effect
by the set size of the irrelevant set. The intrusion effect
lasted a long time and was larger for older adults, whereas
the irrelevant set size effect occurred only for several hun-
dred milliseconds, presumably until the irrelevant list could
be removed from the focus of attention, and did not differ
with age. In another experiment, in which subjects (young
adults) knew that both lists had to be recalled, the results
reassuringly suggested that both lists remained in the focus
of attention. This procedure could be used to estimate the
contents of the focus of attention in a more principled man-
ner than has been done previously.
R2.3.2. The 4-chunk perceptual/1-chunk memory hy-
pothesis. Commentator Jou posed in interesting criti-
cism. If the memory search procedure of Sternberg (1966)
and the enumeration procedure (e.g., Mandler & Shebo
1982) both reflect the focus of attention or window of si-
multaneous consciousness (Ebbinghaus, cited in Slamecka
1985), then why do they show such different patterns of re-
sults? Specifically, memory search tasks yield a linear in-
crease in reaction times as a function of the set size up
through about 6 items and then a shallow slope, whereas
enumeration tasks yield a shallow slope for 1–4 items and
a steep slope after that. Jou’s suggested explanation ap-
pears to be that, in perception, the simultaneous presence
of several stimuli results in parallel processing of the items
in the focus of attention; whereas, in memory search, items
enter the focus of attention only one at a time in a serial
search process.
There are several points that must be made in response.
First, it seems unlikely that memory search occurs in a
straightforward, serial fashion. It has often been found that
search times are faster for items at the end of the list than
for items earlier in the list (Clifton & Cruse 1977; Diener
1990; Dosher 1981; Monsell 1978; Ratcliff 1978), which ap-
pears to rule out a serial search of items in the presented
serial order. Although it is possible that memory search oc-
curs in some random or backward order, it seems more
Response/Cowan: The magical number 4
160
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:1
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 75 (native) -----
plausible, and there is better evidence, that memory search
occurs for list items in parallel, in a capacity-limited man-
ner (Ashby et al. 1993; Ratcliff 1978; Townsend 1976), with
recent items often having an advantage within the compet-
itive process because of their greater salience in memory.
Second, the difference between reaction time patterns is
not the result of a contrast between perceptual tasks on one
hand and memory tasks on the other. In visual search tasks
with a varied target set from trial to trial, which are per-
ceptual tasks, one sees a reaction time that increases stead-
ily with set size, not the two-part pattern seen in subitizing
(Dosher 1998; Schneider & Shiffrin 1977).
Third, one must take into consideration differences in
task demands. In enumeration, the entire pattern of objects
is relevant to the count. In memory search, in contrast, what
is needed is not a conglomeration but a discrimination
among items. In one way or another, the probe must be
compared to each item in memory at least until a match is
found. For any memory set size greater than one, the total
collection in the focus of attention will not match the probe.
There is no reason to think that the process of determining
whether one of the items within the focus of attention
matches the probe should be automatic, so it will depend
on the set size.
Fourth, it is easily understandable from a fixed-capacity
view that the supra-capacity slope differs markedly from
one task to another. Specifically, whether the reaction time
function at large set sizes becomes steeper (as in enumera-
tion tasks) or flattens (as in memory search) clearly must de-
pend on what process takes over at that point. In the case
of enumeration, it is a serial counting process, whereas in
the case of memory search, it is a parallel direct access
process that is not capacity limited, yet is slower than the
capacity-limited process that one finds at smaller set sizes.
So this difference between findings is not a problem for the
4-chunk hypothesis.
Despite these points, it must be acknowledged that a
central riddle remains unanswered. Why should the reac-
tion time in memory search increase linearly as the set size
increases to 6 items if only 4 can be held in the focus of at-
tention? That is a good question. Nevertheless, it is worth
pointing out that subjects in memory search tasks are al-
lowed to rehearse the stimuli. The process of rehearsal may
keep up to 6 or so items in such an active state that the re-
sponse times remain faster than is found through capacity-
unlimited memory access. According to this suggestion, it
would be predicted that the inability to rehearse during
presentation of the memory list should shift the point of dis-
continuity leftward, so that the linear increasing portion of
the function should extend through set sizes of 4 but no
more.
This still does not really address the question of why re-
action times increase in a linear fashion through 6 items in
memory search. That point has been a problem, though, for
all theories of memory search. We know that various types
of serial or parallel capacity-limited processes can produce
linear functions but we do not know why the functions hap-
pen to be linear despite nonlinear serial position effects in
reaction time. I am confident that it would be possible to
put forth a theory of the linear function that assumes a core
attentional capacity of 4 chunks but, given how little is un-
derstood here, it would be post hoc and unhelpful to do so.
Instead, I would point to this as an exciting area for further
empirical research in the near future.
R2.3.3. The 7-chunk hypothesis. Two commentators
(Bachelder and Pascual-Leone) found value in the 7-
chunk hypothesis, although presumably for very different
reasons.
Bachelder showed that points from several types of
experiments (memory span, subitizing or span of appre-
hension, and absolute judgment) could be plotted on a sim-
ilar, inverse-ogive function (as in his figure). He suggested
that the “magical number 4” emerges from a perfect-
performance criterion on this function, whereas Miller’s
“magical number 7” emerges from a criterion at which 50%
of the trials result in correct responses. (At least, I assume
that is what the curve shown in Bachelder’s figure repre-
sents.) Although this function is empirically beautiful, I
have some doubts about its interpretation, for several rea-
sons. First, correct performance on a memory span trial re-
quires success at all serial positions. In contrast, the span of
apprehension and absolute judgment tasks required just
one response per trial.
More important, there is no way that the curve shown in
Bachelder’s figure can represent all of the evidence that I
take to reflect capacity limits. Consider, for example, the 35
adults who carried out the memory-for-unattended-speech
task of Cowan et al. (1999). These subjects completed at-
tended-speech as well as unattended-speech tasks. The re-
sults corresponding to Bachelder’s plot (proportion of trials
correct at each list length) are shown in Figure R1. The bold
solid line is a portion of Bachelder’s normal ogive. The plain
solid lines with solid points represent data from the at-
tended-speech procedure. Each subject received trials at
only 4 list lengths, equal to the longest list that was recalled
correctly in a pretest (defined here as “span”) and three
shorter list lengths (span-1, span-2, and span-3). To obtain
a wider range of list lengths, data are shown separately for
subjects with span 5 6 (N 5 5), span 5 7 (N 5 14), span
5 8 (N 5 11), and span 5 9 (N 5 5). The ogive approxi-
mates these functions fairly well; it seems nearly perfect for
subjects with a span of 6. However, look now at the dashed
lines, representing data from the unattended-speech pro-
cedure. In this procedure, scores are considerably lower. In
fact, for these data, it is approximately the case that the 50%
Response/Cowan: The magical number 4
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:1
161
Figure R1.
Proportion of lists correctly recalled by the 35 adults
who carried out the task of Cowan et al. (1999); these are the same
subjects shown, for example, in Figure 3 of the target article. Here
they are reported separately for subjects with each memory span
(defined as the longest list repeated correctly in a pretest). Thin
solid lines, attended-speech condition; dashed lines, ignored-
speech condition. Only the attended-speech condition matches
the normal ogive (bold solid line). Based on data by Bachelder.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 76 (native) -----
correct criterion occurs for 4 items, not 7. This may reflect
the fact that the estimated capacity is 4 chunks or higher
only in about half of the adults, as shown in Figure 3.
A devil’s advocate could point out that one measure taken
to indicate a pure STM capacity limit, the subitizing (span
of apprehension) limit of Mandler and Shebo (1982), fits
Bachelder’s function, whereas another measure, the unat-
tended speech procedure of Cowan et al. (1999), does not,
suggesting that they cannot represent the same concept. I
would argue, though, that this discrepancy can be explained
within the fixed-capacity view through a theoretically-
oriented task analysis. Memory span and absolute judg-
ment, which I consider to be compound STM estimates,
could both require rehearsal of a stimulus series (the list
items for span and the response choices for absolute judg-
ment). In subitizing, however, all items are considered at
the same time and only one response is to be emitted. Loss
of some precision of information may or may not throw off
the single response, whereas loss of precision in a span sit-
uation is likely to result in one or more incorrect item re-
sponse, making the entire list response count as incorrect
for the type of data shown in Bachelder’s figure. Thus, the
empirical functions shown by Bachelder do not consistently
indicate the pure capacity limit.
There is, nevertheless, a problem in understanding subi-
tizing according to the 4-chunk hypothesis. If only 4 items
are apprehended as separate chunks and the other items in
an array are not apprehended, shouldn’t performance be
approximately a step function of items, with the step oc-
curring at the capacity limit? At least two alternative expla-
nations of subitizing have been introduced. As mentioned
by Taatgen, Peterson and Simon (2000) suggested that
rapid enumeration of small numbers of objects comes from
the recognition of specific patterns that the objects happen
to form, and showed that the number of patterns to be
learned begins to skyrocket for numbers above 4. Avons et
al. Suggested that numbers of objects are judged in a con-
tinuous manner and that the just-noticeable difference
(jnd) between two amounts depends on the Weber frac-
tion. (Milner made a similar suggestion.) The idea would
be that for a 4-item array, the Weber fraction is small
enough that the true number plus or minus the jnd is still
nearer to 4 than to the neighboring numbers; whereas for
arrays of 5 items or more, the jnd is large enough for the
number to be mistaken for a neighboring number. This is
an interesting possibility, although it is unclear if the mag-
nitude of differences could account for the discontinuity
observed between 4 and 5 items. For example, according to
an application of Weber’s law, suppose that the just-notice-
able difference for 4 objects was .44, so that the perceived
number could not reach any lower than 3.56 or any higher
than 4.44. In that case, the predicted jnd for 5 objects would
have to be (5/4) 3 (.44), or .55. With some random error
thrown in, it is unclear whether such a subtle change in the
jnd could truly account for the discontinuous performance
function. One prediction of the model, however, is that the
point of discontinuity should increase markedly if the task
requirement is relaxed (e.g., not asking for an exact count
but asking whether there were ,X objects or not). At pre-
sent, I am far from certain that the limit in subitizing occurs
for the same reason as the other capacity limits reviewed in
the target article. This does not, however, provide any sup-
port for the 7-chunk hypothesis or weaken the 4-chunk hy-
pothesis much, generally. (It also is possible that there are
logical constraints that apply similarly to both STM and
LTM. For example, the explosion in the number of ways in
which one can arrange n objects as n exceeds 4 could add a
difficulty to both STM and LTM mechanisms even if they
operate separately.)
Pascual-Leone was more explicit in arguing for a 7-
chunk hypothesis. The basis of the argument was that the
analysis in the target article was incomplete and did not take
into account the memory capacity needed for the proce-
dures involved in carrying out the task. However, this analy-
sis would be invalid if, in fact, the procedures have become
sufficiently automatized so that they do not compete with
limited-capacity storage. A case in point is Pascual-Leone’s
analysis of the unattended-speech task of Cowan et al.
(1999). According to that analysis, 3 or 4 slots in working
memory are used up to carry out the rhyme-matching
primary task, and a remaining 3 or 4 are used to retain in
memory digits from the unattended channel, which are rec-
ognized following an orienting response. This analysis con-
trasts with the analysis of Cowan et al., who assumed that
the digits were held automatically in a sensory memory and
that attention (and, therefore, capacity-limited storage) was
focused on the speech only after the rhyming task was re-
placed by the auditory-memory recall cue. One problem
with Pascual-Leone’s analysis is that Cowan et al. found no
effect of the concurrent memory task on performance in
the rhyme-matching task. The same was true of Cowan et
al. (2000), who used the same task but manipulated the
memory retention interval rather than the list length. Also,
if working memory slots were used up retaining some of the
supposedly unattended sounds, one might expect the ca-
pacity to remain fairly constant across a silent retention in-
terval. This would not be expected if performance depended
on a sensory memory that was lost during the retention in-
terval. A reanalysis of adult data from Cowan et al. (2000)
shows that the capacity (and its SD) was 3.34 (1.53) after a
1-sec retention interval, 2.27 (0.85) after a 5-sec retention
interval, and 1.90 (0.73) after a 10-sec retention interval.
This is in contrast to performance in the attended-speech
condition, which showed no memory loss across the reten-
tion intervals. Thus, the evidence is more consistent with
the interpretation of Cowan et al. (1999), involving a 3- to
4-chunk limit drawing upon a sensory memory representa-
tion of the last spoken list at the time of the recall cue.
It also would be difficult for Pascual-Leone’s model to
interpret one finding of Luck and Vogel (1997) in their
color-array memory task: that performance was unaffected
by a concurrent, 2-item, verbal memory load.
How, then, would we account for the evidence upon
which Pascual-Leone’s M-space theory is based? One pos-
sibility to consider is that the tasks he used allowed a con-
tribution of rehearsal and chunking strategies to improve
performance, providing compound STM estimates rather
than pure STM capacity estimates.
Kareev (2000) offered another argument in favor of a
magical number 7 6 2. The argument was based on con-
siderations about correlations between binary variables.
Small samples tend to overestimate the correlation found
in the entire population. Given that a smaller working
memory provides an individual with smaller samples, a limit
on working memory could be useful for detecting weak cor-
relations (see sect. 4.1.1). Kareev (2000) argued that the
usefulness index was greatest for samples of around 7 pairs
of values. Although this might be viewed as embarrassing,
Response/Cowan: The magical number 4
162
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:1
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 77 (native) -----
given that the target article used the same phenomenon to
argue for a capacity limit of 4 rather than 7, I stand by my
estimate, on the basis of all of the evidence taken together.
The arguments based on correlations are lax enough to
allow either estimate. An argument demonstrating the
plausibility of 4 emerges from a rudimentary simulation I
have carried out with slightly different assumptions than
Kareev used. I created a random list of 1,000 numbers (x1,
x2, . . . x1000) with the value of 1 or 2. I then created an-
other list of 1,000 numbers (y1, y2, . . . y1000) with the
value of 1 or 2 so that the correlation between the two lists
equaled .4. A third list was constructed, so that its correla-
tion with the first list was .6. For each pair of correlated lists
(1–2 and 1–3), a moving window of 2, 4, 6, or 8 number
pairs was used to calculate sample correlations. If there was
no variation in the sample obtained from at least one of the
lists, no correlation was calculated. A particular value of the
sample correlation was taken as the minimum criterion (C)
indicating that the subject would “notice” the correlation,
and the results were examined with various criteria. The
question then was, which number-pair sample set size (2, 4,
6, or 8) produced the largest number of “noticed” correla-
tions in the same direction as the population correlation?
The number of noticeable correlations was corrected by
subtracting from the number of correlations with r $ C the
number that were noticeable, but in the wrong direction (r
# 2C), to produce an adjusted success value. The outcome
was similar for a population correlation of either .4 or .6.
With C set to .9, set size 4 was clearly the winner. (With a
population correlation of .4, the set sizes of 2, 4, 6, and 8
produced adjusted success values of 198, 212, 114, and 57,
respectively. With a population correlation of .6, the same
set size produced adjusted success values of 290, 352, 263,
and 182, respectively.) Set size 4 also consistently came out
ahead with C set to .6, whereas set size 6 won with C set to
.7 or .8, and set size 8 won with a C set to .5. Given that we
do not know the appropriate detectable sample correlation
level C for human subjects, this exercise yielded no clear-cut
winner. It suggests that in our present ignorance, one should
not take Kareev (2000) as strong teleological evidence either
for or against a basic capacity limit of 4 chunks.
Wilding presented protocols of mnemonists who could
recall long strings of memorized digits. Reaction times
showed breaks after sets of about 4 digits but, in an appar-
ent departure from the 4-chunk hypothesis, the last series
could be as long as about 7 digits. One might suspect that a
decay-based mechanism held the last string of 7 or so dig-
its until they were available for entry into the focus of at-
tention. However, according to the theoretical view sug-
gested in the target article, it is mysterious how the focus 
of attention could collect and recall the last 7 in a single
cluster. Close inspection of Wilding’s Figure 1 suggests that
there actually may have been slight pauses in the middle of
the last group of 7. They could be difficult to detect if the
retrieval process for the last chunk could take place largely
during the recall of the next-to-last chunk. This could occur
at the end of the list because the overall structure of the list
no longer had to be held in mind. Another possibility is that
the last two chunks of 3 or 4 numbers were melded into a
single super-chunk in the period after the list was presented
and before recall.
R2.3.4. The unlimited-capacity hypothesis. A completely
different view from the present target article was taken by
Ericsson & Kirk. They stated that “Even in task environ-
ments where the functional independence of chunks is con-
vincingly demonstrated, individuals can increase the stor-
age of independent chunks with deliberate practice – well
above the magical number four.” One may well question,
however, what the effects of expertise are and what was
meant by the functional independence of chunks. For ex-
ample, in the memory performance of a trained individual
who can repeat lists of many digits in a row (Ericsson et al.
1980), there may be a hierarchical organization in which
chunks are composed of other chunks. It is the higher-level
chunk that should govern recall ability (e.g., features are
chunked into letters but capacity is not measured at the let-
ter level when letters are in turn grouped into words).
Ericsson & Kirk noted two encoding mechanisms by
which information can be stored beyond any specific ca-
pacity limit. They were said to be able to “generate associ-
ations between different presented chunks of information
and build new integrated structures in LTM.” It was noted
that “If experts can encode associative relations between
virtually all chunks within their domain of expertise, then
the concept of chunk independence would not apply. Sec-
ond, and more important, skilled individuals acquire skills
to associate chunks of presented information with internal
cues organized in retrieval structures.” I do not deny any of
this. However, if experts are able to do this they may be able
to represent an entire stimulus field as a single chunk that
can be unpacked (with the help of long-term memory) into
smaller chunks as needed. Therefore, the ability of experts
to overcome the conventional capacity limits can be viewed
as an extraordinary instance of the capacity limit but not an
exception.
An important complication for future research is that
some associations may be intermediate in strength. So, for
example, if one were asked to recite the alphabet and then
the American pledge of allegiance to the flag, one would
pause briefly within the alphabet because some groups of
letters form a subgroup; and one might pause during the
pledge because a certain phrase is not immediately acces-
sible. Nevertheless, if we can learn to understand effects of
intermediate-level associations and of grouping hierarchies
used in multiple reiterations, it is reasonable to apply a ca-
pacity model. Basically, all one has to do in the aforemen-
tioned situation is to hold in mind a node for the alphabet
and a node for the pledge of allegiance, while unpacking
and recalling subgroups of elements one by one. The more
expertise is involved, the more theoretical work investiga-
tors must do to understand the associative structure before
a capacity principle can be applied. This, however, does not
rule out the principle. Ruling out the existence of capacity
limits on the basis of the phenomenon of expertise would
be much like ruling out the existence of controlled pro-
cessing (Shiffrin & Schneider 1977) on the basis of the phe-
nomenon of automatic processing, or more broadly, like
ruling out effects of gravity on the basis of effects of wind
resistance.
Schubert & Frensch made an interesting suggestion
along this line. They suggested that “in dual-task studies a
capacity limitation of the central mechanism can be ob-
served only when subjects carry out the tasks in a relatively
unlearned state.” They go on to suggest that “training leads
to an over-learned mapping of stimuli and responses, and,
consequently, to an automatic activation of the response
when a stimulus is presented.” In other words, expertise
Response/Cowan: The magical number 4
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:1
163
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 78 (native) -----
uses a type of automatic processing that can obscure the ef-
fects of capacity limitation within controlled processing.
The task for a capacity account would be to determine what
little controlled processing is left to be accomplished by the
expert in a capacity-limited manner. For example, a chess
expert may be able to go around a room playing multiple
chess games at once, but it seems doubtful that chess ex-
pertise would allow an individual to play one game with the
left hand and a different game with the right hand, without
some loss of speed or playing quality. I, thus, adhere to the
principle that expertise is likely to alter the way in which a
limited capacity can be filled, but without doubting the ca-
pacity itself in terms of chunks (or a more sophisticated,
graded, hierarchical associative structure once it is under-
stood and studied).
One commentary (Lane et al.) reviewed work on com-
plex tasks such as chess, in which, following Chase and Si-
mon (1973), they have been able to obtain empirical evi-
dence of chunks. They were able to implement a specific
computational model of the process and found that a 3- or
4-chunk capacity best matched performance of players at
different levels of expertise. Although this theoretical suc-
cess is in only one research domain, it is a reassuring
demonstration that such work can be done.
R2.3.5. Decay-and-interference-only hypothesis. Several
commentators (Davis; Grondin; McKone; Milner; Mu-
ter; Taatgen; Towse) suggested that the possible influ-
ences and results of limiting factors other than chunk 
capacity (in particular, time-based forgetting and interfer-
ence) were neglected or dismissed. For example, Muter
suggested that “a comprehensive account of STM should
surely include treatment of the nature of forgetting after at-
tention has been diverted.” I could not agree more and ad-
dressed those questions at length in several previous works
(Cowan 1988; 1995). I have studied time-based forgetting
intensively in the past (see for example Cowan 1984; 1988;
Cowan et al. 1990; 1994; 1997; 2000; in press; Gomes et al.
1999; Keller & Cowan 1994; Keller et al. 1995; Saults &
Cowan 1996). Time-based forgetting has been difficult to
understand inasmuch as, after all these years, there still may
be no clear evidence for forgetting as a function of the pass-
ing of a particular, absolute amount of time as opposed to
the passage of time relative to the times of presentation of
potentially interfering stimuli (e.g., see Cowan et al. 1997
vs. Cowan et al., in press). Nevertheless, time-based for-
getting and interference from other items are both very im-
portant factors to consider in recall. The present target ar-
ticle is simply intended to cover only one theoretical
mechanism of short-term memory, the capacity limit.
Towse noted that “Strong faith in measures of memory
size alone may permit us to find The Answer, but at what
cost to a full understanding of immediate memory?” The
implication is that he believes that chunk-based capacity
limits may eventually turn out to result indirectly from de-
cay and interference factors. Although I believe that decay
and interference are critical for remembering, their useful-
ness seems reduced when one is talking about the contri-
bution of the focus of attention, the topic of the target arti-
cle. What is crucial here is that the 4-chunk capacity seems
to apply even in situations in which conditions have been
selected so as to minimize time-based forgetting of infor-
mation before it reaches the focus of attention and output
interference that could conceivably displace it before it is
recalled (e.g., the single-decision procedure of Luck and
Vogel 1997; the unpublished paper on unattended speech
discussed in sect. R2.3.1, in which just the first-recalled
item was examined). It also is worth recalling evidence that
information in the focus of attention may be impervious to
some types of interference that can occur outside of that
focus (Craik & Birtwhistle 1971; Halford et al. 1988, dis-
cussed in sect. 3.3.4). Therefore, I believe that the concepts
of time-based forgetting and material-specific interference
are more appropriate for describing passive storage buffers
(Baddeley 1986) or activation outside of the focus of atten-
tion (Cowan 1988; 1995). To understand short-term mem-
ory, one must know about the capacity of attention (in
chunks) as well as the passively held information available
to it (affected by time and interference). The intent of the
target article is to improve our understanding of short-term
memory by analyzing a key component of it separately but
we will then have to put the whole working memory system
back together. (For attempts to do so see Cowan 1999; also
see the commentary by Baddeley and see Baddeley, in
press.) Additional discussion will be in response to the spe-
cific points of each commentator, who used the notions of
decay ind interference in different ways.
Davis described an unpublished experiment in visual
perception by Davis et al. that he thought ruled out a
chunk-based capacity limit in favor of “decay and interfer-
ence.” There was not much actual emphasis on decay. The
“interference” that he mentioned apparently referred to a
limit in how many binding links could remain activated, be-
tween objects and between features within an object. That
type of interference, if correct, could serve as a “subatomic”
type of analysis of capacity limits that is essentially friendly
to the notion of a 4-chunk limit, which he predicted on the
basis of the number of links for ordinary objects, in which
the total number of inter-object links increases rapidly with
the number of objects in the display.
Although this reasoning is exciting, the conclusion that
Davis described on the basis of an experiment seems open
to question. In this experiment, subjects had to compare the
shapes of two notches among 3 or 6 irregularly-shaped ob-
jects, as shown in Parts C and D of his figure. The number
of objects (3 or 6) did not matter overall, but one case was
an exception. In that case, horizontally displaced notches
appeared on the same object in either situation, whereas
vertically displaced notches appeared on the same object
only in the case of 3 objects, not in the case of 6 objects. In
this case, there was an advantage of fewer objects. This ex-
ception showed that the number of perceived objects in the
displays really did differ as intended. Thus, the absence of
a number-of-objects effect overall was seen as evidence
against a capacity limit of 4 objects. The ordinary effect of
number of objects was said to be an indirect effect of the
number of inter- and intra-object links combined, which
here were held constant. My concern with this logic is that
the demands of the task are not clear. Not all visual searches
are capacity-limited; simple feature searches are indepen-
dent of the number of objects. If the two target notches in
the display can be located in a capacity-unlimited search,
then there is no reason to expect that the comparisons
would be made more slowly with 6 objects present than with
3. Also, the more specific effect that was obtained could
have occurred not because of a difference in the number of
objects perceived in the two types of display but because of
subjects’ use of local symmetry as a cue. It may be especially
Response/Cowan: The magical number 4
164
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:1
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 79 (native) -----
easy to compare two notches when they flank a large, sim-
ple object because, in that circumstance, the notches are
the same if and only if there is local symmetry in the design.
For the horizontally displaced notches, symmetry is always
a useful cue because a rectangular edge is flanked by the
notched (though perhaps this cue is not as useful in the case
of 3 large objects because the horizontal symmetry of the
semi-elliptical shapes could make it difficult to perceive lo-
cal asymmetry). For vertically displaced notches, in the case
of 3 large objects, the notches flank a white semi-elliptical
shape; that design feature might be used to judge symme-
try. For 6 small objects, in contrast, vertical displacement
leaves no large shape for the notches to flank, which may
make symmetry less useful. Davis’s point is potentially very
interesting but it seems that these possibly confounding fac-
tors first need to be examined further.
Grondin brought up an interesting temporal limit in cog-
nition. The comparative judgment of time intervals benefits
from rehearsal only, according to his findings, for intervals
longer than about 1.2 sec. Presumably, this is an estimate of
the “psychological present,” which could be described as
the period for which stimulus input seems to cohere into the
same perceived event. (It may be worth noting one impor-
tant nuance, that the “psychological moment,” the time dur-
ing which sequentially-presented stimuli are perceived as
simultaneous, is an order of magnitude smaller; see, for ex-
ample, Allport 1968.) I would not in any way dispute such
an interval or its importance in limiting the psychological
present. The stance taken in the target article was just that
these factors could not explain storage limitations in the full
range of situations in which they have been observed; for
example, it is hard to see how they could explain the limi-
tations observed by Luck and Vogel (1997). Nevertheless, I
agree that there are some likely links between any such psy-
chological present and the chunk-based capacity limit. For
example, a rapid sequence of 4 stimuli presented within a
1.2-sec window would allow 300 msec per stimulus presen-
tation, just long enough for brief stimuli to be perceived
(Massaro 1972; Turvey 1973). Perhaps there is both a tem-
poral and a chunk limit to the psychological present, lead-
ing to a rule such as this: The psychological present can in-
clude up to 3–5 chunks of information at once, provided
that these chunks all can be perceived, conceived from long-
term memory, or reactivated through rehearsal within the
period of one psychological present. Such a rule might make
many investigators happy (e.g., Baddeley 1986). However,
it should be noted that the reason for the rule might not be
decay of the first-presented chunks. Rather, chunks pre-
sented farther apart might be difficult to integrate into the
same perceptual present (or coherent scene, in present
terms). Given that this rule is stated in such abstract terms,
considerable empirical work would be needed to assess its
validity. It would have to be shown to apply with rehearsal
processes blocked. Rehearsal may serve the purpose of al-
lowing the subject to re-present all of the items within one
psychological present in order to encode them into a com-
mon mental context.
Finally, Grondin found the postulation of a chunk limit
(rather that a time limit) as central to short-term memory
to be an oxymoron; a “term” is a time period. Perhaps so,
but the continual need for the focus of attention in pro-
cessing practically ensures that any particular set of chunks
must leave to make room for other chunks within a rather
short term. This explains the great difficulty of vigilance
during a secondary task, for example, remembering to
check the oven in a timely fashion while busy composing a
journal article. Despite the importance of not burning
down the house, the stove presumably cannot remain in
working memory and must be reloaded periodically, most
likely during breaks in the mental workload of the ongoing
composition.
McKone presented results that were discussed briefly in
section R2.3.1. and are relevant to the decay issue. Recog-
nition times were found to be shortest to the most-recently-
presented item and to increase steadily until a lag of 4, af-
ter which the response times stay much more constant.
Given this pattern, she noted that it conflicts with the idea
that the most recent 4 items are equally well represented in
the focus of attention. There, she suggested that “older
items fade from the limited capacity mechanism (at least
without rehearsal).” What makes me doubt that interpreta-
tion is the pattern of results from our experiments on mem-
ory for unattended lists of spoken digits (e.g., Cowan et al.
1999; 2000b). These experiments show a distinct bow-
shaped serial position function. One interpretation is that,
at the time of the recall cue, the focus of attention casts its
net upon the available activated memory (in this case, pre-
sumably a stream of auditory sensory memory) and picks up
the 3 to 5 most salient chunks within the representation.
The pre-list silent period makes the sensory information
from the beginning of the list salient and the end-of-list
silent period, as well as perhaps the highly activated state of
recent sensory memory, makes that part of the list salient.
In McKone’s procedure, also, there is the possibility that
the focus of attention is refilled with the appropriate items,
from activated memory outside of the focus, only after the
recall probe is presented. Thus, time-based forgetting is
only one part of what differentiated the salience of differ-
ent items. McKone’s reaction time function could be ac-
counted for if there were a probabilistic tendency to fill the
available 4 or so slots with the most recent items, but if on
some trials some of the slots were filled with items from
other serial positions or not filled with items. The monoto-
nically increasing advantage across the last 4 serial positions
would occur because, on many trials, the slots were indeed
filled with the last 4 items.
McKone also objected that the capacity was much lower
than 4, specifically about 2, in the implicit memory of pseu-
dowords. I would suggest here that under implicit memory
situations, it may not be the case that each pseudoword was
learned as a single chunk. Instead, many pseudowords may
be recognized only as several separate chunks, as was sug-
gested in the target article (sect. 3.2.1).
Taatgen presented an ACT-R model that combines a 1-
chunk focus of attention with activation, decay, and inter-
ference of information from long-term memory. Except for
the postulation of only a 1-chunk focus, this model is in
keeping with that presented by Cowan (1999). On one hand,
the output of the model (shown in Taatgen’s Fig. 1) seems
very promising. The low-capacity curve appears to match
the data for the unattended speech condition shown in Fig-
ure R1, whereas the high-capacity curve appears to match
the attended-speech condition and the curve presented by
Bachelder. However, it is difficult to understand how the
function based on “the effects of decay, interference, and
the increased probability of doing something wrong if more
responses are required” (Taatgen) can account for evi-
dence with simultaneous arrays followed by only one deci-
Response/Cowan: The magical number 4
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:1
165
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 80 (native) -----
sion (Luck & Vogel 1997) unless a metric is proposed for
mutual interference between elements within a simultane-
ous display. Again, it also is difficult to understand how a 1-
chunk focus of attention can accomplish comparisons be-
tween items. The success of the modeling is encouraging
but we probably do not know how many different forms of
model can accomplish the same thing. I agree with the im-
plication that capacity, an integer quantity, ultimately is
likely to result from developmental changes and individual
differences in some underlying continuous quantity or
quantities. However, I see no reason to exclude attention as
the basis for that change or the locus of that capacity.
In sum, I agree with many of the commentators that de-
cay (or any type of time-based forgetting) and interference
are important factors to consider in short-term recall. How-
ever, the present thesis is that a 4-chunk limit of the infor-
mation in the focus of attention at one time can be identi-
fied apart from these other factors. According to the model
of Cowan (1995; 1999), decay and interference determine
what information will be available and accessible to the fo-
cus of attention, from which about 4 chunks will be se-
lected. While in the focus, items may be protected from
further decay or interference. Evidence presented by Ren-
sink from change-detection experiments is especially help-
ful in illustrating this point of the separability of capacity
from other processing limitations. For example, when the
interval between displays increases to 360 msec, eliminat-
ing a visual sensory memory contribution, a change can be
identified reliably among at most 3–4 items, and this limit
does not change with further increases in the interval.
R2.4. An improved procedure to estimate 
capacity in visual arrays
The majority of the criticisms of the 4-chunk hypothesis
have been directed at the interpretation of verbal, serial re-
call measures. Therefore, it is important to communicate
that, since the target article was written, I have developed
(with co-investigators J.S. Saults and N.M Fristoe) an im-
proved means to assess capacity in visual array experiments.
Specifically, we have developed a formula to index memory
capacity in the procedure of Luck and Vogel (1997) in
which a single item within the second array is encircled and
the task is to determine whether that item has changed
color from its counterpart in the first array (the arrays be-
ing otherwise identical). The formula was a modification of
one presented earlier by Pashler (1988). The logic of the
measure is as follows.
Upon examining a briefly presented array of N items, the
subject is able to apprehend a certain fixed number of items,
k. The apprehension of these items would allow a change to
be detected if one of these k items should happen to be the
changed item. Thus, with probability k/N, the change is de-
tected. If the change is not detected, the subject guesses
“yes, there was a change” with probability g. Thus, the for-
mula for the hit rate H is: H 5 k/N 1 [(N 2 k)/N]g. If there
is no change between the two arrays, and if the cued item
happens to be an item that is included within the set k that
the subject apprehended, then that knowledge will allow
the subject to answer correctly that no change has occurred
(and this is where our formula differs from Pashler’s). If
there is no such knowledge (for N 2 k items), then the sub-
ject still will answer correctly with a probability 1 2 g, where
g is again the probability of guessing “yes.” Given that mem-
ory is used to respond in the no-change situation, it is use-
ful to define performance in terms of the rate of correct re-
jections, CR. The assumptions just stated then lead to the
following expression: CR 5 k/N 1 [(N 2 k)/N](1 2 g).
Combining equations, H 1 CR 5 2k/N1 (N 2 k)/N 5 (k
1 N)/N. Rearranging terms, the capacity can be estimates
as k5(H 1 CR 2 1)N. The resulting estimates appear to be
compromised slightly by a performance ceiling in set size 4
but they are rather constant across larger set sizes, which we
have tested up to 10. The resulting capacity estimate in sev-
eral data sets is about 3.5 items.
To illustrate the working of the model, estimates can be
obtained on the basis of the data figure provided by Schnei-
der et al. for a set size of 6. Inasmuch as H1CR equals
twice the proportion correct P, for large objects or small ob-
jects, assuming P 5 .80 (from the data graph), k 5 (2(.80)
2 1) 6 5 3.6. For combined objects, if we assume that 6
small objects plus 6 large objects equal 12 objects total and
P 5 .63 (from the data graph), then k 5 (2(.63) 2 1)12 5
3.12. The lower number in the second case suggests that not
only were large and small objects perceived separately, they
also may have interfered with one another slightly. In sum,
simultaneous arrays lead to quantifiable capacity-limit esti-
mates, much as sequential presentations do.
R3. Cognitive theoretical accounts 
of the 4-chunk limit
R3.1. Metatheoretical considerations
As mentioned above, my strong belief in the 4-chunk limit
is not accompanied by convictions that are as strong re-
garding the theoretical reason for the limit. Many of the re-
viewers offered their own theoretical approaches to under-
standing capacity limits. The theoretical problem we have as
a field is certainly not the absence of a plausible explanation,
but rather many different, and in some cases conflicting, ex-
planations. Therefore, a first step toward the understanding
of the capacity limit may be to set out a simple taxonomy of
capacity-limit theories. In doing so I will assume that the 
4-chunk limit applies. Inasmuch as I already discussed al-
ternative theoretical approaches that do not lead to the pre-
diction of a 4-chunk limit in STM, the following discussion
will be limited to theories that are, at least to my under-
standing, compatible with a 4-chunk limit. The goal is to try
to discover what types of experimentation will be most help-
ful in distinguishing between these possibilities.
After making certain core assumptions (from Cowan 1995;
1999), I find that the most general question that arises is
about the mechanism that constrains capacity. A basic sug-
gestion in the target article was that the limit is in the ca-
pacity of the focus of attention. Upon reflection, however,
one might interpret that suggestion in two different ways.
First, the focus of attention might be able to hold only a lim-
ited number of items from the activated representation con-
currently. Second, the activated representation might be
limited in some way that constrains how many items can be
recovered by the attentional mechanism.
These two possibilities are illustrated in Figure R2 for
processing of a single row of 7 letters in Sperling’s (1960)
whole-report task. Before explaining the figure, the under-
lying assumptions must be stated as they apply to this case.
All 7 items are presumably contained briefly (for several
hundred milliseconds) in a visual sensory store. This visual
Response/Cowan: The magical number 4
166
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:1
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 81 (native) -----
sensory story might consist of a feature map that deterio-
rates unless it is enhanced by attention quickly. (The feature-
map concept was included because most errors in the
Sperling-type procedure are location errors rather than
omissions or substitutions, as shown for example, by Irwin
& Yeomans 1986; and by Mewhort et al. 1981.) Each item
is assumed to be encoded as a separate object (or chunk)
because the rapid presentation did not allow enough time
for items to be grouped. Not all of this information is held
in the focus of attention at one time. Items presumably
must come into the focus of attention before they can be
deliberately recalled. In the example, the activated repre-
sentation comes from sensory memory but, presumably,
long-term memory retrieval also produces an activated rep-
resentation. The main difference is that the latter tends to
have fewer sensory features and more semantic features
than activated memory originating in sensory memory.
Given these assumptions, two loci for the limit in capac-
ity then can be articulated. In the first hypothesis (H1,
shown on the left of Fig. R2), the focus of attention, depicted
by the dashed circle, is limited to four items within the en-
coded set. In the second (H2, on the right), the focus of at-
tention (dashed ellipse) can process all of the items but their
representations interfere with one another. This particular
example shows one plausible deficiency, a bow-shaped re-
call function; items surrounding the center of the display are
too indistinct from one another within the memory repre-
sentation for them all to be recalled. Variants of both of these
alternative views may be viable, given the available evi-
dence.
Let us refer to these hypotheses shown in Figure R2 as
(H1) the limited-focus view, and (H2) the limited-repre-
sentation view. The figure does not capture all theoretical
views but it can serve as an anchor point from which other
views also can be described: for example (H3). It is possi-
ble that there are limits in both the focus of attention and
the representation upon which attention is focused. For ex-
ample, one could propose that the focus of attention can in-
clude only one coherent scene at a time and also that the
scene can include no more than 4 chunks because of limi-
tations in the representation. One could also propose (H4)
that attention is not a unitary concept and that, therefore,
limits apply separately in different domains. This type of
proposal appears to be a variation on H1 in which different
attentional limits operate at the same time in different do-
mains. There are other possible accounts, but these are ad-
equate for the present exposition.
Some commentators’ alternative views (sect. R3.2) will
be classified with respect to these four categories along 
with further specifications as appropriate. The theoreti-
cal views include separate-stores accounts (R3.2.1), unitary
memory accounts (R3.2.2), multiple-attention accounts
(R3.2.3), and storage-plus-processing (neo-Piagetian) ac-
counts (R3.2.4). Biologically oriented explanations will be
presented and some will be classified according to these
categories later on in section R4. Last, a tentative appraisal
of the models will be offered in section R5.
R3.2. Alternative theoretical views
R3.2.1. A separate-stores account. Whereas I suggested
that the focus of attention works with an activated portions
of long-term memory, Baddeley proposed that the focus of
attention works with a number of passive stores. He sug-
gested that my characterization of his model contains some
misinterpretations and pointed out both similarities and
differences between our views. A comparison of our ap-
proaches could be helpful.
At the time that I wrote the section on his view of work-
ing memory, I had not yet heard of his addition of an
episodic buffer (and did not realize until now that he con-
sidered it to be of limited capacity in terms of chunks). With
that addition, I agree that his view and mine are rather sim-
ilar despite different uses of terminology.
In the target article I used the word “arbitrary” to describe
the stores in Baddeley’s model, as he noted; but that term was
misleading. I meant to imply only that the stores are not ex-
haustive; some types of coding do not appear to fit in well.
The contribution of the episodic buffer may change this.
Baddeley (in press) described this buffer briefly. The main
reason for proposing it appears to be that activated elements
of long-term memory do not include the novel combinations
of these elements that occur in new experiences, which
clearly must be preserved if new episodic information is to be
remembered (in both the short and the long term, although
the episodic buffer is for the short term). With this addition,
the view is either a limited-representation view (H2) or, with
another limit in attention thrown in, a version of H3.
Although Baddeley (in press) contrasted this point to my
own view, I actually agree with him. Thus, Cowan (1999, p.
89) stated,
Finally, there is one important qualification of the statement
that working memory contains activated elements of long-term
memory. Most stimulus situations in life include novel combi-
nations of familiar features. In memory the elements are acti-
vated independently, but the particular links between those el-
ements are often novel. The current combination of elements
may, however, be stored as new long-term memory trace.
Similarly, Cowan (1995, p. 101) previously stated,
The information that is in an activated state must include new
information as well as the activated set of previously learned in-
formation. Links between items and/or between each item and
its serial position context must be generated and preserved as
additional activated information. The new links comprise an epi-
sodic record that will become part of long-term memory.
Response/Cowan: The magical number 4
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:1
167
Figure R2.
An illustration of two alternative, cognitive theoreti-
cal hypotheses as to why a capacity limit of about 4 chunks is ob-
tained. The illustration is for a 7-item linear character array in a
whole-report condition like that of Sperling (1960) but the depic-
tion should be similar for any estimate of pure STM capacity limits.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 82 (native) -----
A remaining, subtle difference between views is that I have
envisaged a mechanism different from Baddeley’s to ac-
commodate this information. I have imagined that the
newly combined information immediately forms new paths
in LTM, while at first being in an activated state (and often,
or always, at first in the focus of attention) and then sub-
siding out of activation. The newly combined information
includes, for example, the binding of elements to serial po-
sitions in the current list. In contrast, Baddeley sees the
need for a separate episodic buffer to hold the newly
formed combinations temporarily.
Several questions about the episodic buffer seem to re-
main unanswered at this point. What passive storage sys-
tem would hold, say, imagery for musical timbre (Crowder
1989), which is neither phonological nor spatial in nature?
If the episodic buffer holds such a code, does the code then
have a status comparable to phonological and spatial codes
or is the episodic buffer different (e.g., less passive in na-
ture)? Presumably, one can deposit a musical timbre in
memory either passively, through a sensory stimulus, or ac-
tively, through imagination. A potential concern is that the
system, even as amended, seems to suggest that some
codes (phonological and spatial) are represented in a more
fundamental or enfranchised manner than others (such as
acoustic quality or, say, tactile quality) and there may not
be sufficient empirical support for that particular assump-
tion.
My statement about the focus of attention that “no other
mental faculties are capacity limited” was followed imme-
diately by a qualifier: “although some are limited by time
and susceptibility to interference.” Thus, I use the term “ca-
pacity” in a narrow sense. I agree that this set of processing
limits is probably similar to Baddeley’s (1986) model, except
that chunk limits were not emphasized within that earlier
description of his model.
Baddeley pointed out three apparent differences be-
tween our models, to which I will respond.
1. I was said to regard short-term memory as “simply the
currently activated areas of long-term memory,” which was
said to be inconsistent with neuropsychological data inas-
much as “deficits in long-term memory are found which
have no apparent impact on immediate memory, or on
working memory more generally.” I cannot claim to be an
expert on the neuropsychological data. I would caution,
though, that what appear to be separate short-term stores
could be, instead, separate routes to the activation or use of
information in long-term memory, so that it would be spe-
cific retrieval processes, rather than stores, that are im-
paired or left intact in some patients. Processes versus
stores can be notoriously difficult to distinguish.
2. My limited capacity system was said to be unitary, in
contrast to the “fractionable” central executive of Badde-
ley’s model. Actually, I distinguish between the control as-
pects of attention and the focus of attention (e.g., Cowan
1995), in a manner that seems similar to Baddeley’s con-
ception. His central executive control processes appear
similar to my central executive or control of attention (heav-
ily involving the frontal lobes), whereas his episodic buffer
probably is more closely aligned to what I call the capacity-
limited focus of attention (heavily involving the parietal
lobes and adjoining temporal areas, according to sugges-
tions made by Cowan 1995). For the present target article
I saw no reason to emphasize control processes. Further
fractionation of the central executive may be possible, as
Baddeley believes, but I simply have not dealt with any such
further fractionation.
3. As mentioned, my focus-of-attention mechanism was
said to have storage capacity, whereas in Baddeley’s recent
conception that capacity resides in the episodic buffer. An
important difference between the predictions of these
views appears to be that momentary distraction would
cause items to be lost from a focus of attention (though the
information would stay in an activated form for a while and
therefore could be returned to the focus of attention with-
out much difficulty). In contrast, distraction would not be
expected to have as severe an effect on an episodic buffer.
Clearly, the effect of distraction on a limited-capacity sys-
tem is a fruitful question for future research and may help
to resolve this issue.
R3.2.2. Unitary-memory accounts. At least four commen-
taries (Nairne & Neath; Avons et al.; Rensink; Taatgen)
questioned, in one way or another, a fundamental assump-
tion underlying the present thesis that there is a 4-chunk ca-
pacity: the assumption that there exist separate short- and
long-term memory faculties. This assumption is necessary
if one wishes to hold the belief that long-term memory is
unlimited in capacity, whereas short-term memory is lim-
ited. Instead, the theoretical account would presumably
draw on general principles of memory, such as contextual
cues in retrieval and the distinctiveness of memory repre-
sentations within a retrieval context. As such, it appears to
be a version of H2, a limited-representation view.
Although this type of account seems reasonable, it seems
theoretically implausible that there is not some sort of STM/
LTM distinction. I define STM rather broadly (as the focus
of attention along with other activated elements of LTM;
see Cowan 1988; 1995; 1999). It seems to me that some-
thing of this nature must exist. First, I think that no one
truly believes humans can attend to an unlimited amount of
information at once, and that the concept of an attentional
limit is practically self-evident. Second, the concept of mem-
ory activation probably maps onto the distinction between
information held through synaptic connections (long-term
storage) and the subset of that information that is currently
in an electrochemically active state (short-term storage).
My view of short-term storage does not require that a sep-
arate copy of the information be formed in a different fac-
ulty within the brain, in contrast to a view offered of the ba-
sis of neuropsychological considerations by Baddeley;
though this view was apparently attributed to me by Taat-
gen, probably because of my use of the term STM to refer
to this activation, against the wise counsel of Morra. Even
though most cognitive researchers may accept the idea of a
limited attention and memory activation of some sort, I sup-
pose that many of them do not see these as scientifically
helpful concepts. I would argue, however, that one cannot
apply the general principles without at least an implicit use
of the attention concept to describe capacity limitations
during encoding and retrieval, even if the 4-chunk limit
turns out to be a result of limitations in the focused-upon
memory representation.
The unitary-memory theorists presumably want to use
general mechanisms of memory to account for the 4-chunk
limit. It is worth noting that they have various options open
to them. I can identify basically three: overwriting, pertur-
bation, and contextual distinctiveness. I will try to describe
the potential relevance and boundaries of each of these.
Response/Cowan: The magical number 4
168
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:1
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 83 (native) -----
In an overwriting model (e.g., Nairne 1990; Neath &
Nairne 1995) each stimulus is assumed to be represented
as a bundle of features, and features of each stimulus are
said to overwrite the same features that happened to occur
within previous stimuli in the sequence. (By the way, I
would think that long-term memory is preserved intact,
whereas the overwriting takes place in activated memory, in
which case this type of model would seem to be misclassi-
fied and actually is a dual-store model; but its users typically
see it as a unitary model.) Murray presented an account of
this type. Overwriting models of this sort seem possible for
the description of memory for sequential stimuli but not si-
multaneous arrays. It is not clear to me, in this type of
model, what overwriting is supposed to take place among
simultaneously presented stimuli as in the Luck and Vogel
(1997) task in a manner that depends on the number of
stimuli in the array. Thus, someone with this view might
well be forced to suggest that capacity limits in simultane-
ous arrays arise from a different mechanism than memory
limits in sequential presentations. Then it is not clear if the
limit of about 4 chunks in each realm would be judged the
result of a coincidence or some deeper design principle. In
any case, if one accepts that attention must be focused on
the representation in order for recall to take place, it is a
version of H2 or H3. (The same probably could be said for
perturbation and contextual distinctiveness; all of them fo-
cus on limitations in the representation rather than in at-
tention per se.)
In a perturbation model (e.g., Lee & Estes 1981; Nairne
1991), the items do not obliterate one another in memory
as in the overwriting model. Instead, representations of
items are said to switch serial positions within the memory
representation of a list, a process termed perturbation.
Usually, it appears to be nearby positions that switch. One
could also generalize this model to a spatial array with the
assumption that adjacent spatial positions switch within the
representation. This type of model widens the types of rep-
resentation that can be considered. Whereas an overwrit-
ing model may be inherently committed to some sort of
temporary representation because an overwritten trace is
destroyed, one can talk of perturbations taking place in a
representation without it being destroyed. Nevertheless, if
one holds that long-term memory representations are not
destroyed, it is a bit mystifying how they can be so altered.
Perhaps the perturbations take place at the time of re-
trieval. If so, multiple retrievals from the same list might
tend to show a perturbation during one retrieval that is un-
perturbed in a later retrieval. It is not clear to me how good
the evidence for a perturbation mechanism is because
guessing factors in serial recall can produce patterns of re-
sults that look like perturbation patterns (Anderson & Ma-
tessa 1997). On the other hand, the target article brought
up the possibility that items that had been encoded in the
same attention cohort tend to be confused with one another
(sect. 3.4.3) and that could be the mechanism of perturba-
tion (which would seem to place perturbation in the camp
of H1 rather than H2 or H3, where it otherwise would fall).
Finally, in a contextual distinctiveness model, the sets of
features established during encoding are not necessarily
degraded but there is a failure to distinguish some items (or
chunks) from others within the representation at the time
of retrieval, and therefore an inability to recall all of the
chunks appropriately. This confusion among items can de-
pend on the similarity between the context of encoding and
the context at the time of retrieval. One type of contextual
cue is a timing signal from the time of encoding (Brown et
al. 2000). Contextual distinctiveness is the principle under-
lying the ratio rule that has been used to explain the recency
effect in recall: the principle that the ability to distinguish
two nearby items correctly depends on the ratio of the time
between the items and the time between the last item and
the recall cue. It could account for the 4-chunk limit in se-
quential recall on the basis of diminishing distinctiveness of
items earlier in the list. An analogy could be drawn so that
spatial distinctiveness could govern the ability to tell apart
objects within the visual field. That presumably is the gist
of the finding of He et al. (1997) mentioned by Scholl 
& Xu, showing that with great enough spatial distinctive-
ness one can enumerate numbers above 4 in a visual after-
image; although I have no access to the research report.
The theory of subitizing mentioned by Avons et al., based
on the application of the Weber fraction for a continuous
perception of numbers, may be an example of the distinc-
tiveness principle but based on a perceptual representation
(and sometimes its afterimage) rather than a longer-lasting
memory representation. It involves the comparison of the
perceived quantity with a continuum of quantities encoded
in long term memory. The alternative account of Peterson
and Simon, mentioned by Taatgen, can be described sim-
ilarly except that it is a pattern rather than an amount that
is compared with the contents of long-term memory.
There are other principles of memory but they may not
apply directly to the question of the reason for the chunk
limit in memory. For example, memory can be improved
with long-term recoding in order to form associations be-
tween items and between these items and existing struc-
tures in memory. However, by definition, this type of
process alters the size of chunks rather limiting how many
chunks can be recalled, and so is not relevant here. Now, let
us turn to some of the evidence provided by commentators
taking a unitary-memory view.
Nairne & Neath presented a provocative result. Words
presented in lists for pleasantness ratings were presented
again in alphabetical order, the task being reconstruction of
order in the long term. Lists of an average of 3.75 items
could be ordered correctly 50% of the time. Their conclu-
sion was, reasonably enough, that a limited capacity does
not indicate a separate STM mechanism.
This experiment tells us a great deal about the mecha-
nisms of working memory, which will be addressed in later
sections. However, it does not pose a problem for the pres-
ent theoretical view. As Shiffrin (1973) noted: in a sense,
every deliberate task is a short-term memory task. The mem-
ory representation must be brought to consciousness before
it can be overtly recalled. Thus, it is perfectly possible for the
representation of a list to be retrieved from long-term mem-
ory into an activated state so that the most distinctive aspects
of the representation (limited to about 4 at a time) can be
drawn into the focus of attention and overtly recalled.
If there are separate STM and LTM faculties, the STM
faculty could affect LTM recall not only at the time of re-
trieval as Shiffrin noted, but also at the time of encoding.
With the latter case apparently in mind, Broadbent (1971)
addressed the STM/LTM relationship as follows (pp. 342–
43):
There remain to be considered two points urged by interfer-
ence theory: the existence of effects on short-term memory
from previous long-term experiences, and the continuity which
Response/Cowan: The magical number 4
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:1
169
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 84 (native) -----
seems to exist between memory at long and short periods of
time. The first of these must be admitted straight away, and is
perfectly consistent with a view of short-term memory as due
to recirculation into and out of a decaying buffer storage . . . In
general one must beware of concluding that the appearance in
short-term memory of an effect known from longer-term stud-
ies is evidence for identity of the two situations . . . Only the
success or failure of attempts to show differences between the
two situations is of interest in distinguishing the theories.
Pothos & Juola reinforced the logical case introduced by
Broadbent in the previous quote, that STM tasks and LTM
tasks would not be expected to be process-pure. He noted
that “If language is at least partly learned, linguistic depen-
dency structure should reflect properties of the cognitive
components mediating learning; one such component is
STM.” He showed higher contingencies between words
within a range of 4 words in natural language, with remark-
able convergence among samples from different languages.
Like Nairne & Neath, another commentary, Avons et
al., similarly argued for a continuity of STM and LTM. It is
precisely this sort of thrust that led me to comment in the
target article that the existence of memory decay (i.e., time
limitations in certain kinds of mental representations) still
has not been established after all these years. However, do
Avons et al. actually doubt that the focus of attention can en-
compass only a small amount of information, in contrast to
the vast amount of information in memory? I believe that this
dual process, which was central to the target article, should
be counted as a discontinuity between STM and LTM.
Taatgen suggested that “short-term memory capacity is
not something that can be used to explain the outcomes of
experiments, but is rather something that needs to be ex-
plained itself.” Why shouldn’t the arrow of causality go in
both directions? Just as gravity helps to explain many phe-
nomena (e.g., our ability to stay on earth) and a theory of
space/time attempts to explain gravity, STM capacity may
help to explain many phenomena (e.g., problem-solving
proficiency) and yet itself needs to be explained at a finer-
grained level of analysis.
To sum up, unitary memory accounts argue against a sep-
arate short-term storage facility. However, it is unclear
where they stand on the existence of a limited-capacity at-
tentional mechanism or on some definitions of memory ac-
tivation. (Clearly, even in these unitary views, there is a spe-
cial accessible status for information in memory that has not
been overwritten and that matches currently available re-
trieval cues.) In a dual-storage view, a continuity between
short- and long-term memory procedures is nevertheless to
be expected, on the basis of the involvement of these at-
tentional and activation factors both at the time of long-
term learning and at the time of retrieval (Broadbent 1971;
Shiffrin 1993).
R3.2.3. Multiple-attention accounts. Several commenta-
tors (McKone; Rensink; Scholl & Xu; Woodman et al.)
argued that the attention-based account is not suitable be-
cause attention is not a unitary phenomenon. These are ap-
parently versions of H4 above.
Woodman et al. discussed how visual search occurs on
one time scale and working-memory search on another
time scale, and how visual search can take place without
impairment when working memory is loaded. They also
mentioned research on the separability of response limits.
I believe that their arguments overlook some important
theoretical treatments of the phenomena mentioned. There
was no discussion of the distinction between controlled and
automatic processing in visual search and memory search
(Schneider & Shiffrin 1977; Shiffrin & Schneider 1977).
The experimental procedure in which search was investi-
gated during a memory load (Woodman et al., under re-
view)  was one in which the search targets were the same
from trial to trial and therefore was presumably an auto-
matic search. It would be expected that, in contrast, a con-
trolled visual search would be influenced by working mem-
ory load. There also was no mention of the alternative views
on the reason why a response bottleneck often is obtained
(Cowan 1995; Meyer & Kieras 1997).
Woodman et al. are on to something but not, I believe,
something relevant to the 4-chunk hypothesis. It seems rea-
sonable to believe that mechanisms contributing to auto-
matic visual search and to response bottlenecks occur, re-
spectively, before and after a central attentional process
that is linked to subjective awareness. These input- and
output-related processes still may be termed attention if
one prefers, but their limitations may not be appropriately
defined in terms of a capacity limit. They may be limited in-
stead by other factors, such as the time of processing and
the presence of domain-specific or feature-specific inter-
ference. Therefore, I do not think that they alter the argu-
ments of the target article, although they clearly contribute
a great deal to our overall understanding of information
processing.
Scholl & Xu argued more directly that the phenomena
discussed in the target article dealing with visual informa-
tion processing come from a different source than the phe-
nomena dealing with verbal information processing. For ex-
ample, they said that a general STM-based theory capacity
limits “could not easily account for the strong dependency
of MOT (multi-object tracking) performance on subtle vi-
sual details such as the type of accretion and deletion be-
hind occluders.” I do not understand why this is the case.
The findings appear to indicate that tracking performance
is preserved with a logical disappearance and reappearance
of objects (disappearance behind occluding objects or even
virtual objects) but is impaired when objects inexplicably
disappear and reappear. These studies point to a fascinat-
ing perceptual apparatus that influences the input to a cen-
tral capacity-limited process. If one object disappears and
reappears somewhere else inexplicably, it does not pick up
the same object identity. However, the capacity limit still
could reside in a central attentional faculty fed by this per-
ceptual process, not in a separate visual attention mecha-
nism per se. The ability to “track 4 targets in the MOT task
and simultaneously acquire and hold 4 verbally-presented
items in STM” was used as an argument against a central
capacity limit inasmuch as attention-switching is impossible
in this procedure. However, in adults, an articulatory loop
(Baddeley 1986) would be able to hold 4 items almost ef-
fortlessly, leaving the attentional mechanism free for track-
ing. If verbal memory were loaded to capacity or the pro-
cedure were used in children old enough to rehearse, but
not effortlessly (Guttentag 1984), I would predict more in-
terference between tasks.
The other arguments also seem questionable. Arguments
based on the subitizing procedure are open to question
given the uncertainly as to the cause of that phenomenon,
acknowledged above (sects. R2.3.3 and R3.2.2), although it
may well be that common principles underlie subitizing and
Response/Cowan: The magical number 4
170
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:1
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 85 (native) -----
memory limits (much as Newton’s inverse-square law ap-
plies not only to gravity, but also to other phenomena such
as light intensity). If subitizing limits come from limits in
long-term recognition, it stands to reason that uncrowded
sets of objects could be more likely to be recognized than
crowded sets. Arguments based on neurological dissocia-
tions are open to question because a deficit in one area (e.g.,
verbal STM) with a normal performance in another area
(e.g., subitizing) could be explained on the basis of a defect
in a perceptual or representational process feeding into the
central attentional faculty, rather than a fractionation of the
attentional faculty per se. The points raised by Scholl and
Xu suggest some important possibilities for future research
to resolve these issues.
Some points make by McKone and Rensink can be
thought of similarly. McKone noted that “Clear theoretical
reasons exist for limits on the number of items that can be
simultaneously active within a single domain, since leftover
activation from previous items will interfere with identifi-
cation of the currently-presented item.” Here one must dis-
tinguish between similarity-dependent interference, on
one hand, and a true capacity limit, on the other hand. Both
may well occur. Theoretically at least, the difference would
be that a capacity limit depends on the number of chunks
in memory at the same time, rather than specific similari-
ties in the features of those chunks; whereas interference
depends on similarity rather than number per se. Rensink
pointed to evidence for “at least 10 items” probably “re-
sulting from the grouping of items of similar contrast sign.”
No doubt such a visual mechanism (one that initially breaks
the world into parts) occurs, but it is presumed to be
a preattentive mechanism that feeds into the capacity-
limited process. This type of distinction is reminiscent of
the distinction (Norman & Bobrow 1975) between data-
limited processes, such as specific processes in visual per-
ception, and resource-limited processing, such as central
attention, a distinction that seems very important. Again, I
maintain that data-limited processes are affected by decay
and interference factors but are not truly capacity-limited,
unlike resource-limited processes. Nevertheless, I am sym-
pathetic to Rensink’s conclusion that “Given that there are
no compelling a priori grounds which can be appealed to,
this matter will have to be settled by experiment.”
R3.2.4. Storage-plus-processing accounts. Three of the
commentaries are from a neo-Piagetian perspective (Hal-
ford et al.; Morra; Pascual-Leone). What all of these ac-
counts have in common is that they suggest that processes
take up capacity. The processing accounts all incorporate
the need for storage in one way or another but that is a ba-
sis of controversy. The accounts nevertheless all appear to
be varieties of H1, suggesting that a central attentional limit
explains the processing and storage limitations. Halford et
al. focus on processes, suggesting that “humans are limited
to relating four entities,” (see also Davis), whereas Morra
and Pascual-Leone consider storage and processing sepa-
rately and suggest that the total capacity is therefore 7
chunks (some taken up by processing schemes), not 4. Iron-
ically, the latter two theorists (like Raffone et al.) appear
to fall into my camp in considering storage and processing
to share a common resource, as opposed to the suggestion
by Halford et al. that processing limits cannot be “sub-
sumed under storage limits.” Yet, it is Halford et al. who
come up with a capacity estimate in keeping with my result.
The reason that I still do not agree with the limit of 7
is that the views leading to that estimate by Morra and
Pascual-Leone do not appear to allow that processes can
become automatized and thereafter cease to take up ca-
pacity. The research combining processing with storage
loads (reviewed, for example, by Baddeley 1986) does not
seem to suggest that there is a strong tradeoff between the
two. In many studies, a moderate storage load proves to
have minimal effects on concurrent processing. A full stor-
age load has notable effects on processing but, in that situ-
ation, one can argue that the central executive has become
involved in special processes (various types of complex,
attention-demanding rehearsal) in order to manage the full
storage load. Given the disagreement even among the neo-
Piagetians, it is clear that more empirical work is needed to
determine the relation between processing and storage. I
believe that the procedures used in the target article to in-
dicate a storage limit of 4 chunks are procedures in which
everything except storage tends to become automatized
and takes up little capacity.
R4. Biologically oriented accounts 
of the 4-chunk limit
The present section complements the previous one by ex-
amining commentaries describing theory and evidence rel-
evant to the neurobiological underpinnings of the capacity
limit. These include psychophysiological evidence (sect.
R4.1), defined broadly to include electrophysiology and
neuroimaging; evidence from individual and group differ-
ences in humans (sect. R4.2); and evidence from animal be-
havior (sect. R4.3), which is relevant to evolutionary con-
siderations. Following these topics I will discuss several
neurobiological models of capacity that were offered by
commentators (sect. R4.4) and will seek clarification of the
most useful relations between theoretical models and em-
pirical evidence, and between neurobiology and behavior,
in understanding capacity limit (sect. R4.5).
R4.1. Psychophysiological evidence
The evidence that was presented offers some important op-
portunities for further research in the near future. Rypma
& Gabrieli showed that the brain response to one or three
items is far less than the brain response to six items. This
finding may offer the opportunity to use the neuroimaging
to help solve the difficult problem of how to define chunks,
discussed in section R2.2. For example, if one presents a
sequence such as “F-B-I-C-I-A,” will the brain metabo-
lism look like two simple items (assuming that the subjects
form two higher-order chunks) or like six? If it looks like
six, could it be made to look like two by presenting pre-
exposures of the acronyms? If the method does not match
behavioral results, such a discrepancy could suggest that
there are hidden processes that need to be added to the
cognitive model. This type of research could help to answer
Tiitinen’s plea for research to address the chunking issue.
Gratton et al. considered a distributed capacity hypoth-
esis in which a limit of about 4 chunks would result from a
limit of about 2 in each hemisphere. They showed interest-
ing evidence that reaction times were about the same when
five items were distributed to the two hemispheres 2–3 or
1–4, but not when all five items were presented to one hemi-
Response/Cowan: The magical number 4
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:1
171
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 86 (native) -----
sphere. It would seem, though, that a distributed capacity
model should predict a smoother transition between the two
conditions. The result that was obtained may be more con-
sistent with a model in which groupings play a role. Groups
of 1 to 4 items can be chunked together. Perhaps two such
chunks can be accessed and searched in parallel; quickly,
given that they are small sets. When all 5 items occur in one
location, it may be more difficult to separate them into sub-
groups, in which case a slower search of set size 5 has to be
used. This hypothesis could be investigated by dividing the
stimuli into two groups above and below fixation, rather
than to the left and right of fixation. The distributed mem-
ory model should predict no difference between distribu-
tion conditions, whereas a grouping account predicts a dif-
ference comparable to what was obtained in Gratton et al.’s
Figure 1. This, too, is a promising area for research.
Jensen & Lisman brought up several new physiologi-
cal findings related to the hypothesis of Lisman and Idiart
(1995) that nested cycles of oscillation in the brain can ac-
count for the capacity limit. These, too, show promise al-
though, sooner or later, a tighter linkage between physio-
logical and behavioral results will be needed (as discussed
in sect. R4.5). For example, how can the physiological ev-
idence for changes in oscillation rates in the brain be rec-
onciled, if necessary, with behavioral evidence favoring a
parallel rather than serial memory-search process, as dis-
cussed in section R2.3.3? It is helpful that several investi-
gators have begun to find behavioral evidence of changes
in stimulus presentation rates that can be closely linked to
the physiological data on the special role of the 40-Hz
rhythm in humans; not only Burle and Bonnet (2000), as
brought up by Jensen and Lisman, but also Elliott and
Müller (1998; 2000). Clearly, though, it will be a while be-
fore we know what is happening in these innovative new
procedures.
R4.2. Evidence from individual and group 
differences in humans
As discussed in the target article (e.g., sect. 3.1.3), studies
of individual and group differences can contribute to our
understanding of the mechanisms underlying capacity lim-
its. Insofar as the individual and group differences in ca-
pacity can be attributed to biological sources, they have the
potential to yield information about relevant biological pro-
cesses. Oades & Jemel considered the possibility that the
capacity limit may be different in individuals with schizo-
phrenia. It is a good point that pathological populations are
a likely source of information about the reason for capacity
limits. Oades and Jemel brought up an interesting question.
Given that schizophrenics are renowned for loose associa-
tions, why do they not chunk items more than normal indi-
viduals and therefore show a supernormal STM? I think
that the answer must be that the loose associations are non-
selective and are based on characteristics of the stimuli that
are typically irrelevant for performance. Perhaps if those
typically irrelevant associations were make relevant, schiz-
ophrenics would excel. Oades and Jemel stated that schiz-
ophrenics excel on global processing. They might excel also
if tested on, say, incidental occurrences of rhymes among
stimuli to be memorized on a semantic, rather than a
phonological, basis. In this case, their loose associations
could result in the recoding of relevant stimuli into fewer
chunks. Pure capacity limits are an important area in which
to look for subnormality in schizophrenics given that they
do not differ in some of the temporal aspects of STM be-
havior. In particular, they are abnormal in the precision of
auditory encoding, but not in auditory recognition speed or
auditory memory duration when the overall performance
levels are equated with normal individuals (Javitt et al.
1997; March 1999).
It is not only subnormal individuals who are potentially
instructive. As discussed in section R2.3.3, Wilding illus-
trated that capacity limits of about 4 items emerge in the
form of the number of items clustered together, within spe-
cial subjects whose memory for digits is supernormal. The
pattern is similar to individuals who have trained them-
selves to have a supernormal digit span, discussed by Erics-
son & Kirk. In both cases, there are anomalies that the au-
thors would want to attribute to some mechanism other
than a capacity limited to 4 chunks of information, though
in both cases the predominant finding is consistent with the
4-chunk hypothesis. If capacity limits are eventually to be
understood well, these anomalies in the results must be un-
derstood; but it still seems to me that the vast preponder-
ance of evidence is favorable to the 4-chunk hypothesis. We
all would agree that these individuals’ unusual abilities can-
not be attributed to a larger-than-normal memory capacity,
and therefore that supernormal performance depends
more on training than on biology. Yet, it remains to be de-
termined if any normal individual could learn to accomplish
these mnemonic feats. Given that pure STM capacity mea-
sures have not been applied, we cannot rule out the possi-
bility that there is a minimum level of capacity that an indi-
vidual must have before being capable of becoming a
mnemonist. It must be difficult to distinguish between raw
ability and motivation, with some individuals falling by the
way instead of becoming experts because of insufficient
motivation or inadequate ability.
Hecht & Shackelford remarked upon the possible role
of pure STM capacity limits for applied areas of cognitive
development, including mathematics. Of course, this gen-
eral approach is consistent with the neo-Piagetian ap-
proaches of Halford et al., Morra, and Pascual-Leone.
The assumption is that biological changes mediate a growth
of capacity developmentally. Hecht and Shackelford ap-
pealed to Geary’s (1993; 1995) distinction between biolog-
ically primary skills, which come relatively easily in devel-
opment (e.g., natural language learning; math in the
subitizing range), and secondary skills which are much
newer in the evolution of the human species and prove dif-
ficult for many children (e.g., learning to read; math in the
counting range). According to Geary’s theory, the secondary
skills can be learned through a “co-opting” process in which
primary skills are used to bootstrap the secondary ones.
Hecht and Shackelford wrote that “A limited pure short-
term memory capacity, shaped by evolutionary forces, may
currently be ‘co-opted’ for many contemporary tasks such
as biologically secondary mathematical problem solving
skills.” If this is the case, measures of pure STM capacity
could be important in understanding individual differences
in applied areas. One reason why these measures could
serve a different purpose from more complex measures of
working memory (e.g., Daneman & Carpenter 1980; Dane-
man & Merikle 1996) is that the latter can incorporate many
processes (item storage, sentence or task information pro-
cessing, and probably rehearsal) and therefore do not make
it clear which basic abilities underlie the correlation of
Response/Cowan: The magical number 4
172
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:1
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 87 (native) -----
working memory with practical skills. Measures of pure
STM capacity might be questioned on similar grounds but
are at least more narrowly focused than complex measures
of working memory capacity.
R4.3. Evidence from animal behavior
Several interesting biological questions can be addressed
through comparisons of animals to humans. First, in a pure
STM capacity measure, if capacity is linked to uniquely hu-
man abilities, there should be a substantial advantage for
humans. The absence of any advantage for humans would
indicate that capacity is biologically more fundamental.
Second, in a compound STM measure, if performance de-
pends on skills unique to humans, there should again be a
substantial advantage for humans. (It is reasonable to as-
sume, for example, that verbal rehearsal strategies are
unique to humans and assist their performance.) The ab-
sence of any advantage for humans would suggest that any
strategies unique to humans are not assisting performance.
Kawai & Matsuzawa described the interesting research
from their recent paper in Nature, implementing a type of
memory span task in a numerically trained chimpanzee, in
which digits appeared in a random array about the com-
puter screen and were to be selected by the chimp in nu-
merical order, the digits’ identities being covered by masks
on the screen after the first response was made. A reason-
able argument was made that the chimps remembered 5
digits 65% of the time. (The first digit in the sequence of 5
could have been identified visually, whereas the remaining
digits were masked; but the response lag was relatively long
before the first digit and was shorter between digits, sug-
gesting that the first digit was part of the memorized set.)
Five adult human comparison subjects were run. Their pro-
portions correct were not reported in the article but their
mean accuracy in the same condition as the chimpanzee
was 97% with 4 numbers, 92% with 5 numbers, and 83%
with 6 numbers (Kawai, personal communication, August,
2000). This suggests that adult human spans are about 2
items higher than the chimpanzee.
Arguments could be found for this task being either a
pure STM capacity measure or a compound STM measure.
I suspect the latter. The stimuli appeared in a simultaneous
spatial array on the computer screen, as in many pure STM
capacity measures. In this case, however, the presentation
time was not short and was determined by the subject. The
stimuli lent themselves to coding as a coherent series in a
particular spatial configurations, and therefore might not
have been too taxing to bring from sensory memory into a
categorically coded form. When humans participated in a
second condition in which the numbers were masked after
a fixed 750 msec period from the beginning of each trial,
their scores were much more similar to those of the chim-
panzee (Kawai, personal communication, August, 2000).
Attention to the stimuli at the time of their presentation 
apparently can assist performance, not only in humans
through verbal rehearsal but also through a mechanism
available to chimpanzees. (This should be clear also from
the benefit of attention during presentation in first-grade
children who should be a bit young for strategic rehearsal
[Cowan et al. 1999].) Thus, the study does not provide an
estimate of the chimpanzee’s pure-capacity limit.
One might speculate that if the pure limit in chim-
panzees is about half of the compound estimate, as is typi-
cal in humans, chimpanzees might have a pure capacity of
about 2.5 chunks on the average. That would make them
similar to the first-grade children studied by Cowan et al.
(1999) in an unattended-speech procedure, consistent with
the claim of Kawai and Matsuzawa (2000) that their chim-
panzee’s performance is “the same as (or even more than)
preschool children.” Alternatively, it is possible that adult
chimpanzees have a pure capacity limit of about 4 chunks,
similar to humans, and that the absence of sophisticated
strategies means that there is less of a difference between
pure and compound limits than there is in humans. Conse-
quently, this study raises important questions that can only
be answered in future research.
Todt presented evidence that songbirds repeat songs in
packages of about 4 chirps, except when the songs are
spaced out over time, in which case performance is reduced
below that chunk size. It is unclear if the distinction be-
tween pure and compound capacity estimates is a mean-
ingful one in songbirds or not. If one can assume that this
is a pure capacity estimate in the songbirds, it suggests that
the basic capacity limit is a fundamental property of effi-
cient brains and not a signature of higher human intellect.
It would then be a faculty that is, in the terminology of
Geary (1993; 1995), “co-opted” for human intelligence;
useful for many things including holding information in
mind while processing it in a sophisticated manner. The
similarity between evidence on the burst size in songbirds
and the cluster size in human recall (e.g., sects. 3.4.1 and
3.4.2) is striking. The mystery is only how it could come
about that estimates of capacity in human children (e.g.,
Cowan et al. 1999) fall below estimates in songbirds. That
could be the result of an inappropriate comparison between
different methods. Alternatively, it could be an authentic
phenomenon, analogous to the observation that motor de-
velopment is in many ways more advanced in adult animals
than in immature humans.
R4.4. Neurophysiological models of capacity
Three commentaries briefly described explicit neurophysi-
ological models that can predict capacity limits of about 4
chunks (Jensen & Lisman; Raffone et al.; Usher et al.).
Probably the most important lesson here is that there are
multiple ways to accomplish the same thing. I must admit
straight off that I do not profess expertise in the workings
of these models, severely limiting how much I can say about
them.
Jensen & Lisman elaborated upon the type of oscilla-
tory model that was described by Lisman and Idiart (1995)
and discussed in the target article (sect. 4.1.2). Rather than
adhering strictly to Miller’s magical number, they state on
the basis of recent empirical evidence constraining their
modeling parameters, that the upper limit of STM is about
5 to 6 items. My main question regarding this model is how
absolutely it depends upon the memory search process be-
ing serial in nature. The model is of obvious heuristic value
but ultimately it will be important to see how it could, for ex-
ample, produce recency advantages within search, and how
plausible the additional necessary assumptions would be.
Raffone et al. presented a model that appears to be less
wedded to the notion of a serial search process. In their
model, “neural assemblies in high-level visual areas, coding
unrelated features or objects, exert mutual inhibitory or de-
synchronizing actions.” By stating that “competition and
Response/Cowan: The magical number 4
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:1
173
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 88 (native) -----
desynchronizing actions between neural assemblies coding
for unrelated features are stronger within than between
specific representational domains,” they appeared to be ad-
mitting both representation-specific and general types of
limitations (Hypothesis H3 above). One important ques-
tions about this model is what the role of attention may be
(for the general limitations). The conclusion stated in the
commentary was that “only four ‘magical’ neural assemblies
can dominate the brain at any given time, saving other
domain-specific active neural representations through se-
lective synchronization.” Within this scheme, what happens
to unattended information that is active in memory? My
own view (e.g., Cowan 1999) has been that the limit of four
neural assemblies applies only to attended information and
that, outside of attention, numerous other features can re-
main active in memory (although not fully “assembled” like
the attended chunks). It is not clear if this model fully
agrees with my view or not and, if not, whose conception is
correct.
Last, Usher et al. similarly presented a mode designed
to overcome shortcomings of the Lisman and Idiart (1995)
model. It seems similar to the model of Raffone et al., at
least in its orientation and intent (with a reliance on the con-
cept of competition between neural networks). An impres-
sive aspect of this model is that it presents another possi-
bility that did not emerge from my analysis of the behavioral
literature. It was stated that an inhibition parameter “is set
high when selection is required and moderate when multi-
ple items need to be maintained together, as in immediate
recall tasks.” Yet, the capacity of the system is limited to 3–
5 items and “cannot increase its capacity beyond this range
by diminishing the inhibition parameter even further.” The
limit was rationalized by the observation that one cannot al-
low less representational overlap (in order to increase the
limit) because “representational overlap is essential for
computations that perform generalization.” This model ap-
pears to be a version of H1 above (a single attentional limit),
but with a flexible attentional focus ranging from 1 to 5
chunks depending on the intensity of focus. What I charac-
terized as the singular coherent scene could be the result of
a singular focus of attention when it is in the intensely fo-
cused mode. As evidence continues to accrue, it should
have implications for which model is most promising. The
model of Usher et al. appears to be a version of H3 because
the capacity depends partly on a concept intrinsic to the
memory representations (the amount of overlap) and partly
on a concept related to attention (level of inhibition). How-
ever, it is an interactive concept because neither the repre-
sentation alone nor the level of inhibition alone state a ca-
pacity; that is stated by the interaction of these parameters.
Such a model might be usefully tested in relation to pa-
tients with frontal lobe damage. According to a reasonable
extension of the model, the ability to control the focus of at-
tention might be altered (e.g., making a narrow focus im-
possible) while the maximal capacity limit (3–5 chunks)
would not necessarily be affected, depending as it does on
the degree of representational overlap.
Several other commentators (Milner; Roelfsema &
Lamme; Tiitinen) did not fully present models of capac-
ity limits, but used modeling concepts to challenge or query
aspects of the present approach. Milner asked, “how much
does it further our knowledge to be told that the span is lim-
ited because the focus of attention can hold only about 4
items at a time?” I have tried to show that although this the-
oretical statement may not be right, it does have empirical
consequences that differ from other theoretical concep-
tions (as shown in Fig. R2 and accompanying text). Milner
also objected that “the neural substrate of attention is not a
unitary system that can be pointed like a spotlight or a cam-
era, much less a static process into which peripatetic images
can be directed. Apparently it must be a highly organized
system of centrifugal paths, every bit as specific as the cen-
tripetal sensory paths that it modulates.” I tend to agree but
would urge caution when mixing levels of analysis. A cen-
tral circle for the focus of attention in my cognitive model
(Cowan 1988; 1995) was not intended to imply geographic
unity of the focus of attention in the brain. It instead was
meant, at most, to refer to a more abstract kind of unity,
where all elements in the focus of attention adhere to a
common theme (i.e., scene coherence). Moreover, the uni-
tary nature of the representation of activated information
(surrounding the focus of attention) is no more than an
oversimplification in the drawing, inasmuch as the theoret-
ical view places or limits on requirement of coherence on
what can be activated at any moment.
Roelfsema & Lamme concluded that, “the clarity with
which the psychophysical data point to the number four is
not matched by a similarly clear limit imposed by physio-
logical mechanisms.” That sort of consideration may per-
haps provide a motivation to increase the amount of com-
plexity in neural modeling of the capacity limit, as Raffone
et al. and Usher et al. did. It also may be worth noting the
obvious point that, in attempting to find the correspon-
dence between physiology and behavior, both of them have
to be examined very carefully. Roelfsema & Lamme distin-
guished between “base groupings” (combinations of simple
features) and “incremental groupings” (combinations of
more abstract features) and proposed that only incremen-
tal groupings are capacity-limited, whereas base groupings
“are rapidly available” with “no clear limit on the number
of base groupings that can be computed in parallel during
stimulus presentation.” For example, it was stated that “the
activation of a neuron tuned to, for example, red and verti-
cal provides a base grouping between these features.” This
distinction seems to leave open a question about how an in-
dividual would find a red vertical line among red horizon-
tal lines and blue vertical lines. We know that this requires
a slow, capacity-limited search process (Treisman & Gelade
1980) but it is unclear if Roelfsema & Lamme’s conception
classifies this as a situation handled by base or incremental
groupings.
Tiitinen asked what kind of research could best link neu-
rophysiology to behavior. He presented some objections
to the idea that 40-Hz oscillations per se must mediate a
limited-capacity store, given that these oscillations occur in
an attenuated form even in control conditions. I think that
part of the answer to this challenge is to proceed with re-
search examining behavioral consequences of neurophysi-
ological concepts such as 40-Hz oscillations (already begun
by Burle & Bonnet 2000; Elliott & Müller 1998; 2000). An-
other part is to conduct neurobiological research to capture
patterns that have been observed only behaviorally. An ex-
ample is the finding of Rypma & Gabrieli that the brain
reaction is much different for 1 or 3 items versus 6 items,
and the suggestion of using that finding to explore the way
in which items are chunked together. All of this brings up
another issue, which is what neurobiology and behavior,
and what evidence and models, have to offer one another.
Response/Cowan: The magical number 4
174
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:1
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 89 (native) -----
R4.5. Relation between evidence and models 
in cognition and neurobiology
We have seen that there is considerable ongoing work re-
lated to capacity limits. It is of both an empirical and a
theoretical nature, and is occurring in both cognitive and
neurobiological fields. (Cognitive research on popula-
tions other than adult humans can be considered in this
context to encroach upon neurobiological topics, inasmuch
as the differences in brain structure between types of in-
telligent organism should count as neurobiological quasi-
manipulations.) In this section, I would like to offer a few
musings about where all of this research may lead, rather
than leaving everything hanging. It is important to consider
the logical relations between four types of research en-
deavor: (1) empirical research on cognition; (2) empirical
research on neurobiology; (3) theoretical modeling of cog-
nition; and (4) theoretical modeling of neurobiology. If the
aim is to account for a cognitive phenomenon, the pure
STM capacity limit, the relation between these endeavors
is in some cases asymmetrical.
Some cognitive theory is necessary even to observe a cog-
nitive generalization. Thus, the observation that only 4
chunks can be held in working memory could be made only
with some assumptions about what counts as a chunk. How-
ever, the simplicity of the answer that resulted lends some
support to those theoretical assumptions by allowing the
detection of a simple pattern in the data (consistent with
Occam’s razor). To go further, a theory of capacity must be
stated in cognitive terms so that the elements in the theory
lead to predictions in cognitive terms. Figure R2 summa-
rizes some attempts along those lines and necessarily intro-
duces abstract concepts (active memory representations; an
attentional focus) that can be directly related to behavior.
Neurobiological research is of two types. In some cir-
cumstances, manipulations of neurobiological factors cause
cognitive behavioral differences, and a causal link can be
drawn. We have not reviewed any evidence of exactly that
type but it is possible in the future. For example, it is rea-
sonable to believe that alcohol may affect working memory
by altering the capacity of attention (see Steele & Josephs
1990). However, a neurobiological manipulation has one
limitation that is the same as for a cognitive manipulation:
in either case, the manipulation may not be very specific in
its effect. Any manipulation, biological or behavioral in na-
ture, that affects capacity only by affecting every single cog-
nitive function probably reveals little about the mechanism;
more specific effects are more instructive. On the other
hand, a large neurobiological change that results in little
change in capacity limits is potentially very instructive. For
example, if it turns out that lower animals have a capacity
limit that is the same as in adult humans (see Todt), that
would show a dissociation between the capacity limit and
higher cognitive functions. It would suggest, as various
commentators have proposed, that the capacity limit may
reflect the optimization of certain quantities, such as the
necessary degree of overlap between the neural represen-
tations of different concepts (Usher et al.).
The other basic kind of neurobiological research, includ-
ing electrophysiological recording and neuroimaging, is es-
sentially correlative in nature rather than manipulative (if
carried out only on normal adult humans to ascertain group
means). Thus, one tries to observe correlations between
certain patterns of behaviors and patterns of brain re-
sponse. This type of research can help in several ways. If it
produces brain response patterns that are in accord with
cognitive theory (e.g., the different responses for arrays of
sub- versus supra-capacity numbers of items; see Rypma
& Gabrieli), that then strengthens the cognitive conclu-
sions by showing an orderly and potentially interpretable
pattern across levels of analysis.
Any discrepancy between cognitive and neurobiological
results, indicates that something unexpected may be going
on behind the scenes. In that case, however, the discrep-
ancy may be difficult to interpret without the help of neu-
robiological theory. For example, the complaint of Roelf-
sema & Lamme that neural populations do not tend to
form the oscillatory patterns needed for a model such as
that of Lisman and Idiart (1995) may provide a motivation
to look for more complex theories, such as those of Raffone
et al. and Usher et al.
Finally, neurobiological theory, spurred on by neurobio-
logical as well as cognitive evidence, can contribute to cog-
nitive theory. It can do this by serving as the implementa-
tion of the cognitive theory at a finer-grained lever of
analysis (Marr 1982). It also can help by leading to possi-
bilities that otherwise would not have occurred to the cog-
nitive investigators. For example, the use of representa-
tional overlap and inhibition concepts (Usher et al.) led to
the understanding that the same focus of attention could be
limited to as few as one chunk or as many at three to five,
depending on the setting of an inhibition parameter.
R5. Appraisal of models
In this final section I will briefly try to extract, from the im-
mense amount of information provided by the commenta-
tors, an improved understanding of the basis of capacity
limits. I will do this with respect to the models illustrated in
Figure R2 and accompanying text.
The main question I will address is whether the 3- to 5-
chunk capacity limit in adult humans is likely to be caused
by the nature of focus of attention (H1), the nature of mem-
ory representations (H2), or both (H3). It seems obvious
from the literature that was reviewed in the target article
that attention exists and that performance can be limited
similarly either by removing attention or by limiting its ef-
fects (e.g., through articulatory suppression or presentation
of a complex array of items); so I will not entertain H4. The
question for me is just where the pure STM capacity limit
comes from.
Several types of study that do not yet exist seem rather
crucial (and, indeed, several laboratories are working on
them). First, we need studies using two concurrent pure-
capacity tasks, in which memory loads in very different do-
mains are presented concurrently to determine if the 4-
chunk limit is shared across domains or is reproduced intact
within each domain even in this dual-task situation. We
have plenty of dual-task experiments but most have not at-
tempted to use tasks that estimate pure STM capacity. Sec-
ond, we need studies of the correlations of pure STM ca-
pacity estimates across domains.
Lacking this evidence, I will still offer an opinion because
anyone who has followed this extensive controversy has
earned some tentative bottom line. I lean toward H1, in
which the focus of attention is limited in capacity, essen-
tially because we have seen that very different underlying
Response/Cowan: The magical number 4
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:1
175
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 90 (native) -----
forms of memory representation yield similar capacity esti-
mates. For example, consider two situations that may be
best suited to estimate capacity: those in which only one de-
cision has had to be made per trial and there has been no
interference from previous outputs (e.g., Cowan et al. un-
published, discussed in sect. R2.3.1; Luck & Vogel 1997).
The unattended-speech research shows a bow-shaped ser-
ial position function, whereas running memory span shows
a monotonic increasing function across the tested serial po-
sitions; and the task of Luck and Vogel is based on spatial
arrays of colors represented simultaneously. Despite such
representational differences, a common capacity limit seems
to apply, and it requires explanation.
The best suggestion I can offer is that aspects of the mem-
ory representation determine what chunks will be most
prominent (relative to the available retrieval context),
whereas limits in the focus of attention determine how many
of the most prominent chunks in the representation can be
attended at once. Thus, for example, in memory for unat-
tended speech, about four prominent items typically would
be picked off from the two ends of the list together;
whereas, in running span, about four prominent items typ-
ically would be picked off from the recency portion alone.
We do not know which portions of a spatial array are most
prominent in memory but there probably are especially
prominent areas, perhaps those nearest the fovea. Despite
the representational diversity, a common capacity limit
seems to apply.
Some concepts suggested by commentaries may lead to
minor modifications in this H1 account. Suppose Usher et
al.’s concept of representational overlap does not apply for
activated representations in general, but only for a special
type of representation that includes just recently-attended
items. It may be within that type of representation only that
representational overlap limits the capacity to 3 to 5 chunks.
If so, this could be counted either as a limit in the focus of
attention per se (H1), or as a special representational limit
(H2). Similarly, suppose the chunk limit occurs only in a
representation corresponding to Baddeley’s episodic buf-
fer, and not in the simpler passive stores, and suppose this
episodic buffer receives input only from the focus of atten-
tion. If so, it is difficult to know exactly how to apply the the-
oretical distinction shown in Figure R2. As just mentioned,
I prefer to think that the situation best matches H1. While
the present theoretical approach cannot yet indicate exactly
the right model, it can provide a more detailed vision of the
limited-capacity process than before, with the benefit of an
extraordinarily thoughtful set of commentaries.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This project was supported by NICHD Grant R01 21338. I thank
Jeffrey Rouder for helpful comments. Address correspondence to
Nelson Cowan, Department of Psychology, University of Mis-
souri, 210 McAlester Hall, Columbia, MO 65211. E-mail:
cowanN@Missouri.edu.
References
Letters “a” and “r” appearing before authors’ initials refer to target article
and response, respectively.
Adams, D. (1985) The hitch-hiker’s guide to the galaxy: The original radio scripts.
Pan Books.
[JNT]
Allport, D. A. (1968) Phenomenal simultaneity and the perceptual moment
hypothesis. British Journal of Psychology 59:395–406.
[rNC]
(1987) Selection-for-action: Some behavioural and neurophysiological
considerations of attention and action. In: Perspectives on perception and
action, ed. H. Heuer & A. F. Sanders. Erlbaum.
[TS]
Amit, D. J. (1995) The Hebbian paradigm reintegrated: Local reverberations as
internal representations. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 18:615–57.
[AR]
Anderson, J. R. (1983) The architecture of cognition. Harvard University Press.
[SM]
Anderson, J. R. & Lebiere, C. (1998) The atomic components of thought. Erlbaum.
[NAT]
Anderson, J. R. & Matessa, M. (1997) A production system theory of serial
memory. Psychological Review 104:728–48.
[aNC, SM, rNC]
Anderson, R. B., Tweney, R. D., Rivardo, M. & Duncan, S. (1997) Need
probability affects retention: A direct demonstration. Memory and Cognition
25:867–72.
[PM]
Ashby, F. G., Tien, J.-Y. & Balikrishnan, J. D. (1993) Response time distributions in
memory scanning. Journal of Mathematical Psychology 37:526–55.
[rNC]
Atkinson, J., Campbell, F. W. & Francis, M. R. (1976a) The magic number 4 6 0:
A new look at visual numerosity. Perception 5:327–34.
[aNC, BJS]
Atkinson, J., Francis, M. R. & Campbell, F. W. (1976b) The dependence of the
visual numerosity limit on orientation, colour, and grouping of the stimulus.
Perception 5:335–42.
[aNC]
Atkinson, R. C. & Shiffrin, R. M. (1968) Human memory: A proposed system and
its control processes. In: The psychology of learning and motivation: Advances
in research and theory, vol. 2, ed. K. W. Spence & J. T. Spence. Academic
Press.
[aNC, rNC]
Avons, S. E., Wright, K. L. & Pammer, K. (1994) The word-length effect in probed
and serial recall. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology 47A:207–31.
[aNC]
Baars, B. J. (1988) A cognitive theory of consciousness. Cambridge University
Press.
[aNC, BJB, rNC]
(1993) How does a serial, integrated and very limited stream of consciousness
emerge from a nervous system that is mostly unconscious, distributed, parallel
and of enormous capacity? Theoretical and Experimental Studies of
Consciousness, Ciba Foundation Symposium 174:282–303.
[BJB]
(1997) In the theater of consciousness: The workspace of the mind. Oxford
University Press.
[BJB]
(1998) Metaphors of consciousness and attention in the brain. Trends in
Neurosciences 21:58–62.
[BJB]
Baars, B. J. & Newman, J., ed. (in press) Essential sources in the scientific study of
consciousness. MIT Press/Bradford Books.
[BJB]
Bachelder, B. L. (1978) Span Theory: Laboratory and classroom applications.
Paper presented at the Eleventh Annual Gatlinburg Conference on Research
in Mental Retardation, Gatlinburg, TN.
[BLB]
(2000) The magical number seven: What did Miller really prove? (submitted).
[BLB]
Bachelder, B. L. & Denny, M. R. (1977a) A theory of intelligence: I. Span and the
complexity of stimulus control. Intelligence 1:127–50.
[BLB]
(1977b) A theory of intelligence: II The role of span in a variety of intellectual
tasks. Intelligence 1:237–56.
[BLB]
Baddeley, A. D. (1986) Working memory. Clarendon Press.
[aNC, ADB, SG, SM,
BR, BJS, TS, rNC]
(1993) Visual and verbal subsystems of working memory. Current Biology
3:563–65.
[BJB]
(1996) Exploring the central executive. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology 49A:5–28.
[ADB]
(2000) The episodic buffer: A new component for working memory? Trends in
Cognitive Sciences 4:417–23.
[ADB]
(in press) Levels of working memory. In: Perspectives on human memory and
cognitive aging: Essays in honor of Fergus Craik, ed. M. Naveh-Benjamin, M.
Moscovitch & H. L. Roediger. Psychology Press.
[rNC]
Baddeley, A. D. & Ecob, J. R. (1973) Reaction time and short-term memory:
Implications of repetition effects for the high-speed exhaustive scan
hypothesis. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology 25:229–40.
[JJ]
Baddeley, A. D., Grant, S., Wight, E. & Thompson, N. (1975a) Imagery and visual
working memory. In: Attention and performance V, ed. P. Rabbit and S.
Dornic. Academic Press.
[ADB]
Baddeley, A. & Hitch, G. J. (1974) Working memory. In: Recent advances in
learning and motivation, vol. 8, ed. G. Bower. Academic Press.
[ADB, BR]
Baddeley, A. D., Lewis, V., Eldridge, M. & Thomson, N. (1984) Attention and
retrieval from long-term memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General 113:518–40.
[ADB]
Baddeley, A., Lewis, V. & Vallar, G. (1984) Exploring the articulatory loop. The
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology 36A:233–52.
[aNC]
Baddeley, A. D. & Logie, R. (1999) Working memory: The multiple component
model. In: Models of working memory: Mechanisms of active maintenance and
executive control, ed. A. Miyake & P. Shah. Cambridge University Press. [ADB]
References/Cowan: The magical number 4
176
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2001) 24:1
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 91 (native) -----
Baddeley, A. D., Thomson, N. & Buchanan, M. (1975b) Word length and the
structure of short-term memory. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior 14:575–89.
[aNC, SM]
Basso, A., Spinnler, H., Vallar, G. & Zanobio, E. (1982) Left hemisphere damage
and selective impairment of auditory verbal STM. Neuropsychologia 20:263–
74.
[ADB]
Bender, S., Schall, U., Wolstein, J., Grzella, I., Zerbin, D. & Oades, R. D. (1999) A
topographic event-related potential follow-up study of “prepulse inhibition” in
first and second episode patients with schizophrenia. Psychiatry Research
Neuroimaging 90:41–53.
[RDO]
Besner, D. (1987) Phonology, lexical access in reading, and articulatory
suppression: A critical review. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology
39A:467–78.
[aNC]
Biro, D. & Matsuzawa, T. (1999) Numerical ordering in a chimpanzee (Pan
troglodytes): Planning, executing, and monitoring. Journal of Comparative
Psychology 113:178–85.
[NK]
Bjork, R. A. & Whitten, W. B. (1974) Recency-sensitive retrieval processes in long-
term free recall. Cognitive Psychology 6:173–89.
[aNC]
Boudewijnse, G.-J. A., Murray, D. J. & Bandomir, C. A. (1999) Herbart’s
mathematical psychology. History of Psychology 2:163–93.
[DJM]
Bower, G. H. & Winzenz, D. (1969) Group structure, coding and memory for digit
series. Journal of Experimental Psychology Monographs 80:1–17.
[aNC]
Brandimonte, M. A., Hitch, G. J. & Bishop, D. V. M. (1992) Influences of short-
term memory codes on visual image processing: Evidence from image
transformation tasks. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition 18:157–65.
[SM]
Braun, H. A., Wissing, H., Schäfer, K. & Hirsch, M. C. (1994) Oscillation and noise
determine signal transduction in shark multimodal sensory cells. Nature
367:270–73.
[aNC]
Brebion, G., Smith, M. J., Gorman, J. M., Malaspina, D., Sharif, Z. & Amador, X.
(2000) Memory and schizophrenia: Differential link of processing speed and
selective attention with two levels of encoding. Journal of Psychiatric
Research 34:121–27.
[RDO]
Bregman, A. S. & Campbell, J. (1971) Primary auditory stream segregation and
perception of order in rapid sequences. Journal of Experimental Psychology
89:244–49.
[rNC]
Bregman, A. S. & Dannenbring, G. L. (1973) The effect of continuity on auditory
stream segregation. Perception and Psychophysics 13:308–312.
[rNC]
Broadbent, D. E. (1958) Perception and communication. Pergamon Press.
[aNC,
HT, rNC]
Broadbent, D. E. (1971) Decision and stress. Academic Press.
[rNC]
(1975) The magic number seven after fifteen years. In: Studies in long-term
memory, ed. A. Kennedy & A. Wilkes. Wiley.
[aNC]
Brown, G. D. A. & Hulme, C. (1995) Modeling item length effects in memory
span: No rehearsal needed? Journal of Memory and Language 34:594–621.
[aNC, SM]
Brown, G. D. A., Preece, T. & Hulme, C. (2000) Oscillator-based memory for
serial order. Psychological Review 107:127–81.
[aNC, rNC]
Burgess, N. & Hitch, G. J. (1997) Memory for serial order: A network model of the
phonological loop and its timing. Psychological Review 106:551–81.
[SM]
Burle, B. & Bonnet, M. (2000) High-speed memory scanning: A behavioral
argument for a serial oscillatory model. Cognitive Brain Research 9:327–37.
[OJ, rNC]
Burrows, D. & Okada, R. (1975) Memory retrieval from long and short lists.
Science 188:1031–33.
[JJ]
Burtis, P. J. (1982) Capacity increase and chunking in the development of short-
term memory. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 34:387–413.
[JPL]
Caplan, D., Rochon, E. & Waters, G. S. (1992) Articulatory and phonological
determinants of word length in span tasks. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology 45A:177–92.
[SM]
Cardozo, B. L. & Leopold, F. F. (1963) Human code transmission. Ergonomics
6:133–41.
[aNC]
Carey, S. & Xu, F. (in press) Infant knowledge of objects: Beyond object files and
object tracking. Cognition: Special Issue on Objects and Attention.
[BJS]
Case, R. (1974) Structures and strictures: Some functional limitations on the
course of cognitive development. Cognitive Psychology 6:544–73.
[SM]
(1985) Intellectual development: Birth to adulthood. Academic Press.
[SM]
(1995) Capacity-based explanations of working memory growth: A brief history
and reevaluation. In: Memory performance and competencies: Issues in
growth and development, ed. F. E. Weinert & W. Schneider. Erlbaum.
[SM]
(1998) The development of conceptual structures. In: Handbook of child
psychology, vol. 2, Cognition, perception, and language, ed. W. Damon, D.
Kuhn & R. S. Siegler. John Wiley and Sons.
[JPL]
Case, R. & Okamoto, Y. (1996) The role of central conceptual structures in the
development of children’s thought. Monographs of the Society for Research in
Child Development, vol. 61, no. 245.
[JPL]
Catchpole, C. K. & Slater, P. J. B. (1995) Bird song: Biological themes and
variations. Cambridge University Press.
[DT]
Cavanagh, J. P. (1972) Relation between the immediate memory span and the
memory search rate. Psychological Review 79:525–30.
[DJM]
Charniak, E. (1993) Statistical language learning. MIT Press.
[EMP]
Chater, N. & Christiansen, M. (1999) Connectionist and natural language
processing. In: Language Processing, ed. S. Garrod & M. Pickering.
Psychology Press.
[EMP]
Chase, W. G. & Ericsson, K. A. (1981) Skilled memory. In: Cognitive skills and
their acquisition, ed. J. R. Anderson. Erlbaum.
[KAE]
(1982) Skill and working memory. In: The psychology of learning and
motivation, vol. 16, ed. G. H. Bower. Academic Press.
[KAE]
Chase, W & Simon, H. A. (1973) The mind eye’s in chess. In: Visual information
processing, ed. by W. G. Chase. Academic Press.
[aNC, PCL, rNC]
Chelazzi, L., Miller, E. K., Duncan, J. & Desimone, R. (1993) A neural basis for
visual search in inferior temporal cortex. Nature 363:345–47.
[PRR]
Chen, S., Swartz, K. B. & Terrace, H. S. (1998) Knowledge of the ordinal position
of list items in rhesus monkeys. Psychological Science 8:80–86.
[DT]
Cherry, E. C. (1953) Some experiments on the recognition of speech, with one and
with two ears. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 25:975–79.
[aNC, HT]
Cheung, H. & Kemper, S. (1993) Recall and articulation of English and Chinese
words by Chinese-English bilinguals. Memory and Cognition 21:666–70.
[SM]
Chi, M. T. H. & Klahr, D. (1975) Span and rate of apprehension in children and
adults. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 19:434–39.
[aNC]
Chomsky, N. (1975) Reflections on language. Pantheon.
[EMP]
Cleeremans, A. & McClelland, J. L. (1991) Learning the structure of event
sequences. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 120:235–53.
[aNC,
EMP]
Clifton, C & Cruse, D. (1977) Time to recognize tones: Memory scanning or
memory strength? Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology 29:709–26.
[rNC] 
Cohen, J. D., Braver, T. S. & O’Reilly, R. C. (1996) A computational approach to
prefrontal cortex, cognitive control and schizophrenia: Recent developments
and current challenges. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of
London B 351:1515–27.
[MU]
Cohen, J. D., Forman, S. D., Braver, T. S., Casey, B. J., Servan-Schreiber, D. &
Noll, D. C. (1994) Activation of the prefrontal cortex in a nonspatial working
memory task with function MRI. Human Brain Mapping 293–304.
[BR]
Cohen, J. D., Perlstein, W. M., Braver, T. S., Nystrom, L. E., Noll, D. C., Jonides,
J. & Smith, E. E. (1977) Temporal dynamics of brain activation during a
working memory task. Nature 386:604–608.
[aNC]
Conrad, R. (1965) Order error in immediate serial recall of sequences. Journal of
Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior 4:161–69.
[SEA]
Corballis, M. C. (1967) Serial order in recognition and recall. Journal of
Experimental Psychology 74:99–105.
[aNC]
Corbetta, M., Miezin, F. M., Dobmeyer, S., Shulman, G. L. & Petersen, S. E.
(1991) Selective and divided attention during visual discrimination of shape,
color, and speed: Functional anatomy by positron emission tomography. The
Journal of Neuroscience 11:2383–2402.
[BR]
Coslett, H. B. & Saffran, E. (1991) Simultanagnosia: To see but not two see. Brain
114:1523–45.
[BJS]
Cowan, N. (1984) On short and long auditory stores. Psychological Bulletin
96:341–70.
[rNC]
(1988) Evolving conceptions of memory storage, selective attention, and their
mutual constraints within the human information processing system.
Psychological Bulletin 104:163–91.
[aNC, SM, HT, rNC]
(1995) Attention and memory: An integrated framework. Oxford Psychology
Series, No. 26. Oxford University Press.
[aNC, BJS, HT, rNC]
(1999) An embedded-processes model of working memory. In: Models of
working memory: Mechanisms of active maintenance and executive control,
eds. A. Miyake & P. Shah. Cambridge University Press.
[rNC]
Cowan, N., Cartwright, C., Winterowd, C. & Sherk, M. (1987) An adult model of
preschool children’s speech memory. Memory and Cognition 15:511–17.
[aNC]
Cowan, N., Day, L., Saults, J. S., Keller, T. A., Johnson, T. & Flores, L. (1992) The
role of verbal output time in the effect of word length on immediate memory.
Journal of Memory and Language 31:1–17.
[SM]
Cowan, N., Lichty, W. & Grove, T. R. (1990) Properties of memory for unattended
spoken syllables. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition 16:258–69.
[rNC]
Cowan, N., Nugent, L. D., Elliot, E. M. & Geer, T. (2000a) Is there a temporal
basis of the word length effect? A response to Service (1998). Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology 53A:647–60.
[rNC]
Cowan, N., Nugent, L. D., Elliot, E. M., Ponomarev, I. & Saults, J. S. (1999) The
role of attention in the development of short-term memory: Age differences in
the verbal span of apprehension. Child Development 70:1082–97.
[aNC,
SAH, JPL, HT, rNC]
Cowan, N., Nugent, L. D., Elliot, E. M. & Saults, J. S. (2000b) Persistence of
References/Cowan: The magical number 4
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2000) 24:1
177
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 92 (native) -----
memory for ignored lists of digits: Areas of development constancy and
change. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 76:151–72.
[rNC]
Cowan, N., Saults, J. S. & Nugent, L. D. (1997a) The role of absolute and relative
amounts of time in forgetting within immediate memory: The case of tone
pitch comparisons. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review 4:393–97.
[aNC, rNC]
(in press) The ravages of absolute and relative amounts time on memory. In: The
nature of remembering: Essays in honor of Robert G. Crowder, ed. H.
Roediger. American Psychological Association.
[rNC]
Cowan, N., Winkler, I., Teder, W. & Näätänen, R. (1993) Memory prerequisites of
the mismatch negativity in the auditory event-related potential (ERP). Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 19:909–21.
[aNC]
Cowan, N., Wood, N. L. & Borne, D. N. (1994) Reconfirmation of the short-term
storage concept. Psychological Science 5:103–106.
[rNC]
Cowan, N., Wood, N. L., Nugent, L. D. & Treisman, M. (1997b) There are two
word length effects in verbal short-term memory: Opposed effects of duration
and complexity. Psychological Science 8:290–95.
[aNC, rNC]
Cowan, N., Wood, N. L., Wood, P. K., Keller, T. A., Nugent, L. D. & Keller, C. V.
(1998) Two separate verbal processing rates contributing to short-term
memory span. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 127:141–60.
[aNC]
Craik, F. I. M. & Birtwistle, J. (1971) Proactive inhibition in free recall. Journal of
Experimental Psychology 91:120–23.
[rNC]
Craik, F., Gardiner, J. M. & Watkins, M. J. (1970) Further evidence for a negative
recency effect in free recall. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior
9:554–60.
[aNC]
Craik, F. I. M., Govoni, R., Naveh Benjamin, M. & Anderson, N. D. (1996) The
effects of divided attention on encoding and retrieval processes in human
memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 125:159–80.
[ADB]
Craik, F. I. M. & Lockhart, R. S. (1972) Levels of processing: A framework for
memory research. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior 11:671–
84.
[PM]
Crick, F. (1984) Function of the thalamic reticular complex: The searchlight
hypothesis. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA 81:4586–
90.
[BJB]
(1994) The astonishing hypothesis. Touchtone Books.
[JPL]
Crowder, R. G. (1989) Imagery for musical timbre. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 15:472–78.
[rNC],
(1993) Short-term memory: Where do we stand? Memory and Cognition
21:142–45.
[aNC]
Cunningham, T. F., Healy, A. F., Till, R. E., Fendrich, D. W. & Dimitry, C. Z.
(1993) Is there really very rapid forgetting from primary memory? The role of
expectancy and item importance in short-term recall. Memory and Cognition
21:671–88.
[PM]
Damasio, A. R. (1989) Time-locked multiregional retroactivation: A systems-level
proposal for the neural substrates of recall and recognition. Cognition 33:25–
62.
[BJB]
Daneman, M. & Carpenter, P. A. (1980) Individual differences in working memory
and reading. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior 19:450–66.
[aNC, JNT, rNC]
Daneman, M. & Merikle, P. M. (1996) Working memory and language
comprehension: A meta-analysis. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review 3:422–33.
[aNC, rNC]
Darwin, C. J., Turvey, M. T. & Crowder, R. G. (1972) An auditory analogue of the
Sperling partial report procedure: Evidence for brief auditory storage.
Cognitive Psychology 3:255–67.
[aNC, rNC]
Davis, G., Driver, J., Pavani, F. & Shepherd A. J. (2000) Reappraising the costs of
attending to two separate visual objects. Vision Research 40:1323–32.
[GD]
Davis, G., Welch, V. L., Holmes, A. & Shepherd, A. J. (submitted) Can attention
select only a fixed number of objects at a time? 
D’Esposito, M., Detre, J., Alsop, D., Shin, R., Atlas, S. & Grossman, M. (1995) The
neural basis of the central executive system of working memory. Nature
378:279–81.
[BR]
De Groot, A. D. (1978) Thought and choice in chess, 2nd ed. Morton.
[PCL]
Dehaene, S. & Cohen, L. (1994) Dissociable mechanisms of subitizing and
counting: Neuropsychological evidence from simultanagnosic patients.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance
20:958–75.
[BJS]
Dempster, F. N. (1981) Memory span: Sources of individual and developmental
differences. Psychological Bulletin 89:63–100.
[aNC]
Desimone, R. (1998) Visual attention mediated by biased competition in
extrastriate visual cortex. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of
London B 353:1245–55.
[MU]
Desimone, R. & Duncan, J. (1995) Neural mechanisms of selective visual
attention. Annual Review of Neuroscience 18:193–222.
[PRR]
Destexhe, A., Contreras, D. & Steriade, M. (1999) Spatiotemporal analysis of local
field potentials and unit discharges in cat cerebral cortex during natural wake
and sleep states. Journal of Neuroscience 19:4595–4608.
[BJB]
Diener, D. (1990) Role of the preprobe delay in memory-scanning tasks. Memory
and Cognition 18:451–58.
[rNC]
Dirlam, D. K. (1972) Most efficient chunk sizes. Cognitive Psychology 3:355–59.
[aNC]
Dosher, B. A. (1981) The effect of delay and interference: A speed-accuracy study.
Cognitive Psychology 13:551–82.
[BM, rNC]
(1984) Degree of learning and retrieval speed: Study time and multiple
exposures. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition 10:541–74.
[BM]
(1998) Models of visual search: Finding a face in the crowd. In: Methods,
models, and conceptual issues: An invitation to cognitive science, ed. D.
Scarborough and S. Sternberg. MIT Press.
[rNC]
Dosher, B. A. & Ma, J. J. (1998) Output loss or rehearsal loop? Output-time versus
pronunciation-time limits in immediate recall for forgetting-matched
materials. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition 24:316–35.
[BM]
Duncan, J. (1984) Selective attention and the organization of visual information.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 113:501–17.
[GD]
Elliot, M. A. & Müller, H. J. (1998) Synchronous information presented in 40 Hz
flicker enhances visual feature binding. Psychological Science 9:277–83.
[rNC]
(2000) Evidence for a 40-Hz oscillatory short-term visual memory revealed by
human reaction-time measurements. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition 26:703–18.
[rNC]
Elman, J. L. (1993) Learning and development in neural networks: The
importance of starting small. Cognition 48:71–99.
[aNC, EMP]
(1996) Rethinking innateness: A connectionist perspective on development. MIT
Press.
[EMP]
Engel, A. K., Fries, P., Roelfsema, P. R., König, P., Brecht, M. & Singer, W. (1999)
Temporal binding, binocular rivalry, and consciousness. Consciousness and
Cognition 8: 128–51.
[BJB]
Engel, A. K., König, P., Kreiter, A. K., Schillen, T. B. & Singer, W. (1992) Temporal
coding in the visual cortex: New vistas on integration in the nervous system.
Trends in Neuroscience 15:218–26.
[AR]
Engle, R. W., Kane, M. J. & Tuholski, S. W. (1999) Individual differences in
working memory capacity and what they tell us about controlled attention,
general fluid intelligence, and functions of the prefrontal cortex. In: Models of
working memory: Mechanisms of active maintenance and executive control,
ed. A. Miyake and P. Shah. Cambridge University Press.
[aNC]
Ericsson, K. A. (1985) Memory skill. Canadian Journal of Psychology 39:188–231.
[aNC, HT]
(1996) The road to excellence: The acquisition of expert performance in the arts
and sciences, sports, and games. Erlbaum.
[KAE]
Ericsson, K. A., Chase, W. G. & Faloon, S. (1980) Acquisition of a memory skill.
Science 208:1181–82.
[aNC, HT, rNC]
Ericsson, K. A. & Kintsch, W. (1995) Long-term working memory. Psychological
Review 102:211–45.
[aNC, KAE]
Ericsson, K. A., Patel, V. L. & Kintsch, W. (2000) How experts’ adaptation to
representative task demands account for expertise effect in memory recall:
Comment on Vincente & Wang (1998). Psychological Review 107:578–92.
[KAE]
Ericsson, K. A. & Polson, P. G. (1988) Memory for restaurant orders. In: The
nature of expertise, ed. M. Chi, R. Glaser & M. Farr. Erlbaum.
[KAE]
Fabiani, M., Stadler, M. A. & Wessels, P. M. (in press) True memories but not false
ones produce a sensory signature in human lateralized brain potentials.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience.
[GG]
Feigenbaum, E. A. & Simon, H. A. (1984) EPAM-like models of recognition and
learning. Cognitive Science. 8:305–36.
[PCL]
Fisher, D. L. (1984) Central capacity limits in consistent mapping, visual search
tasks: Four channels or more? Cognitive Psychology 16:449–84.
[aNC, TS]
Fraise, P. (1978) Time and rhythm perception. In: Handbook of Perception, vol. 8,
eds. E. Carterette & M. Friedman. Academic Press.
[SG]
Frensch, P. A. & Miner, C. S. (1994) Effects of presentation rate and individual
differences in short-term memory capacity on an indirect measure of serial
learning. Memory and Cognition 22:95–110.
[aNC]
Frick, R. W. (1984) Using both an auditory and a visual short-term store to increase
digit span. Memory and Cognition 12:507–14.
[aNC]
Friedman-Hill, S. R., Robertson, L. C. & Treisman, A. (1995) Parietal
contributions to visual feature binding: Evidence from a patient with bilateral
lesions. Science 269:853–55.
[BJS]
Frith, C. D. & Dolan, R. J. (1997) Brain mechanisms associated with top-down
processes in perception. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of
London B, 352:1221–30.
[RDO]
Fuster, J. M. (1997) Network memory. Trends in Neuroscience 20:451–59.
[PRR]
Fuster, J. M., Bauer, R. H. & Jervey, J. P. (1985) Functional interactions between
inferotemporal and prefrontal cortex in a cognitive task. Brain Research
330:299–307.
[PMM]
References/Cowan: The magical number 4
178
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2000) 24:1
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 93 (native) -----
Gathercole, S. E. & Baddeley, A. D. (1993) Working memory and language.
Erlbaum.
[ADB]
Geary, D. C. (1993) Mathematical disabilities: Cognitive, neuropsychological, and
genetic components. Psychological Bulletin 114:345–62.
[SAH, rNC]
(1995) Reflections of evolution and culture in children’s cognition. American
Psychologist 50:24–36.
[SAH, rNC]
George, N., Jemel, B., Fiori, N. & Renault, B. (2000) Holistic and part-based face
representations: Evidence from the memory span of the “face superiority
effect.” Current Psychology Letters 1:89–106.
[RDO]
Glanzer, M. & Cunitz, A. R. (1966) Two storage mechanisms in free recall. Journal
of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior 5:351–60.
[aNC]
Glanzer, M. & Razel, M. (1974) The size of the unit in short-term storage. Journal
of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior 13:114–31.
[aNC]
Glenberg, A. M. & Swanson, N. C. (1986) A temporal distinctiveness theory of
recency and modality effects. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition 12:3–15.
[aNC]
Gobet, F. (1998) Memory for the meaningless: How chunks help. Proceedings of
the Twentieth Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society. Erlbaum.
[PCL]
Gobet, F. & Simon, H. A. (1996) Templates in chess memory: A mechanism for
recalling several boards. Cognitive Psychology 31:1–40.
[aNC, KAE]
(1998) Expert chess memory: Revisiting the chunking hypothesis. Memory
6:225–55.
[aNC, PCL]
(in press) Five seconds or sixty? Presentation time in expert memory. Cognitive
Science.
[PCL]
Gold, E. M. (1967) Language identification in the limit. Information and Control
16:447–74.
[EMP]
Gomes, H., Sussman, E., Ritter, W., Kurtzberg, D., Cowan, N. & Vaughan Jr., H.
G. (1999) Electrophysiological evidence of developmental changes in the
duration of auditory sensory memory. Developmental Psychology 35:294–302.
[rNC]
Goodman, N. (1951) The structure of appearance. Harvard University Press.
[JPL]
Graesser II, A. & Mandler, G. (1978) Limited processing capacity constrains the
storage of unrelated sets of words and retrieval from natural categories.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and Memory 4:86–100.
[aNC] 
Granholm, E., Perry, W., Filoteo, J. V. & Braff, D. (1999) Hemispheric and
attentional contributions to perceptual organization deficits on the global-local
task in schizophrenia. Neuropsychology 13:271–81.
[RDO]
Gratton, G., Corballis, P. M. & Jain, S. (1997) Hemispheric organization of visual
memories. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 9:92–104.
[GG]
Gratton, G., Fabiani, M., Goodman-Wood, M. R. & DeSoto, M. C. (1998)
Memory-driven processing in human medial occipital cortex: An event-related
optical signal (EROS) study. Psychophysiology 38:348–51.
[GG]
Gray, C. M., König, P., Engel, A. K. & Singer, W. (1989) Oscillatory responses in
cat visual cortex exhibit inter-columnar synchronization, which reflects global
stimulus properties. Nature 338:334–37.
[aNC, PRR, HT]
Greene, R. L. (1989) Immediate serial recall of mixed-modality lists. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 15:266–74.
[aNC]
Greenwald, A. & Shulman, H. (1973) On doing two at once: II. Elimination of the
psychological refractory period. Journal of Experimental Psychology 101:70–
76.
[TS]
Grondin, S. (in press) From physical time to the first and second moments of
psychological time. Psychological Bulletin.
[SG]
Grondin, S., Meilleur-Wells, G. & Lachance, R. (1999) When to start explicit
counting in time-intervals discrimination tasks: A critical point in the timing
process of humans. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance 25:993–1004.
[SG]
Gross, C. G., Bender, D. B. & Rocha-Miranda, C. E. (1974) Inferotemporal cortex:
A single-unit analysis. In: The neurosciences: Third study program, ed. F. O.
Schmitt & F. G. Worden. MIT Press.
[PMM]
Grossberg, S. (1976) Adaptive pattern classification and universal recoding.
Biological Cybernetics 23:121–34.
[MU]
Gruenewald, P. J. & Lockhead, G. R. (1980) The free recall of category examples.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and Memory 6:225–
40.
[aNC]
Guilford, J. P. & Dallenback, K. M. (1925) The determination of memory span by
the method of constant stimuli. American Journal of Psychology 36:621–28.
[BLB]
Guttentag, R. E. (1984) The metal effort requirement of cumulative rehearsal: A
developmental study. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 37:92–106.
[aNC, rNC]
Halford, G. S. (1993) Children’s understanding: The development of mental
models. Erlbaum.
[SM, JPL]
Halford, G. S., Mayberry, M. T. & Bain, J. D. (1988) Set-size effects in primary
memory: An age-related capacity limitation? Memory and Cognition 16:480–
87.
[aNC]
Halford, G. S., Wilson, W. H. & Phillips, S. (1998) Processing capacity defined by
relational complexity: Implications for comparative, developmental, and
cognitive psychology. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 21:723–802.
[aNC,
GSH, JPL, rNC]
Hamilton, W. (1859) Lectures on metaphysics and logic, vol. 1. Blackwood.
[aNC]
Hatano, G. & Osawa, K. (1983) Digit memory of grand experts in abacus-derived
mental calculation. Cognition 15:95–110.
[KAE]
Hausman, A. & Wilson, F. (1967). Goodman’s ontology. In: Carnap and Goodman:
Two formalists, ed. A. Hausman & F. Wilson, Iowa Publications in Philosophy,
vol. 3. Martinus Nijhoff.
[JPL]
Hazeltine, E., Ivry, R. & Teague, D. (2000) Dual-task performance with minimal
cost: Evidence for concurrent response selection processes. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience supplement:110.
[TS]
He, S., Cavanaugh, P. & Intriligator, J. (1997) Many objects can be enumerated in
afterimages when they are not crowded [Abstract]. Abstracts of the
Psychonomic Society 2:3.
[BJS, rNC]
Healy, A. F. & Cunningham, T. F. (1995) Very rapid forgetting: Reply to Muter.
Memory and Cognition 23:387–92.
[PM]
Hebb, D. O. (1949) The organization of behavior. Wiley.
[MU]
Hecht, S. A. (1998) Toward an information processing account of individual
differences in fraction skills. Journal of Educational Psychology 90:545–559.
[SAH]
Hecht, S. A., Torgesen, J. K., Wagner, R. K. & Rashotte, C. A. (in press) The
relations between phonological processing abilities and emerging individual
differences in mathematical computation skills: A longitudinal study from
second- to fifth-grade. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology.
[SAH]
Hellige, J. B. & Cox, P. J. (1976) Effects of concurrent verbal memory on
recognition of stimuli from the left and right visual fields. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 2:210–221.
[SM]
Henderson, L. (1972) Spatial and verbal codes and the capacity of STM. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology 24:485–95.
[aNC]
Henry, L. (1991) The effects of word length and phonemic similarity in young
children’s short-term memory. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology
43A:35–52.
[SM]
Henry, L. (1994) The relationship between speech rate and memory span in
children. International Journal of Behavioral Development 17:37–56.
[SM]
Henson, R. N. A. (1999) Positional information in short-term memory: Relative or
absolute? Memory and Cognition 27:915–27.
[rNC]
Herbart, J. F. (1890) Psychologie als Wissenschaft [Psychology as science]. In: Jon.
Fr. Herbart’s saemtliche Werke in chronologischer Reihenfolge [Jon. Fr.
Herbart’s collected works in their chronological order of publication], part 1,
vol. 5, ed. K. Kehrbach & O. Flügel. Herman Beyer und Soehne.
[DJM]
Hitch, G. J., Burgess, N., Towse, J. N. & Culpin, V. (1996) Temporal grouping
effects in immediate recall: A working memory analysis. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology 49A:116–39.
[aNC]
Hobson, J. A. (1997) Consciousness as a state-dependent phenomenon. In:
Scientific approaches to consciousness: The Twenty-eighth Carnegie
Symposium on Cognition, ed. J. D. Cohen & J. W. Schooler. Erlbaum.
[BJB]
Holtzman, J. D. & Gazzaniga, M. S. (1982) Dual task interactions due exclusively
to limits in processing resources. Science 218:1325–27.
[aNC]
Holyoak, K. J. & Thagard, P. (1995) Mental leaps: Analogy in creative thought.
Bradford.
[GSH]
Horn D. & Opher I. (1996) Temporal segmentation in a neural dynamic system.
Neural Computation 8:373–88.
[MU]
Horn, D. & Usher, M. (1991) Parallel activation of memories in an oscillatory
neural network. Neural Computation 3:31–43.
[MU]
(1992) An oscillatory model for short term memory. In: Advances in neural
information processes systems 4, ed. J. E. Moody, S. J. Hanson & P. R.
Lippmann. Morgan and Kaufmann.
[MU]
Horowitz, T. S. & Wolfe, J. M. (1998) Visual search has no memory. Nature
394:575–77.
[GFW]
Houghton, G. & Tipper, S. P. (1994) A model of inhibitory mechanisms in selective
attention. In: Inhibitory mechanisms in attention, memory, and language, ed.
D. Dagenbach & T. Carr. Academic Press.
[SM]
Hulme, C., Maugham, S. & Brown, G. D. (1991) Memory for familiar and
unfamiliar words: Evidence for a long-term memory contribution to short
term memory span. Journal of Memory and Language 30:685–701.
[SM]
Hulme, C & Tordoff, V. (1989) Working memory development: The effects of
speech rate, word length and acoustic similarity on serial recall. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology 47:72–87.
[SM]
Hultsch, H. (1991) Early experience can modify singing styles: Evidence from
experiments with nightingales, Luscinia megarhynchos. Animal Behavior
42:883–89.
[DT]
(1992) Time window and unit capacity: Dual constraints on the acquisition of
serial information in songbirds. Journal of Comparative Physiology A
170:275–80.
[DT]
References/Cowan: The magical number 4
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2000) 24:1
179
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 94 (native) -----
(1993) Tracing the memory mechanisms in the song acquisition of birds.
Netherlands Journal of Zoology 43:155–71.
[DT]
Hultsch, H., Mundry, R. & Todt, D. (1998) Learning, representation and retrieval
of rule-related knowledge in the song system of birds. In: Learning: Rule
extraction and representation, ed. A. Friederici & R. Menzel. Walter de
Gruyter.
[DT]
Hultsch, H. Schleuss, F. & Todt, D. (1999) Auditory-visual stimulus pairing
enhances perceptual learning in a songbird. Animal Behavior 58:1143–49.
[DT]
Hultsch, H. & Todt, D. (1989) Memorization and reproduction of songs in
nightingales (Luscinia megarhynchos): Evidence for package formation.
Journal of Comparative Physiology A 165:197–203.
[DT]
Hummel, J. E. & Holyoak, K. J. (1997) Distributed representations of structure: A
theory of analogical access and mapping. Psychological Review 104:427–66.
[aNC]
Humphreys, G. W. (1998) Neural representation of objects in space: A dual coding
account. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B
353:1341–51.
[GD]
Irwin, D. E. (1992) Memory for positions and identity across eye movements.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition
18:307–17.
[WS]
Irwin, D. E. & Yeomans, J. M. (1986) Sensory registration and informational
persistence. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance 12:343–60.
[rNC]
Jacoby, L. L. & Bartz, W. H. (1972) Encoding processes and the negative recency
effect. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior 11:561–65.
[PM]
Jacoby, L. L., Woloshyn, V. & Kelley, C. (1989) Becoming famous without being
recognized: Unconscious influences of memory produced by divided
attention. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 118:115–25.
[aNC]
Jahnke, J. C., Davis, S. T. & Bower, R. E. (1989) Position and order: Information in
recognition memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory
and Cognition 15:859–67.
[SEA]
James, W. (1890) The principles of psychology. Henry Holt.
[aNC]
Jarvella, R. J. (1971) Syntactic processing of connected speech. Journal of Verbal
Language and Verbal Behavior 10:409–16.
[EMP]
Javitt, D. C., Strous, R., Grochowski, S., Ritter, W. & Cowan, N. (1997) Impaired
precision, but normal retention, of auditory sensory (Aechoic@) memory
information in schizophrenia. Journal of Abnormal Psychology 106:315–24.
[rNC]
Jensen, E. M., Reese, E. P. & Reese, T. W. (1950) The subitizing and counting of
visually presented fields of dots. Journal of Psychology 30:363–92.
[JJ] 
Jensen, O. & Lisman, J. E. (1996) Novel lists of 7 6 2 known items can be reliably
stored in an oscillatory short-term memory network: Interaction with long-
term memory. Learning and Memory 3:257–63.
[OJ]
(1998) An oscillatory short-term memory buffer model can account for data on
the Sternberg task. Journal of Neuroscience 18:10,688–10,699.
[OJ]
Jensen, O. & Tesche, C. D. (2000) Frontal midline activity in the theta band (6–8
Hz) increases with memory load in a short-term memory task: A parametric
MEG study. European Research Conference, May 2000, Grenada.
[OJ]
Jevons, W. S. (1871) The power of numerical discrimination. Nature 3:281–82.
[aNC]
Jiang, Y., Olson, I. R. & Chun, M. M. (2000) Organization of visual short-term
memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition 26:683–702.
[KAE]
Jinks, A. & Laing, D. G. (1999) Temporal processing reveals a mechanism for
limiting the capacity of humans to analyze odor mixtures. Cognitive Brain
Research 8:311–25.
[rNC]
Johnson, J., Fabian, V. & Pascual-Leone, J. (1989) Quantitative hardware-stages
that constrain language development. Human Development 32:245–71.
[JPL]
Johnston, J. C., McCann, R. S., & Remington, R. W. (1995) Chronometric
evidence for two types of attention. Psychological Science 6:365–69.
[GFW] 
Jones, D., Farrand, P., Stuart, G. & Morris, N. (1995) Functional equivalence of
verbal and spatial information in serial short-term memory. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 21:1008–18.
[aNC]
Jou, J. (1998) Two retrieving modes in memory of the U.S. state names.
Unpublished data.
[JJ]
Jou, J. & Aldridge, J. W. (1999) Memory representation of alphabetic position and
interval information. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition 25:680–701.
[JJ]
Just, M. A., Carpenter, P. A. & Hemphill, D. D. (1996) Constraints on processing
capacity: Architectural or implementational? In: Mind matters: A tribute to
Allen Newell, ed. D. M. Steier & T. M. Mitchell. Erlbaum.
[CPB]
Kareev, Y. (1995) Through a narrow window: Working memory capacity and the
detection of covariation. Cognition 56:263–69.
[aNC, SAH]
(2000) Seven (indeed, plus or minus two) and the detection of correlations.
Psychological Review 107:397–402.
[rNC]
Kareev, Y., Lieberman, I. & Lev, M. (1997) Through a narrow window: Sample size
and the perception of correlation. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General 126:278–87.
[aNC]
Kaufman, E. L., Lord, M. W., Reese, T. W. & Volkmann, J. (1949) The
discrimination of visual number. American Journal of Psychology 62:498–525.
[aNC, JJ]
Kawai, N. (in press) Ordering and planning in sequential responding to arabic
numbers by a chimpanzee. Psychologia.
[NK]
Kawai, N. & Matsuzawa, T. (2000a) A conventional approach to chimpanzee
cognition: Response to M. D. Hauser. Trends in Cognitive Science 4:128–29.
[NK]
(2000b) Numerical memory span in a chimpanzee. Nature 403:39–40.
[NK,
rNC]
(2001) Reproductive memory processes in chimpanzees: Homologous
approaches to research on human working memory. In: Primate origins of
human cognition and behavior, ed. T. Matsuzawa. Springer-Verlag.
[NK]
Keller, T. A. & Cowan, N. (1994) Developmental increase in the duration of
memory for tone pitch. Developmental Psychology 30:855–63.
[rNC]
Keller, T. A., Cowan, N. & Saults, J. S. (1995) Can auditory memory for tone pitch
be rehearsed? Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition 21:635–45.
[rNC]
Killeen, P. R. & Weiss, N. A. (1987) Optimal timing and the Weber function.
Psychological Review 94:455–68.
[SG]
Kintsch, W. & van Dijk, T. A. (1978) Toward a model of text comprehension and
production. Psychological Review 85:363–94.
[aNC]
Kirschfeld, K. (1992) Oscillations in the insect brain: Do they correspond to
theoretical (g-waves of vertebrates? Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 89:4764–68.
[aNC]
Klahr, D. (1973) Quantification processes. In: Visual information processing, ed.
W. G. Chase. Academic Press.
[JJ]
Klapp, S. T. & Netick, A. (1988) Multiple resources for processing and storage in
short-term working memory. Human Factors 30:617–32.
[aNC]
Kleinberg, J. & Kaufman, H. (1971) Constancy for short-term memory: Bits and
chunks. Journal of Experimental Psychology 90:326–33.
[rNC]
Kobatake, E. & Tanaka, K. (1994) Neuronal selectivities to complex object features
in the ventral visual pathway of the macaque cerebral cortex. Journal of
Neurophysiology 71:856–67.
[PRR}
Koehler, O. (1954) Vorbedingungen und Vorstufen unserer Sprache bei Tieren.
Zoologischer Anzeiger Supplement 18:327–41.
[DT]
Kolb, B. & Whishaw, I. Q. (1996) Fundamentals of human neuropsychology. W. H.
Freeman and Company.
[JPL]
Konishi, M. (1989) Bird song for neurobiologists. Neuron 3:541–49.
[DT]
Kroodsma, D. E. & Miller, E. H. (1996) Ecology and evolution of acoustic
communication in birds. Cornell University Press.
[DT]
Laming, D. (1992) Analysis of short-term retention: Models for Brown-Peterson
experiments. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition 18:1342–65.
[PM]
Lane, P. C. R., Gobet, F. & Cheng, P. C.-H. (2000a) Learning perceptual chunks in
a computational model of problem solving with diagrams. In: Proceedings of
the Third International Conference on Cognitive Modeling. Universal Press.
[PCL]
(2000b) Learning-based constraints on schemata. In: Proceedings of the
Twentieth Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society. Erlbaum.
[PCL]
LaPointe, L. B. & Engle, R. W. (1990) Simple and complex word spans as
measures of working memory capacity. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition 16:1118–33.
[aNC]
Lavie, N. & Driver, J. (1996) On the spatial extent of attention in object-based
visual selection. Perception and Psychophysics 58:1238–51.
[GD]
Lee, C. L. & Estes, W. K. (1981) Item and order information in short-term
memory: Evidence for multilevel perturbation processes. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and Memory 7:149–69.
[rNC]
Leventhal, A. G., Thompson, K. F., Liu, D., Zhou, Y. & Ault, S. J. (1995)
Concomitant sensitivity to orientation, direction, and color of cells in layers 2,
3, and 4 of monkey striate cortex. Journal of Neuroscience 15:1808–18.
[PRR]
Levy, B. A. (1971) Role of articulation in auditory and visual short-term memory.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior 10:123–132. 
Lewicki, P., Czyzewska, M. & Hoffman, H. (1987) Unconscious acquisition of
complex procedural knowledge. Journal of Experimental Psychology 13:523–
30.
[aNC]
Libet, B., Alberts, W. W., Wright, E. W., Delattre, L., Levin, G. & Feinstein, B.
(1964) Production of threshold levels of conscious sensation by electrical
stimulation of human somatosensory cortex. Journal of Neurophysiology
27:546–78.
[RDO]
Lisman, J. E. & Idiart, M. A. P. (1995) Storage of 7 6 2 short-term memories in
oscillatory subcycles. Science 267:1512–15.
[aNC, OJ, PMM, AR, PRR, HT,
MU, rNC]
References/Cowan: The magical number 4
180
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2000) 24:1
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 95 (native) -----
Livingstone, M. S. (1996) Oscillatory firing and interneuronal correlations in
squirrel monkey striate cortex. Journal of Neurophysiology 75:2467–85.
PRR]
Logan, G. D. (1988) Toward an instance theory of automatization. Psychological
Review 95:492–527.
[aNC, SAH]
Logan, G. D. & Klapp, S. T. (1991) Automatizing alphabet arithmetic: I. Is
extended practice necessary to produce automaticity? Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 17:179–95.
[aNC]
Logie, R. H. & Baddeley, A. D. (1987) Cognitive processes in counting. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 13:310–26.
[aNC, JJ]
Logie, R. H., Gilhooly, K. J. & Wynn, V. (1994) Counting on working memory in
arithmetic problem solving. Memory and Cognition 22:395–410.
[aNC]
Longoni, A. M., Richardson, J. T. E. & Aiello, A. (1993) Articulatory rehearsal and
phonological storage in working memory. Memory and Cognition 21:11–22.
[aNC]
Lovett, M. C., Reder, L. M. & Lebiere, C. (1997) Modeling individual differences
in a digit working memory task. In: Proceedings of the Nineteenth Conference
of the Cognitive Science Society. Erlbaum.
[NAT]
Luck, S. J. & Vogel, E. K. (1997) The capacity of visual working memory for
features and conjunctions. Nature 390:279–81.
[aNC, SAH, AR, PRR, WS,
rNC]
(1998) Response to visual and auditory working memory capacity by N. Cowan.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences 2:78–80.
[aNC]
MacGregor, J. N. (1987) Short-term memory capacity: Limitation or optimization?
Psychological Review 94:107–108.
[aNC]
Mahoney, J. V. & Ullman, S. (1988) Image chunking defining spatial building
blocks for scene analysis. In: Computational processes in human vision: An
interdisciplinary perspective, ed. Z. Pylyshyn. Intellect.
[PRR]
Mandler, G. (1967) Organization and memory. In: The psychology of learning and
motivation, vol. 1, ed. K. W. Spence & J. T. Spence. Academic Press.
[aNC]
(1975) Memory storage and retrieval: Some limits on the reach of attention and
consciousness. In: Attention and performance V, ed. P. M. A. Rabbit & S.
Dornic. Academic Press.
[aNC]
(1985) Cognitive psychology: An essay in cognitive science. Erlbaum.
[aNC]
Mandler, G. & Shebo, B. J. (1982) Subitizing: An analysis of its component
processes. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 111:1–22.
[aNC,
BLB, JJ, rNC]
March, L., Cienfuegos, A., Goldbloom, L., Ritter, W., Cowan, N. & Javitt, D. C.
(1999) Normal time course of auditory recognition in schizophrenia, despite
impaired precision of the auditory sensory (Aechoic@) memory code. Journal
of Abnormal Psychology 108:69–75.
[rNC]
Marler, P. (1976) Sensory templates in species-specific behavior. In: Simpler
networks and behavior, ed J. C. Fentress. Sinauer Associates.
[DT]
(1991) Differences in behavioural development in closely related species: Bird
song. In: The development and integration of behaviour, ed P. Bateson.
Cambridge University Press.
[DT]
Marr, D. (1982) Vision. Freeman.
[rNC]
Marsh, R. L., Sebrechts, M. M., Hicks, J. L. & Landau, J. D. (1997) Processing
strategies and secondary memory in very rapid forgetting. Memory and
Cognition 25:173–81.
[PM]
Martin, M. (1978) Memory span as a measure of individual differences in memory
capacity. Memory and Cognition 6:194–98.
[SEA]
(1980) Attention to words in different modalities: Four-channel presentation
with physical and semantic selection. Acta Psychologica 44:99–115.
[aNC]
Massaro, D. W. (1972) Preperceptual images, processing time, and perceptual
units in auditory perception. Psychological Review 79:124–45.
[rNC]
Matsuzawa, T. (1985) Use of numbers by a chimpanzee. Nature 315:57–59.
[NK]
Maunsell, J. H. R. (1995) The brain’s visual world: Representation of visual targets
in cerebral cortex. Science 270:764–69.
[PRR]
May, P., Tiitinen, H., Ilmoniemi, R. J., Nyman, G., Taylor, J. G. & Näätänen, R.
(1999) Frequency change detection in human auditory cortex. Journal of
Computational Neuroscience 6:97–118.
[HT]
McCann, R. & Johnston, J. C. (1992) Locus of the single-channel bottleneck in
dual-task performance. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance 18:471–64.
[TS]
McElree, B. (1996) Accessing short-term memory with semantic and phonological
information: A time-course analysis. Memory and Cognition 24:173–87.
[BM]
(1997) Working memory and the focus of attention. Paper presented at the
Psychonomic Society Conference, Philadelphia, Pa, November.
[BM]
(1998) Attended and nonattended states in working memory: Accessing
categorized structures. Journal of Memory and Language 38:225–52.
[BM,
rNC]
(in press) Working memory and focal attention. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition.
[BM]
McElree, B. & Dosher, B. A. (1989) Serial position and set size in short-term
memory: Time course of recognition. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General 118:346–73.
[BM]
(1993) Serial retrieval processes in the recovery of order information. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General 122:291–315.
[BM]
McGeoch, J. A. (1932) Forgetting and the law of disuse. Psychological Review
39:352–70.
[aNC]
McKone, E. (1995) Short-term implicit memory for words and nonwords. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition 21:1108–26.
[aNC, SEA, EM]
McKone, E. & Dennis, C. (2000) Short-term implicit memory: Visual, auditory,
and cross-modality priming. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review 7:341–46.
[EM]
McLean, R. S. & Gregg, L. W. (1967) Effects of induced chunking on temporal
aspects of serial recitation. Journal of Experimental Psychology 74:455–59.
[aNC]
Melton, A. W. (1963) Implications of short-term memory for a general theory of
memory. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior 2:1–21.
[aNC]
Mewhort, D. J. K., Campbell, A. J., Marchetti, F. M. & Campbell, J. I. D. (1981)
Identification, localization, and “iconic memory”: An evaluation of the bar-
probe task. Memory and Cognition 9:50–67.
[rNC]
Meyer, D. E. & Kieras, D. E. (1997) A computational theory of executive processes
and multiple-task performance: Part 1. Basic mechanisms. Psychological
Review 104:3–65.
[aNC, TS, rNC]
Michon, J. (1978) The making of the present: A tutorial review. In: Attention and
Performance VII, ed. J. Requin. Erlbaum.
[SG]
Miller, G. A. (1956) The magical number seven, plus or minus two: Some limits on
our capacity for processing information. Psychological Review 63:81–97.
[aNC, SEA, BLB, CPB, GG, SG, JJ, BJS, HT, NAT, rNC]
Milner, P. M. (1974) A model for visual shape recognition. Psychological Review
81:521–35.
[aNC]
(1999) The autonomous brain. Erlbaum.
[PMM]
Miltner, W. H. R., Braun, C., Arnold, M., Witte, H. & Taub, E. (1999) Coherence
of gamma-band EEG activity as a basis for associative learning. Nature
397:434–36.
[aNC]
Miyake, A. & Shah, P. (1999) Models of working memory: Mechanisms of active
maintenance and executive control. Cambridge University Press.
[ADB]
Miyashita, Y. (1993) Inferior temporal cortex: Where visual perception meets
memory. Annual Review of Neuroscience 16:245–63.
[PMM]
Monsell, S. (1978) Recency, immediate recognition memory, and reaction time.
Cognitive Psychology 10:465–501.
[rNC]
Moran, J. & Desimone, R. (1985) Selective attention gates visual processing in the
extrastriate cortex. Science 229:782–84.
[PMM]
Morra, S. (1989) Untitled presentation given at the Workshop on Working
Memory, Schonloo, The Netherlands, April 21–24.
[SM]
(1990) Why another model of working memory? Paper presented at the Fourth
Conference of the European Society for Cognitive Psychology, Como, Italy,
September 15–19.
[SM]
(1994) Issues in working memory measurement: Testing for M capacity.
International Journal of Behavioral Development 17:143–59.
[SM, JPL] 
(2000) A new model of verbal short-term memory. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology 75:191–227.
[SM, JPL]
Morra, S., Mazzoni, G. & Sava, D. (1993) Esiste un loop articolatorio di capacità
limitata? [Is there a time-limited articulatory loop?] Proceedings of the SIPs
Research Division Conference, Rome, September 29-October 2, 94–95.
[SM]
Morra, S., Moizo, C. & Scopesi, A. (1988) Working memory (of the M. operator)
and the planning of children’s drawings. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology 46:41–73.
[SM]
Morra, S., Pascual-Leone, J., Johnson, J. & Baillargeon, R. (1991) Understanding
spatial descriptions: Experimental test of a mental capacity model. In: Mental
images in human cognition, ed. R. H. Logie & M. Denis. North Holland.
[SM]
Morra, S. & Stoffel, C. (1991) A new model of verbal short term memory and its
development. Paper presented at the International Conference on Memory,
Lancaster, U. K., July 15–19.
[SM]
Morra, S., Vigliocco, G. & Penello, B. (in press) M capacity as a lifespan construct:
A study of its decrease in aging subjects. International Journal of Behavioral
Development.
[SM]
Moscovitch, M. & Umiltà, C. (1990) Modularity and neuropsychology:
Implications for the organization of attention and memory in normal and
brain-damaged people. In: Modular processes in dementia, ed. M. Schwartz.
MIT/Bradford.
[SM]
Murdoch Jr., B. B. & Hockley, W. E. (1989) Short-term memory for associations.
In: The psychology of learning and motivation, vol. 24, ed. G. H. Bower.
Academic Press.
[PM]
Murray, D. J. (1968) Articulation and acoustic confusability in short-term memory.
Journal of Experimental Psychology 78:679–84.
[aNC]
(1995) Gestalt psychology and the cognitive revolution. Harvester Wheatsheaf.
[DJM]
Murray, D. J., Boudreau, N., Burggraf, K. K., Dobell, L., Guger, S. L., Leask, A.,
References/Cowan: The magical number 4
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2000) 24:1
181
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 96 (native) -----
Stanford, L., Tate, T. L. & Wheeler, M. (1999) A grouping interpretation of
the modality effect in immediate probed recognition. Memory and Cognition
27:234–45.
[DJM]
Murray, D. J., Burhop, J., Centa, S., Chande, N., Oinonen, K., Thomas, T., Wilkie,
T. & Farahmand, B. (1998) A partial matching theory of the mirror effect in
immediate probed recognition. Memory and Cognition 26:1196–1213.
[DJM]
Muter, P. (1980) Very rapid forgetting. Memory and Cognition 8:174–79.
[PM]
(1995) Very rapid forgetting: Reply to Cunningham, Healy, Till, Fendrich and
Dimitry. Memory and Cognition 23:383–86.
[PM]
Nairne, J. S. (1990) A feature model of immediate memory. Memory and
Cognition 18:251–69.
[rNC]
(1991) Positional uncertainty in long-term memory. Memory and Cognition
19:332–40.
[aNC, JJ, rNC]
(1992) The loss of positional certainty in long-term memory. Psychological
Science 3:199–202.
[aNC, JJ]
Nairne, J. S., Neath, I. & Serra, M. (1997) Proactive interference plays a role in the
word-length effect. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review 4:541–45.
[SM]
Neath, I. (1998) Human memory: An introduction to research, data, and theory.
Brooks/Cole.
[aNC]
Neath, I. & Nairne, J. S. (1995) Word-length effects in immediate memory:
Overwriting trace decay. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review 2:429–41.
[aNC,
DJM, rNC]
Neely, J. H. (1991) Semantic priming effects in visual word recognition: A selective
review of current findings and theories. In: Basic processes in reading: Visual
word recognition, ed. D. Besner & G. W. Humphreys. Erlbaum.
[SM]
Neumann, O. (1987) Beyond capacity: A functional view of attention. In:
Perspectives on perception and action, ed. H. Heuer & A. Sanders. Erlbaum.
[TS]
Newman, J. B., Baars, B. J. & Cho, S.-B. (1997) A neural Global Workspace model
for conscious attention. Neural Networks 10:1195–1206.
[BJB]
Newport, E. L. (1988) Constraints on learning and their role in language
acquisition: Studies of the acquisition of the American Sign Language.
Language Sciences 10:147–72.
[EMP]
(1990) Maturational constraints on language learning. Cognitive Science 14:11–
28.
[aNC, EMP]
Nicolson, R. & Fawcett, A. (1991) Decomposing working memory: New evidence
from memory span. Paper presented at the International Conference on
Memory, Lancaster, U. K., July 15–19.
[SM] 
Nissen, M. J. & Bullemer, P. (1987) Attentional requirements of learning: Evidence
from performance measures. Cognitive Psychology 19:1–32.
[aNC]
Norman, D. A. & Bobrow, D. G. (1975) On data-limited and resource-limited
processes. Cognitive Psychology 7:44–64.
[rNC]
Norman, D. A. & Shallice, T. (1986) Attention to action: Willed and automatic
control of behavior. In: Consciousness and self-regulation, vol. 4, ed. R. J.
Davidson, G. E. Schwartz & D. Shapiro. Plenum.
[TS]
Nottebohm, F. (1993) The search for neural mechanisms that define the sensitive
period for song learning in birds. Netherlands Journal of Zoology 43:193–234.
[DT]
Oades, R. D., Dittmann-Balcar, A., Zerbin, D. & Grzella, I. (1997) Impaired
attention-dependent augmentation of MMN in nonparanoid versus paranoid
schizophrenic patients: A comparison with obsessive-compulsive disorder and
healthy subjects. Biological Psychiatry 41:1196–1210.
[RDO]
Oades, R. D., Zerbin, D., Dittmann-Balcar, A. & Eggers, C. (1996) Auditory event-
related potential (ERP) and difference-wave topography in schizophrenic
patients with/without active hallucinations and delusions: A comparison with
young obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) and healthy subjects.
International Journal of Psychophysiology 22:185–214.
[RDO]
Oberauer, K. (in press) Removing irrelevant information from working memory: A
cognitive aging study with the modified Sternberg task. Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition.
[rNC]
Okada, R. & Burrows, D. (1978) The effects of subsidiary tasks on memory
retrieval from long and short lists. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology 30:221–33.
[JJ]
Oram, M. W. & Perrett, D. I. (1992) Time course of neural responses
discriminating different views of the face and head. Journal of
Neurophysiology 68:70–84.
[PRR]
Paivio, A., Yuille, J. C. & Madigan, S. A. (1969) Concreteness, imagery, and
meaningfulness values for 925 nouns. Journal of Experimental Psychology
Monograph Supplement 76:1–25.
[JSN]
Pascual-Leone, J. (1970) A mathematical model for the transition rule in Piaget’s
developmental stages. Acta Psychologica 63:301–45.
[SM, JPL]
(1987) Organismic processes for neo-Piagetian theories: A dialectical causal
account of cognitive development. International Journal of Psychology
22:531–70.
[SM, JPL]
(1995) Learning and development as dialectical factors in cognitive growth.
Human Development 38:338–48.
[JPL]
(1998) To appraise developmental difficulty or mental demand, relational
complexity is not enough. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 12:843–44.
[JPL]
(in press) Reflections on working memory: Are the two models complementary?
Journal of Experimental Child Psychology.
[JPL]
Pascual-Leone, J. & Baillargeon, R. (1994) Developmental measurement of mental
attention. International Journal of Behavioral Development 17:161–200.
[SM, JPL]
Pascual-Leone, J. & Johnson, J. (1991) The psychological unit and its role in task
analysis. In: Criteria for competence: Controversies in the assessment of
children’s ablities, ed. M. Chandler & M. Chapman. Erlbaum.
[SM]
Pascual-Leone, J., Johnson, J. & Morris, S. (in preparation) A quantitative model of
mental attention in a mental span task.
[JPL]
Pashler, H. (1988) Familiarity and visual change detection. Perception and
Psychophysics 44:369–78.
[aNC, rNC]
(1991) Shifting visual attention and selecting motor responses: Distinct
attentional mechanism. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance 17:1023–40.
[GFW]
(1994) Dual-task interference in simple tasks: Data and theory. Psychological
Bulletin 16:220–44.
[TS, GFW]
Penney, C. G. (1980) Order of report in bisensory verbal short-term memory.
Canadian Journal of Psychology 34:190–95.
[aNC]
Pepperberg, I. M. (1993) A review of the effects of social interaction on vocal
learning in African grey parrots (Psittacus erithacus). Netherlands Journal of
Zoology 43:104–24.
[DT]
Peterson, L. R. & Johnson, S. T. (1971) Some effects of minimizing articulation on
short-term retention. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior
10:346–54.
[aNC]
Peterson, L. R. & Peterson, M. J. (1959) Short-term retention of individual verbal
items. Journal of Experimental Psychology 58:193–98.
[aNC, PM]
Peterson, S. A. & Simon, T. J. (2000) Computational evidence for the subitizing
phenomenon as an emergent property of the human cognitive architecture.
Cognitive Science 24:93–122.
[NAT, rNC]
Petrides, M. (1996) Lateral frontal cortical contribution to memory. Seminars in
the Neurosciences 8:57–63.
[BR]
Pinker, S. (1979) Formal models of language learning. Cognition 7:217–83.
[EMP]
(1994) The language instinct. Penguin Books.
[EMP]
Platt, J. R. (1964) Strong inference. Science 146:347–53.
[rNC]
Pollack, I. (1952) The information of elementary auditory displays. Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America 24:745–49.
[BLB]
Pollack, I. & Ficks, L. (1954) Information of elementary multi-dimensional
auditory displays. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 26:155–58.
[BLB]
Pollack, I., Johnson, I. B. & Knaff, P. R. (1959) Running memory span. Journal of
Experimental Psychology 57:137–46.
[aNC, rNC]
Posner, M. I. (1969) Abstraction and the process of recognition. In: Psychology of
learning and motivation, vol. 3, ed. G. H. Bower & J. T. Spence. Academic
Press.
[aNC]
Posner, M. L. & Konick, A. W. (1966) On the role of interference in short-term
retention. Journal of Experimental Psychology 72:221–31.
[PM]
Posner, M., Snyder, C. & Davidson, B. (1980) Attention and detection of signals.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 109:160–74.
[aNC]
Postman, L. & Phillips, L. W. (1965) Short-term temporal changes in free recall.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology 17:132–38.
[aNC]
Pothos, E. M. (1998) Aspects of generalisation. Unpublished PhD thesis,
University of Oxford.
[EMP]
Potter, M. C. (1976) Short-term conceptual memory for pictures. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and Memory 2:509–22.
[GFW]
Poulton, E. C. (1954) Eye-hand span in simple serial tasks. Journal of Experimental
Psychology 47:403–10.
[aNC]
Prabhakaran, V., Narayanan, K., Zhao, Z. & Gabrieli, J. D. E. (2000) Integration of
diverse information in working memory within the frontal lobe. Nature-
Neuroscience 3:85–90.
[BR]
Pylyshyn, Z. (1989) The role of location indices in spatial perception: A sketch of
the FINST spatial-index model. Cognition 32:65–97.
[GD]
Pylyshyn, Z., Burkell, J., Fisher, B., Sears, C., Schmidt, W. & Trick, L. (1994)
Multiple parallel access in visual attention. Canadian Journal of Experimental
Psychology 48:260–83.
[aNC]
Pylyshyn, Z. W. & Storm, R. W. (1988) Tracking multiple independent targets:
Evidence for a parallel tracking mechanism. Spatial Vision 3:179–97.
[aNC,
BJS]
Raaijmakers, J. G. W. & Shiffrin, R. M. (1981) Search of associative memory.
Psychological Review 88:93–134.
[aNC]
Rafal, R. D. (1997) Balint syndrome. In: Behavioral neurology and
neuropsychology, ed. T. Feinberg & M. Farrah. McGraw-Hill.
[BJS]
Raffone, A. & Wolters, G. (in press) A cortical mechanism for binding in visual
working memory. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience.
[AR]
Raghavachari, S., Caplan, J. B., Kirschen, M., Kahana, M., Madsen, J. R. &
Lisman, J. E. (1999) The Sternberg task evokes theta oscillations in human
intracranial recordings. Society for Neuroscience Abstracts 25:1143.
[OJ]
Rainer, G., Asaad, W. F. & Miller, E. K. (1998) Selective representation of relevant
References/Cowan: The magical number 4
182
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2000) 24:1
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 97 (native) -----
information by neurons in the primate prefrontal cortex. Nature 393:577–79.
[PRR]
Ratcliff, R. (1978) A theory of memory retrieval. Psychological Review 85:59–108.
[rNC]
Reber, P. J. & Kotovsky, K. (1997) Implicit learning in problem solving: The role of
working memory capacity. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General
126:178–203.
[aNC]
Reisberg, D., Rappaport, I. & O’Shaughnessy, M. (1984) Limits of working
memory: The digit-digit span. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition 10:203–21.
[aNC]
Rensink, R. A. (1999) The magical number one, plus or minus zero. Investigative
Ophthalmology and Visual Science 40:52.
[RAR]
(2000a) Visual search for change: A probe into the nature of attentional
processing. Visual Cognition 7:345– 76.
[RAR, BJS]
(2000b) Seeing, sensing, and scrutinizing. Vision Research 40:1469–87.
[RAR]
(2000c) Differential grouping of features. Perception 29 supplement.
[RAR]
Rensink, R. A., Deubel, H. & Scheneider, W. X. (2000) The incredible shrinking
span: Estimates of memory capacity depend on interstimulus interval.
Investigative Ophthalmology and Visual Science 41:425.
[RAR]
Rensink, R. A., O’Regan, J. K. & Clark, J. J. (1997) To see or not to see: The need
for attention to perceive changes in scenes. Psychological Science 8:368–73.
[aNC, RAR]
Richman, H. B., Gobet, F., Staszewski, J. J. & Simon, H. A. (1996) Perceptual and
memory processes in the acquisition of expert performance: The EPAM
model. In: The road to excellence, ed. K. A. Ericsson. Erlbaum.
[PCL]
Richman, H. B., Staszewski, J. J. & Simon, H. A. (1995) Simulation of expert
memory using EPAM IV. Psychological Review 102:305–30.
[aNC, KAE]
Robertson, L., Treisman, A., Friedman-Hill, S. & Grabowecky, M. (1997) The
interaction of spatial and object pathways: Evidence from Balint’s syndrome.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 9:295–317.
[BJS]
Robin, N. & Holyoak, K. J. (1995) Relational complexity and the functions of
prefrontal cortex. In: The cognitive neurosciences, ed. M. S. Gazzaniga. MIT
Press.
[JPL]
Rodriquez, E., George, N., Lachaux, J.-P., Martinerie, J., Renault, B. & Varela, F. J.
(1999) Perception’s shadow: long-distance synchronization of human brain
activity. Nature 397:430–33.
[aNC]
Roelfsema, P. R., Lamme, V. A. F. & Spekreijse, H. (2000) The implementation of
visual routines. Vision Research 40:1385–1411.
[PRR]
Roelfsema, P. R. & Singer, W. (1998) Detecting connectedness. Cerebral Cortex
8:385–96.
[PRR]
Roitblat, H. L., Bever, T. G., Helweg, D. A. & Harley, H. E. (1991) On-line choice
and the representation of serially structured stimuli. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes 17:55–67.
[DT]
Rubin, D. C. & Wenzel, A. E. (1996) One hundred years of forgetting: A quantitative
description of retention. Psychological Review 103:734–60.
[PM]
Ryan, J. (1969) Grouping and short-term memory: Different means and patterns of
groups. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology 21:137–47.
[aNC]
Rypma, B., Prabhakaran, V., Desmond, J. E., Glover, G. H. & Gabrieli, J. D. E.
(1999) Load-dependent roles of prefrontal cortical regions in the maintenance
of working memory. NeuroImage 9:216–26.
[BR]
Sanders, A. F. (1968) Short term memory for spatial positions. Psychologie 23:1–
15.
[aNC]
Sanders, A. F. & Schroots, J. J. F. (1969) Cognitive categories and memory span:
III. Effects of similarity on recall. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology 21:21–28.
[aNC]
Saults, J. S. & Cowan, N. (1996) The development of memory for ignored speech.
Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 63:239–61.
[rNC]
Scarborough, D. L. (1971) Memory for brief visual displays: The role of implicit
speech. Paper presented to the Eastern Psychological Association, New York,
NY.
[aNC]
Schneider, W. X. (1999) Visual-spatial working memory, attention, and scene
representation: A neuro-cognitive theory. Psychological Research 62:220–36.
[WS]
Schneider, W. & Detweiler, M. (1987) A connectionist/control architecture for
working memory. In: The psychology of learning motivation, vol. 21, ed. G. H.
Bower. Academic Press.
[aNC]
Schneider, W. & Shiffrin, R. M. (1977) Controlled and automatic human
information processing: I. Detection, search, and attention. Psychological
Review 84:1–66.
[aNC, rNC]
Schneider, W. X., Wesenick, M. B., Deubal, H. & Bundesen, C. (1999) A study of
visuospatial working memory. Perception 28:5.
[RAR] 
Scholl, B. J. (in press) Objects and attention: The state of the art. Cognition:
Special Issue on Objects and Attention.
[BJS]
Scholl, B. J. & Leslie, A. M. (1999) Explaining the infant’s object concept: Beyond
the perception/cognition dichotomy. In: What is cognitive science?, ed. E.
Lepore & Z. Pylyshyn. Blackwell.
[BJS]
Scholl, B. J. & Pylyshyn, Z. W. (1999) Tracking multiple items through occlusion:
Clues to visual objecthood. Cognitive Psychology 38:259–90.
[BJS]
Scholl, B. J., Pylyshyn, Z. W. & Feldman, J. (in press) What is a visual object?
Evidence from multiple object tracking. Cognition.
[BJS]
Schubert, T. (1999) Processing differences between choice and simple reaction
tasks affect outcome of bottleneck localisation experiments. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 25:408–25.
[TS]
Schumacher, E., Seymour, T. L., Glass, J. M., Lauber, E. J., Kieras, D. E. & Meyer,
D. E. (1998) Virtually perfect timesharing in dual-task performance:
Behavioural evidence for independent parallel processing in the human brain.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience supplement:106.
[TS]
Schweickert, R. & Boruff, B. (1986) Short-term memory capacity: Magic number
or magic spell? Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition 12:419–25.
[aNC, SM, JSN]
Schweickert, R., Hayt, C., Hersberger, L. & Guentert, L. (1996) How many words
can working memory hold? A model and a method. In: Models of short-term
memory, ed. S. E. Gathercole. Psychology Press.
[aNC]
Schyns, P., Goldstone, R. L. & Thilbaut, J.-P. (1998) The development of features
in object concepts. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 21:1–54.
[RDO]
Sebrechts, M. M., Marsh, R. L. & Seamon, J. C. (1989) Secondary memory and
very rapid forgetting. Memory and Cognition 17:693–700.
[PM]
Service, E. (1998) The effect of word length on immediate serial recall depends on
phonological complexity, not articulatory duration. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology 51A:283–304.
[aNC, SM]
Shah, P. & Miyake, A. (1996) The separability of working memory resources for
spatial thinking and language processing: An individual differences approach.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 125:4–27.
[aNC]
Shallice, T. & Warrington, E. K. (1970) Independent functioning of verbal memory
stores: A neuropsychological study. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology 22:261–73.
[BJS]
Shastri, L. & Ajjanagadde, V. (1993) From simple associations to systematic
reasoning: A connectionist representation of rules, variables, and dynamic
bindings using temporal synchrony. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 16:417–94.
[aNC, HT]
Shibuya, H. & Bundesen, C. (1988) Visual selection from multielement displays:
Measuring and modeling effects of exposure duration. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 14:160–68.
[WS]
Shiffrin, R. M. (1993) Short-term memory: A brief commentary. Memory and
Cognition 21:193–97.
[aNC, rNC]
Shiffrin, R. M. & Schneider, W. (1977) Controlled and automatic human
information processing: II. Perceptual learning, automatic attending, and a
general theory. Psychological Review 84:127–90.
[aNC, rNC]
Simon, H. A. (1974) How big is a chunk? Science 183:482–88.
[aNC]
Simon, T. J. & Vaishnavi, S. (1996) Subitizing and counting depend on different
attentional mechanisms: Evidence from visual enumeration in afterimages.
Perception and Psychophysics 58:915–26.
[aNC, BJS]
Simons, D. J. (1996) In sight, out of mind: When object representations fail.
Psychological Science 7:301–305.
[RAR]
Simons, D. J. & Levin, D. T. (1998) Failure to detect changes to people during a
real-world interaction. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review 5:644–49.
[aNC]
Sirevaag, E. J., Kramer, A. F., Coles, M. G. H. & Donchin, E. (1989) Resource
reciprocity: An event-related brain potentials analysis. Acta Psychologica
70:77–97.
[aNC]
Slak, S. (1970) Phonemic recoding of digital information. Journal of Experimental
Psychology 86:398–406.
[DJM]
Slemecka, N. J. (1985) Ebbinghaus: Some associations. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 11:414–35.
[JJ, rNC]
Smith, E. E. & Jonides, J. (1995) Working memory in humans: Neuropsychological
Evidence. In: The cognitive neurosciences, ed. M. Gazzaniga. MIT Press.
[ADB]
(1999) Storage and executive processes in the frontal lobes. Science 283:1657–
61.
[BR]
Solso, R. L. (1995) Cognitive Psychology, 4th ed. Allyn and Bacon.
[PM]
Sperling, G. (1960) The information available in brief visual presentations.
Psychological Monographs 74:Whole No. 498.
[aNC, SAH, RDO, TS, rNC]
(1967) Successive approximations to a model for short-term memory. Acta
Psychologica 27:285–92.
[aNC]
Spitz, H. H. (1973) The channel capacity of educable mental retardates. In: The
experimental psychology of mental retardation, ed. D. K. Routh. Aldine.
[BLB]
Spitzer, M. (1997) A cognitive neuroscience view of schizophrenic thought
disorder. Schizophrenia Bulletin 23:29–50.
[RDO]
Stadler, M. (1989) On learning complex procedural knowledge. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 15:1061–69.
[aNC]
Steele, C. M. & Josephs, R. A. (1990) Alcohol myopia: Its prized and dangerous
effects. American Psychologist 45:921–33.
[rNC]
Steriade, M., McCormick, D. A. & Sejnowski, R. J. (1993) Thalamocortical
oscillations in the sleeping and aroused brain. Science 262:679–685.
[BJB]
References/Cowan: The magical number 4
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2000) 24:1
183
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 98 (native) -----
Sternberg, S. (1966) High-speed scanning in human memory. Science 153:652–54.
[aNC, BJB, GG, JJ, DJM, rNC]
(1969a) The discovery of processing stages: Extensions of Donders’ method.
Acta Psychologica 30:276–315.
[BR]
(1969b) Memory scanning: Mental processes revealed reaction-time
experiments. American Scientist 57:421–57.
[JJ]
(1975) Memory scanning: New findings and current controversies. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology 27:1–32.
[JJ]
Stewart, L. & Pascual-Leone, J. (1992) Mental capacity constraints and the
development of moral reasoning. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology
54:251–87.
[JPL]
Stigler, J. W. (1984) “Mental abacus”: The effect of abacus training on Chinese
children’s mental calculation. Cognitive Psychology 16:145–76.
[KAE]
Straube, E. & Oades, R. D. (1992) Schizophrenia: Empirical research and finding.
Academic Press.
[RDO]
Sugase, Y., Yamane, S., Ueno, S. & Kawano, K. (1999) Global and fine information
encoded by single neurons in the temporal visual cortex. Nature 400:869–72.
[RDO]
Taatgen, N. A. (1999a) Cognitief modelleren, een nieuwe kijk op individuele
verschillen. Nederlands tijdschrift voor de psychologie 54:167–77.
[NAT]
(1999b) A model of learning task-specific knowledge for a new task. In:
Proceedings of the Twenty-first Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society. Erlbaum.
[NAT]
Tallon-Baudry, C., Kreiter, A. & Bertrand, O. (1999) Sustained and transient
oscillatory responses in the gamma and beta bands in a visual short-term
memory task in humans. Visual Neuroscience 16:449–59.
[OJ]
Tan, L. & Ward, G. (in press) A recency-based account of the primacy effect in
free recall. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition.
[SEA]
Tehan, G. & Humphreys, M. S. (1996) Cuing effects in short-term recall. Memory
and Cognition 24:719–32.
[aNC, JSN, rNC]
Terrace, H. (1987) Chunking by a pigeon in a serial learning task. Nature 325:149–
51.
[DT]
Thompson, C. P., Cowan, T. M. & Frieman, J. (1993) Memory search by a
memorist. Erlbaum.
[DJM, JW] 
Tiitinen, H. & May, P. (preprint) Auditory transient and sustained responses as a
function of interstimulus interval.
[HT]
Tiitinen, H., May, P., Reinikainen, K. & Näätänen, R. (1994) Attentive novelty
detection in humans is governed by pre-attentive sensory memory. Nature
372:90–92.
[HT]
Tiitinen, H., Sinkkonen, J., Reinikainen, K., Alho, K., Lavikainen, J. & Näätänen,
R. (1993) Selective attention enhances the auditory 40-Hz transient response
in humans. Nature 364:59–60.
[aNC, HT]
Todt, D., Cirillo, J., Geberzahn, N. & Schleuss, F. (2000) The role of hierarchy
levels in vocal imitations of songbirds. Cybernetics and Systems: An
International Journal 32:1–27.
[DT]
Tomonaga, M. & Matsuzawa, T. (2000) Sequential responding to arabic numbers
with wild cards by the chimpanzee (Pan troglodytes). Animal Cognition 3:1–
11.
[NK]
Toms, M., Morris, N. & Ward, D. (1993) Working memory and conditional
reasoning. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology 46A:679–99.
[aNC]
Tononi, G. & Edelman, G. M. (1998) Consciousness and complexity. Science
282:1846–51.
[BJB]
Townsend, J. T. (1976) Serial and within-stage independent parallel model
equivalence on the minimum completion time. Journal of Mathematical
Psychology 14:219–38.
[rNC]
Towse, J. N. & Houston-Price, C. M. T. (in press) Reflections on the concept of the
central executive. In: Working memory in perspective, ed. J. Andrade.
Psychology Press.
[JNT]
Treisman, A. M. & Gelade, G. (1980) A feature integration theory of attention.
Cognitive Psychology 12:97–136.
[PRR, rNC]
Treisman, A. & Gormican, S. (1988) Feature analysis in early vision: Evidence from
search asymmetries. Psychological Review 95:15–48.
[WS]
Trick, L. M. & Pylyshyn, Z. W. (1993) What enumeration studies can show us
about spatial attention: Evidence for limited capacity preattentive processing.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance
19:331–51.
[aNC, GD, TS]
(1994a) Why are small and large numbers enumerated differently? A limited-
capacity preattentive stage in vision. Psychological Review 101:80–102.
[aNC, SEA, BJS]
(1994b) Cueing and counting: Does the position of the attentional focus affect
enumeration? Visual Cognition 1:67–100.
[aNC]
Tsodyks, M., Pawelzik, K. & Markram, H. (1998) Neural networks with dynamic
synapses. Neural Computation 10:821–35.
[MU]
Tulving, E. & Colotla, V. (1970) Free recall of trilingual lists. Cognitive Psychology
1:86–98.
[aNC]
Tulving, E. & Patkau, J. E. (1962) Concurrent effects of contextual constraint and
word frequency on immediate recall and learning of verbal material.
Canadian Journal of Psychology 16:83–95.
[aNC]
Tulving, E. & Patterson, R. D. (1968) Functional units and retrieval processes in
free recall. Journal of Experimental Psychology 77:239–48.
[aNC]
Tulving, E. & Pearlstone, Z. (1966) Availability versus accessibility of information
in memory for words. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior 5:381–
91.
[aNC]
Turvey, M. T. (1973) On peripheral and central processes in vision: Inferences
from an information processing analysis of masking with patterned stimuli.
Psychological Review 80:1–52.
[rNC]
Uller, C., Carey, S., Huntley-Fenner, G. & Klatt, L. (1999) What representations
might underlie infant numerical knowledge? Cognitive Development 14:1–43.
[BJS]
Usher, M. & Cohen, J. (1999) Short term memory and selection processes in a
frontal-lobe model. In: Connectionist models in cognitive neuroscience, ed. D.
Heinke, G. W. Humphries & A. Olsen. Springer-Verlag.
[MU]
Usher, M. & McClelland, J. L. (1995) Time course of perpetual choice. (Tech. Rep.
No. PDP. CNS.95.5). Pittsburgh, PA: Carnegie Mellon University.
[MU]
Vallar, G. & Baddeley, A. D. (1982) Short-term forgetting and the articulatory loop.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology 34A:53–60.
[aNC]
(1984) Fractionation of working memory: Neuropsychological evidence for a
phonological short-term store. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior 23:151–61.
[BR]
Van Oeffelen, M. & Vos, P. (1982) A probabilistic model for the discrimination of
visual number. Perception and Psychophysics 32:163–70.
[SEA]
Van Strien, J. W. & Bouma, A. (1990) Selective activation effects on concurrent
verbal and spatial memory loads in left-handed and right-handed adults. Brain
and Cognition 14:81–91.
[SM]
Varela, F. J. (1995) Resonant cell assemblies: A new approach to cognitive
functions and neuronal synchrony. Biological Research 28:81–95.
[AR]
Vogel, E. K. (2000) Selective storage in visual working memory: Distinguishing
between perceptual-level and working memory-level mechanisms of attention.
University of Iowa Press.
[GFW]
Vogel, E. K., Luck, S. J. & Shapiro, K. L. (1998) Electrophysiological evidence for
a postperceptual locus of suppression during the attentional blink. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 24:1656–74.
[aNC, GFW]
Von der Malsburg, C. (1981) The correlation theory of brain function. (Internal
Report 81–2). Göttingen, NL: Max Planck Institute for Biophysical
Chemistry.
[AR]
(1995) Binding in models of perception and brain function. Current Opinion in
Neurobiology 5:520–26.
[aNC, PRR]
Warren, R. M. & Obusek, C. J. (1972) Identification of temporal order within
auditory sequences. Perception and Psychophysics 12:86–90.
[CPB, rNC]
Warren, R. M., Obusek, C. J., Farmer, R. M. & Warren, R. P. (1969) Auditory
sequence: Confusion of patterns other than speech or music. Science
164:586–87.
[CPB]
Watkins, M. J. (1974) Concept and measurement of primary memory.
Psychological Bulletin 81:695–711.
[aNC]
Watkins, M. J. & Watkins, O. C. (1974) Processing of recency items for free recall.
Journal of Experimental Psychology 102:488–93.
[PM]
Watkins, O. C. & Watkins, M. J. (1975) Build-up of proactive inhibition as a cue-
overload effect. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and
Memory 1:442–52.
[aNC]
Watson, S. E. & Kramer, A. F. (1999) Object-based visual selective attention and
perceptual organization. Perception and Psychophysics 61:31–49.
[GD]
Waugh, N. C. & Norman, D. A. (1965) Primary memory. Psychological Review
72:89–104.
[aNC, JJ, BR]
Wegner, D. M., Quillian, F. & Houston, C. E. (1996) Memories out of order:
Thought suppression and the disturbance of sequence memory. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 71:680–91.
[CPB]
Welford, A. T. (1980) The single-channel hypothesis. In: Reaction times, ed. A. T.
Welford. Academic Press.
[TS]
Wharton, R. M. (1974) Approximate language identification. Information and
Control 26:236–55.
[EMP]
Wickelgren, W. A. (1964) Size of rehearsal group and short-term memory. Journal
of Experimental Psychology 68:413–19.
[aNC]
(1966) Phonemic similarity and interference in short-term memory for single
letters. Journal of Experimental Psychology 71:396–404.
[aNC]
Wickelgren, W. A., Corbett, A. T. & Dosher, B. A. (1980) Priming and retrieval
from short-term memory: A speed-accuracy tradeoff analysis. Journal of
Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior 19:387–404.
[BM]
Wickelgren, W. A. & Norman, D. A. (1966) Strength models and serial position in
short-term memory. Journal of Mathematical Psychology 3:316–47.
[DJM]
Wickens, C. D. (1984) Processing resources in attention. In: Varieties of attention,
ed R. Parasuraman & D. R. Davies. Academic Press.
[aNC]
Wickens, D. D., Moody, M. J. & Dow, R. (1981) The nature and timing of the
References/Cowan: The magical number 4
184
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2000) 24:1
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 99 (native) -----
retrieval process and of interference effects. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General 110:1–20.
[aNC]
Wilkes, A. L. (1975) Encoding processes and pausing behaviour. In: Studies in
long-term memory, ed. A. Kennedy & A. Wilkes. Wiley.
[aNC]
Wilson, B. A. & Baddeley, A. D. (1988) Semantic episodic and autobiographical
memory in a postmeningitic amnesic patient. Brain and Cognition 8:31–46.
[ADB]
Woodman, G. F. & Luck, S. J. (1999) Electrophysiological measurement of rapid
shifts of attention during visual search. Nature 400:867–69.
[GFW]
Woodman, G. F., Vogel, E. K. & Luck, S. J. (in press) Visual search remains
efficient when visual working memory is full. Psychological Science.
[GFW,
rNC]
Wynn, K. (1992) Addition and subtraction by human infants. Nature 358:749–50.
[BJS]
Xu, Y. (submitted) Integrating color and shape in visual short-term memory for
objects with parts.
[BJS]
Yamaguchi, S., Yamagata, S. & Kobayashi, S. (2000) Cerebral asymmetry of the
“top-down” allocation of attention to global and local features. Journal of
Neuroscience 20:1–5.
[RDO]
Yantis, S. (1992) Multi-element visual tracking: Attention and perceptual
organization. Cognitive Psychology 24:295–340.
[aNC, SEA]
Yantis, S. & Johnson, D. (1990) Mechanisms of attentional priority. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 16:812–25.
[BJS]
Young, R. M. (1996) Functionality matters: Capacity constraints and Soar. In: Mind
matters: A tribute to Allen Newell, ed. D. M. Steier & T. M. Mitchell.
Erlbaum.
[CPB]
Young, R. M. & Lewis, R. L. (1999) The Soar cognitive architecture and human
working memory. In: Models of working memory: Mechanisms of active
maintenance and executive control, ed. A. Miyake & P. Shah. Cambridge
University Press.
[CPB]
Zhang, G. & Simon, H. A. (1985) STM capacity for Chinese words and idioms:
Chunking and acoustical loop hypotheses. Memory and Cognition 13:193–
201.
[aNC, SEA]
References/Cowan: The magical number 4
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2000) 24:1
185
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01003922 Published online by Cambridge University Press