

----- Page 1 (native) -----
From the outcome of recent epidemiological, physiolog-
ical and omics-​based studies, complemented by cellu-
lar studies and experiments in animals, it appears that 
a considerable part of the environmental influence on 
human health and disease risk may be mediated or mod-
ified by microbial communities1. These microorganisms, 
collectively referred to as the microbiota, include a vast 
number of interacting bacteria, archaea, bacteriophages, 
eukaryotic virus and fungi coexisting on human surfaces 
and in all body cavities1. The majority of them are com-
mensal or mutualistic microorganisms1. The collection 
of all intestinal microbial genes (that is, the microbiome) 
in an individual represents a genetic repertoire that is 
more than one order of magnitude higher in genes than 
the human genome1. The majority of microorganisms 
that inhabit humans reside within the intestines and 
are influenced by mode of birth, infant feeding, life-
style, medication and the genetics of the host. The gut 
microbiome has important roles in the training of host 
immunity, digesting food, regulating gut endocrine func-
tion and neurological signalling, modifying drug action 
and metabolism, eliminating toxins and producing 
numerous compounds that influence the host1.
Here, we review the literature on the intestinal micro-
biota of the human host with a focus on bacteria and 
archaea, and their potential importance for human 
metabolism. In the literature, there is no consensus on 
how to define metabolic health. Yet a tentative definition 
is to have an overall metabolism (as estimated from an 
array of various measures of body organ functions, such 
as those of the liver, and intestinal, fat, muscle, heart 
and brain tissues) that in representative epidemiologi-
cal studies is linked with both desirable life quality and 
longevity. A considerable part of the world population, 
however, primarily due to overeating of processed 
energy-​dense food, urbanization with sedentary occu-
pations and leisure-​time inactivity often combined with 
smoking addiction, has a suboptimal or even a poor 
metabolic health. The implications are a high prevalence 
of metabolic disorders, including obesity, non-​alcoholic 
liver disease, type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2D) as well 
as cardio-​metabolic disease (CMD), and premature 
death2–6. In some developing countries, the metabolic 
health landscape is quite the opposite — a major part of 
the population is chronically malnourished7.
Despite the immense differences in pathologies of 
common chronic metabolic disorders, they are asso-
ciated with shared and disease-​specific abnormali-
ties in the composition and function of the intestinal 
microbiota8–11. Since the start of the microbiota research 
era, whether disease-​associated aberrant microbiota are 
involved in disease causation (that is, predisposition, ini-
tiation or progression) or are secondary phenomena has 
been widely debated. However, one of the first pieces of 
evidence for a mechanistic involvement of the gut micro-
biota in the regulation of metabolism was provided in 
Gut microbiota in human metabolic 
health and disease
Yong Fan    and Oluf Pedersen    ✉
Abstract | Observational findings achieved during the past two decades suggest that the 
intestinal microbiota may contribute to the metabolic health of the human host and, when 
aberrant, to the pathogenesis of various common metabolic disorders including obesity, type 2 
diabetes, non-​alcoholic liver disease, cardio-​metabolic diseases and malnutrition. However, to 
gain a mechanistic understanding of how the gut microbiota affects host metabolism, research  
is moving from descriptive microbiota census analyses to cause-​and-​effect studies. Joint analyses 
of high-​throughput human multi-​omics data, including metagenomics and metabolomics data, 
together with measures of host physiology and mechanistic experiments in humans, animals  
and cells hold potential as initial steps in the identification of potential molecular mechanisms 
behind reported associations. In this Review, we discuss the current knowledge on how gut 
microbiota and derived microbial compounds may link to metabolism of the healthy host or to 
the pathogenesis of common metabolic diseases. We highlight examples of microbiota-​targeted 
interventions aiming to optimize metabolic health, and we provide perspectives for future basic 
and translational investigations within the nascent and promising research field.
Novo Nordisk Foundation 
Center for Basic Metabolic 
Research, Faculty of Health 
and Medical Sciences, 
University of Copenhagen, 
Copenhagen, Denmark.
✉e-​mail: oluf@sund.ku.dk
https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
s41579-020-0433-9
naTure RevIeWS | MIcrobIology
Reviews
	
 volume 19 | January 2021 | 55

----- Page 2 (native) -----
2004 when it was shown in mice that the gut microbiota 
regulates host capacity for harvesting energy from the 
diet as well as energy storage12. Subsequently, and spear-
headed by application of next-​generation microbiome 
sequencing, generation of comprehensive microbial gene 
catalogues, development of targeted bioinformatics and 
availability of high data storage and operational capac-
ity, the research field has delivered an enormous amount 
of new knowledge about the potential role of the gut 
microbiota in metabolism13–15 (Box 1).
In this Review, we discuss taxonomic and functional 
characteristics of the intestinal microbiota in the meta-
bolically healthy human host and the implication of a 
reduction in gut microbial diversity for host metabo-
lism. This is followed by highlighting aspects of abnor-
mal gut microbiota composition and function, and the 
relationship to dysmetabolism in obesity, T2D, CMD, 
metabolic liver disease and malnutrition. We evaluate 
a series of recently discovered gut microbiota-​derived 
compounds and their potential role as messengers 
between the gut microbiota and host metabolism in 
physiological and diseased states. We highlight exam-
ples of microbiota-​based therapies to improve meta-
bolic health and, finally, we outline potential avenues for 
future epidemiological and experimental studies (Box 2 
and Box 3).
Healthy gut microbiota
A fundamental assumption for claiming disruption of 
gut microbiota in states of metabolic disorders is knowl-
edge on the composition and function of the gut micro-
biota of metabolically healthy people. However, a healthy 
human gut microbiota has not been defined at any pro-
found taxonomic resolution. The relative distribution of 
gut bacteria and archaea is unique to an individual, partly 
owing to strain-​level diversities and differences in micro-
bial growth rates16 and in structural variants within the 
microbial genes17,18, and partly owing to influence from 
the considerable inter-​individual variation in environ-
mental exposures and host genetics19. Overall, however, 
a high taxa diversity, high microbial gene richness and 
stable microbiome functional cores characterize healthy 
gut microbial communities18. Yet it is worth noting that 
high gut bacterial diversity and richness alone are not 
unbiased indicators of a healthy microbiota, because the 
intestinal transit time affects microbial richness20. A pro-
longed transit time may result in an increased richness 
but not necessarily in a healthy gut microbiota.
Box 1 | Tools for dissecting gut microbiota–metabolic health associations
Currently, there is major interest in exploring the potential role of the 
intestinal microbiome and linked faecal, blood and urine metabolomes  
as determinants for metabolic health and various metabolic diseases. 
Recent advances in shotgun sequencing technologies and a reduction in 
sequencing costs together with advances in bioinformatics have made it 
possible to capture a more comprehensive view of the entire community 
of gut microorganisms and their functional potentials. Similarly, various 
sensitive and precise technologies for profiling the metabolome of body 
fluids are available. Here, we summarize some of the recent strategies 
that have been applied to uncover relationships between the gut 
microbiome and various metabolomes.
Microbiome-​wide association studies
The microbiome-​wide association study approach largely mimics 
genome-​wide association studies identifying genetic variants in case–
control studies that are associated with a phenotype, often a disease 
state. In the case of microbiome-​wide association studies, microbial DNA 
is purified from intestinal or faecal samples and subjected to deep 
shotgun-​based sequencing. Individually, the identified and assembled 
genes are then integrated to construct a cross-​sampled, non-​redundant 
microbial gene catalogue. The abundance of each gene is determined by 
counting the reads of matching sequences in the individual sample.
Applying various bioinformatic algorithms and correlation coefficients, 
assembled genes in the microbiome data are clustered into specific 
groups, such as metagenomic linkage groups8, metagenomic species62, 
co-​abundance gene groups168 or metagenomic species pan-​genomes169. 
Sequence reads from individual samples that map to the metagenomic 
linkage groups, metagenomic species, co-​abundance gene groups, 
metagenomic species pan-​genomes and their contigs, respectively, are 
then extracted and assembled into high-​quality draft genomes, each  
of which is defined as a species or a group of highly related species. 
Recently, it has also become possible to define strain-​level signatures  
in gut microbiomes. These tools include StrainPhlAn that is based on 
applying single-​nucleotide variant analysis to the core genome of 
sequenced microbial isolates170, MetaMLST that is based on species-​ 
specific hypervariable loci171 and MetaPanPhlAn that is based on pan-​ 
genome profiling172. However, these methods rely on the coverage and 
quality of reference genomes173. Results from strain-​level profiling still 
need to be validated by obtaining a pure culture containing the target 
bacterial isolate. In addition, associations with health or disease status  
can be characterized for individual microbial genes, taxa or modules  
of microbial functional potentials14,17,45. Classifiers such as supervised  
machine learning or random forest can be used to assign each sample to a 
certain category. To validate associations identified by microbiome-​wide 
association studies, additional metagenomics data sets such as samples 
from other independent studies are included.
Integrated analyses of microbiome and linked metabolomes
Gut bacteria can produce various bioactive metabolites, which can enter 
the bloodstream of the host through absorption into the enterohepatic 
circulation. Specific metabolites associated with a disease phenotype can 
be identified by mass spectrometry or nuclear magnetic resonance-​based 
metabolomics of faeces, plasma, urine or other biofluids, making it 
possible to conduct joint analyses of the microbiome, metabolome and 
host phenotypes to identify potential mechanistic links15. The analysis 
framework includes at least four steps: first, as described above, clustering 
of microbial genes, the functional potential of which can be constructed 
by organizing the genes into Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes 
functional modules based on sequence similarity to proteins with 
known functional characteristics15. The second step involves clustering of 
metabolites showing co-​abundance to reduce dimension of metabolomics 
features, given that metabolites are often shaped by common pathways 
that could be regulated by precursors14. By using weighted gene 
co-​expression network analysis, which was originated from gene expression 
analysis, co-​abundant metabolites can be clustered174. Of note, one of the 
advantages of this algorithm is the use of a bin cluster for unannotated 
metabolites instead of clustering all metabolites. The next step is to apply 
non-​parametric statistical tests to correlated clustered genes and 
metabolites. Finally, based on the hypothesis that microbial functional 
correlations could be driven by one or few species or by a group of species, 
it is recommended to perform leave-​one-​out cross-​validation to evaluate 
the contribution of each gene cluster by removing it from the associations14. 
Correlation analysis between these specific metabolites and prevalent 
gene clusters may lead to the identification of specific species that 
harbour the genes needed to produce precursors of the disease-​relevant 
metabolites that are produced either by the gut microbiota or by both the 
host and the gut microbiota14,45. Eventually, identified microbial candidates 
are evaluated in rodent models (Box 2).
Supervised machine learning
A form of applied artificial 
intelligence where the algorithm 
learns by experience to classify 
new data according to prior 
labels.
Random forest
A machine learning approach 
where a multitude of algorithms 
(decision trees) are used  
to optimize, for instance, 
classification or regression  
of data sets.
Kyoto Encyclopedia of 
Genes and Genomes
A publicly available database 
in bioinformatics and system 
medicine-​driven analyses with 
information on omics-​generated 
data, biological pathways, 
chemicals and drugs.
www.nature.com/nrmicro
Reviews
56 | January 2021 | volume 19

----- Page 3 (native) -----
Box 2 | A framework to study causality of gut microbial components
To progress from microbiome–disease 
associations to functions of the microbiome  
in a given disease, additional experiments  
are suggested to explore potential causality 
between microbial components and the disease 
of interest. Biological samples from affected 
and control individuals are analysed using 
shotgun sequencing and untargeted (that is, 
discovery-based and global but semi-quantitative) 
metabolomics profiling to identify microbial 
features or molecules differently abundant in 
various biofluids (see the figure, part a). In an 
untargeted run, the analyte is characterized by 
its retention time and its mass to charge ratio 
(m/z value). The identification of a novel 
compound is confirmed by generation of a 
nuclear magnetic resonance spectrum or 
matching fragmental behaviour and retention 
time to synthetic reference standards175. 
Both microbiome and metabolome data sets are 
subjected to integrative analysis to capture 
candidate biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs), 
bacteria or communities that are highly related 
to metabolites. To identify whether the 
compound of interest is produced in a 
microbiota-​dependent manner, triple 
quadrupole mass spectrometry can be used  
to perform targeted (that is, validation of 
well-​defined metabolites often in a quantitative 
manner) profiling of samples from both 
germ-​free and control mice (see the figure, 
part b). In addition, the conventionalization  
of antibiotic-​treated mice to rescue gut 
microbiota can also specifically demonstrate 
the role of gut microbiota in generating  
specific compounds. When employing 
reaction-selecting modes in targeted capturing 
of the candidate analytes, both the first 
quadrupole (Q1) and the last quadrupole (Q3) 
are set at a specific mass, allowing only distinct 
monitoring of the ion fragment from a certain 
precursor, which results in an increased 
detecting sensitivity.
When the selected reaction monitoring is 
applied to multiple product ions from one or 
more precursor ions, the pattern is called 
multiple reaction monitoring176.
Human intestinal microbiome data and 
microbial-​derived compounds can be 
associated to select candidate BGCs, microbial 
species or a microbial community whose 
presence correlates with the production of 
specific compounds (see the figure, part c). 
Dimensionality reduction is achieved by 
clustering genes that encode the biosynthetic 
enzymes for secondary metabolite pathways, 
binning co-​abundant genes and assembling 
co-​occurring microbes that are present in a 
defined ecological habitat in space and 
time14,177.
Phenotypic profiling of germ-​free mice harbouring a reference BGC, microbial species or microbial community can be profiled in a comparative 
targeted manner to examine the abundance changes of the compound of interest177.
To identify downstream signalling pathways that microbial-​derived compounds may be involved in, a genetically altered mouse can be generated to see 
the change of microorganism-​generated compound because of the inactivated downstream effects (see the figure, part d). The evidence collected above 
may stimulate to develop microbiota-​directed interventions (Box 3).
HOMA-​IR, homeostatic model assessment of insulin resistance. Part c of figure adapted from ref.14, Springer Nature Limited.
–1
0
1
Spearman 
correlation 
coeﬃcient
Control
Control
Control
Conven-
tionalized
Antibiotic-
treated
Germ-
free
Disease
Disease
Microbial-
targeted therapy
Microbial-based
drug design
Control
Gene knockout
a
b
c
d
Metagenomic 
proﬁling
Untargeted
metabolomic 
proﬁling
m/z
Intensity
+
Metabolome
Microbiome
Integrative analysis
Standard
Analyte
Time
Intensity
Candidate BGCs or 
bacteria or community
Metabolite
identiﬁcation
Gene knockout
Control
Time
Intensity
Serum
Faeces
Urine
Serum
Faeces
Urine
Serum
Faeces
Urine
Q1
Q2
Q3
Ion
source
Precursor ion
selection
Product ion 
selection
Fragmentation
Targeted metabolomics
Time
Intensity
BGC or bacteria or 
community
Microbiota-dependent fashion
Potential targeted
gene deﬁcient
Healthy metabolism
+
BGCs or bacteria or community of interest
Colonization of
germ-free mice
Germ-free
Comparative targeted metabolomics
Time
Intensity
Control
Antibiotic-
treated
Conven-
tionalized
Control
Germ-
free
Serum glucose (mol–1)
HOMA-IR
Minutes post 
insulin injection
P. copri abundance
(a.u.)
5
10
15
0
0
50
100
**
**
*
Prevotella copri
Sham control
20
10
40
30
50
0
0
20
40
60
Phenotypic proﬁling
naTure RevIeWS | MIcrobIology
Reviews
	
 volume 19 | January 2021 | 57

----- Page 4 (native) -----
The mode of birth and access to breastfeeding 
shape the infant gut microbiota, and it matures grad-
ually during childhood in response to environmental 
exposures21,22. Thereafter, the intestinal microbiota 
remains relatively stable in late childhood, adolescence 
and adulthood until a decline in diversity occurs at 
advanced age, likely owing, in part, to a change in 
immune functions22. The mature healthy intestinal 
Box 3 | Microbiota-​changing interventions
Owing to the exponentially growing 
knowledge gained from 
epidemio­logical and experimental 
studies about the impact of the 
intestinal microbiome on metabolic 
health, there is an interest in testing 
both targeted and untargeted 
microbiome-​directed interventions 
in humans with disrupted gut 
microbiomes (see the figure).
Untargeted interventions
Diet or exercise interventions
In rodents, feeding various 
combinations of nutrients changes 
the gut microbiome and metabolism.  
In particular, high-​saturated fat feeding 
causes endotoxaemia and insulin 
resistance178 (Fig. 1). A systematic 
review has summarized the results  
of six interventions and nine cross-​ 
sectional studies investigating the 
effects of dietary fat on intestinal 
microbiota in humans179, and 
demonstrated that diets high in saturated or monounsaturated fat 
negatively influenced the microbiota whereas diets high in 
polyunsaturated fat appeared to be neutral with respect to the microbiota. 
Similarly, high-​polysaccharide diet interventions have resulted in altered 
gut microbiota linked with increased faecal, serum or urine concentrations 
of short-​chain fatty acids, weight loss and improvements of cytokine and 
metabolome profiles180–183. Likewise, interventions with increased physical 
activity have shown adaptive and, in some cases, transmissible changes of 
the intestinal microbiome linked with an increased capacity for breakdown 
of lactate, branched-​chain amino acids, an increased potential for 
synthesis of short-​chain fatty acids and improvements of cardiorespiratory 
fitness and insulin sensitivity.
Trials testing probiotics, prebiotics or postbiotics
Bifidobacterium, Lactobacillus and Saccharomyces spp. have a long history 
as safe probiotics184. In addition, potential next-​generation probiotics, 
which are not yet marketed, include Faecalibacterium prausnitzii185, 
Akkermansia muciniphila186 and several Clostridia spp.187. Systematic 
reviews of short-​term randomized controlled trials in healthy individuals 
show no consistent effect of probiotics on gut microbial composition188. 
However, it is possible that some probiotics, for example A. muciniphila 
strains, do not even need to colonize the intestine to provide beneficial 
metabolic health effects189,190. Some non-​digestible polysaccharides called 
prebiotics change the relative abundance of fermenting microbiota in the 
colon of rodents and induce improved gut barrier functions and in some 
cases improved metabolism191. Of note, randomized controlled trials 
testing various prebiotics have demonstrated that inulin-​type fructans 
changed the gut microbiota composition in adult women with obesity, 
leading to modest changes in host metabolism192. In children who are 
overweight or have obesity, it is reported that oligofructose-​enriched 
inulin prebiotics alter the intestinal microbiota and modestly reduce body 
weight, adiposity and inflammatory markers193. The same holds for the 
combination of various probiotic strains and prebiotics often named 
synbiotics. Postbiotics represent the pasteurized version of probiotics or 
parts of microbial strains possessing health-​promoting effects194. A pilot 
trial of pasteurized A. muciniphila and its membrane protein Amuc_1100 
demonstrated positive effects on markers of human metabolism186,195.
Heterologous and autologous faecal microbiota transplantation
It is currently unsettled whether heterologous faecal microbiota 
transplantation will be an option in preventing or treating metabolic 
dysfunctions with aetiologies far more complex than chronic infections 
caused by Clostridioides difficile196. Challenges include lack of knowledge 
about the importance of dieting for stool graft colonization and survival, 
optimal anaerobic handling of donor faeces, immunological compatibility 
between donor and recipient, and the role of bacteriophages and fungi for 
a successful faecal microbiota transplantation. In parallel, there is a need 
for examining the feasibility and efficacy of the much less complicated 
autologous faecal microbiota transplantation stored prior to development 
of a metabolic disease, that is, faecal samples biobanked in childhood or 
adolescence.
Targeted interventions
Bio-engineered commensals and drugs
In mice, gavaging engineered Escherichia coli overexpressing the satiety 
factor N-​acylphosphatidylethanolamine alleviated high-​fat diet-​induced 
obesity, insulin resistance and hepatosteatosis197; and in rats with diabetes, 
a genetically modified Lactobacillus gasseri strain with the ability to express 
and secrete glucagon-​like peptide 1 (GLP-1) increased insulin release and 
reduced hyperglycaemia198. Whether delivering genetically modified 
organisms carrying microbial genes to the human gut is acceptable for 
health and drug authorities or consumers is at present unsettled. Targeting 
specific microbial-​synthesized metabolites by delivering tailored drugs is 
another emerging potential frontier to optimize metabolism. A prime 
example is the specific drug blockade of the microbial production of 
trimethylamine78.
Bacteriophage therapy and CRISPR–Cas9 editing
As most bacteriophages and archaeal viruses are specific to bacterial  
and archaeal strains, respectively, they may in future experiments  
be applied to target dysbiotic parts of the microbiome in individuals  
with metabolic disorders199. Similarly, it is at present unknown whether  
CRISPR–Cas can be applied to edit and reset dysbiotic parts of a  
human gut microbiome without causing undesired effects for the  
host200.
Exercises
Individualized
nutrition
Faecal microbiota
transplantation
Bio-engineered
commensals
Drugs targeting selected
microbial metabolism
Phage therapy
CRISPR–Cas9-based
therapy
Prebiotics
Probiotics
Synbiotics
Postbiotics
Microbiome-directed interventions
General improvement in
microbial composition and functions
Speciﬁc modiﬁcation in
metabolism-related gut microbiota
Targeted
Untargeted
A
E
D C
B
www.nature.com/nrmicro
Reviews
58 | January 2021 | volume 19

----- Page 5 (native) -----
microbial core functions include genes encoding glycos-
aminoglycan degradation, the production of short-​chain 
fatty acids (SCFAs) via fermentation of complex poly-
saccharides and synthesis of specific lipopolysaccharides 
(LPS), and the biosynthesis of some essential amino 
acids and vitamins13,18,23,24 (Fig. 1).
In summary, a ‘gold standard’ reference of a human 
gut microbiota with the capacity to promote host meta­
b­olic health does not exist. This is owing to a tremen-
dous variation, especially at taxonomy levels, between 
individuals of different demography, ethnicity, sex, age 
and health status. The implications of this variation are 
that epidemiological studies must include controls for 
contextual factors or adjust for the contextual differences.
Receding gut microbial diversity
Compared with people living traditional lifestyles (for 
instance, people in East Africa or in the Amazonas) 
who have not been exposed to antimicrobial factors of 
modern living, most populations in technically devel-
oped countries of the world show reduced gut micro-
bial diversity25. In parallel with urbanization, sewerage, 
higher standards of housing and improved hygiene 
in general, the abundance of Bacteroides, Prevotella, 
Desulfovibrio, Lactobacillus and Oxalobacter genera 
in the gut microbiota is declining25–27. This decline in 
diversity relates to a rise in the prevalence of common 
chronic metabolic disorders28. Similarly, in both lean 
individuals and individuals with obesity, low microbial 
gene richness links with a relative increase in adipos-
ity, insulin resistance, inflammation and dyslipidaemia28. 
The precise and specific causes of the receding microbial 
richness and diversity in developed countries are elusive. 
However, besides the general improvement in standards 
of living and hygiene, the use of antibiotics to combat 
infectious diseases is suspected to be a contributor29. 
For instance, the use of antibiotics before pregnancy, 
during pregnancy or in early childhood may change 
the composition of the gut microbiota of infants and 
children, practices that have occurred in parallel with 
increases in the incidence of early-​onset obesity30,31. 
In adults, short-​term treatment of young healthy indi-
viduals with broad-​spectrum antibiotics causes the 
long-​term depletion of some commensal and mutual-
istic bacteria32. However, causal relationships between 
antibiotic use, disruption of the gut microbiota and 
dysmetabolism have not been shown33–35. The effects of 
antibiotics on the gut microbiota and metabolism may 
be dependent on host genetics because studies in mice 
fed a high-​fat diet demonstrate that the effect of anti-
biotics on numerous metabolic variables is dependent 
on the genetic background of the animals36. Below, we 
discuss aspects of abnormal gut microbiota and the 
relationships to metabolism in obesity, T2D, metabolic 
liver disease and CMD, where the diversity of the gut 
microbiota of the affected is often reported to be reduced 
compared with healthy individuals, and even more 
so compared with people living traditional lifestyles28,37. 
In addition, we discuss how severe malnutrition dur-
ing infancy and early childhood relates to a relative 
depletion of certain bacteria in the gut microbiota. In 
the absence of clinically controlled interventions aimed 
at restoring the richness and diversity of gut microbial 
communities in chronic disorders, it is not possible to 
evaluate whether a receding intestinal microbiota is 
part of disease causation or a secondary adaptation in 
states of chronic non-​communicable disorders. Yet there 
is some evidence that dietary interventions may improve 
low microbial gene richness and host metabolism in 
individuals with obesity38.
Gut microbiota of metabolic pathologies
Gut microbiota is aberrant in obesity. The incidence of 
obesity and its metabolic co-​morbidities in the devel-
oped countries has increased dramatically since the mid-​
twentieth century39. Sedentary lifestyles and increased 
food consumption in combination with a widespread 
polygenetic susceptibility are considered to be the major 
causes for the obesity epidemic40, which is potentially 
further aggravated by the widespread use of antibiotics29. 
In addition, evidence is accumulating for a role of the 
gut microbiota in mediating some of the environmental 
effects in obesity pathogenesis. Following the discovery 
in 2006 that a transferrable obesity-​associated micro­
biota can induce weight gain in lean mice41, subse-
quent epidemiological studies have shown differences 
in the gut microbiota of individuals with obesity and 
lean individuals. At the species level, twin studies have 
shown that the abundance of SCFA producers such as 
Eubacterium ventriosum and Roseburia intestinalis is 
associated with obesity42, whereas butyrate producers 
such as Oscillospira spp.43 and the methanogenic 
archaeon Methanobrevibacter smithii may associate 
with leanness44. Another metagenome-​wide association 
study of lean individuals and individuals with obesity 
showed that the abundance of Bacteroides thetaiotaomi­
cron, a glutamate-​fermenting commensal, was markedly 
decreased in individuals with obesity and was inversely 
correlated with serum glutamate concentration45. 
Furthermore, gavage of mice with B. thetaiotaomicron 
protected against adiposity, pointing to possible future 
modalities for obesity intervention targeting the gut 
microbiota with potential probiotic or microbial com-
pounds (Box 3). Analyses of gut microbial pathways and 
gene families suggest that obesity is associated with a 
decreased capacity for unidirectional conjugation, 
which transfers genetic material between bacteria, and a 
reduction in superoxide reductase, potentially leading to 
intestinal oxidative stress46 (Fig. 2). Observational studies 
have been complemented by a faecal microbiota trans-
plantation study demonstrating that transplantation of 
stools from twins discordant for obesity into germ-​free 
mice transfers, in a diet-​dependent manner, the pheno-
type of the human donor to the recipient animal47. This 
landmark study provides the rationale for the ongoing 
intense search for gut microbial messengers linking the 
gut microbiota with whole-​body energy metabolism. In 
studies of the potential impact of altered gut microbiota 
in the development of chronic disorders including obe-
sity, however, it is important to bear in mind that various 
drugs may influence the gut microbiota. For instance, 
intake of statins, which are cholesterol-​lowering drugs 
widely prescribed for the prevention of arterioscle-
rosis, has been linked with a health-​promoting gut 
Dysmetabolism
Metabolic dysfunctions often 
including abdominal obesity, 
dyslipidaemia and higher 
blood glucose and higher 
blood pressure than normal.
Endotoxaemia
The presence of endotoxin(s) 
within the blood, for example, 
bacterial lipopolysaccharides.
Dyslipidaemia
An abnormal amount and an 
abnormal relative distribution 
of various lipids in the blood.
naTure RevIeWS | MIcrobIology
Reviews
	
 volume 19 | January 2021 | 59

----- Page 6 (native) -----
microbiota48. Obviously, observations of any effects of 
microbiota-​modifying drugs ideally need to be followed 
up in interventional studies to address any causality of 
the relationships.
Type 2 diabetes and prediabetes link with altered gut 
microbiota. Indirect evidence that the intestinal micro-
biota together with the hormonal secretion capacities 
of the distal gut may be involved in glucose regulation 
comes from large-​scale epidemiological studies show-
ing that, compared with individuals without colectomy, 
patients with total colectomy have an increased risk 
of T2D49. In addition, mechanistic studies in rodents 
have shown that hyperglycaemia may increase intesti-
nal barrier permeability through a GLUT2-​dependent 
transcriptional reprogramming of intestinal epithelial 
cells and alteration of tight junction integrity, subse-
quently causing a leaky mucosa50. Therefore, there is 
major interest in understanding whether an aberrant 
gut micro­biota is involved in triggering or sustaining 
elevated blood glucose in T2D and its precursor states. 
T2D represents ~90% of all diabetes cases51 and, like 
obesity, is growing in incidence and prevalence, affect-
ing between 5 and 15% of the adult population, making 
it the most common endocrine disorder52. The aetiology 
of T2D involves a combination of hundreds of genetic 
↓ Mucus
    secretion
GPCR-41/43
GPCR-41/43
Microbiota related to metabolic health
Aberrant microbiota related to metabolic diseases
Diet low in animal fat and protein
but high in plant ﬁbres
Host enzyme
digestion
Acid
hydrolysis
Fermentation
Indigestible
polysaccharides
Diet high in animal fat and protein
but low in plant ﬁbres
Host
proteases
Proteolysis
• Ammonia 
• Amines
• H2
• CO2
• CH4
• Organic
   acids
• p-Cresol 
• Phenyl-
 propionate
• Indole
 propionate 
• Indole
 acetate
• Indole
Phenylacetate
Hydrogen
sulﬁde
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
Peptides
Other
amino acids
Sulfur
amino acids
Aromatic
amino acids
↑ Luminal pH
↑ Acetaldehyde
↑ Energy
    expenditure
↓ Blood
    glucose
↑ Mucus
    secretion
↑ Methane
↓ Luminal pH
↑ Glucose-stimulated
    insulin secretion
↑ BCFAs
↑ TMAO
• Deamination
• Decarboxylation
• Methionine
• Cystine
• Cysteine
• Taurine
Tyrosine
Phenylalanine Tryptophan
Miscellaneous
reactions
Sulfate
reduction
PAMPs (LPS)
L cells
↑ Metabolic
    endotoxaemia
↑ Blood
    glucose
↓ Glucose-stimulated
    insulin secretion
Gut hormones
PYY or GLP-1
Weekly defecation
a
b
SCFAs
Propionate
Acetate
Butyrate
PPARγ
β-Oxidation
Indigestible but 
fermentable
polysaccharides
www.nature.com/nrmicro
Reviews
60 | January 2021 | volume 19

----- Page 7 (native) -----
variants and a series of environmental factors, which are 
shared with obesity53. Most individuals are either over-
weight or obese, and the pathophysiology in the early 
stages of these cases is characterized by insulin resist-
ance of primarily skeletal muscles and liver and adipose 
tissues, and a compensatory increased biosynthesis and 
secretion of insulin. In the presence of continued insu-
lin resistance, insulin biosynthesis declines, which is fol-
lowed by an aggravation of hyperglycaemia54,55. Besides 
hyperglycaemia, the T2D phenotype often exhibits 
dyslipidaemia with elevated circulating levels of triglyc-
erides and low-​density lipoprotein cholesterol, hyperten-
sion and an increased tendency for platelet aggregation. 
All of these abnormalities are risk factors for premature 
arteriosclerosis55,56. Consequently, individuals with 
T2D are, in addition to health behaviour modifications, 
treated with multiple medications targeting both ele-
vated plasma glucose and risk factors for cardiovascular 
co-​morbidities. However, the multidrug regimens affect 
the gut microbiota of these individuals in many differ-
ent ways57. Therefore, recent epidemiological studies 
attempting to elucidate links between the gut microbiota 
and T2D have focused on the drug-​naive early stages 
of T2D, called prediabetes. Individuals with prediabetes 
have elevated plasma glucose values that are within the 
non-​diabetes range but raised to a level where they are at 
an increased risk of developing overt T2D and ischaemic 
cardiovascular disease11. In these drug-​naive individuals 
with prediabetes, the gut microbiota exhibits a loss 
of butyrate-​producing taxa, a decrease in abundance of 
Akkermansia muciniphila and an increase in abundance 
of bacteria with pro-​inflammatory potentials11,58 (Fig. 2). 
Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM), which may occur 
in the third trimester of pregnancy and is estimated to 
affect 7–10% of all pregnancies, is another prediabetic 
state59. In GDM, diagnostic criteria for plasma glucose 
are set at lower thresholds than for other forms of dia-
betes owing to the toxic effects on fetus development 
of even slightly elevated glycaemia59. Interestingly, com-
pared with pregnant women with normoglycaemia in 
the same trimester, women with GDM have a disrupted 
gut microbiota composition, and differences in the gut 
microbiota are still detectable between the two groups 
of women 8 months after pregnancy. Both during and 
after pregnancy, the gut microbiota of GDM resem-
bles the aberrant microbiota composition reported in 
non-​pregnant individuals with T2D60, where a reduced 
abundance of butyrate-​producing bacteria has been con-
sistently found in addition to an often reduced bacterial 
richness and an increase in opportunistic pathogens8,61. 
At the functional potential level, the gut microbiome of 
individuals with T2D is enriched in multiple pathways. 
These include an enrichment of pathways involved in 
sugar-​related membrane transport to increase cellular 
glucose uptake, branched-​chain amino acid (BCAA) 
outward transport to induce insulin resistance, methane 
metabolism related to an anaerobic intestinal environ-
ment, xenobiotic degradation, metabolism to promote 
drug resistance and sulfate reduction to reduce insulin 
sensitivity8 (Fig. 2). However, interpretation of gut micro-
biota profiles from individuals with T2D who are being 
treated with multiple drugs is problematic owing to 
drug confounders. Among the drugs that are frequently 
prescribed for T2D, the anti-​hyperglycaemic drug met-
formin appears to change the gut microbiota most, 
with effects on the relative abundance of multiple gen-
era and species, such as Escherichia and Intestinibacter, 
and enhancement of several microbiome functional 
potentials, such as propionate and butyrate production 
that induces intestinal gluconeogenesis62–64. In fact, the 
gut microbiota has been suggested to mediate some of 
the anti-​hyperglycaemic effects of metformin through 
enhanced production of SCFAs and unconjugated bile 
acids, which activate intestinal gluconeogenesis, and 
an increase in intestinal gluconeogenesis resulting in 
a lowering of glycaemia65,66. However, any effects that 
metformin-​induced changes of gut microbiota have on 
overall glucose regulation may be modest. Consistent 
with this notion, it has been reported that in germ-​free 
or antibiotic-​treated mice, the effect of metformin on 
measures of dysmetabolism remains largely unaffected67. 
Metformin treatment is also known to cause transient or 
persistent intestinal discomfort in around one-​third of 
individuals, which in part may be attributed to increased 
gas production by some Escherichia spp. and an 
enrichment of various virulence factors63,64,68.
Altogether, these studies investigating the role of 
the gut microbiota in T2D highlight several important 
findings and shortcomings. The microbiome in indi-
viduals with overt T2D and prediabetes appears to be 
Fig. 1 | Impact of diet on gut microbiota and host metabolism. The balance between 
metabolically healthy microbiota and dysbiosis is crucial. Homeostasis is maintained by 
various factors, such as host genetics, diet, daily number of defecations, physical activity, 
smoking and drug usage. a | A metabolically healthy microbiota (mainly achieved by a 
high-​fibre, low animal fat and low animal protein diet) is illustrated. The indigestible but 
fermentable polysaccharides are metabolized by the microbiota of the large intestine 
and are fermented to produce an array of compounds, and to stimulate a thick intestinal 
mucus layer and strong barrier functions. Microbial production of short-​chain fatty acids 
(SCFAs) provides an additional energy source for colonocytes and causes a decrease in 
luminal pH. The SCFAs acetate, butyrate and propionate can bind to G protein-​coupled 
receptor (GPCR)-41 and GPCR-43, which are expressed on enteroendocrine L cells, and 
subsequently induce secretion of glucagon-​like peptide 1 (GLP-1) and peptide YY (PYY) 
that contribute to increased energy expenditure162, reduced food intake163 and improved 
glucose metabolism and insulin secretion164. Butyrate is an activator of the peroxisome 
proliferator-​activated receptor-​γ (PPARγ) and a stimulator for β-​oxidation and oxygen 
consumption in the gut, which maintains an anaerobic environment in the gut lumen114.  
b | Microbial dysbiosis induced by a high animal fat and protein diet, sedentary life, 
smoking, alcohol intake and relatively infrequent defecation may result in a leaky 
mucosa, intestinal and systemic inflammation and reduced production of SCFAs, leading 
to less gut hormones being secreted by L cells. In the fermentation process, complex 
proteins are first cleaved by various bacterial peptidases, proteases and endopeptidases 
to release free amino acids and short peptides that then undergo fermentation165. 
Of note, a dysbiotic microbiota is often associated with a prolonged colonic transit time, 
resulting in a shift in colonic metabolism leading to increased microbial proteolysis, even 
though the preferred substrate for bacterial fermentation is fermentable dietary fibres 
and bacteria will not switch to protein metabolism until fermentable polysaccharides are 
depleted166.As a result of increased protein fermentation, branched-​chain fatty acids 
(BCFAs; 2-​methyl butyrate, isobutyrate and isovalerate), trimethylamine, organic acids, 
gases (H2S (malodorous), H2 and CO2) and trace amounts of phenols, amines, indoles and 
ammonia are produced, causing an increase in luminal pH167. Altogether, such changes in 
the microbial environment and metabolites cause a leakage of pathogen-​associated 
molecular patterns (PAMPs) including lipopolysaccharides (LPS) that become increased 
in the blood and trigger systemic low-​grade inflammation and insulin resistance147. 
It should be noted, however, that some indole derivatives such as 3-​indolepropionic 
acid produced by fermentation of dietary fibres have been shown to improve glucose 
metabolism137. TMAO, trimethylamine N-​oxide.
◀
naTure RevIeWS | MIcrobIology
Reviews
	
 volume 19 | January 2021 | 61

----- Page 8 (native) -----
relatively depleted in bacterial butyrate producers and to 
exhibit an increase in species with a pro-​inflammatory 
functional potential. However, none of these changes 
is specific to T2D but they occur in many chronic 
non-​communicable disorders characterized by a clin-
ically silent low-​grade inflammation. So far, attempts 
to transfer gut microbiota from drug-​naive individuals 
with T2D or prediabetes to germ-​free mice to reproduce 
the T2D phenotype have failed11.
Gut microbial dysbiosis linked to cardio-​metabolic dis-
eases. Arteriosclerosis is one of the leading causes of 
morbidity and mortality in the western world69. People 
who suffer from arteriosclerosis frequently have prior 
clinically silent metabolic dysfunctions for many years, 
including elevated circulating concentrations of glu-
cose, insulin70 and lipids71 in addition to insulin resist-
ance and low-​grade inflammation72. Therefore, it is a 
major challenge to disentangle the possible impact of an 
Taxa features
• ↓ Anaerobes to facultative 
anaerobes ratio
• ↓ Biﬁdobacterium longum
• ↓ Biﬁdobacterium pseudolongum
Function features
• ↓ Lantibiotics production
• ↓ Energy harvest
• ↓ Immune protection
• ↓ Vitamin biosynthesis
• ↑ Pathogenic factors
Taxa features
• ↓ Coprococcus comes
• ↓ Faecalibacterium prausnitzii
• ↑ Klebsiella pneumoniae
• ↑ Streptococcus anginosus
• ↑ Veillonella atypica
Function features
• ↑ Oxidative damage
• ↑ γ-Aminobutyric acid biosynthesis
• ↓ Haem biosynthesis
• ↑ Dentriﬁcation
• ↑ Ethanol production
• ↑ Lipopolysaccharide and 
peptidoglycan biosynthesis
• ↑ BCAAs and AAA biosynthesis
Taxa features
• ↓ Enterobacter aerogenes
• ↓ Escherichia coli
• ↑ Faecalibacterium prausnitzii
• ↑ Klebsiella spp.
• ↑ Ruminococcus gnavus
• ↑ Streptococcus spp.
Function features
• ↓ Activities of SCFAs
• ↑ TMA lysases
• ↑ Phosphotransferase system
• ↓ Vitamin metabolism
• ↑ Lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis
• ↑ Tryptophan production
• ↓ SCFA metabolism
• ↓ Butyrate production
Taxa features
• ↓ Akkermansia muciniphila
• ↑ Bacteroides vulgatus
• ↑ Clostridium clostridioforme
• ↑ Clostridium hathewayi
• ↓ Clostridiales sp. SS3/4
• ↑ Prevotella copri
Function features
• ↑ Membrane transport of sugars
• ↑ BCAA transport
• ↓ SCFA production
• ↓ Metabolism of cofactors 
and vitamins
Taxa features
• ↓ Bacteroidetes to Firmicutes ratio
• ↓ Akkermansia muciniphila
• ↓ Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron
• ↓ Clostridium histolyticum
• ↓ Clostridium coccoides
• ↑ Dorea longicatena
• ↑ Eubacterium ventriosum
• ↓ Faecalibacterium prausnitzii
• ↓ Methanobrevibacter smithii
• ↑ Roseburia intestinalis
• ↑ Ruminococcus gnavus
• ↑ Ruminococcus torques
Function features
• ↑ LGC: degradation of β-glucuronide 
and aromatic amino acids
• ↑ HGC: production of organic acids 
and H2
• ↑ Phosphotransferase system
• ↓ Glycosaminoglycan degradation
• ↑ Glutamine or glutamate transport 
system
• ↑ Phenylalanine, tyrosine and 
tryptophan biosynthesis
• ↓ Valine, leucine and isoleucine 
degradation
• ↓ Superoxide reductase
Healthy microbiota
Dysbiosis
Obesity
Type 2 diabetes
Malnutrition
Cardio-metabolic
disease
Metabolic liver
disease
Fig. 2 | Some of the reported intestinal microbial taxonomic and functional features linked to common metabolic 
disorders. An overview of selected key gut microbiome features related to metabolic diseases. Multiple studies have 
implicated bacterial species and functional features in metabolic diseases; however, results differ between studies. The 
association results from metagenomic studies have been summarized. Selected microbial taxonomic features are listed  
in addition to their directions in metabolic diseases. The list is not comprehensive of all altered taxonomic or functional 
features but represents common patterns observed across studies. AAA, aromatic amino acid; BCAA, branched-​chain 
amino acid; HGC, high gene count; LGC, low gene count; SCFA, short-​chain fatty acid; TMA, trimethylamine; ↓, lower 
abundance in metabolic diseases when compared with control; ↑, higher levels in metabolic diseases when compared 
with control.
www.nature.com/nrmicro
Reviews
62 | January 2021 | volume 19

----- Page 9 (native) -----
aberrant gut microbiota on early-​stage metabolic per-
turbations from an imbalanced gut microbiota that, at 
a stage distal to the dysmetabolic stage, is escalating the 
pathogenesis of ischaemic heart disease. On top of this, 
individuals with CMD are, as in T2D, heavily medicated, 
making it challenging to tease apart authentic arterio-
sclerosis signals in the gut micro­biota from signatures 
induced by complex medication and pre-​morbidities 
and co-​morbidities. So far, these challenges have not 
been systematically addressed. A metagenome-​wide 
association study of faecal samples from individuals 
with CMD reported that the gut microbiome of these 
individuals, without adjustments for pre-​morbidities 
or co-​morbidities, exhibits enriched abundances of 
Enterobacteriaceae, including Escherichia coli, Klebsiella 
spp. and Enterobacter aerogenes, as well as an increased 
abundance of oral cavity species when compared with 
healthy control subjects73 (Fig. 2). By contrast, individuals 
with CMD had a reduced abundance of Bacteroides spp. 
and anti-​inflammatory Faecalibacterium prausnitzii74. 
At the functional level, a decrease in some fermen-
tation capacities was seen but an enrichment in the 
phosphotransferase system, amino acid transporters 
and enzymes involved in the synthesis of LPS and tri-
methylamine (TMA)73 was also seen. Recently, it was 
shown that ischaemic heart failure is associated with a 
dysbiotic gut microbiota with an increased abundance of 
Ruminococcus, Acinetobacter and Veillonella spp. and a 
decreased abundance of Alistipes, Faecalibacterium and 
Oscillibacter spp.75. At the functional level, the micro-
biome of these patients was enriched in genes involved 
in the biosynthesis of LPS and trimethylamine N-​oxide 
(TMAO)75. Taken together, these studies of CMD point 
to a more inflammatory and a less fermentative micro-
biome, even though it remains to be determined which 
components of the gut microbiota are involved in early-​
stage dysmetabolism and which are related to a more 
distal atherogenesis stage.
Of special interest is the discovery of the TMAO 
pathway with the involvement of the gut microbiota 
and relations to ischaemic vascular diseases76. TMA is 
synthesized by gut microbiota from dietary phosphati-
dylcholine, lecithin and l-​carnitine, which are found 
not only in meat from four-​legged animals but also in 
poultry, seafood and eggs. TMA enters the portal circu-
lation and is oxidized to TMAO in the liver. Experiments 
in rodents demonstrate that feeding dietary TMAO or 
its dietary precursors causes an acceleration of arterio-
sclerosis, induces platelet aggregation and enhances the 
thrombosis potential77. Moreover, inhibition of intestinal 
bacterial TMA production with 3,3-​dimethyl-1-​butanol 
(a TMA-​lyase inhibitor) attenuates arteriosclerosis and 
thrombosis78. Epidemiological studies showing posi-
tive relationships between the plasma concentrations 
of TMAO and an increased prevalence of stroke and 
myocardial infarction as well as an increase in prema-
ture mortality of people with stable coronary artery 
ischaemia lend support to the outcome of the mech-
anistic experiments that TMAO is a biomarker of 
arteriosclerosis79,80.
Still, there are inconsistencies in available results. For 
instance, mice fed a diet enriched in l-​carnitine have 
increased plasma TMAO concentrations but unex-
pectedly reduced aortic lesion sizes without changes in 
plasma lipids, thereby indicating a potential beneficial 
role for l-​carnitine in the prevention of atherosclerosis 
independently of an increase in plasma TMAO, in this 
specific mouse model81. Moreover, there are numerous 
foods that are rich in TMAO itself, such as some cold 
water-​dwelling fish, the intake of which is generally con-
sidered beneficial for cardiovascular health82. Lately, the 
contradictory results may have been reconciled to some 
extent83. Recent animal and human studies suggest that 
the influence of TMAO on vascular biology is dependent 
on dietary–microbiome interactions and host genetics, 
which may explain some of the apparent controversies 
of TMAO’s involvement in atherothrombosis. In rodent 
experiments, it was found that TMAO can be directly 
produced in the gut in addition to oxidation of TMA in 
the liver, and blood TMAO levels increased after feed-
ing the animals with a high-​fibre diet or a high-​choline 
diet. In two different genetically modified mouse mod-
els that are predisposed to arteriosclerosis, investigators 
could not find evidence of any relationships between 
TMAO generation and accelerated atherogenesis83. 
However, in the atherosclerosis-​prone animals, circu-
lating TMAO concentrations linked directly with fea-
tures of plaque instability, including biomarkers of platelet 
aggregation, intra-​plaque bleeding and inflammation. 
In a population-​based observational study of adults, the 
same authors could not find evidence of correlations 
between plasma TMAO levels and markers of arterio-
sclerosis such as intima thickness of carotid arteries or 
calcium scores of coronary arteries83,84. Thus, it appears 
that a major role of the partially gut microbiota-​derived 
TMAO, in relation to ischaemic vascular disorders, 
may be an aggravation of atherogenesis in individu-
als with already established ischaemic heart disease or 
stroke through mechanisms primarily involving plaque 
instability.
Dysbiosis of the intestinal microbiota in metabolic liver 
diseases. Non-​alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), 
frequently regarded as the hepatic manifestation of 
the metabolic syndrome, occurs in many countries 
with a prevalence of 20–40% of the adult population3. 
NAFLD comprises a wide spectrum of diseases ranging 
from simple steatosis to non-​alcoholic steatohepatitis 
(NASH), which is the inflammatory, aggressive form of 
NAFLD85. There is growing recognition that a disrupted 
gut microbiota may be one of several crucial factors in 
the pathophysiology of NAFLD and NASH. Individuals 
with NAFLD have an increased abundance of species 
assigned to Clostridium, Anaerobacter, Streptococcus, 
Escherichia and Lactobacillus, whereas Oscillibacter, 
Flavonifaractor, Odoribacter and Alistipes spp. 
are less abundant86. In comparison, the abundance of 
Proteobacteria, Enterobacteriaceae and Escherichia 
spp. is elevated in patients with NASH87. Concordantly, 
children with steatosis or NASH are depleted in 
Oscillospira spp. accompanied by higher abundance 
of Dorea and Ruminococcus spp. when compared with 
controls88. The microbiota alterations are associated 
with higher faecal concentrations of 2-​butanone and 
Atherogenesis
The dynamic process of 
forming atheromas (also called 
plaques), that is, accumulated 
inflammatory cells, lipids,  
cell debris, minerals and 
connective tissue in and on  
the walls of an artery forming  
a swelling that narrows the 
arterial lumen and restricts  
the flow of blood.
Thrombosis
The formation of a blood clot, 
known as a thrombus, within  
a blood vessel. The blood clot 
that consists of platelets, red 
blood cells and fibrin proteins 
obstructs the flow of blood 
through the blood vessel.
Stroke
An acute brain insult where 
compromised blood flow in 
atherosclerotic arteries or 
bleeding from brain arteries 
causes damage to brain tissues 
often resulting in various 
paresis.
Myocardial infarction
(Also known as an acute heart 
attack or acute coronary 
syndrome). An event that 
occurs when blood flow is 
acutely compromised or  
is completely stopped to a  
part of the heart muscle 
(myocardium), causing severe 
damage to the heart.
Atherosclerosis
The build-​up of cholesterol, 
other lipids, inflammatory cells 
and calcium in artery walls, 
which can restrict blood flow.
Atherothrombosis
The formation of a blood clot 
within an artery that is affected 
by arteriosclerosis.
Plaque instability
Vulnerable arterial wall plague 
that intermittently ruptures 
giving rise to circulating plaque 
fragments called emboli, which 
may cause myocardial 
infarction or stroke.
Intima
The innermost coating  
of the vessel wall including  
the endothelial surface  
at the lumen.
Steatosis
An abnormal retention of lipids 
within an organ. The term is 
most often used about a fatty 
liver.
naTure RevIeWS | MIcrobIology
Reviews
	
 volume 19 | January 2021 | 63

----- Page 10 (native) -----
4-​methyl-2-​pentanone that cause hepatocellular toxic-
ity in individuals with metabolic liver diseases compared 
with healthy controls88.
Additionally, given that the microbiota associated 
with NALFD is enriched in ethanol-​producing bac-
teria such as E. coli, it has been hypothesized that the 
aberrant gut microbiome of individuals with NAFLD 
produce more ethanol than microbiomes of healthy 
individuals, as evidenced by increased concentrations 
of intrinsically generated ethanol in the circulation and 
breath87,89 (Fig. 2). Ethanol activates nuclear factor-​κB 
(NF-​κB) signalling pathways and causes tissue damage 
by impairing gut barrier function and contributing to 
portal endotoxaemia90,91. In the liver of individuals with 
NALFD, the detoxification pathway is weakened, pro-
viding a constant source of reactive oxygen species that 
potentially cause oxidative damage to the hepatocytes, 
which in turn may induce hepatic inflammation and 
steatohepatitis92.
Similarly, individuals with liver cirrhosis have a sub-
stantially altered microbiota, including an enrichment 
of Proteobacteria and Fusobacteria phyla9. The func-
tional potentials of the gut microbiome in individuals 
with liver cirrhosis and liver failure are massively altered 
compared with healthy individuals. The changes include 
significant enrichment of both assimilation and dissim-
ilation of nitrate to or from ammonia as signatures of 
hepatic encephalopathy. An increase in denitrification 
capacity may relate to the higher nitrogen production, 
whereas increased γ-​aminobutyric acid (GABA) bio-
synthesis and GABA shunt functions relate to hydro-
dynamic venous shunting in liver failure. An increase 
of microbial haem biosynthesis may contribute to liver 
damage because of protoporphyrin toxicity, whereas an 
increase in phosphotransferase systems may indicate 
an increased demand for protein following liver tissue 
damage9,93.
Apart from the above-​mentioned observations, 
indicating links between gut microbial composition 
and function and metabolic liver disorders, human and 
animal faecal transplantation studies show that a 
high abundance of the alcohol-​producing bacterial 
species Klebsiella pneumoniae in the gut accelerates 
NAFLD pathogenesis94,95. Additionally, an integrative 
multi-​omics approach in women with obsesity without 
diabetes identified phenylacetate as a microbial metabo-
lite contributing to the accumulation of lipids in the liver 
and, hence, to NASH96.
Disrupted gut microbiota in malnutrition. Globally, mal-
nutrition affects ~160 million people and is the leading 
cause of death in children under the age of 5 years97,98. 
Breastfeeding, food and water security are major protec-
tive factors against malnutrition and are crucial factors 
in the maturation of the healthy gut microbiota, char-
acterized by a transient bifidobacterial bloom before 
a rise in anaerobes during late infancy99. Early loss of 
Bifidobacterium longum and Bifidobacterium pseudo­
longum, two key members in mother milk, represents 
some of the first disruptions in the intestinal dysbiosis 
of severe acute malnutrition (SAM)100 (Fig. 2). B. longum 
and B. pseudolongum appear to be crucial in shaping the 
early gut microbiota in infants, partly through secretion 
of broad-​spectrum lantibiotics101. Following this, SAM 
dysbiosis is mainly accompanied by an aberrant inver-
sion of the ratio of anaerobes to facultative anaerobes. 
This inversion might be corrected under appropriate 
dietary treatment, eventually leading to microbial com-
munities enriched in anaerobes102. However, in cases 
where malnutrition continues, the loss of the healthy 
mature anaerobic gut microbiota gradually leads to a 
deficiency in energy harvest41, immune responses103 and 
vitamin synthesis104, and links with chronic malabsorp-
tion, diarrhoea and systemic invasion from pathogenic 
bacteria105. Current dietary therapeutic regimens for 
SAM are not based on knowledge about the develop-
mental biology of the intestinal microbiota. However, a 
recent study designed diets using pig and mouse mod-
els to nudge the microbiota into a mature post-​weaning 
state, which could entrain maturation of the microbiota 
of children with SAM and restore their metabolic and 
growth profiles to a healthier trajectory106. Such dietary 
regimens urgently need to be tested in long-​term ran-
domized clinical trials to evaluate the effects of matu-
rating the gut microbiota on weight gain and overall 
physiology of affected children.
Bacterial messengers affect metabolism
An overwhelming number of reports demonstrate that 
disruptions in gut microbiome taxonomy and func-
tional potential relate to numerous pathological pheno-
types. The majority of studies in humans and animals 
are observational and lack experimental mechanistic 
data. However, as revealed by the genetic repertoire of 
the human gut microbiome, the trillions of commen-
sal or mutualistic bacteria and archaea are an immense 
chemical factory that can synthesize a multitude of 
compounds needed for their own existence and survival 
with their host, but also compounds that affect the entire 
holobiont. In the following sections, we selectively review 
some reported intestinal microbial products that affect 
host energy homeostasis, body adiposity, glucose toler-
ance, insulin sensitivity, inflammation and endocrine 
regulation (Fig. 3).
Microbiota affecting energy homeostasis and body adi-
posity. For their own energy supply, the gut microbiota 
ferment energy-​yielding nutrients, especially complex 
carbohydrates and, to lesser extent, proteins, mono­
saccharides, SCFAs and amino acids. However, the 
microbiota produces large amounts of fermented nutri-
ents that benefit their host, corresponding to 5–10% 
of the daily energy needs of a human107. Here, we first 
focus on the SCFAs butyrate, propionate and acetate, 
which affect energy metabolism and body adiposity in 
various ways in addition to being simple substrates for 
overall host energy turnover and nutrients for colonic 
cell metabolism. Both propionate and butyrate are pre-
dominantly anti-​obesogenic through their stimulation 
of anorexigenic hormones and leptin synthesis108,109. Mice 
treated with a butyrate precursor drug (tributyrin) are 
protected from diet-​induced obesity, insulin resistance 
and hepatic steatosis110. Butyrate also suppresses inflam-
mation in various tissues, enhances the differentiation of 
Portal endotoxaemia
Endotoxins, primarily bacterial 
lipopolysaccharides, which are 
absorbed from the intestines 
into mensenteric and liver 
veins (portal drainage).
Liver cirrhosis
A chronic liver disease caused, 
for instance, by alcohol abuse 
or virus infection with 
impairment of multiple liver 
functions owing to replacement 
of normal liver tissues by scar 
tissue.
Hepatic encephalopathy
A spectrum of cognitive and 
neuro-​psychiatric 
abnormalities such as 
personality changes, anxiety, 
confusion, fatigue, shaky hands 
or seizures caused by severely 
impaired liver function.
Holobiont
The unique and discrete 
collective of a macro-​organism 
— a host — and the complex 
microbial communities for 
which the macro-​organism is 
the habitat.
Anorexigenic hormones
These appetite-​decreasing 
hormones include 
glucagon-​like peptide 1 
(GLP-1) and peptide YY (PYY), 
both produced by specialized 
intestinal cells and leptin 
produced by adipocytes and 
intestinal cells.
Leptin
A hormone predominantly 
synthesized in adipose cells 
and enterocytes in the small 
intestine that helps to regulate 
energy balance by inhibiting 
hunger, which in turn 
diminishes fat storage in 
adipocytes.
www.nature.com/nrmicro
Reviews
64 | January 2021 | volume 19

----- Page 11 (native) -----
colonic anti-​inflammatory regulatory T cells and induces 
the NOD, LRR and pyrin domain-​containing protein 3 
(NLRP3) inflammasome in a G protein-​coupled recep-
tor manner111,112. Another G protein-​coupled receptor, the 
olfactory receptor 78, which may modulate blood pres-
sure regulation, can also be directly activated by acetate 
and propionate113. Additionally, increased butyrate pro-
duction activates the peroxisome proliferator-​activated 
receptor-​γ (PPARγ), leading to β-​oxidation and oxygen 
consumption in the gut, a phenomenon that contributes 
to the maintenance of anaerobic conditions in the gut 
lumen114 (Fig. 1).
O
R
N
H
R1
p38/mTORC1
FMO
• Satiety
• Neuronal effects
Gut peptide
Vagus nerve
Satiety
• Body weight gain
• Fat mass gain
• Insulin resistance
• Glucose intolerance
• Fatty acid metabolism
• Inﬂammation
Atherosclerosis
Neuro-
transmitters
Improved gut
barrier function
TLR2
MC1R
GPR-119
TGR5
GPCRs
GLP-1/
PYY
Increased
goblet cell 
density
Entero-
endocrine 
cell
Cytokines
Inﬂammation
GLP-1 or PYY
AhR
GLP-1
TMAO
• Energy harvest 
• Fat storage
• Adipose 
    inﬂammation
SCFAs
Acetate Succinate
LPS
LPS
Secondary bile acids
TMA
BCAAs
N-Acyl amides
• Indole 
• Indole
derivatives
Imidazole
propionate
Firmicutes/
Bacteroidetes
Gram-negative
bacteria
Speciﬁc
bacteria
Speciﬁc
bacteria
Speciﬁc
bacteria
Secondary 
bile acids
FXR
Speciﬁc
bacteria
ClpB
MECO-1
Amuc_1100
Dietary ﬁbres Primary bile acids
Amino acids
Phosphatidylcholine
and L-carnitine
Gut lumen
Ghrelin
UCP1
Fig. 3 | Microbial messengers regulate host metabolism. An overview of 
some of the intestinal microbial compounds affecting host energy 
homeostasis, body adiposity, inflammation, glucose regulation, insulin 
sensitivity and hormone secretion. Fermentation of the dietary fibre by gut 
Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes produces the short-​chain fatty acids (SCFAs) 
butyrate, propionate and acetate, which influence host metabolism in 
multiple ways by acting on G protein-​coupled receptors (GPCRs) expressed 
by enteroendocrine cells. Acetate and butyrate stimulates glucagon-​like 
peptide 1 (GLP-1) and peptide YY (PYY) release with effects on the pancreas 
(GLP-1-​induced insulin biosynthesis) and on the brain (PYY-​induced satiety), 
and acetate may enhance fat storage by inducing secretion of ghrelin. 
Microbial-​derived succinate drives expression of uncoupling protein 1 
(UCP1), thereby increasing thermogenesis in adipose tissue. However, 
succinate has pro-​inflammatory properties on lipopolysaccharide-​activated 
macrophages and may thus contribute to adipose tissue inflammation and 
insulin resistance. Lipopolysaccharides (LPS) are pro-​inflammatory 
compounds derived from Gram-​negative bacterial membranes that 
promote inflammation. Primary bile acids are converted by gut microbiota 
to secondary bile acids that act through the TGR5 receptor to promote 
GLP-1 release enhancing thermogenesis in adipose tissue. Gut microbiota 
produces trimethylamine (TMA) by metabolizing dietary phosphatidy­l­
choline and l-​carnitine. TMA is N-​oxidized in the liver by flavin-​ 
containing monooxygenase (FMO) to trimethylamine N-​oxide (TMAO), 
which contributes to atherosclerosis. Imidazole propionate, a bacterial 
metabolite derived from histidine, contributes to insulin resistance. Gut 
bacterial-​derived branched-​chain amino acids (BCAAs) correlate, in cases 
of high fat intake, with insulin resistance in both humans and rodents. Other 
bacterial metabolites such as indole and its derivatives bind to the aryl 
hydrocarbon receptor (AhR). Indolepropionic acid is linked with improved 
insulin secretion and insulin sensitivity and a decreased risk of type 2 
diabetes. Gut bacteria produce N-​acyl amide, an endocannabinoid mimic 
that regulates host glucose metabolism by binding to the G protein-​coupled 
receptor 119 (GPR119). Proteins secreted by gut bacteria also modulate 
paracrine or endocrine action. ClpB, a protein secreted by Escherichia coli, 
is involved in regulation of appetite. Melanocortin-​like peptide of E. coli 
(MECO-1), which is a structural and functional analogue to α-​melanocyte-​ 
stimulating hormone and adrenocorticotropin, acts via the mammalian 
melanocortin-1 receptor (MC1R), inhibiting cytokine release in response to 
pro-​inflammatory stimuli. In the large intestine, pro-​inflammatory changes 
involve increased production of cytokines such as IL-1β and IL-18, and 
reduced IL-10 and IL-22. Amuc_1100, expressed on the outer membrane of 
Akkermansia muciniphila, improves gut barrier function with increased 
goblet cell density through Toll-​like receptor 2 (TLR2) and partially 
recapitulates the beneficial effect of the live A. muciniphila bacterium on 
energy metabolism and insulin sensitivity. Host metabolism is also 
influenced by gut bacterially synthesized neurotransmitters (that is, 
catecholamine, histamine, γ-​aminobutyric acid and serotonin) or gaseous 
neurotransmitters (NO and H2S). Arrow represents stimulation, arrow with 
bar indicates inhibition. FXR, farnesoid X receptor; mTORC1, mechanistic 
target of rapamycin complex 1.
naTure RevIeWS | MIcrobIology
Reviews
	
 volume 19 | January 2021 | 65

----- Page 12 (native) -----
In two independent studies, structural variations in 
the Anaerostipes hadrus genome that encode metabolic 
modules for inositol catabolism and for metaboliz-
ing 3-​hydroxybutanoyl-​CoA to butyrate show inverse 
relationships with body weight, waist circumference 
and body mass index, potentially pointing to mecha-
nistic links between these metabolic pathways and host 
metabolic health17.
A mouse study demonstrated that acetate, butyrate 
and propionate may have anabolic effects on host 
metabolism115, whereas another study demonstrated 
that long-​term administration of an inulin-​propionate 
ester significantly reduced weight gain, intra-​abdominal 
adipose tissue distribution, intra-​hepatocellular lipid 
content and insulin resistance in overweight adults116. 
Nevertheless, other investigators have reported conflict-
ing findings for effects of propionate on host metabo-
lism. A host genetics-​driven increase in gut microbial 
production of butyrate improved the insulin response 
after an oral glucose tolerance test, whereas propionate 
causally increased the risk of T2D117. In line with the 
latter finding, another study in mice suggested that pro-
pionate impairs insulin signalling through stimulation 
of the production of glucagon and fatty acid-​binding 
protein 4 (FABP4)118. Intake of a propionate-​containing 
meal in humans resulted in a postprandial increase in 
plasma concentrations of glucagon, FABP4 and norep-
inephrine, leading to insulin resistance and compensa-
tory hyperinsulinemia118. Finally, findings in a human pilot 
study suggested that glucose metabolism is more respon-
sive to oral butyrate supplementation in lean individu-
als than in people with the metabolic syndrome, which 
argues against oral butyrate supplementation as a poten-
tial therapeutic remedy to improve glucose regulation 
in individuals with dysmetabolism119. These conflicting 
experimental results call for human studies in which the 
physiological effects of each SCFA are tested separately 
as well as in combinations, relative to their proportional 
concentrations in circulation, in order to properly and 
systematically investigate their net effects on glucose 
homeostasis, insulin secretion and insulin sensitivity.
Unlike butyrate and propionate, acetate may pre-
dominantly have obesogenic properties because it acts 
as a substrate for hepatic and adipocyte lipogenesis120. 
In mice, increased acetate production induced by an 
altered gut microbiota promotes hyperphagia through 
increased ghrelin secretion and enhances fat storage by 
increasing glucose-​stimulated insulin secretion121. In 
humans, plasma concentrations of the intestinal hor-
mones, peptide YY (PYY) and glucagon-​like peptide 
1 (GLP-1) are reported to increase following rectal or 
intravenous administration of acetate122.
Host energy homeostasis and body adiposity are 
also influenced by bile acids, and the gut microbiota 
converts primary bile acids to various secondary bile 
acids123. Both categories of bile acid exert their meta-
bolic functions by binding to cellular receptors in various 
organs of the body, including nuclear farnesoid X recep-
tor (FXR) and TGR5, a G protein-​coupled receptor124. 
Signalling via these receptors is implicated in glucose 
metabolism, yet in opposite directions; FXR impairs125 
whereas TGR5 promotes126 carbohydrate metabolism. 
One of the primary bile acids, chenodeoxycholic acid, is 
a highly efficacious FXR ligand127, whereas the second-
ary bile acids lithocholic acid (LCA) and taurolithocholic 
acid, which in rodents are transformed from primary 
bile acids by intestinal bacteria123, are the two most 
potent endogenous TGR5 ligands128. TGR5 signalling 
in enteroendocrine L cells induces secretion of GLP-1, 
thereby improving liver function and enhancing glucose 
tolerance in obese mice126. LCA, a high-​affinity TGR5 
agonist, stimulates thermogenesis through browning of 
both white and brown adipose tissues129, whereas deoxy­
cholic acid (DCA) and LCA have been suggested as 
partial antagonists of FXR130. Recently, a subgroup of sec-
ondary bile acids, C-6-​hydroxylated secondary bile acids, 
have attracted attention as these bile acids may be asso-
ciated with leanness in rodents131 and early weight loss 
in people with obesity following sleeve gastrectomy132.
Studies of the intestinal microbiome in several 
chronic metabolic disorders show increased functional 
potentials for metabolism of amino acids133. Whether 
these observations reflect primary disease-​linked mech-
anisms or secondary phenomena is unclear. However, in 
the case of microbial break down of tryptophan, both 
in vitro and in vivo studies suggest that indole, a trypto-
phan microbial catabolite (Fig. 1), improves intestinal epi-
thelial barrier functions134,135. Indole is also a signalling 
molecule involved in enhancing the release of the gut 
hormone GLP-1 from enteroendocrine L cells136, thereby 
indirectly influencing insulin secretion and appetite 
regulation. Similarly, the circulating concentration of 
3-​indolepropionic acid (IPA), a catabolite involved in 
the tryptophan metabolic pathway, is in epidemiolog-
ical studies reported to associate with improved insulin 
secretion and insulin sensitivity, and a lower likelihood 
of developing T2D137.
Microbiota affecting insulin sensitivity and endocrine 
regulation. Elevated circulating concentrations of the 
BCAAs leucine, isoleucine and valine are a strong bio-
marker for insulin resistance and an increased risk of 
T2D138. In individuals with normoglycaemia who are 
insulin resistant, the gut microbiome has an increased 
potential to synthesize BCAAs, which is largely driven 
by an increased abundance of Prevotella copri and 
Bacteroides vulgatus, but a reduced potential for micro-
bial BCAA uptake and BCAA catabolism primar-
ily driven by Butyrivibrio crossotus and Eubacterium 
siraeum14. These findings, supported by experiments in 
mice, suggest that the gut microbiome may contribute 
to increased plasma BCAA concentrations and insulin 
resistance under conditions of unhealthy dieting138. In 
heart failure, the catabolism of BCAAs is impaired and 
the accumulated BCAAs induce oxidative stress and 
disrupt mitochondrial function139.
Imidazole propionate is yet another microbial com-
pound that contextually impairs insulin signalling140. In 
portal and peripheral blood of individuals with T2D, 
imidazole propionate was present at higher concentra-
tions than in healthy individuals. Gut bacterial species 
such as Streptococcus mutans and Eggerthella lenta were 
verified as producers of imidazole propionate. In mice 
experiments, imidazole propionate worsened glucose 
Hyperinsulinemia
A state where the 
concentration of insulin in 
blood is higher than what is 
considered normal.
Hyperphagia
An abnormally great desire for 
food.
Ghrelin
A circulating hormone that is 
produced mainly by stomach 
cells and that stimulates 
appetite and promotes fat 
storage.
www.nature.com/nrmicro
Reviews
66 | January 2021 | volume 19

----- Page 13 (native) -----
tolerance and insulin signalling through activation of the 
mechanistic target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) 
pathway. In line with these findings, overexpression of the 
mTORC1-​mediated insulin signalling pathway was found 
in liver tissue isolated from individuals with T2D140.
Both the host and the intestinal microbiome produce 
succinate, which may have multiple roles as a metabolic 
intermediate. One role relates to insulin sensitivity and 
inflammation, with effects that are also apparently con-
textual. In wild-​type mice, microbial-​derived succinate 
not only prevented obesity but also improved insulin 
sensitivity and glucose tolerance141,142. By contrast, suc-
cinate might act as a metabolite in innate immune sig-
nalling. Thus, in LPS-​activated macrophages, succinate 
stabilized the transcription factor hypoxia-​inducible fac-
tor 1α, which increased IL-1β production and triggered 
inflammation. Therefore, succinate may under some 
conditions contribute to insulin resistance that is trig-
gered by inflammation143. Unexpectedly, pharmacolog-
ically raised circulating succinate concentrations in mice 
have been shown to be a driver for uncoupling protein 
1 (UCP1)-​dependent thermogenesis in brown adipose 
tissue, thereby boosting protection against diet-​induced 
obesity and improving glucose tolerance142. Nevertheless, 
outcomes of studies of the impact of the gut micro­
biome on regulation of UCP1 in various mouse models 
remain inconsistent144,145. Whether microbial-​derived 
succinate is relevant to comparable processes in human 
metabolism is unknown.
Bacterial LPS are the major outer surface membrane 
components present in most Gram-​negative bacteria146. 
LPS are released at bacterial cell death and become 
strong stimulators of host immunity. When in excess, 
for instance owing to habitual intake of diets high in 
animal fat or in an extreme state such as sepsis-​elicited 
endotoxaemia, LPS trigger local and systemic inflamma-
tion and insulin resistance147. Generally, several common 
chronic disorders that appear to be characterized by a 
relative disruption of the gut barrier, which elicits mul-
tiple imbalances in both intestinal and systemic immune 
competences, converge to cause insulin resistance, 
eventually leading to metabolic syndrome148,149.
Above, we have discussed how, for instance, SCFAs 
and indole interfere with endocrine regulation, but 
there are more examples of how gut bacterial com-
pounds interact with hormone secretion or act as lig-
ands for known hormone receptors. Several proteins 
secreted by E. coli, including ClpB, which mimics the 
host peptide α-​melanocyte-​stimulating hormone 
(α-​MSH), affect food intake150 and meal patterns in 
mice151. Mechanistically, the ClpB protein stimulates 
release of intestinal GLP-1 and PYY and activates brain 
anorexigenic pathways inducing satiety. In humans, 
higher plasma ClpB levels have been reported in indi-
viduals with eating disorders such as anorexia ner-
vosa compared with circulating ClpB levels in healthy 
individuals152. Furthermore, some gut commensal bac-
teria harbour N-​acyl amide synthase genes, and their 
encoded lipids mimic binding of classical eukaryotic 
signalling molecules to G protein-​coupled receptors153. 
In experiments where mice were fed an engineered bac-
terium that produces the lipid N-​acyl serinol, which 
is structurally similar to a human ligand for GPR119, 
the mice had an improved glucose tolerance when 
compared with control mice that were gavaged with 
E. coli harbouring an empty vector154. Finally, MECO-1, 
which is a bacterial melanocortin-​like peptide that has 
structural similarities to α-​MSH and adrenocorticotro-
pin (ACTH)155, inhibits the release of cytokines when 
exposed to pro-​inflammatory stimuli in vitro and res-
cues mice from death caused by endotoxins. Whether 
the microbial peptide also has endocrine functions like 
its human homologous hormones is unknown.
In summary, an overwhelming amount of data gen-
erated both in humans and in animals suggest important 
involvements of the primary saccharolytically derived 
microbial fermentation products SCFAs, succinate and 
ethanol in host metabolism. We know less about posi-
tive or undesired health implications of proteolytic or 
lipolytic fermentation by the gut microbiota (Fig. 1). An 
exception is the microbial fermentation of the dietary 
amino acids tryptophan and tyrosine that are metabo-
lized to indoles and phenols, respectively156. In the liver, 
the compounds are converted to indoxyl sulfate and 
p-​cresyl sulfate, the blood concentrations of which are 
elevated in CMD. In chronic kidney disease, elevated cir-
culating levels of the two metabolites are associated with 
progression of chronic kidney disease, risk of CMD and 
all-​cause mortality157. In addition, experiments in mice 
suggest that microbiota-​produced gluconeogenic amino 
acid metabolites, including indoxyl sulfate, contribute to 
maintaining glucose homeostasis158.
Conclusions and perspectives
The past two decades of research within the microbiome 
field has made it evident that human biology means the 
biology of the holobiont Homo sapiens. In other words, 
human biology is contextual on the coexisting microor-
ganisms, with the majority living in the digestive tract 
from where they produce or modify various chemicals, 
or trigger host reactions that affect various physiolog-
ical functions including immunity, neurobiology and, 
not least, metabolism. As appears from our discussion of 
the pertinent literature on metabolism and the intestinal 
microbiota, the research field is still at a juvenile stage 
both in its basic and translational dimensions. With 
the focus on the influence of the gut microbiome on the 
overall functional metabolic read-​outs, much still needs 
to be learned. The knowledge gaps to be filled include 
annotation of hundreds of as yet unknown chemical 
compounds in the metabolomes and peptidomes of 
various body fluids as well as approaches to decipher 
compounds of solely host, microbial and dietary origin, 
or of combined origin159. Most studies are snapshots of 
microbiome landscapes and more information is needed 
on the short-​term and long-​term dynamics of the intes-
tinal microbiome. Importantly, very little of the novel 
knowledge is validated or has maturated to stages where 
it can be translated to guide personal everyday health 
behaviour (public health) or clinical practice. To achieve 
such goals, several conceptual and analytical challenges 
need attention in future studies where data on the micro-
biome are integrated with other omics read-​out and 
bioclinical variables (Box 2).
naTure RevIeWS | MIcrobIology
Reviews
	
 volume 19 | January 2021 | 67

----- Page 14 (native) -----
The fact that the human intestinal microbiota is 
unique at deep resolution levels, with substantial struc-
tural variations in species and subspecies that influ-
ence microbiome functionality, is a major conceptual 
and statistical challenge when comparing individual 
microbiota irrespective of the health status of study 
subjects17. Moreover, there are several more technical 
and database-​related shortcomings, including incom-
plete microbial genome databases and a lack of func-
tional annotation of the majority of microbial genes. 
Similarly, knowledge about the regulation of transcrip-
tional and translational activities of the gut microbiome 
is sparse, and when it comes to the interpretation of the 
outcome of untargeted metabolome profiling, which is 
often compared with microbiome features, the majority 
of read-​outs are neither annotated nor quantified70.
When considering the translational implications of 
microbiome research, it recently became evident that 
most drugs influence microbiome, metatranscriptome 
and metabolome profiles in addition to their well-​known 
effects on bioclinical variables57,62–64. Blindness to the 
impact of medication on ‘omics’ analyses may there-
fore have inflated the reported findings in human stud-
ies of any relationships between the gut microbiome 
and host metabolism, which we have discussed in this 
Review. Ideally, any such omics-​based studies should be 
performed in drug-​naive individuals. This demand is 
difficult to accommodate in studies of individuals with 
chronic metabolic diseases who often are prescribed 
multiple medications. Instead, more studies are cur-
rently undertaken in individuals at high risk of devel-
oping metabolic diseases and prior to medication, for 
example, in treatment-​naive pre-​morbid individuals. Yet 
another shortcoming of microbiome studies is the fact 
that microbiome analysis has so far largely been limited 
to relative abundances, failing therefore to account for 
biologically relevant differences between microbiomes 
owing to considerable sample variation in the bacterial 
cell density of stools or intestinal contents160.
Experimental studies of the targets and mechanisms 
of action of a given microbial compound are, for obvi-
ous reasons, done in vitro in assumed target tissues 
or cells and are complemented with in vivo studies in 
rodents (Box 2). However, many experimental studies 
fall short owing to lack of appropriate test animals with 
a biology and behaviour close to those of humans and, 
especially when unravelling the role of the gut micro-
biome in disease causation, there is often a lack of ani-
mal models with genetic susceptibilities comparable 
to those of the human disorders under examination. 
Nevertheless, experimental studies are not exclusively 
done in cellular systems or animal models. In fact, clin-
ically controlled trials are by their nature mechanis-
tic experiments. Because of the massive and complex 
inter-​individual variation in the gut microbiome, the 
ideal human trial design is to perform various con-
trolled crossover interventions in the same individuals 
for years. Intra-​individual trials have been done but are 
very resource demanding and have no potential for gen-
eralization to the population level161. Therefore, the only 
realistic way forward to gain population-​relevant mecha-
nistic insights into how the gut microbiome mediates or 
modifies the effects of diet, exercise, drugs and so forth 
in the human setting appears to be through carefully 
prepared randomized controlled trials of long duration. 
That means the inclusion of homogeneous groups of 
people who have undergone deep and extensive pheno-
typing in a sufficient number to have statistical power to 
address the hypothesis in focus.
Finally, the complexity of the gut microbiome 
is daunting, and the global intestinal microbiome is 
far more than bacteria and archaea. It also includes 
fungi, bacteriophages and eukaryotic virus. Future, 
sequencing-​based and culture-​based gut microorganism 
surveys combined with mechanistic exploitations of the 
gut bacteriome, archaeome, phageome, virome and myco­
biome will exponentially expand our knowledge about 
the interactions within the global intestinal microbial 
community. Moreover, not least, exciting new knowl-
edge about the multitude of chemicals that the global 
gut microbiome produces affecting host physiology and 
numerous pathologies may foster novel efficacious paths 
to stabilize metabolic health of the human holobiont and 
prevent or combat common human metabolic disorders.
Published online 4 September 2020
1.	
Lynch, S. V. & Pedersen, O. The human intestinal 
microbiome in health and disease. N. Engl. J. Med. 
375, 2369–2379 (2016).
2.	
Jaacks, L. M. et al. The obesity transition: stages of 
the global epidemic. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 7, 
231–240 (2019).
3.	
Younossi, Z. M. et al. Global epidemiology of 
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease — meta-analytic 
assessment of prevalence, incidence, and outcomes. 
Hepatology 64, 73–84 (2016).
4.	
Zheng, Y., Ley, S. H. & Hu, F. B. Global aetiology  
and epidemiology of type 2 diabetes mellitus and its 
complications. Nat. Rev. Endocrinol. 14, 88 (2018).
5.	
Reddy, K. S. & Yusuf, S. Emerging epidemic of 
cardiovascular disease in developing countries. 
Circulation 97, 596–601 (1998).
6.	
Lakka, H.-M. et al. The metabolic syndrome and total 
and cardiovascular disease mortality in middle-​aged 
men. JAMA 288, 2709–2716 (2002).
7.	
Müller, O. & Krawinkel, M. Malnutrition and health  
in developing countries. CMAJ 173, 279–286 (2005).
8.	
Qin, J. et al. A metagenome-​wide association study  
of gut microbiota in type 2 diabetes. Nature 490, 
55–60 (2012).  
This is the first metagenome-​wide association study to 
identify links between the gut microbiome and T2D.
9.	
Qin, N. et al. Alterations of the human gut microbiome 
in liver cirrhosis. Nature 513, 59–64 (2014).
10.	 Koeth, R. A. et al. Intestinal microbiota metabolism  
of l-​carnitine, a nutrient in red meat, promotes 
atherosclerosis. Nat. Med. 19, 576–585 (2013).
11.	 Allin, K. H. et al. Aberrant intestinal microbiota in 
individuals with prediabetes. Diabetologia 61,  
810–820 (2018).
12.	 Bäckhed, F. et al. The gut microbiota as an 
environmental factor that regulates fat storage.  
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 101, 15718–15723 
(2004).
13.	 Qin, J. et al. A human gut microbial gene catalogue 
established by metagenomic sequencing. Nature 464, 
59–65 (2010).
14.	 Pedersen, H. K. et al. Human gut microbes impact 
host serum metabolome and insulin sensitivity. Nature 
535, 376–381 (2016).  
This study identifies P. copri and B. vulgatus as  
the main species driving the association between 
biosynthesis of BCAAs and insulin resistance under 
conditions of high fat intake.
15.	 Pedersen, H. K. et al. A computational framework  
to integrate high-​throughput ‘-omics’ datasets for  
the identification of potential mechanistic links.  
Nat. Protoc. 13, 2781 (2018).
16.	 Korem, T. et al. Growth dynamics of gut microbiota in 
health and disease inferred from single metagenomic 
samples. Science 349, 1101–1106 (2015).
17.	 Zeevi, D. et al. Structural variation in the gut 
microbiome associates with host health. Nature 568, 
43–48 (2019).
18.	 Huttenhower, C. et al. Structure, function and diversity 
of the healthy human microbiome. Nature 486,  
207–214 (2012).
19.	 Rothschild, D. et al. Environment dominates over host 
genetics in shaping human gut microbiota. Nature 
555, 210–215 (2018).
20.	 Falony, G., Vieira-​Silva, S. & Raes, J. Richness and 
ecosystem development across faecal snapshots  
of the gut microbiota. Nat. Microbiol. 3, 526–528 
(2018).
21.	 Jakobsson, H. E. et al. Decreased gut microbiota 
diversity, delayed Bacteroidetes colonisation and 
reduced Th1 responses in infants delivered by 
caesarean section. Gut 63, 559–566 (2014).
22.	 Rodríguez, J. M. et al. The composition of the gut 
microbiota throughout life, with an emphasis on  
early life. Microb. Ecol. Health Dis. 26, 26050  
(2015).
23.	 Flint, H. J., Scott, K. P., Louis, P. & Duncan, S. H.  
The role of the gut microbiota in nutrition and health. 
www.nature.com/nrmicro
Reviews
68 | January 2021 | volume 19

----- Page 15 (native) -----
Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 9, 577–589 
(2012).
24.	 Shafquat, A., Joice, R., Simmons, S. L. &  
Huttenhower, C. Functional and phylogenetic assembly 
of microbial communities in the human microbiome. 
Trends Microbiol. 22, 261–266 (2014).
25.	 Clemente, J. C. et al. The microbiome of uncontacted 
Amerindians. Sci. Adv. 1, e1500183 (2015).
26.	 Smits, S. A. et al. Seasonal cycling in the gut microbiome 
of the Hadza hunter-​gatherers of Tanzania. Science 357, 
802–806 (2017).
27.	 Tyakht, A. V. et al. Human gut microbiota community 
structures in urban and rural populations in Russia. 
Nat. Commun. 4, 1–9 (2013).
28.	 Le Chatelier, E. et al. Richness of human gut microbiome 
correlates with metabolic markers. Nature 500,  
541–546 (2013).  
This work shows that adults with low bacterial gene 
richness in their gut microbiome feature insulin 
resistance, pro-​inflammation dyslipidaemia and 
increased body adiposity compared with individuals 
with high bacterial gene richness.
29.	 Cox, L. M. & Blaser, M. J. Antibiotics in early life and 
obesity. Nat. Rev. Endocrinol. 11, 182–190 (2015).
30.	 Ajslev, T., Andersen, C., Gamborg, M., Sørensen, T.  
& Jess, T. Childhood overweight after establishment  
of the gut microbiota: the role of delivery mode,  
pre-​pregnancy weight and early administration of 
antibiotics. Int. J. Obes. 35, 522 (2011).
31.	 Mor, A. et al. Prenatal exposure to systemic 
antibacterials and overweight and obesity in Danish 
schoolchildren: a prevalence study. Int. J. Obes. 39, 
1450 (2015).
32.	 Palleja, A. et al. Recovery of gut microbiota of healthy 
adults following antibiotic exposure. Nat. Microbiol. 3, 
1255–1265 (2018).
33.	 Thuny, F. et al. Vancomycin treatment of infective 
endocarditis is linked with recently acquired obesity. 
PLoS ONE 5, e9074 (2010).
34.	 Mikkelsen, K. H. et al. Effect of antibiotics on gut 
microbiota, gut hormones and glucose metabolism. 
PLoS ONE 10, e0142352 (2015).
35.	 Reijnders, D. et al. Effects of gut microbiota 
manipulation by antibiotics on host metabolism  
in obese humans: a randomized double-​blind  
placebo-​controlled trial. Cell Metab. 24, 63–74 
(2016).
36.	 Fujisaka, S. et al. Antibiotic effects on gut microbiota 
and metabolism are host dependent. J. Clin. Invest. 
126, 4430–4443 (2016).
37.	 Yatsunenko, T. et al. Human gut microbiome viewed 
across age and geography. Nature 486, 222–227 
(2012).
38.	 Cotillard, A. et al. Dietary intervention impact on gut 
microbial gene richness. Nature 500, 585–588 (2013).
39.	 World Health Organization. Obesity: Preventing  
and Managing the Global Epidemic (World Health 
Organization, 2000).
40.	 McAllister, E. J. et al. Ten putative contributors to  
the obesity epidemic. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 49, 
868–913 (2009).
41.	 Turnbaugh, P. J. et al. An obesity-​associated gut 
microbiome with increased capacity for energy 
harvest. Nature 444, 1027–1031 (2006).
42.	 Tims, S. et al. Microbiota conservation and BMI 
signatures in adult monozygotic twins. ISME J. 7, 
707–717 (2013).
43.	 Gophna, U., Konikoff, T. & Nielsen, H. B. Oscillospira 
and related bacteria—from metagenomic species to 
metabolic features. Environ. Microbiol. 19, 835–841 
(2017).
44.	 Miller, T. L., Wolin, M., de Macario, E. C. & Macario, A. 
Isolation of Methanobrevibacter smithii from human 
feces. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 43, 227–232 (1982).
45.	 Liu, R. et al. Gut microbiome and serum metabolome 
alterations in obesity and after weight-​loss intervention. 
Nat. Med. 23, 859–868 (2017).  
This study links intestinal microbiota alterations, 
circulating amino acids and obesity, and suggests 
that a possible way to intervene in obesity is by 
targeting the gut microbiota.
46.	 Thingholm, L. B. et al. Obese individuals with and 
without type 2 diabetes show different gut microbial 
functional capacity and composition. Cell Host 
Microbe 26, 252–264.e10 (2019).
47.	 Ridaura, V. K. et al. Gut microbiota from twins 
discordant for obesity modulate metabolism in mice. 
Science 341, 1241214 (2013).  
This study shows that adiposity is transmissible in 
a diet-​dependent manner from human to mouse 
and is associated with alterations in serum levels  
of BCAAs.
48.	 Vieira-​Silva, S. et al. Statin therapy is associated with 
lower prevalence of gut microbiota dysbiosis. Nature 
581, 310–315 (2020).  
This study observes that obesity-​associated 
microbiota dysbiosis is negatively associated with 
statin treatment, indicating statins as a possible 
target for the development of future drug-​based 
strategies for the modulation of the intestinal 
microbiota.
49.	 Jensen, A. B. et al. Increase in clinically recorded type 2 
diabetes after colectomy. eLife 7, e37420 (2018).
50.	 Thaiss, C. A. et al. Hyperglycemia drives intestinal 
barrier dysfunction and risk for enteric infection. 
Science 359, 1376–1383 (2018).
51.	 Association, A. D. Diagnosis and classification of 
diabetes mellitus. Diabetes Care 37, S81–S90 (2014).
52.	 Deshpande, A. D., Harris-​Hayes, M. & Schootman, M. 
Epidemiology of diabetes and diabetes-​related 
complications. Phys. Ther. 88, 1254–1264 (2008).
53.	 Grarup, N., Sandholt, C. H., Hansen, T. & Pedersen, O. 
Genetic susceptibility to type 2 diabetes and obesity: 
from genome-​wide association studies to rare variants 
and beyond. Diabetologia 57, 1528–1541 (2014).
54.	 Kasuga, M. Insulin resistance and pancreatic β cell 
failure. J. Clin. Invest. 116, 1756–1760 (2006).
55.	 Bornfeldt, K. E. & Tabas, I. Insulin resistance, 
hyperglycemia, and atherosclerosis. Cell Metab. 14, 
575–585 (2011).
56.	 Laakso, M. & Kuusisto, J. Insulin resistance and 
hyperglycaemia in cardiovascular disease development. 
Nat. Rev. Endocrinol. 10, 293–302 (2014).
57.	 Vila, A. V. et al. Impact of commonly used drugs on  
the composition and metabolic function of the gut 
microbiota. Nat. Commun. 11, 1–11 (2020).
58.	 Zhong, H. et al. Distinct gut metagenomics  
and metaproteomics signatures in prediabetics and 
treatment-naïve type 2 diabetics. EBioMedicine 47, 
373–383 (2019).
59.	 Whiting, D. R., Guariguata, L., Weil, C. & Shaw, J.  
IDF diabetes atlas: global estimates of the prevalence 
of diabetes for 2011 and 2030. Diabetes Res. Clin. 
Pract. 94, 311–321 (2011).
60.	 Crusell, M. K. W. et al. Gestational diabetes is 
associated with change in the gut microbiota 
composition in third trimester of pregnancy and 
postpartum. Microbiome 6, 89 (2018).
61.	 Karlsson, F. H. et al. Gut metagenome in European 
women with normal, impaired and diabetic glucose 
control. Nature 498, 99–103 (2013).
62.	 Forslund, K. et al. Disentangling type 2 diabetes and 
metformin treatment signatures in the human gut 
microbiota. Nature 528, 262–266 (2015).  
This work outlines a paradigm to disentangle 
disease microbiome features from secondary 
changes in the microbiome induced by medication.
63.	 Wu, H. et al. Metformin alters the gut microbiome of 
individuals with treatment-​naive type 2 diabetes, 
contributing to the therapeutic effects of the drug. 
Nat. Med. 23, 850–858 (2017).
64.	 Bryrup, T. et al. Metformin-​induced changes of the gut 
microbiota in healthy young men: results of a non-​
blinded, one-​armed intervention study. Diabetologia 
62, 1024–1035 (2019).
65.	 Sun, L. et al. Gut microbiota and intestinal FXR 
mediate the clinical benefits of metformin. Nat. Med. 
24, 1919 (2018).
66.	 De La Cuesta-​Zuluaga, J. et al. Metformin is 
associated with higher relative abundance of mucin-​
degrading Akkermansia muciniphila and several  
short-​chain fatty acid-​producing microbiota in the gut. 
Diabetes Care 40, 54–62 (2017).
67.	 Adeshirlarijaney, A., Zou, J., Tran, H. Q., Chassaing, B. 
& Gewirtz, A. T. Amelioration of metabolic syndrome 
by metformin associates with reduced indices of  
low-​grade inflammation independently of the gut 
microbiota. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 317, 
E1121–E1130 (2019).
68.	 Pryor, R. et al. Host–microbe–drug–nutrient screen 
identifies bacterial effectors of metformin therapy. Cell 
178, 1299–1312.e29 (2019).
69.	 Herrington, W., Lacey, B., Sherliker, P., Armitage, J.  
& Lewington, S. Epidemiology of atherosclerosis  
and the potential to reduce the global burden of 
atherothrombotic disease. Circ. Res. 118, 535–546 
(2016).
70.	 Fan, Y. et al. Comprehensive metabolomic 
characterization of coronary artery diseases. J. Am. 
Coll. Cardiol. 68, 1281–1293 (2016).
71.	 Michos, E. D., McEvoy, J. W. & Blumenthal, R. S. Lipid 
management for the prevention of atherosclerotic 
cardiovascular disease. N. Engl. J. Med. 381,  
1557–1567 (2019).
72.	 Hansson, G. K. Inflammation, atherosclerosis, and 
coronary artery disease. N. Engl. J. Med. 352,  
1685–1695 (2005).
73.	 Jie, Z. et al. The gut microbiome in atherosclerotic 
cardiovascular disease. Nat. Commun. 8, 845 (2017).
74.	 Sokol, H. et al. Faecalibacterium prausnitzii is an anti-​
inflammatory commensal bacterium identified by gut 
microbiota analysis of Crohn disease patients. Proc. 
Natl Acad. Sci. USA 105, 16731–16736 (2008).
75.	 Cui, X. et al. Metagenomic and metabolomic analyses 
unveil dysbiosis of gut microbiota in chronic heart 
failure patients. Sci. Rep. 8, 1–15 (2018).
76.	 Wang, Z. et al. Gut flora metabolism of 
phosphatidylcholine promotes cardiovascular disease. 
Nature 472, 57–63 (2011).  
This work discovers a relationship between the  
gut microbiota-​dependent metabolism of dietary 
phosphatidylcholine and pathogenesis of 
arteriosclerosis.
77.	 Zhu, W. et al. Gut microbial metabolite TMAO 
enhances platelet hyperreactivity and thrombosis risk. 
Cell 165, 111–124 (2016).
78.	 Wang, Z. et al. Non-​lethal inhibition of gut microbial 
trimethylamine production for the treatment of 
atherosclerosis. Cell 163, 1585–1595 (2015).  
This study discovers a structural analogue of 
choline that inhibits microbial TMA lyases and the 
production of TMA by the gut microbiota.
79.	 Haghikia, A. et al. Gut microbiota-​dependent 
trimethylamine N-​oxide predicts risk of cardiovascular 
events in patients with stroke and is related to 
proinflammatory monocytes. Arterioscl. Throm. Vas. 
Biol. 38, 2225–2235 (2018).
80.	 Senthong, V. et al. Intestinal microbiota-​generated 
metabolite trimethylamine-​N-oxide and 5-year 
mortality risk in stable coronary artery disease: the 
contributory role of intestinal microbiota in a 
COURAGE-​like patient cohort. J. Am. Heart Assoc. 5, 
e002816 (2016).
81.	 Collins, H. L. et al. l-​Carnitine intake and high 
trimethylamine N-​oxide plasma levels correlate  
with low aortic lesions in ApoE−/− transgenic mice 
expressing CETP. Atherosclerosis 244, 29–37 (2016).
82.	 He, K. et al. Accumulated evidence on fish consumption 
and coronary heart disease mortality: a meta-​analysis 
of cohort studies. Circulation 109, 2705–2711 (2004).
83.	 Koay, Y. C. et al. Plasma levels of TMAO can be 
increased with ‘healthy’ and ‘unhealthy’ diets and do 
not correlate with the extent of atherosclerosis but 
with plaque instability. Cardiovasc. Res. 8, cvaa094 
(2020).
84.	 Tang, W. W. et al. Intestinal microbial metabolism of 
phosphatidylcholine and cardiovascular risk. N. Engl. 
J. Med. 368, 1575–1584 (2013).
85.	 Brunt, E. M. et al. Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease 
(NAFLD) activity score and the histopathologic 
diagnosis in NAFLD: distinct clinicopathologic 
meanings. Hepatology 53, 810–820 (2011).
86.	 Jiang, W. et al. Dysbiosis gut microbiota associated 
with inflammation and impaired mucosal immune 
function in intestine of humans with non-​alcoholic fatty 
liver disease. Sci. Rep. 5, 8096 (2015).
87.	 Zhu, L. et al. Characterization of gut microbiomes  
in nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) patients:  
a connection between endogenous alcohol and NASH. 
Hepatology 57, 601–609 (2013).
88.	 Del Chierico, F. et al. Gut microbiota profiling of 
pediatric nonalcoholic fatty liver disease and obese 
patients unveiled by an integrated meta-​omics-based 
approach. Hepatology 65, 451–464 (2017).
89.	 Nair, S., Cope, K., Terence, R. H. & Diehl, A. M. 
Obesity and female gender increase breath ethanol 
concentration: potential implications for the 
pathogenesis of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. Am. J. 
Gastroenterol. 96, 1200–1204 (2001).
90.	 Rao, R., Seth, A. & Sheth, P. Recent advances in 
alcoholic liver disease I. Role of intestinal permeability 
and endotoxemia in alcoholic liver disease. Am. J. 
Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol. 286, G881–G884 
(2004).
91.	 Xu, J. et al. Synergistic steatohepatitis by moderate 
obesity and alcohol in mice despite increased 
adiponectin and p-​AMPK. J. Hepatol. 55, 673–682 
(2011).
92.	 de Medeiros, I. C. & de Lima, J. G. Is nonalcoholic  
fatty liver disease an endogenous alcoholic fatty  
liver disease? — A mechanistic hypothesis.  
Med. Hypotheses 85, 148–152 (2015).
93.	 Schwenger, K. J., Clermont-​Dejean, N. & Allard, J. P. 
The role of the gut microbiome in chronic liver  
disease: the clinical evidence revised. JHEP Rep. 1, 
214–226 (2019).
naTure RevIeWS | MIcrobIology
Reviews
	
 volume 19 | January 2021 | 69

----- Page 16 (native) -----
94.	 Le Roy, T. et al. Intestinal microbiota determines 
development of non-​alcoholic fatty liver disease in 
mice. Gut 62, 1787–1794 (2013).
95.	 Yuan, J. et al. Fatty liver disease caused by high-​
alcohol-producing Klebsiella pneumoniae. Cell Metab. 
30, 675–688.e7 (2019).
96.	 Hoyles, L. et al. Molecular phenomics and 
metagenomics of hepatic steatosis in non-​diabetic 
obese women. Nat. Med. 24, 1070–1080 (2018).  
This study demonstrates that individuals with liver 
steatosis have low microbial gene richness and 
increased genetic potential for the processing of 
dietary lipids and endotoxin biosynthesis, hepatic 
inflammation and dysregulation of aromatic and 
BCAA metabolism.
97.	 UNICEF–WHO–The World Bank Group: Joint Child 
Malnutrition Estimates — levels and trends in  
child malnutrition: key findings of the 2015 edition. 
Global Database on Child Growth and Malnutrition 
(WHO, 2015).
98.	 Black, R. E. et al. Maternal and child undernutrition: 
global and regional exposures and health 
consequences. Lancet 371, 243–260 (2008).
99.	 Million, M., Diallo, A. & Raoult, D. Gut microbiota and 
malnutrition. Microb. Pathog. 106, 127–138 (2017).
100.	Smith, M. I. et al. Gut microbiomes of Malawian  
twin pairs discordant for kwashiorkor. Science 339, 
548–554 (2013).
101.	Lee, J.-H., Li, X. & O’Sullivan, D. J. Transcription 
analysis of a lantibiotic gene cluster from 
Bifidobacterium longum DJO10A. Appl. Environ. 
Microbiol. 77, 5879–5887 (2011).
102.	Mata, L. J. et al. Gastrointestinal flora of children with 
protein — calorie malnutrition. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 25, 
1118–1126 (1972).
103.	Kelly, D. et al. Commensal anaerobic gut bacteria 
attenuate inflammation by regulating nuclear-​
cytoplasmic shuttling of PPAR-​γ and RelA.  
Nat. Immunol. 5, 104–112 (2004).
104.	Martens, J.-H., Barg, H., Warren, M. A. & Jahn, D. 
Microbial production of vitamin B 12. Appl. Microbiol. 
Biotechnol. 58, 275–285 (2002).
105.	Stecher, B. & Hardt, W.-D. The role of microbiota in 
infectious disease. Trends Microbiol. 16, 107–114 
(2008).
106.	Gehrig, J. L. et al. Effects of microbiota-​directed foods 
in gnotobiotic animals and undernourished children. 
Science 365, eaau4732 (2019).
107.	Jumpertz, R. et al. Energy-​balance studies reveal 
associations between gut microbes, caloric load, and 
nutrient absorption in humans. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 94, 
58–65 (2011).
108.	Lin, H. V. et al. Butyrate and propionate protect 
against diet-​induced obesity and regulate gut 
hormones via free fatty acid receptor 3-independent 
mechanisms. PLoS ONE 7, e35240 (2012).
109.	Xiong, Y. et al. Short-​chain fatty acids stimulate leptin 
production in adipocytes through the G protein-​
coupled receptor GPR41. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 
101, 1045–1050 (2004).
110.	 Vinolo, M. A. R. et al. Tributyrin attenuates obesity-​
associated inflammation and insulin resistance in high-​
fat-fed mice. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 303, 
E272–E282 (2012).
111.	 Maslowski, K. M. et al. Regulation of inflammatory 
responses by gut microbiota and chemoattractant 
receptor GPR43. Nature 461, 1282–1286 (2009).
112.	Macia, L. et al. Metabolite-​sensing receptors GPR43 
and GPR109A facilitate dietary fibre-​induced gut 
homeostasis through regulation of the inflammasome. 
Nat. Commun. 6, 6734 (2015).
113.	Pluznick, J. L. Renal and cardiovascular sensory 
receptors and blood pressure regulation. Am. J. 
Physiol. Ren. Physiol. 305, F439–F444 (2013).
114.	Byndloss, M. X. et al. Microbiota-​activated PPAR-​γ 
signaling inhibits dysbiotic Enterobacteriaceae 
expansion. Science 357, 570–575 (2017).
115.	Tang, T. W. et al. Loss of gut microbiota alters immune 
system composition and cripples postinfarction 
cardiac repair. Circulation 139, 647–659 (2019).
116.	Chambers, E. S. et al. Effects of targeted delivery of 
propionate to the human colon on appetite regulation, 
body weight maintenance and adiposity in overweight 
adults. Gut 64, 1744–1754 (2015).
117.	Sanna, S. et al. Causal relationships among the gut 
microbiome, short-​chain fatty acids and metabolic 
diseases. Nat. Genet. 51, 600 (2019).  
This study presents data providing evidence of a 
causal effect of the gut microbiome on metabolic 
traits.
118.	Tirosh, A. et al. The short-​chain fatty acid propionate 
increases glucagon and FABP4 production, impairing 
insulin action in mice and humans. Sci. Transl Med. 
11, eaav0120 (2019).
119.	Bouter, K. et al. Differential metabolic effects of oral 
butyrate treatment in lean versus metabolic syndrome 
subjects. Clin. Trans. Gastroenterol 9, 155 (2018).
120.	Gao, X. et al. Acetate functions as an epigenetic 
metabolite to promote lipid synthesis under hypoxia. 
Nat. Commun. 7, 11960 (2016).
121.	Perry, R. J. et al. Acetate mediates a microbiome–
brain–β-​cell axis to promote metabolic syndrome. 
Nature 534, 213–217 (2016).
122.	Freeland, K. R. & Wolever, T. M. Acute effects of 
intravenous and rectal acetate on glucagon-​like 
peptide-1, peptide YY, ghrelin, adiponectin and 
tumour necrosis factor-​α. Br. J. Nutr. 103, 460–466 
(2010).
123.	Ridlon, J. M., Kang, D.-J. & Hylemon, P. B. Bile salt 
biotransformations by human intestinal bacteria.  
J. Lipid Res. 47, 241–259 (2006).
124.	Fiorucci, S., Mencarelli, A., Palladino, G. & Cipriani, S. 
Bile-​acid-activated receptors: targeting TGR5 and 
farnesoid-​X-receptor in lipid and glucose disorders. 
Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 30, 570–580 (2009).
125.	Prawitt, J. et al. Farnesoid X receptor deficiency 
improves glucose homeostasis in mouse models  
of obesity. Diabetes 60, 1861–1871 (2011).
126.	Thomas, C. et al. TGR5-mediated bile acid sensing 
controls glucose homeostasis. Cell Metab. 10,  
167–177 (2009).
127.	Makishima, M. et al. Identification of a nuclear 
receptor for bile acids. Science 284, 1362–1365 
(1999).
128.	Kawamata, Y. et al. A G protein-​coupled receptor 
responsive to bile acids. J. Biol. Chem. 278,  
9435–9440 (2003).
129.	Pathak, P. et al. Intestine farnesoid X receptor agonist 
and the gut microbiota activate G-​protein bile acid 
receptor-1 signaling to improve metabolism. 
Hepatology 68, 1574–1588 (2018).
130.	Modica, S., Gadaleta, R. M. & Moschetta, A. 
Deciphering the nuclear bile acid receptor FXR 
paradigm. Nucl. Recept. Signal. https://doi.org/ 
10.1621/nrs.08005 (2010).
131.	Spinelli, V. et al. Influence of Roux-​en-Y gastric bypass 
on plasma bile acid profiles: a comparative study 
between rats, pigs and humans. Int. J. Obes. 40, 1260 
(2016).
132.	Kindel, T. L. et al. Increased glycine-​amidated 
hyocholic acid correlates to improved early weight loss 
after sleeve gastrectomy. Surg. Endosc. 32, 805–812 
(2018).
133.	Canfora, E. E., Meex, R. C., Venema, K. & Blaak, E. E. 
Gut microbial metabolites in obesity, NAFLD and 
T2DM. Nat. Rev. Endocrinol. 15, 261–273 (2019).
134.	Bansal, T., Alaniz, R. C., Wood, T. K. & Jayaraman, A. 
The bacterial signal indole increases epithelial-​cell 
tight-​junction resistance and attenuates indicators  
of inflammation. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 107,  
228–233 (2010).
135.	Shimada, Y. et al. Commensal bacteria-​dependent 
indole production enhances epithelial barrier function 
in the colon. PLoS ONE 8, e80604 (2013).
136.	Chimerel, C. et al. Bacterial metabolite indole 
modulates incretin secretion from intestinal 
enteroendocrine L cells. Cell Rep. 9, 1202–1208 
(2014).
137.	De Mello, V. D. et al. Indolepropionic acid and novel 
lipid metabolites are associated with a lower risk of 
type 2 diabetes in the Finnish Diabetes Prevention 
Study. Sci. Rep. 7, 46337 (2017).  
This study shows that microbial indole propionate 
and additional metabolites associate with lower 
risk of incident T2D.
138.	Wang, T. J. et al. Metabolite profiles and the risk of 
developing diabetes. Nat. Med. 17, 448 (2011).
139.	Sun, H. et al. Catabolic defect of branched-​chain 
amino acids promotes heart failure. Circulation 133, 
2038–2049 (2016).
140.	Koh, A. et al. Microbially produced imidazole 
propionate impairs insulin signaling through mTORC1. 
Cell 175, 947–961.e17 (2018).  
This study demonstrates that imidazole propionate 
is produced from histidine in a gut simulator at 
higher concentrations when using faecal microbiota 
from subjects with T2D than from individuals 
without T2D, and that it impairs glucose tolerance 
when administered to mice.
141.	MacDonald, M. J., Fahien, L. A., Mertz, R. J. &  
Rana, R. S. Effect of esters of succinic acid and other 
citric acid cycle intermediates on insulin release and 
inositol phosphate formation by pancreatic islets. 
Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 269, 400–406 (1989).
142.	Mills, E. L. et al. Accumulation of succinate controls 
activation of adipose tissue thermogenesis. Nature 
560, 102–106 (2018).
143.	Tannahill, G. et al. Succinate is an inflammatory signal 
that induces IL-1β through HIF-1α. Nature 496,  
238–242 (2013).
144.	Suárez-​Zamorano, N. et al. Microbiota depletion 
promotes browning of white adipose tissue and 
reduces obesity. Nat. Med. 21, 1497 (2015).
145.	Li, B. et al. Microbiota depletion impairs thermogenesis 
of brown adipose tissue and browning of white adipose 
tissue. Cell Rep. 26, 2720–2737.e5 (2019).
146.	Kamio, Y. & Nikaido, H. Outer membrane of 
Salmonella typhimurium: accessibility of phospholipid 
head groups to phospholipase C and cyanogen 
bromide activated dextran in the external medium. 
Biochemistry 15, 2561–2570 (1976).
147.	Cani, P. D. et al. Metabolic endotoxemia initiates 
obesity and insulin resistance. Diabetes 56,  
1761–1772 (2007).
148.	Luck, H. et al. Gut-​associated IgA+ immune cells regulate 
obesity-​related insulin resistance. Nat. Commun. 10, 
1–17 (2019).
149.	Winer, D. A., Luck, H., Tsai, S. & Winer, S. The 
intestinal immune system in obesity and insulin 
resistance. Cell Metab. 23, 413–426 (2016).
150.	Breton, J. et al. Gut commensal E. coli proteins 
activate host satiety pathways following nutrient-​
induced bacterial growth. Cell Metab. 23, 324–334 
(2016).
151.	Tennoune, N. et al. Bacterial ClpB heat-​shock protein, 
an antigen-​mimetic of the anorexigenic peptide α-​MSH, 
at the origin of eating disorders. Transl Psychiat. 4, 
e458–e458 (2014).
152.	Breton, J. et al. Elevated plasma concentrations of 
bacterial ClpB protein in patients with eating 
disorders. Int. J. Eat. Disord. 49, 805–808 (2016).
153.	Cohen, L. J. et al. Functional metagenomic discovery of 
bacterial effectors in the human microbiome and 
isolation of commendamide, a GPCR G2A/132 agonist. 
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 112, E4825–E4834 (2015).
154.	Cohen, L. J. et al. Commensal bacteria make GPCR 
ligands that mimic human signalling molecules. Nature 
549, 48 (2017).
155.	Qiang, X. et al. New melanocortin-​like peptide of  
E. coli can suppress inflammation via the mammalian 
melanocortin-1 receptor (MC1R): possible endocrine-​
like function for microbes of the gut. NPJ Biofilms 
Microbiomes 3, 31 (2017).
156.	Elsden, S. R., Hilton, M. G. & Waller, J. M.  
The end products of the metabolism of aromatic 
amino acids by Clostridia. Arch. Microbiol. 107,  
283–288 (1976).
157.	Lin, C.-J., Wu, V., Wu, P.-C. & Wu, C.-J. Meta-​analysis 
of the associations of p-​cresyl sulfate (PCS) and indoxyl 
sulfate (IS) with cardiovascular events and all-​cause 
mortality in patients with chronic renal failure.  
PLoS ONE 10, e0132589 (2015).
158.	Krisko, T. I. et al. Dissociation of adaptive thermogenesis 
from glucose homeostasis in microbiome-​deficient 
mice. Cell Metab. 31, 592–604.e9 (2020).
159.	Vojinovic, D. et al. Relationship between gut 
microbiota and circulating metabolites in  
population-based cohorts. Nat. Commun. 10,  
1–7 (2019).
160.	Vandeputte, D. et al. Quantitative microbiome 
profiling links gut community variation to microbial 
load. Nature 551, 507 (2017).  
This study builds a workflow for the quantitative 
microbiome profiling of faecal material, showing 
that quantitative microbiome profiling has a 
substantial effect on co-​occurrence analyses and 
the characterization of disease-​associated 
microbiota perturbations.
161.	Zhou, W. et al. Longitudinal multi-​omics of host–microbe 
dynamics in prediabetes. Nature 569, 663–671 
(2019).
162.	Flint, A., Raben, A., Rehfeld, J., Holst, J. & Astrup, A. 
The effect of glucagon-​like peptide-1 on energy 
expenditure and substrate metabolism in humans.  
Int. J. Obes. 24, 288 (2000).
163.	Batterham, R. L. et al. Gut hormone PYY 3-36 
physiologically inhibits food intake. Nature 418, 650 
(2002).
164.	Holz, I. V. IV, G. G., Kiihtreiber, W. M. & Habener, J. F. 
Pancreatic β-​cells are rendered glucose-​competent by 
the insulinotropic hormone glucagon-​like peptide-1 
(7–37). Nature 361, 362 (1993).
165.	Macfarlane, S. & Macfarlane, G. T. Composition and 
metabolic activities of bacterial biofilms colonizing 
food residues in the human gut. Appl. Environ. 
Microbiol. 72, 6204–6211 (2006).
www.nature.com/nrmicro
Reviews
70 | January 2021 | volume 19

----- Page 17 (native) -----
166.	Roager, H. M. et al. Colonic transit time is related to 
bacterial metabolism and mucosal turnover in the gut. 
Nat. Microbiol. 1, 16093 (2016).  
This study indicates that the colonic transit time is 
an important factor to consider in microbiome and 
metabolomics studies.
167.	Russell, W. R. et al. Major phenylpropanoid-​derived 
metabolites in the human gut can arise from microbial 
fermentation of protein. Mol. Nutr. Food Res. 57, 
523–535 (2013).
168.	Flemer, B. et al. The oral microbiota in colorectal cancer 
is distinctive and predictive. Gut 67, 1454–1463 
(2018).
169.	Plaza Oñate, F. et al. MSPminer: abundance-​based 
reconstitution of microbial pan-​genomes from shotgun 
metagenomic data. Bioinformatics 35, 1544–1552 
(2018).
170.	Truong, D. T., Tett, A., Pasolli, E., Huttenhower, C. & 
Segata, N. Microbial strain-​level population structure 
and genetic diversity from metagenomes. Genome 
Res. 27, 626–638 (2017).
171.	Zolfo, M., Tett, A., Jousson, O., Donati, C. & Segata, N. 
MetaMLST: multi-​locus strain-​level bacterial typing 
from metagenomic samples. Nucleic Acids Res. 45, 
e7–e7 (2016).
172.	Truong, D. T. et al. MetaPhlAn2 for enhanced 
metagenomic taxonomic profiling. Nat. Methods 12, 
902 (2015).
173.	Greenblum, S., Carr, R. & Borenstein, E. Extensive 
strain-​level copy-​number variation across human gut 
microbiome species. Cell 160, 583–594 (2015).
174.	Langfelder, P. & Horvath, S. WGCNA: an R package  
for weighted correlation network analysis. BMC 
Bioinforma. 9, 559 (2008).
175.	Wikoff, W. R. et al. Diacetylspermine is a novel 
prediagnostic serum biomarker for non-​small-cell  
lung cancer and has additive performance with  
pro-​surfactant protein B. J. Clin. Oncol. 33, 3880 
(2015).
176.	de Hoffmann, E. Tandem mass spectrometry:  
a primer. J. Mass. Spectrom. 31, 129–137 (1996).
177.	Donia, M. S. & Fischbach, M. A. Small molecules from 
the human microbiota. Science 349, 1254766 (2015).
178.	Cani, P. D. et al. Changes in gut microbiota control 
metabolic endotoxemia-​induced inflammation in  
high-​fat diet-​induced obesity and diabetes in mice. 
Diabetes 57, 1470–1481 (2008).
179.	Wolters, M. et al. Dietary fat, the gut microbiota, and 
metabolic health — a systematic review conducted 
within the MyNewGut project. Clin. Nutr. 38,  
2504–2520 (2018).
180.	Kjølbæk, L. et al. Arabinoxylan oligosaccharides and 
polyunsaturated fatty acid effects on gut microbiota 
and metabolic markers in overweight individuals with 
signs of metabolic syndrome: a randomized cross-​over 
trial. Clin. Nutr. 39, 67–79 (2019).
181.	Dieterich, W. et al. Influence of low FODMAP and 
gluten-​free diets on disease activity and intestinal 
microbiota in patients with non-​celiac gluten 
sensitivity. Clin. Nutr. 38, 697–707 (2019).
182.	Hansen, L. B. et al. A low-​gluten diet induces changes 
in the intestinal microbiome of healthy Danish adults. 
Nat. Commun. 9, 4630 (2018).
183.	Roager, H. M. et al. Whole grain-​rich diet reduces 
body weight and systemic low-​grade inflammation 
without inducing major changes of the gut microbiome: 
a randomised cross-​over trial. Gut 68, 83–93 (2019).
184.	Sanders, M. E., Merenstein, D. J., Reid, G., Gibson, G. R. 
& Rastall, R. A. Probiotics and prebiotics in intestinal 
health and disease: from biology to the clinic.  
Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 16, 605–616 
(2019).
185.	Martín, R. et al. Functional characterization of  
novel Faecalibacterium prausnitzii strains isolated 
from healthy volunteers: a step forward in the use  
of F. prausnitzii as a next-​generation probiotic.  
Front. Microbiol. 8, 1226 (2017).
186.	Depommier, C. et al. Supplementation with 
Akkermansia muciniphila in overweight and obese 
human volunteers: a proof-​of-concept exploratory 
study. Nat. Med. 25, 1096–1103 (2019).  
This proof-​of-concept study shows that 
supplementation with A. muciniphila improves 
several dysmetabolic features.
187.	Cani, P. D. & Van Hul, M. Novel opportunities for  
next-​generation probiotics targeting metabolic 
syndrome. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 32, 21–27  
(2015).
188.	Kristensen, N. B. et al. Alterations in fecal microbiota 
composition by probiotic supplementation in healthy 
adults: a systematic review of randomized controlled 
trials. Genome Med. 8, 52 (2016).
189.	Zmora, N. et al. Personalized gut mucosal colonization 
resistance to empiric probiotics is associated with 
unique host and microbiome features. Cell 174, 
1388–1405.e21 (2018).
190.	Suez, J. et al. Post-​antibiotic gut mucosal microbiome 
reconstitution is impaired by probiotics and improved 
by autologous FMT. Cell 174, 1406–1423.e16 
(2018).
191.	Everard, A. et al. Responses of gut microbiota and 
glucose and lipid metabolism to prebiotics in genetic 
obese and diet-​induced leptin-​resistant mice. Diabetes 
60, 2775–2786 (2011).
192.	Dewulf, E. M. et al. Insight into the prebiotic concept: 
lessons from an exploratory, double blind intervention 
study with inulin-​type fructans in obese women. Gut 
62, 1112–1121 (2013).
193.	Nicolucci, A. C. et al. Prebiotics reduce body fat  
and alter intestinal microbiota in children who are 
overweight or with obesity. Gastroenterology 153, 
711–722 (2017).
194.	Tsilingiri, K. et al. Probiotic and postbiotic activity in 
health and disease: comparison on a novel polarised ex-​
vivo organ culture model. Gut 61, 1007–1015 (2012).
195.	Plovier, H. et al. A purified membrane protein  
from Akkermansia muciniphila or the pasteurized 
bacterium improves metabolism in obese and diabetic 
mice. Nat. Med. 23, 107 (2017).
196.	Van Nood, E. et al. Duodenal infusion of donor feces 
for recurrent Clostridium difficile. N. Engl. J. Med. 
368, 407–415 (2013).
197.	Kootte, R. S. et al. Improvement of insulin sensitivity 
after lean donor feces in metabolic syndrome is  
driven by baseline intestinal microbiota composition. 
Cell Metab. 26, 611–619.e6 (2017).
198.	Duan, F. F., Liu, J. H. & March, J. C. Engineered 
commensal bacteria reprogram intestinal cells into 
glucose-​responsive insulin-​secreting cells for the 
treatment of diabetes. Diabetes 64, 1794–1803 
(2015).
199.	Górski, A. et al. Perspectives of phage therapy in non-​
bacterial infections. Front. Microbiol. https://doi.org/ 
10.3389/fmicb.2018.03306 (2018).
200.	Ramachandran, G. & Bikard, D. Editing the microbiome 
the CRISPR way. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 
374, 20180103 (2019).
Acknowledgements
This study was supported by Marie Skłodowska-​Curie 
Individual Fellowship 797267 (granted to Y.F.). The Novo 
Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic Research is 
an independent research centre at the University of 
Copenhagen partially funded by an unrestricted donation 
from the Novo Nordisk Foundation.
Author contributions
The authors contributed equally to all aspects of the article.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Peer review information
Nature Reviews Microbiology thanks M. Nieuwdorp, C. Thaiss 
and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution 
to the peer review of this work.
Publisher’s note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
 
© Springer Nature Limited 2020
naTure RevIeWS | MIcrobIology
Reviews
	
 volume 19 | January 2021 | 71