

----- Page 1 (native) -----
HAL Id: inria-00548659
https://inria.hal.science/inria-00548659v1
Submitted on 20 Dec 2010
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not.
The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.
L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.
Learning Realistic Human Actions from Movies
Ivan Laptev, Marcin Marszalek, Cordelia Schmid, Benjamin Rozenfeld
To cite this version:
Ivan Laptev, Marcin Marszalek, Cordelia Schmid, Benjamin Rozenfeld. Learning Realistic Human
Actions from Movies. CVPR 2008 - IEEE Conference on Computer Vision & Pattern Recognition,
Jun 2008, Anchorage, United States. pp.1-8, ￿10.1109/CVPR.2008.4587756￿. ￿inria-00548659￿

----- Page 2 (native) -----
Learning realistic human actions from movies
Ivan Laptev
Marcin Marszałek
Cordelia Schmid
Benjamin Rozenfeld
INRIA Rennes, IRISA
INRIA Grenoble, LEAR - LJK
Bar-Ilan University
ivan.laptev@inria.fr
marcin.marszalek@inria.fr
cordelia.schmid@inria.fr
grurgrur@gmail.com
Abstract
The aim of this paper is to address recognition of natural
human actions in diverse and realistic video settings. This
challenging but important subject has mostly been ignored
in the past due to several problems one of which is the lack
of realistic and annotated video datasets. Our ﬁrst contri-
bution is to address this limitation and to investigate the
use of movie scripts for automatic annotation of human ac-
tions in videos. We evaluate alternative methods for action
retrieval from scripts and show beneﬁts of a text-based clas-
siﬁer. Using the retrieved action samples for visual learn-
ing, we next turn to the problem of action classiﬁcation in
video. We present a new method for video classiﬁcation
that builds upon and extends several recent ideas including
local space-time features, space-time pyramids and multi-
channel non-linear SVMs. The method is shown to improve
state-of-the-art results on the standard KTH action dataset
by achieving 91.8% accuracy. Given the inherent problem
of noisy labels in automatic annotation, we particularly in-
vestigate and show high tolerance of our method to annota-
tion errors in the training set. We ﬁnally apply the method
to learning and classifying challenging action classes in
movies and show promising results.
1. Introduction
In the last decade the ﬁeld of visual recognition had an
outstanding evolution from classifying instances of toy ob-
jects towards recognizing the classes of objects and scenes
in natural images. Much of this progress has been sparked
by the creation of realistic image datasets as well as by the
new, robust methods for image description and classiﬁca-
tion.
We take inspiration from this progress and aim to
transfer previous experience to the domain of video recog-
nition and the recognition of human actions in particular.
Existing datasets for human action recognition (e.g. [15],
see ﬁgure 8) provide samples for only a few action classes
recorded in controlled and simpliﬁed settings. This stands
in sharp contrast with the demands of real applications fo-
cused on natural video with human actions subjected to in-
Figure 1. Realistic samples for three classes of human actions:
kissing; answering a phone; getting out of a car. All samples have
been automatically retrieved from script-aligned movies.
dividual variations of people in expression, posture, motion
and clothing; perspective effects and camera motions; illu-
mination variations; occlusions and variation in scene sur-
roundings. In this paper we address limitations of current
datasets and collect realistic video samples with human ac-
tions as illustrated in ﬁgure 1. In particular, we consider the
difﬁculty of manual video annotation and present a method
for automatic annotation of human actions in movies based
on script alignment and text classiﬁcation (see section 2).
Action recognition from video shares common problems
with object recognition in static images. Both tasks have
to deal with signiﬁcant intra-class variations, background
clutter and occlusions. In the context of object recogni-
tion in static images, these problems are surprisingly well
handled by a bag-of-features representation [17] combined
with state-of-the-art machine learning techniques like Sup-
port Vector Machines. It remains, however, an open ques-
tion whether and how these results generalize to the recog-
nition of realistic human actions, e.g., in feature ﬁlms or
personal videos.

----- Page 3 (native) -----
Building on the recent experience with image classiﬁ-
cation, we employ spatio-temporal features and generalize
spatial pyramids to spatio-temporal domain. This allows
us to extend the spatio-temporal bag-of-features representa-
tion with weak geometry, and to apply kernel-based learn-
ing techniques (cf. section 3). We validate our approach
on a standard benchmark [15] and show that it outperforms
the state-of-the-art. We next turn to the problem of action
classiﬁcation in realistic videos and show promising results
for eight very challenging action classes in movies. Finally,
we present and evaluate a fully automatic setup with action
learning and classiﬁcation obtained for an automatically la-
beled training set.
1.1. Related work
Our script-based annotation of human actions is simi-
lar in spirit to several recent papers using textual informa-
tion for automatic image collection from the web [10, 14]
and automatic naming of characters in images [1] and
videos [4]. Differently to this work we use more sophis-
ticated text classiﬁcation tools to overcome action vari-
ability in text.
Similar to ours, several recent methods
explore bag-of-features representations for action recogni-
tion [3, 6, 13, 15, 19], but only address human actions in
controlled and simpliﬁed settings. Recognition and local-
ization of actions in movies has been recently addressed
in [8] for a limited dataset, i.e., manual annotation of two
action classes. Here we present a framework that scales to
automatic annotation for tens or more visual action classes.
Our approach to video classiﬁcation borrows inspiration
from image recognition methods [2, 9, 12, 20] and extends
spatial pyramids [9] to space-time pyramids.
2. Automatic annotation of human actions
This section describes an automatic procedure for col-
lecting annotated video data for human actions from
movies. Movies contain a rich variety and a large num-
ber of realistic human actions.
Common action classes
such as kissing, answering a phone and getting out of a
car (see ﬁgure 1), however, often appear only a few times
per movie. To obtain a sufﬁcient number of action samples
from movies for visual training, it is necessary to annotate
tens or hundreds of hours of video which is a hard task to
perform manually.
To avoid the difﬁculty of manual annotation, we make
use of movie scripts (or simply “scripts”). Scripts are pub-
licly available for hundreds of popular movies1 and provide
text description of the movie content in terms of scenes,
characters, transcribed dialogs and human actions. Scripts
as a mean for video annotation have been previously used
1We obtained hundreds of movie scripts from www.dailyscript.com,
www.movie-page.com and www.weeklyscript.com.
for the automatic naming of characters in videos by Ever-
ingham et al. [4]. Here we extend this idea and apply text-
based script search to automatically collect video samples
for human actions.
Automatic annotation of human actions from scripts,
however, is associated with several problems.
Firstly,
scripts usually come without time information and have to
be aligned with the video. Secondly, actions described in
scripts do not always correspond with the actions in movies.
Finally, action retrieval has to cope with the substantial vari-
ability of action expressions in text. In this section we ad-
dress these problems in subsections 2.1 and 2.2 and use the
proposed solution to automatically collect annotated video
samples with human actions, see subsection 2.3. The result-
ing dataset is used to train and to evaluate a visual action
classiﬁer later in section 4.
2.1. Alignment of actions in scripts and video
Movie scripts are typically available in plain text format
and share similar structure. We use line indentation as a
simple feature to parse scripts into monologues, character
names and scene descriptions (see ﬁgure 2, right). To align
scripts with the video we follow [4] and use time informa-
tion available in movie subtitles that we separately down-
load from the Web. Similar to [4] we ﬁrst align speech
sections in scripts and subtitles using word matching and
dynamic programming. We then transfer time information
from subtitles to scripts and infer time intervals for scene
descriptions as illustrated in ﬁgure 2. Video clips used for
action training and classiﬁcation in this paper are deﬁned
by time intervals of scene descriptions and, hence, may
contain multiple actions and non-action episodes. To in-
dicate a possible misalignment due to mismatches between
scripts and subtitles, we associate each scene description
with the alignment score a. The a-score is computed by
the ratio of matched words in the near-by monologues as
a = (#matched words)/(#all words).
Temporal misalignment may result from the discrepancy
between subtitles and scripts.
Perfect subtitle alignment
(a = 1), however, does not yet guarantee the correct action
annotation in video due to the possible discrepancy between
Figure 2. Example of matching speech sections (green) in subtitles
and scripts. Time information (blue) from adjacent speech sections
is used to estimate time intervals of scene descriptions (yellow).

----- Page 4 (native) -----
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
a=1.0
a≥0.5
precision
number of samples
Evaluation of retrieved actions on visual ground truth
[1:13:41 - 1:13:45]
A black car pulls up. Two
army ofﬁcers get out.
Figure 3. Evaluation of script-based action annotation. Left: Preci-
sion of action annotation evaluated on visual ground truth. Right:
Example of a visual false positive for “get out of a car”.
scripts and movies. To investigate this issue, we manually
annotated several hundreds of actions in 12 movie scripts
and veriﬁed these on the visual ground truth. From 147 ac-
tions with correct text alignment (a=1) only 70% did match
with the video. The rest of samples either were misaligned
in time (10%), were outside the ﬁeld of view (10%) or were
completely missing in the video (10%). Misalignment of
subtitles (a < 1) further decreases the visual precision as
illustrated in ﬁgure 3 (left). Figure 3 (right) shows a typical
example of a “visual false positive” for the action “get out
of a car” occurring outside the ﬁeld of view of the camera.
2.2. Text retrieval of human actions
Expressions for human actions in text may have a con-
siderable within-class variability. The following examples
illustrate variations in expressions for the “GetOutCar” ac-
tion: “Will gets out of the Chevrolet.”, “A black car pulls
up. Two army ofﬁcers get out.”, “Erin exits her new truck.”.
Furthermore, false positives might be difﬁcult to distin-
guish from positives, see examples for the “SitDown” ac-
tion: “About to sit down, he freezes.”, “Smiling, he turns
to sit down. But the smile dies on his face when he ﬁnds
his place occupied by Ellie.”. Text-based action retrieval,
hence, is a non-trivial task that might be difﬁcult to solve
by a simple keyword search such as commonly used for re-
trieving images of objects, e.g. in [14].
To cope with the variability of text describing human ac-
tions, we adopt a machine learning based text classiﬁcation
approach [16]. A classiﬁer labels each scene description
in scripts as containing the target action or not. The imple-
mented approach relies on the bag-of-features model, where
each scene description is represented as a sparse vector in a
high-dimensional feature space. As features we use words,
adjacent pairs of words, and non-adjacent pairs of words oc-
curring within a small window of N words where N varies
between 2 and 8.
Features supported by less than three
training documents are removed. For the classiﬁcation we
use a regularized perceptron [21], which is equivalent to a
support vector machine. The classiﬁer is trained on a man-
ually labeled set of scene descriptions, and the parameters
(regularization constant, window size N, and the acceptance
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
recall
precision
Regularized Perceptron action retrieval from scripts
AllActions
<AnswerPhone>
<GetOutCar>
<HandShake>
<HugPerson>
<Kiss>
<SitDown>
<SitUp>
<StandUp>
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
recall
precision
Keywords action retrieval from scripts
AllActions
<AnswerPhone>
<GetOutCar>
<HandShake>
<HugPerson>
<Kiss>
<SitDown>
<SitUp>
<StandUp>
Figure 4. Results of retrieving eight classes of human actions from
scripts using regularized perceptron classiﬁer (left) and regular ex-
pression matching (right).
threshold) are tuned using a validation set.
We evaluate text-based action retrieval on our eight
classes of movie actions that we use throughout this pa-
per: AnswerPhone, GetOutCar, HandShake, HugPerson, Kiss,
SitDown, SitUp, StandUp. The text test set contains 397 action
samples and over 17K non-action samples from 12 manu-
ally annotated movie scripts. The text training set was sam-
pled from a large set of scripts different from the test set.
We compare results obtained by the regularized perceptron
classiﬁer and by matching regular expressions which were
manually tuned to expressions of human actions in text. The
results in ﬁgure 4 very clearly conﬁrm the beneﬁts of the
text classiﬁer. The average precision-recall values for all
actions are [prec. 0.95 / rec. 0.91] for the text classiﬁer ver-
sus [prec. 0.55 / rec. 0.88] for regular expression matching.
2.3. Video datasets for human actions
We construct two video training sets, a manual and an
automatic one, as well as a video test set. They contain
video clips for our eight classes of movie actions (see top
row of ﬁgure 10 for illustration). In all cases we ﬁrst apply
automatic script alignment as described in section 2.1. For
the clean, manual dataset as well as the test set we manu-
ally select visually correct samples from the set of manu-
ally text-annotated actions in scripts. The automatic dataset
contains training samples that have been retrieved automat-
ically from scripts by the text classiﬁer described in sec-
tion 2.2. We limit the automatic training set to actions with
an alignment score a > 0.5 and a video length of less than
1000 frames. Our manual and automatic training sets con-
tain action video sequences from 12 movies 2 and the test
set actions from 20 different movies 3. Our datasets, i.e., the
2“American
Beauty”,
“Being
John
Malkovich”,
“Big
Fish”,
“Casablanca”,
“The Crying Game”,
“Double Indemnity”,
“Forrest
Gump”, “The Godfather”, “I Am Sam”, “Independence Day”, “Pulp
Fiction” and “Raising Arizona”.
3“As Good As It Gets”, “Big Lebowski”, “Bringing Out The Dead”,
“The Butterﬂy Effect”, “Dead Poets Society”, “Erin Brockovich”, “Fargo”,
“Gandhi”, “The Graduate”, “Indiana Jones And The Last Crusade”, “Its
A Wonderful Life”, “Kids”, “LA Conﬁdential”, “The Lord of the Rings:
Fellowship of the Ring”, “Lost Highway”, “The Lost Weekend”, “Mission
To Mars”, “Naked City”, “The Pianist” and “Reservoir Dogs”.

----- Page 5 (native) -----
5
6
9
7
10
21
5
33
96
15
6
14
8
34
30
7
29
143
20
12
23
15
44
51
12
62
239
233
automatically labeled training set
<AnswerPhone>
<GetOutCar>
<HandShake>
<HugPerson>
<Kiss>
<SitDown>
<SitUp>
<StandUp>
Total labels
Total samples
False
Correct
All
22
13
20
22
49
47
11
47
231
219
manually labeled training set
23
13
19
22
51
30
10
49
217
211
test set
Table 1. The number of action labels in automatic training set
(top), clean/manual training set (middle) and test set (bottom).
video clips and the corresponding annotations, are available
at http://www.irisa.fr/vista/actions.
The objective of having two training sets is to evalu-
ate recognition of actions both in a supervised setting and
with automatically generated training samples. Note that
no manual annotation is performed neither for scripts nor
for videos used in the automatic training set. The distri-
bution of action labels for the different subsets and action
classes is given in table 1. We can observe that the num-
ber of correctly labeled videos in the automatic set is 60%.
Most of the wrong labels result from the script-video mis-
alignment and a few additional errors come from the text
classiﬁer. The problem of classiﬁcation in the presence of
wrong training labels will be addressed in section 4.3.
3. Video classiﬁcation for action recognition
This section presents our approach for action classiﬁca-
tion. It builds on existing bag-of-features approaches for
video description [3, 13, 15] and extends recent advances in
static image classiﬁcation to videos [2, 9, 12]. Lazebnik et
al. [9] showed that a spatial pyramid, i.e., a coarse descrip-
tion of the spatial layout of the scene, improves recognition.
Successful extensions of this idea include the optimization
of weights for the individual pyramid levels [2] and the use
of more general spatial grids [12]. Here we build on these
ideas and go a step further by building space-time grids.
The details of our approach are described in the following.
3.1. Space-time features
Sparse space-time features have recently shown good
performance for action recognition [3, 6, 13, 15]. They pro-
vide a compact video representation and tolerance to back-
ground clutter, occlusions and scale changes. Here we fol-
low [7] and detect interest points using a space-time exten-
sion of the Harris operator. However, instead of performing
scale selection as in [7], we use a multi-scale approach and
extract features at multiple levels of spatio-temporal scales
(σ2
i , τ 2
j ) with σi = 2(1+i)/2, i = 1, ..., 6 and τj = 2j/2, j =
1, 2 . This choice is motivated by the reduced computational
Figure 5. Space-time interest points detected for two video frames
with human actions hand shake (left) and get out car (right).
complexity, the independence from scale selection artifacts
and the recent evidence of good recognition performance
using dense scale sampling. We also eliminate detections
due to artifacts at shot boundaries [11]. Interest points de-
tected for two frames with human actions are illustrated in
ﬁgure 5.
To characterize motion and appearance of local features,
we compute histogram descriptors of space-time volumes
in the neighborhood of detected points. The size of each
volume (Δx, Δy, Δt) is related to the detection scales by
Δx, Δy = 2kσ, Δt = 2kτ. Each volume is subdivided into
a (nx, ny, nt) grid of cuboids; for each cuboid we compute
coarse histograms of oriented gradient (HoG) and optic ﬂow
(HoF). Normalized histograms are concatenated into HoG
and HoF descriptor vectors and are similar in spirit to the
well known SIFT descriptor. We use parameter values k =
9, nx, ny = 3, nt = 2.
3.2. Spatio-temporal bag-of-features
Given a set of spatio-temporal features, we build a
spatio-temporal bag-of-features (BoF). This requires the
construction of a visual vocabulary. In our experiments we
cluster a subset of 100k features sampled from the training
videos with the k-means algorithm. The number of clusters
is set to k = 4000, which has shown empirically to give
good results and is consistent with the values used for static
image classiﬁcation. The BoF representation then assigns
each feature to the closest (we use Euclidean distance) vo-
cabulary word and computes the histogram of visual word
occurrences over a space-time volume corresponding either
to the entire video sequence or subsequences deﬁned by a
spatio-temporal grid. If there are several subsequences the
different histograms are concatenated into one vector and
then normalized.
In the spatial dimensions we use a 1x1 grid—
corresponding to the standard BoF representation—, a 2x2
grid—shown to give excellent results in [9]—, a horizontal
h3x1 grid [12] as well as a vertical v1x3 one. Moreover, we
implemented a denser 3x3 grid and a center-focused o2x2
grid where neighboring cells overlap by 50% of their width
and height. For the temporal dimension we subdivide the
video sequence into 1 to 3 non-overlapping temporal bins,

----- Page 6 (native) -----
x
y
t
1x1 t1
1x1 t2
h3x1 t1
o2x2 t1
Figure 6. Examples of a few spatio-temporal grids.
resulting in t1, t2 and t3 binnings. Note that t1 represents
the standard BoF approach. We also implemented a center-
focused ot2 binning. Note that for the overlapping grids the
features in the center obtain more weight.
The combination of six spatial grids with four temporal
binnings results in 24 possible spatio-temporal grids. Fig-
ure 6 illustrates some of the grids which have shown to be
useful for action recognition. Each combination of a spatio-
temporal grid with a descriptor, either HoG or HoF, is in the
following called a channel.
3.3. Non-linear Support Vector Machines
For classiﬁcation, we use a non-linear support vector ma-
chine with a multi-channel χ2 kernel that robustly combines
channels [20]. We use the multi-channel Gaussian kernel
deﬁned by:
K(Hi, Hj) = exp

−

c∈C
1
Ac
Dc(Hi, Hj)

(1)
where Hi = {hin} and Hj = {hjn} are the histograms for
channel c and Dc(Hi, Hj) is the χ2 distance deﬁned as
Dc(Hi, Hj) = 1
2
V

n=1
(hin −hjn)2
hin + hjn
(2)
with V the vocabulary size. The parameter Ac is the mean
value of the distances between all training samples for a
channel c [20]. The best set of channels C for a given train-
ing set is found based on a greedy approach. Starting with
an empty set of channels all possible additions and removals
of channels are evaluated until a maximum is reached. In
the case of multi-class classiﬁcation we use the one-against-
all approach.
4. Experimental results
In the following we ﬁrst evaluate the performance of the
different spatio-temporal grids in section 4.1. We then com-
pare our approach to the state-of-the-art in section 4.2 and
evaluate the inﬂuence of noisy, i.e., incorrect, labels in sec-
tion 4.3. We conclude with experimental results for our
movie datasets in section 4.4
4.1. Evaluation of spatio-temporal grids
In this section we evaluate if spatio-temporal grids im-
prove the classiﬁcation accuracy and which grids perform
best in our context. Previous results for static image clas-
siﬁcation have shown that the best combination depends on
the class as well as the dataset [9, 12]. The approach we
take here is to select the overall most successful channels
and then to choose the most successful combination for each
class individually.
As some grids may not perform well by themselves,
but contribute within a combination [20], we search for
the most successful combination of channels (descriptor &
spatio-temporal grid) for each action class with a greedy
approach. To avoid tuning to a particular dataset, we ﬁnd
the best spatio-temporal channels for both the KTH action
dataset and our manually labeled movie dataset. The exper-
imental setup and evaluation criteria for these two datasets
are presented in sections 4.2 and 4.4. We refer the reader to
these sections for details.
Figure 7 shows the number of occurrences for each of
our channel components in the optimized channel combi-
nations for KTH and movie actions. We can see that HoG
descriptors are chosen more frequently than HoFs, but both
are used in many channels. Among the spatial grids the
horizontal 3x1 partitioning turns out to be most successful.
The traditional 1x1 grid and the center-focused o2x2 per-
form also very well. The 2x2, 3x3 and v1x3 grids occur less
often and are dropped in the following. They are either re-
dundant (2x2), too dense (3x3), or do not ﬁt the geometry
of natural scenes (v1x3). For temporal binning no temporal
subdivision of the sequence t1 shows the best results, but
t3 and t2 also perform very well and complement t1. The
ot2 binning turns out to be rarely used in practice—it often
duplicates t2—and we drop it from further experiments.
Table 2 presents for each dataset/action the performance
of the standard bag-of-features with HoG and HoF descrip-
tors, of the best channel as well as of the best combination
of channels found with our greedy search. We can observe
that the spatio-temporal grids give a signiﬁcant gain over the
standard BoF methods. Moreover, combining two to three
 0
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
hog
hof
h3x1
1
o2x2
2x2
3x3
v3x3
t1
t3
t2
ot2
KTH actions
Movie actions
Figure 7. Number of occurrences for each channel component
within the optimized channel combinations for the KTH action
dataset and our manually labeled movie dataset.

----- Page 7 (native) -----
Task
HoG BoF
HoF BoF
Best channel
Best combination
KTH multi-class
81.6%
89.7%
91.1% (hof h3x1 t3)
91.8% (hof 1 t2,
hog 1 t3)
Action AnswerPhone
13.4%
24.6%
26.7% (hof h3x1 t3)
32.1% (hof o2x2 t1, hof h3x1 t3)
Action GetOutCar
21.9%
14.9%
22.5% (hof o2x2 1)
41.5% (hof o2x2 t1, hog h3x1 t1)
Action HandShake
18.6%
12.1%
23.7% (hog h3x1 1)
32.3% (hog h3x1 t1, hog o2x2 t3)
Action HugPerson
29.1%
17.4%
34.9% (hog h3x1 t2)
40.6% (hog 1 t2,
hog o2x2 t2, hog h3x1 t2)
Action Kiss
52.0%
36.5%
52.0% (hog 1 1)
53.3% (hog 1 t1,
hof 1 t1,
hof o2x2 t1)
Action SitDown
29.1%
20.7%
37.8% (hog 1 t2)
38.6% (hog 1 t2,
hog 1 t3)
Action SitUp
6.5%
5.7%
15.2% (hog h3x1 t2)
18.2% (hog o2x2 t1, hog o2x2 t2, hog h3x1 t2)
Action StandUp
45.4%
40.0%
45.4% (hog 1 1)
50.5% (hog 1 t1,
hof 1 t2)
Table 2. Classiﬁcation performance of different channels and their combinations. For the KTH dataset the average class accuracy is
reported, whereas for our manually cleaned movie dataset the per-class average precision (AP) is given.
channels further improves the accuracy.
Interestingly, HoGs perform better than HoFs for all real-
world actions except for answering the phone. The inverse
holds for KTH actions. This shows that the context and the
image content play a large role in realistic settings, while
simple actions can be very well characterized by their mo-
tion only. Furthermore, HoG features also capture motion
information up to some extent through their local temporal
binning.
In more detail, the optimized combinations for sitting
down and standing up do not make use of spatial grids,
which can be explained by the fact that these actions can
occur anywhere in the scene. On the other hand, temporal
binning does not help in the case of kissing, for which a high
variability with respect to the temporal extent can be ob-
served. For getting out of a car, handshaking and hugging a
combination of a h3x1 and a o2x2 spatial grid is successful.
This could be due to the fact that those actions are usually
pictured either in a wide setting (where a scene-aligned grid
should work) or as a closeup (where a uniform grid should
perform well).
The optimized combinations determined in this section,
cf. table 2, are used in the remainder of the experimental
section.
4.2. Comparison to the state-of-the-art
We compare our work to the state-of-the-art on the KTH
actions dataset [15], see ﬁgure 8. It contains six types of
human actions, namely walking, jogging, running, boxing,
hand waving and hand clapping, performed several times
by 25 subjects. The sequences were taken for four differ-
ent scenarios: outdoors, outdoors with scale variation, out-
doors with different clothes and indoors. Note that in all
cases the background is homogeneous. The dataset con-
Method
Schuldt
Niebles
Wong
ours
et al. [15]
et al. [13]
et al. [18]
Accuracy
71.7%
81.5%
86.7%
91.8%
Table 3. Average class accuracy on the KTH actions dataset.
Walking
Jogging
Running
Boxing
Waving
Clapping
Figure 8. Sample frames from the KTH actions sequences. All six
classes (columns) and scenarios (rows) are presented.
tains a total of 2391 sequences. We follow the experimental
setup of Schuldt et al. [15] with sequences divided into the
training/validation set (8+8 people) and the test set (9 peo-
ple). The best performing channel combination, reported
in the previous section, was determined by 10-fold cross-
validation on the combined training+validation set. Results
are reported for this combination on the test set.
Table 3 compares the average class accuracy of our
method with results reported by other researchers. Com-
pared to the existing approaches, our method shows signif-
icantly better performance, outperforming the state-of-the-
art in the same setup. The confusion matrix for our method
is given in table 4. Interestingly, the major confusion occurs
between jogging and running.
Walking
Jogging
Running
Boxing
Waving
Clapping
Walking
.99
.01
.00
.00
.00
.00
Jogging
.04
.89
.07
.00
.00
.00
Running
.01
.19
.80
.00
.00
.00
Boxing
.00
.00
.00
.97
.00
.03
Waving
.00
.00
.00
.00
.91
.09
Clapping
.00
.00
.00
.05
.00
.95
Table 4. Confusion matrix for the KTH actions.

----- Page 8 (native) -----
Note that results obtained by Jhuang et al. [6] and Wong
et al. [19] are not comparable to ours, as they are based
on non-standard experimental setups: they either use more
training data or the problem is decomposed into simpler
tasks.
4.3. Robustness to noise in the training data
Training with automatically retrieved samples avoids the
high cost of manual data annotation. Yet, this goes in hand
with the problem of wrong labels in the training set. In this
section we evaluate the robustness of our action classiﬁca-
tion approach to labeling errors in the training set.
Figure 9 shows the recognition accuracy as a function of
the probability p of a label being wrong. Training for p = 0
is performed with the original labels, whereas with p = 1 all
training labels are wrong. The experimental results are ob-
tained for the KTH dataset and the same setup as described
in subsection 4.2. Different wrong labelings are generated
and evaluated 20 times for each p; the average accuracy and
its variance are reported.
The experiment shows that the performance of our
method degrades gracefully in the presence of labeling er-
rors. Up to p = 0.2 the performance decreases insigniﬁ-
cantly, i.e., by less than two percent. At p = 0.4 the perfor-
mance decreases by around 10%. We can, therefore, predict
a very good performance for the proposed automatic train-
ing scenario, where the observed amount of wrong labels is
around 40%.
Note that we have observed a comparable level of resis-
tance to labeling errors when evaluating an image classiﬁ-
cation method on the natural-scene images of the PASCAL
VOC’07 challenge dataset.
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
Average class accuracy
Probability of a wrong label
KTH actions
Figure 9. Performance of our video classiﬁcation approach in the
presence of wrong labels. Results are report for the KTH dataset.
4.4. Action recognition in real-world videos
In this section we report action classiﬁcation results for
real-word videos, i.e., for our test set with 217 videos.
Training is performed with a clean, manual dataset as well
as an automatically annotated one, see section 2.3 for de-
Clean
Automatic
Chance
AnswerPhone
32.1%
16.4%
10.6%
GetOutCar
41.5%
16.4%
6.0%
HandShake
32.3%
9.9%
8.8%
HugPerson
40.6%
26.8%
10.1%
Kiss
53.3%
45.1%
23.5%
SitDown
38.6%
24.8%
13.8%
SitUp
18.2%
10.4%
4.6%
StandUp
50.5%
33.6%
22.6%
Table 5. Average precision (AP) for each action class of our test
set. We compare results for clean (annotated) and automatic train-
ing data. We also show results for a random classiﬁer (chance).
tails. We train a classiﬁer for each action as being present
or not following the evaluation procedure of [5]. The perfor-
mance is evaluated with the average precision (AP) of the
precision/recall curve. We use the optimized combination
of spatio-temporal grids from section 4.1. Table 5 presents
the AP values for the two training sets and for a random
classiﬁer referred to as chance AP.
The classiﬁcation results are good for the manual train-
ing set and lower for the automatic one. However, for all
classes except “HandShake” the automatic training obtains
results signiﬁcantly above chance level. This shows that
an automatically trained system can successfully recognize
human actions in real-world videos. For kissing, the per-
formance loss between automatic and manual annotations
is minor. This suggests that the main difﬁculty with our au-
tomatic approach is the low number of correctly labeled ex-
amples and not the percentage of wrong labels. This prob-
lem could easily be avoided by using a large database of
movies which we plan to address in the future.
Figure 10 shows some example results obtained by our
approach trained with automatically annotated data.
We
display key frames of test videos for which classiﬁcation
obtained the highest conﬁdence values. The two top rows
show true positives and true negatives. Note that despite
the fact that samples were highly scored by our method,
they are far from trivial: the videos show a large variability
of scale, viewpoint and background. The two bottom rows
show wrongly classiﬁed videos. Among the false positives
many display features not unusual for the classiﬁed action,
for example the rapid getting up is typical for “GetOutCar”
or the stretched hands are typical for “HugPerson”. Most of
the false negatives are very difﬁcult to recognize, see for ex-
ample the occluded handshake or the hardly visible person
getting out of the car.
5. Conclusion
This paper has presented an approach for automatically
collecting training data for human actions and has shown
that this data can be used to train a classiﬁer for ac-
tion recognition. Our approach for automatic annotation

----- Page 9 (native) -----
AnswerPhone
GetOutCar
HandShake
HugPerson
Kiss
SitDown
SitUp
StandUp
TP
TN
FP
FN
Figure 10. Example results for action classiﬁcation trained on the automatically annotated data. We show the key frames for test movies
with the highest conﬁdence values for true/false positives/negatives.
achieves 60% precision and scales easily to a large num-
ber of action classes. It also provides a convenient semi-
automatic tool for generating action samples with manual
annotation. Our method for action classiﬁcation extends
recent successful image recognition methods to the spatio-
temporal domain and achieves best up to date recognition
performance on a standard benchmark [15]. Furthermore, it
demonstrates high tolerance to noisy labels in the training
set and, therefore, is appropriate for action learning in au-
tomatic settings. We demonstrate promising recognition re-
sults for eight difﬁcult and realistic action classes in movies.
Future work includes improving the script-to-video
alignment and extending the video collection to a much
larger dataset. We also plan to improve the robustness of our
classiﬁer to noisy training labels based on an iterative learn-
ing approach. Furthermore, we plan to experiment with a
larger variety of space-time low-level features. In the long
term we plan to move away from bag-of-features based rep-
resentations by introducing detector style action classiﬁers.
Acknowledgments.
M. Marszałek is supported by the
European Community under the Marie-Curie project VIS-
ITOR. This work was supported by the European research
project CLASS. We would like to thank J. Ponce and A. Zis-
serman for discussions.
References
[1] T. Berg, A. Berg, J. Edwards, M. Maire, R. White, Y. Teh,
E. Learned Miller, and D. Forsyth. Names and faces in the news.
In CVPR, 2004.
[2] A. Bosch, A. Zisserman, and X. Munoz. Representing shape with a
spatial pyramid kernel. In CIVR, 2007.
[3] P. Doll´ar, V. Rabaud, G. Cottrell, and S. Belongie. Behavior recog-
nition via sparse spatio-temporal features. In VS-PETS, 2005.
[4] M. Everingham, J. Sivic, and A. Zisserman. Hello! my name is...
Buffy – automatic naming of characters in TV video.
In BMVC,
2006.
[5] M. Everingham, L. van Gool, C. Williams, J. Winn, and A. Zisser-
man. Overview and results of classiﬁcation challenge, 2007. The
PASCAL VOC’07 Challenge Workshop, in conj. with ICCV.
[6] H. Jhuang, T. Serre, L. Wolf, and T. Poggio. A biologically inspired
system for action recognition. In ICCV, 2007.
[7] I. Laptev. On space-time interest points. IJCV, 64(2/3):107–123,
2005.
[8] I. Laptev and P. P´erez. Retrieving actions in movies. In ICCV, 2007.
[9] S. Lazebnik, C. Schmid, and J. Ponce.
Beyond bags of features:
spatial pyramid matching for recognizing natural scene categories.
In CVPR, 2006.
[10] L. Li, G. Wang, and L. Fei Fei. Optimol: automatic online picture
collection via incremental model learning. In CVPR, 2007.
[11] R. Lienhart. Reliable transition detection in videos: A survey and
practitioner’s guide. IJIG, 1(3):469–486, 2001.
[12] M. Marszałek, C. Schmid, H. Harzallah, and J. van de Weijer. Learn-
ing object representations for visual object class recognition, 2007.
The PASCAL VOC’07 Challenge Workshop, in conj. with ICCV.
[13] J. C. Niebles, H. Wang, and L. Fei-Fei. Unsupervised learning of
human action categories using spatial-temporal words. In BMVC,
2006.
[14] F. Schroff, A. Criminisi, and A. Zisserman.
Harvesting image
databases from the web. In ICCV, 2007.
[15] C. Schuldt, I. Laptev, and B. Caputo. Recognizing human actions: A
local SVM approach. In ICPR, 2004.
[16] F. Sebastiani.
Machine learning in automated text categorization.
ACM Computing Surveys, 34(1):1–47, 2002.
[17] J. Willamowski, D. Arregui, G. Csurka, C. R. Dance, and L. Fan.
Categorizing nine visual classes using local appearance descriptors.
In IWLAVS, 2004.
[18] S.-F. Wong and R. Cipolla. Extracting spatiotemporal interest points
using global information. In ICCV, 2007.
[19] S.-F. Wong, T. K. Kim, and R. Cipolla. Learning motion categories
using both semantic and structural information. In CVPR, 2007.
[20] J. Zhang, M. Marszalek, S. Lazebnik, and C. Schmid. Local fea-
tures and kernels for classiﬁcation of texture and object categories:
A comprehensive study. IJCV, 73(2):213–238, 2007.
[21] T. Zhang. Large margin winnow methods for text categorization. In
KDD-2000 Workshop on Text Mining, 2000.