

----- Page 1 (native) -----
1
I N T R O D U C T I O N
Feminism and International Development
I. DEVELOPMENT AND SEX EQUALITY
Women in much of the world lack support for fundamental functions
of a human life. They are less well nourished than men, less healthy,
more vulnerable to physical violence and sexual abuse. They are much
less likely than men to be literate, and still less likely to have preprofes-
sional or technical education. Should they attempt to enter the work-
place, they face greater obstacles, including intimidation from family or
spouse, sex discrimination in hiring, and sexual harassment in the
workplace – all, frequently, without effective legal recourse. Similar
obstacles often impede their effective participation in political life. In
many nations women are not full equals under the law: they do not
have the same property rights as men, the same rights to make a con-
tract, the same rights of association, mobility, and religious liberty.1
Burdened, often, with the ‘‘double day’’ of taxing employment and full
responsibility for housework and child care, they lack opportunities for
play and for the cultivation of their imaginative and cognitive faculties.
All these factors take their toll on emotional well-being: women have
fewer opportunities than men to live free from fear and to enjoy re-
warding types of love – especially when, as often happens, they are
married without choice in childhood and have no recourse from bad
marriages. In all these ways, unequal social and political circumstances
give women unequal human capabilities.
1 For examples of these inequalities, see Chapter 3, and my ‘‘Religion and Women’s
Human Rights,’’ in Paul Weithman, ed., Religion and Contemporary Liberalism (Notre
Dame: University of Notre Dame Press, 1997), 93–137, also in Nussbaum, Sex and
Social Justice (New York: Oxford University Press, 1999).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511841286.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 2 (native) -----
WOMEN AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
2
One might sum all this up by saying that all too often women are
not treated as ends in their own right, persons with a dignity that
deserves respect from laws and institutions. Instead, they are treated as
mere instruments of the ends of others – reproducers, caregivers, sexual
outlets, agents of a family’s general prosperity. Sometimes this instru-
mental value is strongly positive; sometimes it may actually be negative.
A girl child’s natal family frequently treats her as dispensable, seeing
that she will leave anyhow and will not support parents in their old
age. Along the way to her inevitable departure she will involve the
family in the considerable expense of a dowry and wedding festivities.
What use would it be, then, to care for her health and education in the
same way that one would care for a boy’s? What wonder, that the birth
of a girl is often an occasion for sorrow rather than for rejoicing?
As the old Indian proverb puts it, ‘‘A daughter born / To husband or
death / She’s already gone.’’
Nor is the marital home likely to be a place of end-like respect for
such a daughter, although here her instrumental value may become
positive. Her in-laws are likely to see her as a mere adjunct of a beloved
son, a means to (especially male) grandchildren, an addition to the
number of household workers, perhaps as a device to extract money in
dowry payments from her parents. Even when she is not abused, she is
unlikely to be treated with warmth, nor is her education likely to be
fostered. Should her husband prove kind, he can be a buffer between
her and the demands of his parents. Should he prove unkind, the
woman is likely to have no recourse from abuse in the marital family,
and no good exit options. Her natal family will probably refuse to have
her back, she probably has no employment-related skills, and the law
is not very interested in her predicament. Should the husband die, her
situation is likely to become still worse, given the stigma attached to
widowhood in many parts of the world. A tool whose purpose is gone:
that is what a widow is, and that’s rather like being dead.
These are not rare cases of unusual crime, but common realities.
According to the Human Development Report 1997 of the United
Nations Development Programme, there is no country that treats its
women as well as its men, according to a complex measure that in-
cludes life expectancy, wealth, and education.2 Developing countries,
2 Human Development Report 1997, United Nations Development Programme (Oxford
and New York: Oxford University Press, 1997), 39.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511841286.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 3 (native) -----
INTRODUCTION
3
however, present especially urgent problems. Gender inequality is
strongly correlated with poverty.3 When poverty combines with gender
inequality, the result is acute failure of central human capabilities. In
the developing countries as a whole, there are 60% more women than
men among illiterate adults; the female school enrollment rate even at
the primary level is 13% lower than that of males; and female wages
are only three-fourths of male wages. We do not yet have reliable sta-
tistics for rape, domestic violence, and sexual harassment, because in
many countries little attention is paid to domestic violence and sexual
harassment, rape within marriage is not counted as a crime, and even
stranger-rape is so rarely punished that many women are deterred from
reporting the crime.4
If we turn to the very basic area of health and nutrition, there is
pervasive evidence of discrimination against females in many nations
of the developing world. Researchers standardly claim that where equal
nutrition and health care are present, women live, on average, slightly
longer than men: thus, we would expect a sex ratio of something like
102.2 women to 100 men (the actual sex ratio of sub-Saharan Africa).5
3 The four countries ranking lowest in the gender-adjusted development index (GDI) (Si-
erra Leone, Niger, Burkina Faso, and Mali) also rank lowest in the Human Poverty
Index (HPI), a complex measure (see 126–7) including low life expectancy, deprivation
in education, malnutrition, and lack of access to safe water and health services; among
the four developing countries ranking highest in the HPI, three (Costa Rica, Singapore,
and Trinidad and Tobago) also rank among the highest in the GDI: see 1997 Report,
39.
4 On India, see the special report on rape in India Abroad, July 10, 1998. According to
recent statistics, one woman is raped every 54 minutes in India, and rape cases increased
32% between 1990 and 1997. Even if some of this increase is due to more reporting, it
is unlikely that all is, because there are many deterrents to reporting. A woman’s sexual
history and social class is sure to be used against her in court, medical evidence is rarely
taken promptly, police typically delay in processing complaints, and therefore convic-
tions are extremely difﬁcult to secure. Penile penetration is still a necessary element of
rape in Indian law, and thus cases involving forced oral sex, for example, cannot be
prosecuted as rape. Rape cases are also expensive to prosecute, and there is currently no
free legal aid for rape victims. In a sample of 105 cases of rape that actually went to
court (in a study conducted by Sakshi, a Delhi-based NGO) only 17 resulted in convic-
tions.
5 Sub-Saharan Africa was chosen as the ‘‘baseline’’ because it might be thought inappro-
priate to compare developed to developing countries. Europe and North America have
an even higher ratio of women to men: about 105/100. Sub-Saharan Africa’s relatively
high female/male ratio, compared to other parts of the developing world, is very likely
explained by the central role women play in productive economic activity, which gives
women a claim to food in time of scarcity. For a classic study of this issue, see Esther
Boserup, Women’s Role in Economic Development (New York: St. Martin’s Press,
1970; second edition Aldershot: Gower Publishing, 1986). For a set of valuable re-
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511841286.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 4 (native) -----
WOMEN AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
4
Many countries have a far lower sex ratio: India’s, for example, is 92.7
women to 100 men, the lowest sex ratio since the census began early
in this century. If we study such ratios and ask the question, ‘‘How
many more women than are now present in Country C would be there
if C had the same sex ratio as sub-Saharan Africa?’’ we get a ﬁgure that
economist Amartya Sen has graphically called the number of ‘‘missing
women.’’ There are many millions of missing women in the world to-
day.6 Using this rough index, the number of missing women in South-
east Asia is 2.4 million, in Latin America 4.4, in North Africa 2.4, in
Iran 1.4, in China 44.0, in Bangladesh 3.7, in India 36.7, in Pakistan
5.2, in West Asia 4.3. If we now consider the ratio of the number of
missing women to the number of actual women in a country, we get,
for Pakistan 12.9%, India 9.5%, Bangladesh 8.7%, China 8.6%, Iran
8.5%, West Asia 7.8%, North Africa 3.9%, Latin America 2.2%,
Southeast Asia 1.2%. In India, not only is the mortality differential
especially sharp among children (girls dying in far greater numbers
than boys), the higher mortality rate of women compared to men ap-
plies to all age groups until the late thirties.7
Women, in short, lack essential support for leading lives that are
fully human. This lack of support is frequently caused by their being
women. Thus, even when they live in a constitutional democracy such
as India, where they are equals in theory, they are second-class citizens
in reality.
II. THE CAPABILITIES APPROACH: AN OVERVIEW
I shall argue that international political and economic thought should
be feminist, attentive (among other things) to the special problems
women face because of sex in more or less every nation in the world,
problems without an understanding of which general issues of poverty
and development cannot be well confronted. An approach to interna-
sponses to Boserup’s work, see Persistent Inequalities, ed. Irene Tinker (New York:
Oxford University Press, 1990).
6 The statistics in this paragraph are taken from Jean Dre`ze and Amartya Sen, Hunger
and Public Action (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1989) and Dre`ze and Sen, India: Economic
Development and Social Opportunity (Delhi: Oxford University Press, 1995), Chapter
7. Sen’s estimated total number of missing women is one hundred million; the India
chapter discusses alternative estimates.
7 See Dre`ze and Sen, Hunger, 52.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511841286.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 5 (native) -----
INTRODUCTION
5
tional development should be assessed for its ability to recognize these
problems and to make recommendations for their solution. I shall pro-
pose and defend one such approach, one that seems to me to do better
in this area than other prominent alternatives. The approach is philo-
sophical, and I shall try to show why we need philosophical theorizing
in order to approach these problems well.8 It is also based on a univer-
salist account of central human functions, closely allied to a form of
political liberalism; one of my primary tasks will be to defend this type
of universalism as a valuable basis from which to approach the prob-
lems of women in the developing world.
The aim of the project as a whole is to provide the philosophical
underpinning for an account of basic constitutional principles that
should be respected and implemented by the governments of all
nations, as a bare minimum of what respect for human dignity requires.
(Issues of implementation are complex, and I shall give these separate
discussion in section VII of this chapter.) I shall argue that the best
approach to this idea of a basic social minimum is provided by an
approach that focuses on human capabilities, that is, what people are
actually able to do and to be – in a way informed by an intuitive idea
of a life that is worthy of the dignity of the human being. I shall identify
a list of central human capabilities, setting them in the context of a type
of political liberalism that makes them speciﬁcally political goals and
presents them in a manner free of any speciﬁc metaphysical grounding.
In this way, I argue, the capabilities can be the object of an overlapping
consensus among people who otherwise have very different comprehen-
sive conceptions of the good.9 And I shall argue that the capabilities in
question should be pursued for each and every person, treating each as
an end and none as a mere tool of the ends of others: thus I adopt a
principle of each person’s capability, based on a principle of each per-
son as end. Women have all too often been treated as the supporters of
8 On this see my ‘‘Public Philosophy and International Feminism,’’ Ethics 108 (1998),
770–804; ‘‘Why Practice Needs Ethical Theory: Particularism, Principle, and Bad Behav-
ior,’’ forthcoming in The Path of the Law in the Twentieth Century, ed. S. Burton,
Cambridge University Press; and ‘‘Still Worthy of Praise: A Response to Richard A.
Posner, The Problematics of Moral and Legal Theory,’’ Harvard Law Review 111
(1998), 1776–95.
9 The terms ‘‘political liberalism,’’ ‘‘overlapping consensus,’’ and ‘‘comprehensive concep-
tion’’ are used as by John Rawls in Political Liberalism (expanded paperback edition,
New York: Columbia University Press, 1996), hereinafter PL.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511841286.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 6 (native) -----
WOMEN AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
6
the ends of others, rather than as ends in their own right; thus this
principle has particular critical force with regard to women’s lives. Fi-
nally, my approach uses the idea of a threshold level of each capability,
beneath which it is held that truly human functioning is not available
to citizens; the social goal should be understood in terms of getting
citizens above this capability threshold.
The capabilities approach has another related, and weaker, use. It
speciﬁes a space within which comparisons of life quality (how well
people are doing) are most revealingly made among nations. Used in
this way, it is a rival to other standard measures, such as GNP per
capita and utility. This role for the conception is signiﬁcant, since we
are not likely to make progress toward a good conception of the social
minimum if we do not ﬁrst get the space of comparison right. And we
may use the approach in this weaker way, to compare one nation to
another, even when we are unwilling to go further and use the ap-
proach as the philosophical basis for fundamental constitutional prin-
ciples establishing a social minimum or threshold. On the other hand,
the comparative use of capabilities is ultimately not much use without
a determinate normative conception that will tell us what to make of
what we ﬁnd in our comparative study. Most conceptions of quality of
life measurement in development economics are implicitly harnessed to
a normative theory of the proper social goal (wealth maximization,
utility maximization, etc.), and this one is explicitly so harnessed. The
primary task of my argument will be to move beyond the merely com-
parative use of capabilities to the construction of a normative political
proposal that is a partial theory of justice. (The reasons for saying that
it is not a complete theory of justice will be presented in section IV.)
The capabilities approach is fully universal: the capabilities in ques-
tion are important for each and every citizen, in each and every nation,
and each is to be treated as an end. Women in developing nations are
important to the project in two ways: as people who suffer pervasively
from acute capability failure, and also as people whose situation pro-
vides an interesting test of this and other approaches, showing us
the problems they solve or fail to solve. Defects in standard GNP- and
utility-based approaches can be well understood by keeping the prob-
lems of such women in view; but of course women’s problems are
urgent in their own right, and it may be hoped that a focus on them
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511841286.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 7 (native) -----
INTRODUCTION
7
will help compensate for earlier neglect of sex equality in development
economics and in the international human rights movement.
This project is somewhat unusual in feminist political philosophy
because of its focus on developing countries. Such a focus, already
common in feminist economic thought and feminist activism, is becom-
ing more common in feminist philosophy, and rightly so. Feminist phi-
losophy, I believe, should increasingly focus on the urgent needs and
interests of women in the developing world, whose concrete material
and social contexts must be well understood, in dialogue with them,
before adequate recommendations for improvement can be made. This
international focus will not require feminist political philosophy to turn
away from its traditional themes, such as employment discrimination,
domestic violence, sexual harassment, and the reform of rape law; these
are all as central to women in developing countries as to Western
women. But feminist philosophy will have to add new topics to its
agenda if it is to approach the developing world in a productive way;
among these topics are hunger and nutrition, literacy, land rights, the
right to seek employment outside the home, child marriage, and child
labor. (Some of these topics are also essential in framing a philosophi-
cal approach to the lives of poor women in wealthier nations.) In gen-
eral, it seems right that problems of poor working women in both
developing and developed nations should increasingly hold the center
of the scene, and that problems peculiar to middle-class women should
give way to these.
Feminist philosophy has frequently been skeptical of universal nor-
mative approaches. I shall argue that it is possible to describe a frame-
work for such a feminist practice of philosophy that is strongly uni-
versalist, committed to cross-cultural norms of justice, equality, and
rights, and at the same time sensitive to local particularity, and to the
many ways in which circumstances shape not only options but also
beliefs and preferences. I shall argue that a universalist feminism need
not be insensitive to difference or imperialistic, and that a particular
type of universalism, framed in terms of general human powers and
their development, offers us in fact the best framework within which to
locate our thoughts about difference.
In the ﬁrst chapter, I map out and defend an approach to the foun-
dation of basic political principles using the idea of human capability.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511841286.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 8 (native) -----
WOMEN AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
8
I argue that this approach yields a form of universalism that is sensitive
to pluralism and cultural difference; in this way it enables us to answer
the most powerful objections to cross-cultural universals. I also explain
the relationship of my approach to various forms of liberalism and
defend a form of political liberalism in connection with the capabilities
idea. I then explain the relationship of this approach to the idea of
fundamental human rights. And I offer an account of the relationship
between political justiﬁcation and political implementation.
But to display the attractive features of a conception is only one
small part of the task of justiﬁcation. In the second chapter, I take on
one further part of that task by arguing that this approach is superior
to approaches based on subjective welfarism, the idea that each per-
son’s perceived well-being should be the basis for social choice. Welfar-
ist conceptions are ubiquitous and highly inﬂuential in economics and
therefore in development; so it seems important, both philosophically
and practically, to think clearly about the relationship between the
capabilities view and welfarism. I shall argue that the problem of
preference-deformation makes a welfarist approach unacceptable as the
basis for a normative theory of political principles; we need a substan-
tive account of central political goods, of the sort the capabilities ap-
proach gives us. Recognizing the phenomenon of adaptive preference-
formation does not entail an unacceptable type of paternalism, if this
recognition is combined with a version of political liberalism and a
focus on capabilities (not actual functions) as political goals. But the
welfarist approach, by showing respect for human desire, gets some-
thing right: and I shall try to say what that something is, contrasting
my capabilities approach with Platonist accounts of the human good.
The third and fourth chapters investigate two speciﬁc problem areas
that have particular salience for women’s lives. There are several such
areas that one might fruitfully pursue. Education and property would
be obvious choices, as would rape, domestic violence, and sexual ha-
rassment.10 I have chosen religion and the family, both because of their
10 On education, see Dre`ze and Sen, India, Chapter 6; on land rights, see Bina Agarwal,
A Field of One’s Own: Gender and Land Rights in South Asia (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1994); on sexual harassment, see my ‘‘The Modesty of Mrs. Bajaj:
India’s Problematic Route to Sexual Harassment Law,’’ in a volume on sexual harass-
ment ed. Reva Siegel and Catharine MacKinnon, forthcoming from Yale University
Press.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511841286.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 9 (native) -----
INTRODUCTION
9
complexity (in a way, they include all the others) and because they raise
complicated problems of a distinctively philosophical kind. The chapter
on religion analyzes conﬂicts between religion and sex equality, devel-
oping a strategy for dealing politically and legally with such conﬂicts. I
argue that any good approach to this problem must balance recogni-
tion of religion’s importance in the human search for meaning (includ-
ing women’s search) against a critical scrutiny of religion when it
threatens valuable areas of human functioning. Here the tradition of
U.S. constitutional law provides helpful insights, which can be suitably
adapted to the problems of pluralistic democracies in the developing
world; most of the materials for my solution are already present in the
Indian Constitution. Chapter 4, ﬁnally, tackles the difﬁcult question of
family love and care, asking how, if at all, it is possible to retain the
idea that women have value as givers of love and care while promoting
political goals of full equality and family justice. Tackling this problem
requires, ﬁrst, giving an adequate philosophical account of love (or at
least the general outlines of one), and then examining the social and
political origins of that apparently ‘‘natural’’ entity, the family.
I focus throughout on the case of India, a nation in which women
suffer great inequalities despite a promising constitutional tradition.
Some writings about women and development pull in thinly described
examples from many different cultures, without setting any of them in
a deep or rich context. I feel that this is unwise; we cannot really see
the meaning of an incident or a law without setting it in its context and
history. By focusing on India, I can write on the basis of personal
observation and familiarity, as well as study, and I am able to assess
scholarly debates in a way that I could not had I tried to cover a wider
area. The best way of thinking about the relationship between the po-
litical ideal presented here in connection with India and its wider appli-
cation was suggested by Jawaharlal Nehru, in these famous words:
The service of India means the service of the millions who suffer. It means
the ending of poverty and ignorance and disease and inequality of opportu-
nity. The ambition of the greatest man of our generation has been to wipe
every tear from every eye. That may be beyond us, but as long as there are
tears and suffering, so long our work will not be over . . . Those dreams are
for India, but they are also for the world, for all the nations and people are
too closely knit together today for any one of them to imagine that it can
live apart. Peace has been said to be indivisible; so is freedom, so is prosper-
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511841286.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 10 (native) -----
WOMEN AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
10
ity now, and so also is disaster in this One World that can no longer be split
into isolated fragments.11
Similarly, this ideal political proposal takes its orientation from the
example of India, but pertains to all nations.
I am doubly an outsider vis-a`-vis the places about which I write, that
is, both a foreigner and a middle-class person. But most Indian schol-
arship about India is also the work of foreigners in at least some sense,
that is, people who live middle-class lives that are not remotely like the
lives about which they write. (So too is most American scholarship
about poverty and welfare reform.) I believe that through curiosity and
determination one can surmount these hurdles – especially if one listens
to what people say. Maybe at times a foreigner can maintain, too, a
helpful type of neutrality amid the cultural, religious, and political de-
bates in which any scholar living in India is bound to be enmeshed.
Certainly one is sometimes more warmly received as an unimplicated
foreigner than as an upper-class person from the person’s own culture.
I would not ﬁnd the warm and trusting reception I found in working-
class homes in India, were I to walk one block from my ofﬁce into the
Woodlawn area (a poor African-American neighborhood) that borders
the prosperous university community. In a situation of entrenched in-
equality, being a neighbor can be an epistemological problem.
This is a philosophical project, whose aim is to develop a particular
type of normative philosophical theory. I am not an empirical social
scientist, nor is this book intended as the record of sustained empirical
research. But I do attempt to be responsive to empirical facts and to
what I have seen. I believe that philosophical theorizing has practical
political value, and that its place cannot be ﬁlled by other more empir-
ical types of inquiry. Part of theory’s practical value lies in its abstract
and systematic character. Feminists who disparage abstraction in a
global way are, I believe, very unwise to do so. Without abstraction of
some sort, there could be no thought or speech; and the type of abstrac-
tion characteristic of the tradition of political philosophy has great
value, so long as it is tethered in the right way to a sense of what is
relevant in reality (something that has not always been the case).12
11 Speech delivered in the Constituent Assembly, New Delhi, August 14, 1947, on the eve
of Independence.
12 See my ‘‘The Feminist Critique of Liberalism,’’ a Lindley Lecture published in pamphlet
form by the University of Kansas Press, and in Nussbaum, Sex and Social Justice.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511841286.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 11 (native) -----
INTRODUCTION
11
Some feminist philosophy, particularly the type inﬂuenced by postmod-
ernist literary theory, has involved a type of abstraction that turns the
mind away from reality, and that does not help us see or understand
real women’s lives better. A focus on real cases and on empirical facts
can help us to identify the salient features that a political theory should
not efface or ignore. So I have tried to write in a way that is responsive
to reality and that helps the reader imagine the relevant reality, how-
ever theoretical my ultimate aims. I shall therefore begin my argument,
in section IV, by presenting two accounts of particular lives that I have
encountered, which should help us to see the salient problems and how
they bear on one another. These lives will provide an illustrative focus
for many of the concrete discussions in subsequent chapters.13 In sec-
tion V I shall set these particular lives against the background of a more
general factual account of some of the problems facing women in to-
day’s India.
III. THE CAPABILITIES APPROACH: SEN AND
NUSSBAUM
Before we can begin the argument, however, the capabilities approach
must be introduced from a different perspective. For, as will emerge
more fully from the concrete discussions in Chapters 1 and 2, an ap-
proach based on functioning and capability was pioneered in develop-
ment economics by Amartya Sen. My own version of the approach
derives from a period of collaboration with Sen at the World Institute
for Development Economics Research beginning in 1986, when we rec-
ognized that ideas I had been pursuing in the context of Aristotle schol-
arship had a striking resemblance to ideas that he had for some years
been pursuing in economics. It might therefore be assumed that we
agree on all the matters to be discussed here, and controversial propos-
als in the present argument might be attributed to Sen, who has enough
13 Different examples will be used in Chapter 3. Vasanti seems little interested in religion;
although Jayamma prays regularly, religion has not played a major role in shaping her
circumstances. Religious law has played a relatively small role in both lives. Both,
moreover, are Hindu, and my aim is to investigate tensions among the religions, as
they bear on sex equality. Finally, the religion issue requires a focus on law, and thus
a selection of examples from among signiﬁcant legal cases.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511841286.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 12 (native) -----
WOMEN AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
12
arguments on his hands already. It therefore seems important to try to
describe what is and is not common to our respective approaches.
Sen’s primary use of the notion of capability is to indicate a space
within which comparisons of quality of life (or, as he sometimes says,
standard of living) are most fruitfully made. Instead of asking about
people’s satisfactions, or how much in the way of resources they are
able to command, we ask, instead, about what they are actually able to
do or to be. Sen has also insisted that it is in the space of capabilities
that questions about social equality and inequality are best raised.
I agree wholeheartedly with Sen’s claims about the capability space,
and with the arguments he has used to support them, many of which
will be replicated here. But my goal in this book is to go beyond the
merely comparative use of the capability space to articulate an account
of how capabilities, together with the idea of a threshold level of capa-
bilities, can provide a basis for central constitutional principles that
citizens have a right to demand from their governments. The notion of
a threshold is more important in my account than the notion of full
capability equality: as I argue, we may reasonably defer questions
about what we shall do when all citizens are above the threshold, given
that this already imposes a taxing and nowhere-realized standard. Thus
my proposal is intended to be compatible with several different ac-
counts of distribution above the threshold; it is consequently a partial,
rather than a complete, theory of just distribution. Sen nowhere uses
the idea of a threshold. I do not think he has stated whether he would
actually favor complete capability equality; to the extent that his pro-
posal is open-ended on this point, he and I may be in substantial agree-
ment.
Another area of strong agreement is in the important role we both
give to the political liberties. Sen has explicitly endorsed the Rawlsian
priority of liberty. My view holds that all the capabilities are equally
fundamental, and does not announce a lexical ordering among them.
But insofar as we both argue strenuously that economic needs should
not be met by denying liberty, we are in complete agreement.
Finally, we are in agreement in stressing that the capabilities we
strive for should be understood to be valuable for each and every per-
son, and that it is the capability of each that we should consider, when
we ask how nations are doing. Sen has never announced anything so
explicit as my principle of each person’s capability, but his criticism of
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511841286.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 13 (native) -----
INTRODUCTION
13
organic models of the family, for example, makes it perfectly clear that
he supports this emphasis on treating each person as an end.
My approach, however, departs from Sen’s in several signiﬁcant
ways. First of all, although Sen and I are in strong agreement about the
poverty of cultural relativism and the need for universal norms in the
development policy arena, he has never produced explicit arguments
against relativism, apart from historical arguments about non-Western
cultures that show the descriptive inadequacy of many anti-universalist
approaches. It is reasonably clear that he agrees with the way in which
I would answer what, in Chapter 1, I call the argument from culture,
by stressing that cultures are scenes of debate and contestation. But it
is less clear whether he would endorse the other replies to relativist
arguments that I present in Chapter 1, although he is in sympathy with
their general spirit.
Nor has Sen ever attempted to ground the capabilities approach in
the Marxian/Aristotelian idea of truly human functioning that plays a
central role in my argument. Although he occasionally alludes both to
Marx and to Aristotle in articulating the approach, it is unclear to me
whether those thinkers played a central role in shaping his conception;
insofar as they did, it was probably in an indirect way, through their
role in shaping a climate of debate on the left in India. Thus the argu-
ments about which lives are worthy of the dignity of the human being,
and about the waste and tragedy involved in the blighting of human
powers – and, in addition, all discussions of philosophical justiﬁcation
– should be understood to have no assent from him, though that does
not mean that he disagrees with them either.
Most importantly, Sen has never made a list of the central capabili-
ties. He gives lots of examples, and the Human Development Reports
organize things in ways that correspond to at least some of the items
on my list. But the idea of actually making the list and describing its
use in generating political principles is not his, and he should not be
taken as endorsing either the project or its speciﬁc contents.
Other distinctions introduced in my account – for example, the def-
initions of the three types of capabilities (basic, internal, combined) –
have no parallel in Sen, although in his treatment of examples he some-
times makes similar points. The idea that capability, not functioning, is
the appropriate political goal is an idea he sometimes supports through
examples, but he has never endorsed it as a general theoretical point.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511841286.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 14 (native) -----
WOMEN AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
14
My own treatment of this question is closely linked to my articulation
of the list as a basis for a speciﬁcally political conception and a speciﬁ-
cally political overlapping consensus. Sen has never yet discussed the
contrast between comprehensive and political liberalism, and it is un-
clear which type of liberalism he would actually favor. On religion his
position is complex. At times he inclines toward what, in Chapter 3, I
identify as secular humanist feminism; but in writing about the Indian
situation he has supported the type of secularism that now prevails,
which gives the religions a large political role.
One set of distinctions prominently used by Sen is absent in my own
version of the capabilities approach. This is the distinction between
well-being and agency, which, together with the distinction between
freedom and achievement, structures much of his recent writing about
capabilities. I agree with Sen that the concepts introduced by these
distinctions are important: but I believe that all the important distinc-
tions can be captured as aspects of the capability/function distinction.
When we think of health, for example, we should distinguish between
the capability or opportunity to be healthy and actual healthy function-
ing: a society might make the ﬁrst available and also give individuals
the freedom not to choose the relevant functioning. But I am not sure
that any extra clarity is added by using a well-being/agency distinction
here: healthy functioning is itself a way of being active, not just a pas-
sive state of satisfaction. Although Sen would surely agree with this, I
fear that the Utilitarian associations of the idea of ‘‘well-being’’ may
cause some readers to suppose that he is imagining a way of enjoying
well-being that does not involve active doing and being. I would
therefore prefer to dissociate my own terminology more strongly from
that of the Utilitarian tradition, and I do not think that any important
philosophical issues are blurred by sticking to a simpler set of distinc-
tions (along with the distinctions among levels of capability discussed
above).
On the relationship between rights and capabilities we have a mod-
est disagreement, connected to a larger one that does not touch the
present project. Sen, who defends a complex non-Utilitarian form of
consequentialism, has criticized the view that rights should be under-
stood as supplying side-constraints. I defend a version of that view,
putting the central capabilities in the place of rights: central capabilities
may not be infringed upon to pursue other types of social advantage.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511841286.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 15 (native) -----
INTRODUCTION
15
In substance, however, our views are very close, because I also give an
analysis of rights that differs from the one he uses in attacking the claim
that rights supply side-constraints. (See Chapter 1, section VI.)
Finally, the narrative method I sometimes employ, with its implicit
emphasis on the political importance of the imagination and the emo-
tions, is not something about which Sen has ever written one way or
another. My own views on that topic, which I have developed at length
elsewhere, should certainly not be attributed to him. To that narrative
material I now turn.
IV. TWO WOMEN TRYING TO FLOURISH
Ahmedabad, in Gujarat, is the textile mill city where Mahatma Gandhi
organized labor in accordance with his principles of nonviolent resis-
tance. Tourists visit it for its textile museum and its Gandhi ashram.
But today it attracts attention, too, as the home of another resistance
movement: the Self-Employed Women’s Association (SEWA), with
more than 50,000 members, which for over twenty years has been
helping female workers in the informal sector to improve their living
conditions through credit, education, and a labor union. (In India a
very large proportion of the labor force works in what is called the
‘‘informal sector’’ – meaning cottage industries, agricultural labor, and
various types of self-employment. Among working women, 94% are
self-employed.)14 On one side of the polluted river that bisects the city
is the shabby old building where SEWA was ﬁrst established, now used
as ofﬁces for staff. On the other side are the education ofﬁces and the
SEWA bank, newly housed in a marble ofﬁce building. All the custom-
ers and all the employees are women. Women like to say, ‘‘This bank
is like our mother’s place’’ – because, says SEWA’s founder Ela Bhatt,
a woman’s mother takes her seriously, keeps her secrets, and helps her
solve her problems.15
14 See Kalima Rose, Where Women Are Leaders: The SEWA Movement in India (Delhi:
Vistaar, 1992), 17, and personal communication, Ela Bhatt, March 1997. SEWA pre-
fers the term ‘‘self-employed’’ to the term ‘‘informal sector,’’ on the ground that it gives
dignity and positive status to people who might otherwise be regarded as marginal to
economic activity. Rose notes that 55% of the work force in Ahmedabad and 50% in
Calcutta and Bombay are self-employed.
15 Bhatt, interview, May 1988, reproduced in Rose, Where Women Are Leaders, 172–4.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511841286.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 16 (native) -----
WOMEN AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
16
Vasanti sits on the ﬂoor in the meeting room of the old ofﬁce build-
ing.16 A tiny dark woman in her early thirties, she wears an attractive
electric blue sari, and her long hair is wound neatly into a bun on the
top of her head. Soft and round, she seems more comfortable sitting
than walking. Her teeth are uneven and discolored, but otherwise she
looks to be in reasonable health. My colleague Martha Chen tells me
later she is a Rajput, that is, of good (Hindu) caste; I’ve never ﬁgured
out how one would know that.17 She has come with her older (and
lower-caste)18 friend Kokila, maker of clay pots and a janitor at the
local conference hall, a tall ﬁery community organizer who helps the
police identify cases of domestic violence. Vasanti speaks quietly, look-
ing down often as she speaks, but there is animation in her eyes.
Vasanti’s husband was a gambler and an alcoholic. He used the
household money to get drunk, and when he ran out of that money he
got a vasectomy in order to take the cash incentive payment offered by
the local government. So Vasanti has no children to help her. Eventu-
ally, as her husband became physically abusive, she could live with him
no longer and returned to her own family. Her father, who used to
make Singer sewing machine parts, has died, but her brothers run an
auto parts business in what used to be his shop. Using a machine that
had once been her father’s, and living in the shop itself, sleeping on the
ﬂoor, at ﬁrst she earned a small income making eyeholes for the hooks
on sari tops. Her brothers got her a lawyer to take her husband to
court for maintenance – quite an unusual step for someone in her eco-
nomic class – but the case has dragged on for years with no conclusion
in sight. Meanwhile, her brothers also gave her a loan to get the ma-
16 Throughout our conversation, Vasanti referred to herself, and was referred to, as Vas-
antibehn, following Gujarati custom.
17 Indicia would typically include name, style of speech, and, in a limited way, occupa-
tion. But, given changing economic opportunities, many of which do not map onto
traditional caste occupations, norms of what it’s proper to do for upper caste men have
shifted considerably (as the occupations of Vasanti’s father and brother illustrate).
Women are more frequently restricted by caste norms of propriety. Thus Uma Narayan
observes (in correspondence) that in her mother’s generation upper-caste women did
not engage in paid work – or if they did, driven by economic necessity, they tried to
conceal it from their relatives. Today this is less an issue.
18 Kokila, a lower-caste Hindu, told us that she used to live in an ‘‘integrated’’ Hindu-
Muslim area; she moved away to a purely Hindu area as religious tensions escalated in
the city.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511841286.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 17 (native) -----
INTRODUCTION
17
chine that rolls the edges of the sari; but she didn’t like being dependent
on them, since they are married and have children, and may not want
to support her much longer. With the help of SEWA, therefore, she got
a bank loan of her own to pay back the brothers, and by now she has
paid back almost all of the SEWA loan. She now earns 500 rupees a
month, a decent living.19 She has two savings accounts, and is eager to
get more involved in the SEWA union. Usually, she says, women lack
unity, and rich women take advantage of poor women. In SEWA, by
contrast, she has found a sense of community. She clearly ﬁnds pleasure
in the company of Kokila, a woman of very different social class and
temperament.
By now, Vasanti is animated; she is looking us straight in the eye,
and her voice is strong and clear.20 Women in India have a lot of pain,
she says. And I, I have had quite a lot of sorrow in my life. But from
the pain, our strength is born. Now that we are doing better ourselves,
we want to do some good for other women, to feel that we are good
human beings.
Jayamma stands outside her hut in the ovenlike heat of a late March
day in Trivandrum, in Kerala, at the southern tip of India.21 The ﬁrst
thing you notice about her is the straightness of her back, and the
muscular strength of her movements. Her teeth are falling out, her
eyesight seems clouded, and her hair is thin – but she could be a captain
of the regiment, ordering her troops into battle. It doesn’t surprise me
that her history speaks of ﬁerce quarrels with her children and her
19 The amount of maintenance allotted to destitute women under the Criminal Procedure
Code (see Chapter 3) was Rs. 180 per month in 1986.
20 The ﬁrst day of the typical SEWA education program for future union and bank leaders
is occupied by getting each woman to look straight at the group leader and say her
name. The process is videotaped, and women grow accustomed to looking at them-
selves. Eventually, though with considerable difﬁculty, they are all able to overcome
norms of modesty and deference and to state their names publicly.
21 Unlike Vasanti, Jayamma has been examined previously in the development economics
literature. See the chapter ‘‘Jayamma, the Brick Worker,’’ in Leela Gulati, Proﬁles in
Female Poverty: A Study of Five Poor Working Women in Kerala (Delhi: Hindustan
Publishing Company, 1981), and Leela Gulati and Mitu Gulati, ‘‘Female Labour in the
Unorganised Sector: The Brick Worker Revisited,’’ Economic and Political Weekly,
May 3, 1997, 968–71, also scheduled for publication in Martha Chen, ed., Widows
and Social Responsibility (Delhi: Sage, forthcoming). I am very grateful to Leela Gulati
for introducing me to Jayamma and her family and for translating.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511841286.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 18 (native) -----
WOMEN AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
18
neighbors. Her jaw juts out as she chews tobacco. An Ezhava – a lower
but not ‘‘scheduled’’ (Hindu) caste22 – Jayamma loses out in two ways,
lacking good social standing but ineligible for the afﬁrmative action
programs established by government for the lowest castes. She still lives
in a squatters’ colony on some government land on the outskirts of
Trivandrum. Although I am told that I am seeing the worst poverty in
all Trivandrum, given Kerala’s generally high living standard the col-
ony seems relatively prosperous compared to poor areas in Bombay
and some rural areas. The huts in the settlement are clean and cool,
solidly walled, some with mud, some with brick, decorated with photos
and children’s artwork; some of them command a stunning view of a
lake covered with water hyacinth. Many have toilets, provided by a
local government program; both water and electricity reach the settle-
ment reliably. Although the settlers were originally squatters, by now
they have some property rights in the land. The bus stops right outside,
on a well-maintained road; there is a hospital not far away; and there’s
a cheerful primary school in the settlement itself. Older children all
seem to be enrolled in school: clean and proud in their school uniforms,
looking healthy and well nourished, they escort visitors around the
settlement. (In many regions of India, there simply aren’t any schools,
and basic utilities are unreliable.)
For approximately forty-ﬁve years, until her recent retirement, Jay-
amma went every day to the brick kiln and spent eight hours a day
carrying bricks on her head, 500 to 700 bricks per day. (She never
earned more than ﬁve rupees a day, and employment depended upon
the weather.) Jayamma balanced a plank on her head, stacked twenty
bricks at a time on the plank, and then walked rapidly, balancing the
bricks by the strength of her neck, to the kiln, where she then had to
unload the bricks without twisting her neck, handing them two by two
to the man who loads the kiln. Men in the brick industry typically do
this sort of heavy labor for a while, and then graduate to the skilled
(but less arduous) tasks of brick molding and kiln loading, which they
can continue into middle and advanced ages. Those jobs pay up to
twice as much, though they are less dangerous and lighter. Women are
22 The two largest religious groups in Kerala are Hindus and Christians. Kerala (formerly
the princely states of Travancore and Cochin) was once also the home of India’s largest
Jewish community, but most of those Jews have since emigrated.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511841286.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 19 (native) -----
INTRODUCTION
19
never considered for these promotions and are never permitted to learn
the skills involved. Like most small businesses in India, the brick kiln is
deﬁned as a cottage industry and thus its workers are not protected by
any union. All workers are badly paid, but women suffer special disa-
bilities. Nonetheless, they cling to the work because it offers regular
employment, unlike construction and agriculture; kilns also typically
employ children of workers, so Jayamma could take her children to
work with her. She feels she has a bad deal, but she doesn’t see any
way of changing it.
Thus, in her middle sixties, no longer able to perform the physically
taxing job of brick carrying, Jayamma has no employment to fall back
on. Her husband never supported the family much anyway, and now
he has died; in his old age she lost a lot of work time nursing him. She
is unwilling to become a domestic servant, because in her community
such work is considered shameful and degrading. Jayamma adds a po-
litical explanation: ‘‘As a servant, your alliance is with a class that is
your enemy.’’ A widow, she is unable to collect a widows’ pension from
the government: the village ofﬁce told her that she was ineligible be-
cause she has able-bodied sons, although in fact her sons refuse to
support her. Males in this region are unreliable contributors to the care
and maintenance of aged relatives; only one of Jayamma’s sons lives in
the region at all. At the same time, during their childhood she invested
more in her sons than in her daughters – so her daughters, who are
more willing to help her, have very restricted skills and opportunities.
There is one exception: one of her granddaughters actually has a nurs-
ing diploma, through afﬁrmative action programs in education aimed
at the lowest castes (her mother married a Pulaya man). But corruption
in the hospital system means that she would have to pay Rs. 2,500 up-
front money to have a chance at a nursing job. So this tall, proud,
beautiful woman sits at home all day doing housework; she keeps the
nursing diploma in a box, and shows it sadly to visitors.
Despite all these reversals (and others), Jayamma is tough, deﬁant,
and healthy. She doesn’t seem interested in talking, but she shows her
visitors around, and makes sure that they are offered lime juice and
water.
Vasanti and Jayamma have very different lives. One is on the poor
edges of the lower middle class, and one is at the very bottom of the
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511841286.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 20 (native) -----
WOMEN AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
20
economic ladder.23 Vasanti has ﬁve times the income that Jayamma had
at her employment peak. Jayamma could never hope to have a bank
loan, since she has no security (her property rights in the land would
need to be established in court, at some cost), and the very idea of two
savings accounts is far beyond her. But in many ways their lives reveal
similar patterns, patterns extremely common among women in India
and in much of the developing world. Both have been raised in a nation
in which women are formally the equals of men, with equal political
rights and nominally equal social and employment opportunities. (Dis-
crimination on the basis of sex is outlawed by the Indian Constitution
itself.) And both suffer to some extent from general problems of pov-
erty that are not caused exclusively by their being women. Both, how-
ever, have also suffered from deprivations that do arise from sex dis-
crimination, and sex discrimination is such a pervasive factor in these
women’s experience of poverty that it would be wrong to say that any
aspect of their poverty is fully understandable without taking it into
account. Jayamma’s entire life as a worker has been deﬁned by the rigid
stratiﬁcation of the sexes in the brick industry, and by the fact that
women in the lower classes rarely get opportunities for formal educa-
tion and higher skill development. (Men don’t always get these chances
either, but if any child in the family does, it is almost certain to be a
male, for several reasons: males in fact have greater economic oppor-
tunities; daughters’ income typically belongs to their conjugal, not their
natal, family; and in some regions and classes it is thought shameful to
depend on one’s daughters.)24 Vasanti has been held up by different,
23 Not the social ladder: Jayamma was furious that her daughter married a Pulaya man,
even though it meant government beneﬁts for the family.
24 Notice that this asymmetry of expectation is built into law itself: the government of
Kerala gives widows’ pensions to women with able-bodied daughters, but not to those
with able-bodied sons – even though in Kerala, where many communities are matrilin-
eal and some of these are also matrilocal, it is more likely than in most of India that
daughters will in fact remain close to their natal home. (Sardamoni, a leading historian
of Kerala, tells me in conversation that she has concluded that customs of matriliny
and matrilocal residence date back to the eleventh century. Among the communities
that are not matrilocal, some are duolocal – the men do not reside with their wives –
and others are ‘‘avunculocal,’’ that is, residing near the matrilineal kin of the husband;
see Agarwal, A Field of One’s Own, 141, 505.) Notice, too, that although these three
reasons make unequal education of girls seem rational from the parents’ point of view,
the practice of unequal education persists even when these factors are less in evidence.
Women in Kerala frequently support their mothers and males frequently don’t; and yet
Jayamma too took the traditional course, educating only her sons. The one case of
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511841286.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 21 (native) -----
INTRODUCTION
21
more middle-class pressures: early marriage, the restriction of a married
woman to a domestic role, her lack of formal education and of training
for any useful occupation. Obviously a very intelligent and resourceful
woman, she didn’t have a chance to make her way into a really middle-
class job, since she is illiterate.
Both live in a world in which women are profoundly dependent
upon males, and in which males often take their responsibilities lightly.
Jayamma’s husband usually used up all his income (not large in any
case) on tobacco, drink, and meals out for himself, leaving it to Jay-
amma not only to do all the housework after her backbreaking day,
but also to provide the core ﬁnancial support for children and house.
This is a common Kerala pattern, which Jayamma’s sons have imitated.
Vasanti’s husband exhibited a depressingly common pattern: alcohol-
ism and domestic violence – problems pervasive enough (and combined
often enough with one another) to have caused the state of Gujarat to
pass alcohol prohibition, in response to pressures from women’s
groups. He didn’t do much to support her, and he even deprived her of
children who might have supported her by his clever stratagem of get-
ting drunk on vasectomy money (revealing a dark face of a state pro-
gram that was supposed to make things better for women). In order to
leave him, she had to become the dependent of yet other men – though
in this instance her brothers proved unusually helpful, both getting her
a lawyer and giving her the loan that eventually enabled her to stand
on her feet. Although she clearly has a good legal case for maintenance,
the inefﬁciency of the somewhat Dickensian legal system has not served
her well. Both women, ﬁnally, have been severely limited by their lack
of education, a lack that is explained at least in part by their sex.
The problems faced by Jayamma and Vasanti are particular to the
social situation of women in particular caste and regional circum-
stances in India. One cannot understand Jayamma’s choices and con-
straints without understanding, at many different levels of speciﬁcity
and generality, how she is socially placed: what it means to be an
equal female education in Leela Gulati’s study in Trivandrum involved a family with
two daughters and no sons – and, in addition, an unusually home-involved and hard-
working husband. Their daughters were ﬁnishing high school at the time of the study
(1981). More recently, government has taken a strong hand, promoting female primary
education through a system of free school lunches; by now there is almost universal
literacy among adolescents of both sexes.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511841286.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 22 (native) -----
WOMEN AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
22
Ezhava rather than a Pulaya, what it means that she lives in Kerala
rather than some other state, what it means that she is in the city rather
than a rural area, what it means that she is Hindu in Kerala rather than
Christian,25 why she prays every evening and why she thinks it matters,
and, of course, what it means more generally that she was born in India
rather than in Europe or the U.S. One cannot understand Vasanti with-
out understanding the double bind of being both upper-caste – with
lots of rules limiting what it’s proper to do – and very poor, with few
opportunities to do nice proper things that bring in a living.26 One also
cannot understand her story without knowing about family planning
programs in Gujarat, the progress of the SEWA movement, the back-
ground Gandhian tradition of self-sufﬁciency on which the Gujarati
women’s movement draws, and many other highly particular things.
No doubt all this particularity shapes the inner life of each woman, in
ways that it is hard for an outsider to begin to understand.
On the other hand, in this highly concrete set of circumstances, in
some ways so unlike the circumstances of poor working women in the
U.S., are two recognizable and imaginable women, with problems not
altogether and unrecognizably different from problems of many women
(and many poor people generally) in many parts of the world. In Jay-
amma’s tenacity and feistiness, Vasanti’s desire to serve the community
and to show that she is a good human being, the intense desire of both
women for independence and economic self-sufﬁciency, Jayamma’s
complex pride in her family, Vasanti’s affection for her female friends,
the desire of both to have some money and property in their own
names, in general in their search for competence and mastery and con-
trol over the conditions of their lives – we see efforts common to
women in many parts of the world. The body that labors is in a sense
the same body all over the world, and its needs for food and nutrition
and health care are the same – so it is not too surprising that the female
manual laborer in Trivandrum is in many ways comparable to a female
manual laborer in Alabama or Chicago, that she doesn’t seem to have
25 For example, the Christian churches in Kerala strongly oppose family planning, and
this does have a serious effect on their poorest followers: see the difﬁcult story of Sara
the ﬁsh vendor, in Gulati, Proﬁles.
26 Thus the advantage of her actual employment is clearly that it can be carried on at
home, without going out and dealing with men, and without being in a partly male
workplace.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511841286.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 23 (native) -----
INTRODUCTION
23
an utterly alien consciousness or an identity unrecognizably strange,
strange though the circumstances are in which her efforts and her con-
sciousness take root. Similarly, the body that gets beaten is in a sense
the same all over the world, concrete though the circumstances of do-
mestic violence are in each society. Even what is most apparently
strange in the circumstances of each is also, at another level, not so
unfamiliar. We ﬁnd it pretty odd that the brick kiln makes women do
all the heavy jobs and then pays them less – but many forms of sex
discrimination in employment exhibit similar forms of irrationality;27
we ﬁnd it odd that Jayamma seems to accept this as the way things are,
and yet we know that women suffering from discrimination have not
always been able to organize to ﬁght against inequality. Again, the fact
that Vasanti did not go to school again seems odd, but the more general
idea that women are basically wives and mothers and that men are
workers in the outside world is not in the least unfamiliar. The fact
that she does not even seem to want to go to school is not so surprising
either, or the sign of an alien consciousness, given that she does not see
any signs of a better way of life that she could enjoy by becoming
educated. (As we shall see, many women in the SEWA organization
become literate quickly enough – when they see women serving as bank
tellers and union organizers, and using literacy to better their lives.)
Indeed, the biggest obstacle for a Western feminist philosopher in
thinking about these lives may the speciﬁc details and dynamics of their
poverty more than their foreignness: Western feminist philosophy has
not typically focused on getting loans, learning to read, and buying a
sewing machine, although such a focus is common in feminist politics
and in other academic disciplines such as development economics and
political science. The very idea that crucial choices would be made (as
in Jayamma’s household) about who gets to have milk in tea and who
only sugar, is a fact that feminist philosophers may ﬁnd more difﬁcult
to comprehend than the the big facts of location and political organi-
27 Strictly speaking, we would need to ask more questions before we could conclude that
the arrangement is, in an economic sense, irrational: we would need, for example, to
know a lot more about other employment opportunities available to men and women.
Furthermore, it is possible that even if the arrangement is irrational, all things consid-
ered, it was rational at one time – for example, because of the need to compete for
male laborers against other trades – and has been maintained because of habit and
male power.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511841286.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 24 (native) -----
WOMEN AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
24
zation and religion. (Most American philosophers probably are not
aware – I certainly was not – that the amount of sugar that goes into
tea costs less than the amount of milk that goes into tea – I would not
begin to count pennies to the extent that is common in poor households
the world over.)28 This feminist philosophical project therefore needs to
begin by orienting the reader in a general way to the situation of
women (especially poor women) in India.
V. INDIA: SEX EQUALITY IN THEORY, NOT IN
REALITY
The situation of women in India is an extraordinarily difﬁcult topic to
introduce, since there is probably no nation in the world with greater
internal diversity and plurality. In what follows I shall be describing
some of those differences (of caste, religion, regional background,
wealth and class, and still others). But there are some very basic facts
that should be borne in mind in what follows.
India celebrated the ﬁftieth anniversary of its independence from
Britain on August 15, 1997. It is the world’s largest democracy, with a
population of 846.3 million. It is a constitutional parliamentary democ-
racy, with a written account of Fundamental Rights that includes the
abolition of untouchability and an elaborate set of equality and nondis-
crimination provisions. Its legal system is in some respects similar to
(and modeled on) that of the U.S., combining a basically common-law
tradition with the constraints of a written constitution. Its Supreme
Court, like ours, is the ultimate interpreter of the Fundamental Rights,
and frequently uses U.S. constitutional jurisprudence (and legal writ-
ings) as sources of precedent. (For example, most of the privacy juris-
prudence that is by now so controversial in the U.S. has been incorpo-
rated
into
Indian
constitutional
law,
through
a
very
similar
understanding of substantive due process.)
India’s Constitution is a very woman-friendly document. The right
of nondiscrimination on the basis of sex is guaranteed in the list of
justiciable Fundamental Rights, as is the right to the equal protection
28 In that sense, Western women are, in Indian terms, more like men: Gulati’s research
on poor women in Kerala has shown that these women are much more accurate when
estimating the cost of a meal they have eaten than men are.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511841286.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 25 (native) -----
INTRODUCTION
25
of the laws – which, as in the U.S., has been interpreted to be incom-
patible with systematic gender-based hierarchy. Article 21, which states
that no citizen shall be deprived of ‘‘life or liberty’’ without due process
of law, has been interpreted as entailing the full range of privacy-right
judgments involved in U.S. cases such as Griswold v. Connecticut and
Roe v. Wade, and this privacy right has been used to call into question
the Victorian law mandating ‘‘restitution of conjugal rights’’ when a
wife has left the conjugal home.29 Especially interesting is the fact that
the framers explicitly state that nondiscrimination is compatible with
systematic programs of afﬁrmative action aimed at bettering the lot of
deprived groups: thus the principle of afﬁrmative action, for both gen-
der and caste, is written into the Constitution itself. India has never
understood equality in the bare formal way that has sometimes pre-
vailed in American law: there has been a shared understanding that
equality has material and institutional prerequisites, and that it is best
understood to require the elimination of systematic hierarchies of all
kinds. (Article 17 abolishes untouchability: ‘‘its practice in any form is
forbidden.’’)30
India has a uniform code of criminal law, in most respects a relic of
the Victorian colonial period. Some aspects of this Victorian code have
recently been used by feminists to make progress on women’s issues.
For example, a Victorian law regarding modesty has been used to win
a (problematic) victory in a case of sexual harassment.31 But the code’s
Victorian understanding of women (as either modest or depraved) is
ultimately a barrier to full sex equality. Indian feminists have made
some progress in the area of rape law, where consent under threat of
violence now no longer counts as consent. In a creative and innovative
reform that goes beyond U.S. accomplishments, rape in police custody
has been sharply deterred by shifting the burden of proof in such cases
to the defendant. But some of the most important accomplishments of
American rape reform (for example, not allowing questioning about
the woman’s prior sexual experience) remain to be achieved in India.
29 See my Sex and Social Justice, Introduction, for a discussion of this issue; a lower court
declared the remedy of restitution unconstitutional, citing the right to privacy as well
as equal protection; but the Supreme Court overruled the judgment, and the remedy
(in the Hindu legal system) was retained.
30 For more discussion of constitutional issues, see Chapter 3.
31 See my ‘‘The Modesty of Mrs. Bajaj.’’
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511841286.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 26 (native) -----
WOMEN AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
26
There is one tremendous structural difference between India and the
U.S. where their legal systems are concerned. India has no uniform code
of civil law (even within each region). With the exception of commer-
cial law, which was uniformly codiﬁed on a nationwide basis by the
British and has remained so, civil law remains the province of the vari-
ous religious systems of law, Hindu, Muslim, Parsi, and Christian.32
There are some individual secular laws of property, marriage, and di-
vorce, but they do not form a system, and, for reasons to be discussed
in Chapter 3, it is not so easy for individuals to avail themselves of
them, once they are classiﬁed in one of the religious systems. Cases may
be appealed from the religious systems to the secular courts, but the
lines of authority are extremely unclear, and much difﬁculty thus en-
sues.
To turn from law to economics, India is on the whole an extremely
poor nation, ranking number 138 out of the 175 nations of the world
on the Human Development Index of the 1997 Human Development
Report. As I have mentioned, this measure includes three compo-
nents: longevity (measured by life expectancy at birth), knowledge
(measured by adult literacy and mean years of schooling), and income
(using the Atkinson formulation for the utility of income, which as-
sumes diminishing returns as income rises).33 The average life expec-
tancy at birth is 61.334 (as opposed to nearly 80 in the U.S., Canada,
Japan, and most of Europe), and infant mortality is high, at 74 per
1,000 live births (although this represents a great decline from 165 per
1,000 in 1960). Women do even worse than men in basic nutrition and
health. The sex ratio has not even reached 1/1 at any time since mea-
surements began in the early twentieth century. From a high of 97
women to 100 men in 1901, the ratio dropped steadily, reaching a low
of around 93/100 in 1971; after a slight rise, it declined again even
further, reaching 92.7/100 in 1991.35 Experts in health and nutrition
generally attribute this uneven ratio to differential nutrition of boys
32 See Chapter 3 for discussion of the development of these systems of personal law. Sikhs
are deﬁned as Hindus for legal purposes, although many resent this. Members of relig-
ions such as Judaism that have no separate legal system use the secular laws.
33 The aggregation involves a complex weighting process described in the 1991 report.
34 Data are from 1994.
35 For these and other statistics, see J. Dre`ze and A. Sen, India: Economic Development
and Social Opportunity.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511841286.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 27 (native) -----
INTRODUCTION
27
and girls and to unequal health care, rather than primarily to active
infanticide, but there is strong evidence of infanticide in some areas.36
This hypothesis is conﬁrmed by the presence of considerable regional
differences. Kerala, for example, has more women than men; other
regions, for example Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, and Rajasthan, do far
worse. Bihar as a whole has a sex ratio of 90/100, and in one rural
area where a reliable head count has been performed by a careful
NGO, the astonishing ﬁgure of 75/100 was the result.37 There is also
increasing evidence of sex-selective abortion: a recent study by the In-
dian Association of Women’s Studies estimates that 10,000 female fe-
tuses are aborted every year.38 Life chances in India generally are far
from equal to those in the developed world, but women clearly face
unequal obstacles.
In education, the male-female gap is even more striking: in 1991,
adult literacy rates for women were as low as 39%, as against 64% for
men. (In China, the ﬁgures are 68% for women and 87% for men.)39
Such statistics are hard to interpret, since local governments tend to be
boastful, and since it is hard to establish a clear measure of literacy:
and yet what is unambiguously clear is that, despite the fact that edu-
cation is a state responsibility, India has done extremely badly in basic
education across the board, and even worse in basic education for
women – far worse, clearly, than China, which began with comparable
problems. Nor does this seem to be a necessary or unbreakable pattern,
since some otherwise poor regions have done extremely well. Kerala,
Jayamma’s state, has an adult literacy rate of 90% and near-universal
literacy among adolescent boys and girls. This remarkable record is the
outcome of more than a hundred years of concerted public action,40
36 Personal communication, Viji Srinivasan of Adithi, who tells me of the evidence of
infanticide uncovered by members of her organization in Northern Bihar, where the
sex ratio is as low as 75/100.
37 Personal communication, Viji Srinivasan of Adithi. The region was the Sitamarhi dis-
trict near the Nepalese border, where Adithi has found widespread evidence of female
infanticide.
38 India Abroad, July 10, 1998, p. 31.
39 These ﬁgures are from Dre`ze and Sen, India. The HDR for 1997 gives, as 1994 data,
the ﬁgures 36.1 for females and 64.5 for males in India, and 70.9 (females) and 89.6
(males) in China.
40 V. K. Ramachandran, ‘‘Kerala’s Development Achievements,’’ in J. Dre`ze and A. Sen,
Indian Development: Selected Regional Perspectives (Oxford and Delhi: Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 1996).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511841286.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 28 (native) -----
WOMEN AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
28
involving both the state and the general public, and building on a long
(partly Jesuit-inspired) tradition of education that goes back to the
eighteenth century. But Kerala is very unusual. Although all Indian
states have laws making primary education compulsory, these laws
have little relation to reality. Many regions utterly lack schools of any
kind, just as they frequently lack reliable electricity, medical services,
water, and decent roads; many local functionaries are corrupt, and so
teachers in many regions accept pay but never even show up in the
region where they are supposed to be teaching. In some rural areas, the
female literacy rate is as low as 5%.41 The national government, though
well-intentioned, has done little to ﬁll these gaps, although some adult
education programs have been established in some of the poorer states,
and many nongovernmental organizations run both adult education
programs and after-work programs for working girls.42 Recently a con-
stitutional amendment has been introduced that would make the right
to education a justiciable fundamental right.43 It may be hoped that the
passage of this amendment will goad government into acting more ag-
gressively on its good intentions.
Child labor compounds the problem. Large numbers of poor fami-
lies, especially rural families, depend on the work performed by their
children. Children often begin working as early as age ﬁve or six, herd-
ing animals, and a large proportion are at work during the day by the
age of twelve. Although this situation affects both male and female
children, females suffer disproportionately, since their housework is
frequently thought crucial to sustaining a household where the mother,
like Jayamma, performs long days of manual labor. In general, if only
one child in a family can be sent to school, it is far more likely that a
poor family will choose a boy. Despite pressures against child labor
from foreign entities such as the World Bank, from domestic political
action, and from national and international agencies, the national gov-
ernment has been reluctant to intervene actively, because so many poor
41 Personal communication, Sarda Jain, Jaipur, Rajasthan.
42 See the detailed report in Archana Mehendale, ‘‘Compulsory Primary Education in
India: The Legal Framework,’’ From the Lawyers Collective 13 (April 1998), 4–12. I
am grateful to Viji Srinivasan, Sarda Jain, and Ginny Srivastava for giving me valuable
information about nongovernmental education programs in Bihar and Rajasthan.
43 Amendment 83, to be inserted in the Fundamental Rights section of the Constitution
as Article 21a. See the full text of the amendment in From the Lawyers Collective 13
(April 1998), 10.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511841286.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 29 (native) -----
INTRODUCTION
29
families depend on it for their very survival. Many nongovernmental
organizations have been reluctant to take an unequivocal stand against
child labor under present conditions; they prefer to provide supplemen-
tary after-hours schooling for working children, to help working chil-
dren acquire some small property and savings, and to teach them how
to work for social change. One group I visited in rural Bihar, for ex-
ample, provided basic education for girls who spend their days herding
goats, helped the group save to buy their own goats, and showed them
how women in other regions had been able to resist the dowry system
that is such a large part of what constructs the unequal worth of female
life. In the present situation, all this is much more helpful than getting
the truant ofﬁcer (if one existed) to force the girls to stop work and go
to school.
Any approach to women’s situation in India must begin from such
facts, understanding that it is not simply a matter of waving a wand
and saying even ‘‘universal compulsory primary education.’’ Far less is
it realistic at this point, in most regions, to hold out more advanced
goals, such as secondary education for both boys and girls. Any at-
tempt to improve women’s quality of life faces harsh economic realities.
Nonetheless, it is also striking how certain regions, above all Kerala,
have been able to make great strides despite these realities. One impres-
sively successful program has been the school lunch program, which
makes sending children to school economically more advantageous to
many families than using them as child labor.
Women face many other obstacles to fully equal citizenship. Child
marriage, although illegal, is a very common reality, especially in some
regions where it is traditional.44 Laws against it are not enforced, and
it pervasively shapes the trajectory of a girl’s life. In Rajasthan, for
example, girls I visited with the organization Vishaka were already
married by the age of eight or nine; thus, although they had not yet
moved into their husband’s home, they saw that as their inevitable
future, and this awareness of themselves as small wives shaped their
44 Child marriage is common in parts of Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, and Uttar Pradesh.
For a good popular treatment of this issue, see John F. Burns, ‘‘Though Illegal, Child
Marriage Is Popular in Part of India,’’ New York Times, May 1998. Burns studied a
group of child marriages in Rajasthan, focusing on a ceremony in which the bride was
four and the groom twelve. Under law, eighteen is the minimum age for women and
twenty-one for men.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511841286.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 30 (native) -----
WOMEN AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
30
attitudes toward education, dress, and especially play – they were un-
willing to race around and enjoy childhood, in the manner of boy
children. (The protective attitude of their families toward their purity
exacerbates this situation: they are rarely permitted to play outside.)
Domestic violence is so pervasive that three states have adopted al-
cohol prohibition laws in response to women’s lobbying; and yet, as
Vasanti and Kokila’s story shows, police do not aggressively investigate
this crime, nor is rape within marriage even illegal.45 Virtually no
women’s shelters exist anywhere in India. As I have mentioned, rape is
badly dealt with under the current legal system, and the number of
rapes appears to be on the rise. It is easy to ﬁnd cases where acquittal
was secured on the ground that the woman was of low caste, or ‘‘im-
modest,’’ even when there is ample evidence of forcible rape in the
particular instance.46
Rape is also used as a weapon against women crusading for political
change. In 1993 Bhanwari Devi, a member of Rajasthan state’s Sathin
movement for women’s welfare, was campaigning against child mar-
riage when she was gang-raped by men from a community that sup-
ports this practice. Because the men were inﬂuential community lead-
ers, police refused to register the case until it was too late to perform
the necessary medical examination; a lower court in Jaipur acquitted
all the accused. Although Bhanwari appealed this judgment and the
Rajasthan High Court agreed in 1996 to hear her appeal, arguments in
the case have not yet been heard.
India has also seen an apparent increase in the sexual abuse of chil-
dren: statistics suggest a 23.4 percent rise in the number of such cases
between 1992 and 1995, but it is believed that most cases still go un-
reported, particularly when they occur within families.47 Some notori-
ous child-abuse cases involve boys, but estimates suggest that two girl
children are raped every day.48
45 See Sumeet Malik, ‘‘Marital Rape,’’ From the Lawyers Collective 13 (January 1998),
13–15.
46 For a rundown of recent cases, see Hutokshi Rustomfram and Sanjoy Ghose, ‘‘Rape:
When Victim Is Seen as Villain,’’ India Abroad, July 10, 1998; also ‘‘Torment over
Terror: The Vithura Rape Case,’’ From the Lawyers Collective 13 (January 1998), 4–
12.
47 See ‘‘Growing Child Abuse a Worrying Social Phenomenon,’’ India Abroad, July 10,
1998, p. 32.
48 Statistics from the Indian Association of Women’s Studies, meeting in Pune, July 1998.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511841286.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 31 (native) -----
INTRODUCTION
31
VI. SAMENESS AND DIFFERENCE
We should do as much as we can to master these and many other facts
that construct the circumstances within which women like Vasanti and
Jayamma attempt to ﬂourish. These circumstances affect the inner lives
of people, not just their external options: what they hope for, what
they love, what they fear, as well as what they are able to do. Neither
Vasanti nor Jayamma even thinks about getting a college degree – that
would be totally alien to their sense of what is possible for them, and
there would be no point in even entertaining the thought, however
strong-willed, able, and determined they are. By contrast, Meeghan D.,
a cashier at the Hyde Park Co-op who sometimes rings up my grocer-
ies, is ﬁnishing her B.A. at Roosevelt College while working full time,
and has already been accepted for graduate study in social science at
Howard University. She doesn’t know how easy it will be to get a job
to support herself in Washington, but she says, ‘‘It doesn’t matter. I’ll
make it somehow.’’ This both is and is not similar to the determination
and strength of both Vasanti and Jayamma. We should not underrate
the extent to which such differences in options construct differences in
thought; neither, however, should we overrate these differences, think-
ing of them as creating an Indian ‘‘essence’’ that is utterly incomprehen-
sible to other imaginations. Certain basic aspirations to human ﬂour-
ishing are recognizable across differences of class and context, however
crucial it remains to understand how context shapes both choice and
aspiration.
There are obtuse ways of thinking across cultural boundaries. Some
of these ways were characteristic of colonialism all over the world,
which typically assumed that the ways of the colonial power were pro-
gressive and enlightened, the ways of the colonized people primitive.
Such mistaken judgments can still be found today, even among femi-
nists, who sometimes characterize developing cultures as uniformly re-
actionary and their own as progressive, neglecting the history of sexism
in the West and of progressive traditions in the ‘‘East.’’ Such blindness
to complexity has made many sensitive thinkers skeptical about all
forms of universalism; but of course universalism need not have these
defects, and universal values may even be necessary for an adequate
critique of colonialism itself.
Other forms of obtuse universalizing can be found in the current
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511841286.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 32 (native) -----
WOMEN AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
32
global economy, where it is sometimes assumed that people are all
simply rational agents in the global market, seeking to maximize utility
whatever their traditions or context. It is because such approaches seem
obtuse – neglecting tradition and context and their role in constructing
desire and preference, neglecting the many different conceptions of the
good that citizens of different nations have and their urgent need to be
able to live in accordance with these conceptions – that many sensitive
thinkers feel all universalizing approaches are bound to be obtuse, and
mere accomplices of a baneful globalizing process. Such thinkers see
before them the prospect of a world in which all interesting differences,
all the rich texture of value, have been ﬂattened out, and we all go to
McDonald’s together. But the fact that some universal approaches are
obtuse does not indict them all. Pluralism and respect for difference are
themselves universal values that are not everywhere observed; they re-
quire a normative articulation and defense, and that is one of the things
I hope to provide in this project. More generally, in a time of rapid
globalization, when non-moral interests are bringing us together across
national boundaries, we have an especially urgent need to reﬂect about
the moral norms that can also, and more appropriately, unite us, pro-
viding constraints on the utility-enhancing choices nations may make.
If utility is inadequate as a source of basic political principles in a
pluralistic nation – as I believe it clearly is – this hardly means that
there are no cross-cultural sources of such basic principles, or that they
cannot command a broad consensus among the nations. Seeking such
norms is an urgent task; if we do not seek them, we will be governed,
without the input of our own critical reﬂection, by interests and pro-
cesses that very likely could not withstand the scrutiny of ethical argu-
ment.
Critical moral principles are especially urgent when we consider
women’s situation, as particularly vulnerable people in a time of rapid
economic change. If we consider each person as worthy of regard, as
an end and not just a means, we cannot in any simple way praise
Gujarat’s rapid economic growth, which has left many powerless peo-
ple behind and caused many self-employed women to lose their live-
lihoods. (The traditional lace-making industry is under threat from
factory-made lace, and there are many political controversies over how
to resolve this problem.) Economic growth, furthermore, does not by
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511841286.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 33 (native) -----
INTRODUCTION
33
itself improve the situation with regard to literacy and health care:49 so
there are issues affecting all citizens that are left in a state of relative
neglect when growth becomes the sole target. On the other hand, we
should also not demonize the pursuit of economic growth, which does
play a role in the well-being of citizens. Kerala, with its union-inspired
wage controls, has driven many employers out of the region and caused
unnecessarily high unemployment; these failures are not necessary cor-
relates of its positive achievements in health and education, and they
have made people’s lives worse.
In short, we need to ask what politics should be pursuing for each
and every citizen, before we can think well about economic change. We
need to ask what constraints there ought to be on economic growth,
what the economy is supposed to be doing for people, and what all
citizens are entitled to by virtue of being human. That citizens such as
Vasanti and Jayamma should be able to live with a full menu of oppor-
tunities and liberties, and thus be able to have lives that are worthy of
the dignity of human beings: this political goal should constrain all
economic choices. Justice takes priority in social reﬂection; contrary to
what some economists think, it is not simply what you mention ‘‘when
you have nothing else to say.’’50 Considerations of justice for women
have been disproportionately silenced in many debates about interna-
tional development; it is only ﬁtting, then, that they should be a central
focus of a project aimed at constructing basic political principles for
all.
49 This is a central thesis of Dre`ze and Sen, India.
50 Law student, University of Chicago Law School, quoting an unnamed faculty member’s
instruction to students.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511841286.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press