

----- Page 1 (native) -----
Psychological Safety 
and Learning Behavior 
in Work Teams 
Amy Edmondson 
Harvard University 
? 1999 by Cornell University. 
0001 -8392/99/4402-0350/$1 .00. 
I thank Richard Hackman for extensive 
advice and feedback on the design of this 
study and on several versions of this pa- 
per. Keith Murnighan, Rod Kramer, Mark 
Cannon, and three anonymous reviewers 
provided feedback that greatly benefited 
the final version of the paper. I gratefully 
acknowledge the Division of Research at 
the Harvard Business School for provid- 
ing financial support for this research. 
This paper presents a model of team learning and tests it 
in a multimethod field study. It introduces the construct 
of team psychological safety-a shared belief held by 
members of a team that the team is safe for interper- 
sonal risk taking-and models the effects of team psy- 
chological safety and team efficacy together on learning 
and performance in organizational work teams. Results 
of a study of 51 work teams in a manufacturing com- 
pany, measuring antecedent, process, and outcome vari- 
ables, show that team psychological safety is associated 
with learning behavior, but team efficacy is not, when 
controlling for team psychological safety. As predicted, 
learning behavior mediates between team psychological 
safety and team performance. The results support an in- 
tegrative perspective in which both team structures, such 
as context support and team leader coaching, and shared 
beliefs shape team outcomes.' 
A growing reliance on teams in changing and uncertain orga- 
nizational environments creates a managerial imperative to 
understand the factors that enable team learning. Although 
much has been written about teams and about learning in 
organizations, our understanding of learning in teams re- 
mains limited. A review of the team effectiveness and orga- 
nizational learning literatures reveals markedly different ap- 
proaches and a lack of cross-fertilization between them. An 
emerging literature on group learning, with theoretical papers 
on groups as information-processing systems and a number 
of empirical studies examining information exchange in labo- 
ratory groups, has not investigated the learning processes of 
real work teams (cf. Argote, Gruenfeld, and Naquin, 1999). 
Although most studies of organizational learning have been 
field-based, empirical research on group learning has primar- 
ily taken place in the laboratory, and little research has been 
done to understand the factors that influence learning behav- 
ior in ongoing teams in real organizations. 
Studies of work teams in a variety of organizational settings 
have shown that team effectiveness is enabled by structural 
features such as a well-designed team task, appropriate 
team composition, and a context that ensures the availability 
of information, resources, and rewards (Hackman, 1987). 
Many researchers have concluded that structure and design, 
including equipment, materials, physical environment, and 
pay systems, are the most important variables for improving 
work-team performance (Goodman, Devadas, and Hughson, 
1988; Campion, Medsker, and Higgs, 1993; Cohen and Led- 
ford, 1994) and have argued against focusing on interper- 
sonal factors (e.g., Goodman, RavIin, and Schminke, 1987). 
According to this research, organization and team structures 
explain most of the variance in team effectiveness. 
In contrast, organizational learning research has emphasized 
cognitive and interpersonal factors to explain effectiveness, 
showing, for example, that individuals' tacit beliefs about in- 
terpersonal interaction inhibit learning behavior and give rise 
to ineffectiveness in organizations (e.g., Argyris, 1993). This 
cognitive emphasis takes different forms. Organizational 
learning theorists have offered both descriptive theory ex- 
350/Administrative Science Quarterly, 44 (1999): 350-383

----- Page 2 (native) -----
Psychological Safety 
plaining the failure of organizations to adapt rationally due to 
cognitive biases that favor existing routines over alternatives 
(e.g., Levitt and March, 1988) and prescriptive theory propos- 
ing interventions that alter individuals' "theories-in-use" to 
improve organization effectiveness (e.g., Argyris and Schdn, 
1 978). The former theorists suggest that adaptive learning in 
social systems is fundamentally problematic and rare, and 
the latter, only slightly more sanguine, propose that expert 
intervention is necessary to bring it about (cf. Edmondson 
and Moingeon, 1998). This paper takes a different approach 
to understanding learning in organizations by examining to 
what extent and under what conditions learning occurs natu- 
rally in organizational work groups. 
Much organizational learning research has relied on qualita- 
tive studies that provide rich detail about cognitive and inter- 
personal processes but do not allow explicit hypothesis test- 
ing (e.g., Senge, 1990; Argyris, 1993; Watkins and Marsick, 
1993). Many team studies, in contrast, have used large 
samples and quantitative data but have not examined ante- 
cedents and consequences of learning behavior (e.g., Good- 
man, Devadas, and Hughson, 1988; Hackman, 1990; Cohen 
and Ledford, 1994). I propose that to understand learning 
behavior in teams, team structures and shared beliefs must 
be investigated jointly, using both quantitative and qualitative 
methods. 
This paper presents a model of team learning and tests it in 
a multimethod field study. The results support an integrative 
perspective in which both team structures, such as context 
support and team leader coaching, and shared beliefs shape 
team outcomes. Organizational work teams are groups that 
exist within the context of a larger organization, have clearly 
defined membership, and share responsibility for a team 
product or service (Hackman, 1987; Alderfer, 1987). Their 
learning behavior consists of activities carried out by team 
members through which a team obtains and processes data 
that allow it to adapt and improve. Examples of learning be- 
havior include seeking feedback, sharing information, asking 
for help, talking about errors, and experimenting. It is 
through these activities that teams can detect changes in 
the environment, learn about customers' requirements, im- 
prove members' collective understanding of a situation, or 
discover unexpected consequences of their previous actions. 
These useful outcomes often go unrealized in organizations. 
Members of groups tend not to share the unique knowledge 
they hold, such that group discussions consist primarily of 
jointly held information (Stasser and Titus, 1987), posing a 
dilemma for learning in groups. More centrally, those in a 
position to initiate learning behavior may believe they are 
placing themselves at risk; for example, by admitting an er- 
ror or asking for help, an individual may appear incompetent 
and thus suffer a blow to his or her image. In addition, such 
individuals may incur more tangible costs if their actions cre- 
ate unfavorable impressions on people who influence deci- 
sions about promotions, raises, or project assignments. Im- 
age costs have been explored in research on face saving, 
which has established that people value image and tacitly 
abide by social expectations to save their own and others' 
351/ASQ, June 1999

----- Page 3 (native) -----
face (Goffman, 1955). Asking for help, admitting errors, and 
seeking feedback exemplify the kinds of behaviors that pose 
a threat to face (Brown, 1990), and thus people in organiza- 
tions are often reluctant to disclose their errors (Michael, 
1976) or are unwilling to ask for help (Lee, 1997), even when 
doing so would provide benefits for the team or organization. 
Similarly, research has shown that the sense of threat 
evoked in organizations by discussing problems limits indi- 
viduals' willingness to engage in problem-solving activities 
(Dutton, 1993; MacDuffie, 1997). The phenomenon of threat 
rigidity has been explored at multiple levels of analysis, 
showing that threat has the effect of reducing cognitive and 
behavioral flexibility and responsiveness, despite the implicit 
need for these to address the source of threat (Staw, Sand- 
elands, and Dutton, 1981). In sum, people tend to act in 
ways that inhibit learning when they face the potential for 
threat or embarrassment (Argyris, 1982). 
Nonetheless, in some environments, people perceive the 
career and interpersonal threat as sufficiently low that they 
do ask for help, admit errors, and discuss problems. Some 
insight into this may be found in research showing that fa- 
miliarity among group members can reduce the tendency to 
conform and suppress unusual information (Sanna and Shot- 
land, 1990); however, this does not directly address the 
question of when group members will be comfortable with 
interpersonally threatening actions. More specifically, in a 
recent study of hospital patient-care teams, I found signifi- 
cant differences in members' beliefs about the social conse- 
quences of reporting medication errors; in some teams, 
members openly acknowledged them and discussed ways 
to avoid their recurrence; in others, members kept their 
knowledge of a drug error to themselves (Edmondson, 
1996). Team members' beliefs about the interpersonal con- 
text in these teams could be characterized as tacit; they 
were automatic, taken-for-granted assessments of the "way 
things are around here." For example, a nurse in one team 
explained matter-of-factly, "Mistakes are serious, because of 
the toxicity of the drugs [we use]-so you're never afraid to 
tell the Nurse Manager"; in contrast, a nurse in another 
team in the same hospital reported, "You get put on trial! 
People get blamed for mistakes . . . you don't want to have 
made one." These quotes illustrate markedly different be- 
liefs about the interpersonal context; in the first team, mem- 
bers saw it as self-evident that speaking up is natural and 
necessary, and in the other, speaking up was viewed as a 
last resort. 
An aim of the present study was to investigate whether be- 
liefs about the interpersonal context vary between teams in 
the same organization, as well as to examine their effects on 
team outcomes. Existing theories do not address the issue 
of how such beliefs may affect learning behavior in teams, 
instead focusing primarily on structural conditions associated 
with overall team effectiveness (e.g., Hackman, 1987) or on 
the skills that must be learned by individuals to enable learn- 
ing in difficult interpersonal interactions (e.g., Argyris, 1982). 
Similarly, research on group training has focused primarily on 
task knowledge and has paid little attention to the role of 
social knowledge (Levine and Moreland, 1991). Thus, the 
352/ASQ, J une 1999

----- Page 4 (native) -----
Psychological Safety 
role of beliefs about the interpersonal context in individuals' 
willingness to engage in otherwise-threatening learning be- 
havior has been largely unexamined. This is the gap I seek 
to fill with a model and study of team learning. 
A MODEL OF TEAM LEARNING 
Team Learning Behavior 
Organizational learning is presented in the literature in two 
different ways: some discuss learning as an outcome; others 
focus on a process they define as learning. For example, 
Levitt and March (1 988: 320) conceptualized organizational 
learning as the outcome of a process of organizations "en- 
coding inferences from history into routines that guide be- 
havior"; in contrast, Argyris and Sch6n (1978) defined learn- 
ing as a process of detecting and correcting error. In this 
paper I join the latter tradition in treating learning as a pro- 
cess and attempt to articulate the behaviors through which 
such outcomes as adaptation to change, greater understand- 
ing, or improved performance in teams can be achieved. For 
clarity, I use the term "learning behavior" to avoid confusion 
with the notion of learning outcomes. 
The conceptualization of learning as a process has roots in 
the work of educational philosopher John Dewey, whose 
writing on inquiry and reflection (e.g., Dewey, 1938) has had 
considerable influence on subsequent learning theories (e.g., 
Kolb, 1984; Schbn, 1983). Dewey (1922) described learning 
as an iterative process of designing, carrying out, reflecting 
upon, and modifying actions, in contrast to what he saw as 
the human tendency to rely excessively on habitual or auto- 
matic behavior. Similarly, I conceptualize learning at the 
group level of analysis as an ongoing process of reflection 
and action, characterized by asking questions, seeking feed- 
back, experimenting, reflecting on results, and discussing 
errors or unexpected outcomes of actions. For a team to dis- 
cover gaps in its plans and make changes accordingly, team 
members must test assumptions and discuss differences of 
opinion openly rather than privately or outside the group. I 
refer to this set of activities as learning behavior, as it is 
through them that learning is enacted at the group level. 
This conceptualization is consistent with a definition of group 
learning proposed recently by Argote, Gruenfeld, and Naquin 
(1999) as both processes and outcomes of group interaction 
activities through which individuals acquire, share, and com- 
bine knowledge, but it focuses on the processes and leaves 
outcomes of these processes to be investigated separately. 
The management literature encompasses related discussions 
of learning, for example, learning as dependent on attention 
to feedback (Schon, 1983), experimentation (Henderson and 
Clark, 1990), and discussion of failure (Sitkin, 1992; Leonard- 
Barton, 1995). Research has demonstrated performance ben- 
efits for feedback seeking by individual managers (Ashford 
and Tsui, 1991), for teams seeking information and feedback 
from outside the team (Ancona and Caldwell, 1992), and for 
research and development teams that experiment frequently 
(Henderson and Clark, 1990). Similarly, because errors pro- 
vide a source of information about performance by revealing 
353/ASQ, June 1999

----- Page 5 (native) -----
that something did not work as planned, the ability to dis- 
cuss them productively has been associated with organiza- 
tional effectiveness (Michael, 1976; Sitkin, 1992; Schein, 
1993). On one hand, if feedback seeking, experimentation, 
and discussion of errors individually promote effective perfor- 
mance, learning behavior-which 
includes all of these activi- 
ties-is 
also likely to facilitate performance, whether for indi- 
viduals or teams. On the other hand, learning behavior 
consumes time without assurance of results, suggesting 
that there are conditions in which it may reduce efficiency 
and detract from performance, such as when teams are re- 
sponsible for highly routine repetitive tasks with little need 
for improvement or modification. For teams facing change or 
uncertainty, however, the risk of wasting time may be small 
relative to the potential gain; in such settings, teams must 
engage in learning behavior to understand their environment 
and their customers and to coordinate members' actions ef- 
fectively. Moreover, teams that perform routine production 
tasks may still require learning behavior for effective self- 
management as a team and for intermittent process im- 
provement: 
Hypothesis 1 (H1): Learning behavior in teams is positively associ- 
ated with team performance. 
Team Psychological Safety 
Team psychological safety is defined as a shared belief that 
the team is safe for interpersonal risk taking. For the most 
part, this belief tends to be tacit-taken for granted and not 
given direct attention either by individuals or by the team as 
a whole. Although tacit beliefs about interpersonal norms are 
sometimes explicitly discussed in a team, their being made 
explicit does not alter the essence of team psychological 
safety. The construct has roots in early research on organiza- 
tional change, in which Schein and Bennis (1965) discussed 
the need to create psychological safety for individuals if they 
are to feel secure and capable of changing. Team psycho- 
logical safety is not the same as group cohesiveness, 
as re- 
search has shown that cohesiveness can reduce willingness 
to disagree and challenge others' views, such as in the phe- 
nomenon of groupthink (Janis, 1982), implying a lack of inter- 
personal risk taking. The term is meant to suggest neither a 
careless sense of permissiveness, nor an unrelentingly posi- 
tive affect but, rather, a sense of confidence that the team 
will not embarrass, reject, or punish someone for speaking 
up. This confidence stems from mutual respect and trust 
among team members. 
The importance of trust in groups and organizations has long 
been noted by researchers (e.g., Golembiewski and Mc- 
Conkie, 1975; Kramer, 1999). Trust is defined as the expec- 
tation that others' future actions will be favorable to one's 
interests, such that one is willing to be vulnerable to those 
actions (Mayer, Davis, and Schoorman, 1995; Robinson, 
1996). Team psychological safety involves but goes beyond 
interpersonal trust; it describes a team climate characterized 
by interpersonal trust and mutual respect in which people 
are comfortable being themselves. 
For team psychological safety to be a group-level construct, 
it must characterize the team rather than individual members 
354/ASQ, J une 1 999

----- Page 6 (native) -----
Psychological Safety 
of the team, and team members must hold similar percep- 
tions of it. Previous researchers have studied the similarity 
of beliefs in social systems such as organizations and work 
groups (for reviews, see Klimoski and Mohammed, 1994; 
Walsh, 1995). Perceptions of psychological safety, like other 
such beliefs, should converge in a team, both because team 
members are subject to the same set of structural influ- 
ences and because these perceptions develop out of salient 
shared experiences. For example, most members of a team 
will conclude that making a mistake does not lead to rejec- 
tion when they have had team experiences in which appre- 
ciation and interest are expressed in response to discussion 
of their own and others' mistakes. 
Team psychological safety should facilitate learning behavior 
in work teams because it alleviates excessive concern about 
others' reactions to actions that have the potential for em- 
barrassment or threat, which learning behaviors often have. 
For example, team members may be unwilling to bring up 
errors that could help the team make subsequent changes 
because they are concerned about being seen as incompe- 
tent, which allows them to ignore or discount the negative 
consequences of their silence for team performance. In con- 
trast, if they respect and feel respected by other team mem- 
bers and feel confident that team members will not hold the 
error against them, the benefits of speaking up are likely to 
be given more weight. Support for the centrality of interper- 
sonal inferences in groups is found in research on distribu- 
tive justice, which shows that people are more focused on 
relational than instrumental considerations in their assess- 
ments of allocation decisions made by authority figures; 
people are very attentive to the tone and quality of social 
processes and are more willing to comply with these when 
they feel valued (Tyler and Lind, 1992). Argyris and Schdn 
(1 978) made a connection between interpersonal threat and 
learning when they posited that interpersonally threatening 
issues impede learning behavior, but they did not address 
the possibility that dyads or groups may differ in their tacit 
beliefs about interpersonal threat, thereby giving rise to dif- 
ferent levels of learning. In contrast, I propose that psycho- 
logical safety varies from team to team, such that otherwise 
interpersonally threatening learning behavior can occur if the 
team has a sufficiently safe environment: 
Hypothesis 2 (H2): Team psychological safety is positively associ- 
ated with learning behavior in organizational work teams. 
Psychological safety does not play a direct role in the team's 
satisfying customers' needs, the core element of perfor- 
mance; rather, it facilitates the team's taking appropriate ac- 
tions to accomplish its work. Thus, learning behavior should 
mediate the effects of team psychological safety on perfor- 
mance outcomes: 
Hypothesis 3 (H3): Team learning behavior mediates between 
team psychological safety and team performance. 
Team Efficacy and Team Learning 
Building on earlier work on the role of self-efficacy in en- 
hancing individual performance (Bandura, 1982), a body of 
research has established 
group efficacy as a group-level phe- 
355/ASQ, June 1999

----- Page 7 (native) -----
nomenon (e.g., Guzzo et al., 1993) and also reported a rela- 
tionship between group efficacy and performance (Lindsley, 
Brass, and Thomas, 1995; Gibson, 1996). This work has not 
specified mechanisms through which shared perceptions of 
efficacy lead to good performance, and one possibility is that 
efficacy fosters team members' confidence, which promotes 
learning behavior and helps accomplish desired team goals: 
Hypothesis 4 (H4): Team efficacy is positively associated with 
team learning behavior. 
Team members deciding whether to reveal errors they have 
made are likely to be motivated to speak up if two condi- 
tions are satisfied: first, they believe they will not be re- 
jected (team psychological safety) and, second, they believe 
that the team is capable of using this new information to 
generate useful results (team efficacy). Team psychological 
safety and team efficacy are thus complementary shared 
beliefs, one pertaining to interpersonal threat and the other 
characterizing the team's potential to perform. Team efficacy 
thus should supplement team psychological safety's positive 
effect on team learning: 
Hypothesis 5 (H5): Team efficacy is positively associated with 
team learning behavior, controlling for the effects of team psycho- 
logical safety. 
Team Leader Coaching and Context Support as 
Antecedents of Team Psychological Safety 
A set of structural features-consisting of a clear compelling 
team goal, an enabling team design (including context sup- 
port such as adequate resources, information, and rewards), 
along with team leader behaviors such as coaching and di- 
rection setting-have been shown to increase team effec- 
tiveness (Hackman, 1987; Wageman, 1998). These structural 
features provide a starting point for examining antecedents 
of team psychological safety. The extent of context support 
experienced by a team should be positively associated with 
team psychological safety because access to resources and 
information is likely to reduce insecurity and defensiveness 
in a team. Team leader coaching is also likely to be an im- 
portant influence on team psychological safety. A team lead- 
er's behavior is particularly salient; team members are likely 
to attend to each other's actions and responses but to be 
particularly aware of the behavior of the leader (Tyler and 
Lind, 1992). If the leader is supportive, coaching-oriented, 
and has non-defensive responses to questions and chal- 
lenges, members are likely to conclude that the team consti- 
tutes a safe environment. In contrast, if team leaders act in 
authoritarian or punitive ways, team members may be reluc- 
tant to engage in the interpersonal risk involved in learning 
behaviors such as discussing errors, as was the case in the 
study of hospital teams mentioned above (Edmondson, 
1996). Furthermore, team leaders themselves can engage in 
learning behaviors, demonstrating the appropriateness of and 
lack of punishment for such risks. 
Hypothesis 6 (H6): Team leader coaching and context support are 
positively associated with team psychological safety. 
Through enhancing psychological safety, team leader coach- 
ing and context support are likely to facilitate team learning. 
356/ASQ, J une 1 999

----- Page 8 (native) -----
Psychological Safety 
Team psychological safety thus serves as a mechanism 
translating structural features into behavioral outcomes: 
Hypothesis 7 (H7): Team psychological safety mediates between 
the antecedents of team leader coaching and context support and 
the outcome of team learning behavior. 
Context support and team leader coaching should also affect 
team efficacy. Effective coaching is likely to contribute to 
members' confidence in the team's ability to do its job, as is 
a supportive context, which reduces obstacles to progress 
and allows team members to feel confident about their 
chances of success. If coaching and context support pro- 
mote team efficacy and team efficacy promotes team learn- 
ing, this suggests that team efficacy also functions as a me- 
diator: 
Hypothesis 8 (H8): Team efficacy mediates between the anteced- 
ents of team leader coaching and context support and the outcome 
of team learning behavior. 
Team Type 
Organizations use a variety of types of teams. Team type 
varies across several dimensions, including cross-functional 
versus single-function, time-limited versus enduring, and 
manager-led versus self-led. These dimensions combine to 
form different types of teams, such as a time-limited new 
product development team or an ongoing self-directed pro- 
duction team. The team learning model should be applicable 
across multiple types of teams, because the social psycho- 
logical mechanism at the core of the model concerns people 
taking action in the presence of others, and the salience of 
interpersonal threat should hold across settings. Therefore, 
although the utility of learning behavior may vary across 
types of teams, the association between team psychological 
safety and team learning behavior should apply across differ- 
ent team types. Thus, the effects of team type on learning 
behavior should be insignificant when assessed together 
with the other variables in the team learning model, shown 
in figure 1. For example, new product development teams 
might be expected to exhibit more learning behavior than 
production teams because of the nature of their task; none- 
theless, mean differences in learning behavior that might be 
observed across types of teams should be explained by 
team psychological safety and team efficacy, as shown in 
figure 1, rather than by team type. 
Figure 1. A model of work-team learning. 
Antecedent 
Tea m 
Team 
Conditions 
Beliefs 
Behaviors 
Outcomes 
TEAM LEARNING 
TEAM 
BEHAVIOR 
STRUCTURES 
TEAM 
PERFORMANCE 
TEAM SAFETY 
Seeking feedback, 
Context support 
TEAM EFFICACY 
discussing errors, 
seeking information 
Satisfies customer needs 
Team leader 
and feedback from 
and expectations 
coaching 
customers and others 
357/ASQ, June 1999

----- Page 9 (native) -----
METHODS 
To test the hypotheses in the team learning model, I studied 
real work teams in an organization that has a variety of team 
types, using a combination of qualitative and quantitative 
methods to investigate and measure the constructs in the 
model. Preliminary observation and interviews in the organi- 
zation suggested that there was considerable variation in the 
extent to which teams engaged in learning behavior, making 
it a good site in which to explore the phenomenon and to 
investigate factors associated with team learning. 
Research Site and Sample 
"Office Design Incorporated" (ODI), a manufacturer of office 
furniture with approximately 5,000 employees and a reputa- 
tion for product and management innovation, provided the 
research site for this study. Teams in this company, imple- 
mented in 1979 to promote employee participation and 
cross-functional collaboration, consisted of four types. Most 
were functional teams, made up of managers or supervisors 
and direct reports, and these included sales teams, manage- 
ment teams, and manufacturing teams; this type of team 
existed within and supported the work of a single functional 
department. Although encompassing dyadic reporting rela- 
tionships, functional teams had shared goals, and members 
were interdependent in reaching them. As with other teams 
at ODI, they also typically had some training in teamwork. 
Second, ODI had a growing number of self-managed teams 
in both manufacturing and sales; these teams consisted of 
peers from the same function. The third type was time-lim- 
ited cross-functional product development teams, and the 
fourth was time-limited cross-functional project teams, con- 
vened to work on other projects that involved multiple de- 
partments. The company was willing to participate in this 
research to obtain feedback on how well its teams were 
working. 
My primary contact at ODI was a manager in an internal or- 
ganization development group who worked closely with me 
to facilitate data collection. She scheduled interviews and 
meetings, recruited teams to participate in the study, and 
identified recipients of the work of each of these teams. As 
ODI did not have a central roster of all work teams, she dis- 
tributed a memo to managers throughout the company de- 
scribing the goal of the study (to assess team effectiveness 
at ODI) and asking for lists of teams in their area. This 
yielded a list of 53 teams, encompassing differences in orga- 
nization level, department, type, size, self- versus leader- 
managed, and tenure or team age. At the time of survey 
data collection, the oldest team had been together for about 
seven years, and the newest had been in place for four 
months; both the oldest and newest teams were production 
teams. These 53 teams included 34 functional teams (in 
sales, manufacturing, and staff services such as information 
technology and accounting), nine self-managed teams (in 
manufacturing and sales), five cross-functional product devel- 
opment teams, and three cross-functional project teams. As 
the purpose of the study was to test a theoretical model 
rather than to describe properties of this particular organiza- 
358/ASQ, J une 1 999

----- Page 10 (native) -----
Psychological Safety 
tion or to characterize teams of different types, this sample 
was not selected to ensure representativeness of the popu- 
lation of all teams at ODI, nor were the four subgroups of 
team types selected to ensure that they were representative 
of each type. The sample did satisfy the essential criterion to 
achieve the purposes of this study, however, which was to 
include sufficient variance on the variables in the model to 
test hypothesized relationships. Despite using a process 
characterized by voluntary participation in the research, the 
resulting sample was not a self-selected group of high-per- 
forming or highly satisfied teams; instead, there was sub- 
stantial variance for all variables studied, including for such 
key measures as team psychological safety, learning behav- 
ior, and performance. 
Procedure 
The study involved three phases of data collection. First, I 
conducted interviews and observation that involved eight 
teams, selected from among those available during my two 
first visits to ODI, to ensure variance in team type. Second, I 
designed and administered two surveys and a structured in- 
terview instrument to obtain quantitative data for all teams in 
the sample. Third, I interviewed and observed seven teams, 
selected according to survey results as high or low in learn- 
ing behavior. 
Phase 1: Preliminary qualitative research. In two four-day 
visits to ODI, I observed eight team meetings, each of which 
lasted one to three hours, and conducted 17 interviews last- 
ing from 45 minutes to an hour with members or observers 
of these eight teams. The eight teams included five product 
development teams, two management teams, and one self- 
managed production team. I interviewed at least one and as 
many as six members of each team, as well as one senior 
manager responsible for reviewing the work of one of the 
product development teams. The objectives of this phase of 
the study were to verify that the theoretical constructs of 
team psychological safety and team learning behavior could 
be operationalized at ODI and, if so, to develop survey items 
to assess these constructs in language that would be mean- 
ingful in this setting-a modified empathic strategy (Alderfer 
and Brown, 1972). In team meetings, I took notes and lis- 
tened for examples of learning behavior, such as asking for 
feedback, asking for help, admitting errors, and proposing or 
describing instances of seeking help or information from oth- 
ers outside the team. In interviews, I asked team members 
to describe features of their team, such as the goal and the 
nature of its task, and to describe how the team organized 
its work and what challenges it faced. These general ques- 
tions allowed me to listen for examples of learning behavior. 
I taped most interviews, except for some in the factory 
where noise levels made it difficult to do so, and reviewed 
tapes and notes to identify data that provided evidence of 
team psychological safety and learning behavior and to as- 
sess whether these constructs varied across teams. Ex- 
amples of learning behavior and quotes that suggested the 
presence or absence of team psychological safety were tran- 
scribed, and these data suggested that both psychological 
safety and learning behavior varied across teams. 
359/ASQ, June 1999

----- Page 11 (native) -----
Table 1 
Construct Development from Preliminary Qualitative Data* 
Constructs 
Positive form 
Negative form 
Beliefs about the team interpersonal context (inferred from informant quotes) 
Members of this team respect each 
"I trust the people here that they're 
"The [other] team has a lot of trust in the 
other's abilities. 
making the right decision, for the 
expertise of other [memberls, unlike 
function and for ODI. And they feel the 
this one." (Engineering member, 
same way about me." [Finance 
NPD 2) 
member, New Product Development 
Team 1 (NPD 1)] 
"Each person is important. Everyone is 
respected." (Marketing member, 
NPD 1) 
Members of this team are interested in 
"There's much greater openness on this 
"What gets in the way is guys who hold 
each other as people. 
team-it's intangible ... . We have a 
information close to their chests, so 
personal interest in each other. We're 
knowledge doesn't get filtered out to 
comfortable outside the realm of work, 
the team." (Management team 2) 
we've shared personal information ... 
if you don't know anything about 
people, you don't know how to react 
to them." (Manufacturing 
member, 
NPD 1) 
"Our efforts to get to know each other 
led to our mutual respect.... 
At the 
core, these are outstanding human 
beings. (Finance member, NPD 1) 
In this team, you aren't rejected for being 
"Sally and Sue both had been getting a 
"People try to figure out what [the team 
yourself or stating what you think. 
hard time on the first shift for 
leadern wants to hear [before saying 
outperforming.... That's why they like 
what they think]." (Management 
being on this team." (Chair production 
team 2) 
team 2) 
"[Members of this team are] willing to 
state what they believe . . . people, in 
other teams, if they don't get their 
way, they stay silent." (NPD 1) 
Members of this team believe that other 
"They're not out to corrupt my success." 
". . we struggled through the problem 
members have positive intentions. 
(NPD 1 team member, referring to the 
statement, because it [the project] was 
other team members) 
clearly for ODI's internal needs, not for 
customers. We had a lot of nay sayers 
who just wanted to do [the assignment 
from management] and not question it. 
They were worried about getting their 
hands slapped...." (NPD 2) 
Team behaviors (observed by researcher or reported by team members or team observers) 
Seeking or giving feedback 
"We talked to over a hundred customers; 
"They were too methodical, too detailed 
this changed the project goal slightly, 
in their wandering . . . they did not do 
to make it integrate more with the 
enough checking with customers until 
[other] product as a top priority." 
too far along." (Senior manager, R&D, 
(Marketing team member, NPD 1) 
describing NPD 2) 
"We also bring in people from Advanced 
NPD 2 hired a vendor to conduct 
Applications to bounce ideas off of, to 
customer interviews, in contrast to 
get a check on what we're doing." 
NPD Team 1 members, who frequently 
(Engineering team member, NPD 1) 
spoke to customers themselves. 
"[NPD 1 team leader] asks me to come 
to certain meetings; she wants my 
view, my industry experience, and how 
[this product] fits with ODI's systems 
strategy." (Senior manager, R&D) 
"Am I missing the mark with how to 
proceed? Is there anything you can 
add?" (Team leader, management 
team 1, in a team meeting) 
Making changes and improvements (vs. 
"Every three months we decide we need 
"We did make changes, but too slowly." 
avoiding change or sticking with a 
to improve how we get our 
(NPD 2) 
course too long) 
information. We look for better ways to 
"They did learn, but not fast enough." 
do something and we make changes." 
(Senior manager describing NPD 2) 
(NPD 1) 
.". every six months, they take time 
.... 
[ [there were a lot of] blind alleys.... 
out to look at what works . . . and a lot 
We had a preconceived notion of what 
happens in those meetings." 
was important that prevented us from 
(NPD 1) 
seeing it . . ." (NPD 2) 
"We found ourselves going around in 
circles a lot. Sometimes this took a lot 
of time." (NPD 2) 
360/ASQ, June 1999

----- Page 12 (native) -----
Psychological Safety 
Table 1 (continued) 
Construct Development from Preliminary Qualitative Data* 
Constructs 
Positive form 
Negative form 
"This team gets stuck.... It's hard to 
get a decision. The dynamics are that 
the conversation gets shut down." 
(Management team 2) 
Obtaining or providing help or expertise 
"[NPD 11 used the applications specialists 
[an ODI internal design group] more 
than any other team I know of." 
(Senior manager, R&D) 
"I've learned a lot about marketing a 
product-about how and why we make 
decisions." (Finance team member, 
NPD 1) 
"Are there any concerns right now on 
regional fleets?" (Team leader, 
management team 1) 
Experimenting 
"There's a lot of testing of new ways to 
do stuff. We're doing design and 
engineering at the same time. It's wild. 
It's incredibly complex. We need to be 
constantly creative about the 
mechanisms...." (NPD 1) 
"There have been a lot of iterations. It's 
like reducing a sauce by half. It's a 
more flavorful sauce, a more complex 
group of ingredients, but the end result 
is simpler. We made it easier to use ... 
by continually challenging ourselves to 
find what is essential." (NPD 1) 
One team member called the other eight 
together at the beginning of the shift 
and asked who was interested in trying 
which new task. She listened carefully 
to responses and suggested a plan that 
she explained would allow several 
people to learn a new role. (Chair 
production team 1) 
Another team member raised the 
question of what goal to set for the 
shift; after discussion, the team settled 
on a new (ambitious) target of 
producing 83 chairs. (Chair production 
team 1) 
Engaging in constructive conflict or 
"They bring conflict up directly; they 
confrontation 
don't let it fester . . " (Team leader, 
NPD 1) 
"People speak openly in team meetings, 
[whereas in other teams] they wait 
until the meeting is over and 'speak 
privately in the hall [about their 
frustrations]."' (Finance team member, 
NPD 1) 
* NPD = new product development. Text in italics became the basis of a new survey item. 
A set of related beliefs about the interpersonal context 
emerged as suggestive of the presence (or absence) of 
team psychological safety, including a belief that others 
won't reject people for being themselves, that team mem- 
bers care about and are interested in each other as people, 
that other members have positive intentions, and that team 
members respect each other's competence. Table 1 pre- 
sents excerpts of these data to illustrate the constructs of 
team psychological safety and team learning behavior and to 
show the elements that made up each construct. 
Phase 2: Survey research. All members of the 53 teams in 
the sample (496 individuals) were administered a five-section 
survey developed-for this study. Most teams were re- 
361/ASQ, June 1999

----- Page 13 (native) -----
quested to complete surveys before or after a team meeting 
and to enclose them in sealed envelopes collected by ODI 
staff and mailed to me. In a few cases, surveys were mailed 
to team members with return envelopes attached and were 
then returned to me directly. In total, 427 team members 
from 51 teams completed the surveys, an 86-percent re- 
sponse rate; of these 51 teams, 90 percent of members re- 
sponded. Two teams did not return any surveys; in both 
cases, the teams continued to express a desire to participate 
but ultimately failed to do so, attributing this to busy sched- 
ules. At the same time, for each team, two or three manag- 
ers outside of each team were identified as recipients of the 
team's work and were given a short survey I developed to 
assess team learning behavior and performance; 135 of the 
150 observers surveyed returned the survey, a 91-percent 
response rate. Three months after completing the survey, 
each team received an individual report, providing feedback 
about their team and department results compared with the 
overall ODI results, along with a brief explanation of how to 
interpret these data. 
During this time, to obtain independent data that could help 
establish the construct validity of survey variables assessing 
team design, another researcher-blind to the survey re- 
sults-interviewed 31 managers who were familiar with the 
design of one or more of the 51 teams and who had not 
served as team observers. The interview instrument in- 
cluded questions to elicit informants' descriptions of team 
design (goal, task, composition, and context support), prob- 
ing for factual descriptions and examples rather than evalua- 
tions of the team. The interviewer reviewed the tapes, made 
notes and-using a five-point scale from very low to very 
high-assessed four variables: (1) presence of a clear goal, 
(2) team task interdependence, (3) appropriateness of team 
composition, and (4) context support. 
Phase 3: Follow-up qualitative research. From the team 
survey data, I identified teams with the six lowest and six 
highest means for team learning behavior; seven of these 
twelve (four high and three low) were available for follow-up 
observation and interviews. The set of seven teams con- 
sisted of three functional teams (one high- and two low- 
learning), two product development teams (high and low), 
one self-managed team (high), and one project team (high); 
none of these overlapped with the eight teams I studied in 
the first phase. I observed six of these teams, individually 
interviewed one or two members of each, and conducted 
interviews with every member of the seventh team. The ob- 
jective of this phase was to explore differences between 
high- and low-learning teams and to learn more about how 
team learning behavior works. I reviewed these field notes 
and tapes to construct short cases describing each team, 
which were then used to suggest patterns related to team 
learning. 
Measures 
Antecedent factors. l coded the team survey to identify re- 
spondents by team rather than by individual and to identify 
team type (functional, self-managed, product development, 
or project) and company department (operations, sales, staff 
362/ASQ, June 1999

----- Page 14 (native) -----
Psychological Safety 
Table 2 
Chronbach's Alpha and Intercorrelations between Group-level Survey Variables* 
Variable 
Mean 
S.D. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
1. Context support 
4.78 
.97 
.65 
2. Team leader coaching 
3.77 
.81 
.69 
.80 
3. Team psychological 
safety 
5.25 
1.03 
.70 
.63 
.82 
4. Team efficacy 
5.07 
1.07 
.70 
.50 
.50 
.63 
5. Team learning behavior 4.67 
.93 
.68 
.63 
.80 
.50 
.78 
6. Team performance 
5.10 
1.03 
.60 
.45 
.72 
.50 
.71 
.76 
7. Internal motivation 
6.11 
.68 
(.03) (-.06) 
.15 
(-.02) 
.12 
.33 
.64 
8. Job involvement 
3.30 
1.69 
-.16 
-.22 
(-.07) 
-.26 
-.09 
(-.01) 
.31 
t 
9. Team tenure 
(in years) 
2.40 
1.70 (-.06) 
.34 
-.26 
-.15 
-.16 
-.09 
(.05) 
(.01) 
t 
10. Average company 
tenure (in years) 
9.00 
6.70 
.33 
-.31 
.26 
.15 
.17 
.14 
(.06) (-.01) 
.16 
t 
11. Team learning 
(observer rated) 
3.48 
.77 
.49 
-.48 
.60 
.52 
.60 
.34 
-.16 
(-.02) -.21 
.30 
.84 
12. Team performance 
(observer rated) 
4.95 
1.29 
.48 
-.50 
.47 
.43 
.52 
.36 
-.1 1 
-.12 
-.21 
.22 
.81 
.87 
* Chronbach's alpha coefficients are presented on the diagnonal. Correlations in parentheses not significant at p < .05; all other 
correlations are significant at p < .05. 
t Only 1 survey item. 
services, or cross-functional). I included in the survey scales 
developed by Hackman (1990) to assess team design fea- 
tures, including context support and team leader coaching. 
Team shared beliefs. I developed scales to measure team 
psychological safety and team efficacy, using items designed 
to assess several features of each theoretical construct. In 
doing this, I also drew from qualitative data obtained in 
phase-1 interviews. Sample items for psychological safety 
include "If you make a mistake on this team, it is often held 
against you" (reverse scored), "It is safe to take a risk on 
this team," and "No one on this team would deliberately act 
in a way that would undermine my efforts." Team efficacy 
was measured with items such as "With focus and effort, 
this team can do anything we set out to accomplish." As in 
other sections of the survey, a mix of negatively and posi- 
tively worded items was used to mitigate response set bias. 
(See the Appendix for all items.) The survey also measured 
team tenure (the average number of years each member 
had worked in the team) and company tenure (respondents' 
years of employment at ODI). Between-scale correlations for 
variables in the model are shown in table 2, at the group 
level of analysis (N = 51). 
Team behavior. I developed scales to assess the extent of 
learning behavior for both the team and observer surveys. 
Team learning behavior includes items such as "We regu- 
larly take time to figure out ways to improve our team's 
work process" and "Team members go out and get all the 
information they possibly can from others-such 
as from 
customers or other parts of the organization." 
Performance. Hackman's team performance scale was used 
to obtain self-report measures of team performance, and I 
developed a similar scale for the observer survey, including 
"This team meets or exceeds its customers' expectations" 
and "This team does superb work." 
363/ASQ, J une 1 999

----- Page 15 (native) -----
1 
Discriminant validity was also established 
by creating a multitrait multimethod 
(MTMM) matrix (Campbell and Fiske, 
1959) for each group of variables, from 
which I confirmed that, for antecedent 
and outcome variables, correlations be- 
tween items designed to measure the 
same construct were larger than correla- 
tions between these items and all other 
items in the section. For the antecedent 
variables, the average within-trait, be- 
tween-method correlation was .35, and 
between-trait, between-method correla- 
tions (between each item of a given 
scale and all items in other scales) aver- 
aged .25. For the outcome variables, the 
average within-trait, between-method cor- 
relation was .36 and between-trait, be- 
tween-method correlations averaged .25. 
2 
Factor analyses (principal components, 
varimax rotation), using a cut-off criterion 
of .40 for factor loadings and eigenvalues 
of 1.0 or above, yielded six factors for 
the antecedent variables, replicating most 
of the planned scales: items for team 
psychological safety, team efficacy, team 
task, and clear goal loaded onto four fac- 
tors exactly as planned, while context 
support items loaded onto two factors, 
both conceptually related to context sup- 
port, and team composition items loaded 
onto the first three factors. All items 
were retained in the planned scales be- 
cause they made a positive contribution 
to Cronbach's alpha. For the team out- 
comes section, factor analysis replicated 
the planned scales-team 
learning behav- 
ior and team performance. To test 
whether team learning behavior and team 
psychological safety items were tapping 
into the same issues rather than into two 
distinct constructs, I ran a factor analysis 
on all items from both scales. Reassur- 
ingly, two clean factors resulted, replicat- 
ing the planned scales precisely. 
3 
Three of the four interview variables were 
more correlated with the survey scale mea- 
suring the same construct than with any 
other scale in the survey. The interview 
measure of adequacy of team composition 
was more highly correlated with the survey 
measure of team composition (r = .33, p < 
.01) than with any of the other survey vari- 
ables. The degree of task interdependence 
and wholeness was most correlated with 
the survey variable assessing task design (r 
= .34, p < .01), and context support was 
most correlated with context support (r = 
.33, p < .01). Although the differences be- 
tween correlation values were in some 
cases small, the overall degree of conver- 
gence between the two different instru- 
ments is striking. The fourth interview vari- 
able, clear team direction, is more 
correlated with context support (r = .28, p 
< .05) than with the survey measure of 
team direction (r = .17, p = .12); however, 
this result is, in fact, reassuring for mea- 
surement reliability, as the survey and in- 
terview "direction" variables measured 
two distinct constructs. The survey mea- 
sured the extent to which time and effort 
had been spent on clarifying team goals, 
and the interviews asked to what extent 
the team had a clear shared goal; the low 
correlation between the two is thus not 
surprising. 
Team feedback variables. Additional variables, not included 
in the team learning model, such as presence of a clear goal, 
adequacy of team composition, team task design, quality of 
team relationships, job satisfaction, job involvement, and in- 
ternal motivation were included in the team survey for the 
purpose of providing supplementary feedback to the teams. 
Adequacy of Measures 
I conducted preparatory analyses to assess psychometric 
properties of the two new instruments, including internal 
consistency reliability and discriminant validity of the scales. 
The results supported the adequacy of most of the mea- 
sures for substantive analysis, although Cronbach's alpha 
was low for both context support and team efficacy (see 
table 2). Discriminant validity was established through factor 
analysis.1 As the team antecedent and outcome sections 
yielded, respectively, six and three distinct factors with 
eigenvalues greater than one, these results demonstrated 
that the team survey was not hampered by excessive com- 
mon-method variance, according to Harman's one factor test 
for common-method bias.2 
I computed two scales from the observer survey (team 
learning behavior and team performance), and both showed 
high internal consistency reliability (see table 2). Discriminant 
validity was lacking; many team learning behavior items 
were as correlated or more correlated with team perfor- 
mance items as with themselves. Some of this between- 
scale (multitrait) correlation can be attributed to a substantive 
relationship between team learning behavior and team per- 
formance; however, because of the lack of discriminant va- 
lidity, I avoided analyses that tested relationships between 
the two variables in the observer survey. Because it is likely 
that the team observers or customers are in a better posi- 
tion to judge performance-defined 
in part as meeting recipi- 
ents' needs-than 
to assess specific behaviors, which they 
may not always observe, substantive analyses reported be- 
low rely primarily on observers' ratings of performance and 
members' ratings of behavior. Observers' ratings of learning 
are used in certain analyses to illustrate consistency in re- 
sults across different measures of the same construct. Pear- 
son correlations between team members' and independent 
observers' responses about team learning (r = .60, p < .001) 
and team performance (r = .36, p < .01) provided one mea- 
sure of construct validity for the team survey. A substantial 
degree of correspondence between analogous measures in 
the team survey and structured interview data also contrib- 
uted to establishing the construct validity of the survey mea- 
sures of teams' structural features; correlations between 
each team-structure scale in the survey and the correspond- 
ing variable in the structured interviews were positive and 
significant.3 
Finally, a group-level variable must satisfy two criteria (Kenny 
and LaVoie, 1985). First, the construct must be conceptually 
meaningful at the group level; for example, team size is a 
meaningful group attribute, internal motivation is not. Sec- 
ond, data gathered from individual respondents to assess 
the group attribute must converge, such that the intraclass 
correlation (ICC) is greater than zero. Intraclass correlation 
364/ASQ, J une 1999

----- Page 16 (native) -----
4 
To generate each intraclass correlation 
coefficient, one-way analysis of variance 
(ANOVA) was conducted on the full data 
set of 427 cases, with team membership 
as the independent variable and a team 
survey scale as the dependent variable. 
Intraclass correlations are significant 
when the one-way ANOVA from which 
the coefficients are derived are significant 
(Kenny and LaVoie, 1985). 
Psychological 
Safety 
Table 3 
Analysis of Variance and Intraclass Correlation Coefficients for 
Group-Level Scales 
Team survey variables 
F(50,427) 
P 
ICC 
Context support 
4.80 
<.001 
.29 
Team leader coaching 
4.88 
<.001 
.30 
Team psychological safety 
6.98 
<.001 
.39 
Team efficacy 
5.70 
<.001 
.34 
Team learning behavior 
5.79 
<.001 
.27 
Team performance 
6.02 
<.001 
.35 
Internal motivation* 
1.13 
.07 
.03 
Job involvement* 
1.25 
.06 
.04 
Observers' survey variables 
F(50,135) 
P 
ICC 
Team learning behaviors 
2.27 
<.001 
.19 
Team performance 
2.90 
<.001 
.21 
* Two variables that are conceptually individual-level variables are included for 
purposes of comparison, to demonstrate the contrast between these results 
and those for the variables from the same survey that are conceptually group- 
level. One-way ANOVA shows these two variables are not significantly differ- 
ent across teams, in contrast to the group-level variables, which are significant 
to the p < .0001 level. 
coefficients, measuring the extent to which team members' 
responses agree with each other and differ from other 
teams, were calculated for all group-level variables in the 
team survey; all were significant at the p < .0001 level.4 
Table 3 shows the results. It is particularly noteworthy that 
new measures such as team psychological safety and team 
learning behavior have high ICCs (.39 and .33, respectively), 
satisfying the methodological prerequisite for group-level 
variables. In contrast, ICCs were near zero for constructs 
that are conceptually meaningful at the individual rather than 
group level of analysis (internal motivation, with ricc = .03 
and job involvement with rick = .04); the data thus confirm 
that these individual-level constructs are less likely to be 
shared within and vary across teams. ICCs were calculated 
for observer variables as measures of interrater reliability for 
different observers of the same team; these were also posi- 
tive and significant. These results allowed the creation of a 
group-level data set (N = 51) that merged group means for 
group-level variables from both surveys. 
RESULTS 
Team Psychological Safety, Efficacy, Learning Behavior, 
and Performance 
To test hypotheses relating team shared beliefs, learning be- 
havior, and performance, I conducted a series of regression 
analyses, using customers' ratings of team performance as 
the dependent variable and measures obtained from team 
members as regressors. Because respondents belonging to 
the same team are not independent, I performed regression 
analyses on the group-level data set (N = 51) to avoid violat- 
ing the regression assumption of independence. The results 
are shown in table 4. First, regressing team learning (self- 
reported) on team performance (observer-rated) reveals that 
learning 
behavior 
is 
a significant 
predictor 
of 
team 
perfor- 
365/ASQ, June 1999

----- Page 17 (native) -----
mance, supporting HI (model 1). This minimal test of two 
key variables in the model was utilized to increase power, 
given the small team N, and the same strategy was used to 
test other core relationships, such as between team psycho- 
logical safety and team learning behavior. To explore alterna- 
tive models, I then introduced additional regressors into the 
model-specifically, 
context support and team leader coach- 
ing, which in previous studies have been used to explain 
team performance-and 
these provided no additional ex- 
planatory value, nor did they, without learning behavior, ac- 
count for more variance than learning behavior alone (table 
4, models 2 and 3). Similarly, a series of alternative regres- 
sors (team psychological safety, team efficacy, context sup- 
port, and team leader coaching) individually accounted for 
less of the variance in team performance than was ac- 
counted for by team learning behavior. Thus, of seven alter- 
native models, team learning behavior accounts for the most 
variance in observer-rated team performance, providing sup- 
port for HI. 
I conducted four regressions to test hypotheses relating 
team psychological safety and team efficacy to team learn- 
ing behavior. To assess the consistency of these predictions 
for differing data sources, I first used self-reported team 
learning behavior as the dependent variable and then re- 
peated the same analyses using observers' ratings of team 
learning behavior. The results reveal a high degree of consis- 
tency across the two sets of equations using the two inde- 
pendent measures of team learning, as shown in table 5. 
First, regressing psychological safety on self-reported team 
learning behavior shows a significant positive relationship, 
providing initial support for H2 (panel A, model 1). I then re- 
gressed team efficacy alone on team learning behavior to 
test H4, and although team efficacy accounts for substan- 
tially less variance than team psychological safety, the rela- 
tionship was positive and significant (panel A, model 2). H5, 
that team efficacy is positively associated with team learning 
behavior when controlling for team psychological safety, was 
not supported for self-reported team learning (panel A, 
model 3). With observer-rated team learning as the depen- 
dent variable, the results for H2 and H4 were similar to 
those obtained using self-reported team learning (panel B). 
When team psychological safety and team efficacy were en- 
tered into the model together, however, team efficacy re- 
mained significant (model 3, panel B), providing some sup- 
port for H5. Finally, to explore alternative models, I 
regressed other antecedent variables on team learning be- 
havior, and, as shown in table 5 (models 4, 5, and 6), team 
psychological safety accounts for more variance in both self- 
reported and observer-assessed 
team learning behavior than 
context support or team leader coaching. Model 7 then 
shows that when all regressors are entered into the model- 
for either measure of team learning behavior-only team 
psychological safety is significant. Together, these results 
provide substantial support for H2, that team psychological 
safety is associated with team learning behavior; support for 
H4, that team efficacy is associated with team learning be- 
havior; and mixed support for H5, that team efficacy predicts 
team learning behavior when controlling for team psychologi- 
cal safety. 
366/ASQ, June 1999

----- Page 18 (native) -----
Psychological Safety 
Table 4 
Regression Models of Observer-assessed 
Team Performance (N= 51) 
Model 
Variable 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
(7) 
Constant 
1.31 
.44 
.87 
1.41 
2.04- 
1.48 
2.32- 
Team learning behavior 
.80-- 
.40 
Context support 
.22 
.43 
.75-- 
Team leader coaching 
.45 
.57 
.93-- 
Team psychological safety 
.67-- 
Team efficacy 
.60-- 
Adjusted P-squared 
.26 
.27 
.26 
.21 
.17 
.22 
.23 
* p < .05; *-p < .01. 
Table 5 
Regression Models of Team Learning (N= 51) 
Model 
Variable 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
(7) 
A. Team learning (self-report) 
Constant 
.69 
2.45-- 
.41 
1.06 
1.4100 
1.9400 
.42 
Team psychological safety 
.76-- 
.70 
.51 - 
Team efficacy 
.45-- 
.11 
-.05 
Context support 
.52-- 
.69-- 
.28 
Team leader coaching 
.31 
.75-- 
.14 
Adjusted R-squared 
.63 
.23 
.63 
.52 
.45 
.38 
.66 
B. Team learning behavior (Observer-assessed) 
Constant 
.990 
1.5-- 
.48 
1.27- 
1.53-- 
1.7300 
.53 
Team psychological safety 
.46-- 
.35 
.330 
Team efficacy 
.38-- 
.22- 
.21 
Context support 
.27- 
.40-- 
-.07 
Team leader coaching 
.23 
.46-- 
.12 
Adjusted R-squared 
.35 
.26 
.40 
.26 
.23 
.21 
.36 
p < .05; *-p < .01. 
To test H3, that team learning behavior mediates the effects 
of team psychological safety on team performance, I con- 
ducted a three-stage analysis to test whether three condi- 
tions for mediation were satisfied: (1) the proposed mediator 
significantly predicts the dependent variable, (2) the indepen- 
dent variable predicts the mediator, and (3) the contribution 
of the independent variables drops substantially for partial 
mediation and becomes insignificant for full mediation when 
entered into the model together with the mediator (Baron 
and Kenny, 1986). In these analyses, I used observers' rat- 
ings of performance as the dependent variable and self-re- 
ported team learning behavior as the mediating variable, be- 
cause this created a higher hurdle for demonstrating a 
relationship between team learning and team performance. 
As shown above, team learning behavior is significantly posi- 
tively associated with team performance, supporting the first 
of the three conditions. The second condition, that the inde- 
pendent variable (team psychological safety) significantly pre- 
dicts the proposed mediator (team learning behavior) also 
was established above. Finally, the third condition for media- 
tion is also satisfied: the contribution of team psychological 
367/ASQ, June 1999

----- Page 19 (native) -----
safety becomes insignificant (B = .25, p = .42) when entered 
into the regression model together with team learning, 
which remains significant (B = .60, p < .05). 
Context Support, Leader Behavior, Psychological Safety, 
and Learning Behavior 
Next, I used regression to test H6, H7, and H8, followed by 
GLM analysis to further explore the relationships in H6, that 
team leader coaching and context support are positively as- 
sociated with team psychological safety. Results are shown 
in table 6. As a first test, I regressed these two variables on 
team psychological safety. Both were positively related to 
the dependent variable; context support was significant and 
team leader coaching was close to significant (condition 2). 
In testing H7, that team psychological safety mediates be- 
tween coaching, context support, and team learning behav- 
ior, the first two conditions of the three-step analysis were 
already satisfied-team 
psychological safety predicted team 
learning behavior, and context support and coaching pre- 
dicted team psychological safety. The third condition was 
also satisfied; when all three predictors were entered into 
the model simultaneously, the effects of context support 
and coaching were insignificant, and team psychological 
safety remained significant. This result supports H7, as did 
repeating the three-step analysis for self-reported learning 
behavior. 
In contrast, the results shown in table 7 do not support H8, 
that team efficacy functions as a mediator. Team efficacy 
predicted observer-rated team learning behavior, but of the 
two independent variables, only context support predicted 
the proposed mediator, team efficacy. Despite insufficient 
support for the second condition, I checked the third condi- 
tion by regressing context support and team efficacy on ob- 
server-rated team learning and found that the effects of con- 
text support were insignificant, while team efficacy remained 
barely significant. Finally, using self-reported team learning, I 
found no support for mediation. 
Next, I examined relationships between context support, 
team leader coaching, team psychological safety, and team 
learning behavior using GLM analyses on the individual-level 
data set (N = 427). This allowed simultaneous testing of ran- 
dom effects of team membership and fixed effects of team 
type while exploring the relationship between predictor vari- 
Table 6 
Tests of Team Psychological Safety as a Mediator between Coaching, Context Support, and Learning 
Observer-assessed 
Self-report learning 
learning behavior 
behavior 
Conditions to demonstrate mediation* 
Independent variable 
B 
t 
P 
R2 
B 
t 
P 
R2 
1. Does psychological safety significantly 
Team psychological safety 
.46 
5.26 
<.001 
.33 
.76 
9.16 
<.001 
.63 
predict team learning? 
2. Do coaching and context support 
Team leader coaching 
.33 
1.89 
.06 
.52 
.33 
1.89 
.06 
.52 
significantly predict team psychological 
Context support 
.56 
3.82 
<.001 
.56 
3.82 
<.001 
safety? 
3. Does the effect of the antecedents drop 
Team psychological safety 
.29 
2.46 
.02 
.33 
.51 
4.56 
<.001 
.66 
substantially or become insignificant? 
Context support 
.09 
.66 
.51 
.24 
1.83 
.07 
(Team learning) 
Team leader coaching 
.12 
.78 
.21 
.14 
1.00 
.32 
* Dependent variables are in italics. 
368/ASQ, June 1999

----- Page 20 (native) -----
Psychological Safety 
Table 7 
Tests of Team Efficacy as a Mediator between Coaching, Context Support, and Learning 
Observer-assessed 
Self-report learning 
learning behavior 
behavior 
Conditions to demonstrate mediation* Independent variable 
B 
t 
P 
R2 
B 
t 
P 
R2 
1. Does team efficacy significantly predict 
Team efficacy 
.45 
3.97 
<.001 
.23 
.38 
4.27 
<.001 
.26 
team learning? 
2. Do coaching and context support 
Team leader coaching 
.01 
.06 
.95 
.01 
.06 
.95 
significantly predict team efficacy? 
Context support 
.77 
5.01 
<.001 
.49 
.77 
5.01 
<.001 
.49 
3. Does the effect of the antecedents drop 
Team efficacy 
.26 
2.05 
.05 
.02 
.21 
.83 
substantially or become insignificant? 
Context support 
.20 
1.46 
.15 
.27 
.67 
4.44 
<.001 
.52 
(Team learning) 
* Dependent variables are in italics. 
ables and either team psychological safety or team learning 
behavior. Despite mean differences across team types in 
both team psychological safety and team learning behavior, 
GLM analyses revealed that these differences could be ex- 
plained by context support and team leader coaching. As 
shown in table 8, context support, team leader coaching, 
and team membership (random effects of belonging to the 
same team) were significant predictors of individuals' ratings 
of team psychological safety. In contrast, the effect of team 
type was insignificant. Controlling for team tenure revealed 
that its effects on team psychological safety were also insig- 
nificant. Similarly, team psychological safety, team efficacy, 
and team membership were significantly related to team 
learning behavior, while team type and team tenure again 
were insignificant. Although the GLM analyses allowed a 
more detailed apportioning of the variance in individuals' re- 
sponses than the group-level data set, which uses team 
means as data points, the direction and magnitude of the 
results are consistent with those obtained using regression 
analysis. 
Exploring Differences between High- and Low- 
learning Teams 
I used the data from the seven teams identified in phase 3 
as high- or low-learning to better understand the relationship 
between team psychological safety and learning behavior. 
Table 8 
Results of GLM Analyses (N= 427) 
Model 
Independent variable 
F-ratio 
p 
Team psychological safety 
Team type 
F(3,51) = 2.02 
.12 
P2 = .60 
Team membership* 
F(50,427) = 3.25 
<.001 
Context support 
F(1 ,427) = 26.83 
<.001 
Team leader coaching 
R1,427) = 39.81 
<.001 
Team tenure 
R1,427) = 0.10 
.74 
Team learning behavior 
Team type 
F(3,51) = 2.21 
.10 
R2 = .53 
Team membership* 
F(50,427) = 2.64 
<.001 
Team psychological safety 
F(1 ,427) = 42.21 
<.001 
Team efficacy 
F(1,427) = 10.52 
<.001 
Team tenure 
F(1,427) = 0.22 
.49 
* Team membership is the categorical variable identifying each team. The result that team membership accounts for 
significant variance in team psychological safety or in team learning behavior indicates that variance is attributable to 
unexplained effects of belonging to the same team. 
369/ASQ, J une 1999

----- Page 21 (native) -----
My goal in studying them was to learn more about how they 
functioned as teams rather than to confirm or disconfirm a 
model. Table 9 summarizes these qualitative data by com- 
paring aspects of context support, leader behavior, team 
psychological safety, and team learning behavior. A few ob- 
servations stand out. First, team psychological safety is as- 
sociated with learning behavior across all seven teams. Sec- 
ond, in all cases but two, team leader coaching is associated 
with team psychological safety and team learning behavior. 
The exceptions, shown in table 9, include the troubled Help 
Desk team, for which the leader's reported efforts to help 
and coach the team are juxtaposed against persistent con- 
flicts and difficulties reported by team members, and a new 
product development team (NPD 3), in which the leader 
functioned primarily as a coordinator and offered an easy- 
going, passive style that did not match the team's energetic 
discussions, active brainstorming, and feedback seeking. 
A third observation pertains to team design. The degree of 
context support varied across the teams in a way that was 
not tightly coupled with the high- or low-learning categoriza- 
tion. For example, a self-managed production team (the Stain 
Team) confronted persistent depletion of its members, who 
were frequently pulled off to work on other jobs in the plant, 
leaving two or three others to carry out the six-person 
team's work. Despite this obstacle, the team exhibited nu- 
merous examples of proactive learning behavior, illustrated 
below. The Publications Team had a similar initial design and 
degree of context support as two other publications teams 
in the larger sample, yet survey data suggested that this 
team was both lower in psychological safety (3.9 versus 5.0 
and 5.9) and in learning behavior (3.9 versus 4.2 and 5.4) 
than the other two similarly appointed teams. Although their 
own survey responses show lower means for context sup- 
port than the other two teams (3.3 versus 4.5 and 5.4), the 
structured interview data (capturing outside managers' 
views) place all three at roughly the same level (3 versus 3.5 
and 3.5). This comparison shows that learning-oriented 
teams might be able to modify their work processes to be 
more interdependent, suggesting that team design features 
are not always unchangeable constraints. Implications of 
these observations are explored in the discussion section. 
Examining in more detail the Stain Team, a self-managed 
production team (selected as a high-learning team from the 
survey data), and the Publications Team, a leader-led func- 
tional team (selected as low learning), provides some insight 
into how team members' experiences of psychological 
safety may enable learning behavior. Evidence of team psy- 
chological safety was evident in interviews with each mem- 
ber of the Stain Team. For example, Margie, a long-time 
team member, offered, "Two years ago in the Stain Team 
[under a different structure and leader], people were blaming 
each other and trying to make themselves look better, never 
taking responsibility . . . but this team is different." Matt, an- 
other member, explained, "This team . . . has more coopera- 
tion; we take more responsibility for helping each other .... 
Right now, I think this is the best team I've been on . . . [in 
other teams] it's people not carrying their share, or it's con- 
flict. 
" 
370/ASQ, June 1999

----- Page 22 (native) -----
Psychological Safety 
These descriptions allude to a shared belief that one will not 
be blamed by other team members, who can be counted on 
to help each other and who are not punitive. Interviews with 
members also generated numerous examples of learning 
behavior. For example, Margie described how the team lis- 
tened to and acted on negative feedback from recipients of 
the team's work output: "This is going to sound very child- 
ish, but let's say I just did a part and I got drips on it. Now, if 
they [those next in the production process] told me I got 
drips on the edge, I say 'thanks'-and then I'm glad I can 
get these drips off. Where it used to be, when that hap- 
pened, we'd just try to find something wrong that person 
did-we'd 
keep an eye out for it! It wasn't to be helpful, it 
was to bring them down to your level or something like 
that.... 
Now, we don't think anything of it. We just fix it." 
In this quote, feedback about the team's work-and about 
mistakes, in particular-is seen as helpful. Margie offered a 
reason for this change: "I think that the reason we are now 
so open to that kind of thing is because we feel that the 
people who are telling us are not telling us because they 
want to put us down and say we're doing a bad job but be- 
cause they want us to do a good job-do the product 
good-so 
they want to work together to make the product 
better. " 
Her explanation suggests that the team's interpretation of 
others' intentions plays an important role in its openness to 
feedback; by believing others' intentions to be helpful rather 
than critical, the team is more likely to interpret negative 
feedback as friendly rather than unfriendly data. Another 
member, Joe, described this phenomenon in similar terms, 
"Our group is very good; if something comes back to us, I 
think all of us will say, 'Yeah, I did that.' I don't think there is 
any of us who wouldn't-where 
before it was, 'I don't re- 
member. . . .' Now I think everyone takes responsibility." 
Finally, Matt provided an example of learning behavior that 
combines the construct of conducting an experiment with 
that of seeking feedback: "Sometimes, if we have a quality 
issue-we're 
not sure about something we've just done- 
we'll bring others in without telling them what the issue is 
to ask them if they see a problem with this part. Second 
opinion type stuff. We do a lot of second opinions [from oth- 
ers not on the team but in the stain area]." The device of 
keeping the others blind to the real concern is used to gen- 
erate honest and useful feedback. Knowing they cannot pro- 
vide an objective opinion themselves, they seek an objective 
eye elsewhere. The Stain Team illustrates how a shared 
sense of psychological safety can allow team members to 
take interpersonal risks and act in learning-oriented ways. 
Margie alluded to understanding others' intentions to be 
helpful as making it easy to accept constructive criticism; 
Matt described proactive feedback-seeking that is enabled 
by the belief that the team takes responsibility for doing 
good work and is not focused on placing blame. 
In contrast, interviews with the Publications Team, a func- 
tional team responsible for preparing brochures and other 
publications for a group of ODI dealers, revealed very differ- 
ent perceptions of the team's interpersonal context. The 
newest member (who joined the team two months earlier) 
371/ASQ, June 1999

----- Page 23 (native) -----
4-~~~~~~~-U 
Kn c 
- 
>co 
U)c 
() 
( 
- 
E 
E 
EC 
aUg) 
0 
- 
0 
co 
co 
a 
, 
f 
E 
U, 
CD~~~~~ 
~~.Cu?~~~~E 
0 
E 
CE 
6~ -5 
E 
co 
coC c 
F- 
E 
~ 
0E 
- 
CU0 
-- 
E 
a) 
CDQ2 
) 
E 
0, ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~~~- 
co 
_ 
oU)C 
aE 
- 
oc 
4-, 
0, 
-~~~~~0 
) 
0 
U) 
0~~~~~~~~~C 
CD 
0 
>~a)( 
a 
* 
0, 
< 
0 
U)>0 
>_) 
- E-~~~~~~ 
~ c 
co 
C E 
O 
0 ~~~~~~~~ 
U),> 
Cu 
- U)uco 
0- 
0 
C 
co _0( 
o- 
f 
CUE 
- 
)0 
Ec 
Cu 
0 
(fc 
) 
co 
co 
co 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
E 
4Cu 
Q 
E C 
Cu~- 
~c 
0, 
-~~~~~~~~0)> 
O 
m 
U 
> ~ 
~ 
E 
E~ 
C ~r.E - 
co 
)0) 
uf) 
V 
~ 
~ 
-E2U)?~~~ 
= 
g)0c3 
>u 
Co 
u, 
O 
O 
co) 
0) 
3 
-C 
0 
C 
C 
co 
0 
0 
x 
E 
E0 
E 
o 
-0 
-0 
a) 
co 
co~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
0) 
0) 
0) 
c 
U)0C3 
o 
0Co 
01) 0)- 
c 
> 
Co 
C- 
0Q 
)0 
O~ 
~~~0, 
0 
2~~~~~~~a 
I0 
C E 
CE 
_ 
c~~~~Eo 
~~~~~~- 
oot0)aooui 
co 
0 
Co 
U) 
00,0, 
0 ~~~~~~0 0 
0 ,0C,0U 
Eco 
E- E -0 
c -(nc 
o 
G~~~~ 
C-) ~~~~~~~ 
~oE 
-0 - 
- 
)U)0, 
O 
n 
co _0 
QQ. E 
a 0 
a) co 
00,Q 
E 
o 
c 
V 
C c 
c 
0 
~~~~~Cu 
CU 
~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ 
-- 
= 
E ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~> 
ECc 
E 
Cu~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~o oI 
E 
C 
coc 
a 
o 
coa 
372/ASQ, June 1999

----- Page 24 (native) -----
Psychological Safety 
0 
;: ~~0 ~ 
o 
Co 
U) 
0OcO 
0 
o0 
0T 
Co 
couCo 
0 
a> 
~-0 
-~ 
o 
OZ-0 
) 
a) 
- 
'Z 
Co 
- 
- 
--. 
U)U 
o ~~~~~~~~ 
c 
- 
! 
0o 
>- 
_-- 
)U)oc 
o 
- 
E U-o 
co 
U) 
- 
0 ~~- 
- ~ 
- 
~~~~~ ~~~~~0- 
E 0 
0Q 
E 
z5 
o 
C') 
U - 
>5 
H ~~~~~~~~0c 
o 
H c 
co 
a) a 
-,z +, c 
a)z 
Cu 
co a) 
C-o 
c 
a~~ a)~~- - 
C)cC' 
~~~~ ~~~~~ 
coc~ 
a ) 
CU 
a) 
Co 
0 
~~0 
o 
a) 
.t 
~ 
U 
a 
o 
c C 
) 
a ,) 
~ 
00 
DDa 
a, 
0-ca 
co 
o 
o 
+ 
= -0 - 
E 
CFn 
) 
C') 
o 
0 
0 
0 
H 
o 
0 
C-) 
-0 
co 
c 
a) 
-J0 
- 
H- 
-J~~~~~~~~C 
.-5+ 
373/ASQ, June 1999

----- Page 25 (native) -----
volunteered, ". . . there are underlying tensions. I'm not sure 
where it comes from." A long-time member complained, 
"Amanda [the team leader] doesn't want to know if things 
aren't going well." Later he added, "I'm not being backed, 
not being supported." Another member said, "People are 
put down for being different ... [there is a] lack of trust." 
These descriptions suggest a tangible lack of team psycho- 
logical safety; the notion that someone does not "want to 
know if things aren't going well" exemplifies the construct. 
There appeared to be little overt learning behavior in this 
team. The team's task was flexible enough to permit either 
a collaborative approach or division into relatively indepen- 
dent tasks, and the degree of interaction varied across the 
three publications teams included in the sample of 51 
teams. All three teams had the same general task, which 
required integrating technical skills with an understanding of 
dealers' specific needs to create finished products for a cer- 
tain group of dealers, but did not specify how team mem- 
bers were to work together. The leader of this team at- 
tempted to manage work allocation herself, by assigning 
tasks to individuals. As she explained, "Everyone has their 
own assignment, but they can help each other.... 
But are 
they pulling together to get it all done? No.... 
In the past, 
some were putting in more hours. I did not like that. It's not 
fair.... 
I try to take care of it by spreading out the volume, 
switching the dealers around." Other members explained 
that much of the interaction and information transfer is be- 
tween team members and dealers rather than among team 
members, despite the fact that team members are co-lo- 
cated. Within the team, members revealed a lack of learning 
behavior such as asking questions. As one member re- 
ported, "If I have questions I ask others-but 
I'm pretty con- 
fident in what I do and I do it." Not surprisingly, team mem- 
bers also reported not receiving "honest feedback," "not 
feeling heard," and having "no opportunity to gain skills, no 
opportunity to grow." Another member complained, "People 
are leaving, but none of the problems get addressed." Over- 
all, the data suggested that the team was stuck in a self- 
defeating pattern in which a lack of psychological safety dis- 
couraged reaching out to ask for or offer help or to discuss 
ways to improve the team's work process. Viewing the envi- 
ronment as unsafe, members developed their own coping 
strategies, such as planning to leave the team or planning to 
stay while remaining as insular as possible. 
A similar contrast can be found in data collected in phase 1 
of the study, in which the two new product development 
teams studied displayed very different experimentation be- 
havior. NPD 1 demonstrated an eagerness to experiment, to 
try many things quickly and often simultaneously. One mem- 
ber, Bob, reported, "There's a lot of testing of new ways to 
do stuff. We're doing design and engineering at the same 
time. It's wild. It's incredibly complex. We need to be con- 
stantly creative about the mechanisms...." 
Another mem- 
ber, Kim, said, "There have been a lot of iterations. It's like 
reducing a sauce by half. It's a more flavorful sauce, a more 
complex group of ingredients, but the end result is simpler. 
We made it easier to use . . . by continually challenging our- 
selves to find what is essential." 
374/ASQ, June 1999

----- Page 26 (native) -----
Psychological Safety 
In contrast, members of NPD 2 described getting stuck in 
"blind alleys" in a process of perfecting one solution at a 
time before getting feedback: "We went down a lot of blind 
alleys.... 
We would go down a path for a while, develop 
details, then abandon it. Each path represented time 
wasted...." 
The lack of experimentation behavior in NPD 2 
appeared to be related to the team's concern that they had 
to produce a certain solution that "management" wanted. 
As one member explained, ". . . we had a lot of nay-sayers 
who just wanted to do [the project] and not question it. They 
were worried about getting their hands slapped by manage- 
ment." In contrast, NPD 1 members describe their team as 
able to make the right decisions: "I trust the people here 
that they're making the right decision for the function and 
for ODI. And they feel the same way about me"-a 
belief 
that may facilitate the rapid, low-stakes experimentation be- 
havior the team exhibited. 
DISCUSSION 
Overall, the study shows the usefulness of the construct of 
team psychological safety for understanding collective learn- 
ing processes. The existence of team psychological safety, 
conceptualized as a shared belief about the consequences of 
interpersonal risk-taking, at the group level of analysis was 
supported by qualitative and quantitative data. A set of sa- 
lient beliefs about the interpersonal context that were con- 
sistent with this construct emerged from qualitative data col- 
lected in phase 1 of the study, and survey items designed to 
capture the experience of team psychological safety showed 
high internal consistency reliability. The data also suggest 
that team psychological safety is something beyond interper- 
sonal trust; there was evidence of a coherent interpersonal 
climate within each group characterized by the absence or 
presence of a blend of trust, respect for each other's com- 
petence, and caring about each other as people. But building 
trust may be an important ingredient in creating a climate of 
psychological safety. Team members interviewed often re- 
ferred to others' intentions, such as the Stain Team's belief 
that others pointing out their "drips" don't "want to put us 
down" but, rather, "want to work together to make the 
product better"; such beliefs suggest that a team's proclivity 
to trust others' intentions plays a role in psychological safety 
and learning behavior. Although building trust may not nec- 
essarily create a climate of mutual respect and caring, trust 
may provide a foundation for further development of the in- 
terpersonal beliefs that constitute team psychological safety. 
Support for the Team Learning Model 
The relationship between team psychological safety and 
learning behavior received substantial empirical support. 
Team members' own descriptions, taken from different 
types of teams and settings, illustrated how a climate of 
safety and supportiveness enabled them to embrace error- 
for example, the Stain Team's drips-or to seek feedback 
from customers and make changes in a product design, as 
did NPD 1. Conversely, a lack of psychological safety contrib- 
uted to reluctance to ask for help in preparing publications 
for dealers and, in NPD 2, to an unwillingness to question 
the team goal for fear of sanction by management. Their sto- 
375/ASQ, June 1999

----- Page 27 (native) -----
ries lend weight to the premise that learning behavior in so- 
cial settings is risky but can be mitigated by a team's toler- 
ance of imperfection and error. This appeared to be a 
tolerance (or lack of tolerance) that was understood by all 
team members. 
The results of the study supported the proposition that team 
psychological safety affects learning behavior, which in turn 
affects team performance. Quantitative analyses provided 
consistent support for six of the eight hypotheses. This in- 
cluded support for two mediating relationships: learning be- 
havior appears to mediate between team psychological 
safety and team performance, and team psychological safety 
appears to mediate the effects of context support and team 
leader coaching on learning behavior. Data from team ob- 
servers on team performance, independent of other data 
sources, strengthen these results. 
Two hypotheses-that 
team efficacy would be associated 
with learning behavior when controlling for team psychologi- 
cal safety and that team efficacy mediates the effect of con- 
text support and leader behavior on team learning-were 
not 
supported. This outcome may in fact strengthen the core 
argument in this paper-that engaging in learning behavior in 
a team is highly dependent on team psychological 
safety-by 
suggesting that team members' confidence that 
they will not be punished for a well-intentioned interpersonal 
risk enables learning behavior in a way that team efficacy, or 
confidence that the team is capable of doing its work, does 
not. In contrast to the uneven results for efficacy, one of the 
most striking results is the degree to which the proposed 
relationship between team psychological safety and team 
learning behavior received consistent empirical support 
across several analyses and independent measures. The im- 
plication of this result is that people's beliefs about how oth- 
ers will respond if they engage in behavior for which the out- 
come is uncertain affects their willingness to take 
interpersonal risks. Because beliefs about team efficacy are 
unrelated to this central interpersonal concern, it may be 
less important for learning behavior. Thus, the theoretical 
premise that lies at the core of the team learning model 
does not appear to require the supplementary effects of 
team efficacy. Moreover, the conclusion that team psycho- 
logical safety fosters team learning behavior is both consis- 
tent with existing organizational learning theory and has a 
certain degree of face validity; that is, the juxtaposition of 
team members' descriptions of the interpersonal context in 
their team with their stories of learning behavior is not a sur- 
prising one. 
Quantitative and qualitative results both suggested that con- 
text support accounts for variance in learning behavior but, 
also, that it provides an incomplete explanation. The quanti- 
tative data demonstrated a positive association between 
context support and psychological safety, and the qualitative 
data allowed isolation of specific cases from within this gen- 
eral trend that suggested different ways real teams handle 
the absence or presence of enabling design conditions. For 
example, the Stain Team lacked context support and yet 
was learning-oriented. The Publications Team, despite having 
a similar set-up and level of context support as two other 
376/ASQ, June 1999

----- Page 28 (native) -----
Psychological Safety 
publications teams, showed substantially less learning be- 
havior than they did. Thus, a focus on just these two teams 
might suggest that context support and other features of 
team design account for little variance in learning behavior. 
In contrast, the seven high- and low-learning teams studied 
provided more data and do suggest an important role for 
team design in team learning. 
First, the four high- and three low-learning teams differed 
markedly by team type. Functional teams were overrepre- 
sented in the low-learning teams (two of three), and product 
development, project, and self-managed teams made up 
three of the four high-learning teams. The two groups also 
differed somewhat on whether they exhibited key elements 
of a well-designed team (cf. Hackman, 1987). The low-learn- 
ing teams' tasks at the time of the study tended to lack in- 
terdependence; for example, in the Publications Team, each 
member had his or her "own assignment"; other team 
members could be used as resources, but as a design for 
teamwork, the arrangement was suboptimal. But the fact 
that the two other publications teams in the survey sample 
had higher levels of learning demonstrates that the degree 
of task interdependence can be modified through learning 
behavior. Similarly, context support was adequate for the 
three low-learning teams and inadequate for two of the four 
high-learning teams, also illustrating that it is possible for 
teams to overcome limitations in their context through learn- 
ing behavior. These few cases thus provided evidence that 
high-learning teams could overcome obstacles they faced in 
their initial set-up; a lack of structural support did not seal 
their fate. The Stain Team overcame personnel limits that 
repeatedly depleted their ranks, and the Fusion Team (de- 
scribed in table 9) overcame time and staffing constraints to 
push energetically forward on its shared project. In contrast, 
low-learning teams, such as the Publications and Help Desk 
teams, appeared vulnerable to a self-sealing pattern of mem- 
bers having private concerns about the team environment, 
which led to withholding relevant thoughts and actions and 
made it difficult to escape the low-learning condition. These 
cases suggest an asymmetry, in which high-learning teams 
can confront and work with design and other constraints to 
improve their situation, while low-learning teams are far 
more likely to get stuck and be unable to alter their situation 
without intervention. 
An integrative perspective that mirrors and reinforces the 
results of the quantitative data can be articulated from the 
seven cases; in this, team psychological safety is a mecha- 
nism that mediates between effective team design and 
learning behavior. Effective team leader coaching and con- 
text support, such as access to information and resources, 
appear to contribute to, but not to fully shape, an environ- 
ment in which team members can develop shared beliefs 
that well-intentioned interpersonal risks will not be punished, 
and these beliefs enable team members to take proactive 
learning-oriented action, which in turn fosters effective per- 
formance. Quantitative results also suggest that team psy- 
chological safety mediates between team structures (context 
support and coaching) and the behavioral outcome of team 
learning. These findings have important implications for theo- 
377/ASQ, J une 1999

----- Page 29 (native) -----
ries of team effectiveness. They suggest an explanation for 
how effective team design and leadership enables effective 
team performance. 
Study Limitations and Model Applicability 
The results of this study represent a first step in establishing 
team psychological safety as a construct, but additional con- 
ceptual and empirical work is needed to refine and extend 
the implications of the construct before firm conclusions can 
be drawn. The qualitative data, although consistent with the 
proposed construct, did not map onto it precisely. Similarly, 
survey items used to capture the experience of team psy- 
chological safety also have conceptual relationships with 
other interpersonal constructs, especially trust. Thus, the 
empirical data were supportive of the existence of team psy- 
chological safety as a construct but could not conclusively 
differentiate it from related constructs. Further research is 
needed to establish construct validity. 
The relationship between psychological safety and learning 
could be detected across the four types of teams in the 
study; for example, whether a team was a self-managed 
team producing chairs or a management team designing 
transportation strategy, team psychological safety generally 
was associated with team learning behavior. Although I can- 
not generalize from this study about the relationship be- 
tween team learning and team performance for all types of 
teams, it is likely that under certain conditions, team learning 
behavior will not control much variance in team perfor- 
mance, such as for team tasks that are highly constrained 
with tightly specified criteria for success. For example, a 
team working to assemble a product on a machine-paced 
assembly line is less likely to benefit from learning behavior 
than a team with few inherent task constraints and uncertain 
criteria for success, such as a cross-functional product devel- 
opment team designing a new product. Highly constrained 
tasks leave little opportunity for information seeking to be 
helpful in improving team performance, and feedback tends 
to be built into the task, such that asking others for feedback 
becomes redundant. Unconstrained tasks such as designing 
a new product, in contrast, create ample opportunity for the 
team's output to benefit from new information and feed- 
back. The utility of learning behavior across team types thus 
deserves further research. 
This study provides a limited exploration of factors that man- 
agers can influence in their efforts to promote team learning. 
It focused on two antecedent conditions with clear concep- 
tual relationships to team psychological safety but did not 
examine a wide range of managerial factors that might also 
affect team learning. For example, team leader coaching was 
included in the study, but the data do not specify leader be- 
haviors precisely. Furthermore, analyses testing predictors of 
team psychological safety had to rely on variables from 
within the same survey. Although the team survey was not 
subject to excessive common-method variance, this is still a 
concern and suggests that findings on the antecedents of 
team psychological safety should be considered tentative. 
Thus, further research is needed to explore factors that pro- 
mote team psychological safety. 
378/ASQ, June 1999

----- Page 30 (native) -----
Psychological Safety 
The cross-sectional survey design prevented a demonstra- 
tion of causality and also limited my ability to explore dy- 
namic issues. The theoretical model also leaves out the dy- 
namic interaction that is likely to take place in which team 
psychological safety facilitates taking the risks of learning 
behavior, which, when unpunished by the team, further rein- 
forces team psychological safety. A team's history includes 
events that demonstrate to members that interpersonal risk 
is or is not worthwhile, and thus both psychological safety 
and learning may be influenced as much or more by the cu- 
mulative effects of interpreting these events as by initial de- 
sign features. Some evidence of the effects of history could 
be seen in the Stain Team, where informants contrasted 
present conditions with those under an earlier leader. None- 
theless, how shared beliefs are created gradually in teams 
over time as a consequence of minor events and subtle in- 
teractions cannot be assessed in this study, nor can whether 
self-reinforcing cycles or spirals exist. Given the inherently 
dynamic nature of learning, this snapshot approach provides 
an incomplete picture. Issues of how team psychological 
safety develops over time and how team learning behavior 
might alter undesirable structural factors warrant careful con- 
sideration and future research. 
Finally, conducting the study in a single company imposed 
limitations, suggesting caution in drawing conclusions for 
teams in other organizations. Although there was consider- 
able diversity across teams in work context, organization 
level, education, and tenure, the sample may not be repre- 
sentative of the full spectrum of possible teams in work or- 
ganizations. Moreover, with 51 teams, the sample size is 
small for multivariate analyses. The inclusion of four team 
types is both a strength and a weakness of the study. On 
one hand, unlike studies that include only one type of team, 
such as sales teams or production teams, the findings can- 
not be said to be merely a function of the nature of the 
team task. On the other hand, this inclusion also brought in 
more variables than could be thoroughly tested with only 51 
teams. Larger studies could strengthen the validity of the 
findings. 
CONCLUSION 
Structural and interpersonal factors have been viewed in the 
literature as alternative explanations for team effectiveness. 
This study supported, instead, an integrative perspective, in 
which structural and interpersonal characteristics both influ- 
ence learning and performance in teams. In particular, the 
results showed that psychological safety is a mechanism 
that helps explain how previously studied structural factors, 
such as context support and team leader coaching, influence 
behavioral and performance outcomes. Future team research 
has much to gain by investigating how structural and inter- 
personal factors are interrelated rather than which is more 
important. To do this, it is essential to study real work 
teams. There was some evidence in this study that a team's 
history matters in shaping psychological safety. Shared be- 
liefs about how others will react are established over time; 
these cannot take shape in the laboratory in a meaningful 
way. Moreover, for the risks of learning to be salient, the 
379/ASQ, J une 1999

----- Page 31 (native) -----
interpersonal consequences must matter-as they do in on- 
going work relationships. Studying learning in laboratory 
groups is therefore likely to miss an essential source of vari- 
ance. Beyond the need to study real groups, longitudinal re- 
search could help to develop an understanding of how psy- 
chological safety develops or erodes with changes in 
membership, leadership, or context. 
In this study, my focus on learning behavior and its accom- 
panying risk made the interpersonal context especially sa- 
lient; however, the need for learning in work teams is likely 
to become increasingly critical as organizational change and 
complexity intensify. Fast-paced work environments require 
learning behavior to make sense of what is happening as 
well as to take action. With the promise of more uncertainty, 
more change, and less job security in future organizations, 
teams are in a position to provide an important source of 
psychological safety for individuals at work. The need to ask 
questions, seek help, and tolerate mistakes in the face of 
uncertainty-while team members and other colleagues 
watch-is probably more prevalent in companies today than 
in those in which earlier team studies were conducted. This 
may partially account for the empirical support I found for 
the role of psychological safety in promoting performance in 
these work teams; however, it also suggests that psycho- 
logical safety and ways to promote it will be increasingly rel- 
evant for future research on work teams. 
REFERENCES 
Alderfer, Clayton P. 
1987 "An intergroup perspective on 
organizational behavior." In 
J. W. Lorsch (ed.), Handbook 
of Organizational Behavior: 
190-222. Englewood Cliffs, 
NJ: Prentice-Hall. 
Alderfer, Clayton P., and D. L. 
Brown 
1972 "Designing an empathic ques- 
tionnaire for organizational re- 
search." Journal of Applied 
Psychology, 56: 456-468. 
Ancona, Deborah G., and David F. 
Caldwell 
1992 "Bridging the boundary: Exter- 
nal activity and performance in 
organizational teams." Admin- 
istrative Science Quarterly, 37: 
634-655. 
Argote, Linda, Deborah Gruenfeld, 
and Charles Naquin 
1999 "Group learning in organiza- 
tions." In M. E. Turner (ed.), 
Groups at Work: Advances in 
Theory and Research. New 
York: Erlbaum (forthcoming). 
Argyris, Chris 
1982 Reasoning, Learning and Ac- 
tion: Individual and Organiza- 
tional. San Francisco: Jossey- 
Bass. 
1993 Knowledge for Action: A 
Guide to Overcoming Barriers 
to Organizational Change. San 
Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 
Argyris, Chris, and Donald Sch6n 
1978 Organizational Learning: A 
Theory of Action Perspective. 
Reading, MA: Addison-Wes- 
ley. 
Ashford, Susan J., and Anne S. 
Tsui 
1991 "Self regulation for managerial 
effectiveness: The role of ac- 
tive feedback seeking." Acad- 
emy of Management Journal, 
34: 251-280. 
Bandura, Albert 
1982 "Self-efficacy mechanism in 
human agency." American 
Psychologist, 37: 22-147. 
Baron, Reuben M., and David A. 
Kenny 
1986 "The moderator-mediator vari- 
able distinction in social psy- 
chological research: Concep- 
tual, strategic and statistical 
considerations." Journal of 
Personality and Social Psy- 
chology, 51: 1173-1183. 
Brown, Roger 
1990 "Politeness theory: Exemplar 
and exemplary." In I. Rock 
(ed.), The Legacy of Solomon 
Asch: Essays in Cognition and 
Social Psychology: 23-37. 
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Campbell, D. T., and D. W. Fiske 
1959 "Convergent and discriminant 
validation by the multitrait- 
multimethod matrix." In D. N. 
Jackson and S. Messick 
(eds.), Problems in Human 
Assessment. 
New York: 
McGraw-Hill. 
Campion, Michael A., Gina J. 
Medsker, and A. Catherine Higgs 
1993 "Relations between work 
group characteristics and ef- 
fectiveness: Implications for 
designing effective work 
groups." Personnel Psychol- 
ogy, 46: 823-850. 
Cohen, Susan G., and Gerald E. 
Ledford 
1994 "The effectiveness of self- 
managing teams: A quasi-ex- 
periment." Human Relations, 
47: 13-43. 
Dewey, John 
1922 Human Nature and Conduct. 
New York: Holt. 
1938 Logic: The Theory of Inquiry. 
New York: Holt. 
380/ASQ, June 1999

----- Page 32 (native) -----
Psychological Safety 
Dutton, Jane 
1993 "The making of organizational 
opportunities: An interpretive 
pathway to organizational 
change." In L. L. Cummings 
and B. M. Staw (eds.), Re- 
search in Organizational Be- 
havior, 15: 195-226. Green- 
wich, CT: JAI Press. 
Edmondson, Amy C. 
1996 "Learning from mistakes is 
easier said than done: Group 
and organizational influences 
on the detection and correc- 
tion of human error." Journal 
of Applied Behavioral Science, 
32: 5-32. 
Edmondson, Amy C., and 
Bertrand Moingeon 
1998 "From organizational learning 
to the learning organization." 
Management Learning, 29: 
499-517. 
Gibson, Christina B. 
1996 "They do what they believe 
they can: Group-efficacy be- 
liefs and group performance 
across tasks and cultures." 
Academy of Management 
Journal, 42: 138-1 52. 
Goffman, Erving 
1955 "On face-work: An analysis of 
ritual elements in social inter- 
action." Psychiatry, 18: 213- 
231. 
Golembiewski, Robert T., and 
Mark McConkie 
1975 "The centrality of interper- 
sonal trust in group process." 
In Cary L. Cooper (ed.), Theo- 
ries of Group Process: 131- 
181. London: Wiley. 
Goodman, Paul, S. Devadas, and 
T. L. Hughson 
1988 "Groups and productivity: 
Analyzing the effectiveness of 
self-managing teams." In J. P. 
Campbell, R. J. Campbell, and 
Associates (eds.), Designing 
Effective Work Groups: 295- 
327. San Francisco: Jossey- 
Bass. 
Goodman, Paul, E. RavIin, and M. 
Schminke 
1987 "Understanding groups in or- 
ganizations." In L. L. Cum- 
mings and B. M. Staw (eds.), 
Research in Organizational 
Behavior, 9: 121-173. Green- 
wich, CT: JAI Press. 
Guzzo, R. A., P. R. Yost, R. J. 
Campbell, and G. P. Shea 
1993 "Potency in groups: Articulat- 
ing a construct." British Jour- 
nal of Social Psychology, 32: 
87-106. 
Hackman, J. Richard 
1987 "The design of work teams." 
In J. Lorsch (ed.), Handbook 
of Organizational Behavior: 
315-342. Englewood Cliffs, 
NJ: Prentice-Hall. 
Hackman, J. Richard (ed.) 
1990 Groups that Work (and Those 
That Don't). San Francisco: 
Jossey-Bass. 
Henderson, Rebecca H., and Kim 
B. Clark 
1990 "Architectural innovation: The 
reconfiguration of existing 
product technology and the 
failure of existing firms." Ad- 
ministrative Science Quarterly, 
35: 9-30. 
Janis, Irving L. 
1982 Groupthink, 2d ed. Boston: 
Houghton-Mifflin. 
Kenny, David A., and Lawrence La 
Voie 
1985 "Separating individual and 
group effects." Journal of Per- 
sonality and Social Psychol- 
ogy, 48: 339-348. 
Klimoski, Richard, and 
S. Mohammed 
1994 "Team mental model: Con- 
struct or metaphor?" Journal 
of Management, 20: 403-437. 
Kolb, David A. 
1984 Experiential Learning. Engle- 
wood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. 
Kramer, Roderick M. 
1999 "Trust and distrust in organi- 
zations: Emerging perspec- 
tives, enduring questions." 
Annual Review of Psychology, 
50: 569-598. Palo Alto, CA: 
Annual Reviews. 
Lee, Fiona 
1997 "When the going gets tough, 
do the tough ask for help? 
Help seeking and power moti- 
vation in organizations." Orga- 
nizational Behavior and Hu- 
man Decision Processes, 72: 
336-363. 
Leonard-Barton, Dorothy 
1995 Wellsprings of Knowledge: 
Building and Sustaining the 
Sources of Innovation. Bos- 
ton: Harvard Business School 
Press. 
Levine, John M., and Richard L. 
Moreland 
1991 "Culture and socialization in 
work groups." In L. B. 
Resnick, J. M. Levine, and 
S. D. Teasley (eds.), Perspec- 
tives on Socially Shared Cog- 
nition: 257-279- Washington, 
DC: American Psychological 
Association. 
Levitt, Barbara, and James G. 
March 
1988 "Organizational learning." An- 
nual Review of Sociology, 14: 
319-340. Palo Alto, CA: An- 
nual Reviews. 
Lindsley, Dana H., Daniel J. Brass, 
and James B. Thomas 
1995 "Efficacy-performance spirals: 
A multi-level perspective." 
Academy of Management Re- 
view, 20: 645-678. 
MacDuffie, John Paul 
1997 "The road to 'root cause': 
Shop-floor problem-solving at 
three auto assembly plants." 
Management Science, 43: 
479-502. 
Mayer, Roger C., James H. Davis, 
and F. David Schoorman 
1995 "An integrative model of orga- 
nizational trust." Academy of 
Management Review, 20: 
709-734. 
Michael, Donald N. 
1976 On Learning to Plan and Plan- 
ning to Learn. San Francisco: 
Jossey-Bass. 
Robinson, Sandra L. 
1996 "Trust and breach of the psy- 
chological contract." Adminis- 
trative Science Quarterly, 41: 
574-599. 
Sanna, Lawrence J., and R. Lance 
Shotland 
1990 "Valence of anticipated evalu- 
ation and social facilitation." 
Journal of Experimental Social 
Psychology, 26: 82-92. 
Schein, Edgar H. 
1993 "How can organizations learn 
faster? The challenge of enter- 
ing the green room." Sloan 
Management Review, 34: 85- 
92. 
Schein, Edgar H., and Warren 
Bennis 
1965 Personal and Organizational 
Change via Group Methods. 
New York: Wiley. 
Schbn, Donald 
1983 The Reflective Practitioner. 
New York: Basic Books. 
Senge, Peter M. 
1990 The Fifth Discipline: The Art 
and Practice of the Learning 
Organization. New York: 
Doubleday. 
Sitkin, Sim B. 
1992 "Learning through failure: The 
strategy of small losses." In 
L. L. Cummings and B. M. 
Staw (eds.), Research in Orga- 
nizational Behavior, 14: 231- 
266. Greenwich, CT: JAI 
Press. 
381/ASQ, June 1999

----- Page 33 (native) -----
Stasser, Garold, and William Titus 
1987 "Effects of information load 
and percentage of shared in- 
formation on the dissemina- 
tion of unshared information 
during group discussion." 
Journal of Personality and So- 
cial Psychology, 53: 81-93. 
Staw, Barry M., Lance E. 
Sandelands, and Jane E. 
Dutton 
1981 "Threat-rigidity effects in orga- 
nizational behavior: A multi- 
level analysis." Administrative 
Science Quarterly, 26: 501- 
524. 
Tyler, Tom R., and E. Allan Lind 
1992 "A relational model of author- 
ity in groups." In Advances in 
Experimental Psychology, 25: 
115-191. New York: Aca- 
demic Press. 
Wageman, Ruth 
1998 "The effects of team design 
and leader behavior on self- 
managing teams: A field 
study." Working paper, School 
of Business, Columbia Univer- 
sity. 
Walsh, James 
1995 "Managerial and organizational 
cognition: Notes from a trip 
down memory lane." Organi- 
zation Science, 6: 280-321. 
Watkins, Victoria J., and Karen E. 
Marsick 
1993 Sculpting the Learning Organi- 
zation: Lessons in the Art of 
Systemic Change. San Fran- 
cisco: Jossey-Bass. 
APPENDIX: Survey Scales and Item Correlations 
Team survey item* 
Pearson R correlations 
Supportiveness 
of organization context 
2 
3 
4 
5 
1. This team gets all the information it needs to do our work and plan our schedule. 
.43 
.29 
.26 
.22 
2. It is easy for this team to obtain expert assistance when something comes up that we don't 
know how to handle. 
.26 
.30 
.24 
3. This team is kept in the dark about current developments and future plans that may affect 
its work. 
.26 
.29 
4. This team lacks access to useful training on the job. 
.15 
5. Excellent work pays off in this company. 
Task design 
2 
3 
1. The work that this team does makes a difference for the people who receive or use it. 
.23 
.27 
2. The work we do on this team itself provides us with plenty of feedback about how well the 
team is performing. 
.25 
3. Those who receive or use this team's output rarely give us feedback about how well our 
work meets their needs. 
Clear direction 
2 
3 
1. It is clear what this team is supposed to accomplish. 
.41 
.38 
2. This team spent time making sure every team member understands the team objectives. 
.65 
3. The team has invested plenty of time to clarify our goals. 
Team composition 
2 
3 
1. Most people in this team have the ability to solve the problems that come up in our work. 
.26 
.34 
2. All members of this team have more than enough training and experience for the kind of 
work they have to do. 
.27 
3. Certain individuals in this team lack the special skills needed for good team work. 
Team efficacy 
2 
3 
1. Achieving this team's goals is well within our reach. 
.37 
.43 
2. This team can achieve its task without requiring us to put in unreasonable time or effort. 
.28 
3. With focus and effort, this team can do anything we set out to accomplish. 
Team psychological 
safety* 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
1. If you make a mistake on this team, it is often held against you. 
.36 
.38 
.49 
.41 
.34 
.43 
2. Members of this team are able to bring up problems and tough issues. 
.28 
.56 
.35 
.34 
.37 
3. People on this team sometimes reject others for being different. 
.32 
.45 
.45 
.33 
4. It is safe to take a risk on this team. 
.37 
.37 
.48 
5. It is difficult to ask other members of this team for help. 
.42 
.41 
6. No one on this team would deliberately act in a way that undermines my efforts. 
.39 
7. Working with members of this team, my unique skills and talents are valued and utilized. 
Team leader coachingt 
2 
3 
The team leader ... 
1. 
initiates meetings to discuss the team's progress. 
.38 
.47 
2. 
is available for consultation on problems. 
.70 
3. 
is an ongoing "presence" in this team-someone who is readily available. 
382/ASQ, June 1999

----- Page 34 (native) -----
Psychological Safety 
APPENDIX (continued) 
Team learning behavior* 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
1. We regularly take time to figure out ways to improve our team's work processes. 
.23 
.28 .35 
.41 
.30 .23 
2. This team tends to handle differences of opinion privately or off-line, rather than 
addressing them directly as a group. 
.26 
.31 .27 
.29 
.22 
3. Team members go out and get all the information they possibly can from others-such 
as customers, or other parts of the organization. 
.38 .35 
.37 .37 
4. This team frequently seeks new information that leads us to make important changes.... 
.41 
.47 .37 
5. In this team, someone always makes sure that we stop to reflect on the team's work process. 
.47 .25 
6. People in this team often speak up to test assumptions about issues under discussion. 
.43 
7. We invite people from outside the team to present information or have discussions with us. 
Team performance* 
2 
3 
4 
5 
1. Recently, this team seems to be "slipping" a bit in its level of performance and 
accomplishments. 
.38 .41 
.44 
.40 
2. Those who receive or use the work this team does often have complaints about 
our work. 
.26 
.42 .47 
3. The quality of work provided by this team is improving over time. 
.36 
.26 
4. Critical quality errors occur frequently in this team. 
.51 
5. Others in the company who interact with this team often complain about how it functions. 
Internal motivation* 
2 
3 
1. My opinion of myself goes up when I do my job well. 
.33 .48 
2. I feel bad and unhappy when I discover that I have performed less well than I should have 
in my job. 
.30 
3. I feel a great sense of personal satisfaction when I do my job well. 
Job Involvement* 
1. I live, eat, and breathe my job. 
Observer Survey Items 
Team learning behaviorst 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
This team ... 
1. ... asks its internal customers (those who receive or use its work) for feedback on its 
performance. 
.24 
.55 .39 
.52 
.37 .30 
2. 
relies on outdated information or ideas. (Reverse scored) 
.46 
.37 
.36 
.47 
.36 
3. 
actively reviews its own progress and performance. 
.47 
.61 .38 
.51 
4. 
does its work without stopping to consider all the information team members have. 
(Reverse scored) 
.36 
.44 
.22 
5. 
regularly takes time to figure out ways to improve its work performance. 
.49 
.44 
6. 
ignores feedback from others in the company. (Reverse scored) 
.30 
7. 
asks for help from others in the company when something comes up that team 
members don't know how to handle. 
Team performance* 
2 
3 
4 
1. This team meets or exceeds its customers' expectations. 
.77 
.62 
.64 
2. This team does superb work. 
.57 .71 
3. Critical quality errors occur frequently in this team's work. (Reverse scored) 
.53 
4. This team keeps getting better and better. 
* 7-point scale from "very inaccurate" to "very accurate." 
t 5-point scale from "never" to "always." 
383/ASQ, J une 1 999