

----- Page 1 (native text) -----
Please do not remove this page
Marketing the competitive destination of the
future
Buhalis, Dimitrios
https://openresearch.surrey.ac.uk/esploro/outputs/journalArticle/Marketing-the-competitive-destination-of-the/99516689802346/filesAndLinks?index=
0
Buhalis, D. (2000). Marketing the competitive destination of the future. Tourism Management, 21(1),
97–116. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0261-5177(99)00095-3
Published Version: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0261-5177(99)00095-3
Document Version: Text
Downloaded On 2025/11/01 20:59:13 +0000
Research:Open
openresearch@surrey.ac.uk
Surrey Open Research repository homepage: https://openresearch.surrey.ac.uk/esploro/


----- Page 2 -----


----- Page 3 (native text) -----
ii
Tourism Management 
Special Issue: 
The Competitive Destination 
 
Marketing the competitive destination of the future 
 
© Dr Dimitrios Buhalis 
 
Senior Lecturer in Tourism  
University of Westminster 
 
35 Marylebone Road 
London, NW1 5LS, England 
 
Tel : +44 (0) 171 9115000 ext 3112 
Fax: +44 (0) 171 9115171 
Home Tel/Fax: +44 (0) 1483 574463 
 
E Mail: buhalid@wmin.ac.uk 
 Internet: http://www.wmin.ac.uk/Env/UDP/staff/buhalis.htm 
 


----- Page 4 (native text) -----
iii
Abstract 
 
Destination marketing is increasingly becoming extremely competitive worldwide. This paper 
explains the destination concept and attempts to synthesise several models for strategic marketing 
and management of destinations. It provides an overview of several techniques widely used and 
illustrates examples from around the world. The paper also explains that marketing of destinations 
should balance the strategic objectives of all stakeholders as well the sustainability of local 
resources. Destinations need to differentiate their products and develop partnerships between the 
public and private sector locally in order to co-ordinate delivery. Taking advantage of new 
technologies and the Internet also enables destinations to enhance their competitiveness by 
increasing their visibility, reducing costs and enhancing local co-operation. Destination marketing 
must lead to the optimisation of tourism impacts and the achievement of the strategic objectives for 
all stakeholders.  
 


----- Page 5 (native text) -----
1
1. Introducing destinations and destination marketing  
 
Destination marketing facilitates the achievement of tourism policy, which should be co-ordinated 
with the regional development strategic plan. Marketing of destinations should also guide the 
tourism impacts optimisation and the maximisation of benefits for the region. In order to appreciate 
the complexity of destination marketing this paper explains the destination concept and attempts to 
synthesise several models for strategic marketing and management of destinations.  
 
The analysis illustrates numerous frameworks for the development of a destination marketing 
strategy and a comprehensive marketing mix. The paper also illustrates the relationship between 
marketing and planning of destinations and their conflicting and symbiotic relationship. This paper 
is based on research and consultancy on destination marketing around the world, where several 
frameworks have been tested and implemented. It discusses a wide spectrum of destination 
marketing tools and provides plentiful references for researchers who would like to study in-depth 
each technique. Although the suggestions and conclusions presented here are inevitably 
generalised, destinations can use the suggested methodology in order to develop and implement 
their strategic plan and marketing policies. The contribution of the paper is therefore in 
synthesising well-developed techniques and to provide a comprehensive framework for destination 
marketing rather than to introduce original research outcomes. 
 
2. Destination as an amalgam of tourism services and experiences 
 
Destinations are amalgams of tourism products, offering an integrated experience to consumers. 
Traditionally, destinations are regarded as well-defined geographical areas, such as a country, an 
island or a town. However, it is increasingly recognised that a destination can also a perceptual 
concept, which can be interpreted subjectively by consumers, depending on their travel itinerary, 
cultural background, purpose of visit, educational level and past experience. For example, London 
can be a destination for a German business traveller, whilst Europe may be the destination for a 
leisure Japanese tourist who packs six European countries in a two week tour. Some travellers will 
consider a cruise ship to be their destination, while others on the same cruise may perceive the 
ports visited during the trip as their destination. Often destinations are artificially divided by 
geographical and political barriers, which fail to take into consideration consumer preferences or 
tourism industry functions. An example of that is the Alps shared by France, Austria, Switzerland, 
Italy by often perceived and consumed as part of the same product by skiers. For the purpose of 
this paper destinations are considered to be a defined geographical region which is understood by 
its visitors as a unique entity, with a political and legislative framework for tourism marketing and 
planning. This definition enables Destination Management Organisations (DMOs) to be 
accountable for the planning and marketing of the region and to have the power and resources to 
undertake action towards achieving its strategic objectives.  
 
Destinations offer an amalgam of tourism products and services, which are consumed under the 
brand name of the destination. Leiper (1995, p.87) explains that destinations are places towards 
which people travel and where they choose to stay for a while in order to experience certain 
features or characteristics-a perceived attraction of some sort. Cooper et al (1998) define 
destinations as the focus of facilities and services designed to meet the needs of the tourists. Most 
destinations comprise a core of the following components, which can be characterised as the six 
As framework as illustrated in Table 1. Therefore, a destination can be regarded as a combination 
(or even as a brand) of all products, services and ultimately experiences provided locally. It also 
enables us to assess the impact of tourism regionally, as well as manage demand and supply in 
order to maximise benefits for all stakeholders. 
 


----- Page 6 (native text) -----
2
Table 1: Six As Framework for the analysis of tourism destinations 
 

Attractions (natural, man-made, artificial, purpose built, heritage, special events) 

Accessibility (entire transportation system comprising of routes, terminals and vehicles) 

Amenities (accommodation and catering facilities, retailing, other tourist services) 

Available packages (pre-arranged packages by intermediaries and principals) 

Activities (all activities available at the destination and what consumers will do during their 
visit) 

Ancillary services (services used by tourists such as banks, telecommunications, post, 
newsagents, hospitals,  etc) 
Although there is plenty of literature on destination planning and development of facilities (Inskeep, 
1991 and 1994; Pearce, 1989; Gunn, 1994; Davidson and Maitland, 1997), there are few textbooks 
examining destination marketing (Heath and Wall, 1992; Goodall and Ashworth, 1988) and even 
fewer illustrate destinations as an experience-provider for tourists and locals (Ryan, 1997 and 1991a). 
This is also reflected in the academic literature published in journals and other scientific publications. 
The inadequacy of destination marketing literature probably illustrates the interest of researchers in 
the impacts of tourism on destinations. Hence, the management and marketing of destinations is often 
left to industry people and consultants and it is not frequently discussed in the literature or in academic 
debates. The competitive nature of destination marketing also prevents involved parties from 
publishing their strategies and marketing plans. In addition, there is an apparent difference between 
the marketing and planning tourism literature.  
 
Traditionally marketing concentrates on increasing visitation and treats tourism like any other 
commodity. This approach fails to recognise the unique needs and limitations of each destination as 
well as their particular geographical, environmental and socio-cultural characteristics. In contrast, 
planning literature concentrates more on the impacts of tourism and on limiting tourism development, 
often ignoring the market dynamics and the requirements of entrepreneurs at the destination and the 
place of origin (Ryan,1991b; Burns,1999). Ryan (1991b) explains that companies and governments 
in tourism have applied only part of the marketing mix to tourism, i.e., promotion, with little attention 
being paid to the other components of marketing. However, if tourism is to survive by generating 
satisfaction among interacting tourists and hosts, it must adopt societal marketing strategies. This 
involves carefully monitoring tourist satisfaction levels and using these as part of the criteria for 
success, rather than increasing numbers of tourists; continually monitoring host reactions to 
tourists, for host-tourist interaction is an important component of the tourist experience; and being 
aware that infrastructure development of tourism resort areas has implications for the types of 
tourists that will be attracted (Ryan, 1991b). 
 
3. The strategic purpose of destinations and their management and marketing 
 
Destinations are some of the most difficult entities to manage and market, due to the complexity of the 
relationships of local stakeholders (Sautter and Leisen,1999). Managing and marketing destinations 
is also challenging because of the variety of stakeholders involved in the development and 
production of tourism products. The destination experience is essentially comprised of regions, 
resources and amalgams of tourism facilities and services, which often do not belong to 
individuals. Instead they represent a collection of both professional and personal interests of all the 
people who live and work in the area. Managing often conflicting stakeholders’ interests makes 
controlling and marketing destinations as a whole extremely challenging. Hence, strategies and 
actions should take into account the wishes of all stakeholders, namely indigenous people, 
businesses and investors, tourists, tour operators and intermediaries, and interest groups. Perhaps 
the most difficult problem is ensuring the rational use of zero-priced public goods, such as 
landscapes, mountains, and the sea for the benefit of all stakeholders and at the same time 
preserving the resources for future generations. Conflicts can easily develop, especially when 
some (perhaps greedy) stakeholders exploit resources for short-term benefits. A compromise 
encompassing all these interests is extremely difficult if not impossible, but is the key to long term 
success (Buhalis, 1999a; Buhalis and Fletcher,1995; Jamal and Getz,1996; Yuksel et al, 1999; 
Palmer, and Bejou, 1995). 


----- Page 7 (native text) -----
3
And yet tourists perceive the destination as a brand comprising of a collection of suppliers and 
services. Before visiting they develop an image about destinations as well as a set of expectations 
based on previous experience, word of mouth, press reports, advertising, and common beliefs (Chon, 
1991 and 1992; Baloglu and Brinberg, 1997). During their holiday, they “consume” destinations as a 
comprehensive experience, without often realising that each element of the product are produced and 
managed by individual players. Most service providers are small and medium-sized tourism 
enterprises which have a wide range of strengths and weaknesses whilst are also characterised by 
their independent nature (Buhalis and Cooper,1998, Cooper and Buhalis, 1992). Tourists' overall 
experience is composed of numerous small encounters with a variety of tourism principals, such as 
taxi drivers, hoteliers, waiters, as well as with elements of the local attractions such as museums, 
theatres, beaches, theme parks etc. Their overall impression develops their image of a destination 
after their visitation. As a consequence there is much overlapping between strategic marketing of the 
destination as a whole and of each individual supplier at the region. Hence, the competitiveness of 
each player is often interrelated and almost indistinguishable from one another. 
 
As consumers increasingly value environmental resources they are prepared to pay for them 
premium prices (Pigram,1996; Archer,1996; Thomas, 1992; Garrod and Willis, 1992; Laarman, and 
Gregersen, 1996). Hence, local resources become a central asset for destinations and tourism 
suppliers and their sustainability a core function of tourism marketing. Middleton and Hawkins 
(1998,p.8) state that “a marketing perspective is essentially an overall management orientation 
reflecting corporate attitudes that, in the case of travel and tourism, must balance the interests of 
shareholders/owners with the long-run environmental interests of a destination and at the same 
time meet the demands and expectations of customers”. 
 
DMOs tend to be part of the local, regional or national government and have political and 
legislative power as well as the financial means to manage resources rationally and to ensure that 
all stakeholders can benefit in the long term. Destination management and marketing should act as 
tools and facilitators to achieve a complex range of strategic objectives, which will ultimately need 
to satisfy the needs and wants of stakeholders. Four key generic strategic objectives should be 
addressed by DMOs, as illustrated in Table 2. Figure 1 demonstrates the dynamic wheel of tourism 
stakeholders. The development and implementation of strategic objectives at destinations depends 
on relationships between stakeholders and thus the implementation of the key generic strategic 
objectives illustrated in Table 2 will be determined by the dynamics of the actors on this wheel. 
Naturally each stakeholder aims to maximise the benefits emerging for themselves. Inevitably, the 
interests of some stakeholders may be conflicting with others and thus some of the four key 
strategic objectives may be jeopardised. This is often a result of some stakeholder trying to 
enhance its benefit at the expense of others. For example a tour operator may try to reduce the 
prices paid to local suppliers in order to increase its profit margin and remain competitive in the 
marketplace. It is imperative, therefore, for DMOs to use legislative and management tools during 
planning and management of destinations in order to ensure that the benefits of tourism activity is 
shared fairly between all stakeholders and that sustainable practices safeguard the regeneration of 
resources utilised for the production of tourism (Buhalis,1995; Buhalis and Fletcher,1995; Sautter 
and Leisen, 1999). Failure to ensure and maintain a balance effectively jeopardises relationships 
between stakeholders, and threatens the achievement of the strategic objectives and the long term 
competitiveness and prosperity of destinations.  
 
Table 2: Strategic management and marketing objectives for destinations 
 

Enhance the long term prosperity of local people 

Delight visitors by maximising their satisfaction 

Maximise profitability of local enterprises and maximise multiplier effects 

Optimise tourism impacts by ensuring a sustainable balance between economic benefits 
and socio-cultural and environmental costs 
Figure1 : The dynamic wheel of tourism stakeholders 


----- Page 8 (native text) -----
4
Source: Adapted from Buhalis and Fletcher, 1995. 
 
Hence, tourism marketing should not only be regarded as a tool for attracting more visitors to a 
region, as it has been the case for most destinations. Instead, tourism marketing should operate as 
a mechanism to facilitate regional development objectives and to rationalise the provision of 
tourism in order to ensure that the strategic objectives of destinations are achieved. Tourism 
marketing should also ensure equitable returns-on-resources-utilised for the production and 
delivery of tourism products, as well as the regeneration of these resources. It should also provide 
suitable gains to all stakeholders involved in the tourism system. Hence, marketing should be used 
as a strategic mechanism in co-ordination with planning and management rather than a sales tool.  
Destinations may also involve de-marketing, i.e. the discouragement of certain market segments 
from visiting the destination during certain periods, through a range of prohibitive measures or by 
charging premium prices. Examples of these techniques include:  
♦
visitor management techniques in theme parks which divert people from congested attractions 
to less busy ones by using a leading story/attraction;  
♦
towns like Cambridge, which aims to attract only visitors who stay overnight and to discourage 
excursionists who contribute little to the local economy by controlling their parking processes;  
♦
Mauritius which provides high quality resort accommodation and does not allow charter flights, 
therefore promoting high expenditure tourism; or  
♦
Venice, which deters more visitors by charging premium prices for all services offered and 
recently initiated negative advertisement to reduce mass tourism.  
In this way marketing is used as a mechanism to achieve strategic objectives of destination regions 
and thus, should be guided by the policies for regional development. 
Interests & 
benefits 
----------------------- 
Responsibilities 
Tourism 
Enterprises 
and SMTEs 
Tour 
Operators 
Public 
Sector and 
government 
Tourists 
Host 
population 


----- Page 9 (native text) -----
5
4 Main markets and destination choice 
 
Understanding destination types and characteristics is of paramount importance for its marketing. 
Each destination can only match certain types of demand and hence tourism marketers need to 
appreciate travel motivations in order to develop appropriate offerings and brand destinations for 
the right target markets. In addition, destinations should be aware not only of the needs and wants 
of the active demand but also of the potential markets they can attract. It can then develop a 
product portfolio, which will enable the optimisation of benefits and adapt their marketing mix to 
their target markets (McKercher,1995, Tribe,1997). Consumer behaviour studies indicate that a 
wide range of criteria is used to select tourism products. These criteria are altered according to the 
purpose and features of the trip, elements of the external environment, the characteristics of the 
traveller and the particularities and attributes of destinations. Several analysts have examined 
tourism consumer behaviour in detail (Gilbert, 1991 and 1993; Swarbrooke and Horner, 1999; 
Goodall, 1988 and 1991; Kent,1991; Mansfeld,1995; Mayo and Jarvis, 1981; Sirakaya et al, 1996; 
Mazanec, 1989; Mazanec, and Zins, 1994; Moutinho, 1987, Ryan, 1997, Woodside, and Lysonski, 
1989). 
 
Classifying travel behavior and segmentation becomes increasingly more difficult as modern travelers 
combine pleasure with business, in order to take time and cost advantage. There are therefore 
endless variations between the two principle classifications of travel activities, i.e. business and leisure 
trips. However, leisure trips may include elements, characteristics and motivations of business travel 
and vice versa. Incentive travelling, extended conference stays and business meetings during leisure 
travel makes the distinction between the two categories increasingly blurred. Nevertheless the two 
principle categories are fairly identifiable and they are treated differently in this text for simplifying the 
concepts and marketing responses. 
 
Business trips are fairly inflexible and it is often difficult for travelers to select their destinations. 
Business travel, often referred to as MICE (Meetings-Incentives-Conferences-Exhibitions), is normally 
determined by business opportunities and involvement of the traveler with organisations at the 
destination. Perhaps more flexibility can be exercised by travelers attending optional meetings, which 
provide benefits but are not strictly essential to their business such as conferences, exhibitions, 
incentives, familiarization trips etc (Davidson 1994). Even though business tourism is much more 
restricted in terms of choice, destinations providing a high degree of efficiency and safety, as well as 
elegance and leisure opportunities tend to be preferred for conferences and incentive travel. Business 
travel is seasonal, as people do not generally travel less during the holiday seasons, i.e. summer 
months and public holidays. Nevertheless, business tourism provide much higher revenue for 
enterprises as consumers are willing to pay more for their inflexible schedules and also destinations 
can increase their multiplier effects as some particular forms of business tourism use a much greater 
spectrum of local services than leisure tourism. Convenient transportation connections with major 
cities around the world, smooth arrangements at the destination and adequate provision of business 
related amenities are therefore very important. Urban destinations in developed countries with strong 
economic activity and vibrant markets tend to receive the majority of business traffic, as a result of the 
business meetings taking place locally. The location of meeting partners, host organisations, as well 
as company policy may determine the selection of destinations for business travel. In addition, 
corporate rates, membership of loyalty clubs (i.e. frequent flyer or frequent guest) as well as the 
availability of service providers are some additional criteria used to identify suitable destinations and 
service providers for the MICE market (O’Brien,1998, BTA,1999;Vlitos-Rowe, 1994). 
 
Leisure travelers, on the other hand, use a much more complex set of criteria in selecting their 
destination. They have a much higher price elasticity and therefore, price is a key element in the 
decision making process (Gilbert, 1991 and 1993; Swarbrooke and Horner, 1999; Goodall, 1988 and 
1991; Mayo and Jarvis, 1981). In addition, leisure travelers are often time sensitive as families with 
children cannot travel during school time, creating the seasonality problem for the industry. However, 
different market segments have dissimilar seasonality patterns. For example, pensioners and elderly 
people tend to travel during the low season to benefit from discounts, whilst Scandinavian tourists 
tend to stay home during the summer months in order to enjoy the whether. School children and 


----- Page 10 (native text) -----
6
University students go on field research trips or excursions during the low season. Therefore, 
destinations have to identify the seasonality patterns of their various markets and attract compatible 
segments, which will enable them to maximise their total yield (both average expenditure and 
occupancy levels) (O’Brien, 1996). It is also important to understand other factors that influence the 
decision of consumers to purchase. The social status and peer groups of consumers often influence 
what is acceptable and desirable as a destination. Travel intermediaries also play a significant role in 
determining the destination decision of consumers by using a wide range of promotional techniques 
and often channeling travelers to destinations and principals who offer higher remuneration for them. 
This will also enable destinations to manage their resources according and attract the right market 
segments in order to optimize their impacts.  
 
Nevertheless for both leisure and business markets, perhaps the most important criterion for selecting 
to visit or not to visit a destination is its image. Image is the set of expectations and perceptions a 
prospective traveler has of a destination. Past experience of the destination or the companies involved 
(i.e. airlines, hotels, tour operators); descriptions by friends and relatives; general information; and 
marketing campaigns develop these expectations and perception which may be true or imaginary 
representations. (Baloglu and Brinberg, 1997; Chon,1991 and 1992; Chacko, 1997). Interestingly, 
the sustainability of local resources becomes one of the most important elements of destination 
image, as a growing section of the market is not prepared to tolerate over-developed tourism 
destinations and diverts to more environmentally advanced regions. The degree of consumer 
satisfaction will depend on the assessment of the perceived overall experience of the destination 
versus anticipated expectations and perceptions. Developing the right image for destinations will 
therefore determine their ability to satisfy visitors as it will allow them to develop realistic and fulfil-able 
expectations (Morgan and Pritchard, 1998; Seaton,1997;Pearce,1997).  
 
5. Types of destinations, target markets and marketing strategies required 
 
Developing a destination typology is a difficult task, as different visitors use destinations for 
different purposes. Nevertheless most destinations can be classified in several categories which 
represent their principle attractiveness, as illustrated in Table 3. Understanding and appreciating 
the type of destination enables marketers to develop a suitable destination marketing mixes and 
deliver them to the appropriate target markets. 
 
Urban destinations have been involved in tourism since the early years of the civilisation. People 
used to travel to cities and towns to meet politicians and business associates. Sports 
organisations, such as the Olympic Games in ancient Greece also generated tourism activity in 
main cities. People also travelled to cities on pilgrimage for religious purposes, as this is where all 
major cathedrals, mosques and temples were usually located. Urban destinations have also been 
attracting business travellers attending meetings, conferences and exhibitions. Most urban 
destinations are well equipped with conference and exhibition halls and transportation and 
accommodation infrastructure to facilitate the organisation of larger events. Urban destinations also 
attract leisure travellers, especially during periods of low business travelling activity, such as 
weekends and school holidays. Suppliers and facilities aim to reduce seasonality by developing the 
number of leisure visitors, despite the fact that they can only charge a fraction of the price they 
charge business travellers. On the other hand, leisure travellers can take advantage of some of the 
unique facilities and services of urban destinations to enjoy short-breaks or extended weekends. 
London for example provides a wide range of heritage attractions as well as a wide range of 
entertainment opportunities such as theatre, concerts, bars, theme restaurants, discos etc. 
Barcelona offers excellent conference facilities, combined with a culturally interesting and relaxed 
atmosphere. New York is highly regarded for shopping, sight seeing and theatre going. Urban 
destinations also attract education and health tourists, as they are generally equipped with good 
educational establishments and hospitals. Increasingly urban resorts take advantage of their 
industrial heritage and use obsolete industrial sites as educational experiences and leisure 
facilities. The Docklands in Liverpool and coal mines in Skipton are good examples of these 
facilities (Berg, et al, 1995, Law, 1996, and 1993, Page, 1994; Mazanec, 1997). 
 


----- Page 11 (native text) -----
7
Table 3: Types of destinations-Main target markets and activities undertaken 
Type 
of 
Destination  
Customers 
Activities 
Business-MICE 
Meetings-Incentives-Conference-Exhibitions 
Education-Religion-Health 
Urban 
 
Leisure 
Sightseeing-Shopping-Shows-Short breaks 
Business-MICE 
Meetings-Incentives-Conference-Exhibitions 
Seaside 
Leisure 
Sea-Sun-Sand-Sex-Sports 
Business-MICE 
Meetings-Incentives-Conference-Exhibitions 
Alpine 
Leisure 
Ski-Mountain Sports-Health- 
Business-MICE 
Meetings-Incentives-Conference-Exhibitions 
Rural 
Leisure 
Relaxation-Agriculture-Learning activities-Sports 
Business-MICE 
Exploring business opportunities-Incentives 
Authentic 
Third World 
Leisure 
Adventure-Authentic-Charities-Special interest 
Business-MICE 
Meetings-Incentives-Retreats 
Unique-Exotic- 
Exclusive 
Leisure 
Special occasion-Honeymoon-Anniversary 
Seaside destinations and resorts traditionally serve tourists on holidays. Travellers from 
Northern regions and climates tend to spend a proportion of their annual holiday in the South 
where they can enjoy sunshine as well as sea sports. Seaside resorts nearby the place of 
residence were replaced by international destinations as a result of the emergence of mass 
tourism since the 1970s. For example, in the UK traditional resorts such Blackpool, Scarborough, 
Bournemouth and Brighton were replaced by the Spanish Costas through the development of 
package holidays. Typically European leisure travellers will take their annual holiday at 
Mediterranean seaside resorts, whilst Northern Americans visit Southern regions such as Florida, 
California and the Caribbean. As the product in traditional seaside resorts matures, new long haul 
and exotic destinations, often in less developed countries attract sophisticated travellers who are 
looking for authentic and off-the-track experiences. The globalisation experienced reduces 
distances and enables people to travel further afield. Examples include destinations such as Goa 
and Bali which take advantage of developments in transportation and attract travellers. Examples 
of seaside destinations and resorts can be identified globally (see for example Jenner, and Smith, 
1993; Gayle and Goodrich, 1993; Lockhart and Drakakis-Smith, 1997; Morgan,1995; Briguglio, 
Archer, et al, 1996; Brigulio, Butler, et al, 1996; Shaw and Williams, 1997; Conlin, and Baum, 1995; 
Towner and Newton, 1996). 
 
Alpine destinations attract leisure travellers for winter sports, such as skiing, as well as 
holidaymakers who appreciate natural attractions in all seasons. They also attract activity 
holidaymakers such as naturalists, mountain cyclists, walkers etc. Although the majority of alpine 
sports are for recreational purposes a wide range of expeditions and challenges are organised for 
mountains such as the Everest or the Alps. Lakes may also offer facilities for sea sports such as 
surfing and skiing. Although the majority of alpine resorts are in near proximity to urban centres 
and thus can easily be accessed by private car, several are still unexplored and offer authentic 
experiences for travellers. Lakes and scenic landscapes make alpine resorts increasingly more 
popular for conference and incentive tourists and thus a certain business travelling activity can be 
observed in the last few years. The development of important business, political and economic 
meetings, such as the Davos Forum, attract a new market segment and expand the season for 
winter resorts. As a result a wide range of marketing and planning implications emerge to allow 
alpine areas to benefit from tourism and yet to ensure the sustainability of their resources 
(Johnston and Edwards, 1994; Weiermair, 1993; Khan, 1994). 
Rural tourism is also developing rapidly. Farmers and rural populations take advantage of the 
desire of travellers to go back to nature and experience some authentic agricultural processes. 
Hence agricultural facilities are often transformed to leisure activities. Tourism is regarded as a 
development tool for several regions where their agriculture declines steadily or where people 
would like to diversify their living and working patterns. Tourists can stay in rural areas and 
contribute to agricultural activities taking place or assume a more passive role. There is an 


----- Page 12 (native text) -----
8
educational element to this activity particularly for children from urban centres who may have never 
experience agricultural life. Rural tourism can also be themed according to the activities 
undertaken, such as cooking or bee-keeping schools organised in rural regions. Examples of this 
form of tourism can be identified globally (Page and Getz, 1997, Sharpley and Sharpley, 1997 
Oppermann, 1996). 
 
Destinations in authentic (often Third World) countries are often off the beaten track. Tourists 
enjoy authentic experiences in places which have experienced limited tourism development. 
Emerging destinations in Asia, South America and Africa attract a small number of adventurous 
tourists who are prepared to forego their comfort in order to interact with local communities and 
unspoiled surroundings. Although these regions may develop at a later stage to mass tourism 
destinations, they need to be planned properly in order to sustain their resources. They often lack 
the required infrastructure to deliver tourism services (Silver,1993; Hughes, 1995; Sofield, 1991). 
 
Finally certain destinations are branded unique-exotic-exclusive as they are regarded to offer a 
unique and precious experience. As a result, these destinations are promoted as “one-in-a-life-
time” experience and they are promoted premium prices. Examples include Bhutan, Mauritius, and 
Seychelles. In some destinations, there are several mechanisms controlling the number of visitors, 
often through managing their transportation and accommodating capacity or immigration 
procedures and visa allowances. These destinations focus on the non-charter and non-mass 
traveller reducing their visitation but maximising their income per visitor. They often epitomise the 
dream of the average traveller and thus are packaged and priced as prestigious products, for 
instance for weddings, honeymoons, anniversaries or a special occasion trip, or for incentive 
travel. 
 
6. Marketing research: identifying market segments for destination products 
 
Marketing research is used extensively by destination marketers to identify the types of customers 
that can be attracted (active demand), as well as the prospective visitors (suppressed demand) 
who do not visit for a variety of reasons (Athiyaman, 1997). Approaching the right target market 
and providing the most appropriate combination of local tourism products and services is the secret 
for successful destinations. Product design and formulation should therefore be based on research 
(Baker et al, 1994; Ritchie, 1996, Calantone and Mazanec, 1991;Hu and Ritchie,1993). As tourism 
bundles are formulated ad-hoc to satisfy specific consumer requests, a dynamic marketing 
research process will enable destinations to provide unique products by initiating local partnerships 
between all suppliers to address the needs of demand. Destination image is also developed 
through marketing research, which guides promotional activities towards branding and amending 
the brand values of the region. The effectiveness of promotional campaigns can be assessed so 
that the most cost-effective media is used to approach and persuade target markets to visit the 
destination (Woodside, 1990). Table 4 illustrates the contribution of marketing research to 
destination marketing. 
 
Table 4: Contribution of marketing research to destination marketing 
 

Identification of the main attributes anticipated by each market segment 

Design and attributes required for tourism products and services 

Evaluation and development of destination image 

Segmentation of market and development of corresponding marketing mixes 

Opening new markets and reducing dependency on existing ones 

Evaluation of the elasticity of demand for each market segment 

Reduction of seasonality by matching market segments 

Examination of reasons deterring people (suppressed demand) from visiting destinations 

Assessment of compatibility with other target markets 

Examination of alternative distribution channels 

Assessment of tourism impacts to the destination and selecting the right segments 

Evaluation of marketing effectiveness and selection of media for promotion 


----- Page 13 (native text) -----
9
Source: Adapted from Baker et al, 1994; Ritchie, 1996; Calantone and Mazanec, 1991. 
 
Marketing research should not be limited to before visitation investigations. As tourism demand is 
extremely dynamic, marketing research needs to follow constant developments to ensure that all 
elements of the destination marketing mix evolve continuously. Surveys during and after visitation 
enable destinations to identify weaknesses and concentrate their corrective action. Data is often 
collected by frontier controls, airports and transport authorities, national statistics offices, local 
councils, tax offices as well as principals such as hotels, travel agencies etc. The effectiveness of 
marketing research in destinations will depend on their ability to co-ordinate the research activities 
undertaken by the entire range of local authorities and organisations. It is therefore very important 
to co-ordinate all these surveys and data in order to produce meaningful inferences to inform and 
guide tourism policy and marketing strategies (March, 1994; Hawes et al, 1991). 
 
7. Marketing destinations: strategies and practices 
 
Developing a marketing strategy and mix for destinations is a complex process, mainly because 
there are many independent stakeholders and principals involved. Destinations cannot be 
managed or marketed as enterprises, due to the dynamics of interests and benefits sought by 
stakeholders. In addition, most destinations are amalgams of independent SMTEs, which already 
follow their own marketing strategies. Although DMOs have traditionally taken marketing 
responsibility for the destination product, they fail to control marketing activities and mixes of 
individual players and hence can only co-ordinate and guide, rather than undertake a 
comprehensive marketing strategy. Perhaps the most important challenge for destination 
marketing therefore is to bring all individual partners together to compete rather than to co-operate 
and to pool resources towards developing an integrated marketing mix and delivery system 
(Buhalis and Cooper,1998; Fayos-Sola, 1996). 
 
The international tourist industry is becoming an increasingly competitive marketplace where only 
the best-managed destinations are likely to prosper. Comprehensive strategic business plans 
therefore need to address all factors that have an impact on the product. Tourism strategies should 
not only concentrate on visitation, but also include the entire range of impacts such as 
overcrowding, environmental problems, visitor safety and security, seasonality problems, and 
sensitivity to local culture (Evans, et al 1995). This will enable destinations to develop 
comprehensive strategies to fulfil all strategic objectives illustrated in Table 2. 
 
7.1 The position of destinations and their marketing 
Perhaps one additional complication to tourism marketing is that in most cases destinations have 
already a rich history and legacy development which needs to be taken into consideration when 
developing tourism marketing strategies. Not only consumers develop certain images and views 
about places, but also previous development often provides several limits for marketing to address 
as well as stakeholders who need to be respected and consulted. Understanding therefore the stage 
and roots of tourism development is critical for development a strategy. One of the most widely used 
tools for undertaking this task is the destination life cycle (Butler, 1980). The main utility of the 
destination life cycle is to facilitate the understanding the evolution of tourist products and 
destinations and it to provide guidance for strategic decision taking. Cooper (1989, 1992 and 1994) 
suggests that the life cycle concept illustrates that destinations experience a “birth to death” cycle 
and that the life cycle model has gained attention in tourism and hospitality as an explanatory tool. 
Although in tourism life cycle analysis is often seen as a useful conceptualisation tool for 
destination area development, in hospitality management it is beginning to be used as a guide for 
strategic planning. However the main problems relate to identifying turning points, stages, length of 
stages and level of aggregation. Despite the many criticisms of the life cycle concept, it is quite 
critical for marketers to appreciate the stage of development of resort areas (Haywood, 1986). A 
number of researchers have used the cycle as a framework for analysing changing destinations 


----- Page 14 (native text) -----
10
(Agarwal, 1997; Shaw and Williams,1997; Formica and Uysal, 1996; Tooman, 1997; Douglas, 
1997; Choy, 1992; Getz, 1992; Ahmed and Krohn,1990; Cooper and Jackson, 1989).  
 
Based on the above literature, Figure 2 synthesises the different stages destinations are going 
through during their life cycle and illustrates how that effects their tourism impacts. This also 
illustrates that different stages of the life cycle require different marketing strategies and planning 
actions. This is largely due to the differences between demand and supply experienced at different 
levels. In the early stages demand exceeds supply whilst this relationship is reversed in the maturity 
and consolidation stages. As a result, marketing strategies should focus on building awareness and 
promoting the destination product on the early stages of the circle while they probably have to deal 
with image alteration and re-design and re-launch the product at the later stages. The entire 
marketing mix therefore will need to be differentiated to accommodate the needs of destinations at 
each stage of their life cycle. In addition, Figure 2 highlights that destinations experience different 
environmental and socio-cultural impacts during the different faces. As a result they need to use 
marketing to encourage sustainable practices for both consumers and industry as well as to 
communicate their environmental and socio-cultural policies.  


----- Page 15 (native text) -----
11
Figure 2: Destination life cycle and tourism impacts 
Impacts Analysis  
 
Introducti
on 
Growth  
Maturity 
Saturation 
Decline 
 
Life Cycle 
 
Supply 
 
Demand 
SITUATION 
 
New 
trendy 
destination 
More 
people 
interested 
Investment 
on 
accommodation 
& facilities 
Maximum 
visitation 
Increasing 
facilities 
Oversupply, 
Original demand 
moves 
Reduction 
of 
demand 
Special 
offers 
to 
boost visitation 
DESTINATION CHARACTERISTICS 
Visitor Number of Tourists 
Few 
Many 
Too Many 
Many 
Many 
Growth rate 
Low 
Fast growth 
Fast growth 
Slow growth 
Decline 
Accommodation Capacity 
Very low 
Low 
High 
Very High 
Very High 
Occupancy levels 
Low 
Very High 
Very High 
High 
Low 
Prices of Services 
High 
Very High 
High  
Low 
Very Low 
Expenditure per capita 
High 
Very High 
Very High 
Low 
Very Low 
Visitor types 
Drifters 
Innovators 
Innovators 
Followers 
Cheap-mass market 
Image and attractions 
Low 
Very High 
High 
Low 
Very Low 
Tourists are perceived as  
Guests 
Guests 
Customers 
Customers 
Foreigners 
MARKETING RESPONSE 
Marketing Target 
Awareness 
Inform 
Persuade 
Persuade 
Loyalty/new market 
Strategic Focus 
Expansion 
Penetration 
Defence 
Defence 
Reintroduce 
Marketing Expenditure 
Growing 
High  
High 
Falling 
Consolidate 
Product  
Basic 
Improved 
Good 
Deteriorates 
Decay 
Promotion 
Introduction 
Advertising 
Travel Trade 
Travel Trade 
Travel Trade 
Price 
High 
High 
Lower 
Low 
Below cost 
Distribution 
Independent 
Independent 
Travel Trade 
Travel Trade 
Travel Trade 
ECONOMIC IMPACTS 
Employment 
Low 
High 
Very High 
High 
Low 
Foreign Exchange 
Low 
Very High 
Very High 
High 
Low 
Profitability of private sector 
Negative 
Growing 
Very High 
High 
Decline 
Income of residents 
Low 
Very High 
Very High 
Low 
Very Low 
Investments 
Low 
Very High 
Very High 
Low 
Very Low 
State revenue & Taxes 
Low 
Very High 
Very High 
Low 
Very Low 
Economic Structure  
Balanced 
Tourism oriented 
Tourism 
dominated 
Tourism 
Depended 
Unbalanced and not 
self sufficient 
Dependency on intermediaries 
Negligible 
Low 
High 
Over-dependent 
Over-dependent 
Imports 
Low 
Very High  
Very High 
Very High 
High 
Inflation 
Low 
Very High  
Very High 
High 
Low 
SOCIAL IMPACTS 
Types of tourists 
Allocentrics 
Allocentrics 
Midcentrics 
Psychocentrics 
Psychocentrics 
Relationships between locals 
and tourists 
Euphoria 
Apathy 
Irritating 
Antagonism 
Final 
Demographics at destination 
Immigrations 
and 
Older 
residents 
Youth stays to 
work in tourism 
More balanced 
Balanced 
Balanced 
Immigrations as no 
jobs available and 
Older residents 
Migration to the destination 
Low 
High 
Very High 
High 
Low 
Crime at the destination 
Low 
High 
High 
Very High 
Very High 
Family structure 
Traditional  
Effected 
Modern 
Modern 
Modern 
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS 
Environment and landscape 
Unspoilt 
Improved 
No respect 
Polluted 
Damaged 
Conservation and heritage 
Unspoilt 
Improved 
No respect 
Decay 
Damaged 
Ecological disruption 
Unspoilt 
Improved 
No respect 
Decay 
Damaged 
Pollution related to tourism 
Negligible 
Low 
High 
Very High 
Very High 
Water pollution 
Negligible 
Low 
High 
Very High 
Very High 
Congestion and traffic 
Low 
Low 
Very High 
Very High 
Low 
Erosion 
Low 
High 
Very High 
Very High 
Very High 
It is evident, therefore, that different destinations are affected in a dissimilar pattern on each stage 
of their life cycle and as a consequence they require specific marketing action. For example 
Northern European coastal resorts have experienced declining visitor numbers and decay which 


----- Page 16 (native text) -----
12
has resulted to alteration of main use of facilities as well as a concentration on few expanding 
markets (e.g. senior citizens, conferences and language schools). In contrast, the majority of 
coastal regions in Southern Europe face a decline of tourism benefits, rather than numbers of 
visitors as a result of their progression from one stage of the cycle to the next one. Paradoxically in 
most cases the number of visitors increase mainly due to the price reductions used to stimulate 
demand. Established mass tourism destinations, such as Benidorm, use a high volume low profit 
margin strategy to ensure their profitability and they are successful in increasing their visitors. 
However unless carefully managed any increase of visitors deteriorates local resources further and 
pushes destinations in greater decline, which forces to further price reductions and further quality 
decrease. This is a vicious circle which eventually makes the purpose and benefit of the entire 
tourism activity at the destination questionable. Clearly therefore resorts will need to take into 
consideration the phase of development there are in as well as the patterns of destination life cycle 
experienced in competing destinations and adopt their strategic marketing accordingly. 
 
7.2 Strategic marketing for destinations and strengthening their competitiveness 
Competitive strategy "is the search for a favourable competitive position in an industry". This is a 
function of both the attractiveness of the industry and the relative competitive position within that 
particular industry, as well as alternative activities that an organisation can undertake. "Competitive 
strategy aims to establish a profitable and sustainable position against the forces that determine 
industry competition" (Porter,1985). Competitiveness is, therefore, defined here as the effort and 
achievement of long term profitability, above the average of the particular industry within which they 
operate as well as above alternative investment opportunities in other industries. This definition 
includes therefore the concept of opportunity cost and illustrates that successful organisations should 
not only compete within their particular industry but also against other investment opportunities. 
When referring to tourism destinations competitiveness should also include the sustainability of local 
resources for ensuring the maintenance of long term success as well as the achievement of 
equitable returns-on-resources utilised to satisfy all stakeholders. 
 
There is little written about the competitiveness of tourism destinations. Bordas (1994a and 1994b) 
has developed several frameworks which determine destination competitiveness. They are based on 
demand and supply as well as a wide range of factors influenced by the external environment of the 
destination. Ritchie and Crouch (1993) have developed a comprehensive model for tourism 
organisations, as illustrated in Figure 3, which can be analysed further to include the entire range of 
factors affecting the competitiveness of destinations.  
 
Figure 3: Ritchie and Crouch model for tourism destination competitiveness 
Destination prosperity = fn Competitiveness (Sector 1, Sector 2, tourism…) 
Tourism  
Competitiveness = 
 
Fn 
{destination appeal (attractiveness and deterrents)} 
 
{destination management (marketing and managerial efforts)} 
 
{destination organisation (DMO capabilities, strategic alliances 
 
{destination information (internal management information system,  
 
research capabilities)} 
 
{destination efficiency (integrity of experience, productivity) 
Source: Adapted from Ritchie and Crouch, 1993. 
 
The framework explains that the prosperity of destination depends on the competitiveness of all 
economic sectors as well as the competitiveness of tourism. A further analysis illustrates the 
competitiveness of tourism is a function of several factors related to destination administration. A 
wide range of elements are included in the model illustrating that tourism is affected by an endless 
number of factors in its internal and external environment. Although the model fails to rate the 
importance of each of the elements examined, it is suggested that a dissimilar rating should be 
adopted by different destinations depending on the types of markets they attract, their life cycle stage 
and specific characteristics. Nevertheless the contribution of the Ritchie and Crouch lies on the 
comprehensiveness and wideness of the elements taken into consideration. The model also 
highlights that it is the combination of all factors comprising the competitiveness of destinations as 


----- Page 17 (native text) -----
13
well as synergies between these elements that determine the attractiveness of a region. Perhaps 
future research will attach ratings to each factor for specific types of destination and also illustrate 
potential tradeoffs that consumers may consider. Consumers may be willing to compromise some 
elements for some others, for example overcrowdness for cheaper price in some Spanish Costas. 
Understanding the values and prime aims would be critical for developing the module further. 
Ultimately the competitiveness of destinations depends on their ability to maximise their performance 
for each individual element assessed. 
 
7.3 Strategy formulation for destinations 
This paper reviews three strategy models, namely Porter's generic strategies, Gilbert's proposition for 
"differentiation of the destination" and Poon's analysis for "flexible specialisation". The paper then 
synthesises their propositions in order to propose a generic strategy and illustrate how destinations 
should develop their offerings.  
 
7.3.1 Porter’s generic strategies 
 
Figure 4 illustrates the three main strategies proposed by Porter (1980) aimed to "outperform other 
firms in an industry", i.e.:  

Overall cost leadership, where organisations are required to minimise their costs, based on 
mass production and strict cost control of the main business functions;  

differentiation of products or services offered by "creating something that is perceived industry-
wide as being unique";  

focus on a "particular buyer group, segment of the product line or geographical market" and 
achieve either cost leadership or product differentiation.  
 
Figure 4 Porter's three generic strategies 
STRATEGIC ADVANTAGE 
Perceived product uniqueness 
Cost advantage 
TARGET 
MARKET 
Industry 
wide 
• Differentiation 
• Cost Leadership 
Particular 
segments 
only 
• Differentiation Focus 
• Cost Focus 
Source: Adapted from Porter, 1980, p.39. 
 
This is well-developed generic model, which is widely used to all industries. It provides clear 
guidance for decision makers to position their products in order to maximise profitability and improve 
their competitiveness. However, this model fails to address the specific needs of tourism and in 
particular the scarcity of resources at the destination level. Therefore, similarly with commodities this 
model suggests unlimited resources are available to reproduce endless number of products. This is 
particularly the case for the cost leadership strategy where organisations are urged to increase their 
volume and to reduce their profit margin. Unfortunately environmental resources, both natural (e.g. 
coral reefs or mountain landscapes) and man-made (e.g. archaeological sites or architectural 
structures) have a limited capacity which they can accommodate. Resources in tourism are 
irreplaceable once destroyed and therefore a strategy should ensure that their use is limited to the 
degree that does not threat their sustainability in the long term. Once this is understood and 
appreciated, Porter’s model enables tourism marketers to focus on differentiation strategies and to 
develop their mix accordingly. However, several destinations, which are on the consolidation phase 
of their life cycle, have exceeded the maximum capacity which would have enabled them to sustain 
their resources. Their ability to promote differentiated tourism products has also been jeopardised, as 
over-development has exploited and damaged their resources. This is experienced in some mass 
tourism destinations, such as Benidorm and Costa Brava in Spain, or Faliraki and Malia in Greece. 


----- Page 18 (native text) -----
14
Once destinations have reached that stage there is limited choice. The majority try to attract more 
mass tourism so they can increase their profitability through volume. Increasingly however some 
regions aim to renovate their properties and facilities and re-launch their offerings. The Calvia 
example in Mallorca, which decided to demolish three hotels in order to improve public areas and to 
enhance the quality of its products set new best practices which may be followed by other regions. 
 
7.3.2 Gilbert’s strategic framework 
 
Based on the above rational the second strategic framework introduced by Gilbert (1984 and 1990b) 
argues that destinations can classified on a continuum between a “status” and a “commodity” area, 
as illustrated in Figure 5.. "Status areas" achieve intentional demand as a result of the unique 
product attributes perceived by the tourism market. These unique attributes may be genuine or 
imaginative and thus, a destination is regarded as irreplaceable, which increases consumers' loyalty 
and willingness to pay. In the “commodity status” case, destinations are substitutable, very sensitive 
to price and economic changes, while consumers have a low awareness of any unique benefits or 
attributes. Thus, travellers base their decision to visit the area merely on price, while the demand for 
the destination is incidental and destinations are unable to attract high spenders. Despite the fact that 
the sustainability of resources is not discussed explicitly by the model, it is quite evident that “status 
areas” manage their resources as product attributes and therefore are appreciated by consumers 
who are willing to pay more. 
 
Figure 5: Gilbert's differentiation strategy 
 
Source: Adapted from Gilbert, 1990, p.25 
 
Gilbert (1990) asserts that destinations should attempt to become "status areas", rather than a 
"commodity area" one, in order to improve their image, loyalty and economic benefits. It is suggested 
that destinations should differentiate their tourism products in order to achieve a unique "tourist 
product benefit". This will enable them to establish their position in the international market, and 
attract both high spenders and loyal tourists, who appreciate the uniqueness of their resources and 
offerings. Although the model clearly differentiates destinations to distinctive categories it fails to 
recognise that the majority of destinations lay between the two ends of the continuum. It also fails to 
relate to the different stages of the life cycle and to the inevitability experienced in several regions 
where destinations are launched as status areas and gradually slip to commodity status 
(Buhalis,1999a). Nevertheless the model clearly contributes to tourism marketing by correlating 
product attributes with willingness to pay and also by illustrating clearly that destinations should 
decide on what direction they should plan and manage their resources and facilities.  
 
7.3.3 Poon’s flexible specialisation  
 
A third strategic approach for tourism is proposed by Poon (1989 and 1993), based on the concept of 
"flexible specialisation" of the tourism business. Poon examines the tourism industry processes and 
proposes a strategy to enable tourism organisations to improve their competitiveness. Poon argues 
that "flexible specialisation" is a strategy of "permanent innovation" and "ceaseless change" which 
provides for "new tourism". New tourism is flexible, segmented, customised to the tourist's needs and 
diagonally integrated. In contrast, old tourism can be characterised as "mass, standardised and 
Commodity
Area 
Status 
area 
Willingness to 
pay higher prices 
Status 
Area 
Product attributes 
Product attributes 
Commodity
Area 


----- Page 19 (native text) -----
15
rigidly packaged". "The main sources of flexibility for service firms lie in the organisation, 
management, marketing, distribution and other forms of interaction and interrelationships among 
guests, hotels, suppliers, distributors. What is important however is not each of these stand-alone 
aspects but how they are coupled to create competitive advantages and hence, capabilities to move 
with the market" (Poon, 1993). This is a timely model, which predicted the impact of information 
technology on the both decision making and consumer behaviour. Industry innovation is critical in 
this strategy and the utilisation of new technology provides the opportunity to customise products 
according to customers’ specific requirements. Hence destinations can organise their assets and 
attributes in such a way which will enable them to specialise their tourism product according to 
particular demand needs.  
 
Although Poon’s model revolutionised tourism thinking it is still difficult to implement at the 
destination level. The majority of infrastructure and superstructure is based on fixed assets, which 
cannot be altered easily and therefore they have a limited degree of flexibility. This is more evident at 
destinations at the consolidation stages, which are unable to reinvent themselves and approach new 
markets. Nevertheless, the model clearly contributes to the field by encouraging tourism 
organisations and destinations to challenge existing strategies and practices and to forcing them to 
approach new tourism with new tools introduced by technology. Concentrating on core functions and 
outsourcing all peripheral activities to networks of virtual co-operations should enable destinations 
and enterprises to innovate and to adapt to the needs of consumers constantly. 
 
7.3.4 Synthesis of strategic frameworks and lessons for strategic destination marketing 
 
The discussion of the three models provides several interesting lessons. A close examination of 
strategies reveals that they share a similar base. Porter's "differentiation", Gilbert's "status area" and 
Poon's "flexible specialisation" describe how firms and destinations can achieve value competitive 
advantages. Consumers appreciate special attributes and values and as a result they are inclined to 
visit areas more regularly, to increase their loyalty and to pay higher prices. In contrast, "cost 
leadership", "commodity area" and "standardisation or the “Fordism production model" describe the 
efforts of firms or destinations to achieve "cost competitive advantage" by offering their products for 
less than their competitors. This is achieved through economies of scale, standardisation and mass 
production. Destinations and tourism products are treated as commodities and decisions are merely 
based on price. Hence the underlying concept of the two alternative strategies is the relationship 
between volume and price. The first set of strategies supports a "low volume-high profit margin" 
approach, where each consumer is paying premium prices for unique products, whilst the second set 
of strategies follows a "high volume-low profit margin" approach. 
 
Tourism destinations should avoid the cost advantage strategies as they are based on mass 
production and consumption and assume unlimited production capacity and resources. The 
inseparability of the tourism product determines that consumers should be present at the time of 
product delivery. Therefore, the interaction of consumers with socio-cultural and environmental 
scarce resources can decay the very reasons, which attract people to places. Seasonality also 
generates demand peaks and inflates the problem during certain periods every year. Although 
economic benefits can also be achieved by using the "commodity area" or the "standard product 
model", it is argued that on the long term these approaches reduce tourist satisfaction, consumer 
willingness to pay, and are against demand trends. In addition, the "high volume-low profit margins" 
strategy has catastrophic social and environmental impacts on destinations. As a result, not only their 
sustainability may be jeopardised but also the competitiveness of the region as a whole. Effectively 
these strategies push destinations through their life cycle stages and force them to reach their 
consolidation stage. Destinations therefore should define and not exceed their carrying capacities in 
order to sustain their resources and at the same avoid jeopardising consumers satisfaction. 
 
This is reflected on both Gilbert and Poon’s strategies which agree that destinations should aim to 
achieve a "status area" or “niche” orientation through differentiation, in order to increase consumer 
satisfaction as well as to maximise the benefits for tourism regions. This strategy is already adopted 
in several resort areas, such as Valencia in Spain, where it is recognised that the need for 
diversification and differentiation "has now become essential owing to the level of competitiveness 


----- Page 20 (native text) -----
16
that has been attained (and can be foreseen) in the world tourist market" (Fayos-Sola, 1992). It is 
also particularly useful for insular, peripheral and remote destinations, where a limited number of 
economic and financial resources are available. However, this strategy should not serve as an 
excuse for principals at destinations for not improving their efficiency and minimising their production 
costs. Although providing unique service to satisfy tourist needs should be their priority, offering 
perceived value for money would determine their competitiveness in the marketplace (Murphy and 
Pritchard, 1997). As most destinations consist of networks of tourism suppliers and principals, there 
is much overlapping between the strategic orientation followed at the macro and micro level. Hence a 
close collaboration between the private and public sector is required. Destinations and enterprises 
following a "status area" strategy would probably enhance tourists' satisfaction, as well as their 
competitiveness. The formulation of unique and customised products by using flexibility and co-
operation will also increase tourists' willingness to pay and their loyalty, while responding to new 
tourism demand trends.  
 
Unfortunately, some destinations can no longer be positioned as irreplaceable unique products, due 
to over-development and degradation of their resources. Tourism supply has exceeded their carrying 
capacity and they have reached the saturation or decline phases of their life cycle. For example 
several Mediterranean "costas" have been overdeveloped to such an extent that only a high-volume, 
low-profit margin orientation is feasible. When resorts reach their saturation level only a "cost 
leadership" or "mass production" strategy can be employed, as they are unable to provide any 
specific "tourist product benefit". The attraction of the lower end of the market is inevitable and as a 
consequence, there are no alternative strategies. In this case the minimisation of further social and 
environmental damages as well as attempts to improve the surrounding environment should also be 
the primary objective.  
 
In addition, a re-positioning of the product can also be attempted although it is quite difficult to alter 
the image of destinations. For example the Calvia Municipality in Mallorca has implemented a 
dynamic plan for enhancing the quality of the tourism offering through the enhancement of the 
landscape and the regeneration of environmental resources. As a result, intentional demand has 
increased and a higher willingness to pay is experienced, increasing the profitability of the private 
sector and boosting the economic impacts of tourism. Another successful example of destination 
management and marketing is also Las Vegas. Although it has not yet on the maturity level, the local 
industry constantly undertakes initiatives to reinvent and reposition itself. They diversified their target 
markets by developing theme parks within major hotels in order to attract families and young 
children. Several new hotels open every year while older properties are being renovated, often by 
demolishing properties and rebuilding them. The “old strip” was also relaunched to attract visitors 
from the new hotels and casinos. 
 
8 Destination marketing mix 
 
Once a tourism management and marketing strategy has been decided destinations will have to 
develop their marketing mix. This will enable them to approach each target market with a 
comprehensive range of offerings and to propose an integrated solution to consumer needs and 
wants. Developing a marketing mix for destinations will depend on each destination, the types of 
target markets and a whole range of issues on the external environment. Nevertheless some 
principles need to be addressed and the following text illustrates examples and frameworks which 
can assist destination marketers to decide on the most appropriate marketing mixes.  
 
8.1 Formulating the destination product 
 
Destinations are amalgams of individually produced tourism amenities and services 
(accommodation, transportation, catering, entertainment etc) and a wide range of public goods 
(such as landscape, scenery, sea, lakes, socio-cultural surroundings, atmosphere etc). All these 
elements are branded together under the name of the destination. The ubiquity of the destination 
concept effectively means that the tourism product for each prospective traveller is very subjective 
and depends heavily on his/her image and expectations of the place. Nevertheless, the tourism 
product for a region consists of the entire range of facilities and services offered locally, plus all 


----- Page 21 (native text) -----
17
socio-cultural, environmental resources and public goods. Understanding the core product as well 
as the facilitating, supportive and augmented products for each target market is of paramount 
importance for destination marketing. The augmented environment will include intangible elements 
such as interaction and customer participation as well as accessibility and physical environment 
(Kotler et al,1996,p.276) 
 
DMOs have an overall responsibility for the entire destination product and through incentives and 
policies facilitate the development of products, which is desirable from the demand side, and at the 
same time does not jeopardise local resources. DMOs should therefore be the guardians of the 
image and resources of destinations. However, throughout the world tourism services are offered 
by small and medium tourism enterprises (SMTEs) which tend to be family managed. The 
challenge for destination management organisations is therefore to provide leadership in the 
development of innovative products and create local partnerships for the delivery of seamless 
experiences. These partnerships should bring together both private and public sector and should 
ensure that the long term competitiveness of the tourism product prevails all decision making 
processes (Buhalis and Cooper,1998).  
 
DMOs also need to enhance and differentiate their products by emphasising their 
uniqueness. Destination marketers often adopt a mass tourism orientation, because they falsely 
believe that tourism products can grow indefinitely. Hence, generic characteristics of destinations 
are frequently emphasised in all marketing campaigns as they attempt to attract too many target 
markets. Sun and sea dominate the promotion of Mediterranean destinations; exotic surroundings 
are emphasised for long haul destinations and skiing is offered by Alpine resorts. However, it is 
increasingly evident that new-sophisticated consumers seek authentic and unique experiences. 
They are also willing to pay a premium, but only if the product is significantly better than that of 
competitors. Hence, destinations will need to re-assess the entire range of their resources and 
identify suitable tourism products for each particular target market segment.  
 
Themed or alternative tourism enables destinations to provide unique experiences. For example, 
Greece could concentrate on its heritage and history and offer ancient/mythology experiences; Italy 
can develop culture/art/design/fashion/cuisine themes; Romania should explore the Dracula myth; 
and Bali should concentrate on the unique religious rituals and cultural traditions. Natural, 
agricultural, cultural, artistic, heritage, resources of destinations can be used accordingly. Tourism 
should also contribute to the preservation of these resources by increasing the awareness of both 
locals and visitors and by providing funds for the conservation and regeneration of resources. 
Attracting appropriate target market segments should also assist the reduction of seasonality, as 
special theme offerings, as well as festivals and events should enable destinations to increase their 
demand during the low season. For example, the renovation of physical features and natural 
resources on Mallorca, or the development of innovative new products such as Festivals and 
themed experiences (e.g. Edinburgh New Year’s Eve and summer festivals) also enable 
destinations to manage their product life cycle effectively. The aim is to maintain the destination to 
the maturity/consolidation stages and to avoid the stagnation, saturation and decline stages in their 
life cycle. 
 
8.2 Pricing the destination 
 
A wide range of pricing techniques are applicable to tourism destinations (Meidan, 1995; Kotler et 
al,1996). However, pricing is a difficult process for destinations as it is often determined by the 
pricing and marketing policies of individual enterprises both at the destination and distributors at 
the place of origin. Local suppliers can have their own policy and thus co-ordinating and 
establishing a destination wide pricing strategy is almost unachievable. Furthermore, national 
economic policies and economic conditions in the international marketplace also influence pricing. 
Therefore, both macro- and micro- economics determine the pricing function of tourism 
organisations locally and destinations. The cost of living and employment, as well as inflation, 
exchange rates and local efficiency and competition all contribute to the pricing equation. Tourism 
in Japan is inevitably much more expensive than tourism in Indonesia due to the differences 
between the two economies. Macroeconomic changes have great influence on the pricing of 


----- Page 22 (native text) -----
18
destination and the attraction of consumers. For instance, the depreciation of the Spanish Peseta 
and the Greek Drachma as well as the high inflation rate of the Turkish Lira have all determined 
the pricing of their destinations and have influenced their competitiveness (Edwards, 1993).  
 
Pricing the destination and all the individual elements of the local tourism product is a very complex 
process. Principals tend to have their own pricing mix and policies. DMOs can control elements of 
pricing through regulation, advice and through partnerships with the private sector. However, 
DMOs often provide guidelines by suggesting minimum prices to protect small suppliers from fierce 
competition and maximum prices to protect consumers from overcharging. For example, in several 
destinations the public sector determines the lowest price per category for accommodation, 
advises on the retail price of consumer goods and foods, set the maximum prices for transportation 
or taxi services. Although enforcing pricing policies is extremely difficult, destination managers 
should formulate partnerships with principals and train them on the importance of maintaining a 
fairly standardised pricing structure and policy.  
 
In several leisure destinations tour operators also play a critical role in determining the price 
consumers pay for products locally. This is has significant implications for destinations which 
depend on intermediaries (tour operators) for their clientele, and in particular for destinations which 
have an oversupply of facilities. Tour operators in Europe and especially the larger/mass/integrated 
operators, such as Airtours, Thomson, TUI, and Neckerman, exercise bargaining and coercive 
power because of the large volume of tourists they represent and reduce the prices of principals at 
destinations. This enables them to offer competitively priced products at their marketplace. 
However, as local suppliers may not be able to gain enough profit from the basic product (i.e. 
accommodation and transfers) they may need to overprice other element of the product (i.e. 
catering, entertainment, local excursions) in order to boost their profitability (Buhalis, 1999b). 
 
The higher the expenditure of tourists locally the better it is for destinations, as it increases the 
profitability of local enterprises and enhances the economic benefits. Consumers take into 
consideration the total cost of a trip, i.e. before, during and after their visit. In most cases they have 
not visited the destination before they purchase their travel product. Hence pricing plays an 
important role in determining the image of destinations. Perhaps the biggest travel expenditure is 
transport to and from the destination, especially for long haul trips, and thus can determine the 
willingness and ability of travellers to visit destinations. 
 
Destinations can only charge premium prices if they offer a unique experience. Venice for example 
profits from its unique product attributes and charges substantially higher prices than other Italian 
destinations. However, increasingly consumers are unimpressed by tourism facilities and products, 
as they have travelled extensively and have acquired a wealth of experiences. Global competition 
and oversupply, as well as the emergence of new destinations in third world countries with lower 
labour costs, generate frequent price wars especially for constrained capacity at the last minute. As 
a result, consumer are increasingly prepared to pay less for getting more. Nevertheless, it is 
important for consumers to perceive prices as fair and good value for money, because 
dissatisfaction damages the competitiveness of the destination. 
 
8.3 Distributing tourism destinations 
 
Distribution or marketing channels are defined as sets of interdependent organisations involved in the 
process of making a product or service available for use or consumption. The ultimate objective of 
distribution channel can be summarised as: delivering the right quality and quantity of a product, in the 
right place, at the right time, at the right cost, to the right customer. Several important distribution and 
marketing functions performed by channel members, such as: carrying of inventory; demand 
generation through promotion; market information collection and analysis; negotiation between channel 
members and consumers; physical possession and distribution; risk taking; payment and financial 
arrangements; and after-sale service. Distribution is emerging as a critical element of strategic 
management and as one of the few remaining sources of real competitive advantage. Apart from 
influencing costs, increasingly distribution channels also support and enable product differentiation by 


----- Page 23 (native text) -----
19
adding value on the product and by contributing to the total brand experience and projecting powerful 
images 
 
The entire range of players that bring together tourism demand and supply for a region formulate 
its distribution channel. Distribution of destinations becomes increasingly more important, not only 
because it is estimate to cost 20-30% of the product price but also because it determines whether 
and under what conditions suppliers can meet their target markets. This is the case especially in 
the European leisure market context as concentration has led four major companies to dominate 
the market. Business travellers have strict schedules and use intermediaries to organise their 
itineraries. In contrast, leisure travellers tend to have much greater flexibility and price elasticity. As 
a consequence, intermediaries can influence their decision and choice of destination.  
 
Business travellers can be influenced indirectly by people who are responsible for arranging 
business meetings and conferences. These include corporate travel officers and administrative 
staff in organisations who choose the location of meetings, as well as services suppliers. For 
destinations to attract business travellers they need to develop strong links with the local business 
and academic communities as well as with various types of associations. This will enable DMOs to 
appreciate the needs of business travellers and to provide convenient and adequate products. 
Often local associations, chambers, businesses or academics need to be closely involved in order 
to attract and arrange Meetings, Incentives, Conferences, and Exhibitions (MICE) at the 
destination. Consequently, relationships with business travel agencies as well as conference and 
exhibition organisers are important to attract and satisfy the MICE markets. 
 
Leisure travellers have a much wider choice and flexibility and therefore a different distribution 
strategy and mix are required. Domestic tourists usually make direct arrangements and often use 
their own transport, whereas international leisure travellers tend to be more influenced by 
intermediaries. Representation of destinations in tour operators’ brochures determines their ability 
to attract the appropriate volume and quality of consumers. Leisure travellers often require travel 
agencies advice on selecting appropriate destinations and products. Hence, destinations need to 
provide travel agencies with information and promotional material, as well as to organise 
educational trips and provide incentives for their staff in order to promote the destination to 
consumers. Workshops and road shows may also increase awareness and provide positive 
impressions. Travel trade manuals serve as reference books for intermediaries offering 
comprehensive information about destination regions. Developing long-term partnerships with tour 
operators and leisure travel agencies is therefore extremely significant for the success of leisure 
destinations.  
 
The concentration of the European tourism industry increases the power of certain integrated travel 
organisations. As a result, they increasingly control more than 70% of the market and can use a 
wide range of marketing techniques to determine consumer choice. Table 5 illustrates the 
penetration of the largest tour operating groups in the European market and clearly demonstrates 
that leisure movement in Europe is directed to a large extent by a small number of integrated tour 
operators (O’Brien, 1996; Bywater 1992 and 1997). Since then more concentration is experienced 
daily as operators merge to develop their volume and take advantage from economies of scale and 
negotiation power. In addition, a wide range of smaller specialised tour operators exists in each 
market promoting specialised products.  
 
Table 5: Penetration of the largest tour operator groups  
in the European leisure market in 1994/5 
Country 
Tour Operators 
Estimated market share 
United Kingdom 
Thomson/Airtours/First Choice 
58%
Belgium 
NUR (Neckerman) 
50%
Austria 
Touropa/ITAS/Ruefa/Kuoni/Neckerman 
45%
Scandinavia 
Airtours (Spies, Tjaereborg) 
43%
Ireland 
Budget/JWT (First Choice) 
40%
Germany 
TUI/NUR/LTT 
37%
Netherlands 
TUI (Holland International/Arke) 
30%


----- Page 24 (native text) -----
20
France 
Nouvelles Frontières/Club Med 
25%
Source: Adapted from O’Brien, 1996 and Bywater, 1997 and 1992 
 
Although, there is a concentration on leisure distribution channels, consumers become more 
independent and sophisticated and use the entire range of tools to arrange their travel. The 
availability of information on the Internet and the emergence of electronic intermediaries 
revolutionise distribution. Destinations that appreciate the new developments and build 
comprehensive tools for their local suppliers increasingly improve their ability to reach their 
strategic objectives. IT enables consumers to seek for information as well as construct and 
purchase individual itineraries on-line, and thus it revolutionised destination marketing. Not only do 
they provide opportunities for reducing dependency on traditional intermediaries for remote, 
peripheral and insular destinations but they also provide a mechanism to develop and promote 
specialised products for mini market segments (Buhalis, 1998).  
 
Electronic distribution also offers opportunities for closer interaction and co-operation at the local 
level. In several places where IT has been used extensively, such as Tyrol, Ireland and Singapore, 
an integration of local resources and organisations enables suppliers at the destination level to 
develop and deliver seamless tourism products to consumers. Destination Management Systems 
will need to be developed in order to enable the networking of all local tourism providers as well as 
a comprehensive and innovative interface between the destinations and their prospective and 
current clients (Buhalis, 1994 and 1997).  
 
8.4 Promoting the destination 
 
Promoting destinations essentially implies the development of communicating channels with 
clientele and other stakeholders to increase awareness and persuade to purchase products. 
Destination promotion requires a co-ordinated campaign and message for all local principals and 
suppliers. Designing a cost-effective promotional mix is difficult because of the diversity of tourism 
suppliers at destinations and the spread of consumers throughout the world. Achieving a 
consensus on the marketing campaign as well as raising adequate funds to develop and 
implement it is one of the most challenging tasks for destination marketing. Traditionally, DMOs 
lead promotional campaigns, whilst suppliers participate and contribute. A wide range of 
techniques are used, both above and below the line (Kotler, et al,1996; Horner and 
Swarbooke,1996). 
 
Above the line promotional activity includes advertising on television, radio, and press as well as 
using poster campaigns. Targeting the right market with the right message at the right time is 
always difficult, especially for destinations, which attract consumers from several geographical 
regions as well as cultural and linguistic backgrounds. Although very expensive, above the line 
advertisement can assist the development of the destination brand as well as influence a large 
number to visitors to travel to the destination or to extend their visit (Bonham and Mak,1996). 
Crouch (1994) has illustrated that although many countries have substantially increased their 
spending on tourism promotions there is little evidence of their effectiveness as studies which have 
attempted to evaluate the promotional impact empirically have generally produced inconclusive 
and varied results. Nevertheless, DMOs are increasingly being held accountable for generating 
adequate results through advertising and for measuring advertising effectiveness (Woodside, 
1990; Faulkner,1997; Crompton, 1997; Schoenbachler et al, 1995). Advertisements use slogans, 
which change frequently in order to follow tourism demand trends and to update the image of 
destinations (Morgan and Pritchard, 1998). For example, Spain recently changed its slogan from 
“everything under the sun” to “passion for life”. This change reflected the refocus of its product 
away from the traditional “sun and sea” product to a much more sophisticated offering based on 
socio-cultural diversity and the life-style of local people (Fayos-Sola,1996).  
 
In addition, DMOs often use below the line promotional techniques. They participate in major 
annual tourism and travel fairs in Berlin, London, Milan, Madrid, Paris and elsewhere. There they 
have the opportunity to meet intermediaries and members of the public to promote their offerings. 
They produce brochures, which they distribute to all their partners in the industry and to 


----- Page 25 (native text) -----
21
prospective consumers who require information on the destination. Brochures normally show local 
attractions and activities, whilst they also feature a number of local suppliers such as hotels, 
entertainment and catering establishments (Wicks and Schuett, 1991, 1993). In addition, travel 
trade manuals offer information about the destination to the travel trade and provide a reference 
guide.  
 
Although DMOs often operate information offices where they provide information about local 
suppliers they tend to refrain from selling direct, as they regard themselves as facilitators rather 
than intermediaries and also avoid to be seen as promoters of individual products and services 
against other local suppliers. Instead, when asked by prospective customers they provide contact 
details of local suppliers and advise consumers on the ones that are likely to satisfy their demand. 
However, increasingly DMOs are forced to play a more active selling role as consumers appreciate 
an one-stop-service. In many destinations they are also required to justify their income or to 
contribute towards their expenses and hence they charge commissions for local bookings and sell 
maps, local guidebooks and souvenirs to generate income. Direct marketing is also used as 
destinations can identify prospective customers and promote elements of the local offerings that 
satisfy the specific demand. Developing relationship marketing and loyalty clubs enables repeat 
visitors to be recognised and appreciated. Discount schemes and other add-ones are currently 
developing for several destinations to reward and maintain their loyal clientele.  
 
Finally, public relations are extensively used for most tourism destinations. Destination 
representatives at national level establish tourism offices in their major markets to distribute 
promotional material and information as well as through their embassies. In addition, public 
relations are used to generate news stories, articles and publicity in order to develop the 
awareness of consumers and persuade them to purchase the products. Often hosting a journalist 
or a celebrity in the destination can generate more interest than any other forms of promotion 
because consumers are more passive receivers than with advertising. Public relations are also 
critical for the development and updating of the right image (Morgan and Pritchard, 1998; Kotler et 
al,1996; Middleton,1992).  
 
9. Marketing competitive destinations for the future 
 
Destination marketing is increasingly becoming extremely competitive worldwide. Providing 
innovative and well co-ordinated tourism products is therefore exceedingly important for tourism 
regions. Consumers assess their travel experience as a whole and they associate destinations with 
the entire range of local producers and suppliers. Producing innovative and specialised tourism 
products will enable destinations to attract intentional demand and to differentiate their products. 
Flexible specialisation will also support local suppliers and the region as a whole to evolve with 
consumer trends and support the requirements of the emerging sophisticated clientele as well as 
compete globally. Destinations, which appreciate these principles, can develop and maintain 
competitive advantage and as a result achieve their strategic objectives. 
 
Partnerships between the public and private sector and close co-operation between all local 
suppliers is key to the ability of destinations to offer quality products. Exceeding consumers’ 
expectations is therefore instrumental for the ability of both suppliers and destinations to attract 
visitors in the long term. Hence the competitiveness of each supplier locally as well as their 
distributors determines the competitiveness of destinations. Local suppliers should co-operate 
rather than compete. Buhalis and Cooper (1998) argue that tourism suppliers at destinations need 
to mature and understand that they should not compete with each other at the destination level. 
Instead they should join forces and pool resources to develop and implement comprehensive 
marketing strategies which enable them to compete with other destinations. The rapid 
development of new destinations, especially in third world countries generates an unprecedented 
level of competition. They can offer unspoiled natural landscapes and authentic socio-cultural 
resources inexpensively. In contrast, most traditional destinations suffer from their own success 
and the lack of a strict rational planning and management system. Having gone through most of 
the stages of they life cycle they have reached maturity or saturation and this has forced them to 
rely mass tourism for their operations. Often facilities require urgent renovation, but lack of financial 


----- Page 26 (native text) -----
22
resources and the unwillingness of consumers to pay jeopardise the competitiveness of 
destinations further. Initiatives at the local level facilitated by both private and public sectors can 
improve the tourism product by investment in resources, as well as the implementation of a 
comprehensive marketing strategy and mix which supports the competitiveness of the destination. 
This is particularly important for the small and medium tourism enterprises, which traditionally 
dominate local supply but lack management and marketing expertise to operate their business 
professionally and financial resources to approach their target markets.  
 
Taking advantage of new technologies and the Internet can also enable destinations to enhance 
their competitiveness. Technology can improve the efficiency of all local suppliers and also provide 
tools for the development and delivery of differentiated tourism products. Provision of information 
on local facilities and attractions and the ability to reserve the whole range of tourism products 
determines the ability to attract the new and sophisticated types of tourism demand. The recent 
evolution of Destination Management Systems (DMSs) enables destinations to co-ordinate the 
entire range of products and services offered locally and to promote them globally. The provision of 
differentiated and tailor made products becomes much easier as consumers can assemble 
specialised products and construct their own itinerary. The availability of information on local 
resources and services reduces the cost of individual travel and enables destinations to offer 
mass-customised services.  
 
More importantly the new IT tools enable even smaller and peripheral players to compete at equal 
footage with larger and more central ones and therefore provide an unprecedented opportunity to 
enhance their competitiveness. One of the major benefits is the reduction of dependency on 
intermediaries for the distribution of tourism products. As a consequence, tourism suppliers are 
able to improve their negotiation power with powerful tour operators and can develop a healthier 
distribution mix. This is particularly significant for remote, peripheral and insular destinations where 
local principals and authorities have a great dependency on tourism for their lifehood but lack 
expertise and resources to undertake comprehensive marketing campaigns. Partnerships 
marketing through loyalty/fun clubs enabling destinations to develop long-term relationships with 
consumers benefit both destinations and suppliers. DMSs should also be utilised to optimise 
tourism impacts by providing an effective mechanism to bridge the expectations of both consumers 
and local residents with their experiences from tourism (Buhalis, 1993, 1994, 1997)  
 
Finally tourism destinations should learn from past mistakes and appreciate that their strategic 
management and marketing must lead to the optimisation of tourism impacts and the 
achievement of their strategic objectives for all stakeholders. Hitherto, destinations have 
suffered because they wrongly assumed that the higher the volume of tourists, the more benefits 
they can achieve. However it is evident that limits on the development of tourism activity should be 
imposed in order to avoid over-exploitation of local resources. Although marketing has often been 
regarded as an enemy of sustainability, destination authorities and principals need to realise that 
strategic marketing should be used to achieve destination policies. A comprehensive marketing 
strategy should enable managers and planers to identify appropriate target markets and to 
maximise economic benefits locally without jeopardising local resources. A suitable communication 
strategy should support destination authorities to convey their message and promote 
environmentally friendly practices locally. 
 
In conclusion, destination marketing is becoming more complex as tourists consume regions as 
experiences, often ignoring that tourism products consist of a great number of individually 
produced products and services. Global competition and industry concentration develop new 
challenges. In this sense, destination marketers have to achieve the strategic objectives set 
through stakeholders’ analysis and match the appropriate demand with supply, by using the entire 
range of marketing tools for communicating with consumers and suppliers. Global competition and 
the new, experienced, demanding and sophisticated travellers reposition destination marketing to 
be the main interface between consumers and local principals. Consumers are increasingly 
following special interests and regard their trips as both recreational and educational experiences. 
Therefore, destination themes and their interpretation become more important for the future. 
Training of human resources as well as co-operation between competing and complementary 


----- Page 27 (native text) -----
23
destinations enable regions to learn from each other and adapt to demand requirements. 
Innovative marketing led by research and using new technologies, will be the only way to manage 
and market competitive destinations in the future for the benefits of their stakeholders. 
 
REFERENCES 
Agarwal, S. 1997; The resort cycle and seaside tourism: an assessment of its applicability and 
validity, Tourism Management, Vol.18(2), pp.65-73. 
Ahmed, Z. U., Krohn, F. B., 1990, Reversing the United States declining competitiveness in the 
marketing of international tourism: a perspective on future policy, Journal of Travel 
Research, Vol.29(2), pp.23-29. 
Archer, B., 1996, Sustainable tourism-Do economists really care?, Progress in Tourism and 
Hospitality Research, Vol.2(3&4),pp.217-222. 
Athiyaman, A., 1997, Knowledge development in tourism: tourism demand research, Tourism 
Management, Vol.18(4),pp.221-228.  
Baker, K. G., Hozier, G. C., Jr., Rogers, R. D., 1994, Marketing research theory and methodology 
and the tourism industry: a nontechnical discussion, Journal of Travel Research, Vol. 32(3), 
pp3-7. 
Baloglu, S., Brinberg, D., 1997, Affective images of tourism destinations, Journal of Travel 
Research, Vol.35(4), pp.11-15. 
Berg, L. van den, Borg, J. van der, Meer, J. van der, 1995, Urban Tourism: performance and 
strategies in eight European cities, Avebury, Aldershot. 
Bonham, C., Mak, J., 1996, Private versus public financing of state destination promotion, Journal 
of Travel Research, Vol.35(2), pp.3-10. 
Bordas, E. 1994a, Competitiveness of tourist destinations in long distance markets, Revue de 
Tourisme, Vol.49(3),pp.3-9. 
Bordas, M., 1994b, Competitiveness of tourist destinations in Long distance markets, Etudes et 
Memoires, Centre des Hautes Etudes Touristiques, Aix-en-Provence. 
Briguglio, L., Archer, B., Jafari, J., Wall, G., 1996, (eds) Sustainable tourism in islands and small 
states: issues and policies, Pinter, London. 
Briguglio, L., Butler, R., Harrison, D., Filho, W.L., 1996, (eds) Sustainable tourism in islands and 
small States: Case studies, Pinter, London. 
BTA, 1999, Business Tourism Leads the way, A report by the Business Tourism Forum and the 
Business Tourism Advisory Committee, January, British Tourism Authority, London. 
Buhalis, D., 1993, Regional Integrated Computer Information Reservation Management Systems as 
a strategic tool for the small and medium tourism enterprises, Tourism Management, Vol. 
14(5), pp.366-378. 
Buhalis, D., 1994, Information and Telecommunications Technologies as a strategic tool for small 
and medium tourism enterprises in the contemporary business environment, in Seaton, A., et 
al (Eds), Tourism-The State of the Art: The Strathclyde Symposium, Wiley and Sons, 
England, pp.254-275. 
Buhalis, D., 1995, The impact of information telecommunication technologies on tourism channels: 
implications for the small and medium sized tourism enterprises, PhD Thesis, University of 
Surrey, Guildford, UK. 
Buhalis, D., 1997, Information and Telecommunication Technology as a strategic tool for economic, 
social and environmental benefits enhancement of tourism at destination regions, Progress in 
Tourism and Hospitality Research, Vol.3(1), p.71-93. 
Buhalis, D., 1998, Strategic use of information technologies in the tourism industry, Tourism 
Management, Vol.19(5), pp.409-421. 
Buhalis, D., 1999a, Limits of tourism development in peripheral destinations: problems and 
challenges, Tourism Management, Vol.20(2), pp.183-185. 
Buhalis, D., 1999b, Relationships in the distribution channel of tourism: Conflicts between hoteliers 
and tour operators in the Mediterranean region, Journal of International Hospitality, Leisure 
and Tourism Administration, Vol.2(2) (forthcoming). 
Buhalis, D., and Cooper, C., 1998, Competition or co-operation: The needs of Small and Medium 
sized Tourism Enterprises at a destination level, in E., Laws, Faulkner, B., and Moscardo, G., 
(ed.), Embracing and managing change in Tourism, Routledge, London. 


----- Page 28 (native text) -----
24
Buhalis, D., and Fletcher, J., 1995, Environmental impacts on tourism destinations: An economic 
analysis, in Coccosis, H., and Nijkamp, P., (eds), Sustainable Tourism Development, 
Avebury, England, pp.3-24. 
Burns, P., 1999, Paradoxes in Planning: Tourism elitism or brutalism? Annals of Tourism 
Research,Vol.26(2), pp.329-348. 
Butler, R., 1980, The concept of a tourism area cycle of evolution: implications for resources, 
Canadian Geographer, Vol. 24(1), pp.5-12. 
Bywater, M., 1992, The European Tour Operator Industry, Economist Intelligence Unit, London. 
Bywater, M., 1997, The European Agency Industry, Travel and Tourism Intelligence, London. 
Calantone, R. J., Mazanec, J. A., 1991, Marketing management and tourism, Annals of Tourism 
Research, Vol.18(1), pp.101-119.  
Chacko, H. E., 1997, Positioning a tourism destination to gain a competitive edge, Asia Pacific 
Journal of Tourism Research, Vol. 1(2), pp.69-75. 
Chon, K. S., 1991, Tourism destination image modification process: marketing implications, 
Tourism Management, Vol.12(1),pp.68-72. 
Chon, K. S., 1992, Self-image/destination image congruity, Annals of Tourism Research, 
Vol.19(2),pp.360-363. 
Choy, D. J. L., 1992, Life cycle models for Pacific island destinations, Journal of Travel Research, 
Vol.30(3), pp.26-31. 
Conlin, M., and Baum, T., 1995, (eds), Island Tourism: management, principles and practice, 
Wiley, London. 
Cooper, C. P., 1989, Tourist product life cycle, in Witt, S.F. and Moutinho, L.(eds), Tourism marketing 
and management handbook, London: Prentice Hall, pp.577-580 
Cooper, C., 1992, The life cycle concept and tourism, in Johnson, P.; Thomas, B., (eds), Choice 
and demand in tourism, London, UK; Mansell, pp.145-160. 
Cooper, C., 1994, Tourism product life cycle, in Seaton, A., et al (eds) Tourism: The state of the 
art, J., Wiley, Chichester,pp.340-346. 
Cooper, C., and Buhalis, D., 1992, Strategic management and marketing issues for SMTEs: A 
case study of the Greek Aegean Islands, in Teare, R., et al, (Eds), Projects in Hospitality 
Organisations, Cassell, London.  
Cooper, C., and Jackson, S., 1989, Destination life cycle. The Isle of Man case study, Annals of 
Tourism Research, Vol.16(3), pp.377-398 
Cooper, C., Fletcher, J., Gilbert, D., Shepherd, R., Wanhill, S., (eds), 1998, Tourism: Principles and 
Practices, 2nd ed, Addison Wesley Longman, England. 
Crouch, G. I., 1994, Promotion and demand in international tourism, Journal of Travel & Tourism 
Marketing, Vol.3(3),pp.109-125. 
Davidson, R., 1994, Business Travel, Pitman, London. 
Davidson, R., and Maitland, R., 1997, Tourism destinations, Hodder & Stoughton, London. 
Douglas, N., 1997, Applying the life cycle model to Melanesia, Annals of Tourism Research, 
Vol.24(1), pp.1-22. 
Edwards, A., 1993, Price Competitiveness of holiday destinations: Costs for European Travellers, 
Research Report, Economist Intelligence Unit, London. 
Evans, M. R., Fox, J. B., Johnson, R. B., 1995, Identifying competitive strategies for successful 
tourism destination development, Journal of Hospitality & Leisure Marketing, Vol. 3(1), 
pp.37-45. 
Faulkner, B., 1997, A model for the evaluation of national tourism destination marketing programs, 
Journal of Travel Research, Vol.35(3), pp.23-32 
Fayos-Sola, E., 1992, A strategic outlook for regional tourism policy: The White Paper on 
Valencian tourism, Tourism Management, No.13(1), pp.45-49. 
Fayos-Sola, E., 1996, Tourism policy: a midsummer night's dream?, Tourism Management, 
Vol.17(6), pp.405-412 
Formica, S., Uysal, M. 1996, The revitalization of Italy as a tourist destination, Tourism 
Management, Vol.17(5), pp.323-331 
Garrod, G., Willis, K. G., 1992, The amenity value of woodland in Great Britain: a comparison of 
economic estimates, Environmental and Resource Economics, Vol.2(4), pp.415-434. 
Gayle, D., and Goodrich, J., 1993, Tourism marketing and management in the Caribbean, 
Routledge. 


----- Page 29 (native text) -----
25
Getz, D. 1992,Tourism planning and destination life cycle, Annals of Tourism Research, Vol.19(4), 
pp.752-770 
Gilbert, D., 1984, The need for countries to differentiate their tourist product and how to do so, 
Seminar papers: tourism managing for results, University of Surrey, Guildford. 
Gilbert, D., 1990, Strategic marketing planning for national tourism, The Tourist Review, No.1, 
pp.18-27. 
Gilbert, D., 1991, An examination of the consumer decision process relate to tourism, in Cooper, C., 
(Eds), Progress in Tourism, Recreation and Hospitality Management, Vol.3, Belhaven, 
London. 
Gilbert, D., 1993, Consumer Behaviour and tourism demand, in Cooper, C., Fletcher, J., Gilbert, D., 
and Wanhill, S., (Eds), Tourism: Principles and Practice, Pitman Publishing, London, pp.20-31. 
Goodall, 1988, How tourists choose their holidays: An analytical framework, in Goodall and Ashworth, 
(ed), Marketing in the tourism industry: The promotion of destination regions, Groom Helm, 
London. 
Goodall, 1991, Understanding holiday choice, in Cooper, C., (Eds), Progress in Tourism, Recreation 
and Hospitality Management, Vol.3, Belhaven, London, pp.58-77. 
Goodall, B., and Ashworth, G., (eds), 1988, Marketing in the tourism industry: The promotion of 
destination Regions, Groom Helms, London. 
Gunn, C., 1994, Tourism Planning, Taylor and Francis, 3rd ed, London. 
Hawes, D. K., Taylor, D. T., Hampe, G. D., 1991,Destination marketing by state, Journal of Travel 
Research, Vol.30(1), pp.11-17. 
Haywood, K. M., 1986, Can the tourist-area life cycle be made operational?, Tourism 
Management, Vol.7(3), pp.154-167 
Heath, E., Wall, G., 1992, Marketing Tourism Destinations: A strategic Planning Approach, Wiley, 
New York. 
Horner, S., and Swarbrooke, J., 1996, Marketing Tourism, Hospitality and Leisure in Europe, 
Thomson Business Press, London. 
Hu, Y. Z., Ritchie, J. R. B., 1993, Measuring destination attractiveness: a contextual approach, 
Journal of Travel Research, Vol.32(2),pp.25-34. 
Hughes, G., 1995, Authenticity in tourism, Annals of Tourism Research, Vol.22(4), pp.781-803. 
Inskeep, E., 1991, Tourism Planning: An integrated and sustainable approach, Van Nostrand 
Reinhold: New York. 
Inskeep, E., 1994, National and Regional Tourism Planning, Routledge, London. 
Jamal, T., and Getz, D., 1996, Does strategic planning pay? Lessons for destinations from 
corporate planning experience, Progress in Tourism and Hospitality Research, 
Vol.2(1),pp.59-78. 
Jenner, P., Smith, C., 1993, Tourism in the Mediterranean, Economist Intelligence Unit, London. 
Johnston, B. R., Edwards, T., 1994, The commodification of mountaineering, Annals of Tourism 
Research, Vol. 21(3),pp.459-478. 
Kent, P., 1991, Understanding holiday choices, in Sinclair and Stabler, M., (eds), The tourism industry: 
An International Analysis, CAB International, Oxford, pp. 165-185. 
Khan, S. A., 1994, Tourism and a European strategy for the alpine environment, in Cater, E.; 
Lowman, G. (eds), Ecotourism: a sustainable option? John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, UK, 
pp.103-110. 
Kotler, P., Bowen, J., and Makens, J., 1996, Marketing for Hospitality and Tourism, Prentice Hall: 
UK. 
Laarman, J. G., Gregersen, H. M., 1996, Pricing policy in nature-based tourism, Tourism 
Management, Vol.17(4), pp.247-254. 
Law, C., 1993, Urban Tourism: Attracting visitors to large cities, Mansell, London. 
Law, C., 1996, (ed), Tourism in major cities, Thomson Business Press, London. 
Leiper, N., 1995, Tourism Management, RMIT Press, Melbourne. 
Lockhart, D., and Drakakis-Smith, D., 1997, (eds) Island Tourism: Trends and Prospects, Pinter, 
London. 
Mansfeld, Y., 1995, The "value stretch" model and its implementation in detecting tourists' class-
differentiated destination choice, Journal of Travel & Tourism Marketing, Vol.4(3), pp.71-92. 
March, R., 1994, Tourism marketing myopia, Tourism Management, Vol.15(6), pp.411-415. 
Mayo E., and Jarvis, L., 1981, The psychology of leisure travel, CBI Publishing, Boston. 


----- Page 30 (native text) -----
26
Mazanec, J., 1989, Consumer behaviour in tourism, in Witt, S., and Moutinho, L., (ed), Tourism 
marketing and management handbook, Practice Hall, London, pp. 69-73. 
Mazanec, J., 1997, (ed) International City tourism: Analysis and Strategy, Pinter, London. 
Mazanec, J., and Zins, A., 1994, Tourist behaviour and the new European life style typology, in 
Theobold, W. (ed.), Global Tourism: The next decade, Oxford: Butterworth-Heinemann, 
pp.199-216. 
McKercher, B., 1995, The destination-market matrix: a tourism market portfolio analysis model, 
Journal of Travel & Tourism Marketing, Vol.4(2), pp.23-40. 
McWilliams, E. G., Crompton, J. L., 1997, An expanded framework for measuring the effectiveness 
of destination advertising, Tourism Management, Vol.18(3),pp.127-137. 
Meidan, A., 1995, Pricing, in Witt, S.F. and Moutinho, L.(eds), Tourism marketing and management 
handbook, Student Edition, London: Prentice Hall, pp.367-375. 
Middleton, V., 1992, Marketing in Travel and Tourism, 2nd ed, Heinemann, London. 
Middleton, V., and Hawkins, R., 1998, Sustainable tourism: a marketing perspective, Butterworth-
Heinemann, Oxford.  
Morgan N., and Pritchard, A., 1998, Tourism Promotion and Power: Creating Images, creating 
identities, Wiley, Chichester. 
Morgan, M., 1995, Homogeneous products: the future of established resorts, in Theobald, W. F, 
(ed), Global tourism: the next decade, Butterworth-Heinemann Oxford. 
Moutinho, L., 1987, Consumer Behaviour in Tourism, European Journal of Marketing, Vol. 21(10), pp. 
1-44. 
Murphy, P. E., Pritchard, M., 1997, Destination price-value perceptions: an examination of origin 
and seasonal influences, Journal of Travel Research, Vol.35(3), pp.16-22 
O’Brien, K., 1996, The West European Leisure Travel Market: Forecasts for opportunities into the 
next century, Financial Times Newsletters and Management Reports, London. 
O’Brien, K., 1998, The European Business Travel Market, Travel and Tourism Analyst, no.4, pp. 
37-54. 
Oppermann, M., 1996, Rural tourism in southern Germany, Annals of Tourism Research, 
Vol.23(1), pp.86-102.). 
Page, S., 1994, Urban Tourism, Routledge, London. 
Page, S., and Getz, D., 1997, (eds), The business of rural tourism: International perspectives, 
Thomson Business Press, London. 
Palmer, A., Bejou, D., 1995, Tourism destination marketing alliances, Annals of Tourism Research, 
Vol.22(3), pp.616-629. 
Pearce, D. G., 1997, Competitive destination analysis in Southeast Asia, Journal of Travel 
Research, Vol.35(4),pp.16-24. 
Pearce, D., 1989, Tourist Development, Longman: Essex, UK. 
Pigram, J., 1996, Best practice environmental management and the tourism industry, Progress in 
Tourism and Hospitality Research, Vol.2(3&4),pp.261-271. 
Poon, A., 1989, Competitive strategies for new tourism, in Cooper, C., (ed.), Progress in -Tourism 
Recreation and Hospitality Management, Vol.1, Belhaven Press, London, pp.91-102. 
Poon, A., 1993, Tourism, technology and competitive strategies, CAB International, Oxford. 
Porter, M., 1980, Competitive strategy: techniques for analysing industries and competitors, Free 
Press, New York. 
Porter, M., 1985, Competitive advantage, Free Press, New York. 
Ritchie, 1996, Beacons of light in an expanding universe: an assessment of the state-of-the-art in 
tourism marketing/marketing research, Journal of Travel & Tourism Marketing, Vol.5(4), 
pp.49-84. 
Ritchie, B., and Crouch, G., 1993, Competitiveness in international tourism: A framework for 
understanding and analysis, Annual Congress of the International Association of Scientific 
Experts in Tourism, Baliloche, Argentina. 
Ryan, C. 1997, The tourist experience: A new Introduction, Cassell, London. 
Ryan, C., 1991a, Recreational Tourism: A social Science Perspective, Routledge, London. 
Ryan, C., 1991b, Tourism and marketing-A symbiotic relationship, Tourism Management, 
Vol.12(2), pp.101-111. 
Sautter, E. T., and Leisen, B., 1999, Managing stakeholders: A tourism planning model, Annals of 
Tourism Research, Vol.26(2), pp.312-328. 


----- Page 31 (native text) -----
27
Schoenbachler, D. D., Benedetto, C. A. di, Gordon, G. L., Kaminski, P. F., 1995, Destination 
advertising: assessing effectiveness with the split-run technique, Journal of Travel & 
Tourism Marketing, Vol. 4(2), pp.1-21. 
Seaton, A., 1997, Destination Marketing, in Seaton, A., and Bennett, M.,(eds), marketing Tourism 
Products: Concepts, issues, cases, Thomson Business Press, London. 
Sharpley, R., and Sharpley, J., 1997, Rural Tourism, Thomson Business Press, London. 
Shaw, G., and Williams, A., 1997, (eds), The rise and fall of British Coastal resorts: cultural and 
economic perspectives, Mansell, London. 
Silver, I., 1993, Marketing authenticity in Third World countries, Annals of Tourism Research, 
Vol.20(2), pp.302-318. 
Sirakaya, E., McLellan, R. W., Uysal, M., 1996, Modeling vacation destination decisions: a 
behavioral approach, Journal of Travel & Tourism Marketing, Vol. 5(1/2), pp.57-75. 
Sofield, T. H. B., 1991, Sustainable ethnic tourism in the South Pacific: some principles, Journal of 
Tourism Studies, Vol.2(1), pp.56-72. 
Swarbrooke, J., and Horner, S., 1999, Consumer behaviour in Tourism, Butterworth-Heinemann, 
Oxford 
Thomas, J., 1992, Tourism and the environment: an exploration of the willingness to pay of the 
average visitor, Conference proceedings Tourism in Europe: the 1992 conference, 8-10 
July 1992, Durham, UK. 
Tooman, L. A., 1997, Applications of the life-cycle model in tourism, Annals of Tourism Research, 
Vol.24(1), pp.214-234 
Towner, B., Newton, M., 1996, (ed), Tourism in Spain: Critical issues, Cab, Oxford. 
Tribe, J., 1997, Corporate strategy for tourism. International Thomson Business Press, London. 
Vlitos-Rowe, 1994, International business travel: a changing profile, Economist Intelligence Unit, 
London. 
Weiermair, K., 1993, Innovation and innovatory behaviour in the tourist industry: growth strategies 
for accommodation establishments in alpine regions, Revue de Tourisme, Vol. 48(1), 
pp.14-22. 
Wicks, B. E., Schuett, M. A. 1991, Examining the role of tourism promotion through the use of 
brochures, Tourism Management, Vol.12(4), pp.301-312. 
Wicks, B. E., Schuett, M. A., 1993, Using travel brochures to target frequent travellers and 'big-
spenders', Journal of Travel & Tourism Marketing, Vol.2(2/3), pp.77-90. 
Woodside, A. G., 1990, Measuring advertising effectiveness in destination marketing strategies, 
Journal of Travel Research, Vol.29(2), pp.3-8. 
Woodside, A., and Lysonski, S., 1989, A general model of traveler destination choice, Journal of 
Travel Research, Vol. 27(4), pp. 8-14. 
Yuksel, F., Bramwell, B., Yuksel, A., 1999, Stakeholder interviews and tourism planning at 
Pamukkale, Turkey, Tourism Management, Vol.20(3),pp.351-360.  
 
