

----- Page 1 (native text) -----
Present and Future of Surface-Enhanced
Raman Scattering
Judith Langer,† Dorleta Jimenez de Aberasturi,†
Javier Aizpurua,‡
Ramon A. Alvarez-Puebla,§,∥
Baptiste Auguié,⊥,#,7 Jeremy J. Baumberg,8
Guillermo C. Bazan,9
Steven E. J. Bell,10
Anja Boisen,11
Alexandre G. Brolo,12,13
Jaebum Choo,14 Dana Cialla-May,15,16 Volker Deckert,15,16
Laura Fabris,17
Karen Faulds,18
F. Javier García de Abajo,∥,19 Royston Goodacre,20
Duncan Graham,18
Amanda J. Haes,21
Christy L. Haynes,22
Christian Huck,23
Tamitake Itoh,24 Mikael Käll,25
Janina Kneipp,26
Nicholas A. Kotov,27
Hua Kuang,28,29 Eric C. Le Ru,⊥,#,7
Hiang Kwee Lee,30,31
Jian-Feng Li,32
Xing Yi Ling,30
Stefan A. Maier,33 Thomas Mayerhöfer,15,16 Martin Moskovits,34
Kei Murakoshi,35
Jwa-Min Nam,36
Shuming Nie,37 Yukihiro Ozaki,38
Isabel Pastoriza-Santos,39
Jorge Perez-Juste,39
Juergen Popp,15,16
Annemarie Pucci,23
Stephanie Reich,40 Bin Ren,32
George C. Schatz,41
Timur Shegai,25
Sebastian Schlücker,42
Li-Lin Tay,43 K. George Thomas,44
Zhong-Qun Tian,32
Richard P. Van Duyne,41 Tuan Vo-Dinh,45
Yue Wang,46 Katherine A. Willets,47
Chuanlai Xu,28,29
Hongxing Xu,48 Yikai Xu,10
Yuko S. Yamamoto,49 Bing Zhao,50
and Luis M. Liz-Marzán*,†,51
†CIC biomaGUNE and CIBER-BBN, Paseo de Miramón 182, Donostia-San Sebastián 20014, Spain
‡Materials Physics Center (CSIC-UPV/EHU), and Donostia International Physics Center, Paseo Manuel de Lardizabal 5,
Donostia-San Sebastián 20018, Spain
§Departamento de Química Física e Inorgánica and EMaS, Universitat Rovira i Virgili, Tarragona 43007, Spain
∥ICREA-Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats, Passeig Lluís Companys 23, Barcelona 08010, Spain
⊥School of Chemical and Physical Sciences, Victoria University of Wellington, PO Box 600, Wellington 6140, New Zealand
#The MacDiarmid Institute for Advanced Materials and Nanotechnology, PO Box 600, Wellington 6140, New Zealand
7The Dodd-Walls Centre for Quantum and Photonic Technologies, PO Box 56, Dunedin 9054, New Zealand
8NanoPhotonics Centre, Cavendish Laboratory, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB3 0HE, United Kingdom
9Department of Materials and Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, Santa Barbara, California 93106-9510,
United States
10School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Queen’s University of Belfast, Belfast BT9 5AG, United Kingdom
11Department of Micro- and Nanotechnology, The Danish National Research Foundation and Villum Foundation’s Center for
Intelligent Drug Delivery and Sensing Using Microcontainers and Nanomechanics, Technical University of Denmark, Kongens
Lyngby 2800, Denmark
12Department of Chemistry, University of Victoria, P.O. Box 3065, Victoria, BC V8W 3 V6, Canada
13Center for Advanced Materials and Related Technologies, University of Victoria, Victoria, BC V8W 2Y2, Canada
14Department of Chemistry, Chung-Ang University, Seoul 06974, South Korea
15Leibniz Institute of Photonic Technology Jena - Member of the research alliance “Leibniz Health Technologies”,
Albert-Einstein-Str. 9, Jena 07745, Germany
16Institute of Physical Chemistry and Abbe Center of Photonics, Friedrich-Schiller University Jena, Helmholtzweg 4, Jena 07745,
Germany
17Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Rutgers University, 607 Taylor Road, Piscataway New Jersey 08854,
United States
18Department of Pure and Applied Chemistry, University of Strathclyde, Technology and Innovation Centre, 99 George Street,
Glasgow G1 1RD, United Kingdom
19The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Institut de Ciencies Fotoniques, Castelldefels (Barcelona) 08860, Spain
Received:
July 8, 2019
Accepted:
September 3, 2019
Published: September 3, 2019
Review
www.acsnano.org
Cite This: ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
© 2019 American Chemical Society
28
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
This is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits
copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.


----- Page 2 (native text) -----
20Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool, Biosciences Building, Crown Street,
Liverpool L69 7ZB, United Kingdom
21Department of Chemistry, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52242, United States
22Department of Chemistry, University of Minnesota, 207 Pleasant Street SE, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455,
United States
23KirchhoﬀInstitute for Physics, University of Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 227, Heidelberg 69120, Germany
24Nano-Bioanalysis Research Group, Health Research Institute, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology,
Takamatsu, Kagawa 761-0395, Japan
25Department of Physics, Chalmers University of Technology, Goteborg S412 96, Sweden
26Department of Chemistry, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Brook-Taylor-Str. 2, Berlin-Adlershof 12489, Germany
27Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, United States
28Key Lab of Synthetic and Biological Colloids, Ministry of Education, International Joint Research Laboratory for Biointerface and
Biodetection, Jiangnan University, Wuxi, Jiangsu 214122, China
29State Key Laboratory of Food Science and Technology, Jiangnan University, JiangSu 214122, China
30Division of Chemistry and Biological Chemistry, School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences, Nanyang Technological
University, 21 Nanyang Link, Singapore 637371, Singapore
31Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, United States
32State Key Laboratory of Physical Chemistry of Solid Surfaces, Collaborative Innovation Center of Chemistry for Energy Materials,
MOE Key Laboratory of Spectrochemical Analysis & Instrumentation, Department of Chemistry, College of Chemistry and
Chemical Engineering, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, China
33Chair in Hybrid Nanosystems, Nanoinstitute Munich, Faculty of Physics, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München,
Munich 80539, Germany
34Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry, University of California Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, California 93106-9510,
United States
35Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Hokkaido University, North 10 West 8, Kita-ku, Sapporo, Hokkaido 060-0810,
Japan
36Department of Chemistry, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, South Korea
37Department of Bioengineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 1406 W. Green Street, Urbana, Illinois 61801,
United States
38Department of Chemistry, School of Science and Technology, Kwansei Gakuin University, Sanda, Hyogo 669-1337,
Japan
39Departamento de Química Física and CINBIO, University of Vigo, Vigo 36310, Spain
40Department of Physics, Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin 14195, Germany
41Department of Chemistry, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois 60208-3113, United States
42Physical Chemistry I, Department of Chemistry and Center for Nanointegration Duisburg-Essen, University of Duisburg-Essen,
Essen 45141, Germany
43National Research Council Canada, Metrology Research Centre, Ottawa K1A0R6, Canada
44School of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Science Education and Research Thiruvananthapuram, Vithura Thiruvananthapuram
695551, India
45Fitzpatrick Institute for Photonics, Department of Biomedical Engineering, and Department of Chemistry, Duke University,
101 Science Drive, Box 90281, Durham, North Carolina 27708, United States
46Department of Chemistry, College of Sciences, Northeastern University, Shenyang 110819, China
47Department of Chemistry, Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19122, United States
48School of Physics and Technology and Institute for Advanced Studies, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China
49School of Materials Science, Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Nomi, Ishikawa 923-1292, Japan
50State Key Laboratory of Supramolecular Structure and Materials, Jilin University, Changchun 130012, China
51Ikerbasque, Basque Foundation for Science, Bilbao 48013, Spain
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
29


----- Page 3 (native text) -----
ABSTRACT: The discovery of the enhancement of Raman scattering
by molecules adsorbed on nanostructured metal surfaces is a landmark
in the history of spectroscopic and analytical techniques. Signiﬁcant
experimental and theoretical eﬀort has been directed toward under-
standing the surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) eﬀect and
demonstrating its potential in various types of ultrasensitive sensing
applications in a wide variety of ﬁelds. In the 45 years since its
discovery, SERS has blossomed into a rich area of research and
technology, but additional eﬀorts are still needed before it can be
routinely used analytically and in commercial products. In this Review,
prominent authors from around the world joined together to
summarize the state of the art in understanding and using SERS
and to predict what can be expected in the near future in terms of
research, applications, and technological development. This Review is
dedicated to SERS pioneer and our coauthor, the late Prof. Richard Van Duyne, whom we lost during the preparation of
this article.
KEYWORDS: surface-enhanced Raman scattering, biosensing, SERS tags, chemosensors, nanomedicine, TERS, SEIRA,
charge transfer, hot electrons, catalysis
S
urface-enhanced Raman scattering, or SERS, is a
commonly used sensing technique in which inelastic
light scattering (Figure 1) by molecules is greatly
enhanced (by factors up to 108 or even larger, enabling single-
molecule (SM) SERS in some cases) when the molecules are
adsorbed onto corrugated metal surfaces such as silver or gold
nanoparticles (NPs). Since its discovery over 40 years ago, it has
enjoyed steady growth of interest in the research community,
and it has spawned a variety of other spectroscopic techniques
that take advantage of enhanced local ﬁelds that arise from
plasmon excitation in the NPs, for optical phenomena such as
ﬂuorescence or nonlinear optics. In addition, the coupling of
SERS with atomic force microscopy (AFM) or scanning
tunneling microscopy (STM) tips has led to tip-enhanced
Raman scattering (TERS), which is a powerful imaging tool. For
analytical applications, SERS can be diﬀerentiated from many
other techniques by the rich vibrational spectroscopic informa-
tion that it provides, which has led to applications in several
diﬀerent directions, including electrochemistry, catalysis, biol-
ogy, medicine, art conservation, materials science, and others.
The discovery of SERS has a relatively short history. It was
accidentally discovered by Fleischmann and co-workers in
1974 during measurements of the Raman scattering of pyridine
on rough silver electrodes,1 and they ascribed the enhancement
to a surface-area eﬀect. The phenomenon was identiﬁed
independently by Jeanmaire and Van Duyne2 and by Albrecht
and Creighton3 in 1977, both of whom suggested enhance-
ment factors (EFs) of 105−106. The connection with plasmon
excitation was suggested by Albrecht and Creighton as a resonant
Raman eﬀect involving plasmon excitation, as proposed earlier by
Philpott.4 Subsequently, the connection of SERS intensities to
enhanced ﬁelds arising from localized surface plasmons in
nanostructured metals was noted by Moskovits.5 Forty-ﬁve years
later, tens of thousands of research papers have been published on
SERS,6 which discuss in great detail elements of the theory behind
it, the design of a wide variety of (mostly but not only metallic)
enhancing substrates, and their implementation in a wide variety of
applications. Indeed, SERS has become a research ﬁeld in its own
right, as a source of exciting scientiﬁc phenomena, as well as one of
the most sensitive analytical techniques currently available.
Numerous excellent review articles and even comprehensive
overviews of the technique have been published on various aspects
of SERS and related topics. There is, thus, probably no need to
perform an extensive literature review again. However, during the
recent 26th International Conference on Raman Spectroscopy (XXVI
ICORS, Jeju, Korea, August 26−31, 2018),7 some of us identiﬁed
the need to put together a comprehensive perspective to describe
the current state of the ﬁeld and the path that we expect will be
followed in the near future. We therefore joined eﬀorts to
identify the most active areas of SERS research and develop-
ment, including basic aspects and emerging phenomena,
materials synthesis, and major applications. We also decided
to include a section devoted to other “surface-enhanced”
techniques, which have seen signiﬁcant development in parallel
with and often proﬁting from lessons learned during the
optimization of SERS-related methods and materials.
The diﬀerent sections include not only both basic and state-
of-the-art concepts and methods but, because we consistently
attempt to present a view forward, also what we can expect
during the coming years, to guide and to inspire not only
currently active researchers but also young generations of
scientists from diﬀerent disciplines who can get excited about
this rich ﬁeld of research and its emerging branches into so
many diﬀerent directions.
MODELING AND NEW CONCEPTS
The use of modeling and advanced theory has become essential
for understanding SERS as a fundamental phenomenon and to
interpret and to predict experimental results obtained under
various conditions and in varying environments correctly. This
Figure 1. SERS involves inelastic light scattering by molecules
adsorbed onto corrugated metal surfaces such as silver or gold
nanoparticles.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
30


----- Page 4 (native text) -----
holds for SERS at the SM/single-particle level, as well as for
ensembles comprising either a few or many molecules/
particles. Theoretical modeling of SERS intensities and spectra
has a long history, which has been reviewed many times.8−15
There is now good agreement among researchers in the ﬁeld
that the overall EF is a combination of an electromagnetic
(EM) enhancement associated with plasmon excitation in
metal particles serving as the SERS substrate and a chemical
(CHEM) enhancement due to the target molecules being able
to transfer electrons to/from the metal particles in both ground
and excited states, often in the process of forming the metal−
molecule bond.
The Raman signal involves absorption of an incident photon
of frequency ωin (see Figure 1), coupling to an internal degree
of freedom of the molecule, typically a molecular vibration of
frequency ωvib, and re-emission at diﬀerent frequencies ωem =
ωin ± ωvib, where the sum/diﬀerence results in anti-Stokes/
Stokes Raman scattering, respectively. Three inelastic tran-
sitions are therefore involved in the process (absorption,
vibrational excitation, and re-emission); the vibrational
excitation occurs with a probability that depends on the
environment through the chemical interaction discussed above,
whereas the other two processes are controlled by the
availability of photonic states at the positions of the molecules.
In the absence of a structured environment (e.g., in solution),
the Raman process has a low probability, quantiﬁed in terms of
the optical cross section (i.e., the area of the incident beam
over which incident photons are eﬀectively converted into
emitted Raman photons) of ∼10−11−10−15 nm2, which
depends on whether the process is resonant or nonresonant
Raman (i.e., whether the incoming light is or is not resonant
with transitions between ground and excited electronic states
of the molecule). The low intensity of Raman scattering is
clearly insuﬃcient for many practical applications, and,
therefore, ﬁnding means of enhancing the Raman process is
often beneﬁcial. Such means are provided by the large optical
ﬁeld enhancement produced by suitably resonant structures. In
particular, the initial absorption process is directly proportional
to the local electric ﬁeld intensity at the molecule, which
plasmons in noble metal nanostructures can dramatically
amplify relative to the incident light intensity. Although SERS
can be obtained from the electric ﬁeld enhancement at single
NPs, it is advantageous to involve a more elaborate structure,
for example, by placing the molecules within nanometer-sized
gaps between two metal particles (so-called hotspots), which
enable intensity EFs as large as EF ≈105−106 to be routinely
reached.16−19
Hotspots can be produced not only at gaps between NPs but
also within NP junctions and ﬂat metal surfaces supporting
plasmon resonances. The resulting ﬁeld strength depends
strongly on the gap distance and other geometrical details. In
particular, the EM ﬁeld amplitude has an approximate inverse
gap dependence. The main characteristics for a typical SERS
hotspot, the extension of which lies in the 2−10 nm range, are
satisfactorily well-described within classical electromagnetism
by neglecting nonlocal eﬀects and only resorting to the
frequency-dependent dielectric functions of the materials
involved in the structure. When reducing the NP gap distance
below 1 nm, nonlocal eﬀects come into play, requiring a more
sophisticated treatment of the optical response. In addition, at
such small separations the enhancement of EM ﬁelds is so
strong that the optical response may become nonlinear (i.e.,
the threshold for nonlinear eﬀects is correspondingly reduced
in inverse proportion to the ﬁeld enhancement). In this strong
coupling regime, the intrinsic properties of the molecule−NP
system might be signiﬁcantly altered, which, in turn, aﬀects the
SERS intensities. Examples include the creation of hot
electrons at the NP surface that can trigger or catalyze
chemical reactions, change the photophysical and/or photo-
chemical properties of the adsorbed molecule, and modify the
excitation dynamics and the emergence of molecular opto-
mechanical eﬀects. In the extreme coupling regime (e.g., a
single molecule inside a nanometer-sized cavity, or picocavity),
classical models are no longer valid and must be comple-
mented by descriptions based on quantum-mechanical ap-
proaches. Therefore, speciﬁc and accurate modeling of Raman
and competing processes in subnano- to nanosized hotspots are
crucial in supporting and/or interpreting experimental results and
enabling the design of substrates with the desired SERS response.
Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering Mechanisms:
Electromagnetic Field Enhancement. The EM EF has
been the subject of numerous studies, typically using
computational electrodynamics calculations to determine the
enhanced electric ﬁeld amplitude E(ω) that arises when
plasmons are excited in an SERS substrate at frequency ω;
E(ω) is then evaluated at the molecular positions. The SERS
enhancement is normally approximated by averaging |E(ω)|4/
|E0|4 over the illuminated molecules, where E0 is the incident
(laser) ﬁeld amplitude. Actually, this analytical result neglects
the Stokes shift, which can be included through a slightly more
elaborate expression: |E(ω)|2|E(ω′)|2/|E0|4, where ω′ is the
Raman emitted frequency. A slightly more accurate approx-
imation is also obtained by correcting the |E(ω′)|2 factor to
account properly for the emission from the inelastic emission
dipole (sometimes termed dipole reradiation20). Another
important issue is related to the signiﬁcant ﬁeld gradients
that often exist as a consequence of the strong spatial
localization of the plasmon-enhanced ﬁeld;21,22 these gradients
contain nondipolar components that can eﬃciently produce
SERS involving dipole−quadrupole and quadrupole−quadru-
pole in−out polarizabilities; these eﬀects are obviously stronger
for transitions involving more spatially delocalized electronic
states in the molecule. Calculations based on dipole reradiation
and ﬁeld gradient eﬀects have rarely been performed, as the
structures of the NPs involved are not known accurately
enough to warrant this level of detail in the analysis. Indeed,
for most applications, the |E(ω)|4 expression produces results
that are good to approximately an order of magnitude. In fact,
10 years ago, pioneering work by Schatz and Van Duyne on
NP clusters used this level of theory23,24 and showed that the
EM EF for clusters of NPs is often the highest (experimentally
measured as ∼109) at wavelengths where the plasmon
resonance is “dark” (i.e., at wavelengths corresponding to a
dip rather than a maximum in the extinction spectrum). Dark
plasmon modes, which are often quadrupolar in character, can
nevertheless produce large electric ﬁelds in the electromagnetic
hotspots between NPs.24 In addition, it was found that the
dipole reradiation at wavelengths where the plasmon resonance
is dark can sometimes lead to stronger-than-expected far-ﬁeld
intensities, because the dipole ﬁeld of the adsorbed molecules
can more eﬀectively excite quadrupolar and higher-order
multipolar resonances than light plane waves can.
Although most numerical simulations of EM enhacement
have been limited to relatively simple geometries or at most a
few particles, ensemble eﬀects can be critical in the
performance of actual large-scale SERS samples. In a recent
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
31


----- Page 5 (native text) -----
example, state-of-the-art electromagnetic computation techni-
ques were used to simulate NP-based SERS substrates,
comprising hundreds of randomly organized gold NPs. The
authors unexpectedly concluded that NP morphologies that
provide large enhancements at the single-particle level, such as
nanostars, do not necessarily improve when organized in close-
packed arrays; in contrast, simpler morphologies (e.g., spheres
or rods) lead to signiﬁcantly increased SERS enhancement as
their surface density approaches full coverage (Figure 2).19
In addition to EM enhancements that can be calculated by
solving Maxwell’s equations for speciﬁc nanostructures, more
qualitative estimates of EFs based on simple model structures
(such as spheroids) have been developed25 and, recently, used
to understand SERS for randomly rough substrates made of
aluminum, gold, or silver over a wide range of wavelengths
from the ultraviolet (UV) to the near-infrared (NIR), in good
agreement with experimental data.26 Prediction of plasmonic
properties of NPs with arbitrary morphologies has also been
recently simpliﬁed by derivation of analytical expressions based
on parameters that stem from numerical modeling.27,28
Nonlocal eﬀects can also play a role in the EM mechanism;29,30
for example, although gaps between NPs lead to EM hotspots
that often dominate SERS measurements (leading to SM
sensitivity31), and although classical electromagnetics predicts
that enhancements should vary inversely with the gap size,32
for gaps with dimensions signiﬁcantly below 1 nm, quantum
eﬀects associated with electron tunneling between NPs
become important,21,33,34 changing the dominant plasmon
energies signiﬁcantly, usually resulting in a reduction in the EM
enhancement.
Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering Mechanisms:
Chemical. The chemical mechanism of SERS refers to
contributions to the Raman scattering that do not rely on
the EM environment (e.g., plasmon excitation), often because
they are associated with the transfer of electrons between
adsorbed molecules and the NP substrate. This can arise in
two ways, corresponding to electron transfer in the ground and
excited states of the molecule−metal system. The EF
associated with the former mechanism can be deﬁned in
terms of the static polarizability derivatives of the molecule−
metal system,35 which is a property that can be calculated using
electronic structure theory using a cluster model for the metal
particle, in which the particle is replaced by a small cluster of
metal atoms. This type of calculation produces a result that is
nominally independent of frequency, which reﬂects changes in
the polarizability derivative due to the transfer of charge by the
molecule adsorbed on the metal NP. Valley et al.36 obtained
values from such calculations for several substituted benzene
thiolates adsorbed on silver and gold substrates and compared
them to measured EFs. Because the substrates were the same
for all of the molecules considered, the variation in EF for the
various molecules was entirely due to changes in the chemical
enhancement. Theory and experiment were in agreement
within a factor of 2, and the values that showed a variation of
∼10 for the molecules considered corresponded to a chemical
enhancement in the 10−100 range.
Although the static polarizability derivative provides a simple
way to model the chemical eﬀect, including charge transfer
(CT) in the optical frequency response is necessary for a
complete understanding.37,38 Charge transfer is challenging to
estimate, however, as CT states are poorly described with
standard density functional theory (DFT) methods and
strongly mixed with plasmon excitations in models that couple
molecules to metal clusters. Thus, separating CT eﬀects from
plasmon excitations is not rigorously possible. One way to
make progress involves the use of semiempirical molecular
orbital methods, such as INDO/S,39 with parameters appro-
priately chosen to give reasonable plasmonic properties for
Ag.40 With this approach, it is possible to describe CT eﬀects
accurately and to separate CT and plasmonic contributions to
SERS for molecule/cluster models. Such a separation was
performed by modifying the INDO/S calculation so that terms
in the Hamiltonian responsible for CT between molecule and
metal were omitted, thereby yielding an electronic structure
that only includes EM eﬀects. The CHEM factor is then
generated by comparing results with and without CT for
frequencies where plasmon excitation occurs. In a study of the
pyridine SERS spectrum on a silver cluster, this analysis
generated a CHEM EF of 10 for excitation near the plasmon
resonance.41 It was also noted that there was a CT excited state
∼0.5 eV above the plasmon state and that this state produced a
substantial Raman enhancement (down by a factor less than 10
from the SERS enhancement) when the CT state was excited
on resonance. The signiﬁcant enhancement associated with CT
states provides rationalization for recent studies in which large
Raman enhancements were observed for systems composed of
organic molecules on organic semiconductor substrates, for
which plasmon excitation is not present.42
Figure 3 shows a recent result based on semiempirical
INDO/S calculations, for a CO molecule attached to a silver
tip, in TERS.43 The Ag-CO tip was located near a gold
substrate (see inset in Figure 3) under electrical bias, and the
Raman intensity of the CO stretching vibration was measured
as the bias was varied, resulting in an increased measured
intensity with increasing bias above zero. Results for three
diﬀerent theoretical models of this experiment are plotted, all
based on INDO/S with various approaches to deﬁning how
the bias induces a static potential between the tip and the
substrate. The calculations show that the intensity increase
stems from CT excited states that tune into resonance as the
bias becomes more positive. Thus, we directly see how CT
excited states can inﬂuence SERS intensities. The same theory
can also be used to connect SERS measurements to formal
potentials for TERS-based SM electrochemical studies.44,45
Figure 2. Predicted SERS enhancement as a function of surface
coverage, for monolayers of gold NPs with diﬀerent shapes (a).
Solid curves obtained for excitation at 785 nm light wavelength
(resonant with 65 × 21 nm nanorods); dashed curves obtained for
633 nm (resonant with 51 nm nanospheres) and 900 nm (resonant
with nanostars: 20 nm core, 10 nm branches). Schemes in (b)
illustrate low- and high-density NP surface coverage. Reproduced
from ref 19. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
32


----- Page 6 (native text) -----
We note that the Ag-CO TERS measurement can also be
performed by monitoring the shift in CO vibrational frequency
instead of Raman intensity as a function of potential bias, and
exciting developments have also been reported using the
Ag-CO system for atomic resolution imaging.46
Modeling of Molecular Species at the Surface.
Another challenge for theory in SERS involves the determi-
nation of spectra using computation, which possesses suﬃcient
precision to be used to determine the identity of the molecules
producing them. This activity is important in almost any study
where the identity of the species represented in the SERS
spectrum is required and especially so when SERS is used to
study chemical reactions on surfaces. Raman spectra can be
generated for isolated molecules using various electronic
structure codes; however, much uncertainty exists as to what
structural model should be used in the calculations. As noted
in the previous example, properly describing the chemical EF
requires an electronic structure calculation that includes the
molecule plus a metal cluster representing the plasmonic metal.
The choice of cluster model is important, and, for any model,
there are important questions as to which density functional is
best47 and what level of averaging over molecular orientations
on the cluster is needed to generate a meaningful result to be
compared with experiment.48 Ultimately, an exhaustive study
requires signiﬁcant computational resources, and, given the
level of uncertainty about what molecules are actually present,
their protonation and charge state, and possible decomposition
pathways, such studies soon become intractable. A greatly
simpliﬁed approximation that often works well is to calculate
the orientation-averaged spectrum associated with the
molecule in the absence of any metal atoms using a simple
functional like CAM-B3LYP. Figure 4 shows an example of this
type49 for the molecule bipyridine (BPY), including results for
both the H8 and perdeutero D8 isomers (where D8 is used to
determine if the spectra arise from single molecules or not).
The top panels show waterfall spectra associated with
experiments in which initially a relatively intense pulse of
532 nm light is used to irradiate BPY on a gold substrate for a
few seconds, followed by SERS spectra measured with 785 nm
every few seconds for hundreds of seconds after the pulse. The
top spectra in the lower panel are spectra measured for H8 and
D8, which are in excellent agreement with orientation averaged
spectra for BPY calculated using DFT (not shown). The
second spectrum shows the presence of additional modes (also
seen in the waterfall plots) indicating the presence of another
molecule. The bottom spectra in Figure 4 show calculated
spectra for anions of the H8 and D8 molecules, which are open-
shell molecules with low-lying excited states. The calculated
spectra match the extra peaks that show in the middle panel,
which enables the identiﬁcation of the extra molecules as
anions. This recently developed capability for generating
resonance Raman spectra of this type using the NWChem
program can clearly play an important role.49 Ultimately, this
work and a more recent study of the molecule trans-1,2-bis(4-
pyridyl)ethylene (BPE)50 demonstrate that 532 nm light
generates electrons that escape from the NPs and diﬀuse on
the surface, occasionally converting the molecules to anions,
sometimes with other conformational changes that include
isomerization, as observed in the SERS spectra. The fact
that the orientation-averaged spectra work well in this appli-
cation is likely a reﬂection of the fact that the molecules
being observed adopt many orientations on what is a randomly
roughened SERS substrate and that many of the molecules
that contribute to the results are not strongly coordinated to
the metal surface. The foregoing illustrates how SERS can be
Figure 4. Representative anion events for both BPY-h8 and BPY-d8.
(A) Top waterfall plot depicts time-dependent SERS data as a
function of optical pump time. Anion modes appear starting at
148 s, indicated by white dotted line. Bottom plot shows the
neutral spectrum for a BPY-h8 + BPY-d8 nanosphere assembly
(black); the midspectrum depicts the contribution from neutral
molecules plus BPY-h8 anion modes that appear (red); the bottom
spectrum shows open-shell DFT (CAM-B3LYP) calculation for the
radical BPY-h8 anion. (B) Waterfall plot from a diﬀerent
nanosphere assembly that shows a preference for BPY-d8 anionic
behavior, with anion activity appearing at 209 s of pump time. The
top spectrum in the lower plot consists of neutral molecules only
(black); the midspectrum is neutral plus BPY-d8 anion modes; the
bottom spectrum is DFT (CAM-B3LYP) calculated BPY-d8 anion
modes. Reproduced from ref 49. Copyright 2017 American
Chemical Society.
Figure 3. Comparison of experiment (top) and theory (bottom)
for the CO tip-enhanced Raman scattering intensity associated
with an Ag-CO tip structure near a gold surface, as a function of
potential bias. (inset) The tip model. Adapted from ref 43.
Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
33


----- Page 7 (native text) -----
used to study molecular surface chemistry using relatively
simple modeling.
Modiﬁed Electronic Absorbance of Molecules on
Surfaces. Many SERS studies have been and still are being
performed with analytes under resonant or preresonant condi-
tions. The main reason for this choice is practical: Raman cross
sections are much larger (typically by a factor of 102−106) than
in nonresonant conditions,51 yielding stronger signals for a
given SERS EF, facilitating fundamental studies of SERS,
notably in the context of SM detection.52 Other applications
also beneﬁt from increased signals, for example, the use of
SERS tags.
One consequence of using (pre)resonant analytes is that any
change in electronic resonance originating from the molecule’s
adsorption to the metal can dramatically aﬀect the SERS
measurements and their interpretations. In simpliﬁed terms, a
spectral shift toward the excitation wavelength increases the
Raman cross section of the adsorbed molecule, with respect to
its intrinsic cross section, resulting in an apparent increase in
the SERS EF, which operates in addition to the standard EM
enhancement53 and surface selection rules.54,55 And vice versa
for a spectral shift toward the excitation wavelength. Such a
change in Raman polarizability upon adsorption can be
classiﬁed as an instance of chemical enhancement,56,57 which,
however, has been largely overlooked, as it could only be
indirectly inferred from the SERS EF, which is aﬀected by
many factors.
Recent progress in experimental methods has enabled direct
access to the modiﬁed absorbance spectrum of dye molecules
such as rhodamine 6G (R6G) and crystal violet (CV)
adsorbed on metallic NPs (Figure 5), a ﬁrst important step
toward assessing the eﬀect of adsorption to the metal surface
on their SERS response. These experiments have revealed
three important points, discussed below in the case of R6G:
• The measured absorption enhancement is somewhat
smaller (∼4 on 60 nm silver nanospheres) than expected
from a simple isotropic EM model (the average surface
absorbance enhancement is here predicted to be ∼15),
which can be attributed to orientation eﬀects59,60 and
provides a complementary insight on the importance of
preferential orientation in adsorption for quantitative or
even semiquantitative interpretations of SERS exper-
iments.
• The absorbance spectrum of the adsorbed dye is shifted,
from ∼526 to 538 nm in the case of R6G. This relatively
small shift could be explained by a chemical
interaction61 or even by a purely EM interaction
(image-dipole eﬀect)60 with the metal surface. Such a
shift in electronic energy is nonetheless likely to aﬀect
the (resonance) Raman cross section by a non-negligible
factor: the Raman cross sections of bare R6G drop by a
factor of 103−104 from 532 nm (resonant) to 633 nm
(preresonant) excitation51,62a 12 nm red-shift in
resonance may therefore result in a measurable increase
in cross section at 633 nm. Although these eﬀects have
not yet been evidenced directly in the SERS EF, they
may explain why R6G has been so extensively used in
SERS studies at 633 nm excitation on silver particles,
even though its Raman cross section is relatively small at
this wavelength.51 For molecules such as CV, where a
dramatic change in the absorption spectrum is observed
upon adsorption on silver, with a peak shift from 590 to
500 nm (Figure 5a), even more substantial changes in
SERS EF can be expected.
• The absorbance spectrum varies with dye concentration,
with spectral changes observed from a surface coverage
as low as 0.1 nm−2 for R6G. This variation may be
attributed to electromagnetic dipole−dipole interaction
between adsorbed dyes on the surface and is akin to
the spectral changes observed in the formation of J- or
H-type dimers or aggregates of dyes. This interpretation
is further supported by recent theoretical developments
in the electromagnetic modeling of anisotropic shells of
dyes.59,60,63 The implications of such dye−dye inter-
actions in SERS have not yet been investigated but could
be important. It is generally assumed that SERS
enhancements are independent of analyte concentration,
at least in the low-concentration regime, where there is
no saturation of adsorption. Many studies have therefore
used average SERS signals as a proxy for the number of
adsorbed molecules, for example, to study adsorption
isotherms. Dye−dye interactions may aﬀect these
interpretations, and further work is needed to assess
their contribution in concentration-dependent SERS
experiments.
These recent results call for additional experiments, comple-
mented by EM theory and computational chemistry,61,64 to
reﬁne our understanding of this chemical enhancement
contribution to SERS and how it is aﬀected by the parameters
that govern adsorption of speciﬁc molecules: their adsorption
geometry, relative orientation, (in-)homogeneity in surface
coverage, and how much the electronic resonance is aﬀected
Figure 5. (a, b) Measured diﬀerential absorbance spectra of CV
and R6G adsorbed on 60 nm silver nanospheres at low surface
coverage, compared with the reference absorption spectra in water.
(c) Extinction and absorbance spectra of the silver nanospheres
(at 8 pM) compared with the bare R6G spectrum in water.
(d) Concentration dependence for the modiﬁed absorbance
spectra of R6G on 60 nm silver nanospheres. See ref 58 for
further experimental details.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
34


----- Page 8 (native text) -----
by adsorption. Pushing experiments to the UV region will be
highly desirable in this context, to probe the chemical changes
undergone by a wider range of relevant molecules. It will also
be instructive to consider diﬀerent types of NPs (silver, gold,
but also dielectric and core−shell particles) with diverse
shapes, to explore more comprehensively the full range of
molecule−surface interactions. Such studies also have direct
relevance to the pursuit of weak and strong coupling between
local emitters and NPs that sustain strong plasmonic or Mie
resonances, a topic of current interest for applications in
quantum optics,65 spasers,66 surface-enhanced photochemis-
try,67 and circular dichroism (CD).68
Strong Coupling Regime. A recently introduced insight is
the strong coupling regime between plasmons and molecular
excitons under SERS activity. In 1997, SM SERS was
discovered by EFs of 1010−1014 for dye molecules within
plasmonic NP aggregates69,70 and was successfully explained by
the EM model, under the condition that NP dimers included
SMs at their junctions.71 It was therefore concluded that the
EM model is the dominant SERS mechanism. The NP dimers
generating SM SERS enabled direct examination of various
relationships between plasmons and SERS associated with the
EM model, because in this strategy, one can identify the
plasmon “resonance” that is inducing Raman “enhancement”
by single-particle spectroscopy.72 These examinations also
highlighted phenomena involving SERS hotspots, as follows:
(1) Spectral changes in plasmon resonance by losing SERS
activity revealed that SERS hotspots may involve strong
coupling, in which EM coupling rates between plasmon and
molecular exciton resonances are larger than the dephasing
rates of both resonances. (2) The unusual laser energy
dependence of broad background emission spectra in SERS
was revealed as ultrafast surface-enhanced ﬂuorescence (ultra-
fast SEF), in which SEF rates exceed the molecular vibrational
decay rates, thus resulting in emission from vibrationally
excited states in the electronically excited state. (3) The
appearance of forbidden Raman modes in SERS spectra was
revealed as the breakdown of the selection rules of Raman
excitation by the ﬁeld-gradient eﬀect. These three insights are
related to the strong coupling regime; thus, for future
perspective the initially proposed EM in SERS model should
include these points to more appropriately explain the SERS
eﬀect at hotspots.
The main point for considering strong coupling regimes in
SERS is estimating the size of hotspots that generate SERS.
Various eﬀorts toward improving the EM model including
strong coupling revealed that the size of hotspots can be below
1 nm3 at the junction between NP dimers or NPs on ﬂat metal
surfaces.65 We present below these three topics. First, the
correlation between strong coupling and ultrafast SEF has been
also investigated as a function of the extremely small hotspot
size.73 Second, in photochemistry, such an extremely small
volume of the hotspots indicates that SERS may be useful to
analyze the internal structure of SMs.74 Indeed, SERS spectra
usually show spectral changes related to structural changes of
SMs located at hotspots.75 However, the perfect elucidation of
such structural changes is quite diﬃcult, because reference data
for assignment are lacking. Therefore, DFT calculations are
helpful to analyze SM structural changes induced by
oxidization, local decomposition, etc. Third, in photophysics,
SM SERS at extremely small hotspots indicates that (ultra- and
deep-) strong coupling can directly control the ground-state
properties of the molecule, because such changes by
ℏg
N
2
1
cannot be negligible for an SM condition, where ℏg is the
coupling energy, and N is the number of molecules involved in
the coupling.76 Thus, under the SM strong coupling condition,
a conventional nonresonant excitation condition can become
resonant, thereby resulting in a photochemical reaction by
applying energy below the conventional excitation energy
threshold and/or in nonlinear optical responses such as the
pumping eﬀect and classical Rabi splitting driven by photons.
Ultrafast SEF reveals the control of excited-state electron
dynamics of SMs at hotspots.77
Controlling the size of hotspots is important for the
investigation and application of strong coupling in SERS;
however, note that the size of conventional (zero-dimensional)
hotspots may be too small for application in practical devices,
utilizing the above-mentioned photochemical and photo-
physical phenomena. Thus, we expected that special types of
hotspots would be developed that can resolve the size problem.
One example is provided by one-dimensional hotspots along
the junction in nanowire (NW) dimers or between NWs and
ﬂat metal substrates.78 The two main characteristics of such
hotspots are (1) the volume is considerably larger (at least 104
times) than hotspots within NP dimers and (2) hotspots can
interact with propagating plasmon modes. The larger volume
of hotspots makes SERS phenomena stable by mitigating the
eﬀect of molecular ﬂuctuations. Interaction with propagating
plasmons may enable transfer of information at hotspots in
NW network systems, including zero- and one-dimensional
hotspots. We propose that research in this direction, that is,
considering the strong coupling regime and its extentive
phenomena including the control over the size of hotspots, will
lead to novel photoscience and phototechnology in SERS.
Extreme Interaction Regime (Quantum Eﬀects). For
many years, the SERS signal from a few or even SMs has been
described as being due to the local ﬁeld produced in the
vicinity of the pristine host nanoantenna, and the EFs were
obtained from standard electrodynamics methods, within the
local dielectric response theory.32,79 This initial classical descrip-
tion provided the main spectral features of the plasmonic
gap,71,80,81 including its spectral dispersion as the gap closes as
well as the dependencies of the intensity of the corresponding
local ﬁelds. This approach provided a fundamental under-
standing of the classical regime of interaction and served to
interpret numerous SERS experiments of molecules in colloidal
solution and in TERS conﬁgurations. However, synthesis and
fabrication methods have improved their capabilities to build
plasmonic nanoantennas, currently being able to reach gaps
down to a few nanometers and below 1 nm, where molecules
and material layers can be located.82 In this extreme regime of
interaction, quantum eﬀects due to the dynamics of the
electron gas forming the plasmon mode are revealed, and their
description requires theoretical approaches beyond classical
electrodynamics, as pointed out in the sections above.
An adequate approach to address the optical response, and
thus the local ﬁelds of plasmonic gaps at this extreme regime,
relies on solving the time-dependent Schrödinger equation
for the dynamics of the electron gas forming the gap. Such
an approach turned out to be very valuable to set the limits
of classical electrodynamics and to account for the actual
ﬁeld enhancements in the cavity. In particular, a quantum-
mechanical treatment of the optical response, at diﬀerent levels
of accuracy, accounts for (i) dynamical screening eﬀects in the
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
35


----- Page 9 (native text) -----
response, the so-called non locality;83 (ii) the eﬀect of spill-out
of the electrons at interfaces that can extend spatially a few
ångströms into the dielectric;84 (iii) quantum-size eﬀects,
which are relevant for small clusters and protrusions;85 (iv)
atomistic eﬀects, which sculpt the surface-charge density at
sub-nanometer dimensions;86,87 and (v) optical tunneling,
which sets conduction channels at optical frequencies even
before physical contact between the metallic surfaces, thereby
quenching and reshaping the distribution of the local ﬁelds34
sensed by the molecules and other sample materials.
This plethora of quantum eﬀects get to their epitome when
nanometer and sub-nanometer gaps with atomic-scale features
are formed within a plasmonic cavity. Theoretical approaches
attempted to face these challenges and describe the local
ﬁelds and, thus, the SERS signal, in these extreme situations.
A recent example showed how tunneling eﬀects produced
charge transfer between metallic interfaces in vacuum at ∼4 Å
gap separation,34 quenching the local ﬁeld, as experimentally
conﬁrmed.88,89 However, most of the practical realizations of
SERS in plasmonic gaps can still play safe, as most nanogaps
used in SERS are larger than half a nanometer, thereby
avoiding the onset of tunneling eﬀects. Nevertheless, some
conducting molecules might distort this general rule of
thumb,90,91 and conduction eﬀects between electrodes at
optical frequencies might be a matter to be considered more
deeply in the future.
In the realm of sub-nanometer plasmonic gaps, the
challenges for accurate modeling are diverse, and in one way
or another, many of them have to do with the quantum
description of either the plasmonic gap, the material sample,
the type of interactions, or all together. A remarkable
experimental achievement in a TERS conﬁguration managed
to obtain optical Raman maps for selected vibrational modes of
a single molecule with sub-nanometer resolution,74 thus even
competing with the signal obtained in STM. This level of
resolution required a previously unthinkable localization of the
local ﬁelds within the gap, far beyond the typical 5−10 nm
lateral plasmonic extent within the gap. Accurate atomistic ab
initio calculations based on time-dependent DFT (TDDFT),
which considered the actual distribution and conﬁguration of
atoms within a gap, revealed that atomic-scale localization of
the ﬁelds was indeed possible,87 thanks to the varying induced
electronic density proﬁle at single atoms acting as an atomic-
scale lightning rod.92 The actual ﬁeld localization in such a
situation is shown in Figure 6. The simplicity of the concept
provides an eﬀective description of this eﬀect by classical
means, where atomic protrusions in a cavity can be modeled by
corresponding classical interfaces that follow the electronic
density proﬁle.93 Such an extreme localization, as it may
happen in many tip apexes, might be responsible, to a large
extent, for the sub-nanometer resolution achieved in an
increasing number of experimental TERS realizations.74,94−96
This extreme localization not only aﬀects resolution but also
actually governs a dramatic breaking of Raman selection rules
at the SM level due to the action of the strongly
inhomogeneous ﬁelds induced at atomic-scale morpholo-
gies.97−99 Activation of unusual vibrational modes of SMs
under stable conditions has been reported in both
cryogenic74,99 and room-temperature conditions.100,101 Most
such features can only be explained in terms of this extreme
atomic-scale ﬁeld localization within the gaps, which have been
termed “picocavities” due to the ultrasmall eﬀective mode
volume sustained by the atomic features (see Figure 6).
An additional challenge of the current modeling and under-
standing of the Raman processes is associated with the possi-
bility of exploiting the optomechanical interactions between
molecular vibrations and plasmons, beyond the thermal
regime. The recently established analogy between nonresonant
Raman scattering and an optomechanical process102 has
enabled a description of the dynamics of plasmons and vibra-
tions in SERS, within the framework of cavity quantum electro-
dynamics (QED), with the use of a linearized interaction
Hamiltonian Ĥ int = −ℏgo(â†â)·(b† + b), where â†,â (b†,b) are
the plasmon (phonon) creation, annihilation operators, and go
is the vacuum optomechanical coupling, which is inversely
proportional to the eﬀective mode volume of the plasmonic
cavity, go ∝1/Veff. This quantum treatment has predicted a
nonlinear evolution of the Stokes and anti-Stokes Raman
signals, due to the optomechanical interaction.103 Such an
eﬀect has been revealed in molecules in the vicinity of
plasmonic picocavities, which boost the optomechanical
interaction, go, as a result of the extremely reduced eﬀective
mode volume.91 Molecular optomechanical pumping or
cooling in plasmonic cavities can overcome thermal
eﬀects,104,105 thereby opening the possibility of controlling
the vibrational dynamics and reactivity of molecules.106
Therefore, many unusual trends and variations of vibrational
lines in plasmonic SERS might now be reinterpreted in terms
of optomechanical interactions. The eﬀort to describe
theoretically this rich variety of molecular optomechanical
eﬀects in realistic plasmonic cavities results in the cavity-QED
framework.107 Cooling and pumping of vibrational modes,
resonant Raman processes, collective eﬀects due to self-
assembly of molecules within plasmonic gaps, or the statistics
of Stokes and anti-Stokes emissions are theoretical and
experimental challenges that the SERS community will need
to face sooner or later.
Another important issue in the theoretical description of
SERS has to do with the assumption of physical interac-
tions between sample (molecule) and cavity (plasmonic gap).
Figure 6. Artist’s view of a plasmonic gap formed by metallic
nanoparticles hosting a set of organic molecules. A picocavity is
formed due to the protrusion of a single atom, localizing the
electromagnetic ﬁeld at the atomic scale, thus producing sub-
nanometer resolution and close-to-strong optomechanical cou-
pling. Theoretical methods to address this extreme interaction
regime in surface-enhanced Raman scattering are outlined on the
sides, including electrodynamics, cavity QED, quantum chemistry,
and TDDFT.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
36


----- Page 10 (native text) -----
In practice, chemisorption of molecules on metallic surfaces
often produces a complex redistribution of the molecule−
substrate electronic structure and, thus, of its corresponding
polarizability, modifying vibrational modes and enabling
charge transfer.108 This eﬀect complicates the modeling and
simple description of Raman modes as well as the depend-
encies of their intensities, and it might require a combined
quantum description of the substrate−molecule hybrid,
together with the self-consistent action of the induced EM
ﬁeld at the cavity. In other words, the quantum realm of
vibrational spectroscopy in extreme atomic-scale cavities might
require the combination of aspects from condensed matter
physics, quantum chemistry, and classical or quantum nano-
optics, which turn SERS into a fascinating arena for theoretical
developments, as well as for experimental testing and
exploitation of unexpected eﬀects.
Outlook for Future Surface-Enhanced Raman Scat-
tering Applications. Research during the past few years has
opened opportunities for further intriguing SERS science and
technology, which, in our view, has been enabled by the
emerging capability to use bottom-up nanoassembly in a
reproducible, robust manner to form nanometer-sized gap
constructs. Let us consider two regimes, with either few or
speciﬁc numbers of molecules in a fully deﬁned nanoscale
geometry, or a paradigm for simple but robust solution-based
SERS sensing.
The ﬁrst is the nanoparticle-on-mirror (NPoM) construct,
which produces single gaps down to 0.3 nm between two
plasmonic metals that can be precisely ﬁlled with diﬀerent
molecular or monolayer systems (for a recent review of this
system see ref 109). It can be understood as a metal−
insulator−metal (MIM) waveguide that conﬁnes light, both
between the metals and laterally, to give less than 50 nm3
mode volumes. This system has improved understanding of the
role of molecular conductivity on SERS,91 as well as aided in
identifying the origins of SERS background emission (which
sets practical detection limits) as coming (partly) from
molecule−metal coupling110 and partly from the unavoidably
enhanced electronic Raman scattering of free electrons in the
metal walls.111,112 Careful kinetic studies of NPoMs show that
optically induced migration of individual metal atoms
dominates much of the dynamics,113 which can even induce
metallic nanowires to bridge across the gap, changing both
plasmon resonances and SERS.114,115 This work has been
extended to look at memristive electronic memory devices,116
to study individual charges hopping on and oﬀsingle redox
molecules117 (which shifts the SERS lines), and to study the
inﬂuence of electrochemical potentials on SERS.118 It has also
been demonstrated that single emitters can be precisely
assembled in NPoMs using DNA origami, thereby enabling
SERS of strong coupling systems.65,119 This and many ongoing
experiments reveal much of the nanoworld at interfaces,
showing it to be far more subtle, nuanced, and dynamic than
previously accepted.
A detailed campaign to study the SERS of NPoMs has
revealed the presence of transient sharp vibrational lines that
evolve. With an apparatus devised to drop the laser power
automatically as soon as these are detected and initially at
cryogenic temperatures, it was shown that the transient SERS
must originate from single molecules in the gap.99 A variety of
evidence showed that single Au atoms move partially out of
the close-packed metal surface to yield extra ﬁeld enhance-
ments of 3−5. Therefore, several-hundred-fold higher SERS
enhancements enable SMs to emit more signal than the
remaining hundred molecules in the gap.105,106 These
observations also resolve questions from past decades, such
as the spatial mapping and irreproducibility of TERS, as well as
how SM signals can be observed in SERS, likely emerging from
picocavities in the crevices of aggregated metal NPs (though
much less controllably). The same Au adatom behavior was
also recently shown at room temperature, using several million
SERS spectra to prove that the atom prefers to move from the
bottom planar Au mirror,101 at least in some cases. The
prospects for intriguing light−matter and catalytic interactions
in such atomic-scale regions are fascinating and ongoing.
The second regime of interest has been the use of colloidal
metal NP aggregates when the gaps are set by precise linkers
(e.g., cucurbit[n]urils, giving 0.9 nm gaps), which can ﬁlter
classes of small molecules from a heterogeneous soup into
SERS active reliable hotspots. This technology facilitated the
detection of neurotransmitters at clinical concentrations in
urine120 and of methanol at less than 1% in ethanol,121 and
these assays are also used in microdroplets122,123 and
microﬂuidics.124 This technology can be used to track chemical
reactions routinely125 and, thus, is now ripe for exploitation, for
example, in the form of the “Intelligent Toilet”, capable of
long-term personalized health monitoring. The ability to
explore fundamental science at the nanoscale through SERS
of individual, exquisitely controlled nanoassemblies, as well as
developing realistic societal tools for personalized medicine
and other challenges, puts SERS in great shape for continuing
developments (Figure 7).
SURFACE-ENHANCED RAMAN SCATTERING
SUBSTRATES
An important prerequisite for better understanding of SERS
and its applications in chemical analysis and SM detection is
the development of highly reproducible, reliable, and rational
substrates. “Rational” in this case means that the substrate has
quasi-uniform and predictable optical and near-ﬁeld properties.
The choice of the substrate type, material, and fabrication
method depend on the speciﬁc application or question to be
answered. More fundamentally and academically oriented
problems, such as the question of the dependence of SERS EFs
on hotspot size/geometry, require fabrication methods to tune
the plasmonic structure (at the single-particle level), pushing
Figure 7. Structures ranging from nanogap geometry (NPoM) to
nanoparticle sensing using CB:AuNP aggregates enable surface-
enhanced Raman scattering applications from single-molecule
detection to personalized medicine.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
37


----- Page 11 (native text) -----
the precision to ultimate limits that are usually time-consuming,
costly, and hardly possible to produce at large scales. However,
when focusing on (practical) chemical analysis, aspects other
than high precision are important, for example, large-scale
homogeneity and batch-to-batch reproducibility of the
substrate, cost-eﬀective and easy fabrication, robust SERS
signal intensity, substrate stability, high aﬃnity toward the
analyte of interest under given conditions, etc.
In this context, the concept of SERS substrates does not only
refer to solid substrates but also to colloidal NPs in a
dispersion medium (solution). Advantages of using colloidal
NPs include highly reproducible and cost-eﬀective synthesis
via bottom-up strategies, tailored optical properties over a wide
wavelength range by tuning particle shape and size, as well as
manifold surface functionalization, which render them
applicable in diﬀerent environments and for many analytes.
The most widely used NPs display a simple spherical
morphology, at the expense of exhibiting moderate Raman
signal enhancement as single particles because of their high
symmetry. Aggregated colloidal NPs still feature low cost while
often exhibiting very strong enhancement due to a three-
dimensional (3D) distribution of plasmonic hotspots. How-
ever, since colloidal aggregation is a dynamic process, SERS
spectra must be recorded within a certain time window,
meaning that the reproducibility of the SERS spectra strongly
depends on the precise experimental conditions used. In
contrast, anisotropic plasmonic single NPs enable substantial
Raman signal enhancement, due to the presence of intrinsic
hotspots at edges and corners, such as in nanorods (NRs) and
nanocubes, or at sharp protruding features, such as in
nanostars. Among all other shapes, gold nanostars have likely
attracted the most attention recently: their validity as eﬀective
SERS enhancing platforms was proven early on and has been a
motivation to pursue the investigation of their properties
further over the past decade.126−131 Within the general concept
of nanostars, we consider a variety of geometries and symme-
tries, and, therefore, we dedicate a section below to discuss this
particular shape class exclusively.
Although colloidal systems pose the potential problem of
aggregation in solution, this drawback can be overcome by
directing the self-assembly of colloidal nanoparticles into
homogeneous and ordered layers and arrays. Multilayered
systems and supercrystals oﬀer substrates with three-dimen-
sionally organized hotspot architectures. Alternatively, sophis-
ticated colloidal lithography and chemical etching methods can
be also applied. These methods all enable the hotspot size,
geometry, and density to be designed and engineered in a
reliable manner, over large areas. Some of the reported
assembly strategies enable the fabrication of substrates that are
not just restricted to ﬂat supports but can also be applied to
ﬂexible, curved, or rough supporting materials, thereby leading
to sensing applications.
The renewed drive to expand the materials base for
plasmonics beyond the coinage metals and aluminum,
motivated by both extension of localized plasmon resonances
into the infrared (IR), as well as issues around loss, tempera-
ture stability, and complementary metal−oxide−semiconduc-
tor (CMOS) compatibility,132 is expected to also have an
inﬂuence on the development of substrates for SERS.133
Transition-metal nitrides, transparent conductive oxides, metal
sulﬁdes, and doped oxides are all candidate materials for future
surface-enhanced spectroscopy substrates, and a survey of
these materials from this point of view is warranted.
Surface Chemistry, Stability, and Solution-Phase
Nanoparticles: A Balancing Act. Nanoparticles synthesized
using bottom-up synthetic methods are widely used as SERS
substrates. Most often these materials are synthesized via
metal-reduction routes in the presence of electrostatically
stabilized chemical species, dynamic stabilization using
molecules or ions with reversible aﬃnity for an interface, or
covalently attached surface ligands. Each of these surface
chemistries oﬀers diﬀerent advantages and disadvantages for
subsequent SERS applications, as these surface chemistries
simultaneously promote the suspension of the nanostructures
in solution, lead to the formation of EM hotspots for increased
SERS signals,134 and/or can block the metal surface from
adsorption of the targeted molecules when used for direct
detection.135 The latter mechanism can limit direct SERS
detection because of signal suppression arising from short-
range chemical enhancement mechanism routes associated
with SERS. Solution-phase NPs are inherently “metastable”,
because colloidal dynamics induce frequent collisions between
nanostructures due to Brownian motion.136,137 These materials
can remain stably suspended in solution for long periods of
time, yet they can also undergo degradation through
dissolution,138−140 aggregation,136,137 and/or sedimentation141
processes during storage and/or use. Although dissolution is
dependent on electrical potential diﬀerences between the metal
nanoparticle composition and other chemical species in
solution, both sedimentation and aggregation depend on the
dynamic movements of nanostructures in solution. The
kinetics of these processes can be modeled using collision
theory.142,143 In so doing and by treating nanostructures as
point charges moving in three dimensions in water at room
temperature, it is estimated that over ∼104 particle collisions
will occur per second in a 1 mL solution containing ∼5 nM
nanostructures.137 The energetics involved with the collisions
will dictate whether nanostructures aggregate, forming
potential hotspots for large SERS enhancement, generating
relatively larger aggregates in solution that can lead to EM
losses and particle sedimentation if the mass of the aggregates
overcomes buoyancy forces or remains stably suspended in
solution, thus exhibiting plasmonic properties that are
maintained.
Surface chemistry and the local environment surrounding
nanostructures in the solution phase control the energetics and
fate of these materials for SERS applications. Both molecule
orientation and dwell time at high-ﬁeld-strength locations must
occur, suggesting that adsorption is required.135 In addition,
the energetics of nanoparticle collisions must be considered,
because these inﬂuence the underlying plasmonic properties
and enhancement associated with SERS substrates.144 In other
words, both chemical and EM enhancement mechanisms
inﬂuence the observed spectroscopic signal, and these both
depend on the local environment surrounding the nanostruc-
tures and their surface chemistry. The probability of observing
an SERS signal for a given molecule increases as the analyte
exhibits more favorable binding energies and nonzero sticking
probabilities to an interface.145,146 Many parameters including
material composition, solvation, and local surface chemistry
can either promote or prohibit the sticking probability of a
molecule. In general, SERS signals are detectable for a given
molecule, if that molecule exhibits a larger attractive potential
to the surface versus its incident kinetic energy, thus increasing
its residence time at the interface and exceeding the collection
time window for an SERS measurement.135 It is well-established
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
38


----- Page 12 (native text) -----
that thiolate-containing molecules are excellent targets for
SERS measurements, because their residence times are large,
thereby promoting adsorption via displacement of stabilizing
agents and solvent molecules.
Not all molecules disrupt the local NP environment
suﬃciently for SERS measurements to be made, however. In
these cases, SERS can still be observed if the molecules are
trapped between small NP clusters. As such, the energetics of
NP interactions also inﬂuence the likelihood of observing
SERS signals. One model that is commonly used to describe
these interactions is the extended Derjaguin, Landau, Verwey,
Overbeek (xDLVO) theory.147−150 The xDLVO theory models
the pairwise interaction potential between two objects148−150 as
a function of van der Waals, electrostatic, and steric (osmotic
and elastic) potential energies.148−150 The sum of these
separation-distance-dependent interaction potentials can accu-
rately predict whether colloidal particles will form aggregates
(irreversible clusters), agglomerates (reversible cluster for-
mation), or will remain in an identical state as the initial
primary particles.137 In most cases, the short-range attractive
van der Waals potential is the driving force behind cluster
formation. It has been shown for both silver151 and gold137,144
particles that these attractive potentials depend on the size-
dependent dielectric constants of the metals and that the
magnitudes of these interaction potentials increase with
decreasing NP dimensions (for NPs with diameters below
∼100 nm). It was recently demonstrated that the smallest
dimensions of a nanostructure such as the tips of gold nanostar
spikes (i.e., branched nanostructures) drive NP clustering
behavior144 as well as the reproducible use of these materials in
SERS assays.152 Clearly, attractive interactions between
colloidal nanostructures in solution can shorten the average
separation distance, thus increasing the electromagnetic ﬁeld
strength at gaps between nanostructures and increasing SERS
signals. For visible light excitation, edge-to-edge NP separation
distances of 0.8−1.5 nm are likely ideal for maximizing the EM
enhancement of SERS chromophores between nanostruc-
tures.134 This range is limited at shorter separation distances
via quenching mechanisms81 and at larger separation distances
by ﬁeld decay.153−156
Surface functionalization, electrostatic potentials from ions
at the particle interface, and solvent ultimately provide
opposing forces to attractive potentials induced via van der
Waals forces.136,148,149 To understand how these parameters
inﬂuence interparticle separation distances and, in turn, SERS
signals, both electrostatic terms (dependent on ionic compo-
sition of the solution) and those that depend on solvent and
surface chemistry (i.e., osmotic and elastic potentials) must be
considered.136,148,149 In all, the sum of these interaction
potentials should be considered in a way that balances the
likelihood of molecule−interface aﬃnity for SERS detection
without yielding uncontrolled aggregates, if quantitative SERS
signals are sought. As such, how NP and medium attributes
contribute to these processes should be understood.137
Increasing ionic strength has been shown to compress the
electrostatic repulsive double layer137 and decrease solution
permittivity,157 thereby reducing electrostatic repulsive inter-
action potentials between colloidal nanostructures. Similarly,
the osmotic potential between nanostructures arises from the
competition of solvent molecules to solvate surface-bound
functional groups on two NPs at short interparticle spacing.
This stabilizing force comes into play when the edge-to-edge
separation distance between nanostructures is less than twice
the thickness of one adsorbate layer.136,148 When separation
distances are shorter than one adsorbate thickness, entropic
eﬀects arise from surface ligand compression,148 resulting in an
elastic contribution to the potential. These stabilizing forces
can be large, that is, exceeding 100/kBT, when the separation
distance between two SERS-active particles is less than 1 nm.
By comparison, the elastic potential is repulsive but smaller in
magnitude.
The various mechanisms involved in NP clustering ener-
getics oﬀer an opportunity in SERS detection, as equilibrium
separation distances between nanostructures can be tuned,
leading to separation distances ideal for SERS excitation at
visible wavelengths (0.8−1.5 nm). As shown in Figure 8,4 the
addition of a self-assembled monolayer composed of thioctic
acid, 6-mercaptohexanoic acid, or 11-mercaptoundecanoic acid
on ∼13 nm gold nanospheres yielded ideal interparticle
separation distances in this critical range, as diﬀerences in
monolayer thickness and packing density inﬂuence contribu-
tions to the energetics between NPs upon collision. Moving
forward, the metastability or the retention of plasmonic
properties by solution-phase SERS substrates will be key for
the reproducible use of these materials. As such, synergistic
contributions from attractive van der Waals potentials, electro-
static surface potentials, solvent composition, and surface
ligands could be balanced to facilitate the rational design of
solution-phase SERS assays while also considering nanoparticle
stability, fate, and interparticle interactions.
Anisotropic Nanoparticles: Nanostars. Although the
term nanostars is quite pervasive in the literature today, owing,
in particular, to the wealth of applications that these particles
have found, it identiﬁes in reality a group of NPs with a wide
variety of morphologies, whose only common trait is to have a
uniform core, often spherical, and several branches of variable
sharpness, length, number, and crystallinity, depending on the
synthetic method.
The ﬁrst reports of branched gold NPs appeared in the early
2000s involving the use of cetyl trimethylammonium bromide
(CTAB) and ascorbic acid, with or without NaOH.158,159
Hafner then proposed in 2006 the term nanostar to describe
gold NPs characterized by spherical cores and protruding
spikes, which he synthesized from both CTAB-capped seeds
and commercial seeds employing ascorbic acid as the reducing
agent, in the presence of NaOH.160 However, only the system-
atic experimental studies by Liz-Marzán and co-workers,161−164
and the theoretical explanation of their plasmonic response by
Nordlander and co-workers,165 established gold nanostars as a
very speciﬁc NP morphology, with streamlined and uniﬁed
synthetic protocols. Nonetheless, these particles can still be
found in the literature under a wide variety of names. For
Figure 8. Total interaction pair potentials between two (···) Au@
TA, (- - -) Au@MHA, and () Au@MUA nanoparticles predicted
using xDLVO theory. Reproduced from ref 137. Copyright 2015
American Chemical Society.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
39


----- Page 13 (native text) -----
instance, they have been deﬁned as branched NPs,166 nano-
ﬂowers,167 multipods (tetrapods, hexapods, or octapods),168
nanourchins,169 highly branched nanostructures,170 hedgehog
NPs,171 spiky NPs,172 wrinkled NPs,173 nanodendrites,174
nanopopcorn,175 nanoﬂowers,176 and even nanoechinus.177
Although one can understand that an NP called nanopopcorn
may have shorter and more rounded branches than another
termed nanourchin, in certain instances the diﬀerentiation has
become quite blurry, especially as the ﬁeld has moved forward
during the past 10 years, and research has focused more on the
application, rather than the synthesis and detailed character-
ization, of these particles. After a decade of research, thus,
clariﬁcation is needed as to what are the deﬁning parameters
that characterize a nanostar, including a neat classiﬁcation of
the synthetic protocols.
The synthesis of gold nanostars was ﬁrst proposed as a
seeded protocol involving the use of CTAB as the surfactant.160
Later on, a poly(vinylpyrrolidone) (PVP)-mediated protocol
was proposed161 that produced high yields of reproducible
gold nanostars with multiple short spikes when conducted in
dimethylformamide (DMF). Interestingly, another seeded
approach (mediated by cetyltrimethylammonium chloride
(CTAC)) was reported roughly at the same time and involved
the use of four growth solutions to produce regular nanostars
with short branches,178 resembling what we currently deﬁne as
multipods. Such multipod-like nanostars, with 10 identical
(short) pyramidal arms and twinned morphology, can
currently be synthesized with impressive uniformity via a
diﬀerent seeding method employing a single growth solution
(Figure 9).179 Later, a seeded growth method mediated by
4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid (HEPES)
buﬀer was proposed by Pompa and co-workers,180 who
obtained nanostars with short, rounded spikes, protruding
from a large spherical core. Interestingly, HEPES and other
kinds of Good’s buﬀers are now regularly employed to produce
NPs with only four to ﬁve spikes, in the seedless version of the
synthesis.181 The advantage of using HEPES is that its
biocompatibility discards toxicity concerns that can be raised
when polymers or surfactants are employed instead (e.g.,
CTAB). Eventually, Vo-Dinh proposed a surfactant-free, seed-
mediated method that led to the tunable synthesis of
biocompatible gold nanostars stabilized only by ascorbic acid
without requiring the use of toxic surfactants (e.g., CTAB).182
This type of nanostar has arguably led to the most intense
signal enhancements in direct SERS sensing applications so far,
likely due to the approachable metallic surface that is not
hindered by the presence of surfactants and, perhaps, because
of the presence of a signiﬁcant amount of silver used in the
synthesis.183 Although the majority of protocols involve the use
of seeds, a few seedless methods have been reported as well, in
addition to that mediated by HEPES.184,185 One protocol
involved the use of either glucosamine or glucosaminic acid as
the only reagents needed for both reduction and induction of
shape anisotropy.185 Following this method, Feldmann and
co-workers proposed another seedless method mediated by
CTAB,186 which enabled the study of SERS properties at the
single-particle level.165 Overall, while the seedless methods
may appear more advantageous for their simplicity, they aﬀord
only limited tunability and lead to higher polydispersity. One
question that arises now is what deﬁnes monodispersity in
branched NPs? Is it the overall diameter, or the aspect ratio of
the spikes? Or is it the number of spikes rather than their
sharpness? These questions become even more important
when the nanostars are characterized by high shape aniso-
tropy, such as those ﬁrst proposed by Pallavicini and
co-workers187 and recently studied more in depth at the
Fabris group (Figure 9).188
If we go back chronologically through the literature on a sort
of journey down memory lane, we realize that, during their ﬁrst
years of existence, gold nanostars were thoroughly studied and
characterized with a variety of technical tools, including
femtosecond laser spectroscopy,189 dark ﬁeld scattering,190
photoelectron emission microscopy,191 and two-photon photo-
luminescence.182 Their nonlinear response was explored,192
along with their performance in SERS.160−165,179,183,192,193
Similarly, their optical response was theoretically modeled in
primis by Nordlander and co-workers165 but also by García de
Abajo and others.161,182,193,194 Thereafter, the community has
steered away from these studies, perhaps lured by the excep-
tional ﬁeld enhancements nanostars produce and the
possibility of using them for chemical sensing, intracellular
imaging, or catalysis. Because of this, fundamental studies on
the synthesis and growth mechanisms or on the theoretical and
computational understanding of their plasmonic response have
substantially decreased in number.
In the past couple of years, however, the community has
turned back to tackle a better understanding of these intriguing
NPs. The growth of symmetric nanostars has been performed
in microﬂuidic devices195 and followed in real time by liquid
cell transmission electron microscopy (TEM),196 their puriﬁ-
cation via density gradient centrifugation was reported,197 their
dark ﬁeld response was studied in great detail and conﬁrmed
computationally,198 and systematic studies to optimize mono-
dispersity and plasmonic response of surfactant-free nano-
stars were performed.199 Detailed accounts on the growth
mechanism of PVP-capped gold nanostars were reported,200
and the inﬂuence of seed morphology and silver nitrate con-
centration on the ﬁnal morphology and stability of nanostars
with few, long, high aspect ratio spikes was also studied.188
Because gold nanostars are generally characterized by limited
shelf lives, the parameters aﬀecting their stability were analyzed
in detail by Haes and co-workers.144 Along the same lines, the
thermal stability of nanostars was studied in 3D in real time by
Bals and co-workers, who showed that faster atomic migration
from the tip to the base of the spike occurs as the temperature
increases.201 Finally, 3D ﬁnite element method simulations
were reported to understand in detail the origin of the
plasmonic resonances of gold nanostars with highly elongated
spikes, and their 3D coupling behavior was proposed.202
In the wake of this renewed interest in the fundamental
properties of gold nanostars, we need to ask ourselves which of
these particles’ properties are most relevant to SERS. How do
we calculate the EF of substrates produced by such com-
plicated particles? We could simplify their morphology188 or
ﬁnd methods to evaluate their extinction coeﬃcient and
surface areas.203,204 But, how do we move forward to ensure
that each nanostar produces the same enhancement? In many
applications this may not be an issue, but if we think about a
parallel between SERS tags and ﬂuorescent dyes, how will we
make the former competitive if their response is inconsistent?
Also, could an improvement on the quality, tunability, mono-
dispersity, and reproducibility of nanostars improve the chance
for SERS to become truly quantitative? Although artiﬁcial
intelligence appears to be inﬁltrating every area of science,
there is an opportunity to understand how these tools can be
leveraged ﬁrst to optimize and then to drive the synthesis of
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
40


----- Page 14 (native text) -----
gold nanostars to extend the reach of SERS toward true
applicability in medicine, forensics, and catalysis, or even more.
Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering (SERS) in Sin-
gle-Nanoparticle Dimers (Precision SERS). A set of
substrates that are particularly interesting for understanding
the fundamental mechanism of SERS are lithographically
prepared metal nanostructures that have a single or very few
hotspots, that is, lithographic plasmonic oligomers.89,205,206
They may be fabricated in large quantities with excellent
control over their geometry, especially over the gap size
between the plasmonic building blocks. Subtle geometrical
changes enable tailoring of the oligomers, for example, to
support Fano resonances between two optical excitations.207,208
A key advantage of plasmonic oligomers is that their structure
is accessible by electron and force microscopies, enabling us to
relate their structure to their optical properties and SERS
Figure 9. Gold nanostar morphologies vary substantially depending on the synthetic protocol used. (A) PVP-capped gold nanostars
synthesized via seed-mediated approach. Adapted with permission from ref 189. Copyright 2012 Elsevier B. V. (B) A Good’s buﬀer-
mediated seedless method yields nanostars with few rounded branches. Adapted from ref 181. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.
(C) Multipod nanostars with pyramidal branches can be synthesized with high control and reproducibility employing PVP in the presence of
dimethylamine. Adapted from ref 179. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (D) Gold nanostars with few, long spikes can be
obtained with high reproducibility employing Triton X 100 as surfactant. Adapted with permission from ref 188. Copyright 2019 Royal
Society of Chemistry. (E) Tunable spike length and number can be achieved in gold nanostars employing ascorbic acid as the capping agent.
Adapted from ref 199. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
41


----- Page 15 (native text) -----
eﬃciency. The optical properties of plasmonic oligomers have
been studied via far-ﬁeld absorption and scattering, as well as
by near-ﬁeld optical mapping.207,209−213
Some experimental data obtained from SERS by plasmonic
oligomers challenged our theoretical description of SERS. For
systematic studies of SERS by a single, well-deﬁned hotspot,
Raman probes have been explored and found to be highly
beneﬁcial. A supersharp Si tip, for example, was used to
correlate the EM near ﬁeld with the SERS enhancement.
A dual scattering scanning near-ﬁeld microscope/surface
enhanced Raman setup correlated the spatial distribution of
the enhanced ﬁeld with the distribution of the SERS signal
produced by the Si tip, ﬁnding excellent agreement of the
hotspot shape and relative intensity pattern with the EM
enhancement model.213 Another interesting probe comprises
graphene and other two-dimensional (2D) materials, which are
transferred onto plasmonic oligomers.214,215 Graphene is a
nonresonant Raman scatterer, with a constant cross section in
the IR and visible energy ranges.216,217 Thus, any changes in
the SERS intensity with respect to polarization, laser energy,
and so on are caused by the plasmonic hotspot (as opposed to
intrinsic variations in the Raman scattering cross section that
occur in many other materials).214,218 Conversely, the extreme
localization of SERS hotspots enables strain detection in 2D
materials with subwavelength resolution, using phonon
frequencies as a marker for strain.219 To study how plasmonic
enhancement depends on the excitation wavelength, the laser
excitation was varied in small steps (∼5 nm) in SERS experi-
ments on graphene, coupled to a plasmonic dimer. The SERS
resonance proﬁle found a resonance that diﬀered strongly
(∼200 meV) from the plasmonic resonance obtained by elastic
scattering in dark-ﬁeld spectroscopy.215 The discrepancy was
much larger than the expected diﬀerence between near- and
far-ﬁeld resonances (<50 meV) and remains to be resolved.
Another key feature that requires additional experimental
studies is the total SERS enhancement. First sets of quanti-
tative experiments were performed on individual hotspots
where the plasmonic nanostructures were imaged with electron
and force microscopies, but the position, density, and
orientation of the molecular Raman probes were inaccessible
experimentally.23,220−222 The studies reported an experimental
SERS enhancement that was 102−104 stronger than predicted
by accompanying simulations. A further reﬁnement of this
approach involved Raman reporter molecules (α-sexithio-
phene) encapsulated in carbon nanotubes (6T@CNT), as
shown in Figure 10.223 Carbon nanotubes were used as nano-
containers to carry molecules into the plasmonic hotspots,
thereby making molecular position and orientation visible by
scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and AFM. 6T@CNT
have added beneﬁts in that the large distance between 6T
molecules and the gold surface (large on atomic scales, several
nm), as well as the presence of a carbon wall between 6T and
the gold surface, prevent both enhancement by surface
roughness and chemical enhancement. Nevertheless, the
experimentally determined enhancement of almost 105 was 2
orders of magnitude higher than that simulated for the
conﬁguration in Figure 10.223 Our current understanding of
SERS thus appears to miss ingredients that can explain the
higher experimental intensity, as well as the apparent shift in
resonance energy. Recent proposals to describe SERS within
the microscopic description of the Raman eﬀect and within the
framework of optomechanics may guide us toward a full
description of the eﬀect.102,105,224 Such a description may need
to include more phenomena explicitly related to strong light−
matter coupling, such as superradiance and Rabi shifts of
plasmonic resonances.225
Self-Assembled Nanoparticles. Monolayers at Liquid−
Liquid Interfaces. The quest for uniform, reproducible, and
aﬀordable enhancing substrates aimed at realizing the potential
analytical applications of SERS has led to substrates that have
generally fallen into two broad classes: aggregated colloidal
NPs and solid substrates carrying plasmonic nanostruc-
tures.227−230 Solid substrates are generally more stable and
convenient to handle, both in use and in storage, but the
sophisticated fabrication procedures typically required for their
production render them considerably more expensive than
aggregated colloidal NPs.
Metal liquid-like ﬁlms (MeLLFs) combine the advantages of
conventional aggregated colloids and solid substrates. Because
they consist of a densely packed monolayer of colloidal Ag/Au
NPs assembled at the interface of two immiscible liquids, they
are easy and inexpensive to prepare but still provide stable
hotspots.231 The key to inducing self-assembly of colloidal
Ag/Au NPs into MeLLFs at liquid−liquid interfaces (LLIs) is
to remove the electrostatic repulsion between adjacent par-
ticles at the interface. For Ag/Au NPs, this has typically been
achieved through surface functionalization using strongly
adsorbing charge-neutral organic “modiﬁer” molecules, such
as thiols.232,233 However, these strongly adsorbing modiﬁers
may also block the adsorption of analytes to the surface of the
enhancing particles. Bell and co-workers recently reported that
charged colloidal Ag/Au NPs can be induced to assemble at
LLIs without any surface modiﬁcation by using hydrophobic
“promoter” ions, such as tetrabutylammonium (TBA+), which
carry an opposite charge to the NPs. Such promoter ions act as
charge-screening agents and, thus, reduce the electrostatic
repulsion between adjacent particles at the oil side of the LLI
(Figure 11)231,234 so that densely packed interfacial NP ﬁlms
Figure 10. Quantitative SERS enhancement using 6T molecules
encapsulated in CNT. (a) Encapsulation process, adapted from ref
226. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (b) SEM image
of a gold dimer with 6T@CNT deposited in the gap. (c) Scanning
near-ﬁeld optical microscopy image of the plasmonic hotspot.
(d) SERS (red) and Raman (black) spectra of 6T measured under
plasmon resonance conditions (638 nm). The total enhancement
on several dimers varied between 3 × 104 and 9 × 105, cor-
responding to 1 × 106 to 4 × 107 for the enhancement of the
Raman cross section. Reproduced with permission from ref 223.
Copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
42


----- Page 16 (native text) -----
form spontaneously when an aqueous Ag/Au colloid is shaken
with an immiscible organic solvent in the presence of a low
concentration of promoter. The particles within these reﬂective
MeLLFs are optically coupled and yield strong SERS enhance-
ment at a level similar to that obtained from aggregation of the
parent colloids. However, unlike aggregated colloids, MeLLFs
are typically stable for days and have excellent signal
uniformity, with a striking relative standard deviation of 1.1%
in absolute signal intensity over millimeter-scale enhancing
areas.231 Moreover, since MeLLFs lie at the water−oil inter-
face, they directly interact with analytes dissolved in either
phase for in situ detection of both soluble and insoluble
analytes in water, such as dipicolinic acid and 4-mercapto-
benzoic acid, down to below parts per billion levels. The ability
to perform dual-phase analysis is extremely important, because
it facilitates applications of SERS in various ﬁelds, ranging from
the detection of important analytes with low solubility in water,
such as hydrocarbons and explosives, to the in situ monitoring
of chemical reactions in organic solvents.
Apart from being a versatile enhancing substrate as shown
above, MeLLFs can also be used as a simple precursor for
constructing bulk-scale solid-enhancing substrates with densely
packed, uniform hotspots on their surfaces. Stable and robust
enhancing substrates carrying a monolayer of densely packed
Ag/Au NPs can be created by simply dip-coating various rigid
substrate materials in MeLLFs.231,235 Using MeLLFs-coated
transparent quartz plates as the enhancing material enabled
continuous in situ SERS monitoring of the headspace directly
above various bacterial cultures and revealed strong character-
istic bands from chemisorbed dimethyl disulﬁde (DMDS).235
Because DMDS is a fermentative metabolite commonly
produced by a variety of viable bacteria, it can be used as a
general SERS marker compound for the identiﬁcation of viable
bacteria cultures. With a hand-held Raman system, the
sensitivity limit for headspace SERS detection of E. coli
DH5a was found to be 1.5 × 107 CFU/mL, which corre-
sponded to detection of bacterial infection within 15 min of
inoculation of the growth medium. This combination of
generality and speed oﬀers a convenient and low-cost bedside
detection of bacterial infections, as well as rapid and high-
throughput screening of antibiotics against speciﬁc bacterial
infections.
Monolayers at Liquid−Air Interfaces. The main disadvan-
tages that come with dip-coating MeLLFs onto solid substrates
are the weak attachment of the NPs to the surface of the
substrate material through van der Waals forces and that the
initial particle packing of the MeLLFs at the LLI may be
perturbed when the deposited ﬁlm is dried. Ideally, a method is
required to transform the mobile interfacial particle arrays into
bulk freestanding ﬁlms that are strong enough for routine
handling while retaining their initial nanostructure. This
transformation can be achieved by growing a supportive thin
polymer ﬁlm onto the MeLLFs, at the organic side of the LLI,
through in situ solvent evaporation-induced deposition of
predissolved polymer, as shown in Figure 11.236 This approach
results in materials with particles anchored onto the surface of
the supporting polymer ﬁlms, with the majority of their
surfaces still remaining exposed, rather than being trapped
within the polymer layer, which is why they have been named
surface-exposed nanoparticle sheets (SENS). Importantly,
neither the self-assembly nor the polymer-deposition process
involve material-speciﬁc chemical reactions, which means that
this approach can readily be used to generate bulk-scale (100s
of cm2), ﬂexible, and robust NP/polymer hybrid materials
carrying various types of densely packed plasmonic NP surface
layers. Because the initial packing of the particles at the LLI is
preserved, the optical properties of the SENS resemble those of
the parent MeLLFs, and they exhibit strong and uniform SERS
enhancement. With monodisperse spherical AuNPs ca. 50 nm
in diameter as the plasmonic components in SENS and
thiophenol (TP) as the probe analyte, the EF and average
signal uniformity within 1.5 × 1.5 cm2 areas were measured to
be ca. 107 and 8%, respectively.237
A signiﬁcant advantage that arises from the combination of
ﬂexibility, robustness, and exposed plasmonic surface in SENS
is that they can be physically pressed into contact with solid
analytes to achieve solvent-free quantitative SERS measure-
ments, as shown in Figure 11.238 Because SERS requires the
target molecules to sit in plasmonic hotspots, which are
typically only a few nanometers across, in order for solid
samples to be able to diﬀuse into enhancing regions they are
normally either dissolved into a solvent or vaporized prior to
the analysis. However, it may not be desirable or even possible
to dissolve the sample, for example, if the structure of the
analyte changes in solution or the physical form of the sample
Figure 11. (A) Schematic illustration of “promoter” induced NP
interfacial self-assembly. (B) SEM characterization of SENS
showing short-range hexagonal particle packing. Insets 1 and 2
show optical images of a Au MeLLF and a Au SENS, respectively.
Inset 3 is a tilted SEM image of SENS showing the NPs anchored
in the polymer. (C) Schematic illustration of SENS used for
solvent-free SERS analysis. Adapted with permission from refs 234
and 238, copyrights 2016 American Chemical Society and 2018
Elsevier B. V., respectively.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
43


----- Page 17 (native text) -----
needs to be retained. Since the enhancing hotspots in SENS
are exposed and physically accessible but also ﬁrmly anchored
onto a robust and ﬂexible polymer substrate, solid analytes are
pressured into the enhancing hotspots in SENS to generate
intense SERS signals. Examples of solid dry samples ranging
from explosives to pharmaceuticals have been demonstrated
using this approach, which enables quantitative SERS analysis
down to picogram levels. Moreover, the excellent signal unifor-
mity in SENS means that the physical distribution of the
analytes can be mapped using the SERS signal intensity, which
allows nondestructive, solvent-free SERS imaging.
Related studies were performed by using gold NPs with
diﬀerent morphologies and a variety of surface coatings,
providing also various degrees of hydrophobicity. Indeed,
deposition and self-assembly at the water−air interface can be
facilitated by using NPs covered with hydrophobic surface
ligands, as recently shown for Ag and Au nanospheres of
diﬀerent sizes up to 200 nm, as well as anisotropic Au
nanorods, nanotriangles, and nanostars, using a mixture of
thiolated poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG-SH) and 1-dodecane-
thiol in chloroform, leading to SERS enhancement factors at
785 nm for thiophenol as high as 3 × 106 for AuNR mono-
layers.239 Interestingly, the same study showed that dense
monolayers of Au nanostars are not as eﬃcient, in agreement
with numerical simulations that demonstrate collective optical
eﬀects leading to lower near-ﬁeld enhancements.19 Liquid−air
interfaces were also used to monitor the optical and Raman
enhancement properties of gold nanospheres and nanorods, in
situ and in real time; by watching the dynamic response of NP
positioning at the interface, the authors identiﬁed the need to
include X-ray reﬂectivity and grazing-incidence small-angle
X-ray scattering (GISAXS) measurements to determine
interparticle distances accurately at the interface.240
Multilayers. Applications of SERS require large-area sub-
strates with reliable and reproducible enhancement at a
predeﬁned wavelength and scalable production at low cost.
Despite the availability of substrates partly meeting such
requirements (see previous section), most of them still suﬀer
from expensive fabrication methods (lithography) or display a
random distribution of hotspots. Recent eﬀorts have focused
on improving the organization of NPs within thin ﬁlms, toward
more intense and uniform distribution of hotspots. A recently
introduced substrate comprises self-organized colloidal gold
NPs with diameters of more than 30 nm (Figure 12). The NPs
self-organize into hexagonally packed layers that cover up to
square millimeter areas.241 Particularly interesting are the
pronounced plasmonic resonances in the near-IR that arise
for NP multilayers, for example, in the peak labeled DM in
Figure 12. Such resonances originate from plasmons with
vanishing dipole moment that are normally considered
optically forbidden.242 These excitations are optically active
because of the large NP diameter and the retardation of the
incoming light. Their energy and lifetime are tuned by NP
diameter and gap size, but for a given structure the excitations
are uniform across the entire sample area.242,243 The eﬀect of
the dark mode on SERS is illustrated in Figure 12 for excitation
at 785 nm (1.58 eV). No plasmon gets excited in the gold NP
monolayer (Figure 12), resulting in the Raman spectrum of
polystyrene without SERS enhancement. For the bilayer, an
increase is observed in the overall scattering intensity, because
the laser is in resonance with the dark plasmon mode; the
additional intensity corresponds to 104 enhancement. Adding
more layers increases the number of plasmon excitations to the
gold multilayer spectrum (Figure 12).242 For thicker ﬁlms,
these modes transform into standing waves, similar to what is
observed for disordered 3D NP arrangements.244 Nanoparticle
multilayers and crystals open the route toward tailoring the
SERS enhancement to a speciﬁc laser excitation and analyte
wavenumber for large-area SERS substrates. The plasmon
resonances may be matched to the incoming and scattered
photon wavelength by controlling the system parameters.
In a more elaborate development, Klajn and co-workers
applied a liquid−air self-assembly method to obtain binary
multilayers composed of Au and Fe2O3 NPs, which were then
treated to remove the iron oxide chemically, leaving so-called
gold “nanoallotropes”. The resulting highly ordered hierarch-
ical structure displayed highly eﬃcient SERS enhancement due
to the availability of small interparticle gaps (hotspots) and
larger ones that enable the analyte molecules to diﬀuse through
the entire superlattice.245
Vertically Aligned Au Nanorod Arrays. In the search for
substrates that provide uniform SERS enhancement, self-
assembled arrays of anisotropic plasmonic nanostructures with
a regular pattern of hotspots oﬀer additional elements for
optimization and light manipulation. Mono- and multilayered,
vertically aligned gold nanorod (AuNR) arrays have been
obtained through self-assembly by keeping a balance between
AuNR concentration and physicochemical parameters of the
solvent. For example, Tay and colleagues246 achieved large,
vertically aligned AuNR superlattices by adjusting NaCl con-
centration in a colloid containing 2 nM AuNRs. An experi-
mentally determined critical AuNR concentration of 2.0 nM
Figure 12. Self-organized gold nanoparticle layers as surface-
enhanced Raman scattering substrates. (a) TEM images of
hexagonally packed gold nanoparticles in a monolayer (left),
bilayer (middle), and trilayer (right). BM−bright mode, DM−dark
mode. (b) Absorption spectra and plasmon eigenmodes of the gold
layers shown in (a). (c) Raman spectrum of polystyrene measured
on the monolayer (black) and the bilayer (red). The 5−10 increase
in total scattering intensity corresponds to ∼104 enhancement of
the Raman cross section. Adapted with permission from refs 242
and 243. Copyrights 2018 American Chemical Society and 2019
Royal Society of Chemistry, respectively.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
44


----- Page 18 (native text) -----
and 50 mM NaCl produced well-ordered vertically aligned,
hexagonally close-packed AuNR array as shown in Figure 13.
The self-assembly and formation of AuNR superlattices occurs
while the rods are suspended in the aqueous phase, so that the
ionic strength of the solution aﬀects the way AuNR rafts are
assembled on the planar substrate. As previously observed in
similar systems, the self-assembled vertically aligned AuNRs
produce hexagonally packed structures containing a regular
pattern of hotspots in the longitudinal interparticle junctions
between nanorods, when excited with an electromagnetic
radiation polarized parallel to the planar carrier substrate. The
elongated rod shape and vertically aligned assembly facilitate
trapping of the analyte of interest within the interparticle
region with high local ﬁeld intensity, making it an ideal SERS
sensor. As prepared, the surfaces of AuNRs are passivated with
CTAB molecules, which provide necessary electrostatic
repulsion between AuNR and play a key role in the self-
assembly process. For the AuNR array to function as an SERS
sensor, it is necessary to remove some of the surface-bound
CTAB molecules to enable the analyte of interest to reach the
highly enhanced interparticle junctions. Exposure to UV−
ozone cleaning disrupts the CTAB layer, enabling SERS
detection of analyte molecules, which was tested by the
detection of a small common SERS reporter molecule
thiophenol and subsequently applied to SERS detection of
cannabinol (CBN), the metabolite of tetrahydrocannabinol
(THC), as shown in Figure 13.247
As the SERS intensity is related to the number of hotspots
per illumination volume, perfectly and homogeneously packed
3D nanorod supercrystals are expected to be one of the most
eﬃcient architectures for robust and reliable SERS substrates.
Alvarez-Puebla et al. showed that highly monodisperse CTAB-
stabilized Au nanorods spontaneously crystallize into regular
islands of uniform dimension, comprising ca. 15 monolayers of
standing nanorods, upon slowly drying the nanorod colloid in a
controlled humidity atmosphere. Such nanorod supercrystals
were shown to provide ultrasensitive biodetection of scrambled
prions.248 In a subsequent work, Liz-Marzán and co-workers
investigated systematically (both experimentally and by
numerical modeling) the inﬂuence of the number of stacked
Au nanorod monolayers on the SERS eﬃciency of the super-
crystals.249 To improve the eﬃciency of self-assembly, mono-
disperse AuNRs were coated with an amphiphilic alkanethio-
late (1-mercaptoundec-11-yl)hexa(ethylene glycol), termed
MUDOL or MUHEG, and subsequently drop-casted onto
glass slides, so that supercrystals composed of standing
nanorod multilayers were spontaneously formed upon drying.
Depending on the initial nanorod concentration, regular
supercrystals composed of 1−20 monolayers could be obtained
(in the spontaneously formed coﬀee ring area). Interestingly,
the SERS signal of CV was found to be almost identical for
supercrystals of 1−3 monolayers (EF = 1 × 107) when excited
at 633 nm, but the intensity was half for the monolayer than
for the multilayer when exciting at 785 nm. This result is in
agreement with simulations, assuming that the analyte cannot
penetrate within the gaps between nanorod monolayers, and,
thus, only the upper layer contributes to the SERS enhance-
ment.
A strategy to tune the size and morphology of supercrystals
over large scales can be achieved by controlled evaporation
within a patterned substrate, leading to small supercrystals
within a silicon pattern250 or to large supercrystals within
micron-sized pillars on a transparent glass substrate.251 By
using an elastomeric poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS) tem-
plate, Hamon et al. obtained uniform, stable, reproducible
micron-sized Au nanorod supercrystals arrays over square-
millimeter scale areas.251 The SERS EF for CV excited at 633
nm was determined to be 3.1 × 105. A similar template-assisted
self-assembly procedure was used for the fabrication of regular
micron-sized pyramidal supercrystal substrates made of highly
monodisperse PEGylated Au nanospheres, over square-
millimeter areas.252 In these examples, the size and shape of
each individual supercrystal as well as the periodicity of the
array are limited by the dimensions of the cavities in the
PDMS template and the dimensions of the NPs. By selecting a
suitable lattice parameter−NP size combination, the strong
optical response of the superstructures can be tuned over the
visible to the NIR range, which is appealing for multiple SERS
applications. Supported by EM simulations, Matricardi et al.
recently showed that regular square arrays of hexagonally
packed supercrystals lead to highest SERS enhancement when
the surface lattice plasmon resonance wavelength (lattice
parameter L = 500 nm) matches the laser excitation wave-
length (785 nm).253 The authors also observed that the
absolute SERS enhancement correlates to the numbers of NP
layers (and hotspots) within the supercrystal and that the
absolute intensity and its relative standard deviation (RSD)
depend on the degree of local order within the array. An extension
Figure 13. (a) SEM image of a vertically aligned AuNR array. (b) SERS spectra of CBN on AuNR arrays. Adapted with permission from
ref 247. Copyright 2018 Elsevier B. V.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
45


----- Page 19 (native text) -----
of this work to AuNR superlattices has been reported, where
the use of ethanol as cosolvent was shown to improve the
superlattice quality signiﬁcantly.254
Assembly on Rough, Flexible, or Curved Supports.
Recent eﬀorts have been directed to implementing large-scale,
robust, and economic production of reproducible SERS sub-
strates. The mechanical properties of the support material can
also be a limiting factor, for example, on curved surfaces or
hard-to-access places, in swab applications, etc. Paper appears
as an inexpensive, ﬂexible, lightweight, biodegradable NP sup-
port that may overcome these problems. Li et al. developed
SERS substrates impregnated with AuNRs by dip coating.255,256
A drawback, however, was the required dipping time of 2 d.
Surface-enhanced Ramen scattering paper substrates have also
been fabricated in large scale by inkjet printing and screen
printing of highly concentrated NPs.257−259 The pen-on-paper
approach presented by Polavarapu et al. is an easy, fast, and
eﬀective do-it-yourself variation, which does not require any
instrumentation.260 The concentrated NP ink (3 mg/mL) can
be ﬁlled in a commercially available ink pen and the SERS
arrays painted directly onto slightly hydrophobic inkjet paper,
in the desired size (limited by the pen oriﬁce). In contrast to
commonly used ﬁlter paper-based substrates, this method has
the advantage that no additional hydrophobizing step of the
paper is required to avoid spreading of the ink and analyte of
interest. The immobilized NPs are so well-adhered at the ﬁbers
that they cannot be removed by sticky tape or redissolved into
solution. The pen-on-paper approach was demonstrated for
diﬀerent types of NPs, including spherical citrate-stabilized Au
and Ag nanoparticles, as well as CTAB-stabilized AuNRs,
reaching a detection limit of 10 aM for malachite green.
Some speciﬁc SERS applications may require that the NP
support be not only ﬂexible but also transparent. This is the
case when excitation of the plasmonic nanostructure and
detection of the analyte should occur through the backside of
the supporting material, for example, the direct, nondestructive
analysis of art works or historic textiles261 and other curved
surfaces. The support material PDMS fulﬁlls many such useful
requirements, as it enables facile assembly of diﬀerent types of
NPs such as Au and Ag nanospheres262,263 and Au nano-
stars,264−266 lacks toxicity, and the interfering intrinsic Raman
signal is not very pronounced.
Analysis of bioﬂuids such as blood and urine using Raman
spectroscopy has originated diagnostics that are minimally
invasive, readily accessible, and from repeated samplings.267,268
However, analysis in bioﬂuids also requires compatibility in
high ionic strength environments, which contain various
biomolecules, easily inducing NP aggregation and severely
interfering with SERS spectra.269,270 The development of an
omnidispersible SERS probe, capable of rapid biodetection
using layer-by-layer (LbL) coated “hedgehog particles” (HPs)
is an example of a generation of colloids with pronounced
surface corrugation and high dispersion stability.271 Surface
corrugation as a dispersion strategy based on surface nanoscale
topography was ﬁrst demonstrated using HPs consisting of a
micron-sized polystyrene (PS) core surrounded by nanoscale
zinc oxide spikes.272 The HPs’ mesoscale geometry resembles
that of spiky pollen grains and that of some cells and viruses
with highly corrugated surfaces.273 Surface corrugation from
the spikes leads to marked reductions in contact area and van
der Waals forces, resulting in the ability to disperse particles in
both organic and aqueous solvents. In the case of biological
particles of micro-, meso-, and nanoscale dimensions, the HP
structural motif enables accurate control over particle
agglomeration and adhesion, resulting in both greater colloidal
stability and speciﬁcity of attachment.
The introduction of LbL ﬁlms on highly corrugated particles
enables high NP loadings and can be used to create dense
coatings of plasmonic NPs for SERS applications.274,275 By
introducing AuNPs to the spiky HP geometry, Kotov and co-
workers created dense conformal plasmonic NP ﬁlms with
tunable thickness.271 Importantly, these modiﬁed HPs main-
tain excellent dispersion stability in high-ionic-strength environ-
ments (Figure 14). Confocal microscopy shows dispersed single
AuNP-modiﬁed HPs, while large aggregates are observed for
AuNP-modiﬁed PS beads. Gold NP-modiﬁed HPs were also
shown to form stable dispersions in heptane, illustrating
dispersibility in environments of extreme ionic strength or
polarity.271
The SERS performance of HPs was assessed using two
probe molecular dyes: methylene blue (MB) and R6G. As the
density of the NPs increased, the SERS signal from MB
correspondingly increased due to the proximity of the AuNPs,
resulting in hotspots where SERS enhancement occurs.276 Two
model bioﬂuids were used to examine signal stability with
other biomolecules present: tryptic soy broth with the addition
Figure 14. SEM (a, b) and TEM (c) images of HP modiﬁed with
two bilayers of gold nanoparticles. (d) Photographs of dispersions
of LbL-modiﬁed HPs with gold layer thickness increasing from left
to right, in 1 M NaCl. (e, f) Confocal microscopy images of
Au-coated HPs (e) and polystyrene beads (f), in 1 M NaCl.
Adapted from ref 271. Copyright 2018 American Chemical
Society.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
46


----- Page 20 (native text) -----
of 1% glucose (TSB) and Dulbecco’s modiﬁed eagle medium
(DMEM) media with 5% fetal bovine serum and 1%
penicillin/streptavidin, commonly used as bacteria growth
medium and in blood culture, respectively. Gold-coated HPs
were able to detect both dyes in complex media with over
an order of magnitude increase of intensity compared to
Au-coated beads and detected R6G in the presence of MB in
both types of complex biological media (Figure 15), whereas
Au-coated beads could not. Gold nanostars were also unable to
detect the probe molecules in complex media even when
equipped with a poly(ethylene glycol) stabilizer layer. This
ﬁnding indicates that the greater degree of corrugation
observed in HPs is critical for dispersion and for a stable
SERS signal to be maintained and must be accounted for in the
design of a corrugated SERS probe.
For future SERS probes, the importance of dispersion
stability to enable a more robust and stable SERS signal is
critical for sensing in bioﬂuids. Surface corrugation represents
an interesting strategy to engineer dispersion stability in a wide
array of environments. The introduction of surface corrugation
to create plasmonic structures has the potential to create a
family of SERS sensors with stability in a wide range of
bioﬂuids and the capability to perform sensitive multiplexed
detection.
Hole−Mask Colloidal Lithography. Hole−mask colloi-
dal lithography (HCL) is a cost-eﬀective and versatile nano-
fabrication method based on colloidal self-assembly litho-
graphic patterning for generating homogeneous macroscopic
areas (up to several cm2) of nanostructures with short-range
translational order but well-deﬁned particle shape and
orientation.277 Early versions of the technique were used to
fabricate basic nanoplasmonic structures, such as nanorings,278
while later developments enabled fabrication of more advanced
structure types, for example, chiral particles.279 Hole−mask
colloidal lithography structures are extremely useful for a
variety of plasmonics applications, such as nanoplasmonic
biosensing,280 but they have, in general, turned out to be
relatively ineﬃcient SERS substrates, because they typically
lack the sharp protrusions or nanogaps that are critical
ingredients in SERS.71 The structures shown in Figure 16
are an exception. Here, angle-resolved deposition was used to
generate Au dimers with nanometric gap lengths (d = 7.1 ±
4.2 nm) and with an underlying Au mirror surface to amplify
ﬁeld enhancement further.281 The structures could be used to
record SERS signals from attograms of 1,2-di(4-pyridyl)-
ethylene (BPE), a common SERS probe molecule. The corre-
sponding EF was estimated to the order of 1011. This is, in fact,
orders of magnitude higher than what can be expected from
pure EM ﬁeld enhancement in these nanogaps, indicating that
additional ampliﬁcation due to surface-induced molecular-
resonance eﬀects are also at play.281
In a recent development,282−284 a variant of HCL was used
to fabricate metasurfaces and colloids comprising silicon NPs
of various shapes and sizes (Figure 16). Such high refractive
index NPs support pronounced geometrical resonances
(Mie modes) in the visible to the NIR wavelength range.
The Mie resonances are superﬁcially similar to localized
surface plasmons in terms of far-ﬁeld optical behavior, but the
associated enhanced near ﬁelds are mostly conﬁned to the NP
interior rather than to the surface. Figure 16 illustrates this
Figure 15. (a) Background-corrected Raman scattering intensity of various AuNP-modiﬁed HPs for detection of 1 μM methylene blue with
increasing loading of AuNPs; one bilayer (blue), one bilayer with salt (red), two bilayers with salt (black). (b) Raman scattering spectra
obtained with HP (black) and polystyrene beads (red) modiﬁed with two bilayers of gold nanoparticles of 1 μM MB and 1 μM R6G in TSB.
Adapted from ref 271. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.
Figure 16. Resonant nanostructures fabricated through HCL. (a)
Side view of SERS substrate consisting of gold nanodisk dimers
fabricated on top of a Au mirror with a SiO2 spacer layer in
between; (b) top view of a Au dimer-on-mirror SERS substrate
illustrating the uniform dimensions and orientations of the
individual nanostructures. (c) Si nanopillars and (d) chiral Si
colloids fabricated by a variant of HCL; (e) illustration of near-
ﬁeld ampliﬁcation and Raman scattering enhancement in Si
nanodisks supporting an anapole resonance. Reproduced with
permission from refs 281−283 and 285. Copyrights 2015 Royal
Society of Chemistry, 2017 American Chemical Society, 2017
Wiley-VCH, and 2018 American Chemical Society, respectively.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
47


----- Page 21 (native text) -----
eﬀect for high-aspect-ratio Si nanodisks that support a
particular resonance feature known as an “anapole”.285 The
anapole is manifested as a dip in the extinction eﬃciency and a
concomitant ampliﬁcation of the local ﬁeld inside the disk for
certain disk radii. This in turn generates strongly enhanced
Raman scattering from the Si 522 cm−1 optical phonon.285
Although not an SERS eﬀect in the classical sense, it is not far-
fetched to imagine that Mie resonances in high-index
dielectrics can be combined with plasmons in metal nano-
structures to generate a huge variety of novel and powerful
substrates for SERS and other nanophotonic applications.
Nanopillars. Densely spaced nanometer-sized pillars have
been used as SERS substrates for several decades. Vo-Dinh and
co-workers fabricated nanopost array substrates for SERS
detection using NP arrays as masks for submicron photo-
lithography.286 When metallized, these nanopillars can oﬀer
large EFs, often in combination with a leaning eﬀect of the
nanopillars.287−289 Upon exposure to liquid and subsequent
evaporation, the nanopillars can form clusters due to collective
leaning of the pillars induced by capillary forces (Figure 17).
The cluster formation ensures that analyte molecules are
trapped and positioned in the vicinity of hotspots. The
majority of these nanopillar substrates are realized by top-
down fabrication using lithography-based techniques, for
example, nanosphere lithography,290 block copolymer lithog-
raphy,291 and phase-shift interference lithography.292 Diﬀerent
designs with small assemblies ranging from 2−7 nanopillars
have been studied, with the pentagonal assembly having the
largest enhancement.293 These substrates have, among other
uses, been applied in melamine detection in milk.294
Nanopillar substrates can also be produced by lithography-
free techniques, such as maskless reactive ion etching (RIE).287
Furthermore, these pillars can be replicated by injection
molding to potentially facilitate large-scale and cost-eﬃcient
manufacturing of substrates and enable direct integration of
microﬂuidics for sample handling.295
Polymer nanopillars have been realized in regular patterns
combining lithography and nanoimprint.296 Here, a detailed
and inverse nanopillar substrate is ﬁrst realized and
subsequently transferred into polymer via nanoimprint. In a
diﬀerent approach, polymer nanopillars with integrated gold
particles have been realized using anodic aluminum oxide as a
template.297 Recently, superhydrophobic polymer nanopillars
have been realized by maskless RIE using Ar plasma.298 Wafer-
scale fabrication of silicon nanopillar substrates have been
realized by maskless RIE. By ﬁne-tuning the etching process, it
is possible to customize pillar height, density, and width.287
Hotspot engineering has been conducted on these substrates,
and high SERS EFs and extraordinary signal uniformities over
large sampling areas (∼50 cm2) have been achieved.299−301
These substrates are now being commercialized, enabling a
variety of applications and studies.302−308
The concept of maskless etching can be transferred to glass
substrates, enabling realization of nanopillars as well as more
exotic structures such as nanocylinders.309 Glass nanopillar
substrates have been patterned with gold electrode structures
and applied for combined electrochemistry and SERS
detection.310 Exceptionally good electrochemical and SERS
performances were obtained, probably as a result of the overall
larger nanostructured electrode surface and the presence of
isolated metallic caps on the pillars. An applied potential on
the nanopillar substrate enabled a 20 times increase in signal
intensity when detecting melamine.
Large-area, uniform, and robust nanohoodoos (pillars with a
“neck”) can be fabricated in wafer-scale using block copolymer
lithography, which provides an ordered etch mask with
uniform structures with high resolution and high precision.311
Gold is evaporated onto the nanohoodoos forming gold NPs,
thereby creating an SERS substrate that can be used for both
gas and liquid sensing. Upon drying of a deposited analyte
solution, the gold NPs slide on the nanohoodoos and form
particle clusters with strong, dense, and uniform hotspots.
Gold can be removed by wet etching, and the substrate can be
remetalized. In this way, the substrate can be recycled
numerous times, and other plasmonic materials can be applied.
Nanostructured Dielectrics and Hybrids. A completely
diﬀerent route toward extending the materials base for SERS
substrates does away with surface plasmon resonances alto-
gether and, instead, investigates the use of dielectrics and semi-
conductors. A pioneering study by Hayashi and co-workers on
GaP small particles,312 dating to 1988, saw evidence of an EM
enhancement of Raman scattering due to Mie resonances, yet
further reports compared to the scale of plasmonic-based SERS
research have been scarce. Although this scarcity might be
partially due to the often smaller local ﬁeld enhancements than
are possible with metals, it must be recognized that dielectric
substrates can oﬀer a number of advantages for enhancing
light/molecule interactions at surfaces, including compatibility
with semiconductor device processing, a wide parameter space
for electronic structure and bandgap tuning, potential for
Figure 17. Concept of leaning nanopillar substrate. (a−c) Scheme
of the leaning mechanism. (d) Scheme of the enhancement
mechanism. When solvent evaporates, surface tension pulls the
silicon nanopillars together, trapping analytes at the hotspot,
giving rise to a large Raman signal. (e) SEM image of a cluster of
leaning silver-coated silicon nanopillars. (f) Tilted SEM image of
the outer perimeter of the evaporated solvent droplet area. The
nanopillars to the right have leaned to form hotspots, while the
nanopillars to the left remain vertical and free-standing. (g) SEM
image of a nanopillar substrate, seen perpendicular to the surface.
The line indicates the outer perimeter of the evaporated solvent
droplet. (bottom) Individual free-standing nanopillars. (top)
Clusters of nanopillars. Reproduced with permission from
ref 287. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
48


----- Page 22 (native text) -----
surface-modiﬁcation beyond thiol bonds, and, critically, less
extreme conditions in terms of heat generation and photo-
chemical reactions compared with plasmonic surfaces.
Similar to metal-based substrates, any enhancement of
Raman scattering in molecule−semiconductor systems can be
conceptually broken down into an EM and a chemical
contribution. The chemical contribution is associated with
CT resonances from the highest occupied molecular orbital
(HOMO) level of the molecule to the conduction band of the
semiconductor, and from the valence band to the lowest
unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) level.313 Bandgap and
exciton formation should hence enable a wide parameter space,
in terms of tuning and optimizing enhancement via this route.
For structured dielectric surfaces, the EM enhancement is
due to morphological, Mie-type resonances, which can be
either electric or magnetic in nature. For dielectric structures of
a few wavelengths in size, higher-order Mie modes, also known
as whispering gallery modes, provide large quality factors;
however, the associated sharp resonances are not optimal for
SERS, as they cannot overlap with both the excitation laser
light and the Stokes-shifted beam. The substantial advances in
nanotechnology now enable the controlled generation of
dielectric nanostructures of sizes on the order of the
wavelength in the material and, critically, also nanosized gaps
between dielectric components in antenna-like conﬁgurations.
This structure in turn enables the exploitation of low-order
electric and magnetic Mie resonances, with their much broader
spectral width and, in gap structures, reduced mode volumes,
which has led to exciting discoveries in dielectric nano-
photonics based on single antennas and metasurfaces in recent
years.314 The possibility of tailoring nanoscale light ﬁelds with
dielectrics requires the employment of nanostructured
dielectrics and semiconductors for SERS315 and surface-
enhanced spectroscopies more generally. For example, a
signiﬁcantly reduced local heat generation has been demon-
strated for silicon dimer nanoantennas, compared to equivalent
plasmonic nanoantennas,316 while recently SERS and surface-
enhanced ﬂuorescence for monolayer coverage have been
observed.317 Although the absence of ﬂuorescent quenching
would enable the use of the same nanostructured dielectric
substrate for both enhancement of Raman scattering and
ﬂuorescence emission, contrary to metals, in practice the
nonsuppression of background ﬂuorescence needs to be taken
into account when choosing the illumination laser wavelength.
Other intriguing developing materials are metal oxides,
particularly when doped with oxygen vacancy centers. Large
SERS enhancements have been shown for nonstochiometric
tungsten oxide318 and a variety of ion-irradiated metal
oxides.319 In hybrid structures composed of Ag or Au colloids
on top of titanium oxide thin ﬁlms, the chemical enhancement
factor in Raman scattering can be increased via photoinduced
oxygen vacancy creation,320 opening additional pathways for
substrate−molecule charge transfer.
SURFACE-ENHANCED RAMAN SCATTERING (SERS)
TAGS
The selective detection and localization of target molecules
requires target-speciﬁc ligands for molecular recognition via
noncovalent interactions. For example, proteins are selectively
recognized by antibodies directed against them as antigens,
whereas for nucleic acids the complementary oligonucleotide
strands are employed. The optical identiﬁcation and visual-
ization of the target-speciﬁc ligands, and therefore the target
molecules, typically require labeling agents, for example, ﬂuo-
rescent dyes/quantum dots321 (e.g., in immunoﬂuorescence) or
enzymes, which give rise to a colored reaction product upon
incubation with a colorless substrate (e.g., horseradish peroxi-
dase in ELISA and immunohistochemistry). SERS nanotags
are an emerging class of labeling agents based on molecularly
functionalized, Raman-encoded noble metal NPs.322,323
Advantages of SERS nanotags over existing labeling approaches
include (i) multicolor detection: the tremendous spectral
multiplexing capacity for parallel detection/localization is due to
the narrow full width at half-maximum (fwhm) of vibrational
Raman bands compared to the broad emission proﬁles of
molecular ﬂuorophores (Figure 18); (ii) quantiﬁcation: the
SERS signal is proportional to the number of SERS nanotags;
(iii) no or minimal photobleaching, that is, high photostability
of the SERS signal in repeated and/or long-term measure-
ments; (iv) single laser wavelength excitation: all SERS spectra
of a set of spectrally distinct SERS nanotags can be excited by
using a single laser excitation; (v) suppression of autoﬂuor-
escence in biological/biomedical applications: the use of SERS
nanotags with plasmon resonances in the red to NIR elegantly
circumnavigates the excitation of unwanted and interfering
autoﬂuorescence; NIR excitation is also required for biomedi-
cal applications in vivo.324−327
A disadvantage of SERS nanotags is their large size and
weight compared with molecular ﬂuorophores but also with
quantum dots.328 For many bioanalytical applications such as
assays (e.g., in microﬂuidics or lateral-ﬂow assays on mem-
branes), where typically no restrictive spatial constraints are
relevant, this steric aspect is typically not a problem. However,
the size of SERS nanotagstypically several tens of nanome-
tersbecomes relevant when confocal high-spatial resolution
microscopy on single biological cells is performed.329 Finally,
SERS nanotags are colloids, and sample purity is an issue that
is often overlooked. Obtaining puriﬁed colloids is more
challenging compared with conventional ﬂuorescent dyes, for
which established separation techniques from analytical
chemistry have been known for decades.330
Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering (SERS) Nano-
tags: Noble Metal Nanoparticles Coated with Raman
Reporter Molecules. SERS nanotags typically comprise a
noble metal NP coated with a Raman reporter molecule for
identiﬁcation via its characteristic Raman spectrum. Figure 19
shows a schematic representation of an SERS nanotag,
speciﬁcally designed for red laser excitation, which is beneﬁcial
Figure 18. Comparison of spectral emission proﬁles: ﬂuorescence
from Cy5 and SERS from 4-NTB on Au nanoparticles excited with
632.8 nm laser radiation. Reproduced with permission from
ref 331. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
49


----- Page 23 (native text) -----
for bioanalytical and biomedical applications where autoﬂuor-
escence often occurs: the hollow Au/Ag nanoshell is coated
with a self-assembled monolayer (SAM) of an aromatic thiol
featuring a high Raman scattering cross section and protected
by a silica shell.332
For bioanalytical and biomedical applications, the SERS
nanotag is conjugated to target-speciﬁc ligands such as anti-
bodies or oligonucleotides. A wide variety of conﬁgurations for
SERS nanotags exists, and also various options for their
bioconjugation are available. Table 1 summarizes the most
common types, which are based on the variation of (i) the type
of metal NP, as well as its size and shape; (ii) number of NPs:
monomer versus assembly; (iii) the type of Raman reporter
(e.g., ﬂuorescent dyes for surface-enhanced resonance Raman
scattering (SERRS) or SAMs of small aromatic thiols); (iv) the
protective shell (e.g., short ethylene glycol (EG) or long PEG,
biopolymers, and silica); (v) the type of bioconjugation,
depending on available functional groups on the protective
shell (carboxylic acids, amines, thiols, etc.).
In the following two subsections we discuss the advantages
and disadvantages of using either ﬂuorescent dyes for SERRS
or aromatic thiols for SERS.
Fluorescent Dyes for Surface-Enhanced Resonance
Raman Scattering and Multiplexing. The fabrication of an
SERS nanotag with the highest possible SERS eﬃciency
requires the choice of the best plasmonic NP that will act as
Raman enhancer as well as the best Raman reporter that, in
principle, should have an inherently large Raman cross
section.333 Chromophores and ﬂuorophores including cyanine
dyes, CV, malachite green, nile blue, R6G, etc. fulﬁll this
requirement. Additionally, by using an excitation laser line in
the Raman measurements that overlap with the absorption
spectrum of the Raman reporter, we are under resonant Raman
conditions (SERRS). Thus, for cases where the SERRS
conditions are fulﬁlled, an increase in the Raman enhancement
of 10−100-fold over conventional SERS experiments has been
reported.334
Therefore, the fabrication of a library of SERRS tags for
multiplexing purposes will depend on either a collection of
dyes with a similar absorption band and in resonance with the
selected excitation laser line or the combination of dyes
capable of producing a SERRS signal over a wide range of
excitation wavelengths (typically from 514−1064 nm).
Unfortunately, the availability of Raman dyes that satisfy
both approximations is somewhat limited, which hampers the
potential applications of the SERRS tags for multiplexing.
Alternatively, diﬀerent combinations of dyes in the Raman
encoding shell would enable an encryption based on either
frequency alone or using signal intensity as an additional code
element.335
Self-Assembled Monolayer of Small Aromatic Thiols
and Spectral Multiplexing. Porter and co-workers have
introduced aromatic thiols/disulﬁdes as Raman reporters,
because these compounds form an SAM on gold surfaces via
stable Au−S bonds.336−338 Advantages of using small aromatic
thiols as Raman reporters are (i) reproducible SERS signatures
due to the dense packing and uniform orientation of Raman
reporter molecules within the SAM;332,339,340 (ii) maximum
SERS brightness due to the maximum surface coverage with
Raman reporter molecules (Figure 20) compared to sub-
monolayer coverage;332 (iii) high spectral multiplexing
capacity as the number of vibrational bands scales linearly
with the number of atoms; (iv) no or minimal photobleaching,
since resonant electronic excitation of the molecule is avoided.
The brightness of SERS nanotags depends on both the
Raman scattering cross section of the individual Raman
reporter adsorbed on the metal surface and the number of
reporters per particle.324 Fluorescent dyes generally feature
larger Raman scattering cross sections; however, their packing
density on the metal surface is typically much lower compared
to SAMs.341,342 Aromatic thiols also generate fewer vibrational
bands, as their molecular size is typically signiﬁcantly smaller
than those for ﬂuorescent chromophores.332,343 The latter
aspect has been exploited in a quantitative 6-plex SERS experi-
ment. Speciﬁcally, various mixtures of six SERS nanotags with
distinct spectral signatures were employed. The stoichiometry
of the mixtures was known a priori for comparison with the
results from spectral decomposition. By using the known SERS
signature of the six individual particle types, the SERS spectra
of the mixtures could be quantitatively decomposed into the
contributions of the individual particles.344 Overall, a good
agreement between experiment (SERS spectrum of the
mixture) and simulation (diﬀerent linear combinations of the
six individual SERS tag spectra) was obtained.
Finally, note that, in addition to the use of commercially
available Raman reporter molecules, some groups have also
designed and synthesized custom-made Raman reporters.
Examples include the conjugation of existing dyes to thiol-
containing linkers for binding to the metal surface345−348 and
the modiﬁcation of aromatic thiols with triple bonds and short
hydrophilic linkers containing terminal carboxy groups for
bioconjugation.349
Protection and Stabilization. Direct Hydrophilic Stabi-
lization of Self-Assembled Monolayers (Short Spacers).
Colloidal stability and solubility in water of SERS nanotags
Figure 19. Sketch of an SERS nanotag comprising a hollow Au/Ag
nanoshell coated with an SAM of an aromatic thiol as the Raman
reporter molecule. The particle is protected by a silica shell.
Rerproduced with permission from ref 327. Copyright 2009 Wiley-
VCH.
Table 1. Components of SERS Nanotags with Some
Examples
component of SERS nanotag
examples
plasmonic nanoparticle (NP):
metal, size, shape
Au, Ag; spheres, rods, stars
number of NPs
monomer vs cluster
Raman reporter molecule
dyes, aromatic thiols
protective shell
ethylene glycol/poly(ethylene glycol),
bovine serum albumin, silica
bioconjugation
via COOH, NH2, SH
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
50


----- Page 24 (native text) -----
are both largely dominated by the Raman reporters adsorbed
on the metal surface.350,351 The conjugation of EG spacers to
the terminus of a Raman reporter molecule, for example, the
carboxylic acid of mercaptobenzoic acid or one of its
derivatives, can signiﬁcantly increase both the colloidal stability
as well as the solubility in water, since the hydrophilic EG
groups point toward the interface with the suspension medium.
Using a mixture of a Raman reporter extended with a short
hydrophilic monoethylene glycol (MEG) unit comprising a
terminal hydrophilic OH group and the same Raman reporter
extended with a longer triethylene glycol (TEG) moiety with
terminal COOH moieties for bioconjugation not only
increased the steric accessibility of the SAM for bioconjugation
via the longer TEG-COOH spacer but also provided an option
for controlled bioconjugation by varying the ratio of the two
spacer units (MEG−OH/TEG−COOH).339,352−354 A further
advantage of the hydrophilic EG units is the minimization of
nonspeciﬁc binding.339 This is a very important aspect in many
biological and biomedical applications: the binding selectivity is
determined by the target-speciﬁc binding molecule and should
not be hindered by nonspeciﬁc binding of the labeling agent,
which might lead to false-positive results.355 However, although
both colloidal stability and water solubility are both guaranteed
by this approach, many biomedical applications, in particular,
those in vivo, require the use of signiﬁcantly longer EG chains.
Stabilization by Polymers and Biopolymers. Metal NP
stabilization is a critical issue if the SERS tags are to be
dispersed in biological ﬂuids, because they will be prone to
aggregating in high-ionic-strength media, which would
compromise the stability of the SERS signal. Diﬀerent
polymers have been employed as protective layers to confer
stability to SERS-encoded particles in biological media and to
prevent the release of the Raman reporter or nonspeciﬁc
protein adsorption.356 Poly(ethylene glycol) can be considered
as the most versatile polymer due to its biocompatibility, which
enables prolonged blood-circulation lifetimes. Additionally,
PEG synthesis through controlled polymerization can readily
incorporate well-deﬁned end groups. For instance, the
presence of an end-thiol functionality enables anchoring onto
the metal NP surface, while preserving enough space to bind
the Raman reporter (Figure 20).351 Alternative strategies
involve the encapsulation of plasmonic NPs within crosslinked
polymers such as poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (pNIPAM).357
The encapsulation of single plasmonic NPs within the
microgels was based on a grafting through polymerization
approximation.358 The porous nature of the pNIPAM coating
enables the incorporation of Raman reporters, even if they do
not have a speciﬁc aﬃnity toward the metal NP surface,
through diﬀusion and subsequent trapping by sealing the
porous shell by LbL deposition of an outer polyelectrolyte
coating, which eventually facilitates covalent conjugation with
antibodies (Figure 20).359,360 Raman-encoded SERS tags have
also been stabilized by encapsulation with an amphiphilic
diblock copolymer such as polystyrene-block-poly(acrylic acid),
through a thermodynamically controlled self-assembly process
leading to uniform coatings (Figure 20).361 A similar process
was used for the stabilization of SERS-encoded nanostars,
using the copolymer dodecylamine-modiﬁed polyisobutylene-
alt-maleic anhydride (PMA).362 Phospholipids have also been
reported to provide coatings that render the NPs biologically
compatible and highly versatile.363−366
High-molecular-weight proteins such as bovine serum
albumin (BSA) have also been reported as suitable stabilizing
agents for encoded metal NPs, preventing their aggregation as
well as the desorption of Raman-active molecules.345,350,368,369
BSA adsorption onto metal surfaces was suggested to occur via
an electrostatic mechanism, in combination with binding of the
single free external thiol group on N-form BSA (associated
with a cysteine residue) to the metal surface.370,371 Other
proteins, such as antibodies, could be similarly used as
stabilizing agents after binding the Raman reporter molecules,
giving rise to a one-step biconjugation of the SERS tags.372
Silica Encapsulation of Surface-Enhanced Raman Scat-
tering Nanotags. Natan and co-workers introduced silica-
encapsulated SERS nanotags, obtained by coadsorption of a
Raman reporter and mercaptosilane (1:20 stoichiometry for
incubation) onto the metal NP surface, followed by silica
deposition on the vitreophilized NPs.373,374 This approach
leads to sub-monolayer coverage of Raman reporter molecules
(ca. 5% based on the 1:20 stoichiometry) on the metal surface
due to competitive surface adsorption with mercaptosilane.
Doering and Nie presented a similar approach toward silica-
protected SERS nanotags,375 while Schlücker and co-workers
introduced the concept of silica-encapsulated SERS nanotags
with 100% surface coverage of Raman reporters, which leads to
signiﬁcantly brighter particles compared to sub-monolayer
coverage.332,376 The subsequent formation of a silica shell
around the SAM of aromatic thiols was initially achieved by
preparing vitreophilic NPs using LbL deposition of polymers
such as polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH) and PVP
Figure 20. (A, B) Resonant Raman conﬁguration; multiple-dye
conjugates capable of producing signals over a wide range of
common excitation wavelengths (A) and dye conjugates with
similar optical properties for multiplexing (B). Adapted with
permission from refs 335 and 359. Copyrights 2014 American
Chemical Society and 2015 Wiley-VCH, respectively. (C−F)
Conﬁguration for protection and stabilization; thiolated poly-
styrene (C), poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) shell (D), PSS−PAA
block copolymer encapsulation (E) and phospholipid-coated
surface-enhanced Raman scattering nanotags (F). Adapted with
permission from refs351, 359, 367, and 363. Copyrights 2007
Springer-Nature, 2015 Wiley-VCH, 2018 Royal Society of
Chemistry, and 2010 American Chemical Society, respectively.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
51


----- Page 25 (native text) -----
onto SAM-coated NPs.332 Since this route involves several
steps in diﬀerent solvents and multiple centrifugation steps, it
becomes labor-intensive and time-consuming. A faster route
can be achieved by using Raman reporter-SiO2 precursor
conjugates, which contain both the actual Raman reporter
molecule and a silane covalently attached to it.340 However,
this approach requires an additional step using organic
synthesis under protective atmosphere, due to the use of a
moisture-sensitive silane.
The deposition of a silica shell around an SERS nanotag is
attractive, because it provides high mechanical stability and the
option for long-term storage.373 In addition to AuNPs and
Au/Ag nanoshells, silica encapsulation has also been demon-
strated for a variety of other plasmonic NPs, including
Au NRs,377 gold nanostars,378,379 gold NP dimers,331 and
assemblies,380 which highlights the potential of this approach.
A potential drawback, however, is that electrostatic interactions
with biological material render silica prone to nonspeciﬁc
binding. Thus, in particular for applications in vivo, an
additional PEG coating using silane-PEG is recommended.381
The plasmonic substrate can be modiﬁed into either positive
or negative charge by suitable surface modiﬁcation, which
enables electrostatic binding of various charged analyte
molecules. The hydroxyl groups on the surface of silica can
also be conveniently functionalized for incorporation of various
analyte molecules. Modiﬁcation of silica using bioreceptors
enables potential application in immunoassays.373,382 On a
diﬀerent note, the metal-molecule CT contribution to SERS
can be eliminated by silica coating, as varying the thickness of
the silica shell further enables tuning the EM ﬁeld experienced
by the analyte molecule. In a recent study, Swathi, George
Thomas, and co-workers investigated the Raman signal enhance-
ment by varying silica shell thickness (t = 3 to 25 nm). By using
Ag@SiO2 with a negative surface charge (ζ = −33 mV) and a
positively charged analyte molecule (1-pyrenyl(methyl)-
trimethylammonium hexaﬂuorophosphate), an enhanced
Raman signal intensity was observed when the probe mole-
cules were placed at t ≤10 nm. At larger thickness, probe
molecules are at suﬃciently large distances from the plasmonic
core that they experience negligible enhancement.383 Silica
coating can also be used to tune plasmon hybridization, when
brought in close proximity.384 In a recent study, the gap
distance between dimeric Ag@SiO2 nanostructures was varied
from 1.5 up to 40 nm, by increasing the silica shell thickness.
A dimerization process was achieved by binding the
ammonium ion screening the negative charge on the silica
surface. An enhancement in Raman signal intensity (105−106)
was observed at hotspots, decaying with gap distance. The
SERS enhancement at hotspots was found to follow a 1/dn
dependence, with n = 1.5, in agreement with theoretical studies
by Schatz and co-workers.32,385
Bioconjugation to Surface-Enhanced Raman Scatter-
ing Labels. Direct Conjugation of Ligands to Unprotected
Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering Nanotags. The ﬁnal
step in the preparation of SERS tags is the bioconjugation step
with a targeting entity, which confers to the encoded particle a
high speciﬁcity to the molecule of interest. The bioconjugation
approach will strongly depend on the conﬁguration of the
SERS tag and, more precisely, on its protection and stabiliza-
tion. Thus, for unprotected SERS nanotags direct bioconjuga-
tion to the plasmonic NP could be achieved through the
adsorption of proteins (i.e., antibodies, thiolated DNA) by
either electrostatic interactions or covalent binding. Within this
direct bioconjugation, diﬀerent alternatives have been developed,
such as the coadsorption of a thiolated Raman reporter and the
antibody leading to a mixed monolayer.337 An alternative design
involves a bifunctional coating, where ﬁrst a thiolated Raman
reporter with a terminal succinimide group is attached, and the
protein can then be covalently attached through the formation
of an amide linkage.338
Conjugation of Ligands to Protected Surface-Enhanced
Raman Scattering Nanotags. The bioconjugation of
protected SERS tags relies on the terminal functional group
of the stabilizing shell. Typically, most common end groups are
either carboxyl groups or primary amines, which facilitate
further bioconjugation of the NPs through the formation of an
amide bond by carbodiimide activation.386 The extensive
library of diﬀerent functionalities reported from polymer
chemistry readily enables functionalization of NPs with
biological molecules through chemical approaches, such as
Michael addition, click chemistry, or Diels−Alder reaction,
among others.387 Bioconjugation from biopolymer-stabilized
NPs relies on the availability of terminal amine and carboxyl
groups, enabling subsequent functionalization through EDC/
NHS chemistry as described above.388 For example, Knudsen
et al. described the stabilization of SERS tags by BSA adsorp-
tion, but in combination with glutaraldehyde, leading to a
crosslinked organic encapsulation.389 The addition of gluta-
raldehyde removes most of the surface amino groups from
BSA, rendering an SERS tag with a net negative charge from
the carboxylic acid groups. For silica-encapsulated SERS
nanotags, silanes with amino or thiol groups (e.g., APTMS
and MPTMS) can be employed for bioconjugation. Hetero-
bifunctional crosslinkers, such as those with a NHS ester at one
terminus and a succinimide at the other, can couple the amino
(or thiol)-functionalized SERS tags to target-speciﬁc ligands such
as antibodies via their thiol (or amino) moieties (Figure 21).332
A similar strategy can be also used to link with sugar head
groups such as mannose for lectin targeting, allowing for the
speciﬁc uptake by macrophages and thereby serving as an
in vitro model for the detection of atherosclerosis.390
Brightness of Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering
Nanotags. Ensemble Experiments. The evaluation of the
brightness of an SERS tag relies on measuring the SERS EF.
The EF is a relative measurement of the eﬀect of the plasmonic
NP on the scattering intensity of the Raman reporter. From a
qualitative point of view, a relatively simple method to estimate
the SERS enhancement eﬃciency is the measurement of the
analytical enhancement factor (AEF),57 which can be
calculated as
= I
c
I
c
AEF
(
/
)/( /
)
SERS
SERS
R
R
where ISERS and IR are the intensities of the SERS and Raman
signals, respectively, and cSERS and cR are the concentrations of
Figure 21. SERS nanotag-antibody conjugate with a heterobifunc-
tional linker molecule. Reproduced with permission from ref 332.
Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
52


----- Page 26 (native text) -----
the analyte in the SERS and control Raman experiments,
respectively. Although ensemble measurements of the SERS
intensity can be a useful measure to characterize SERS
performance for analytical applications, in particular for SERS
in colloidal solutions, uncertainties about SERS tag concen-
tration, size heterogeneity, and a lack of widely accepted
external intensity standards for calibrating intensity represent
signiﬁcant hurdles against this approach.51
Alternatively, the variation of the SERS intensity as a
function of particle concentration has been proposed as a way
to test how quantitative and reproducible the intensities of
SERS tags are.359 Nam et al. reported that SERS nanotags
(under nonresonant conditions) composed by Au/Ag plasmonic
nanosnowmen can be detected at concentrations as low as
1 pM. Interestingly, for the same conﬁguration but under
resonance conditions, the lowest detectable particle concen-
tration was 5 fM, which represents an improvement of 2 orders
of magnitude in the detection limit, additionally showing a
linear dependence over 1−100 fM range, which makes them
suitable for quantiﬁcation purposes.391
Single-Particle Experiments. Conventional SERS experi-
ments are performed on colloids in a cuvette. This type of
ensemble measurement yields a mean value of the SERS
intensity averaged over all particles within the focal volume
during the acquisition time. Quasi-spherical AuNP and AgNP
are the most common metal colloids used in SERS, and it has
been demonstrated that monomers are not SERS-active, but
small clusters of AuNP such as dimers and trimers
are.23,380,392−394 From a pragmatic point of view, one does
not necessarily have to care about the monomer/cluster
composition of the colloid, as long as there is enough SERS
signal for detection. However, this aspect clearly matters when
microscopic SERS experiments are performed, in which, due to
spatial constraints, only single particles may bind to a given
biological target.395 Computer simulations are very helpful in
the theory-guided design of bright SERS nanotags, which are
detectable at the single-particle level.198,380 A convincing
experimental demonstration of single-particle SERS brightness
typically requires correlative experiments either on immobi-
lized tags70,198,396 or in suspension.397
The ideal SERS nanotag would be a highly monodisperse
colloid in which each and every single particle gives an equally
strong SERS signal. This highly ambitious aim requires
synthetic eﬀorts for producing highly uniform SERS nanotags,
advanced separation techniques for isolating the highly SERS-
active particles, and, ﬁnally, sophisticated single-particle SERS
characterization techniques in suspension to determine the
distribution function of the SERS intensity for a suﬃciently
large number of individual tags.
ANALYTICAL TECHNIQUES AND QUANTIFICATION
Analytical Techniques. The task of analytical techniques
dealing with SERS is either identifying or quantifying mole-
cules, or both. To reach this aim, many diﬀerent approaches
for many diﬀerent molecules/components (or classes of
molecules) have been developed over the past decades. In
general, the identiﬁcation of a molecule/component can be
performed via direct or indirect strategies. Direct measure-
ments are characterized by recording and analyzing the
analyte’s own ﬁngerprint, whereas indirect strategies use the
SERS response of a secondary molecule, stimulated by
the presence of the analyte. Normally, direct techniques oﬀer
the advantage of reﬂecting the instantaneous situation of the
molecule (binding state, orientation, molecular conformation,
interaction to the surface and to surrounding molecules) but
imply label-free SERS measurements, which are often more
challenging due to very low Raman cross sections for most
molecules. This problem can be overcome by using a bright
molecule as a messenger (label), featuring an extraordinarily
high SERS cross section. Analytical detection schemes based
on label molecules or SERS tags belong to indirect techniques.
Indirect pathways are also possible without labels in the
classical sense, for example, when the SERS response of a
secondary molecule changes or depends on the interaction
with the analyte. These molecules can be of a diﬀerent nature
and, in general, are selective to a speciﬁc analyte. Chemo-
sensors such as molecular beacons, aptamers, or DNA
sequences are some of the molecules used in biomedical
applications. Moreover, the diﬀerent interaction of chiral
molecules with the plasmonic substrate or with the ligand
attached to the substrate can be used to discriminate between
two enantiomers using SERS.
The large signal enhancements in SERS generate stronger
and more stable signals than those from chemical ﬂuorophores,
but the lack of precise control over the degree of ampliﬁcation
typically results in poorly reproducible, nonquantiﬁable SERS
signals. Over the years, focus has been on the enhancement of
the Raman signal, rather than quantifying the signals, which is
of high importance for various analytical aplications. The
EFs reported are often overclaimed or misclaimed, thereby
limiting practical application, particularly in diagnostics and
bioimaging.398−401 Addressing these issues should be one of
the central topics for future advancement in the ﬁeld of SERS,
which aims to build a well-deﬁned analyte−nanogap system
with outstanding uniformity for large-area scaling. To this end,
plasmonic nanogaps should be fabricated in a robust way to
ensure a reproducible ﬁeld enhancement. The highest SERS
enhancement would be obtained in the narrowest gap distance
(sub-nanometer size) before quantum quenching eﬀects
dominate.89,402,403 Further optimization of SERS detection
also demands many aspects of excitation and detection
matching, such as plasmon resonances in wavelength,404,405
polarization,406−408 and emission direction.409 Sub-nanogaps
can be realized by aggregation, assembly, or lithographic
methods but also in core−shell NPs having tailored gaps
between core and shell (so-called intragap). Alternatively, sub-
nanogaps can also be generated between NPs and ﬂat metallic
surfaces. Such a situation is realized in the NPoM conﬁgura-
tion, with a dielectric and a deﬁned spacer between NP and
mirror. Shell-isolated nanoparticles (SHINs) can also be
considered as a speciﬁc realization, where the dielectric spacer
is equivalent to the NP shell, additionally acting as a protection
or coating. Shell-isolated NPs are ﬂexible nanoparticle systems
for analytics, because, as well as the size, material, and shape of
the plasmonic core, the material and thickness of the dielectric
layer and the support can be tailored for speciﬁc application
strategies.
Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering Chemosensors.
Chemosensors (also molecular sensors) can be considered as
an analytical concept (or device) that is used for sensing of an
analyte. They are typically composed of a signaling moiety and
a recognition moiety, which, in the presence of the analyte,
generate a detectable signal or a signal change. Surface-
enhanced Raman scattering-based chemosensors comprise
plasmonic NPs or nanostructures functionalized with speciﬁ-
cally binding ligands (the chemosensors) as receptors, which
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
53


----- Page 27 (native text) -----
can selectively recognize the analyte of interest. The analyte−
ligand interaction changes the original ligand SERS signal or
gives rise to a diﬀerent SERS signal. Advantages of this method
include the generation of highly selective sensors and the use
of the chemosensor as an analytical standard for quantitative
purposes. An advantage of SERS chemosensors is the high
sensitivity and small bandwidth of the molecular ﬁngerprint
that permits distinguishing molecules with similar structures.
The same concept can be applied to target biological material,
for example, by functionalization of the NPs with speciﬁc
antibodies, aptamers, peptides, etc. This kind, to which also
some of the SERS labels described in a previous section
belong, works as an SERS biosensor. Surface-enhanced
Raman scattering chemosensors and biosensors have been
designed for many diﬀerent analytes, from single atoms such as
metal ions410−413 to small ions and molecules,414−416 biomole-
cules,417,418 genes,419 and cells and tissues, both in vitro and
in vivo.420 A look into the recent literature reveals increasing
interest in the development of SERS sensors; examples of
analytical applications are presented in more detail in other
sections below.
Enantioselective Discrimination of Chiral Molecules
by Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering. Molecular
chirality is one of the most intriguing fundamental character-
istics in various ﬁelds such as catalysis, chemical biology, and
pharmacology.421−426 Two kinds of enantiomers in biological
process can demonstrate essential diﬀerences in terms of
physiological responses. Various conventional spectroscopic
methods have been used to explore enantiomeric discrim-
ination, such as ﬂuorescence spectroscopy, nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, vibrational circular dichroism
(VCD), and Raman optical activity (ROA). Most of these
approaches require either the synthesis of a specialized chiral
entity as a chiral selector or the use of circularly polarized light
(chiral light).
Few studies have reported achieving chiral discrimination by
SERS, which unfortunately lack generality and show poor
distinction between enantiomers. As a result, we can say that
generic spectroscopic enantioselective detection by SERS has
not been realized due to diﬃculties in the fabrication of an
SERS receptor with the speciﬁc stereochemical properties
required to detect molecular chirality. Ozaki and co-workers
proposed a label-free enantioselective discrimination method
for chiral molecules based on SERS,427,428 which does not
require either chiral reagents or chiral light. The enantiose-
lective discrimination of various chiral alcohols was achieved
by SERS through CT contributions.427,428 The relative peak
intensities in the SERS spectra of a chiral selector without
chirality rely strongly on the chirality of its surroundings. This
marked spectral discrepancy probably arises from the tendency
of chiral enantiomers to form intermolecular hydrogen-
bonding complexes with the chiral selector in diﬀerent molec-
ular orientations, resulting in diﬀerent CT states and SERS
intensities of the adsorbed selector molecules in the system.
Figure 22 shows the fabrication process for the chiral discrimi-
nation system based on SERS.428 The Ag-chiral selector mole-
cule complex was fabricated on a glass substrate by a previously
reported method.427,428
Figure 23 shows the SERS spectral features for the
enantiomeric discrimination of p-mercaptopyridine (MPY).427
Of note is a marked intensity decrease of the band at 1578 cm−1
(the nontotally symmetric vibration, b2 mode) and a
simultaneous intensity increase of the band at 1612 cm−1
(the totally symmetric vibration, a1 mode) when the Ag−MPY
complex was immersed in a solution of the S enantiomer, or
even in the racemic mixture (Figure 23). Additionally, the
enantioselective discrimination indicator, that is, the ratio of
the intensity of the bands at 1202 and 1220 cm−1, in both
2-butanol and 1-methoxy-2-propanol (MOIP), increased when
increasing the S enantiomer content (Figure 23B,E). It was
considered that there are some slight diﬀerences in the spatial
structures of the S and R enantiomers−MPY complexes versus
Ag NPs, generating diﬀerent energy states that could induce
diﬀerentiated CT processes between the adsorbed MPY and
the Ag substrate.427 In general, changes in the relative Raman
intensities of adsorbates in an SERS spectrum could be a
visible manifestation of a CT transition and be considered as a
propensity rule to estimate the occurrence of a photoinduced
CT process. According to the CT mechanism, it can be
Figure 22. Schematic view of the fabrication process of a chiral
discrimination system based on SERS. Reprinted from ref 428.
Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.
Figure 23. (A, D) Normalized SERS spectra of the MPY−Ag
complex separately immersed in diﬀerent chiral alcohols (2-butanol
and MOP, respectively) in their optical pure and racemic forms.
(B, E) and (C, F) Magniﬁcations of the 1175−1250 cm−1 and
1540−1650 cm−1 spectral regions of the SERS spectra shown in
(A) and (D), respectively. Reproduced with permission from
ref 427. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
54


----- Page 28 (native text) -----
inferred that the S-type enantioselective discrimination process
in an assembled system increases the contribution of the
Frank−Condon term and simultaneously inhibits the Herz-
berg−Teller term. Nevertheless, in spite of the hydrogen-
bonding interaction with the Ag−MPY complex, the R enan-
tiomer may have a diﬀerence in either orientation or composi-
tion, leading to a diﬀerent CT state being involved in the CT
transition. In this case, SERS enhancement of the MPY
molecules may still be greatly inﬂuenced by the Herzberg−
Teller eﬀect. Thus, this enantioselective phenomenon in SERS
spectra is dominated by the CT enhancement mechanism,
based on the eﬀect of intermolecular hydrogen bonding in the
system. In this label-free enantioselective discrimination
method, the selectivity originates from the enantioselectivity
of the intermolecular hydrogen-bonding interactions. The
diﬀerence in protonation of the Ag−MPY complex through
hydrogen bonding leads to formation of diﬀerent CT states of
the complex, which are further manifested in remarkable
diﬀerences in the SERS spectra.427
To explore the possible mechanism of enantioselective dis-
crimination further, a series of SERS experiments was
performed with p-aminobenzenethiol (PATP) as the chiral
selector molecule.428 Laser excitation wavelength-dependent
and concentration-dependent SERS experiments revealed that
CT-induced chiral discrimination enhanced the diﬀerences
between both enantiomers of two chiral alcohols (2-butanol
and 1,1,1-triﬂuoro-2-propanol) interacting with PATP, by
SERS. It was proposed that the process of CT from Ag NPs to
PATP molecules are diﬀerent under diﬀerent enantiomeric
conditions, resulting in diﬀerent CT transitions and signiﬁ-
cantly diﬀerent SERS spectra.428
The above studies demonstrate discrimination between two
enantiomers and break the traditional notion that chiral
discrimination requires other chiral entities as chiral selectors
or the involvement of chiral light in the system. This approach
may thus be of great signiﬁcance in the ﬁelds of chiral
discrimination, separation, and catalysis. The above studies did
not consider the possibility that chirality of plasmonic nano-
structures may contribute to enantiomeric discrimination.
Investigation of the hotspot-by-hotspot dependence ability of
the chiral selector may reveal the local chirality of plasmonic
nanostructures, which should be complemented by DFT
calculations for CT complexes. Similar studies may also be
possible using TERS. It has been reported that the metal tip in
TERS has intrinsic chirality,74,429 even if chirality is averaged
out by a collective measurement by SERS. Ozaki and co-workers
recently reported the observation of enantiomeric discrimination
by TERS using a chemically modiﬁed TERS tip.430,431 In this
case, the mechanism of enantiomeric discrimination is
probably due to a CT mechanism similar to the SERS case,
as well as the chirality by the tip. The contribution of chirality
by the tip was conﬁrmed by measuring the tip-by-tip
dependence of enantiomeric discrimination. Nurushima and
Okamoto432 reported strong nanoscale optical activity
localized in 2D chiral metal nanostructures. As nanostructures
with chiral shapes behave like chiral molecules and show
optical activity, it is likely that the summation of local optical
activities over the entire nanostructure provides optical activity
to the chiral nanostructure. Their study indicates that
prominent nanoscale local CD signals may exist even if only
a tiny CD signal is observed as the macroscopic optical activity
of the nanostructured sample. In contrast to conventional
Raman spectroscopy, where there is no chirality because any
chirality would be averaged out, SERS and TERS have intrinsic
chiral nature. For example, a hotspot itself is not completely
symmetrical and thus may have some chirality. We should
probably deepen our understanding of chirality in the near
ﬁeld.
Quantitative Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering
with Plasmonic Nanogap Particles. Enhancing the SERS
signals by many orders of magnitude while uniformly
controlling the signal intensities and spectral features from
Raman-active molecules on each structure is utterly challeng-
ing and complicated, since even a 1 or 2 nm diﬀerence in the
position of a Raman dye on a nanostructure can signiﬁcantly
aﬀect SERS signal intensity.52 Precisely synthesizing plasmonic
nanostructures in ultrahigh yield; creating the plasmonically
enhanced EM ﬁeld on many nanostructures, often assembled
in a reproducible manner; precisely positioning Raman dyes
inside a highly localized and enhanced ﬁeld; controlling the
orientation, number, and density of dyes; incorporating and
tuning resonance eﬀects between laser wavelength, plasmonic
structure, and dye molecule; measuring and comparing SERS
signals from single molecules, single particles, and bulk samples
in a quantitative manner; and understanding and controlling
the interactions between Raman dyes, nanostructures, passiv-
ation molecules, and target samples, particularly for biomedical
and chemical sensing applications, should all be considered
for quantitative SERS (Figure 24). Analytical methods for
obtaining the plasmonic gap size, the number and orientation
of particle-surface-modiﬁed Raman dye molecules, and SERS
EFs signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the outcome of SERS results that
vary among diﬀerent studies by diﬀerent researchers, with
diﬀerent approaches and setups. Further, the SERS signals
from a large number of individual particles should be com-
pared to the SERS signals from bulk samples for quantitative
assessment of SERS data. In these regards, from design to
applications, many diﬀerent steps and aspects must be carefully
and quantitatively scrutinized to test whether a particular
probe or system is actually useful for real applications with
SERS (Figure 24). Note that, although more desired and
beneﬁcial, ultrahigh SERS EF values from plasmonically
enhanced nanostructures mean that that these structures are
likely to generate poorly controllable and heterogeneous SERS
signals to a larger degree than the cases with lower EF values.
Important advances have been made for quantitative SERS
using plasmonic nanogap structures possessing ∼1 nm gaps,
either between particles (interparticle gap or intergap) or
inside a single particle (intraparticle gap or intragap) (see TEM
images in Figure 24).89,398,399 Precisely synthesizing the
targeted nanostructures in high yield (well over 95%) is the
ﬁrst step for quantitative SERS,433,434 and poor controllability
of the size and shape of the nanogaps with low structural
reproducibility can generate large ﬂuctuations in SERS signal
intensity and peak positions (Figure 24).435,436 Single-molecule
SERS has been shown to be reliable and repeatedly detectable
with gold−silver nanodumbells, where a Raman dye is posi-
tioned at the center of DNA-tethered gold NPs, and inter-
particle gaps have been engineered by nanometer-scale tuning
of silver shells.433 It has been theoretically shown that forming
∼1 nm or smaller gap is critical toward largely increasing
the EM ﬁeld within the gap between metal structures, and
DNA-tethered NP dimers with less than 1 nm interparticle gap
can generate a narrow distribution of larger SERS EFs.434
Intrananogap particles are promising, and therefore several
methods and strategies have been reported to form NPs with
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
55


----- Page 29 (native text) -----
highly uniform and controllable ∼1 nm intragaps.219,437−439
Such particles with robust 1 nm gaps can be used as reliable
SERS labels (or SERS tags) with quantitative SERS signals.
Also note that quantum tunneling eﬀects may be present for
sub-nanometer (∼0.3−0.7 nm or smaller) gaps formed
between metal nanostructures,88,89,440 and this eﬀect should
be avoided for stronger SERS signals, because tunneling
reduces the EM ﬁeld inside the nanogap. Therefore, sub-
nanometer accuracy in engineering nanogaps and precisely
positioning Raman dyes inside them are needed to obtain
maximum and reproducible SERS signals.
If biomedical applications are considered, quantitative
aspects and data reliability in SERS become even more
important, and surface chemistry of SERS probes is critical in
maximizing target binding and minimizing nonspeciﬁc binding.
Further, large-scale production of targeted SERS probes/
substrates with high structural precision and desired
functionalities while generating the same detection/imaging
results with diﬀerent batches of probes, particularly as scaling
up the synthesized probe amounts, is absolutely necessary for
the clinical and commercial use of SERS probes/substrates but
utterly challenging. Although ﬂuorescent probes have been
predominantly used in biomedical applications, they suﬀer
from many issues including poor photostability (photo-
bleaching/photoblinking), limited multiplexing capability
(broad line width), and autoﬂuorescence background signals.
In contrast, Raman scattering exhibits sharply and clearly
discernible molecular ﬁngerprint peaks with excellent photo-
stability,441 can be free from background signals, and oﬀers
richer information on molecules and nanostructures. These
features have recently been shown to be powerful in biosensing
and bioimaging applications with high multiplexing potential, a
reliable long-term monitoring capability of biomolecules of
interest inside a cell, multimodal bioimaging, and ultrasensitive
and quantitative biodetection.439,442 Thus, if the quantitative
SERS issue can be addressed properly with all the supporting
evidence described above, we might now be looking at the
emergence of SERS probes/substrates that can ﬁnally replace
or complement widely used ﬂuorescent probes in the near
future and provide opportunities for SERS probes in a wide
variety of practical applications.
Remote Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering. For
trace-molecule detection and analysis, the SERS sensitivity
and reliability critically depend on whether the analyte is stably
positioned around the eﬀective hotspot region (Figure 25) or,
better yet, the orientation matches the vibration modes and
plasmonic ﬁelds. To trap analytes inside nanogaps, various
techniques have been applied, including plasmon-enhanced
optical forces,443,444 microcapillarity,288 DNA assembly,221,445,446
and host−guest chemistry.447,448
Recently, a quantitative SERS study using a MoS2-spaced
metallic NPoM system (Figure 25) by Chen et al. tried to meet
most of these requirements.403 With monolayer MoS2 to
separate the NP and gold mirror, a robust 0.62 nm thick gap,
which is near the upper limits of ﬁeld enhancement, was
created. To obtain the maximum SERS signal, the optimal
resonant excitation was matched by a plasmon-scanning tech-
nique. Furthermore, the strict lattice arrangement of MoS2
Figure 24. Prospects and challenges of quantitative SERS (top) and representative plasmonic nanogap structures for quantitaitve SERS
(bottom).
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
56


----- Page 30 (native text) -----
ﬁlling the gap ensures a precise alignment between the lattice
vibrations and the plasmonic ﬁeld components. As a result, the
plasmonic enhancement can be quantitatively probed. These
quantitative SERS designs might provide important guidelines
for interesting eﬀects under the high gradient plasmonic ﬁeld, such
as quantum plasmonics,34 plasmon−phonon interactions,449
selection rule breakdown,450 and cavity optomechanics.100,101
In conventional local SERS experiments, the samples are
directly exposed to a far-ﬁeld incident beam to excite a much
smaller nanoscopic hotspot region for the desired SERS signal.
This local excitation mode not only brings strong background
noise from the remaining unenhanced region but is also
unsuitable for some biological studies due to photodamage
eﬀects under the strong laser exposure. An eﬀective approach to
circumvent these problems is based on using remote SERS, by
coupling the hotspots with a plasmonic waveguide. This was ﬁrst
demonstrated in a nanowire−particle system (Figure 26).451,452
In this scheme, surface plasmon polaritons (SPPs) are generated
at the nanowire end by far-ﬁeld excitation and then propagate
along the nanowire waveguide453 to excite SERS signals of
molecules in the nanowire−particle junction (several micro-
meters away from the laser beam). Because of the separation
between the SERS output region and the excitation beam, this
technique enables high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) SERS
detection, without losing SM sensitivity. This technique is
especially suitable for applications associated with SERS
imaging.
Recently, in an initial stage, the remote SERS technique by
virtue of a nanogap-coupled nanowire probe was applied to
live-cell SERS endoscopy (Figure 26).454 In contrast to the
local SERS detection with a laser beam directly illuminating
the cell, remotely excited hotspots in the cell show a largely
reduced photodamage eﬀect and much higher SNR SERS
signals from the nucleus region. In the future, the sensitivity
and speciﬁcity of in vivo remote SERS detection could be
further improved by optimizing the plasmonic nanogaps using
various chemical-linking techniques. On one hand, their
resonant antenna conditions in complex liquid environments,
including resonance and polarization matching, should also be
carefully considered. On the other hand, a remote-excitation
plasmonic source from a similar nanogap-coupled nanowire
probe has been used to suppress the background noise in
TERS measurements.455
The NPoM system is another promising platform for future
remote excitation methodology. This system is based on the
conversion between SPPs propagating along the metal ﬁlm and
localized plasmon modes within the gaps, which can be
achieved by momentum matching, through the use of a proper
excitation wavelength and control of particle geometry and gap
morphology. The propagation of the antenna-mediated SPPs
can be ﬂexibly directed by rotating the excitation polarization
or controlling the laser beam position with respect to the gap
antenna.456 By reciprocity, the strongest out-of-plane gap
mode can be excited to the maximum by the SPPs due to their
vertically oriented electric ﬁeld. This facilitates the optimiza-
tion of SERS detection and studies in a quantitative manner.
On one hand, by further combing speciﬁc-targeting techni-
ques457 in the NPoM system, the remote excitation technique
could manifest the potential for future quantitative SERS
detection and studies, including bioanalysis and plasmon-
driven chemical reactions.458−460 On the other hand, the
remotely excited gap antenna can be used to avoid damage
from the pulsed high-power laser for the excitation of plasmon-
enhanced nonlinear Raman processes, such as coherent Raman
scattering461 and molecular optomechanics,106 making these
novel phenomena clearly resolved in a more stable plasmonic
analyte-hotspot system.
Shell-Isolated Nanoparticle-Enhanced Raman Spec-
troscopy. Admittedly, SERS is an extremely surface-sensitive
technique, but it is material-limited, requiring nanostructured
Figure 25. Whereas in conventional SERS the molecules to be
probed are hard to trap and to control, a Raman probe based on
2D materials can be used to build a robust sub-nanometer gap.
It enables a perfect orientation match between the vibrational
modes and the local plasmonic ﬁelds. Reprinted with permission
from ref 403. Copyright 2018 Springer Nature.
Figure 26. (a) (i) SEM, (ii) scattering, and (iii) Raman images of a nanoparticle-coupled nanowire plasmonic waveguide for remote SERS.
The green cross in (iii) marks the illumination position. Reprinted from ref 451. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. (b) (i)
Transmission and (ii) remote SERS images of a live HeLa cell with the nanoparticle-coupled nanowire endoscopy. (iii) The SERS spectrum
from the nucleus region of the cell. Reprinted with permission from ref 454. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
57


----- Page 31 (native text) -----
plasmonic substrates to generate surface plasmon resonances
(SPRs) for enhancing the Raman signals. To overcome this
limitation, Tian’s group developed so-called shell-isolated
nanoparticle-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SHINERS).462
In SHINERS, inert SHINs consisting of plasmonic cores
(Au or Ag) and ultrathin but pinhole-free silica shells work as
nanosized Raman signal ampliﬁers (Figure 27). The plasmonic
cores generate strong EM ﬁelds, which enhance the Raman
signals of nearby molecules, while the silica shells isolate the
plasmonic cores, preventing physical interactions with the
analyte. At the same time, the silica shell can greatly improve
the long-term stability of the plasmonic cores, especially when
Ag is used.463 In general, by applying SHINs to the probe
surface, SHINERS can be used to investigate any type of
substrate, with EFs up to 5−8 orders of magnitude.464 Shell-
isolated nanoparticle-enhanced Raman spectroscopy has now
been widely applied in various ﬁelds, including electro-
chemistry, analytical chemistry, catalysis, energy, life sciences,
and even people’s daily lives.465
A major application of SHINERS is probing interfacial
processes at single-crystal surfaces with well-deﬁned surface
atomic structures and EM ﬁelds,466 which is of signiﬁcance in
surface science but can hardly be studied by traditional SERS
due to the well-known material limitations of SERS. Combining
SHINERS with electrochemistry, Li and co-workers successfully
studied in situ the potential dependent-adsorption behavior of
molecules, such as hydrogen, CO, and pyridine, at Au(hkl),
Pt(hkl), and Rh(hkl) surfaces, respectively, and observed their
diﬀerent potential dependent-adsorption mechanisms.462,464,467,468
Next, they used in situ SHINERS to study catalytic reac-
tion mechanisms at Au(hkl) and Pt(hkl) single-crystal
electrodes. For example, during electrooxidation at the Au(hkl)
single-crystal surface, direct Raman spectroscopy evidence of
the OH intermediate was observed.469 Recently, in situ
electrochemical-SHINERS has been used to monitor the
oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) at Pt(hkl) surfaces, the most
important cathode reaction in fuel cells.470 When ORR was
performed under acidic conditions, OOH intermediates were
observed at Pt(111), whereas OH species were observed at
Pt(110) and Pt(100) surfaces. However, ORR in alkaline
conditions led to observing O2
−at all three low-index Pt(hkl)
single-crystal electrode surfaces. Therefore, diﬀerent key
intermediate species, generated at distinct Pt(hkl) facets, can
induce diﬀerent ORR catalytic pathways.
In contrast with catalysis on well-deﬁned surfaces, nano-
catalysts are used throughout industrial processes toAuthor:
enhance their eﬃciencies. However, nanocatalysts feature more
complicated surface structures and are usually dispersed on
supports, such as oxides or carbon black, with high surface
areas. Therefore, due to the lack of coupling eﬀects between
the catalysts and SHINs, it is diﬃcult to employ SHINERS
directly to study surface catalysis processes on nanocatalysts.
To that end, a general SHINERS-satellite strategy was
developed to track nanocatalytic processes in situ.471 Nano-
catalysts were deposited on SHINs via charge-induced self-
assembly, to form SHINERS-satellite (Au core@silica shell@
nanocatalyst satellite) nanocomposites, so that the Raman
signals of species adsorbed on the nanocatalysts can be
eﬀectively enhanced. Using the SHINERS-satellite strategy, the
reaction mechanisms and structure−activity relationships for
CO oxidation on Pt- and Pd-based nanocatalysts were
successfully identiﬁed. Additionally, in situ SHINERS demon-
strated that O2 is eﬃciently activated on PtFe bimetallic
catalysts, into superoxide and peroxide, even at room
temperature, with higher activities than those achieved with a
pure Pt catalyst. Conversely, at Pd nanocatalysts CO oxidation
only occurs at high temperatures when PdOx is formed and O2
is activated to superoxide and peroxide, indicating that O2
activation is essential for CO oxidation and that surface PdOx
may be the active site. Shell-isolated nanoparticle-enhanced
Raman spectroscopy has also been used on numerous substrate
surfaces in various ﬁelds, to obtain enhanced Raman signals.
One example is the application of SHINERS to study the
atomically smooth Si single crystal surface, widely used in the
semiconductor industry, which successfully provided the
Raman signal of the Si−H bond during surface-cleaning
processes.462 In addition to metallic and nonmetallic sub-
strates, SHINERS can also be used to probe complex biological
systems. For instance, membrane structures of living cells were
obtained using SHINERS with Raman signals detecting
mannoprotein and other bioactive substances related to
protein secretion and movement in living cells.462 In combina-
tion with portable Raman spectrometers, SHINERS has also
been used in the areas of food safety and rapid detection to
detect pesticide residues on the surface of fruit or vegetables.
Thus, SHINERS provides an opportunity to overcome the
long-standing material and morphological limitations of
traditional SERS, while signiﬁcantly improving the trace anal-
ysis capabilities of Raman spectroscopy. The SHIN enhance-
ment concept has been expanded to other surface enhanced
spectroscopies. For instance, due to the quenching eﬀect
resulting from nonradiative energy transfer between metal
substrates and ﬂuorophores, surface-enhanced ﬂuorescence
displays only around 1 order of magnitude enhancement. Both
the Aroca and Li groups developed shell-isolated nanoparticle-
enhanced ﬂuorescence (SHINEF), reporting a 103 enhance-
ment factor with general application to diﬀerent ﬂuorophores,
quantum dots, and even phosphorescent molecules.463,472−475
Li and co-workers also established shell-isolated tip-enhanced
Raman and ﬂuorescence spectroscopy by employing shell-
isolated tips, which can exclude interference by contaminants
and enables acquisition of tip-enhanced Raman and ﬂuores-
cence signals simultaneously.476 Thus, it shows promising
applications for the Raman and ﬂuorescence dual mode
analysis of solutions, such as biological systems. More
remarkably, shell-isolated tip-enhanced ablation and ionization
mass spectrometry has also been realized, which greatly
improved the spatial detection resolution from the micrometer
to the nanometer scale.477 These shell-isolated nanostructure-
enhanced spectroscopic techniques with ultrahigh sensitivity
Figure 27. Schematic diagram of the principle of SHINERS.
Reprinted with permission from ref 462. Copyright 2010 Springer
Nature.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
58


----- Page 32 (native text) -----
and spatial resolution will make it possible to monitor bio-
logical and energy conversion processes at an SM or even a
single-atom in real-time, thereby providing profound funda-
mental insights into reaction processes.
Analytical Quantiﬁcation. The most fundamental goal of
an analytical chemist is answering two questions about an
analyte in a sample: (1) what is it? (2) what is its concen-
tration? Surface-enhanced Raman scattering answers the
qualitative question better than several other analytical tools.
The SERS pattern is a vibrational ﬁngerprint of the species
being analyzed, leading to direct identiﬁcation.52 Advanced
chemometric methods can be applied to extract the spectral
signature for each component in a complex mixture.478 The
high sensitivity inherent to SERS enables identiﬁcation of
particular analytes, even at very low solution concentrations.
The ability of SERS to answer the quantitative question is
regularly challenged by analytical chemists outside the SERS
research ﬁeld. This skepticism is justiﬁed by the reputation of
SERS being an irreproducible technique. The source of
irreproducibility has been assigned to the nature of the SERS
substrate (metallic nanostructured surface that supports the
eﬀect). As extensively discussed above, the plasmonic SERS
eﬀect requires molecules to be adsorbed on surface regions of
strong localized ﬁelds, that is, hotspots. The electric ﬁeld
distribution around a hotspot is not homogeneous and is
highly dependent on the local geometric characteristics of the
metallic nanofeatures. In principle, this causes a high degree of
variability in SERS intensities, since nanometric changes in
molecular position, orientation, and nanoparticle geometry
should result in very large changes of the scattering response.
This “limitation” of the SERS technique has arguably
precluded the widespread application of the method in
industrial settings. However, the last 20 years have been
marked by an accelerated development in nanotechnology,
including methods for design, fabrication, and synthesis of
nanostructures.479,480 Motivated by trying to ﬁnd solutions to
the “substrate reproducibility problem”, SERS researchers
played a pivotal role in those advances and reported several
approaches, with diﬀerent degrees of sophistication, for
substrate preparation (some of these approaches are described
in this Review). In fact, hundreds of papers have been
published over the years on how to produce SERS substrates
with diﬀerent characteristics, including large-area, low-cost,
high eﬃciency, and “good reproducibility”. The state of the art
in the ﬁeld oﬀers a variety of technologies to prepare substrates
(from either top-down or bottom-up approaches) that present
reasonable (less than 20% RSD) variations in SERS inten-
sities.479 Even commercial substrates that provide a good
degree of reproducibility are now available.481 These substrates
enable the construction of robust calibration curves from SERS
data that can be used for quantiﬁcation in real-world analytical
applications. In addition to the control of substrate reproduc-
ibility, the processing and analysis of spectral features for
quantiﬁcation is another signiﬁcant challenge, in particular, in
complex mixtures and environments, multicomponent samples
(of known or unknown composition), and at low concen-
trations down to the single molecule (SM) level.
Development of Chemometrics for Quantitative Surface-
Enhanced Raman Scattering. Although many would consider
analytical techniques within SERS to be limited to NP produc-
tion, diﬀerent types of sample processing, and analysis, another
important aspect that has been developed over the past decade
is the use of chemometrics. These computational approaches
are based on multivariate data analyses and use the whole
SERS spectra rather than speciﬁc bands for quantiﬁcation.
A recent review of mathematical approaches for quantifying
analytes from SERS data482 details two general approaches,
which are summarized and exempliﬁed here.
The ﬁrst approach uses a readily identiﬁable unique peak
that is speciﬁc to the substance being quantiﬁed. In this case,
one can generate a simple calibration model by plotting the
intensity or area of the band against analyte concentration. To
overcome any extraction eﬃciencies from complex samples or
any unavoidable analytical challenges (viz., number and
arrangement of nanoparticles in the collection voxel, or laser
power ﬂuctuations), recent developments have involved the
use of isotopologues (also referred to as isotope dilution
surface-enhanced Raman scattering) where isotope substitu-
tion is used in an internal standard, with the same molecular
formula and structure as the determinand.483 This method
leads to diﬀerent but recognizable vibrations (e.g., a CH at
∼2800 cm−1 is shifted to ∼2100 cm−1 in CD), which can then
be used for ratio-based correction. However, for 12C to 13C and
15N to 14N, the shifts are generally more modest, and peak
overlap is observed, especially within the ﬁngerprint region of
the SERS spectra; therefore, these ratio corrections involve the
use of chemometrics. Examples of the use of isotopologues,
often with chemometrics, for absolute quantiﬁcation include
assessing nicotine levels within electronic cigarettes484 as well
as for assessing drugs and biomarkers in human bioﬂuids, such
as measuring codeine in plasma485 and uric acid in serum.486
Other analytical approaches for absolute quantiﬁcation
involved the standard addition method with the incorporation
of multivariate analyses. Recent examples include the quanti-
ﬁcation of various drugs and metabolites in urine including the
antibiotic nitroxoline,487 nicotine,488 and uric acid, as this
metabolite is a potential marker for preeclampsia during
pregnancy.489
Chemometrics, which has been central to the above studies,
uses multivariate calibrations such as partial least-squares
regression (PLSR), although there are many other versions
of supervised, or even unsupervised, learning methods.490
In PLSR, a set of standards is prepared, where one knows the
level of the substance to be quantiﬁed. Surface-enhanced
Raman scattering spectra are obtained (directly, with isotope
additions, or via standard addition method), and a PLSR
model is generated that associates the spectra with the level of
the determined target. This process needs to be validated
carefully, which can be achieved by generating more samples
containing known levels of target molecules and then testing
the model’s predictive power.490 One of the advantages of
using multivariate PLSR calibration is that structured outputs
(i.e., the Y variables) can be used,491 which contain multiple
analytes to be quantiﬁed, thus enabling quantitative multi-
plexed analysis with SERS.492
Analytical Quantiﬁcation from Single-Molecule Measure-
ments. Although the substrate reproducibility problem has
been tamed, there are still challenges related to SERS
quantiﬁcation, particularly for a nonspecialist. Some of them
are experimental pitfalls, such as sampling493 and acquisition
conditions (time or laser power, for instance), that need to be
tailored for a particular analysis. However, there are also
fundamental characteristics of SERS that need to be con-
sidered, particularly when attempting SERS quantiﬁcation at
ultralow concentrations (generally, less than 1 nM). One of
these characteristics is SERS intensity ﬂuctuations (SIFs),100,494
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
59


----- Page 33 (native text) -----
which are observed at low concentrations and constitute a
challenge for a robust analytical calibration. The origin of these
intrinsic ﬂuctuations can be rationalized considering a simple
Langmuir model for the analyte adsorption onto the SERS-
active surface. In this case, the concentration in solution (the
quantity of interest for an analytical chemist) is related to the
amount of adsorbed analyte (surface coverage or concen-
tration) by an adsorption equilibrium constant (Ka). For a
typical adsorbate (Ka ≈107, for instance), the surface coverage
would be ∼1% for a 1 nM solution. Below 1 nM, the surface
coverage would decrease linearly with the solution concen-
tration (Langmuir model). In these conditions, variations in
Raman intensities arise due to the number and nature of the
SERS hotspots. The electric ﬁelds in SERS hotspots are tightly
localized and occupy a relatively small fraction of the surface
area illuminated by the excitation laser.495,496 When the surface
concentration is also small, then the probability of molecules to
be found in a hotspot becomes low, leading to strong variations
(spatial and temporal) of the SERS signal, which, at the limit,
can be assigned to SMs visiting the SERS hotspot. Figure 28
shows an example of an experimental time-dependent
trajectory of SIFs for R6G adsorbed on a nanostructured
silver surface.497 The inset in Figure 28 shows 5000 spectra
acquired at every second. The “SERS intensity” from each
spectrum was used to generate the temporal trajectory. Note
that, although intensity is plotted in Figure 28, more
sophisticated approaches to analyze this type of data, involving
principal component analysis or other data-reduction methods,
are preferred. In that case, the whole spectral pattern is
considered, and photodecomposition products can be readily
identiﬁed and removed from the data set.498,499
The wild intensity ﬂuctuations shown in Figure 28 provide a
challenge for the generation of a proper calibration curve. The
distribution of intensities in this case is not Gaussian, and
simply measuring an average is not appropriate. Moreover, the
large ﬂuctuations lead to large error bars. These issues can be
tackled somewhat by increasing the sample size; however, for a
long-time trace, the laser excitation ﬁxed in a spot at the
nanostructured surface would increase the probability for
photodecomposition products and other artifacts. A method-
ology has been suggested for SERS quantiﬁcation at ultralow
concentration conditions, particularly when the strong SIFs
can be related to SM SERS events.500 The substrate was a thin
ﬁlm of immobilized gold NPs on a glass slide. Enroﬂoxacin
(ENRO) and ciproﬂoxacin (CIPRO), two ﬂuoroquinolone
antibiotics that are emerging contaminants found in surface
waters,478 were analyzed by SERS at ultralow concentrations
(less than 1 nM). The analytes were drop-casted on the nano-
structured surface, and several areas of the slide were spatially
mapped501 using a Raman microscope. Spatial mapping was
preferred to avoid photodecomposition, because, in this case,
the diﬀraction-limited laser illumination was moved from a
particular spot right after the 1 s spectral acquisition. It is
assumed that, as the concentration decreases into the picomolar
regime, the Raman signal generated from a particular
illuminated spot (pixel) will originate from SM events.
Figure 29A shows a typical analytical calibration curve
obtained by plotting the average scores from the non-negative
matrix factorization resolution method (NMF; equivalent to
SERS intensities, but the whole spectrum is considered instead
of just one band) against the number of molecules being
illuminated (the concentration ranged from 3 pM to 14 nM).
The large variations in SERS intensities, as depicted in Figure 29,
lead to very large “error bars” and preclude proper quantiﬁcation.
Figure 29A nicely illustrates a fundamental problem for SERS
quantiﬁcation that is related to the nature of the phenomenon,
rather than to substrate variability. To circumvent this problem, a
methodology was suggested based on the digitization of the
SERS signal. The technique is based on the assumption that
the SERS signal from each pixel of an SERS map is from an SM
event. In that case, quantiﬁcation can be achieved by counting
the number of SM events (deﬁned by establishing an intensity
threshold above the background) observed in the map for a
particular concentration. Figure 29B,D shows two digitized
SERS maps at diﬀerent concentrations. The number of SM
Figure 28. SERS intensity of 10 nM R6G adsorbed on silver
colloids recorded vs time. The spectral data set is shown in the
inset. Excitation was at 633 nm, and acquisition time was 1 s.
Adapted with permission from ref 497. Copyright 2013 D. P. dos
Santos.
Figure 29. (A) Analytical calibration curve using the average value
of the SERS intensities (represented as non-negative matrix
factorization resolution method scores). The error bars are related
to the magnitude of the ﬂuctuations; (B) digital SERS mapping for
CIPRO (100 molecules/μm2) adsorbed on immobilized gold NPs;
(C) revised calibration curve obtained using the digital SERS
procedure; (D) digital SERS mapping for CIPRO (10 molecules/μm2)
adsorbed on immobilized gold NPs. Adapted from ref 500.
Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
60


----- Page 34 (native text) -----
events in the 50 × 50 μm2 maps, represented by blue squares,
scales with the concentration, as shown in Figure 29C. The
digital procedure described here is general and could be
implemented for any type of analyte, as long as the SIFs are
due to SM events.498 In terms of substrates, this method is
suitable for nanostructured surfaces with “immobilized”
hotspots. In the case of suspensions, other factors, such as
the aggregation process (that traps molecules in certain regions
of the surface) and even the dynamics of the movement of the
NP clusters within the suspension might also play a role.502
The methodology described here provides a robust
alternative for SERS quantiﬁcation in conditions of extreme
ﬂuctuations (ultralow concentrations). As with any procedure
based on counting statistics, the error in the determination will
scale with the number of (SM) events (counts). This digital
SERS procedure should provide reliable results as long as a
large area SERS map is considered, but SERS quantiﬁcation
has been dubbed the Achilles’ heel of the technique. However,
with the advent of substrates with a high level of reproduc-
ibility, methods are being devised to tackle fundamental
sources of Raman intensity variations, particularly at ultralow
concentrations.503−505 Preconcentration procedures have also
been described,506,507 and they can be incorporated into
devices for an integrated approach for SERS quantiﬁcation
from highly diluted solutions. The further development of
methods capable of transforming SERS intensity variations into
useful analytical signal might constitute the next step toward a
wider application of the SERS technique in industrial,
commercial, and clinical settings.
ANALYTICAL METHODS AND DEVICES IN
BIOMEDICAL APPLICATIONS
Surface-enhanced Raman scattering has attracted increasing interest in
the development of novel methods and devices for biomedical
applications. Practical and sensitive diagnostics and cost-eﬀective
techniques that are capable of simultaneously detecting the presence
of several biomarkers (i.e., multiplex detection) associated with
speciﬁc diseases at the point-of-care (POC) are highly desirable.
Because of its versatility, SERS has provided solutions for many
diverse medical applications. Diﬀerent analytical techniques, methods,
and devices have been developed to overcome the diﬀerent needs.
Before delving into the details of the diﬀerent applications, we
mention here the most common and some novel techniques used in
biomedical applications.
Basic Techniques in Biomedical Applications. Label-Free
Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering Measurements in Bioﬂuids.
As previously mentioned, direct determination of analytes can be
performed by recording the characteristic signal of the analytes in
close contact with plasmonic NPs. If we focus on biomedical
applications such as the analysis of bioﬂuids, we need to consider that
the readout of the signal and, therefore, the result of the analysis is
always associated with three parameters: the nature of the analyte, the
nature of the ﬂuid, and the nature of the optical enhancing material.
Additionally, the desired output about the analyte, either ultrasensitive
detection or/and quantiﬁcation, should also be considered. Notably,
although in some cases the mere presence of a given chemical species
in a bioﬂuid is indicative of disease, in modern medicine it is essential
to achieve quantiﬁcation of the levels of certain parameters both to
provide an adequate diagnosis and to understand the eﬀect of a given
treatment after diagnosis. For example, although SERS can be
successfully applied to the diagnosis of degenerative disorders (e.g.,
presence of amyloid proteins in Creutzfeldt-Jakob248 or Alzheimer’s508
diseases), infectious diseases (e.g., the presence of virus,509 bacteria,510
or fungi511), or genetic diseases (i.e., presence of mutations in DNA),512
indicators of other malignancies are not so obvious and depend on the
excess or shortage of a given molecule in the bioﬂuid.
Surface-enhanced Raman scattering direct detection in the
biomedical ﬁeld has proven useful in the demonstration of the
analytical capabilities of technique (i.e., SM detection and ultra-
sensitive qualitative analysis); however, the inherent complexities of
the bioﬂuids (i.e., blood, saliva, urine, etc.) hinder its direct
applicability. Notwithstanding, the direct addition of the bioﬂuid to
the plasmonic substrate may yield good results in two situations. First,
when the analyte to be determined has a very strong aﬃnity for the
plasmonic surfaces. In such cases, the retention of the analyte on the
plasmonic surfaces is preferred to the other components of the
sample, giving rise to the possibility of quantitative/semiquantitative
detection in well-designed plasmonic platforms. A clear illustration of
this is, for example, the determination of scrambled Creutzfeldt-Jakob
prions in blood samples by using Au nanorod supercrystals (Figure 30A).
The prionic protein presents an amino acid sequence of -Met-Lys-
His-Met-, known to have an extraordinary aﬃnity for gold surfaces.
This high aﬃnity, together with the exceptional enhancing properties
of nanorod supercrystals, enabled the SERS quantiﬁcation of the prion
at low (pM) levels.248 Second, direct approaches are also useful when
the target analyte can be easily puriﬁed from the main components of
the bioﬂuid. A typical example is the detection of single-point
mutations in nucleic acids (Figure 30B). These macromolecules can
be easily extracted from cells, puriﬁed, and cut into the desired
fragments by using commercial kits and endonucleases. Subsequent
addition of the samples to the appropriate plasmonic surfaces (in this
case, positively charged spermine derivatized silver NPs) enables
classiﬁcation of the samples, by using statistical protocols, into their
respective groups, wild type or mutated, which is of paramount
importance in the treatment of several neoplasm such as colorectal
cancer.513
Indirect Strategies in Bioﬂuids: Surface-Enhanced Raman
Scattering Chemobiosensors. The indirect detection of analytes in
biological media based on the SERS response of a secondary
moleculea chemosensorthat changes in the presence of the
analyte is useful for analysis in complex media. In particularly complex
systems, such as bioﬂuids, when the study of analyte levels
(quantiﬁcation) is required, indirect strategies are commonly used,
and SERS biosensors are excellent systems. The complexity of
bioﬂuids, which includes millions of substances diﬀerent to the target
analytes, requires the external functionalization of the plasmonic
materials with chemical species capable of imparting selectivity toward
those analytes (i.e., chemosensors).504 The target analyte is
determined here through a structural or electronic change in the
selective molecule (reﬂected in its SERS spectrum) upon combination
with the analyte. Advantages of this method include the generation of
highly selective sensors but also the use of the chemosensor as an
analytical standard for quantitative purposes. These biological
chemosensors can be employed for the analysis of small and large
molecules and can themselves be small or large molecules. For example,
small chemosensor molecules have been used to monitor chloride514 or
nitric oxide515 inside living cells but also amyloid proteins.516 The most
common chemosensor used in biological systems relies on the use of
biomolecules with high aﬃnity and speciﬁcity against their analytical
targets; especially aptamers, peptides, and proteins (antibodies). Again,
these macromolecules have been used for detecting both small
metabolites, such as benzoylecgonine,517 and large proteins such as
ovoalbumin518 or thrombin.519 Unfortunately, the low SERS cross
section of polymers (including biopolymers) is well-known,520 resulting
in the limited availability of aptamers, peptides, or proteins that may
gather speciﬁcity, selectivity, and high SERS signals all together.
Possible solutions include the use of internal and external molecular
labeling of the chemosensor. In the internal labeling, a molecule with
high cross section for SERS is introduced as a bridge between the
plasmonic surface and the chemosensor itself. Detection is based on
orientation changes of this molecule (also known as molecular spring)
upon conjugation of the chemosensor with its target, in agreement with
surface-selection rules (Figure 30C).521 This approach is eﬃcient for
analysis of bulky analytes. For example, it has been demonstrated in the
quantitative determination of oncoproteins in cell lysates522 or even
whole blood.523
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
61


----- Page 35 (native text) -----
Molecular Beacons. Small analytes do not promote great
orientation changes, and, thus, the use of external labels, such as
molecular beacons, can be used to advantage. Classically, molecular
beacons (MBs) are fragments of nucleic acids with a stem-and-loop
structure doubly labeled with a ﬂuorophore and a quencher group on
each end. In the absence of targets, the MBs act as switches that are
normally closed by the stem part (in the “oﬀ” position) without
observed ﬂuorescence background because of quenching. However,
upon binding to their targets, conformational changes in the MB open
the hairpin, and ﬂuorescence is turned “on”. Molecular beacons are
characterized by simple operation and high sensitivity and speciﬁcity.
By replacing one of the ﬂuorophores with a plasmonic surface, the
SERS signal of the other ﬂuorophore can be monitored as a function
of MB interaction with the target.524,525
A related technique, with direct bioapplications, is surface-
enhanced spatially oﬀset Raman spectroscopy (SESORS), which
enables the detection of SERS-labeled nanostar probes beneath thick
material and bone, such as a monkey skull,526 thus opening the
possibility of noninvasive remote sensing of SERS nanoprobes for
biomedical imaging. The possibility of combining the spectral
selectivity and high sensitivity of the SERS process with the inherent
molecular speciﬁcity of bioreceptor-based nanoprobes provides a
multiplex selective diagnostic modality, as well as eﬃcient and
versatile multimodal therapy.527
Methods in Biological Applications. The revolution of what is
currently known as modern medicine has driven the evolution of
existing techniques and the appearance of others. The development of
microscopic and spectroscopic techniques combined with the
preparation of nanomaterials with a high degree of control has been
a crucial step that resulted in important ﬁndings. When technology
advances, measurement methods, devices, etc. appear, which are
adjusted to the upcoming requirements. Surface-enhanced Raman
scattering is a technique that has evolved considerably and found a
variety of applications, with recent focus on biological and medical
applications.528 In medicine, practical and sensitive diagnostic and
cost-eﬀective techniques that are capable of simultaneously detecting
the presence of several biomarkers (i.e., multiplex detection)
associated with speciﬁc diseases at the point-of-care (POC) are
highly desirable. In addition to rapid diagnostic solutions, extremely
precise methods, including advanced imaging techniques, are also
required for accurate diagnostics and follow-up care.529 Surface-
enhanced Raman scattering imaging has revealed itself as a promising
technique that covers several of these characteristics and require-
ments. However, each system is diﬀerent, and, therefore, diﬀerent
measuring methods should be considered. The most common and
simple methods, well-known in the SERS community, generally
consist of an SERS active substrate and a detector that registers the
Raman signal generated when the target molecule is combined with
the substrate, while irradiating with a laser (direct method). The
indirect method makes use of receptors, disposed in the substrate
forming a receptor/target signal. A wide variety of advanced methods
have been developed to cover such a diversity of biosamples.
Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering-Based DNA Detection
Methods. Nucleic acid biomarkers, such as DNA, mRNA, and
microRNA (miRNA), have long been considered valuable diagnostic
indicators to monitor the presence and progression of various diseases.
For in vitro nucleic acid detection, a label-free SERS-based technology
called inverse molecular sentinel (iMS) can be used as a homogeneous
bioassay in solution or on a chip platform (Figure 31A). The sensing
mechanism is based on hybridization of target sequences and DNA
probes, resulting in a distance change between SERS reporters and the
nanoplatform’s plasmonic active surface. As the ﬁeld intensity of the
surface plasmon decays exponentially as a function of distance, a change
in the distance in turn modulates the SERS signal intensity, thus
indicating the presence and capture of target sequences. The iMS
technique is a single-step detection method, with simple delivery of
sample solutions onto DNA probe-functionalized nanoplatforms,
followed by measurement of the SERS signal after probe incubation.
Target sequence labeling and sample washing to remove unreacted
components are not required, rendering the technique simple, easy-to-
use, and cost-eﬀective. The iMS methodology can be used in solution
format for multiplexed detection of miRNA biomarkers of cancer.530
Alternatively, the iMS approach can also be adapted to a nanochip
platform, which is based on a metal ﬁlm on nanosphere (MFON)
array substrate, developed for the arguably ﬁrst analytical application
of SERS.531,532 The MFON-type substrate was further developed and
referred to as a “Nanowave” chip (Figure 31B).533−535 The Nanowave
chip has been used for multiplex detection and diagnosis of host
genetic biomarkers of respiratory viral infection and infectious
diseases such as the dengue virus (Figure 31C).536
Figure 30. (A) SEM images of a typical nanorod supercrystal island
ﬁlm and SERS spectra of (a) natural and (b) spiked human blood;
(c) natural and (d) spiked human plasma. (e) SERS spectra spiked
human plasma after spectral subtraction of the matrix (human
plasma). (f) SERS spectra of the scrambled prion. Adapted with
permission from ref 248. Copyright 2011 National Academy of
Sciences. (B) SERS of 141-nucleobase ssDNA fragment of the
wild-type K-Ras gene and with diﬀerent single-point mutations and
its classiﬁcation by using partial least-squares discriminant
analysis. Adapted with permission from ref 513. Copyright 2017
Wiley-VCH. (C) SERS detection of the oncoprotein c-MYC. The
sensor includes a speciﬁc peptide (H1) for c-MYC chemically
attached to an optical molecular spring (mercapto-N-methylben-
zamide, MMB), which is bound to a silver nanoparticle.
Theoretical and experimental Raman spectrum of MMB and
SERS spectra of MMB, MB-H1, and MB-H1 in the presence of
c-MYC, on SiO2@Ag. Magniﬁcation of the spectral windows
between 730−800 and 990−1050 cm−1 are also shown. (C−B)
Model used in the estimation of the molecular orientation.
Absolute orientation of the molecule on the surface and relative
orientation of the ring over the surface are represented by XYZ and
xyz axes, respectively. Adapted from ref 523. Copyright 2016
American Chemical Society.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
62


----- Page 36 (native text) -----
Another sensitive yet simple DNA detection method involves a
nanoplatform using ultrabright SERS core−shell probes called
“nanorattles” (Figure 31D−H).537 In this sensitive sandwich assay,
the presence of nucleic acid targets is detected by sandwich
hybridization of magnetic beads having capture probes and ultrabright
SERS-encoded nanorattles having reporter probes. Upon hybrid-
ization, a magnet is applied to concentrate the hybridized sandwiches
at a detection spot for SERS measurements. With this method, a
speciﬁc DNA sequence of the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum
could be detected with a detection limit of ∼100 attomoles. Single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) discrimination of wild-type malaria
DNA and mutant malaria DNA, which confers resistance to
artemisinin drugs, was also demonstrated.538 The simplicity of the
method renders it a suitable tool for molecular diagnostics at the POC
and in resource-limited settings.
An SERS-based bioassay using plasmonic nanorattles was also
developed for rapid diagnosis of head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma (HNSCC), which is a critical challenge, particularly in low-
and middle-income countries. In a blinded HNSCC trial, the SERS
nanorattle-based technique demonstrated a sensitivity of 100% and
speciﬁcity of 89%, supporting its use as a useful alternative to
histopathological diagnosis.539 In comparison to histopathology,
which can take several months in remote limited-resources regions,
the SERS nanorattle method can provide a diagnosis within only a few
hours, enabling earlier treatment before the onset of distant
metastases.
Another promising method for SERS biosensing is based on
anisoptropic gold NPs such as gold nanostars (GNS). For in vivo
monitoring, implanted SERS nanosensors based on GNS have been
developed as “smart tattoos” for the detection of nucleic acid targets.
In vivo detection of nucleic acid targets was demonstrated using
implanted GNS nanoprobes in the skin of a large animal model
(pig).540 The in vivo nanosensor involved the iMS detection scheme
using GNS with plasmon bands in the NIR tissue optical window,
rendering them an eﬃcient platform for in vivo optical detection.
Nanorattles with Raman reporters trapped between the core and the
shell were used as an internal standard system for sensor self-
calibration. These results illustrate the usefulness and translational
potential of implanted SERS nanosensors for in vivo biosensing.
Gold nanostars also provide an excellent multimodality theranostics
platform that combines SERS detection with other modalities
including two-photon luminescence (TPL), photodynamic therapy
(PDT), photothermal therapy (PTT), or photoimmunotherapy to
treat metastatic cancer and to produce an anticancer “vaccine”
eﬀect.541 A method to synthesize biocompatible GNS was developed
avoiding the use of toxic surfactants, suitable for in vivo applications
and future clinical applications.182 Plasmon-enhanced and optically
modulated delivery of nanostars into brain tumors in live animals has
been demonstrated. A quintuple-modality nanoreporter based on
GNS for theranostic applications using SERS, TPL, magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI), computed tomography, and PTT has
also been reported,542 which overcomes the limitations of conven-
tional optical methods, typically limited to SERS from superﬁcial
levels, due to the attenuation caused by highly scattering and
absorbing tissue.
Immunoassays. Immunoassays are well-established biochemical
tests that measure the presence or concentration of a speciﬁc target
molecule in solution, through the interaction between antibodies and
antigens. Currrently, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA)
using well plates, or chemiluminescence using magnetic beads, have
been extensively employed as immunoassays for diagnostic
applications. However, such methods have drawbacks, including
tedious washing steps, long assay times, the need for large sample
volumes, and poor limits of detection (LODs). The LOD is a
Figure 31. (A). Operating principle of the iMS detection approach (“Oﬀ-to-On” scheme). The “stem-loop” DNA probe of the iMS, having a
Raman label at one end of the stem, is immobilized onto a metallic nanoparticle or nanostar via a metal−thiol bond. In the absence of the
target, the probe is “open” with very low SERS signal (“Oﬀ” state). Upon exposure to a target sequence, the target ﬁrst binds to the toehold
region (intermediate I) and starts displacing the DNA probe from the placeholder via branch migration (intermediate II), ﬁnally releasing
the placeholder from the nanoparticle system. This enables the stem-loop to “close” and brings the Raman label closer to the plasmonic
metal surface, producing a strong SERS signal (“On” state). Adapted from ref 530. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.
(B) Nanowave platform consisting of nanosphere arrays coated with a silver ﬁlm. Adapted from ref 531. Copyright 1984 American Chemical
Society. The inset represents the unit cell used as a 3D model for ﬁnite element modeling calculations. Adapted from ref 532. Copyright
2012 American Chemical Society. (C) AFM image of a bimetallic Nanowave chip used for detection of Dengue nucleic acid biotargets.
Adapted with permission from ref 536. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry. (D) Synthesis of cubic nanorattles to be used in an
integrated “lab-in-a-stick” device. TEM images of (E) AuNP; (F) AuNP@AgCube; (G) reporter-loaded AuNP@CubeCage; (H) cube
nanorattles. Adapted with permission from ref 537. Copyright 2018 Springer Nature.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
63


----- Page 37 (native text) -----
particularly important parameter, as it is directly related to the
capability of using such platforms for early stage diagnosis of the
disease. Apart from high analytical sensitivities and low LOD, SERS
features other intrinsic beneﬁts, such as facile molecular ﬁnger-
printing, operation over a wide range of excitation wavelengths,
reduced photobleaching, and the ability to extract highly resolved
spectroscopic signatures. Accordingly, SERS-based assays are well-
suited for the simultaneous detection of multiple biotargets within
complex analytical samples, such as blood and plasma.543 Nonethe-
less, the application of SERS in quantitative analysis of biomolecules is
problematic due to the diﬃculties associated with reproducing SERS
enhancement levels. Such variability stems from a lack of control over
factors including the degree of particle aggregation, particle size, and
analyte distributions on particle surfaces. To address some of these
critical issues, integration of SERS with microﬂuidics has revealed
several useful advantages over conventional macroscale SERS
platforms.544 For instance, the ability to operate within a continuous
ﬂow regime and to generate homogeneous mixing conditions within
microﬂuidic networks has been shown to aﬀord quantitative SERS-
based analysis. The combination of SERS and microﬂuidics appears to
provide an ideal means for ensuring sensitive detection with
reproducible measurement conditions and well-deﬁned detection
zones. Additional beneﬁts of such an integrated system for
bioanalytics includes the ability to make measurements using minimal
sample volumes and low analyte concentrations.
Devices. The POC concept, which is directly related to lab-in-a-
stick portable devices and microﬂuidic systems coupled with
immunoassay methods, has already been mentioned several times in
this Review. Such devices rely on the idea of achieving easy, fast, and
accurate medical diagnostic tools that can be used everywhere, are
available for everyone, and do not need expensive technology. This
idea goes hand in hand with the concept of reaching more
personalized medicine. For that purpose, nanotechnology has
provided the possibility of reducing device size and producing such
POC tools. Several devices have been reported, and many more are
under development.545
Microﬂuidics-Based Devices. Chon et al. reported an SERS-based
on-chip immunoassay, using magnetic beads in a continuous ﬂow
regime.546 Although successful in application, memory eﬀects caused
by the deposition of NPs on channel walls aﬀect both measurement
reproducibility and sensitivity. To address these issues, the same
group developed a two-phase liquid/liquid segmented ﬂow system for
SERS measurements (Figure 32).547 This system enables the
generation and manipulation of monodisperse, nanoliter-sized liquid
droplets in an immiscible carrier ﬂuid, with high throughput.
Compared to single phase ﬂow, the localization of reagents within
discrete and encapsulated droplets enhances mixing, minimizes
residence time distributions, and aﬀords ultrahigh analytical
throughput. An integrated microﬂuidic system, including droplet
generation, transport, mixing, merging, and splitting modules, has
been developed for both eﬃcient immunoreactions and wash-free
assays, where immunoreactions could be eﬃciently performed by
transport through multiple winding channels. Subsequently, large
droplets including magnetic immunocomplexes were split into
daughter droplets for the wash-free immunoassay. Note that the
integration of SERS with such a microﬂuidic platform can be used to
perform rapid, sensitive, and safe immunoassays of hazardous
materials, since all immunoreaction and detection processes are
performed within isolated nanoliter volumes in an automated manner.
More recently, SERS studies have been combined with micro-
ﬂuidics to perform immuno- and cellular assays. Surface-enhanced
Raman scattering-based microﬂuidic technology can also be applied to
DNA analysis. Current DNA-detection techniques typically require
DNA ampliﬁcation using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and
detection of ampliﬁed signals by ﬂuorescence. It is thus possible to
detect very low concentrations of DNA without ampliﬁcation using
SERS-based microﬂuidics, due to enhanced detection sensitivity. It is
also possible to detect multiple analytes simultaneously, because SERS
target signals are much narrower than ﬂuorescence bands. For use in
medical diagnostics, an important aspect is the miniaturization of the
optical sensing device. Although typical dimensions of microﬂuidic
channels are very small, most Raman spectrometric systems comprise
bulky optical components, including lasers, microscopes, mono-
chromator, and detector, which are external to the microﬂuidic
channel. A fully integrated and portable Raman system would be
required for real-time, in-the-ﬁeld analysis. Such integrated systems
are likely to become a powerful next-generation biomedical diagnostic
tool. In conclusion, the use of microﬂuidic platforms enables an
exquisite degree of control over mixing times, scattering geometries,
localized heating, and photodissociation. Consequently, their marriage
with SERS-based detection schemes aﬀords reproducible and
quantitative analysis. We expect that SERS-based microﬂuidic
platforms will have a substantial impact on biomedical diagnostics
in the near future. In this respect, it is also important to realize that a
Figure 32. (a) Schematic illustration of an integrated SERS-based microﬂuidic channel composed of six microdroplet compartments:
(i) droplet generation from the shear force at the interface between the aqueous and oil phases, (ii) droplet mixing for the ﬁrst
immunoreaction, (iii) droplet merging for the formation of magnetic immunocomplexes, (iv) droplet mixing for the second
immunoreaction, (v) droplet splitting for the wash-free immunoassay, and (vi) Raman detection of unbound SERS nanotags in supernatant
solution droplets. (b) Extended images for (i) droplet generation, (iii) droplet merging, and (vi) droplet splitting. Adapted from ref 544.
Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
64


----- Page 38 (native text) -----
closer collaboration between medical and scientiﬁc communities will
be critical in creating such robust platforms for a wide range of
diagnostic applications.
In relation with infectious disease detection, Vo-Dinh et al.537
developed a method for the direct detection of pathogen RNA in
blood lysate, which uses an SERS-based bioassay integrated in a lab-
in-a-stick portable device. This device could detect RNA from the
Plasmodium falciparum malaria parasite, directly from an infected red
blood cell lysate. This was the ﬁrst report of SERS-based direct
detection of pathogen nucleic acid in blood lysate without nucleic acid
extraction or target ampliﬁcation, underlining the potential of this
integrated bioassay for ﬁeld use and POC diagnostics. Direct
detection of genetic biomarkers in body ﬂuid lysates without target
ampliﬁcation is likely to revolutionize nucleic acid-based diagnostics.
Another alternative lab-on-a-chip (LOC) device combined with
SERS that enables high-throughput SERS measurements under
reproducible measurement conditions has been developed by Popp
and co-workers.487,548,549 Here, the walls of a glass microﬂuidic
channel system were silanized to induce the formation of aqueous
droplets in a stream of mineral oil. Via various ports, aqueous
solutions of the target analytes, the silver colloid and the aggregation
agent, as well as water to dilute the sample, were pumped into the
channel system. As a consequence, droplets were formed and guided
through a meandering channel to guarantee complete mixing of the
droplet content. Finally, SERS spectra were recorded by focusing the
laser beam into the channel with 1 s integration time. As the recorded
spectra were measured within the droplet as well as within the mineral
oil phase, all spectra with contributions from the oil were
subsequently separated from the data set. Thus, a powerful LOC-
SERS system was developed, enabling the recording of large databases
in a short time. In the case of the antibiotic levoﬂoxacin, the potential
of the LOC-SERS detection scheme in bioanalytics was illustrated by
employing artiﬁcial as well as human patient urine as matrix.487
Interestingly, the SERS signal of the analyte molecule was increased
upon dilution of the spiked artiﬁcial urine matrix with water, which
has been attributed to a lower competition for free binding sites on
the metallic surface. Moreover, patient urine samples were applied as a
matrix, and the target analyte levoﬂoxacin was spiked within these
samples. For all investigated urine samples, the root-mean-square
error of prediction, which was interpreted as the limit of detection,
was between 0.057 and 0.16 mM. In a second example, the standard
addition method was applied to detect nitroxoline in spiked human
urine samples using LOC-SERS as analytical tool.548 Here, urine
samples from a healthy volunteer were spiked with the target analyte,
and the detection parameters were estimated by means of LOC-SERS,
that is, the limit of detection was ∼3 μM (0.57 mg/L), the limit of
quantiﬁcation was ∼6.5 μM (1.23 mg/L), and the linear range was
between 4.28 and 42.8 μM (0.81−8.13 mg/L). As the minimum
inhibitor concentration value of the most common uropathogens is
within this range, the LOC-SERS technique illustrated its great
potential in biomedical detection. Moreover, seven clinical urine
samples were spiked with nitroxoline to simulate real samples with
unknown concentrations. The standard addition method was applied,
and SERS spectra were analyzed employing the multicurve resolution
alternating least-squares algorithm to predict the initial concentration
of the target analyte. Thus, LOC-SERS was shown to be an excellent
tool in biomedical application ﬁelds, thereby opening the path toward
precision medicine, to control and to adjust the drug level and to
avoid toxicity eﬀects. To identify mycobacteria, the cells were ﬁrst
disrupted with a bead-beating system and, in a second step, SERS
spectra were recorded by employing a LOC-SERS system.549 Thus, in
general, all molecules within cells were allowed to interact with the
metallic surface and could contribute to the overall SERS spectra.
Within this study, six species of mycobacteria were applied, and it was
found that the SERS spectra were dominated by the cell wall
component mycolic acid, which features a structure that is speciﬁc for
diﬀerent mycobacteria species. Because of the LOC-SERS technique,
a large data set was established for all investigated species in a short
time, that is, more than 2100 single SERS spectra of one species could
be recorded in 1 h. To discriminate the bacteria, a hierarchical
chemometric model was developed. Thus, the potential for future
applications to provide reliable information to physicians was clearly
illustrated. In the future, SERS in microﬂuidics should play an
important role for automated sample feeding and sensing operation
for online monitoring, such as drug monitoring in intensive care units.
Cartridge Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering. As an alternative
to LOC-SERS and for application in scenarios where no monitoring
of a target analyte concentration over a time period is required, for
example, estimating the contamination of surface water with drug
molecules to initiate measures against pollution, an SERS-based
cartridge system was developed.550 Here, the SERS substrate was
embedded within a cartridge, and after incubation with the analyte
solutions, SERS spectra were recorded. For each measurement a
diﬀerent SERS-active surface was required, and the cartridge system
was recycled. In future applications such as food analytics or
environmental monitoring, the development of disposable cartridges
with an implemented SERS substrate, fabricated cost-eﬃciently, will
be of high importance.
Future Outlook. Surface-enhanced Raman scattering nanosensors
and nanoreporters are eﬀective and versatile platforms for biochemical
sensing, imaging, and medical theranostics. Surface-enhanced Raman
scattering detection techniques, which have high multiplexing
capability, will be critical for future personalized and genomic
medicine. The ability to detect multiple biomarkers simultaneously,
such as nucleic acids (DNA, mRNA, miRNA, etc.), is important for
many applications and for future medicine based on POC diagnostics,
high-throughput screening systems, biology research, and early
medical diagnostics at the gene and molecular levels. Novel methods,
therefore, should be found to explore and to exploit the possibilities
oﬀered by SERS. Novel substrates such as GNS also provide useful
tools for in vivo SERS sensing and theranostics applications. Because
of their well-established features, including the lack of photobleaching
and photodegradation, the ability to perform multiplexed bioanalysis,
and narrow spectral ﬁngerprints, SERS nanosensors and nanoprobes
coupled with advanced POC devices may lead to important
theranostic applications for the medicine of the future.
SURFACE-ENHANCED RAMAN SCATTERING IN
BIOMEDICINE: FROM SINGLE-MOLECULE DETECTION
TO IN VIVO STUDIES
Surface-enhanced Raman scattering has proved extremely
useful for a large number of analytical issues related to
biomedical applications. After describing the main techniques,
methods, and devices that have emerged as a consequence of
technological advances in the previous section, we now focus
on the improvement of diagnostic tools that may lead to
applying selective treatments for various diseases. All of these
examples are based on the properties of SERS as an analytical
technique. There is, thus, a current need to develop rapid,
sensitive, simple, and reliable devices for the identiﬁcation of
ions (e.g., calcium for bone regeneration), cancer biomarkers,
or pathogens such as diﬀerent kinds of bacteria. Additionally,
improvements in imaging modalities have been inspired by the
development of more complex study systems, which are more
realistic with respect to human bodies, typically based on 3D
cell cultures, animal models, or in vivo experiments. To image
such systems, high penetration depth, no photobleaching, and
minimum overlap between signals is desired. In the NIR
biological transparency windows (650−950 nm (NIR-I); 1 to
1.35 μm (NIR-II); 1.5 to ∼1.8 μm (NIR-III)),551,552 we ﬁnd
optimal light transmission through tissue with maximum
penetration and minimized autoﬂuorescence. Thus, thanks to
the accessibility to NIR-responsive SERS substrates and its
noninvasive character that avoids the need for ﬁxing cells,
confocal SERS imaging has also found a niche as a promising
bioimaging technique.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
65


----- Page 39 (native text) -----
From SM detection through in vivo studies, we can ﬁnd a
huge variety of examples that proﬁt from SERS detection. We
start this section by dealing with the simplest systems based on
biomarker detection and detection of pathogens, either directly
or indirectly, measuring their internal signaling. We then focus
on single cell imaging, continue with complex cell cultures,
tissues, and ﬁnally oﬀer a perspective toward using SERS for in
vivo studies that may enable image-guided surgery of tumor
margins and development of endoscopy-SERS coupled systems
to identify and to localize internal tumors.
Detection of Biomarkers. Surface-enhanced Raman
scattering-based biomedical diagnostics are vital for early
biomedical monitoring. Various targets have been reported for
small molecules (dopamine,553,554 folic acid,555 toxin,556 etc.)
and macromolecules (vascular endothelial growth factor,557
prostate-speciﬁc antigens,558 alpha fetoprotein,559 DNA,560 etc.).
One of the most fascinating and, in terms of spectroscopic
interpretation, most challenging aspects of biomedical applica-
tions in SERS are the spectra produced by the biomolecular
species directly, in the absence of a tag, reporter, or indicator
molecule. Such label-free, intrinsic SERS spectra have been
reported from all kinds of cells, ranging from bacteria and other
microorganisms561,562 to plant and animal cells, including body
ﬂuids, tissue sections, and cell or tissue extracts. Surface-
enhanced Raman scattering spectra from bacterial and eukary-
otic cells in cell cultures add signiﬁcantly to our understanding
of the interaction of plasmonic nanostructures with the
intracellular and extracellular environments. Therefore, by
controlling or deﬁning the interaction of the SERS substrate
with the biological system, intrinsic SERS signals can be used
to detect speciﬁc biomarkers563 or physiologically relevant
biomolecular species inside or near individual cells, such as
adenosine monophosphate (AMP),564,565 important metabo-
lites in normal566 and tumor cells,567 neurotransmitters,565,568
or trehalose.569 Surface-enhanced Raman scattering micros-
copy always indicates the presence of an interaction of the
substrate with the samples and enables mapping the position of
plasmonic NPs.570−572 An important aspect in SERS experi-
ments of live cells, and when gold or silver NPs are used as
plasmonic substrates rather than when cells are attached to
solid sensors573,574 or nanoelectrodes,575 or when substrates
are inserted into cells in needle-type approaches,566,576−579 is
the control of the plasmonic properties, which are critical for
SERS enhancement. Diﬀerent from labeled SERS tags, the
sensitivity of the SERS experiment cannot be modiﬁed by
changing the type or number of reporter molecules (e.g., by
exploiting molecular resonance of a dye molecule), but only by
optimizing the SERS enhancement of the plasmonic
nanostructure and by maintaining it inside the biological
environment. If NPs enter cells, they are processed depending
on their uptake mode and their constantly changing
biofunctionalization, which occurs before, during, and after
uptake, that is, in the cellular exterior and inside diﬀerent
cellular compartments. Gold NPs are very eﬃcient SERS sub-
strates for label-free cellular probing due to tunable size and
shape, which inﬂuence both their enhancement, aggregate
formation, and transport inside cells and tissues. As examples,
spheres,564,572 shells,580 ﬂowers,581 nanorods,582 and nano-
stars573 have been used to record intrinsic SERS spectra from
cells. Metal NPs for intracellular SERS can be stabilized by
silica coating with varying porosity, so that analyte molecules
can reach the plasmonic surface, while aggregation in the
endosomal system is controlled.565,571
Experiments quantifying the amount and distribution of NPs
in cells by mass spectrometry,583 together with high-resolution
ultrastructural imaging of the cells and the NPs, help us
understand the changes in plasmonic properties and SERS
enhancement of a particular type of SERS nanoprobe. Such
experiments show that the microscopic distribution and SERS
spectral signatures are correlated, rather than the number of
NPs that are located in a cell,584 yet the morphology and
interparticle distances within nanoaggregates are critical. The
interaction with diﬀerent kinds of biomolecules in the cellular
environment results in aggregates with high variation in SERS
enhancement. Speciﬁcally, the combination of nonideally
spherical NPs was recently shown to have a strong inﬂuence
on the local ﬁeld enhancement of gold nanostructures for NIR
excitation585 and is expected to play a major role in the
diﬀerent overall enhancement observed inside cells. Modeling
the EM ﬁeld distributions of highly SERS-active particles586
and their arrangements that are representative of a typical
speciﬁc biomolecule−NP in the complex biosystem,587
including the characterization of dark modes, which are
expected to play a major role in the SERS enhancement,588 will
help optimize SERS signals in vitro and in vivo. Improvements
in elucidating nanoaggregate geometries in the biological
environment are expected from ultrastructural imaging and
tomography.571,589
Understanding the formation of the biomolecular corona,
that is, the modiﬁcation that the surface of a NP undergoes
inside a biological system, is a main prerequisite for all
applications of NPs in theranostics and biotechnology,
including SERS. In fact, SERS itself is one of the few tools
that can be used to understand the composition, structure, and
dynamics of the biomolecular corona, not only in cells but also
in related bioﬂuids and cell culture media. As an example, the
protein corona of silver NPs largely diﬀers under identical
incubation conditions from that of gold NPs590 and of their
silica-coated versions,571 whereas the speciﬁc ring-shaped
morphology along endosomal membranes that was observed
for silver NPs can be related to their particular surface
composition.590
The endosomal system of eukaryotic cells is easy to target
yet highly complex and of varying molecular composition and
pH. The dynamic nature of this organelle makes it ideal for
assessment of optical and multifunctional nanoprobes for drug
delivery591−593 and theranostics.594,595 Plasmonic structures, as
key components of SERS probes, can oﬀer high local optical
ﬁelds for both sensitive diagnostic probing with SERS and
eﬃcient therapeutic tools. Particularly attractive are those
multifunctional probes combining photothermal capabilities
with the potential to monitor localization and therapeutic
eﬃciency by SERS and to understand their action better.596−601
Among them are also materials with SERS properties that
do not rely on the plasmonic properties of gold or silver,
such as molybdenum oxide,602 or 2D nanomaterials in
chemophotothermal therapy such as black phosphorus603 or
graphene.604,605 Of course, such nonplasmonic NPs, for
example, from ZnO, are also very attractive tools for cancer
detection and, apart from their role in novel SERS tags,606
might serve for intrinsic SERS detection in the future.
From the endosomal system, nanoprobes can be targeted to
other organelles, for example, the nucleus, where processes
related to drug- and/or NP-induced apoptosis and DNA
structure607 can be monitored by SERS. Considering the
therapeutic possibilities of the NPs and all reporter-based
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
66


----- Page 40 (native text) -----
sensing enabled by SERS, for example, monitoring of pH,608,609
presence of reactive oxygen species (ROS),610,611 NO signaling,612
or even temperature,613,614 a whole SERS-based toolbox for
monitoring cellular physiology is at hand. In addition to the
nucleus, mitochondria have also been targeted and can be
observed by SERS,615,616 in particular, due to their important
role in apoptosis.617
Nevertheless, a major challenge posed by the strong
variations in Raman cross sections of the diﬀerent molecular
groups renders some classes of molecules in the cells
undetected, in particular, cellular membranes and their lipids,
even if probes are known to reside in close proximity to cell
membranes, in the many examples of endocytotic delivery.
Outside cells, SERS spectra of pure lipids and lipid vesicles
have been reported, with eﬃcient interaction of molecules
and SERS substrates being obtained by functionalization
of NPs618−620 by using lipid−alkanethiol bilayers621 or the
in situ synthesis of gold NP−liposome composite structures
that mimic the composition of the cellular outer membrane.589
However, reports of in situ and in vivo lipid SERS spectra are
relatively rare.622,623 In complex biosystems, where other
molecules are also present, contributions to SERS spectra by
lipids have been found mainly when the interaction with the
SERS substrates was enhanced, for example, by using
plasmonic substrates that directly connect to the outer cell
membranes, such as nanoelectrodes.575 Lipid signals are also
detected when the abundance of lipids in a biological system is
particularly high.624,625 As recently evidenced in a macrophage
model of Leishmania infection, SERS microscopy can show the
distinct distribution of cholesterol and its ester ergosterol, as
well as of glycoinositol−phospholipids, all of which are
secreted by the parasite in vacuoles inside the cells and are
highly speciﬁc for the infection.625 Lipid spectral contributions
have also been discussed in an SERS analysis of exosomes,626
although most SERS characterizations of these important organ-
elles in cancer diagnostics rely on protein biomarkers.563,627,628
From the perspective of accurate detection, the controllable
selectivity of plasmonic substrates that are used to obtain
ﬁngerprint-like SERS spectra from complex bioorganic samples
will always compete with the selectivity of a targeting
chemosensor used for functionalization of a labeled SERS tag
of controlled enhancement and its reproducible spectral
information due to a speciﬁc “ﬂavor”. From the perspective
of compositional and structural information that is gained from
the biological cell, the spectroscopic information is of a
completely diﬀerent quality and, even though it relies on the
interaction with a plasmonic nanostructure, provides enormous
insight into cellular biochemistry.
Biomarker Detection using Surface-Enhanced Raman
Scattering Tags. Although various SERS active plasmonic
substrates can be used for biomolecule sensing and with great
potential in biodetection, often matrix eﬀects disturb detection
sensitivity and accuracy. A potential strategy to address this
issue would be based on developing ultrasensitive SERS
detection based on signal ampliﬁcation.629 Surface-enhanced
Raman scattering tags have been used for DNA ampliﬁcation
in biomedical detection, for example, applying PCR as an
ampliﬁcation strategy for highly sensitive detection of DNA
with femtomolar sensitivity.630 Nanoparticle assemblies addi-
tionally exhibit high signal-to-noise SERS signals that can be
used to distinguish diﬀerent targets.631−633 An interesting
strategy has been developed based on SERS-encoded discrete
silver pyramids (Figure 33A).632 Three silver NPs assembled in
DNA-directed pyramids were labeled with three diﬀerent
Raman tags. Through a speciﬁc bioreaction between the
aptamers and their corresponding targets, the reconﬁgurable
structured pyramids switched into a smaller gap state, which
induced stronger SERS. Limits of detection in the attomolar
range were obtained for the multiplex detection of mucin-1,
thrombin, and prostate-speciﬁc antigen (PSA). In these
systems, other signals such as CD and ﬂuorescence are used
next to SERS as screening signals.634
Surface-enhanced Raman scattering signals have also been
developed for quantitative detection of speciﬁc classes of
biomolecules in situ in living cells (miR-21, telomerase).635,636
By combining two signals (SERS, CD), which can operate
independently, the detection of two types of targets (nucleic
acids or proteins) was achieved, using two independent
graphene oxide−AuNP assemblies (Figure 33B).631 Hybrid-
ization of the molecular probe with the miRNA miR-21 leads
to the separation of the Raman tag from graphene oxide (GO)
reducing the Raman signal, while epithelial cell adhesion
molecule (EpCAM) recognition decreases the CD signal in
parallel. Also based on the multiple-signal-sensing principle,
assemblies of Au nanorod dimers with upconverting nano-
particles (UCNP) in a core−satellite structure successfully
induced two independent signals (SERS and luminescence)
(Figure 33C).633 The miR-21 target triggered the disassembly
of Au NR dimers, leading to decreased Raman signal, while the
target telomerase induced release of upconverting nano-
particles from Au NRs, resulting in increased luminescence,
which led to LOD for miRNA of 0.011 amol/ngRNA, and LOD
by luminescence of 3.2 × 10−13 IU (Figure 33C). Other
structures such as Au−Au−UCNP trimers encoded with SERS
and luminescence also enabled ultrasensitive monitoring of
dual cancer biomarkers (mucin-1 and Alpha-fetoprotein).637
Detection of multiple targets is crucial for early stage diagnosis,
so that false positive or negative signals can be eliminated in
biomedical samples. Future work toward optimizing stability in
real samples could improve further POC applications. Single-
molecule SERS and real-time SERS imaging of live cells
provide useful tools for monitoring intracellular compartments
and targets.638
Detection of Circulating Tumor Cells. The fast and
accurate optical analysis of cells in bioﬂuids for cancer
diagnosis is a current matter of intense research. Such
determinations face a major challenge related with the usually
small content of the cells of interest in the bioﬂuid. Circulating
tumor cells (CTCs) in blood are characterized by extremely
low CTC concentration, ranging from units to tens in 8 mL of
blood (standard volume for analysis) in stage IV cancer.
Because of such extremely low CTC concentrations in blood,
many methods use an enrichment process prior to the
quantiﬁcation step, some of them based on physical properties
such as size, density, or deformability, and others resting on
biological properties such as protein expression. By far, the
most common protocol makes use of magnetic particles,
usually comprising iron oxide, functionalized with antibodies
against the EpCAM. The rationale for this choice lies in the
idea that epithelial linage is not common in blood and, thus,
epithelial cells in blood are most likely related to cancer.
Epithelial cell adhesion molecule magnetic particles are thus
exposed to the blood sample, and, after an appropriate time for
conjugate binding to the targeted cells, they are extracted by
means of a permanent magnetic ﬁeld. These systems typically
use more than one antibody. For example, Cell Search (Jansen
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
67


----- Page 41 (native text) -----
Technologies) use also anti-CD45, attached to a dye, as a
negative control to detect false positives due to the partial
retention of anti-EpCAM by the mononuclear cell fraction of
blood.639 Approaches have recently emerged to address these
issues, mainly based on encoded plasmonic NPs and SERS,
which enable the multiplex quantiﬁcation of diﬀerent
CTCs.640,641 Advantages of this methodology include ultrahigh
analytical resolution combined with a virtually unlimited
number of available codes and, thus, markers, that can be
studied simultaneously. Unfortunately, state-of-the-art SERS
acquisition times are longer than 10 ms, hindering the use of
this technique for real samples, where a single CTC is diluted
among billions of other cells. Thus, a viable solution could be
achieved by combining the acquisition speed of ﬂuorescence
(down to ns) for rapid screening and sorting,642 with the
analytical resolution of SERS applied to the smaller cell
fraction, previously separated by physical or molecular
techniques.
Detection of Pathogens. The detection of the causing
agents of given infectious diseases has also gained much
interest. The speciﬁcity and detection limit that SERS enables
are suitable for the detection of low abundance but dangerous
pathogens, which pose risks for human health. The most
common infections are produced by bacteria such as E. coli, S.
aureus, or S. typhimurium that can commonly be transmitted
via food and water. Therefore, eﬀective detection tools are
necessary to avoid spreading of bacteria colonies and to
identify infection rapidly by diﬀerent pathogens in humans.
It is also of high importance to ﬁnd fast and inexpensive
methods that can be used in underdeveloped countries, where
drinking water accessibility is reduced and contamination is
common.
As recently reviewed,561 the ﬁrst report that SERS directly
on bacteria was reproducible enough to enable bacterial
discrimination and identiﬁcation to the species and subspecies
levels was reported by Jarvis and Goodacre.643 In this study,
bacteria were mixed with colloids and dried, and, after SERS
detection, multivariate discriminant analysis was used for
identiﬁcation. Following this work, Ziegler and colleagues
reported a similar analytical approach but introduced a novel
and robust identiﬁcation procedure incorporating SERS
barcodes.644 However, at the time, these studies did not
attempt to identify the biochemical origin of the SERS signal.
By contrast, recent studies have employed the use of isotope
substrates, such as glucose uniformly labeled with 13C or 15N
ammonium hydroxide, during bacterial growtha process
called stable isotope probing (SIP).645 In this process, heavier
isotopes are incorporated into bacterial biomass, resulting in
changes of vibrational frequencies (due to reduced mass in the
vibrations), which thus leads to Raman/SERS shifts toward
lower wavenumbers. This process enables the origin of
vibrations to be elucidated and, with reference SERS spectra
of natural and isotope standards of key molecules, enables
unequivocal chemical identiﬁcation. The ﬁrst study by
Premasiri et al.646 showed that purine-related molecules were
predominantly measured by SERS of intact bacteria, while
Figure 33. (A) Multiple detection of biomarkers (prostrate-speciﬁc antigen, thrombin, and mucin-1), using SERS-encoded Ag-pyramids
based on three Ag NPs modiﬁed by diﬀerent Raman reporters. Adapted with permission from ref 632. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH.
(B) GO−Au structures used for simultaneous detection of EpCAM and miR-21 using CD and SERS signals. Adapted with permission from
ref 631. Copyright 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (C) Au nanorod dimer−upconverting NP core−satellite nanostructures for miR-21 SERS
detection and telomerase detection by luminescence. Adapted with permission from ref 633. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
68


----- Page 42 (native text) -----
other studies using SERS-SIP have also used this principle for
the same purpose.647,648 This approach has also been used to
image single bacterial cells and to identify phenotypic function
in mixed communities.649 Surface-enhanced Raman scattering
is becoming a powerful tool for characterizing bacterial
pathogens, and this method can be used to assess antibiotic
susceptibility or resistance, both by probing the bacteria
directly650 or by measuring the volatile organic compounds
from the headspace of bacteria cultures.651
Rather than detecting bacteria directly, Liz-Marzán and
co-workers aimed at measuring their intercellular signaling
processes, that is, quorum sensing (QS). Most bacteria exist in
nature as bioﬁlms, which support their QS, a cell-to-cell
communication mechanism that enables bacteria to monitor
and to respond to cell density and changes in the environment.
Because QS and bioﬁlms are involved in the ability of bacteria
to cause disease, it is important to ﬁnd methods for the
noninvasive analysis of QS in natural bacterial populations.
Bodelón et al. reported the preparation of nanostructured
plasmonic substrates to monitor, using label-free SERRS, the
presence of pyocyanin, a QS signaling metabolite in growing
Pseudomonas aeruginosa bioﬁlms and microcolonies.652 Pyocyanin,
a heterocyclic nitrogen-containing compound of the phenazine
family produced by P. aeruginosa, and excreted into the
environment, plays important roles in bioﬁlm morphogenesis
in this microorganism. The strategy was based on the use of
hybrid materials comprising a plasmonic component within a
porous matrix that allows diﬀusion of small molecules only.653
Although diﬀerent combinations were tested, the use of
mesoporous silica-coated micropatterned supercrystal Au
nanorod arrays enabled SERRS detection of QS-behavior
(i.e., pyocyanin expression) at early stages of bioﬁlm formation
and enabled imaging the phenazine produced by small clusters
of bacteria colonizing micron-sized plasmonic features (25 μm2
on average), as shown in Figure 34. Subsequent work demon-
strated the application of this method to study interspecies
bacterial interactions, both for separated bacterial colonies654
and for mixed colonies.655
In some cases, localized infections may give rise to
septicemia or blood infection. This systemic disease, deﬁned
as the presence of one or less colony-forming bacterial unit
(CFU) per 1 mL of blood, may produce death within hours.
Therefore, the direct detection of bacteria is not a triﬂing
measurement. Despite all recent improvements in sample
manipulation and concentration, the standard approach to
direct SERS analysis of bacteria, dried on a solid substrate, still
retains major issues in terms of spectral ﬂuctuations, long
measurement time to acquire statistically reliable data sets, and
lack of quantitative response. These limitations can potentially
be addressed by combining SERS with microﬂuidic devices. As
explained above, such approaches drastically reduce the
acquisition time while improving the spectral reproducibility
by analyzing the sample in suspension.656
Because the ultimate goal for bacterial identiﬁcation is
completely bypassing the culture step, which takes from 24 h
to several days, concentration procedures have been
implemented into SERS-microﬂuidics biosensors. For example,
by applying nonuniform electric ﬁelds on dielectric particles,
including cells and microorganisms, it is possible to control
their location.657 Combining short-range dielectrophoresis and
long-range electroosmosis ﬂows, it is possible to concentrate
pathogens rapidly and selectively in a diluted human blood
sample, at the stagnation area on an SERS-active roughened
electrode.658
Unfortunately, although the sensitivity issue has been
addressed by some methods, only small volumes (∼microliters)
of samples, which are often not relevant for clinical diagnosis,
can actually be investigated. Mixing bacteria-containing bioﬂuids
Figure 34. In situ detection and imaging of pyocyanin produced by P. aeruginosa PA14 grown on micropatterned SiO2-coated Au nanorod
supercrystal substrates. (a) SEM images; scale bar: 5 μm. (b) Representative SERRS spectra measured at 0, 1, 3, and 20 h of bacteria growth.
(c) Relative SERRS intensities (1600 cm−1), recorded at 0, 1, 3, and 20 h. (d) Optical image of the substrate and SERRS mapping of
pyocyanin (1600 cm−1) at 20 h of growth. Scale bar: 5 μm. (e, f) SEM images of supercrystals colonized by P. aeruginosa (20 h) at diﬀerent
magniﬁcations. Scale bar: 5 μm. Reproduced with permission from ref 652. Copyright 2016 Springer Nature.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
69


----- Page 43 (native text) -----
with antibody-functionalized SERS-encoded silver NPs in-
duced the accumulation of the particles at the bacterial
membrane. By designing SERS-encoded particles that become
proximate upon adhesion to the bacteria walls, a dense array of
interparticle gaps is formed in which the Raman signal is
ampliﬁed by several orders of magnitude relative to the
dispersed particles (Figure 35). Under this scenario, the
sample can be pumped directly through a milliﬂuidic channel
where a backscattered detecting laser continuously monitors
the liquid stream, therefore removing the need for time-
consuming centrifugation/washing cycles prior to the SERS
analysis. Positive events associated with NP-coated CFUs
traversing the laser focus generate SERS intensities well above
the background of dispersed, encoded NPs. For a demon-
stration of bacteria detection, three diﬀerent types of bacteria
(S. aureus, E. coli, and S. agalactiae) were successfully and
simultaneously quantiﬁed, at a pace of 13 min per mL of blood
or serum (Figure 35) and at concentrations ranging from units
to tens of CFU/mL.659
Immuno-Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering Mi-
croscopy. Surface-enhanced Raman scattering is not only
applied for sensing purposes but can also be used as an
accurate imaging tool for ex vivo and in vivo samples, as we
describe below. Immuno-SERS (iSERS) microscopy exploits
the beneﬁts of SERS nanotags as described above. Central
advantages of this emerging nano-biophotonic technique are
the parallel localization of multiple proteins on cells and
tissues, protein quantiﬁcation, and high image contrast.324,660
The following paragraphs are intended as a brief introduction
to iSERS microscopy and its application ex vivo to single cells
and tissues.
Immuno-SERS microscopy employs SERS nanotags con-
jugated to antibodies for selective protein recognition.661
Protein localization is based on the characteristic SERS
spectrum of the corresponding Raman reporter molecule.
False-color images, which visualize the protein distribution in
the cell or tissue, are typically generated from a hyperspectral
data set of spatially resolved Raman spectra, obtained by point
or line focus mapping.662 The false color encodes the SERS
intensity of the corresponding nanotags, and thereby, as the
SERS signal response scales linearly with the amount of SERS
nanotags, it quantitatively reﬂects the amount of the target
protein.322 Since it was ﬁrst reported in 2006, when it was
termed immuno-Raman microspectroscopy,663 advances in
iSERS microscopy have largely been due to the development of
brighter SERS nanotags. Because time is a very important
experimental parameter, it soon became evident that
acquisition times as long as 1 s per pixel in the initial report
using hollow Au/Ag nanoshells should be reduced to the
millisecond regime by brighter tags such as small silica-
encapsulated clusters of AuNPs with single-particle bright-
ness.395 In 2011, the nonlinear variant of iSERS, immuno-
surface-enhanced coherent anti-Stokes Raman scattering
(immuno-SECARS) microscopy, was demonstrated.664 Con-
vincing iSERS results require negative control experiments to
demonstrate the binding speciﬁcity of the SERS nanotag-
labeled antibodies unambiguously. This result is achieved by
using isotope controls, as the most important and required
negative control in which only the corresponding antibody is
exchanged, but SERS nanotags and cell/tissue specimens are
both the same as in the positive control.665
Single cells are the simplest biological system to which
iSERS microscopy can be applied and, therefore, are ideally
suited for testing its performance and evaluating relevant
technical parameters. A critical acquisition parameter in SERS
microscopy is the laser power density at the sample, since
Figure 35. Conceptual view of a microorganism optical detection system and its relevant components. Silver NPs are separately labeled with
diﬀerent Raman-active molecules and functionalized with bacteria-selective antibodies (1). A NP dispersion is mixed in a vessel (3 mL) with
the possibly infected sample ﬂuid (2). Several types of bacteria are targeted using NPs prepared with speciﬁc combinations of Raman
molecules and antibodies. The presence of one of these microorganisms induces aggregation of antibody-matching NPs on its membrane,
rapidly evolving toward full random coverage (3). The mixture circulates through a milliﬂuidic channel (4) and passes through the focus of a
785 nm laser (5), which is in turn spectrally analyzed to record the SERS signal generated by the Raman-active molecules (6). Targeted
bacteria produce a large increase in the SERS signal, whose spectral ﬁngerprints enable the identiﬁcation of the pathogen. Correlation
between a time series of spectra and the SERS reference of labeled NPs. The analyzed serum samples contain either one pathogen (1−4, see
labels) or no pathogen (5, blank). Series 6 shows the result for a blood sample spiked with a combination of three diﬀerent bacteria
(S. aureus, E. coli, and S. agalactiae). Large correlation values reveal the passage of an individual bacteria or CFU. Bacterial cultures
(24−48 h) for the microorganism inoculated in the blood samples (series 6). White spots correspond to the CFUs. Adapted with permission
from ref 659. Copyright 2016 Springer Nature.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
70


----- Page 44 (native text) -----
SERS nanotags can be damaged due to signiﬁcant heating as a
result of absorption. A recent systematic study on single breast-
cancer cells demonstrated that ca. 1−2 mW/pixel is a suitable
upper limit.666 This value resulted from repeated measure-
ments on the same single cell and the comparison of the corre-
sponding false-color SERS images and spectra. In situations
where an electron multiplying charge-coupled device (CCD) is
used for detection, the electron multiplying gain can be
exploited for faster acquisition. Although the multiplexing
advantage of iSERS microscopy is clearly evident in the context
of single-cell studies, experimental work demonstrating this aspect
with a substantial number of SERS nanotags (N > 3 colors) is still
lacking.342,347,379,667 In the future, such multicolor studies are
urgently needed to demonstrate unambiguously the propa-
gated superiority of iSERS microscopy compared to its optical
competitors.
Formalin-ﬁxed and paraﬃn-embedded tissue is the most
commonly employed material in histopathology. Compared to
single cells, tissue is a signiﬁcantly more complex system con-
taining many cells, including diﬀerent cell types. This situation
is further complicated by the process of tissue treatment prior
to analysis. For maintaining the morphology in subsequent
histopathological studies, the native tissue from biopsies is
usually ﬁxed in formalin and then embedded in paraﬃn to
obtain micrometer-thick tissue sections using a microtome.
Antigen retrieval techniques are required to make the target
protein accessible for antibody recognition in immunostaining.
A direct comparison of immunoﬂuorescence and iSERS
revealed that the type of antigen retrieval directly aﬀects the
iSERS staining results.668 Several iSERS studies on tissue were
performed on PSA, an organ-speciﬁc but cancer-unspeciﬁc
target protein; PSA is a good test system, because it is broadly
expressed at high levels in epithelium of the prostate
gland.331,349,355,389,663,668 Again, as for single cells, convincing
multicolor iSERS studies on tissue (N > 3 colors) are missing
and should be demonstrated in the future for promoting the
acceptance of this technique in the biomedical community.669
Finally, instrumental challenges such as the fast and automated
examination of entire tissue slides with dimensions of ca.
2.5 cm × 1 cm must be solved prior to implementation in
routine diagnostics.
Multiplexed Cell Discrimination Using Surface-En-
hanced Raman Scattering Imaging. Bright SERS tags can
also be applied to monitor complex cell cultures. A recent
example of SERS-based imaging demonstrated multiplexed cell
discrimination.363 Instead of measuring the proteins that are
present in the cells, SERS-encoded particles were used to label
diﬀerent kinds of cells, which can readily take them up, thereby
providing the possibility to monitor live cells over long periods
of time. Cell migration and diﬀerentiation is of high relevance
for understanding tumor cell behavior, and, importantly, this
study proved the long-term stability of such SERS tags. Speciﬁc
imaging of breast-cancer cells from ﬁve diﬀerent cell lines,
within a quintuple coculture over time periods over 24 h were
successfully performed, which could be extended into 3D cell
culture models.
Future Prospects of Surface-Enhanced Raman Scat-
tering in Medicine. Although the number of applications of
SERS in biosensing has rapidly increased during the past
decade,326,670,671 its progress toward becoming a widespread
clinical diagnostic technology has lagged behind.672 A speciﬁc
bottleneck problem is the limited tissue penetration depth
achievable, which severely hinders the implementation in
full-body, deep tissue, or intracranial applications (the
maximum tissue penetration depths for simple SERS setups
are on the order of several millimeters,673,674 if we do not
consider SESOR implementations675). In fact, although SERS
imaging via SERS tags has been performed in murine
models,674,676 it may be unlikely that this approach will
become applicable to molecular imaging of organs in human
patients. One should not discount other (including niche)
clinical research areas in which SERS has shown or has the
potential to demonstrate superiority, however. Compared to
other optical and nonoptical techniques, such as ﬂuorescence
imaging, MRI, or photoacoustic imaging, SERS may have
distinct advantages. For instance, its well-known high
sensitivity and brightness, together with the lack of photo-
bleaching of SERS tags, have proven advantageous with respect
to ﬂuorescence techniques for single-cell imaging, even at a low
concentration of contrast agent.677 Furthermore, the micro-
meter-range resolution of SERS is far superior to that of MRI,
which ranges in the order of one to few millimeters. To put
this value in perspective, if one assumes the diameter of a
cancer cell to be of the order of 20 μm, 100 000 cancer cells
would need to be present in a tumor tissue for it to be
detectable via MRI, which may render the analysis too late for
certain types of aggressive tumors.678 Finally, photoacoustic
imaging suﬀers from the lack of targeted imaging agents,
compared to the case of SERS,679 for which there is a large
number of available tags.672 Therefore, we need to leverage
these advantages for SERS to become a diagnostic technique
with true clinical reach.
There are three main clinical implementations of SERS that
could ﬁnd applicability in the near future (Figure 36): (1)
during surgery, for the detection of tumor margins;680 (2) via
endoscopy, colonoscopy, or other optical ﬁber-guided imaging
procedure to visualize and to detect superﬁcial diseased tissues
within the interior of the body;681 or (3) via liquid biopsy, a
term that broadly comprises the identiﬁcation of disease
biomarkers in blood or other bodily ﬂuids.682 Biomarkers that
have been the focus of most research eﬀorts include small
molecules,683 proteins,684,685 DNA and RNA,686−688 CTCs,689
and exosomes.690
With respect to the detection of tumor margins or
microinﬁltrated tumor tissues, a breakthrough demonstration
was reported by Kircher and co-workers,680 who showed
that the use of SERS tags, to target glioblastoma tissues
intraoperatively in genetically engineered mouse animal
models, led to an improved identiﬁcation of tumor margins
compared to the surgeon’s eye alone. The approach
demonstrated that tags were suﬃcient to improve tracking of
tumor margins employing a portable Raman microscope
instead of a benchtop instrument. The same authors also
showed that the use of nanostars, instead of silica-coated gold
nanospheres, improved their ability to image, with high
precision, pancreatic cancer, breast cancer, prostate cancer,
and sarcoma in animal models,691 further extending the
approach to ovarian cancer via use of folate targeting692 and to
liver cancer via intravenous injection of NPs.693 With no need
for surgical dissection, Vo-Dinh and co-workers demonstrated
in vivo SERS detection of gold nanostars accumulated in tumor
in a genetically engineering mouse animal model.597 Although
these reports have been key to solidifying the relevance of
SERS in clinical practice, further considerations are needed to
make extensive use of SERS with patients. First, the systematic
intravenous delivery of imaging tags to the targeted organ
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
71


----- Page 45 (native text) -----
would be more complex in humans than in murine counter-
parts, requiring stabilities of over 24−48 h, resistance to fouling
and protein corona formation,694 and extremely high biocom-
patibility. If one takes into account that, on average, less than
5% of the systemically injected NPs reach the target organ,
issues related to NP aggregation, shape reconstruction,
accumulation, and toxicity become important. Furthermore,
it is unlikely that SERS tags, because of the size of their
plasmonic component, will ever be able to cross the blood−
brain barrier (BBB), unless its functionality has already been
altered by damages to its integrity due to disease or impact.695
However, to bypass the BBB, one could design biocompatible
liquids or gels containing SERS tags, to be sprayed during
open-brain surgery onto the brain tissues that need to be
excised, at a suﬃcient concentration to make them detectable
via a portable Raman spectrometer, in suﬃcient amounts to
cover the area under examination, and without aﬀecting its
viability and without inﬁltrating surrounding healthy tissues.
Another approach proposed bypassing the BBB by using lasers
to heat plasmonic nanoprobes (gold nanostars) photo-
thermally and to modulate their delivery into the brain
tumor parenchyma optically with minimal oﬀ-target distribu-
tion in a murine model.696 For these issues to be solved
productively, there will need to be a collaborative approach
among chemists, physicists, materials scientists, and clinicians.
Surface-enhanced Raman scattering detection of mainly
cancerous tissues in animal models has been performed via
endoscopy by adapting the optics of Raman microscopes to
available endoscopes. For instance, Zavaleta et al.697 developed
a ﬂexible, noncontact, ﬁber optic-based device with a diameter
of 5 mm and inserted it into an existing endoscope to obtain a
device with variable working distance (from 1−10 mm), which
accommodates imperfect centering during endoscopy and
nonuniform surface topology in human (and animal) tissues.
With institutional review board (IRB) approval, they were then
able to administer SERS tags to patients topically and to
employ their device during colonoscopy. With a similar
approach, Liu et al. topically administered a multiplexed
cocktail of SERS tags to murine models of esophageal cancer
and were able to visualize tumor tissues in the lumen of the
esophagus and to quantify biomarker expression levels by
employing a miniature spectral endoscope featuring rotational
scanning and axial pull-back.681 Other implementations of
endoscopy include the use of plasmonic nanowire waveguides
to limit hotspot light concentration and photodamage, by
providing remote excitation,454 and the assessment of gastric
and colon disease individually and in multiplex.698,699 Currently,
the main limitation to this approach is the minimum optical
ﬁber diameter (and therefore endoscope) that can be employed,
due to constraints in the design and implementation of the
excitation and detection optics. Once this issue is overcome,
additional applications, not limited to cancer detection, may
become feasible, such as the screening of the upper respiratory
system for the presence of viral particles.
As previously mentioned, liquid biopsy holds the promise to
render early disease detection and monitoring much simpler to
perform and less painful for the patient. In particular, the
possibility to evaluate the presence of disease biomarkers in
Figure 36. SERS tags can be employed to (A) aid in the identiﬁcation of tumor margins intraoperatively. Adapted from ref 680. Copyright
2014 American Chemical Society. (B) identify and localize tumor tissues endoscopically. Adapted with permission from ref 681. Copyright
2015 Optical Society of America. (C) aid in the multiplex detection of circulating tumor cells, by identifying overexpressed membrane
biomarkers. Adapted with permission from ref 689. Copyright 2014 Springer Nature.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
72


----- Page 46 (native text) -----
bodily ﬂuids instead of tissues would enable monitoring disease
progression and response to therapy, in principle on a daily
basis, rather than having to rely on imaging approaches that
may or may not detect changes in tumor size. Furthermore, the
opportunity to monitor the presence of biomarkers in healthy
individuals that may however have genetically inherited the
disease from their parents, would open the opportunity for true
personalized medicine. In this area, SERS oﬀers many
opportunities.682 Its selectivity and sensitivity, along with the
variety of SERS platforms and tags that have been developed
over the years, will likely render it a key player in the medical
ﬁeld. Recently, Li et al. designed and implemented an SERS
immunoassay to analyze exosomes in 2 μL of clinical serum
and to discriminate pancreatic tumor patients from healthy
individuals as well as to distinguish between metastasized and
nonmetastasized disease.700 Alvarez-Puebla and co-workers
implemented an SERS platform to monitor the biomarker
c-MYC, a transcription factor deregulated in 70% of cancers,
by leveraging changes in Raman reporter orientation upon
binding of the target. They validated the sensor in cell lines,
healthy donors, and one cancer patient.523 One of the main
hurdles to overcome in the application of SERS in liquid
biopsy will be understanding how to process the specimens of
bodily ﬂuids to minimize matrix interference in the resulting
spectra. When targeting circulating tumor cells, it will be
necessary to design simpler enrichment methods than those
developed in recent years, based on complex microﬂuidic
devices. Promise lies in the use of aptamers, which, based on
their ability to capture cells by recognizing cell surface
biomarkers, have recently been shown to achieve capture
eﬃciencies of 50−60%, with values of 40% for cell numbers as
low as 10, which is realistic in the case of CTCs.684
Importantly, the use of truncated aptamers produced an
increase in capture eﬃciency, which is promising with respect
to clinical implementations of SERS in liquid biopsy.
Looking ahead, one of the hurdles to increase applicability of
SERS in medicine will be its implementation alongside clinical
trials to address questions that are important to clinicians.
A recent study by Bhamidipati et al. showed that SERS may aid
oncologists in the stratiﬁcation of prostate cancer patients,
compared to immunoﬂuorescence alone, by quantifying the
expression of the prostate-speciﬁc membrane antigen (PSMA)
in tissue microarrays obtained from 34 patients with varying
stage of prostate cancer.684 What the study showed was that
some patients who had been clinically staged at low risk
showed instead high PSMA expression, whereas other patients
who had been staged at high risk, showed only low PSMA
expression. Although this was a retrospective study, if
these patients had been in an ongoing clinical trial, the SERS
data would have deﬁnitely called for further investigation.
To proceed along these lines, pairing SERS studies to clinical
trials with consenting patients (i.e., prospective studies) will be
necessary to make it possible for SERS to penetrate the clinic
and to become a diagnostic tool available to clinicians.
ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING
Surface-enhanced Raman scattering has been widely used for
monitoring and quantiﬁcation of environmental toxins and
chemicals,556,701−703 heavy metals,704−706 bacteria signaling
metabolites,652 etc. Diﬀerent nanostructures, including NP
dimers and oligomers (Figure 37A),446,701,706 Au NRs or NP
chains (Figure 37B),556,704 Au NRs ladders,705 heterostructures
(Figure 37C),707 as well as AuNP arrays708 and nanopillars709
ﬁlm structures, among others,652,710 have been exploited to
provide SERS enhancement for environmental detection.
Additionally, the application of novel nanomaterials has
been explored, including semiconductors,711 transition-metal
chalcogenides,712 and metal−organic frameworks,713 which
may further improve the performance of SERS substrates.
Compared to absorption spectroscopy or hydrodynamic
size-based sensing technologies, SERS-based detection has
achieved better sensitivity, even reaching the picomolar
level.702,705 It has been reported that, with the use of more
extensive NP assemblies, such as NP chains versus GNS dimers,
the sensitivity was further improved (0.45 vs 0.8 pg mL−1).706
Compared to Au NR oligomers and AuNP chains, which have
similar sensitivity, sharp tips on the NPs can help improve the
detection performance.705,706 For the detection of environ-
mental toxins or chemicals, the sensitivities provided by
end-to-end Au NR chains or NP−NR−NP trimer structures
were, however, of the same order, indicating a similar SERS
enhancement.556,701 An interesting structure was built by
applying PCR to create alternating plasmonic NP heterochains,
which displayed stronger SERS intensity as the number of NPs
was increased (Figure 37C).707 Strategies based on NP
assemblies for SERS ultrasensitive detection thus provide alter-
native routes to overcome sensitivity limitations but require
reproducibility and stability optimization for real sample
detection. In general, small gaps, larger assemblies (multigaps),
roughness (sharp tips), and type of NP building blocks all
contribute to the overall SERS enhancement. On the basis of
Raman ﬁngerprint spectra, SERS is capable of simultaneously
detecting multiple pollutants of varying molecular weight, even
distinguishing organic chemicals with similar structures.632
Although simultaneous monitoring of multiple targets can be
possible, the optimal SERS conﬁguration for diﬀerent mole-
cules with a similar structure, polarity, or molecular weight may
be diﬀerent. Challenges thus remain for SERS detection
technology, such as unspeciﬁc aggregation of NPs, variation of
surface chemistry, and sample matrix eﬀects, which aﬀect the
detection performance (sensitivity, selectivity, and accuracy).
Single-molecule SERS will be important for probing complex
chemical and biological environments, which could be realized
by means of a dual-function linker that can localize and secure
a single target within a plasmonic nanogap, for example, a
nanojunction of Ag NP (60 nm) on Ag substrate.448 Even
though the dimensions of the NPs can be tailored to increase
the sensor signals,714 the presence of impurities or the orien-
tation of target molecules can induce ﬂuctuations in SM SERS
spectra. Surface-enhanced Raman scattering provides great
potential to establish a rapid, reliable, practical detection
platform, in which the targets should be matched to a suitable
SERS substrate, optimal laser light, and controlled speed and
automation for vast sample monitoring.
Detection of Toxins. On the basis of the characteristic
vibrational ﬁngerprints, displayed even by very similar molec-
ular species, and the ability to measure Raman spectra in
aqueous matrices, intrinsic SERS has great potential to detect
toxins that could compromise our food supply. Several recent
publications demonstrate SERS detection of toxic bacteria
(e.g., Salmonella typhimurium715 and Yersinia pestis547), proteins
(e.g., ricin716), and small molecules (e.g., mycotoxins717 and
dipicolinic acid718). Perhaps the most signiﬁcant challenge
toward exploiting this potential lies in the requirement that, to
achieve a high SNR in the SERS spectrum of the toxin itself,
the scattering molecule must dwell within a few nanometers of
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
73


----- Page 47 (native text) -----
the plasmonic substrate. Thus, the most important design
element for an intrinsic SERS sensor lies in the nature of the
aﬃnity agent, coating, or capture mechanism that will draw
and/or hold the target analyte near the plasmonic surface. In
some cases, on the basis of the molecular features of the toxin,
the toxin itself will have an aﬃnity for the plasmonic surface
and can be directly detected using SERS. An excellent example
of this circumstance was reported by Van Duyne and co-
workers, comprising the direct SERS detection of dipicolinic
acid, a biomarker for Bacillus anthracis, quickly and at levels
relevant for detection of infectious doses.719
In most cases, however, the target molecules do not display a
natural aﬃnity for the plasmonic substrates that enable SERS
detection. As such, a wide range of aﬃnity agents have been
used for SERS detection of toxins (Figure 38).720 Among the
most important factors to keep in mind when selecting aﬃnity
agents are (1) the length of the aﬃnity agent (since this
determines how far the analyte will be from the enhancing
substrate) and (2) the Raman scattering properties of the
aﬃnity agent itself (since these vibrational bands will interfere
with new signals from the target).
On the basis of the widespread use of antibody aﬃnity
agents in traditional assays such as ELISAs, there are many
examples of antibody-based detection of toxins. In general,
antibodies themselves are not great Raman scatterers, so their
spectral features are not a great source of interference. For
example, Porter and co-workers demonstrated an antibody-
enabled sandwich assay SERS detection of two antigenic protein
markers of Bacillus anthracis.721 A similar antibody-enabled
SERS immunoassay was also successfully used to detect the
neurotoxin Clostridium botulinum,722 and a lateral ﬂow assay
format was used with antibody-enabled SERS detection of
staphylococcal enterotoxin B.723 In some cases, the antibody is
used to capture the target toxin, but an additional capture step
is needed to concentrate and to probe the captured target. For
example, Choo and co-workers concentrated antibody-
captured Yersinia pestis into microdroplets ahead of SERS
interrogation,547 while Faulds and co-workers used a com-
bination of antibody-modiﬁed NPs and lectin-modiﬁed NPs to
facilitate SERS detection of Escherichia coli, Salmonella
typhimurium, and methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus.715
Figure 37. (A) SERS active gold nanostar dimer for mercury ion detection (top) and gold nanoparticle−nanorod heteroassemblies for
bisphenol A detection (bottom). Adapted with permission from refs 706 and 701. Copyrights 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry and 2016,
Elsevier B. V., respectively. (B) SERS active gold nanorod assembly for toxin detection. Adapted with permission from ref 556. Copyright
2012 Royal Society of Chemistry. (C) Plasmonic nanoparticle heterochains and SERS enhancement properties. Adapted from ref 707.
Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.
Figure 38. Schematic view of various approaches used to localize a
Raman target within the enhancing electromagnetic ﬁeld.
Reproduced from ref 720. Copyright 2018 American Chemical
Society.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
74


----- Page 48 (native text) -----
Keeping aﬃnity agent size in mind, intact antibodies are quite
large compared to the exponentially decaying EM ﬁelds at the
plasmonic surface, so high-aﬃnity antibody fragments, if
available, would likely improve the performance of all of
these antibody-based detection schemes. In analogy to the 3D
structure critical for antibody/antigen interaction, some groups
have employed molecularly imprinted polymers (MIPs), a
polymer cast around a target-of-interest to create a speciﬁc
binding pocket, in SERS sensors. Currently, there have only
been a few applications of MIPs for foodborne toxin detection,
including the detection of chloramphenicol in milk and
honey724 and carcinogenic Sudan I in paprika.725
Aptamers are another type of aﬃnity agent with signiﬁcant
potential for SERS-based detection of toxins. These DNA or
RNA structures do display some Raman scattering features that
could interfere with the spectrum from the target analyte, but
these bands are well-known and relatively few in number.
In the context of detecting toxins using SERS, aptamers have
been used most commonly to sense the protein ricin (or
components of the protein). This focus on aptamer-enabled
detection of ricin is due, in part, to the importance of ricin as a
sensing target, but also because an eﬀective aptamer for ricin
was generated.726 With this aptamer in hand, detection of
relevant concentrations of ricin has been demonstrated in food
matrices and blood.727−729
Although the speciﬁcity of antibodies and aptamers can be
advantageous, some toxin-sensing applications would beneﬁt
from a less speciﬁc capture method so that more than one
target toxin can be detected simultaneously. One system to
consider for this application is self-assembled partition layers
like those successfully used by Van Duyne and co-workers to
concentrate and detect glucose;730,731 however, the approach
has not been used yet for small-molecule toxin detection.
An alternative low-speciﬁcity capture layer comprises cova-
lently attached linear polymers. This approach has a signiﬁcant
potential because, based on the polymer repeat unit functional
groups, particular classes of molecules can be targeted, and if
controlled polymerization methods are used, the thickness of
the capture layer can also be controlled. In two recent
examples, Haynes, Reineke, and co-workers demonstrated that
linear polymers can be used to capture the protein ricin716 or
the small molecule aﬂatoxin B1717 for intrinsic SERS-based
detection.
Finally, in some cases, researchers have avoided using an
aﬃnity agent altogether, even if the target toxin does not have
a natural aﬃnity for plasmonic substrates, by using physical
means to bring the target within the electromagnetically
enhancing ﬁelds. For example, He and co-workers dried both
plasmonic NPs and ricin-containing solution on paper and
demonstrated SERS detection of ricin within 10 min.732 Bell,
Goodacre, and co-workers localized mesoscale droplets
containing dipicolinic acid (a biomarker for Anthrax) onto
SERS substrates by manipulating hydrophobic interactions,
yielding detection far below the equivalent infectious dose of
Bacillus anthracis.718
Overall, there has been some exciting recent progress using
SERS to detect foodborne toxins directly, but many analyte
systems are yet to be explored. We should take advantage of all
that we have learned in the more advanced area of SERS
applications in biomedicine, as well as using the best of SERS
substrates and measurement platforms.
Water and Food Analytics. Providing clean drinking
water for all humans is one of the major challenges of the 21st
century. As a consequence, monitoring water quality is of
tremendous importance. A cartridge system with an imple-
mented SERS substrate was applied by Popp and co-workers to
detect sulfamethoxazole, a drug molecule, in real water
matrices.550 The required sensitivity of the SERS-based
detection scheme is associated with the maximum allowed
concentration of 2 × 10−7 M. Concentration-dependent SERS
measurements were performed, and, with this approach, the
target analyte could be monitored down to 2.2 × 10−9 M, in
various surface water samples. This example illustrates the
potential of SERS-based cartridge systems in future environ-
mental monitoring. Indeed, the future of SERS in environ-
mental science might be related to the implementation of
powerful and reproducible SERS substrates with an easy and
cost-eﬃcient fabrication protocol into cartridge systems,
enabling fast and cost-eﬃcient one-point measurements in
regions with less-developed infrastructure, outside of speci-
alized laboratories.
However, establishing a healthy lifestyle to prevent diseases
via balanced nutrition is also of great importance. To illustrate
one example where SERS gives insight into nutritional
elements of food, the lycopene and β-carotene content in
tomatoes was estimated by SERS.733 Here, SERS substrates
prepared by electron beam lithography were applied to build
up a database from SERS spectra of lycopene/β-carotene
mixtures with diﬀerent percentages. Principal component
analysis with partial least-squares regression was employed
for the prediction of the correct content ratio. To prove the
robustness of the database in the determination of lycopene
and β-carotene percentages in real samples, tomatoes were
collected at diﬀerent ripening states, and extraction of the
carotenoids was performed. The extracts were investigated by
means of SERS, and good agreement with the gold standard
high-performace liquid chromatography (HPLC) was obtained.
Since SERS has the potential to be applied outside of specialized
laboratories, the future of SERS in food analytics might be the
pretesting; that is, all food samples are tested by SERS, and
when a concentration value with high accuracy is needed,
HPLC is applied for selected samples, for example, to conﬁrm
the compliance of limiting values (such as food dyes) or
minimal required concentration (such as vitamins).
Within the described detection scheme, a label-free
approach has been applied; that is, all molecules present in
the extracts were allowed to interact with the metallic surface.
To increase the speciﬁcity, recognition elements bound to the
metallic surface need to be applied. In doing so, the structure
and/or orientation of the recognition element are changed
upon the speciﬁc interaction with the target analyte, and, thus,
the SERS spectrum of the recognition element undergoes
detectable variations. This chemosensor concept was applied
during the detection of Cu2+ ions in white wine.413 In this
study, gold NPs were modiﬁed with a dipicolylamine-based
ligand, and due to the interaction with Cu2+, the structure of
the ligand was changed leading to spectral changes within the
SERS response. The detection limit in water was measured to
be 5 × 10−8 M using this method. To illustrate the potential of
this detection platform in real application scenarios, such as
controlling wine production, Cu2+ was spiked into white wine,
and concentrations below the recommended maximum
amount of 7.87 × 10−6 M could be readily monitored in
such a complex matrix.
Nonpolar Organic Pollutants. In spite of the relatively
high polarizability exhibited by the most common nonpolar
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
75


----- Page 49 (native text) -----
organic pollutants, like PAHs, polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs),
or pesticides, their direct detection by SERS is challenging.
The lack of functional groups having any aﬃnity for a metal
surface, such as thiols, amines, or carboxylic acids, makes it
necessary to design strategies that promote the interaction
between pollutants and the plasmonic sensing platform, which
is crucial for their SERS detection. The high toxicity of these
persistent organic pollutants (POPs) poses adverse health
eﬀects in humans and animals exposed to them even at
extremely low concentrations, which has promoted the devel-
opment of ultrasensitive SERS sensors with the ability to detect
and to capture these molecules. One of the ﬁrst reported
approaches for detecting PAHs and PCBs was based on the
functionalization of a plasmonic surface with alkyl thiols to
create a self-assembled monolayer, which would interact with
hydrophobic molecules through van der Waals forces.154,734−738
Haynes et al.735,736 demonstrated that the modiﬁcation of silver
ﬁlm over nanospheres (AgFON) substrates with alkanethiols
enabled the detection of PAHs or PCBs with an expected
picomolar limit of detection. These hydrophobic AgFON
substrates were used to distinguish two diﬀerent PAHs/PCBs
pollutants from one another in mixtures and could be reused
after rinsing with octanol. Interestingly, when investigating the
alkyl chain eﬀect on the AgFON SERS performance, it was
found that decanethiol monolayers worked better than other
alkanethiols, due to the key role of layer thickness (chain
length) and crystallinity of the monolayer.737
Another strategy to trap small molecules mechanically
on or close to the metal surface is based on the combina-
tion of plasmonic NPs with poly(N-isopropylacryamide)
(Figure 39).739−741 The encapsulation of AuNPs within this
thermosensitive polymer creates a core−shell nanostructure
where 1-naphtol (1-NOH) can be captured. By shrinking the
pNIPAM shell above 32 °C, 1-NOH gets closer to the Au core
surface, enabling SERS detection.739 As the pNIPAM shell
around the AuNPs is usually thick, it can prevent the formation
of hotspots, thereby limiting the enhancing ability. The limit of
detection can be improved by using wrinkle-assisted assembly
of pNIPAM-coated AuNPs into parallel linear arrays, for SERS
sensing of pyrene traces (a well-known PAH) in the gas
phase.741 The detection limit of pNIPAM-based sensors has
also been improved by incorporation of magnetic Fe2O3 nano-
particles within the pNIPAM matrix, so that the plasmonic
composites can be concentrated after the capture of the
pollutant, into a small spot, by applying an external magnetic
ﬁeld. This method enabled the ﬁrst SERS analysis of
pentachlorophenol (PCP), a highly toxic contaminant, reach-
ing a detection limit of 1 ppb (as mandated by the United
States Environmental Protection Agency).740
Several reports show the use of macrocycles, such as
calixarenes, cyclodextrins, or pillarenes, to enhance the ability
of plasmonic substrates to detect and to capture POPs.742−748
These macrocycles feature a hydrophobic cavity that can favor
the size-selective inclusion and trapping of small hydrophobic
Figure 39. (a) SERS detection of 1-naphtol using core−shell Au@poly(N-isopropylacryamide) colloids. Reproduced with permission from
ref 739. Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH. (b) Plasmonic thin ﬁlms fabricated through LbL assemby of Au nanoparticles and ammonium
pillar[5]arene (AP[5]A) for (multiplexed) SERS sensing of PAHs in gas or liquid phase. Reproduced from ref 747. Copyright 2017
American Chemical Society. (c) ZIF8-coated silver ﬁlm over nanospheres for the detection of benzene, toluene, nitrobenzene, or 2,6-di-tert-
butylpyridine in gas phase. Reproduced with permission from ref 754. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
76


----- Page 50 (native text) -----
pollutants, forming host−guest inclusion complexes. Impor-
tantly, the chemical properties of these macrocycles or the
shape of the cavity can be tailored by changing the groups on
the upper and lower rims. The modiﬁcation of Ag NPs with
dithiolcarbamate-functionalized calix[4]arene as host mole-
cules enabled the detection of four diﬀerent PAHs (pyrene,
benzo[c]phenanthrene, coronene, and triphenylene) in water,
with a limit of detection ranging between 10 nM and 100
pM.744 By implementing a silica ﬁlm doped with Ag NPs
within a ﬂow cell, 12 diﬀerent PAHs could be detected in situ
in the Baltic Sea.749 The ammonium pillar[5]arene (AP[5]A)
has been used for SERS detection,746,747 via electrostatic LbL
assembly of Au nanospheres, yielding a plasmonic hybrid
nanostructure with uniform hotspots across large areas, with
remarkable size-selective capture capability for diﬀerent PAHs
(pyrene, nitropyrene, and anthracene) (Figure 39b).
Another interesting strategy for improving selective molec-
ular sensing is based on the combination of metal−organic
frameworks (MOFs) and metal NPs.750−755 Metal−organic
frameworks exhibit a well-deﬁned, porous structure; tunable
pore size; large speciﬁc surface area; and tailored chemical
functionality, which confer them with a high capacity for
selective molecular trapping and sensing. Regarding pollutants,
the deposition of an MOF ﬁlm on a AgFON enabled the
selective detection of benzene, toluene, nitrobenzene, or 2,6-di-
tert-butylpyridine from the gas phase. These pollutants did not
adsorb onto a bare AgFON surface (Figure 39c).754 In a
related work, AuNPs embedded within MIL-101 demon-
strated good sensing capabilities for quantitative analysis of
p-phenylenediamine in environmental water and the tumor
marker α-fetoprotein in human serum.755 Interestingly, it was
recently demonstrated that certain MOFs (such as ZIF67) can act
as SERS-active substrates for speciﬁc analytes, achieving enhance-
ment factors up to 106 and limits of detection of ∼10−8 M.756
In spite of the absence of a plasmonic material, the coupling of
diﬀerent contributions, like CT, interband transitions, and molec-
ular resonances, resulted in the enhancement of the Raman
signals. Although ZIF-67 showed excellent SERS performance for
R6G detection under 532 nm laser line, it could not be used to
detect methyl orange, even at high concentrations. The ﬁeld of
MOFs thus facilitates the development of highly selective SERS
sensors, though there is still much to be learnt about designing
optimal systems and generalizability of performance.
RELATED TECHNIQUES
Over the years, several SERS-related experimental technologies
and techniques that beneﬁt from high EM ﬁeld enhancement
in plasmonic structures and in nanogaps have been developed
for a wide range of applications. SESORS has been advanced in
improving signal detection from deeper sites. With electro-
chemical SERS (EC-SERS) molecular resonances can be tuned
to the excitation wavelength, providing information about the
electronic states involved in SERS. Surface-enhanced hyper
Raman scattering (SEHRS) provides complementary vibrational
information, due to changed selection rules in multiphoton
excitation processes. TERS is able to push the limits of spatial
resolution to a few nanometers with intramolecular chemical
resolution. Surface-enhanced infrared absorption (SEIRA) oﬀers
infrared absorption EFs typically ranging between 1 and 7 orders
of magnitude, depending on the measurement and sample details.
Surface-Enhanced Spatially Oﬀset Raman Spectros-
copy and Surface-Enhanced Spatially Oﬀset Resonance
Raman Scattering. Recent work has focused on the creation
and development of approaches based on SESORS. This
technique makes use of functionalized NPs, which contain a
strong Raman signal and can be combined with spatially oﬀset
Raman (SORS) to give measurements at depth, for example,
through tissue. A homemade SORS system initially demon-
strated detection of functionalized NPs at depths up to 8 mm
through tissue analogues,675 but a subsequent study already
compared a hand-held Raman spectrometer with a hand-held
SORS instrument for the detection of ethanol through plastic
barriers.757 The results showed that the depth achievable for
detection was 21 mm through plastic. The work progressed
into surface-enhanced spatially oﬀset resonance Raman scattering
(SESORRS) imaging of a breast cancer tumor model consisting
of 3D multicellular tumor spheroids (MTS), using hand-held
spatially oﬀset measurements and functionalized 100 nm gold
NPs.758 To obtain the maximum depth penetration, a red-shifted
chalcogenpyrilium dye (λmax = 823 nm) was used to provide
resonance enhancement with the Raman excitation wavelength
(830 nm), as well as surface enhancement from the gold NPs.
This method enabled detection of NPs inside the MTS tumor
model, through 15 mm of tissue, and 2D heat maps of NP
localization were constructed. The maximum depth of tissue
through which it was possible to detect signals from the NPs
alone was 25 mm, by using the red-shifted chalcogenpyrilium-
based Raman reporters. A subsequent study demonstrated that
a hand-held conventional backscattered Raman spectrometer
could achieve depths of analysis up to 20 mm through plastic
and 10 mm of tissue sections, indicating that it was not always
necessary to use an SORS instrument, unless depths beyond
5−10 mm were required.759 Multiplexed detection of NPs in
breast cancer tumor models was also demonstrated, where a 3-
plex was analyzed at depths of 10 mm, using three diﬀerent
ﬂavors of resonant NPs that could be diﬀerentiated using
chemometrics (Figure 40).760 To assess the sensitivity of the
technique, a minimum concentration of NPs for use with
SESORRS was investigated, with the outcome being that
femtomolar concentrations of nanotags could be detected
accurately at depths of up to 5 mm of tissue.761 Inverse
SESORS oﬀers the possibility of recovering the SERS signals of
GNS through a monkey skull.762
To make all of the measurements previously described
biomolecularly speciﬁc, an approach using targeted nano-
particles for use in assessing the risk of atherosclerosis in vivo
was devised. Four diﬀerent antibodies were attached to gold
NPs in a mixed monolayer with speciﬁc Raman tags to target
ICAM-1, VCAM-1, and p-selectin with an IgG control NP
conjugate.763 Tail vein injection into inﬂamed mice showed
detection of diﬀerent NPs in a human saphenous vein grafted
onto the back of the mouse. Compared to a control, diﬀerences
in the levels of the biomarkers were identiﬁed, indicating the
ability to perform semiquantitative measurements in vivo by
means of functionalized NPs and SERS. The next step will be
to combine the targeting ability of the NPs with SESORRS, to
perform these measurements in vivo and at clinically relevant
depths.
Electrochemical Surface-Enhanced Raman Scatter-
ing. The ultrahigh sensitivity of SERS is based on the
resonance of the electronic excitation at target molecules and
materials excited by plasmons. The localization of the EM ﬁeld
at plasmonic nanostructures as well as the additional resonance
eﬀect induces vibronic coupling, increasing SERS intensity
drastically.764−768 The eﬀect has been recognized especially at
SM observation in aqueous environments, where only the
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
77


----- Page 51 (native text) -----
SERS-active target molecule is selectively observed without the
SERS contribution from water molecules, which have compa-
rable Raman cross section to that of the target.769 However, if
one can electrochemically polarize SERS metal substrates to
very negative potentials, the evolution of SERS from water
molecules is clearly observed.770,771 The interesting eﬀect of
molecular selectivity of SERS depending on the electro-
chemical potential of the systems implies that the apparent
SERS intensity can be used as a probe of the electronic
excitation of target molecules and nanomaterials on SERS
substrates.
The eﬀect of electrochemical potential on SERS intensity
has been regarded as proof of the CT process to enhance
SERS.765−768 This contribution is also considered as a
chemical enhancement.36−38 A resonant excitation that induces
CT between metal substrates and adsorbed molecules
contributes to enhance the SERS intensity. The enhancement
occurs when the excitation energy of light matches the
transition between the Fermi level in the metal substrate and
an unoccupied molecular orbital, or from an occupied orbital
of the molecules to an unoccupied level of the metal. The
potential energy of the Fermi level is deﬁned by electro-
chemical potential. Thus, experimental observations showed a
resonant shape in the plot of SERS intensity as a function of
electrochemical potential (Figure 41a),766 indicating the
validity of the CT mechanism. A ﬁtting parameter of the line
width Γ reﬂects the inverse of the characteristic damping time
of the excitation. The dependence of the excitation energy on
the electrochemical potential showing the SERS intensity
maximum has also been used as a measure of the degree of CT.
A linear relationship of the electrochemical potential maximum
to the excitation energy of light indicates that the CT contribu-
tion dominates the enhancement (Figure 41 b).767 Control of
the electrochemical potential for SERS observation varying the
excitation light energy provides information on the electronic
structures at molecule−metal substrate interfaces contributing
to SERS enhancement.
As additional interesting characteristics of the CT eﬀect,
relatively intense nontotally symmetric modes of molecules,
which are normally described by relatively small nondiagonal
terms in the polarizability tensor, were observed. The contribu-
tion of the CT eﬀect on the selectivity of this mode has also
been estimated from the slope of the linear plot of the electro-
chemical potential maximum to the excitation energy of light.766
The degree of CT contribution to the nontotally symmetric
modes is generally higher than that to totally symmetric
modes, which are observed at normal Raman spectroscopy.
This eﬀect could be understood as the electronic excitation
that accompanies CT for the resonance-inducing anisotropic
polarization of the molecules. An SM observation by SERS is
characterized by the observation of very intense nontotally
symmetric modes compared with those of totally symmetric
modes. The SERS intensity of a nontotally symmetric mode
enhanced by the CT eﬀect is typically stronger by 1 order of
magnitude compared to normal Raman modes enhanced by
the EM eﬀect.769 This characteristic behavior may also provide
us with further information on the electronic excitation at CT
process, induced by a highly conﬁned plasmonic ﬁeld. Note
that the spatially conﬁned EM ﬁeld also contributes to the
change in the selectivity of the vibrational modes. The dipole−
quadupole polarizabilities in SERS become also apparent due
to the EM ﬁeld-gradient eﬀects.772−775 The electrochemical
potential may also contribute to this eﬀect, because the change
in the resonance often results in the energy and localization of
plasmons.776−778 At present, precise tuning of the localization
has not yet been achieved.
One should also pay attention to the eﬀects of EM ﬁeld-
gradient on the electronic excitation. The selection rule for the
Figure 40. SESORRS false-color two-dimensional (2D) heat maps of the peak intensity at (a) 1178 cm−1 (dye 823), (b) 1181 cm−1 (dye 813),
(c) 1185 cm−1 (dye 810) and (d) 1181 cm−1 (triplex). Measurements were performed using an xy translational stage in step sizes of
3 mm to create an image of 8 × 8 pixels. 2D heat maps were generated and show the tracking of each of the four MTS models through
10 mm of tissue. Clear discrimination is seen between spectra collected at the point of maximum intensity, where the nanotags were spotted,
and that collected where the nanotags were not present. The corresponding maximum and minimum collected 8 mm oﬀset spectra also
conﬁrm the presence of the nanotags in regions where the MTS were spotted (a−d). Reproduced with permission from ref 760. Copyright
2018 Royal Society of Chemistry.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
78


----- Page 52 (native text) -----
electronic excitation is modiﬁed in the plasmonic EM ﬁeld.
The selection rule for the optical transitions between electronic
levels is deﬁned by the electronic wave functions, under the
assumption of the long-wavelength approximation. Thus, the
normal selection rules for electronic excitations could be
broken at the excitation of local surface plasmon resonance
(LSPR), where a huge ﬁeld intensity gradient exists.779−781
The eﬀect is experimentally observed as SERS from an isolated
single-walled carbon nanotube located at the gap of the Au
dimer structure, as resonant Raman via a normally forbidden
electronic transition.450 The transition is characterized as a
nonzero wavevector electronic excitation beyond the normal
selection rule, leading to the formation of distinct excited
electrons and holes with higher and deeper potential energies,
compared to those generated by illumination with normal
light. This characteristic electronic excitation could also be
veriﬁed by electrochemical SERS measurements, to obtain
detailed information on the potential energy distribution of
excited electrons and holes.
An additional eﬀect of the resonance on SERS is also
apparent under the condition of the strong coupling states
between plasmons and excitons in materials. When the energy
of plasmons and that of excitons are close to each other, the
spontaneous emission rate and the energy transfer rate are
drastically changed compared to the normal case.782−784 The
Raman scattering of the dye molecules has been reported to be
strongly coupled to the plasmon of Ag dimer structures.785
Polarized Raman measurements showed that the maximum
enhancement of Raman scattering from the strong coupling
regime was achieved at the resonant energy between the
hybridized state and the excitation. Active tuning of the
coupling strength between dye molecules and metal array
structures could be controlled by the electrochemical potential
of metal nanostructures (Figure 41c).786 The electrochemical
potential can vary the number of molecules with controlled
distances from metal surface and the direction to the EM ﬁled,
which are required for coupling.787 The possibility of tuning
the localization of plasmons for coupling by electrochemical
potential control was also suggested by this observation.
Surface-enhanced Raman scattering provides useful informa-
tion on light−matter interactions, especially photoabsorption
properties at the nanoscale. Considering the eﬀect of resonance
enhancement on the Raman process, SERS spectral intensity as
well as selectivity of vibrational bands contain details on the
electronic excitation of the materials strongly interacting with the
plasmon. Signiﬁcant changes in the selection rules for the
electronic excitation could be characterized by the observation of
a dependence with the electrochemical potential. Recent theo-
retical analysis on the localized excitation of materials predicts
novel characteristics on not only the excitation of electrons but
also on phonons and spins.788 Further electrochemical SERS
studies could open the possibility for the utilization of the
unexpected excitation process in highly conﬁned EM ﬁelds, to
control the energy state of molecules and nanomaterials.
Surface-Enhanced Hyper Raman Scattering. Nonlinear
incoherent optical eﬀects can also utilize enhanced local optical
Figure 41. (a) Intensity−electrochemical potential proﬁle for the 1020 cm−1 line of piperidine on a silver electrode. The dots show the ﬁt of
theoretical analysis with Γ = 0.3 eV. (b) Electrochemical potential maximum of the SERS of PATP signal as a function of excitation light
energy. Reproduced with permission from ref 766. Copyright 1986 American Institute of Physics. (c) Schematic presentation of the
electrochemical tuning of the strong coupling strength between dye excitons and plasmons. Reproduced from refs 785 and 786. Copyrights
2008 and 2018, respectively, American Chemical Society.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
79


----- Page 53 (native text) -----
ﬁelds of plasmonic nanostructures, in particular, hyper Raman
scattering (HRS),789,790 and also second hyper Raman scatter-
ing.791 Two-photon excited, spontaneous Raman scattering
that is obtained in the local ﬁelds of plasmonic nanostructures,
that is, surface-enhanced hyper Raman scattering, has been
discussed since the 1980s. In SEHRS, the scattered photons
are shifted relative to the second harmonic of the excitation
wavelength, and the excitation with light in the NIR is
combined with the desirable detection in the visible spectral
range (Figure 42). Although the cross sections of nonenhanced
HRS are extremely low,792 the HRS signal depends on the
square of the incident radiation intensity. The EM enhance-
ment in SEHRS is the product of the enhancement of the
incident ﬁeld |A(v0)|4 and of the scattered ﬁeld |A(vHRS)|2,
whereas in SERS it is the product of |A(v0)|2 and |A(vRS)|2.793
This diﬀerence shows that HRS beneﬁts enormously from the
enhancement by local ﬁelds. The total EF for SEHRS has been
reported to be on the order of 1020.794,795 Cross sections that
are comparable to good two-photon ﬂuorophores in SEHRS795
enable two-photon excited vibrational spectra down to the
limit of SMs796,797 and collect hyper Raman anti-Stokes
spectra.795,798 Theoretical studies show that the chemical contri-
bution to the overall enhancement in SEHRS can be larger than
the corresponding chemical enhancement for SERS.799−802
The fact that the HRS process relies on the change in
hyperpolarizability of a molecule implies diﬀerent selection
rules, which provide complementary spectroscopic informa-
tion. Depending on the molecular symmetry, HRS may probe
IR active modes or, in addition, so-called silent modes, which
are seen neither in Raman nor in IR spectra;803 therefore,
SEHRS adds spectral information beyond Raman scattering,
and, in this way, it can improve structural characterization, for
example, of molecule−metal interaction,804 sensing,805−807 and
imaging.808,809
The selection rules for nonresonantly excited SEHRS have
been discussed by comparing SERS and SEHRS spectra from
small organic molecules,608,810−812 including nucleobases,813,814
amino acids,815 drugs,804 or CV.64 In the case of centrosym-
metric molecules, SERS and SEHRS spectra are complementary
to a great extent.810−812 When the symmetry is lowered during
adsorption to the metal, Raman-active modes become visible
in the SEHRS spectrum as well. As an example, the nonsurface-
enhanced, resonant HRS, and the Raman spectra of β-carotene
are very diﬀerent from each other,816,817 but very high
similarity of the resonant SEHRS and SERRS spectra is
found, because the interaction with the silver surface lowers the
symmetry of the adsorbed molecules.817 The SEHRS and
SERS spectra from non-centrosymmetric molecules display
bands mostly at the same positions, although with quite
diﬀerent relative intensities,799,807,813,815 which can be useful
for studying their interactions with the surfaces or for
detection. As becomes clear in recent discussions of two-
photon resonant SEHRS spectra, it can serve in the characteri-
zation of electronic states that are not allowed in one-photon
absorption.818,819
The high sensitivity of SEHRS with respect to the inter-
action and orientation of the molecules at surfaces enables
probing a very local surface environment using vibrational
information that is inaccessible by SERS.804,812 This technique
will help improve our understanding of molecule−nanostruc-
ture interactions, including those utilized in SERS probing.
Surface-enhanced hyper Raman scattering spectra of dyes
and biological molecules under resonant and nonresonant
conditions are typically collected using photon ﬂux densities
of 1026−1029 photons cm−2 s−1, respectively, both from
pulsed795,806,808,814,815,817,820 and tightly focused continuous-
wave (cw) lasers.821 Many SEHRS experiments have been
done using silver nanostructures.799,821,822 More recently, gold
NRs and their aggregates were also shown to provide optical
properties that are speciﬁcally suited to support enhancement
of SEHRS.585
In current developments, the concept of SERS is shown to
extend to two-photon excitation in several analytical applica-
tions already, and SEHRS signals of both reporters or tags and
biological molecules can be used for sensing and imaging. This
includes more eﬃcient pH sensors608,806,823 and the ability of
trace detection807 by reporter species. The advantages of two-
photon excitation, together with the strong conﬁnement of
SEHRS as plasmonic eﬀect to nanoscopic volumes, led to the
development of SEHRS for vibrational imaging and micros-
copy.808 Surface-enhanced hyper Raman scattering signals
from cultured cells can be obtained795,809 and used for
imaging, and they constitute a tool to characterize their micro-
scopic heterogeneity, in particular, in combination with SERS.
Two-photon excitation enables the use of NIR excitation
wavelengths. Biological samples such as live cells will proﬁt
from better propagation of the NIR photons through tissues
and low phototoxicity. The high enhancement obtained with
the gold nanostructures585 renders them a useful tool in future
analytical applications of SEHRS in biological samples, due to
low nanotoxicity. As a ﬁrst example, characterization of gold-
based multifunctional drug carriers for tricyclic antidepressants
has been achieved by a combination of SEHRS and SERS.804
In summary, as two-photon excited SERS, SEHRS will provide
additional vibrational information and better characterization
of molecules and materials, in combination with the advantages
of NIR excitation and the high lateral resolution of plasmonics-
based spectroscopy.
Tip-Enhanced Raman Scattering. As a sister technique
to SERS, TERS spectroscopy uses Ag or Au tips with tip apex
diameters smaller than 20 nm, to produce strongly enhanced
EM ﬁelds at the tip apex (Figure 43.).824−826 The highly
conﬁned EM ﬁeld at the tip apex not only enhances the Raman
signal of species in the vicinity of the tip (usually less than 5 nm)
Figure 42. Schematic representation of vibrational transitions:
linear Stokes Raman scattering (A), Stokes hyper Raman scattering
(B), anti-Stokes hyper Raman scattering (C), Stokes resonant
Raman scattering (D), and Stokes resonant hyper Raman
scattering (E). Molecular systems undergo vibrational transitions
from the initial state (ν = 0 for Stokes, ν = 1 for anti-Stokes) to the
ﬁnal state (ν = 1 for Stokes, ν = 0 for anti-Stokes), linked to a
normal mode k with frequency nk. One possible resonance
condition is depicted in (E). Reproduced with permission from
ref 793. Copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
80


----- Page 54 (native text) -----
but also provides a high spatial resolution below 5 nm by
scanning the tip over the sample,95,827−830 which endows it
with the capability to resolve submolecular features inside one
molecule.74,831 Indeed, it has been nearly 20 years since the
ﬁrst discovery of TERS in 2000, and the technique has found
wide applications in various ﬁelds including chemistry, physics,
materials science, and biology.827−831
Diﬀerent from SERS, TERS relies on the enhancement
provided by a single tip and from a single hotspot. Therefore,
sensitivity is the key issue for TERS, which can be improved by
either optimizing the tip structure or the throughput of instru-
ments. Hitherto, most TERS works were executed on home-
built TERS instruments, including ambient condition STM- or
AFM-based TERS,824−826 ultrahigh-vacuum-based TERS
(UHV-TERS),74,831−833 and liquid834 or electrochemical
TERS (EC-TERS) systems.835−837 Some companies are now
providing commercial instruments by closely collaborating
with TERS researchers, while others provide key components
such as AFM/STM systems or Raman spectrometers.
The tip is the core component in TERS, because it not only
needs to be sharp enough to obtain high-resolution topological
images of the sample but also supports the LSPR at the desired
wavelength, to enhance the near-ﬁeld Raman signal of the
sample signiﬁcantly.828,838 Numerous physical and chemical
methods have been reported to fabricate tips with high TERS
activity. Diﬀerent TERS working modes (STM tunneling,
AFM cantilever feedback, AFM tuning fork feedback, etc.) will
require diﬀerent tip-fabrication methods. Electrochemical
etching is the most frequently used method to etch silver or
gold wires to obtain TERS tips for STM-TERS conven-
iently.839−841 Vacuum deposition methods are most widely
used to deposit Ag or Au coating on commercial AFM tips for
AFM-TERS, and the formation of islandlike structures is
advantageous for a large enhancement.841,842 This method has
also been used to produce commercial TERS tips. More
recently, the electrochemical deposition method has also been
developed to fabricate Ag and Au AFM-TERS tips with
controlled size.843−845 To improve the stability and to prolong
the lifetime of TERS tips, especially Ag tips, they can be coated
with an ultrathin silica layer to prevent Ag oxidation,
adsorption of impurities, and the movement of surface
atoms. If a material with a high dielectric constant is used,
the TERS signal may not be sacriﬁced while still maintaining
the high stability of the tip.476 There are reports on TERS
imaging with ultrahigh spatial resolution, without using a
metallic substrate to support gap mode TERS.845,846 Such a
large enhancement and conﬁnement of the EM ﬁeld from a
single tip has not yet been explicitly understood and requires
both high spatial resolution characterization of such peculiar
tips and theoretical eﬀorts, which may help to engineer tips
with ultrahigh enhancement and conﬁnement of the EM ﬁeld
rationally.
The ﬁrst demonstration of TERS was on the detection of
molecular ﬁlm deposited on a glass slide.824,847,848 Thereafter,
the studied molecules have been expanded from dye molecules
with resonance Raman signal to small aromatic molecules with
strong binding aﬃnity to the surface. The employed substrates
range from simple glass slides, Au or Ag ﬁlms to Au or Ag
single crystals. Tip-enhanced Raman scattering has already
passed the stage of simply showing its capability of achieving a
near-ﬁeld signal. Instead, the high spatial resolution of TERS
has been fully exploited to tackle some important problems in
surface science and electrochemistry, as well as to identify
biomolecules.827−830 Speciﬁcally, TERS has been used to
monitor chemical reactions like simple protonations,849 but
also more complex reactions like dimerization of p-amino-
thiophenol or p-nitrothiophenol (PNTP) to form p,p′-
dimercaptoazobenzene (DMAB) and isomerization of azoben-
zene on the surface or under the inﬂuence of plasmon
excitation, among others.850,851 The high spatial resolution of
Figure 43. Schematic illustration of STM- (a) and AFM- (b) based TERS setups. (c) Experimental TERS images obtained with ultrahigh-
vacuum TERS, which enables visualization of diﬀerent normal modes of a single molecule. (d) Simulation results. (e) Assigned vibrational
normal modes. (c−e) Reproduced with permission from ref 831. Copyright 2019 Springer Nature.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
81


----- Page 55 (native text) -----
TERS has been fully applied to investigate, with a spatial
resolution of 2.5 nm, the electronic properties of bimetallic
systems (e.g., monoatomic islands of Pd and multilayer Pt
islands on Au(111) surfaces) using isocyanidebenzene, which
is sensitive to the substrate electronic properties, as probe
molecules.852,853 This study revealed interesting properties,
including bonding interaction, surface coordination, and strain
eﬀects of bimetallic surfaces.
Tip-enhanced Raman scattering measurements in air are
often accompanied by sample degradation as a result of several
eﬀects after plasmon excitation, including plasmon-induced hot
carriers, heating, and oxygen activation. There are increasing
eﬀorts in developing environmental TERS, for example, in
electrochemistry or UHV, to control surface states properly.
Electrochemical TERS involves measurements in an electrolyte
and under potential control. In this way, the surface states and
the interactions and reactions of molecules with the substrate
can be controlled in a ﬂexible manner. In EC-TERS, the
molecular system to be probed is under complex interaction
with its environment close to the operando condition. After the
ﬁrst demonstration of TERS in liquid in 2009,834 EC-TERS
was successfully demonstrated on an STM-TERS system in
2015 by revealing the potential dependent protonation and
deprotonation of thiol molecules adsorbed on a Au(111)
surface.835 Almost at the same time, AFM-based EC-TERS was
developed to monitor the electrochemical redox behavior of
Nile blue (NB) molecules on a transparent indium tin oxide
surface.836 A steplike feature in TERS voltammograms was
observed at low surface coverage, corresponding to the
reduction and oxidation of single or few molecules. There
are increasing eﬀorts in employing STM-TERS due to the
ﬂexibility of making TERS tips for working under electro-
chemical conditions.837,854 Although EC-TERS is still at an
early stage, it shows promising potential in addressing more
interesting and challenging issues at the electrochemical
interface, including electro(photo)catalysis, corrosion, plas-
mon-driven electron transfer, and energy storage. With an
extremely high spatial resolution down to several nanometers,
it is possible to achieve nanoscale spectral imaging and reveal
the structure−function correlation for electrochemical inter-
faces by correlating the sub-nanometer resolution scanning
probe microscopy (SPM) image with a simultaneous nano-
meter-resolution TERS image.
Diﬀerent from EC-TERS, when TERS is working in a UHV
chamber (UHV-TERS), it is free of oxygen and other
impurities, which can considerably reduce photoinduced
reactions. Most importantly, UHV-TERS is generally much
more stable than environmental TERS. The ﬁrst room-
temperature UHV-TERS demonstrated the TERS signal
from a single brilliant cresyl blue (BCB) molecule.832 Recently,
the diﬀerent adsorption conﬁgurations of oxygen on cobalt
phtalocyanine (CoPc) supported on the Ag(111) surface
were probed by UHV-TERS and the vibrational mode
coupling of the O−O and Co−O vibrations with the Pc ring
was observed.855 When the temperature is lowered to
cryogenic conditions, the mobility of the molecules on the
surface and the thermal drift of the instrument can be signiﬁ-
cantly reduced, which enables TERS imaging at an extremely
high spatial resolution. A milestone work in TERS was the
demonstration of submolecular (0.5 nm) TERS imaging of a
single porphyrin molecule on the Ag(111) surface at a
temperature of 80 K and under UHV conditions.74 The high
resolution enables the spatial distinction of two adjacent
molecules within van der Waals interactions.856 When the
temperature was lowered to the liquid helium regime (6 K),
the ångström-scale resolution TERS images of diﬀerent normal
modes within a molecule were clearly obtained.831 Such a
spatial resolution challenges our understanding in the frame-
work of traditional EM theory but may reveal interesting
physics of vibrational spectroscopy and inhomogeneously
distributed EM ﬁeld under conﬁned picocavity conditions.
All of the above high-resolution studies relied on the use of
gap mode TERS, which means Ag or Au substrates were used
to couple with the LSPR of Ag or Au tip to increase the
enhancement and spatial resolution signiﬁcantly. However, an
increasing number of studies have shown a spatial resolution of
∼3 nm on carbon nanotubes, enabling the visualization of local
defects and strain,857 and better than 2 nm (and even single
amino acid resolution) on amyloid protein crystals,858 without
using the gap mode on an AFM-TERS under ambient condi-
tions. Such high enhancement and resolution cannot be readily
explained by a standard EM model, but it may be understood
by the following two possibilities: (1) the atomic roughness
features on the TERS tips that generate an additional highly
conﬁned EM ﬁeld suﬃcient to enable SM sensitivity87,93 and
(2) the special chemical interaction by approaching the tip to a
special site on a molecule, which may not be favorable in
SERS. In the latter case, even minute position changes (a few
ångströms) of the tip with respect to the molecule will result in
a conformational change and, consequently, in a change of the
Raman pattern.108
Increasing eﬀorts are being made toward applying TERS to
study novel materials, from carbon nanotubes to 2D materials,
including graphene, silicene, and various types of transition-
metal dichalcogenides (TMDC). More recently, TERS was
used to image 2D silicene on Ag(111) and achieved a spatial
resolution of 0.5 nm, which beneﬁted from enhancement
factors as high as 109. The zone center optical (ZO), longitu-
dinal optical (LO), and transverse optical (TO) phonon
modes were observed at high frequencies that are not
observable in normal Raman.859 There is a surging interest
in using TERS to characterize TMDCs, including MoS2,
MoSe2, WS2, and WSe2, regarding their peculiar properties
including special chemical activity, optical properties, and
valley-related eﬀects, as a result of structural heterogeneities,
including doping, defects, and strain in TMDCs.860 A spatial
resolution of 2.3 nm was achieved from monolayer MoS2
because of giant enhancements up to 5 × 108, as a result of the
coupling between the Au-coated AFM tip and Au nanocluster
arrays. The plasmonic hot electron doping of monolayer MoS2
was estimated to be in the order of 1.8 × 1013 cm−2, leading to
a transient structural shift from the 2H to 1T phase. Such
information might not have been achieved without the
superhigh spatial resolution of TERS.861
A remarkably large number of investigations using TERS
have been done on biorelated compounds despite the
complexity of such samples. Tip-enhanced Raman scattering
has been applied to a wide range of biological samples ranging
from bioﬁlms,862 to bacterial863 and cell surfaces,864 to single
protein and RNA/DNA crystals, molecules, and strands.865−870
The common goal is to investigate structures that cannot be
revealed by standard microscopy techniques. Although
sequencing has become an almost routine technique and
TERS will not be able to compete directly with traditional
methods, TERS spectra along the DNA strands, modiﬁed
DNA, and aging DNA still showed a strong indication of direct
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
82


----- Page 56 (native text) -----
sequencing.871,872 Similar approaches could be foreseen for an
analytical application regarding single-virus detection and
discrimination, as no culture step is necessary.873,874 By
scanning over the surface of a virus particle, a spectral
ﬁngerprint could be generated to distinguish diﬀerent viruses.
With the development of nanoscience and experimental
techniques, intriguing results are reported, for example, the
observation of localized or forbidden vibrational modes and
ultrahigh spatial resolution. As mentioned above, these novel
phenomena cannot be fully understood by the classical EM
theory and thus stimulate a surge of work toward alternative
ways to understand the TERS mechanism under well-deﬁned
conditions, so that the proposed mechanisms can be strictly
veriﬁed by experiments.93,95−98,102,875 Although it has been
demonstrated that TERS is able to obtain signals from
adsorbed species and reaction products on metal surfaces, great
eﬀorts are yet to be devoted to its development into an
operando technique so that the dynamic changes of surface
structures at active sites and quantiﬁcation of products at such
sites can be monitored with nanometer spatial resolution and
at the molecular level. Although EC-TERS has enabled in situ
characterization of electrochemical processes at solid−liquid
interfaces, TERS systems that can work under water and in air-
free conditions, such as in a glovebox, are highly welcome.
Such a facility can be used for studying more practical systems,
such as lithium ion batteries and photoelectrochemical
systems. All of these important and potential applications
require TERS with signiﬁcantly improved sensitivity and
imaging rates. It is also necessary to establish a solid protocol
to guide the selection of the tip and optical conﬁguration, as
well as excitation wavelength to achieve the optimized sensi-
tivity and spatial resolution. The directional TERS detection
scheme is another important approach that may help in
reducing the background and improving the collection
eﬃciency, but it requires a rational design of the tip and
sample conﬁguration.876 By combining nonlinear Raman
techniques (CARS877 or SRS878) with plasmonic tip enhance-
ment, suﬃcient Raman signal can be obtained fast enough to
achieve (sub-)ångström resolution under ambient conditions,
or even in an aqueous solution. Also note that most TERS
systems are optimized to a particular wavelength as they
operate with single-line laser excitation. Recently, an
excitation-tunable TERS (eTERS) setup was reported by
coupling a commercial TERS system with a tunable laser.879
The advantage of eTERS is twofold: ﬁrst, the combined
resonant enhancement and tip enhancement results in much
higher EFs than those in conventional TERS; second, eTERS
is able to map optical transition energies and speciﬁc resonant
vibrations at nanometer spatial resolution. It can thus be used
to measure, for example, an optically active component in large
biomolecules or optical trap states in 2D materials.879
Although chemometric methods have been widely used in
standard Raman and SERS studies, it would be advantageous if
they could also be integrated into TERS software to improve
signal quality and TERS imaging speed. The existing
challenges in the ﬁeld also indicate that there is still potential
and room to improve the enhancement and accelerate the
development of TERS further, which requires the synergistic
collaboration between experimentalists and theoreticians.
Surface-Enhanced Infrared Absorption. Just like SERS,
surface enhanced infrared absorption (SEIRA) of molecular
vibrations extraordinarily beneﬁts from resonant plasmonic
enhancements.880−884 There is however an important diﬀerence:
The molecules do not inelastically scatter light; they absorb
light at the frequencies of their vibrational resonances, which
are in the IR range. This diﬀerence has two consequences for
the measured vibrational signal size. On the one hand, the
beneﬁt from the near-ﬁeld enhancement is lower than in SERS.
For weak vibrational oscillators, the SEIRA enhancement is
clearly proportional to the squared near-ﬁeld amplitude
enhancement885,886 and not to its fourth power as in SERS.
On the other hand, molecular absorption is a direct process
with a much higher cross section than in Raman scattering.
Similar to Raman scattering and SERS, chemical interface
processes might modify measured SEIRA signals further.882,887,888
These chemical interaction processes can be avoided with inert
interlayers between the metal surface and the molecules. Then
only EM enhancement occurs, which simpliﬁes the quantitative
chemical analysis. The coupling of IR vibrational dipoles with
plasmonic resonances is mostly strong enough to lead to a
Fano-type vibrational line shape, the asymmetry of which
depends on the detuning between the plasmonic resonance
and the vibrational resonance.880−889 Even Rabi splitting has
been observed for strong vibrational dipoles, from optical
phonon polaritons of thin layers within the spatial range of the
enhanced plasmonic near ﬁeld.890 Therefore, the line shape as
well as the vibrational signal enhancement depend on the
amount of near-ﬁeld enhancement. For the spectral analysis,
the Fano lines due to EM coupling are not really a problem,
because the right molecular frequencies and vibrational
damping can be obtained by spectral ﬁts to Fano lines instead
of Lorentzians.889
The maximum value of the near-ﬁeld enhancement for a
given nanostructure is reached at its plasmonic resonance (see,
e.g., ref 881 and references therein). This maximum enhance-
ment is the highest possible if the absorption cross section of
the plasmonic structure is equal to the cross section for
radiation scattering.891 Such a situation can be reached with
geometrically optimized structures and low electronic damping
(perfect crystallinity) of the metal, as shown by measurements892
and simulations886 for linear nanoantennas (Figure 44). Then, in
SEIRA based on IR extinction measurements, extraordinarily
enhanced vibrational signals show up, because the vibrational
absorption strongly modulates the IR light scattering of the
plasmonic system.886
Surface-enhanced infrared absorption with metallic nano-
structures for which light scattering is marginal is a weaker
coupling eﬀect, which is based on the modulation of the light
absorption of the nanostructure by the vibrational absorp-
tion.882,886 Examples are metal particles much smaller than a
certain wavelength at which they then mainly absorb light but
almost do not scatter it.893 Thus, metal particle layers with
particle diameters of less than ∼100 nm only absorb IR light.
There are many studies on the development of the IR
absorption spectrum with particle geometry and den-
sity,888,894,895 and many related SEIRA studies have been
published.882,896,897 The SEIRA signal intensity in such studies
beneﬁts from near-ﬁeld hotspots and also from the multitude
of adsorption sites for the molecules. The hotspots are, for
example, located between particles in a close neighborhood,
and thus, for a metal island layer as an ensemble of tiny
plasmonic particles, the highest SEIRA signals are observed
near the percolation threshold.882,897,898
Nanostructures consisting of geometrically optimized nano-
apertures in metallic layers combine the advantages of con-
centrated hotspots and notable light scattering and, thus, are
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
83


----- Page 57 (native text) -----
perfectly suited for huge SEIRA enhancement.899−902 For
chemical sensing of vibrational signals of clusters (e.g., ultraﬁne
dust), bowtie-like apertures are beneﬁcial, because they feature
a particularly high near-ﬁeld concentration and oﬀer a further
advantage that is the trapping of the clusters (Figure 45).902
Recently, Popp and co-workers succeeded in designing and
fabricating slit-based substrates, in which both substrate and
electric ﬁeld are concentrated in the same location. These
substrates consist of a periodic array of slits in a gold surface
above a dielectric layer and a continuous gold layer (metal−
dielectric−metal structure). For completely ﬁlled slits, ﬁnite
diﬀerence time domain (FDTD) calculations predict a signal
in reﬂection as large as 25%, which is even exceeded in the
experiment.903 Without the continuous layer and placed on a
thin Si3N4 substrate, such substrates can also be employed in
transmission mode. With two slits that cross each other but
are not perpendicularly aligned, a gigantic CD signal is
generated.904 On the basis of this eﬀect, the ﬁrst working
plasmonic substrates were demonstrated, which enable the
discrimination of enantiomers based on IR CD.905 For very
thin ﬁlms (thickness < 2 nm) structured substrates are less
suited. Here, interference rather than plasmonic enhancement
is of particular advantage. In this respect, it was recently shown
that, working in the internal reﬂection conﬁguration,
interference enhancement should give signals of more than
5% for the CH2−stretching vibrational bands of a monolayer
of octadecane.906 The same technique should also be able to
enhance Raman signals strongly without changing the selection
rules, something that is known from ordinary interference-
enhanced Raman spectroscopy.907
Infrared and SEIRA measurements are usually done with far-
ﬁeld IR microscopes908 coupled to Fourier-transform spec-
trometers. A lateral resolution much better than the Abbé limit
can be obtained with spectroscopic IR near-ﬁeld microscopy,
for which the detection of the vibrational signal of one
molecule was predicted if it sits in a hotspot of the fundamental
plasmon resonance of a noble metal nanoantenna (see the
Supporting Information of ref 880). This experimental result
has not been published yet, but recent SEIRA experiments
have detected the vibrational signal of less than 1000
molecules, still with far-ﬁeld techniques.909
MONITORING CHEMICAL REACTIONS
Surface plasmons (SPs) can redistribute not only the EM ﬁeld
but also the excited carriers (electron and hole) and heat
energy in time and space, which can power chemical reactions.
The expansion from plasmon physics (e.g., plasmon-enhanced
molecular spectroscopies (PEMS) and waveguides, etc.) to
plasmon chemistry has recently attracted a great deal of
attention.910−915 The term plasmon-mediated (also -enhanced,
-assisted, -promoted, or -induced) chemical reactions (PMCR)
is used to describe how nanostructure-based surface plasmons
act as mediators to convert the photon energy in time, space,
and at various energy scales eﬀectively, thereby driving
chemical reactions by localizing photon, electronic, and/or
thermal energies. The idea of using SPs to enhance chemical
reactions was ﬁrst proposed in 1981 and then experimentally
realized two years later.916,917 In recent years, numerous
elegant studies demonstrated that plasmonic nanostructures
Figure 44. (a) Cross sections: σext for extinction, σabs for absorption, and σsca for scattering of light. These cross sections have been calculated
for gold antennas at the fundamental resonance by FDTD simulations and are shown as quantities normalized to the geometric cross
section. Reproduced from ref 886. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. The maximum near-ﬁeld enhancement is expected when σabs
= σsca at the plasmon resonance. In (b) the relative transmittance (at normal incidence of light) of a 10 nm thick layer of a tetraﬂuorinated
zinc phthalocyanine complex (C32H12F4N8Zn, short name: F4ZnPc) on a CaF2 wafer is shown on top. Spectra of 10 nm F4ZnPc on 50 nm
high nanoantennas produced on CaF2 substrates, from various metals, are shown in the middle (as transmittance at normal incidence of light
with polarization along the antennas divided by the bare substrate’s transmittance) and in the bottom panel as baseline-corrected vibrational
spectra. The width of the nanoantennas has been adjusted to the maximum SEIRA enhancement, which is achieved if σabs = σsca. SEIRA is
directly obvious, and, furthermore, it should be noticed that the SEIRA enhancement comes only from the small sample regions with near-
ﬁeld enhancement. Bigger enhancement with Cu, Ag, and Au antennas is attained because of the lower electronic damping. Reproduced
from ref 892. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
84


----- Page 58 (native text) -----
can mediate/catalyze chemical reactions under low-intensity
visible light illumination, for example, reactions at the solid−
gas interface or at the solid−liquid interface and even
electrochemical processes, as a promising approach to facilitate
chemical reaction under mild conditions.918−922 For example,
it has been demonstrated that the SP excited electrons can
transfer into oxygen molecules to promote oxygen activation
by forming transient negative-ion states, which can greatly
improve the catalytic oxidation reactions, such as ethylene
epoxidation, CO oxidation, and NH3 oxidation.919 Further-
more, overall water splitting was performed by SP-excited
electrons and holes from Au NR arrays in contact with TiO2
upon visible light irradiation.918 Most recently, it was found
that SPs can be used to reduce the thermal activation barrier
by excited carriers.921
Plasmon-Mediated Chemical Reactions and Plas-
mon-Enhanced Molecular Spectroscopy. In general,
PEMS and PMCR are three-body interactions, including
photons, molecules, and nanostructures (Figure 46), and their
interface is not sharp. In 2010, Tian and co-workers discovered
that SPs could mediate the transformation of p-amino-
thiophenol into p,p′-dimercaptoazobenzene during plasmon-
enhanced Raman spectroscopy (PERS).923 In such experi-
ments, surface plasmons were exploited in two ways: mediating
the photochemical reaction and enabling in situ reliable
measurements of the reaction process. Nevertheless, it should
be pointed out that PEMS and PMCR are diﬀerent in some
key aspects. For example, the strong bonding between the
probe molecule and the metal surface can ensure a satisfactory
detection sensitivity for PERS, but it usually blocks the active
sites for chemical reactions.
The growth and future of PMCR critically depend on the
fundamental understanding of SP properties and how they
enable chemical reactions. On the basis of existing reports, it is
found that PMCR has its own advantages, distinct from
existing photo- and thermal-reaction systems.915 For example,
the EM ﬁeld and/or the thermal ﬁeld in PMCR systems are
usually nanoconﬁned with sharp gradients (sub-nanometer to
nm for EM ﬁelds, and nm to μm for thermal ﬁelds), which can
drive chemical reactions at an extreme level of spatial
selectivity. Moreover, in such systems, both the nano-optics
and nano-thermodynamics are special, thereby providing
opportunities for mediating reactions with increased eﬃcien-
cies and/or regulating the product selectivity. Additionally, the
lifetime (<ps) and the energy distribution of the excited
carriers in PMCR systems are largely diﬀerent from those in
traditional photocatalysts because of the lack of band gap for
most plasmon active materials. On the basis of these
characteristics, one should ﬁnd out the functions that PMCR
can do but traditional photo- and thermal reactions cannot.
The ﬁeld of PMCR is still in an embryonic stage, and two
main challenges have risen to the forefront: its complex
operating mechanism and its limited eﬃciency. More
speciﬁcally, one challenge is how to distinguish the inﬂuence
of multieﬀects of surface plasmons on the chemical reaction,
especially the photoelectronic and photothermal eﬀects; the
other challenge is how to power the chemical reaction more
eﬀectively, especially to regulate the product selectivity, which
are two key factors for the chemical industry. Predictably, by
understanding the mechanism of PMCR in depth, thus
rationally designing plasmonic nanostructures, SPs can expand
the possibilities for chemistry.
Plasmo-Induced Chemical ReactionsPractical Ex-
amples. SERS has proven particularly powerful for monitoring
reactions on the surface of plasmonic NPs in situ and with
sensitivity down to the SM level.496,924 In one class of
reactions, excitation of SPs facilitates light-driven photo-
chemistry,911,925−927 which can be monitored by tracking the
evolution of SERS spectra over time. Perhaps the most widely
studied example of this is the formation of DMAB on
plasmonic NP surfaces, from either the oxidation of PATP or
the reduction of nitrothiophenol (NTP).923,928−930 Surface-
enhanced Raman scattering is particularly well-suited to study
this reaction, because the spectra show a clear emergence of
vibrational signatures from the newly formed azo bond,
enabling the reaction kinetics to be monitored in real time
Figure 45. (a) Near normal relative reﬂectance (normalized to the
reﬂectance of the ﬂat gold layer, polarization as indicated in the
inset) of one bowtie aperture in a 50 nm thick gold layer (on 2.5
nm Cr as adhesion layer) on CaF2. The SiO2 nanosphere (85 nm in
diameter) in the gap of the bowtie aperture gives rise to an anti-
absorption-like feature on the broader plasmonic resonance
spectrum. The geometry of the nanostructure can be recognized
in the SEM image shown as inset. (b) Baseline-corrected spectrum
of the nanosphere. The peak is related to a localized phonon-
polariton excitation of the sphere in the Si−O−Si stretching
vibration band and is thus material-speciﬁc. The inset shows an
SEM image from (a) enlarged to the gap region with the sphere
colored in red (scale bar: 400 nm). Reproduced with permission
from ref 902. Copyright 2019 American Physical Society.
Figure 46. Schematic representation of PEMS and PMCR.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
85


----- Page 59 (native text) -----
and reaction reversibility under varying conditions to be
followed. The mechanism for DMAB formation is believed to
be plasmonic in origin, with hot charge carriers produced upon
plasmon decay promoting the reaction at the NP sur-
face,931−933 although questions about the role of local heating
and how other species aﬀect reactivity remain active avenues of
exploration.934−937 Beyond this canonical set of reactions,
SERS has also been used to study other plasmon-driven
photochemical reactions. For example, Moskovits and
co-workers used a combination of SERS and electron
microscopy to follow plasmon-driven photochemistry of Pt(II)
ions in solution.938 Although electron microscopy revealed
deposition of solid material at the surface of gold NPs upon
plasmon excitation, suggesting reduction of Pt(II) to Pt(0),
subsequent SERS analysis revealed the presence of PtO2,
indicating that both oxidation and reduction products were
present. Shin and co-workers used SERS to track the hot
carrier induced reduction of Fe3+ to Fe2+ at the surface of silver
NPs, using CN-terminated molecules bound to the silver
surface to capture the cation and report subsequent reduction
through a shift in the frequency of the CN stretch.939 A key to
each of these examples is that, while light drives the reactions
at the plasmonic NP surface, it also provides an analytical tool
for real-time characterization of the products through SERS,
highlighting the ability of these materials to serve as both
catalysts and probes. Thus, as interest in plasmon-assisted
photocatalysis continues to grow, we envision SERS will be a
key characterization strategy to monitor these types of
reactions in situ and in real time. However, the use of SERS
for characterizing plasmon-driven reactions must also be
accompanied by an appreciation of how hot carrier and
thermal eﬀects can impact the observed results, requiring
careful analysis of the spectra to untangle potentially complex
reaction mechanisms.927,940
Electrochemical Reactions. A second class of reactions
that can be interrogated with SERS involves electrochemical
conversion of reactants to products under an applied potential,
using a variety of NP- and tip-enhanced geometries to provide
signal enhancement.118,941−944 As molecules undergo electro-
chemical oxidation/reduction, changes in the SERS spectra are
followed in real time, enabling reactions to be monitored in situ
as well as providing hidden mechanistic insight.945,946 For
example, Van Duyne and co-workers used SERS with 532 nm
excitation to monitor the electrochemical behavior of R6G
under an applied potential, tracking the loss and gain in the
resonantly enhanced SERS signal from the molecule as it
underwent reduction and oxidation, respectively.946,947 To
probe the reduced form of the molecule, the authors switched
to 405 nm excitation and found vibrational modes that were
associated with R6G radical formation, as supported by
theoretical calculations.947 Willets and co-workers used SERS
to understand a change in the electrochemical behavior of NB
upon covalent attachment to the surface of gold NPs.948,949 In
this work, the cyclic voltammogram of the molecule shifted
from being single-peaked to dual-peaked upon covalent
attachment to the surface of the gold. By monitoring the
SERS spectrum as the potential was swept, the authors were
able to distinguish two electron-transfer events associated with
each of the two peaks in the voltammogram: one to the
terminal amine and the second to the phenoxazine core.
Although these examples highlight the power of using SERS in
electrochemical environments, it is also important to consider
the possibility that plasmon excitation can lead to unexpected
changes in the electrochemical behavior, either through local
heating or charge-carrier production.941 As SERS continues to
be used across a wide range of applications in electrochemical
studies, we encourage all results to be carefully analyzed, so as
to ensure that no plasmon-driven side reactions have occurred.
Spatial Conﬁnement in Gaps and Hotspots. Beyond
using SERS as a spectroscopic tool to follow reactions in real
time, SERS imaging has emerged as a powerful strategy for
following the spatial dependence of reactions on plasmonic
NPs.950,951 Here, SERS-scattered photons are not spectrally
dispersed but are rather imaged directly onto a CCD camera,
usually as diﬀraction-limited spots. By applying techniques
from super-resolution imaging, the SERS scattering from
molecules on/near the NP surface can be spatially localized,
often with a precision better than 20 nm.952 For example,
Willets and co-workers used super-resolution SERS imaging to
study the electrochemical behavior of NB on the surface of
gold NPs.951 Nile blue has a strong SERS signal in its oxidized
form, but the signal drops near zero upon reduction. Localizing
the SERS signal as diﬀerent populations of molecules are
reduced provides a window into how the spatial distribution of
molecules on the NP surface aﬀects their electrochemical
performance. Figure 47 shows an example of how the spatial
origin of the NB SERS on the surface of an aggregated gold NP
structure changes under diﬀerent applied potentials. Under
oxidizing potentials, when all molecules are expected to
generate strong SERS signals, the spatial origin of SERS
collapses near the geometric center of the aggregate, indicating
the average position of the molecules on the surface. How-
ever, as the potential is stepped toward increasingly negative
values, such that few molecules remain in the SERS-active
oxidized form, the spatial origin of the SERS signal localizes
near junction regions (or hotspots), suggesting that these
regions have a distinct electrochemical environment that
makes the molecules more diﬃcult to reduce (or, conversely,
easier to oxidize). This is consistent with the picture
that plasmon-generated hot carriers may be associated with
regions of strong EM ﬁeld enhancement,938,953 generating
local potential diﬀerences across the surface of plasmonic
NPs.950 Importantly, this example highlights the power of
using SERS imaging to track reactions spatially in real time and
to understand how the structure of the plasmonic catalyst
aﬀects local reactivity, representing an important future
direction, as interest in plasmon-assisted photocatalysis
continues to grow.
Figure 47. Potential-dependent spatial origin of SERS from
surface-tethered Nile blue molecules (colored points) overlaid
on an SEM image of the underlying AuNP aggregate. The applied
potential range is indicated at the top of each panel. The data show
that molecules located near junction regions are the most diﬃcult
to reduce/easiest to oxidize. Potentials are reported relative to a
Ag|AgCl electrode. Reproduced from ref 951. Copyright 2015
American Chemical Society.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
86


----- Page 60 (native text) -----
Liquid- and Gas-Based Reactions. We have seen that
SERS is promising for molecular-level reaction tracking owing
to its ability to read-out the identity and composition of
reaction species (e.g., reactants, intermediates, and products)
rapidly using their characteristic vibrational ﬁngerprints. These
attributes enable concurrent elucidation of representative
reaction mechanisms and associated kinetic models, even in
a multistep reaction, which were previously not possible using
nonmolecular-speciﬁc techniques such as ﬂuorescence spec-
troscopy and gravimetric analysis.954 In this section, we discuss
recent eﬀorts to incorporate SERS platforms for in situ
monitoring of (1) liquid-based reactions and (2) gas-based
reactions (Figure 48).
Liquid-Based Reactions. In liquid-based reactions, all
reaction species are present in one or more liquid phases,
and it is probably the most common process setup in research
and industrial settings. This class of reactions undergoes
reactant-to-product transformations, usually in bulk liquid
phase, making them hard to track because evolving species may
not be present within the EM hotspot needed for SERS
measurements. It is thus necessary to create 3D plasmonic
structures with dense EM hotspots for eﬃcient interaction and
read-out of reaction species. Ling et al. demonstrated the use of
plasmonic particle-assembled microdroplets, such as plasmonic
liquid marbles (PLM; millimeter-sized) and plasmonic
colloidosomes (PC; micron-sized), which function as both
miniaturized reactors and ultrasensitive SERS platforms for in
situ reaction monitoring (Figure 48A-i).955−957 These micro-
droplets possess a 3D plasmonic shell to boost the Raman
signal by more than 108-fold, thereby enabling temporal
reaction tracking in single liquid-phase reactions.955 Beyond
single liquid-phase detection, PC also oﬀers a powerful
approach for swift and stable SERS measurements of dynamic
events at a liquid−liquid interface. This approach involves the
strategic positioning of a 3D SERS-active ensemble, directly at
the interfacial boundary.956 More importantly, the recorded
molecular vibrational signatures enable univocal diﬀerentiation
of isomeric products during the interfacial protonation of
dimethyl yellow. This advantage again highlights the
importance of SERS to index reaction species accurately that
are otherwise undistinguishable using conventional analytical
methods such as HPLC.
Recently, PLM was demonstrated as an isolated spectroelec-
trochemical microreactor, capable of complementing electro-
chemistry with in situ molecular-level reaction tracking
(Figure 48A-ii).957 The key strategy lies on the use of an
electrically conductive Ag shell as both a 3D working electrode
and an SERS-active platform. With the electro-degradation of
an environmental toxin as a model, the Ag shell is capable of
resolving multistep electron-transfer processes by providing
molecule-speciﬁc identiﬁcation and quantiﬁcation of transient
species throughout the electrochemical reaction. It is note-
worthy that these insights cannot be obtained via electro-
chemistry alone. Interestingly, the 3D electrode conﬁguration
exhibits 2-fold and 10-fold superior electrochemical and SERS
performance, respectively, compared to a conventional 2D
microplatform. This work opens an attractive perspective
toward the design of next-generation spectroelectrochemical
cells for eﬃcient elucidation of electrochemical events in
energy and environment-related applications, such as batteries,
fuel cells, or toxin removal.
Gas-Based Reactions. Among all reactions, it is most
challenging to monitor processes involving gaseous species in
real time, due to the poor detection sensitivity arising from low
molecular concentrations in gases. Moreover, the low density
and poor gas solubility in liquids inevitably lead to its rapid
escape from the reaction mixture, thereby preventing eﬀective
interactions between gas molecules and plasmonic surfaces, as
required for SERS readout.
To realize gas-based process monitoring, Ling et al.
integrated MOFs with plasmonic nanostructures/particles to
create an MOF-SERS system (Figure 48B).958,959 Metal−
organic frameworks are 3D crystalline scaﬀolds containing an
extensive network of nanopores with large speciﬁc surface areas
up to 7000 m2·g−1. The most critical attribute of MOFs for
enabling SERS-based gas detection revolves around their
excellent gas absorptivity, to accumulate gas molecules directly
onto the plasmonic surfaces. This phenomenon improves
detection sensitivity by several orders of magnitude, as com-
pared to bare plasmonic particles. For instance, MOF-encapsulated
Figure 48. Emerging strategies to monitor liquid-based (A) and
gas-based (B) reactions using SERS. (A) Particle-assembled
microdroplets, such as plasmonic liquid marble and plasmonic
colloidosome, have been designed to track (i) immiscible liquid−
liquid reactions; adapted from ref 955, Copyright 201, American
Chemical Society; and (ii) electrochemical reactions; adapted with
permission from ref 955, copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH. (B)
Integrating MOFs with SERS to read-out molecular events during
(i) gas−solid interaction; adapted from ref 958, copyright 2017
American Chemical Society; (ii) gas−liquid reaction; adapted with
permission from ref 959, copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
87


----- Page 61 (native text) -----
Ag nanocube arrays (Ag@MOF) were reported as ultra-
sensitive SERS platforms to observe the concentration of CO2
molecules directly at a nanoscale interface created between an
MOF and metal NP surface (Figure 48B-i).957 Quantitative
reconstruction of the 3D molecular footprint near the MOF-
encapsulated solid surface unraveled the transition of sparsely
distributed and randomly oriented CO2 molecules into a quasi-
condensed CO2 liquid state, remarkably at ambient operation
of 1 bar and 298 K. It is noteworthy that such dynamic
molecular-level details cannot be teased out using conventional
monitoring techniques that typically focus on bulk MOFs
instead. These valuable insights represent a signiﬁcant leap
forward in the understanding of solid@MOF systems, whereby
it is traditionally perceived that gas molecules are merely con-
ﬁned near the solid surface via the intrinsic MOF nanopores.
The Ag@MOF system also functions as an excellent ana-
lytical platform to follow liquid−gas reactions (Figure 48B-ii).959
In this case, the interfacial nanocavities in solid@MOF were
exploited to concentrate immiscible gas and liquid reactants
selectively and simultaneously within the electromagnetic
hotspots. Corroborating SERS measurements and simulations,
Ling et al. uncovered reaction events at the interfacial cavities and
provided the ﬁrst molecular-level validation to the formation of
phenylcarbamic acid from liquid aniline and CO2 gas. Notably,
phenylcarbamic acid can only be identiﬁed in situ, because it is
unstable toward postreaction treatments required in common
characterization techniques, such as NMR spectroscopy or mass
spectrometry. By overcoming core challenges in the realm of gas-
phase detection, this MOF-SERS approach lays a strong
foundation for future investigations into various important ﬁelds,
including heterogeneous catalysis, removal of greenhouse gases,
and gas-to-fuel conversions. Additional eﬀorts could also be
directed to the optimization of MOF-SERS platforms toward
facile, real-time monitoring of homogeneous all-gas reactions.
GENERAL CONCLUSIONS AND OUTLOOK
Surface-enhanced Raman scattering has been conﬁrmed as a
powerful method to probe simple as well as complex
molecules, in contact or close to a plasmonic substrate, usually
a metal surface but more recently also generalized to semicon-
ductor or hybrid materials. A broad spectrum of physical,
chemical, and analytical applications has been proposed,
ranging from materials and environmental science through
biology and medicine. Such huge potential, combined with
extraordinary technological progress in the development of
related instrumentation, has resulted in an explosion of
research, which has pushed SERS forward in many diﬀerent
directions (sometimes even leading to conﬂicting answers).
Improvement of established classical EM and CHEM
mechanisms, implementation of relevant secondary processes,
and consideration of quantum eﬀects have provided a more
precise description and prediction of SERS enhancement
(factors), with further demonstration of particularly high values
within nano- and subnano-scale gaps between NPs or between
NPs and ﬂat metal substrates. One of the major driving forces
behind recent progress of SERS has been the practical
achievement of nanostructures with excellent quality and
tailored morphologies, in some cases featuring smaller and
more precisely designed 2D and 3D nanogaps. Such fabrication
strategies and techniques have also enabled rapid, fast, cost-
eﬀective, reproducible, large-scale production of substrates and
nanotags with robust SERS response, for general as well as
target-oriented sensing applications.
For analytical purposes, high sensitivity, eﬃciency, and
reproducibility of SERS substrates are recurrently discussed as
key factors. In this context, speciﬁc platforms have been
devised and synthesized toward a variety of sensing strategies
based on SERS nanotags, chemosensors, chiral-selective
systems, SHINERS, intragap core−shell particles, and remote
SERS, often achieving SM detection. The development and
implementation of statistical data analysis currently oﬀers quanti-
ﬁcation and identiﬁcation of multiple molecules/components
within complex mixtures, which are crucial advancements for
biomedical and environmental applications. However, optimiza-
tion of the optical and chemical properties of SERS platforms,
including coupling of the analytes to the plasmonic surface,
ideally within hotspots/gaps, as well as an even closer collabo-
ration between theoretical modeling and experimental
realization, will be indispensable for obtaining a deeper under-
standing of all relevant aspects and realizing the eﬀective transfer
of SERS as a standard analytical method in the near future.
The ability to detect multiple biomarkers, such as aptamers
or antibodies, simultaneously (multiplexing) is crucial to many
applications involving biological samples, toxin-contaminated
environments, and for personalized medicine, based on POC
early diagnostics, high-throughput screening systems at the gene
and molecular levels. Label-free SERS biosensors oﬀer DNA
detection through a single hybridization step, with no need for
secondary hybridization or posthybridization washing, thus
resulting in shorter assay time and less reagent usage. Surface-
enhanced Raman scattering bioimaging has also revealed itself as
an alternative long-term imaging technique providing high
selectivity and multiplexing, while avoiding photobleaching,
often encountered in ﬂuorescence detection schemes. Addition-
ally, it can be combined with other traditionally used bioimaging
tools (multimodality). Immunoassay platforms coupled with
advanced POC devices are important for the fast analysis of
biological samples. Such improvements in SERS detection will
be critical toward future personalized and genomic medicine.
Applications of SERS in biosensing have seen a rapid
increase during the past decade, related to detection of cancer
biomarkers, CTCs, or pathogens. However, progress toward
becoming a widespread clinical diagnostics technology has
lagged behind, for example, due to the use of highly diluted
samples in complex matrixes and the need for sophisticated
instrumentation. Some of these issues could be solved by using
brighter probes, such as SERS tags combined with microﬂuidic
systems, using portable devices. In the case of in vivo
applications, limited tissue penetration depth has hindered
implementation in full-body or deep tissues, and, therefore,
applications where the laser beam can access the diseased area
have a better chance to succeed. It has been predicted that
there are main clinical implementations of SERS that could
ﬁnd applicability in the near future: (a) during surgery, for the
detection of tumor margins; (b) via endoscopy, colonoscopy,
or other optical ﬁber-guided imaging procedures to visualize
and to detect superﬁcial diseased tissues within the interior of
the body, and (c) via liquid biopsy, a term that broadly
comprises the identiﬁcation of disease biomarkers in blood or
other bodily ﬂuids. Eﬃcient and timely disease diagnosis is a
critical challenge, particularly in low- and middle-income
countries. These regions are ill-prepared to handle the
diagnostic burden due to limited resources, resulting in
delayed diagnosis and treatment. Surface-enhanced Raman
scattering biosensors may become a low-cost, resource-eﬃcient
alternative to histopathological analysis.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
88


----- Page 62 (native text) -----
Surface-enhanced Raman scattering has also been demon-
strated to be a useful tool to monitor bacterial contamination, as
well as inorganic and highly toxic organic pollutants within our
ecosystem, which relied on the application of hydrogel- and
MOF-based NP platforms, with detection thresholds in the parts
per billion range. Quality control and nutrient quantiﬁcation in
food analytics have been achieved, with detection limits down to
the nanomolar range. For the near future, the implementation of
robust, reliable, and predictable SERS substrates into cartridge
devices could become a promising strategy toward commercial
SERS sensors. In the area of renewable energy, there is a strong
need to monitor nucleic acid targets, such as microRNAs
(miRNAs) involved in molecular regulatory pathways control-
ling plant growth and development. Such pathways are complex
and require tight control of gene expression for various
applications, ranging from gene therapy to biofuel development.
A recent but promising research direction has been the use
of plasmonic substrates to facilitate catalytic reactions under
mild conditions, including liquid-based and gas-based reac-
tions, which can be monitored in situ with sensitivities down to
the SM level, by tracking the evolution of SERS spectra over
time. Electrochemical conversion of reactants to products
under an applied potential has been demonstrated. Time-
dependent SERS appears especially appealing to read out the
identity and composition of reaction species (i.e., reactants,
intermediates, and products) rapidly and to understand
reaction mechanisms that were not accessible by means of
molecule-unspeciﬁc techniques.
The broad interest in the phenomenon of surface-enhanced
signal ampliﬁcation, the consistently improved control over
substrate fabrication, and the plethora of applications under
manifold conditions, has resulted in the development of other
SERS-related techniques, which promise signiﬁcant improve-
ments in the spatial resolution, while providing complementary
spectroscopic information. With SERS as a mature spectro-
scopic technique and the tremendous progress in its
implementation as an analytical tool, we expect rapid
development of commercial products, including tailored
enhancing substrates, compact setups, and eﬃcient imaging
methods that can compete or complement existing goods in a
wide variety of technologies.
We close with our list of top 10 items that should be
accomplished, to make SERS a fully successful technique, both
in research and in the market.
Electromagnetic
theory: design
Integration of classical and
quantum
methodologies combining charge transfer, quantum eﬀects, and classical
inhomogeneous enhancements in the complex molecule−substrate.
Theory: modeling
Generally available modeling/simulation tools
for realistic
SERS substrate conﬁgurations and for the accurate determination of
Raman spectra of molecules possibly present in observations.
Stimulated and quantum SERS
Exploitation of stimulated Raman processes
(e.g., involving multiple incident wavelengths) and
the single-photon
nature of the inelastic Raman emission for surface-enhanced imaging
and spectroscopy.
Substrate
benchmarking
Development of standardization
protocols for the
characterization of plasmonic (macroscopic and colloidal) substrates
and evaluation of SERS performance.
Substrate fabrication
Reliable methods for the synthesis/fabrication
of uniform, highly reproducible, and eﬃcient enhancing substrates,
with a high degree of structural precision and robust, quantitative
SERS response within speciﬁcation limits (to be established).
Reliability
Proof of SERS performance, preferentially using nonresonant
molecules (established reporters) and in the absence of charge-transfer
resonances.
Labeling and
analyte access
Development of a
methodology to determine the
density and localization of molecules (including target molecules,
surfactants, ions, eventual contaminations, etc.)
accurately with ultraresolution in space (nm or better) and time (sub-picosecond),
capable of tracing the dynamics of Raman processes in situ and in real time.
Analysis
in real environments
Rational design,
careful characterization,
and modeling of (functionalized) SERS substrates or tags in real environments/under
real conditions, leading to general rules for applicability of SERS
substrates in various ﬁelds.
Data processing and quantiﬁcation Development of standardized protocols
and data processing for (multiple) analyte quantiﬁcation for diﬀerent
application strategies (with labels, label-free as well as using complex
statistical models for unknown compositions).
Clinical translation
Clinical translation of SERS nanoparticles for in vivo human applications.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
89


----- Page 63 (native text) -----
AUTHOR INFORMATION
Corresponding Author
*E-mail: llizmarzan@cicbiomagune.es.
ORCID
Dorleta Jimenez de Aberasturi: 0000-0001-5009-3557
Javier Aizpurua: 0000-0002-1444-7589
Ramon A. Alvarez-Puebla: 0000-0003-4770-5756
Jeremy J. Baumberg: 0000-0002-9606-9488
Guillermo C. Bazan: 0000-0002-2537-0310
Steven E. J. Bell: 0000-0003-3767-8985
Alexandre G. Brolo: 0000-0002-3162-0881
Volker Deckert: 0000-0002-0173-7974
Karen Faulds: 0000-0002-5567-7399
Royston Goodacre: 0000-0003-2230-645X
Amanda J. Haes: 0000-0001-7232-6825
Christy L. Haynes: 0000-0002-5420-5867
Christian Huck: 0000-0003-3012-3901
Mikael Käll: 0000-0002-1163-0345
Janina Kneipp: 0000-0001-8542-6331
Nicholas A. Kotov: 0000-0002-6864-5804
Eric C. Le Ru: 0000-0002-3052-9947
Jian-Feng Li: 0000-0003-1598-6856
Xing Yi Ling: 0000-0001-5495-6428
Martin Moskovits: 0000-0002-0212-108X
Kei Murakoshi: 0000-0003-4786-0115
Jwa-Min Nam: 0000-0002-7891-8482
Yukihiro Ozaki: 0000-0002-4479-4004
Isabel Pastoriza-Santos: 0000-0002-1091-1364
Jorge Perez-Juste: 0000-0002-4614-1699
Juergen Popp: 0000-0003-4257-593X
Annemarie Pucci: 0000-0002-9038-4110
Bin Ren: 0000-0002-9821-5864
George C. Schatz: 0000-0001-5837-4740
Timur Shegai: 0000-0002-4266-3721
Sebastian Schlücker: 0000-0003-4790-4616
K. George Thomas: 0000-0003-1279-308X
Zhong-Qun Tian: 0000-0002-9775-8189
Tuan Vo-Dinh: 0000-0003-3701-3326
Katherine A. Willets: 0000-0002-1417-4656
Chuanlai Xu: 0000-0002-5639-7102
Yikai Xu: 0000-0003-3881-8871
Bing Zhao: 0000-0002-0044-9743
Luis M. Liz-Marzán: 0000-0002-6647-1353
Notes
The authors declare no competing ﬁnancial interest.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are sad to report that Richard P. Van Duyne passed away
July 28, 2019. Rick was a key ﬁgure in the original discovery of
SERS in the 1970s, as described in the text. Subsequently he
was a giant in the development of the SERS technique,
including important contributions to our understanding of
single-molecule SERS, to the development of SERS substrates,
to the discovery of enhanced nonlinear Raman-based methods,
to the development of TERS and electrochemical SERS and
TERS, and to the applications of SERS and related methods in
a wide variety of directions related to sensing and surface
chemistry. Rick also played a crucial role in mentoring students
and postdocs, especially female scientists, who are now leaders
in the SERS ﬁeld. Funding is acknowledged from the European
Research Council (ERC Advanced Grant No. 787510-
4DBIOSERS to L.M.L.-M., ERC Advanced Grant No.
789104-eNANO to F.J.G.A., ERC Starting Grant No.
259432-MULTIBIOPHOT to J.K., ERC Consolidator Grant
No. 772108-DarkSERS); the Department of Education of the
Basque Government (Grant No. IT1164-19 to J.A.); the
Spanish MINECO (CTQ2017-88648-R to R.A.-P., MAT2016-
77809-R to I.P.-S. and J.P.-J.); the EPSRC (EP/P034063/1 to
S.B., EP/L027151/1 to J.B., EP/L014165/1 to D.G. and K.F.);
IDUN-Danish National Research Foundation (DNRF122)
and Villum Fonden (Grant No. 9301) to A.B.; the National
R es ea r c h
F oun d a t ion
of
K or ea
( G ra n t
N o .
2019R1A2C3004375 to J.B.); the German Science Founda-
tion, DFG (SFB 1278 Polytarget (Project B4) to V.D., Grant
No. SCHL 594/13-1 to S.S., Germany’s Excellence Strategy
(EXC 2089/1-390776260) to S.M.); the Federal Ministry of
Education and Research, Germany (BMBF) (Grant InfectoG-
nostics 13GW0096F to D.C.-M. and J.P.); DARPA-16-35-
INTERCEPT-FP-018 to L.F.; the UK BBSRC (Grant No. BB/
L014823/1 to R.G.); the Department of Science and
Technology (DST Nanomission Project SR/NM/NS-23/
2016 to K.G.T.); the U.S. National Science Foundation
(Grant No. CHE-1707859 to A.J.H., Center for Sustainable
Nanotechnology CHE-1503408 (Centers for Chemical In-
novation Program) to C.L.H., Center for Chemical Innovation
Chemistry at the Space-Time Limit (CaSTL) CHE-1414466
to G.C.S. and R.P.V.D., Grant No. CHE-1807269 to K.A.W.);
the Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation to M.K.; the Oﬃce
of Naval Research (Grant No. N00014-18-1-2876 to N.A.K.);
Royal Society of New Zealand Te Apa̅rangi to E.L.R. and B.A.;
Singapore Ministry of Education, Tier 1 (RG11/18) to X.Y.L.;
the Photoexcitonix Project in Hokkaido Univ., Japan, to K.M.;
BioNano Health-Guard Research Center funded by the
Ministry of Science and ICT (MSIT) of Korea as Global
Frontier
Project
(Grant
No.
H-GUARD_2013-
M3A6B2078947) to J.-M.N.; NSFC of P. R. China (Grant
No. 21705015 to Y.O., Grant No. 21633005 to B.R.); National
Key R&D Program (2017YFA0206902) to C.X. This work was
coordinated under the Maria de Maeztu Units of Excellence
Program from the Spanish State Research AgencyGrant No.
MDM-2017-0720.
VOCABULARY
Raman scattering, the inelastic scattering of a photon by
matter, which reveals vibrational transitions; SERS tags,
plasmonic nanoparticles carrying Raman-active molecules,
which act as spectroscopic bar codes; quantiﬁcation, a method
to convert observations into numbers; biomarker, a molecule
or quantiﬁable signal revealing a biological condition; hot
electrons, electrons that have acquired high energy above the
Fermi level
REFERENCES
(1) Fleischmann, M.; Hendra, P. J.; McQuillan, A. J. Raman Spectra
of Pyridine Adsorbed at a Silver Electrode. Chem. Phys. Lett. 1974, 26,
163−166.
(2) Jeanmaire, D. L.; Van Duyne, R. P. Surface Raman
Spectroelectrochemistry Part I. Heterocyclic, Aromatic, and Aliphatic
Amines Adsorbed on the Anodized Silver Electrode. J. Electroanal.
Chem. Interfacial Electrochem. 1977, 84, 1−20.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
90


----- Page 64 (native text) -----
(3) Albrecht, M. G.; Creighton, J. A. Anomalously Intense Raman
Spectra of Pyridine at a Silver Electrode. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1977, 99,
5215−5217.
(4) Philpott, M. R. Effect of Surface Plasmons on Transitions in
Molecules. J. Chem. Phys. 1975, 62, 1812.
(5) Moskovits, M. Surface Roughness and the Enhanced Intensity of
Raman Scattering by Molecules Adsorbed on Metals. J. Chem. Phys.
1978, 69, 4159.
(6) A search in Web of Science, as “TOPIC: (surface enhanced
raman) OR TOPIC: (sers)” yields over 37 000 records as of May
2019.
(7) http://www.icors2018.org (Accessed Aug 5, 2019).
(8) Birke, R. L.; Lu, T.; Lombardi, J. R. In Surface-Enhanced Raman
spectroscopy; Wiley, 1991; pp 211−277.
(9) Schatz, G. C.; Young, M. A.; Van Duyne, R. P. Electromagnetic
Mechanism of SERS. In Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering; Kneipp,
K., Moskovits, M., Kneipp, H., Eds.; Topics in Applied Physics;
Springer: Berlin, Germany, 2006; Vol. 103, pp 19−46 DOI: 10.1007/
3-540-33567-6_2.
(10) Jensen, L.; Aikens, C. M.; Schatz, G. C. Electronic Structure
Methods for Studying Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering. Chem.
Soc. Rev. 2008, 37, 1061−1073.
(11) Payton, J. L.; Morton, S. M.; Moore, J. E.; Jensen, L. A Hybrid
Atomistic Electrodynamics-Quantum Mechanical Approach for
Simulating Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering. Acc. Chem. Res.
2014, 47, 88−99.
(12) Tong, L.; Zhu, T.; Liu, Z. Approaching the Electromagnetic
Mechanism of Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering: From Self-
Assembled Arrays to Individual Gold Nanoparticles. Chem. Soc. Rev.
2011, 40, 1296−1304.
(13) Wu, D.-Y.; Li, J.-F.; Ren, B.; Tian, Z.-Q. Electrochemical
Surface-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy of Nanostructures. Chem. Soc.
Rev. 2008, 37, 1025−1041.
(14) Schatz, G. C. Theoretical Studies of Surface Enhanced Raman
Scattering. Acc. Chem. Res. 1984, 17, 370−376.
(15) Harris, N.; Ausman, L. K.; McMahon, J. M.; Masiello, D. J.;
Schatz, G. C. Computational Electrodynamics Methods. RSC Theor.
Comput. Chem. Ser. 2011, 4, 147−178.
(16) Xu, H.; Bjerneld, E. J.; Käll, M.; Börjesson, L. Spectroscopy of
Single Hemoglobin Molecules by Surface Enhanced Raman
Scattering. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1999, 83, 4357−4360.
(17) Li, K. R.; Stockman, M. I.; Bergman, D. J. Self-Similar Chain of
Metal Nanospheres as an Efficient Nanolens. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2003, 91,
227402.
(18) Alvarez-Puebla, R. A.; Liz-Marzán, L. M.; García de Abajo, F. J.
Light Concentration at the Nanometer Scale. J. Phys. Chem. Lett.
2010, 1, 2428−2434.
(19) Solis, S. M.; Taboada, J. M.; Obelleiro, F.; Liz-Marzán, L. M.;
García de Abajo, F. J. Optimization of Nanoparticle-Based SERS
Substrates through Large-Scale Realistic Simulations. ACS Photonics
2017, 4, 329−337.
(20) Ausman, L. K.; Schatz, G. C. On the Importance of
Incorporating Dipole Reradiation in the Modeling of Surface
Enhanced Raman Scattering from Spheres. J. Chem. Phys. 2009,
131, No. 084708.
(21) Chen, X.; Jensen, L. Morphology Dependent Near-Field
Response in Atomistic Plasmonic Nanocavities. Nanoscale 2018, 10,
11410−11417.
(22) Chulhai, D. V.; Chen, X.; Jensen, L. Simulating Ensemble-
Averaged Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering. J. Phys. Chem. C 2016,
120, 20833−20842.
(23) Wustholz, K. L.; Henry, A.-I.; McMahon, J. M.; Freeman, R. G.;
Valley, N.; Piotti, M. E.; Natan, M. J.; Schatz, G. C.; Van Duyne, R. P.
Structure-Activity Relationships in Gold Nanoparticle Dimers and
Trimers for Surface-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy. J. Am. Chem. Soc.
2010, 132, 10903−10910.
(24) Kleinman, S. L.; Sharma, B.; Blaber, M. G.; Henry, A.-I.; Valley,
N.; Freeman, R. G.; Natan, M. J.; Schatz, G. C.; Van Duyne, R. P.
Structure Enhancement Factor Relationships in Single Gold Nano-
antennas by Surface-Enhanced Raman Excitation Spectroscopy. J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 2013, 135, 301−308.
(25) Greeneltch, N. G.; Blaber, M. G.; Schatz, G. C.; Van Duyne, R.
P. Plasmon-Sampled Surface-Enhanced Raman Excitation Spectros-
copy on Silver Immobilized Nanorod Assemblies and Optimization
for Near Infrared (λex = 1064 nm) Studies. J. Phys. Chem. C 2013,
117, 2554−2558.
(26) Sharma, B.; Cardinal, M. F.; Ross, M. B.; Zrimsek, A. B.; Bykov,
S. V.; Punihaole, D.; Asher, S. A.; Schatz, G. C.; Van Duyne, R. P.
Aluminum Film-Over-Nanosphere Substrates for Deep-UV Surface-
Enhanced Resonance Raman Spectroscopy. Nano Lett. 2016, 16,
7968−7973.
(27) Yu, R.; Liz-Marzán, L. M.; García de Abajo, F. J. Universal
Analytical Modeling of Plasmonic Nanoparticles. Chem. Soc. Rev.
2017, 46, 6710−6724.
(28) http://www.nanophotonics.es/widgets (Accessed Aug 5,
2019).
(29) Ford, G. W.; Weber, W. H. Electromagnetic Interactions of
Molecules with Metal Surfaces. Phys. Rep. 1984, 113, 195−287.
(30) García de Abajo, F. J. Nonlocal Effects in the Plasmons of
Strongly Interacting Nanoparticles, Dimers, and Waveguides. J. Phys.
Chem. C 2008, 112, 17983−17987.
(31) Camden, J. P.; Dieringer, J. A.; Wang, Y.; Masiello, D. J.; Marks,
L. D.; Schatz, G. C.; Van Duyne, R. P. Probing the Structure of Single-
Molecule Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering Hot Spots. J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 2008, 130, 12616−12617.
(32) McMahon, J. M.; Li, S.; Ausman, L. K.; Schatz, G. C. Modeling
the Effect of Small Gaps in Surface-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy. J.
Phys. Chem. C 2012, 116, 1627−1637.
(33) Yoon, J. H.; Zhou, Y.; Blaber, M. G.; Schatz, G. C.; Yoon, S.
Surface Plasmon Coupling of Compositionally Heterogeneous Core-
Satellite Nanoassemblies. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2013, 4, 1371−1378.
(34) Esteban, R.; Borisov, A. G.; Nordlander, P.; Aizpurua, J.
Bridging Quantum and Classical Plasmonics with a Quantum-
Corrected Model. Nat. Commun. 2012, 3, 825.
(35) Morton, S. M.; Jensen, L. Understanding the Molecule-Surface
Chemical Coupling in SERS. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2009, 131, 4090−
4098.
(36) Valley, N.; Greeneltch, N.; Van Duyne, R. P.; Schatz, G. C. A
Look at the Origin and Magnitude of the Chemical Contribution to
the Enhancement Mechanism of Surface-Enhanced Raman Spectros-
copy (SERS): Theory and Experiment. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2013, 4,
2599−2604.
(37) Birke, R. L.; Lombardi, J. R.; Saidi, W. A.; Norman, P. Surface-
Enhanced Raman Scattering Due to Charge-Transfer Resonances: A
Time-Dependent Density Functional Theory Study of Ag13−4-
Mercaptopyridine. J. Phys. Chem. C 2016, 120, 20721−20735.
(38) Lombardi, J. R.; Birke, R. L. The Theory of Surface-Enhanced
Raman Scattering. J. Chem. Phys. 2012, 136, 144704.
(39) Gorelsky, S. I. In Semiempirical SCF MO Methods, Electronic
Spectra, and Conﬁgurational Interaction; Elsevier Ltd., 2004; pp 467−
489.
(40) Gieseking, R. L.; Ratner, M. A.; Schatz, G. C. Semiempirical
Modeling of Ag Nanoclusters: New Parameters for Optical Property
Studies Enable Determination of Double Excitation Contributions to
Plasmonic Excitation. J. Phys. Chem. A 2016, 120, 4542−4549.
(41) Gieseking, R. L.; Ratner, M. A.; Schatz, G. C. Theoretical
Modeling of Voltage Effects and the Chemical Mechanism in Surface-
Enhanced Raman Scattering. Faraday Discuss. 2017, 205, 149−171.
(42) Yilmaz, M.; Babur, E.; Ozdemir, M.; Gieseking, R. L.; Dede, Y.;
Tamer, U.; Schatz, G. C.; Facchetti, A.; Usta, H.; Demirel, G.
Nanostructured Organic Semiconductor Films for Molecular
Detection with Surface-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy. Nat. Mater.
2017, 16, 918−924.
(43) Gieseking, R. L. M.; Lee, J.; Tallarida, N.; Apkarian, V. A.;
Schatz, G. C. Bias-Dependent Chemical Enhancement and Non-
classical Stark Effect in Tip-Enhanced Raman Spectromicroscopy of
CO-Terminated Ag Tips. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2018, 9, 3074−3080.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
91


----- Page 65 (native text) -----
(44) Gieseking, R. L.; Ratner, M. A.; Schatz, G. C. Semiempirical
Modeling of Electrochemical Charge Transfer. Faraday Discuss. 2017,
199, 547−563.
(45) Gieseking, R. L. M.; Ratner, M. A.; Schatz, G. C. Benchmarking
Semiempirical Methods To Compute Electrochemical Formal
Potentials. J. Phys. Chem. A 2018, 122, 6809−6818.
(46) Tallarida, N.; Lee, J.; Apkarian, V. A. Tip-Enhanced Raman
Spectromicroscopy on the Angstrom Scale: Bare and CO-Terminated
Ag Tips. ACS Nano 2017, 11, 11393−11401.
(47) Mullin, J. M.; Autschbach, J.; Schatz, G. C. Time-Dependent
Density Functional Methods for Surface Enhanced Raman Scattering
(SERS) Studies. Comput. Theor. Chem. 2012, 987, 32−41.
(48) Mullin, J.; Schatz, G. C. Combined Linear Response Quantum
Mechanics and Classical Electrodynamics (QM/ED) Method for the
Calculation of Surface-Enhanced Raman Spectra. J. Phys. Chem. A
2012, 116, 1931−1938.
(49) Sprague-Klein, E. A.; McAnally, M. O.; Zhdanov, D. V.;
Zrimsek, A. B.; Apkarian, V. A.; Seideman, T.; Schatz, G. C.; Van
Duyne, R. P. Observation of Single Molecule Plasmon-Driven
Electron Transfer in Isotopically Edited 4,4’-Bipyridine Gold
Nanosphere Oligomers. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2017, 139, 15212−15221.
(50) Sprague-Klein, E. A.; Negru, B.; Madison, L. R.; Coste, S. C.;
Rugg, B. K.; Felts, A. M.; McAnally, M. O.; Banik, M.; Apkarian, V. A.;
Wasielewski, M. R.; Ratner, M. A.; Seideman, T.; Schatz, G. C.; Van
Duyne, R. P. Photoinduced Plasmon-Driven Chemistry in Trans-1,2-
Bis(4-pyridyl)ethylene Gold Nanosphere Oligomers. J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 2018, 140, 10583−10592.
(51) Le Ru, E. C.; Blackie, E.; Meyer, M.; Etchegoin, P. G. Surface
Enhanced Raman Scattering Enhancement Factors: A Comprehensive
Study. J. Phys. Chem. C 2007, 111, 13794−13803.
(52) Le Ru, E. C.; Etchegoin, P. G. Single Molecule Surfaced-
Enhanced Raman Scattering. Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 2012, 63, 65−87.
(53) Le Ru, E. C.; Etchegoin, P. G. Rigorous Justification of the |E|4
Enhancement Factor in Surface Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy.
Chem. Phys. Lett. 2006, 423, 63−66.
(54) Moskovits, M. Surface Selection Rules. J. Chem. Phys. 1982, 77,
4408−4416.
(55) Le Ru, E. C.; Meyer, S. A.; Artur, C.; Etchegoin, P. G.; Grand,
J.; Lang, P.; Maurel, F. Experimental Demonstration of Surface
Selection Rules for SERS on Flat Metallic Surfaces. Chem. Commun.
2011, 47, 3903−3905.
(56) Dieringer, J. A.; McFarland, A. D.; Shah, N. C.; Stuart, D. A.;
Whitney, A. V.; Yonzon, C. R.; Young, M. A.; Zhang, X.; Van Duyne,
R. P. Surface Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy: New Materials,
Concepts, Characterization Tools, and Applications. Faraday Discuss.
2006, 132, 9−26.
(57) Le Ru, E. C.; Etchegoin, P. G. Quantifying SERS Enhance-
ments. MRS Bull. 2013, 38, 631−640.
(58) Darby, B. L.; Auguié, B.; Meyer, M.; Pantoja, A. E.; Le Ru, E. C.
Modified Optical Absorption of Molecules on Metallic Nanoparticles
at Sub-Monolayer Coverage. Nat. Photonics 2016, 10, 40−45.
(59) Tang, C.; Auguié, B.; Le Ru, E. C. Modeling Molecular
Orientation Effects in Dye-Coated Nanostructures Using a Thin-Shell
Approximation of Mie Theory for Radially Anisotropic Media. ACS
Photonics 2018, 5, 5002−5009.
(60) Auguié, B.; Darby, B. L.; Le Ru, E. C. Electromagnetic
Interactions of Dye Molecules Surrounding a Nanosphere. Nanoscale
2019, 11, 12177.
(61) Morton, S. M.; Jensen, L. A Discrete Interaction Model/
Quantum Mechanical Method for Describing Response Properties of
Molecules Adsorbed on Metal Nanoparticles. J. Chem. Phys. 2010,
133, No. 074103.
(62) Shim, S.; Stuart, C. M.; Mathies, R. A. Resonance Raman
Cross-Sections and Vibronic Analysis of Rhodamine 6G from
Broadband Stimulated Raman Spectroscopy. ChemPhysChem 2008,
9, 697−699.
(63) Auguié, B.; Le Ru, E. C. Optical Absorption of Dye Molecules
in a Spherical Shell Geometry. J. Phys. Chem. C 2018, 122, 19110−
19115.
(64) Turley, H. K.; Hu, Z.; Silverstein, D. W.; Cooper, D. A.; Jensen,
L.; Camden, J. P. Probing Two-Photon Molecular Properties with
Surface-Enhanced Hyper-Raman Scattering: A Combined Exper-
imental and Theoretical Study of Crystal Violet. J. Phys. Chem. C
2016, 120, 20936−20942.
(65) Chikkaraddy, R.; de Nijs, B.; Benz, F.; Barrow, S. J.; Scherman,
O. A.; Rosta, E.; Demetriadou, A.; Fox, P.; Hess, O.; Baumberg, J. J.
Single-Molecule Strong Coupling at Room Temperature in Plasmonic
Nanocavities. Nature 2016, 535, 127−130.
(66) Stockman, M. I. Spasers Explained. Nat. Photonics 2008, 2,
327−329.
(67) Cortés, E.; Xie, W.; Cambiasso, J.; Jermyn, A. S.;
Sundararaman, R.; Narang, P.; Schlücker, S.; Maier, S. A. Plasmonic
Hot Electron Transport Drives Nano-Localized Chemistry. Nat.
Commun. 2017, 8, 14880.
(68) Kneer, L. M.; Roller, E.-M.; Besteiro, L. V.; Schreiber, R.;
Govorov, A. O.; Liedl, T. Circular Dichroism of Chiral Molecules in
DNA-Assembled Plasmonic Hotspots. ACS Nano 2018, 12, 9110−
9115.
(69) Kneipp, K.; Wang, Y.; Kneipp, H.; Perelman, L. T.; Itzkan, I.;
Dasari, R. R.; Feld, M. S. Single Molecule Detection Using Surface-
Enhanced Raman Scattering (SERS). Phys. Rev. Lett. 1997, 78, 1667−
1670.
(70) Nie, S.; Emory, S. R. Probing Single Molecules and Single
Nanoparticles by Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering. Science 1997,
275, 1102−1106.
(71) Xu, H.; Aizpurua, J.; Käll, M.; Apell, P. Electromagnetic
Contributions to Single-Molecule Sensitivity in Surface-Enhanced
Raman Scattering. Phys. Rev. E: Stat. Phys., Plasmas, Fluids, Relat.
Interdiscip. Top. 2000, 62, 4318−4324.
(72) Yamamoto, Y. S.; Ozaki, Y.; Itoh, T. Recent Progress and
Frontiers in the Electromagnetic Mechanism of Surface-Enhanced
Raman Scattering. J. Photochem. Photobiol., C 2014, 21, 81−104.
(73) Itoh, T.; Yamamoto, Y. S. Reproduction of Surface-Enhanced
Resonant Raman Scattering and Fluorescence Spectra of a Strong
Coupling System Composed of a Single Silver Nanoparticle Dimer
and a Few Dye Molecules. J. Chem. Phys. 2018, 149, 244701.
(74) Zhang, R.; Zhang, Y.; Dong, Z. C.; Jiang, S.; Zhang, C.; Chen,
L. G.; Zhang, L.; Liao, Y.; Aizpurua, J.; Luo, Y.; Yang, J. L.; Hou, J. G.
Chemical Mapping of a Single Molecule by Plasmon-Enhanced
Raman Scattering. Nature 2013, 498, 82−86.
(75) Itoh, T.; Yamamoto, Y. S.; Biju, V.; Tamaru, H.; Wakida, S.
Fluctuating Single sp2 Carbon Clusters at Single Hotspots of Silver
Nanoparticle Dimers Investigated by Surface-Enhanced Resonance
Raman Scattering. AIP Adv. 2015, 5, 127113.
(76) Ebbesen, T. W. Hybrid Light−Matter States in a Molecular and
Material Science Perspective. Acc. Chem. Res. 2016, 49, 2403−2413.
(77) Itoh, T.; Yamamoto, Y. S.; Ozaki, Y. Plasmon-Enhanced
Spectroscopy of Absorption and Spontaneous Emissions Explained
Using Cavity Quantum Optics. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2017, 46, 3904−3921.
(78) Itoh, T.; Yamamoto, Y. S.; Kitahama, Y.; Balachandran, J. One-
Dimensional Plasmonic Hotspots Located Between Silver Nanowire
Dimers Evaluated by Surface-Enhanced Resonance Raman Scattering.
Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 2017, 95, 115441.
(79) Ward, D. R.; Grady, N. K.; Levin, C. S.; Halas, N. J.; Wu, Y.;
Nordlander, P.; Natelson, D. Electromigrated Nanoscale Gaps for
Surface-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy. Nano Lett. 2007, 7, 1396−
1400.
(80) Nordlander, P.; Oubre, C.; Prodan, E.; Li, K.; Stockman, M.
Plasmon Hybridization in Nanoparticle Dimers. Nano Lett. 2004, 4,
899−903.
(81) Romero, I.; Aizpurua, J.; Bryant, G. W.; Garcia de Abajo, F. J.
Plasmons in Nearly Touching Metallic Nanoparticles: Singular
Response in the Limit of Touching Dimers. Opt. Express 2006, 14,
9988−9999.
(82) Mertens, J.; Eiden, A. L.; Sigle, D. O.; Huang, F.; Lombardo, A.;
Sun, Z.; Sundaram, R. S.; Colli, A.; Tserkezis, C.; Aizpurua, J.; Milana,
S.; Ferrari, A. C.; Baumberg, J. J. Controlling Subnanometer Gaps in
Plasmonic Dimers Using Graphene. Nano Lett. 2013, 13, 5033−5038.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
92


----- Page 66 (native text) -----
(83) Teperik, T. V.; Nordlander, P.; Aizpurua, J.; Borisov, A. G.
Robust Subnanometric Plasmon Ruler by Rescaling of the Nonlocal
Optical Response. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2013, 110, 263901.
(84) Toscano, G.; Straubel, J.; Kwiatkowski, A.; Rockstuhl, C.; Evers,
F.; Xu, H.; Asger Mortensen, N.; Wubs, M. Resonance Shifts and
Spill-Out Effects in Self-Consistent Hydrodynamic Nanoplasmonics.
Nat. Commun. 2015, 6, 7132.
(85) Fraire, J. C.; Pérez, L. A.; Coronado, E. A. Cluster Size Effects
in the Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering Response of Ag and Au
Nanoparticle Aggregates: Experimental and Theoretical Insight. J.
Phys. Chem. C 2013, 117, 23090−23107.
(86) Zhang, P.; Feist, J.; Rubio, A.; García-González, P.; García-
Vidal, F. J. Ab Initio Nanoplasmonics: The Impact of Atomic
Structure. Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 2014, 90,
161407.
(87) Barbry, M.; Koval, P.; Marchesin, F.; Esteban, R.; Borisov, A.
G.; Aizpurua, J.; Sánchez-Portal, D. Atomistic Near-Field Nano-
plasmonics: Reaching Atomic-Scale Resolution in Nanooptics. Nano
Lett. 2015, 15, 3410−3419.
(88) Savage, K.; Hawkeye, M.; Esteban, R.; Borisov, A.; Aizpurua, J.;
Baumberg, J. Revealing the Quantum Regime in Tunnelling
Plasmonics. Nature 2012, 491, 574−577.
(89) Zhu, W.; Crozier, K. Quantum Mechanical Limit to Plasmonic
Enhancement as Observed by Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering.
Nat. Commun. 2014, 5, 5228.
(90) Pérez-González, O.; Zabala, N.; Borisov, A. G.; Halas, N. J.;
Nordlander, P.; Aizpurua, J. Optical Spectroscopy of Conductive
Junctions in Plasmonic Cavities. Nano Lett. 2010, 10, 3090−3095.
(91) Benz, F.; Tserkezis, C.; Herrmann, L. O.; de Nijs, B.; Sanders,
A.; Sigle, D. O.; Pukenas, L.; Evans, S. D.; Aizpurua, J.; Baumberg, J. J.
Nanooptics of Molecular-Shunted Plasmonic Nanojunctions. Nano
Lett. 2015, 15, 669−674.
(92) Urbieta, M.; Barbry, M.; Zhang, Y.; Koval, P.; Sánchez-Portal,
D.; Zabala, N.; Aizpurua, J. Atomic-Scale Lightning Rod Effect in
Plasmonic Picocavities: A Classical View to a Quantum Effect. ACS
Nano 2018, 12, 585−595.
(93) Trautmann, S.; Aizpurua, J.; Götz, I.; Undisz, A.; Dellith, J.;
Schneidewind, H.; Rettenmayr, M.; Deckert, V. A classical
Description of Subnanometer Resolution by Atomic Features in
Metallic Structures. Nanoscale 2017, 9, 391−401.
(94) Chen, C.; Hayazawa, N.; Kawata, S. A 1.7 nm Resolution
Chemical Analysis of Carbon Nanotubes by Tip-Enhanced Raman
Imaging in The Ambient. Nat. Commun. 2014, 5, 3312.
(95) Richard-Lacroix, M.; Zhang, Y.; Dong, Z.; Deckert, V.
Mastering High Resolution Tip-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy:
Towards a Shift of Perception. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2017, 46, 3922−3944.
(96) Chiang, N.; Chen, X.; Goubert, G.; Chulhai, D. V.; Chen, X.;
Pozzi, E. A.; Jiang, N.; Hersam, M. C.; Seideman, T.; Jensen, L.; Van
Duyne, R. P. Conformational Contrast of Surface-Mediated Molecular
Switches Yields Angstrom-Scale Spatial Resolution in Ultrahigh
Vacuum Tip-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy. Nano Lett. 2016, 16,
7774−7778.
(97) Duan, S.; Tian, G.; Luo, Y. Theory for Modeling of High
Resolution Resonant and Nonresonant Raman Images. J. Chem.
Theory Comput. 2016, 12, 4986−4995.
(98) Liu, P.; Chulhai, D. V.; Jensen, L. Single-Molecule Imaging
Using Atomistic Near-Field Tip-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy. ACS
Nano 2017, 11, 5094−5102.
(99) Benz, F.; Schmidt, M. K.; Dreismann, A.; Chikkaraddy, R.;
Zhang, Y.; Demetriadou, A.; Carnegie, C.; Ohadi, H.; de Nijs, B.;
Esteban, R.; Aizpurua, J.; Baumberg, J. J. Single-Molecule
Optomechanics in Picocavities. Science 2016, 354, 726−729.
(100) Shin, H.-H.; Yeon, G. J.; Choi, H.-K.; Park, S.-M.; Lee, K. S.;
Kim, Z. H. Frequency-Domain Proof of the Existence of Atomic-Scale
SERS Hot-Spots. Nano Lett. 2018, 18, 262−271.
(101) Carnegie, C.; Griffiths, J.; de Nijs, B.; Readman, C.;
Chikkaraddy, R.; Deacon, W. M.; Zhang, Y.; Szabö, I.; Rosta, E.;
Aizpurua, J.; Baumberg, J. J. Room-Temperature Optical Picocavities
Below 1 nm3 Accessing Single-Atom Geometries. J. Phys. Chem. Lett.
2018, 9, 7146−7151.
(102) Roelli, P.; Galland, C.; Piro, N.; Kippenberg, T. J. Molecular
Cavity Optomechanics as A Theory of Plasmon-Enhanced Raman
Scattering. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2016, 11, 164−169.
(103) Schmidt, M. K.; Esteban, R.; González-Tudela, A.; Giedke, G.;
Aizpurua, J. Quantum Mechanical Description of Raman Scattering
from Molecules in Plasmonic Cavities. ACS Nano 2016, 10, 6291−
6298.
(104) Maher, R.; Galloway, C.; Le Ru, E.; Cohen, L.; Etchegoin, P.
Vibrational Pumping in Surface Enhanced Raman Scattering (SERS).
Chem. Soc. Rev. 2008, 37, 965−979.
(105) Schmidt, M. K.; Esteban, R.; Benz, F.; Baumberg, J. J.;
Aizpurua, J. Linking Classical and Molecular Optomechanics
Descriptions of SERS. Faraday Discuss. 2017, 205, 31−65.
(106) Lombardi, A.; Schmidt, M. K.; Weller, L.; Deacon, W. M.;
Benz, F.; de Nijs, B.; Aizpurua, J.; Baumberg, J. J. Pulsed Molecular
Optomechanics in Plasmonic Nanocavities: From Nonlinear Vibra-
tional Instabilities to Bond-Breaking. Phys. Rev. X 2018, 8,
No. 011016.
(107) Kamandar Dezfouli, M.; Hughes, S. Quantum Optics Model
of Surface-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy for Arbitrarily Shaped
Plasmonic Resonators. ACS Photonics 2017, 4, 1245−1256.
(108) Latorre, F.; Kupfer, S.; Bocklitz, T.; Kinzel, D.; Trautmann, S.;
Gräfe, S.; Deckert, V. Spatial Resolution of Tip-Enhanced Raman
Spectroscopy - DFT Assessment of the Chemical Effect. Nanoscale
2016, 8, 10229.
(109) Baumberg, J. J.; Aizpurua, J.; Mikkelsen, M. H.; Smith, D. R.
Extreme Nanophotonics from Ultrathin Metallic Gaps. Nat. Mater.
2019, 18, 668−678.
(110) Barnett, S. M.; Harris, N.; Baumberg, J. J. Molecules in the
Mirror: How SERS Backgrounds Arise from the Quantum Method of
Images. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2014, 16, 6544−6549.
(111) Hugall, J. T.; Baumberg, J. J. Demonstrating Photo-
luminescence from Au is Electronic Inelastic Light Scattering of a
Plasmonic Metal: The Origin of SERS Backgrounds. Nano Lett. 2015,
15, 2600−2604.
(112) Mertens, J.; Kleemann, M.-E.; Chikkaraddy, R.; Narang, P.;
Baumberg, J. J. How Light Is Emitted by Plasmonic Metals. Nano Lett.
2017, 17, 2568−2574.
(113) Sigle, D. O.; Mertens, J.; Herrmann, L. O.; Bowman, R. W.;
Ithurria, S.; Dubertret, B.; Shi, Y.; Yang, H. Y.; Tserkezis, C.;
Aizpurua, J.; Baumberg, J. J. Monitoring Morphological Changes in
2D Monolayer Semiconductors Using Atom-Thick Plasmonic Nano-
cavities. ACS Nano 2015, 9, 825−830.
(114) Mertens, J.; Demetriadou, A.; Bowman, R. W.; Benz, F.;
Kleemann, M.-E.; Tserkezis, C.; Shi, Y.; Yang, H. Y.; Hess, O.;
Aizpurua, J.; Baumberg, J. J. Tracking Optical Welding through
Groove Modes in Plasmonic Nanocavities. Nano Lett. 2016, 16,
5605−5611.
(115) Herrmann, L. O.; Valev, V. K.; Tserkezis, C.; Barnard, J. S.;
Kasera, S.; Scherman, O. A.; Aizpurua, J.; Baumberg, J. J. Threading
Plasmonic Nanoparticle Strings with Light. Nat. Commun. 2014, 5,
4568.
(116) Di Martino, G.; Tappertzhofen, S.; Hofmann, S.; Baumberg, J.
J. Nanoscale Plasmon-Enhanced Spectroscopy in Memristive
Switches. Small 2016, 12, 1334−1341.
(117) De Nijs, B.; Benz, F.; Barrow, S. J.; Sigle, D. O.; Chikkaraddy,
R.; Palma, A.; Carnegie, C.; Kamp, M.; Sundararaman, R.; Narang, P.;
Scherman, O. A.; Baumberg, J. J. Plasmonic Tunnel Junctions for
Single-Molecule Redox Chemistry. Nat. Commun. 2017, 8, 994.
(118) Di Martino, G.; Turek, V. A.; Lombardi, A.; Szabó, I.; de Nijs,
B.; Kuhn, A.; Rosta, E.; Baumberg, J. J. Tracking Nanoelectrochem-
istry Using Individual Plasmonic Nanocavities. Nano Lett. 2017, 17,
4840−4845.
(119) Chikkaraddy, R.; Turek, V. A.; Kongsuwan, N.; Benz, F.;
Carnegie, C.; van de Goor, T.; de Nijs, B.; Demetriadou, A.; Hess, O.;
Keyser, U. F.; Baumberg, J. J. Mapping Nanoscale Hotspots with
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
93


----- Page 67 (native text) -----
Single-Molecule Emitters Assembled into Plasmonic Nanocavities
Using DNA Origami. Nano Lett. 2018, 18, 405−411.
(120) Kasera, S.; Herrmann, L. O.; del Barrio, J.; Baumberg, J. J.;
Scherman, O. A. Quantitative Multiplexing with Nano-Self-
Assemblies in SERS. Sci. Rep. 2015, 4, 6785.
(121) de Nijs, B.; Kamp, M.; Szabó, I.; Barrow, S. J.; Benz, F.; Wu,
G.; Carnegie, C.; Chikkaraddy, R.; Wang, W.; Deacon, W. M.; Rosta,
E.; Baumberg, J. J.; Scherman, O. A. Smart Supramolecular Sensing
with Cucurbit[n]urils: Probing Hydrogen Bonding with SERS.
Faraday Discuss. 2017, 205, 505−515.
(122) Salmon, A. R.; Esteban, R.; Taylor, R. W.; Hugall, J. T.; Smith,
C. A.; Whyte, G.; Scherman, O. A.; Aizpurua, J.; Abell, C.; Baumberg,
J. J. Monitoring Early-Stage Nanoparticle Assembly in Microdroplets
by Optical Spectroscopy and SERS. Small 2016, 12, 1788−1796.
(123) Taylor, R. W.; Esteban, R.; Mahajan, S.; Aizpurua, J.;
Baumberg, J. J. Optimizing SERS from Gold Nanoparticle Clusters:
Addressing the Near Field by an Embedded Chain Plasmon Model. J.
Phys. Chem. C 2016, 120, 10512−10522.
(124) Carnegie, C.; Chikkaraddy, R.; Benz, F.; de Nijs, B.; Deacon,
W. M.; Horton, M.; Wang, W.; Readman, C.; Barrow, S. J.; Scherman,
O. A.; Baumberg, J. J. Mapping SERS in CB:Au Plasmonic
Nanoaggregates. ACS Photonics 2017, 4, 2681−2687.
(125) Huang, J.; de Nijs, B.; Cormier, S.; Sokolowski, K.; Grys, D.-
B.; Readman, C. A.; Barrow, S. J.; Scherman, O. A.; Baumberg, J. J.
Plasmon-Induced Optical Control over Dithionite-Mediated Chem-
ical Redox Reactions. Faraday Discuss. 2019, 214, 455−463.
(126) Xie, J.; Zhang, Z. Q.; Lee, J. Y.; Wang, D. I. C. The Synthesis
of SERS-Active Gold Nanoflower Tags for in Vivo Applications. ACS
Nano 2008, 2, 2473−2480.
(127) Khoury, C. G.; Vo-Dinh, T. Gold Nanostars For Surface-
Enhanced Raman Scattering: Synthesis, Characterization and
Optimization. J. Phys. Chem. C 2008, 112, 18849−18859.
(128) Rodríguez-Lorenzo, L.; Alvarez-Puebla, R. A.; Pastoriza-
Santos, I.; Mazzucco, S.; Stephan, O.; Kociak, M.; Liz-Marzán, L. M.;
García de Abajo, F. J. Zeptomol Detection Through Controlled
Ultrasensitive Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering. J. Am. Chem. Soc.
2009, 131, 4616−4618.
(129) Pazos-Pérez, N.; Barbosa, S.; Rodríguez-Lorenzo, L.;
Aldeanueva-Potel, P.; Pérez-Juste, J.; Pastoriza-Santos, I.; Alvarez-
Puebla, R. A.; Liz-Marzán, L. M. Growth of Sharp Tips on Gold
Nanowires Leads to Increased Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering
Activity. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2010, 1, 24−27.
(130) Nalbant Esenturk, E.; Hight Walker, A. R. Surface-Enhanced
Raman Scattering Spectroscopy via Gold Nanostars. J. Raman
Spectrosc. 2009, 40, 86−91.
(131) Hrelescu, C.; Sau, T. K.; Rogach, A. L.; Jäckel, F.; Feldmann, J.
Single Gold Nanostars Enhance Raman Scattering. Appl. Phys. Lett.
2009, 94, 153113.
(132) Doiron, B.; Mota, M.; Wells, M. P.; Bower, R.; Mihai, A.; Li,
Y.; Cohen, L. F.; Alford, N. M.; Petrov, P. K.; Oulton, R. F.; Maier, S.
A. Quantifying Figures of Merit for Localized Surface Plasmon
Resonance Applications: A Materials Survey. ACS Photonics 2019, 6,
240−259.
(133) Ding, S.-Y.; Yi, J.; Li, J.-F.; Ren, B.; Wu, D.-Y.; Panneerselvam,
R.; Tian, Z.-Q. Nanostructure-Based Plasmon-Enhanced Raman
Spectroscopy for Surface Analysis of Materials. Nat. Rev. Mater.
2016, 1, 16021.
(134) Haes, A. J.; Haynes, C. L.; McFarland, A. D.; Schatz, G. C.;
Van Duyne, R. P.; Zou, S. Plasmonic Materials for Surface-Enhanced
Sensing and Spectroscopy. MRS Bull. 2005, 30, 368−375.
(135) Xi, W.; Shrestha, B. K.; Haes, A. J. Promoting Intra- and
Intermolecular Interactions in Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering.
Anal. Chem. 2018, 90, 128−143.
(136) Vincent, B.; Edwards, J.; Emmett, S.; Jones, A. Depletion
Flocculation in Dispersions of Sterically-Stabilized Particles (″Soft
Spheres″). Colloids Surf. 1986, 18, 261−281.
(137) Wijenayaka, L. A.; Ivanov, M. R.; Cheatum, C. M.; Haes, A. J.
Improved Parametrization for Extended Derjaguin, Landau, Verwey,
and Overbeek Predictions of Functionalized Gold Nanosphere
Stability. J. Phys. Chem. C 2015, 119, 10064−10075.
(138) Suherman, A. L.; Zampardi, G.; Kuss, S.; Tanner, E. E. L.;
Amin, H. M. A.; Young, N. P.; Compton, R. G. Understanding Gold
Nanoparticle Dissolution in Cyanide-Containing Solution via Impact-
Chemistry. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2018, 20, 28300−28307.
(139) Reidy, B.; Dawson, K.; Lynch, I.; Haase, A.; Luch, A.
Mechanisms of Silver Nanoparticle Release, Transformation and
Toxicity: A Critical Review of Current Knowledge and Recom-
mendations for Future Studies and Applications. Materials 2013, 6,
2295−2350.
(140) Zook, J. M.; Long, S. E.; Cleveland, D.; Geronimo, C. L. A.;
MacCuspie, R. I. Measuring Silver Nanoparticle Dissolution in
Complex Biological and Environmental Matrices Using UV-Visible
Absorbance. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 2011, 401, 1993−2002.
(141) Velzeboer, I.; Quik, J. T. K.; van de Meent, D.; Koelmans, A.
A. Rapid Settling of Nanoparticles Due to Heteroaggregation with
Suspended Sediment. Environ. Toxicol. Chem. 2014, 33, 1766−1773.
(142) Liu, H. H.; Surawanvijit, S.; Rallo, R.; Orkoulas, G.; Cohen, Y.
Analysis of Nanoparticle Agglomeration in Aqueous Suspensions via
Constant-Number Monte Carlo Simulation. Environ. Sci. Technol.
2011, 45, 9284−9292.
(143) Shen, C.; Li, B.; Huang, Y.; Jin, Y. Kinetics of Coupled
Primary- and Secondary-Minimum Deposition of Colloids under
Unfavorable Chemical Conditions. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2007, 41,
6976−6982.
(144) Xi, W.; Phan, H. T.; Haes, A. J. How to Accurately Predict
Solution-Phase Gold Nanostar Stability. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 2018,
410, 6113−6123.
(145) Jung, L. S.; Campbell, C. T. Sticking Probabilities in
Adsorption of Alkanethiols from Liquid Ethanol Solution onto
Gold. J. Phys. Chem. B 2000, 104, 11168−11178.
(146) Somorjai, G. S. Introduction to Surface Chemistry and Catalysis;
Wiley: Chichester, UK, 1994.
(147) Phenrat, T.; Saleh, N.; Sirk, K.; Kim, H.-J.; Tilton, R.; Lowry,
G. Stabilization of Aqueous Nanoscale Zerovalent Iron Dispersions by
Anionic Polyelectrolytes: Adsorbed Anionic Polyelectrolyte Layer
Properties and their Effect on Aggregation and Sedimentation. J.
Nanopart. Res. 2008, 10, 795−814.
(148) Saunders, S. R.; Eden, M. R.; Roberts, C. B. Modeling the
Precipitation of Polydisperse Nanoparticles Using a Total Interaction
Energy Model. J. Phys. Chem. C 2011, 115, 4603−4610.
(149) Skoglund, S.; Lowe, T. A.; Hedberg, J.; Blomberg, E.;
Wallinder, I. O.; Wold, S.; Lundin, M. Effect of Laundry Surfactants
on Surface Charge and Colloidal Stability of Silver Nanoparticles.
Langmuir 2013, 29, 8882−8891.
(150) Hotze, E. M.; Phenrat, T.; Lowry, G. V. Nanoparticle
Aggregation: Challenges to Understanding Transport and Reactivity
in the Environment. J. Environ. Qual. 2010, 39, 1909−1924.
(151) Pinchuk, A. O. Size-Dependent Hamaker Constant for Silver
Nanoparticles. J. Phys. Chem. C 2012, 116, 20099−20102.
(152) Lu, G.; Forbes, T. Z.; Haes, A. J. SERS Detection of Uranyl
Using Functionalized Gold Nanostars Promoted by Nanoparticle
Shape and Size. Analyst 2016, 141, 5137−5143.
(153) Dick, L. A.; Haes, A. J.; Van Duyne, R. P. Distance and
Orientation Dependence of Heterogeneous Electron Transfer: A
Surface-Enhanced Resonance Raman Scattering Study of Cytochrome
C Bound to Carboxylic Acid Terminated Alkanethiols Adsorbed on
Silver Electrodes. J. Phys. Chem. B 2000, 104, 11752−11762.
(154) Kennedy, B. J.; Spaeth, S.; Dickey, M.; Carron, K. T.
Determination of the Distance Dependence and Experimental Effects
for Modified Sers Substrates Based on Self-Assembled Monolayers
Formed Using Alkanethiols. J. Phys. Chem. B 1999, 103, 3640−3646.
(155) Kumari, G.; Kandula, J.; Narayana, C. How Far Can We Probe
by SERS? J. Phys. Chem. C 2015, 119, 20057−20064.
(156) Pierre, M. C. S.; Haes, A. J. Purification Implications on SERS
Activity of Silica Coated Gold Nanospheres. Anal. Chem. 2012, 84,
7906−7911.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
94


----- Page 68 (native text) -----
(157) Volkert, A. A.; Subramaniam, V.; Ivanov, M. R.; Goodman, A.
M.; Haes, A. J. Salt-Mediated Self Assembly of Thioctic Acid on Gold
Nanoparticles. ACS Nano 2011, 5, 4570−4580.
(158) Sau, T. K.; Murphy, C. J. Room Temperature, High-Yield
Synthesis of Multiple Shapes of Gold Nanoparticles in Aqueous
Solution. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2004, 126, 8648−8649.
(159) Chen, S.; Wang, Z. L.; Ballato, J.; Foulger, S. H.; Carroll, D. L.
Monopod, Bipod, Tripod, and Tetrapod Gold Nanocrystals. J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 2003, 125, 16186−16187.
(160) Nehl, C. L.; Liao, H.; Hafner, J. H. Optical Properties of Star-
Shaped Gold Nanoparticles. Nano Lett. 2006, 6, 683−688.
(161) Senthil Kumar, P.; Pastoriza-Santos, I.; Rodríguez-González,
B.; García de Abajo, F. J.; Liz-Marzán, L. M. High-Yield Synthesis and
Optical Response of Gold Nanostars. Nanotechnology 2008, 19,
No. 015606.
(162) Barbosa, S.; Agrawal, A.; Rodríguez-Lorenzo, L.; Pastoriza-
Santos, I.; Alvarez-Puebla, R. A.; Kornowski, A.; Weller, H.; Liz-
Marzán, L. M. Tuning Size and Sensing Properties in Colloidal Gold
Nanostars. Langmuir 2010, 26, 14943−14950.
(163) Guerrero-Martínez, A.; Barbosa, S.; Pastoriza-Santos, I.; Liz-
Marzán, L. M. Nanostars Shine Bright for You. Colloidal Synthesis,
Properties and Applications Of Branched Metallic Nanoparticles.
Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci. 2011, 16, 118−127.
(164) Wang, Y.; Sentosun, K.; Li, A.; Coronado-Puchau, M.;
Sánchez-Iglesias, A.; Li, S.; Su, X.; Bals, S.; Liz-Marzán, L. M.
Engineering Structural Diversity in Gold Nanocrystals by Ligand-
Mediated Interface Control. Chem. Mater. 2015, 27, 8032−8040.
(165) Hao, F.; Nehl, C. L.; Hafner, J. H.; Nordlander, P. Plasmon
Resonances of a Gold Nanostar. Nano Lett. 2007, 7, 729−732.
(166) Evcimen, N. I.; Coskun, S.; Kozanoglu, D.; Ertas, G.; Unalan,
H. C.; Nalbant Esenturk, E. Growth of Branched Gold Nanoparticles
on Solid Surfaces and their Use as Surface-Enhanced Raman
Scattering Substrates. RSC Adv. 2015, 5, 101656.
(167) Yang, D. P.; Liu, X.; Teng, C. P.; Owh, C.; Win, K. Y.; Lin, M.;
Loh, X. J.; Wu, Y.-L.; Li, Z.; Ye, E. Unexpected Formation of Gold
Nanoflowers by a Green Synthesis Method as Agents for a Safe and
Effective Photothermal Therapy. Nanoscale 2017, 9, 15753−15759.
(168) Cai, J.; Raghavan, V.; Bai, Y. J.; Zhou, M. H.; Liu, X. L.; Liao,
C. H.; Ma, P.; Shi, L.; Dockery, P.; Keogh, I.; Fan, H. M.; Olivo, M.
Controllable Synthesis of Tetrapod Gold Nanocrystals with Precisely
Tunable Near-Infrared Plasmon Resonance Towards Highly Efficient
Surface Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy Bioimaging. J. Mater. Chem. B
2015, 3, 7377−7385.
(169) Kim, G. W.; Ha, J. W. Polarization-Sensitive Single Dipoles
Generated from Multiple Sharp Branches on the Surfaces of Single
Gold Nanourchins. J. Phys. Chem. C 2017, 121, 19975−19982.
(170) Cao, X.; Chen, S.; Li, W.; Li, J.; Bi, L.; Shi, H. One-Step
Synthesis of Highly-Branched Gold Nanostructures and its
Application in Fabrication of SERS-Active Substrates. AIP Adv.
2018, 8, 105133.
(171) Bhattacharya, M.; Mazov, V.; Satpati, B.; Jena, P.; Das
Chakraborty, S.; Kumar, S.; Pathak, B.; Kuznetsov, D. V.; Senapati, D.
Exploiting Le Chatelier’s Principle for a One-Pot Synthesis of
Nontoxic Hhoggnps with the Sharpest Nanoscopic Features Suitable
for Tunable Plasmon Spectroscopy and High Throughput SERS
Sensing. Chem. Commun. 2017, 53, 10402−10405.
(172) Li, A.; Li, S. Large-Volume Hot Spots in Gold Spiky
Nanoparticle Dimers for High-Performance Surface-Enhanced Spec-
troscopy. Nanoscale 2014, 6, 12921−12928.
(173) Lee, S.; Song, Y. D.; Yang, Y. I.; Kim, G.-P.; Choi, I.; Yi, J.
Solution Based, on Chip Direct Growth of Three-Dimensionally
Wrinkled Gold Nanoparticles for a SERS Active Substrate. Chem.
Commun. 2015, 51, 213−216.
(174) Jia, W.; Li, J.; Jiang, L. Synthesis of Highly Branched Gold
Nanodendrites with a Narrow Size Distribution and Tunable NIR and
SERS Using a Multiamin Surfactant. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2013,
5, 6886−6892.
(175) Xu, Q.; Guo, X.; Xu, L.; Ying, Y.; Wu, Y.; Wen, Y.; Yang, H.
Template-Free Synthesis Of SERS-Active Gold Nanopopcorn for
Rapid Detection of Chlorpyrifos Residues. Sens. Actuators, B 2017,
241, 1008−1013.
(176) Li, S.; Zhang, L.; Wang, T.; Li, L.; Wang, C.; Su, Z. The Facile
Synthesis of Hollow Au Nanoflowers for Synergistic Chemo-
Photothermal Cancer Therapy. Chem. Commun. 2015, 51, 14338−
14341.
(177) Vijayaraghavan, P.; Liu, C.-H.; Hwang, K. C. Synthesis of
Multibranched Gold Nanoechinus Using a Gemini Cationic
Surfactant and its Application for Surface Enhanced Raman
Scattering. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2016, 8, 23909−23919.
(178) Wu, H.-L.; Chen, C.-H.; Huang, M.-H. Seed-Mediated
Synthesis of Branched Gold Nanocrystals Derived from the Side
Growth of Pentagonal Bipyramids and the Formation of Gold
Nanostars. Chem. Mater. 2009, 21, 110−114.
(179) Niu, W.; Chua, Y. A. A.; Zhang, W.; Huang, H.; Lu, X. Highly
Symmetric Gold Nanostars: Crystallographic Control and Surface-
Enhanced Raman Scattering Property. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2015, 137,
10460−10463.
(180) Maiorano, G.; Rizzello, L.; Malvindi, M. A.; Shankar, S. S.;
Martiradonna, L.; Falqui, A.; Cingolani, R.; Pompa, P. P.
Monodispersed and Size-Controlled Multibranched Gold Nano-
particles with Nanoscale Tuning of Surface Morphology. Nanoscale
2011, 3, 2227−2232.
(181) Chandra, K.; Culver, K. S. V.; Werner, S. E.; Lee, R. C.;
Odom, T. W. Manipulating the Anisotropic Structure of Gold
Nanostars using Good’s Buffers. Chem. Mater. 2016, 28, 6763−6769.
(182) Yuan, H.; Khoury, C. J.; Hwang, H.; Wilson, C. M.; Grant, G.
A.; Vo-Dinh, T. Gold Nanostars: Surfactant-Free Synthesis, 3D
Modelling, and Two-Photon Photoluminescence Imaging. Nano-
technology 2012, 23, No. 075102.
(183) Indrasekara, A. S. D.S.; Meyers, S.; Shubeita, S.; Feldman, L.
C.; Gustafsson, T.; Fabris, L. Gold Nanostar Substrates for SERS
Sensing in the Femtomolar Regime. Nanoscale 2014, 6, 8891−8899.
(184) Zapata-Urzúa, C.; Pérez-Ortiz, M.; Acosta, G. A.; Mendoza, J.;
Yedra, L.; Estradé, S.; Álvarez-Lueje, A.; Núñez-Vergara, L. J.;
Albericio, F.; Lavilla, R.; Kogan, M. J. Hantzsch Dihydropyridines:
Privileged Structures for the Formation of Well-Defined Gold
Nanostars. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 2015, 453, 260−269.
(185) Moukarzel, W.; Fitremann, J.; Marty, J.-D. Seed-Less Amino-
Sugar Mediated Synthesis of Gold Nanostars. Nanoscale 2011, 3,
3285−3290.
(186) Sau, T. K.; Rogach, A. L.; Döblinger, M.; Feldmann, J. One-
Step High-Yield Aqueous Synthesis of Size-Tunable Multispiked Gold
Nanoparticles. Small 2011, 7, 2188−2194.
(187) Pallavicini, P.; Donà, A.; Casu, A.; Chirico, G.; Collini, M.;
Dacarro, G.; Falqui, A.; Milanese, C.; Sironi, L.; Taglietti, A. Triton X-
100 for Three-Plasmon Gold Nanostars with Two Photothermally
Active NIR (Near IR) and SWIR (Short-Wavelength IR) Channels.
Chem. Commun. 2013, 49, 6265−6267.
(188) Atta, S.; Beetz, M.; Fabris, L. Understanding the Role of
AgNO3 Concentration and Seed Morphology to Achieve Tunable
Shape Control in Gold Nanostars. Nanoscale 2019, 11, 2946−2958.
(189) Wheeler, D. A.; Green, T. D.; Wang, H.; Fernández-López, C.;
Liz-Marzán, L.; Zou, S.; Knappenberger, K. L.; Zhang, J. Z. Optical
Properties and Coherent Vibrational Oscillations of Gold Nanostars.
Chem. Phys. Lett. 2012, 543, 127−132.
(190) Sanchez-Gaytan, B. L.; Swanglap, P.; Lamkin, T. J.; Hickey, R.
J.; Fakhraai, Z.; Link, S.; Park, S.-J. Spiky Gold Nanoshells: Synthesis
and Enhanced Scattering Properties. J. Phys. Chem. C 2012, 116,
10318−10324.
(191) Hrelescu, C.; Sau, T. K.; Rogach, A. L.; Jäckel, F.; Laurent, G.;
Douillard, L.; Charra, F. Selective Excitation of Individual Plasmonic
Hotspots at the Tipsof Single Gold Nanostars. Nano Lett. 2011, 11,
402−407.
(192) Liu, X. L.; Wang, J.-H.; Liang, S.; Yang, D.-J.; Nan, F.; Ding,
S.-J.; Zhou, L.; Hao, Z.-H.; Wang, Q.-Q. Tuning Plasmon Resonance
of Gold Nanostars for Enhancements of Nonlinear Optical Response
and Raman Scattering. J. Phys. Chem. C 2014, 118, 9659−9664.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
95


----- Page 69 (native text) -----
(193) Shao, L.; Susha, A. S.; Cheung, L. S.; Sau, T. K.; Rogach, A. L.;
Wang, J. Plasmonic Properties of Single Multispiked Gold Nanostars:
Correlating Modeling with Experiments. Langmuir 2012, 28, 8979−
8984.
(194) Giannini, V.; Rodríguez-Oliveros, R.; Sánchez-Gil, J. A.
Surface Plasmon Resonances of Metallic Nanostars/Nanoflowers for
Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering. Plasmonics 2010, 5, 99−104.
(195) Silvestri, A.; Lay, L.; Psaro, R.; Polito, L.; Evangelisti, C.
Fluidic Manufacture of Star-Shaped Gold Nanoparticles. Chem. - Eur.
J. 2017, 23, 9732−9735.
(196) Ahmad, N.; Wang, G.; Nelayah, J.; Ricolleau, C.; Alloyeau, D.
Exploring the Formation of Symmetric Gold Nanostars by Liquid-Cell
Transmission Electron Microscopy. Nano Lett. 2017, 17, 4194−4201.
(197) Chandra, K.; Kumar, V.; Werner, S. E.; Odom, T. W.
Separation of Stabilized MOPS Gold Nanostars by Density Gradient
Centrifugation. ACS Omega 2017, 2, 4878−4884.
(198) Tran, V.; Thiel, C.; Svejda, J. T.; Jalali, M.; Walkenfort, B.;
Erni, D.; Schlücker, S. Probing the SERS Brightness of Individual Au
Nanoparticles, Hollow Au/Ag Nanoshells, Au Nanostars and Au
Core/Au Satellite Particles: Single-Particle Experiments and Com-
puter Simulations. Nanoscale 2018, 10, 21721−21731.
(199) De Silva Indrasekara, A. S.; Johnson, S. F.; Odion, R. A.; Vo-
Dinh, T. Manipulation of the Geometry and Modulation of the
Optical Response of Surfactant-Free Gold Nanostars: A Systematic
Bottom- Up Synthesis. ACS Omega 2018, 3, 2202−2210.
(200) Pu, Y.; Zhao, Y.; Zheng, P.; Li, M. Elucidating the Growth
Mechanism of Plasmonic Gold Nanostars with Tunable Optical and
Photothermal Properties. Inorg. Chem. 2018, 57, 8599−8607.
(201) Vanrompay, H.; Bladt, E.; Albrecht, W.; Béché, A.;
Zakhozheva, M.; Sánchez-Iglesias, A.; Liz-Marzán, L. M.; Bals, S.
3D Characterization of Heat-Induced Morphological Changes of Au
Nanostars by Fast in Situ Electron Tomography. Nanoscale 2018, 10,
22792−22801.
(202) Tsoulos, T. V.; Fabris, L. Interface and Bulk Standing Waves
Drive the Coupling of Plasmonic Nanostar Antennas. J. Phys. Chem. C
2018, 122, 28949−28957.
(203) de Puig, H.; Tam, J. O.; Yen, C.-W.; Gehrke, L.; Hamad-
Schifferli, K. Extinction Coefficient of Gold Nanostars. J. Phys. Chem.
C 2015, 119, 17408−17415.
(204) Tsoulos, T. V.; Han, L.; Weir, J.; Xin, H. L.; Fabris, L. A
Closer Look at the Physical and Optical Properties of Gold
Nanostars: An Experimental and Computational Study. Nanoscale
2017, 9, 3766−3773.
(205) Prodan, E.; Radloff, C.; Halas, N. J.; Nordlander, P. A
Hybridization Model for the Plasmon Response of Complex
Nanostructures. Science 2003, 302, 419−422.
(206) Hentschel, M.; Saliba, M.; Vogelgesang, R.; Giessen, H.;
Alivisatos, A. P.; Liu, N. Transition from Isolated to Collective Modes
in Plasmonic Oligomers. Nano Lett. 2010, 10, 2721−2726.
(207) Luk'yanchuk, B.; Zheludev, N. I.; Maier, S. A.; Halas, N. J.;
Nordlander, P.; Giessen, H.; Chong, C. T. The Fano Resonance in
Plasmonic Nanostructures and Metamaterials. Nat. Mater. 2010, 9,
707−715.
(208) Jain, P. K.; El-Sayed, M. A. Plasmonic Coupling in Noble
Metal Nanostructures. Chem. Phys. Lett. 2010, 487, 153−164.
(209) Lombardi, A.; Grzelczak, M. P.; Crut, A.; Maioli, P.; Pastoriza-
Santos, I.; Liz-Marzán, L. M.; Del Fatti, N.; Vallée, F. Optical
Response of Individual Au−Ag@SiO2 Heterodimers. ACS Nano
2013, 7, 2522−2531.
(210) Yanai, A.; Grajower, M.; Lerman, G. M.; Hentschel, M.;
Giessen, H.; Levy, U. Near- and Far-Field Properties of Plasmonic
Oligomers under Radially and Azimuthally Polarized Light Excitation.
ACS Nano 2014, 8, 4969−4974.
(211) Zohar, N.; Chuntonov, L.; Haran, G. The Simplest Plasmonic
Molecules: Metal Nanoparticle Dimers. J. Photochem. Photobiol., C
2014, 21, 26−39.
(212) Yorulmaz, M.; Hoggard, A.; Zhao, H.; Wen, F.; Chang, W.-S.;
Halas, N. J.; Nordlander, P.; Link, S. Absorption Spectroscopy of an
Individual Fano Cluster. Nano Lett. 2016, 16, 6497−6503.
(213) Kusch, P.; Mastel, S.; Mueller, N. S.; Morquillas-Azpiazu, N.;
Heeg, S.; Gorbachev, R.; Schedin, F.; Hübner, U.; Pascual, J. I.; Reich,
S.; Hillenbrand, R. Dual-Scattering Near-Field Microscope for
Correlative Nanoimaging of SERS and Electromagnetic Hotspots.
Nano Lett. 2017, 17, 2667−2673.
(214) Heeg, S.; Fernandez-Garcia, R.; Oikonomou, A.; Schedin, F.;
Narula, R.; Maier, S. A.; Vijayaraghavan, A.; Reich, S. Polarized
Plasmonic Enhancement by Au Nanostructures Probed through
Raman Scattering of Suspended Graphene. Nano Lett. 2013, 13, 301−
308.
(215) Wasserroth, S.; Bisswanger, T.; Mueller, N. S.; Kusch, P.;
Heeg, S.; Clark, N.; Schedin, F.; Gorbachev, R.; Reich, S. Graphene as
a Local Probe to Investigate Near-Field Properties of Plasmonic
Nanostructures. Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 2018, 97,
155417.
(216) Narula, R.; Panknin, R.; Reich, S. Absolute Raman Matrix
Elements of Graphene and Graphite. Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter
Mater. Phys. 2010, 82, No. 045418.
(217) Chen, C.-F.; Park, C.-H.; Boudouris, P. W.; Horng, J.; Geng,
B.; Girit, C.; Zettl, A.; Crommie, M. F.; Segalman, R. A.; Louie, S. G.;
Wang, F. Controlling Inelastic Light Scattering Quantum Pathways in
Graphene. Nature 2011, 471, 617−620.
(218) Mueller, N. S.; Reich, S. Microscopic Theory of Optical
Absorption in Graphene Enhanced by Lattices of Plasmonic
Nanoparticles. Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 2018, 97,
235417.
(219) Mueller, N. S.; Heeg, S.; Pena Alvarez, M.; Kusch, P.;
Wasserroth, P.; Clark, N.; Schedin, F.; Parthenios, J.; Papagelis, K.;
Galiotis, C.; et al. Evaluating Arbitrary Strain Configurations and
Doping in Graphene with Raman Spectroscopy. 2D Mater. 2018, 5,
No. 015016.
(220) Zhu, W.; Crozier, K. B. Quantum Mechanical Limit to
Plasmonic Enhancement as Observed by Surface-Enhanced Raman
Scattering. Nat. Commun. 2014, 5, 5228.
(221) Lim, D.-K.; Jeon, K.-S.; Hwang, J.-H.; Kim, H.; Kwon, S.; Suh,
Y. D.; Nam, J.-M. Highly Uniform and Reproducible Surface-
Enhanced Raman Scattering from DNA Tailorable Nanoparticles with
1-nm Interior Gap. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2011, 6, 452−460.
(222) Talaga, D.; Comesaña-Hermo, M.; Ravaine, S.; Vallee, R. A.
L.; Bonhommeau, S. Colocalized Dark-Feld Scattering, Atomic Force
and Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering Microscopic Imaging of
Single Gold Nanoparticles. J. Opt. 2015, 17, 114006.
(223) Mueller, N. S.; Heeg, S.; Kusch, P.; Gaufrès, E.; Tang, N. Y.-
W.; Hübner, U.; Martel, R.; Vijayaraghavan, A.; Reich, S. Plasmonic
Enhancement of SERS Measured on Molecules in Carbon Nanotubes.
Faraday Discuss. 2017, 205, 85−103.
(224) Mueller, N. S.; Heeg, S.; Reich, S. Surface-Enhanced Raman
Scattering as a Higher-Order Raman Process. Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol.,
Opt. Phys. 2016, 94, No. 023813.
(225) Frisk Kockum, A.; Miranowicz, A.; de Liberato, S.; Savasta, S.;
Nori, F. Ultrastrong Coupling Between Light and Matter. Nat. Rev.
Phys. 2019, 1, 19.
(226) Gaufres, E.; Tang, N. Y.-W.; Favron, A.; Allard, C.; Lapointe,
F.; Jourdain, V.; Tahir, S.; Brosseau, C.-N.; Leonelli, R.; Martel, R.
Aggregation Control of α-Sexithiophene via Isothermal Encapsulation
Inside Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes. ACS Nano 2016, 10,
10220−10226.
(227) Ye, Z.; Li, C.; Xu, Y.; Bell, S. E. J. Exploiting the Chemical
Differences Between Ag and Au Colloids Allows Dramatically
Improved SERS Detection of “Non-Adsorbing” Molecules. Analyst
2019, 144, 448−453.
(228) Dick, S.; Bell, S. E. J.; Alexander, K. J.; O’Neil, I. A.; Cosstick,
R. SERS and SERRS Detection of the DNA Lesion 8-Nitroguanine: A
Self-Labeling Modification. Chem. - Eur. J. 2017, 23, 10663−10669.
(229) Canrinus, T. R.; Lee, W. W. Y.; Feringa, B. L.; Bell, S. E. J.;
Browne, W. R. Supramolecular Low-Molecular Weight Hydrogelator
Stabilization of SERS-Active Aggregated Nanoparticles for Solution
and Gas Sensing. Langmuir 2017, 33, 8805−8812.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
96


----- Page 70 (native text) -----
(230) Lee, W. W. Y.; Silverson, V. A. D.; Jones, L. E.; Ho, Y. C.;
Fletcher, N. C.; McNaul, M.; Peters, K. L.; Speers, S. J.; Bell, S. E. J.
Surface-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy of Novel Psychoactive
Substances Using Polymer-Stabilized Ag Nanoparticle Aggregates.
Chem. Commun. 2016, 52, 493−496.
(231) Konrad, M. P.; Doherty, A. P.; Bell, S. E. J. Stable and
Uniform SERS Signals from Self-Assembled Two-Dimensional
Interfacial Arrays of Optically Coupled Ag Nanoparticles. Anal.
Chem. 2013, 85, 6783−6789.
(232) Duan, H.; Wang, D.; Kurth, D. G.; Möhwald, H. Directing
Self-Assembly of Nanoparticles at Water/Oil Interfaces. Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed. 2004, 43, 5639−5642.
(233) Andryszewski, T.; Iwan, M.; Hołdyński, M.; Fiałkowski, M.
Synthesis of a Free-Standing Monolayer of Covalently Bonded Gold
Nanoparticles. Chem. Mater. 2016, 28, 5304−5313.
(234) Xu, Y.; Konrad, M. P.; Lee, W. W. Y.; Ye, Z.; Bell, S. E. J. A
Method for Promoting Assembly of Metallic and Nonmetallic
Nanoparticles into Interfacial Monolayer Films. Nano Lett. 2016,
16, 5255−5260.
(235) Kelly, J.; Patrick, R.; Patrick, S.; Bell, S. E. J. Surface-Enhanced
Raman Spectroscopy for the Detection of a Metabolic Product in the
Headspace Above Live Bacterial Cultures. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.
2018, 57, 15686−15690.
(236) Xu, Y.; Konrad, M. P.; Trotter, J. L.; McCoy, C. P.; Bell, S. E.
J. Rapid One-Pot Preparation of Large Freestanding Nanoparticle-
Polymer Films. Small 2017, 13, 1602163.
(237) Li, C.; Ye, Z.; McCabe, H.; Kelly, J.; Xu, Y.; Bell, S. E. J.; et al.
Dataset Demonstrating the Working-Principles of Surface-Exposed
Nanoparticle Sheet Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy. Data in Brief
2019, 23, 103746.
(238) Xu, Y.; Ye, Z.; Li, C.; McCabe, H.; Kelly, J.; Bell, S. E. J.
Pressing Solids Directly into Sheets of Plasmonic Nanojunctions
Enables Solvent-Free Surface-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy. Appl.
Mater. Today 2018, 13, 352−358.
(239) Serrano-Montes, A. B.; Jimenez de Aberasturi, D.; Langer, J.;
Giner-Casares, J. J.; Scarabelli, L.; Herrero, A.; Liz-Marzán, L. M. A
General Method for Solvent Exchange of Plasmonic Nanoparticles
and Self-Assembly into SERS-Active Monolayers. Langmuir 2015, 31,
9205−9213.
(240) Velleman, L.; Scarabelli, L.; Sikdar, D.; Kornyshev, A. A.; Liz-
Marzán, L. M.; Edel, J. B. Monitoring Plasmon Coupling and SERS
Enhancement Through in Situ Nanoparticle Spacing Modulation.
Faraday Discuss. 2017, 205, 67−83.
(241) Schulz, F.; Tober, S.; Lange, H. Size-Dependent Phase
Transfer Functionalization of Gold Nanoparticles To Promote Well-
Ordered Self-Assembly. Langmuir 2017, 33, 14437−14444.
(242) Mueller, N. S.; Vieira, B. G. d. M.; Schulz, F.; Kusch, P.;
Oddone, V.; Barros, E. B.; Lange, H.; Reich, S. Dark Interlayer
Plasmons in Colloidal Gold Nanoparticle Bi- and Few-Layers. ACS
Photonics 2018, 5, 3962−3969.
(243) Mueller, N. S.; Vieira, B. G. M.; Höing, D. F.; Schulz, D. F.;
Barros, E. B.; Lange, H.; Reich, S. Direct Optical Excitation of Dark
Plasmons for Hot Electron Generation. Faraday Discuss. 2019, 214,
159.
(244) Solís, D. M.; Taboada, J. M.; Obelleiro, F.; Liz-Marzán, L. M.;
García de Abajo, F. J. Toward Ultimate Nanoplasmonics Modeling.
ACS Nano 2014, 8, 7559−7570.
(245) Udayabhaskararao, T.; Altantzis, T.; Houben, L.; Coronado-
Puchau, M.; Langer, J.; Popovitz-Biro, R.; Liz-Marzán, L. M.; Vuković,
L.; Král, P.; Bals, S.; Klajn, R. Tunable Porous Nanoallotropes
Prepared by Post-Assembly Etching of Binary Nanoparticle Super-
lattices. Science 2017, 358, 514−518.
(246) Tay, L.-L.; Hulse, J.; Poirier, S.; Fraser, J. Unpublished results.
(247) Milliken, S.; Fraser, J.; Poirier, S.; Hulse, J.; Tay, L.-L. Self-
Assembled Vertically Aligned Au Nanorod Arrays for Surface
Enhanced Raman Scattering (SERS) Detection of Cannabinol.
Spectrochim. Acta, Part A 2018, 196, 222−228.
(248) Alvarez-Puebla, R. A.; Agarwal, A.; Khanal, B. P.; Aldeanueva-
Potel, P.; Carbó-Argibay, E.; Pazos-Pérez, N.; Zubarev, E. R.; Kotov,
N. A.; Liz-Marzán, L. M. Real-Time Detection of Scrambled Prions
on 3D Supercrystals of Gold Nanorods. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
2011, 108, 8157−8161.
(249) Hamon, C.; Novikov, S.; Scarabelli, L.; Solís, D. M.; Altantzis,
T.; Bals, S.; Taboada, J. M.; Obelleiro, F.; Liz-Marzán, L. M.
Collective Plasmonic Properties in Few-Layer Gold Nanorod
Supercrystals. ACS Photonics 2015, 2, 1482−1488.
(250) Thai, T.; Zheng, Y.; Ng, S. H.; Mudie, S.; Altissimo, M.; Bach,
U. Self-Assembly of Vertically Aligned Gold Nanorod Arrays on
Patterned Substrates. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2012, 51, 8732−8735.
(251) Hamon, C.; Novikov, S.; Scarabelli, L.; Basabe-Desmonts, L.;
Liz-Marzán, L. M. Hierarchical Self-Assembly of Gold Nanoparticles
into Patterned Plasmonic Nanostructures. ACS Nano 2014, 8,
10694−10703.
(252) Hanske, C.; González-Rubio, G.; Hamon, C.; Formentín, P.;
Modin, E.; Chuvilin, A.; Guerrero-Martínez, A.; Marsal, L. F.; Liz-
Marzán, L. M. Large-Scale Plasmonic Pyramidal Supercrystals via
Templated Self-Assembly of Monodisperse Gold Nanospheres. J.
Phys. Chem. C 2017, 121, 10899−10906.
(253) Matricardi, C.; Hanske, C.; García-Pomar, J. L.; Langer, J.;
Mihi, A.; Liz-Marzán, L. M. Gold Nanoparticle Plasmonic Super-
lattices as Surface Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy Substrates. ACS
Nano 2018, 12, 8531−8539.
(254) Hanske, C.; Hill, E. H.; Vila-Liarte, D.; González-Rubio, G.;
Matricardi, C.; Mihi, A.; Liz-Marzán, L. M. Solvent Assisted Self-
Assembly of Gold Nanorods into Hierarchically Organized Plasmonic
Mesostructures. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2019, 11, 11763−11771.
(255) Lee, C. H.; Tian, L.; Singamaneni, S. Paper-Based SERS Swab
for Rapid Trace Detection on Real-World Surfaces. ACS Appl. Mater.
Interfaces 2010, 2, 3429−3435.
(256) Lee, C. H.; Hankus, M. E.; Tian, L.; Pellegrino, P. M.;
Singamaneni, S. Highly Sensitive Surface Enhanced Raman Scattering
Substrates Based on Filter Paper Loaded with Plasmonic Nanostruc-
tures. Anal. Chem. 2011, 83, 8953−8958.
(257) Yu, W. W.; White, I. M. Inkjet-Printed Paper-Based SERS
Dipsticks and Swabs for Trace Chemical Detection. Analyst 2013,
138, 1020−1025.
(258) Yu, W. W.; White, I. M. Inkjet Printed Surface Enhanced
Raman Spectroscopy Array on Cellulose Paper. Anal. Chem. 2010, 82,
9626−9630.
(259) Qu, L.-L.; Li, D.-W.; Xue, J. Q.; Zhai, W.-L.; Fossey, J. S.;
Long, Y.-T. Batch Fabrication of Disposable Screen Printed SERS
Arrays. Lab Chip 2012, 12, 876−881.
(260) Polavarapu, L.; La Porta, A.; Novikov, S. M.; Coronado-
Puchau, M.; Liz-Marzán, L. M. Pen-on-paper Approach Toward the
Design of Universal Surface Enhanced Raman Scattering Substrates.
Small 2014, 10, 3065−3071.
(261) Idone, A.; Gulmini, M.; Henry, A.-I.; Casadio, F.; Chang, L.;
Appolonia, L.; Van Duyne, R. P.; Shah, N. C. Silver Colloidal Pastes
for Dye Analysis of Reference and Historical Textile Fibers Using
Direct, Extractionless, Non-Hydrolysis Surface-Enhanced Raman
Spectroscopy. Analyst 2013, 138, 5895−5903.
(262) Lu, G.; Li, H.; Zhang, H. Nanoparticle-Coated PDMS
Elastomers for Enhancement of Raman Scattering. Chem. Commun.
2011, 47, 8560−8562.
(263) Guo, Y.; Yu, J.; Li, C.; Li, Z.; Pan, J.; Liu, A.; Man, B.; Wu, T.;
Xiu, X.; Zhang, C. SERS Substrate Based on the Flexible Hybrid of
Polydimethylsiloxane and Silver Colloid Decorated with Silver
Nanoparticles. Opt. Express 2018, 26, 21784−21796.
(264) Shiohara, A.; Langer, J.; Polavarapu, L.; Liz-Marzán, L. M.
Solution Processed Polydimethylsiloxane/ Gold Nanostar Flexible
Substrates for Plasmonic Sensing. Nanoscale 2014, 6, 9817−9823.
(265) Park, S.; Lee, J.; Ko, H. Transparent and Flexible Surface-
Enhanced Raman Scattering (SERS) Sensors Based on Gold Nanostar
Arrays Embedded in Silicon Rubber Film. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces
2017, 9, 44088−44095.
(266) Fortuni, B.; Fujita, Y.; Ricci, M.; Inose, T.; Aubert, R.; Lu, G.;
Hutchison, J. A.; Hofkens, J.; Latterini, L.; Uji-I, H. A Novel Method
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
97


----- Page 71 (native text) -----
for in Situ Synthesis of SERS-Active Gold Nanostars on Poly-
dimethylsiloxane Film. Chem. Commun. 2017, 53, 5121−5124.
(267) Good, D. M.; Thongboonkerd, V.; Novak, J.; Bascands, J. L.;
Schanstra, J. P.; Coon, J. J.; Dominiczak, A.; Mischak, H. Body Fluid
Proteomics for Biomarker Discovery: Lessons from the Past Hold the
Key to Success in the Future. J. Proteome Res. 2007, 6, 4549−4555.
(268) Kong, K.; Kendall, C.; Stone, N.; Notingher, I. Raman
Spectroscopy for Medical Diagnostics From in-Vitro Bio Fl Uid
Assays to in-Vivo Cancer Detection. Adv. Drug Delivery Rev. 2015, 89,
121−134.
(269) Pfeiffer, C.; Rehbock, C.; Hühn, D.; Carrillo-Carrion, C.; de
Aberasturi, D. J.; Merk, V.; Barcikowski, S.; Parak, W. J. Interaction of
Colloidal Nanoparticles with their Local Environment: The (Ionic)
Nanoenvironment around Nanoparticles is Different from Bulk and
Determines the Physico-Chemical Properties of the Nanoparticles. J.
R. Soc., Interface 2014, 11, 20130931.
(270) Jaworska, A.; Fornasaro, S.; Sergo, V.; Bonifacio, A. Potential
of Surface Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy (SERS) in Therapeutic
Drug Monitoring (TDM). A Critical Review. Biosensors 2016, 6, 47.
(271) Montjoy, D. G.; Bahng, J. H.; Eskafi, A.; Hou, H.; Kotov, N.
A. Omnidispersible Hedgehog Particles with Multilayer Coatings for
Multiplexed Biosensing. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2018, 140, 7835−7845.
(272) Bahng, J. H.; Yeom, B.; Wang, Y.; Tung, S. O.; Hoff, J. D.;
Kotov, N. Anomalous Dispersions of ‘Hedgehog’ Particles. Nature
2015, 517, 596−599.
(273) Kogasaka, R.; Sakuma, Y.; Chiba, S.; Akihara, M.; Horino, K.;
Nakao, T. Small Round Virus-like Particles Associated with Acute
Gastroenteritis in Japanese Children. J. Med. Virol. 1980, 5, 151−160.
(274) Mir-Simon, B.; Morla-Folch, J.; Gisbert-Quilis, P.; Pazos-
Perez, N.; Xie, H.; Bastús, N. G.; Puntes, V.; Alvarez-Puebla, R. A.;
Guerrini, L. SERS Efficiencies of Micrometric Polystyrene Beads
Coated with Gold and Silver Nanoparticles: The Effect of
Nanoparticle Size. J. Opt. 2015, 17, 114012.
(275) Abalde-Cela, S.; Ho, S.; Rodríguez-González, B.; Correa-
Duarte, M. A.; Álvarez-Puebla, R. A.; Liz-Marzán, L. M.; Kotov, N. A.
Loading of Exponentially Grown LBL Films with Silver Nanoparticles
and their Application to Generalized SERS Detection. Angew. Chem.,
Int. Ed. 2009, 48, 5326−5329.
(276) Hao, E.; Schatz, G. C. Electromagnetic Fields around Silver
Nanoparticles and Dimers. J. Chem. Phys. 2004, 120, 357−366.
(277) Fredriksson, H.; Alaverdyan, Y.; Dmitriev, A.; Langhammer,
C.; Sutherland, D. S.; Zäch, M.; Kasemo, B. Hole-Mask Colloidal
Lithography. Adv. Mater. 2007, 19, 4297−4302.
(278) Aizpurua, J.; Hanarp, P.; Sutherland, D. S.; Käll, M.; Bryant, G.
W.; García de Abajo, F. J. Optical Properties of Gold Nanorings. Phys.
Rev. Lett. 2003, 90, No. e057401.
(279) Fang, Y. R.; Verre, R.; Shao, L.; Nordlander, P.; Käll, M. Hot
Electron Generation and Cathodoluminescence Nanoscopy of Chiral
Split Ring Resonators. Nano Lett. 2016, 16, 5183−5190.
(280) Acimovic, S. S.; Sipova, H.; Emilsson, G.; Dahlin, A. B.;
Antosiewicz, T. J.; Käll, M. Superior LSPR Substrates Based on
Electromagnetic Decoupling for On-a-Chip High-Throughput Label-
Free Biosensing. Light: Sci. Appl. 2017, 6, No. e17042.
(281) Hakonen, A.; Svedendahl, M.; Ogier, R.; Yang, Z.-J.;
Lodewijks, K.; Verre, R.; Shegai, T.; Andersson, P. O.; Käll, M.
Dimer-on-Mirror SERS Substrates with Attogram Sensitivity Fab-
ricated by Colloidal Lithography. Nanoscale 2015, 7, 9405−9410.
(282) Odebo Länk, N.; Verre, R.; Johansson, P.; Käll, M. Large-Scale
Silicon Nanophotonic Metasurfaces with Polarization Independent
Near-Perfect Absorption. Nano Lett. 2017, 17, 3054−3060.
(283) Verre, R.; Shao, L.; Odebo Länk, N.; Karpinski, P.; Yankovich,
A. B.; Antosiewicz, T. J.; Olsson, E.; Käll, M. Metasurfaces and
Colloidal Suspensions Composed of 3D Chiral Si Nanoresonators.
Adv. Mater. 2017, 29, 1701352.
(284) Verre, R.; Odebo Länk, N.; Andrén, D.; Sipova, H.; Käll, M.
Large-Scale Fabrication of Shaped High-Index Dielectric Nano-
particles on a Substrate and in Solution. Adv. Opt. Mater. 2018, 6,
No. e1701253.
(285) Baranov, D. G.; Verre, R.; Karpinski, P.; Käll, M. Anapole-
Enhanced Intrinsic Raman Scattering from Silicon Nanodisks. ACS
Photonics 2018, 5, 2730−2736.
(286) Enlow, P. D.; Vo Dinh, T. Detection of Nitro-Polynuclear
Aromatic Compounds by Surface Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy.
Anal. Chem. 1986, 58, 1119−1123.
(287) Schmidt, M. S.; Hübner, J.; Boisen, A. Large Area Fabrication
of Leaning Silicon Nanopillars for Surface Enhanced Raman
Spectroscopy. Adv. Mater. 2012, 24, OP11−OP18.
(288) Hu, M.; Ou, F. S.; Wu, W.; Naumov, I.; Li, X.; Bratkovsky, A.
M.; Williams, R. S.; Li, Z. Gold Nanofingers for Molecule Trapping
and Detection. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2010, 132, 12820−12822.
(289) Chen, J.; Mårtensson, T.; Dick, K. A.; Deppert, K.; Xu, H. Q.;
Samuelson, L.; Xu, H. Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering of
Rhodamine 6G on Nanowire Arrays Decorated with Gold Nano-
particles. Nanotechnology 2008, 19, 275712.
(290) Karadan, P.; Aggarwal, S.; Anappara, A. A.; Narayana, C.;
Barshilia, H. C. Tailored Periodic Si Nanopillar Based Architectures as
Highly Sensitive Universal SERS Biosensing Platform. Sens. Actuators,
B 2018, 254, 264−271.
(291) Li, T.; Wu, K.; Rindzevicius, T.; Wang, Z.; Schulte, L.;
Schmidt, M. S.; Boisen, A.; Ndoni, S. Wafer-Scale Nanopillars Derived
from Block Copolymer Lithography for Surface-Enhanced Raman
Spectroscopy. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2016, 8, 15668−15675.
(292) Jeon, T. Y.; Park, S.-G.; Kim, D.-H.; Kim, S.-H. Standing-
Wave-Assisted Creation of Nanopillar Arrays with Vertically
Integrated Nanogaps for SERS-Active Substrates. Adv. Funct. Mater.
2015, 25, 4681−4688.
(293) Ou, F. S.; Hu, M.; Naumov, I.; Kim, A.; Wu, W.; Bratkovsky,
A. M.; Li, X.; Williams, R. S.; Li, Z. Hot-Spot Engineering in
Polygonal Nanofinger Assemblies for Surface Enhanced Raman
Spectroscopy. Nano Lett. 2011, 11, 2538−2542.
(294) Kim, A.; Barcelo, S. J.; Williams, R. S.; Li, Z. Melamine
Sensing in Milk Products by Using Surface Enhanced Raman
Scattering. Anal. Chem. 2012, 84, 9303−9309.
(295) Viehrig, M.; Thilsted, A. H.; Matteucci, M.; Wu, K.; Catak, D.;
Schmidt, M. S.; Zór, K.; Boisen, A. Injection Molded Microfluidic
Device for SERS Sensing Using Embedded Au-Capped Polymer
Nanocones. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2018, 10, 37417−37425.
(296) Barcelo, S. J.; Wu, W.; Li, X.; Li, Z.; Williams, R. S.
Nanoimprint Lithography of Plasmonic Platforms for SERS
Applications. Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process. 2015, 121, 443−449.
(297) Zhao, W.; Liu, X.; Xu, Y.; Wang, S.; Sun, T.; Liu, S.; Wu, X.;
Xu, Z. Polymer Nanopillar Array with Au Nanoparticle Inlays as a
Flexible and Transparent SERS Substrate. RSC Adv. 2016, 6, 35527−
35531.
(298) Park, S.-G.; Mun, C.; Xiao, X.; Braun, A.; Kim, S.; Giannini,
V.; Maier, S. A.; Kim, D.-H. Surface Energy-Controlled SERS
Substrates for Molecular Concentration at Plasmonic Nanogaps. Adv.
Funct. Mater. 2017, 27, 1703376.
(299) Wu, K.; Rindzevicius, T.; Schmidt, M. S.; Thilsted, A. H.;
Boisen, A. Optimizing Silver-Capped Silicon Nanopillars to
Simultaneously Realize Macroscopic, Practical-Level SERS Signal
Reproducibility and High Enhancement at Low Costs. J. Raman
Spectrosc. 2017, 48, 1808−1818.
(300) Wu, K.; Rindzevicius, T.; Schmidt, M. S.; Mogensen, K. B.;
Xiao, S.; Boisen, A. Plasmon Resonances of Ag Capped Si Nanopillars
Fabricated Using Mask-Less Lithography. Opt. Express 2015, 23,
12965−12978.
(301) Wu, K.; Rindzevicius, T.; Schmidt, M. S.; Mogensen, K. B.;
Hakonen, A.; Boisen, A. Wafer-Scale Leaning Silver Nanopillars for
Molecular Detection at Ultra-Low Concentrations. J. Phys. Chem. C
2015, 119, 2053−2062.
(302) Stadelmann, K.; Elizabeth, A.; Martín Sabanés, N.; Domke, K.
F. The SERS Signature of PbS Quantum Dot Oxidation. Vib.
Spectrosc. 2017, 91, 157−162.
(303) Gong, T.; Hong, Z. Y.; Chen, C. H.; Tsai, C. Y.; Liao, L. D.;
Kong, K. V. Optical Interference-Free Surface-Enhanced Raman
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
98


----- Page 72 (native text) -----
Scattering CO-Nanotags for Logical Multiplex Detection of Vascular
Disease-Related Biomarkers. ACS Nano 2017, 11, 3365−3375.
(304) Ashley, J.; Wu, K.; Hansen, M. F.; Schmidt, M. S.; Boisen, A.;
Sun, Y. Quantitative Detection of Trace Level Cloxacillin in Food
Samples Using Magnetic Molecularly Imprinted Polymer Extraction
and Surface-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy Nanopillars. Anal. Chem.
2017, 89, 11484−11490.
(305) Hakonen, A.; Wu, K.; Stenbæk Schmidt, M.; Andersson, P. O.;
Boisen, A.; Rindzevicius, T. Detecting Forensic Substances Using
Commercially Available SERS Substrates and Handheld Raman
Spectrometers. Talanta 2018, 189, 649−652.
(306) Hakonen, A.; Wang, F.; Andersson, P. O.; Wingfors, H.;
Rindzevicius, T.; Schmidt, M. S.; Soma, V. R.; Xu, S.; Li, Y.; Boisen,
A.; Wu, H. Hand-Held Femtogram Detection of Hazardous Picric
Acid with Hydrophobic Ag Nanopillar SERS Substrates and
Mechanism of Elasto-Capillarity. ACS Sens. 2017, 2, 198−202.
(307) Morelli, L.; Zór, K.; Jendresen, C. B.; Rindzevicius, T.;
Schmidt, M. S.; Nielsen, A. T.; Boisen, A. Surface Enhanced Raman
Scattering for Quantification of p -Coumaric Acid Produced by
Escherichia Coli. Anal. Chem. 2017, 89, 3981−3987.
(308) Yang, J.; Palla, M.; Bosco, F. G.; Rindzevicius, T.; Alstrøm, T.
S.; Schmidt, M. S.; Boisen, A.; Ju, J.; Lin, Q. Surface-Enhanced Raman
Spectroscopy Based Quantitative Bioassay on Aptamer-Functionalized
Nanopillars Using Large-Area Raman Mapping. ACS Nano 2013, 7,
5350−5359.
(309) Thilsted, A. H.; Pan, J. Y.; Wu, K.; Zór, K.; Rindzevicius, T.;
Schmidt, M. S.; Boisen, A. Lithography-Free Fabrication of Silica
Nanocylinders with Suspended Gold Nanorings for LSPR-Based
Sensing. Small 2016, 12, 6745−6752.
(310) Sanger, K.; Durucan, O.; Wu, K.; Thilsted, A. H.; Heiskanen,
A.; Rindzevicius, T.; Schmidt, M. S.; Zór, K.; Boisen, A. Large-Scale,
Lithography-Free Production of Transparent Nanostructured Surface
for Dual-Functional Electrochemical and SERS Sensing. ACS Sens.
2017, 2, 1869−1875.
(311) Wu, K.; Li, T.; Schmidt, M. S.; Rindzevicius, T.; Boisen, A.;
Ndoni, S. Gold Nanoparticles Sliding on Recyclable Nanohoodoos
Engineered for Surface-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy. Adv. Funct.
Mater. 2018, 28, 1704818.
(312) Hayashi, S.; Koh, R.; Ichiyama, Y.; Yamamoto, K. Evidence for
Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering on Non-Metallic Surfaces:
Copper Phthalocyanine Molecules on GaP Small Particles. Phys.
Rev. Lett. 1988, 60, 1085.
(313) Lombardi, J. R.; Birke, R. L. Theory of Surface-Enhanced
Raman Scattering in Semiconductors. J. Phys. Chem. C 2014, 118,
11120−11130.
(314) Kuznetsov, A. I.; Miroshnichenko, A. E.; Brongersma, M. L.;
Kivshar, Y. S.; Luk’yanchuk, B. Optically Resonant Dielectric
Nanostructures. Science 2016, 354, aag2472.
(315) Alessandri, I.; Lombardi, J. R. Enhanced Raman Scattering
with Dielectrics. Chem. Rev. 2016, 116, 14921−14981.
(316) Caldarola, M.; Albella, P.; Cortés, E.; Rahmani, M.; Roschuk,
T.; Grinblat, G.; Oulton, R. F.; Bragas, A. V.; Maier, S. A. Non-
Plasmonic Nanoantennas for Surface Enhanced Spectroscopies with
Ultra-Low Heat Conversion. Nat. Commun. 2015, 6, 7915.
(317) Cambiasso, J.; König, M.; Cortés, E.; Schlücker, S.; Maier, S.
A. Surface-Enhanced Spectroscopies of a Molecular Monolayer in an
All-Dielectric Nanoantenna. ACS Photonics 2018, 5, 1546−1557.
(318) Cong, S.; Yuan, Y.; Chen, Z.; Hou, J.; Yang, M.; Su, Y.; Zhang,
Y.; Li, L.; Li, Q.; Geng, F.; Zhao, Z. Noble Metal-Comparable SERS
Enhancement from Semiconducting Metal Oxides by Making Oxygen
Vacancies. Nat. Commun. 2015, 6, 7800.
(319) Zheng, X.; Ren, F.; Zhang, S.; Zhang, X.; Wu, H.; Zhang, X.;
Xing, Z.; Qin, W.; Liu, Y.; Jiang, C. A General Method for Large-Scale
Fabrication of Semiconducting Oxides with High SERS Sensitivity.
ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2017, 9, 14534−14544.
(320) Ben-Jaber, S.; Peveler, W. J.; Quesada-Cabrera, R.; Cortés, E.;
Sotelo-Vazquez, C.; Abdul-Karim, N.; Maier, S. A.; Parkin, I. P.
Photo-Induced Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy for Universal Ultra-
Trace Detection of Explosives, Pollutants and Biomolecules. Nat.
Commun. 2016, 7, 12189.
(321) Ruedas-Rama, M. J.; Walters, J. D.; Orte, A.; Hall, E. A. H.
Fluorescent Nanoparticles for Intracellular Sensing: A Review. Anal.
Chim. Acta 2012, 751, 1−23.
(322) Schlücker, S. Surface-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy:
Concepts and Chemical Applications. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2014,
53, 4756−4795.
(323) Lane, L. A.; Qian, X.; Nie, S. SERS Nanoparticles in Medicine:
From Label-Free Detection to Spectroscopic Tagging. Chem. Rev.
2015, 115, 10489−10529.
(324) Schlücker, S. SERS Microscopy: Nanoparticle Probes and
Biomedical Applications. ChemPhysChem 2009, 10, 1344−1354.
(325) Wang, Y.; Yan, B.; Chen, L. SERS Tags: Novel Optical
Nanoprobes for Bioanalysis. Chem. Rev. 2013, 113, 1391−1428.
(326) Rodriguez-Lorenzo, L.; Fabris, L.; Alvarez-Puebla, R. A.
Multiplex Optical Sensing with Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering:
A Critical Review. Anal. Chim. Acta 2012, 745, 10−23.
(327) Schlücker, S. Surface Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy: Analytical,
Biophysical and Life Science Applications; Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH &
Co. KGaA: Weinheim, Germany, 2011.
(328) Fabris, L. Gold-Based SERS Tags for Biomedical Imaging. J.
Opt. 2015, 17, 114002.
(329) Chou, L. Y. T.; Ming, K.; Chan, W. C. W. Strategies for the
Intracellular Delivery of Nanoparticles. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2011, 40,
233−245.
(330) Steinigeweg, D.; Schütz, M.; Salehi, M.; Schlücker, S. Fast and
Cost-Effective Purification of Gold Nanoparticles in the 20−250 nm
Size Range by Continuous Density Gradient Centrifugation. Small
2011, 7, 2443−2448.
(331) Salehi, M.; Schneider, L.; Ströbel, P.; Marx, A.; Packeisen, J.;
Schlücker, S. Two-Color SERS Microscopy for Protein Co-Local-
ization in Prostate Tissue with Primary Antibody−Protein A/G−Gold
Nanocluster Conjugates. Nanoscale 2014, 6, 2361−2367.
(332) Küstner, B.; Gellner, M.; Schütz, M.; Schöppler, F.; Marx, A.;
Ströbel, P.; Adam, P.; Schmuck, C.; Schlücker, S. SERS Labels for Red
Laser Excitation: Silica-Encapsulated SAMs on Tunable Gold/Silver
Nanoshells. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2009, 48, 1950−1953.
(333) Wang, Y. L.; Schlücker, S. Rational Design and Synthesis of
SERS Labels. Analyst 2013, 138, 2224−2238.
(334) McNay, G.; Eustace, D.; Smith, W. E.; Faulds, K.; Graham, D.
Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering (SERS) and Surface-Enhanced
Resonance Raman Scattering (SERRS): A Review of Applications.
Appl. Spectrosc. 2011, 65, 825−837.
(335) McLintock, A.; Cunha-Matos, C. A.; Zagnoni, M.; Millington,
O. R.; Wark, A. W. Universal Surface-Enhanced Raman Tags:
Individual Nanorods for Measurements from the Visible to the
Infrared (514−1064 nm). ACS Nano 2014, 8, 8600−8609.
(336) Ni, J.; Lipert, R. J.; Dawson, G. B.; Porter, M. D. Immunoassay
Readout Method Using Extrinsic Raman Labels Adsorbed on
Immunogold Colloids. Anal. Chem. 1999, 71, 4903−4908.
(337) Grubisha, D. S.; Lipert, R. J.; Park, H.-Y.; Driskell, J.; Porter,
M. D. Femtomolar Detection of Prostate-Specific Antigen: An
Immunoassay Based on Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering and
Immunogold Labels. Anal. Chem. 2003, 75, 5936−5943.
(338) Porter, M. D.; Lipert, R. J.; Siperko, L. M.; Wang, G.;
Narayanan, R. SERS as a Bioassay Platform: Fundamentals, Design,
and Applications. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2008, 37, 1001−1011.
(339) Jehn, C.; Küstner, B.; Adam, P.; Marx, A.; Ströbel, P.;
Schmuck, C.; Schlücker, S. Water Soluble SERS Labels Comprising a
SAM with Dual Spacers for Controlled Bioconjugation. Phys. Chem.
Chem. Phys. 2009, 11, 7499−7504.
(340) Schütz, M.; Küstner, B.; Bauer, M.; Schmuck, C.; Schlücker, S.
Synthesis of Glass-Coated SERS Nanoparticle Probes via SAMs with
Terminal SiO2 Precursors. Small 2010, 6, 733−737.
(341) Pallaoro, A.; Braun, G. B.; Moskovits, M. Biotags Based on
Surface-Enhanced Raman Can Be as Bright as Fluorescence Tags.
Nano Lett. 2015, 15, 6745−6750.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
99


----- Page 73 (native text) -----
(342) Woo, M.-A.; Lee, S.-M.; Kim, G.; Baek, J.; Noh, M. S.; Kim, J.
E.; Park, S. J.; Minai-Tehrani, A.; Park, S.-C.; Seo, Y. T.; Kim, Y.-K.;
Lee, Y.-S.; Jeong, D. H.; Cho, M.-H. Multiplex Immunoassay Using
Fluorescent-Surface Enhanced Raman Spectroscopic Dots for the
Detection of Bronchioalveolar Stem Cells in Murine Lung. Anal.
Chem. 2009, 81, 1008−1015.
(343) von Maltzahn, G.; Centrone, A.; Park, J.-H.; Ramanathan, R.;
Sailor, M. J.; Hatton, T. A.; Bhatia, S. N. SERS-Coded Gold Nanorods
as a Multifunctional Platform for Densely Multiplexed Near-Infrared
Imaging and Photothermal Heating. Adv. Mater. 2009, 21, 3175−
3180.
(344) Schütz, M.; Schlücker, S. Towards Quantitative Multi-Color
Nanodiagnostics: Spectral Multiplexing with Six Silica-Encapsulated
SERS Labels. J. Raman Spectrosc. 2016, 47, 1012−1016.
(345) Samanta, A.; Maiti, K. K.; Soh, K.-S.; Liao, X.; Vendrell, M.;
Dinish, U. S.; Yun, S.-W.; Bhuvaneswari, R.; Kim, H.; Rautela, S.;
Chung, J.; Olivo, M.; Chang, Y.-T. Ultrasensitive Near-Infrared
Raman Reporters for SERS-Based in Vivo Cancer Detection. Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed. 2011, 50, 6089−6092.
(346) Maiti, K. K.; Dinish, U. S.; Fu, C. Y.; Lee, J.-J.; Soh, K.-S.; Yun,
S.-W.; Bhuvaneswari, R.; Olivo, M.; Chang, Y.-T. Development of
Biocompatible SERS Nanotag with Increased Stability by Chem-
isorption of Reporter Molecule for in Vivo Cancer Detection. Biosens.
Bioelectron. 2010, 26, 398−403.
(347) Maiti, K. K.; Samanta, A.; Vendrell, M.; Soh, K.-S.; Olivo, M.;
Chang, Y.-T. Multiplex Cancer Cell Detection by SERS Nanotags
with Cyanine and Triphenylmethine Raman Reporters. Chem.
Commun. 2011, 47, 3514−3516.
(348) Brem, S.; Schlücker, S. Surface-Enhanced Raman Spectrosco-
py and Density Functional Theory Calculations of a Rationally
Designed Rhodamine with Thiol Groups at the Xanthene Ring. J.
Phys. Chem. C 2017, 121, 15310−15317.
(349) Schütz, M.; Müller, C. I.; Salehi, M.; Lambert, C.; Schlücker,
S. Design and Synthesis of Raman Reporter Molecules for Tissue
Imaging by Immuno-SERS Microscopy. J. Biophotonics 2011, 4, 453−
463.
(350) Su, X.; Zhang, J.; Sun, L.; Koo, T.-W.; Chan, S.; Sundararajan,
N.; Yamakawa, M.; Berlin, A. A. Composite Organic−Inorganic
Nanoparticles (COINs) with Chemically Encoded Optical Signatures.
Nano Lett. 2005, 5, 49−54.
(351) Qian, X.; Peng, X.-H.; Ansari, D. O.; Yin-Goen, Q.; Chen, G.
Z.; Shin, D. M.; Yang, L.; Young, A. N.; Wang, M. D.; Nie, S. In Vivo
Tumor Targeting and Spectroscopic Detection with Surface-
Enhanced Raman Nanoparticle Tags. Nat. Biotechnol. 2008, 26, 83−
90.
(352) Cormack, P. A. G.; Hernandez-Santana, A.; Prasath, R. A.;
McKenzie, F.; Graham, D.; Smith, W. E. Multidentate Macro-
molecules for Functionalisation, Passivation and Labelling of Metal
Nanoparticles. Chem. Commun. 2008, 2517−2519.
(353) McKenzie, F.; Ingram, A.; Stokes, R.; Graham, D. SERRS
Coded Nanoparticles for Biomolecular Labelling with Wavelength-
Tunable Discrimination. Analyst 2009, 134, 549−556.
(354) Wang, Y.; Salehi, M.; Schütz, M.; Rudi, K.; Schlücker, S.
Microspectroscopic SERS Detection of Interleukin-6 with Rationally
Designed Gold/Silver Nanoshells. Analyst 2013, 138, 1764−1771.
(355) Schütz, M.; Steinigeweg, D.; Salehi, M.; Kömpe, K.; Schlücker,
S. Hydrophilically Stabilized Gold Nanostars as SERS Labels for
Tissue Imaging of the Tumor Suppressor P63 By Immuno-SERS
Microscopy. Chem. Commun. 2011, 47, 4216−4218.
(356) Strozyk, M. S.; Jimenez de Aberasturi, D.; Liz-Marzan, L. M.
Composite Polymer Colloids for SERS-Based Applications. Chem.
Rec. 2018, 18, 807−818.
(357) Contreras-Caceres, R.; Sanchez-Iglesias, A.; Karg, M.;
Pastoriza-Santos, I.; Perez-Juste, J.; Pacifico, J.; Hellweg, T.;
Fernandez-Barbero, A.; Liz-Marzan, L. M. Encapsulation and Growth
of Gold Nanoparticles in Thermoresponsive Microgels. Adv. Mater.
2008, 20, 1666−1670.
(358) Perez-Juste, J.; Pastoriza-Santos, I.; Liz-Marzan, L. M.
Multifunctionality in Metal@Microgel Colloidal Nanocomposites. J.
Mater. Chem. A 2013, 1, 20−26.
(359) Bodelon, G.; Montes-Garcia, V.; Fernandez-Lopez, C.;
Pastoriza-Santos, I.; Perez-Juste, J.; Liz-Marzan, L. M. Au@pNIPAM
SERRS Tags for Multiplex Immunophenotyping Cellular Receptors
and Imaging Tumor Cells. Small 2015, 11, 4149−4157.
(360) Casado-Rodriguez, M. A.; Sanchez-Molina, M.; Lucena-
Serrano, A.; Lucena-Serrano, C.; Rodriguez-Gonzalez, B.; Algarra, M.;
Diaz, A.; Valpuesta, M.; Lopez-Romero, J. M.; Perez-Juste, J.;
Contreras-Caceres, R. Synthesis of Vinyl-Terminated Au Nanoprisms
and Nanooctahedra Mediated by 3-Butenoic Acid: Direct Au@
PNIPAM Fabrication with Improved SERS Capabilities. Nanoscale
2016, 8, 4557−4564.
(361) Feng, Y. H.; Wang, Y.; Wang, H.; Chen, T.; Tay, Y. Y.; Yao,
L.; Yan, Q. Y.; Li, S. Z.; Chen, H. Y. Engineering “Hot” Nanoparticles
for Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering by Embedding Reporter
Molecules in Metal Layers. Small 2012, 8, 246−251.
(362) Jimenez de Aberasturi, D.; Serrano-Montes, A. B.; Langer, J.;
Henriksen-Lacey, M.; Parak, W. J.; Liz-Marzan, L. M. Surface
Enhanced Raman Scattering Encoded Gold Nanostars for Multi-
plexed Cell Discrimination. Chem. Mater. 2016, 28, 6779−6790.
(363) Tam, N. C. M.; Scott, B. M. T.; Voicu, D.; Wilson, B. C.;
Zheng, G. Facile Synthesis of Raman Active Phospholipid Gold
Nanoparticles. Bioconjugate Chem. 2010, 21, 2178−2182.
(364) Ip, S.; MacLaughlin, C. M.; Gunari, N.; Walker, G. C.
Phospholipid Membrane Encapsulation of Nanoparticles for Surface-
Enhanced Raman Scattering. Langmuir 2011, 27, 7024−7033.
(365) Tam, N. C. M.; McVeigh, P. Z.; MacDonald, T. D.; Farhadi,
A.; Wilson, B. C.; Zheng, G. Porphyrin-Lipid Stabilized Gold
Nanoparticles for Surface Enhanced Raman Scattering Based Imaging.
Bioconjugate Chem. 2012, 23, 1726−1730.
(366) Alipour, E.; Halverson, D.; McWhirter, S.; Walker, G. C.
Phospholipid Bilayers: Stability and Encapsulation of Nanoparticles.
Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 2017, 68, 261−283.
(367) Cheng, X. J.; Zhao, G.; Lu, Y.; Yan, M.; Wang, H.; Chen, H. Y.
Controllable Oligomerization: Defying Step-Growth Kinetics in the
Polymerization of Gold Nanoparticles. Chem. Commun. 2018, 54,
7746−7749.
(368) Zheng, X. S.; Hu, P.; Cui, Y.; Zong, C.; Feng, J. M.; Wang, X.;
Ren, B. BSA-Coated Nanoparticles for Improved SERS-Based
Intracellular pH Sensing. Anal. Chem. 2014, 86, 12250−12257.
(369) Yuan, H. K.; Liu, Y.; Fales, A. M.; Li, Y. L.; Liu, J.; Vo-Dinh, T.
Quantitative Surface-Enhanced Resonant Raman Scattering Multi-
plexing of Biocompatible Gold Nanostars for in Vitro and ex Vivo
Detection. Anal. Chem. 2013, 85, 208−212.
(370) Dominguez-Medina, S.; McDonough, S.; Swanglap, P.;
Landes, C. F.; Link, S. In Situ Measurement of Bovine Serum
Albumin Interaction with Gold Nanospheres. Langmuir 2012, 28,
9131−9139.
(371) Tsai, D. H.; DelRio, F. W.; Keene, A. M.; Tyner, K. M.;
MacCuspie, R. I.; Cho, T. J.; Zachariah, M. R.; Hackley, V. A.
Adsorption and Conformation of Serum Albumin Protein on Gold
Nanoparticles Investigated Using Dimensional Measurements and in
Situ Spectroscopic Methods. Langmuir 2011, 27, 2464−2477.
(372) Blanco-Covian, L.; Montes-Garcia, V.; Girard, A.; Fernandez-
Abedul, M. T.; Perez-Juste, J.; Pastoriza-Santos, I.; Faulds, K.;
Graham, D.; Blanco-Lopez, M. C. Au@Ag SERRS Tags Coupled to a
Lateral Flow Immunoassay for the Sensitive Detection of Pneumo-
lysin. Nanoscale 2017, 9, 2051−2058.
(373) Mulvaney, S. P.; Musick, M. D.; Keating, C. D.; Natan, M. J.
Glass-Coated, Analyte-Tagged Nanoparticles: A New Tagging System
Based on Detection with Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering.
Langmuir 2003, 19, 4784−4790.
(374) Liz-Marzán, L. M.; Giersig, M.; Mulvaney, P. Synthesis of
Nanosized Gold-Silica Core−Shell Particles. Langmuir 1996, 12,
4329−4335.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
100


----- Page 74 (native text) -----
(375) Doering, W. E.; Nie, S. Spectroscopic Tags Using Dye-
Embedded Nanoparticles and Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering.
Anal. Chem. 2003, 75, 6171−6176.
(376) Schütz, M.; Salehi, M.; Schlücker, S. Direct Silica
Encapsulation of Self-Assembled-Monolayer-Based Surface-Enhanced
Raman Scattering Labels with Complete Surface Coverage of Raman
Reporters by Noncovalently Bound Silane Precursors. Chem. - Asian J.
2014, 9, 2219−2224.
(377) Wang, C.; Chen, Y.; Wang, T.; Ma, Z.; Su, Z. Monodispersed
Gold Nanorod-Embedded Silica Particles as Novel Raman Labels for
Biosensing. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2008, 18, 355−361.
(378) Rodríguez-Lorenzo, L.; Krpetic, Z.; Barbosa, S.; Alvarez-
Puebla, R. A.; Liz-Marzán, L. M.; Prior, I. A.; Brust, M. Intracellular
Mapping with SERS-Encoded Gold Nanostars. Integr. Biol. 2011, 3,
922−926.
(379) Lee, S.; Chon, H.; Yoon, S.-Y.; Lee, E. K.; Chang, S.-I.; Lim,
D. W.; Choo, J. Fabrication of SERS-Fluorescence Dual Modal
Nanoprobes and Application to Multiplex Cancer Cell Imaging.
Nanoscale 2012, 4, 124−129.
(380) Gellner, M.; Steinigeweg, D.; Ichilmann, S.; Salehi, M.; Schütz,
M.; Kömpe, K.; Haase, M.; Schlücker, S. 3D Self-Assembled
Plasmonic Superstructures of Gold Nanospheres: Synthesis and
Characterization at the Single-Particle Level. Small 2011, 7, 3445−
3451.
(381) Chung, T.-H.; Wu, S.-H.; Yao, M.; Lu, C.-W.; Lin, Y.-S.;
Hung, Y.; Mou, C.-Y.; Chen, Y.-C.; Huang, D.-M. The Effect of
Surface Charge on the Uptake and Biological Function of
Mesoporous Silica Nanoparticles in 3T3-L1 Cells and Human
Mesenchymal Stem Cells. Biomaterials 2007, 28, 2959−2966.
(382) Rodríguez-Fernández, D.; Langer, J.; Henriksen-Lacey, M.;
Liz-Marzán, L. M. Hybrid Au−SiO2 Core−Satellite Colloids as
Switchable SERS Tags. Chem. Mater. 2015, 27, 2540−2545.
(383) Shanthil, M.; Thomas, R.; Swathi, R. S.; George Thomas, K.
Ag@SiO2 Core−Shell Nanostructures: Distance-Dependent Plasmon
Coupling and SERS Investigation. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2012, 3, 1459−
1464.
(384) Ung, T.; Liz-Marzán, L. M.; Mulvaney, P. Optical Properties
of Thin Films of Au@SiO2 Particles. J. Phys. Chem. B 2001, 105,
3441−3452.
(385) Li, S.; Pedano, M. L.; Chang, S.-H.; Mirkin, C. A.; Schatz, G.
C. Gap Structure Effects on Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering
Intensities for Gold Gapped Rods. Nano Lett. 2010, 10, 1722−1727.
(386) Hermanson, G. T. Bioconjugate Techniques; Elsevier, 2013.
(387) Sapsford, K. E.; Algar, W. R.; Berti, L.; Gemmill, K. B.; Casey,
B. J.; Oh, E.; Stewart, M. H.; Medintz, I. L. Functionalizing
Nanoparticles with Biological Molecules: Developing Chemistries
that Facilitate Nanotechnology. Chem. Rev. 2013, 113, 1904−2074.
(388) Wang, C.; Yan, Q.; Liu, H. B.; Zhou, X. H.; Xiao, S. J.
Different EDC/NHS Activation Mechanisms between PAA and
PMAA Brushes and the Following Amidation Reactions. Langmuir
2011, 27, 12058−12068.
(389) Sun, L.; Sung, K. B.; Dentinger, C.; Lutz, B.; Nguyen, L.;
Zhang, J. W.; Qin, H. Y.; Yamakawa, M.; Cao, M. Q.; Lu, Y.; Chmura,
A. J.; Zhu, J.; Su, X.; Berlin, A. A.; Chan, S.; Knudsen, B. Composite
Organic-Inorganic Nanoparticles as Raman Labels for Tissue Analysis.
Nano Lett. 2007, 7, 351−356.
(390) Dugandžić, V.; Drikermann, D.; Ryabchykov, O.; Undisz, A.;
Vilotijević, I.; Lorkowski, S.; Bocklitz, T. W.; Matthäus, C.; Weber, K.;
Cialla-May, D.; Popp, J. Surface Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy-
Detection of the Uptake of Mannose-Modified Nanoparticles by
Macrophages in Vitro: A Model for Detection of Vulnerable
Atherosclerotic Plaques. J. Biophotonics 2018, 11, No. e201800013.
(391) Lee, J. H.; You, M. H.; Kim, G. H.; Nam, J. M. Plasmonic
Nanosnowmen with a Conductive Junction as Highly Tunable
Nanoantenna Structures and Sensitive, Quantitative and Multi-
plexable Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering Probes. Nano Lett.
2014, 14, 6217−6225.
(392) Zhang, Y.; Walkenfort, B.; Yoon, J. H.; Schlücker, S.; Xie, W.
Gold and Silver Nanoparticle Monomers are Non-SERS-Active: A
Negative Experimental Study with Silica-Encapsulated Raman-
Reporter-Coated Metal Colloids. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2015, 17,
21120−21126.
(393) Kleinman, S. L.; Frontiera, R. R.; Henry, A.-I.; Dieringer, J. A.;
Van Duyne, R. P. Creating, Characterizing, and Controlling
Chemistry with SERS Hot Spots. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2013,
15, 21−36.
(394) Steinigeweg, D.; Schütz, M.; Schlücker, S. Single Gold Trimers
and 3D Superstructures Exhibit a Polarization-Independent SERS
Response. Nanoscale 2013, 5, 110−113.
(395) Salehi, M.; Steinigeweg, D.; Ströbel, P.; Marx, A.; Packeisen,
J.; Schlücker, S. Rapid Immuno-SERS Microscopy for Tissue Imaging
with Single-Nanoparticle Sensitivity. J. Biophotonics 2012, 6, 785−792.
(396) Mulvihill, M. J.; Ling, X. Y.; Henzie, J.; Yang, P. Anisotropic
Etching of Silver Nanoparticles for Plasmonic Structures Capable of
Single-Particle SERS. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2010, 132, 268−274.
(397) Wissler, J.; Wehmeyer, M.; Bäcker, S.; Knauer, S.; Schlücker,
S. Simultaneous Rayleigh/Mie and Raman/Fluorescence Character-
ization of Molecularly Functionalized Colloids by Correlative Single-
Particle Real-Time Imaging in Suspension. Anal. Chem. 2018, 90,
723−728.
(398) Park, J. E.; Jung, Y.; Kim, M.; Nam, J. M. Quantitative
Nanoplasmonics. ACS Cent. Sci. 2018, 4, 1303−1314.
(399) Nam, J. M.; Oh, J. W.; Lee, H.; Suh, Y. D. Plasmonic
Nanogap-Enhanced Raman Scattering with Nanoparticles. Acc. Chem.
Res. 2016, 49, 2746−2755.
(400) Wang, Z.; Zong, S.; Wu, L.; Zhu, D.; Cui, Y. SERS-Activated
Platforms for Immunoassay: Probes, Encoding Methods, and
Applications. Chem. Rev. 2017, 117, 7910−7963.
(401) Shan, B.; Pu, Y.; Chen, Y.; Liao, M.; Li, M. Novel SERS
Labels: Rational Design, Functional Integration and Biomedical
Applications. Coord. Chem. Rev. 2018, 371, 11−37.
(402) Mao, L.; Li, Z.; Wu, B.; Xu, H. Effects of Quantum Tunneling
in Metal Nanogap on Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering. Appl. Phys.
Lett. 2009, 94, 243102.
(403) Chen, W.; Zhang, S.; Kang, M.; Liu, W.; Ou, Z.; Li, Y.; Zhang,
Y.; Guan, Z.; Xu, H. Probing the Limits of Plasmonic Enhancement
Using a Two-Dimensional Atomic Crystal Probe. Light: Sci. Appl.
2018, 7, 56.
(404) Dieringer, J. A.; Wustholz, K. L.; Masiello, D. J.; Camden, J.
P.; Kleinman, S. L.; Schatz, G. C.; Van Duyne, R. P. Surface-Enhanced
Raman Excitation Spectroscopy of a Single Rhodamine 6G Molecule.
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2009, 131, 849−854.
(405) Chu, Y.; Banaee, M. G.; Crozier, K. B. Double-Resonance
Plasmon Substrates for Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering with
Enhancement at Excitation and Stokes Frequencies. ACS Nano 2010,
4, 2804−2810.
(406) Shegai, T.; Li, Z.; Dadosh, T.; Zhang, Z.; Xu, H.; Haran, G.
Managing Light Polarization via Plasmon−Molecule Interactions
within an Asymmetric Metal Nanoparticle Trimer. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U. S. A. 2008, 105, 16448−16453.
(407) Wei, H.; Hao, F.; Huang, Y.; Wang, W.; Nordlander, P.; Xu,
H. Polarization Dependence of Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering
in Gold Nanoparticle−Nanowire Systems. Nano Lett. 2008, 8, 2497−
2502.
(408) Li, Z.; Shegai, T.; Haran, G.; Xu, H. Multiple-Particle
Nanoantennas for Enormous Enhancement and Polarization Control
of Light Emission. ACS Nano 2009, 3, 637−642.
(409) Mubeen, S.; Zhang, S.; Kim, N.; Lee, S.; Krämer, S.;
Moskovits, M.; et al. Plasmonic Properties of Gold Nanoparticles
Separated from a Gold Mirror by an Ultrathin Oxide. Nano Lett.
2012, 12, 2088−2094.
(410) Tsoutsi, D.; Guerrini, L.; Hermida-Ramon, J. M.; Giannini, V.;
Liz-Marzán, L. M.; Wei, A.; Alvarez-Puebla, R. A. Simultaneous SERS
detection of Copper and Cobalt at Ultratrace Levels. Nanoscale 2013,
5, 4776−4784.
(411) Chung, E.; Gao, R.; Ko, J.; Choi, N.; Lim, D. W.; Lee, E. K.;
Chang, S.-I.; Choo, J. Trace Analysis of Mercury(II) Ions Using
Aptamer-Modified Au/Ag Core−Shell Nanoparticles and SERS
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
101


----- Page 75 (native text) -----
Spectroscopy in a Microdroplet Channel. Lab Chip 2013, 13, 260−
266.
(412) Yin, J.; Wu, T.; Song, J.; Zhang, Q.; Liu, S.; Xu, R.; Duan, H.
SERS-Active Nanoparticles for Sensitive and Selective Detection of
Cadmium Ion (Cd2+). Chem. Mater. 2011, 23, 4756−4764.
(413) Dugandžić, V.; Kupfer, S.; Jahn, M.; Henkel, T.; Weber, K.;
Cialla-May, D.; Popp, J. A SERS-Based Molecular Sensor for Selective
Detection and Quantification of Copper(II) Ions. Sens. Actuators, B
2019, 279, 230−237.
(414) Alvarez-Puebla, R. A.; Liz-Marzán, L. M. SERS Detection of
Small Inorganic Molecules and Ions. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2012, 51,
11214−11223.
(415) Cao, Y.; Li, D.-W.; Zhao, L.-J.; Liu, X.-Y.; Cao, X.-M.; Long,
Y.-T. Highly Selective Detection of Carbon Monoxide in Living Cells
by Palladacycle Carbonylation-Based Surface Enhanced Raman
Spectroscopy Nanosensors. Anal. Chem. 2015, 87, 9696−9701.
(416) Tang, H.; Zhu, C.; Meng, G.; Wu, N. Surface-Enhanced
Raman Scattering Sensors for Food Safety and Environmental
Monitoring. J. Electrochem. Soc. 2018, 165, B3098−B3118.
(417) Cao, W. Y. C.; Jin, R.; Mirkin, C. A. Nanoparticles with
Raman Spectroscopic Fingerprints for DNA and RNA Detection.
Science 2002, 297, 1536−1540.
(418) Kim, W. H.; Lee, J. U.; Song, S.; Kim, S.; Choi, Y. J.; Sim, S. J.
A Label-Free, Ultra-Highly Sensitive and Multiplexed SERS Nano-
plasmonic Biosensor for miRNA Detection Using a Head-Flocked
Gold Nanopillar. Analyst 2019, 144, 1768−1776.
(419) Vo-Dinh, T.; Allain, L. R.; Stokes, D. L. Cancer Gene
Detection Using Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering (SERS). J.
Raman Spectrosc. 2002, 33, 511−516.
(420) Lee, S.; Kadam, U. S.; Craig, A. P.; Irudayaraj, J. In Vivo
Biodetection Using Surface-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy. In
Biosensors Based on Nanomaterials and Nanodevices; Li, J., Wu, N.,
Eds.; CRC Press, Taylor and Francis Group: Boca Raton, FL, 2014,
pp 165−172.
(421) Hao, H. P.; Wang, G. J.; Sun, J. G. Enantioselective
Pharmacokinetics of Ibuprofen and Involved Mechanisms. Drug
Metab. Rev. 2005, 37, 215−234.
(422) Brown, J. M.; Davies, S. G. Chemical Asymmetric Synthesis.
Nature 1989, 342, 631−636.
(423) Maier, N. M.; Franco, P.; Lindner, W. Separation of
Enantiomers: Needs, Challenges, Perspectives. J. Chromatogr. A
2001, 906, 3−33.
(424) Lee, S. J.; Lin, W. A Chiral Molecular Square with Metallo-
Corners for Enantioselective Sensing. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2002, 124,
4554−4555.
(425) Tkachenko, G.; Brasselet, E. Optofluidic Sorting of Material
Chirality by Chiral Light. Nat. Commun. 2014, 5, 3577.
(426) Cameron, R. P.; Barnett, S. M.; Yao, A. M. Discriminatory
Optical Force for Chiral Molecules. New J. Phys. 2014, 16,
No. 013020.
(427) Wang, Y.; Yu, Z.; Ji, W.; Tanaka, Y.; Sui, H.; Zhao, B.; Ozaki,
Y. Enantioselective Discrimination of Alcohols by Hydrogen Bonding:
A SERS Study. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2014, 53, 13866−13870.
(428) Wang, Y.; Yu, Z.; Han, X.; Su, H.; Ji, W.; Cong, Q.; Zhao, B.;
Ozaki, Y. Charge-Transfer-Induced Enantiomer Selective Discrim-
ination of Chiral Alcohols by SERS. J. Phys. Chem. C 2016, 120,
29374−29381.
(429) Tierney, H. L.; Murphy, C. J.; Sykes, E. C. H. Regular
Scanning Tunneling Microscope Tips Can Be Intrinsically Chiral.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 2011, 106, No. 010801.
(430) Ozaki, Y.; Sukmanee, T.; Wongravee, K.; Kitahama, Y.;
Ekgasit, S.; Pienpinijtham, P. Chiral Discrimination Using Chemically
Modiﬁed Tip-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy (TERS) Based Charge-
Transfer and H-Bonding. In The 26th International Conference on
Raman Spectroscopy, Jeju, Korea, Aug 26−31, 2018.
(431) Sukmanee, T.; Wongravee, K.; Kitahama, Y.; Ekgasit, S.;
Pienpinijtham, P.; Itoh, T.; Ozaki, Y. Manuscript submitted.
(432) Narushima, T.; Okamoto, H. Strong Nanoscale Optical
Activity Localized in Two-Dimensional Chiral Metal Nanostructures.
J. Phys. Chem. C 2013, 117, 23964−23969.
(433) Park, J.-E.; Lee, Y.; Nam, J.-M. Precisely Shaped, Uniformly
Formed Gold Nanocubes with Ultrahigh Reproducibility in Single-
Particle Scattering and Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering. Nano
Lett. 2018, 18, 6475−6482.
(434) González-Rubio, G.; Díaz-Núñez, P.; Rivera, A.; Prada, A.;
Tardajos, G.; González-Izquierdo, J.; Bañares, L.; Llombart, P.;
Macdowell, L. G.; Alcolea-Palafox, M.; Liz-Marzán, L. M.; Peña-
Rodríguez, O.; Guerrero-Martínez, A. Femtosecond Laser Reshaping
Yields Gold Nanorods with Ultranarrow Surface Plasmon Resonances.
Science 2017, 358, 640−644.
(435) Lim, D. K.; Jeon, K. S.; Kim, H. M.; Nam, J. M.; Suh, Y. D.
Nanogap-Engineerable Raman-Active Nanodumbbells for Single-
Molecule Detection. Nat. Mater. 2010, 9, 60−67.
(436) Lee, J.-H.; Nam, J.-M.; Jeon, K.-S.; Lim, D.-K.; Kim, H.;
Kwon, S.; Lee, H.; Suh, Y. D. Tuning and Maximizing the Single-
Molecule Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering from DNA-Tethered
Nanodumbbells. ACS Nano 2012, 6, 9574−9584.
(437) Oh, J. W.; Lim, D. K.; Kim, G. H.; Suh, Y. D.; Nam, J. M.
Thiolated DNA-Based Chemistry and Control in the Structure and
Optical Properties of Plasmonic Nanoparticles with Ultrasmall
Interior Nanogap. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2014, 136, 14052−14059.
(438) Song, J.; Duan, B.; Wang, C.; Zhou, J.; Pu, L.; Fang, Z.; Wang,
P.; Lim, T. T.; Duan, H. SERS-Encoded Nanogapped Plasmonic
Nanoparticles: Growth of Metallic Nanoshell by Templating Redox-
Active Polymer Brushes. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2014, 136, 6838−6841.
(439) Kim, M.; Ko, S. M.; Kim, J. M.; Son, J.; Lee, C.; Rhim, W. K.;
Nam, J. M. Dealloyed Intra-Nanogap Particles with Highly Robust,
Quantifiable Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering Signals for Biosens-
ing and Bioimaging Applications. ACS Cent. Sci. 2018, 4, 277−287.
(440) Lin, L.; Zapata, M.; Xiong, M.; Liu, Z.; Wang, S.; Xu, H.;
Borisov, A. G.; Gu, H.; Nordlander, P.; Aizpurua, J.; Ye, J. Nanooptics
of Plasmonic Nanomatryoshkas: Shrinking the Size of a Core-Shell
Junction to Subnanometer. Nano Lett. 2015, 15, 6419−6428.
(441) Marks, H.; Schechinger, M.; Garza, J.; Locke, A.; Coté, G.
Surface Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy (SERS) for In Vitro
Diagnostic Testing at the Point of Care. Nanophotonics 2017, 6,
681−701.
(442) Henry, A.-I.; Sharma, B.; Cardinal, M. F.; Kurouski, D.; Van
Duyne, R. P. Surface-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy Biosensing: In
Vivo Diagnostics and Multimodal Imaging. Anal. Chem. 2016, 88,
6638−6647.
(443) Xu, H.; Kall, M. Surface-Plasmon-Enhanced Optical Forces in
Silver Nanoaggregates. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2002, 89, 246802.
(444) Juan, M. L.; Righini, M.; Quidant, R. Plasmon Nano-Optical
Tweezers. Nat. Photonics 2011, 5, 349.
(445) Lim, D.-K.; Jeon, K.-S.; Kim, H. M.; Nam, J.-M.; Suh, Y. D.
Nanogap-Engineerable Raman-Active Nanodumbbells for Single-
Molecule Detection. Nat. Mater. 2010, 9, 60−67.
(446) Thacker, V. V.; Herrmann, L. O.; Sigle, D. O.; Zhang, T.;
Liedl, T.; Baumberg, J. J.; Keyser, U. F. DNA Origami Based
Assembly of Gold Nanoparticle Dimers for Surface-Enhanced Raman
Scattering. Nat. Commun. 2014, 5, 3448.
(447) Taylor, R. W.; Lee, T.-C.; Scherman, O. A.; Esteban, R.;
Aizpurua, J.; Huang, F. M.; Baumberg, J. J.; Mahajan, S. Precise
Subnanometer Plasmonic Junctions for SERS within Gold Nano-
particle Assemblies Using Cucurbit[n]uril “Glue. ACS Nano 2011, 5,
3878−3887.
(448) Kim, N. H.; Hwang, W.; Baek, K.; Rohman, M. R.; Kim, J.;
Kim, H. W.; Mun, J.; Lee, S. Y.; Yun, G.; Murray, J.; Ha, J. W.; Rho, J.;
Moskovits, M.; Kim, K. Smart SERS Hot Spots: Single Molecules Can
Be Positioned in a Plasmonic Nanojunction Using Host−Guest
Chemistry. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2018, 140, 4705−4711.
(449) Sigle, D. O.; Hugall, J. T.; Ithurria, S.; Dubertret, B.;
Baumberg, J. J. Probing Confined Phonon Modes in Individual CdSe
Nanoplatelets Using Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 2014, 113, No. 087402.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
102


----- Page 76 (native text) -----
(450) Takase, M.; Ajiki, H.; Mizumoto, Y.; Komeda, K.; Nara, M.;
Nabika, H.; Yasuda, S.; Ishihara, H.; Murakoshi, K. Selection-Rule
Breakdown in Plasmon-Induced Electronic Excitation of an Isolated
Single-Walled Carbon Nanotube. Nat. Photonics 2013, 7, 550−554.
(451) Fang, Y. R.; Wei, H.; Hao, F.; Nordlander, P.; Xu, H. X.
Remote-Excitation Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering Using Prop-
agating Ag Nanowire Plasmons. Nano Lett. 2009, 9, 2049−2053.
(452) Hutchison, J. A.; Centeno, S. P.; Odaka, H.; Fukumura, H.;
Hofkens, J.; Uji-i, H. Subdiffraction Limited, Remote Excitation of
Surface Enhanced Raman Scattering. Nano Lett. 2009, 9, 995−1001.
(453) Wei, H.; Pan, D.; Zhang, S.; Li, Z.; Li, Q.; Liu, N.; Wang, W.;
Xu, H. Plasmon Waveguiding in Nanowires. Chem. Rev. 2018, 118,
2882−2926.
(454) Lu, G.; De Keersmaecker, H.; Su, L.; Kenens, B.; Rocha, S.;
Fron, E.; Chen, C.; Van Dorpe, P.; Mizuno, H.; Hofkens, J.;
Hutchison, J. A.; Uji-i, H. Live-Cell SERS Endoscopy Using
Plasmonic Nanowire Waveguides. Adv. Mater. 2014, 26, 5124−5128.
(455) Ma, X.; Zhu, Y.; Yu, N.; Kim, S.; Liu, Q.; Apontti, L.; Xu, D.;
Yan, R.; Liu, M. Toward High-Contrast Atomic Force Microscopy-
Tip-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy Imaging: Nanoantenna-Mediated
Remote-Excitation on Sharp-Tip Silver Nanowire Probes. Nano Lett.
2019, 19, 100−107.
(456) Day, J. K.; Neumann, O.; Grady, N. K.; Halas, N. J.
Nanostructure-Mediated Launching and Detection of 2D Surface
Plasmons. ACS Nano 2010, 4, 7566−7572.
(457) Zong, C.; Xu, M.; Xu, L. J.; Wei, T.; Ma, X.; Zheng, X.-S.; Hu,
R.; Ren, B. Surface-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy for Bioanalysis:
Reliability and Challenges. Chem. Rev. 2018, 118, 4946−4980.
(458) Fang, Y.; Li, Y.; Xu, H.; Sun, M. Ascertaining p,p′-
Dimercaptoazobenzene Produced from p-Aminothiophenol by
Selective Catalytic Coupling Reaction on Silver Nanoparticles.
Langmuir 2010, 26, 7737−7746.
(459) Sun, M.; Hou, Y.; Li, Z.; Liu, L.; Xu, H. Remote Excitation
Polarization-Dependent Surface Photochemical Reaction by Plas-
monic Waveguide. Plasmonics 2011, 6, 681−687.
(460) Sun, M.; Zhang, Z.; Zheng, H.; Xu, H. In-Situ Plasmon-Driven
Chemical Reactions Revealed by High Vacuum Tip-Enhanced Raman
Spectroscopy. Sci. Rep. 2012, 2, 647.
(461) Gruenke, N. L.; Cardinal, M. F.; McAnally, M. O.; Frontiera,
R. R.; Schatz, G. C.; Van Duyne, R. P. Ultrafast and Nonlinear
Surface-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2016, 45,
2263−2290.
(462) Li, J. F.; Huang, Y. F.; Ding, Y.; Yang, Z. L.; Li, S. B.; Zhou, X.
S.; Fan, F. R.; Zhang, W.; Zhou, Z. Y.; Wu, D. Y.; Ren, B.; Wang, Z.
L.; Tian, Z. Q. Shell-Isolated Nanoparticle-Enhanced Raman
Spectroscopy. Nature 2010, 464, 392−395.
(463) Li, C. Y.; Meng, M.; Huang, S. C.; Li, L.; Huang, S. R.; Chen,
S.; Meng, L. Y.; Panneerselvam, R.; Zhang, S. J.; Ren, B.; Yang, Z. L.;
Li, J. F.; Tian, Z. Q. Smart” Ag Nanostructures for Plasmon-Enhanced
Spectroscopies. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2015, 137, 13784−13787.
(464) Li, J. F.; Ding, S. Y.; Yang, Z. L.; Bai, M. L.; Anema, J. R.;
Wang, X.; Wang, A.; Wu, D. Y.; Ren, B.; Hou, S. M.; Wandlowski, T.;
Tian, Z. Q. Extraordinary Enhancement of Raman Scattering from
Pyridine on Single Crystal Au and Pt Electrodes by Shell-Isolated Au
Nanoparticles. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2011, 133, 15922−15925.
(465) Li, J. F.; Zhang, Y. J.; Ding, S. Y.; Panneerselvam, R.; Tian, Z.
Q. Core−Shell Nanoparticle-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy. Chem.
Rev. 2017, 117, 5002−5069.
(466) Wang, D.; Wan, L. J. Electrochemical Scanning Tunneling
Microscopy: Adlayer Structure and Reaction at Solid/Liquid
Interface. J. Phys. Chem. C 2007, 111, 16109−16130.
(467) Li, J. F.; Zhang, Y. J.; Rudnev, A. V.; Anema, J. R.; Li, S. B.;
Hong, W. J.; Rajapandiyan, P.; Lipkowski, J.; Wandlowski, T.; Tian, Z.
Q. Electrochemical Shell-Isolated Nanoparticle-Enhanced Raman
Spectroscopy: Correlating Structural Information and Adsorption
Processes of Pyridine at the Au(hkl) Single Crystal/Solution
Interface. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2015, 137, 2400−2408.
(468) Wang, Y. H.; Zhang, Y. J.; Liang, M. M.; Chen, S.; Radjenovic,
P.; Zhang, H.; Yang, Z. L.; Zhou, X. S.; Tian, Z. Q.; Li, J. F. Probing
Interfacial Electronic and Catalytic Properties on Well-Defined
Surfaces Using in Situ Raman Spectroscopy. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.
2018, 57, 11257−11261.
(469) Li, C. Y.; Dong, J. C.; Jin, X.; Chen, S.; Panneerselvam, R.;
Rudnev, A. V.; Yang, Z. L.; Li, J. F.; Wandlowski, T.; Tian, Z. Q. In
Situ Monitoring of Electrooxidation Processes at Gold Single Crystal
Surfaces Using Shell-Isolated Nanoparticle-Enhanced Raman Spec-
troscopy. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2015, 137, 7648−7651.
(470) Dong, J. C.; Zhang, X. G.; Briega-Martos, V.; Jin, X.; Yang, J.;
Chen, S.; Yang, Z. L.; Wu, D. Y.; Feliu, J. M.; Williams, C. T.; Tian, Z.
Q.; Li, J. F. In Situ Raman Spectroscopic Evidence for Oxygen
Reduction Reaction Intermediates at Platinum Single-Crystal
Surfaces. Nat. Energy 2019, 4, 60−67.
(471) Zhang, H.; Wang, C.; Sun, H. L.; Fu, G.; Chen, S.; Zhang, Y.
J.; Chen, B. H.; Anema, J. R.; Yang, Z. L.; Li, J. F.; Tian, Z. Q. In Situ
Dynamic Tracking of Heterogeneous Nanocatalytic Processes by
Shell-Isolated Nanoparticle-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy. Nat.
Commun. 2017, 8, 15447.
(472) Guerrero, A. R.; Aroca, R. F. Surface-Enhanced Fluorescence
with Shell-Isolated Nanoparticles (SHINEF). Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.
2011, 50, 665−668.
(473) Li, C. Y.; Gao, J.; Yi, J.; Zhang, X. G.; Cao, X. D.; Meng, M.;
Wang, C.; Huang, Y. P.; Zhang, S. J.; Wu, D. Y.; Wu, C. L.; Xu, J. H.;
Tian, Z. Q.; Li, J. F. Plasmon-Enhanced Ultra-Sensitive Surface
Analysis Using Ag Nanoantenna. Anal. Chem. 2018, 90, 2018−2022.
(474) Yin, H.; Yi, J.; Yang, Z. W.; Xu, Z. Y.; Xie, S. J.; Li, L.; Li, C.
Y.; Xu, J.; Zhang, H.; Zhang, S. J.; Li, J. F.; Tian, Z. Q. Plasmon
Enhanced Quantum Dots Fluorescence and Energy Conversion in
Water Splitting Using Shell-Isolated Nanoparticles. Nano Energy
2017, 42, 232−240.
(475) Meng, M.; Zhang, F. L.; Yi, J.; Lin, L. H.; Zhang, C. L.;
Bodappa, N.; Li, C. Y.; Zhang, S. J.; Aroca, R. F.; Tian, Z. Q.; Li, J. F.
Shell-Isolated Nanoparticle-Enhanced Phosphorescence. Anal. Chem.
2018, 90, 10837−10842.
(476) Huang, Y. P.; Huang, S. C.; Wang, X. J.; Bodappa, N.; Li, C.
Y.; Yin, H.; Su, H.-S.; Meng, M.; Zhang, H.; Ren, B.; Yang, Z. L.;
Zenobi, R.; Tian, Z. Q.; Li, J. F. Shell-Isolated Tip-Enhanced Raman
and Fluorescence Spectroscopy. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2018, 57,
7523−7527.
(477) Liang, Z.; Zhang, S.; Li, X.; Wang, T.; Huang, Y.; Hang, W.;
Yang, Z.; Li, J.; Tian, Z. Tip-Enhanced Ablation and Ionization Mass
Spectrometry for Nanoscale Chemical Analysis. Sci. Adv. 2017, 3,
No. eaaq1059.
(478) Hong, K. Y.; de Albuquerque, C. D. L.; Poppi, R. J.; Brolo, A.
G. Determination of Aqueous Antibiotic Solutions Using SERS
Nanogratings. Anal. Chim. Acta 2017, 982, 148−155.
(479) Shi, R. Y.; Liu, X. J.; Ying, Y. B. Facing Challenges in Real-Life
Application of Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering: Design and
Nanofabrication of Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering Substrates for
Rapid Field Test of Food Contaminants. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2018,
66, 6525−6543.
(480) Fan, M. K.; Andrade, G. F. S.; Brolo, A. G. A Review on the
Fabrication of Substrates for Surface Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy
and their Applications in Analytical Chemistry. Anal. Chim. Acta
2011, 693, 7−25.
(481) Massarini, E.; Wasterby, P.; Landstrom, L.; Lejon, C.; Beck,
O.; Andersson, P. O. Methodologies for Assessment of Limit of
Detection and Limit of Identification Using Surface-Enhanced Raman
Spectroscopy. Sens. Actuators, B 2015, 207, 437−446.
(482) Goodacre, R.; Graham, D.; Faulds, K. Recent Developments
in Quantitative SERS Moving: Towards Absolute Quantification.
TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem. 2018, 102, 359−368.
(483) Subaihi, A.; Xu, Y.; Muhamadali, H.; Mutter, S. T.; Blanch, E.
W.; Ellis, D. I.; Goodacre, R. Towards Improved Quantitative Analysis
Using Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering Incorporating Internal
Isotope Labelling. Anal. Methods 2017, 9, 6636−6644.
(484) Itoh, N.; Bell, S. E. J. High Dilution Surface-Enhanced Raman
Spectroscopy for Rapid Determination of Nicotine in e-Liquids for
Electronic Cigarettes. Analyst 2017, 142, 994−998.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
103


----- Page 77 (native text) -----
(485) Subaihi, A.; Muhamadali, H.; Mutter, S. T.; Blanch, E.; Ellis,
D. I.; Goodacre, R. Quantitative Detection of Codeine in Human
Plasma Using Surface Enhance Raman Scattering via Adaptation of
the Isotopic Labelling Principle. Analyst 2017, 142, 1099−1105.
(486) Zakel, S.; Rienitz, O.; Güttler, B.; Stosch, R. Double Isotope
Dilution Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering as a Reference
Procedure for the Quantification of Biomarkers in Human Serum.
Analyst 2011, 136, 3956−3961.
(487) Hidi, I. J.; Jahn, M.; Weber, K.; Bocklitz, T.; Pletz, M. W.;
Cialla-May, D.; Popp, J. Lab-on-a-Chip-Surface Enhanced Raman
Scattering Combined with the Standard Addition Method: Toward
the Quantification of Nitroxoline in Spiked Human Urine Samples.
Anal. Chem. 2016, 88, 9173−9180.
(488) Mamian-Lopez, M. B.; Poppi, R. J. Standard Addition Method
Applied to the Urinary Quantification of Nicotine in the Presence of
Cotinine and Anabasine Using Surface Enhanced Raman Spectros-
copy and Multivariate Curve Resolution. Anal. Chim. Acta 2013, 760,
53−59.
(489) Westley, C.; Xu, Y.; Thilaganathan, B.; Carnell, A. J.; Turner,
N. J.; Goodacre, R. Absolute Quantification Of Uric Acid In Human
Urine Using Surface Enhanced Raman Scattering With The Standard
Addition Method. Anal. Chem. 2017, 89, 2472−2477.
(490) Gromski, P. S.; Muhamadali, H.; Ellis, D. I.; Xu, Y.; Correa, E.;
Turner, M. L.; Goodacre, R. A Tutorial Review: Metabolomics and
Partial Least Squares-Discriminant Analysis −A Marriage of
Convenience or a Shotgun Wedding. Anal. Chim. Acta 2015, 879,
10−23.
(491) Xu, Y.; Muhamadali, H.; Sayqal, A.; Dixon, N.; Goodacre, R.
Partial Least Squares with Structured Output for Modelling the
Metabolomics Data Obtained from Complex Experimental Designs: A
Study into the Y-Block Coding. Metabolites 2016, 6, 38.
(492) Gracie, K.; Correa, E.; Mabbott, S.; Dougan, J. A.; Graham,
D.; Goodacre, R.; Faulds, K. Simultaneous Detection and
Quantification of Three Bacterial Meningitis Pathogens by SERS.
Chem. Sci. 2014, 5, 1030−1040.
(493) Crawford, A. C.; Skuratovsky, A.; Porter, M. D. Sampling
Error: Impact on the Quantitative Analysis of Nanoparticle-Based
Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering Immunoassays. Anal. Chem.
2016, 88, 6515−6522.
(494) Itoh, T.; Yamamoto, Y. S. Recent Topics on Single-Molecule
Fluctuation Analysis Using Blinking in Surface-Enhanced Resonance
Raman Scattering: Clarification by the Electromagnetic Mechanism.
Analyst 2016, 141, 5000−5009.
(495) Fang, Y.; Seong, N. H.; Dlott, D. D. Measurement of the
Distribution of Site Enhancements in Surface-Enhanced Raman
Scattering. Science 2008, 321, 388−392.
(496) Zrimsek, A. B.; Chiang, N. H.; Mattei, M.; Zaleski, S.;
McAnally, M. O.; Chapman, C. T.; Henry, A. I.; Schatz, G. C.; Van
Duyne, R. P. Single-Molecule Chemistry with Surface- and Tip-
Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy. Chem. Rev. 2017, 117, 7583−7613.
(497) dos Santos, D. P. Espalhamento Raman Intensiﬁcado pela
Superﬁ́cie (SERS) no Regime de Detecção de uma Molécula. Ph.D.
Thesis, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil, 2013.
(498) Etchegoin, P. G.; Meyer, M.; Blackie, E.; Le Ru, E. C. Statistics
of Single-Molecule Surface Enhanced Raman Scattering Signals:
Fluctuation Analysis with Multiple Analyte Techniques. Anal. Chem.
2007, 79, 8411−8415.
(499) Santos, D. P.; Andrade, G. F. S.; Temperini, M. L. A.; Brolo,
A. G. Electrochemical Control of the Time-Dependent Intensity
Fluctuations in Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering (SERS). J. Phys.
Chem. C 2009, 113, 17737−17744.
(500) de Albuquerque, C. D. L.; Sobral-Filho, R. G.; Poppi, R. J.;
Brolo, A. G. Digital Protocol for Chemical Analysis at Ultralow
Concentrations by Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering. Anal. Chem.
2018, 90, 1248−1254.
(501) Tian, Y. F.; Wu, P.; Liu, Q.; Wu, X.; Hou, X. D. Mapping for
Total Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering to Improve its Quantifi-
cation Analysis. Talanta 2016, 161, 151−156.
(502) Darby, B. L.; Le Ru, E. C. Competition between Molecular
Adsorption and Diffusion: Dramatic Consequences for SERS in
Colloidal Solutions. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2014, 136, 10965−10973.
(503) Ameer, F. S.; Hu, W. F.; Ansar, S. M.; Siriwardana, K.; Collier,
W. E.; Zou, S. L.; Zhang, D. M. Robust and Reproducible
Quantification of SERS Enhancement Factors Using a Combination
of Time-Resolved Raman Spectroscopy and Solvent Internal
Reference Method. J. Phys. Chem. C 2013, 117, 3483−3488.
(504) Feliu, N.; Hassan, M.; Garcia Rico, E.; Cui, D. X.; Parak, W.;
Alvarez-Puebla, R. SERS Quantification and Characterization of
Proteins and Other Biomolecules. Langmuir 2017, 33, 9711−9730.
(505) Brule, T.; Bouhelier, A.; Yockell-Lelievre, H.; Clement, J. E.;
Leray, A.; Dereux, A.; Finot, E. Statistical and Fourier Analysis for In-
line Concentration Sensitivity in Single Molecule Dynamic-SERS.
ACS Photonics 2015, 2, 1266−1271.
(506) Fan, M. K.; Cheng, F. S.; Wang, C.; Gong, Z. J.; Tang, C. Y.;
Man, C. Z.; Brolo, A. G. SERS Optrode as a ″Fishing Rod″ to Direct
Preconcentrate Analytes from Superhydrophobic Surfaces. Chem.
Commun. 2015, 51, 1965−1968.
(507) De Angelis, F.; Gentile, F.; Mecarini, F.; Das, G.; Moretti, M.;
Candeloro, P.; Coluccio, M. L.; Cojoc, G.; Accardo, A.; Liberale, C.;
Zaccaria, R. P.; Perozziello, G.; Tirinato, L.; Toma, A.; Cuda, G.;
Cingolani, R.; Di Fabrizio, E. Breaking the Diffusion Limit with
Super-Hydrophobic Delivery of Molecules to Plasmonic Nano-
focusing SERS Structures. Nat. Photonics 2011, 5, 683−688.
(508) Bhowmik, D.; Mote, K. R.; MacLaughlin, C. M.; Biswas, N.;
Chandra, B.; Basu, J. K.; Walker, G. C.; Madhu, K.; Maiti, S. Cell-
Membrane-Mimicking Lipid-Coated Nanoparticles Confer Raman
Enhancement to Membrane Proteins and Reveal Membrane-Attached
Amyloid-β Conformation. ACS Nano 2015, 9, 9070−9077.
(509) Shanmukh, S.; Jones, L.; Driskell, J.; Zhao, Y.; Dluhy, R.;
Tripp, R. A. Rapid and Sensitive Detection of Respiratory Virus
Molecular Signatures Using a Silver Nanorod Array SERS Substrate.
Nano Lett. 2006, 6, 2630−2636.
(510) Jarvis, R. M.; Brooker, A.; Goodacre, R. Surface-Enhanced
Raman Spectroscopy for Bacterial Discrimination Utilizing a Scanning
Electron Microscope with a Raman Spectroscopy Interface. Anal.
Chem. 2004, 76, 5198−5202.
(511) Dina, N. E.; Raluca Gherman, A. M.; Chiş, V.; Sârbu, C.;
Wieser, A.; Bauer, D.; Haisch, C. Characterization of Clinically
Relevant Fungi via SERS Fingerprinting Assisted by Novel Chemo-
metric Models. Anal. Chem. 2018, 90, 2484−2492.
(512) Garcia-Rico, E.; Alvarez-Puebla, R. A.; Guerrini, L. Direct
Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering (SERS) Spectroscopy of Nucleic
Acids: From Fundamental Studies to Real-Life Applications. Chem.
Soc. Rev. 2018, 47, 4909−4923.
(513) Morla-Folch, J.; Gisbert-Quilis, P.; Masetti, M.; Garcia-Rico,
E.; Alvarez-Puebla, R. A.; Guerrini, L. Conformational SERS
Classification of K-Ras Point Mutations for Cancer Diagnostics.
Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2017, 56, 2381−2385.
(514) Tsoutsi, D.; Montenegro, J. M.; Dommershausen, F.; Koert,
U.; Liz-Marzán, L. M.; Parak, W. J.; Alvarez-Puebla, R. A. Quantitative
SERS Ultradetection of Atomic Inorganic Ions: The Case of Chlorine.
ACS Nano 2011, 5, 7539−7546.
(515) Rivera-Gil, P.; Vazquez-Vazquez, C.; Giannini, V.; Callao, M.
P.; Parak, W. J.; Correa-Duarte, M. A.; Alvarez-Puebla, R. A.
Plasmonic Nanoprobes for Real-Time Optical Monitoring of Nitric
Oxide inside Living Cells. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2013, 52, 13694−
13698.
(516) Guerrini, L.; Arenal, R.; Mannini, B.; Chiti, F.; Pini, R.;
Matteini, P.; Alvarez-Puebla, R. A. SERS Detection of Amyloid
Oligomers on Metallorganic-Decorated Plasmonic Beads. ACS Appl.
Mater. Interfaces 2015, 7, 9420−9428.
(517) Sanles-Sobrido, M.; Rodríguez-Lorenzo, L.; Lorenzo-Abalde,
S.; González-Fernández, A.; Correa-Duarte, M. A.; Alvarez-Puebla, R.
A.; Liz-Marzán, L. M. Label-Free SERS Detection of Relevant
Bioanalytes on Silver-Coated Carbon Nanotubes: The Case of
Cocaine. Nanoscale 2009, 1, 153−158.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
104


----- Page 78 (native text) -----
(518) He, L.; Rodda, T.; Haynes, C. L.; Deschaines, T.; Strother, T.;
Diez-Gonzalez, F.; Labuza, T. P. Detection of a Foreign Protein in
Milk Using Surface-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy Coupled with
Antibody-Modified Silver Dendrites. Anal. Chem. 2011, 83, 1510−
1513.
(519) Yang, L.; Fu, C.; Wang, H.; Xu, S.; Xu, W. Aptamer-Based
Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering (SERS) Sensor for Thrombin
Based on Supramolecular Recognition, Oriented Assembly, and Local
Field Coupling. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 2017, 409, 235−242.
(520) Alvarez-Puebla, R. A.; Liz-Marzán, L. M. Traps and Cages for
Universal SERS Detection. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2012, 41, 43−51.
(521) Moskovits, M.; Suh, J. S. Surface Selection Rules for Surface-
Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy: Calculations and Application to the
Surface-Enhanced Raman Spectrum of Phthalazine on Silver. J. Phys.
Chem. 1984, 88, 5526−5530.
(522) Guerrini, L.; Pazos, E.; Penas, C.; Vázquez, M. E.; Mascareñas,
J. L.; Alvarez-Puebla, R. A. Highly Sensitive SERS Quantification of
the Oncogenic Protein c-Jun in Cellular Extracts. J. Am. Chem. Soc.
2013, 135, 10314−10317.
(523) Pazos, E.; Garcia-Algar, M.; Penas, C.; Nazarenus, M.;
Torruella, A.; Pazos-Perez, N.; Guerrini, L.; Vázquez, M. E.; Garcia-
Rico, E.; Mascareñas, J. L.; Alvarez-Puebla, R. A. Surface-Enhanced
Raman Scattering Surface Selection Rules for the Proteomic Liquid
Biopsy in Real Samples: Efficient Detection of the Oncoprotein c-
MYC. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2016, 138, 14206−14209.
(524) Marks, H. L.; Pishko, M. V.; Jackson, G. W.; Coté, G. L.
Rational Design of a Bisphenol A Aptamer Selective Surface-
Enhanced Raman Scattering Nanoprobe. Anal. Chem. 2014, 86,
11614−11619.
(525) Pang, S.; Labuza, T. P.; He, L. Development of a Single
Aptamer-Based Surface Enhanced Raman Scattering Method for
Rapid Detection Of Multiple Pesticides. Analyst 2014, 139, 1895−
1901.
(526) Odion, R. A.; Strobbia, P.; Crawford, B. M.; Vo-Dinh, T.
Inverse Surface-Enhanced Spatially Offset Raman Spectroscopy
(SESORS) Through a Monkey Skull. J. Raman Spectrosc. 2018, 49,
1452−1460.
(527) Vo-Dinh, T.; Liu, Y.; Crawford, B. M.; Wang, H. N.; Yuan, H.;
Register, J. K.; Khoury, C. G. Shining Gold Nanostars: From Cancer
Diagnostics to Photothermal Treatment and Immunotherapy. J.
Immunol. Sci. 2018, 2, 1−8.
(528) Alvarez-Puebla, R. A.; Liz-Marzán, L. M. SERS-Based
Diagnosis and Biodetection. Small 2010, 6, 604−610.
(529) Lewin, J. S. Future Directions in Minimally Invasive
Intervention. Trans. Am. Clin. Climatol. Assoc. 2017, 128, 346−352.
(530) Wang, H. N.; Crawford, B. M.; Fales, A. M.; Bowie, M. L.;
Seewaldt, V. L.; Vo-Dinh, T. Multiplexed Detection of MicroRNA
Biomarkers Using SERS-Based Inverse Molecular Sentinel (iMS)
Nanoprobes. J. Phys. Chem. C 2016, 120, 21047−21050.
(531) Vo-Dinh, T.; Hiromoto, M. Y. K.; Begun, G. M.; Moody, R. L.
Surface-Enhanced Raman Spectrometry for Trace Organic Analysis.
Anal. Chem. 1984, 56, 1667−1670.
(532) Vo-Dinh, T. Surface-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy Using
Metallic Nanostructures. TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem. 1998, 17, 557−
582.
(533) Khoury, C. G.; Vo-Dinh, T. Plasmonic Nanowave Substrates
for SERS: Fabrication and Numerical Analysis. J. Phys. Chem. C 2012,
116, 7534−7545.
(534) Ngo, H. T.; Wang, H.-N.; Fales, A. M.; Vo-Dinh, T. Label-
Free DNA Biosensor Based on SERS Molecular Sentinel on
Nanowave Chip. Anal. Chem. 2013, 85, 6378−6383.
(535) Vo-Dinh, T.; Dhawan, A.; Norton, S. J.; Khoury, C. G.; Wang,
H. N.; Misra, V.; Gerhold, M. D. Plasmonic Nanoparticles and
Nanowires: Design, Fabrication and Application in Sensing. J. Phys.
Chem. C 2010, 114, 7480−7488.
(536) Ngo, H. T.; Wang, H.-N.; Fales, A. M.; Nicholson, B. P.;
Woods, C. W.; Vo-Dinh, T. DNA Bioassay-on-Chip Using SERS
Detection for Dengue Diagnosis. Analyst 2014, 139, 5655−5659.
(537) Ngo, H. T.; Freedman, E.; Odion, R. A.; Strobbia, P.;
Indrasekara, A. S. D. S.; Vohra, P.; Taylor, S. M.; Vo-Dinh, T. Direct
Detection of Unamplified Pathogen RNA in Blood Lysate using an
Integrated Lab-in-a-Stick Device and Ultrabright SERS Nanorattles.
Sci. Rep. 2018, 8, 4075.
(538) Ngo, H. T.; Gandra, N.; Fales, A. M.; Taylor, S. M.; Vo-Dinh,
T. Sensitive DNA Detection and SNP Discrimination Using
Ultrabright SERS Nanorattles and Magnetic Beads for Malaria
Diagnostics. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2016, 81, 8−14.
(539) Vohra, P.; Strobbia, P.; Ngo, H. T.; Lee, W. T.; Vo-Dinh, T.
Rapid Nanophotonics Assay for Head and Neck Cancer Diagnosis.
Sci. Rep. 2018, 8, 12989.
(540) Wang, H. N.; Register, J. K.; Fales, A. M.; Gandra, N.; Cho, E.
H.; Boico, A.; Palmer, G. M.; Klitzman, B.; Vo-Dinh, T. Surface-
Enhanced Raman Scattering Nanosensors for in Vivo Detection of
Nucleic Acid Targets in a Large Animal Model. Nano Res. 2018, 11,
4005−4016.
(541) Liu, Y.; Maccarini, P.; Palmer, G. M.; Etienne, W.; Zhao, Y.;
Lee, C. T.; Ma, X.; Inman, B. A.; Vo-Dinh, T. Synergistic Immuno
Photothermal Nanotherapy (SYMPHONY) for the Treatment of
Unresectable and Metastatic Cancers. Sci. Rep. 2017, 7, 8606.
(542) Liu, Y.; Chang, Z.; Yuan, H.; Fales, A. M.; Vo-Dinh, T.
Quintuple-Modality (SERS-MRI-CT-TPL-PTT) Plasmonic Nanop-
robe for Theranostics. Nanoscale 2013, 5, 12126−12131.
(543) Cheng, Z.; Choi, N.; Wang, R.; Lee, S.; Moon, K. C.; Yoon, S.
Y.; Chen, L.; Choo, J. Simultaneous Detection of Dual Prostate
Specific Antigrns Using SERS-Based Immunoassay for Accurate
Diagnosis of Prostate Cancer. ACS Nano 2017, 11, 4926−4933.
(544) Chrimes, A. F.; Khoshmanesh, K.; Stoddart, P. R.; Mitchell,
A.; Kalantar-Zadeh, K. Microfluidics and Raman Microscopy: Current
Applications and Future Challenges. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2013, 42, 5880−
5906.
(545) Nayak, S.; Blumenfeld, N. R.; Laksanasopin, T.; Sia, S. K.
Point of Care Diagnostics: Recent Developments in a Connected Age.
Anal. Chem. 2017, 89, 102−123.
(546) Chon, H.; Lim, C.; Ha, S. M.; Ahn, Y.; Lee, E. K.; Chang, S. I.;
Seong, G. H.; Choo, J. On-chip Immunoassay Using Surface-
Enhanced Raman Scattering of Hollow Gold Nanospheres. Anal.
Chem. 2010, 82, 5290−5295.
(547) Choi, N.; Lee, J.; Ko, J.; Jeon, J. H.; Rhie, G.; deMello, A. J.;
Choo, J. Integrated SERS-Based Microdroplet Platform for the
Automated Immunoassay of F1 Antigens in Yersinia Pestis. Anal.
Chem. 2017, 89, 8413−8420.
(548) Hidi, I. J.; Jahn, M.; Pletz, M. W.; Weber, K.; Cialla-May, D.;
Popp, J. Toward Levofloxacin Monitoring in Human Urine Samples
by Employing the LOC-SERS Technique. J. Phys. Chem. C 2016, 120,
20613−20623.
(549) Mühlig, A.; Bocklitz, T. W.; Labugger, I.; Dees, S.; Henk, S.;
Richter, E.; Andres, S.; Merker, M.; Stöckel, S.; Weber, K.; Cialla-
May, D.; Popp, J. LOC-SERS: A Promising Closed System for the
Identification of Mycobacteria. Anal. Chem. 2016, 88, 7998−8004.
(550) Patze, S.; Huebner, U.; Liebold, F.; Weber, K.; Cialla-May, D.;
Popp, J. SERS as an Analytical Tool in Environmental Science: The
Detection of Sulfamethoxazole in Water in the Nanomolar Range by
Applying a Microfluidic Cartridge Setup. Anal. Chim. Acta 2017, 949,
1−7.
(551) Hemmer, E.; Venkatachalam, N.; Hyodo, H.; Hattori, A.;
Ebina, Y.; Kishimoto, H.; Soga, K. Upconverting and NIR Emitting
Rare Earth Based Nanostructures for NIR-Bioimaging. Nanoscale
2013, 5, 11339−11361.
(552) Hemmer, E.; Benayas, A.; Légaré, F.; Vetrone, F. Exploiting
the Biological Windows: Current Perspectives on Fluorescent
Bioprobes Emitting above 1000 nm. Nanoscale Horiz. 2016, 1,
168−184.
(553) Tang, L.; Li, S.; Han, F.; Liu, L.; Xu, L.; Ma, W.; Kuang, H.;
Li, A.; Wang, L.; Xu, C. SERS-Active Au@Ag Nanorod Dimers for
Ultrasensitive Dopamine Detection. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2015, 71, 7−
12.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
105


----- Page 79 (native text) -----
(554) Gao, F.; Liu, L.; Cui, G.; Xu, L.; Wu, X.; Kuang, H.; Xu, C.
Regioselective Plasmonic Nano-Assemblies for Bimodal Sub-Femto-
molar Dopamine Detection. Nanoscale 2017, 9, 223−229.
(555) Wu, X.; Chen, X.; Gao, F.; Ma, W.; Xu, L.; Kuang, H.; Li, A.;
Xu, C. SERS Encoded Nanoparticle Heterodimers for the Ultra-
sensitive Detection of Folic Acid. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2016, 75, 55−
58.
(556) Zhu, Y.; Kuang, H.; Xu, L.; Ma, W.; Peng, C.; Hua, Y.; Wang,
L.; Xu, C. Gold Nanorod Assembly Based Approach to Toxin
Detection by SERS. J. Mater. Chem. 2012, 22, 2387−2391.
(557) Zhao, S.; Ma, W.; Xu, L.; Wu, X.; Kuang, H.; Wang, L.; Xu, C.
Ultrasensitive SERS Detection of VEGF Based on a Self-Assembled
Ag Ornamented−Au Pyramid Superstructure. Biosens. Bioelectron.
2015, 68, 593−597.
(558) Ma, W.; Yin, H.; Xu, L.; Wu, X.; Kuang, H.; Wang, L.; Xu, C.
Ultrasensitive Aptamer-Based SERS Detection of PSAs by Heteroge-
neous Satellite Nanoassemblies. Chem. Commun. 2014, 50, 9737−
9740.
(559) Wu, X.; Fu, P.; Ma, W.; Xu, L.; Kuang, H.; Xu, C. SERS-Active
Silver Nanoparticle Trimers for Sub-Attomolar Detection of Alpha
Fetoprotein. RSC Adv. 2015, 5, 73395−73398.
(560) Zhao, Y.; Liu, L.; Kuang, H.; Wang, L.; Xu, C. SERS-Active
Ag@Au Core−Shell NP Assemblies for DNA Detection. RSC Adv.
2014, 4, 56052−56056.
(561) Chisanga, M.; Muhamadali, H.; Ellis, D. I.; Goodacre, R.
Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering (SERS) in Microbiology:
Illumination and Enhancement of the Microbial World. Appl.
Spectrosc. 2018, 72, 987−1000.
(562) Dina, N. E.; Zhou, H.; Colniţǎ, A.; Leopold, N.; Szoke-Nagy,
T.; Coman, C.; Haisch, C. Rapid Single-Cell Detection and
Identification of Pathogens by Using Surface-Enhanced Raman
Spectroscopy. Analyst 2017, 142, 1782−1789.
(563) Carmicheal, J.; Hayashi, C.; Huang, X.; Liu, L.; Lu, Y.;
Krasnoslobodtsev, A.; Lushnikov, A.; Kshirsagar, P. G.; Patel, A.; Jain,
M.; Lyubchenko, Y. L.; Lu, Y.; Batra, S. K.; Kaur, S. Label-Free
Characterization of Exosome via Surface Enhanced Raman Spectros-
copy for the Early Detection of Pancreatic Cancer. Nanomedicine
2019, 16, 88−96.
(564) Kneipp, J.; Kneipp, H.; McLaughlin, M.; Brown, D.; Kneipp,
K. In Vivo Molecular Probing of Cellular Compartments with Gold
Nanoparticles and Nanoaggregates. Nano Lett. 2006, 6, 2225−2231.
(565) Silwal, A. P.; Lu, H. P. Raman Spectroscopic Analysis of
Signaling Molecules-Dopamine Receptors Interactions in Living Cells.
ACS Omega 2018, 3, 14849−14857.
(566) Lussier, F.; Brulé, T.; Vishwakarma, M.; Das, T.; Spatz, J. P.;
Masson, J.-F. Dynamic-SERS Optophysiology: A Nanosensor for
Monitoring Cell Secretion Events. Nano Lett. 2016, 16, 3866−3871.
(567) Shiota, M.; Naya, M.; Yamamoto, T.; Hishiki, T.; Tani, T.;
Takahashi, H.; Kubo, A.; Koike, D.; Itoh, M.; Ohmura, M.; Kabe, Y.;
Sugiura, Y.; Hiraoka, N.; Morikawa, T.; Takubo, K.; Suina, K.;
Nagashima, H.; Sampetrean, O.; Nagano, O.; Saya, H.; et al. Gold-
Nanofève Surface-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy Visualizes Hypo-
taurine as a Robust Anti-Oxidant Consumed in Cancer Survival. Nat.
Commun. 2018, 9, 1561.
(568) Lussier, F.; Brulé, T.; Bourque, M.-J.; Ducrot, C.; Trudeau, L.-
É.; Masson, J.-F. Dynamic SERS Nanosensor for Neurotransmitter
Sensing near Neurons. Faraday Discuss. 2017, 205, 387−407.
(569) Kneipp, H.; Mobjerg, N.; Jorgensen, A.; Bohr, H. G.; Helix-
Nielsen, C.; Kneipp, J.; Kneipp, K. Surface Enhanced Raman
Scattering on Tardigrada Towards Monitoring and Imaging Molecular
Structures in Live Cryptobiotic Organisms. J. Biophotonics 2012, 6,
759−764.
(570) Ando, J.; Fujita, K.; Smith, N. I.; Kawata, S. Dynamic SERS
Imaging of Cellular Transport Pathways with Endocytosed Gold
Nanoparticles. Nano Lett. 2011, 11, 5344−5348.
(571) Drescher, D.; Zeise, I.; Traub, H.; Guttmann, P.; Seifert, S.;
Buchner, T.; Jakubowski, N.; Schneider, G.; Kneipp, J. In Situ
Characterization of SiO2 Nanoparticle Biointeractions Using Bright
Silica. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2014, 24, 3765−3775.
(572) Huefner, A.; Kuan, W.-L.; Müller, K. H.; Skepper, J. N.;
Barker, R. A.; Mahajan, S. Characterization and Visualization of
Vesicles in the Endo-Lysosomal Pathway with Surface-Enhanced
Raman Spectroscopy and Chemometrics. ACS Nano 2016, 10, 307−
316.
(573) Wang, M.; Cao, X.; Lu, W.; Tao, L.; Zhao, H.; Wang, Y.; Guo,
M.; Dong, J.; Qian, W. Surface-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopic
Detection and Differentiation of Lung Cancer Cell Lines (A549,
H1229) and Normal Cell Line (AT II) Based on Gold Nanostar
Substrates. RSC Adv. 2014, 4, 64225−64234.
(574) Zhang, Y. J.; Zeng, Q. Y.; Li, L. F.; Qi, M. N.; Qi, Q. C.; Li, S.
X.; Xu, J. F. Label-Free Rapid Identification of Tumor Cells and
Blood Cells with Silver Film SERS Substrate. Opt. Express 2018, 26,
33044−33056.
(575) Caprettini, V.; Huang, J. A.; Moia, F.; Jacassi, A.; Gonano, C.
A.; Maccaferri, N.; Capozza, R.; Dipalo, M.; De Angelis, F. Enhanced
Raman Investigation of Cell Membrane and Intracellular Compounds
by 3D Plasmonic Nanoelectrode Arrays. Adv. Sci. 2018, 5, 1800560.
(576) Vitol, E. A.; Orynbayeva, Z.; Bouchard, M. J.; Azizkhan-
Clifford, J.; Friedman, G.; Gogotsi, Y. In Situ Intracellular Spectros-
copy with Surface Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy (SERS)-Enabled
Nanopipettes. ACS Nano 2009, 3, 3529−3536.
(577) Dong, J.; Chen, Q.; Rong, C.; Li, D.; Rao, Y. Minimally
Invasive Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering Detection with Depth
Profiles Based on a Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering-Active
Acupuncture Needle. Anal. Chem. 2011, 83, 6191−6195.
(578) Yuen, C.; Liu, Q. Towards in Vivo Intradermal Surface
Enhanced Raman Scattering (SERS) Measurements: Silver Coated
Microneedle Based SERS Probe. J. Biophotonics 2014, 7, 683−689.
(579) Li, P.; Zhou, B.; Cao, X.; Tang, X.; Yang, L.; Hu, L.; Liu, J.
Functionalized Acupuncture Needle as Surface-Enhanced Resonance
Raman Spectroscopy Sensor for Rapid and Sensitive Detection of
Dopamine in Serum and Cerebrospinal Fluid. Chem. - Eur. J. 2017,
23, 14278−14285.
(580) Ochsenkühn, M. A.; Jess, P. R. T.; Stoquert, H.; Dholakia, K.;
Campbell, C. J. Nanoshells for Surface-Enhanced Raman Spectros-
copy in Eukaryotic Cells: Cellular Response and Sensor Development.
ACS Nano 2009, 3, 3613−3621.
(581) Boca, S.; Rugina, D.; Pintea, A.; Barbu-Tudoran, L.; Astilean,
S. Flower-Shaped Gold Nanoparticles: Synthesis, Characterization
and their Application as SERS-Active Tags Inside Living Cells.
Nanotechnology 2011, 22, No. 055702.
(582) Panikkanvalappil, S. R.; Mackey, M. A.; El-Sayed, M. A.
Probing the Unique Dehydration-Induced Structural Modifications in
Cancer Cell DNA Using Surface Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy. J.
Am. Chem. Soc. 2013, 135, 4815−4821.
(583) Drescher, D.; Giesen, C.; Traub, H.; Panne, U.; Kneipp, J.;
Jakubowski, N. Quantitative Imaging of Gold and Silver Nanoparticles
in Single Eukaryotic Cells by Laser Ablation ICP-MS. Anal. Chem.
2012, 84, 9684−9688.
(584) Buchner, T.; Drescher, D.; Traub, H.; Schrade, P.; Bachmann,
S.; Jakubowski, N.; Kneipp, J. Relating Surface-Enhanced Raman
Scattering Signals of Cells to Gold Nanoparticle Aggregation as
Determined by LA-ICP-MS Micromapping. Anal. Bioanal. Chem.
2014, 406, 7003−7014.
(585) Madzharova, F.; Heiner, Z.; Simke, J.; Selve, S.; Kneipp, J.
Gold Nanostructures for Plasmonic Enhancement of Hyper-Raman
Scattering. J. Phys. Chem. C 2018, 122, 2931−2940.
(586) Tsoulos, T. V.; Atta, S.; Lagos, M. J.; Batson, P. E.;
Tsilomelekis, G.; Fabris, L. Rational Design of Gold Nanostars with
Tailorable Plasmonic Properties. ChemRxiv 2018. DOI: 10.26434/
chemrxiv.6552743.v1.
(587) Heck, C.; Kanehira, Y.; Kneipp, J.; Bald, I. Placement of Single
Proteins within the SERS Hot Spots of Self-Assembled Silver
Nanolenses. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2018, 57, 7444−7447.
(588) Kneipp, K.; Kneipp, H.; Kneipp, J. Probing Plasmonic
Nanostructures by Photons and Electrons. Chem. Sci. 2015, 6, 2721−
2726.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
106


----- Page 80 (native text) -----
(589) Živanović, V.; Kochovski, Z.; Arenz, C.; Lu, Y.; Kneipp, J.
SERS and Cryo-EM Directly Reveal Different Liposome Structures
during Interaction with Gold Nanoparticles. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2018,
9, 6767−6772.
(590) Drescher, D.; Guttmann, P.; Buchner, T.; Werner, S.; Laube,
G.; Hornemann, A.; Tarek, B.; Schneider, G.; Kneipp, J. Specific
Biomolecule Corona is Associated with Ring-Shaped Organization of
Silver Nanoparticles in Cells. Nanoscale 2013, 5, 9193−9198.
(591) Kneipp, J.; Kneipp, H.; Rice, W. L.; Kneipp, K. Optical Probes
for Biological Applications Based on Surface Enhanced Raman
Scattering from Indocyanine Green on Gold Nanoparticles. Anal.
Chem. 2005, 77, 2381−2385.
(592) Song, J.; Zhou, J.; Duan, H. Self-Assembled Plasmonic
Vesicles of SERS-Encoded Amphiphilic Gold Nanoparticles for
Cancer Cell Targeting and Traceable Intracellular Drug Delivery. J.
Am. Chem. Soc. 2012, 134, 13458−13469.
(593) Ali, M. R. K.; Panikkanvalappil, S. R.; El-Sayed, M. A.
Enhancing the Efficiency of Gold Nanoparticles Treatment of Cancer
by Increasing their Rate of Endocytosis and Cell Accumulation Using
Rifampicin. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2014, 136, 4464−4467.
(594) Suarasan, S.; Focsan, M.; Potara, M.; Soritau, O.; Florea, A.;
Maniu, D.; Astilean, S. Doxorubicin-Incorporated Nanotherapeutic
Delivery System Based on Gelatin-Coated Gold Nanoparticles:
Formulation, Drug Release, and Multimodal Imaging of Cellular
Internalization. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2016, 8, 22900−22913.
(595) Deng, R.; Qu, H.; Liang, L.; Zhang, J.; Zhang, B.; Huang, D.;
Xu, S.; Liang, C.; Xu, W. Tracing the Therapeutic Process of Targeted
Aptamer/Drug Conjugate on Cancer Cells by Surface-Enhanced
Raman Scattering Spectroscopy. Anal. Chem. 2017, 89, 2844−2851.
(596) Mackey, M. A.; Saira, F.; Mahmoud, M. A.; El-Sayed, M. A.
Inducing Cancer Cell Death by Targeting Its Nucleus: Solid Gold
Nanospheres versus Hollow Gold Nanocages. Bioconjugate Chem.
2013, 24, 897−906.
(597) Liu, Y.; Ashton, J. R.; Moding, E. J.; Yuan, H. K.; Register, J.
K.; Fales, A. M.; Choi, J.; Whitley, M. J.; Zhao, X. G.; Qi, Y.; Ma, Y.;
Vaidyanathan, G.; Zalutsky, M. R.; Kirsch, D. G.; Badea, C. T.; Vo-
Dinh, T. A Plasmonic Gold Nanostar Theranostic Probe for in Vivo
Tumor Imaging and Photothermal Therapy. Theranostics 2015, 5,
946−960.
(598) Ali, M. R. K.; Wu, Y.; Han, T.; Zang, X.; Xiao, H.; Tang, Y.;
Wu, R.; Fernández, F. M.; El-Sayed, M. A. Simultaneous Time-
Dependent Surface-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy, Metabolomics,
and Proteomics Reveal Cancer Cell Death Mechanisms Associated
with Gold Nanorod Photothermal Therapy. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2016,
138, 15434−15442.
(599) Aioub, M.; El-Sayed, M. A. A Real-Time Surface Enhanced
Raman Spectroscopy Study of Plasmonic Photothermal Cell Death
Using Targeted Gold Nanoparticles. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2016, 138,
1258−1264.
(600) Narayanan, N.; Nair, L. V.; Karunakaran, V.; Joseph, M. M.;
Nair, J. B.; Ramya, A. N.; Jayasree, R. S.; Maiti, K. K. Investigation of
Apoptotic Events at Molecular Level Induced by SERS Guided
Targeted Theranostic Nanoprobe. Nanoscale 2016, 8, 11392−11397.
(601) Espinosa, A.; Silva, A. K. A.; Sanchez-Iglesias, A.; Grzelczak,
M.; Pechoux, C.; Desboeufs, K.; Liz-Marzan, L. M.; Wilhelm, C.
Cancer Cell Internalization of Gold Nanostars Impacts Their
Photothermal Efficiency in Vitro and in Vivo: Toward a Plasmonic
Thermal Fingerprint in Tumoral Environment. Adv. Healthcare Mater.
2016, 5, 1040−1048.
(602) Zhan, Y.; Liu, Y.; Zu, H.; Guo, Y.; Wu, S.; Yang, H.; Liu, Z.;
Lei, B.; Zhuang, J.; Zhang, X.; Huang, D.; Hu, C. Phase-Controlled
Synthesis of Molybdenum Oxide Nanoparticles for Surface Enhanced
Raman Scattering and Photothermal Therapy. Nanoscale 2018, 10,
5997−6004.
(603) Liu, Z.; Chen, H.; Jia, Y.; Zhang, W.; Zhao, H.; Fan, W.;
Zhang, W.; Zhong, H.; Ni, Y.; Guo, Z. A Two-Dimensional
Fingerprint Nanoprobe Based on Black Phosphorus for Bio-SERS
Analysis and Chemo-Photothermal Therapy. Nanoscale 2018, 10,
18795−18804.
(604) Nergiz, S. Z.; Gandra, N.; Tadepalli, S.; Singamaneni, S.
Multifunctional Hybrid Nanopatches of Graphene Oxide and Gold
Nanostars for Ultraefficient Photothermal Cancer Therapy. ACS Appl.
Mater. Interfaces 2014, 6, 16395−16402.
(605) Zhang, Y.; Zou, Y.; Liu, F.; Xu, Y.; Wang, X.; Li, Y.; Liang, H.;
Chen, L.; Chen, Z.; Tan, W. Stable Graphene-Isolated-Au-Nano-
crystal for Accurate and Rapid Surface Enhancement Raman
Scattering Analysis. Anal. Chem. 2016, 88, 10611−10616.
(606) Haldavnekar, R.; Venkatakrishnan, K.; Tan, B. Non Plasmonic
Semiconductor Quantum SERS Probe as a Pathway for in Vitro
Cancer Detection. Nat. Commun. 2018, 9, 3065.
(607) Austin, L. A.; Kang, B.; Yen, C.-W.; El-Sayed, M. A. Plasmonic
Imaging of Human Oral Cancer Cell Communities During
Programmed Cell Death by Nuclear-Targeting Silver Nanoparticles.
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2011, 133, 17594−17597.
(608) Kneipp, J.; Kneipp, H.; Wittig, B.; Kneipp, K. One- and Two-
Photon Excited Optical pH Probing for Cells Using Surface-Enhanced
Raman and Hyper-Raman Nanosensors. Nano Lett. 2007, 7, 2819−
2823.
(609) Wei, H. R.; Willner, M. R.; Marr, L. C.; Vikesland, P. J. Highly
Stable SERS pH Nanoprobes Produced by Co-Solvent Controlled
AuNP Aggregation. Analyst 2016, 141, 5159−5169.
(610) Peng, R. Y.; Si, Y. M.; Deng, T.; Zheng, J.; Li, J. S.; Yang, R.
H.; Tan, W. H. A Novel SERS Nanoprobe for the Ratiometric
Imaging of Hydrogen Peroxide in Living Cells. Chem. Commun. 2016,
52, 8553−8556.
(611) Wang, W. K.; Zhang, L. M.; Li, L.; Tian, Y. A Single
Nanoprobe for Ratiometric Imaging and Biosensing of Hypochlorite
and Glutathione in Live Cells Using Surface-Enhanced Raman
Scattering. Anal. Chem. 2016, 88, 9518−9523.
(612) Han, S.; Sun, J.; Wang, J.; Qian, W.; Dong, J. A Built-In
Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering-Active Microneedle for Sampling
in Vivo and Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering Detection Ex Vivo of
NO. J. Raman Spectrosc. 2018, 49, 1747−1755.
(613) Pozzi, E. A.; Zrimsek, A. B.; Lethiec, C. M.; Schatz, G. C.;
Hersam, M. C.; Van Duyne, R. P. Evaluating Single-Molecule Stokes
and Anti-Stokes SERS for Nanoscale Thermometry. J. Phys. Chem. C
2015, 119, 21116−21124.
(614) Gardner, B.; Stone, N.; Matousek, P. Non-Invasive Chemically
Specific Measurement of Subsurface Temperature in Biological
Tissues Using Surface-Enhanced Spatially Offset Raman Spectrosco-
py. Faraday Discuss. 2016, 187, 329−339.
(615) Kang, J. W.; So, P. T. C.; Dasari, R. R.; Lim, D.-K. High
Resolution Live Cell Raman Imaging Using Subcellular Organelle-
Targeting SERS-Sensitive Gold Nanoparticles with Highly Narrow
Intra-Nanogap. Nano Lett. 2015, 15, 1766−1772.
(616) Qi, G.; Zhang, Y.; Xu, S.; Li, C.; Wang, D.; Li, H.; Jin, Y.
Nucleus and Mitochondria Targeting Theranostic Plasmonic Surface-
Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy Nanoprobes as a Means for Revealing
Molecular Stress Response Differences in Hyperthermia Cell Death
between Cancerous and Normal Cells. Anal. Chem. 2018, 90, 13356−
13364.
(617) Shen, Y.; Liang, L.; Zhang, S.; Huang, D.; Deng, R.; Zhang, J.;
Qu, H.; Xu, S.; Liang, C.; Xu, W. Organelle-Targeting Gold Nanorods
for Macromolecular Profiling of Subcellular Organelles and Enhanced
Cancer Cell Killing. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2018, 10, 7910−7918.
(618) Driver, M.; Li, Y.; Zheng, J.; Decker, E.; Julian McClements,
D.; He, L. Fabrication of Lipophilic Gold Nanoparticles for Studying
Lipids by Surface Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy (SERS). Analyst
2014, 139, 3352−3355.
(619) Matthews, J. R.; Payne, C. M.; Hafner, J. H. Analysis of
Phospholipid Bilayers on Gold Nanorods by Plasmon Resonance
Sensing and Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering. Langmuir 2015, 31,
9893−9900.
(620) Suga, K.; Yoshida, T.; Ishii, H.; Okamoto, Y.; Nagao, D.;
Konno, M.; Umakoshi, H. Membrane Surface-Enhanced Raman
Spectroscopy for Sensitive Detection of Molecular Behavior of Lipid
Assemblies. Anal. Chem. 2015, 87, 4772−4780.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
107


----- Page 81 (native text) -----
(621) Taylor, R. W.; Benz, F.; Sigle, D. O.; Bowman, R. W.; Bao, P.;
Roth, J. S.; Heath, G. R.; Evans, S. D.; Baumberg, J. J. Watching
Individual Molecules Flex Within Lipid Membranes Using SERS. Sci.
Rep. 2015, 4, 5940.
(622) Kneipp, J.; Kneipp, H.; Rajadurai, A.; Redmond, R. W.;
Kneipp, K. Optical Probing and Imaging of Live Cells Using SERS
Labels. J. Raman Spectrosc. 2009, 40, 1−5.
(623) Panikkanvalappil, S. R.; Hira, S. M.; Mahmoud, M. A.; El-
Sayed, M. A. Unraveling the Biomolecular Snapshots of Mitosis in
Healthy and Cancer Cells Using Plasmonically-Enhanced Raman
Spectroscopy. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2014, 136, 15961−15968.
(624) Moody, B.; Haslauer, C. M.; Kirk, E.; Kannan, A.; Loboa, E.
G.; McCarty, G. S. In Situ Monitoring of Adipogenesis with Human-
Adipose-Derived Stem Cells Using Surface-Enhanced Raman Spec-
troscopy. Appl. Spectrosc. 2010, 64, 1227−1233.
(625) Živanović, V.; Semini, G.; Laue, M.; Drescher, D.; Aebischer,
T.; Kneipp, J. Chemical Mapping of Leishmania Infection in Live
Cells by SERS Microscopy. Anal. Chem. 2018, 90, 8154−8161.
(626) Stremersch, S.; Marro, M.; Pinchasik, B. E.; Baatsen, P.;
Hendrix, A.; De Smedt, S. C.; Loza-Alvarez, P.; Skirtach, A. G.;
Raemdonck, K.; Braeckmans, K. Identification of Individual Exosome-
Like Vesicles by Surface Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy. Small 2016,
12, 3292−3301.
(627) Shin, H.; Jeong, H.; Park, J.; Hong, S.; Choi, Y. Correlation
between Cancerous Exosomes and Protein Markers Based on Surface-
Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy (SERS) and Principal Component
Analysis (PCA). ACS Sens. 2018, 3, 2637−2643.
(628) Park, J.; Hwang, M.; Choi, B.; Jeong, H.; Jung, J. H.; Kim, H.
K.; Hong, S.; Park, J. H.; Choi, Y. Exosome Classification by Pattern
Analysis of Surface-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy Data for Lung
Cancer Diagnosis. Anal. Chem. 2017, 89, 6695−6701.
(629) Kuang, H.; Ma, W.; Xu, L.; Wang, L.; Xu, C. Nanoscale
Superstructures Assembled by Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR):
Programmable Construction, Structural Diversity, and Emerging
Applications. Acc. Chem. Res. 2013, 46, 2341−2354.
(630) Ma, W.; Kuang, H.; Xu, L.; Ding, L.; Xu, C.; Wang, L.; Kotov,
N. A. Attomolar DNA Detection with Chiral Nanorod Assemblies.
Nat. Commun. 2013, 4, 2689.
(631) Ma, W.; Sun, M.; Fu, P.; Li, S.; Xu, L.; Kuang, H.; Xu, C. A
Chiral-Nanoassemblies-Enabled Strategy for Simultaneously Profiling
Surface Glycoprotein and MicroRNA in Living Cells. Adv. Mater.
2017, 29, 1703410.
(632) Xu, L.; Yan, W.; Ma, W.; Kuang, H.; Wu, X.; Liu, L.; Zhao, Y.;
Wang, L.; Xu, C. SERS Encoded Silver Pyramids for Attomolar
Detection of Multiplexed Disease Biomarkers. Adv. Mater. 2015, 27,
1706−1711.
(633) Ma, W.; Fu, P.; Sun, M.; Xu, L.; Kuang, H.; Xu, C. Dual
Quantification of MicroRNAs and Telomerase in Living Cells. J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 2017, 139, 11752−11759.
(634) Ma, W.; Xu, L.; de Moura, A. F.; Wu, X.; Kuang, H.; Xu, C.;
Kotov, N. A. Chiral Inorganic Nanostructures. Chem. Rev. 2017, 117,
8041−8093.
(635) Xu, L.; Zhao, S.; Ma, W.; Wu, X.; Li, S.; Kuang, H.; Wang, L.;
Xu, C. Multigaps Embedded Nanoassemblies Enhance in Situ Raman
Spectroscopy for Intracellular Telomerase Activity Sensing. Adv.
Funct. Mater. 2016, 26, 1602−1608.
(636) Xu, L.; Kuang, H.; Xu, C.; Ma, W.; Wang, L.; Kotov, N. A.
Regiospecific Plasmonic Assemblies for in Situ Raman Spectroscopy
in Live Cells. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2012, 134, 1699−1709.
(637) Qu, A.; Wu, X.; Xu, L.; Liu, L.; Ma, W.; Kuang, H.; Xu, C.
SERS- and Luminescence-Active Au-Au-UCNP Trimers for Attomo-
lar Detection of Two Cancer Biomarkers. Nanoscale 2017, 9, 3865−
3872.
(638) Radziuk, D.; Moehwald, H. Prospects for Plasmonic Hot
Spots in Single Molecule SERS Towards the Chemical Imaging of
Live Cells. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2015, 17, 21072−21093.
(639) Carroll, S.; Al-Rubeai, M. ACSD Labelling and Magnetic Cell
Separation: A Rapid Method of Separating Antibody Secreting Cells
from Non-Secreting Cells. J. Immunol. Methods 2005, 296, 171−178.
(640) Pallaoro, A.; Hoonejani, M. R.; Braun, G. B.; Meinhart, C. D.;
Moskovits, M. Rapid Identification by Surface-Enhanced Raman
Spectroscopy of Cancer Cells at Low Concentrations Flowing in a
Microfluidic Channel. ACS Nano 2015, 9, 4328−4336.
(641) Wu, X.; Luo, L.; Yang, S.; Ma, X.; Li, Y.; Dong, C.; Tian, Y.;
Zhang, L.; Shen, Z.; Wu, A. Improved SERS Nanoparticles for Direct
Detection of Circulating Tumor Cells in the Blood. ACS Appl. Mater.
Interfaces 2015, 7, 9965−9971.
(642) Garcia-Algar, M.; Fernandez-Carrascal, A.; Olano-Daza, A.;
Guerrini, L.; Feliu, N.; Parak, W. J.; Guimera, R.; Garcia-Rico, E.;
Alvarez-Puebla, R. A. Adaptive Metabolic Pattern Biomarker for
Disease Monitoring and Staging of Lung Cancer with Liquid Biopsy.
npj Precis. Oncol. 2018, 2, 16.
(643) Jarvis, R. M.; Goodacre, R. Rapid Discrimination of Bacteria
Using Surface Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy. Anal. Chem. 2004, 76,
40−47.
(644) Patel, I. S.; Premasiri, W. R.; Moir, D. T.; Ziegler, L. D.
Barcoding Bacterial Cells: A SERS-Based Methodology for Pathogen
Identification. J. Raman Spectrosc. 2008, 39, 1660−1672.
(645) Muhamadali, H.; Chisanga, M.; Subaihi, A.; Goodacre, R.
Combining Raman and FT-IR Spectroscopy with Quantitative
Isotopic Labelling for Differentiation of E. coli Cells at Community
and Single Cell Levels. Anal. Chem. 2015, 87, 4578−4586.
(646) Premasiri, W. R.; Lee, J. C.; Sauer-Budge, A.; Théberge, R.;
Costello, C. E.; Ziegler, L. D. The Biochemical Origins of the Surface-
Enhanced Raman Spectra of Bacteria: A Metabolomics Profiling by
SERS. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 2016, 408, 4631−4647.
(647) Kubryk, P.; Niessner, R.; Ivleva, N. P. The Origin of the Band
at Around 730 cm−1 in the SERS Spectra of Bacteria: A Stable Isotope
Approach. Analyst 2016, 141, 2874−2878.
(648) Cui, L.; Yang, K.; Zhou, G. W.; Huang, W. E.; Zhu, Y. G.
Surface-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy Combined with Stable
Isotope Probing to Monitor Nitrogen Assimilation at Both Bulk
and Single-Cell Level. Anal. Chem. 2017, 89, 5793−5800.
(649) Chisanga, M.; Muhamadali, H.; Kimber, R.; Goodacre, R.
Quantitative Detection of Isotopically Enriched E. coli Cells by SERS.
Faraday Discuss. 2017, 205, 331−343.
(650) Premasiri, W. R.; Chen, Y.; Williamson, P. M.; Bandarage, D.
C.; Pyles, C.; Ziegler, L. D. Rapid Urinary Tract Infection Diagnostics
by Surface-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy (SERS): Identification and
Antibiotic Susceptibilities. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 2017, 409, 3043−
3054.
(651) Kelly, J.; Patrick, R.; Patrick, S.; Bell, S. E. J. Surface-Enhanced
Raman Spectroscopy for the Detection of a Metabolic Product in the
Headspace Above Live Bacterial Cultures. Angew. Chem. 2018, 130,
15912−15916.
(652) Bodelon, G.; Montes-Garcia, V.; Lopez-Puente, V.; Hill, E. H.;
Hamon, C.; Sanz-Ortiz, M. N.; Rodal-Cedeira, S.; Costas, C.;
Celiksoy, S.; Perez-Juste, I.; Scarabelli, L.; La Porta, A.; Perez-Juste, J.;
Pastoriza-Santos, I.; Liz-Marzan, L. M. Detection and Imaging of
Quorum Sensing in Pseudomonas aeruginosa Biofilm Communities by
Surface-Enhanced Resonance Raman Scattering. Nat. Mater. 2016, 15,
1203−1210.
(653) Lopez-Puente, V.; Abalde-Cela, S.; Angelome, P. C.; Alvarez-
Puebla, R. A.; Liz-Marzan, L. M. Plasmonic Mesoporous Composites
as Molecular Sieves for SERS Detection. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2013, 4,
2715−2720.
(654) Bodelón, G.; Montes-García, V.; Costas, C.; Pérez-Juste, I.;
Pérez-Juste, J.; Pastoriza-Santos, I.; Liz-Marzán, L. M. Imaging
Bacterial Inter-Species Chemical Interactions by Surface Enhanced
Raman Scattering. ACS Nano 2017, 11, 4631−4640.
(655) De Marchi, S.; Bodelón, G.; Vázquez-Iglesias, L.; Liz-Marzán,
L. M.; Pérez-Juste, J.; Pastoriza-Santos, I. Surface-Enhanced Raman
Scattering (SERS) Imaging of Bioactive Metabolites in Mixed
Bacterial Populations. Appl. Mater. Today 2019, 14, 207−215.
(656) Walter, A.; März, A.; Schumacher, W.; Rösch, P.; Popp, J.
Towards a Fast, High Specific and Reliable Discrimination of Bacteria
on Strain Level by Means of SERS in a Microfluidic Device. Lab Chip
2011, 11, 1013−1021.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
108


----- Page 82 (native text) -----
(657) Pethig, R. Dielectrophoresis: Status of the Theory,
Technology, and Applications. Biomicrofluidics 2010, 4, No. 022811.
(658) Cheng, I.-F.; Chang, H.-C.; Chen, T.-Y.; Hu, C.; Yang, F.-L.
Rapid (∼5 min) Identification of Pathogen in Human Blood by
Electrokinetic Concentration and Surface-Enhanced Raman Spectros-
copy. Sci. Rep. 2013, 3, 2365.
(659) Pazos-Perez, N.; Pazos, E.; Catala, C.; Mir-Simon, B.; Gómez-
de Pedro, S.; Sagales, J.; Villanueva, C.; Vila, J.; Soriano, A.; García de
Abajo, F. J.; Alvarez-Puebla, R. A. Ultrasensitive Multiplex Optical
Quantification of Bacteria in Large Samples of Biofluids. Sci. Rep.
2016, 6, 29014.
(660) Xie, W.; Schlücker, S. Medical Applications of Surface-
Enhanced Raman Scattering. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2013, 15,
5329−5344.
(661) Zhang, Y.; Schlücker, S. iSERS Microscopy for Tissue-Based
Cancer Diagnostics with SERS Nanotags. In Confocal Raman
Microscopy; Hollricher, O., Dieing, T., Toporski, J., Eds.; Springer
International Publishing AG: Switzerland, 2018; Vol. 66, pp 347−379.
(662) Schlücker, S.; Schaeberle, M. D.; Huffman, S. W.; Levin, I. W.
Raman Microspectroscopy: A Comparison of Point, Line, and Wide-
Field Imaging Methodologies. Anal. Chem. 2003, 75, 4312−4318.
(663) Schlücker, S.; Küstner, B.; Punge, A.; Bonfig, R.; Marx, A.;
Ströbel, P. Immuno-Raman Microspectroscopy: In Situ Detection of
Antigens in Tissue Specimens by Surface-Enhanced Raman
Scattering. J. Raman Spectrosc. 2006, 37, 719−721.
(664) Schlücker, S.; Salehi, M.; Bergner, G.; Schütz, M.; Ströbel, P.;
Marx, A.; Petersen, I.; Dietzek, B.; Popp, J. Immuno-Surface-
Enhanced Coherent Anti-Stokes Raman Scattering Microscopy:
Immunohistochemistry with Target-Specific Metallic Nanoprobes
and Nonlinear Raman Microscopy. Anal. Chem. 2011, 83, 7081−
7085.
(665) Hewitt, S. M.; Baskin, D. G.; Frevert, C. W.; Stahl, W. L.;
Rosa-Molinar, E. Controls for Immunohistochemistry: The Histo-
chemical Society’s Standards of Practice for Validation of
Immunohistochemical Assays. J. Histochem. Cytochem. 2014, 62,
693−697.
(666) Wang, X.-P.; Walkenfort, B.; König, M.; König, L.; Kasimir-
Bauer, S.; Schlücker, S. Fast and Reproducible iSERS Microscopy of
Single HER2-Positive Breast Cancer Cells Using Gold Nanostars as
SERS Nanotags. Faraday Discuss. 2017, 205, 377−386.
(667) MacLaughlin, C. M.; Mullaithilaga, N.; Yang, G.; Ip, S. Y.;
Wang, C.; Walker, G. C. Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering Dye-
Labeled Au Nanoparticles for Triplexed Detection of Leukemia and
Lymphoma Cells and SERS Flow Cytometry. Langmuir 2013, 29,
1908−1919.
(668) Zhang, Y.; Wang, X.-P.; Perner, S.; Bankfalvi, A.; Schlücker, S.
Effect of Antigen Retrieval Methods on Nonspecific Binding of
Antibody−Metal Nanoparticle Conjugates on Formalin-Fixed Paraf-
fin-Embedded Tissue. Anal. Chem. 2018, 90, 760−768.
(669) Lutz, B. R.; Dentinger, C. E.; Nguyen, L. N.; Sun, L.; Zhang,
J.; Allen, A. N.; Chan, S.; Knudsen, B. S. Spectral Analysis of
Multiplex Raman Probe Signatures. ACS Nano 2008, 2, 2306−2314.
(670) Kahraman, M.; Mullen, E. R.; Korkmaz, A.; Wachsmann-
Hogiu, S. Fundamentals and Applications of SERS-Based Bioanalyt-
ical Sensing. Nanophotonics 2017, 6, 831−852.
(671) Indrasekara, A. S. D. S.; Fabris, L. SERS-Based Approaches
toward Genetic Profiling. Bioanalysis 2015, 7, 263−278.
(672) Fabris, L. SERS Tags: The Next Promising Tool for
Personalized Cancer Detection? ChemNanoMater. 2016, 2, 249−258.
(673) Keren, S.; Zavaleta, C.; Cheng, Z.; de la Zerda, A.; Gheysens,
O.; Gambhir, S. S. Noninvasive Molecular Imaging of Small Living
Subjects Using Raman Spectroscopy. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.
2008, 105, 5844−5849.
(674) Qian, X.; Peng, X.-H.; Ansari, D. O.; Yin-Goen, Q.; Chen, G.
Z.; Shin, D. M.; Yang, L.; Young, A. N.; Wang, M. D.; Nie, S. In Vivo
Tumor Targeting and Spectroscopic Detection with Surface-
Enhanced Raman Nanoparticle Tags. Nat. Biotechnol. 2008, 26, 83−
90.
(675) Asiala, S. M.; Shand, N. C.; Faulds, K.; Graham, D. Surface-
Enhanced, Spatially Offset Raman Spectroscopy (SESORS) in Tissue
Analogues. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2017, 9, 25488−25494.
(676) Pal, S.; Harmsen, S.; Oseledchyk, A.; Hsu, H.-T.; Kircher, M.
F. MUC1 Aptamer Targeted SERS Nanoprobes. Adv. Funct. Mater.
2017, 27, 1606632.
(677) Indrasekara, A. S. D. S.; Paladini, B. J.; Naczynski, D. J.;
Starovoytov, V.; Moghe, P. V.; Fabris, L. Dimeric Gold Nanoparticle
Assemblies as Tags for SERS- Based Cancer Detection. Adv.
Healthcare Mater. 2013, 2, 1370−1376.
(678) Narod, S. A. Disappearing Breast Cancers. Curr. Oncol. 2012,
19, 59−60.
(679) Vendrell, M.; Maiti, K. K.; Dhaliwal, K.; Chang, Y.-T. Surface-
Enhanced Raman Scattering in Cancer Detection and Imaging. Trends
Biotechnol. 2013, 31, 249−257.
(680) Karabeber, H.; Huang, R.; Iacono, P.; Samii, J. M.; Pitter, K.;
Holland, E. C.; Kircher, M. F. Guiding Brain Tumor Resection Using
Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering Nanoparticles and a Hand-Held
Raman Scanner. ACS Nano 2014, 8, 9755−9766.
(681) Wang, Y. W.; Kang, S.; Khan, A.; Bao, P. Q.; Liu, J. T. C. In
Vivo Multiplexed Molecular Imaging of Esophageal Cancer via
Spectral Endoscopy of Topically Applied SERS Nanoparticles.
Biomed. Opt. Express 2015, 6, 3714−3723.
(682) Zhang, Y.; Mi, X.; Tan, X.; Xiang, R. Recent Progress on
Liquid Biopsy Analysis using Surface-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy.
Theranostics 2019, 9, 491−525.
(683) Lauridsen, R. K.; Sommer, L. M.; Johansen, H. K.;
Rindzevicius, T.; Molin, S.; Jelsbak, L.; Engelsen, S. B.; Boisen, A.
SERS Detection of The Biomarker Hydrogen Cyanide from
Pseudomonas aeruginosa Cultures Isolated from Cystic Fibrosis
Patients. Sci. Rep. 2017, 7, 45264.
(684) Bhamidipati, M.; Cho, H. Y.; Lee, K.-B.; Fabris, L. SERS-
based Quantification of Biomarker Expression at the Single Cell Level
Enabled by Gold Nanostars and Truncated Aptamers. Bioconjugate
Chem. 2018, 29, 2970−2981.
(685) Zong, S.; Wang, Z.; Chen, H.; Cui, Y. Ultrasensitive
Telomerase Activity Detection by Telomeric Elongation Controlled
Surface Enhanced Raman Scattering. Small 2013, 9, 4215−4220.
(686) Ngo, H. T.; Wang, H. N.; Burke, T.; Ginsburg, G. S.; Vo-
Dinh, T. Multiplex Detection of Disease Biomarkers Using SERS
Molecular Sentinel-On-Chip. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 2014, 406, 3335−
3344.
(687) Lowe, A. J.; Huh, Y. S.; Strickland, A. D.; Erickson, D.; Batt, C.
A. Multiplex Single Nucleotide Polymorphism Genotyping Utilizing
Ligase Detection Reaction Coupled Surface Enhanced Raman
Spectroscopy. Anal. Chem. 2010, 82, 5810−5814.
(688) Zhou, W.; Tian, W. F.; Yin, B.-C.; Ye, B. C. Simultaneous
Surface-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy Detection of Multiplexed
MicroRNA Biomarkers. Anal. Chem. 2017, 89, 6120−6128.
(689) Nima, Z. A.; Mahmood, M.; Xu, Y.; Mustafa, T.; Watanabe,
F.; Nedosekin, D. A.; Juratli, M. A.; Fahmi, T.; Galanzha, E. I.; Nolan,
J. P.; Basnakian, A. G.; Zharov, V. P.; Biris, A. Circulating Tumor Cell
Identification by Functionalized Silver-Gold Nanorods with Multi-
color, Super-Enhanced SERS and Photothermal Resonances. Sci. Rep.
2015, 4, 4752.
(690) Wang, Z.; Zong, S.; Wang, Y.; Li, N.; Li, L.; Lu, J.; Wang, Z.;
Chen, B.; Cui, Y. Screening and Multiple Detection of Cancer
Exosomes Using a SERS-Based Method. Nanoscale 2018, 10, 9053−
9062.
(691) Harmsen, S.; Huang, R.; Wall, M. A.; Karabeber, H.; Samii, J.
M.; Spaliviero, M.; White, J. R.; Monette, S.; O’Connor, R.; Pitter, K.
L.; Sastra, S. A.; Saborowski, M.; Holland, E. C.; Singer, S.; Olive, K.
P.; Lowe, S. W.; Blasberg, R. G.; Kircher, M. F. Surface-Enhanced
Resonance Raman Scattering Nanostars for High-Precision Cancer
Imaging. Sci. Transl. Med. 2015, 7, 271ra7.
(692) Oseledchyk, A.; Andreou, C.; Wall, M. A.; Kircher, M. F.
Folate-Targeted Surface-Enhanced Resonance Raman Scattering
Nanoprobe Ratiometry for Detection of Microscopic Ovarian Cancer.
ACS Nano 2017, 11, 1488−1497.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
109


----- Page 83 (native text) -----
(693) Andreou, C.; Neuschmelting, V.; Tschaharganeh, D.-F.;
Huang, C.-H.; Oseledchyk, A.; Iacono, P.; Karabeber, H.; Colen, R.
R.; Mannelli, L.; Lowe, S. W.; Kircher, M. F. Imaging of Liver Tumors
Using Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering Nanoparticles. ACS Nano
2016, 10, 5015−5026.
(694) Ke, P. C.; Lin, S.; Parak, W. J.; Davis, T. P.; Caruso, F. A
Decade of Protein Corona. ACS Nano 2017, 11, 11773−11776.
(695) Saraiva, C.; Praça, C.; Ferreira, R.; Santos, T.; Ferreira, L.;
Bernardino, L. Nanoparticle-Medeiated Brain Drug Delivery: Over-
coming Blood−Brain Barrier to Treat Neurodegenerative Diseases. J.
Controlled Release 2016, 235, 34−47.
(696) Yuan, H.; Wilson, C. M.; Xia, J.; Doyle, S. L.; Li, S.; Fales, A.
M.; Liu, Y.; Ozaki, E.; Mulfaul, K.; Hanna, G.; Palmer, G. M.; Wang,
L. V.; Grant, G. A.; Vo-Dinh, T. Plasmonics-Enhanced and Optically
Modulated Delivery of Gold Nanostars into Brain Tumor. Nanoscale
2014, 6, 4078−4082.
(697) Zavaleta, C. L.; Garai, E.; Liu, J. T. C.; Sensarn, S.; Mandella,
M. J.; Van de Sompel, D.; Friedland, S.; Van Dam, J.; Contag, C. H.;
Gambhir, S. S. A Raman-Based Endoscopic Strategy for Multiplexed
Molecular Imaging. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2013, 110, E2288−
E2297.
(698) Sharma, N.; Takeshita, N.; Ho, K. Y. Raman Spectroscopy for
the Endoscopic Diagnosis of Esophageal, Gastric, and Colonic
Diseases. Clin. Endosc. 2016, 49, 404−407.
(699) Garai, E.; Sensarn, S.; Zavaleta, C. L.; Loewke, N. O.; Rogalla,
S.; Mandella, M. J.; Felt, S. A.; Friedland, S.; Liu, J. T.; Gambhir, S. S.;
Contag, C. H. A Real-Time Clinical Endoscopic System for
Intraluminal, Multiplexed Imaging of Surface-Enhanced Raman
Scattering Nanoparticles. PLoS One 2015, 10, No. e0123185.
(700) Li, T. D.; Zhang, R.; Chen, H.; Huang, Z.-P.; Ye, X.; Wang,
H.; Deng, A.-M.; Kong, J.-L. An Ultrasensitive Polydopamine Bi-
Functionalized SERS Immunoassay for Exosome-Based Diagnosis and
Classification of Pancreatic Cancer. Chem. Sci. 2018, 9, 5372−5382.
(701) Feng, J.; Xu, L.; Cui, G.; Wu, X.; Ma, W.; Kuang, H.; Xu, C.
Building SERS-Active Heteroassemblies for Ultrasensitive Bisphenol
A Detection. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2016, 81, 138−142.
(702) Li, A.; Tang, L.; Song, D.; Song, S.; Ma, W.; Xu, L.; Kuang, H.;
Wu, X.; Liu, L.; Chen, X.; Xu, C. A SERS-Active Sensor Based on
Heterogeneous Gold Nanostar Core-Silver Nanoparticle Satellite
Assemblies for Ultrasensitive Detection of Aflatoxinb1. Nanoscale
2016, 8, 1873−1878.
(703) Schmit, V. L.; Martoglio, R.; Scott, B.; Strickland, A. D.;
Carron, K. T. Lab-on-a-Bubble: Synthesis, Characterization, and
Evaluation of Buoyant Gold Nanoparticle-Coated Silica Spheres. J.
Am. Chem. Soc. 2012, 134, 59−62.
(704) Xu, L.; Yin, H.; Ma, W.; Kuang, H.; Wang, L.; Xu, C.
Ultrasensitive SERS Detection of Mercury Based on the Assembled
Gold Nanochains. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2015, 67, 472−476.
(705) Wu, X.; Tang, L.; Ma, W.; Xu, L.; Liu, L.; Kuang, H.; Xu, C.
SERS-Active Au NR Oligomer Sensor for Ultrasensitive Detection of
Mercury Ions. RSC Adv. 2015, 5, 81802−81807.
(706) Ma, W.; Sun, M.; Xu, L.; Wang, L.; Kuang, H.; Xu, C. A SERS
Active Gold Nanostar Dimer for Mercury Ion Detection. Chem.
Commun. 2013, 49, 4989−4991.
(707) Zhao, Y.; Xu, L.; Liz-Marzán, L. M.; Kuang, H.; Ma, W.;
Asenjo-García, A.; García de Abajo, F. J.; Kotov, N. A.; Wang, L.; Xu,
C. Alternating Plasmonic Nanoparticle Heterochains Made by
Polymerase Chain Reaction and their Optical Properties. J. Phys.
Chem. Lett. 2013, 4, 641−647.
(708) Lin, E.-C.; Fang, J.; Park, S.-C.; Stauden, T.; Pezoldt, J.;
Jacobs, H. O. Effective Collection and Detection of Airborne Species
Using SERS-Based Detection and Localized Electrodynamic Precip-
itation. Adv. Mater. 2013, 25, 3554−3559.
(709) Huang, Z.; Meng, G.; Huang, Q.; Yang, Y.; Zhu, C.; Tang, C.
Improved SERS Performance from Au Nanopillar Arrays by
Abridging the Pillar Tip Spacing by Ag Sputtering. Adv. Mater.
2010, 22, 4136−4139.
(710) Zhao, Y.; Sun, M.; Ma, W.; Kuang, H.; Xu, C. Biological
Molecules-Governed Plasmonic Nanoparticle Dimers with Tailored
Optical Behaviors. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2017, 8, 5633−5642.
(711) Wang, X.; Shi, W.; Jin, Z.; Huang, W.; Lin, J.; Ma, G.; Li, S.;
Guo, L. Remarkable SERS Activity Observed from Amorphous ZnO
Nanocages. Angew. Chem. 2017, 129, 9983−9987.
(712) Tao, L.; Chen, K.; Chen, Z.; Cong, C.; Qiu, C.; Chen, J.;
Wang, X.; Chen, H.; Yu, T.; Xie, W.; Deng, S.; Xu, J.-B. 1T′
Transition Metal Telluride Atomic Layers for Plasmon-Free SERS at
Femtomolar Levels. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2018, 140, 8696−8704.
(713) Zhao, Y.; Kornienko, N.; Liu, Z.; Zhu, C.; Asahina, S.; Kuo,
T.-R.; Bao, W.; Xie, C.; Hexemer, A.; Terasaki, O.; Yang, P.; Yaghi, O.
M. Mesoscopic Constructs of Ordered and Oriented Metal−Organic
Frameworks on Plasmonic Silver Nanocrystals. J. Am. Chem. Soc.
2015, 137, 2199−2202.
(714) Xu, L.; Ma, W.; Wang, L.; Xu, C.; Kuang, H.; Kotov, N. A.
Nanoparticle Assemblies: Dimensional Transformation of Nanoma-
terials and Scalability. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2013, 42, 3114−3126.
(715) Kearns, H.; Goodacre, R.; Jamieson, L. E.; Graham, D.;
Faulds, K. SERS Detection of Multiple Antimicrobial-Resistant
Pathogens Using Nanosensors. Anal. Chem. 2017, 89, 12666−12673.
(716) Szlag, V. M.; Styles, M. J.; Madison, L. R.; Campos, A. R.;
Wagh, B.; Sprouse, D.; Schatz, G. C.; Reineke, T. M.; Haynes, C. L.
SERS Detection of Ricin B-Chain via N-Acetyl-Galactosamine
Glycopolymers. ACS Sens. 2016, 1, 842−846.
(717) Szlag, V. M.; Jung, S.; Rodriguez, R. S.; Bourgeois, M.; Bryson,
S.; Schatz, G. C.; Reineke, T. M.; Haynes, C. L. Isothermal Titration
Calorimetry for the Screening of Aflatoxin B1 Surface-Enhanced
Raman Scattering Sensor Affinity Agents. Anal. Chem. 2018, 90,
13409−13418.
(718) Cheung, M.; Lee, W. W. Y.; Cowcher, D. P.; Goodacre, R.;
Bell, S. E. J. SERS of Meso-Droplets Supported on Superhydrophobic
Wires Allows Exquisitely Sensitive Detection of Dipicolinic Acid, an
Anthrax Biomarker, Considerably Below the Infective Dose. Chem.
Commun. 2016, 52, 9925−9928.
(719) Zhang, X.; Young, M. A.; Lyandres, O.; Van Duyne, R. P.
Rapid Detection of an Anthrax Biomarker by Surface-Enhanced
Raman Spectroscopy. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2005, 127, 4484−4489.
(720) Szlag, V. M.; Rodriguez, R. S.; He, J.; Hudson-Smith, N.;
Kang, H.; Le, N.; Reineke, T. M.; Haynes, C. L. Molecular Affinity
Agents for Intrinsic Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering (SERS)
Sensors. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2018, 10, 31825−31844.
(721) Granger, J. H.; Porter, M. D. The Case for Human Serum as a
Highly Preferable Sample Matrix for Detection of Anthrax Toxins.
ACS Sens. 2018, 3, 2303−2310.
(722) Lim, C. Y.; Granger, J. H.; Porter, M. D. SERS Detection of
Clostridium Botulinum Neurotoxin Serotypes A and B in Buffer and
Serum: Towards the Development of a Biodefense Test Platform.
Anal. Chim. Acta X 2019, 1, 100002.
(723) Hwang, J.; Lee, S.; Choo, J. Application of a SERS-Based
Lateral Flow Immunoassay Strip for the Rapid and Sensitive
Detection of Staphylococcal Enterotoxin B. Nanoscale 2016, 8,
11418−11425.
(724) Gao, F.; Feng, S.; Chen, Z.; Li-Chan, E. C.; Grant, E.; Lu, X.
Detection and Quantification of Chloramphenicol in Milk and Honey
Using Molecularly Imprinted Polymers: Canadian Penny-Based SERS
Nano-Biosensor. J. Food Sci. 2014, 79, N2542−N2549.
(725) Gao, F.; Hu, Y.; Chen, D.; Li-Chan, E. C. Y.; Grant, E.; Lu, X.
Determination of Sudan I in Paprika Powder by Molecularly
Imprinted Polymers-Thin Layer Chromatography-Surface Enhanced
Raman Spectroscopic Biosensor. Talanta 2015, 143, 344−352.
(726) Lamont, E. A.; He, L.; Warriner, K.; Labuza, T. P.; Sreevatsan,
S. A Single DNA Aptamer Functions as a Biosensor for Ricin. Analyst
2011, 136, 3884−3895.
(727) He, L.; Lamont, E.; Veeregowda, B.; Sreevatsan, S.; Haynes,
C. L.; Diez-Gonzalez, F.; Labuza, T. P. Aptamer-Based Surface-
Enhanced Raman Scattering Detection of Ricin in Liquid Foods.
Chem. Sci. 2011, 2, 1579−1582.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
110


----- Page 84 (native text) -----
(728) Zengin, A.; Tamer, U.; Caykara, T. Fabrication of a SERS
Based Aptasensor for Detection of Ricin B Toxin. J. Mater. Chem. B
2015, 3, 306−315.
(729) Campos, A. R.; Gao, Z.; Blaber, M. G.; Huang, R.; Schatz, G.
C.; Van Duyne, R. P.; Haynes, C. L. Surface-Enhanced Raman
Spectroscopy Detection of Ricin B Chain in Human Blood. J. Phys.
Chem. C 2016, 120, 20961−20969.
(730) Lyandres, O.; Shah, N. C.; Yonzon, C. R.; Walsh, J. T., Jr.;
Glucksberg, M. R.; Van Duyne, R. P. Real-Time Glucose Sensing by
Surface-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy in Bovine Plasma Facilitated
by a Mixed Decanethiol/Mercaptohexanol Partition Layer. Anal.
Chem. 2005, 77, 6134−6139.
(731) Yonzon, C. R.; Haynes, C. L.; Zhang, X.; Walsh, J. T., Jr.; Van
Duyne, R. P. A Glucose Biosensor Based on Surface-Enhanced Raman
Scattering: Improved Partition Layer, Temporal Stability, Reversi-
bility, and Resistance to Serum Protein Interference. Anal. Chem.
2004, 76, 78−85.
(732) Zheng, J.; Zhao, C.; Tian, G.; He, L. Rapid Screening for Ricin
Toxin on Letter Papers Using Surface Enhanced Raman Spectrosco-
py. Talanta 2017, 162, 552−557.
(733) Radu, A. I.; Ryabchykov, O.; Bocklitz, T. W.; Huebner, U.;
Weber, K.; Cialla-May, D.; Popp, J. Toward Food Analytics: Fast
Estimation of Lycopene and Β-Carotene Content in Tomatoes Based
on Surface Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy (SERS). Analyst 2016,
141, 4447−4455.
(734) Zhu, C. H.; Meng, G. W.; Huang, Q.; Huang, Z. L. Vertically
Aligned Ag Nanoplate-Assembled Film as a Sensitive and Reprodu-
cible SERS Substrate for the Detection of PCB-77. J. Hazard. Mater.
2012, 211, 389−395.
(735) Bantz, K. C.; Haynes, C. L. Surface-Enhanced Raman
Scattering Detection and Discrimination of Polychlorinated Biphen-
yls. Vib. Spectrosc. 2009, 50, 29−35.
(736) Jones, C. L.; Bantz, K. C.; Haynes, C. L. Partition Layer-
Modified Substrates for Reversible Surface-Enhanced Raman
Scattering Detection of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons. Anal.
Bioanal. Chem. 2009, 394, 303−311.
(737) Bantz, K. C.; Nelson, H. D.; Haynes, C. L. Plasmon-Enabled
Study of Self-Assembled Alkanethiol Ordering on Roughened Ag
Substrates. J. Phys. Chem. C 2012, 116, 3585−3593.
(738) Xiao, L. L.; Zhang, M.; Liu, Z.; Bian, W. W.; Zhang, X. L.;
Zhan, J. H. Hydrophobic Silver Nanowire Membrane for Swabbing
Extraction and in Situ SERS Detection of Polycyclic Aromatic
Hydrocarbons on Toys. Anal. Methods 2017, 9, 1816−1824.
(739) Alvarez-Puebla, R. A.; Contreras-Caceres, R.; Pastoriza-Santos,
I.; Perez-Juste, J.; Liz-Marzan, L. M. Au@pNIPAM Colloids as
Molecular Traps for Surface-Enhanced, Spectroscopic, Ultra-Sensitive
Analysis. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2009, 48, 138−143.
(740) Contreras-Caceres, R.; Abalde-Cela, S.; Guardia-Giros, P.;
Fernandez-Barbero, A.; Perez-Juste, J.; Alvarez-Puebla, R. A.; Liz-
Marzan, L. M. Multifunctional Microgel Magnetic/Optical Traps for
SERS Ultradetection. Langmuir 2011, 27, 4520−4525.
(741) Mueller, M.; Tebbe, M.; Andreeva, D. V.; Karg, M.; Alvarez-
Puebla, R. A.; Pazos-Perez, N.; Fery, A. Large-Area Organization of
pNIPAM-Coated Nanostars as SERS Platforms for Polycyclic
Aromatic Hydrocarbons Sensing in Gas Phase. Langmuir 2012, 28,
9168−9173.
(742) Leyton, P.; Sanchez-Cortes, S.; Garcia-Ramos, J. V.; Domingo,
C.; Campos-Vallette, M.; Saitz, C.; Clavijo, R. E. Selective Molecular
Recognition of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons (PAHs) on
Calix[4]arene-Functionalized Ag Nanoparticles by Surface-Enhanced
Raman Scattering. J. Phys. Chem. B 2004, 108, 17484−17490.
(743) Guerrini, L.; Garcia-Ramos, J. V.; Domingo, C.; Sanchez-
Cortes, S. Functionalization of Ag Nanoparticles with Dithiocarba-
mate Calix[4]arene as an Effective Supramolecular Host for the
Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering Detection of Polycyclic Aromatic
Hydrocarbons. Langmuir 2006, 22, 10924−10926.
(744) Guerrini, L.; Garcia-Ramos, J. V.; Domingo, C.; Sanchez-
Cortes, S. Sensing Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons with
Dithiocarbamate-Functionalized Ag Nanoparticles by Surface-En-
hanced Raman Scattering. Anal. Chem. 2009, 81, 953−960.
(745) Zhu, C. H.; Meng, G. W.; Huang, Q.; Li, Z. B.; Huang, Z. L.;
Wang, M. L.; Yuan, J. P. Large-Scale Well-Separated Ag Nanosheet-
Assembled Micro-Hemispheres Modified with HS-beta-CD as
Effective SERS Substrates for Trace Detection of PCBs. J. Mater.
Chem. 2012, 22, 2271−2278.
(746) Montes-Garcia, V.; Fernandez-Lopez, C.; Gomez, B.; Perez-
Juste, I.; Garcia-Rio, L.; Liz-Marzan, L. M.; Perez-Juste, J.; Pastoriza-
Santos, I. Pillar[5] arene-Mediated Synthesis of Gold Nanoparticles:
Size Control and Sensing Capabilities. Chem. - Eur. J. 2014, 20, 8404−
8409.
(747) Montes-Garcia, V.; Gomez-Gonzalez, B.; Martinez-Solis, D.;
Taboada, J. M.; Jimenez-Otero, N.; de Una-Alvarez, J.; Obelleiro, F.;
Garcia-Rio, L.; Perez-Juste, J.; Pastoriza-Santos, I. Pillar[5]arene-
Based Supramolecular Plasmonic Thin Films for Label-Free,
Quantitative and Multiplex SERS Detection. ACS Appl. Mater.
Interfaces 2017, 9, 26372−26382.
(748) Xie, Y. F.; Wang, X.; Han, X. X.; Xue, X. X.; Ji, W.; Qi, Z. H.;
Liu, J. Q.; Zhao, B.; Ozaki, Y. Sensing of Polycyclic Aromatic
Hydrocarbons with Cyclodextrin Inclusion Complexes on Silver
Nanoparticles by Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering. Analyst 2010,
135, 1389−1394.
(749) Pfannkuche, J.; Lubecki, L.; Schmidt, H.; Kowalewska, G.;
Kronfeldt, H. D. The Use of Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering
(SERS) for Detection of PAHs in the Gulf of Gdansk (Baltic Sea).
Mar. Pollut. Bull. 2012, 64, 614−626.
(750) Kreno, L. E.; Hupp, J. T.; Van Duyne, R. P. Metal-Organic
Framework Thin Film for Enhanced Localized Surface Plasmon
Resonance Gas Sensing. Anal. Chem. 2010, 82, 8042−8046.
(751) Cao, X. L.; Hong, S. H.; Jiang, Z. J.; She, Y. X.; Wang, S. S.;
Zhang, C.; Li, H.; Jin, F.; Jin, M. J.; Wang, J. SERS-Active Metal-
Organic Frameworks with Embedded Gold Nanoparticles. Analyst
2017, 142, 2640−2647.
(752) He, L. C.; Liu, Y.; Liu, J. Z.; Xiong, Y. S.; Zheng, J. Z.; Liu, Y.
L.; Tang, Z. Y. CoreShell Noble-Metal@Metal-Organic-Framework
Nanoparticles with Highly Selective Sensing Property. Angew. Chem.,
Int. Ed. 2013, 52, 3741−3745.
(753) Cai, Y. Z.; Wu, Y. P.; Xuan, T.; Guo, X. Y.; Wen, Y.; Yang, H.
F. Core-Shell Au@Metal-Organic Frameworks for Promoting Raman
Detection Sensitivity of Methenamine. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces
2018, 10, 15412−15417.
(754) Kreno, L. E.; Greeneltch, N. G.; Farha, O. K.; Hupp, J. T.; Van
Duyne, R. P. SERS of Molecules that Do Not Adsorb on Ag Surfaces:
A Metal-Organic Framework-Based Functionalization Strategy.
Analyst 2014, 139, 4073−4080.
(755) Hu, Y. L.; Liao, J.; Wang, D. M.; Li, G. K. Fabrication of Gold
Nanoparticle-Embedded Metal-Organic Framework for Highly
Sensitive Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering Detection. Anal.
Chem. 2014, 86, 3955−3963.
(756) Sun, H.; Cong, S.; Zheng, Z.; Wang, Z.; Chen, Z.; Zhao, Z.
Metal−Organic Frameworks as Surface Enhanced Raman Scattering
Substrates with High Tailorability. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2019, 141, 870−
878.
(757) Nicolson, F.; Jamieson, L. E.; Mabbott, S.; Shand, N. C.;
Graham, D.; Faulds, K. Through Barrier Detection of Ethanol Using
Handheld Raman Spectroscopy −Conventional Raman versus
Spatially Offset Raman Spectroscopy (SORS). J. Raman Spectrosc.
2017, 48, 1828−1838.
(758) Nicolson, F.; Jamieson, L. E.; Mabbott, S.; Plakas, K.; Shand,
N. C.; Detty, M. R.; Graham, D.; Faulds, K. Through Tissue Imaging
of a Live Breast Cancer Tumour Model Using Handheld Surface
Enhanced Spatially Offset Resonance Raman Spectroscopy (SE-
SORRS). Chem. Sci. 2018, 9, 3788−3792.
(759) Nicolson, F.; Jamieson, L. E.; Mabbott, S.; Plakas, K.; Shand,
N. C.; Detty, M. R.; Graham, D.; Faulds, K. Surface Enhanced
Resonance Raman Spectroscopy (SERRS) for Probing Through
Plastic and Tissue Barriers Using a Handheld Spectrometer. Analyst
2018, 143, 5965−5973.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
111


----- Page 85 (native text) -----
(760) Nicolson, F.; Jamieson, L. E.; Mabbott, S.; Plakas, K.; Shand,
N. C.; Detty, M. R.; Graham, D.; Faulds, K. Multiplex Imaging of Live
Breast Cancer Tumour Models Through Tissue Using Handheld
Surface Enhanced Spatially Offset Resonance Raman Spectroscopy
(SESORRS). Chem. Commun. 2018, 54, 8530−8533.
(761) Nicolson, F.; Jamieson, L. E.; Mabbott, S.; Plakas, K.; Shand,
N. C.; Detty, M. R.; Graham, D.; Faulds, K. Towards Establishing a
Minimal Nanoparticle Concentration for Applications Involving
Surface Enhanced Spatially Offset Resonance Raman Spectroscopy
(SESORRS) in Vivo. Analyst 2018, 143, 5358−5363.
(762) Odion, R. A.; Strobbia, P.; Crawford, B. M.; Vo-Dinh, T.
Inverse Surface-Enhanced Spatially Offset Raman Spectroscopy
(SESORS) Through a Monkey Skull. J. Raman Spectrosc. 2018, 49,
1452−1460.
(763) Noonan, J.; Asiala, S. M.; Grassia, G.; MacRitchie, N.; Gracie,
K.; Carson, J.; Moores, M.; Girolami, M.; Bradshaw, A. C.; Guzik, T.
J.; Meehan, G. R.; Scales, H. E.; Brewer, J. M.; McInnes, I. B.; Sattar,
N.; Faulds, K.; Garside, P.; Graham, D.; Maffia, P. In Vivo Multiplex
Molecular Imaging of Vascular Inflammation Using Surface-Enhanced
Raman Spectroscopy. Theranostics 2018, 8, 6195−6209.
(764) Burstein, E.; Lundqvist, S.; Mills, D. L. In Surface Enhanced
Raman Scattering; Chang, R. K., Furtak, T. E., Eds.; Plenum Press:
New York, 1982; pp 51−66.
(765) Lombardi, J. R.; Birke, R. L. A Unified View of Surface-
Enhanced Raman Scattering. Acc. Chem. Res. 2009, 42, 734−742.
(766) Lombardi, J. R.; Birke, R. L.; Lu, T.; Xu, J. Charge-Transfer
Theory of Surface Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy: Herzberg−Teller
Contributions. J. Chem. Phys. 1986, 84, 4174−4180.
(767) Lombardi, J. R.; Birke, R. L. A Unified Approach to Surface-
Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy. J. Phys. Chem. C 2008, 112, 5605−
5617.
(768) Gale, R. J. Spectroelectrochemistry: Theory and Practice;
Springer US, 1988.
(769) Konishi, T.; Kiguchi, M.; Takase, M.; Nagasawa, F.; Nabika,
H.; Ikeda, K.; Uosaki, K.; Ueno, K.; Misawa, H.; Murakoshi, K. Single
Molecule Dynamics at a Mechanically Controllable Break Junction in
Solution at Room Temperature. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2013, 135, 1009−
1014.
(770) Tian, Z. Q.; Lian, Y. Z.; Lin, T. Q. SERS Studies on Interfacial
Water in Concentrated NaClO4 Solutions. J. Electroanal. Chem.
Interfacial Electrochem. 1989, 265, 277−282.
(771) Chen, Y. X.; Tian, Z. Q. Dependence of Surface Enhanced
Raman Scattering of Water on the Hydrogen Evolution Reaction.
Chem. Phys. Lett. 1997, 281, 379−383.
(772) Kedziora, G. S.; Schatz, G. C. Calculating Dipole and
Quadrupole Polarizabilities Relevant to Surface Enhanced Raman
Spectroscopy. Spectrochim. Acta, Part A 1999, 55, 625−638.
(773) Polubotko, A. M. Some Anomalies of the SER Spectra of
Symmetrical Molecules Adsorbed on Transition Metal Substrates:
Consideration by the Dipole−Quadrupole SERS Theory. J. Raman
Spectrosc. 2005, 36, 522−532.
(774) Johansson, P.; Xu, H.; Käll, M. Surface-Enhanced Raman
Scattering and Fluorescence Near Metal Nanoparticles. Phys. Rev. B:
Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 2005, 72, No. 035427.
(775) Nabika, H.; Takase, M.; Nagasawa, F.; Murakoshi, K. Toward
Plasmon-Induced Photoexcitation of Molecules. J. Phys. Chem. Lett.
2010, 1, 2470−2487.
(776) Mulvaney, P. Surface Plasmon Spectroscopy of Nanosized
Metal Particles. Langmuir 1996, 12, 788−800.
(777) Brown, A. M.; Sheldon, M. T.; Atwater, H. A. Electrochemical
Tuning of the Dielectric Function of Au Nanoparticles. ACS Photonics
2015, 2, 459−464.
(778) Zapata Herrera, M.; Aizpurua, J.; Kazansky, A. K.; Borisov, A.
G. Plasmon Response and Electron Dynamics in Charged Metallic
Nanoparticles. Langmuir 2016, 32, 2829−2840.
(779) Iida, T.; Ishihara, H. Unconventional Control of Excited
States of a Dimer Molecule by a Localized Light Field Between Metal
Nanostructures. Phys. Status Solidi A 2009, 206, 980−984.
(780) Iida, T.; Aiba, Y.; Ishihara, H. Anomalous Optical Selection
Rule of an Organic Molecule Controlled by Extremely Localized Light
Field. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2011, 98, No. 053108.
(781) Jain, P. K.; Ghosh, D.; Baer, R.; Rabani, E.; Alivisatos, A. Near-
Field Manipulation of Spectroscopic Selection Rules on the
Nanoscale. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2012, 109, 8016−8019.
(782) Lidzey, D. G.; Bradley, D. D. C.; Skolnick, M. S.; Virgili, T.;
Walker, S.; Whittaker, D. M. Strong Exciton-Photon Coupling in an
Organic Semiconductor Microcavity. Nature 1998, 395, 53−55.
(783) Bellessa, J.; Bonnand, C.; Plenet, J. C.; Mugnier, J. Strong
Coupling between Surface Plasmons and Excitons in an Organic
Semiconductor. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2004, 93, No. 036404.
(784) Hutchison, J. A.; Schwartz, T.; Genet, C.; Devaux, E.;
Ebbesen, T. W. Modifying Chemical Landscapes by Coupling to
Vacuum Fields. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2012, 51, 1592−1596.
(785) Nagasawa, F.; Takase, M.; Murakoshi, K. Raman Enhance-
ment via Polariton States Produced by Strong Coupling between a
Localized Surface Plasmon and Dye Excitons at Metal Nanogaps. J.
Phys. Chem. Lett. 2014, 5, 14−19.
(786) Kato, F.; Minamimoto, H.; Nagasawa, F.; Yamamoto, Y. S.;
Itoh, T.; Murakoshi, K. Active Tuning of Strong Coupling States
between Dye Excitons and Localized Surface Plasmons via Electro-
chemical Potential Control. ACS Photonics 2018, 5, 788−796.
(787) Minamimoto, H.; Kato, F.; Nagasawa, F.; Takase, M.;
Murakoshi, K. Electrochemical Control of Strong Coupling States
Between Localized Surface Plasmons and Molecule Excitons for
Raman Enhancement. Faraday Discuss. 2017, 205, 261−269.
(788) Rivera, N.; Kaminer, I.; Zhen, B.; Joannopoulos, J. D.; Soljačić,
M. Shrinking Light to Allow Forbidden Transitions on the Atomic
Scale. Science 2016, 353, 263−269.
(789) Baranov, A. V.; Bobovich, Y. S. Super-Enhanced Hyper-
Raman Scattering from Dyes Adsorbed on Colloidal Silver Particles.
JETP Lett. 1982, 36, 339−343.
(790) Murphy, D. V.; Vonraben, K. U.; Chang, R. K.; Dorain, P. B.
Surface-Enhanced Hyper-Raman Scattering from SO3
2‑ Adsorbed on
Ag Powder. Chem. Phys. Lett. 1982, 85, 43−47.
(791) Simmons, P. D.; Turley, H. K.; Silverstein, D. W.; Jensen, L.;
Camden, J. P. Surface-Enhanced Spectroscopy for Higher-Order Light
Scattering: A Combined Experimental and Theoretical Study of
Second Hyper-Raman Scattering. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2015, 6, 5067−
5071.
(792) Denisov, V. N.; Mavrin, B. N.; Podobedov, V. B. Hyper-
Raman Scattering by Vibrational Excitations in Crystals, Glasses and
Liquids. Phys. Rep. 1987, 151, 1−92.
(793) Madzharova, F.; Heiner, Z.; Kneipp, J. Surface Enhanced
Hyper Raman Scattering (SEHRS) and its Applications. Chem. Soc.
Rev. 2017, 46, 3980−3999.
(794) Kneipp, K.; Kneipp, H.; Itzkan, I.; Dasari, R. R.; Feld, M. S.
Surface-Enhanced Non-Linear Raman Scattering at the Single-
Molecule Level. Chem. Phys. 1999, 247, 155−162.
(795) Kneipp, J.; Kneipp, H.; Kneipp, K. Two-Photon Vibrational
Spectroscopy for Biosciences Based on Surface-Enhanced Hyper-
Raman Scattering. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2006, 103, 17149−
17153.
(796) Yoshikawa, H.; Adachi, T.; Sazaki, G.; Matsui, T.; Nakajima,
K.; Masuhara, H. Surface-Enhanced Hyper-Raman Spectroscopy
Using Optical Trapping of Silver Nanoparticles for Molecular
Detection in Solution. J. Opt. A: Pure Appl. Opt. 2007, 9, S164.
(797) Milojevich, C. B.; Mandrell, B. K.; Turley, H. K.; Iberi, V.;
Best, M. D.; Camden, J. P. Surface-Enhanced Hyper-Raman
Scattering from Single Molecules. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2013, 4,
3420−3423.
(798) Nie, S.; Lipscomb, L. A.; Yu, N.-T. Surface-Enhanced Hyper-
Raman Spectroscopy. Appl. Spectrosc. Rev. 1991, 26, 203−276.
(799) Golab, J. T.; Sprague, J. R.; Carron, K. T.; Schatz, G. C.; Van
Duyne, R. P. A Surface Enhanced Hyper-Raman Scattering Study of
Pyridine Adsorbed onto Silver: Experiment and Theory. J. Chem. Phys.
1988, 88, 7942−7951.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
112


----- Page 86 (native text) -----
(800) Yang, W. H.; Schatz, G. C. Ab Initio and Semiempirical
Molecular Orbital Studies of Surface Enhanced and Bulk Hyper-
Raman Scattering from Pyridine. J. Chem. Phys. 1992, 97, 3831−3845.
(801) Valley, N.; Jensen, L.; Autschbach, J.; Schatz, G. C.
Theoretical Studies of Surface Enhanced Hyper-Raman Spectroscopy:
The Chemical Enhancement Mechanism. J. Chem. Phys. 2010, 133,
No. 054103.
(802) Mullin, J.; Valley, N.; Blaber, M. G.; Schatz, G. C. Combined
Quantum Mechanics (TDDFT) and Classical Electrodynamics (Mie
Theory) Methods for Calculating Surface Enhanced Raman and
Hyper-Raman Spectra. J. Phys. Chem. A 2012, 116, 9574−9581.
(803) Christie, J. H.; Lockwood, D. J. Selection Rules for Three- and
Four-Photon Raman Interactions. J. Chem. Phys. 1971, 54, 1141−
1154.
(804) Živanović, V.; Madzharova, F.; Heiner, Z.; Arenz, C.; Kneipp,
J. Specific Interaction of Tricyclic Antidepressants with Gold and
Silver Nanostructures as Revealed by Combined One- and Two-
Photon Vibrational Spectroscopy. J. Phys. Chem. C 2017, 121, 22958−
22968.
(805) Turley, H. K.; Camden, J. P. A Nonlinear Approach to
Surface-Enhanced Sensing in the Short-Wave Infrared. Chem.
Commun. 2014, 50, 1472−1474.
(806) Gühlke, M.; Heiner, Z.; Kneipp, J. Combined Near-Infrared
Excited SEHRS and SERS Spectra of pH Sensors Using Silver
Nanostructures. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2015, 17, 26093−26100.
(807) Trujillo, M. J.; Camden, J. P. Utilizing Molecular Hyper-
polarizability for Trace Analysis: A Surface-Enhanced Hyper-Raman
Scattering Study of Uranyl Ion. ACS Omega 2018, 3, 6660−6664.
(808) Gühlke, M.; Heiner, Z.; Kneipp, J. Surface-Enhanced Hyper-
Raman and Raman Hyperspectral Mapping. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys.
2016, 18, 14228−14233.
(809) Heiner, Z.; Gühlke, M.; Živanović, V.; Madzharova, F.;
Kneipp, J. Surface-Enhanced Hyper Raman Hyperspectral Imaging
and Probing in Animal Cells. Nanoscale 2017, 9, 8024−8032.
(810) Li, W.-H.; Li, X.-Y.; Yu, N.-T. Surface-Enhanced Hyper-
Raman Spectroscopy (SEHRS) and Surface-Enhanced Raman
Spectroscopy (SERS) Studies of Pyrazine and Pyridine Adsorbed
on Silver Electrodes. Chem. Phys. Lett. 1999, 305, 303−310.
(811) Li, X.-Y.; Huang, Q.-J.; Petrov, V. I.; Xie, Y.-T.; Luo, Q.; Yu,
X.; Yan, Y.-J. Surface-Enhanced Hyper-Raman and Surface-Enhanced
Raman Scattering from Molecules Adsorbed on Nanoparticles-on-
Smooth-Electrode (NOSE) Substrate I. Pyridine, Pyrazine and
Benzene. J. Raman Spectrosc. 2005, 36, 555−573.
(812) Hulteen, J. C.; Young, M. A.; Van Duyne, R. P. Surface-
Enhanced Hyper-Raman Scattering (SEHRS) on Ag Film over
Nanosphere (FON) Electrodes: Surface Symmetry of Centrosym-
metric Adsorbates. Langmuir 2006, 22, 10354−10364.
(813) Kneipp, H.; Kneipp, K. Surface-Enhanced Hyper Raman
Scattering in Silver Colloidal Solutions. J. Raman Spectrosc. 2005, 36,
551−554.
(814) Madzharova, F.; Heiner, Z.; Gühlke, M.; Kneipp, J. Surface-
Enhanced Hyper-Raman Spectra of Adenine, Guanine, Cytosine,
Thymine, and Uracil. J. Phys. Chem. C 2016, 120, 15415−15423.
(815) Madzharova, F.; Heiner, Z.; Kneipp, J. Surface Enhanced
Hyper-Raman Scattering of the Amino Acids Tryptophan, Histidine,
Phenylalanine, and Tyrosine. J. Phys. Chem. C 2017, 121, 1235−1242.
(816) Shimada, R.; Hamaguchi, H. O. Solute-Solvent Intermolecular
Vibronic Coupling as Manifested by the Molecular Near-Field Effect
in Resonance Hyper-Raman Scattering. J. Chem. Phys. 2011, 134,
No. 034516.
(817) Gühlke, M.; Heiner, Z.; Kneipp, J. Surface-Enhanced Raman
and Surface-Enhanced Hyper-Raman Scattering of Thiol-Function-
alized Carotene. J. Phys. Chem. C 2016, 120, 20702−20709.
(818) Milojevich, C. B.; Silverstein, D. W.; Jensen, L.; Camden, J. P.
Probing Two-Photon Properties of Molecules: Large Non-Condon
Effects Dominate the Resonance Hyper-Raman Scattering of
Rhodamine 6G. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2011, 133, 14590−14592.
(819) Milojevich, C. B.; Silverstein, D. W.; Jensen, L.; Camden, J. P.
Probing One-Photon Inaccessible Electronic States with High
Sensitivity: Wavelength Scanned Surface Enhanced Hyper-Raman
Scattering. ChemPhysChem 2011, 12, 101−103.
(820) Espina Palanco, M.; Bo Mogensen, K.; Gühlke, M.; Heiner, Z.;
Kneipp, J.; Kneipp, K. Templated Green Synthesis of Plasmonic Silver
Nanoparticles in Onion Epidermal Cells Suitable for Surface-
Enhanced Raman and Hyper-Raman Scattering. Beilstein J. Nano-
technol. 2016, 7, 834−840.
(821) Itoh, T.; Ozaki, Y.; Yoshikawa, H.; Ihama, T.; Masuhara, H.
Hyper-Rayleigh Scattering and Hyper-Raman Scattering of Dye-
Adsorbed Silver Nanoparticles Induced by a Focused Continuous-
Wave Near-Infrared Laser. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2006, 88, No. 084102.
(822) Leng, W.; Yasseri, A. A.; Sharma, S.; Li, Z.; Woo, H. Y.; Vak,
D.; Bazan, G. C.; Kelley, A. M. Silver Nanocrystal-Modified Silicon
Nanowires as Substrates for Surface-Enhanced Raman and Hyper-
Raman Scattering. Anal. Chem. 2006, 78, 6279−6282.
(823) Kitahama, Y.; Hayashi, H.; Itoh, T.; Ozaki, Y. Measurement of
pH-Dependent Surface-Enhanced Hyper-Raman Scattering at Desired
Positions on Yeast Cells via Optical Trapping. Analyst 2017, 142,
3967−3974.
(824) Stockle, R.; Suh, Y.; Deckert, V.; Zenobi, R. Nanoscale
Chemical Analysis by Tip-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy. Chem.
Phys. Lett. 2000, 318, 131−136.
(825) Anderson, M. Locally Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy with an
Atomic Force Microscope. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2000, 76, 3130−3132.
(826) Hayazawa, N.; Inouye, Y.; Sekkat, Z.; Kawata, S. Metallized
Tip Amplification of Near-Field Raman Scattering. Opt. Commun.
2000, 183, 333−336.
(827) Deckert-Gaudig, T.; Taguchi, A.; Kawata, S.; Deckert, V. Tip-
Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy −From Early Developments to
Recent Advances. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2017, 46, 4077−4110.
(828) Wang, X.; Huang, S. C.; Huang, T. X.; Su, H. S.; Zhong, J. H.;
Zeng, Z. C.; Li, M. H.; Ren, B. Tip-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy
for Surfaces and Interfaces. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2017, 46, 4020−4041.
(829) Shao, F.; Zenobi, R. Tip-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy:
Principles, Practice, and Applications to Nanospectroscopic Imaging
of 2D Materials. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 2019, 411, 37−61.
(830) Pozzi, E. A.; Goubert, G.; Chiang, N.; Jiang, N.; Chapman, C.
T.; McAnally, M. O.; Henry, A. I.; Seideman, T.; Schatz, G. C.;
Hersam, M. C.; Van Duyne, R. P. Ultrahigh-Vacuum Tip-Enhanced
Raman Spectroscopy. Chem. Rev. 2017, 117, 4961−4982.
(831) Lee, J. H.; Crampton, K. T.; Tallarida, N.; Apkarian, A. V.
Visualizing Vibrational Normal Modes of a Single Molecule with
Atomically Confined Light. Nature 2019, 568, 78−82.
(832) Steidtner, J.; Pettinger, B. Tip-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy
and Microscopy on Single Dye Molecules with 15nm Resolution.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 2008, 100, 4.
(833) Jiang, N.; Chiang, N.; Madison, L. R.; Pozzi, E. A.;
Wasielewski, M. R.; Seideman, T.; Ratner, M. A.; Hersam, M. C.;
Schatz, G. C.; Van Duyne, R. P. Nanoscale Chemical Imaging of a
Dynamic Molecular Phase Boundary with Ultrahigh Vacuum Tip-
Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy. Nano Lett. 2016, 16, 3898−3904.
(834) Schmid, T.; Yeo, B. S.; Leong, G.; Stadler, J.; Zenobi, R.
Performing Tip-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy in Liquids. J. Raman
Spectrosc. 2009, 40, 1392−1399.
(835) Zeng, Z. C.; Huang, S. C.; Wu, D. Y.; Meng, L. Y.; Li, M. H.;
Huang, T. X.; Zhong, J. H.; Wang, X.; Yang, Z. L.; Ren, B.
Electrochemical Tip-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy. J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 2015, 137, 11928−11931.
(836) Kurouski, D.; Mattei, M.; Van Duyne, R. P. Probing Redox
Reactions at the Nanoscale with Electrochemical Tip-Enhanced
Raman Spectroscopy. Nano Lett. 2015, 15, 7956−7962.
(837) Martin Sabanes, N.; Ohto, T.; Andrienko, D.; Nagata, Y.;
Domke, K. F. Electrochemical TERS Elucidates Potential-Induced
Molecular Reorientation of Adenine/Au(111). Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.
2017, 56, 9796−9801.
(838) Huang, T. X.; Huang, S. C.; Li, M. H.; Zeng, Z. C.; Wang, X.;
Ren, B. Tip-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy: Tip-Related Issues. Anal.
Bioanal. Chem. 2015, 407, 8177−8195.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
113


----- Page 87 (native text) -----
(839) Ren, B.; Picardi, G.; Pettinger, B. Preparation of Gold Tips
Suitable for Tip-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy and Light Emission
by Electrochemical Etching. Rev. Sci. Instrum. 2004, 75, 837−841.
(840) Dickmann, K.; Demming, F.; Jersch, J. New Etching
Procedure for Silver Scanning Tunneling Microscopy Tips. Rev. Sci.
Instrum. 1996, 67, 845.
(841) Taguchi, A.; Yu, J.; Verma, P.; Kawata, S. Optical Antennas
with Multiple Plasmonic Nanoparticles for Tip-Enhanced Raman
Microscopy. Nanoscale 2015, 7, 17424−17433.
(842) Trautmann, S.; Richard-Lacroix, M.; Dathe, A.; Schneidewind,
H.; Dellith, J.; Fritzsche, W.; Deckert, V. Plasmon Response
Evaluation Based on Image-Derived Arbitrary Nanostructures.
Nanoscale 2018, 10, 9830−9839.
(843) Yang, L. K.; Huang, T. X.; Zeng, Z. C.; Li, M. H.; Wang, X.;
Yang, F. Z.; Ren, B. Rational Fabrication of a Gold-Coated AFM
TERS Tip by Pulsed Electrodeposition. Nanoscale 2015, 7, 18225−
18231.
(844) Huang, T. X.; Li, C. W.; Yang, L. K.; Zhu, J. F.; Yao, X.; Liu,
C.; Lin, K. Q.; Zeng, Z. C.; Wu, S. S.; Wang, X.; Yang, F. Z.; Ren, B.
Rational Fabrication of Silver-Coated AFM TERS Tips with a High
Enhancement and Long Lifetime. Nanoscale 2018, 10, 4398−4405.
(845) Ichimura, T.; Fujii, S.; Verma, P.; Yano, T.; Inouye, Y.;
Kawata, S. Subnanometric Near-Field Raman Investigation in the
Vicinity of a Metallic Nanostructure. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2009, 102,
186101.
(846) Deckert-Gaudig, T.; Kämmer, E.; Deckert, V. Tracking of
Nanoscale Structural Variations on a Single Amyloid Fibril with Tip-
Enhanced Raman Scattering. J. Biophotoics. 2012, 5, 215−219.
(847) Pettinger, B.; Ren, B.; Picardi, G.; Schuster, R.; Ertl, G.
Nanoscale Probing of Adsorbed Species by Tip-Enhanced Raman
Spectroscopy. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2004, 92, No. 096101.
(848) Ren, B.; Picardi, G.; Pettinger, B.; Schuster, R.; Ertl, G. Tip-
Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy of Benzenethiol Adsorbed on Au and
Pt Single-Crystal Surfaces. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2005, 44, 139−142.
(849) Singh, P.; Deckert, V. Local Protonation Control Using
Plasmonic Activation. Chem. Commun. 2014, 50, 11204−11207.
(850) van Schrojenstein Lantman, E. M.; Deckert-Gaudig, T.; Mank,
A. J. G.; Deckert, V.; Weckhuysen, B. M. Catalytic Processes
Monitored at the Nanoscale with Tip-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy.
Nat. Nanotechnol. 2012, 7, 583−586.
(851) Zhang, Z.; Richard-Lacroix, M.; Deckert, V. Plasmon Induced
Polymerization Using a TERS Approach: a Platform for Nano-
structured 2D/1D Material Production. Faraday Discuss. 2017, 205,
213−216.
(852) Zhong, J. H.; Jin, X.; Meng, L.; Wang, X.; Su, H. S.; Yang, Z.
L.; Williams, C. T.; Ren, B. Probing the Electronic and Catalytic
Properties of a Bimetallic Surface with 3 nm Resolution. Nat.
Nanotechnol. 2017, 12, 132−136.
(853) Su, H. S.; Zhang, X. G.; Sun, J. J.; Jin, X.; Wu, D. Y.; Lian, X.
B.; Zhong, J. H.; Ren, B. Real-Space Observation of Atomic Site-
Specific Electronic Properties of a Pt Nanoisland/Au(111) Bimetallic
Surface by Tip-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.
2018, 57, 13177−13181.
(854) Chen, X.; Brasiliense, V.; Van Duyne, R. P. Operando
Observation of Molecular-Scale Manipulation Using Electrochemical
Tip-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy. J. Phys. Chem. C 2018, 122,
24329−24333.
(855) Nguyen, D.; Kang, G.; Chiang, N.; Chen, X.; Seideman, T.;
Hersam, M. C.; Schatz, G. C.; Van Duyne, R. P. Probing Molecular-
Scale Catalytic Interactions between Oxygen and Cobalt Phthalocya-
nine Using Tip-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy. J. Am. Chem. Soc.
2018, 140, 5948−5954.
(856) Jiang, S.; Zhang, Y.; Zhang, R.; Hu, C. R.; Liao, M. H.; Luo,
Y.; Yang, J. L.; Dong, Z. C.; Hou, J. G. Distinguishing Adjacent
Molecules on a Surface Using Plasmon-Enhanced Raman Scattering.
Nat. Nanotechnol. 2015, 10, 865−869.
(857) Yano, T.; Ichimura, T.; Kuwahara, S.; H’Dhili, F.; Uetsuki, K.;
Okuno, Y.; Verma, P.; Kawata, S. Tip-Enhanced Nano-Raman
Analytical Imaging of Locally Induced Strain Distribution in Carbon
Nanotubes. Nat. Commun. 2013, 4, 2592.
(858) Deckert-Gaudig, T.; Kämmer, E.; Deckert, V. Tracking of
Nanoscale Structural Variations on a Single Amyloid Fibril with Tip-
Enhanced Raman Scattering. J. Biophotonics 2012, 5, 215−219.
(859) Sheng, S.; Wu, J.-B.; Cong, X.; Li, W.; Gou, J.; Zhong, Q.;
Cheng, P.; Tan, P.-H.; Chen, L.; Wu, K. Vibrational Properties of a
Monolayer Silicene Sheet Studied by Tip-Enhanced Raman Spec-
troscopy. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2017, 119, 196803.
(860) Su, W.; Kumar, N.; Mignuzzi, S.; Crain, J.; Roy, D. Nanoscale
Mapping of Excitonic Processes in Single-Layer MoS2 Using Tip-
Enhanced Photoluminescence Microscopy. Nanoscale 2016, 8,
10564−10569.
(861) Milekhin, A. G.; Rahaman, M.; Rodyakina, E. E.; Latyshev, A.
V.; Dzhagan, V. M.; Zahn, D. R. T. Giant Gap-Plasmon Tip-Enhanced
Raman Scattering of MoS2 Monolayers on Au Nanocluster Arrays.
Nanoscale 2018, 10, 2755−2763.
(862) Schmid, T.; Burkhard, J.; Yeo, B.-S.; Zhang, W.; Zenobi, R.
Towards Chemical Analysis of Nanostructures in Biofilms I: Imaging
of Biological Nanostructures. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 2008, 391, 1899−
1905.
(863) Neugebauer, U.; Rösch, P.; Schmitt, M.; Popp, J.; Julien, C.;
Rasmussen, A.; Budich, C.; Deckert, V. On the Way to Nanometer-
Sized Information of the Bacterial Surface by Tip-Enhanced Raman
Spectroscopy. ChemPhysChem 2006, 7, 1428−1430.
(864) Richter, M.; Hedegaard, M.; Deckert-Gaudig, T.; Lampen, P.;
Deckert, V. Laterally Resolved and Direct Spectroscopic Evidence of
Nanometer-Sized Lipid and Protein Domains on a Single Cell. Small
2011, 7, 209−214.
(865) He, Z.; Han, Z.; Kizer, M.; Linhardt, R. J.; Wang, X.;
Sinyukov, A. M.; Wang, J.; Deckert, V.; Sokolov, A. V.; Hu, J.; Scully,
M. Tip-Enhanced Raman Imaging of Single-Stranded DNA with
Single Base Resolution. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2019, 141, 753−757.
(866) Lin, X.-M.; Deckert-Gaudig, T.; Singh, P.; Siegmann, M.;
Kupfer, S.; Zhang, Z.; Gräfe, S.; Deckert, V. Direct Base-to-Base
Transitions in ssDNA Revealed by Tip-Enhanced Raman Scattering,
2016, arXiv:1604.06598.
(867) Kurouski, D.; Deckert-Gaudig, T.; Deckert, V.; Lednev, I. K.
Structure and Composition of Insulin Fibril Surfaces Probed by
TERS. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2012, 134, 13323−13329.
(868) Treffer, R.; Lin, X.; Bailo, E.; Deckert-Gaudig, T.; Deckert, V.
Distinction of Nucleobases - a Tip-Enhanced Raman Approach.
Beilstein J. Nanotechnol. 2011, 2, 628−637.
(869) Bailo, E.; Deckert, V. Tip-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy of
Single RNA Strands: Towards a Novel Direct-Sequencing Method.
Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2008, 47, 1658−1661.
(870) Hayazawa, N.; Watanabe, H.; Saito, Y.; Kawata, S. Towards
Atomic Site-Selective Sensitivity in Tip-Enhanced Raman Spectros-
copy. J. Chem. Phys. 2006, 125, 244706−244707.
(871) Domke, K. F.; Zhang, D.; Pettinger, B. Tip-Enhanced Raman
Spectra of Picomole Quantities of DNA Nucleobases at Au(111). J.
Am. Chem. Soc. 2007, 129, 6708−6709.
(872) Lipiec, E.; Sekine, R.; Bielecki, J.; Kwiatek, W. M.; Wood, B.
R. Molecular Characterization of DNA Double Strand Breaks with
Tip-Enhanced Raman Scattering. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2014, 53,
169−172.
(873) Olschewski, K.; Kämmer, E.; Stöckel, S.; Bocklitz, T.; Deckert-
Gaudig, T.; Zell, R.; Cialla-May, D.; Weber, K.; Deckert, V.; Popp, J.
A Manual and an Automatic TERS Based Virus Discrimination.
Nanoscale 2015, 7, 4545−4552.
(874) Cialla, D.; Deckert-Gaudig, T.; Budich, C.; Laue, M.; Moeller,
R.; Naumann, D.; Deckert, V.; Popp, J. Raman to the Limit: Tip-
Enhanced Raman Spectroscopic Investigations of a Single Tobacco
Mosaic Virus. J. Raman Spectrosc. 2009, 40, 240−243.
(875) Zhang, C.; Chen, B. Q.; Li, Z. Y. Optical Origin of
Subnanometer Resolution in Tip-Enhanced Raman Mapping. J. Phys.
Chem. C 2015, 119, 11858−11871.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
114


----- Page 88 (native text) -----
(876) Meng, L. Y.; Yang, Z. L. Directional Surface Plasmon-Coupled
Emission of Tilted-Tip Enhanced Spectroscopy. Nanophotonics 2018,
7, 1325−1332.
(877) Ichimura, T.; Hayazawa, N.; Hashimoto, M.; Inouye, Y.;
Kawata, S. Tip-Enhanced Coherent Anti-Stokes Raman Scattering for
Vibrational Nanoimaging. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2004, 92, 220801.
(878) Wickramasinghe, H. K.; Chaigneau, M.; Yasukuni, R.; Picardi,
G.; Ossikovski, R. Billion-Fold Increase in Tip-Enhanced Raman
Signal. ACS Nano 2014, 8, 3421−3426.
(879) Mueller, N. S.; Juergensen, S.; Höflich, K.; Reich, S.; Kusch, P.
Excitation-Tunable Tip-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy. J. Phys.
Chem. C 2018, 122, 28273−28279.
(880) Neubrech, F.; Pucci, A.; Cornelius, T. W.; Karim, S.; García-
Etxarri, A.; Aizpurua, J. Resonant Plasmonic and Vibrational Coupling
in a Tailored Nanoantenna for Infrared Detection. Phys. Rev. Lett.
2008, 101, 157403.
(881) Neubrech, F.; Pucci, A. Plasmonic Enhancement of Vibra-
tional Excitations in the Infrared. IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron.
2013, 19, 4600809.
(882) Neubrech, F.; Huck, C.; Weber, K.; Pucci, A.; Giessen, H.
Surface-Enhanced Infrared Spectroscopy Using Resonant Nano-
antennas. Chem. Rev. 2017, 117, 5110−5145.
(883) Vogt, J.; Huck, C.; Neubrech, F.; Pucci, A. Plasmonic Light
Scattering and Infrared Vibrational Signal Enhancement. In Frontiers
of Plasmon Enhanced Spectroscopy; Ozaki, Y., Schatz, G. C., Graham,
D., Itoh, T., Eds.; ACS Symposium Series 1246; American Chemical
Society: Washington, DC, 2019; Vol. 2, pp 1−19 DOI: 10.1021/bk-
2016-1246.ch001.
(884) Wu, C.; Khanikaev, A. B.; Adato, R.; Arju, N.; Yanik, A. A.;
Altug, H.; Shvets, G. Fano-Resonant Asymmetric Metamaterials for
Ultrasensitive Spectroscopy and Identification of Molecular Mono-
layers. Nat. Mater. 2012, 11, 69−75.
(885) Neubrech, F.; Beck, S.; Glaser, T.; Hentschel, M.; Giessen, H.;
Pucci, A. Spatial Extent of Plasmonic Enhancement of Vibrational
Signals in the Infrared. ACS Nano 2014, 8, 6250−6258.
(886) Neuman, T.; Huck, C.; Vogt, J.; Neubrech, F.; Hillenbrand,
R.; Aizpurua, J.; Pucci, A. Importance of Plasmonic Scattering for an
Optimal Enhancement of Vibrational Absorption in SEIRA with
Linear Metallic Antennas. J. Phys. Chem. C 2015, 119, 26652−26662.
(887) Siemes, C.; Bruckbauer, A.; Goussev, A.; Otto, A.; Sinther, M.;
Pucci, A. SERS-Active Sites on Various Copper Substrates. J. Raman
Spectrosc. 2001, 32, 231−239.
(888) Sinther, M.; Pucci, A.; Otto, A.; Priebe, A.; Diez, S.; Fahsold,
G. Enhanced Infrared Absorption of SERS-Active Lines of Ethylene
on Cu. Phys. Status Solidi 2001, 188, 1471−1476.
(889) Vogt, J.; Huck, C.; Neubrech, F.; Toma, A.; Gerbert, D.;
Pucci, A. Impact of the Plasmonic Near- and Far-Field Resonance-
Energy Shift on the Enhancement of Infrared Vibrational Signals.
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2015, 17, 21169−21175.
(890) Huck, C.; Vogt, J.; Neuman, T.; Nagao, T.; Hillenbrand, R.;
Aizpurua, J.; Pucci, A.; Neubrech, F. Strong Coupling between
Phonon-Polaritons and Plasmonic Nanorods. Opt. Express 2016, 24,
25528.
(891) Seok, T. J.; Jamshidi, A.; Kim, M.; Dhuey, S.; Lakhani, A.;
Choo, H.; Schuck, P. J.; Cabrini, S.; Schwartzberg, A. M.; Bokor, J.;
Yablonovitch, E.; Wu, M. C. Radiation Engineering of Optical
Antennas for Maximum Field Enhancement. Nano Lett. 2011, 11,
2606−2610.
(892) Tzschoppe, M.; Huck, C.; Vogt, J.; Neubrech, F.; Pucci, A.
Impact of Metal-Optical Properties on Surface-Enhanced Infrared
Absorption. J. Phys. Chem. C 2018, 122, 15678−15687.
(893) Bohren, C. F.; Clothiaux, E. E.; Huﬀman, D. R. Absorption and
Scattering of Light by Small Particles, 2nd ed.; Wiley-VCH: Weinheim,
Germany, 2009.
(894) Meng, F.; Pucci, A. Growth of Silver on MgO(001) and
Infrared Optical Properties. Phys. Status Solidi B 2007, 244, 3739−
3749.
(895) Lust, M.; Priebe, A.; Fahsold, G.; Pucci, A. Infrared
Spectroscopic Study of the CO-Mediated Decrease of the Percolation
Threshold during the Growth of Ultrathin Metal Films on
MgO(001). Surf. Interface Anal. 2002, 33, 487−490.
(896) Griﬃths, P. R. Surface-Enhanced Infrared Absorption
Spectroscopy: Principles and Applications. In Spectroscopic Properties
of Inorganic and Organometallic Compounds: Techniques, Materials and
Applications; Yarwood, J., Douthwaite, R., Duckett, S., Eds.; The Royal
Society of Chemistry, 2013; Vol. 44, pp 95−122.
(897) Enders, D.; Nagao, T.; Pucci, A.; Nakayama, T.; Aono, M.
Surface-Enhanced ATR-IR Spectroscopy with Interface-Grown
Plasmonic Gold-Island Films near the Percolation Threshold. Phys.
Chem. Chem. Phys. 2011, 13, 4935−4941.
(898) Priebe, A.; Sinther, M.; Fahsold, G.; Pucci, A. The Correlation
between Film Thickness and Adsorbate Line Shape in Surface
Enhanced Infrared Absorption. J. Chem. Phys. 2003, 119, 4887−4890.
(899) Cetin, A. E.; Aksu, S.; Turkmen, M.; Etezadi, D.; Altug, H.
Theoretical and Experimental Analysis of Subwavelength Bowtie-
Shaped Antennas. J. Electromagn. Waves Appl. 2015, 29, 1686−1698.
(900) Huck, C.; Vogt, J.; Sendner, M.; Hengstler, D.; Neubrech, F.;
Pucci, A. Plasmonic Enhancement of Infrared Vibrational Signals:
Nanoslits versus Nanorods. ACS Photonics 2015, 2, 1489−1497.
(901) Vogt, J.; Zimmermann, S.; Huck, C.; Tzschoppe, M.;
Neubrech, F.; Fatikow, S.; Pucci, A. Chemical Identification of
Individual Fine Dust Particles with Resonant Plasmonic Enhancement
of Nanoslits in the Infrared. ACS Photonics 2017, 4, 560−566.
(902) Huck, C.; Tzschoppe, M.; Semenyshyn, R.; Neubrech, F.;
Pucci, A. Chemical Identification of Single Ultrafine Particles Using
Surface-Enhanced Infrared Absorption. Phys. Rev. Appl. 2019, 11,
No. 014036.
(903) Mayerhöfer, T. G.; Knipper, R.; Hübner, U.; Cialla-May, D.;
Weber, K.; Meyer, H.-G.; Popp, J. Ultra Sensing by Combining
Extraordinary Optical Transmission with Perfect Absorption. ACS
Photonics 2015, 2, 1567−1575.
(904) Knipper, R.; Mayerhöfer, T. G.; Kopecký, V.; Huebner, U.;
Popp, J. Observation of Giant Infrared Circular Dichroism in
Plasmonic 2D-Metamaterial Arrays. ACS Photonics 2018, 5, 1176−
1180.
(905) Knipper, R.; Kopecký, V.; Huebner, U.; Popp, J.; Mayerhöfer,
T. G. Slit-Enhanced Chiral- and Broadband Infrared Ultra-Sensing.
ACS Photonics 2018, 5, 3238−3245.
(906) Mayerhöfer, T. G.; Popp, J. Electric Field Standing Wave
Effects in Internal Reflection and ATR Spectroscopy. Spectrochim.
Acta, Part A 2018, 191, 165−171.
(907) Pahlow, S.; Mayerhöfer, T.; van der Loh, M.; Hubner, U.;
Dellith, J.; Weber, K.; Popp, J. Interference-Enhanced Raman
Spectroscopy as a Promising Tool for the Detection of Biomolecules
on Raman-Compatible Surfaces. Anal. Chem. 2018, 90, 9025−9032.
(908) Carr, G. L.; Chubar, O.; Dumas, P. Multichannel Detection
with a Synchrotron Light Source: Design and Potential. In
Spectrochemical Analysis Using Infrared Multichannel Detectors;
Bhargava, R., Levin, I. W., Eds.; Blackwell Publishing Ltd: Oxford,
UK, 2007; pp 56−84.
(909) Dong, L.; Yang, X.; Zhang, C.; Cerjan, B.; Zhou, L.; Tseng, M.
L.; Zhang, Y.; Alabastri, A.; Nordlander, P.; Halas, N. J. Nanogapped
Au Antennas for Ultrasensitive Surface-Enhanced Infrared Absorption
Spectroscopy. Nano Lett. 2017, 17, 5768−5774.
(910) Linic, S.; Aslam, U.; Boerigter, C.; Morabito, M. Photo-
chemical Transformations on Plasmonic Metal Nanoparticles. Nat.
Mater. 2015, 14, 567−576.
(911) Brongersma, M. L.; Halas, N. J.; Nordlander, P. Plasmon-
Induced Hot Carrier Science and Technology. Nat. Nanotechnol.
2015, 10, 25−34.
(912) Baffou, G.; Quidant, R. Nanoplasmonics for Chemistry. Chem.
Soc. Rev. 2014, 43, 3898−3907.
(913) Christopher, P.; Moskovits, M. Hot Charge Carrier Trans-
mission from Plasmonic Nanostructures. Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 2017,
68, 379−398.
(914) Aslam, U.; Rao, V. G.; Chavez, S.; Linic, S. Catalytic
Conversion of Solar to Chemical Energy on Plasmonic Metal
Nanostructures. Nat. Catal. 2018, 1, 656−665.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
115


----- Page 89 (native text) -----
(915) Zhan, C.; Chen, X.-J.; Yi, J.; Li, J.-F.; Wu, D.-Y.; Tian, Z.-Q.
From Plasmon-Enhanced Molecular Spectroscopy to Plasmon-
Mediated Chemical Reactions. Nat. Rev. Chem. 2018, 2, 216−230.
(916) Nitzan, A.; Brus, L. E. Theoretical Model for Enhanced
Photochemistry on Rough Surfaces. J. Chem. Phys. 1981, 75, 2205−
2214.
(917) Chen, C. J.; Osgood, R. M. Direct Observation of the Local-
Field-Enhanced Surface Photochemical Reactions. Phys. Rev. Lett.
1983, 50, 1705−1708.
(918) Mubeen, S.; Lee, J.; Singh, N.; Kramer, S.; Stucky, G. D.;
Moskovits, M. An Autonomous Photosynthetic Device in which All
Charge Carriers Derive from Surface Plasmons. Nat. Nanotechnol.
2013, 8, 247−251.
(919) Christopher, P.; Xin, H.; Linic, S. Visible-Light-Enhanced
Catalytic Oxidation Reactions on Plasmonic Silver Nanostructures.
Nat. Chem. 2011, 3, 467−472.
(920) Kim, Y.; Smith, J. G.; Jain, P. K. Harvesting Multiple
Electron−Hole Pairs Generated Through Plasmonic Excitation of Au
Nanoparticles. Nat. Chem. 2018, 10, 763−769.
(921) Zhou, L.; Swearer, D. F.; Zhang, C.; Robatjazi, H.; Zhao, H.;
Henderson, L.; Dong, L.; Christopher, P.; Carter, E. A.; Nordlander,
P.; Halas, N. J. Quantifying Hot Carrier and Thermal Vontributions in
Plasmonic Photocatalysis. Science 2018, 362, 69−72.
(922) Oshikiri, T.; Ueno, K.; Misawa, H. Plasmon-Induced
Ammonia Synthesis through Nitrogen Photofixation with Visible
Light Irradiation. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2014, 53, 9802−9805.
(923) Huang, Y.-F.; Zhu, H.-P.; Liu, G.-K.; Wu, D.-Y.; Ren, B.; Tian,
Z.-Q. When the Signal Is Not from the Original Molecule To Be
Detected: Chemical Transformation of para-Aminothiophenol on Ag
during the SERS Measurement. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2010, 132, 9244−
9246.
(924) Hartman, T.; Wondergem, C. S.; Kumar, N.; van den Berg, A.;
Weckhuysen, B. M. Surface- and Tip-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy
in Catalysis. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2016, 7, 1570−1584.
(925) Zhang, Y.; He, S.; Guo, W.; Hu, Y.; Huang, J.; Mulcahy, J. R.;
Wei, W. D. Surface-Plasmon-Driven Hot Electron Photochemistry.
Chem. Rev. 2018, 118, 2927−2954.
(926) Cortés, E. Efficiency and Bond Selectivity in Plasmon-Induced
Photochemistry. Adv. Opt. Mater. 2017, 5, 1700191.
(927) Gieseking, R. L.; Ratner, M. A.; Schatz, G. C. Review of
Plasmon-Induced Hot-Electron Dynamics and Related SERS
Chemical Eﬀects. In Frontiers of Plasmon Enhanced Spectroscopy;
ACS Symposium Series 1245; American Chemical Society:
Washington, DC, 2016; Vol. 1, pp 1−22.
(928) Ren, X.; Cao, E.; Lin, W.; Song, Y.; Liang, W.; Wang, J. Recent
Advances in Surface Plasmon-Driven Catalytic Reactions. RSC Adv.
2017, 7, 31189−31203.
(929) Sun, M.; Huang, Y.; Xia, L.; Chen, X.; Xu, H. The pH-
Controlled Plasmon-Assisted Surface Photocatalysis Reaction of 4-
Aminothiophenol to p,p′-Dimercaptoazobenzene on Au, Ag, and Cu
Colloids. J. Phys. Chem. C 2011, 115, 9629−9636.
(930) Choi, H.-K.; Park, W.-H.; Park, C.-G.; Shin, H.-H.; Lee, K. S.;
Kim, Z. H. Metal-Catalyzed Chemical Reaction of Single Molecules
Directly Probed by Vibrational Spectroscopy. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2016,
138, 4673−4684.
(931) Brandt, N. C.; Keller, E. L.; Frontiera, R. R. Ultrafast Surface-
Enhanced Raman Probing of the Role of Hot Electrons in Plasmon-
Driven Chemistry. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2016, 7, 3179−3185.
(932) Dong, B.; Fang, Y.; Chen, X.; Xu, H.; Sun, M. Substrate-,
Wavelength-, and Time-Dependent Plasmon-Assisted Surface Catal-
ysis Reaction of 4-Nitrobenzenethiol Dimerizing to p,p′-Dimercap-
toazobenzene on Au, Ag, and Cu Films. Langmuir 2011, 27, 10677−
10682.
(933) Choi, H.-K.; Lee, K. S.; Shin, H.-H.; Kim, Z. H. Identification
of the First Elementary Step in the Photocatalytic Reduction of
Nitrobenzenethiols on a Metallic Surface. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2016, 7,
4099−4104.
(934) Zhang, Z.; Merk, V.; Hermanns, A.; Unger, W. E. S.; Kneipp,
J. Role of Metal Cations in Plasmon-Catalyzed Oxidation: A Case
Study of p-Aminothiophenol Dimerization. ACS Catal. 2017, 7,
7803−7809.
(935) Zhang, Z.; Kneipp, J. Mapping the Inhomogeneity in
Plasmonic Catalysis on Supported Gold Nanoparticles Using
Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering Microspectroscopy. Anal.
Chem. 2018, 90, 9199−9205.
(936) Xu, P.; Kang, L.; Mack, N. H.; Schanze, K. S.; Han, X.; Wang,
H.-L. Mechanistic Understanding of Surface Plasmon Assisted
Catalysis on a Single Particle: Cyclic Redox of 4-Aminothiophenol.
Sci. Rep. 2013, 3, 2997.
(937) Keller, E. L.; Frontiera, R. R. Ultrafast Nanoscale Raman
Thermometry Proves Heating Is Not a Primary Mechanism for
Plasmon-Driven Photocatalysis. ACS Nano 2018, 12, 5848−5855.
(938) Kim, N. H.; Meinhart, C. D.; Moskovits, M. Plasmon-
Mediated Reduction of Aqueous Platinum Ions: The Competing
Roles of Field Enhancement and Hot Charge Carriers. J. Phys. Chem.
C 2016, 120, 6750−6755.
(939) Kim, K.; Lee, S. H.; Choi, J.-Y.; Shin, K. S. Fe3+ to Fe2+
Conversion by Plasmonically Generated Hot Electrons from Ag
Nanoparticles: Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering Evidence. J. Phys.
Chem. C 2014, 118, 3359−3365.
(940) Szczerbiński, J.; Gyr, L.; Kaeslin, J.; Zenobi, R. Plasmon-
Driven Photocatalysis Leads to Products Known from E-beam and X-
Ray-Induced Surface Chemistry. Nano Lett. 2018, 18, 6740−6749.
(941) Willets, K. A. Probing Nanoscale Interfaces with Electro-
chemical Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering. Curr. Opin. Electro-
chem. 2019, 13, 18−24.
(942) Zaleski, S.; Wilson, A. J.; Mattei, M.; Chen, X.; Goubert, G.;
Cardinal, M. F.; Willets, K. A.; Van Duyne, R. P. Investigating
Nanoscale Electrochemistry with Surface- and Tip-Enhanced Raman
Spectroscopy. Acc. Chem. Res. 2016, 49, 2023−2030.
(943) Cortés, E.; Etchegoin, P. G.; Le Ru, E. C.; Fainstein, A.; Vela,
M. E.; Salvarezza, R. C. Monitoring the Electrochemistry of Single
Molecules by Surface-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy. J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 2010, 132, 18034−18037.
(944) Cortés, E.; Etchegoin, P. G.; Le Ru, E. C.; Fainstein, A.; Vela,
M. E.; Salvarezza, R. C. Strong Correlation between Molecular
Configurations and Charge-Transfer Processes Probed at the Single-
Molecule Level by Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering. J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 2013, 135, 2809−2815.
(945) Zong, C.; Chen, C.-J.; Zhang, M.; Wu, D.-Y.; Ren, B.
Transient Electrochemical Surface-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy: A
Millisecond Time-Resolved Study of an Electrochemical Redox
Process. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2015, 137, 11768−11774.
(946) Zaleski, S.; Cardinal, M. F.; Klingsporn, J. M.; Van Duyne, R.
P. Observing Single, Heterogeneous, One-Electron Transfer Reac-
tions. J. Phys. Chem. C 2015, 119, 28226−28234.
(947) Zaleski, S.; Cardinal, M. F.; Chulhai, D. V.; Wilson, A. J.;
Willets, K. A.; Jensen, L.; Van Duyne, R. P. Toward Monitoring
Electrochemical Reactions with Dual-Wavelength SERS: Character-
ization of Rhodamine 6G (R6G) Neutral Radical Species and
Covalent Tethering of R6G to Silver Nanoparticles. J. Phys. Chem. C
2016, 120, 24982−24991.
(948) Wilson, A. J.; Molina, N. Y.; Willets, K. A. Modification of the
Electrochemical Properties of Nile Blue through Covalent Attachment
to Gold as Revealed by Electrochemistry and SERS. J. Phys. Chem. C
2016, 120, 21091−21098.
(949) Wilson, A. J.; Willets, K. A. Unforeseen Distance-Dependent
SERS Spectroelectrochemistry from Surface-Tethered Nile Blue: The
Role of Molecular Orientation. Analyst 2016, 141, 5144−5151.
(950) Wilson, A. J.; Willets, K. A. Visualizing Site-Specific Redox
Potentials on the Surface of Plasmonic Nanoparticle Aggregates with
Superlocalization SERS Microscopy. Nano Lett. 2014, 14, 939−945.
(951) Weber, M. L.; Wilson, A. J.; Willets, K. A. Characterizing the
Spatial Dependence of Redox Chemistry on Plasmonic Nanoparticle
Electrodes Using Correlated Super-Resolution Surface-Enhanced
Raman Scattering Imaging and Electron Microscopy. J. Phys. Chem.
C 2015, 119, 18591−18601.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
116


----- Page 90 (native text) -----
(952) Willets, K. A. Super-Resolution Imaging of SERS Hot Spots.
Chem. Soc. Rev. 2014, 43, 3854−3864.
(953) Manjavacas, A.; Liu, J. G.; Kulkarni, V.; Nordlander, P.
Plasmon-Induced Hot Carriers in Metallic Nanoparticles. ACS Nano
2014, 8, 7630−7638.
(954) Han, X.; Lee, H. K.; Lee, Y. H.; Hao, W.; Liu, Y.; Phang, I. Y.;
Li, S.; Ling, X. Y. Identifying Enclosed Chemical Reaction and
Dynamics at the Molecular Level Using Shell-Isolated Miniaturized
Plasmonic Liquid Marble. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2016, 7, 1501−1506.
(955) Han, X.; Koh, C. S. L.; Lee, H. K.; Chew, W. S.; Ling, X. Y.
Microchemical Plant in a Liquid Droplet: Plasmonic Liquid Marble
for Sequential Reactions and Attomole Detection of Toxin at
Microliter Scale. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2017, 9, 39635−39640.
(956) Phan-Quang, G. C.; Lee, H. K.; Ling, X. Y. Isolating Reactions
at the Picoliter Scale: Parallel Control of Reaction Kinetics at the
Liquid−Liquid Interface. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2016, 55, 8304−
8308.
(957) Koh, C. S. L.; Lee, H. K.; Phan-Quang, G. C.; Han, X.; Lee,
M. R.; Yang, Z.; Ling, X. Y. SERS- and Electrochemically Active 3D
Plasmonic Liquid Marbles for Molecular-Level Spectroelectrochem-
ical Investigation of Microliter Reactions. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2017,
56, 8813−8817.
(958) Lee, H. K.; Lee, Y. H.; Morabito, J. V.; Liu, Y.; Koh, C. S. L.;
Phang, I. Y.; Pedireddy, S.; Han, X.; Chou, L.-Y.; Tsung, C.-K.; Ling,
X. Y. Driving CO2 to a Quasi-Condensed Phase at the Interface
between a Nanoparticle Surface and a Metal−Organic Framework at
1 bar and 298 K. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2017, 139, 11513−11518.
(959) Sim, H. Y. F.; Lee, H. K.; Han, X.; Koh, C. S. L.; Phan-Quang,
G. C.; Lay, C. L.; Kao, Y.-C.; Phang, I. Y.; Yeow, E. K. L.; Ling, X. Y.
Concentrating Immiscible Molecules at Solid@MOF Interfacial
Nanocavities to Drive an Inert Gas−Liquid Reaction at Ambient
Conditions. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2018, 57, 17058−17062.
ACS Nano
Review
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.9b04224
ACS Nano 2020, 14, 28−117
117
