

----- Page 1 (native) -----
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Open Access
Health literacy and public health: A systematic
review and integration of definitions and models
Kristine Sørensen1*†, Stephan Van den Broucke2†, James Fullam3†, Gerardine Doyle3†, Jürgen Pelikan4,
Zofia Slonska5 and Helmut Brand1†, for (HLS-EU) Consortium Health Literacy Project European6
Abstract
Background: Health literacy concerns the knowledge and competences of persons to meet the complex demands
of health in modern society. Although its importance is increasingly recognised, there is no consensus about the
definition of health literacy or about its conceptual dimensions, which limits the possibilities for measurement and
comparison. The aim of the study is to review definitions and models on health literacy to develop an integrated
definition and conceptual model capturing the most comprehensive evidence-based dimensions of health literacy.
Methods: A systematic literature review was performed to identify definitions and conceptual frameworks of
health literacy. A content analysis of the definitions and conceptual frameworks was carried out to identify the
central dimensions of health literacy and develop an integrated model.
Results: The review resulted in 17 definitions of health literacy and 12 conceptual models. Based on the content
analysis, an integrative conceptual model was developed containing 12 dimensions referring to the knowledge,
motivation and competencies of accessing, understanding, appraising and applying health-related information
within the healthcare, disease prevention and health promotion setting, respectively.
Conclusions: Based upon this review, a model is proposed integrating medical and public health views of health
literacy. The model can serve as a basis for developing health literacy enhancing interventions and provide a
conceptual basis for the development and validation of measurement tools, capturing the different dimensions of
health literacy within the healthcare, disease prevention and health promotion settings.
Background
Health literacy is a term introduced in the 1970s [1] and
of increasing importance in public health and health-
care. It is concerned with the capacities of people to
meet the complex demands of health in a modern
society [2]. Health literate means placing one’s own
health and that of one’s family and community into con-
text, understanding which factors are influencing it, and
knowing how to address them. An individual with an
adequate level of health literacy has the ability to take
responsibility for one’s own health as well as one’s
family health and community health [3].
It is important to distinguish health literacy from lit-
eracy in general. According to the United Nation
Education, Science and Culture Organization (UNESCO)
during its history in English, the word ‘literate’ mostly
meant to be ‘familiar with literature’ or in general terms
‘well educated, learned’. While maintaining its broader
meaning of being knowledgeable or educated in a parti-
cular area, during the late nineteenth century it has also
come to refer to the abilities to read and write text. In
recent years four understandings of literacy have
appeared from the debate of the notion: 1) Literacy as
an autonomous set of skills; 2) literacy as applied, prac-
ticed and situated; 3) literacy as a learning process; and
4) literacy as text. The focus is furthermore broadening
so that literacy is not only referring to individual trans-
formation, but also to contextual and societal transfor-
mation in terms of linking health literacy to economic
growth and socio-cultural and political change [4].
The same development can be traced in the realm of
health literacy. For some time most emphasis was given
to health literacy as the ability to handle words and
* Correspondence: K.Sorensen@Maastrichtuniversity.nl
† Contributed equally
1Department of International Health, Research School of Primary Care and
Public Health, Maastricht University, Maastricht, The Netherlands
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
Sørensen et al. BMC Public Health 2012, 12:80
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2458/12/80
© 2012 Sorensen et al; BioMed Central Ltd.. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

----- Page 2 (native) -----
numbers in a medical context, and in recent years the
concept is broadening to also understanding health lit-
eracy as involving the simultaneous use of a more com-
plex and interconnected set of abilities, such as reading
and acting upon written health information, communi-
cating needs to health professionals, and understanding
health instructions [5]. American studies in the 1990s
linked literacy to health, showing an association between
low literacy and decreased medication adherence,
knowledge of disease and self-care management skills
[6]. The 2003 National Assessment of Adult Literacy
(NAAL), which measured the English literacy of Ameri-
can adults (people age 16 and older) included questions
related to health, and revealed the consequences of lim-
ited literacy on health and healthcare [7].
A report from the Institute of Medicine indicates that
nearly half of the American adult population may have
difficulties in acting on health information [8]. This
finding has been referred to as the “health literacy epi-
demic” [9]. In response, measures have been taken to
ensure better health communication through establish-
ing health literacy guidelines [10], and a trans-disciplin-
ary approach has been encouraged to improve health
literacy [11]. To support this approach, the American
Medical Association recommends four areas for
research: health literacy screening; improving communi-
cation with low-literacy patients; costs and outcomes of
poor health literacy; and causal pathways of how poor
health literacy influences health [12,13]. The research
literature on health literacy has expanded exponentially,
with nearly 5,000 PubMed-listed publications to date
(Primo November 2011), the majority of which have
been published since 2005 [5,14] and is evident that
health literacy is being explored within different disci-
plines and with different approaches, e.g. looking at the
role of health educators in promoting health literacy
[15]; public health literacy for lawyers [16], health com-
munication [17], the prevalence of limited health literacy
[18], and health literacy as an empowerment tool for
low-income mothers [19].
While until recently the interest in health literacy was
mainly concentrated in the United States and Canada, it
has become more internationalized over the past decade
[20]. Research on health literacy has taken place in e.g.
Australia [21,22], Korea [23], Japan [24], the UK [25],
the Netherlands [26], and Switzerland [27]. Although
the EU produced less than a third of the global research
on health literacy between 1991 and 2005 [28,29], the
importance of the issue is increasingly recognized in
European health policies. As a case in point, health lit-
eracy is explicitly mentioned as an area of priority action
in the European Commission’s Health Strategy 2008-
2013 [30]. It is linked to the core value of citizen
empowerment, and the priority actions proposed by the
European Commission include the promotion of health
literacy programs for different age groups.
However, with the proliferation of health literacy
research and policy measures, it becomes clear that
there is no unanimously accepted definition of the con-
cept. Moreover, the constituent dimensions of health lit-
eracy remain disputed, and attempts to operationalize
the concept vary widely in scope, method and quality.
As a result, it is very difficult to compare findings with
regard to health literacy emerging from research in dif-
ferent countries.
The current article aims to address this issue by offer-
ing a systematic review of existing definitions and con-
cepts of health literacy as reported in the international
literature, by identifying the central health literacy
dimensions, the target group as well as antecedents and
consequences if explained. in order to develop an inte-
grated definition and conceptual model capturing the
most comprehensive evidence-based dimensions of
health literacy.
Method
A systematic review in Medline, Pubmed and Web of
Science was performed by two independent research
teams in autumn 2009 and spring 2010 and the results
compared and combined to obtain information regard-
ing two research questions: (1) How is health literacy
defined? and (2) How can health literacy be conceptua-
lized? To retrieve studies, 17 keywords (definition,
model, concept, dimension, framework, conceptual fra-
mework, theory, analysis, qualitative, quantitative, com-
petence,
skill,
“public
health”,
communication,
information, functional, critical) were combined (using
the Boolean operator and) with the search terms “health
literacy”, “health competence”, and health competence
(without quotes). Combinations of the keywords with
health literacy (without quotes) produced a list of stu-
dies that was too wide for the purpose of this study, and
therefore not used for the review. From the resulting
list, studies were selected for inclusion in the review on
the basis of their abstracts. Eligible studies were
included which met the following inclusion criteria: (1)
written in English; (2) concerned with health literacy in
a developed country; and (3) offering relevant content
with regard to the definition or conceptualization of
health literacy, or a combination of these issues.
The eligible literature was scanned for definitions, and
a content analysis was performed in three steps: Firstly,
the definitions were coded and condensed by two
research teams working independently. Secondly the
analysis was discussed with a panel of health experts
from the European Health Literacy Consortium. In a
third step, the feedback was elaborated by the original
research team and integrated in a final analysis yielding
Sørensen et al. BMC Public Health 2012, 12:80
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2458/12/80
Page 2 of 13

----- Page 3 (native) -----
a condensed ‘all-inclusive’ definition of health literacy
capturing the different meanings and dimensions pre-
sented in the literature. In addition, an overview of all
models from the eligible literature was conducted, the
models were compared according to dimensions, target
groups and antecedents as well as consequences if
explained, and as a result a new conceptual model was
drafted capturing the most comprehensive core dimen-
sions of health literacy identified as well as its antece-
dents and consequences.
Results
The combination of the key words with the three search
terms resulted in the initial identification of 170 publica-
tions. Additional publications were found by reference
tracking and included in the review. Based on the appli-
cation of the inclusion criteria to the abstracts, 19 publi-
cations were retrieved which explicitly dealt with the
definition of health literacy, and 12 with conceptual fra-
meworks of health literacy.
Definitions of health literacy
From the 19 publications focusing specifically on defini-
tions of health literacy 17 explicit definitions could be
derived (Table 1). Of these definitions, the ones by the
American Medical Association [12], the Institute of
Medicine [8] and WHO [31] are cited most frequently
in the eligible literature. A shared characteristic of these
definitions is their focus on individual skills to obtain,
process and understand health information and services
necessary to make appropriate health decisions. How-
ever, recent discussions on the role of health literacy
highlight the importance of moving beyond an indivi-
dual focus, and of considering health literacy as an
interaction between the demands of health systems and
the skills of individuals. In fact the Institute of Medicine
report already alluded that “health literacy is a shared
function of social and individual factors, which emerges
from the interaction of the skills of individuals and the
demands of social systems” [8]. More recently, Kwan
[32] and Pleasant [33] underscored the importance of
skills and abilities on the part of all parties involved in
communication and decisions about health, including
patients, providers, health educators, and lay people.
This broader view is presented in the definition pro-
posed by Zarcadoolas, Pleasant and Greer [34], who
state that a health literate person is able to apply health
concepts and information to novel situations, and to
participate in ongoing public and private dialogues
about health, medicine, scientific knowledge, and cul-
tural beliefs. Freedman and her collegues [35] argue that
the medical perspective on factors influencing people’s
health should be shifted towards a societal level, and
that a distinction must be made between public and
individual health literacy. Public health literacy can be
found when the conceptual foundations of health lit-
eracy are in place in a group or community.
The content analysis on the definitions yielded six
clusters representing: (1) competence, skills, abilities; (2)
actions; (3) information and resources; (4) objective; (5)
context; and (6) time as outlined in Table 2. Accordingly
each cluster was carefully examined, discussed and con-
densed by the research team and the resulting chosen
terms and notions were combined to yield a new ‘all
inclusive’ comprehensive definition capturing the
essence of the 17 definitions identified in the literature:
Health literacy is linked to literacy and entails peo-
ple’s knowledge, motivation and competences to
access, understand, appraise, and apply health infor-
mation in order to make judgments and take deci-
sions in everyday life concerning healthcare, disease
prevention and health promotion to maintain or
improve quality of life during the life course.
This definition encompasses the public health per-
spective and can easily be specified to accommodate an
individual approach by substituting the three domains of
health “healthcare, disease prevention and health pro-
motion” with “being ill, being at risk and staying
healthy”.
Concepts of health literacy
Table 3 lists the publications which provide a concep-
tual model of health literacy. From this overview, two
issues become apparent. Firstly, health literacy is a mul-
tidimensional concept and consists of different compo-
nents. Secondly, most conceptual models not only
consider the key components of health literacy, but also
identify the individual and system-level factors that
influence a person’s level of health literacy, as well as
the pathways that link health literacy to health
outcomes.
Dimensions of health literacy
The distinction between medical and public health lit-
eracy [35] is reflected in the identification of different
dimensions. Within the definition of health literacy as
individual capacities, the Institute of Medicine [8] con-
sider cultural and conceptual knowledge, listening,
speaking, arithmetical, writing, and reading skills as the
main components of health literacy. Speros [48] also
identifies reading and numeracy skills as the defining
attributes, but adds comprehension, the capacity to use
health information in decision making, and successful
functioning in the role of healthcare consumer as
dimensions. Baker [49] divides health literacy into health
related print literacy and health related oral literacy,
while Paashe-Orlow and Wolf [40] distinguish between
Sørensen et al. BMC Public Health 2012, 12:80
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2458/12/80
Page 3 of 13

----- Page 4 (native) -----
listening, verbal fluency, memory span and navigation.
Lee et al. [47] identify four interrelated factors: (1) dis-
ease and self-care knowledge; (2) health risk behavior;
(3) preventive care and physician visits; and (4) compli-
ance with medication. While these defining elements of
health literacy vary considerably they all concern cogni-
tive capabilities, skills and behaviors which reflect an
individual’s capacity to function in the role of a patient
within the healthcare system.
Proponents of the population health literacy view, on
the other hand, extend the concept to include dimen-
sions which go beyond individual competences and the
medical context. The prototypical model is that of Nut-
beam [36], which distinguishes between three typologies
of health literacy: (1) Functional health literacy refers to
the basic skills in reading and writing that are necessary
to function effectively in everyday situations, broadly
comparable with the content of “medical” health literacy
referred to above; (2) Interactive health literacy refers to
more advanced cognitive and literacy skills which,
together with social skills, can be used to actively parti-
cipate in everyday situations, extract information and
derive meaning from different forms of communication,
and apply this to changing circumstance; and (3) Criti-
cal health literacy refers to more advanced cognitive
skills which, together with social skills, can be applied to
critically analyze information and use this to exert
greater control over life events and situations. The dif-
ferent typologies represent levels of knowledge and skills
that progressively support greater autonomy and perso-
nal empowerment in health related decision-making, as
well as engagement with a wider range of health
Table 1 Definitions of health literacy
1
WHO (1998)
“The cognitive and social skills which determine the motivation and ability of individuals to gain access to
understand and use information in ways which promote and maintain good health” [31]
2
American Medical Association’s
(1999)
“The constellation of skills, including the ability to perform basic reading and numeral tasks required to
function in the healthcare environment” [12]
3
Nutbeam (2000)
“The personal, cognitive and social skills which determine the ability of individuals to gain access to,
understand, and use information to promote and maintain good health” [36]
4
Institute of Medicine (2004)
“The individuals’ capacity to obtain, process and understand basic health information and services needed
to make appropriate health decisions” [8]
5
Kickbusch, Wait & Maag (2005)
“The ability to make sound health decision(s) in the context of everyday life–at home, in the community, at
the workplace, the healthcare system, the market place and the political arena. It is a critical empowerment
strategy to increase people’s control over their health, their ability to seek out information and their ability
to take responsibility” [37]
6
Zarcadoolas, Pleasant & Greer
(2003, 2005, 2006)
“The wide range of skills, and competencies that people develop to seek out, comprehend, evaluate and
use health information and concepts to make informed choices, reduce health risks ad increase quality of
life” [34,38,39]
7
Paasche-Orlow & Wolf (2006)
“An individual’s possession of requisite skills for making health-related decisions, which means that health
literacy must always be examined in the context of the specific tasks that need to be accomplished. The
importance of a contextual appreciation of health literacy must be underscored” [40]
8
EU (2007)
“The ability to read, filter and understand health information in order to form sound judgments” [30]
9
Pavlekovic (2008)
“The capacity to obtain, interpret and understand basic health information and services and the
competence to use such information to enhance health” [41]
10 Rootman & Gordon-Elbihbety
(2008)
“The ability to access, understand, evaluate and communicate information as a way to promote, maintain
and improve health in a variety of settings across the life course” [42]
11 Ishikawa & Yano (2008)
“The knowledge, skills and abilities that pertain to interactions with the healthcare system” [14]
12 Mancuso (2008)
“A process that evolves over one’s lifetime and encompasses the attributes of capacity, comprehension, and
communication. The attributes of health literacy are integrated within and preceded by the skills, strategies,
and abilities embedded within the competencies needed to attain health literacy” [43]
13 Australian Bureau of Statistics
(2008)
“The knowledge and skills required to understand and use information relating to health issues such as
drugs and alcohol, disease prevention and treatment, safety and accident prevention, first aid, emergencies,
and staying healthy” [44]
14 Yost et al. (2009)
“The degree to which individuals have the capacity to read and comprehend health-related print material,
identify and interpret information presented in graphical format (charts, graphs and tables), and perform
arithmetic operations in order to make appropriate health and care decisions” [45]
15 Adams et al. (2009)
“The ability to understand and interpret the meaning of health information in written, spoken or digital
form and how this motivates people to embrace or disregard actions relating to health” [22]
16 Adkins et al. (2009)
“The ability to derive meaning from different forms of communication by using a variety of skills to
accomplish health-related objectives” [46]
17 Freedman et al. (2009)
“The degree to which individuals and groups can obtain process, understand, evaluate, and act upon
information needed to make public health decisions that benefit the community” [35]
Sørensen et al. BMC Public Health 2012, 12:80
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2458/12/80
Page 4 of 13

----- Page 5 (native) -----
knowledge that extends from personal health manage-
ment to the social determinants of health [52]. Manga-
nello [50] adds media literacy as the ability to critically
evaluate media messages. Zarcadoolas et al. [38] distin-
guish between fundamental literacy (skills and strategies
involved in reading, speaking, writing and interpreting
numbers); science literacy (the levels of competence with
science and technology); civic literacy (abilities that
enable citizens to become aware of public issues and
become involved in the decision-making process); and
cultural literacy (the ability to recognize and use collec-
tive beliefs, customs, world-view and social identity in
order to interpret and act on health information). In a
similar vein, Freedman et al. [35] identify three dimen-
sions of public health literacy, each of which involves
corresponding competences: (1) Conceptual foundations
includes the basic knowledge and information needed to
understand and take action on public health concerns;
individuals and groups should be able to discuss core
public health concepts, public health constructs and
ecologic perspectives. (2) Critical skills relates to the
skills necessary to obtain, process, evaluate, and act
upon information that is needed to make public health
decisions that benefit the community; an individual or
group should be able to obtain, evaluate, and utilize
public health information, identify public health aspects
of personal and community concerns, and access who is
naming and framing public health problems and solu-
tions. (3) Civic orientation includes the skills and
resources necessary to address health concerns through
civic engagement; an individual or group should be able
to articulate the uneven distribution of burdens and
benefits of the society, evaluate who benefits and who is
harmed by public health efforts, communicate current
public health problems, and address public health pro-
blems through civic action, leadership, and dialogue.
Mancuso [43] emphasizes that health literacy is a pro-
cess that evolves over a person’s lifetime and identify
the attributes of health literacy to be capacity, compre-
hension and communication. (1) The Capacity skills
related to health literacy include gathering, analyzing,
and evaluating health information for credibility and
Table 2 The six clusters identified when condensing the definitions from the literature review
Competence / skills /
abilities
Action
Information
Objective
Context
Time
Skills
Possession of requisite
skills/Constellation of
skills/Wide range of
skills
Cognitive skills
Social skills
Personal skills
The ability
The capacity
The knowledge
The competencies
Motivation
Comprehension
Communication
To gain access
To understand
To use
To perform basic
reading and
numerical tasks
To obtain
To process
To seek out
To comprehend
To evaluate
To read
To filter
To find
To appraise
To communicate
To interpret
To identify
To perform
arithmetic
operations
To embrace or
disregard actions
To derive meaning
To act
To make sound
decisions/to make
health-related
decisions
To take
responsibility
To pertain
interactions
To attain capacity,
comprehension
and
communication
Information
Health
information
Information
relating to
health
Basic health
information
Health-related
print-material
Information
presented in
graphical form
Health
information in
written, spoken
or digital form
Different forms
of
communication
Concepts
Services
Promote and maintain
good health
To function in the health
care environment
To make appropriate
health decisions
A critical empowerment
strategy to increase
people’s control over
their health
To make informed
choices
Reduce health risks
Increase quality of life
To form sound
judgments
To engage in demands
of different health
contexts
To promote health
To enhance health
To improve health
To make appropriate
health and care decisions
To accomplish health-
related objectives
To make public health
decisions that benefit the
community
Variety of settings
The health care environment
Different health contexts
Health care setting
Health related contexts
The everyday life at home, in the community,
at the workplace, within the healthcare system,
at the market place and within the political
arena
HL always related to the context of the
specific tasks needed to be accomplished
Across
the life
course
Evolves
over
lifetime
Sørensen et al. BMC Public Health 2012, 12:80
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2458/12/80
Page 5 of 13

----- Page 6 (native) -----
Table 3 Conceptual models of health literacy
Reference
Dimensions
Antecedents
Consequences
1
Nutbeam
(2000) [36]
- Functional health literacy
- Interactive health literacy
- Critical health literacy
Health promotion actions (education, social
mobilization, advocacy)
Individual benefits
- Improved knowledge of risks
- Compliance with prescribed actions. Improved
capacity to act independently on knowledge
- Improved motivation and self-confidence
- Improved individual resilience to adversity
Community/social benefits
- Increased participation in population health
programs
- Improved capacity to influence social norms and
interact with social groups.
- Improved capacity to act on social and economic
determinants of health
- improved community empowerment
2
Lee et al.
(2004) [47]
- Disease and self-care
knowledge.
- Health risk behavior
- Preventive care and physician
visits.
- Compliance with
medications.
- Social-economic status
- Gender
- Ethnicity
- Health insurance coverage
- Disease severity
- Income discrepancy
- Ethnic composition of the community
- Health status
- Emergency care
- Hospitalization
3
Institute of
Medicine
(2004) [8]
- Cultural and conceptual
knowledge
- Listening
- Speaking
- Arithmetical skills
- Writing skills
- Reading skills
- Education, culture and language.
- Communication and assessment skills of
people with whom individuals interact for
health
- Ability of the media, the marketplace, and
governmental agencies to provide health
information in an appropriate manner
Health outcomes and costs
4
Zarcadoolas
et al. (2005)
[38]
- Fundamental literacy Science
literacy
- Civic literacy
Cultural literacy
- Health status
- Demographic, sociopolitical, psychosocial
and cultural factors
- Ability to apply information to novel situations
Ability to participate in public and private
dialogues about health, medicine, scientific
knowledge and cultural beliefs
5
Speros
(2005) [48]
- Reading/numeracy skills
- Comprehension
- Capacity to use health
information in decision making
- Successful functioning in
healthcare consumer role
- Literacy
- Health-related experience.
- Improved self-reported health status
- Lower healthcare costs
- Increased health knowledge
- Shorter hospitalization
Less frequent use of healthcare services
6
Baker (2006)
[49]
- Health-related print literacy
- Health-related oral literacy.
- Health-related reading fluency
- Health-related vocabulary
- Familiarity with health concepts
Complexity and difficulty of the printed
and spoken messages in the healthcare
environment
- Acquisition of new knowledge
- More positive attitudes
- Greater self-efficacy Positive health behaviors
- Better health outcomes
7
Paashe-
Orlow
& Wolf
(2007) [40]
- Listening
- Verbal fluency
- Memory span
- Navigation.
- Socioeconomic status Occupation
- Employment status Income
- Social support
- Culture and language
- Education
- Age
- Race/ethnicity Personal competences
such as vision, hearing, verbal ability,
memory and reasoning.
- Access and utilization of healthcare (influenced by
patients’ navigation skills, self-efficacy and
perceived barriers, and by system’s complexity,
acute care orientation and tiered delivery model).
- Patient/provider interactions (influenced patients’
knowledge, beliefs and participation in decision-
making, and by providers’ communication skills,
teaching ability, time and patient-centered care).
Self care (influenced by patients’ motivation,
problem-solving, self-efficacy, knowledge/skills, and
by support technologies, mass media, health
education and resources)
8
Kickbusch &
Maag (2008)
[2]
- Functional
- Interactive
- Critical
- Education system
- Health-care system
- Culture/home and community
- Work
- Politics
Market
- Health outcomes and costs
Sørensen et al. BMC Public Health 2012, 12:80
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2458/12/80
Page 6 of 13

----- Page 7 (native) -----
quality, working together, managing resources, seeking
guidance and support, developing and expressing a
sense of self, creating and pursuing a vision and goals,
and keeping pace with change. Oral language skills are
also considered essential. Social skills and credentials
such as reading, listening, analytical, decision-making,
and numerical abilities are important as well to advocate
for oneself, to act on health information, and to negoti-
ate and navigate within the health-care system. (2) Com-
prehension is a complex process based on the effective
interaction of logic, language, and experience and is cru-
cial to the accurate interpretation of a myriad of infor-
mation that is provided to the modern patient, such as
discharge instructions, consent forms, patient education
materials, and medication directions. (3) Communication
is how thoughts, messages or information are exchanged
through speech, signals, writing or behavior. Communi-
cation involves inputs, decoding, encoding output, and
feedback. Essential communication skills are reading
with understanding, conveying ideas in writing, speaking
so others can understand, listening actively, and obser-
ving critically.
In conclusion, the range of factors that are considered
as key components of health literacy is extensive, and
there is a wide variation between conceptual models.
However, this diversity of views can to a large extent be
reduced to two dimensions, notably the core qualities of
health literacy (e.g., basic or functional, interactive, and
critical health literacy), and its scope and area of
application (e.g., as a patient in healthcare, as a consu-
mer at the market, as a citizen in the political arena, or
as a member of the audience in relation to the media).
Antecedents and consequences of health literacy
Apart from the dimensions of health literacy, the con-
ceptual models summarized in Table 3 also give the
main antecedents and consequences of health literacy
outlined in the literature.
For the antecedents, most authors refer to demo-
graphic, psychosocial, and cultural factors, as well as to
more proximal factors such as general literacy, indivi-
dual characteristics and prior experience with illness
and the healthcare system. Among the demographic and
social factors which impact on health literacy one notes
socioeconomic status, occupation, employment, income,
social support, culture and language [40], environmental
and political forces [35], and media use [50]. In addition,
peer and parental influences may impact on the health
literacy of adolescents. In terms of personal characteris-
tics, health literacy is predicted by age, race, gender and
cultural background [50]; as well as by competences
such as vision, hearing, verbal ability, memory and rea-
soning [40], physical abilities and social skills [50], and
meta-cognitive skills associated with reading, compre-
hension, and numeracy [4,48,50]. The latter refers to the
level of overall literacy, defined as the capacity to use
printed and written information to function in society,
achieve one’s goals, and develop one’s knowledge and
potential. Finally, Nutbeam [36] points out that health
Table 3 Conceptual models of health literacy (Continued)
9
Mancuso
(2008) [43]
- Capacity
- Comprehension
Communication
- Operational competence
- Interactive competence
- Autonomous competence
- Informational competence
- Contextual competence
- Cultural competence
- Healthcare costs
- Knowledge of diseases and treatments
- Self-management skills
- Ability to care for chronic conditions
- Compliance
- Medical or medication treatment errors
- Access to and use of healthcare services.
- Use of expensive services such as emergency care
and inpatient admissions. Prevention and screening
health-promoting behaviors
Health status, defined as physical illness or
perceptions of illness, disease or impairment
10 Manganello
(2008) [50]
- Functional health literacy
- Interactive health literacy
- Critical health literacy
Media literacy
- Individual traits (age, race, gender, cultural
background, cognitive and physical
abilities, social skills)
- Media use
- Peer and parent influences
- Mass media, the education system and
the health system
- Health behavior
- Health costs
- Health service use
11 Freedman
et al. (2009)
[35]
- Conceptual foundations
- Critical skills
Civic orientation
Social, environmental and political forces
- Resolve some of society’s more pressing health
issues
- Alleviate social injustices.
12 Von Wagner
et al. (2009)
[51]
- Ability to rely on literacy and
numeracy skills when they are
required to solve problems
- Epidemiological or structural
determinants
- Individual influences
- Reading and arithmetic skills
- External influences
- Access and use of healthcare
- Patient-provider interaction
- Management of health and illness
Sørensen et al. BMC Public Health 2012, 12:80
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2458/12/80
Page 7 of 13

----- Page 8 (native) -----
literacy is also a result of health promotion actions such
as education, social mobilization and advocacy.
In terms of the consequences, a number of research-
ers pointed out that health literacy leads to improved
self-reported health status, lower healthcare costs,
increased health knowledge, shorter hospitalization, and
less frequent use of healthcare services [43,48,50,53].
According to Baker [49], these better health outcomes
are caused by the acquisition of new knowledge, more
positive attitudes, greater self-efficacy, and positive
health behaviors associated with higher health literacy.
Paashe-Orlow and Wolf [40] posit that health literacy
influences three main factors which in turn have an
impact on health outcomes: (1) navigation skills, self-
efficacy and perceived barriers influence the access and
utilization of healthcare; (2) knowledge, beliefs and par-
ticipation in decision-making influence patient/provider
interactions; and (3) motivation, problem-solving, self-
efficacy, and knowledge and skills influence self care.
The relationship of health literacy to health outcomes
according to these authors must be conceived as a step
function with a threshold effect, rather than in a simple
linear fashion. People generally exist within a web of
social relationships; and below a certain level of func-
tion, much of the day-to-day detail of chronic disease
management often needs to be facilitated by others.
While the interaction between health literacy and social
support is likely to have complicated and subtle implica-
tions, the health impact of social effects has not been
fully elucidated in the context of health literacy [54].
Nutbeam [36] distinguishes between individual and
community or social benefits of health literacy. In terms
of individual benefits, functional health literacy leads to
an improved knowledge of risks and health services, and
compliance with prescribed actions; interactive health
literacy to an improved capacity to act independently,
an improved motivation and more self-confidence; and
critical health literacy to improved individual resilience
to social and economic adversity. In terms of commu-
nity and social benefits, functional health literacy
increases the participation in population health pro-
grams; interactive health literacy enhances the capacity
to influence social norms and interact with social
groups; and critical health literacy improves community
empowerment and enhances the capacity to act on
social and economic determinants of health. Nutbeam’s
conceptual framework has been applied in case studies
focusing on topics of diarrhea [55], self-management in
diabetes [56] and health promoting schools [57].
Ratzan [58] links health literacy in the community to
the concept of social capital, arguing that health literate
people live longer and have stronger incentives to invest
in developing their own and their children’s knowledge
and skills. Healthier populations tend to have higher
labor market productivity contributing to, rather than
withdrawing from, pension schemes. Similarly, healthier
people use the health system less, and coupled with edu-
cation and cognitive function, appropriately demand
fewer health services.
An integrated conceptual model of health literacy
Whereas a number of conceptual models of health lit-
eracy have been presented in the literature, none of
these can be regarded as sufficiently comprehensive to
line up with the evolving health literacy definitions and
with the competencies they imply [59]. This is probably
due to the fact that attempts to conceptualize health lit-
eracy have thus far failed to integrate the existing
knowledge encompassing different perspectives on
health literacy. Firstly, most of the existing conceptual
models are not sufficiently grounded in theory in terms
of the notions and concepts included. Secondly, very
few models have integrated the components included in
“medical” and “public health” literacy models. The only
models which explicitly try to bridge the difference
between both views are Nutbeam’s [36] and Manganel-
lo’s [50], whose dimension of functional literacy corre-
sponds with the cognitive skills of medical health
literacy. Thirdly, while acknowledging that health lit-
eracy entails different dimensions, the majority of the
existing models are rather static and do not explicitly
account for the fact that health literacy is also a process,
which involves the consecutive steps of accessing,
understanding, processing and communicating informa-
tion. Fourthly, while most conceptual models identify
the factors that influence health literacy and mention its
impact on health service use, health costs and health
outcomes, the pathways linking health literacy to its
antecedents and consequences are not very clear.
Researchers could link conceptual models of health lit-
eracy more explicitly to established health promotion
theories and models [59]. Finally, very few conceptual
models of health literacy have been empirically vali-
dated. To address these shortcomings, we propose an
integrated model of health literacy which captures the
main dimensions of the existing conceptual models
reviewed above (Figure 1).
The model combines the qualities of a conceptual
model outlining the main dimensions of health literacy
(represented in the concentric oval shape in the middle
of Figure 1), and of a logical model showing the proxi-
mal and distal factors which impact on health literacy,
as well as the pathways linking health literacy to health
outcomes.
The core of the model shows the competencies related
to the process of accessing, understanding, appraising
and applying health-related information. According to
the ‘all inclusive’ definition this process requires four
Sørensen et al. BMC Public Health 2012, 12:80
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2458/12/80
Page 8 of 13

----- Page 9 (native) -----
types of competencies: (1) Access refers to the ability to
seek, find and obtain health information; (2) Understand
refers to the ability to comprehend the health informa-
tion that is accessed; (3) Appraise describes the ability
to interpret, filter, judge and evaluate the health infor-
mation that has been accessed; and (4) Apply refers to
the ability to communicate and use the information to
make a decision to maintain and improve health. Each
of these competences represents a crucial dimension of
health literacy, requires specific cognitive qualities and
depends on the quality of the information provided [60]:
obtaining and accessing health information depends on
understanding, timing and trustworthiness; understand-
ing the information depends on expectations, perceived
utility, individualization of outcomes, and interpretation
of causalities; processing and appraisal of the informa-
tion depends on the complexity, jargon and partial
understandings of the information; and effective com-
munication depends on comprehension. The compe-
tences also incorporate the qualities of functional,
interactive and critical health literacy as proposed by
Nutbeam [36].
This process generates knowledge and skills which
enable a person to navigate three domains of the health
continuum: being ill or as a patient in the healthcare set-
ting, as a person at risk of disease in the disease preven-
tion system, and as a citizen in relation to the health
promotion efforts in the community, the work place, the
educational system, the political arena and the market
place. Going through the steps of the health literacy pro-
cess in each of these three domains equips people to take
control over their health by applying their general literacy
and numerical skills as well as their specific health lit-
eracy skills to acquire the necessary information, under-
standing this information, critically analyzing and
appraising it, and acting independently to engage in
actions overcoming personal, structural, social and eco-
nomical barriers to health. As contextual demands
change over time, and the capacity to navigate the health
system depends on cognitive and psychosocial develop-
ment as well as on previous and current experiences, the
skills and competencies of health literacy develop during
the life course and are linked to life long learning.
The frameworks associated with the three domains
represent a progression from an individual towards a
population perspective. As such, the model integrates
the “medical” conceptualization of health literacy with
the broader “public health” perspective. Placing greater
emphasis on heath literacy outside of healthcare settings
has the potential to impact on preventative health and
reduce pressures on health systems.
The combination of the four dimensions referring to
health information processing with the three levels of
domains yields a matrix with 12 dimensions of health
literacy as illustrated in Table 4.
Four dimensions of health literacy in the domain of
healthcare, i.e., the ability to access information on
medical or clinical issues, to understand medical
information, to interpret and evaluate medical infor-
mation, and to make informed decisions on medical
issues and comply with medical advice.
Four dimensions of health literacy in the domain of
disease prevention, notably the ability to access
Figure 1 Integrated model of health literacy–see separate file.
Sørensen et al. BMC Public Health 2012, 12:80
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2458/12/80
Page 9 of 13

----- Page 10 (native) -----
information on risk factors for health, to understand
information on risk factors and derive meaning, to
interpret and evaluate information on risk factors,
and to make informed decisions on risk factors for
health.
Four dimensions in the domain of health promotion,
notably the ability to regularly update oneself on
determinants of health in the social and physical
environment, to comprehend information on deter-
minants of health in the social and physical environ-
ment and derive meaning, to interpret and evaluate
information on determinants, of health in the social
and physical environment, and the ability to make
informed decisions on health determinants in the
social and physical environment.
Health literacy is in our understanding regarded an
asset for improving people’s empowerment within the
domains of healthcare, disease prevention and health
promotion.
In addition to the components of health literacy
proper, the model in Figure 1 also shows the main ante-
cedents and consequences of health literacy. Among the
factors which impact on health literacy, a distinction is
made between more distal factors, including societal and
environmental determinants (e.g., demographic situa-
tion, culture, language, political forces, societal systems),
and proximal factors, which are more concerned with
personal determinants (e.g., age, gender, race, socioeco-
nomic status, education, occupation, employment,
income, literacy) and situational determinants (e.g. social
support, family and peer influences, media use and phy-
sical environment). Health literacy is strongly associated
with educational attainment [50], as well as with overall
literacy [34,38,39]. Fundamental literacy affects a wide
range of cognitive, behavioral, and societal skills and
abilities. It should be distinguished from other specific
literacy, such as science literacy (i.e., the ability to com-
prehend technical complexity, understanding of com-
mon technology, and an understanding that scientific
uncertainty is to be expected), cultural literacy (i.e.,
recognizing and using collective beliefs, customs, world-
views, and social identity relationships) and civic literacy
(i.e., knowledge about sources of information and about
agendas and how to interpret them, enabling citizens to
engage in dialogue and decision-making). According to
Mancuso [43], an individual must have certain skills and
abilities to obtain competence in health literacy, and
identifies six dimensions that are considered as neces-
sary antecedents of health literacy, namely operational,
interactive, autonomous, informational, contextual, and
cultural competence.
Health literacy in turn influences health behavior and
the use of health services, and thereby will also impact
on health outcomes and on the health costs in society.
At an individual level, ineffective communication due to
poor health literacy will result in errors, poor quality,
and risks to patient safety of the healthcare services
[61]. At a population level, health literate persons are
able to participate in the ongoing public and private dia-
logues about health, medicine, scientific knowledge and
cultural beliefs. Thus, the benefits of health literacy
impact the full range of life’s activities–home, work,
society and culture [34,38,39]. Advancing health literacy
will progressively allow for greater autonomy and perso-
nal empowerment, and the process of health literacy can
be seen as a part of an individual’s development towards
improved quality of life. In the population, it may also
lead to more equity and sustainability of changes in
public health. Consequently, low health literacy can be
addressed by educating persons to become more resour-
ceful (i.e., increasing their personal health literacy), and
by making the task or situation less demanding, (i.e.,
improving the “readability of the system”).
Discussion
In this article we have we have presented a working
definition of health literacy which represents the essence
of the definitions of this concept as given in the litera-
ture. Furthermore a new conceptual model has been
developed as a result of the review of existing health lit-
eracy concepts. While the literature indicates that health
Table 4 The matrix with four dimensions of health literacy applied to three health domains
Access/obtain information
relevant to health
Understand information relevant
to health
Process/appraise
information relevant to health
Apply/use information
relevant to health
Health
care
Ability to access information
on medical or clinical issues
Ability to understand medical
information and derive meaning
Ability to interpret and evaluate
medical information
Ability to make informed
decisions on medical issues
Disease
prevention
Ability to access information
on risk factors for health
Ability to understand information on
risk factors and derive meaning
Ability to interpret and evaluate
information on risk factors for
health
Ability to make informed
decisions on risk factors for
health
Health
promotion
Ability to update oneself on
determinants of health in
the social and physical
environment
Ability to understand information on
determinants of health in the social
and physical environment and derive
meaning
Ability to interpret and evaluate
information on health
determinants in the social and
physical environment
Ability to make informed
decisions on health
determinants in the social and
physical environment
Sørensen et al. BMC Public Health 2012, 12:80
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2458/12/80
Page 10 of 13

----- Page 11 (native) -----
literacy refers to the competences of people to meet the
complex demands of health in modern society [2,3,62]
the exact nature of these competences is still debated.
One perspective is that they refer to a series of indivi-
dual cognitive skills and abilities applied in a medical
context; the other perspective sees a broader range of
competencies applied in the social realm. The first is
referred to as “medical health literacy” [5], “patient
health literacy” [14], or “clinical health literacy” [63]; the
second as “public health literacy” [35]. Nutbeam [52]
refers to the opposing medical and public health views
on health literacy as respectively a “clinical risk”, and a
“personal asset” approach, and points out that they are
rooted in the different traditions of clinical care, and
adult learning and health promotion, respectively. As
both perspectives are important and useful to enable a
better understanding of health communication processes
in clinical and community settings, any definition of
health literacy needs to integrate both views. The pro-
posed ‘all inclusive’ definition is adaptable and includes
the public health perspective as well as the individual
perspective.
While originating from the study of the reading and
numerical skills that are necessary to function ade-
quately in the healthcare environment, the concept of
health literacy has expanded in meaning to include
information-seeking, decision-making, problem-solving,
critical thinking, and communication, along with a mul-
titude of social, personal, and cognitive skills that are
imperative to function in the health-system [49,52,59]. It
has now diffused into the realm of culture, context, and
language [49,52,59]. Although some authors have argued
that health literacy is merely “new wine in old bottles”,
and is basically the repackaging of concepts central to
the ideological theory and practice of health promotion
[64], enhancing health literacy is increasingly recognized
as a public health goal and a determinant of health. As
new health literacy frameworks have emerged to clarify
the deeper meaning of health literacy, its contribution to
health, and the social, environmental, and cultural fac-
tors that influence health literacy skills in a variety of
populations, there is a need for an integration of diver-
ging definitions, conceptual frameworks and models of
health literacy.
Conclusion
The conceptual framework presented in this paper pro-
vides this integration in the form of a comprehensive
model. Based on a systematic review of existing defini-
tions and conceptualizations of health literacy, it com-
bines the qualities of a conceptual model outlining the
most comprehensive dimensions of health literacy, and
of a logical model, showing the proximal and distal fac-
tors which impact on health literacy as well as the
pathways linking health literacy to health outcomes.
Specifically, the model identifies 12 dimensions of health
literacy, referring to the competencies related to acces-
sing, understanding, appraising and applying health
information in the domains of healthcare, disease pre-
vention and health promotion, respectively.
By integrating existing definitions and conceptualiza-
tions of health literacy into an encompassing model
outlining the main dimensions of health literacy as well
as its determinants and the pathways to health out-
comes, this model has a heuristic value in its own right.
More importantly, however, it can also support the
practice of healthcare, disease prevention and health
promotion by serving as a conceptual basis to develop
health literacy enhancing interventions. Moreover, it can
contribute to the empirical work on health literacy by
serving as a basis for the development of measurement
tools. As currently available tools to measure health lit-
eracy do not capture all aspects of the concept as dis-
cussed in the literature, there is a need to develop new
tools to assess health literacy, reflecting health literacy
definitions and accompanying conceptual models for
public health. By following a concept validation
approach, scales can be developed to assess the dimen-
sions outlined in the conceptual model presented in this
paper. This will not only produce a comprehensive
measure of health literacy, reflecting the state of the art
of the field and applicable for social research and in
public health practice, but also serve to validate the
conceptual model and thus contribute to the under-
standing of health literacy.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank all partners in the HLS-EU consortium for contributing to
the development of the conceptual model and the content of this article.
HLS-EU Consortium members
Maastricht University, the Netherlands: Helmut Brand, Stephan van den
Broucke and Kristine Sørensen
National School of Public Health, Greece: Demosthenes Agrafiodis, Elizabeth
Ioannidis and Barbara Kondilis
University College of Dublin, National University of Ireland: Gerardine Doyle,
James Fullam and Kenneth Cafferkey
Ludwig Boltzmann Gesellschaft GmbH, Austria: Jürgen Pelikan and Florian
Röethlin
Instytut Kardiologii, Poland: Zofia Slonska
University of Murcia, Spain: Maria Falcon
Medical University - Sofia, Bulgaria: Kancho Tchamov and Alex Zhekov
National Institute of Public Health and the Environment, The Netherlands:
Mariël Droomers, Jantine Schuit, Iris van der Heide and Ellen Uiters
NRW Centre for Health, Germany: Gudula Ward and Monika Mensing
Funding
The HLS-EU project and related research are supported by grant 2007-113
from the European Commission.
Author details
1Department of International Health, Research School of Primary Care and
Public Health, Maastricht University, Maastricht, The Netherlands. 2Université
Catholique de Louvain, Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium. 3University College
Dublin, National University of Ireland, Dublin, Ireland. 4Ludwig Boltzmann
Institute Health Promotion Research, Vienna, Austria. 5National Institute of
Sørensen et al. BMC Public Health 2012, 12:80
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2458/12/80
Page 11 of 13

----- Page 12 (native) -----
Cardiology, Warsaw, Poland. 6The HLS-EU Consortium, Maastricht University,
Maastricht, the Netherlands.
Authors’ contributions
Background: KS, SVDB, JF, GD. Methodology: KS, SVDB, JF. Results: KS, SVDB,
HB, JF, GD, ZS and JP. Discussion: KS, SVDB, HB, JF, GD, ZS and JP.
Conclusion: KS, SVDB, JF and GD. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors are members of the European Health Literacy (HLS-EU)
consortium and claim to have no competing interests.
Received: 25 November 2011 Accepted: 25 January 2012
Published: 25 January 2012
References
1.
Simonds SK: Health education as social policy. Health Education
Monograph 1974, 2:1-25.
2.
Kickbusch I, Maag D: Health Literacy. In International Encyclopedia of Public
Health. Volume 3. Edited by: Kris H, Stella Q. Academic Press; 2008:204-211.
3.
In Health and modernity. Edited by: McQueen D, KI Potvin L, Pelikan JM,
Balbo L, Abel Th. Springer: The Role of Theory in Health Promotion; 2007:.
4.
UNESCO: Literacy for all. Education for All Global Monitoring Report 2006
UNESCO Publishing; 2005.
5.
Peerson A, Saunders M: Health literacy revisited: what do we mean and
why does it matter? Health Promot Int 2009, 24(3):285-296.
6.
Parker R: Health literacy: a challenge for American patients and their
health care providers. Health Promot Int 2000, 15(4):277-283.
7.
Kutner M, Jin E, Paulsen C: The Health Literacy of America’s Adults: Results
From the 2003 National Assessment of Adult Literacy (NCES 2006-483).
National Center for Education Washington DC: U.S. Department of
Education; 2006.
8.
Institute of Medicine: Health literacy: a prescription to end confusion
Washington DC: The National Academies; 2004.
9.
Davis T, Wolf MS: Health literacy: implications for family medicine. Fam
Med 2004, 36(8):595-598.
10.
Health Literacy Innovations: The Health Literacy & Plain Language Resource
Guide Health Literacy Innovations; n.d;.
11.
Lloyd LLJ, Ammary NJ, Epstein LG, Johnson R, Rhee K: A transdisciplinary
approach to improve health literacy and reduce disparities. Health
Promot Pract 2006, 7(3):331-335.
12.
Ad Hoc Committee on Health Literacy for the Council on Scientific Affairs
AMA: Health literacy: report of the council on scientific affairs. J Am Med
Assoc 1999, 281(6):552-557.
13.
McCray A: Promoting health literacy. J Am Med Inform Assoc 2004,
12(2):152-163.
14.
Ishikawa H, Yano E: Patient health literacy and participation in the
health-care process. Health Expect 2008, 11(2):113-122.
15.
Tappe MK, Galer-Unti RA: Health educators’ role in promoting health
literacy and advocacy for the 21 st century. J Sch Health 2001,
71(10):477-482.
16.
Robbins A: Public health literacy for lawyers: teaching population-based
legal analysis. Environ Health Perspect 2003, 111(14):744-745.
17.
Parker RM, Gazmararian JA: Health literacy: essential for health
communication. J Health Commun 2003, 8(3):116-118.
18.
Paasche-Orlow MK, Parker RM, Gazmararian JA, Nielsen-Bohlman LT,
Rudd RR: The prevalence of limited health literacy. J Gen Intern Med 2005,
20:174-184.
19.
Porr Caroline, Drummond Jane, Richter Solina: Health Literacy as an
Empowerment Tool for Low-Income Mothers. Family & Community Health
2006, 29(4):328-335.
20.
Paasche-Orlow MK: Bridging the international divide for health literacy
research. Patient Educ Couns 2009, 75:293-294.
21.
Barber MN, Staples M, Osborne RH, Clerehan R, Elder C, Buchbinder R: Up
to a quarter of the Australian population may have suboptimal health
literacy depending upon the measurement tool: results from a
population-based survey. Health Promot Int 2009, 24(3):252-261.
22.
Adams RJ, Stocks NP, Wilson DH, Hill CL, Gravier S, Kickbusch I, Beilby JJ:
Health literacy. A new concept for general practice? Aust Fam Physician
2009, 38(3):144-147.
23.
Lee TW, Kang SJ, Lee HJ, Hyun SI: Testing health literacy skills in older
Korean adults. Patient Educ Couns 2009, 75(3):302-307.
24.
Ishikawa H, Nomura K, Sato M, Yano E: Developing a measure of
communicative and critical health literacy: a pilot study of Japanese
office workers. Health Promot Int 2008, 23(3):269-274.
25.
Ibrahim SY, Reid F, Shaw A, Rowlands G, Gomez GB, Chesnokov M,
Ussher M: Validation of a health literacy screening tool (REALM) in a UK
population with coronary heart disease. Journal of Public Health (Oxf)
2008, 30:449-455.
26.
Twickler TB, Hoogstraten E, Reuwer AQ, Singels L, Stronks K, Essink-Bot M:
Laaggeltetterdheid en beperkte gezondheidsvaardigheden vragen om
een antwoord in de zorg. Nederlandse Tijdschrift Gennesskunde 2009,
153(A250):1-6.
27.
Wang J, Schmid M: Regional differences in health literacy in Switzerland
Zürich: University of Zürich. Institute of Social and Preventive Medicine;
2007.
28.
Kondilis BK, Soteriades ES, Falagas ME: Health literacy research in Europe:
a snapshot. Eur J Public Health 2006, 16(1):113-113.
29.
Kondilis BK, Kiriaze IJ, Athanasoulia AP, Falagas ME: Mapping health literacy
research in the European union: a bibliometric analysis. PLoS One 2008,
3(6):E2519.
30.
European Commission: Together for health: a strategic approach for the
EU 2008-2013. Com(2007) 630 final 2007.
31.
Nutbeam D: Health Promotion Glossary. Health Promot Int 1998,
13:349-364.
32.
Kwan B, Frankish J, Rootman I, Zumbo B, Kelly K, Begoray D, Kazanijan A,
Mullet J, Hayes M: The Development and Validation of Measures of
“Health Literacy” in Different Populations. UBC Institute of Health
Promotion Research and University of Victoria Community Health
Promotion Research; 2006.
33.
Pleasant A: Proposed Defintion. International Health Association Conference:
2008 2008.
34.
Zarcadoolas C, Pleasant A, Greer DS: Elaborating a definition of health
literacy: a commentary. J Health Commun 2003, 8(3):119-120.
35.
Freedman DA, Bess KD, Tucker HA, Boyd DL, Tuchman AM, Wallston KA:
Public health literacy defined. Am J Prev Med 2009, 36(5):446-451.
36.
Nutbeam D: Health literacy as a public goal: a challenge for
contemporary health education and communication strategies into the
21st century. Health Promot Int 2000, 15(3):259-267.
37.
Kickbusch I, Wait S, Maag D, Banks I: Navigating health: the role of health
literacy. Alliance for Health and the Future, International Longevity Centre, UK
2006.
38.
Zarcadoolas C, Pleasant A, Greer DS: Understanding health literacy: an
expanded model. Health Promot Int 2005, 20(2):195-203.
39.
Zarcadoolas C, Pleasant A, Greer D: Advancing health literacy: A
framework for understanding and action. Jossey Bass: San Francisco, CA
2006.
40.
Paasche-Orlow MK, Wolf MS: The causal pathways linking health literacy
to health outcomes. Am J Health Behav 2007, 31(Suppl 1):19-26.
41.
In Health Literacy. Programmes for Training on Research in Public Health for
South Eastern Europe Edited by: Pavlekovic G 2008, 4.
42.
Rootman I, Gordon-El-Bihbety D: A vision for a health literate Canada
Ottawa: Canadian Public Health Association; 2008.
43.
Mancuso JM: Health literacy: a concept/dimensional analysis. Nurs Health
Sci 2008, 10:248-255.
44.
Australian Bureau of Statistics: In Adult literacy and life skills survey. Summary
results. Volume 88. Australia, Canberra: Australian Bureau of Statistics; 2008.
45.
Yost KJ, Webster K, Baker DW, Choi SW, Bode RK, Hahn EA: Bilingual health
literacy assessment using the Talking Touchscreen/la Pantalla
Parlanchina: development and pilot testing. Patient Educ Couns 2009,
75(3):295-301.
46.
Adkins NR, Corus C: Health literacy for improved health outcomes:
effective capital in the marketplace. J Consum Aff 2009, 43(2):199-222.
47.
Lee SD, Arozullah AM, Choc YI: Health literacy, social support, and health:
a research agenda. Soc Sci Med 2004, 58:1309-1321.
48.
Speros C: Health literacy: concept analysis. J Adv Nurs 2005, 50:633-640.
49.
Baker DW: The meaning and the measure of health literacy. J Intern Med
2006, 21:878-883.
50.
Manganello JA: Health literacy and adolescents: a framework and agenda
for future research. Health Educ Res 2008, 23(5):840-847.
Sørensen et al. BMC Public Health 2012, 12:80
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2458/12/80
Page 12 of 13

----- Page 13 (native) -----
51.
von Wagner C, Steptoe A, Wolf MS, Wardle J: Health literacy and health
actions: a review and a framework from health psychology. Health
Education & Behaviour 2009, 36(5):860-877.
52.
Nutbeam D: The evolving concept of health literacy. Soc Sci Med 2008,
67:2072-2078.
53.
Health literacy: a prescription to end confusion. Edited by: Nielson-
Bohlman L, Panzer A, Kinding D 2004.
54.
Shoou-Yih D, Leea AMA, Choc IkYoung: Health literacy, social support,
and health: a research agenda. Soc Sci Med 2004, 58:1309-1321.
55.
Wang R: Critical health literacy: a case study from China in
schistosimiasis control. Health Promot Int 2000, 15(3):269-274.
56.
Levin-Zamir D: Health literacy in health systems: perspectives on patient
self-management in Israel. Health Promot Int 2001, 16(1):87-94.
57.
St Leger L: Schools, health literacy and public health: possibilities and
challenges. Health Promotion International 2001, 16(2):197-205.
58.
Ratzan S: Health literacy: communication for the public good. Health
Promotion International 2001, 16(2):207-214.
59.
Protheroe J, Wallace L, Rowlands G, DeVoe J: Health literacy: setting an
international collaborative research agenda. BMC Fam Pract 2009,
10(1):51.
60.
Magasi S, Durkin E, Wolf MS, Deutsch A: Rehabilitation consumers’ use
and understanding of quality information: a health literacy perspective.
Arch Phys Med Rehabil 2009, 90(2):206-212.
61.
Schyve PM: Language differences as a barrier to quality and safety in
health care: the joint commission perspective. J Gen Intern Med 2007,
22(Suppl 2):360-361.
62.
McQueen DV, Kickbusch I, Potvin L, Pelikan J, Balbo L, Abel T: Health and
Modernity: the Role of Theory in Health Promotion New York: Springer; 2007.
63.
Pleasant A, Kuruvilla SS: A tale of two health literacies: public health and
clinical approaches to health literacy. Health Promot Int 2008,
23(2):152-159.
64.
Tones K: Health literacy: new wine in old bottles. Health Educ Res 2002,
17:187-189.
Pre-publication history
The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2458/12/80/prepub
doi:10.1186/1471-2458-12-80
Cite this article as: Sørensen et al.: Health literacy and public health: A
systematic review and integration of definitions and models. BMC Public
Health 2012 12:80.
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submit
Sørensen et al. BMC Public Health 2012, 12:80
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2458/12/80
Page 13 of 13