

----- Page 1 (native text) -----
Our future: a Lancet commission on adolescent health and 
wellbeing
George C Patton, Susan M Sawyer, John S Santelli, David A Ross, Rima Afifi, Nicholas B 
Allen, Monika Arora, Peter Azzopardi, Wendy Baldwin, Christopher Bonell, Ritsuko 
Kakuma, Elissa Kennedy, Jaqueline Mahon, Terry McGovern, Ali H Mokdad, Vikram Patel, 
Suzanne Petroni, Nicola Reavley, Kikelomo Taiwo, Jane Waldfogel, Dakshitha 
Wickremarathne, Carmen Barroso, Zulfiqar Bhutta, Adesegun O Fatusi, Amitabh Mattoo, 
Judith Diers, Jing Fang, Jane Ferguson, Frederick Ssewamala, and Russell M Viner
Department of Paediatrics (G C Patton MD, SM Sawyer MD, P Azzopardi MEpi), School of 
Population and Global Health (R Kakuma PhD, N Reavley PhD), Melbourne School of 
Psychological Sciences (N B Allen PhD), Australia India Centre (A Mattoo PhD), University of 
Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia; Centre for Adolescent Health, Royal Children’s Hospital, 
Parkville, Melbourne, VIC, Australia (G C Patton, S M Sawyer, P Azzopardi); Murdoch Childrens 
Research Institute (S M Sawyer), Mailman School of Public Health (J S Santelli MD, T McGovern 
JD), School of Social Work (J Waldfogel PhD, F Ssewamala PhD) Columbia University, New York, 
NY, USA; University of Oregon, Eugene, OR, USA (N B Allen); World Health Organization, 
Geneva, Switzerland (D A Ross PhD); London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, London, 
UK (D A Ross, V Patel PhD, J Ferguson PhD); Department of Health Promotion and Community 
Health, American University of Beirut, Beirut, Lebanon (R Afifi PhD); Public Health Foundation of 
India, New Delhi, India (M Arora PhD, V Patel); Institute of Education C Bonell PhD), Institute of 
Child Health (R M Viner PhD), University College London, London, UK; Burnet Institute, 
Melbourne, VIC, Australia (E Kennedy MPH); United Nations Population Fund, New York, NY, 
USA (J Mahon PhD); Institute of Health Metrics and Evaluation, University of Washinton, Seattle, 
Correspondence to: George C Patton, Centre for Adolescent Health, Royal Children’s Hospital, Parkville, VIC 3052, Australia, 
george.patton@rch.org.au. 
Contributors
The 2016 Lancet Commission on Adolescent Health and Wellbeing has been an international collaboration led by the University of 
Melbourne, Columbia University, London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, and University College London. GCP, SMS, JSS, 
RMV, and DAR were the institutional leads who established the Commission.
The Commission undertook its work within five central working groups, which were responsible for the design, drafting, and review 
of their individual sections. All Commissioners (GCP, SMS, JSS, DAR, RMV, RA, NBA, WB, CB, ZB, CB, JD, AOF, JF, RK, JM, 
AM, TM, AHM, VP, SP, FS, KT, JW, DW) contributed to the overall report structure and concepts. PA, EK, MA, and NR were 
responsible for specific elements of the work-plan and contributed more broadly to their integration in the report. All authors had a 
role in reviewing the manuscript.
Declaration of interests
All authors declare that the work of the Commission on Adolescent Health and Wellbeing was supported by the Bill & Melinda Gates 
Foundation (Seattle, WA, USA), MacArthur Foundation (Chicago, IL, USA), Australia India Institute (Melbourne, VIC, Australia), 
and the Murdoch Childrens Research Institute (Melbourne, VIC, Australia). The funding covered travel, accommodation, and meals 
for the Commission meetings, as well as development of background papers, project management and research assistant time. 12 
authors reported grants from either the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, MacArthur Foundation, or the University of Melbourne, 
during the conduct of the study. RA received personal fees from UNDP, outside the submitted work. SMS is a member of WHO’s 
Technical Advisory Committee for the Department of Maternal, Newborn, Child and Adolescent Health.
See Online for appendix
For more on the MTV Staying Alive Ignite campaign, see http://ignite.staying-alive.org/kenya
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Published in final edited form as:
Lancet. 2016 June 11; 387(10036): 2423–2478. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(16)00579-1.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 2 (native text) -----
WA, USA (A H Mokdad PhD); International Centre for Research on Women, Washington, DC, 
USA (S Petroni PhD); International Planned Parenthood Foundation, London, UK (C Barroso 
PhD); University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada (Z Bhutta PhD); Aga Khan University, Karachi, 
Pakistan (Z Bhutta); Obafemi Awolowo University, Ile Ife, Nigeria (A O Fatusi PhD); CARE 
International, London, UK (D Wickremarathne MS); Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi, India 
(A Mattoo); UNICEF, New York, NY, USA (J Diers PhD); Girls Educational Mentoring Services, 
New York, NY, USA (K Taiwo); Retired (W Baldwin PhD); and Kunming Medical University, 
Kunming, China (J Fang PhD)
Executive summary
Unprecedented global forces are shaping the health and wellbeing of the largest generation 
of 10 to 24 year olds in human history. Population mobility, global communications, 
economic development, and the sustainability of ecosystems are setting the future course for 
this generation and, in turn, humankind.1,2 At the same time, we have come to new 
understandings of adolescence as a critical phase in life for achieving human potential. 
Adolescence is characterised by dynamic brain development in which the interaction with 
the social environment shapes the capabilities an individual takes forward into adult life.3 
During adolescence, an individual acquires the physical, cognitive, emotional, social, and 
economic resources that are the foundation for later life health and wellbeing. These same 
resources define trajectories into the next generation. Investments in adolescent health and 
wellbeing bring benefits today, for decades to come, and for the next generation.
Better childhood health and nutrition, extensions to education, delays in family formation, 
and new technologies offer the possibility of this being the healthiest generation of 
adolescents ever. But these are also the ages when new and different health problems related 
to the onset of sexual activity, emotional control, and behaviour typically emerge. Global 
trends include those promoting unhealthy lifestyles and commodities, the crisis of youth 
unemployment, less family stability, environmental degradation, armed conflict, and mass 
migration, all of which pose major threats to adolescent health and wellbeing.
Adolescents and young adults have until recently been overlooked in global health and 
social policy, one reason why they have had fewer health gains with economic development 
than other age groups. The UN Secretary-General’s Global Strategy for Women’s, 
Children’s and Adolescents’ Health initiated, in September, 2015, presents an outstanding 
opportunity for investment in adolescent health and wellbeing.4 However, because of limits 
to resources and technical capacities at both the national and the global level, effective 
response has many challenges. The question of where to make the most effective 
investments is now pressing for the international development community. This Commission 
outlines the opportunities and challenges for investment at both country and global levels 
(panel 1).
Adolescent health profiles differ greatly between countries and within nation states. These 
differences usually reflect a country’s progress through an epidemiological transition in 
which reductions in mortality and fertility shift both population structures and 
predominating patterns of disease. Just over half of adolescents grow up in multi-burden 
Patton et al.
Page 2
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 3 (native text) -----
countries, characterised by high levels of all types of adolescent health problems, including 
diseases of poverty (HIV and other infectious diseases, undernutrition, and poor sexual and 
reproductive health), injury and violence, and noncommunicable diseases (NCDs). These 
countries continue to have high adolescent fecundity and high unmet need for contraception, 
particularly in unmarried, sexually active adolescents. For these countries, addressing the 
diseases of poverty is a priority, at the same time as putting in place strategies to avoid sharp 
rises in injury, mental disorders, and NCD risks. One in eight adolescents grow up in injury 
excess countries, characterised by high persisting levels of unintentional injury or violence 
and high adolescent birth rates, and have generally made little progress in reducing these 
problems in recent decades. For this group of countries there is a need to redouble efforts to 
reduce injury, violence, and adolescent births as well as avoid sharp rises in mental disorders 
and NCD risks. Just over a third of adolescents grow up in countries that are NCD 
predominant, where the major adolescent burden lies in mental and substance use disorders, 
and chronic physical illness. For this group, the priority is now about universal health 
coverage and finding effective and scalable prevention strategies for these neglected 
conditions.
Adolescents and young adults have many unmet needs for health care, and experience 
barriers that include their inexperience and lack of knowledge about accessing health care, 
and heightened sensitivity to confidentiality breaches. Further barriers arise from restrictive 
legislative frameworks, out-of-pocket costs, stigma, and community attitudes. Health-care 
providers need attitudes, knowledge, and skills that foster engagement with adolescents 
while maintaining a level of engagement with families. Universal health coverage requires 
accessible packages of care matched to local need and acceptable to adolescents and young 
adults. The most effective health service systems include high-quality health worker 
training, adolescent responsive facilities, and broad community engagement.
Laws have profound effects on adolescent health and wellbeing. Some protect adolescents 
from harms (eg, preventing child marriage); others could be damaging in limiting access to 
essential services and goods such as contraception. Although nearly all countries have 
signed and ratified the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child, there are profound 
differences in the legal frameworks underpinning adolescent health across countries. Even 
where national legal frameworks exist, customary or religious laws often take precedence, 
leaving the rights of adolescents to health too often neglected and undermined.
The expansion of secondary education in many countries, particularly for girls, offers 
remarkable opportunities for health and wellbeing. Participation in quality secondary 
education enhances cognitive abilities, improves mental health and sexual and reproductive 
health, and lowers risks for later-life NCDs. Schools also provide a platform for health 
promotion that extends from the provision of essential knowledge for health, including 
comprehensive sexuality education, to maintaining lifestyles that minimise health risks. 
Equally, avoiding early pregnancy, infectious diseases, mental disorder, injury-related 
disability, and under-nutrition are essential for achieving the educational and economic 
benefits that extensions to secondary school offer.
Patton et al.
Page 3
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 4 (native text) -----
Digital media and broadband technologies offer outstanding new possibilities for 
engagement and service delivery. Adolescents are biologically, emotionally, and 
developmentally primed for engagement beyond their families. That engagement is essential 
for their social and emotional development. It is also a force for change and accountability 
within communities. Social networking technologies have the potential to galvanise, 
connect, and mobilise this generation as never before. We must create opportunities to 
extend youth engagement into the real world. This requires financial investment, strong 
partnerships with adults, training and mentorship, and the creation of structures and 
processes that allow adolescent and young adult involvement in decision making.
The most effective actions for adolescent health and wellbeing are intersectoral and multi-
component. They could include structural, media, community, online, and school-based 
elements as well as the provision of preventive and treatment health services. The neglect of 
adolescent health and wellbeing has resulted in minimal investments in programming, 
human resources, and technical capacity compared with other age groups. As a consequence 
there are major gaps in our understanding of adolescent health needs, in the evidence base 
for action, in civil society structures for advocacy, and the systems for intersectoral action. 
Within any country there are marked differences in health between different regions and 
within different adolescent groups, with poverty, gender, and social marginalisation 
important determinants. Groups such as ethnic minorities, LGBT (lesbian, gay, bisexual, or 
transgender) youth, those with disabilities, or who are homeless or in juvenile detention have 
the greatest health needs. Sound information underpins any efficient response. Yet because 
information systems on health and wellbeing are piecemeal, the needs of these groups are 
invisible and unmet. A capacity to understand local health needs inclusive of all adolescents, 
regardless of age, sex, marital status, or socioeconomic status, is essential.
In the face of global change, continued inaction jeopardises the health and wellbeing of this 
generation and the next. But there are grounds for optimism. The Global Strategy for 
Women’s, Children’s and Adolescents’ Health offers a framework to drive and coordinate 
investment, capacity building, research, and evaluation.4 Global strategies to extend 
education, to reduce gender inequalities and empower women, to improve food security and 
nutrition, and to promote vocational skills and opportunities for employment are all likely to 
benefit adolescents and young adults.5 Digital technologies and global communications offer 
exceptional opportunities for catch-up in training and education, creation of inclusive health 
information systems, meaningful youth engagement, and cooperation across sectors. This 
generation of adolescents and young adults can transform all of our futures; there is no more 
pressing task in global health than ensuring they have the resources to do so.
Introduction
The second Lancet Series on adolescent health concluded that a “Failure to invest in the 
health of the largest generation of adolescents in the world’s history jeopardises earlier 
investments in maternal and child health, erodes future quality and length of life, and 
escalates suffering, inequality, and social instability”.6 The response of the international 
development community to this and other calls has been striking. From September, 2015, the 
Every Woman, Every Child agenda has become the Global Strategy for Women’s, 
Patton et al.
Page 4
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 5 (native text) -----
Children’s and Adolescents’ Health, supported by a Global Financing Facility.4 This 
Commission on Adolescent Health and Wellbeing outlines where those investments should 
be in the years to 2030.
This Commission was established as a network of academics, policy makers, practitioners, 
and young health advocates with broad expertise in adolescent health. We brought together 
leading academic institutions in global health (Columbia University, the London School of 
Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, University College London, and the University of 
Melbourne). The Commission’s 30 members bring experience from Africa, Asia, Australia, 
Europe, the Middle East, North America, and South America. They represent diverse 
disciplines including public health and medicine, behavioural and neuroscience, education, 
law, economics, and political and social science.
First, we consider the place of adolescent health within the life course, with particular 
reference to the health capital that accrues or is diminished across these years. We also 
consider the global forces shaping adolescent and young adult health and our new 
understanding of healthy development across these years. In the section, Enabling and 
protective systems, we consider the rapidly changing social and structural determinants of 
adolescent health and their implications for health promotion and prevention. In the section, 
The global health profile of adolescents and young adults, we used available data on 
adolescent and young adult health to provide a global profile that takes into consideration 
the differing health needs of adolescents as their countries pass through the epidemiological 
transition. Actions for health summarises a series of reviews of reviews of our current 
knowledge base for action in adolescent health, concluding with an example of matching 
country level actions to health needs. We also consider the different roles of health service 
systems for adolescents. In the section, Adolescent and young adult engagement, we 
consider models for youth engagement and for accountability in adolescent health and 
wellbeing. The Commission’s recommendations are detailed in the conclusion.
Adolescence was historically considered to begin with puberty, and to end with transitions 
into marriage and parenthood.7 In today’s context, the endpoints are often less clear-cut and 
more commonly around the adoption of other adult roles and responsibilities, including the 
transition to employment, financial independence, as well as the formation of life 
partnerships. These events occur at different ages in different parts of the world and local 
cultural concepts of adolescence vary greatly. Given this variability we have adopted an 
inclusive age definition of 10 to 24 years for this report. Panel 2 summarises terms that are 
commonly used to describe this age group.8–10 In general we use the terminology of 
adolescents and young adults, although in some instances we abbreviate this to adolescents. 
Given that the field commonly uses the terms youth engagement and youth participation, we 
have retained these terms.
Definitions of wellbeing are diverse and range from the subjective to more objective. We 
adopted a broad, capabilities-based approach to wellbeing, emphasising adolescents’ 
opportunities to achieve developmentally important goals (eg, access to education, 
opportunities for civic engagement) in the context of their emerging physical, emotional, and 
cognitive abilities.11,12
Patton et al.
Page 5
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 6 (native text) -----
Why adolescent health and wellbeing?
Adolescence is often considered the healthiest time of life. In most countries, adolescence is 
the point of lowest mortality across the life course, sitting between the peaks of early life 
mortality and of chronic disease in later adulthood. It is a time where many attributes of 
good health are at their height,13 and from the perspective of health services, adolescents 
appear to have fewer needs than those in early childhood or in later years. This dominant 
view of adolescent health has been the reason why adolescents and young adults have 
attracted so little interest and investment in global health policy.
However, even from a perspective of conspicuous health needs, there has been a shift in 
attitude towards adolescents and their health.14 Changes in the health of other age groups is 
one reason. Mortality has fallen sharply in younger children in high-income and middle-
income countries compared with older adolescents and young adults.15 By 2013, mortality 
in 1 to 4 year olds had fallen to around a quarter of 1980 levels (appendix figure 1). By 
contrast, deaths in 20 to 24 year olds had only fallen to around 60% of 1980 levels. Deaths 
in many high-income and middle-income countries are now higher in older male adolescents 
and young male adults than in 1 to 4 year olds.15
From three perspectives, adolescence and young adulthood have an altogether different 
significance. Firstly, health and wellbeing underpin the crucial developmental tasks of 
adolescence including the acquisition of the emotional and cognitive abilities for 
independence, completion of education and transition to employment, civic engagement, and 
formation of lifelong relationships. Secondly, adolescence and young adulthood can be seen 
as the years for laying down the foundations for health that determine health trajectories 
across the life course. Lastly, adolescents are the next generation to parent; these same health 
reserves do much to determine the healthy start to life they provide for their children.
The adolescent and young adult years are central in the development of capabilities related 
to health and wellbeing. These emergent capabilities are dependent on available 
opportunities (eg, availability of a school), having the resources to use those opportunities 
(eg, family finances that allow school attendance), and for those who have been socially 
marginalised, access to second chances (eg, access to education for married girls who have 
left school).16 Adolescents with longer participation in education, fewer health risks, and 
slower transitions into marriage and parenthood generally accrue greater capabilities and 
resources for health. Conversely, early marriage and parenthood, little education, and early 
exposure to economic and social adversity are likely to diminish an individual’s health and 
capabilities. Premature autonomy with early disengagement from parents and school and 
high levels of health risk behaviours predict poorer health and wellbeing.17 The extent to 
which an individual’s health and wellbeing is fostered or compromised during these years 
has consequences across the life course as well as influencing the healthy start to life of the 
next generation.18
Health capital is the set of resources that determine trajectories of health across the 
lifecourse,19 which typically peak during adolescence and young adulthood. Physical fitness 
peaks around the age of 20 and remains high until the early 30s when it declines steadily 
Patton et al.
Page 6
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 7 (native text) -----
through to old age.20 Those with the highest fitness levels in their 20s are more likely to stay 
physically healthy throughout life, with less health service use as they age.20 Adolescent 
cardiorespiratory fitness, muscular strength, and body composition are also predictive of 
lower rates of all-cause mortality and lower rates of cardiovascular disease in later life than 
in those who are less fit.21 Adolescence is similarly central in skeletal health. Bone mineral 
density, a primary determinant of later-life osteoporosis and its complications, peaks in the 
late teens to early 20s.22 In the 2 years of peak skeletal growth, adolescents accumulate over 
25% of their adult bone mass, with patterns of physical activity and adolescent nutrition 
important modifiable influences.23,24
A growing understanding that neurodevelopment extends across the second and into the 
third decade of life has implications for both adolescent health and the capacities that 
underpin wellbeing across the life course (panel 3).25–34 Many cognitive abilities increase 
markedly from late childhood to peak in the early 20s and then undergo slow decline from 
the early 30s.35 Analogous to physical health, educational attainment between late childhood 
and the mid-20s is a strong and independent predictor of cognitive capacity in midlife.36 
These cognitive reserves predict later-life physical health and longevity37 and are protective 
against cognitive decline.36 Equally, maturation of the neural systems underpinning 
emotional processes might be one reason for higher risks for mental and substance use 
disorders during these years.38 Maturation of these systems similarly has profound 
implications for emotional development and the capacities that adolescents bring into their 
future roles as parents, citizens, and workers.39
Adolescence and young adulthood are also the years in which an individual establishes the 
social, cultural, emotional, educational, and economic resources to maintain their health and 
wellbeing across the life course.40 Hormonal changes that lead to sexual maturation 
commence with adrenarche in mid-childhood, and continue through puberty. This is a time 
of adaptation to social and cultural complexity and the point at which gender differences in 
social and emotional styles, including gender roles, typically crystallise. The foundations for 
success in the transitions to an independent healthy lifestyle, to employment, and to 
supportive life partnerships, marriage, and parenthood are also laid in these years.16
Conversely, adolescent health problems and health risks diminish peak fitness and lifetime 
health. Sexual health risks that result in teenage pregnancy have profound effects on the 
health and wellbeing of young women across the life course. Pregnancy (and early marriage) 
typically denotes the end of formal education, restricts opportunities for employment, 
heightens poverty, and might limit growth in undernourished girls.41 In many countries of 
low and middle income, adolescents and young adults remain at high risk for infectious 
diseases, such as HIV that now commonly has a chronic course, while others such as 
meningitis, tuberculosis, and neglected tropical diseases can similarly have major and 
persisting effects on health, social and economic adjustment, and wellbeing, albeit for 
different reasons.42 A range of health risks including tobacco and alcohol use, greater 
sedentary behaviour, diminished physical activity, increasing overweight, and obesity 
emerge across adolescence and young adulthood, reducing fitness and ultimately posing 
major risks for cardiovascular disease and type 2 diabetes in later life.43 Mental disorders 
commonly emerge during these years with many persisting into adulthood with 
Patton et al.
Page 7
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 8 (native text) -----
consequences for mental health across the life course, social adjustment, and economic 
productivity.44 Substance use during adolescence diminishes fitness, increases risks for 
many later-life NCDs, and heightens the risk for later substance use disorders.45 Some forms 
of substance use can also affect adolescent cognitive development and ultimately reduce 
peak cognitive abilities.46 Injuries, both intentional and unintentional, disproportionately 
affect adolescents and young adults. They are not only a common cause of adolescent and 
young adult death in many countries, but also a major cause of disability, including acquired 
brain injury, leading to diminished health capacity that persists across the life course.
These same resources that underpin life course health and wellbeing are primary 
determinants of the health and development of the next generation of children. Maternal 
preconception nutritional deficiencies, whether micronutrients (eg, folate) or macronutrients 
(eg, protein energy malnutrition), have profound consequences for fetal and infant 
development with the effects extending to neonatal and early childhood mortality, and 
stunting.47 Chronic adolescent infectious diseases such as HIV, and chronic physical 
conditions such as type 1 diabetes mellitus and congenital heart disease require proactive 
management from adolescence into pregnancy. Adolescent obesity, tobacco and alcohol use, 
and mental health problems are similarly risks for poor pregnancy outcomes in infants as 
well as in mothers.48,49 A possibility of trans-generational epigenetic inheritance, whereby 
preconception influences alter patterns of gene expression that might pass to the next 
generation, has further heightened interest in preconception parent health, behaviours, and 
nutrition.50 From this perspective, investment in adolescent health and wellbeing, including 
lifestyles, knowledge, social, and financial resources for health, can equally be seen as an 
investment in the next generation.51
In many countries, the focus of health policy is shifting from infectious diseases in early life 
to NCDs in older adults.52 The life course trajectories of health capital and wellbeing are 
largely set by young adulthood. The case for optimising health, fitness, and capabilities as 
well as minimising risks to health and wellbeing are reasons to bring adolescents into 
sharper focus,18 as is the knowledge that inequalities established by young adulthood persist 
and account for many of the disparities in health (including cardiovascular disease, cancer, 
type 2 diabetes, and other NCDs) and wellbeing in later life.
Developing adolescent brains
Neuroscience is shedding new light on changing cognitive and emotional capacities across 
adolescence. Adolescence can now be understood as a dynamic period of brain 
development, second only to infancy in the extent and significance of the changes occurring 
within neural systems (panel 3).53 Much of the research that has led to this understanding 
has only emerged in the last 20 years. Adolescent brain development differs from that in 
earlier life, both in its form and regions of greatest activity. It follows the childhood increase 
in dendritic outgrowth and synaptogenesis and is then characterised by synaptic pruning 
during the second decade that continues into young adulthood. Pubertal processes, including 
gonadal hormone changes, have been implicated in maturation of subcortical structures with 
dimorphic patterns that might be relevant to understanding sex differences in the pattern of 
mental and behavioural disorders that emerge during adolescence.54 Neurodevelopment is 
Patton et al.
Page 8
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 9 (native text) -----
also considerably affected by social and nutritional environments, as well as by exposures, 
such as substance use.6
Adolescent neurodevelopment has far-reaching implications for the influence of social 
environments on health.6 The capacity for greater social and emotional engagement that 
emerges around puberty is likely to have had adaptive advantages in the social contexts in 
which modern humans evolved.55 Plasticity in neurodevelopment underpins the acquisition 
of culturally adapted interpersonal and emotional skills that are essential for the more 
complex social, sexual, and parenting roles that until recently occurred soon after pubertal 
maturation.56 These biological foundations of adaptive learning also underpin the 
acquisition of health and human capital from late childhood through to young adulthood. 
However, the social networks and roles of adolescents today differ markedly from those of 
earlier, historical environments. The quality, security, and stability of social contexts in 
which younger adolescents are growing up is likely to be particularly important for the 
acquisition of skills in emotional processing and social cognition (eg, the capacity to infer 
the thoughts, intentions, and beliefs of others).28 It is perhaps not surprising that late 
childhood and early adolescence are often when the first symptoms of most mental disorders 
emerge.
The ways in which adolescents make decisions, including those affecting their health, differ 
from those of older adults. One notable difference is the effect of peer presence that affects 
the processing of social information, with a consequent greater sensitivity to reputational 
enhancement and damage.57 This sensitivity develops in the transition through puberty and 
is likely to have had adaptive advantages in an evolutionary context. It is in part related to 
the way in which younger adolescents differ in terms of a heightened response to the 
emotional displays of others,58 and is one reason why adolescents spend increased time with 
peers.59
In a contemporary context, there are often marked differences between peer and family 
values. The great salience of peers means that for adolescents, peer influences on health and 
wellbeing are greater than at any other time in the life course.6,60 This sensitivity to peers in 
decision making is often targeted by teen-oriented entertainment and marketing. In this way 
the media, particularly social media, shapes attitudes, values, and behaviours in this age 
group more than any other.61 The media’s contribution to adolescent sexual health risks in 
east Asian cities, for example, is equivalent to the influence of peers, families, or schools.62 
In health promotion and prevention, just as in marketing, interventions that affect the 
attitudes, values, and behaviours of the peer group are likely to be more powerful than at any 
other point in the life course.
When making decisions, adolescents seek out and are more influenced by exciting, arousing, 
and stressful situations compared with adults.27 Adolescents differ from adults in their 
capacity to over-ride so called hot emotions that arise in emotionally charged situations. This 
is particularly relevant in the context of sexual activity and one of the reasons why cool-
headed intentions fail to predict adolescent behaviour. It is an important reason why relying 
on condoms for contraception is not wholly effective. It is also one reason why interventions 
that either avoid hot emotions or are effective irrespective of the emotional context are 
Patton et al.
Page 9
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 10 (native text) -----
important. One example is long-acting reversible contraception (LARCs), such as IUDs and 
implantable contraceptives. The effectiveness of LARCs (that have a 0·2% per annum failure 
rate in the USA, in comparison to 18·0% for condoms) reflects their consistent presence 
regardless of the sexual and emotional context.
Adolescent predisposition to sensation seeking is relevant in considering the effects of the 
digital technology revolution. Adolescents are rapid adopters and high-end consumers of 
exciting digital and social media.63 Girls tend to use social media more than boys, whose 
focus is more likely to be on gaming.63 There are potentially great benefits from strong 
social digital connections during this time, but these same media can equally amplify 
vulnerabilities from intense emotions.64 The potential of the new media to amplify social 
contagion is already apparent around adolescent violence, mental health, suicide, and self-
harm.65 Extremist groups are increasingly using social media to offer prospects of 
adventure, belonging, and fulfilment that many adolescents find missing in ordinary life.66
Ultimately, actions to support adolescent health, development, and wellbeing should 
consider decision-making processes. An adolescent’s perception of their power and agency 
affects the balance between short-term and long-term goal setting.67 Supporting an 
adolescent’s capacity to make reflective decisions, considering risks and consequences, has 
been called “autonomy-enhancing paternalism”.68 Progressively empowering adolescents in 
decision making as they mature also affects their perception of agency around health. These 
strategies are particularly important for socially marginalised adolescents such as adolescent 
girls in contexts of gender inequality. Creation of a sense of agency is an important reason 
that there is value in creating opportunities for adolescents to exercise self-determination 
through meaningful participation, supported and facilitated by adults, in decision making 
that affects their lives and their communities.
The demographic transition and changes in adolescence
The demographic transition describes a country’s shift from high birth and death rates to low 
fertility, low mortality, and longer life expectancy. The process comes about as a result of 
economic development. The demographic transition began in many of today’s high-income 
countries after the Industrial Revolution and is now proceeding rapidly in most countries. 
This transition is typically accompanied by an epidemiological transition with reductions in 
maternal mortality, falling rates of infectious disease, and greater child survival into 
adolescence. One consequence of the demographic and epidemiological transitions has been 
the survival into adolescence of the largest cohort of adolescents and young adults, relative 
to other ages, that the world has ever seen (figure 1). The around 1·8 billion people aged 10–
24 years represent almost a quarter of the world’s population.70
The demographic transition is, in turn, linked to a decline in the ratio of dependants 
(children and the elderly) to those in the active workforce. This lowered dependency ratio 
presents a potential demographic dividend for countries to expand their economies and 
reduce poverty. Although the demographic dividend has now passed for many of today’s 
high-income countries, it still lies ahead for many low-income countries. The health and 
human capital of today’s adolescents will be a determinant of future economic and social 
development in these countries.71
Patton et al.
Page 10
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 11 (native text) -----
The demographic transition has typically been accompanied by changing patterns of 
adolescent growth and social development. One consequence of changing patterns of 
childhood infectious disease and nutrition is a fall in the age of onset of puberty in many 
countries.72 Conversely, transitions to marriage and parenthood are taking place later than in 
previous generations. As a result, adolescence now takes up a larger proportion of the life 
course than ever before. This expansion places adolescence more centrally in the creation of 
health and human capital than ever before. The greater duration of contemporary 
adolescence, particularly in the context of rapidly changing consumer and youth cultures, 
increases the possibility of health risks emerging during these years, with detrimental 
consequences well into later life.
In pre-industrial societies, the gap between physical maturation and parenthood was 
generally around 2 years for girls and four years for boys.56 Adolescence was not 
specifically recognised as the distinct phase of life that it is now in most high-income and 
middle-income countries. In many high-income countries, first marriage and parenthood 
now commonly occur 10 to 15 years after the onset of puberty. Indeed, a transition to 
heterosexual marriage in many places is being replaced by other forms of stable union, 
including cohabitation and same-sex partnerships. Inter-related drivers of this upward 
extension of adolescence include economic development, industrialisation, length of 
education, and urbanisation.73 There are often differences in the timing of the transitions 
into marriage and parenthood between adolescents in wealthier urban settings compared 
with those in poorer rural settings, especially in countries of low and middle incomes. In a 
growing number of countries in which marriage and parenthood are very delayed or where it 
is no longer rare for marriage or parenthood not to occur, these events no longer signal the 
end of adolescence.74 Traditional linear sequences of social role transitions such as finishing 
school, getting a job, getting married, and having children are also increasingly less well 
defined.74
Changes in the timing and duration of adolescence are accompanied by dramatic alterations 
in patterns of health risk, particularly around sexual and reproductive health. A delayed 
transition into marriage and parenthood in high-income and middle-income countries has 
brought great benefits for young women. When accompanied with ready access to modern 
contraception, good antenatal care, and legal and safe abortion, the shift has brought 
extraordinary reductions in maternal mortality and morbidity. Opportunities have opened to 
extend education and take advantage of social contexts well beyond the immediate family 
and community, which, in turn, brings greater maturity and experience to later parental roles, 
in addition to the huge contribution to economic development. Conversely, earlier age of 
first sexual intercourse and later marriage have created new vulnerabilities, particularly in 
sexual health, where a pattern of premarital serial sexual relationships creates a period of 
vulnerability to sexually transmitted infections (STIs) and unplanned pregnancy.75 These 
changing patterns of risk could be further heightened with the availability of new social 
media that promote casual sexual intercourse.76
In the past, transitions into marriage and child-rearing were assumed to be a safe haven as 
they were accompanied by a maturing out of health risks, with benefits including reduced 
tobacco, alcohol, and illicit substance use, particularly for young men.77 Yet, for many 
Patton et al.
Page 11
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 12 (native text) -----
young women, the transition to marriage is accompanied by increasing sexual and 
reproductive health risks including HIV and sexually transmitted infections, interpersonal 
violence, and mental disorders.78 With delayed and falling rates of marriage, as well as a 
growth in other partnerships, the historic benefits of marriage on health risks could diminish. 
The demographic transition has in many countries been accompanied by changing health 
risks in adolescents that carry forward into later life. Perhaps the most striking has been a 
shift from undernutrition and growth stunting to increasing rates of obesity. First in high-
income countries and now in countries of low and middle income, there has been a dietary 
switch toward greater consumption of foods high in addded sugars, salt, and unhealthy fats, 
and low in important micronutrients. Combined with decreases in physical activity, these 
patters have fuelled the global rise in obesity.
Adolescents in many countries are also initiating health risk behaviours related to alcohol 
and other substance use at an earlier age. An additional change is the increasing participation 
of girls in these same behaviours, continuing into childbearing years. Girls are increasingly 
coming to marriage and parenthood with more established and heavier patterns of alcohol 
and other substance use. In the absence of pregnancy planning, these shifting patterns of 
adolescent health risks create distinct risks for maternal health and fetal development from 
the preconception through to the postnatal period.79
Enabling and protective systems
Adolescent development takes place within a complex web of family, peer, school, 
community, media, and broader cultural influences.55 Puberty triggers greater engagement 
beyond an individual’s family, with a shift to peers, youth cultures, and the social 
environments created and fostered by new media. This wider social engagement is an 
important aspect of healthy development in which young people test the values and ideas 
that have shaped their childhood lives.28 Not only is the range of social influences greater 
and more complex, but also an extended adolescence increases the duration of their effect 
into young adulthood and ultimately their significance for health and wellbeing.
Beyond local and national trends, powerful global megatrends increasingly shape the 
evolution of society, health, and individual development.1 These include growth in 
educational participation, global patterns of economic development and employment, 
technological change, changing patterns of migration and conflict, growing urbanisation, 
political and religious extremism, and environmental degradation. The adolescent and young 
adult years are increasingly shaped by these global shifts, for better and for worse. For 
example, growing up in urban settings might lessen family poverty and bring better access to 
education and health services. Conversely, urban upbringing can heighten risks for mental 
health problems, substance use, obesity, and physical inactivity. Urban migration might 
involve whole families, parents, or young people alone, bringing different degrees of 
separation from the support of family and community. For adolescents living outside of 
families, urban settings can bring additional risks of sexual exploitation, unsafe employment, 
and human trafficking.
Patton et al.
Page 12
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 13 (native text) -----
The digital revolution has the potential to transform the social environment and social 
networks of today’s adolescents. It has brought mobile phones to the great majority of young 
people, even in countries of low and middle income.80 The potential benefits in terms of 
economic development, education, health care, and promotion of democracy are great.1 For 
adolescents and young adults, new media promote access to an extended social network, 
without geographic or cultural constraints, bringing the potential for engagement with new 
ideas and like-minded individuals. Yet the digital revolution also brings new risks for 
adolescent health. Digital media have extended the marketing of unhealthy commodities and 
promoted stronger consumer cultures which in turn affect lifestyles, health, and wellbeing.81 
Access to global media could accentuate the experience of economic disadvantage as 
adolescents come to understand the extent of material advantage elsewhere. Online safety 
has emerged as a further concern, especially for younger adolescents. Experiences of cyber-
bullying, grooming for sex, sharing of sexual images, and social contagion around self-harm; 
mass shootings; radicalisation; and eating disorders have the potential to cause great harm.82 
Rising rates of adolescent sleep disturbance and addiction to gaming have also been linked 
to the new media.83
The social determinants of health are the conditions in which people are born, grow, 
develop, live, work, and age.55 Within the lifecourse, adolescence is the time of greatest 
change and diversity in exposure to social determinants, particularly those closest to young 
people (figure 2). The influence of families remains strong, although family relationships 
change markedly with adolescents’ greater capacity for autonomy. Inequalities in health 
related to gender, ethnicity, and sexual orientation tend to increase following puberty.55
Young people growing up in contemporary societies differ in fundamental ways from those 
of past generations.84 Key among these differences are changes in the structure and function 
of families, greater engagement with education, and greater exposure to media influences. 
Each influence can function as an important enabling and protective system for health.
Family function, structure, and adolescent health
Families provide the primary structure within which children are born, grow, and develop, 
and from which adolescents transition to adult lives.85 Families are the main protective and 
enabling setting for children’s health, growth, and wellbeing. Economic development has 
generally brought changes in family structure, stability, and patterns of transition to the next 
generation of families. Parents have fewer children, allowing greater investment of family 
resources for each child.86 Smaller families mean parents can afford to invest more in 
education.73 This is important in the context where delayed transition into marriage and the 
formation of the next generation of families necessitates a longer period of parental 
investment. In the next 10 years, spending on education is projected to grow fastest in 
countries with the most rapid economic development and declines in fertility.87
Globally, countries outside of sub-Saharan Africa and south Asia have largely moved away 
from early marriage (appendix figure 2). In the majority of remaining countries with high 
rates of child marriage there is also a trend to later marriage. In north Africa and the Middle 
East, scarcity of employment and the financial resources for family formation have created a 
phase of “waithood”, in which young adults are unable to muster the resources needed for 
Patton et al.
Page 13
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 14 (native text) -----
family formation.88 This has in turn been linked to a rise in civil unrest and conflict with 
potentially devastating effects on health and wellbeing.89
Families take an increasing variety of forms. In most countries, most adolescents still live at 
home with two parents. Cohabitation of parents rather than marriage is increasingly 
common, especially in high-income countries where there is also less stigma about single 
unmarried parents. Parental relationships have become less stable with parental separation 
now common in many countries. Together with declines in marriage, parental deaths from 
HIV in some countries, and parental migration for employment in others, there has been a 
global trend towards more single parent families.85 Living with only one or neither parent is 
now common in much of sub-Saharan Africa and Latin America.90,91 In Asia, the Middle 
East, sub-Saharan Africa, Central America, and South America, large numbers of 
adolescents now live with extended family members rather than parents.85
In high-income countries, many adolescents experience parental divorce, parental 
remarriage, or change in cohabitation during adolescence. In North America and Europe, 
around one-fifth of adolescents live in single parent households.85 By 2030 single parent 
families will make up to 40% of families in many countries.92 Increasing numbers of single 
parent families could increase adolescent exposure to poverty and lower uptake of education.
92 Family instability is linked with poorer outcomes for adolescents including teenage 
parenthood, early marriage, and later life course trajectories that are themselves 
characterised by family instability.84,93
Puberty brings major shifts in parent–child relationships, with increases in both conflict and 
distance as adolescents seek greater independence and more autonomy.94 Such changes in 
parent–child interactional patterns are normal, but parental difficulty in managing these 
changes predicts adolescent health risks.95 Parenting capacities, such as those around 
monitoring and supervision of activities, are important for reducing health risks.84 Beyond 
this function, families are likely to have a central role in how adolescents learn to respond to 
new emotional experiences that emerge in and around puberty.96 Parents and peers are both 
important reference points for the adolescent in learning how to respond to more intense 
experiences of sadness, anxiety, and anger. The extent to which parents are able to express 
and respond to emotions is likely to have a major effect on this capacity in their adolescent 
children.96
Families also have the potential to harm. Family norms might promote gender inequity and 
attitudes towards violence with profound effects on identity development, reproductive 
health, mental health, and risks for violence.97 Female genital cutting or mutilation is 
prevalent across Africa and the Arab world, often perpetuated by families from cultural 
beliefs that it is necessary to prepare girls for marriage.98 Family violence and abuse have 
profound effects on adolescent mental health. Adolescents exposed to family violence are 
more likely to have educational failure and early school leaving, develop substance abuse, 
and engage in abusive relationships themselves.99
In the context of such secular changes in families and the greater complexity of adolescent 
social and emotional development, there are important questions about what strategies might 
Patton et al.
Page 14
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 15 (native text) -----
best support families to nurture adolescents.92 There have been few systematic studies of the 
effects of family functioning on adolescent health. In response, we undertook a review of 
reviews to address the question of how family characteristics are associated with adolescent 
reproductive health, violence, and mental health (appendix table 2). The vast majority of 
identified studies focused on younger children with scant evidence around families of 
adolescents. Most of these studies focused on the effects of parent-adolescent 
communication. Limited but consistent evidence indicates that parent–adolescent 
communication (particularly mother–daughter communication) about sex led to delayed 
initiation of sex, and promoted contraception use.100 Better parent–adolescent 
communication is also linked to adolescent self-esteem and self-worth,101 better social 
functioning,102 and fewer mental health problems.101 For LGBT youth, supportive parent– 
adolescent relationships are protective against risky behaviours.103 Limited but consistent 
evidence indicates that lower family socioeconomic status and parental education are 
associated with higher rates of teenage pregnancy.104 Adolescents living in non-intact 
families or families with problems have higher odds of suicide, substance abuse, depression, 
and eating problems.102
Given that families and parents remain the most important figures in the lives of most 
adolescents, the paucity of rigorous research into family influences on adolescent health and 
wellbeing is a striking knowledge gap.
Education and adolescent health
Education is a powerful determinant of adolescent health and human capital and driver of 
socioeconomic progress.55,105 Those who are more educated live longer lives with less ill 
health. This is true in both rich and poor countries and is likely to have a causal relationship.
105 The benefits are generally greater for women than men in high-income countries, 
particularly in terms of mortality, self-reported health, mental health, and obesity.106 
Amongst adolescents in countries of low and middle income, higher education is associated 
with reduced teenage births and older age at marriage.107 Education also has 
intergenerational effects; improved education for women could account for up to half of the 
global improvement in child mortality since 1970.108
To date, research on the value of education for health in countries of low and middle income 
has largely focused on early childhood and primary education.109 There has been little study 
of the benefits of secondary education for adolescents in countries of low and middle 
income, despite a dramatic global expansion in the length of education in the past 30 years. 
Figure 3 shows estimates of global educational attainment. Young women aged 15–24 years 
had a global average of 9·5 years of education in 2015 in comparison to 9·9 years in young 
men. Primary education only (mean of 7 years of education or less) was the norm for young 
men in 22% of countries and for young women in 26% of countries. A minimum of lower 
secondary education (8–10 years of education) was the norm in 34% of countries for young 
men and in 18% for young women. Upper secondary or beyond (11 or more years of 
education) was the norm in 44% of countries for young men and 56% for young women.110
The health benefits of secondary education for adolescents have been poorly studied in 
countries of low and middle income. In high-income countries there might be a threshold 
Patton et al.
Page 15
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 16 (native text) -----
effect at the upper secondary level for self-reported health, mental health, and alcohol use, 
with little additional benefit from tertiary education.106 With primary education now 
widespread in countries of low and middle income, expansion of participation in secondary 
education offers an achievable strategy for improving health across the life course and into 
the next generation.106 In countries that already have high secondary education participation, 
facilitating schools to more explicitly promote health has the potential for leverage above 
and beyond the health benefits of educational participation alone.
We used recent data on average years of education for young men and young women aged 
15–24 years for 187 countries from 1970 to 2015 and data from UN sources on adolescent 
fertility and mortality to examine the links between participation in secondary education and 
health (figure 4, appendix figures 3, 4, 5). Strong associations were found between the 
average years of education for 15–24-year-old women and girls and adolescent birth rates, 
all-cause and injury mortality among 15–19-year-old boys and girls, and maternal mortality 
amongst 15–24 year olds. Each additional year of education for girls was associated with 9·2 
fewer births per 1000 girls per year. Countries in which young women generally attended 
lower secondary education (ie, received 8–10 years of education) had approximately 48 
fewer births per 1000 girls per year than those with primary education alone. Those where 
most young women obtained upper secondary education (11 years or more) had an average 
of 68 fewer births per 1000 girls per year (figure 4). We then modelled the effect of trends in 
education on adolescent fertility from 1990 to 2012. Both economic development and 
increases in education were independently associated with total birth rate. Each additional 
year of education again decreased adolescent birth rates annually by 8·5 births per 1000 girls 
per year across all countries when adjusted for growth in national wealth. Accelerating 
investments to 12 years of education for girls would bring very marked reductions in total 
adolescent birth rates (appendix figure 5).
Higher average levels of education were associated with lower total adolescent mortality in 
both sexes, injury mortality (boys only), and maternal mortality, after adjustment for national 
wealth. Each additional year of education was associated with 13 fewer deaths per 100 000 
15–19-year-old boys per year after adjustment for national wealth with a similar but smaller 
association for girls. For young women 15–24 years, pregnancy-related maternal mortality, 
while at relatively low levels in most countries providing data, was strongly associated with 
education. Each additional year of education for young women was associated with 0·4 
fewer maternal deaths per 100 000 girls per year in 15–24 year olds after accounting for 
national wealth. Findings were similar when analyses were rerun using education data for 
25–34 year olds instead of 15–24 year olds.
We next identified six cohorts from countries of low and middle income in which it was 
possible to examine the associations of secondary education participation with health (figure 
5, appendix figure 6). In each country, we estimated the association between participation in 
lower or upper secondary school compared with attending primary school on a range of 
health outcomes, using structural marginal models and controlling for a range of potential 
confounders. In each cohort, higher secondary completion was associated with health 
independent of wealth, age, sex, parental education, and cognitive ability. In one cohort in 
the Philippines, adolescents with later secondary education had a greater than 50% lower 
Patton et al.
Page 16
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 17 (native text) -----
rate of various health problems than those with primary education alone (figure 5). The 
benefits were most consistent for mental health, alcohol use, and sexual health. Despite 
being based on observational data, the consistency across cohorts supports secondary 
education as a major resource for adolescent health and wellbeing extending across the life 
course.
Characteristics of health-promoting schools
We reviewed evidence from existing systematic reviews on the school characteristics 
predictive of health for young people across all country types (appendix text box 1). We 
addressed the effects of schools’ environments on violence, substance use, and sexual health 
risks. We focused on these outcomes as each is common, almost entirely initiated during 
adolescence, and has substantial consequences for health and wellbeing.
The traditional way in which schools address these behaviours is through health education 
delivered in classrooms, for which there is established evidence of small to moderate effects 
although implementation is often patchy and effects not sustained.111 The ways that schools 
operate more widely have great effects on health and wellbeing.112 For this reason actions 
that address the school environment are more likely to be effective. A school’s ethos extends 
to the physical and social environment, management and organisation, teaching, discipline, 
pastoral care, school health services, wholeschool health promotion, and extra-curricular 
activities.
We found clear evidence that a positive school ethos is associated with health (table 1). One 
medium quality review113 found that in schools where attainment and attendance are better 
than predicted based on student sociodemographic factors, rates of adolescent smoking, 
alcohol use, and drug use and, in one study, violence were lower. Another medium quality 
review114 found that student connection to school and to teachers was associated with 
reduced drug use, alcohol use, and smoking. A low quality review115 suggested there were 
lower rates of violence in schools with positive student–teacher relationships, with students 
who were aware of rules and accepted these were fair. Another low quality review116 that 
specifically focused on outcomes for LGBT students found that schools with more 
supportive policies had lower rates of victimisation. The evidence around school 
characteristics affecting sexual health were insufficient to draw firm conclusions. Expansion 
of secondary education in countries with high adolescent fertility and sexual health risks 
suggests that this is an important question for research and evaluation.
The health and wellbeing benefits of expansion of secondary education accrue through 
multiple mechanisms, including healthier behaviours, greater cognitive capacity, and longer 
productive adult lives for the current generation, better health and lower mortality among 
their children, and overall greater productivity in the future workforce.73 However, many 
forces operate to exclude or divert adolescents from secondary education. Prominent among 
these are the costs of education and the costs to families of the loss of adolescent labour, 
especially in rural areas. In many countries of low and middle income, poor adolescents are 
less likely to attend secondary school.117 Early marriage accounts for higher dropout rates in 
girls in many low-income and middle-income countries. Most interventions to increase 
access to and retention in education in these settings have been in younger adolescents, 
Patton et al.
Page 17
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 18 (native text) -----
largely in primary schools. Scholarships, school fee reductions, cash transfers conditional on 
remaining in school, decrease in grade repetition, school proximity, and education in the 
mother tongue are cost-effective actions.118,119 Free school uniforms and abolishing school 
fees are among the most cost-effective interventions, while school meals and financial 
support to parent–teacher associations are less cost-effective. Building schools close to 
students is cost-effective, as one school can serve children for many years.118 Addressing 
gender disparities in access and targeting more resources to the poorest regions as well as to 
disadvantaged students (notably children affected by armed conflict, children whose home 
language is not used at school, and children with disabilities) are critical to closing equity 
gaps.120 There is also a need for greater non-formal or flexible learning strategies for 
children without access to mainstream education (eg, child labourers and married 
adolescents who have left school).121 Health interventions including comprehensive 
sexuality education and providing access to modern contraception are likely to have major 
benefits in reducing school dropout in settings where early pregnancy is common.122,123
Academic achievement on standardised tests (eg, the Programme for International Student 
Assessment)124 has commonly been used as an index of school quality. On these measures 
schools in low-income and middle-income countries lag far behind Organisation for 
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries. Yet in higher income settings, 
narrowly focused international metrics of student attainment have been criticised as the main 
driver of school performance and educational focus. There is a risk that schools will de-
emphasise their essential role in social development, marginalise health actions and health-
related education,125 and potentially undermine mental health. Particularly for low achieving 
students, a narrow focus on academic achievement diminishes self-esteem126 and increases 
student disengagement, a predisposing factor for academic failure, poor mental health, 
substance use, violence, and sexual risks.127 Potentially harmful directions in current 
educational policy that overly focus on academic performance could be mitigated by 
including health and wellbeing indices alongside educational attainment metrics in school 
performance management systems.128 Ultimately, promotion of education and health are 
synergistic goals, both of which are essential for wellbeing and generating human capital; 
health and wellbeing interventions boost educational attainment while education boosts 
health and wellbeing.129
Transition into the workforce
The workplace has historically been a major social influence on health from mid-
adolescence. A reduction in the number of 10–24 year olds working has followed increased 
retention in secondary and tertiary education.73 Yet in countries of low and middle income, 
many adolescents younger than 15 years of age still work. Of these, a substantial minority 
work in hazardous occupations with poor lifelong earning prospects.130 Over 47·5 million 
young people aged 15 to 17 years are estimated to work in jobs that expose them to 
environmental hazards, excessive hours, or physical, psychological, or sexual abuse.130 
Young women are more likely than young men to have difficulty finding safe and stable 
work in non-hazardous occupations.130
Patton et al.
Page 18
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 19 (native text) -----
Longer education and reduced exposure to occupational health hazards have positive health 
effects, but new risks are emerging related to unemployment. Transitioning from education 
into the workforce has become more diffi cult in many countries.73 Transitions are now 
slower with a poorer selection of jobs. Many young adults are in unstable, informal 
employment, or unable to get jobs.131 Global youth unemployment is estimated at 12·5%, 
with youth almost three times more likely than adults to be unemployed.131 Those who leave 
school to be unemployed or inactive (not in employment, education, or training [NEET]) 
make up around 13% of the youth population across the OECD but up to 30% in rapidly 
developing countries of low and middle income such as South Africa and India, and close to 
50% in some OECD countries such as Spain and Greece.132 Those who are NEET at the end 
of schooling are more likely to have lower earnings, greater unemployment, and 
employment instability through adult life.133 Poor health and diffi cult transitions into the 
workplace go hand in hand; those who are NEET have high rates of mental health problems, 
suicide risk, and substance abuse.134,135
Peers, media, youth culture, and marketing
The emergence of strong peer relationships is a central feature of early adolescence, with 
significant implications for health and wellbeing.55 Modern adolescence differs markedly 
from a pre-industrial context in both the number and diversity of peers.136 Later marriage 
and parenthood and prolongation of education have acted to expand the role of peers within 
the lives of adolescents. Social media is further expanding the role of peers and youth 
cultures in the lives of adolescents across all countries.137
Peers can have strong positive or negative influences on adolescent health.138 Peer 
connection, peer modelling, and awareness of peer norms can be protective against violence, 
substance use, and sexual risks.139 Peers can also increase risks, with peer participation in 
risk behaviours likely to increase smoking initiation and persistence, alcohol initiation and 
use, sexual risks, and violence.140,141 Other peer characteristics, such as sexual partner 
communication and negotiation skills, influence sexual and HIV risks.139,142
Social media use further extends the influence of peers on health.143 Online spaces have 
changed adolescent developmental tasks such as relationship and identity building which 
were previously mainly negotiated in face-to-face communications with peers.136 For many 
adolescents, identity formation incorporates local influences with new elements derived 
from global culture, particularly youth cultures.144 There is continued debate over whether 
exposure to digital media, including a greatly expanded social network, might adversely 
affect adolescent social, emotional, and cognitive develop ment.145 To date, the development 
of the new media has been so rapid that research efforts to understand their effects have 
failed to keep pace with their growing influence.
There is, however, little doubt that rapid changes in the media environment have changed 
patterns of marketing to adolescents and young adults. Again, the speed of change has been 
such that research on the consequences has lagged far behind marketing practices. To assess 
current knowledge of the effects of marketing on adolescent health, we conducted a review 
of reviews of research around the effects of media on sexual and reproductive health, 
substance use, and obesity, using diverse strategies (table 2). Although most research is on 
Patton et al.
Page 19
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 20 (native text) -----
traditional media, we included reviews on digital media where available (appendix text box 
2).
The evidence of the influence of marketing through traditional media on adolescent tobacco 
use is compelling. Point of sale advertising and smoking imagery in films had the clearest 
evidence. There is moderate evidence around the importance of smoking imagery in other 
settings including television and magazines, particularly among girls. A range of factors 
linked to marketing and media use were also predictors of tobacco initiation with the 
strongest evidence for ownership of a promotional item.
There was moderately strong evidence for marketing affecting alcohol initiation, 
consumption, maintenance, and heavy drinking. Depiction of drinking in movies, television, 
music and rap videos, advertisements in magazines, point of sale displays, and advertising 
on radio and concessional stands at promotional events all had effects. In general, the effects 
of multiple media exposures on alcohol consumption were greater than for specific 
individual media.
Links between marketing and adolescent obesity are less well defined, in part due to the 
greater time lag between exposure and outcome. Yet links between marketing and 
intermediate outcomes that are strongly predictive of later obesity are clear. Food imagery in 
television, imagery in films, and point of sale advertising had moderate evidence for 
outcomes including food choice and amount. Overall media use (TV, computer, and video 
games) showed the strongest evidence of association with overweight and obesity although a 
major mediator is likely to be sedentary behaviour and diminished physical activity.
There have been fewer studies of media effects on sexual health risks. Moderate evidence 
indicates an association between frequent viewing of sexual content on TV with early sexual 
intercourse and increasing levels of non-coital sexual activity. There is weaker evidence 
around associations between exposure to pornography and early sexual debut, higher 
number of lifetime partners and higher-risk sexual activity such as engaging in unprotected 
anal intercourse.
Most studies on the effects of marketing have been in high-income countries where there is 
solid evidence of their effects on adolescent health risks. Few studies have extended either to 
countries of low and middle income or to new media. Yet industries which have until 
recently largely used traditional marketing media are now using digital media to promote 
unsolicited content and advertise their products. This marketing extends beyond national 
borders and is more tailored to individuals. Given that marketing is likely to become even 
more powerful and increasingly cross national borders, policy responses at both national and 
global levels are necessary. The WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control, now 
ratified by 180 countries, provides perhaps the best indication of what might be needed. 
Even strategies such as these can be ineffective in the face of international trade pacts that 
protect the interests of global corporations ahead of a country’s capacity to implement 
regulatory controls.146 There is need to both extend current global health frameworks to 
other unhealthy commodities and access to essential health goods and ensure that these are 
included in international trade and investment agreements.147
Patton et al.
Page 20
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 21 (native text) -----
Legal frameworks
Laws affect adolescents and their future health by governing both access to resources for 
health and protection from hazards. Some specifically address health (eg, access to health 
care including effective contraception); others address health risks (eg, consumption of 
alcohol, access to tobacco); and others address social determinants of health (eg, age of 
marriage, protection from hazardous work). These laws reflect ever-evolving, complex, and 
often contradictory perspectives on young people that have been informed by historical, 
social, economic, religious, and other cultural forces. Inadequate and inconsistent legal 
frameworks can powerfully affect the health, rights, and potential of adolescents and young 
adults.
Complex articulation of legal principles of adolescent capacity—Courts have 
long recognised varying levels of adolescent capacity in decision making and the need to 
protect adolescents by taking age into account. However, it was not until the 20th century 
that more consistent adolescent legal frameworks emerged at the international level. The 
1989 United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child (UNCRC) recognised children 
as bearers of human rights rather than parental property, with liberties and responsibilities 
appropriate to their age.5 It states that when adolescent freedoms and liberties are restricted, 
such imposition should be consistent with human rights principles and the concept of 
evolving capacities. As adolescents acquire greater competency and maturity, there is a 
lesser need for adult guidance and an increased capacity for autonomy in decision making.
Almost all countries have signed and ratified the UNCRC, with the USA and Somalia 
notable exceptions. Despite this, there remains great diversity in adolescent legal 
frameworks. We selected six countries with varying wealth, geographic locations, cultures, 
and religions to illustrate the differences in legal frameworks and their implementation (table 
3, appendix table 1). Variation in the ages at which these protections or acquisition of rights 
apply are slowly becoming more uniform. Rights might be applied differently according to 
sex or sexuality. For example, where homosexuality is legal, there might be a higher age of 
consent for sex between same-sex partners.148 Irrespective of some changes in response to 
the UNCRC, major differences persist across and within countries that profoundly affect the 
health, rights, and life chances of adolescents.
Prevailing legal frameworks fail adolescents both in their framing and implementation. They 
reflect neither the principles of the UNCRC, nor a thoughtful assessment of adolescents’ 
actual and differing capacities. Rather, they mirror historical, economic, social, cultural, and 
sometimes religious priorities of the State, as well as traditional assumptions about what is 
necessary to protect adolescents.149 In some areas where legislation has a proven role in 
protecting health (eg, minimum age to smoke tobacco, working age), laws often do not exist. 
In others, such as legal frameworks around sexual and reproductive health, there is little 
consistency between countries in the age of marriage, access to contraception, and 
availability of safe abortion. Indeed, there is often variability within the one country.
Countries with plural or multiple legal systems allow various sources of law to govern, 
including English common law, French civil or other law, statutory law, customary law, and 
religious law or practice.150 Although international conventions have contributed to national 
Patton et al.
Page 21
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 22 (native text) -----
consensus on norms and statutory laws, other laws often dominate practice. Customary and 
religious laws enjoy binding status in law or practice in most countries in the African region 
and a number in Asia and the Americas.151 These laws permit the persistence of cultural and 
religious customs and practices, some of which are discriminatory and have profound health 
effects.
Child marriage violates many internationally recognised rights. The Convention on the 
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women requires States to ensure that 
men and women have equal rights to enter into marriage and to freely choose a spouse with 
their free and full consent. Free and full consent is defined as a capacity to understand the 
meaning and responsibility of marriage, to have access to full information about her future 
spouse, knowledge about the institution of marriage, and her right to exercise a choice about 
whether to marry, who to marry, and when to marry.152 Consent to marriage cannot be free 
and full when one of the parties involved is insuffi ciently mature and experienced to make 
an informed decision about a life partner.153 Yet 15 million girls around the world marry 
each year before 18 years.154 In developing countries, a third of girls are married before 18 
years, and one in nine before 15 years.155
Girls who marry young face diminished opportunities for education, greater sexual 
exploitation, and violence that can sometimes extend to enslavement. Child brides are also 
exposed to health risks from early pregnancy, have greater maternal and infant mortality, and 
heightened vulnerability to HIV/AIDS and other sexually transmitted diseases.156 34 
countries permit girls to marry before 18 years, some still permit marriage before 15 years, 
and a few specify no minimum age.157 An even more important barrier to progress around 
child marriage lies in the discrepancy between legislation and actual marriage practices, 
largely the result of legal pluralism. At least 40 countries allow customary or religious law to 
over-ride specific age of marriage legislation. Even in countries which have ratified 
international rights treaties applicable to age of marriage, loopholes exist for laws and 
practices in personal, family, religious, or private matters. In many places an absence of 
marriage registration is a further barrier that limits monitoring of implementation of 
international treaties. The barriers to implementation are further illustrated in the case 
examples in panel 4154,158–168 and appendix text box 3.
Developmentally informed legal frameworks—More rational legal frameworks 
governing adolescents would take greater account of evolving adolescent cognitive and 
emotional capacities. Developmental neuroscience is beginning to offer new insights into 
adolescents’ capacities. With access to knowledge, they demonstrate similar or even greater 
cognitive capacity than adults to make good judgments in calm and emotionally-neutral 
contexts.60 Yet in emotionally-charged situations of stress or excitement, particularly with 
peers, emotions are more likely to drive decision making.60,169 Adolescents are also often 
more influenced by short-term than longer-term outcomes.28
Capacity for consent (or competence) has a basis in evolving cognitive and emotional 
capacities, as well as knowledge and experience.170 Legal frameworks should take both 
factors into account in framing legislation on age of consent. Restricting an adolescent’s 
right to smoke is therefore justified from their greater vulnerability to poor decision making 
Patton et al.
Page 22
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 23 (native text) -----
in emotionally-charged contexts with peers, as well as from their still evolving capacity to 
understand the extent of future health consequences of smoking.
Yet in addition to protecting adolescents from harm, legal frameworks should also support 
and promote adolescent autonomy. Developmental neuroscience provides some principles 
for how legal and social policy frameworks could operate more effectively for adolescents. 
Given knowledge, and with appropriate safeguards, adolescents are competent to make 
effective decisions about almost all important matters in their lives, including their health. 
Legal and policy frameworks should reflect these evolving cognitive and emotional abilities 
with age-appropriate autonomy, freedoms, and rights. Most adolescents are capable of 
voting from 16 years and doing so both empowers adolescents and promotes civic 
engagement. Yet, adolescents need legal and policy safeguards and support for decisions 
made in contexts where heightened emotion affects the choices an adolescent might make. 
This includes many decisions around substance use and sexual behaviours. Permitting access 
to effective contraception (eg, long-acting reversible contraceptives) for those sexually active 
under 18 years is one example of how the law can protect adolescents’ health. Lastly, the 
capacity for adolescent learning should be exploited through graduated legal and policy 
frameworks. This includes supporting skills and decision making around driving (panel 5),
171–174 and preventing custodial sentences for young offenders (panel 6).5,175–179
The global health profile of adolescents and young adults
The epidemiological transition has changed health profiles across all age groups. 
Adolescents and young adults have also benefited from the control of infectious diseases, 
including diarrhoeal disease, lower respiratory tract infections, tuberculosis, and malaria. 
Adolescent girls and young women have benefited from gains in maternal health, though 
there is ongoing debate as to whether gains have been as great in this younger age group.180 
However, the epidemiological transition often brings an increase in other health problems of 
adolescents, including road traffi c injuries and suicide.181,182 In some contexts, such as 
Latin America and eastern Europe, these problems have extended to homicide, mostly in 
young men.182 Although young men are the main perpetrators and victims of homicide in 
these settings, young women’s lives are profoundly restricted by both violence and fear of 
violence.183 The link with economic conditions is evident in the rise of mortality and 
alcohol-related disease burden in eastern European countries following the fall of the Soviet 
Union in 1991.184 A high proportion of young men competing for limited economic 
opportunities is also likely to be a factor underlying the recent civil unrest and armed 
conflict across the Middle East, north Africa, and sub-Saharan Africa.185
Other adolescent health problems become more prominent during the epidemiological 
transition. Mental health problems, including self-harm and suicide, assume greater 
significance. In part this is likely to reflect their greater prominence after reductions in 
infectious, nutritional, and sexual and reproductive health problems. It might also, in part, 
reflect a true increase in the prevalence of adolescent mental health problems that has been 
described in recent decades in developed economies.186 Mental disorders typically have 
their onset in late childhood and adolescence. Because many persist into adulthood, 
adolescent mental disorders make a greater contribution to adult disease than ever before.44
Patton et al.
Page 23
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 24 (native text) -----
HIV is a further reason why adolescents and young adults, particularly in southern and 
eastern sub-Saharan Africa, have seen fewer benefits from the epidemiological transition. 
New HIV infections are largely concentrated in young adults, and adolescents and young 
adults have not experienced equivalent mortality declines recently seen in other age groups.
187
With ageing populations and a convergence to a disease burden dominated by NCDs in later 
life, adolescent health risks assume greater significance.188 NCD risks that usually emerge 
during adolescence include tobacco use, physical inactivity, obesity, alcohol and illicit 
substance use, and poor diet. Without specific policy interventions, the combination of 
increasing wealth and unrestrained marketing will see adolescent health risks continue to 
rise in prevalence.
Defining adolescent health needs across the epidemiological transition
We adapted the conceptual model of the 2012 Lancet Series on adolescent health18 to define 
health needs at three levels (figure 6): current health problems and causes of adolescent and 
young adult deaths; health risks for health problems in adolescence, adulthood, or the next 
generation; and important proximal social determinants of health during the adolescent and 
young adult years.18 These include education and employment, marriage and parenthood, 
marketing and digital media, and quality of universal health coverage. The three categories 
of diseases outlined in figure 7 reflect conditions that change in prominence with the 
epidemiological transition. Thus diseases of poverty are conditions that are prominent prior 
to a country passing through the epidemiological transition and include undernutrition, 
major sexual and reproductive health problems (eg, maternal deaths, high rates of sexually 
transmitted infections), and infectious diseases including HIV. Panel 7, appendix text boxes 
4 and 5, and appendix table 3 further describe both the categorisation of disease burden and 
the methods used to derive these three categories of countries.
68 countries are classified as multi-burden countries (figure 8). Many are in southern and 
eastern sub-Saharan Africa where HIV has been a growing contributor to disease burden in 
adolescents and young adults. Some are also in southeast Asia and Oceania. 51% of the 
world’s adolescents live in these countries, but they account for 62·5% of all disability-
adjusted life-years (DALYs). These countries have made some progress in the past 15 years 
in reducing infectious diseases other than HIV and sexual and reproductive health and 
nutritional deficiencies. (figure 9). Reductions in unintentional injuries have been less than 
for diseases of poverty, especially in men and boys.
28 countries are in the injury excess category. They make up 12% of the global population 
and 11% of DALYs. 22 of these 28 countries have made little progress since 2000 in 
reducing the burden of disease affecting adolescents and young adults. These include Syria 
and Iraq, countries that have been affected by conflict. The remaining countries are to a large 
extent in Latin America and central Asia. Six countries, including Russia, Thailand, 
Colombia, and Bolivia, have made good progress in reducing DALYs from unintentional 
injuries and to a lesser extent violence.
Patton et al.
Page 24
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 25 (native text) -----
92 countries fall into the category of NCD predominant countries. 37% of the world’s 
adolescents live in these countries, where they account for a little over a quarter of all 
DALYs (26·3%). These countries include North America, most of western Europe, Latin 
America, and Australasia. 74 countries have been relatively static in their adolescent disease 
burden since 2000. 18 countries, including China and a number of countries in eastern 
Europe and the Middle East, stood out as having made substantial reductions in the 
adolescent disease burden since 2000. In general, this group has made some progress in 
reducing unintentional injuries. By contrast, they have made little progress in reducing the 
disease burden from chronic physical disorders, mental disorders, and substance use 
disorders. As a result the proportion of disease burden due to these conditions has continued 
to rise.
Eight countries have had an increase in their total DALY rate since 2000. Two are conflict 
affected (Georgia and Syria), three are violence-affected Latin American countries (Mexico, 
Venezuela, and Paraguay), and two have been particularly affected by HIV (Lesotho and 
Swaziland). Overall, since 2000 the most consistent gains have been in reducing infectious 
diseases, sexual and reproductive health problems, and nutritional deficiencies in multi-
burden countries. Unintentional injuries have reduced across all three country groups. By 
contrast, progress in reducing violence has been limited. HIV contributes a greater 
proportion of disease burden in adolescents in 2013 than it did 13 years earlier. Alcohol and 
other drug problems have also increased over that time, with increases most pronounced in 
NCD predominant countries.
Figure 10 illustrates the changing burden of disease from early adolescence to young 
adulthood in male and female adolescents. Particularly striking changes occur in rates of 
injury with age in boys, in both injury excess countries and multi-burden countries. In girls, 
the most striking changes with age in multi-burden countries are the increasing burden of 
sexual and reproductive health problems and injuries. In all country groups, there is a large 
increase in disease burden from chronic physical disorders, substance use disorders, and 
mental disorders with increasing age across adolescence.
Figure 11 uses the example of China to illustrate the variation in disease burden within a 
country. Both total disease burden and its contributors vary substantially by province. 
Although China as a whole is classified as NCD predominant, four provinces (Tibet, 
Xinjiang, Qinghia, and Hebei) would fall into the injury excess classification due to 
unintentional injuries remaining at a high level.
Major adolescent health risks
Tobacco use is a major risk factor for NCDs later in life, which overwhelmingly has its onset 
in adolescence. Maternal smoking during pregnancy is also a well-established risk factor for 
poor fetal growth as well as later-life illness in offspring.189 Tobacco use has declined across 
all three country groups, but progress has been mixed (appendix). Rates of daily smoking 
remain above 15% in 10–24 year olds across most European countries. In Russia, one in 
four 10–24 year olds smoke daily. Across all groups of countries, daily smoking is more 
common in men and boys than in women and girls. A number of countries in sub-Saharan 
Africa, eastern Europe, and the Middle East have seen rises. Many non-signatories to the 
Patton et al.
Page 25
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 26 (native text) -----
Framework Convention on Tobacco Control have not seen any fall in adolescent and young 
adult tobacco use.
Alcohol use disorders typically begin during the young adult years. As with nicotine 
addiction, younger age of drinking is a particular risk factor.190,191 Alcohol consumption in 
adulthood is now linked to eight different cancers, hypertension, haemorrhagic stroke and 
atrial fibrillation, various forms of liver disease, and pancreatitis.166 Greater use of alcohol 
in pregnancy has prominent intergenerational harms in the form of fetal alcohol syndrome.
192 Binge drinking was considerably more prevalent in men and boys than women and girls 
in every country grouping (appendix figure 8). Binge drinking rates were highest in NCD 
predominant and injury excess countries where around a quarter of 15 to 24-year-old men 
and boys report at least one occasion in the past 12 months. There has been little progress in 
reducing adolescent and young adult binge drinking since 1990. Indeed, a trend for 
increasing binge drinking is now clear for both boys and girls in injury excess and multi-
burden countries; injury excess countries are likely to overtake the NCD predominant 
countries in binge drinking in the coming years.
Overweight and obesity increase markedly across adolescence and young adulthood with 
very high persistence, particularly for obesity.193 The risks in later life include premature 
mortality, chronic disability, type 2 diabetes, ischaemic heart disease, hypertension, and 
cerebrovascular disease.194 Preconception maternal obesity increases risks for miscarriage, 
gestational diabetes, operative delivery, pre-eclampsia, infant perinatal mortality, and 
macrosomia.195 Adolescent overweight and obesity have increased in prevalence in almost 
all countries since 1990, as shown in figure 12. Notable exceptions are Iran, Turkey, 
Bulgaria, Argentina, and a number of countries in central sub-Saharan Africa. The annual 
increase has been around 10% in China and Vietnam, but there have also been marked 
increases in other countries across southeast Asia as well as in sub-Saharan Africa. The 
prevalence of overweight and obesity is around one in five young people in NCD 
predominant and injury excess countries. Although lower, about one in ten young people in 
multi-burden countries are also overweight or obese. If the recent increase in obesity 
continues, injury excess countries will soon outstrip NCD predominant countries in rates of 
overweight and obesity.
Across sub-Saharan African and Latin American countries with available data, 10–20% of 
15 to 24 year olds report having first sexual intercourse before the age of 15 years (appendix 
figure 9). Condom use in the context of having had two or more partners in the past year 
shows great variability between countries, but remains under 50% for adolescents in multi-
burden countries. Rates of women giving birth before 18 years remain high across western, 
central, and eastern sub-Saharan Africa, and for a number of countries in south Asia. Overall 
around one in five women in multi-burden countries report giving birth by the age of 18 
years. Unmet need for contraception refers to young women aged 15–24 years currently 
married or in union and not wanting to become pregnant within the next 2 years, who report 
not using any method of contraception. Rates of unmet need were high across sub-Saharan 
Africa, though there was substantial variation between countries. Although fewer data are 
available in other regions, high rates of unmet need for contraception remain in countries in 
Oceania, Latin America, and south Asia. Where data exist, the profile of sexual and 
Patton et al.
Page 26
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 27 (native text) -----
reproductive health risks is generally poorer in multi-burden countries. One exception is the 
high rate of intimate partner violence for young women in injury excess countries (appendix 
figure 10).
Lower adolescent fecundity benefits young women by making it more likely that they 
remain in education, delay marriage, enter the workforce, and achieve economic 
independence. In many countries the age of onset of sexual activity has remained similar 
while the age of marriage and first pregnancy has risen substantially. This shift in the age of 
first sexual intercourse relative to the age of marriage has taken place in many countries in 
all regions, with enormous implications for the provision of contraception for young women.
196
Figure 13 illustrates the very large variation in adolescent fecundity by country. The highest 
rates remain in sub-Saharan Africa but rates are also high across Latin America and in many 
countries in south Asia and Oceania. Globally there have been strong trends towards reduced 
adolescent fecundity but these are less prominent in sub-Saharan Africa and Latin America. 
Adolescent fecundity is high in multi-burden and injury excess country groupings. Injury 
excess countries have made little progress in reducing adolescent birth rates and are likely to 
overtake multi-burden countries in having the highest adolescent fecundity.
Actions for health
Investments in adolescent health extend from those directed toward conspicuous health 
problems to health risks that emerge during these years and to the broader social 
determinants of health (figure 6). Yet there are challenges in responding to these health 
needs, whether through health services, community actions, or structural actions. 
Adolescents and young adults have the poorest level of universal health coverage of any age 
group.197 Social and environmental determinants of adolescent health lie largely outside the 
health service sector.55 There are shifts in these determinants as young people mature 
through adolescence, such that strategies suited to younger adolescents might be 
inappropriate or ineffective with young adults.55 Strategies that are effective and appropriate 
for girls might be less effective in boys. The settings for health actions mirror those of 
determinants and extend from health services, schools, and education settings, to families 
and communities, places of employment, road transport, media, and structural, legal, and 
policy environments.
Health services
Health services for adolescents and young adults have a number of essential roles. Firstly, 
adolescents have acute health-care needs. Secondly, health services need to respond to 
emerging health needs, including health actions around normative conditions such as the 
provision of contraception for sexually active adolescents and maternal care for pregnant 
young women, as well as early and effective responses to the many health problems that 
emerge in adolescence such as nutritional deficiencies, HIV and other infectious diseases 
(eg, STIs, tuberculosis), and mental and substance use disorders.198,199 Thirdly, health 
services play a central part in the management of chronic health conditions, including 
physical disorders and HIV/AIDS, mental disorders, and injury-related disability, all 
Patton et al.
Page 27
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 28 (native text) -----
problems that can have profound implication for social, educational, and economic 
adjustment.
Despite having clear needs, adolescents and young adults often fail to access health care. 
Unmet sexual health care needs have been the best described. These needs are high in many 
countries and include lack of access to reliable contraception in both married and unmarried 
adolescent girls. In Tanzania for example, where 58% of 20–24-year-old girls were sexually 
active before 18 years (14% before 15 years), the unmet need for contraception is 16% in 
married 15–19 year olds and 64% in those who are sexually active but unmarried.200 In most 
African countries, the proportion of married 15–19-year-old girls with unmet contraception 
need is at least 25%, and as high as 64% in Ghana.200 Unmarried 15–19-year-old girls have 
approximately double the unmet need for contraception than married girls of the same age. 
Such striking figures are not restricted to Africa. In Asia, for example, the unmet need for 
contraception ranges from 25% in Kazakhstan, to 94% in Laos. In most countries in Latin 
American and the Caribbean, between a third and a half of unmarried sexually active 15–19-
year-old girls have unmet needs.200
Rates of contraceptive failure are higher in adolescents than in older women, with younger 
women more likely to abandon contraception despite ongoing need.201 Reasons include poor 
understanding of pregnancy risks, concerns about the effect of contraceptives on health or 
fertility and opposition from partners. Lack of knowledge of services, cost, shyness, and 
community stigma about sexual activity, and disapproving attitudes from providers are 
further barriers.202 One study in the US found contraceptive failure was almost twice as high 
in under 21 year olds using oral contraceptive pills, transdermal patch, and the vaginal ring. 
By contrast the failure rate of LARCs is extremely low in all age groups.203 Yet despite 
increased use of LARCs in the US since 2007, 15–24 year olds are less likely to use LARCs 
than 25–39-year-old women.204 Given their impressive effectiveness at reducing unplanned 
pregnancy, LARCs should be a critical component of universal health care for sexually 
active adolescent girls and young women, notwithstanding higher upfront costs.
An estimated 22 million unsafe abortions occur annually worldwide, of which about 15% 
(about 3·2 million) are in girls under the age of 20 years. Young women experience a higher 
risk of abortion-related deaths than women over 25 years, are more likely to terminate 
pregnancy after the first trimester, and are more likely to use unregulated providers.200 One 
nationally representative study in Ghana identified younger women as having the highest 
risks for unsafe abortion. In those who obtained an abortion, 44% of those under 20 years 
old did so with a safe provider, compared with 57% of 20–29 year olds and 65% of women 
aged 30 years and older.200 Even after controlling for various sociodemographic factors, 
knowledge of the legal status of abortion and partner support, adolescents were 77% less 
likely to obtain a safe abortion compared with women aged 30 years and older.
Irrespective of increased prevalence across adolescence, evidence suggests that most 
adolescents and young adults with mental health problems do not receive treatment from 
health professionals.205 One European study of mental health care in adults showed that 
about 6% of the sample was in need of mental health care but 48% of those people reported 
no formal health-care use. Those aged 18–24 years reported least use of services.206 Actions 
Patton et al.
Page 28
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 29 (native text) -----
to reduce barriers include promotion of mental health literacy and combat of stigma, 
particularly in countries of low and middle income where the scaling up of mental health 
services has not yet been a priority.207
Barriers to universal health coverage—Two sets of barriers diminish universal health 
coverage for adolescents and young adults. The first set are external to health services and 
include legal frameworks governing health actions, out-of-pocket costs, and cultural and 
community attitudes. Although not unique to adolescents, they assume a greater magnitude 
in the young. Both legal and financial barriers to health service access are greater in 
adolescents than in other age groups. Even when national legislation allows a particular 
health response, a provider’s attitudes and beliefs about the appropriateness of an action in 
the context of age, marital status, or partner or parental consent could affect their response to 
an adolescent.208 Financial barriers might arise from limited eligibility for tax and insurance 
based funding schemes.209 18–24 year olds report more frequent cost barriers than older 
adults.210 Socially marginalised adolescents are particularly vulnerable to catastrophic 
medical events.
The second set of barriers arise more from the developmental context of adolescence. 
Adolescence brings an increasing desire for privacy and confidentiality, with embarrassment, 
shame, and fear of being judged restricting access to health care. A particular concern is that 
their parents will be informed about sensitive issues, such as substance use, mental health, 
and sexual behaviours.211 In the USA, for example, the leading concern of adolescents who 
had foregone health care was that they did not want their parents to find out.212 Difficulties 
also arise when policies and procedures for claiming health-care benefits inadvertently 
expose adolescents to confidentiality breaches through routine communication, such as 
when itemised bills are sent to policy holders (typically parents).213
Adolescents are less experienced users of health care, with a consequence that time is 
required to engage them in consultations, especially around sensitive issues. Inexperience 
also results in a majority of adolescents not appreciating that health risks, such as substance 
use, bullying, or overweight, can be raised with health professionals.214 Adolescents 
welcome such discussions as long as they are sensitively and confidentially addressed.215
A young child’s involvement with health-care providers is typically mediated through 
parents or family. With age, support, and experience, the maturing adolescent develops 
greater capacity to engage in decision making about their own health care. A task for health 
professionals is to help set expectations with adolescents and parents about an adolescent 
taking greater responsibility for their health care. With increasing age, providers need to 
explicitly engage young people themselves, which ideally includes consulting with them 
alone for at least part of the consultation. Engaging adolescents in a friendly, respectful, and 
non-judgmental manner helps them to gain the confidence and skills to increasingly make 
decisions about their health and wellbeing.197 Consulting with young people alone can be 
challenging to parents’ perceptions of their role.216 It requires careful explanation, even in 
settings in which it is more culturally acceptable.217
Patton et al.
Page 29
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 30 (native text) -----
In general, treatment adherence diminishes as children with chronic physical health 
conditions enter adolescence. This has consequences for the management and outcomes of a 
range of significant chronic illnesses such as type 1 diabetes, allergy and asthma, HIV, and 
inflammatory bowel disease.218,219 Providing information alone is ineffective in achieving 
greater adherence in adolescents.220 Additional strategies such as behavioural management, 
family engagement, and understanding the young person’s emotional responses to illness are 
important elements within the clinician’s response.221 Peer strategies are effective at 
improving health outcomes of adolescents, especially when linked to wider school and 
community strategies.222 There is much interest in the role of apps and other technologies in 
promoting adherence in adolescents with chronic physical conditions but as yet there are few 
studies of benefit.
Transition to adult health care poses important challenges for continuity of health care. This 
is now well recognised in high-income countries for adolescents with conditions such as 
type 1 diabetes, spina bifida, and cystic fibrosis.223 Engagement with adult services requires 
repeated discussion with young people and families, detailed planning and care coordination 
with adult services, and enhanced follow-up by adult services to maximise continuity of 
care.224 More recently, the extent that young people with HIV/AIDS are dropping out of 
adult health care in countries of low and middle income after transferring from specialist 
paediatric services has become apparent, leading to failure of adherence to antiretroviral 
therapy, and greater risks to self and others.225 Health-system deficiencies commonly 
include inadequate pre-transfer communication and planning from child health services, and 
adult services that do not meet young people’s needs—or both.224 Such experiences are 
consistent with the less positive experiences of 18–24 year olds than older adult users of 
health services in high-income countries,210 which reinforces recent efforts to bring greater 
attention to the health experiences and outcomes of young adults as well as younger 
adolescents.226
Adolescent-responsive health care—What adolescents view as responsive or youth-
friendly health care is similar across countries of all income levels.227 They value patient-
centred care with an emphasis on respect, coordination of care, appropriate provision of 
information, high-quality communication, involvement in decisions about care, and the 
ability of health-care providers to listen to their needs.228 These align with the principles of 
adolescent-friendly health care, a framework developed by WHO, that emphasises equity of 
access, effectiveness, accessibility, acceptability to young people, and appropriateness of 
care offered.229 These are applicable across all health services (eg, clinic, school health 
service, hospital).
As clinicians generally find consulting with adolescents more challenging than with other 
age groups, extending the competence of health-care providers to ensure they have the 
attitudes, knowledge, and skills to appropriately engage with and respond to adolescents’ 
health needs is required.197 The inexperience of adolescents places particular responsibility 
on health-care providers to identify young people’s conspicuous and emerging health-care 
needs. Health-care providers also need competence to maintain an appropriate level of 
engagement with family, and how to negotiate relationships with adolescents and their 
family in the context of local laws. It often requires individualised assessments of the 
Patton et al.
Page 30
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 31 (native text) -----
competence of adolescents to make autonomous decisions about their health.230 Access to 
broadband and digital technology platforms such as Massive Open Online Courses offer 
exceptional opportunities to build competency in health-care professionals but face-to-face 
training will still be required.231
We are now clearer about the steps needed to make sexual and reproductive health services 
more adolescent responsive in countries of low and middle income.232 Training health 
workers without making changes to facilities does not increase service or contraceptive use. 
Equally, creating stand-alone services for adolescent sexual and reproductive health is not, 
of itself, effective.229 The most effective strategies use a combination of high-quality health-
worker training, adolescent-friendly facility improvements, and broad information 
dissemination via the community, schools, and mass media to drive demand.233 Other 
elements within a multifaceted approach might include promotion of adolescents’ literacy 
about their own health, engagement of community leaders, an appropriate package of 
services, ensuring provider competencies, improving facilities, promoting equity and non-
discrimination, collecting data for quality improvement, and engaging adolescents around 
practice policies.234 In England, the You’re Welcome criteria provide guidelines to health 
services to more consistently provide quality care to adolescents.235
Health-care services depend on adolescent help-seeking. School-based promotion of 
services, mass media campaigns, and social media all have potential roles to reduce 
developmental barriers to accessing health care by promotion of health literacy and help-
seeking.236 Web-based or other technologies might improve help-seeking, although a recent 
systematic review found little evidence to date.237 In countries of low and middle income, 
school-based health services will have greater salience as participation in secondary 
education grows. Service models range from fully equipped and permanently staffed centres 
with medical, nursing, and counselling staff to clinics offering nursing services only a few 
hours a week. The predominant focus so far has been on provision of sexual and 
reproductive health care, where the evidence for the effectiveness of school-based health 
services without on-site provision of contraceptives is mixed.238 Better matching of health 
actions to adolescent health needs is an opportunity for all health services, including school-
based health services.
Preventive health actions
We conducted a series of systematic reviews of systematic reviews to assess current 
knowledge on the effectiveness for preventive interventions outside formal health-care 
settings across the nine areas of health need specified in figure 7 (unpublished). We included 
both specific health outcomes and health risks. Some responses (eg, policy measures such as 
taxation or some forms of legislation such as gun control) are not directly targeted at young 
people but might have particular benefits for young people compared to other age groups. 
Other actions (eg, legislation around age of marriage or employment, or actions taken 
through schools) target adolescents directly. Between March 15 and March 30, 2015, we 
searched the following databases; CINAHL, Education Research Complete, ERIC, 
MEDLINE, PsycINFO, and Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. Levels of evidence 
were classified according to the criteria given in appendix text box 6. Highly recommended 
Patton et al.
Page 31
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 32 (native text) -----
interventions are those with at least 50% of review studies reporting positive outcomes. 
These were often supported by some evidence on cost-effectiveness. Interventions with 
some positive evidence not reaching this threshold have a moderate recommendation with 
further research needed. Some other actions are unlikely to be effective in isolation but are 
recommended as part of multi-component interventions. Other investigators (unpublished) 
also reviewed the available literature on the economic case for health investments through 
the adolescent years. Due to the relative scarcity of cost-effectiveness studies of 
interventions that target adolescents, a review of reviews approach was infeasible and a 
review of primary studies was undertaken. These findings were incorporated into the 
evidence summaries.
Sexual and reproductive health including HIV—More than any other area of health, 
the sexual and reproductive health of adolescents and young adults is affected by a country’s 
cultural, religious, legal, political, and economic contexts. In many settings these underlying 
determinants overlap with the determinants of violence and substance abuse.183 Actions for 
sexual and reproductive health must take these contexts, as well as age and gender, into 
account. In responding, health actions are needed at each level—from structural, through to 
community settings including schools, and health services (table 4, appendix table 4). The 
most effective programmes are typically multi-component and target one or more of these 
settings.239
The provision of accessible and quality health care (eg, provision of contraception, STI 
screening including HIV testing, treatment of STIs, provision of continuous care for HIV-
positive adolescents), and high-quality, comprehensive sexuality education are likely to be 
effective, although much more so in conjunction with a broader suite of actions. Although 
legislation is essential in protecting adolescents from sexual coercion, early marriage, and 
early pregnancy, discrepancies between statutory legislation and actual practices are a barrier 
to implementation. Such laws will often be ineffective without actions to change community 
and professional attitudes. Together with quality health care, comprehensive sexuality 
education, amelioration of family poverty, and access to quality education, legislation is one 
essential element within the suite of interventions for adolescent sexual and reproductive 
health.
Infectious and vaccine-preventable diseases—Vaccination against infectious 
diseases has received far less attention in adolescents than in children. Yet vaccination of 
adolescents is also important for ensuring completion of immunisation schedules (eg, 
measles-rubella, hepatitis B vaccine [HBV]), administering booster doses (eg, diphtheria-
tetanus), and for primary immunisation (eg, human papilloma virus [HPV]). Rubella 
vaccination is important for adolescent girls in terms of intergeneration risks, while HBV is 
important for both sexes given the adult burden of disease from hepatitis B. Others to 
consider according to local prevalence and cost are BCG, influenza, and meningitis 
vaccines.
Recent developments have brought new attention to adolescent vaccination as a strategy to 
prevent adult cancers as well as STIs (eg, HBV, HPV). HPV immunisation for young girls is 
cost-effective across different regions.240,241 There are few cost-effectiveness studies in 
Patton et al.
Page 32
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 33 (native text) -----
males.242 Cost-effectiveness has been calculated from preventing cancer but quadravalent 
and multivalent vaccines have additional value in reducing anogenital warts. In high-income 
countries, school-based HPV vaccination programmes have a higher uptake than other 
approaches.
Lack of basic knowledge has hindered responses to common infectious diseases in 
adolescents. For example, in contrast to diarrhoeal disease in children, the aetiological 
agents, proportion of vaccine-preventable morbidity and mortality, and comorbidities are 
largely unknown in adolescents. Similarly, very little attention has been given to adolescent 
tuberculosis, despite it being the leading contributor to the burden of infectious diseases in 
young adults in multi-burden countries (figure 14). It could, in part, reflect the predominance 
of adults presenting to clinical services. In Africa, estimates of tuberculosis prevalence range 
from 160 to 462 per 100 000 adolescents and young adults (unpublished). In Asia, the range 
is from 39 to 142 per 100 000. Because adolescents are prone to adult-type pulmonary 
manifestations, including cavitation and smear-positive disease, they are a potent source of 
infection to others.240 Yet there is little age-disaggregated data with studies typically 
referring to participants as children, or adults.
Adolescents also carry a substantial burden from malaria in Africa. In high transmission 
areas, rates of malaria infection are higher in young women, who also encounter further 
risks in pregnancy.241 In endemic regions, childhood immunity provides relative protection 
for adolescents, but in areas of lower transmission, clinical disease is more common in 
adolescents and young adults. As infection in endemic areas is controlled, the risk for 
adolescents will increase. In low transmission regions, the adolescent incidence of malaria 
reflects their use of individual preventive interventions such as insecticide-treated bednets. A 
study from Nigeria,243 where 50% of the community is estimated to experience an episode 
of malaria each year, showed that only 8·5% of 13–18 year-old-students reported sleeping 
under insecticide-treated bednets. Over half had learnt about malaria prevention from 
traditional media (radio, TV).
Undernutrition—Adolescent nutrition is relevant for current, future, and intergenerational 
health.244 The causes of adolescent nutritional deficiencies are complex with contributors at 
the individual, household, and population level.245 There is currently no direct evidence of 
the benefit of interventions targeting adolescents specifically, or the effects of broader 
interventions on adolescents as a separate age group. Even the effect of iron deficiency 
anaemia on learning and educational attainment in adolescents is largely unknown. There is, 
however, good evidence for interventions targeting nutrition-related problems that often 
affect adolescents.
Iron requirements increase sharply during adolescence to support pubertal growth, and for 
adolescent girls to meet additional needs relating to menstruation.246 Adolescents, 
particularly girls, are therefore vulnerable to iron deficiency anaemia. Iron fortification of 
staple foods, such as flour, can be implemented through government policy or market-based 
mechanisms. It is cost-effective and can reduce iron deficiency anaemia at a population level 
by up to 63%.247 WHO recommends intermittent iron and folic acid supplementation for all 
menstruating adolescent girls and adult women in populations with 20% or greater 
Patton et al.
Page 33
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 34 (native text) -----
prevalence of anaemia.248 Interventions addressing food insecurity, could also improve iron 
levels. For example, conditional cash transfer programmes,249 and home garden 
programmes250 have both been successful in improving iron levels in some participants.
The increased energy intake required for optimal growth during and following puberty 
means that adolescents are also vulnerable to protein-energy malnutrition.246 Interventions 
that can reduce protein-energy malnutrition, including balanced protein-energy 
supplementation,249 cash transfers,247 and improved household food storage systems,251 
might therefore have particular benefits for them.34 Although school-based meal 
programmes might increasingly extend to include adolescents, recent reviews have found 
only small effects on patterns of undernutrition and school attendance in primary school-
aged children.252 Using schoolchildren as a distribution point for household food packages 
decreased adolescent anaemia, but had little effect on protein-energy malnutrition.253 
Because few interventions have been evaluated for adolescent populations, we know little of 
the benefits or side-effects (eg, obesity) of interventions targeting protein-energy 
malnutrition in adolescents.
Children born to adolescent girls are more likely to have low birthweight, independent of 
socioeconomic or maternal preconception nutrition status.254 This might be due to greater 
maternal–fetal competition for energy and nutrients as pregnant adolescents’ energy and 
nutrient reserves are still important for their own growth.255 Pregnant adolescent girls’ 
growth can slow or stop during pregnancy.256 They might experience weight loss, depleted 
fat body mass and lean body mass.257 Pregnant and lactating adolescent girls are also at 
increased risk of iron deficiency, which is in turn linked with low birthweight.254 For these 
reasons, preconception interventions to increase the availability of energy and micronutrients 
are likely to be of particular benefit. These include multiple micronutrient supplementation 
or iron and folic acid supplementation continuing into pregnancy, deworming to reduce 
nutrient loss, delaying first pregnancies and spacing of later births, and antenatal nutrition 
counselling and education.249 Because of maternal–fetal competition for calcium, pregnant 
adolescents are at increased risk for gestational hypertension and pre-eclampsia and are 
therefore likely to benefit from calcium supplementation.258
Stunted adolescent girls who become pregnant are at increased risk of complications such as 
vesico-ureteric fistulae and obstructed labour, and their children are at increased risk of low 
birthweight and preterm birth.249 We know little about the scope for catch-up growth among 
stunted adolescents whether before or during the pubertal growth spurt.259 However, any 
opportunity for catch-up will be restricted by early pregnancy and for that reason, delaying 
first pregnancy is essential in stunted adolescent girls.255
Specific nutritional interventions should ideally be considered in a broader context of 
actions. Delayed childbearing is a related priority.249 Therefore interventions that improve 
girls’ access to contraception, reduce early marriage, reduce coerced sex, and prevent early 
pregnancy through sexuality education are all linked.260 Nutritional interventions should 
ideally be integrated with strategies to empower young women through access to education 
and health care or to increase their control over household resources.261
Patton et al.
Page 34
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 35 (native text) -----
Unintentional injury
Road traffic injuries dominate the picture of adolescent unintentional injury in most 
countries. Developmental immaturity, risky behaviour, and poor decision making in response 
to hot emotions increase the risks, particularly among boys and young men.262 Adolescents 
and young adults, particularly those in countries of low and middle income, are at high risk 
as they are more likely to be vulnerable road users, such as pedestrians, cyclists, and 
motorcyclists. For these reasons, they will disproportionately benefit from actions to 
promote safer road infrastructure and regulate road safety risks.263
In high-income countries, improvements in road design, equipment and maintenance, traffic 
control (notably speed reducing devices), vehicle design and protective devices, driver 
training and regulation (eg, drink driving), police enforcement and sanctions, public 
education and information, and post-crash care (from training of first responders such as 
ambulance services through to trauma surgery), have brought substantial reductions in the 
burden of disease.264
Effective action to reduce road traffic injury in adolescents and young adults is necessarily 
multifaceted and ultimately benefits all road users. The introduction of graduated licensing 
systems (panel 5)171–174 in which the young driver has an extended learner period increases 
low-risk supervised driving experience prior to licensure. Such systems might regulate 
exposure to high-risk settings such as unsupervised late night driving, driving with other 
young passengers, or alcohol use during an initial licensing period.265 Robust testing of 
competence before issuing of licences is generally an essential element. Legislation and 
enforcement of helmet-wearing in countries where a high proportion of adolescents and 
young adults ride motorcycles are likely to be cost-effective.266 Investment in pedestrian 
safety in regions where pedestrian injuries are common (eg, sub-Saharan Africa) could be 
beneficial. Effective actions include lowering speed limits on lengths of road where 
pedestrians mix with other traffic (and enforcement of these limits),267 regulation including 
police enforcement of the behaviour of drivers and riders at pedestrian crossings,268 
improved pedestrian facilities (footpaths and crossings),269 separating pedestrians and 
vehicles,270 and increasing the visibility of pedestrians.271
These interventions could be supplemented by education programmes, with input from 
young drivers where possible.272 However, school-age driver education programmes, that 
focus on selecting a driving instructor, theory, and practical tests should be avoided as they 
could encourage earlier driving leading to greater risk of accidents.273
Intersectoral coordination has been a feature in countries that have made progress in 
reducing road traffic injury. In addition to the specific interventions outlined here, 
underpinning factors have included strong information systems, clear governance, civil 
society advocacy, and a capacity to implement effectively within the different sectors. Road 
traffic injury therefore provides a powerful illustration of the strategies needed for effective 
intersectoral action in adolescent health.188
Patton et al.
Page 35
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 36 (native text) -----
Violence
Many individual, community, cultural, and economic factors are linked to violence in 
adolescents and young adults.97,274 Individual factors include personality attributes such as 
impulsivity, substance use and abuse, low educational attainment, and childhood aggression. 
Family conflict and poor family management, involvement of peers in problem behaviours, 
poor community social cohesion, high levels of residential mobility, drug trafficking, and 
unemployment might all be interlinked contributors. Social and economic inequality, 
availability of weapons, and laws and cultural norms that support violence are further 
factors. All could be targets for intervention.275
There is some evidence that single interventions such as legislation and school-based 
interventions targeting at-risk students can reduce rates of violence. However, most effective 
interventions, including those targeting homicide, require a multifaceted approach tailored to 
the risk profile of the particular community.276 Policy responses might include those 
directed to inequality, lack of access to education, unemployment, availability of weapons, 
and laws and cultural norms that support violence.277
Evidence of the effectiveness of interventions for preventing intimate partner violence and 
sexual violence in adolescents and young adults is largely lacking. In many cases, 
particularly in countries of low and middle income, studies are of poor quality with small 
sample sizes, varied outcome measures, and short follow-up periods.
Legislative and justice sector responses are again likely to be important elements. Indeed the 
number of countries with relevant legislation has grown considerably in recent decades. 
However legislation has not been shown to reduce intimate partner and sexual violence, and 
there is a need for system-wide changes to overcome resistance from the police and 
judiciary.278
Educational and skills-based programmes implemented in school or tertiary institution 
settings (principally in the USA) have been the most commonly used interventions to target 
adolescents and young adults. They aim to prevent or reduce dating and relationship 
violence by promoting gender-equitable norms and healthy relationships. While the 
programmes might change knowledge and attitudes, they have not been shown to affect 
behaviours.279
Community-based programmes that aim to promote gender-equitable norms have been the 
most commonly evaluated in countries of low and middle income. Evidence on their 
effectiveness is mixed.280 There is an absence of evidence on programmes that more fully 
address risk factors for intimate partner violence and sexual violence (eg, alcohol misuse, 
family-derived attitudes to violence, social norms that condone violence, and gender 
inequality), are tailored to local contexts, include families where appropriate, and target 
adolescents at highest risk (including those in emergency and humanitarian situations).
278,281 Studies of violence against those of sexual minority status are rare (appendix table 5).
Patton et al.
Page 36
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 37 (native text) -----
Mental disorders
The significance of adolescent mental disorders across the life course has only become clear 
in the past few decades.282 Studies in adults suggest that most mental disorders begin before 
25 years of age, most often between 11–18 years.283 Recent prospective studies have found 
that while mental health problems are very common during adolescence, not all persist into 
adulthood, particularly if the episodes are brief.44,284 These understandings have put a 
growing emphasis on early clinical interventions through more accessible and better 
resourced primary health care or in some countries, through adolescent-focused mental 
health services.285 While there is evidence that access to health services is increasing in 
some places, there is as yet no evidence that these increases have led to detectable 
improvements in adolescent mental health.286
So far, evaluation studies have focused on a narrow set of preventive interventions that are 
readily testable in randomised controlled trials (RCTs). The dominant approach has been to 
take effective clinical treatments, such as cognitive-behavioural therapies (CBT), and apply 
these to the general population of adolescents or to at-risk subgroups to test if they prevent 
disorders developing. A systematic review and meta-analysis of RCTs287 of prevention 
interventions for depression or anxiety in children and adolescents had mixed findings on the 
effectiveness of this strategy. The investigators concluded that these interventions produced 
minimal to moderate reduction in symptoms in the shortterm but no effect beyond 12 
months of follow-up. For a group of disorders that often persist for decades, there is clearly a 
need for innovation and more sustained effects of interventions. Approaches that focus on 
developmental mental health risks such as bullying, interpersonal violence, and social media 
risks are worth testing. Although digital and social media have been implicated as risk 
factors, online and mobile-phone interventions could play a positive part in prevention and 
promotion of access to clinical services.287
Suicide prevention—Risks for suicide increase in adolescence and young adulthood, 
particularly for the socially marginalised.288 Risks include depression, alcohol abuse, mental 
disorders, antisocial behaviour, sexual abuse, physical abuse, poor peer relationships, 
suicidal behaviour by friends, family discord, family suicidal behaviour, unsupportive 
parents, and living apart from parents.289 Social contagion is a further factor in up to 60% of 
adolescent and young adult suicides.290 Deliberate self-harm is also common in adolescents, 
particularly in females, and heightens risks for subsequent suicide.291
Adolescent-specific suicide prevention strategies have been implemented in three principal 
settings: schools, the community, and the health system.292 Goals range from increasing 
help-seeking for suicidal thoughts and behaviours; identification and referral of at-risk 
young people (eg, by health professionals, teachers, parents, or peers); reduction of risk 
factors for suicide; and promotion of mental health. School-based interventions are the most 
evaluated, with some systematic reviews focused solely on these.293 Universal interventions 
have been shown to improve knowledge of and attitudes about suicide293 but the gains are 
not maintained at follow-up. Gatekeeper training improves knowledge of and attitudes about 
suicide, and confidence in providing help.293 There is mixed evidence for universal school-
based interventions, gatekeeper training, public education and mass-media interventions, 
Patton et al.
Page 37
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 38 (native text) -----
screening, or postvention (after suicide) programmes on help-seeking behaviour,294 help-
giving behaviour, suicidal ideation, or suicide attempts. Health practitioner education to 
increase the recognition of depression and evaluate suicide risk shows some benefits in 
preventing suicide across all ages and is therefore likely to also benefit adolescents and 
young adults.295
Evidence for prevention of suicide in adolescents and young adults is largely lacking in 
countries of low and middle income. The studies that exist are often of poor quality. 
Reducing suicide in adolescents and young adults is likely to require a multifaceted 
approach that includes limiting access to means (eg, gun control legislation, medication 
packaging, safe storage of pesticides), health practitioner training in risk assessment, and 
effective treatment of risk factors, such as depression and substance use.296 Help-seeking is 
likely to differ between males and females and future evaluations of preventive actions 
should address gender differences in effect.297
Physical health and health risks
Prevention of overweight and obesity—The prevalence of overweight and obesity 
rises in mid-adolescence, with the trend continuing into early adulthood.298 Because 
adolescent obesity strongly predicts adult obesity and associated morbidity, adolescence is 
an essential life phase for action.299 The case is even stronger when considering the maternal 
and intergenerational health risks of obesity in young women.300
Modifiable risks for obesity also change rapidly across adolescence. Physical activity 
commonly decreases and sedentary behaviour increases.301 In addition, adolescents have 
greater autonomy around food choices and are more likely to eat out of the home, which 
often leads to less healthy food choices.302 Exposure to media influences and susceptibility 
to processed food marketing also increase.303 Treatment of obesity in adolescents and young 
adults is necessary for the prevention and treatment of type 2 diabetes and other 
comorbidities, but is diffi cult. The rapidity of change in the prevalence and severity of 
obesity means that prevention in childhood and adolescence is of the highest importance.
Evidence on the effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of interventions for the prevention of 
obesity and promotion of physical activity is included in appendix table 6. Few reviews 
focused on adolescents, although some report on studies of children that include younger 
adolescents.304 Multi-component interventions that incorporate policy measures, 
environmental changes that promote physical activity, and education about a healthy diet and 
physical activity are more likely to be effective than single interventions.305 More work is 
needed on interventions that capitalise on peer and social network influences, and further 
research is needed to explore the impact of gender on response to obesity prevention 
interventions.306 Barriers to participation for girls might be greater than for boys and might 
include cultural or body image sensitivities (especially in mixed-gender settings); a focus on 
competitive sports and lack of facilities in schools (eg, changing rooms, toilets, and 
showers).305 There is also a need for further research into interventions that target 
adolescents and young adults who are not in educational settings, minority groups, and 
socially disadvantaged adolescents.307 In addition, there is a need for evaluation, including 
economic evaluation, of obesity-related interventions in countries of low and middle income. 
Patton et al.
Page 38
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 39 (native text) -----
Consistent with the reductions in substance use that fiscal and marketing interventions have 
brought, the potential benefits from interventions to limit food marketing and increase the 
relative cost of unhealthy products are likely to benefit adolescents in particular.
Alcohol, illicit drugs, and tobacco
Consumption of alcohol and illicit drugs often begins and then increases during the 
adolescent years, with some evidence suggesting that adolescents are using substances at 
increasingly early ages.308 Early initiation of alcohol use is linked to later binge drinking, 
heavy drinking, and alcohol-related problems in adolescence and adulthood.309 There is also 
evidence that early consumption can lead to impairment of neurological development 
(appendix table 7).310
Regulatory or statutory enforcement interventions show the most benefit in the prevention of 
tobacco and harmful use of alcohol. Regulating the availability of alcoholic beverages 
through restricted times of sale and reducing the demand for alcohol through taxation and 
pricing are two of the most cost-effective strategies, while regulating access to alcohol 
through restrictions on purchasing age is particularly effective for preventing alcohol-related 
harms in adolescent and young adults. The great majority of this evidence is from high-
income countries. Interventions should be tailored to the local context with consideration to 
levels of alcohol consumption, age-related and gender-related drinking patterns, and levels 
of harm.
Treatment and rehabilitation services and harm minimisation strategies have been the main 
focus in reducing the adverse consequences of illicit drug use. Harm minimisation strategies 
are essential in preventing transmission of blood-borne viruses, including HIV and hepatitis, 
and can include needle and syringe exchange programmes, drug substitution programmes 
that switch users from illegal drugs to legal drugs dispensed by health professionals, HIV 
testing and counselling, prevention of and services for the management of STIs, overdose 
prevention, and education relating to wound and vein care.311 Strategies need to be tailored 
to the local context, including drug use patterns and related levels of harm.
Whether or not an adolescent initiates tobacco use depends on diverse factors, such as 
gender, concerns with bodyweight and attitudes to smoking, parental, peer, and community 
smoking, socioeconomic status, and level of education.312 School, family, community, and 
media-based intervention can be beneficial but the effects are small, and should ideally form 
part of more comprehensive strategies, as outlined in the Framework Convention for 
Tobacco Control.
Limits in current knowledge
For most health problems and risks, there is a scarcity of published literature on the 
effectiveness of interventions for adolescents and young adults. Furthermore, with the 
exception of sexual and reproductive health, available evidence at the systematic review 
level is from high-income countries, particularly the USA. Different cultures, beliefs, 
knowledge, lifestyles, and health systems affect implementation and effectiveness in 
different settings. The costs of interventions will also vary markedly between countries with 
different salary structures, health systems, other unit costs, and methods of implementation. 
Patton et al.
Page 39
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 40 (native text) -----
Costs are largely unavailable for many settings and evidence on cost-effectiveness scarcer 
still. Comparison of cost-effectiveness is further complicated by differences in outcome 
measures, methods, and thresholds for what is considered cost-effective. A move towards a 
common outcome measure such as the cost per disability-adjusted lifeyear averted would be 
valuable.313
Developing more comprehensive responses
The social and environmental determinants of adolescent health and wellbeing act at 
different levels and across different settings. Furthermore, many social and structural 
determinants affect multiple and interconnected aspects of adolescent health and wellbeing. 
The most effective responses operate at different levels of relevant settings.55 Table 5 
outlines six platforms for action in adolescent health and recommendations for actions from 
each. These platforms offer scope for action in nearly all countries.
Structural interventions—Legislation, taxation, and implementation of policies bringing 
investment in families, communities, schools, and health services are essential elements of 
adolescent health action in all places. They lie at the core of actions for health risks such as 
tobacco and alcohol, prevention of road traffic injury, violence, obesity, and sexual and 
reproductive health. Structural interventions are dependent on sound governance, a capacity 
to implement within the relevant sectors, and good information systems to monitor 
implementation and health outcomes. Legal reforms are unlikely to be successful without 
addressing the values, knowledge, attitudes, and behaviour of the judiciary and police 
responsible for their implementation. Structural actions are more difficult as the government 
systems for implementation are generally weak. In many countries, information systems to 
support structural interventions are also weak.
Media and social marketing—Most social marketing and mass media approaches will 
not only target the attitudes and values of adolescents and young adults but also their 
families and broader communities. The South African multimedia so-called edutainment 
programme, Soul City, helped change social norms around HIV/AIDS and domestic 
violence, contributed to increased individual knowledge about condom use and domestic 
violence, and more widely contributed to the empowerment of local communities.314 
Partnerships with civil society and media professionals are powerful in exploiting the 
potential of these platforms. One such coalition, MTV Staying Alive Ignite, has aimed to 
prevent the spread of HIV by attempting to change attitudes, behaviours, and national 
norms. Building on a confronting television drama, the accompanying multimedia campaign 
challenged young people in Kenya, Trinidad and Tobago, and Ukraine to ignite a wider 
social movement to stop the spread of HIV.
Community interventions—The lives of young people are affected by the behaviour, 
norms, and values of adults and other adolescents around them. Community interventions 
usually involve local government, families, youth-focused and religious organisations, and 
schools. Positive youth development programmes are, for example, often community based 
and seek to promote life skills and positive attitudes including self-confidence and 
empowerment, social and emotional skills, and good problem solving. The strategies 
Patton et al.
Page 40
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 41 (native text) -----
employed range from sport, survival skills, and outdoor education to theatre, music and art, 
leadership training, and mentorship. An intervention such as the promotion of sport in girls 
has the potential to bring benefits in physical health and fitness, as well as empowering girls 
through challenging harmful traditional gender norms.315 The most effective interventions 
have generally incorporated elements that build on available community structures, use good 
information on adolescent health and wellbeing, adopt a multi-component strategy, and 
monitor progress. One well established approach has been the Communities that Care 
framework that has been trialled in a number of sites in the USA with clear benefits and 
evidence for cost-effectiveness.275
Online interventions—Young people are the earliest adopters of information and 
communication technologies such as mobile phones, instant messaging, the internet, and 
social media—a phenomenon seen in countries of low and middle income, as well as in 
high-income countries.316 New social media has the potential to provide a powerful voice 
for adolescents and young adults to actively engage with each other and their communities. 
They also have the potential to transform health knowledge and delivery systems worldwide.
317
Trends in using digital media are global, but the means of accessing information varies 
widely (eg, mobile phones, personal or public computers). In sub-Saharan Africa, growth in 
access to mobile phones has meant that digital media are even available in many remote 
places.318 In Bangladesh, for example, over 70% of women of reproductive age have access 
to a mobile phone within the household.319 These new tools provide a platform for health 
education in their own right as well as the capacity to augment health-care delivery and other 
preventive actions including those within schools.320 Social media offers a possibility of 
reaching diverse groups including geographically and socially marginalised adolescents. 
This is a platform of great promise but as yet there is little consensus about the most 
effective strategies for use with adolescents. Evidence on effectiveness is also very limited 
both in terms of longer term benefits and harder health endpoints.
School interventions—For children who go to them, schools are the site of the most 
important relationships outside of the family ie, with teachers and peers. The global growth 
in secondary education has the potential to greatly increase actions for health among 
adolescents through schools. Yet despite the evidence that enhancing school environments 
brings major health benefits, most school-based interventions have been limited to the 
provision of health education. The most effective actions from this platform are multi-
component with curriculum elements, a focus on a school’s social and physical environment, 
together with engagement of families and the community.321 These types of actions show 
consistently positive outcomes for adolescent sexual health, violence, and tobacco smoking 
and might be beneficial for other health risks.321,322
Health service interventions—Health care has distinct functions in responding to 
conspicuous health problems, emerging health issues, and chronic adolescent health 
problems. Health-care providers need the knowledge and skills to respond to these complex 
health issues, but they also require non-judgmental attitudes, a willingness to maintain 
confidentiality, and skills to engage with adolescents and young adults, while maintaining an 
Patton et al.
Page 41
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 42 (native text) -----
appropriate engagement with families. Strengthening health systems, including health 
financing, creating health-care human resources, and leadership will also benefit 
adolescents. However, given the barriers they face, delivery of universal health care to 
adolescents also requires targeted investments.
Taking action at country level
Many interventions found to be effective in research settings are under used.275 One 
important reason is failure to match actions to need. Where it is unclear what the health 
priorities are, it is difficult to make the case for investment. Scalability is a further 
consideration and determined by the costs of operating at scale and the acceptability of an 
intervention in the local context.323 For comprehensive sexuality education, intra-curricular 
programmes in schools have great potential to be scaled up because of their compulsory 
nature. However, quality depends on teacher training, smaller class sizes, more lessons, and 
working with the local community context which are elements that increase costs. Advocacy 
is a significant cost component of early implementation that is likely to decrease as 
programmes become more accepted.324 As an intervention is successfully scaled up, its cost-
effectiveness is likely to increase.325
Interventions need to be designed and implemented with an equity lens to ensure that 
benefits also reach the most hard-to-reach adolescents and young adults.326 Scaling up 
should give careful consideration to gender, race, ethnicity, sexuality, geography, 
socioeconomic status, and disability.327 Some actions might not reach vulnerable groups and 
could actually worsen inequities. For example, in budget-constrained contexts, financing 
tertiary education could be prioritised over universal quality primary and secondary 
education, which would further disadvantage the most marginalised adolescents.118
Figures 15 and 16 illustrate the complex picture of adolescent health in Nigeria, a multi-
burden country. Nigeria has a continuing high disease burden related to maternal health. 
Adolescent fecundity is high, as are rates of early marriage, although with differences across 
states. Adolescent pregnancy rates in Nigeria’s northern states are more than four times 
higher than in the south. There is a 4-year lower median age of marriage in rural settings 
(16·6 years) compared to urban regions (20·8 years). Nigeria has an emerging HIV 
epidemic, particularly in the north-central zone, although this is not as advanced as in 
southern sub-Saharan Africa. Rates of unsafe sexual activity are high. Infectious diseases 
other than HIV, though diminishing, are still prominent contributors to burden of disease 
among adolescents with malaria and neglected tropical diseases notable among these.328 
While these diseases of poverty are priorities, road traffic injury and sexual violence are also 
prominent. Haemoglobinopathies (eg, sickle cell anaemia, iron deficiency anaemia) figure 
prominently within chronic physical illnesses and rates of obesity are rising in both sexes.
Responses to Nigeria’s adolescent health profile are outlined in panel 8. Because Nigeria has 
a low density of health workers, scaling up of health-service coverage is essential for 
maternal health care, greater contraceptive coverage, treatment of HIV and other infectious 
diseases, and responding to adolescent chronic physical health problems. Retention in 
secondary education is increasing but fewer than 50% of adolescents and young adults are 
receiving a basic level of education (9 years). For both health services and schools, there is a 
Patton et al.
Page 42
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 43 (native text) -----
need for scaling up the country’s capacity. At the same time emerging health priorities of 
road traffic injury and obesity warrant specific policy and legislative responses.
Adolescent and young adult engagement
Two ideas around youth engagement have gained traction in international development. The 
first is that adolescents and young adults make an essential contribution to the design and 
implementation of programmes and policies that affect them and their peers. The second is 
that with structures, support, and processes to do so effectively, meaningful engagement 
leads to healthier, more just, and egalitarian communities.329
The UN’s definition of youth participation is “the active and meaningful involvement of 
young people in all aspects of their own, and their communities’ development, including 
their empowerment to contribute to decisions about their personal, family, social, economic, 
and political development”.330 The UN further affirms that societal progress is based in part 
on a capacity to incorporate the contributions of youth in “building and designing the 
future”.331 From a UN perspective, meaningful youth participation is both a fundamental 
right and captures the unique contributions and social mobilisation skills of young people.
332
Developmental perspectives further support meaningful engagement as an essential positive 
influence on social and emotional development. The transition through puberty brings a shift 
in a child’s orientation from one focused on self and family towards one that takes on the 
perspectives of others.333 By adolescence, most individuals have gained the cognitive 
capacities to allow their greater engagement in social, community, and political life. 
Adolescents are emotionally primed to engage. Developmental neurobiologist Ron Dahl has 
described early adolescence as a phase of igniting passions, during which structures, 
processes, and support for positive and meaningful engagement shape trajectories of 
development into adulthood.333 Equally, social contexts that value antisocial forms of 
engagement including violence, substance abuse, or extremism (of any sort) will shape 
development to the detriment of the individual and the broader community. A lack of social 
and emotional engagement brings risks for mental disorders including depression.28
History has seen many examples of how this growing positive engagement, along with the 
energy, enthusiasm, and passion that young people bring, inspires social change movements. 
Adolescents and young adults have led movements for democracy in Asia and the Middle 
East, for LGBT rights, for gender equality, and for action on climate change. Conversely, 
where opportunities for positive engagement are absent, we have seen adolescents and 
young adults drawn into violent extremism and gang violence, with catastrophic health and 
societal outcomes.183
Meaningful engagement of young people in health advocacy
The idea that meaningful engagement of adolescents and young adults contributes to 
improvements in health policies and services, and in turn improved health and broader 
societal outcomes is well established. More than 20 years ago, WHO cited the importance of 
youth in its call for community participation in health, noting that effective adolescent health 
Patton et al.
Page 43
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 44 (native text) -----
programmes require youth involvement at local, national, and international levels. This 
initiative extends from setting programme objectives to policy development and allocation of 
resources.329 UNICEF, United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), UNAIDS, and 
international non-governmental organisations such as the International Planned Parenthood 
Federation have followed suit, recommending, and sometimes mandating, youth 
participation in the governance of service systems, as well as in the oversight and 
implementation of health-related policies (appendix text box 7).
Young health advocates themselves recognise the crucial importance of meaningful youth 
participation in health policy making and programming. The Lancet Commission on 
Adolescent Health and Wellbeing includes two young members, who were selected through 
a competitive online process. As the Commission also sought to incorporate the views of a 
more globally representative sample of young people, we conducted an online survey to 
capture a broad range of inputs. The survey was promoted to youth health advocates through 
the networks of the Commissioners and their organisations. We sought the opinions of youth 
advocates about priority areas for investment and which key messages are likely to be most 
effective with decision makers. More than 500 adolescents and young adults from 89 
countries working across a range of health issues participated. The idea that “Adolescents 
and youth should be supported and empowered to contribute to designing, implementing and 
assessing policies, programs and systems that contribute to their health and wellbeing” was 
considered the single most important theme by them.
Even though the rationale for youth engagement in health is strong, there have been few 
syntheses of the evidence on its effectiveness. We reviewed available studies of models of 
youth engagement, leadership, and participation, and their effectiveness (unpublished). Few 
studies examined the effects of adolescent and young adult engagement on health outcomes. 
In contrast to the scarcity of effectiveness studies, there is a growing literature about the 
essential elements for meaningful youth engagement.
A crucial starting point is a rejection of presumptions that adults know best. Rather, 
successful engagement emphasises the capacities of adolescents and young adults to work in 
partnership with adults. This generally requires both processes to promote active youth 
participation (training young people to speak), and the responses of adults (training adults to 
listen). Ideally, partnerships with adults begin early. Typically, it begins with shared decision 
making in the family. It should extend to growing engagement in school life and local 
community groups that provide enabling and protective environments for adolescents to 
learn the skills for effective engagement. With growing capacities, adolescents can further 
engage more meaningfully in policies, systems, and programmes that affect them and their 
peers.
Adolescents and young adults depend on systems and structures for engagement that are put 
in place and supported by adults. To engage most effectively, youth need resources 
(including financial), training, ongoing mentorship, and sensitisation to political and 
management processes (figure 17). They also need platforms and mechanisms for 
engagement. In different settings, adolescents and young adults face very different 
opportunities and limits on their ability to engage and advocate meaningfully. Social, 
Patton et al.
Page 44
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 45 (native text) -----
cultural, economic, and political forces shape both the opportunities for and the form of 
youth engagement and the strategies needed to promote it.334
Existing models range from tokenism to those that are completely youth led.335 More 
egalitarian relations between young people and adults are essential for meaningful 
engagement but decisions are still often taken through an adult lens that overlooks youth 
perspectives.336 In general, the greater the level of youth control and responsibility, the 
greater is the effectiveness of engagement, whether around their own health or around 
policies and programmes that affect others.335
Adolescent and young adult engagement around health can start with the individual and can 
move to the clinic and community levels, and on to national and international platforms. 
Below, we discuss some of the ways in which young people have engaged in health decision 
making, policy making, and programming. We point to both promising strategies and 
recommendations for how these efforts might be leveraged to achieve greater impact.
Approaches to youth engagement and advocacy in health
Peer education, or the promotion of healthy behaviours for young people by young people, is 
the most evaluated youth engagement strategy in the health sector. Such interventions have 
shown positive outcomes for the young people conducting the programming (ie, the peer 
educators themselves).337 Peer promoters themselves have greater self-confidence, improved 
communications, leadership and interpersonal skills, higher aspirations, and lower rates of 
health risk behaviours. Although better evaluated than most, there has been little testing of 
their effectiveness in changing health outcomes for the broader population of young people 
they are meant to reach. This reflects a particular challenge in resource-constrained settings, 
and a tension between a wish to scale up promising approaches and the value of undertaking 
smaller scale interventions with rigorous methodologies.337
Youth engagement in health-related advocacy has increased over the past two decades, 
fostered at a global level by the UN and other international organisations. Similar processes 
have occurred at country and community levels within organisations delivering services to 
young people. Panel 9 uses the example of Education as a Vaccine from Nigeria to illustrate 
one recent example of national youth advocacy.338,339
Community-based participatory action research has become popular in work with 
marginalised adolescents. It has the potential to shift the power dynamic from one in which 
adolescents are subjects of research to one where they are active partners.340 Engaging 
young people in this way gives insight into the lives and realities of young people. 
Photovoice is an example of this approach, as illustrated in figure 18.341–344
There are reasons to be optimistic about the scope for extending meaningful youth 
engagement around their health and wellbeing. The growth of democratic processes in many 
countries brings new opportunities.345 The greater involvement of adolescents and young 
adults in education, employment, and local community and youth organisations also offers 
new contexts for meaningful engagement. Social networking and digital media make it 
possible to access information, communicate, and mobilise with other advocates as well as 
Patton et al.
Page 45
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 46 (native text) -----
draw in resources in unprecedented ways. New media promote more active engagement as 
adolescents and young adults can independently generate their own content.346 These 
possibilities allow broader collaboration which in turn can generate political leverage. Time, 
privacy, and the need to convince adolescents that their voices will be heard remain barriers. 
For these reasons capitalising on these new possibilities is likely to require a shift in 
approaches to communication for both government and civil society organisations.347
One unique challenge is that as young people grow, their places as young leaders must be 
taken by the next generation. More than any other field of health, youth engagement requires 
ongoing renewal.348 Attitudes of adults towards young people and their capabilities, together 
with young people’s lack of confidence in engagement processes, are a common barrier.349 
Attitudinal barriers commonly arise from cultural contexts where young people are 
perceived as subordinate to adults, that exclude young women, and that further stigmatise 
socially marginalised groups.350,351 Inflexible bureaucratic arrangements, insufficient 
investment to support ongoing engagement, and restrictive policies, such as limiting the 
participation of adolescents in research, might be further limiting factors.352
For these reasons, most youth engagement in health falls short of sustainability, and top-
down, adult-driven approaches remain the most common.336 In programmes that do engage 
young people, those selected are often already confident, articulate, and naturally identified 
leaders.352 In practice, few efforts meaningfully involve the most marginalised young 
people, who could include ethnic minorities, HIV-positive youth, married adolescents, youth 
with disabilities, LGBT youth, youth living in poverty, those with lower educational levels, 
and very young adolescents.353 In many circumstances, adolescent girls and young women 
face inequitable systems and structures which limit their participation. Yet meaningful 
engagement of vulnerable young people is feasible. One programme with homeless youth in 
the Skid Row of Los Angeles, California, and their adult mentors used the sharing of 
personal stories to inform community activism and policy advocacy, and successfully gained 
educational rights for homeless students.354
More effective and meaningful engagement will require systems and processes that exist in 
few programmes and structures today. Mentorship between adults and youth; the building of 
young people’s capacity, skills, and knowledge; the establishment of new forums; and the 
growth of new methods of communication can create a sustainable environment for young 
people to engage around their health and that of their communities. The growth in mobile 
devices together with social networking and digital technologies provide unparalleled 
opportunities for engagement. Although the evidence of the effectiveness of new 
communication technologies in promoting engagement remains limited,355 many global 
organisations including WHO, UNFPA, and the Lancet Commission itself are using online 
technologies, including social media and surveys, to gather information about health 
priorities directly from young people to inform strategies and policies.
Data and accountability
Global health and development frameworks have tended to include a cycle of three elements 
of monitoring, review, and appropriate responses. These have been criticised for failing to 
adequately address governance and instead relying on voluntary and non-binding 
Patton et al.
Page 46
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 47 (native text) -----
commitments to outcomes.356,357 The limits of this approach have led to calls for 
independent accountability and for ensuring that monitoring and evaluation processes are 
participatory and inclusive.65 The newly-adopted 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development 
has recognised a need for greater accountability particularly at country level.358 The Global 
Strategy for Women’s, Children’s and Adolescents’ Health notes the importance of 
transparent and accessible data, for the inclusion of sectors beyond health service delivery, 
and for the engagement of civil society.4 Other global health agendas have also called for 
increased accountability, with participatory frameworks proposed across a range of areas 
relevant to young people including HIV, NCD risks, obesity, women’s health, mental health, 
and nutrition.359–361
Such participatory approaches to accountability could provide settings for meaningful youth 
engagement. Young health advocates have the energy and optimism to challenge corruption 
and harmful traditional practices, and drive governance, advocacy, and accountability for 
decades to come. To date, adolescents and young adults have generally been an afterthought 
in global and country health initiatives.
Kraak and colleagues357 reviewed 15 interdisciplinary frameworks for accountability, 
including trade and international development, human rights, business finance, public health 
policy, and global health. On this basis they outlined a four-step process for accountability. 
We have adapted this four-step framework to consider the particular elements of effective 
accountability for adolescent and young adult health and wellbeing, as outlined in figure 
19.357
The limits of current data systems
Planning responses to adolescent health requires data that is timely, developmentally 
relevant, age disaggregated and sex disaggregated, and defined to a local level. Ideally, these 
data would allow comparisons over time and tracking of inequalities within and between 
countries. In reality existing global data systems for adolescents are uncoordinated, 
inconsistent in coverage and timing, inadequately disaggregated, missing large groups of 
adolescents, and fail to deal with the spectrum of health problems and their determinants 
(appendix text box 6).362 This matters as countries of low and middle income are, to a large 
extent, dependent on global surveys, such as Demographic and Health Surveys, for data for 
health policy and programming.
Recent developments in health metrics seem unlikely to provide the impetus for change. The 
Global Reference List of 100 Core Health Indicators, proposed by WHO to guide responses 
at global, regional, and national levels illustrates some of the difficulties.363 Younger 
adolescents are largely missing, both in specific indicators and age disaggregation with 
counting generally starting from the age of 15 years. Although some age disaggregation is 
proposed from the age of 15, adolescent fertility rate is the only adolescent-specific indicator 
included.331 The list does not include indicators around mental and substance use disorders 
or violence. The gaps in health risks are even more compelling with obesity, physical 
activity, and fruit and vegetable intake indicators proposed only from 18 years. Important 
social determinants of adolescent health and wellbeing, including child marriage and lack of 
Patton et al.
Page 47
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 48 (native text) -----
participation in secondary education, are not included in either the core or supplementary 
lists. These indicator gaps are further illustrated in appendix table 8.
The data gaps are compounded by the absence at a global level of any single agency with 
responsibility for processing available data to provide a more complete picture of adolescent 
health at either a global or country level. The patchwork approach to data collection is then 
mirrored in data analysis and reporting systems where responsibility for adolescent health 
and wellbeing data sits across a range of UN agencies (eg, UNFPA, WHO, United Nations 
Procurement Division, World Bank, UNICEF), global non-governmental organisations (eg, 
Population Council, Population Reference Bureau) and academic groups (eg, Institute for 
Health Metrics and Evaluation). The result is an incomplete and uneven picture. Similarly, 
for those wishing to understand the profile of adolescent health and wellbeing in any given 
country, there is typically no single “go-to” national department or agency.
These limits in global data systems pose major difficulties for countries in taking an 
adequate account of adolescent health needs. Yet even with better coverage of health areas, 
global surveys are unlikely to provide adequate data for national planning; none provide the 
finer-grained geographic information needed for monitoring progress and capturing 
inequalities at subnational levels. There is therefore a need for country-level technical 
capacity to extend current data collection and data processing systems. It is essential that 
data reporting extends to sectors such as education, transport, justice, and community 
environments. Ideally this would lead to country-level reports of health and wellbeing 
including inequalities and inequities across adolescent groups.
Digital media have the potential to transform the sharing and presentation of such data, to 
generate new data and assess its quality, and allow for communication to and with a much 
wider audience. It also has the potential to heighten the engagement of young people 
globally around adolescent health needs, as well as generating greater demand for data.
The process of communication around adolescent health and wellbeing requires engagement 
with different government ministries. In many countries, it extends to international agencies 
and global funders. However, this process also needs the involvement of civil society groups 
outside of government.166 These constituents include adolescents and young adults 
themselves, youth organisations, professionals working with adolescents, academics, and 
private industry. Young people and youth-focused organisations are essential stakeholders in 
this process. Their meaningful engagement can ensure a proper understanding of what the 
data mean, assess and inform the feasibility and appropriateness of potential actions, and 
support broader buy-in for such actions.
Coordinating responses
For the most part, the most effective actions for adolescent health and wellbeing are 
intersectoral and multi-component, tailored to local needs and capacities. This raises 
important questions about the structure and processes for governance. The creation of 
processes whereby civil society can hold government ministers to account for the 
investments made (or not made) depends on the cultural and political context.364 For 
governments less open to influence from civil society, the involvement of international 
Patton et al.
Page 48
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 49 (native text) -----
agencies and use of financial and economic incentives might be needed for advancing 
adolescent health and wellbeing.
Holding industry to account is yet more challenging. Kraak and Story365 examined the 
Children’s Food and Beverage Advertising Initiative, which promoted the responsible use of 
cartoon brand mascots to promote food products to American children between 2000 and 
2015. They found moderate progress in taking and sharing the account. This included public 
hearings in the US Congress, as well as dialogues between investors, businesses, public 
health researchers, advocates, and government officials. However, there was little actual 
progress in holding companies to account with the absence of a clearly empowered 
organisation to hold industry to account a major shortcoming. Such an organisation could 
encourage governments to play active roles through taxation, legislation, economic 
incentives, and social audits to influence the marketing and sales of products such as food, 
tobacco, alcohol, fashion, or illicit drugs—activities that directly and indirectly influence 
health and health risks for young people.1
Taking action also requires a sound evidence base of interventions that have been ideally 
adapted and trialled in similar contexts. Yet in areas such as mental disorders and sexual and 
intimate partner violence, there are not yet clearly effective and scalable interventions for 
adolescents. Some contexts that are of major importance in shaping the health and wellbeing 
of adolescents, including families and digital media, have received little attention in 
intervention studies. In many areas of health need, actions have been evaluated in high-
income countries, and for the most part, have neither been adapted nor trialled in countries 
of low and middle income. Many innovative approaches have been piloted and sometimes 
rolled out on a larger scale but without evaluation. New platforms based on digital media 
offer great promise but in the absence of more systematic evaluation their broader usefulness 
is still uncertain. Lastly, the absence of good cost and cost-effectiveness data in different 
regions remains a barrier to implementing effective actions at scale.
These knowledge gaps arise in part from a lack of technical capacity. Unlike the fields of 
maternal and child health and HIV that have had considerable investments over decades, 
adolescent health has seen little technical investment. This is further compounded by the 
lack of any single agency with responsibility for pulling together the evidence base for 
action. Current policy and programming relevant to adolescent health and wellbeing sits 
within different agencies (eg, WHO, UNICEF, UNAIDS, UNESCO, UNFPA, World Bank, 
United Nations Offi ce on Drugs and Crime [UNODC]) as well as with various global non-
governmental organisations (eg, Save the Children, Population Council). The absence of an 
overarching coordinating body around the evidence base has led to an inability to provide 
consistent guidance to countries on best buys or the how to of intersectoral implementation.
Limitations notwithstanding, there is sufficient knowledge for generating greater action at 
country level around adolescent health and wellbeing. A human and technical capacity to act 
is essential. This usually requires attention to the training of those across the relevant sectors 
(eg, pre-service and in-service training of teachers in adolescent development and youth 
engagement). There is a need for growing adequate country-level technical capacity in 
policy and programme evaluation. This technical capacity is not only important in ensuring 
Patton et al.
Page 49
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 50 (native text) -----
fidelity in programme implementation but would also generate valuable data on both local 
effectiveness and resources required for implementation.
Key constituents—Adolescent health and wellbeing is increasingly shaped by diverse 
influences beyond the immediate family and community. These influences are themselves 
changing rapidly. Adolescent health and wellbeing increasingly depends on the engagement 
of a broad range of actors and constituencies from local communities to the global level.
Adolescents and young adults are central actors around their health and wellbeing. Their 
meaningful participation and engagement is essential for effective action aiming to enhance 
their health and wellbeing. This same engagement is essential for their own emotional and 
social development. There is need for sustainable systems and processes where meaningful 
engagement becomes a normal part of their lives.
The organisations with and working for young people have a particularly important role in 
their support and mentorship. The influence of religious leaders on community and family 
values, as well as directly on the attitudes, beliefs, and values of adolescents, makes these 
leaders important sources of direction.
Despite the rapidly changing social determinants of adolescent health and wellbeing, 
families provide the most important platform for the transition to adulthood. Families are 
also affected by rapid social and economic change. The knowledge, skills, financial 
resources, and community support available to parents remain essential determinants of 
adolescent health and wellbeing.
Professional groups such as teachers, health-care providers, community workers, sports 
trainers, and employers have increasingly important roles in young lives. For disadvantaged 
and marginalised youth these groups extend to the judiciary, police, youth justice workers, 
social, and accommodation service workers. Their capacity to engage and understand the 
health, social, and developmental needs of adolescents will determine their effectiveness in 
promoting health and wellbeing.
Because the major determinants of health lie outside the health service sector, other sectors 
within government have an essential role in adolescent health and wellbeing. Key portfolios 
for adolescent health include ministers for health, education, youth, finance, justice, 
transport, and industry. Effective actions are often multi-component and intersectoral. They 
require both a capacity for action within individual sectors and coordination of investment 
across different sectors. That coordination is dependent on understanding health needs, 
current investments, and effective actions, together with the structures and processes to 
coordinate across ministerial portfolios.
Private industry, including media and marketing organisations, increasingly shapes the 
health, lifestyle, attitude, and wellbeing of adolescents. Private industry also provides 
employment and many essential services for adolescents and their families. Establishing a 
dialogue with industry as essential partners in adolescent health and wellbeing is a pressing 
agenda.
Patton et al.
Page 50
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 51 (native text) -----
The international development community has an essential role in resourcing and 
coordinating investments in adolescent health and wellbeing. This role will become greater 
with the Global Strategy for Women’s, Children’s and Adolescents’ Health. To date, efforts 
to support adolescent health have been piecemeal and poorly coordinated. Future 
investments require greater consideration of coordination, capacity building, and technical 
support at country level.
The academic community has the potential to partner with the international development 
community and governments in the development of health information systems, innovation 
and evaluation, and training service providers and youth health advocates. Many academic 
disciplines have a role in the promotion of adolescent health and wellbeing. However, the 
academic and research capacity in countries of low and middle income is at very low levels 
and in need of investment.
Independent oversight
Effective accountability requires independent review. A crucial question relates to the 
structures that would most effectively provide that oversight. Responsibility for adolescent 
health and wellbeing at a global level is currently dispersed across many agencies. For 
example, within the UN these include WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA, UNAIDS, UNESCO, and 
UNODC. Each agency has its own emphasis and particular age mandate. Greater 
coordination and stronger inter-agency partnerships, supported by funding partners, will be 
essential for progress. Whether this can be achieved without the creation of a global focal 
point for adolescent health and wellbeing within the UN system is an important question. 
The establishment of networks that bring together the global constituents for adolescent 
health and wellbeing will also be essential in galvanising and reviewing action, mobilising 
and growing global resources including funding, technical and research capacity, processes 
for youth advocacy, and frameworks for intersectoral action. This Commission on 
Adolescent Health and Wellbeing is an example of such a process. Its continuation as a 
Standing Commission on Adolescent Health and Wellbeing will allow a broadening of these 
activities in the coming years. The extension of the UN Secretary-General’s Every Woman, 
Every Child to adolescents, within the Sustainable Development Goal Agenda, provides the 
most important single opportunity for the health and wellbeing of the world’s adolescents, 
and its Independent Accountability Panel will play a crucial role in catalysing these 
processes in the coming years.
Within countries, responsibility for adolescent health and wellbeing is similarly often 
dispersed across sectors and government ministries. This presents challenges in engagement 
of constituents, in setting priorities for investment, and around coordination of action. It also 
means that the provision of independent oversight has considerable complexity. The 
appointment of dedicated and independent Youth Commissioners at levels from the national 
to the local would be one way forward. Various countries already have national Child Rights 
Commissioners who generally have a focus on implementation of international or national 
legislation designed to protect the rights of disadvantaged children.366 In many instances, 
this protective role extends to younger adolescents. Under a Youth Commissioner, that role 
would extend to the protection and empowerment of older adolescents and young adults. It 
Patton et al.
Page 51
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 52 (native text) -----
would also include oversight of other elements in the accountability process: provision and 
communication of sound information, engagement of youth as active partners, and review of 
relevant policy implementation and service delivery systems. A National Youth Commission 
would require clear lines of engagement with the appropriate level of government and the 
ability to communicate with other relevant organisations, including international agencies 
and NGOs. A capacity to convene forums of constituents would be particularly important 
where the most effective actions for adolescent health and well-being may sit uncomfortably 
with local cultural and religious traditions. Youth Commissioners would therefore play both 
an essential role to hold government ministers to account, promote the empowerment of 
youth, and provide a point of engagement with other key constituents.
Establishing effective processes for accountability will ultimately allow us to invest more, 
invest more effi ciently, and innovate and evaluate where evidence does not currently exist. 
The current Commission has taken a step forward in providing a global overview of 
adolescent health and wellbeing. Moving forward requires an ongoing monitoring of 
progress. The SDG agenda and Global Strategy for Women’s, Children’s and Adolescents’ 
Health both emphasise a need for clarity around indicators and improvement in health 
information systems. Yet even with major investments now, a comprehensive global 
coverage of adolescent health and wellbeing remains years away. In this context we have 
proposed an interim set of twelve global indicators (table 6), that draw on this Commission’s 
conceptual framework (figure 6), and reflect measures used in this report. In each instance 
they can now be populated for most countries and with modest investment, estimates could 
be available for nearly all countries in the near future. With the largest generation of 
adolescents in human history facing unprecedented global change, keeping track and 
responding to their health and wellbeing is an essential investment in all our futures.
Responses and recommendations
Despite making up around a third of the population in many countries, adolescents and 
young adults are generally overlooked in health and social policies. The neglect has resulted 
in limited service development, and low human and technical capacities. Major investments 
are now needed to take advantage of the opportunities that come with the largest generation 
of adolescents in human history. The UN Secretary-General’s Global Strategy for Women’s, 
Children’s and Adolescents’ Health is an important starting point. Moving forward, 
investments in adolescents should reflect their numbers in the population and the 
opportunity to create health, wellbeing, and human capital. Here, we outline our 
recommendations for specific actions and investment.
Reframe adolescent health and wellbeing
There is a need for all constituencies to reconsider adolescent health and wellbeing and its 
place in policy. We need the following:
A broader concept of adolescent health—Such a concept starts with a comprehensive 
view of sexual and reproductive health and extends to include HIV and other infectious 
diseases, nutritional deficiencies, injury and violence, chronic physical health problems, and 
mental and substance use disorders, to ensure that adolescents are centrally placed in 
Patton et al.
Page 52
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 53 (native text) -----
relevant and emerging agendas for NCDs, mental health, and maternal, newborn, and child 
health.
An appreciation of the triple dividend of investment in adolescents—Puberty 
initiates a second sensitive period in the development of health and human capabilities. 
Appropriate investments bring benefits during adolescence, across the life course, and into 
the next generation.
The development of policies sensitive to gender and evolving adolescent 
capacities—Understanding of the powerful interactions between biological development 
and social context is essential in formulating policies, laws, and programmes for 
adolescents.
An understanding of adolescence as a time for second chances—Providing 
optimal social, emotional, and nutritional environments in adolescence has the potential to 
reverse or reduce early-life disadvantage. Policies that target inequities related to poverty 
and gender during adolescence have the potential to reduce inequality across the life course 
and into the next generation.
Set clear objectives based on national and local needs
Different actions are needed in different places.
Multi-burden countries—No country should remain in the multi-burden group by 2030. 
Infectious diseases including HIV, sexual and reproductive health, and undernutrition remain 
preventable and treatable causes of disease burden that should be priorities for health service 
delivery and prevention. Policy measures to address injuries are also now essential in this 
group of countries.
Injury excess countries—All current injury excess countries should have NCD 
predominant profiles by 2030. For these countries, preventive efforts targeting the social and 
structural determinants of injuries, violence, and high rates of early pregnancy are priorities.
NCD predominant countries—The great variation in the pattern and level of adolescent 
NCD burden across all countries indicates great scope for accelerating investments in the 
treatment and prevention of adolescent NCDs and NCD risks.
A view to the future—All country groups must now tackle accelerating adolescent risks 
for NCDs to ensure that diseases of poverty and injury are not replaced by an unaffordable 
burden of later-life non-communicable diseases. All countries should identify and adopt 
international best practice (eg, tobacco and alcohol control, and taxation of unhealthy food) 
as well as evaluate promising new interventions for adolescent NCD risks.
Including socially and economically marginalised adolescents—Within all 
countries these groups, including ethnic minorities, young offenders, Indigenous, and LGBT 
adolescents, need particular responses reflecting their poorer health profiles and greater 
difficulty accessing resources for health and wellbeing.
Patton et al.
Page 53
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 54 (native text) -----
Reconfigure health services for universal health coverage
Achieving universal health coverage for adolescents will require delivery platforms beyond 
traditional office-based health-care systems. These are likely to extend to school-based and 
community-based platform delivery models as well as the use of social and digital media. 
Services will need to embrace:
Breadth of coverage—Adolescents need services that extend beyond sexual and 
reproductive health care to all major health problems, including infectious diseases, mental 
disorders, and chronic physical illness regardless of gender, age, sexual orientation, marital, 
or socioeconomic status.
Effective early intervention—Early and effective treatment is essential for health 
problems that commonly emerge or have a particular significance for adolescents including 
HIV and other infectious diseases, nutritional deficiencies, and mental and substance use 
disorders.
Accessible preventive health care—Care should include guarantees of preventive care 
to all sexually active adolescents, maternal health care when necessary, and access to 
affordable modern contraception, particularly long-acting reversible contraceptives; if 
unwanted pregnancy does occur provide access to legal, safe abortion.
Training of health-care providers—It is essential that health-care professionals have 
the necessary knowledge, attitudes, and interpersonal skills to provide confidential, non-
judgmental, and respectful health care to adolescents.
Create protective and empowering social scaffolds through intersectoral partnerships
The most effective actions for adolescent health and wellbeing lie in sectors beyond health 
service provision. Moreover, alignment of health service responses with preventive and 
promotional actions in other sectors is necessary for health service effectiveness. Essential 
investments by other sectors include:
Resources to complete quality secondary education—Access to free, quality 
secondary education regardless of sex, marital, and socioeconomic status should be 
guaranteed and should extend to reducing family financial barriers to quality education.
School as a setting for promoting health and wellbeing—Schools should employ a 
range of available strategies including the delivery of life skills for health and wellbeing, 
comprehensive sexuality education, and support of a positive school ethos.
Training of teachers and other professionals—Pre-service and in-service training for 
teachers and other professionals working with adolescents must be provided, including 
police and community workers, around empowering adolescents to make the best possible 
decisions about their health and wellbeing.
Patton et al.
Page 54
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 55 (native text) -----
Laws that empower and protect—Governments must ensure that national and 
international legal frameworks designed to empower and protect adolescents actually do 
their intended purpose. Guaranteeing 18 years as the minimum age for marriage, for 
example, requires education and engagement of community leaders and professionals within 
the justice system.
Policy linkage—Individual elements of social scaffold for adolescent health and wellbeing 
include access to safe employment and education, universal health coverage, supported 
families and parents, opportunities for community engagement, and taxation and regulation 
of the marketing of unhealthy commodities to adolescents. Linkage of these single sector 
actions will create synergies for adolescent health and wellbeing, with effects greater than 
the sum of the parts.
Enhance the engagement of young people
Adolescence is intrinsically a time of extending social engagement beyond the family. Given 
the opportunity, adolescents and young adults are powerful agents for social change, 
including the promotion of their own health and wellbeing. The growing complexity of 
political and economic systems presents barriers to their engagement. New structures and 
processes are therefore needed, which include the following:
Training and mentoring of adolescents—Access to training, mentorship, and 
resources is essential for adolescents to play an effective role in governance and 
accountability processes around their health and wellbeing.
Establishment of forums for meaningful youth participation—National leaders 
should appoint Independent Youth Commissioners with appropriate resourcees to provide 
independent oversight of government actions to promote adolescent health and wellbeing. 
The Youth Commissioners should convene forums that bring together all constituents 
including adolescents and young adults, their families and community leaders, adolescent-
focused organisations, international development partners, professionals groups, and 
academics. Such forums should extend to establishing and strengthening mechanisms for the 
meaningful participation of adolescents in the design, communication, and implementation 
and monitoring of policies and practices that affect their health and wellbeing. This is 
particularly important for socially and economically marginalised adolescents.
Growing knowledge and capacity
Long-standing neglect of adolescent and young adult health has left limited capacity with 
sectors and across service systems. There is a pressing need for investment in research, 
training, financing, and technical underpinnings, or progress in adolescent health and 
wellbeing will remain slow. Essential next steps include:
Creation of national profiles—Governments must work with international development 
partners, including funders and global data collection systems, to collect and report on a 
minimum set of priority indicators of adolescent health and wellbeing. National statistics 
agencies should report regularly on the health, development, and wellbeing of adolescents, 
Patton et al.
Page 55
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 56 (native text) -----
disaggregated by age and sex, and ensure that this information is easily accessible to 
constituents. International data collection systems should be resourced to collect and report 
on data disaggregated by age and sex on all relevant global indicators of health and 
wellbeing for all adolescents, including those who are out of school and socially and 
economically marginalised.
Addressing knowledge gaps for effective actions—New approaches are particularly 
needed in the prevention and early intervention of mental disorders and violence. In general, 
there is a need to better understand what works for males and females, for different age 
groups of adolescents and for socially marginalised groups. The international development 
community and national governments must work together to create a more comprehensive 
evidence base for action in practice and policy.
Moving to scalable and sustainable action—The Global Strategy for Women’s, 
Children’s and Adolescents’ Health presents an outstanding opportunity for multi-burden 
countries to create the policy and legal frameworks, efficient systems, trained workforce, and 
technical capacity for adolescent health and wellbeing. Similar investments are needed in all 
countries.
Acknowledgments
The Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation (Seattle, WA, USA) provided a grant to assist with the production of the 
Commission. Additional funding came from the John D and Catherine T MacArthur Foundation, Australia India 
Institute, and the Murdoch Childrens Research Institute. The University of Melbourne, University College London, 
the London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, and Columbia University provided financial or logistic 
support. All Commissioners were supported by their employing organisations to undertake the Commission’s work. 
The findings and recommendations are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect recommendations or 
policies of the funders. Overall project Secretariat was provided by Molly O’Sullivan (MCRI), Kristina Bennett 
(MCRI), and Jennifer Heitel (Columbia). A very special thank you goes to all the research assistants from the five 
working groups who assisted with the conceptualisation, literature screening, data extraction, and synthesis of 
evidence. These include Dr Bidyut K Sarkar (UCL/PHFI), Dr Soumyadeep Bhaumik, Dr Kiran Saluja (PHFI), Kate 
Hinds (UCL), Kelly Dickson (UCL), Dr Farah Jamal (UCL), and Dr Nichola Shackleton (UCL) from Project 1. 
Sonia Haerizadeh JD (Columbia University), Dr Elia De la Cruz Toledo (Columbia University), and Dr Nathan 
Hughes (University of Birmingham) from Project 2. Dr Lydia K Murithi (ICRW), Preeti Dhillon (ICRW), Lilian 
Ghandour (AUB), Chaza Akik (AUB), Dr Elie Akl (AUB), Mariana Yaafar Jaafar (AUB), Noura El Salibi (AUB), 
Hala Najm (AUB), Tamara Lotfi (AUB), Jillian Grisel, and Caroline Zahm from Project 3. Donna Lorenze (MCRI), 
Dr Alana Deery (MCRI), Tim Gartland (MCRI), Liz Comrie-Thomson (Burnet Institute), Dr Jo Robinson 
(Orygen), Eric Howard (Whiting Moyne), Stephen Hearps (MCRI), Annie Haakenstad (Harvard School of Public 
Health), and Kara Estep (IHME) from Project 4, without whose hard work this report would not have been possible. 
Additional administrative support provided by Charmaine Sambathkumar, Dr Michelle Tollit (MCRI), Dr Anne-
Lise Goddings (UCL) Jenelle Frances, Mary Boyle, Monica Chase, Stephanie Grilo, and Chelsea Kolff (Columbia 
University). Website and graphic support was provided by Adam Leadoux and Bill Reid (RCH). The authors also 
thank the peer reviewers who provided important feedback on earlier drafts of the report.
References
1. Lamy, P., Bachelet, M., Barber, L., et al. Now for the long term: the report of the Oxford Martin 
commission for future generations. Oxford: Oxford Martin School; 2013. 
2. Whitmee S, Haines A, Beyrer C, et al. The Rockefeller Foundation–Lancet Commission on 
planetary health. Safeguarding human health in the Anthropocene epoch: report of The Rockefeller 
Foundation–Lancet Commission on planetary health. Lancet. 2015; 386:1973–2028. [PubMed: 
26188744] 
3. Blakemore SJ, Mills KL. Is adolescence a sensitive period for sociocultural processing? Annu Rev 
Psychol. 2014; 65:187–207. [PubMed: 24016274] 
Patton et al.
Page 56
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 57 (native text) -----
4. United Nations Secretary-General. The global strategy for women’s, children’s and adolescentss 
health (2016–2030): survive thrive transform. 2015. http://www.who.int/life-course/partners/global-
strategy/globalstrategyreport2016-2030-lowres.pdf?ua=1 (accessed April 3, 2016)
5. UN. Transforming our world: the 2030 agenda for sustainable development. New York: United 
Nations; 2015. 
6. Resnick MD, Catalano RF, Sawyer SM, Viner R, Patton GC. Seizing the opportunities of adolescent 
health. Lancet. 2012; 379:1564–67. [PubMed: 22538176] 
7. Feldman, SS., Elliot, GR. At the threshold: the developing adolescent. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press; 1990. 
8. WHO. The Second Decade: Improving Adolescent Health and Development. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 2001. 
9. Arnett JJ. Emerging adulthood. A theory of development from the late teens through the twenties. 
Am Psychol. 2000; 55:469–80. [PubMed: 10842426] 
10. United Nations General Assembly. Convention on the rights of the child. 1989United Nations 
Treaty Series vol 1577
11. Sen, A. Commodities and capabilities. New Delhi: Oxford University Press; 1999. 
12. Nussbaum, MC. Creating capabilities. Harvard University Press; 2011. 
13. Graham, P. The end of adolescence. New York: Oxford University Press; 2004. 
14. Dick B, Ferguson BJ. Health for the world’s adolescents: a second chance in the second decade. J 
Adolesc Health. 2015; 56:3–6. [PubMed: 25530601] 
15. Viner R, Coffey C, Mather C, et al. 50-year mortality trends in children and young people: a study 
of 50 low-income, middle-income, and high-income countries. Lancet. 2011; 377:1162–74. 
[PubMed: 21450338] 
16. World Bank. World Development Report 2007: Development and the next generation. Washington, 
DC: World Bank; 2007. 
17. Dishion TJ, Nelson SE, Bullock BM. Premature adolescent autonomy: Parent disengagement and 
deviant peer process in the amplification of problem behaviour. J Adolesc. 2004; 27:515–30. 
[PubMed: 15475044] 
18. Sawyer SM, Afifi RA, Bearinger LH, et al. Adolescence: a foundation for future health. Lancet. 
2012; 379:1630–40. [PubMed: 22538178] 
19. Grossman M. On the concept of health capital and the demand for health. J Polit Econ. 1972:223–
55.
20. Rockwood K, Song X, Mitnitski A. Changes in relative fitness and frailty across the adult lifespan: 
evidence from the Canadian National Population Health Survey. Can Med Assoc J. 2011; 
183:E487–E94. [PubMed: 21540166] 
21. Ruiz JR, Castro-Piñero J, Artero EG, et al. Predictive validity of health-related fitness in youth: a 
systematic review. Br J Sports Med. 2009; 43:909–23. [PubMed: 19158130] 
22. Baxter-Jones AD, Faulkner RA, Forwood MR, Mirwald RL, Bailey DA. Bone mineral accrual 
from 8 to 30 years of age: an estimation of peak bone mass. J Bone Miner Res. 2011; 26:1729–39. 
[PubMed: 21520276] 
23. Whiting SJ, Vatanparast H, Baxter-Jones A, Faulkner RA, Mirwald R, Bailey DA. Factors that 
affect bone mineral accrual in the adolescent growth spurt. J Nutr. 2004; 134:696S–700S. 
[PubMed: 14988470] 
24. Julián-Almárcegui C, Gómez-Cabello A, Huybrechts I, et al. Combined effects of interaction 
between physical activity and nutrition on bone health in children and adolescents: a systematic 
review. Nutr Rev. 2015; 73:127–39. [PubMed: 26024536] 
25. Sisk CL, Foster DL. The neural basis of puberty and adolescence. Nat Neurosci. 2004; 7:104–47.
26. Spear LP. The adolescent brain and age-related behavioral manifestations. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 
2000; 24:417–63. [PubMed: 10817843] 
27. Steinberg L. A social neuroscience perspective on adolescent risk-taking. Dev Rev. 2008; 28:78–
106. [PubMed: 18509515] 
28. Crone EA, Dahl RE. Understanding adolescence as a period of social-affective engagement and 
goal flexibility. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2012; 13:636–50. [PubMed: 22903221] 
Patton et al.
Page 57
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 58 (native text) -----
29. Baker ST, Lubman DI, Yucel M, et al. Developmental changes in brain network hub connectivity in 
late adolescence. J Neurosci. 2015; 35:9078–87. [PubMed: 26085632] 
30. Giedd JN, Lalonde FM, Celano MJ, et al. Anatomical brain magnetic resonance imaging of 
typically developing children and adolescents. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2009; 
48:465–70. [PubMed: 19395901] 
31. Giedd JN, Blumenthal J, Jeffries NO, et al. Brain development during childhood and adolescence: 
a longitudinal MRI study. Nat Neurosci. 1999; 2:861–63. [PubMed: 10491603] 
32. Tanner, JL., Arnett, JJ. Presenting “emerging adulthood”: what makes it developmentally 
distinctive?. In: Arnett, JJ.Kloep, M.Hendry, LB., Tanner, JL., editors. Debating emerging 
adulthood: stage or process. Oxford: Oxford Scholarship Online; 2011. p. 13-30.
33. Sawhill, IV. Generation unbound. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press; 2014. 
34. Prentice AM, Ward KA, Goldberg GR, et al. Critical windows for nutritional interventions against 
stunting. Am J Clin Nutr. 2013; 97:911–18. [PubMed: 23553163] 
35. Li S-C, Lindenberger U, Hommel B, Aschersleben G, Prinz W, Baltes PB. Transformations in the 
couplings among intellectual abilities and constituent cognitive processes across the life span. 
Psychol Sci. 2004; 15:155–63. [PubMed: 15016286] 
36. Richards M, Deary IJ. A life course approach to cognitive reserve: a model for cognitive aging and 
development? Ann Neurol. 2005; 58:617–22. [PubMed: 16178025] 
37. Gottfredson LS, Deary IJ. Intelligence predicts health and longevity, but why? Curr Dir Psychol 
Sci. 2004; 13:1–4.
38. Chambers RA, Taylor JR, Potenza MN. Developmental neurocircuitry of motivation in 
adolescence: a critical period of addiction vulnerability. Am J Psychiatry. 2014
39. Martins A, Ramalho N, Morin E. A comprehensive meta-analysis of the relationship between 
emotional intelligence and health. Pers Individ Dif. 2010; 49:554–64.
40. Engström L-M. Who is physically active? Cultural capital and sports participation from 
adolescence to middle age—a 38-year follow-up study. Phys Educ Sport Pedag. 2008; 13:319–43.
41. Macleod CI, Tracey T. A decade later: follow-up review of South African research on the 
consequences of and contributory factors in teen-aged pregnancy. S Afr J Psychol. 2010; 40:18–
31.
42. Rosema S, Crowe L, Anderson V. Social function in children and adolescents after traumatic brain 
injury: A systematic review 1989–2011. J Neurotrauma. 2012; 29:1277–91. [PubMed: 22260408] 
43. Saydah S, Bullard KM, Imperatore G, Geiss L, Gregg EW. Cardiometabolic risk factors among US 
adolescents and young adults and risk of early mortality. Pediatrics. 2013; 131:e679–86. [PubMed: 
23420920] 
44. Patton GC, Coffey C, Romaniuk H, et al. The prognosis of common mental disorders in 
adolescents: a 14-year prospective cohort study. Lancet. 2014; 383:1404–11. [PubMed: 24439298] 
45. Behrendt S, Wittchen H-U, Höfler M, Lieb R, Beesdo K. Transitions from first substance use to 
substance use disorders in adolescence: is early onset associated with a rapid escalation? Drug 
Alcohol Depend. 2009; 99:68–78. [PubMed: 18768267] 
46. Meier MH, Caspi A, Ambler A, et al. Persistent cannabis users show neuropsychological decline 
from childhood to midlife. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2012; 109:E2657–64. [PubMed: 22927402] 
47. Mason E, McDougall L, Lawn JE, et al. From evidence to action to deliver a healthy start for the 
next generation. Lancet. 2014; 384:455–67. [PubMed: 24853599] 
48. Draper CE, Micklesfield LK, Kahn K, et al. Application of intervention mapping to develop a 
community-based health promotion pre-pregnancy intervention for adolescent girls in rural South 
Africa: Project Ntshembo (Hope). BMC Public Health. 2014; 14(suppl 2):S5.
49. Patton GC, Romaniuk H, Spry E, et al. Prediction of perinatal depression from adolescence and 
before conception (VIHCS): 20-year prospective cohort study. Lancet. 2015; 386:875–83. 
[PubMed: 26072108] 
50. Smith GD. Epigenesis for epidemiologists: does evo-devo have implications for population health 
research and practice? Int J Epidemiol. 2012; 41:236–47. [PubMed: 22422459] 
51. Hanson M, Gluckman P. Developmental origins of health and disease–Global public health 
implications. Best Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol. 2015; 29:24–31. [PubMed: 25225058] 
Patton et al.
Page 58
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 59 (native text) -----
52. Murray CJ, Barber RM, Foreman KJ, et al. Global, regional, and national disability-adjusted life 
years (DALYs) for 306 diseases and injuries and healthy life expectancy (HALE) for 188 
countries, 1990–2013: quantifying the epidemiological transition. Lancet. 2015; 10009:2145–91.
53. Andersen SL, Teicher MH. Stress, sensitive periods and maturational events in adolescent 
depression. Trends Neurosci. 2008; 31:183–91. [PubMed: 18329735] 
54. Goddings, A. Doctoral thesis. University College London; 2015. The impact of puberty on 
adolescent brain development. 
55. Viner RM, Ozer EM, Denny S, et al. Adolescence and the social determinants of health. Lancet. 
2012; 379:1641–52. [PubMed: 22538179] 
56. Schlegel, A., Barry, H. Adolescence: an anthropological enquiry. New York: Free Press; 1991. 
57. Somerville LH. The teenage brain sensitivity to social evaluation. Curr Dir Psychol Sci. 2013; 
22:121–27. [PubMed: 24761055] 
58. Pfeifer JH, Masten CL, Moore WE, et al. Entering adolescence: resistance to peer influence, risky 
behavior, and neural changes in emotion reactivity. Neuron. 2011; 69:1029–36. [PubMed: 
21382560] 
59. Brown, B. Adolescents’ relationships with peers In: Lerner R, Steinberg L, eds Handbook of 
Adolescent Psychology. New York: Wiley; 2004. 
60. Steinberg L, Monahan KC. Age differences in resistance to peer influence. Dev Psychol. 2007; 
43:1531–43. [PubMed: 18020830] 
61. Brown JD, Halpern CT, L’Engle KL. Mass media as a sexual super peer for early maturing girls. J 
Adolesc Health. 2006; 36:420–27.
62. Lou C, Cheng Y, Gao E, Zuo X, Emerson MR, Zabin LS. Media’s contribution to sexual 
knowledge, attitudes, and behaviors for adolescents and young adults in three Asian cities. J 
Adolesc Health. 2012; 50:S26–36. [PubMed: 22340853] 
63. Madden, M., Lenhart, A., Duggan, M., Cortesi, S., Gasser, U. Teens and Technology 2013. 
Washington, DC: Pew Research Center; 2014. 
64. Morin-Major JK, Marin M-F, Durand N, Wan N, Juster R-P, Lupien SJ. Facebook behaviors 
associated with diurnal cortisol in adolescents: Is befriending stressful? 
Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2016; 63:238–46. [PubMed: 26519778] 
65. Starcevic V, Aboujaoude E. Cyberchondria, cyberbullying, cybersuicide, cybersex:“new” 
psychopathologies for the 21st century? World Psychiatry. 2015; 14:97–100. [PubMed: 25655165] 
66. Saltman, EM., Smith, M. Till martyrdom do us part. London: Institute for Strategic Dialogue; 
2015. 
67. Joshi PD, Fast NJ. Power and reduced temporal discounting. Psychol Sci. 2013; 24:432–38. 
[PubMed: 23404083] 
68. Binder M, Lades LK. Autonomy-enhancing paternalism. Kyklos. 2015; 68:3–27.
69. Global Health Data Exchange. 2013. http://ghdx.healthdata.org/global-burden-disease-study-2013-
gbd-2013-data-downloads (accessed April 3, 2016)
70. UNFPA. State of the World’s Population. The power of 1·8 billion-adolescents, youth, and the 
transformation of the future. http://www.unfpa.org/swop (accessed April 3, 2016)
71. Bloom DE. Youth in the balance. Finance Dev. 2012; 49:7–11.
72. Song Y, Ma J, Agardh A, Lau PW, Hu P, Zhang B. Secular trends in age at menarche among 
Chinese girls from 24 ethnic minorities, 1985 to 2010. Glob Health Action. 2015; 8:26929. 
[PubMed: 26220757] 
73. National Research Council and Institute of Medicine. Growing up global: the changing transitions 
to adulthood in developing countries. In: Lloyd, CB., editor. Panel on transitions to adulthood in 
developing countries. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press; 2005. 
74. Eisenberg ME, Spry E, Patton GC. From emerging to established: longitudinal patterns in the 
timing of transition events among australian emerging adults. Emerg Adulthood. 2015; 3:277–281.
75. Bajos N, Bozon M, Beltzer N, et al. Changes in sexual behaviours: from secular trends to public 
health policies. AIDS. 2010; 24:1185. [PubMed: 20299962] 
76. Ybarra ML, Mitchell KJ. “Sexting” and its relation to sexual activity and sexual risk behavior in a 
national survey of adolescents. J Adolesc Health. 2014; 55:757–64. [PubMed: 25266148] 
Patton et al.
Page 59
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 60 (native text) -----
77. Staff J, Schulenberg JE, Maslowsky J, et al. Substance use changes and social role transitions: 
proximal developmental effects on ongoing trajectories from late adolescence through early 
adulthood. Dev Psychopathol. 2010; 22:917–32. [PubMed: 20883590] 
78. Santhya K. Early marriage and sexual and reproductive health vulnerabilities of young women: a 
synthesis of recent evidence from developing countries. Curr Opin Obstet Gynecol. 2011; 23:334–
39. [PubMed: 21836504] 
79. Meng Y, Holmes J, Hill-McManus D, Brennan A, Meier PS. Trend analysis and modelling of 
gender-specific age, period and birth cohort effects on alcohol abstention and consumption level 
for drinkers in Great Britain using the General Lifestyle Survey 1984–2009. Addiction. 2014; 
109:206–15. [PubMed: 23941363] 
80. World Bank. World Development Report 2014: Risk and opportunity: managing risk for 
development. Washington, DC: World Bank; 2013. 
81. Furlong, A., Cartmel, F. Young people and social change: individualisation and risk in late 
modernity. Buckingham: Open University Press; 1997. 
82. Bottino SMB, Bottino C, Regina CG, Correia AVL, Ribeiro WS. Cyberbullying and adolescent 
mental health: systematic review. Cad Saude Publica. 2015; 31:463–75. [PubMed: 25859714] 
83. Shochat T, Cohen-Zion M, Tzischinsky O. Functional consequences of inadequate sleep in 
adolescents: a systematic review. Sleep Med Rev. 2014; 18:75–87. [PubMed: 23806891] 
84. Institute of Medicine (IOM) and National Research Council (NRC) of the National Academies. 
Toward and integrated science of research on families: workshop report. Washington, DC: 
National Academies Press; 2011. 
85. Elzakkers IF, Danner UN, Hoek HW, Schmidt U, van Elburg AA. Compulsory treatment in 
anorexia nervosa: a review. Int J Eat Disord. 2014; 47:845–52. [PubMed: 24990434] 
86. UN DESA. World Marriage Patterns. New York: United Nations Department of Economic and 
Social Affairs (UN DESA) Population Division; 2011. 
87. Euromonitor International. Special Report: The family structure of the future. 2013. http://
blog.euromonitor.com/2013/07/special-report-the-family-structure-of-the-future.html (accessed 
Aug 12, 2015)
88. Dhillon, N., Yousef, T. Generation in waiting: The unfulfilled promise of young people in the 
Middle East. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press; 2009. 
89. Snoubar Y, Hawal HH. Young communities and the impact of wars and conflicts on the healthy 
growth of young people: Middle East as a model study. EJIS. 1:129–36.
90. Boampong, M. Adolescents and youth migration: harnessing the development potential while 
mitigating risk. 2011. http://www.voicesofyouth.org/posts/adolescents-and-youth-migration-
harnessing-the-development-potential-while-mitigating-risk–2 (accessed Aug 21, 2015)
91. Cortés, R. Adolescents’ rights, gender and migration: challenges for policy makers. 2011. http://
www.globalmigrationgroup.org/sites/default/files/uploads/gmg-topics/mig-data/Adolescents-
Rights-Gender-Migration-Final-Report-April-2011.pdf (accessed April 3, 2016)
92. OECD. The future of families to 2030: A synthesis report. Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-
operation and Development; 2011. 
93. Harris KM, Lee H, DeLeone FY. Marriage and health in the transition to adulthood: evidence for 
African Americans in the Add Health Study. J Fam Issues. 2010; 31:1106–43. [PubMed: 
21833154] 
94. Larson RW, Richards MH, Moneta G, Holmbeck G, Duckett E. Changes in adolescents’ daily 
interactions with their families from ages 10 to 18: disengagement and transformation. Dev 
Psychol. 1996; 32:744.
95. Schwartz OS, Byrne ML, Simmons JG, et al. Parenting during early adolescence and adolescent-
onset major depression—a 6-year prospective longitudinal study. Clin Psychol Sci. 2014; 2:272–
86.
96. Morris AS, Silk JS, Steinberg L, Myers SS, Robinson LR. The role of the family context in the 
development of emotion regulation. Soc Dev. 2007; 16:361–88. [PubMed: 19756175] 
97. Krug EG, Mercy JA, Dahlberg LL, Zwi AB. The world report on violence and health. Lancet. 
2002; 360:1083–88. [PubMed: 12384003] 
Patton et al.
Page 60
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 61 (native text) -----
98. Garcia-Moreno, C., Guedes, A., Knerr, W. Female Genital Mutilation: Understanding and 
addressing violence against women. Geneva: WHO; 2012. 
99. Volpe, JS. Effects of domestic violence on children and adolescents: an overview. 1996. http://
www.aaets.org/article8.htm (accessed Aug 21, 2015)
100. Commendador KA. Parental influences on adolescent decision making and contraceptive use. 
Pediatr Nurs. 2010; 36:147–56, 70. [PubMed: 20687307] 
101. McPherson KE, Kerr S, McGee E, et al. The association between social capital and mental health 
and behavioural problems in children and adolescents: an integrative systematic review. BMC 
Psychol. 2014; 2:7. [PubMed: 25566380] 
102. Pilgrim NA, Blum RW. Adolescent mental and physical health in the English-speaking 
Caribbean. Rev Panam Salud Publica. 2012; 32:62–69. [PubMed: 22910727] 
103. Bouris A, Guilamo-Ramos V, Pickard A, et al. A systematic review of parental influences on the 
health and well-being of lesbian, gay, and bisexual youth: time for a new public health research 
and practice agenda. J Prim Prev. 2010; 31:273–309. [PubMed: 21161599] 
104. Penman-Aguilar A, Carter M, Snead MC, Kourtis AP. Socioeconomic disadvantage as a social 
determinant of teen childbearing in the U.S. Public Health Rep. 2013; 128:5–22.
105. Cutler, DM., Lleras-Muney, A. Education and health: insights from international comparisons. 
Cambridge, MA, USA: National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER); 2012. 
106. Miyamoto, K., Chevalier, A. Education and health. In: OECD. , editor. Improving health and 
social cohesion through education. Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development; 2010. p. 111-79.
107. McQueston K, Silverman R, Glassman A. The efficacy of interventions to reduce adolescent 
childbearing in low- and middle-income countries: a systematic review. Stud Fam Plann. 2013; 
44:369–88. [PubMed: 24323658] 
108. Gakidou E, Cowling K, Lozano R, Murray CJ. Increased educational attainment and its effect on 
child mortality in 175 countries between 1970 and 2009: a systematic analysis. Lancet. 2010; 
376:959–74. [PubMed: 20851260] 
109. WHO. Closing the gap in a generation: health equity through action on the social determinants of 
health. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2008. 
110. IHME. Global Educational Attainment 1970–2015. Seattle, USA: Institute for Health Metrics and 
Evaluation (IHME); 2015. 
111. Foxcroft DR, Tsertsvadze A. Universal school-based prevention programs for alcohol misuse in 
young people. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2011; 5:Cd009113.
112. Patton G, Bond L, Butler H, Glover S. Changing schools, changing health? Design and 
implementation of the Gatehouse Project. J Adolesc Health. 2003; 33:231–39. [PubMed: 
14519564] 
113. Bonell C, Parry W, Wells H, et al. The effects of the school environment on student health: a 
systematic review of multi-level studies. Health Place. 2013; 21:180–91. [PubMed: 23501377] 
114. Fletcher A, Bonell C, Hargreaves J. School effects on young people’s drug use: a systematic 
review of intervention and observational studies. J Adolesc Health. 2008; 42:209–20. [PubMed: 
18295128] 
115. Johnson SL. Improving the school environment to reduce school violence: a review of the 
literature. J Sch Health. 2009; 79:451–65. [PubMed: 19751307] 
116. Black WW, Fedewa AL, Gonzalez KA. Effects of “Safe School” programs and policies on the 
social climate for sexual-minority youth: a review of the literature. J LGBT Youth. 2012; 9:321–
39.
117. UNESCO. Educational for all 2000–2015: achievements and challenges. Paris: UNESCO; 2015. 
118. UNICEF. Investment case for education and equity. New York: UNICEF; 2015. 
119. Glewwe, P., Kremer, M. Schools,teachers, and education outcomes in developing countries. In: 
Hanushek, E., Welch, F., editors. Handbook of the economics of education. Oxford: Elsevier; 
2006. p. 945-1017.
Patton et al.
Page 61
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 62 (native text) -----
120. UNESCO Institute for Statistics, UNICEF. Fixing the broken promise of education for all: finding 
for the global initiative on out-of-school children. Montreal: UNESCO Institute for Statistics; 
2015. 
121. Yasunaga, M. Non-formal education as a means to meet learning needs of out-of-school children 
and adolescents. Montreal: UNESCO Institute for Statistics; 2014. 
122. Rosenberg M, Pettifor A, Miller WC, et al. Relationship between school dropout and teen 
pregnancy among rural South African young women. Int J Epidemiol. 2015; 44:928–36. 
[PubMed: 25716986] 
123. Azevedo WF, Diniz MB, Fonseca ES, Azevedo LM, Evangelista CB. Complications in adolescent 
pregnancy: systematic review of the literature. Einstein (São Paulo). 2015; 13:618–26. [PubMed: 
26061075] 
124. OECD. PISA 2012 Results in Focus: What 15-year-olds know and what they can do with what 
they know. Geneva: OECD Programme for International Student Assessment; 2012. 
125. Demissie, Z., Brener, ND., McManus, T., Shanklin, SL., Hawkins, J., Kann, L. School Health 
Profiles 2012: Characteristics of Health Programs Among Secondary Schools. Atlanta, GA: 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC); 2013. 
126. Harlen W, Deakin Crick R. Testing and motivation for learning. Assess Educ. 2003; 10:169–207.
127. Kneale D, Fletcher A, Wiggins R, Bonell C. Distribution and determinants of risk of teenage-
motherhood in three British longitudinal studies: implications for targeted prevention 
interventions. J Epidemiol Community Health. 2013; 67:4855.
128. Bonell C, Fletcher A, Sorhaindo A, Wells H, McKee M. How market-oriented education policies 
might influence young people’s health: development of a logic model from qualitative case 
studies in English secondary schools. J Epidemiol Community Health. 2012; 66:e24. [PubMed: 
21712460] 
129. Bonell C, Humphrey N, Fletcher A, Moore L, Anderson R, Campbell R. Why schools should 
promote students’ health and wellbeing Education policy shouldn’t focus solely on academic 
attainment. Br Med J. 2014; 348:g3078. [PubMed: 25134103] 
130. International Labour Organization. World report on child labour 2015: paving the way to decent 
work for young people. Geneva: International Labour Organization; 2015. 
131. International Labour Organization. Global employment trends for youth 2013: a generation at 
risk. Geneva: International Labour Office; 2013. 
132. OECD. Youth neither in employment, education nor training (NEETs) Society at a Glance 2014: 
OECD Social Indicators. Paris: OECD Publishing; 2014. 
133. Hale DR, Bevilacqua L, Viner RM. Adolescent health and adult education and employment: a 
systematic review. Pediatrics. 2015; 136:128–40. [PubMed: 26101362] 
134. Benjet C, Hernández-Montoya D, Borges G, Méndez E, Medina-Mora ME, Aguilar-Gaxiola S. 
Youth who neither study nor work: mental health, education and employment. Salud Publica 
Mex. 2012; 54:410–17. [PubMed: 22832833] 
135. Baggio S, Iglesias K, Deline S, et al. Not in education, employment, or training status among 
young swiss men. Longitudinal associations with mental health and substance use. J Adolesc 
Health. 2015; 56:238–43. [PubMed: 25620308] 
136. Tomasik MJ, Pavlova MK, Lechner CM, Blumenthal A, Korner A. Changing contexts of youth 
development: An overview of recent social trends and a psychological model. New Dir Youth 
Dev. 2012; 135:27–38.
137. Larson RW, Willson S, Brown RB, Furstenberg FF, Verma S. Changes in adolescent’s 
interpersonal experiences: are they being prepared for adult relationships in the twenty-first 
century. J Res Adolesc. 2002; 12:31–68.
138. Jaccard J, Blanton H, Dodge T. Peer influences on risk behavior: an analysis of the effects of a 
close friend. Dev Psychol. 2005; 41:135–47. [PubMed: 15656744] 
139. Salazar, LF., Santelli, JS., Crosby, RA., DiClemente, RJ. Chapter 15: Sexually transmitted disease 
transmission and pregnancy among adolescents. In: DiClemente, RJ.Santelli, JS., Crosby, RA., 
editors. Adolescent health: understanding and preventing risk behaviors. San Francisco, CA: 
Jossey-Bass; 2009. p. 274-302.
Patton et al.
Page 62
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 63 (native text) -----
140. Fisher LB, Miles IW, Austin SB, Camargo CA Jr, Colditz GA. Predictors of initiation of alcohol 
use among US adolescents: findings from a prospective cohort study. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 
2007; 161:959–66. [PubMed: 17909139] 
141. Kretman, SE., Zimmerman, MA., Morrel-Samuels, S., Hudson, D. Chapter 12: Adolescent 
violence: Risk, resilience, and prevention In: DiClemente RJ, Santelli JS, Crosby RA, eds 
Adolescent health: understanding and preventing risk behaviors. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass; 
2009. p. 213-32.
142. Taffa N, Klepp KI, Sundby J, Bjune G. Psychosocial determinants of sexual activity and condom 
use intention among youth in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. Int J STD AIDS. 2002; 13:714–19. 
[PubMed: 12396543] 
143. Strasburger VC, Jordan AB, Donnerstein E. Health effects of media on children and adolescents. 
Pediatrics. 2010; 125:756–67. [PubMed: 20194281] 
144. Jensen LA, Arnett JJ. Going global: new pathways for adolescents and emerging adults in a 
changing world. J Soc Issues. 2012; 68:4730492.
145. Bell V, Bishop DV, Przybylski AK. The debate over digital technology and young people. BMJ. 
2015; 351:h3064. [PubMed: 26268481] 
146. Stuckler D, McKee M, Ebrahim S, Basu S. Manufacturing epidemics: the role of global producers 
in increased consumption of unhealthy commodities including processed foods, alcohol, and 
tobacco. PLoS Med. 2012; 9:695.
147. Thow AM, Snowdon W, Labonté R, et al. Will the next generation of preferential trade and 
investment agreements undermine prevention of noncommunicable diseases? A prospective 
policy analysis of the Trans Pacific Partnership Agreement. Health Policy. 2015; 119:88–96. 
[PubMed: 25217839] 
148. Ellis SJ, Kitzinger C. Denying equality: An analysis of arguments against lowering the age of 
consent for sex between men. J Community Appl Soc Psychol. 2002; 12:167–80.
148. Lansdown, G. Innocenti insight: the evolving capacities of the child. 2005. http://www.unicef-
irc.org/publications/pdf/evolving-eng.pdf. (accessed April 11, 2015)
150. Plan International and Special Representative of the UN Secretary-General on Violence against 
Children. Protecting children from harmful practices in plural legal systems. 2012. https://plan-
international.org/files/global/publications/protection/protecting-children-from-harmful-practices-
in-plural-legal-systems (accessed April 15, 2015)
151. Ngwena, C. Sexual health and human rights in the African region. 2011. http://www.ichrp.org/
files/papers/185/140_Ngwena_Africa_2011.pdf (accessed June 23, 2014)
152. WHO. Keeping promises, measuring results: commission on information and accountability for 
women’s and children’s health. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2011. 
153. U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID). The roadmap for health measurement and 
accountability. Washington, DC: USAID, World Bank, WHO; 2015. 
154. UNICEF. Child Marriage and the Law. 2008. http://www.unicef.org/policyanalysis/files/
Child_Marriage_and_the_Law(1).pdf (accessed April 20, 2015)
155. UNICEF. State of the World’s Children. 2013. http://www.unicef.org/sowc2013/ (accessed April 
20, 2015)
156. Klugman, J., Hanmer, L., Twigg, S., Hasan, T., McCleary-Sills, J., Santamaria, J. Voice and 
agency: empowering women and girls for shared prosperity. Washington, DC: World Bank 
Group; 2014. 
157. Forum on Marriage and the Rights of Women and Girls. Early marriage: whose right to choose?. 
2001. https://www.crin.org/en/library/publications/early-marriage-whose-right-choose (accessed 
April 20, 2015)
158. International Institute for Population Sciences (IIPS). National Family Health Survey (NFHS-1), 
India 1992–93. Mumbai, India: IIPS; 1995. 
159. International Institute for Population Sciences (IIPS), Macro International. National Family 
Health Survey (NFHS-3), 2005–06: India: Volume I. Mumbai, India: IIPS; 2007. 
160. Jain, S., Kurz, K. New Insights on preventing child marriage: a global analysis of factors and 
programs. Washington, DC: ICRW; 2007. 
Patton et al.
Page 63
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 64 (native text) -----
161. International Institute for Population Sciences (IIPS). District level household and facility survey 
2007–08 (DLHS-3). Mumbai, India: IIPS; 2010. 
162. ICRW. Development Initiative on Supporting Healthy Adolescents (DISHA) project: Analysis of 
quantitative baseline survey data conducted in 2004. Washington, DC: International Center for 
Research on Women (ICRW); 2005. 
163. iERG. Every Woman, Every Child: Strengthening Equity and Dignity through Health: the second 
report of the independent Expert Review Group (iERG) on Information and Accountability for 
Women’s and Children’s health. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2013. 
164. DNA India. Cabinet approves bill on compulsory marriage registration. 2012. http://
www.dnaindia.com/india/report-cabinet-approves-bill-on-compulsory-marriage-
registration-1674966 (accessed July 22, 2014)
165. Tandon, U. Family planning in India: a study of law and policy. 2010. http://
paa2010.princeton.edu/papers/101217 (accessed April 2, 2015)
166. Bhamra AS, Nagrath K, Niazi. Role of non-state actors in monitoring and review for effective 
implementation of the post-2015 agenda: IRF2015. 2015
167. Parry CD, Patra J, Rehm J. Alcohol consumption and non-communicable diseases: epidemiology 
and policy implications. Addiction. 2011; 106:1718–24. [PubMed: 21819471] 
168. ICRW. Delaying marriage for girls in India: a formative research to design interventions for 
changing norms. New Delhi, India: UNICEF; 2011. 
169. Van Duijvenvoorde A, Crone E. The teenage brain a neuroeconomic approach to adolescent 
decision making. Curr Dir Psychol Sci. 2013; 22:108–13.
170. Biegler, P. The ethical treatment of depression: autonomy through psychotherapy. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press; 2011. 
171. Johnson SB, Jones VC. Adolescent development and risk of injury: using developmental science 
to improve interventions. Inj Prev. 2011; 17:50–54. [PubMed: 20876765] 
172. DriversEd.com. Graduated Drivers License (GDL). https://www.driversed.com/dmv/california/
gdl.aspx (accessed April 20, 2015)
173. Chen L-H, Baker SP, Li G. Graduated driver licensing programs and fatal crashes of 16-year-old 
drivers: a national evaluation. Pediatrics. 2006; 118:56–62. [PubMed: 16818549] 
174. Lyon JD, Pan R, Li J. National evaluation of the effect of graduated driver licensing laws on 
teenager fatality and injury crashes. J Saf Res. 2012; 43:29–37.
175. Coffey C, Veit F, Wolfe R, Cini E, Patton GC. Mortality in young offenders: retrospective cohort 
study. BMJ. 2003; 326:1064–66. [PubMed: 12750207] 
176. Muncie J. International juvenile (in) justice: penal severity and rights compliance. Int J Crime 
Justice Social Democracy. 2013; 2:43–62.
177. Schwalbe CS, Gearing RE, MacKenzie MJ, Brewer KB, Ibrahim R. A meta-analysis of 
experimental studies of diversion programs for juvenile offenders. Clin Psychol Rev. 2012; 
32:26–33. [PubMed: 22138452] 
178. Asquith, S. The Kilbrandon report Children and Young Persons Scotland. Edinburgh: HMSO; 
1995. 
179. Dünkel, F., Pruin, I. Young adult offenders in juvenile and criminal justice systems in Europe. In: 
Losel, F.Bottoms, A., Farrington, DP., editors. Young adult offenders: lost in transition. Oxford: 
Routledge; 2012. p. 11-39.
180. Blanc AK, Winfrey W, Ross J. New findings for maternal mortality age patterns: Aggregated 
results for 38 countries. PLoS One. 2013; 8:e59864. [PubMed: 23613716] 
181. Patel V, Ramasundarahettige C, Vijayakumar L, et al. Suicide mortality in India: a nationally 
representative survey. Lancet. 2012; 379:2343–51. [PubMed: 22726517] 
182. Patton GC, Coffey C, Sawyer SM, et al. Global patterns of mortality in young people: a 
systematic analysis of population health data. Lancet. 2009; 374:881–92. [PubMed: 19748397] 
183. Moser CO, Van Bronkhorst B. Youth violence in Latin America and the Caribbean: costs, causes, 
and interventions: World Bank, Latin America and the Caribbean Region, environmentally and 
socially sustainable development. SMU. 1999
Patton et al.
Page 64
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 65 (native text) -----
184. Rehm J, Sulkowska U, Mańczuk M, et al. Alcohol accounts for a high proportion of premature 
mortality in central and eastern Europe. Int J Epidemiol. 2007; 36:458–67. [PubMed: 17251244] 
185. Yair O, Miodownik D. Youth bulge and civil war: Why a country’s share of young adults explains 
only non-ethnic wars. Conflict Manage Peace Sci. 2014; 33:25–44.
186. Collishaw S. Annual research review: secular trends in child and adolescent mental health. J Child 
Psychol Psychiatry. 2015; 56:370–93. [PubMed: 25496340] 
187. Murray CJ, Ortblad KF, Guinovart C, et al. Global, regional, and national incidence and mortality 
for HIV, tuberculosis, and malaria during 1990–2013: a systematic analysis for the Global 
Burden of Disease Study 2013. Lancet. 2014; 384:1005–70. [PubMed: 25059949] 
188. Jamison DT, Summers LH, Alleyne G, et al. Global health 2035: a world converging within a 
generation. Lancet. 2013; 382:1898–955. [PubMed: 24309475] 
189. Bruin JE, Gerstein HC, Holloway AC. Long-term consequences of fetal and neonatal nicotine 
exposure: a critical review. Toxicol Sci. 2010; 116:364–74. [PubMed: 20363831] 
190. Bonomo YA, Patton GC, Bowes G. What are the longer term outcomes of adolescent alcohol 
consumption in young adulthood? Results from a 10-year cohort study. Alcoholism. 2006; 
30:117A.
191. Viner RM, Taylor B. Adult outcomes of binge drinking in adolescence: findings from a UK 
national birth cohort. J Epidemiol Community Health. 2007; 61:902–07. [PubMed: 17873228] 
192. Riley EP, McGee CL. Fetal alcohol spectrum disorders: an overview with emphasis on changes in 
brain and behavior. Exp Biol Med. 2005; 230:357–65.
193. Patton GC, Coffey C, Carlin JB, et al. Overweight and obesity between adolescence and young 
adulthood: a 10-year prospective cohort study. J Adolesc Health. 2011; 48:275–80. [PubMed: 
21338899] 
194. Reilly J, Kelly J. Long-term impact of overweight and obesity in childhood and adolescence on 
morbidity and premature mortality in adulthood: systematic review. Int J Obes. 2011; 35:891–98.
195. Yu C, Teoh T, Robinson S. Review article: obesity in pregnancy. BJOG. 2006; 113:1117–25. 
[PubMed: 16903839] 
196. Lesthaeghe R. The second demographic transition: a concise overview of its development. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci USA. 2014; 111:18112–15. [PubMed: 25453112] 
197. Tylee A, Haller DM, Graham T, Churchill R, Sanci LA. Youth-friendly primary-care services: 
how are we doing and what more needs to be done? Lancet. 2007; 369:1565–73. [PubMed: 
17482988] 
198. Granich RM, Gilks CF, Dye C, De Cock KM, Williams BG. Universal voluntary HIV testing with 
immediate antiretroviral therapy as a strategy for elimination of HIV transmission: a 
mathematical model. Lancet. 2009; 373:48–57. [PubMed: 19038438] 
199. Patel V, Flisher AJ, Hetrick S, McGorry P. Mental health of young people: a global public-health 
challenge. Lancet. 2007; 369:1302–13. [PubMed: 17434406] 
200. Woog, V., Singh, S., Browne, A., Philbin, J. Adolescent women’s need for and use of sexual and 
reproductive health services in developing countries. New York NY: Guttmacher Institute; 2015. 
201. Blanc AK, Tsui AO, Croft TN, Trevitt JL. Patterns and trends in adolescents’ contraceptive use 
and discontinuation in developing countries and comparisons with adult women. Int Perspect Sex 
Reprod Health. 2009; 35:63–71. [PubMed: 19620090] 
202. Biddlecom AE, Munthali A, Singh S, Woog V. Adolescents’ views of and preferences for sexual 
and reproductive health services in Burkina Faso, Ghana, Malawi and Uganda. Afr J Reprod 
Health. 2007; 11:99.
203. Winner B, Peipert JF, Zhao Q, et al. Effectiveness of long-acting reversible contraception. N Engl 
J Med. 2012; 366:1998–2007. [PubMed: 22621627] 
204. Finer LB, Jerman J, Kavanaugh ML. Changes in use of long-acting contraceptive methods in the 
United States, 2007–2009. Fertil Steril. 2012; 98:893–97. [PubMed: 22795639] 
205. Vanheusden K, Van der Ende J, Mulder CL, van Lenthe FJ, Verhulst FC, Mackenbach JP. The use 
of mental health services among young adults with emotional and behavioural problems: equal 
use for equal needs? Soc Psychiatry Psychiatr Epidemiol. 2008; 43:808–15. [PubMed: 
18511992] 
Patton et al.
Page 65
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 66 (native text) -----
206. Alonso J, Codony M, Kovess V, et al. Population level of unmet need for mental healthcare in 
Europe. Br J Psychiatry. 2007; 190:299–306. [PubMed: 17401035] 
207. Patel V, Araya R, Chatterjee S, et al. Treatment and prevention of mental disorders in low-income 
and middle-income countries. Lancet. 2007; 370:991–1005. [PubMed: 17804058] 
208. Calhoun LM, Speizer IS, Rimal R, et al. Provider imposed restrictions to clients’ access to family 
planning in urban Uttar Pradesh, India: a mixed methods study. BMC Health Serv Res. 2013; 
13:532. [PubMed: 24365015] 
209. Waddington C, Sambo C. Financing health care for adolescents: a necessary part of universal 
health coverage. Bull World Health Organ. 2015; 93:57–59. [PubMed: 25558109] 
210. Hargreaves DS, Greaves F, Levay C, et al. Comparison of health care experience and access 
between young and older adults in 11 high-income countries. J Adolesc Health. 2015; 57:413–20. 
[PubMed: 26205758] 
211. Ford CA, Millstein SG, Halpern-Felsher BL, Irwin CE. Influence of physician confidentiality 
assurances on adolescents’s willingness to disclose information and seek future health care. A 
randomised controlled trial. J Am Med Assoc. 1997; 278:1029–34.
212. Schoen, C., Davis, K., DesRoches, C., Shekhdar, A. Health of adolescent boys: commonwealth 
fund survey findings. New York, NY: Commonweath Fund; 1998. 
213. Sedlander E, Brindis CD, Bausch SH, Tebb KP. Options for assuring access to confidential care 
for adolescents and young adults in an explanation of benefits environment. J Adolesc Health. 
2015; 56:7–9. [PubMed: 25530602] 
214. Sanci L. Clinical preventive services for adolescents: facing the challenge of proving “an ounce of 
prevention is worth a pound of cure”. J Adolesc Health. 2011; 49:450–52. [PubMed: 22018557] 
215. Kadivar H, Thompson L, Wegman M, et al. Adolescent views on comprehensive health risk 
assessment and counseling: assessing gender differences. J Adolesc Health. 2014; 55:24–32. 
[PubMed: 24613096] 
216. Sasse RA, Aroni RA, Sawyer SM, Duncan RE. Confidential consultations with adolescents: an 
exploration of Australian parents’ perspectives. J Adolesc Health. 2013; 52:786–91. [PubMed: 
23415756] 
217. Duncan RE, Jekel M, O’Connell MA, Sanci LA, Sawyer SM. Balancing parental involvement 
with adolescent friendly health care in teenagers with diabetes: are we getting it right? J Adolesc 
Health. 2014; 55:59–64. [PubMed: 24518535] 
218. Rausch JR, Hood KK, Delamater A, et al. Changes in treatment adherence and glycemic control 
during the transition to adolescence in type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2012; 35:1219–24. 
[PubMed: 22474040] 
219. Kahana SY, Rohan J, Allison S, Frazier TW, Drotar D. A meta-analysis of adherence to 
antiretroviral therapy and virologic responses in HIV-infected children, adolescents, and young 
adults. AIDS Behav. 2013; 17:41–60. [PubMed: 22411426] 
220. Dean AJ, Walters J, Hall A. A systematic review of interventions to enhance medication 
adherence in children and adolescents with chronic illness. Arch Dis Child. 2010; 95:717–23. 
[PubMed: 20522463] 
221. Salema N-EM, Elliott RA, Glazebrook C. A systematic review of adherence-enhancing 
interventions in adolescents taking long-term medicines. J Adolesc Health. 2011; 49:455–66. 
[PubMed: 22018559] 
222. Al-sheyab N, Gallagher R, Crisp J, Shah S. Peer-led education for adolescents with asthma in 
Jordan: a cluster-randomized controlled trial. Pediatrics. 2012; 129:e106–12. [PubMed: 
22157137] 
223. Rosen DS, Blum RW, Britto M, Sawyer SM, Sigel DM. Transition to adult health care for 
adolescents and young adults with chronic conditions: position paper of the Society for 
Adolescent Medicine. J Adolesc Health. 2003; 33:309–11. [PubMed: 14519573] 
224. Suris J-C, Akre C. Key elements for, and indicators of, a successful transition: an international 
Delphi study. J Adolesc Health. 2015; 56:612–18. [PubMed: 26003575] 
225. Agwu AL, Lee L, Fleishman JA, et al. Aging and loss to follow-up among youth living with 
human immunodeficiency virus in the HIV Research Network. J Adolesc Health. 2015; 56:345–
51. [PubMed: 25703322] 
Patton et al.
Page 66
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 67 (native text) -----
226. Bonnie, RJ., Stroud, C., Breiner, H. Investing in the health and well-being of young adults. 
Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2015. 
227. Ambresin AE, Bennett K, Patton GC, Sanci LA, Sawyer SM. Assessment of youth-friendly health 
care: a systematic review of indicators drawn from young people’s perspectives. J Adolesc 
Health. 2013; 52:670–81. [PubMed: 23701887] 
228. Luxford, K., Piper, D., Dunbar, N., Poole, N. Patient-centred care: improving quality and safety 
by focusing care on patients and consumers. 2010. http://www.safetyandquality.gov.au/wp-
content/uploads/2012/01/PCCC-DiscussPaper.pdf (accessed April 3, 2016)
229. WHO. Adolescent friendly health services: an agenda for change. Geneva: World Health 
Organization (WHO); 2002. 
230. Michaud P-A, Blum RW, Benaroyo L, Zermatten J, Baltag V. Assessing an adolescent’s capacity 
for autonomous decision-making in clinical care. J Adolesc Health. 2015; 57:361–66. [PubMed: 
26281798] 
231. Sawyer SM, Conn JJ, Reid KJ, et al. Working with young people: Evaluation of an education 
resource for medical trainees. J Paediatr Child Health. 2013; 49:901–05. [PubMed: 24168019] 
232. Denno DM, Hoopes AJ, Chandra-Mouli V. Effective strategies to provide adolescent sexual and 
reproductive health services and to increase demand and community support. J Adolesc Health. 
2015; 56(suppl):S22–41. [PubMed: 25528977] 
233. Chandra-Mouli V, Svanemyr J, Amin A, et al. Twenty years after International Conference on 
Population and Development: where are we with adolescent sexual and reproductive health and 
rights? J Adolesc Health. 2015; 56:S1–S6.
234. Nair M, Baltag V, Bose K, Boschi-Pinto C, Lambrechts T, Mathai M. Improving the quality of 
health care services for adolescents, globally: a standards-driven approach. J Adolesc Health. 
2015; 57:288–98. [PubMed: 26299556] 
235. Hargreaves DS. Revised You’re Welcome criteria and future developments in adolescent 
healthcare. J Clin Res Pediatr Endocrinol. 2011; 3:43. [PubMed: 21750630] 
236. Kesterton AJ, Cabral de Mello M. Generating demand and community support for sexual and 
reproductive health services for young people: a review of the literature and programs. Reprod 
Health. 2010; 7:25. [PubMed: 20863411] 
237. Kauer SD, Mangan C, Sanci L. Do online mental health services improve help-seeking for young 
people? A systematic review. J Med Internet Res. 2014; 16:e66. [PubMed: 24594922] 
238. Mason-Jones AJ, Crisp C, Momberg M, Koech J, De Koker P, Mathews C. A systematic review of 
the role of school-based healthcare in adolescent sexual, reproductive, and mental health. Syst 
Rev. 2012; 1:49. [PubMed: 23098138] 
239. Blank L, Baxter SK, Payne N, Guillaume LR, Pilgrim H. Systematic review and narrative 
synthesis of the effectiveness of contraceptive service interventions for young people, delivered 
in educational settings. J Pediatr Adolesc Gynecol. 2010; 23:341–51. [PubMed: 20493736] 
240. Goldie SJ, Diaz M, Constenla D, Alvis N, Andrus JK, Kim S-Y. Mathematical models of cervical 
cancer prevention in Latin America and the Carribean. Vaccine. 2008; 265:L59–72.
241. Goldie SJ, Diaz M, Kim S-Y, Levin CE, Minh HV, Kim JJ. Mathematical models of cervical 
cancer prevention in the Asia Pacific Region. Vaccine. 2008; 265:M17–29.
242. Chesson HW, Ekwueme DU, Saraiya M, Dunne EF, Markowitz LE. The cost-effectiveness of 
male HPV vaccination in the United States. Vaccine. 2011; 29:8443–50. [PubMed: 21816193] 
243. Udonwa NE, Gyuse AN, Etokidem AJ. Malaria: knowledge and prevention practices among 
school adolescents in a coastal community in Calabar, Nigeria. Afr J Prim Health Care Fam Med. 
2010; 2:103.
244. Victora CG, Adair L, Fall C, et al. Maternal and child undernutrition: consequences for adult 
health and human capital. Lancet. 2008; 371:340–57. [PubMed: 18206223] 
245. United Nations. Children’s Fund Improving child nutrition: The achievable imperative for global 
progress. New York: UNICEF; 2013. 
246. Haider, R. Adolescent nutrition: a review of the situation in selected South-East Asian countries. 
New Delhi: Regional Offi ce for South-East Asia, World Health Organization (WHO); 2006. 
247. DFID. The neglected crisis of undernutrition: evidence for action. London: Department for 
International Development (DFID); 2012. 
Patton et al.
Page 67
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 68 (native text) -----
248. WHO. Guideline: Intermittent iron and folic acid supplementation in menstruating women. 
Geneva: World Health Organization; 2011. 
249. Bhutta ZA, Das JK, Rizvi A, et al. Evidence-based interventions for improvement of maternal and 
child nutrition: what can be done and at what cost? Lancet. 2013; 382:452–77. [PubMed: 
23746776] 
250. World Bank. From agriculture to nutrition: pathways, synergies and outcomes. Washington, DC: 
World Bank; 2007. 
251. Masset, E., Haddad, L., Cornelius, A., Isanza-Castro, J. A systematic review of agricultural 
interventions that aim to improve the nutritional status of children. London: EPPI-Centre, Social 
Science Research Unit, Institute of Education, University of London; 2011. 
252. Bhutta ZA, Ahmed T, Black RE, et al. What works? Interventions for maternal and child 
undernutrition and survival. Lancet. 2008; 371:417–40. [PubMed: 18206226] 
253. Adelman, S., Gilligan, D., Konde-Lule, J., Alderman, H. School feeding reduces anemia 
prevalence in adolescent girls and other vulnerable household members in a cluster randomized 
controlled trial in Uganda. Washington, DC: International Food Policy Research Institute; 2012. 
254. Gibbs CM, Wendt A, Peters S, Hogue CJ. The impact of early age at first childbirth on maternal 
and infant health. Paediatr Perinat Epidemiol. 2012; 26:259–84. [PubMed: 22742615] 
255. King JC. The risk of maternal nutritional depletion and poor outcomes increases in early or 
closely spaced pregnancies. J Nutr. 2003; 133:1732S–36S. [PubMed: 12730491] 
256. Casanueva E, Roselló-Soberón ME, De-Regil LM, Argüelles MdC, Céspedes MI. Adolescents 
with Adequate Birth Weight Newborns Diminish Energy Expenditure and Cease Growth. J Nutr. 
2006; 136:2498–501. [PubMed: 16988116] 
257. Rah JH, Christian P, Shamim AA, Arju UT, Labrique AB, Rashid M. Pregnancy and lactation 
hinder growth and nutritional status of adolescent girls in rural Bangladesh. J Nutr. 2008; 
138:1505–11. [PubMed: 18641198] 
258. WHO. Guideline: Calcium supplementation in pregnant women. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 2013. 
259. Reinhardt K, Fanzo J. Addressing chronic malnutrition through multi-sectoral, sustainable 
approaches: a review of the causes and consequences. Front Nutr. 2014; 1:13. [PubMed: 
25988116] 
260. Chandra-Mouli V, Camacho AV, Michaud P-A. WHO Guidelines on preventing early pregnancy 
and poor reproductive outcomes among adolescents in developing countries. J Adolesc Health. 
2013; 52:517–22. [PubMed: 23608717] 
261. Bushamuka V, de Pee S, Talukder A, et al. Impact of a homestead gardening program on 
household food security and empowerment of women in Bangladesh. Food Nutr Bull. 2005; 
26:17–25. [PubMed: 15810795] 
262. Toroyan, T., Peden, M. Youth and Road Safety. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization; 
2007. 
263. Peden, M., Scurfield, R., Sleet, D., et al. World report on road traffi c injury prevention. Geneva, 
Switzerland: WHO; 2004. 
264. WHO. Global Status Report on Road Safety 2013: Supporting A Decade of Action. Geneva, 
Switzerland: World Health Organization; 2013. 
265. Simpson HM. The evolution and effectiveness of graduated licensing. J Safety Res. 2003; 34:25–
34. [PubMed: 12535903] 
266. Norton, R., Hyder, AA., Bishai, D., Peden, M. Unintentional Injuries. Disease Control Priorities 
in Developing Countries. 2nd. Jamison, DT.Breman, JG.Measham, AR., et al., editors. 
Washington, DC: World Bank; 2006. p. 737-55.
267. Afukaar FK. Speed control in developing countries: issues, challenges and opportunities in 
reducing road traffi c injuries. Inj Control Saf Promot. 2003; 10:77–81. [PubMed: 12772489] 
268. Elvik, R., Hoye, A., Vaa, T., Sorensen, M. The handbook of road safety measures. 2nd. Bingley, 
UK: Emerald Group Publishing Limited; 2009. 
269. Forjuoh SN. Traffic-related injury prevention interventions for low-income countries. Inj Control 
Saf Promot. 2003; 10:109–18. [PubMed: 12772494] 
Patton et al.
Page 68
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 69 (native text) -----
270. Retting RA, Ferguson SA, McCartt AT. A review of evidence-based traffic engineering measures 
designed to reduce pedestrian-motor vehicle crashes. Am J Public Health. 2003; 93:1456–63. 
[PubMed: 12948963] 
271. Porchia BR, Baldasseroni A, Dellisanti C, Lorini C, Bonaccorsi G. Effectiveness of two 
interventions in preventing traffi c accidents: a systematic review. Ann Ig. 2014; 26:63–75. 
[PubMed: 24452185] 
272. Williams AF. Young driver risk factors: successful and unsuccessful approaches for dealing with 
them and an agenda for the future. Inj Prev. 2006; 12:i4–8. [PubMed: 16788111] 
273. Roberts IG, Kwan I. School-based driver education for the prevention of traffic crashes. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. 2001; 3:CD003201.
274. Krug, EG., Dahlberg, LL., Mercy, JA., Zwi, AB., Lozano, R. World report on violence and health. 
Geneva: WHO; 2002. 
275. Catalano RF, Fagan AA, Gavin LE, et al. Worldwide application of prevention science in 
adolescent health. Lancet. 2012; 379:1653–64. [PubMed: 22538180] 
276. Fagan AA, Catalano RF. What works in youth violence prevention: a review of the literature. Res 
Soc Work Pract. 2013; 23:141–56.
277. WHO. Violence prevention: the evidence. Geneva: World Health Organization (WHO); 2010. 
278. Ellsberg M, Arango DJ, Morton M, et al. Prevention of violence against women and girls: what 
does the evidence say? Lancet. 2015; 385:1555–66. [PubMed: 25467575] 
279. Fellmeth GLT, Heffernan C, Nurse J, Habibula S, Sethi D. Educational and skills-based 
interventions for preventing relationship and dating violence in adolescents and young adults. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013; 6:CD004534.
280. Lundgren R, Amin A. Addressing intimate partner violence and sexual violence among 
adolescents: emerging evidence of effectiveness. J Adolesc Health. 2015; 56:S42–50. [PubMed: 
25528978] 
281. Whitaker DJ, Morrison S, Lindquist C, et al. A critical review of interventions for the primary 
prevention of perpetration of partner violence. Aggr Violent Behav. 2006; 11:151–66.
282. Patton GC, Romaniuk H, Spry E, et al. Prediction of perinatal depression from adolescence and 
before conception (VICHS): 20-year prospective cohort study. Lancet. 386:875–83. [PubMed: 
26072108] 
283. Kessler RC, Berglund P, Demler O, Jin R, Merikangas KR. Lifetime prevalence and age-of-onset 
distributions of DSM-IV disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey replication. Arch Gen 
Psychiatry. 2005; 62:593–602. [PubMed: 15939837] 
284. Copeland W, Shanahan L, Costello EJ, Angold A. Cumulative prevalence of psychiatric disorders 
by young adulthood: a prospective cohort analysis from the Great Smoky Mountains Study. J Am 
Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2011; 50:252–61. [PubMed: 21334565] 
285. McGorry P, Bates T, Birchwood M. Designing youth mental health services for the 21st century: 
examples from Australia, Ireland and the UK. Br J Psychiatry Suppl. 2013; 54:s30–35. [PubMed: 
23288499] 
286. Jorm AF. How effective are ‘headspace’ youth mental health services? Aust N Z J Psychiatry. 
2015; 49:861–62. [PubMed: 26416914] 
287. Stockings E, Degenhardt L, Dobbins T, et al. Preventing depression and anxiety in young people: 
a review of the joint effi cacy of universal, selective and indicated prevention. Psychol Med. 
2016; 46:11–26. [PubMed: 26315536] 
288. Hunter E, Harvey D. Indigenous suicide in Australia, New Zealand, Canada and the United 
States. Emerg Med. 2002; 14:14–23.
289. Evans E, Hawton K, Rodham K. Factors associated with suicidal phenomena in adolescents: a 
systematic review of population-based studies. Clin Psychol Rev. 2004; 24:957–79. [PubMed: 
15533280] 
290. Hazell P. Adolescent suicide clusters: evidence, mechanisms and prevention. Aust N Z J 
Psychiatry. 1993; 27:653–65. [PubMed: 8135690] 
291. Hawton K, Zahl D, Weatherall R. Suicide following deliberate self-harm: long-term follow-up of 
patients who presented to a general hospital. Br J Psychiatry. 2003; 182:537–42. [PubMed: 
12777346] 
Patton et al.
Page 69
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 70 (native text) -----
292. Gould MS, Greenberg T, Velting DM, Shaffer D. Youth suicide risk and preventive interventions: 
a review of the past 10 years. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2003; 42:386. [PubMed: 
12649626] 
293. Robinson J, Cox G, Malone A, et al. A systematic review of school-based interventions aimed at 
preventing, treating, and responding to suicide-related behavior in young people. Crisis. 2013; 
34:164–82. [PubMed: 23195455] 
294. Andriessen K. Suicide bereavement and postvention in major suicidology journals: lessons 
learned for the future of postvention. Crisis. 2014; 35:338–48. [PubMed: 25163845] 
295. Mann JJ, Apter A, Bertolote J, et al. Suicide prevention strategies: a systematic review. JAMA. 
2005; 294:2064–74. [PubMed: 16249421] 
296. Robinson J, Hetrick SE, Martin C. Preventing suicide in young people: systematic review. Aust N 
Z J Psychiatry. 2011; 45:3–26. [PubMed: 21174502] 
297. Klimes-Dougan B, Klingbeil DA, Meller SJ. The impact of universal suicide-prevention programs 
on the help-seeking attitudes and behaviors of youths. Crisis. 2013; 34:82–97. [PubMed: 
23261908] 
298. Ng M, Fleming T, Robinson M, et al. Global, regional, and national prevalence of overweight and 
obesity in children and adults during 1980–2013: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of 
Disease Study 2013. Lancet. 2014; 384:766–81. [PubMed: 24880830] 
299. Whitaker RC, Wright JA, Pepe MS, Seidel KD, Dietz WH. Predicting obesity in young adulthood 
from childhood and parental obesity. N Engl J Med. 1997; 337:869–73. [PubMed: 9302300] 
300. Ruager-Martin R, Hyde MJ, Modi N. Maternal obesity and infant outcomes. Early Hum Dev. 
2010; 86:715–22. [PubMed: 20846795] 
301. Dumith SC, Gigante DP, Domingues MR, Kohl HW 3rd. Physical activity change during 
adolescence: a systematic review and a pooled analysis. Int J Epidemiol. 2011; 40:685–98. 
[PubMed: 21245072] 
302. Niemeier HM, Raynor HA, Lloyd-Richardson EE, Rogers ML, Wing RR. Fast food consumption 
and breakfast skipping: predictors of weight gain from adolescence to adulthood in a nationally 
representative sample. J Adolesc Health. 2006; 39:842–49. [PubMed: 17116514] 
303. Jordan AB, Kramer-Golinkoff EK, Strasburger VC. Does adolescent media use cause obesity and 
eating disorders? Adolesc Med State Art Rev. 2008; 19:431–49. viii–ix. [PubMed: 19227385] 
304. Laska MN, Pelletier JE, Larson NI, Story M. Interventions for weight gain prevention during the 
transition to young adulthood: a review of the literature. J Adolesc Health. 2012; 50:324–33. 
[PubMed: 22443834] 
305. Pearson N, Braithwaite R, Biddle SJ. The effectiveness of interventions to increase physical 
activity among adolescent girls: a meta-analysis. Acad Pediatr. 2015; 15:9–18. [PubMed: 
25441655] 
306. Rees R, Kavanagh J, Harden A, et al. Young people and physical activity: a systematic review 
matching their views to effective interventions. Health Educ Res. 2006; 21:806–25. [PubMed: 
17041020] 
307. Stice E, Shaw H, Marti CN. A meta-analytic review of obesity prevention programs for children 
and adolescents: the skinny on interventions that work. Psychol Bull. 2006; 132:667–91. 
[PubMed: 16910747] 
308. Francis JM, Grosskurth H, Changalucha J, Kapiga SH, Weiss HA. Systematic review and meta-
analysis: prevalence of alcohol use among young people in eastern Africa. Trop Med Int Health. 
2014; 19:476–88. [PubMed: 24479379] 
309. Bonomo YA, Bowes G, Coffey C, Carlin JB, Patton GC. Teenage drinking and the onset of 
alcohol dependence: a cohort study over seven years. Addiction. 2004; 99:1520–28. [PubMed: 
15585043] 
310. Feldstein Ewing SW, Sakhardande A, Blakemore S-J. The effect of alcohol consumption on the 
adolescent brain: A systematic review of MRI and fMRI studies of alcohol-using youth. 
Neuroimage Clin. 2014; 5:420–37. [PubMed: 26958467] 
311. WHO. Global health sector strategy on HIV/AIDS 2011–2015. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 2011. 
Patton et al.
Page 70
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 71 (native text) -----
312. Warren CW, Lea V, Lee J, Jones NR, Asma S, McKenna M. Change in tobacco use among 13–15 
year olds between 1999 and 2008: findings from the Global Youth Tobacco Survey. Glob Health 
Promot. 2009; 16:38–90. [PubMed: 19770234] 
313. Batura N, Hill Z, Haghparast-Bidgoli H, et al. Highlighting the evidence gap: how cost-effective 
are interventions to improve early childhood nutrition and development? Health Policy Plan. 
2015; 30:813–21. [PubMed: 24963156] 
314. Moyer-Gusé E. Toward a theory of entertainment persuasion: Explaining the persuasive effects of 
entertainment-education messages. Commun Theory. 2008; 18:407–25.
315. Saavedra, M. Dilemmas and opportunities in gender and sport-in-development. In: Levermore, R., 
Beacom, A., editors. Sport and international development. Basingstoke: Macmillan; 2009. p. 
124-55.
316. UNICEF. The State of the World’s Children 2011: Adolescence: an age of opportunity. 2011. 
http://www.unicef.org/sowc2011/ (accessed April 12, 2015)
317. Kawamoto K, Houlihan CA, Balas EA, Lobach DF. Improving clinical practice using clinical 
decision support systems: a systematic review of trials to identify features critical to success. 
BMJ. 2005; 330:765. [PubMed: 15767266] 
318. Lester R, Karanja S. Mobile phones: exceptional tools for HIV/AIDS, health, and crisis 
management. Lancet Infect Dis. 2008; 8:738–39. [PubMed: 19022188] 
319. Labrique AB, Sikder SS, Mehara S, et al. Mobile phone ownership and widespread mHealth use 
in 168,231 women of reproductive age in rural Bangladesh. J Mob Technol Med. 2012; 1:26.
320. Puccio JA, Belzer M, Olson J, et al. The use of cell phone reminder calls for assisting HIV-
infected adolescents and young adults to adhere to highly active antiretroviral therapy: a pilot 
study. AIDS Patient Care STDS. 2006; 20:438–44. [PubMed: 16789857] 
321. Harden A, Brunton G, Fletcher A, Oakley A. Teenage pregnancy and social disadvantage: 
systematic review integrating controlled trials and qualitative studies. BMJ. 2009; 339:b4254. 
[PubMed: 19910400] 
322. Blank L, Baxter S, Goyder E, et al. Promoting well-being by changing behaviour: a systematic 
review and narrative synthesis of the effectiveness of whole secondary school behavioural 
interventions. Ment Health Rev J. 2010; 15:43–53.
323. Milat AJ, King L, Newson R, et al. Increasing the scale and adoption of population health 
interventions: experiences and perspectives of policy makers, practitioners, and researchers. 
Health Res Policy Syst. 2014; 12:18. [PubMed: 24735455] 
324. Kivela J, Ketting E, Baltussen R. Cost analysis of school-based sexuality education programs in 
six countries. Cost Eff Resour Alloc. 2013; 11:17. [PubMed: 23915254] 
325. Terris-Prestholt F, Kumaranayake L, Obasi AI, et al. From trial intervention to scale-up: costs of 
an adolescent sexual health program in Mwanza, Tanzania. Sex Transm Dis. 2006; 33:S133–39. 
[PubMed: 16652070] 
326. O’Neill J, Tabish H, Welch V, et al. Applying an equity lens to interventions: using PROGRESS 
ensures consideration of socially stratifying factors to illuminate inequities in health. J Clin 
Epidemiol. 2014; 67:56–64. [PubMed: 24189091] 
327. Chandra-Mouli V, Lane C, Wong S. What does not work in adolescent sexual and reproductive 
health: a review of evidence on interventions commonly accepted as best practices. Glob Health 
Sci Pract. 2015; 3:333–40. [PubMed: 26374795] 
328. Hotez PJ, Asojo OA, Adesina AM. Nigeria:“Ground Zero” for the high prevalence neglected 
tropical diseases. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2012; 6:e1600. [PubMed: 22860138] 
329. Suleiman AB, Soleimanpour S, London J. Youth action for health through youth-led research. J 
Community Pract. 2006; 14:125–45.
330. United Nations (DESA). World Youth Report 2007: Young People’s Transition to Adulthood. 
New York: United Nations; 2007. 
331. United Nations. World Programme of Action on Youth. New York, NY: United Nations; 2010. 
332. UNICEF. The State of the World’s Children Report 2003: Child Participation. 2002. http://
www.unicef.org/adolescence/files/pub_sowc03_en.pdf (accessed April 12, 2015)
333. Dahl RE. Adolescent brain development: a period of vulnerabilities and opportunities. Keynote 
address. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2004; 1021:1–22. [PubMed: 15251869] 
Patton et al.
Page 71
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 72 (native text) -----
334. Lansdown, G. Rights based approach to programming: implications for children. 2005. http://
www.savethechildren.org.uk.proxy.library.vcu.edu/sites/default/files/docs/
Whats_the_Difference_1.pdf (accessed April 9, 2015)
335. Wong NT, Zimmerman MA, Parker EA. A typology of youth participation and empowerment for 
child and adolescent health promotion. Am J Community Psychol. 2010; 46:100–14. [PubMed: 
20549334] 
336. Gibbs A, Campbell C, Maimane S, Nair Y. Mismatches between youth aspirations and 
participatory HIV/AIDS programmes in South Africa. Afr J AIDS Res. 2010; 9:153–63. 
[PubMed: 25860524] 
337. Maticka-Tyndale E, Barnett JP. Peer-led interventions to reduce HIV risk of youth: A review. Eval 
Program Plann. 2010; 33:98–112. [PubMed: 19647874] 
338. Hochberg Z, Belsky J. Evo-devo of human adolescence: beyond disease models of early puberty. 
BMC Med. 2013; 11:113. [PubMed: 23627891] 
339. Akinfaderin-Agurau, F., Fashola, T. What business do youth have making HIV and AIDS laws in 
Nigeria?. 2011. http://pubs.iied.org/pdfs/G03196.pdf (accessed April 2, 2015)
340. Jacquez F, Vaughn LM, Wagner E. Youth as partners, participants or passive recipients: A review 
of children and adolescents in community-based participatory research (CBPR). Am J 
Community Psychol. 2013; 51:176–89. [PubMed: 22718087] 
341. Yi J, Kim MA, An S. The experiences of Korean young adult survivors of childhood cancer a 
Photovoice study. Qual Health Res. 2015; published online Aug 11, 2015. doi: 
10.1177/1049732315599374
342. Findholt NE, Michael YL, Jerofke LJ, Brogoitti VW. Environmental influences on children’s 
physical activity and eating habits in a rural Oregon County. Am J Health Promot. 2011; 26:e74–
85. [PubMed: 22040399] 
343. Dakin EK, Parker SN, Amell JW, Rogers BS. Seeing with our own eyes: Youth in Mathare, Kenya 
use photovoice to examine individual and community strengths. Qual Soc Work. 2015; 14:170–
92.
344. Findholt NE, Michael YL, Davis MM. Photovoice engages rural youth in childhood obesity 
prevention. Public Health Nurs. 2011; 28:186–92. [PubMed: 21732973] 
345. Shaw A, Brady B, McGrath B, Brennan MA, Dolan P. Understanding youth civic engagement: 
debates, discourses, and lessons from practice. Community Dev J. 2014; 45:300–16.
346. Kaplan AM, Haenlein M. Users of the world, unite! The challenges and opportunities of Social 
Media. Bus Horiz. 2010; 53:59–68.
347. Brandtzæg, PB., Haugstveit, IM., Lüders, M., Følstad, A. Participation barriers to youth civic 
engagement in social media. Ninth International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media; 
Oxford, England. May 26–29, 2015; 
348. Campbell C, Gibbs A, Maimane S, Nair Y, Sibiya Z. Youth participation in the fight against AIDS 
in South Africa: from policy to practice. J Youth Stud. 2009; 12:93–109.
349. Coates D, Howe D. The importance and benefits of youth participation in mental health settings 
from the perspective of the headspace Gosford Youth Alliance in Australia. Child Youth Serv 
Rev. 2014; 46:294–99.
350. Harden A, Oakley A, Oliver S. Peer-delivered health promotion for young people: a systematic 
review of different study designs. Health Educ J. 2001; 60:339–53.
351. Iwasaki Y. Reflection on learnings from engaging and working with high-risk, marginalized 
youth. Relat Child Youth Care Pract. 2014; 27:24–35.
352. Villa-Torres L, Svanemyr J. Ensuring youth’s right to participation and promotion of youth 
leadership in the development of sexual and reproductive health policies and programs. J Adolesc 
Health. 2015; 56:S51–57. [PubMed: 25528979] 
353. Paterson BL, Panessa C. Engagement as an ethical imperative in harm reduction involving at-risk 
youth. Int J Drug Policy. 2008; 19:24–32. [PubMed: 18164609] 
354. Garcia AP, Minkler M, Cardenas Z, Grills C, Porter C. Engaging homeless youth in community-
based participatory research: a case study from Skid Row, Los Angeles. Health Promot Pract. 
2014; 15:18–27. [PubMed: 23384969] 
Patton et al.
Page 72
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 73 (native text) -----
355. Bell, J., Vromen, A., Collin, P. Rewriting the rules for youth participation: inclusion and diversity 
in government and community decision making. 2008. http://www.uws.edu.au/__data/assets/
pdf_file/0009/476343/rewriting_the_rules_for_youth_participation.pdf (accessed April 9, 2015)
356. Bonita R, Magnusson R, Bovet P, et al. Country actions to meet UN commitments on non-
communicable diseases: a stepwise approach. Lancet. 2013; 381:575–84. [PubMed: 23410607] 
357. Kraak VI, Swinburn B, Lawrence M, Harrison P. An accountability framework to promote 
healthy food environments. Public Health Nutr. 2014; 17:2467–83. [PubMed: 24564894] 
358. United Nations. Synthesis report of the Secretary-General on the post-2015 sustainable 
development agenda. New York, NY: United Nations; 2014. The road to dignity by 2030: ending 
poverty, transforming all lives and protecting the planet. 
359. Collins C, Coates TJ, Szekeres G. Accountability in the global response to HIV: measuring 
progress, driving change. AIDS. 2008; 22:S105–11. [PubMed: 18641477] 
360. Beaglehole R, Bonita R, Ezzati M, et al. NCD Countdown 2025: accountability for the 25 × 25 
NCD mortality reduction target. Lancet. 2014; 384:105–07. [PubMed: 25012115] 
361. Haddad L, Achadi E, Bendech MA, et al. The Global Nutrition Report 2014: actions and 
accountability to accelerate the world’s progress on nutrition. J Nutr. 2015; 145:663–71. 
[PubMed: 25740908] 
362. Patton GC, Coffey C, Cappa C, et al. Health of the world’s adolescents: a synthesis of 
internationally comparable data. Lancet. 2012; 379:1665–75. [PubMed: 22538181] 
363. WHO. Global Reference List of 100 Core Health Indicators. Geneva: World Health Organization; 
2015. 
364. de Andrade LOM, Pellegrini Filho A, Solar O, et al. Social determinants of health, universal 
health coverage, and sustainable development: case studies from Latin American countries. 
Lancet. 2015; 385:1343–51. [PubMed: 25458716] 
365. Kraak VI, Story M. An accountability evaluation for the industry’s responsible use of brand 
mascots and licensed media characters to market a healthy diet to American children. Obes Rev. 
2015; 16:433–53. [PubMed: 25875469] 
366. Beaglehole R, Bonita R, Horton R. Independent global accountability for NCDs. Lancet. 2013; 
381:602–05. [PubMed: 23410610] 
367. Galati AJ. Onward to 2030: sexual and reproductive health and rights in the context of the 
Sustainable Development Goals. Guttmacher Pol Rev. 2015; 18:77–84.
Patton et al.
Page 73
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 74 (native text) -----
Panel 1
Messages, opportunities, and challenges
Key messages
•
Investments in adolescent health and wellbeing bring a triple dividend of 
benefits now, into future adult life, and for the next generation of children.
•
Adolescents are biologically, emotionally, and developmentally primed for 
engagement beyond their families. We must create the opportunities to 
meaningfully engage with them in all aspects of their lives.
•
Inequities, including those linked to poverty and gender, shape all aspects of 
adolescent health and wellbeing: strong multisectoral actions are needed to 
grow the resources for health and wellbeing and offer second chances to the 
most disadvantaged.
•
Adolescents and young adults face unprecedented social, economic, and 
cultural change. We must transform our health, education, family support, and 
legal systems to keep pace with these changes.
Outstanding opportunities
•
Guaranteeing and supporting access to free, quality secondary education for 
all adolescents presents the single best investment for health and wellbeing.
•
Tackling preventable and treatable adolescent health problems including 
infectious diseases, undernutrition, HIV, sexual and reproductive health, 
injury, and violence will bring huge social and economic benefits. This is key 
to bringing a grand global convergence in health in all countries by 2030.
•
The most powerful actions for adolescent health and wellbeing are 
intersectoral, multilevel, and multi-component: information and broadband 
technologies present an exceptional opportunity for building capacity within 
sectors and coordinating actions between them.
•
Establishing systems for the training, mentoring, and participation of youth 
health advocates has the potential to transform traditional models of health-
care delivery to create adolescent-responsive health systems.
Challenges ahead
•
Rapid global rises in adolescent health risks for later-life non-communicable 
diseases will require an unprecedented extent of coordination across sectors 
from the global to the local level.
•
Non-communicable diseases of adolescents including mental and substance 
use disorders, and chronic physical illnesses are becoming the dominant 
health problems of this age group. Substantial investment in the health-care 
system and approaches to prevention are required.
Patton et al.
Page 74
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 75 (native text) -----
•
Health information systems to support actions in adolescent health remain 
weak: greater harmonisation and broadening of data collection systems to 
neglected problems and younger ages will be needed.
•
Inequalities in health and wellbeing are evident in socially and economically 
marginalised adolescents, including ethnic minorities, refugees, young 
offenders, Indigenous, and LGBT adolescents; engagement of adolescents 
and reconfiguration of service systems to ensure equity of access regardless of 
sex, ethnic, or socioeconomic status will be essential.
Patton et al.
Page 75
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 76 (native text) -----
Panel 2
Definitions of adolescence and young adulthood
Adolescence is defined by WHO as between 10 and 19 years, while youth refers to 15–24 
years. Young people refers to the 10–24-year-old age group, as does the composite term 
adolescents and young adults. This is the age group and term that is used through the 
Commission report.
Emerging adulthood has been used to describe the phase of life from the late teens to the 
late twenties when an individual acquires some of the characteristics of adulthood 
without having reached the milestones that historically define fully fledged adulthood.
The Convention on the Rights of the Child (1989) defines a child as below the age of 18 
years, unless majority is attained earlier under the laws applicable to the child.
The legal age of majority, the point at which an individual is considered an adult, in many 
countries is 18 years. In law there is no single definition of adulthood but rather a 
collection of laws that bestow the status of adulthood at differing ages for different 
activities. These include laws related to the age of consent, the minimum age that young 
people can legally work, leave school, drive, buy alcohol, marry, be held accountable for 
criminal action, and the age young people are deemed able to make medical decisions.
When reporting age-disaggregated data, the 10–24-year-old age range is increasingly 
divided into 5-year age categories. Early adolescence refers to 10–14 years, late 
adolescence to 15–19 years, and young adulthood to 20–24 years.
Patton et al.
Page 76
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 77 (native text) -----
Panel 3
Psychological and emotional development through adolescence
Early adolescence (10–14 years) is biologically dominated by puberty and the effects of 
the rapid rise in pubertal hormones on body morphology, and sexual and brain 
development. Adolescence is a time of remodelling of the brain’s reward system. 
Psychologically it is characterised by low resistance to peer influences, low levels of 
future orientation, and low risk perception, often leading to increases in risk taking 
behaviour and poor self-regulation. It is a time of identity formation and development of 
new interests including emerging interest in sexual and romantic relationships. School 
and family environments are critical social contexts during this period.
Late adolescence (15–19 years) is also characterised by pubertal maturation, especially in 
boys, but in ways that are less visually obvious. At this time the brain continues to be 
extremely developmentally active, particularly in terms of the development of the 
prefrontal cortex and the increased connectivity between brain networks. This later phase 
in adolescent brain development brings continued development of executive and self-
regulatory skills, leading to greater future orientation and an increased ability to weigh up 
the short-term and long-term implications of decisions. Family influences become 
distinctly different during this phase of life, as many adolescents enjoy greater autonomy, 
even if they still live with their families. Likewise, education settings remain important, 
although not all adolescents are still engaged in school at this age, especially in low-
income and middle-income countries.
Young adulthood (typically 20–24 years) is accompanied by maturation of the prefrontal 
cortex and associated reasoning and self-regulatory functions. It marks the end of a 
period of high brain plasticity associated with adolescence whereby the final phase of the 
organisation of the adult brain occurs. This often corresponds to the adoption of adult 
roles and responsibilities, including entering the workforce or tertiary education, 
marriage, childbearing, and economic independence. Secular trends in many developed 
nations point towards an increase in the age that many of these adult roles are attained, if 
they are attained at all.
Patton et al.
Page 77
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 78 (native text) -----
Panel 4
Country case study on legal frameworks for child marriage
Child marriage is common in India, declining very slowly. 47% of women are married 
before 18 years. The highest prevalence is in five states: Madhya Pradesh (73%), Andhra 
Pradesh (71%), Rajasthan (68%), Bihar (67%), and Uttar Pradesh (64%). The urban–
rural differential is substantial, with rural girls marrying younger than 18 years at nearly 
twice the rate of urban girls. Girls marrying before 18 years report physical violence 
twice as often and sexual violence three times as often as those marrying later. The 
Prohibition of Child Marriage Act set the legal age of marriage at 18 years for girls and 
21 years for boys. The Compulsory Registration of Marriages Act requires registration of 
all marriages across India. Close examination of the law reveals many customary and 
religious loopholes. Each religious community has separate personal status laws which 
over-ride national legislation in matters relating to the family, including marriage. 80% of 
the Indian population, including Hindus, Sikhs, Buddhists, and Jains, are governed by the 
Hindu Marriage Act, which validates marriages, once solemnised, even for parties under 
18 years. Under Muslim personal law, marriage can occur at the age of puberty. The 
Prohibition of Child Marriage Act does not prevent or criminalise these marriages, it only 
makes them voidable at the option of a contracting party. In addition, there is an explicit 
exception for Muslim marriage where the voidable provision only applies when a girl is 
under 15 years at the time of marriage. The Compulsory Registration of Marriages Act 
“does not affect any right recognised or acquired by any party to the marriage under law, 
custom or usage”, meaning religious marriages are also exempt from registration. The 
Government of India has also filed a reservation to Article 16(2) of the Convention on the 
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, which mandates compulsory 
registration of marriages stating, “...the Republic of India declares that though in 
principle it fully supports the principle of compulsory registration of marriages, it is not 
practical in a vast country like India with its variety of customs, religions, and level of 
literacy”.
Patton et al.
Page 78
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 79 (native text) -----
Panel 5
Graduated driving licences balance protection and autonomy
Australia, New Zealand, and many US states have introduced graduated driving licences. 
Restrictions on adolescent drivers and those without requisite levels of driving experience 
are intended to address the disproportionately high numbers of teenage automobile 
accidents, injuries, and fatalities. In California, for example, a three-step process to 
obtaining a full driving licence recognises the increased risk associated with peer 
influence and alcohol consumption during this period. The first stage requires all teenage 
drivers to complete 50 h of driving while supervised by an adult over the age of 25 years, 
including 6 h of a driver training course. Completion of this stage must be certified in 
writing by the young person’s parent or guardian. In the subsequent second stage, which 
lasts 12 months, those under 18 years old are prohibited from driving passengers under 
20 years old or between 2300 h and 0500 h, unless accompanied by a licensed driver 
aged 25 years or older. This reflects concerns about peer influences while driving. A full 
driving licence is only awarded as a third stage of graduation if the driver completes the 
second stage without any court-ordered driving restrictions, suspensions, or probations on 
their record. In parallel, up until the age of 21 years, a zero tolerance law prohibits any 
alcohol consumption prior to driving. An evaluation across 43 US states suggests an 18–
21% reduction in the involvement of 16 year olds in crashes in those states with the most 
extensive graduated driving licence programmes. The greatest reductions were seen in 16 
year olds, where a strict permit stage was associated with a 58% reduction in fatal crash 
risks with similar reductions for injury-associated crashes. The success of graduated 
approaches for driving suggests consideration should now be given to applying graduated 
approaches to other aspects of adolescent policy, such as alcohol and other licit substance 
use, particularly where similar public health concerns are apparent.
Patton et al.
Page 79
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 80 (native text) -----
Panel 6
Second chances for young offenders
Adolescents and young adults are more often both the victims and perpetrators of 
criminal offences than older age groups. Offending in the young might be increasing in 
many places, with urbanisation a contributing factor. Many offences occur within the 
context of gangs, where peer influence is a major contributor. Young offenders have some 
of the worst health profiles of any group of adolescents and young adults. In high-income 
countries, deaths of young offenders are around ten times higher than in other adolescents 
due largely to drug overdose, suicide, accidental injury, and homicide. A separation of 
youth from adult justice systems began in high-income countries in the late 19th century 
with a rationale of acting in the best interest of the child. The UN Convention of the 
Rights of the Child has more recently stressed the importance of a consciousness of rights 
within the operation of youth justice systems. In particular, it stressed the use of detention 
and imprisonment as measures of last resort. Yet in many settings, political pressures 
have re-emerged for adolescents to be held fully accountable for their actions. In many 
places, custodial detention (incarceration), including pre-trial detention, is still used with 
first-time adolescent and young adult offenders, even for minor offences such as cannabis 
or other substance use, shop-lifting or minor theft—even though most first-time offenders 
do not reoffend.
Alternative approaches that provide second chances, promote emotional learning, and 
ultimately better life (including health) outcomes have been implemented in a range of 
jurisdictions. Diversion programmes have been designed both to keep adolescents out of 
the criminal justice system and, when tied with family interventions, to reduce 
recidivism. Restorative justice approaches address the needs of both victims and 
offenders, and bring offenders, victims, families, and sometimes other community 
members together. They too reduce rates of recidivism. Other approaches to protect 
young offenders include the use of welfare-oriented hearings for younger offenders, 
ensuring that convictions before 18 years can later lapse from an individual’s criminal 
record, and extending youth justice approaches to the age of 21 years for those 
considered emotionally immature.
Patton et al.
Page 80
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 81 (native text) -----
Panel 7
Categorisation of country health profiles for adolescents
We aggregated the 236 causes of disability-adjusted life-years (DALYs) and deaths 
among 10–24 year olds from the 2013 Global Burden of Disease study into nine 
categories reflecting changing disease burden with progression through the 
epidemiological transition. This resulted in three broad categories of health problems as 
summarised in figure 7. Countries were then classified into one of three categories 
depending on their pattern of disease burden, using the definitions below, and shown in 
figure 8:
•
Multi-burden countries were those with little evidence of having yet passed 
through an epidemiological transition. DALYs due to infectious diseases, 
nutritional deficiency and sexual and reproductive health, together with HIV, 
were grouped. Countries with a total DALY rate within this group of 
conditions of 2500 per 100 000 per year or more were defined as higher 
burden multiple problem.
•
Injury excess countries were those where the burden of disease showed 
evidence of having passed through the first phase of the epidemiological 
transition but where rates of preventable injury remained high. We combined 
the DALY rates for unintentional injuries and violence and defined a group of 
countries with an injury burden of 2500 per 100 000 per year or more and 
DALY rates for infectious diseases, nutritional deficiencies, and sexual and 
reproductive health and HIV less than 2500 per 100 000 per year.
•
NCD predominant countries were defined as those with DALY rates of less 
than 2500 per 100 000 for both groups, namely infectious diseases, nutritional 
deficiencies, sexual and reproductive health and HIV, as well as for 
unintentional injuries and violence.
Further details are provided in supplementary text box 4 in the online appendix.
Patton et al.
Page 81
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 82 (native text) -----
Panel 8
Priority health actions for 10–24 year olds in Nigeria
Sexual and reproductive health
Adolescent fecundity and maternal health, new HIV infections, and HIV morbidity and 
mortality
•
Comprehensive sexuality education (in and out of school)
•
Promotion of condom use
•
Voluntary male circumcision
•
Contraception, abortion care, and maternal health services
•
HIV testing, treatment, and care
•
Enforcement of legislation prohibiting child marriage
•
Increase participation in education
Infectious diseases
Malaria morbidity and mortality, tuberculosis, neglected tropical diseases, meningitis, 
pneumonia
•
Access to quality health services for diagnosis and treatment
•
Ensure completion of childhood vaccination, catch-up vaccination, and 
additional vaccines (eg, human papilloma virus, meningococcal)
•
Improved water, sanitation and hygiene, nutrition, and provision of bednets
Unintentional injury
Road traffic accidents
•
Legislation for graduated licensing, motorcycle helmet use, speed control, 
pedestrian safety measures, and alcohol and driving control
•
Access to high quality trauma care
Physical disorders and non-communicable disease risks
Chronic physical disorders, overweight, and obesity
•
Adolescent-friendly health services
•
Prevention of overweight and obesity through taxation of unhealthy foods, 
restriction of fast food advertising, and promotion of physical activity in 
school and in the community.
Patton et al.
Page 82
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 83 (native text) -----
Panel 9
Youth advocacy in health
Education as a Vaccine, a Nigerian non-governmental organisation focused on the needs 
of vulnerable children and adolescents, supported a Youth Advocacy Group (YAG) of ten 
young Nigerians, aged 18–24, to educate peers, adult gatekeepers, and policy makers in 
sexual and reproductive health policies for young people. In 2010, a draft national HIV/
AIDS anti-discrimination bill was tabled that failed to take into account the stigma and 
discrimination faced by young people. The YAG developed and presented a position 
paper to the House of Representatives, highlighting youth-specific recommendations.
A specific goal was to ensure that the bill made reference to protecting the rights of 
young people. The YAG then actively engaged other youth across Nigeria in support of 
their recommendations. The YAG created a video screened at university campus 
education events in three states. At each event, a YAG member led discussions on the 
policy.
A petition calling for the inclusion of the youth recommendations collected 1500 
signatures. Once the bill passed the House, with the YAG recommendations included, the 
group generated postcards from nearly 2200 young people in advocating with the Senate. 
The bill was signed in 2015 and included language recommended by the YAG. The 
experience illustrated common challenges for young advocates. They faced a culture that 
discouraged young people from speaking out, based on an erroneous perception that they 
lacked the knowledge and expertise for a meaningful contribution. Youth groups across 
the country were poorly resourced making communication difficult. Lastly, lack of 
financial support limited the capacity to engage other youth. Despite the challenges YAG 
members gained leadership skills and a capacity to, in the words of one member, “be 
responsible not just for myself but for others”.
Patton et al.
Page 83
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 84 (native text) -----
Figure 1. Adolescents and young adults as a proportion of country population in 2013
Percentage of total country population aged 10–24 years. Data from Global Health Data 
Exchange.69
Patton et al.
Page 84
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 85 (native text) -----
Figure 2. Changing proximal social determinants of health across the life course
During adolescence, social determinants from outside the family become greater, with major 
influences of peers, media, education, and the beginning of workplace influences. 
Community and structural determinants remain consistently influential, as shown by the 
background shading.
Patton et al.
Page 85
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 86 (native text) -----
Figure 3. Educational participation of 15–24 year olds for 188 countries
(A) Mean years of education attained in women and girls aged 15–24 years in 2013. (B) 
Mean years of education attained in men and boys aged 15–24 years in 2013. Data from 
Global Health Data Exchange.69
Patton et al.
Page 86
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 87 (native text) -----
Figure 4. Country-level association between adolescent birth rates and years of education in 
2010–12
Each additional year of education is associated with an average of nine fewer births per 1000 
adolescent girls per country. GNI=gross national income.
Patton et al.
Page 87
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 88 (native text) -----
Figure 5. Association between health at 18 years of age and level of education in the Cebu cohort 
study, Philippines
Data from Global Health Data Exchange.69 *These associations were not significant.
Patton et al.
Page 88
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 89 (native text) -----
Figure 6. 
Conceptual framework for defining health needs and actions in adolescents and young adults
Patton et al.
Page 89
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 90 (native text) -----
Figure 7. Country categorisation based on adolescent burden of disease
Categorisation of countries into three groups according to adolescent burden of disease and 
reflecting passage through epidemiological transition. DALYs=disability-adjusted life-years. 
NCD=non-communicable diseases.
Patton et al.
Page 90
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 91 (native text) -----
Figure 8. Country categorisation based on patterns of DALYs in 10–24 year olds
(A) Population of 10–24 year olds across country categories. (B) Total DALYs across 
country groups. DALY=disability-adjusted life-years. NCD=non-communicable diseases. 
Data from Global Health Data Exchange.69
Patton et al.
Page 91
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 92 (native text) -----
Figure 9. Changes in disease burden in 10–24 year olds between 1990 and 2013
Disease burden changes across the three country categories; NCD predominant, injury 
excess, and multi-burden. DALY=disability-adjusted life-years. SRH=sexual and 
reproductive health. NCD=non-communicable diseases. Data from Global Health Data 
Exchange.69
Patton et al.
Page 92
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 93 (native text) -----
Figure 10. Patterns of disease burden by age and sex across 10–24 year olds
Patterns of disease burden in different age groups across the three country categories; NCD 
predominant, injury excess, and multi-burden. DALY=disability-adjusted life-years. 
SRH=sexual and reproductive health. NCD=non-communicable diseases. Data from Global 
Health Data Exchange.69
Patton et al.
Page 93
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 94 (native text) -----
Figure 11. Summary profile of disease burden in 10–24 year olds across Chinese provinces
(A) DALYs per 100 000 19–24 year olds in 2013. (B) Annual percentage rate of change in 
total DALYs 2000–13. (C) Categorisation of Chinese provinces by major contributors to 
disease burden. (D) Contributors to disease burden in 10–24 year olds across Chinese 
provinces. DALY=disability-adjusted life-years. NCD=noncommunicable diseases.
Patton et al.
Page 94
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 95 (native text) -----
Figure 12. Overweight and obesity in 10–24 year olds between 1990 and 2013
(A) Prevalence in 2013. (B) Annual percentage change from 1990 to 2013. NCD=non-
communicable diseases. Data from Global Health Data Exchange.69
Patton et al.
Page 95
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 96 (native text) -----
Figure 13. Profile of adolescent fecundity
(A) Births per 1000 girls aged 15–19 years in 2010. (B) Percentage change in births per 
1000 girls aged 15–19 years per year between 1990–95 and 2005–10. NCD=non-
communicable diseases. Data from Global Health Data Exchange.69
Patton et al.
Page 96
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 97 (native text) -----
Figure 14. DALY rate from infectious diseases per 100 000 adolescents in multi burden countries
DALY=disability-adjusted life-years. Data from Global Health Data Exchange.69
Patton et al.
Page 97
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 98 (native text) -----
Figure 15. Health outcomes for 10–24 year olds in Nigeria
(A) DALYs per 100 000 adolescents aged 10–24 years, by cause and sex, 1990–2013. (B) 
Proportion of DALYs across 9 categories by sex in adolescents aged 10–24 years, 1990–
2013. (C) Deaths per 100 000 adolescents aged 10–24 years per year, 1990–2013. (D) 
Causes of DALYs in adolescents aged 10–24 years, 2013, by sex. DALYs=disability-
adjusted life years. NTD=neglected tropical diseases. PEM=protein energy malnutrition.
Patton et al.
Page 98
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 99 (native text) -----
Figure 16. An overview of Nigeria’s health profiles for 10–24 year olds
Social determinants. (i) Currently married women and girls aged 15–19 years. (ii) Birth rate 
in adolescent girls. (iii) Mean years of education attained in adolescents aged 15–24 years. 
(iv) Unemployment in adolescents aged 15–24 years. (B) Health risks. (i) Overweight and 
obesity in adolescents aged 10–24 years. (ii) Daily tobacco smoking in adolescents aged 10–
24 years. (iii) Binge drinking in the past 12 months in adolescents aged 10–24 years. (iv) 
Lifetime use of injectable drugs in adolescents aged 10–24 years. (v) Adolescents aged 10–
24 years reporting sex before age 15 years (2004–14). (vi) Adolescents aged 10–24 years 
reporting condom use at last occasion of high risk sex (2004–14). (vii) Intimate partner 
violence in adolescents aged 10–24 years (2013). (viii) Unmet need for contraception in 
women and girls aged 10–24 years, married or in civil union (2009–14). DALYs=disability-
adjusted life-years. NCD=non-communicable diseases.
Patton et al.
Page 99
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 100 (native text) -----
Figure 17. 
Conceptual framework of the essential elements in meaningful youth engagement
Patton et al.
Page 100
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 101 (native text) -----
Figure 18. Photovoice: using images to communicate and advocate
Photovoice is a participatory action research strategy commonly used with disadvantaged 
and marginalised groups. Photos are used to document personal and community issues and 
provide a basis for storytelling. It is a powerful tool for youth engagement, raising awareness 
of important aspects of the lives of adolescents. It is a useful way of levelling power 
differentials between adults and young participants. The strategy can be a means to catalyse 
community action, as the development of a story narrative facilitates the engagement of all 
participants in engaging in social change. It has been used across a wide variety of settings 
including health care (eg, young survivors of childhood cancer in South Korea), prevention 
and health promotion (eg, obesity prevention in the USA, reproductive health and 
empowerment programme targeting married adolescent girls in Ethiopia), and in youth 
engagement more broadly (adolescents identifying community strengths in Kenya). The 
images powerfully engage public interest in the daily lives and health challenges faced by 
young people.
Patton et al.
Page 101
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 102 (native text) -----
Figure 19. 
Four-step accountability framework for adolescent health and wellbeing
Patton et al.
Page 102
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 103 (native text) -----
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Patton et al.
Page 103
Table 1
Summary of school effects on adolescent health from a systematic review of reviews of observational studies
Sexual health
Violence
Tobacco
Alcohol
Drugs
Value added education
No or inconsistent evidence
Limited evidence for some 
benefit
Rigorous evidence for some 
benefit
Rigorous evidence for some 
benefit
Rigorous evidence for some 
benefit
Student connection to school or 
teachers
No or inconsistent evidence
Limited evidence for some 
benefit
Limited evidence for some 
benefit
Limited evidence for some 
benefit
Limited evidence for some 
benefit
School rules or policies
No or inconsistent evidence
Limited evidence for some 
benefit
No or inconsistent evidence
No or inconsistent evidence
No or inconsistent evidence
Physical environment
No or inconsistent evidence
Limited evidence for some 
benefit
No or inconsistent evidence
Limited evidence for some 
benefit
Limited evidence for some 
benefit
Student norms
No or inconsistent evidence
Limited evidence for some 
benefit
Limited evidence for some 
benefit
Limited evidence for some 
benefit
No or inconsistent evidence
Student socio-demographics
No or inconsistent evidence
Limited evidence for some 
benefit
No or inconsistent evidence
No or inconsistent evidence
No or inconsistent evidence
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.


----- Page 104 (native text) -----
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Patton et al.
Page 104
Table 2
Strength of evidence for effects of media and marketing on adolescent health risks
Tobacco use
Alcohol use
Obesity
Sexual risks
Distal exposures
Point of sale advertising (POS)
Strong
Moderate
Strong (food choice)
NA
Imagery in films/movies
Strong
Strong
Moderate (amount of food)
NA
Imagery in television
Moderate
Moderate
Strong (food choice/amount)
Strong (food purchase request)
Moderate
Music videos/MTV
No studies
Moderate
No studies
Low
Cartoon media characters
No studies
No studies
Moderate (food choice & purchase request)
No studies
Magazines
Moderate
Moderate
No studies
No studies
Outdoor advertising
NA
Moderate
No studies
No studies
Imagery on Internet
Low
NA
No studies
Low
Online social networking sites
Low
NA
No studies
NA
Concessional stands at events
No studies
Moderate
No studies
No studies
Radio advertising
No studies
Low
No studies
No studies
Composite (multiple media)
No studies
Moderate
No studies
No studies
Advertising (media unspecified)
Moderate
No studies
Strong (food choice/amount)
No studies
Intermediate exposures
Ownership of promotional items
Strong
Moderate
No studies
No studies
Approval of advertising
Moderate
No studies
No studies
No studies
Receptivity to marketing
Moderate
No studies
No studies
No studies
Media use
No studies
NA
Strong
No studies
Favourite star smoking
Moderate
No studies
No studies
No studies
Favourite ad/brand recall
Moderate
No studies
No studies
No studies
Attending a promotional event
Low
No studies
No studies
No studies
Strong=strong evidence level based on consistency, temporality, dose-response in cohort studies or experimental study/meta-analysis. 
Moderate=moderate evidence level based on consistency and temporality from cohort studies. Low=low evidence level based on cross-sectional 
surveys. NA=limited/insufficient evidence.
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.


----- Page 105 (native text) -----
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Patton et al.
Page 105
Table 3
Comparison by age (years) of adolescent legal frameworks across six countries
India
Lebanon
Nigeria
Peru
Sweden
USA
Age of majority*
15–18
18
21
18
18
18–21
 Customary or religious law exception
Yes
Yes
Yes
None
None
None
 Other exceptions
Marriage
Marriage
Marriage
Marriage
State varience
Minimum working age
None
13
None
14
13–18
14
 Customary or religious law exception
None
None
None
None
None
None
 Other exceptions
Nature of work
Work nature
Minimum drinking age
18 or Illegal
16 or Illegal
18 or Illegal
18
None–20
21
 Customary or religious law exception
Yes
Yes
Yes
None
None
None
 Other exceptions
State varience
Alcohol strength
Minimum smoking age
18
None
None
18
18
None–20
 Customary or religious law exception
None
None
None
None
None
None
 Other exceptions
State variance
Age of criminal responsibility†
7
7
None
12–18
15
6–14
 Customary or religious law exception
None
None
Yes
None
None
None
 Other exceptions
State variance
Minimum age of marriage
Puberty–21
9–18
9–18
16
18
16–21
 Customary or religious law exception
Yes
Yes
Yes
None
None
None
 Other exceptions
Gender
Gender
Gender
Special reason
None State variance
Heterosexual age of sexual consent
None–18
None–15
Puberty–18
14
15
16–18
 Customary or religious law exception
Yes
Yes
Yes
None
None
 Other exceptions
Marriage, gender
Maturity
State variance
State variance, gender
Same-sex age of sexual consent
No information
No information
No information
14
15
16–18
 Customary or religious law exception
None
None
None
None
None
None
 Other exceptions
Legally restricted
Legally restricted
Legally restricted
State variance
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.


----- Page 106 (native text) -----
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Patton et al.
Page 106
India
Lebanon
Nigeria
Peru
Sweden
USA
Age of consent to medical treatment
12 or 18
18
16
18
18
12–18
 Customary or religious law exception
None
None
None
None
None
None
 Other exceptions
Maturity
State variance
Age to access contraceptives‡
None
18
Unknown
None
None
Varies
 Customary or religious law exception
Yes
Yes
Yes
None
None
None
 Other exception
Provider discretion
Marriage
State variance
Age to access abortion§
18
Illegal
Illegal
Illegal
None
18
 Customary or religious law exception
Yes
Yes
Yes
None
None
None
 Other exception
Marriage
Mother’s life
Mother’s life
Mother’s health¶
State variance
Age of consent to HIV test‖
None
Unknown
18
18
None
12
 Customary or religious law exception
None
None
None
None
None
None
 Other exception
State variance
Range of ages reflects variation within a country, such as by state.
*Age of majority: the age at which a person, formerly a minor or infant, is recognized by law to be an adult.
†Age of criminal responsibility: the age at which an individual can be seen as capable of committing a criminal offence and stand trial and be convicted.
‡Age to access contraceptives: the age at which adolescents or minors can access contraceptives without parental consent.
§Age to access abortion: the age at which adolescents or minors can consent to an abortion without parental consent.
‖Age of consent to an HIV test: the age at which adolescents or minors can consent to an HIV test without parental consent.
¶Avoid grave and permanent harm to the woman.
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.


----- Page 107 (native text) -----
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Patton et al.
Page 107
Table 4
Evidence of effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of sexual and reproductive health interventions, including 
those for HIV
Key findings
Comments
Cost-Recommendation
effectiveness
School-based interventions
Comprehensive sex education; A 
curriculum-based approach that 
aims to provide young people with 
the knowledge, attitudes, and 
skills to make informed decisions 
about their sexuality and sexual 
and reproductive health. Some 
incorporate contraceptive services 
or encourage young people to use 
contraception
Knowledge and attitudes: high 
quality evidence of moderate 
benefit from studies in high-
income countries and countries 
of low income and middle 
income. Both adult-led and 
peer-led interventions have 
shown benefit
Safe-sex behaviours: moderate 
quality evidence of mixed 
impact on service use. 
Significant but minimal 
beneficial impact on safe-sex 
behaviours, including condom 
use, number of sexual partners, 
initiation of first sex and risky 
sexual behavior
STI or HIV prevalence and 
incidence: no evidence of 
benefit; high-quality evidence 
of some benefit with added 
contraception provision
Pregnancy: high quality 
evidence of benefit of 
combining education and 
contraceptive promotion; 
moderate quality evidence of 
the effectiveness of multi-
component interventions, 
particularly with intensive case 
management by a culturally 
matched social worker
Few studies of 
interventions 
involving provision 
of contraceptives 
in countries of low 
income and middle 
income
Few assess impact 
on biological 
outcomes
Most studies of 
effects on 
pregnancy have 
been in high-
income countries
No evidence of 
heightening 
premature sexual 
activity
Some evidence of cost-
effectiveness in USA and 
Europe
Ensure that all 
adolescents and 
young adults’ 
rights to essential 
health information 
are met, including 
comprehensive 
sexuality education
Abstinence-only education
High-quality evidence that 
abstinence-only education is 
ineffective in preventing HIV, 
incidence of sexually 
transmitted infections and 
adolescent pregnancy
NA
Abstinence-only 
education is not 
recommended
School-based health services: 
these range from fully equipped, 
with permanent medical, nursing, 
and other health staff to nurse 
clinics a few hours per week
Safe-sex behaviours: moderate 
quality evidence of mixed 
impact on contraceptive 
behaviours, more effective if 
on-site provision of 
contraceptives
Pregnancy: some moderate 
quality evidence of benefit if 
contraception provision is on 
site
Most studies in 
high-income 
countries.
In countries of low 
income and middle 
income, linkages 
with health 
services might 
increase uptake of 
some sexual and 
reproductive health 
services
NA
Provision of 
essential resources 
for health in 
schools and easy 
access to 
adolescent health 
services including 
condoms and 
modern 
contraception
Community-based interventions
Generating community support: 
for interventions in schools and 
health services through social 
marketing, public hearings, 
meetings, dialogues, and fairs
Sexually transmitted infection 
or HIV prevalence and 
incidence: South African 
Stepping Stones programme–
showed reductions in herpes 
simplex virus-2 incidence
Pregnancy: some moderate 
quality evidence of benefit 
particularly studies including 
access to sexual and 
reproductive health services
In countries of low 
income and middle 
income, it is likely 
to play a key role 
in the effectiveness 
of interventions in 
other settings
NA
Plays a key role in 
the success of 
interventions 
within other 
settings and should 
feature in multi-
component 
interventions
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.


----- Page 108 (native text) -----
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Patton et al.
Page 108
Key findings
Comments
Cost-Recommendation
effectiveness
Early marriage: some moderate 
quality evidence for the 
effectiveness of integrated 
programmes that focus on 
empowerment and incentives
Positive youth development 
programmes focus on school 
retention and academic success as 
well as social support and skill 
development—eg, family or 
parent engagement, life skills 
training, or peer mentoring
Knowledge and attitudes: some 
moderate quality evidence for 
effect
Safe-sex behaviours: some 
moderate quality evidence 
around use of contraception, 
delayed sexual initiation and 
number of sexual partners
Pregnancy: moderate quality 
evidence of no benefit Early 
marriage: moderate quality 
evidence of mixed impact
Programmes may 
also incorporate 
adolescent 
participation and 
leadership and are 
likely to have 
broad educational 
and social benefits
NA
Promising 
intervention; 
further research is 
needed
Youth-friendly venues in which 
young people access information 
and services that address sexual 
and reproductive health needs
Moderate quality evidence of 
mixed impact on uptake of 
services; ineffective in 
changing safe-sex behaviours, 
HIV or sexually transmitted 
infection prevalence or 
incidence, and adolescent 
pregnancy
Main users are 
often older than the 
target age group
High costs so cost-
effectiveness likely to be 
low
Not recommended 
in current form
Interventions to shift social norms 
around early marriage and 
pregnancy Cash transfers (in 
countries of low income and 
middle income) may be 
unconditional, with payments 
going to individuals who are not 
required to do anything to receive 
these, or conditional, with 
payments tied to risk states (eg, 
remaining sexually transmitted 
infection or HIV free), staying in 
school, or not becoming pregnant
Early marriage: moderate 
quality evidence of mixed 
effect
Safe sex behaviours: some 
moderate quality evidence for 
the impact of both 
unconditional and conditional 
cash transfers
Sexually transmitted infection 
and HIV prevalence and 
incidence: mixed results of 
conditional cash transfers for 
remaining STI or HIV free. A 
programme providing cash 
transfers for young women (the 
Zomba programme) to remain 
in school showed a reduction 
in HIV prevalence at 18-month 
follow-up
Pregnancy: moderate quality 
evidence of some benefit
Early marriage: moderate 
quality evidence for 
interventions that support 
school attendance–eg, 
provision of school uniforms 
and supplies
More research 
needed around 
payment amounts 
and frequency The 
Zomba conditional 
cash transfer 
programme 
decreased teenage 
pregnancy rates 
among girls who 
had previously 
dropped out of 
school, but not 
among schoolgirls
Some evidence of cost-
effectiveness in sub-
Saharan Africa
Promising 
intervention; 
further research is 
needed
Peer education: education 
delivered by young people to their 
peers
Safe-sex behaviours: some 
moderate quality evidence for 
impact in countries of low 
income and middle income of 
programme that include 
provision of contraception
Health service use: moderate 
quality evidence of mixed 
impact in countries of low 
income and middle income
Moderate quality evidence that 
peer education in Europe was 
ineffective in changing 
knowledge and attitudes, 
sexually transmitted infection 
or HIV prevalence and 
incidence, or adolescent 
pregnancy
NA
Promising 
intervention in 
countries of low 
income and middle 
income; further 
research is needed.
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.


----- Page 109 (native text) -----
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Patton et al.
Page 109
Key findings
Comments
Cost-Recommendation
effectiveness
Family-based interventions
Interventions to improve parent–
child communication about sexual 
health and sexuality
Some moderate quality 
evidence of effect on parent–
child communication and safe-
sex behaviours
NA
Should feature in 
multi-component 
interventions
Online interventions
Group and individually tailored 
Internet and computer-based 
theory and behavioural skills-
based interventions
Knowledge and attitudes: high 
quality evidence of moderate 
benefit
Safe-sex behaviours: high 
quality evidence of significant 
but minimal benefits
Sexually transmitted infection 
or HIV prevalence or 
incidence: high quality 
evidence of significant but 
minimal benefits
All studies 
conducted in high-
income countries
NA
Promising 
intervention; 
further research is 
needed, 
particularly in 
countries of low 
income and middle 
income
Promoting universal health coverage
Health service interventions 
involve the provision of 
information and counselling, 
contraception, prenatal and 
postnatal care and delivery, 
abortion services and post-
abortion care, treatment and 
prevention of sexually transmitted 
infections, HIV testing and 
counselling, and care for sexual 
and gender-based violence
Safe-sex behaviours: moderate 
quality evidence of mixed 
impact on contraceptive 
behaviours; some moderate 
quality evidence that making 
services more adolescent 
friendly increases service use
Sexually transmitted infection 
or HIV prevalence or 
incidence: moderate quality 
evidence of ineffectiveness
Quality of provider 
training likely to 
be an important 
factor in the 
success of 
interventions
NA
Health services 
should provide all 
essential health-
care responses, 
including modern 
contraception and 
safe abortion 
regardless of age, 
marital, and 
socioeconomic 
status; providers 
should have the 
skills to provide 
confidential and 
non-judgmental 
care
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.


----- Page 110 (native text) -----
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Patton et al.
Page 110
Table 5
Recommended action bundles for adolescent and young adult health problems and risks
Structural
Social marketing
Community 
interventions including 
family
Electronic 
health, 
mobile 
health
Schools
Health service sector
Sexual and reproductive 
health, including HIV
Legislation
18 years as the 
minimum age of 
marriage
Allow provision of 
contraception to 
legal minors
Legalise abortion
Promote community support 
for sexual and reproductive 
health, and HIV health 
access for adolescents
Cash transfer 
programmes, with 
payments linked to 
staying in school
Positive youth 
development
Peer education
Target 
knowledge, 
attitudes, and 
risk 
behaviours
Quality secondary education 
Comprehensive sexuality education
Safe schools with clean toilets and 
facilities for menstrual care
School-based health services with 
condoms and modern contraceptives
Condoms and 
affordable modern 
contraception including 
long-acting reversible 
contraception
Early HIV and STI 
diagnosis and treatment
Male circumcision
Antenatal, delivery, and 
postnatal care
Transition to adult care 
for HIV
Under-nutrition
Fortification of 
foods—eg, iron 
and folate
Micronutrient 
supplements 
(particularly in 
pregnancy)
Protein-energy 
supplementation
Deworming
Cash transfer programme 
Nutrition education
Micronutrient supplements Healthy 
school meals
Screening and 
micronutrient 
supplementation
Infectious diseases
Deworming
Bednet distribution
HPV vaccination
Deworming
Early identification and 
treatment
Adolescent vaccinations 
(human papilloma 
virus, childhood catch-
up)
Deworming
Bednet distribution
Seasonal malaria 
chemoprevention
Violence
Gun control
Legalise 
homosexuality and 
protect women 
from violence and 
sexual coercion
Youth justice 
reforms to promote 
second chances 
and diversion from 
custody
16 years as the 
minimum age for 
Promote knowledge of the 
effects of violence and 
available services
Promote parent skills and 
parent–child 
communication
Positive youth 
development Promote 
gender equality
Economic empowerment
Group training for 
awareness, knowledge, 
and skills
Multi-component interventions that 
target violent behaviour and 
substance use
Trauma care
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.


----- Page 111 (native text) -----
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Patton et al.
Page 111
Structural
Social marketing
Community 
interventions including 
family
Electronic 
health, 
mobile 
health
Schools
Health service sector
criminal 
responsibility
Unintentional injury
Graduated 
licensing
Mandatory 
helmet wearing
Multi-component 
traffic injury 
control
Promote knowledge of risks
Police enforcement of 
traffi c injury control
Trauma care, including 
first responders (eg, 
ambulances)
Alcohol and illicit drugs
Limit alcohol 
sales to underage
adolescents 
Taxation on 
alcohol
Drink-driving 
legislation
Restrict illicit 
alcohol
Interventions in 
licensed
premises
Diversion from 
youth justiceand 
custody
Graduated 
drinking
Advertising 
restrictions(br/)Campaigns 
to build community 
awareness
Promote parent–child 
communication and 
parenting skills
Needle-syringe exchange 
access Mentoring
Target 
knowledge, 
attitudes, and 
risk 
behaviours
Alcohol-free policies
Risk screening and 
motivational interviewing
Tobacco
Tobacco control 
including 
taxation, pricing, 
and advertising 
control
Youth access 
restrictions
Legislation for 
smoke-free air
Anti-tobacco campaigns
Interventions to promote 
parent skills and parent–
child communication
Text 
messaging 
adjunct to 
quitting
Smoke-free policies Multi-component
Routine screening and 
motivation interviewing 
to promote cessation
Mental disorders and 
suicide
Restriction of 
access to means
Promote adolescent mental 
health literacy
Gatekeeper training
Electronic 
mental health 
interventions
Educational interventions Gatekeeper 
training
School-based mental health services
Practitioner training in 
depression recognition 
and treatment
Routine assessment of 
mental health, including 
self-harm and suicide 
risk
Chronic physical disorders
Peer support initiatives
School-based health services
Promote self-
management
Promote transition to 
adult health care
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.


----- Page 112 (native text) -----
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Patton et al.
Page 112
Structural
Social marketing
Community 
interventions including 
family
Electronic 
health, 
mobile 
health
Schools
Health service sector
Overweight and obesity
Taxation of high-
sugar, high-salt, 
and high-fat 
foods
Front-of-pack 
nutrition labels 
Restriction of fast 
food advertising
Promote physical activity
Create opportunities for 
maintenance of physical 
activity in daily life
Interactive or 
personalised 
feedback 
interventions
Multi-component interventions, 
involving education about healthy diet 
and increasing opportunities for 
physical education
Manage comorbidities 
of obesity
Bold are actions where there is an evidence base and italics represent actions that are promising but without yet a strong evidence base in adolescents and young adults.
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.


----- Page 113 (native text) -----
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Patton et al.
Page 113
Table 6
Indicators of adolescent health status, risks, and determinants with wide coverage and achievable targets for 
2030
Headline indicators
Stratification
2030 targets
Social and structural determinants
Extend secondary education 
completion
Completion of 12 or more years of 
education in 20–24 year olds
Female or male
Rural or urban
Bottom wealth quintile or top 
wealth quintile
80% completion†
Reduce adolescent births
Birth rate per 1000 10–19-year-old 
girls per year
Female or male, married or 
unmarried
Rural or urban
Bottom wealth quintile or top 
wealth quintile
Under 25 births per 1000 
10–19-year-old girls per 
year*
Reduce early marriage
Marriage before 18 years in women 
aged 20–24 years
Rural or urban
Bottom wealth quintile or top 
wealth quintile
Under 10%*
Responsive health services367
15–24 year olds with met needs for 
modern contraception
Age band, married or unmarried
Rural or urban
Bottom wealth quintile or top 
wealth quintile
80% met need
Reduce educational and 
employment marginalisation
Not in employment, education or 
training rates in 20–24 year olds
Female or male
Rural or urban
Bottom wealth quintile or top 
wealth quintile
Under 10%*
Health risks
Reduce tobacco use
Daily smoking in 10–24 year olds
Female or male
Rural or urban
Bottom wealth quintile or top 
wealth quintile
Under 10%*
Reduce risky alcohol use
Binge drinking (>60 gm) in 15–19 
year olds in past 30 days
Female or male
Rural or urban
Bottom wealth quintile or top 
wealth quintile†
Under 10%*
Reduce overweight and obesity
Percentage of 10–24 year olds 
exceeding WHO guidelines for 
overweight
Female or male
Rural or urban
Bottom wealth quintile or top 
wealth quintile
Under 20%*
Reduce undernutrition
Prevalence of iron deficiency 
anaemia in 10–24 year olds
Female or male
Rural or urban
Bottom wealth quintile or top 
wealth quintile
Under 10%*
Burden of disease
Reduce diseases of poverty
DALY estimates of diseases of 
poverty in 10–24 year olds
Female or male
Rural or urban
Bottom wealth quintile or top 
wealth quintile
No country remains 
multi-burden by 2030
Reduce injury and violence
DALY estimates due to unintentional 
injury and violence
Female or male
Rural or urban
Bottom wealth quintile or top 
wealth quintile
No current country 
remains in the injury 
excess category by 2030
Reduce non-communicable 
diseases (including mental 
disorders)
DALY estimates due to non-
communicable diseases
Female or male
Rural or urban
Bottom wealth quintile or top 
wealth quintile
Under 1500 DALYs from 
non-communicable 
diseases per 100 000 10–
24 year olds per year*
DALY=disability-adjusted life-years.
*Based on convergence to best countries in 2015.
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.


----- Page 114 (native text) -----
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Patton et al.
Page 114
†Stratification not available.
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 02.
