

----- Page 1 (ocr) -----
TECHNICAL RESEARCH REPORT
The Eyes Have It:
A Task by Data Type Taxonomy for
Information Visualizations
by B. Shneiderman
T.R. 96-66
Ss Sponsored by
the National Science Foundation
Se <> Engineering Research Center Program,
SS ‘» the University of Maryland,
Harvard University,
‘» and Industry

----- Page 2 (ocr) -----
The Eyes Have It:
A Task by Data Type Taxonomy for Information Visualizations
Ben Shneiderman
Department of Computer Science,
Human-Computer Interaction Laboratory, and Institute for Systems Research
University of Maryland
College Park, Maryland 20742 USA
ben @cs.umd.edu
Abstract: A useful starting point for designing developing an understanding of unexpected patterns
advanced graphical user interfaces is the Visual within the collection (browse) (Marchionini, 1995).
Information-Seeking Mantra: Overview first, zoom Exploring information collections becomes
and filter, then details-on-demand. But this is only a increasingly difficult as the volume grows. A page of
starting point in trying to understand the rich and information is easy to explore, but when the
varied set of information visualizations that have been information becomes the size of a book, or library, or
proposed in recent years. This paper offers a task by even larger, it may be difficult to locate known items
data type taxonomy with seven data types (1-, 2-, 3- or to browse to gain an overview.
dimensional data, temporal and multi-dimensional Designers are just discovering how to use the rapid
data, and tree and network data) and seven tasks and high resolution color displays to present large
(overview, zoom, filter, details-on-demand, relate, amounts of information in orderly and user-controlled
history, and extract). ways. Perceptual psychologists, statisticians, and
graphic designers (Bertin, 1983; Cleveland, 1993;
Everything points to the conclusion that the Tufte, 1983, 1990) offer valuable guidance about
phrase ‘the language of art’ is more than a presenting static information, but the opportunity for
loose metaphor, that even to describe the eyoame displays rakes user interface designers well
visible world in images we need a developed eyond current wiscom.
system of schemata. 2. Visual Information Seeking Mantra
. . The success of direct-manipulation interfaces is
E. H. Gombrich Art and illusion, 1959 (p. 76) indicative of the power of using computers in a more
. visual or graphic manner. A picture is often cited to
1. Introduction be worth a thousand words and, for some (but not all)
Information exploration should be a joyous tasks, it is clear that a visual presentation—such as a
experience, but many commentators talk of map or photograph—is dramatically easier to use than
information overload and anxiety (Wurman, 1989). is a textual description or a spoken report. As
However, there is promising evidence that the next computer speed and display resolution increase,
generation of digital libraries for structured databases, information visualization and graphical interfaces are
textual documents, and multimedia will enable likely to have an expanding role. If a map of the
convenient exploration of growing information spaces United States is displayed, then it should be possible
by a wider range of users. Visual language researchers to point rapidly at one of 1000 cities to get tourist
and user-interface designers are inventing powerful information. Of course, a foreigner who knows a city’s
information visualization methods, while offering name (for example, New Orleans), but not its
smoother integration of technology with task. location, may do better with a scrolling alphabetical
The terminology swirl in this domain is especially list. Visual displays become even more attractive to
colorful. The older terms of information retrieval provide orientation or context, to enable selection of
(often applied to bibliographic and textual document regions, and to provide dynamic feedback for
systems) and database management (often applied to identifying changes (for example, a weather map).
more structured relational database systems with Scientific visualization has the power to make
orderly attributes and sort keys), are being pushed atomic, cosmic, and common three-dimensional
aside by newer notions of information gathering, phenomena (such as heat conduction in engines,
seeking, or visualization and data mining, airflow over wings, or ozone holes) visible and
warehousing, or filtering. While distinctions are comprehensible. Abstract information visualization
subtle, the common goals reach from finding a narrow has the power to reveal patterns, clusters, gaps, or
set of items in a large collection that satisfy a well- outliers in statistical data, stock-market trades,
understood information need (known-item search) to computer directories, or document collections.

----- Page 3 (ocr) -----
Overall, the bandwidth of information presentation is Overview: Gain an overview of the entire
potentially higher in the visual domain than for media collection.
reaching any of the other senses. Humans have Zoom : Zoom in on items of interest
remarkable perceptual abilities that are greatly under- Filter: filter out uninteresting items.
utilized in current designs. Users can scan, recognize, Details-on-demand: Select an item or group and
and recall images rapidly, and can detect changes in get details when needed.
size, color, shape, movement, or texture. They can Relate: View relationships among items.
point to a single pixel, even in a megapixel display, History: Keep a history of actions to support undo,
and can drag one object to another to perform an replay, and progressive refinement.
action. User interfaces have been largely text- Extract: Allow extraction of sub-collections and of
oriented, so as visual approaches are explored, the query parameters.
appealing new opportunities are emerging.
There are many visual design guidelines but the Further discussion of the tasks follows the descriptions
basic principle might be summarized as the Visual of the seven data types:
Information Seeking Mantra:
Overview first, zoom and filter, then details-on-demand 1-dimensional: linear data types include textual
Overview first, zoom and filter, then details-on-demand documents, program source code, and alphabetical
Overview first, zoom and filter, then details-on-demand lists of names which are all organized in a sequential
Overview Ars, eoom ang net then cetails on-demand manner. Each item in the collection is a line of text
Overview first. , eon. containing a string of characters. Additional line
verview first, zoom and filter, then details-on-demand P ‘
Overview first, zoom and filter, then details-on-demand attributes might be the date of last update or author
Overview first, zoom and filter, then details-on-demand name. Interface design issues include what fonts,
Overview first, zoom and filter, then details-on-demand color, size to use and what overview, scrolling, or
Overview first, zoom and filter, then details-on-demand selection methods can be used. User problems might
be to find the number of items, see items having
Each line represents one project in which I found certain attributes (show only lines of a document that
myself rediscovering this principle and therefore wrote are section titles, lines of a program that were
it down it as a reminder. It proved to be only a starting changed from the previous version, or people in a list
point in trying to characterize the multiple who are older than 21 years), or see an item with all
information-visualization innovations occurring at its attributes.
university, government, and industry research labs. Examples: An early approach to dealing with large
1-dimensional data sets was the bifocal display which
3. Task by Data Type Taxonomy provided detailed information in the focus area and
To sort out the prototypes and guide researchers to less information in the surrounding context area
new opportunities, I propose a type by task taxonomy (Spence and Apperley, 1982). In their example, the
(TTT) of information visualizations. I assume that selected issue of a scientific journal had details about
users are viewing collections of items, where items each article, the older and newer issues of the journal
have multiple attributes. In all seven data types (1-, 2- were to the left and right on the bookshelf with
, 3-dimensional data, temporal and multi-dimensional decreasing space. Another effort to visualize 1-
data, and tree and network data) the items have dimensional data showed the attribute values of each
attributes and a basic search task is to select all items thousands of item in a fixed-sized space using a
that satisfy values of a set of attributes. An example scrolibar-like display called value bars (Chimera,
task would be finding all divisions in an organization 1992). Even greater compressions were accomplished
structure that have a budget greater than $500,000. in compact displays of tens of thousands of lines of
The data types are on the left side of the TTT program source code (SeeSoft, Eick et al., 1992) or
characterize the task-domain information objects and textual documents (Document Lens, Robertson and
are organized by the problems users are trying to Mackinlay, 1993; Information mural, Jerding and
solve. For example, in two-dimensional information Stasko, 1995).
such as maps, users are trying to grasp adjacency or ;
navigate paths, whereas in tree-structured information 2-dimensional: planar or map data include
users are trying to understand parent/child/sibling geographic maps, floorplans, or newspaper layouts.
relationships. The tasks across the top of the TTT are Each item in the collection covers some part of the
task-domain information actions that users wish to total area and may be rectangular or not. Each item
perform. has task-domain attributes such as name, owner,
The seven tasks are at a high level of abstraction. value, etc. and interface-domain features such as size,
More tasks and refinements of these tasks would be color, opacity, etc. While many systems adopt a
natural next steps in expanding this table. The seven multiple layer approach to dealing with map data,
tasks are: each layer is 2-dimensional. User problems are to find
Proc. Visual Languages 96 -2- September 1996

----- Page 4 (ocr) -----
adjacent items, containment of one item by another,
paths between items, and the basic tasks of counting, Multi-dimensional: most relational and statistical
filtering, and details-on-demand. databases are conveniently manipulated as multi-

Examples: Geographic Information Systems are a dimensional data in which items with n attributes
large research and commercial domain (Laurini and become points in a n-dimensional space. The
Thompson, 1992; Egenhofer and Richards, 1993) with interface representation can be 2-dimensional
numerous systems available. Information visualization scattergrams with each additional dimension
researchers have used spatial displays of document controlled by a slider (Ahlberg and Shneiderman,
collections (Korfhage, 1991; Hemmije et al., 1993; 1994). Buttons can used for attribute values when the
Wise et al., 1995) organized proximally by term co- cardinality is small, say less than ten. Tasks include
occurrences, finding patterns, clusters, correlations among pairs of

variables, gaps, and outliers. Multi-dimensional data

3-dimensional: real-world objects such as molecules, can be represented by a 3-dimensional scattergram
the human body, and buildings have items with but disorientation (especially if the users point of
volume and some potentially complex relationship view is inside the cluster of points) and occlusion
with other items. Computer-assisted design systems (especially if close points are represented as being
for architects, solid modelers, and mechanical larger) can be problems. The technique of parallel
engineers are built to handle complex 3-dimensional coordinates is a clever innovation which makes some
relationships. Users's tasks deal with adjacency plus tasks easier, but takes practice for users to
above/below and inside/outside relationships, as well comprehend (Inselberg, 1985).
as the basic tasks. In 3-dimensional applications users Examples: The early HomeFinder developed
must cope with understanding their position and dynamic queries and sliders for user-controlled
orientation when viewing the objects, plus the serious visualization of multi-dimensional data (Williamson
problems of occlusion. Solutions to some of these and Shneiderman, 1992). The successor FilmFinder
problems are proposed in many prototypes with refined the techniques (Ahlberg and Shneiderman,
techniques such as overviews, landmarks, 1994) for starfield displays (zoomable, color coded,
perspective, stereo display, transparency, and color user-controlled scattergrams), and laid the basis for
coding. the commercial product Spotfire (Ahlberg and

Examples: Three-dimensional computer graphics and Wistrand, 1995). Extrapolations include the Aggregate
computer-assisted design are large topics, but Manipulator (Goldstein and Roth, 1994), movable
information visualization efforts in three dimensions filters (Fishkin and Stone, 1995), and Selective
are still novel. Navigating high resolution images of Dynamic Manipulation (Chuah et al., 1995). Related
the human body is the challenge in the National works include VisDB for multidimensional database
Library of Medicine's Visible Human project (North et visualization (Keim and Kreigal, 1994), the
al., 1996). Some applications have attempted to spreadsheet-like Table Lens (Rao and Card, 1994)
present 3-dimensional versions of trees (Robertson et and the multiple linked histograms in the Influence
al., 1993), networks (Fairchild et al., 1988), or Explorer (Tweedie et al., 1996).
elaborate desktops (Card et al., 1996).

Tree: hierarchies or tree structures are collections of

Temporal: time lines are widely used and vital items with each item having a link to one parent item
enough for medical records, project management, or (except the root). Items and the links between parent
historical presentations to create a data type that is and child can have multiple attributes. The basic
separate from 1-dimensional data. The distinction in tasks can be applied to items and links, and tasks
temporal data is that items have a start and finish related to structural properties become interesting, for
time and that items may overlap. Frequent tasks example, how many levels in the tree? or how many
include finding all events before, after, or during some children does an item have? While it is possible to
time period or moment, plus the basic tasks. have similar items at leaves and internal nodes, it is

Examples: Many project management tools exist, also common to find different items at each level in a
but novel visualizations of time include the tree. Fixed level trees with all leaves equidistant from
perspective wall (Robertson et al., 1993) and the root and fixed fanout trees with the same number
LifeLines (Plaisant et al., 1996). LifeLines shows a of children for every parent are easier to deal with.
youth history keyed to the needs of the Maryland High fanout (broad) and small fanout (deep) trees are
Department of Juvenile Justice, but is intended to important special cases. Interface representations of
present medical patient histories as a compact trees can use an outline style of indented labels used
overview with selectable items to get details-on- in tables of contents (Chimera and Shneiderman,
demand. Temporal data visualizations appear in 1993), a node and link diagram, or a treemap, in
systems for editing video data or composing which child items are rectangles nested inside parent
animations such as Macromedia Director. rectangles.

Proc. Visual Languages 96 -3- September 1996

----- Page 5 (ocr) -----
Examples: Tree-structured data has long been movable field-of-view box to control the contents of

displayed with indented outlines (Egan et al., 1989) or the detail view, allowing zoom factors of 3 to 30.
with connecting lines as in many computer-directory Replication of this strategy with intermediate views
file managers. Attempts to show large tree structures enables users to reach larger zoom factors. Another
as node and link diagrams in compact forms include popular approach is the fisheye strategy (Furnas,
the 3-dimensional cone and cam trees (Robertson et 1986) which has been applied most commonly for
al., 1993; Carriere and Kazman, 1995), dynamic network browsing (Sarkar and Brown, 1994; Bartram
pruning in the TreeBrowser (Kumar et al., 1995), and et al., 1995). The fisheye distortion magnifies one or
the appealingly animated hyperbolic trees (Lamping more areas of the display, but zoom factors in
et al., 1995). A novel space-filling mosaic approach prototypes are limited to about 5. Although query
shows an arbitrary sized tree in a fixed rectangular language facilities made it difficult to gain an
space (Shneiderman, 1992; Johnson and overview of a collection, information visualization
Shneiderman, 1991). The treemap approach was interfaces support some overview strategy, or should.
successfully applied to computer directories, sales Adequate overview strategies are a useful criteria to
data, business decision-making (Asahi et al., 1995), look for. Along with an overview plus detail (also
and web browsing (Mitchell et al., 1995; Mukherjea called context plus focus) view there is a need for
et al., 1995), but users take 10-20 minutes to navigation tools to pan or scroll through the
accommodate to complex treemaps. collection.
Network: sometimes relationships among items Zoom: Zoom in on items of interest. Users typically
cannot be conveniently captured with a tree structure have an interest in some portion of a collection, and
and it is useful to have items linked to an arbitrary they need tools to enable them to control the zoom
number of other items. While many special cases of focus and the zoom factor. Smooth zooming helps
networks exist (acyclic, lattices, rooted vs. un-rooted, users preserve their sense of position and context.
directed vs. undirected) it seems convenient to Zooming could be on one dimension at a time by
consider them all as one data type. In addition to the moving the zoombar controls or by adjusting the size
basic tasks applied to items and links, network users of the field-of -view box. A very satisfying way to
often want to know about shortest or least costly paths zoom in is by pointing to a location and issuing a
connecting two items or traversing the entire network. zooming command, usually by clicking on a mouse
Interface representations include a node and link button for as long as the user wishes (Bederson and
diagram, and a square matrix of the items with the Hollan, 1993). Zooming in one dimension has proven
value of a link attribute in the row and column useful in starfield displays (Jog and Shneiderman,
representing a link. 1995).

Examples: Network visualization is an old but still
imperfect art because of the complexity of Filter: filter out uninteresting items. Dynamic queries
relationships and user tasks. Commercial packages applied to the items in the collection is one of the key
can handle small networks or simple strategies such ideas in information visualization (Ahlberg et al.,
as Netmap's layout of nodes on a circle with links 1992; Williamson and Shneiderman, 1992). By
criss-crossing the central area. An ambitious 3- allowing users to control the contents of the display,
dimensional approach was an impressive early users can quickly focus on their interests by
accomplishment (Fairchild et al., 1988), and new eliminating unwanted items. Sliders, buttons, or other
interest in this topic has been spawned by attempts to control widgets coupled to rapid display update (less
visualize the World Wide Web (Andrews, 1995; than 100 milliseconds) is the goal, even when there
Hendley et al., 1995). are tens of thousands of displayed items.

These seven data types reflect are an abstraction of Details-on-demand: Select an item or group and get
the reality. There are many variations on these themes details when needed. Once a collection has been
(2 1/2 or 4-dimensional data, multitrees,...) and many trimmed to a few dozen items it should be easy to
prototypes use combinations of these data types. This browse the details about the group or individual
taxonomy is useful only if it facilitates discussion and items. The usual approach is to simply click on an
leads to useful discoveries. Some idea of missed item to get a pop-up window with values of each of
opportunities emerges in looking at the tasks and data the attributes. In Spotfire, the details-on-demand
types in depth: window can contain HTML text with links to further

information.

Overview: Gain an overview of the entire collection.

Overview strategies include zoomed out views of Relate: View relationships among items. In the
each data type to see the entire collection plus an FilmFinder (Ahlberg and Shneiderman, 1994) users
adjoining detail view. The overview contains a could select an attribute, such as the film's director,

Proc. Visual Languages 96 - 4- September 1996

----- Page 6 (ocr) -----
in the details-on-demand window and cause the 4. Advanced Filtering
director alphaslider to be reset to the director's name, Users's have highly varied needs for filtering
thereby displaying only films by that director. features. The dynamic queries approach of adjusting
Similarly, in SDM (Chuah et al., 1995), users can numeric range sliders, alphasliders for names or
select an item and then highlight items with similar categories, or buttons for small sets of categories is
attributes or in LifeLines (Plaisant et al., 1996) users appealing to many users for many _ tasks
can click on a medication and see the related visit (Shneiderman, 1994). Dynamic queries might be
report, prescription, and lab test. Designing user called direct-manipulation queries, since they share
interface actions to specify which relationship is to be the same concepts of visual display of actions (the
manifested is still a challenge. The Influence Explorer sliders or buttons) and objects (the query results in the
(Tweedie et al., 1996) emphasizes exploration of task-domain display); the use of rapid, incremental,
relationships among attributes. and the Table Lens and reversible actions; and the immediate display of
emphasizes finding correlations among pairs of feedback (less than 100 msec). Additional benefits
numerical attributes (Rao and Card, 1994). are no error messages and the encouragement of
. ; exploration.
History : Keep a history of actions to support undo, Dynamic queries can reveal global properties as
replay, and progressive refinement. It is rare that a well as assist users in answering specific questions.
single user action produces the desired outcome. As the database grows, it is more difficult to update
Information exploration is inherently a process with the display fast enough, and specialized data
many steps, so keeping the history of actions and structures or parallel computation are required.
allowing users to retrace their steps is important. The dynamic-query approach to the chemical table
However, most prototypes fail to deal with this of elements was tested in an empirical comparison
requirement. Maybe they are reflecting the current with a form-fill-in query interface. The
state of graphic user interfaces, but designers would counterbalanced-ordering within-subjects design with
be better to follow information retrieval systems 18 chemistry students showed strong advantages for
which typically preserve the sequence of searches so the dynamic queries in terms of faster performance
that they can be combined or refined. and lower error rates (Ahlberg et al., 1991).
Dynamic queries usually permit OR combinations
Extract: Allow extraction of sub-collections and of within an attribute with AND combination of
the query parameters. Once users have obtained the attributes across attributes (conjunct of disjuncts).
item or set of items they desire, it would be useful to This is adequate for many situations since rapid
be able to extract that set and save it to a file in a multiple sequential queries allow users to satisfy their
format that would facilitate other uses such as sending information needs. Commercial information-retrieval
by email, printing, graphing, or insertion into a systems, such as DIALOG or Lexis/Nexis, permit
statistical or presentation package. An alternative to complex Boolean expressions with parentheses, but
saving the set, they might want to save, send, or print widespread adoption has been inhibited by the
the settings for the control widgets. Very few difficulty of using them. Numerous proposals have
prototypes support this action, although Roth's recent been put forward to reduce the burden of specifying
work on Visage provides an elegant capability to complex Boolean expressions (Reisner, 1988). Part of
extract sets of items and simply drag-and-drop them the confusion stems from informal English usage
into the next application window. where a query such as List all employees who live in
New York and Boston would result in an empty list
The attraction of visual displays, when compared to because the “and” would be interpreted as an
textual displays, is that they make use of the intersection; only employees who live in both cities
remarkable human perceptual ability for visual would qualify! In English, “and” usually expands the
information. Within visual displays, there are options; in Boolean expressions, AND is used to
opportunities for showing relationships by proximity, narrow a set to the intersection of two others.
by containment, by connected lines, or by color Similarly, in the English “I’d like Russian or Italian
coding. Highlighting techniques (for example, bold- salad dressing,” the “or” is exclusive, indicating that
face text or brightening, inverse video, blinking, you want one or the other but not both; in Boolean
underscoring, or boxing) can be used to draw attention expressions, an OR is inclusive, and is used to expand
to certain items in a field of thousands of items. a set.
Pointing to a visual display can allow rapid selection, The desire for full Boolean expressions, including
and feedback is apparent. The eye, the hand, and the nested parentheses and NOT operators, led us toward
mind seem to work smoothly and rapidly as users novel metaphors for query specification. Venn
perform actions on visual displays. diagrams (Michard, 1982), decision tables (Greene et
al., 1990), and the innovative InfoCrystal (Spoerri,
1993) have been used, but these both become
Proc. Visual Languages 96 - 5 - September 1996

----- Page 7 (ocr) -----
confusing as query complexity increases. We sought Although the computer contributes to the information
to support arbitrarily complex Boolean expressions explosion, it is potentially the magic lens for finding,
with a graphical specification. Our approach was to sorting, filtering, and presenting the relevant items.
apply the metaphor of water flowing from left to right Search in complex structured documents, graphics,
through a series of pipes and filters, where each filter images, sound, or video presents grand opportunities
lets through only the appropriate documents, and the for the design of user interfaces and search engines to
pipe layout indicates relationships of AND or OR. find the needle in the haystack. The novel-information
(Young and Shneiderman, 1993) exploration tools—such as dynamic queries,
In this filter-flow model, ANDs are shown as a treemaps, fisheye views, parallel coordinates,
linear sequence of filters, suggesting the successive starfields, and perspective walls—are but a few of the
application of required criteria. As the flow passes inventions that will have to be tamed and validated.
through each filter, it is reduced, and the visual
feedback shows a narrower bluish stream of water. Acknowledgements: This taxonomy was brewing in
ORs are shown two ways: within an attribute, multiple my mind at the time of the Gubbio, Italy conference
values can be selected in a single filter; and across on Advanced Visual Interfaces (May 1996). Stu
multiple attributes, filters are arranged in parallel Card's opening talk provoked me to start it in time
paths. When the parallel paths converge, the width of for my closing talk, and I have refined it into the
the flow reflects the size of the union of the document structure for the infomration visualization chapter in
sets. my forthcoming (1997) third edition of Designing
Negation was handled by a NOT operator that, when the User Interface, Addison-Wesly Publishers. I am
selected, inverts all currently selected items in a delighted and appreciative of Margaret Burnett and
filter. For example, if California and Georgia were Wayne Citrin for giving me the chance to include
selected and then the NOT operator was chosen, those and present these ideas in the Visual Languages 96
two states would become deselected and all the other Conference.
states would become selected. Finally, clusters of
filters and pipes can be made into a single labeled References
filter. This facility ensures that the full query can be Ahlberg, Christopher and Shneiderman, Ben, Visual
shown on the display at once, and allows clusters to information seeking: Tight coupling of dynamic
be saved in a library for later reuse. query filters with starfield displays, Proc. CHI94
We believe that this approach can help novices and Conference: Human Factors in Computing Systems,
intermittent users to specify complex Boolean ACM, New York, NY (1994), 313-321 + color
expressions and to learn Boolean concepts. A plates.
usability study was conducted with 20 subjects with Ahlberg, Christopher and Shneiderman, Ben,
little experience using Boolean algebra. The prototype AlphaSlider: A compact and rapid selector, Proc. of
filter-flow interface showed statistically significant ACM CHI94 Conference Human Factors in
improved performance against a textual interface for Computing Systems, ACM, New York, NY (1994),
comprehension and composition tasks. The filter-flow 365-371. ,
interface was preferred by all 20 subjects. Ahlberg, Christopher, Williamson, Christopher, and
Shneiderman, Ben, Dynamic queries for information
5. Summary exploration: An implementation and evaluation,
Novel graphical and direct-manipulation approaches Proc. ACM CHI’92: Human Factors in Computing
to query formulation and information visualization are Systems, ACM, New York, NY (1992), 619-626.
now possible. While research prototypes have Ahlberg, Christopher and Wistrand, Erik, IVEE: An
typically dealt with only one data type (1-, 2-, 3- information visualization & exploration
dimensional data, temporal and multi-dimensional environment, Proc. IEEE Information Visualization
data, and tree and network data), successful ‘95, IEEE Computer Press, Los Alamitos, CA
commercial products will have to accommodate (1995), 66-73.
several. These products will need to provide smooth Andrew, Keith, Visualising cyberspace: Information
integration with existing software and support the full visualisation in the Harmony internet browser, Prac.
task list: Overview, zoom, filter, details-on-demand, IEEE Information Visualization '95, EEE Computer
relate, history, and extract. These ideas are attractive Press, Los Alamitos, CA (1995), 97-104.
because they present information rapidly and allow for Asahi, T., Turo, D., and Shneiderman, B., Using
rapid user-controlled exploration. If they are to be treemaps to visualize the analytic hierarchy
fully effective, some of these approaches require process, Information Systems Research 6, 4
novel data structures, high-resolution color displays, (December 1995), 357-375.
fast data retrieval, specialized data structures, Bartram, Lyn, Ho, Albert, Dill, John, and Henigman,
parallel computation, and some user training. Frank, The continuous zoom: A constrained fisheye
technique for viewing and navigating large
Proc. Visual Languages 96 - 6 - September 1996

----- Page 8 (ocr) -----
information spaces, Proc. User Interface Software Guindon, Raymonde (Editor), Cognitive Science
and Technology '95, ACM, New York, NY (1995), and its Applications for Human-Computer
207-215. Interaction, Lawrence Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ

Becker, Richard A., Eick , Stephen G., and Wilks, (1988), 201-233.

Allan R. Visualizing Network Data, [EEE Fishkin, Ken and Stone, Maureen C., Enhanced
Transactions on Visualization and Computer dynamic queries via movable filters, Proc. CHI95
Graphics 1, 1 (March 1995), 16-28. Conference: Human Factors in Computing Systems,

Bederson, Ben B. and Hollan, James D., PAD++: A ACM, New York, NY (1995), 415-420.
zooming graphical user interface for exploring Furnas, George W., Generalized fisheye views, Proc.
alternate interface physics, Proc. User Interfaces CHI86 Conference: Human Factors in Computing
Software and Technology '94 (1994), 17-27. Systems, ACM, New York, NY (1986), 16-23.

Bertin, Jacques, Semiology of Graphics, University of Goldstein, Jade and Roth, Steven F, Using
Wisconsin Press, Madison, WI (1983) aggregation and dynamic queries for exploring large

Card, Stuart K., Robertson, George G., and York, data sets, Proc. CHI95 Conference: Human Factors
William, The WebBook and the WebForager: An in Computing Systems, ACM, New York, NY
information workspace for the World-Wide Web, (1995), 23-29.

Proc. CHI96 Conference: Human Factors in Greene, S. L., Devlin, S. J., Cannata, P. E., and
Computing Systems, ACM, New York, NY (1996), Gomez, L. M., No IFs, ANDs, or ORs: A study of
111-117. database querying, International Journal of Man-—

Carriere, Jeremy and Kazman, Rick, Interacting with Machine Studies 32 (March 1990), 303-326.
huge hierarchies: Beyond cone trees, Proc. IEEE Hendley, R. J., Drew, N. S., Wood, A. S., Narcissus:
Information Visualization '95, IEEE Computer Press, Visualizing information, Proc. IEEE Information
Los Alamitos, CA (1995), 74-81. Visualization '95, TEEE Computer Press, Los

Chimera, Richard, Value bars: An information Alamitos, CA (1995), 90-96.
visualization and navigation tool for multiattribute Humphrey, Susanne M. and Melloni, Biagio John,
listings, Proc. CHI92 Conference: Human Factors in Databases: A Primer for Retrieving Information by
Computing Systems, ACM, New York, NY (1992), Computer, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ
293-294, (1986).

Chimera, Richard and Shneiderman, Ben, Evaluating Inselberg, Alfred, The plane with parallel coordinates,
three user interfaces for browsing tables of contents, The Visual Computer 1 (1985), 69-91.

ACM Transactions on Information Systems 12, 4 Jerding, Dean F. and Stasko, John T., The information
(October 1994), mural: A technique for displaying and navigating

Chuah, Mei C., Roth, Steven F., Mattis, Joe, and large information spaces, Proc. IEEE Information
Kolojejchcik, John, SDM: Malleable Information Visualization '95, TEEE Computer Press, Los
Graphics, Proc. IEEE Information Visualization '95, Alamitos, CA (1995), 43-50.

IEEE Computer Press, Los Alamitos, CA (1995), Jog, Ninad and Shneiderman, Ben, Information
66-73. visualization with smooth zooming on an starfield

Cleveland, William, Visualizing Data, Hobart Press, display, Proc. IFIP Conf. Visual Databases 3,
Summit, NJ (1993). Chapman and Hall, London (1995), 1-10.

Egan, Dennis E., Remde, Joel R., Gomez, Louis M., Johnson, Brian, and Shneiderman, Ben, Tree-maps: A
Landauer, Thomas K., Eberhardt, Jennifer, and space-filling approach to the visualization of
Lochbum, Carol C., Formative design-evaluation of hierarchical information structures, Proc. IEEE
SuperBook, ACM Transactions on Information Visualization’91, TEEE, Piscataway, NJ (1991),
Systems 7, 1 (January 1989), 30-57. 284-291,

Egenhofer, Max and Richards, J., Exploratory access Keim, D. A. and Kriegal, H., VisDB: Database
to geographic data based on the map-overlay exploration using multidimensional visualization,
metaphor, Journal of Visual Languages and IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications
Computing 4, 2 (1993), 105-125. (September 1994), 40-49.

Eick, Stephen G. , Steffen, Jospeh L., and Sumner, Jr., Korfhage, Robert, To see or not to see -- Is that the
Eric E., SeeSoft- A tool for visualizing line-oriented query?, Communications of the ACM 34 (1991),
software statistics, IEEE Transactions on Software 134-141.

Engineering 18, 11 (1992) 957-968. Lamping, John, Rao, Ramana, and Pirolli, Peter, A

Eick, Stephen G. and Wills, Graham J., Navigating focus + context technique based on hyperbolic
Large Networks with Hierarchies, Proc. IEEE geometry for visualizing large hierarchies, Proc. of
Visualization '93 Conference, (1993), 204--210. ACM CHI95 Conference: Human Factors in

Fairchild, Kim M., Poltrock, Steven E., and Furnas, Computing Systems, ACM, New York, NY (1995),
George W., SemNet: Three-dimensional 401-408
representations of large knowledge bases, In

Proc. Visual Languages 96 -7- September 1996

----- Page 9 (ocr) -----
Laurini, R. and Thompson, D., Fundamentals of Spatial Shneiderman, Ben, Tree visualization with tree-maps:
Information Systems, Academic Press, New York, A 2-d space-filling approach, ACM Transactions on
NY (1992), Graphics 11, 1 (January 1992), 92-99,

Marchionini, Gary, Information Seeking in Electronic Shneiderman, Ben, Dynamic queries for visual
Environments, Cambridge University Press, UK information seeking, IEEE Software 11, 6 (1994),
(1995). 70-77.

Michard, A., A new database query language for non- Spence, Robert and Apperley, Mark, Data base
professional users: Design principles and ergonomic navigation: An office environment for the
evaluation, Behavioral and Information Technology professional, Behaviour & Information Technology 1,
1, 3 (July-September 1982), 279-288. 1 (1982), 43-54.

Mitchell, Richard, Day, David, and Hirschman, Spoerri, Anselm, InfoCrystal: A visual tool for
Lynette, Fishing for information on the internet, information retrieval & management, Proc. ACM
Proc. IEEE Information Visualization '95, IEEE Conf on Information and Knowledge Management
Computer Press, Los Alamitos, CA (1995), 105-111. (1993).

Mukherjea, Sougata, Foley, James D., and Hudson, Tufte, Edward, The Visual Display of Quantitative
Scott, Visualizing complex hypermedia networks Information, Graphics Press, Cheshire, CT (1983).
through multiple hierarchical views, Proc. of ACM Tufte, Edward, Envisioning Information, Graphics
CHI95 Conference: Human Factors in Computing Press, Cheshire, CT (1990).

Systems, ACM, New York, NY (1995), 331-337 + Tweedie, Lisa, Spence, Robert, Dawkes, Huw, and
color plate. Su, Hua, Externalising abstract mathematical

North, Chris, Shneiderman, Ben, and Plaisant, models, Proc. of ACM CHI96 Conference: Human
Catherine, User controlled overviews of an image Factors in Computing Systems, ACM, New York,
library: A case study of the Visible Human, Proc. NY (1996), 406-412.

Ist ACM International Conference on Digital Williamson, Christopher, and Shneiderman, Ben, The
Libraries (1996), 74-82. Dynamic HomeFinder: Evaluating dynamic queries

Pirolli, Peter, Schank, Patricia, Hearst, Marti, and in a real-estate information exploration system,
Diehl, Christine, Scatter/gather browsing Proc. ACM SIGIR’92 Conference, ACM, New York,
communicates the topic structure of a very large NY (1992), 338-346. Reprinted in Shneiderman, B.
text collection, Proc. of ACM CHI96 Conference , (Editor), Sparks of Innovation in Human-Computer
ACM, New York, NY (1996), 213-220. Interaction, Ablex Publishers, Norwood, NJ, (1993),

Plaisant, Catherine, Rose, Anne, Milash, Brett, 295-307.

Widoff, Seth, and Shneiderman, Ben, LifeLines: Wise, James A., Thomas, James, J., Pennock, Kelly,
Visualizing personal histories, Proc. of ACM CHI96 Lantrip, David, Pottier, Marc, Schur, Anne, and
Conference: Human Factors in Computing Systems, Crow, Vern, Visualizing the non-visual: Spatial
ACM, New York, NY (1996), 221-227, 518. analysis and interaction with information from text

Rao, Ramana and Card, Stuart K., The Table Lens; documents, Proc. IEEE Information Visualization '95,
Merging graphical and symbolic representations in IEEE Computer Press, Los Alamitos, CA (1995),
an interactive focus + context visualization for 51-58.
tabular information, Proc. CHI94 Conference: Wurman, Richard Saul, Information Anxiety,
Human Factors in Computing Systems, ACM, New Doubleday, New York (1989).

York, NY (1994), 318-322. Young, Degi and Shneiderman, Ben, A graphical

Reisner, Phyllis, Query languages. In Helander, filter/flow model for boolean queries: An
Martin (Editor), Handbook of Human-Computer implementation and experiment, Journal of the
Interaction, North-Holland, Amsterdam, The American Society for Information Science 44, 6 (July
Netherlands (1988), 257-280. 1993), 327-339.

Robertson, George G., Card, Stuart K., and
Mackinlay, Jock D., Information visualization using
3-D interactive animation, Communications of the
ACM 36, 4 (April 1993), 56-71.

Robertson George G. and Mackinlay, Jock D., The
document lens, Proc. 1993 ACM User Interface
Software and Technology, ACM New York, NY
(1993), 101-108.

Sarkar, Manojit and Brown, Marc H., Graphical
fisheye views, Communications of the ACM 37, 12
(July 1994), 73-84.

Proc. Visual Languages 96 - &- September 1996