

----- Page 1 (native text) -----
International Journal of Methods in Psychiatric Research, Volume 13, Number 2
93
The World Mental Health (WMH) Survey
Initiative Version of the World Health
Organization (WHO) Composite
International Diagnostic Interview (CIDI)
RONALD C. KESSLER,1 T. BEDIRHAN ÜSTÜN2
1 Department of Health Care Policy, Harvard Medical School, Boston MA, USA
2 Global Programme on Evidence for Health Policy, World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland
ABSTRACT This paper presents an overview of the World Mental Health (WMH) Survey Initiative version of the
World Health Organization (WHO) Composite International Diagnostic Interview (CIDI) and a discussion of the
methodological research on which the development of the instrument was based. The WMH-CIDI includes a screening
module and 40 sections that focus on diagnoses (22 sections), functioning (four sections), treatment (two sections),
risk factors (four sections), socio-demographic correlates (seven sections), and methodological factors (two sections).
Innovations compared to earlier versions of the CIDI include expansion of the diagnostic sections, a focus on 12-month
as well as lifetime disorders in the same interview, detailed assessment of clinical severity, and inclusion of information
on treatment, risk factors, and consequences. A computer-assisted version of the interview is available along with a
direct data entry software system that can be used to keypunch responses to the paper-and-pencil version of the inter-
view. Computer programs that generate diagnoses are also available based on both ICD-10 and DSM-IV criteria.
Elaborate CD-ROM-based training materials are available to teach interviewers how to administer the interview as
well as to teach supervisors how to monitor the quality of data collection.
Key words: Composite International Diagnostic Interview, epidemiologic research design, psychiatric 
diagnostic interview, question wording methods
Introduction
This paper discusses methodological issues involved
in designing the World Mental Health (WMH)
Survey Initiative version of the World Health
Organization (WHO) Composite International
Diagnostic Interview (CIDI), the interview used in
the US National Comorbidity Survey Replication
(NCS-R; Kessler and Merikangas, 2004). The
WMH-CIDI was developed by WHO for use in the
WHO WMH Survey Initiative. The latter is a series
of face-to-face household surveys carried out with
coordination by WHO in 28 countries around the
world (Kessler, 1999; Kessler and Üstün, 2000).
These surveys aim to obtain valid information about
the prevalence and correlates of mental disorders in
the general population, unmet need for treatment of
mental disorders, treatment adequacy among patients
in treatment for mental disorders, and the societal
burden of mental disorders. The focus of the current
paper is on the sections of the WMH-CIDI that assess
psychopathology, although a few words also are said
about other sections of the instrument. 
Historical overview
The first fully structured psychiatric diagnostic inter-
view that could be administered by trained lay
interviewers was the Diagnostic Interview Schedule
(DIS) (Robins, Helzer, Croughan and Ratcliff, 1981).
The DIS was developed by Lee Robins and her
colleagues at Washington University with support
from the National Institute of Mental Health for use
in the Epidemiologic Catchment Area (ECA) Study


----- Page 2 (native text) -----
Kessler and Üstün
94
(Robins and Regier, 1991). The ECA was a landmark
community-based survey of mental disorders carried
out in selected neighbourhoods in five US communi-
ties. The wide dissemination of ECA results in
high-profile publications led to replications in other
countries as well as to the development of other struc-
tured diagnostic interviews. The most widely used of
these instruments is the WHO CIDI (World Health
Organization, 1990). The CIDI is an expansion of the
DIS that was developed under the auspices of WHO
by an international task force under the supervision
of Lee Robins to address the problem that DIS diag-
noses are exclusively based on the definitions and
criteria of the American Psychiatric Association’s
(APA) Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM) of
Mental Disorders (Robins, Wing, Wittchen, Helzer,
Babor, Burke, Farmer, Jablenski, Pickens, Regier,
Sartorius and Towle, 1988). The WHO was keen to
expand the DIS to generate diagnoses based on the
definitions and criteria of the WHO International
Classification of Disease (ICD). This was especially
important for cross-national comparative research, as
the ICD system is the international standard diag-
nostic system. 
The CIDI was designed to encourage community
epidemiological surveys in many countries around the
world. To this end, a multinational CIDI editorial
committee translated and field-tested the instrument
in many different countries (Wittchen, 1994), while
WHO encouraged researchers around the world to
carry out CIDI surveys beginning in 1990 when the
CIDI was first made available. These efforts were
successful as over a dozen large-scale CIDI surveys in
as many countries were completed during the first
half of the 1990s. The WHO created the
International Consortium in Psychiatric Epi-
demiology (ICPE) in 1997 to bring together and
compare results across these surveys (Kessler, 1999).
The ICPE has subsequently published a number of
useful descriptive studies of cross-national similarities
and differences in prevalence and socio-demographic
correlates of mental disorders (for example, Aguilar-
Gaxiola, Alegria, Andrade, Bijl, Caraveo-Anduaga,
DeWit, Kolody, Kessler, Üstün, Vega and Wittchen,
2000; Alegria, Kessler, Bijl, Lin, Heeringa, Takeuchi
and Kolody, 2000; Bijl, de Graaf, Hiripi, Kessler,
Kohn, Offord, Üstün, Vicente, Vollebergh, Walters
and 
Wittchen, 
2003; 
WHO 
International
Consortium in Psychiatric Epidemiology, 2000).
However, the work of the ICPE with this first genera-
tion of CIDI surveys was hampered by the fact that
comparability among the surveys was limited to the
assessment of mental disorders. Measures of risk
factors, consequences, patterns and correlates of
treatment, and treatment adequacy, none of which
were included in the CIDI, were not assessed in a
consistent manner across the surveys.
Recognizing the value of coordinating the
measurement of these broader areas of assessment,
the ICPE launched an initiative in 1997 to bring
together the senior scientists in planned CIDI
surveys prior to the time their surveys were carried
out in order to coordinate measurement. Within a
short period of time, research groups in over a dozen
countries joined this initiative. The World Health
Organization officially established the WHO WMH
Survey Initiative to coordinate this undertaking in
1998. Since that time, the number of participating
WMH countries has expanded to 28 with an antici-
pated combined sample size of over 200,000
interviews. The authors of the current paper are the
co-directors of both the ICPE and the WMH Survey
Initiative as well as the principal developers of the
WMH-CIDI, the expanded version of the WHO
CIDI that was created for use in the WMH surveys.
An overview of the WMH-CIDI
In the course of expanding the CIDI to include
broader areas of assessment, we also took the oppor-
tunity to make the diagnostic sections of the CIDI
more operational. We expanded questions to break
down critical criteria, including the clinical signifi-
cance criteria required in the DSM-IV system. We
expanded the diagnostic sections to include dimen-
sional information along with the categorical
information that existed in previous CIDI versions.
We also expanded the number of disorders included
in the CIDI. 
The 41 sections in the WMH-CIDI are listed in
Table 1. These are not in their order of assessment.
The first section is an introductory screening and
lifetime review section, the logic of which is
discussed later in this article. There are also 22 diag-
nostic sections that assess mood disorders (two
sections), anxiety disorders (seven sections),
substance-use disorders (two sections), childhood
disorders (four sections), and other disorders (seven
sections). Four additional sections assess various


----- Page 3 (native text) -----
WMH Survey Initiative Version of the CIDI
95
kinds of functioning and physical comorbidity. Two
assess treatment of mental disorders. Four assess risk
factors. Six assess socio-demographics. Two final
sections are methodological. The first of these two
includes rules for determining which respondents to
select into Part II of the interview and which ones to
terminate after Part I of the interview. The second
methodological section consists of interviewer obser-
vations that are recorded after the interview has
ended.
The entire WMH-CIDI takes an average of
approximately 2 hours to administer in most general
population samples. However, interview time varies
widely depending on the number of diagnostic
sections for which the respondent screens positive.
As mentioned in the last paragraph, the interview
has a two-part structure that allows early termination
of a representative subsample of respondents who
show no evidence of lifetime psychopathology. The
sampling fraction used in this subselection procedure
influences average interview time. Finally, a number
of WMH-CIDI sections are optional and can be
administered to subsamples rather than to the entire
sample. This, too, reduces average interview length. 
In addition to the interview schedule, we devel-
oped an elaborate set of training materials to teach
interviewers how to administer the WMH-CIDI and
to teach supervisors how to monitor the quality of
data collection. We developed a computer-assisted
version of the interview (CAI) that can be used with
laptop computers. We also developed a direct data
entry (DDE) software system that can be used to
keypunch paper and pencil versions of the interview.
Finally, we developed computer programs that
generate diagnoses from the completed survey data
using the definitions and criteria of the ICD-10 or
the DSM-IV diagnostic systems. 
Use of the WMH-CIDI requires successful
completion of a training programme offered by an
official WHO CIDI Training and Research Centre
(CIDI-TRC). Another innovation associated with
the WMH-CIDI is a state-of-the art interviewer
Table 1. An outline of the WMH-CIDI
I. Screening and lifetime review  
II. Disorders    
Mood  
Major Depression, Mania   
Anxiety  
Panic Disorder, Specific Phobia, Agoraphobia, Generalized Anxiety Disorder, 
Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder, Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder, Social Phobia
Substance abuse  
Alcohol Abuse, Alcohol Dependence, Drug Abuse, Drug Dependence, Nicotine 
Dependence
Childhood  
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder, Oppositional-Defiant Disorder, 
Conduct Disorder, Separation Anxiety Disorder
Other  
Intermittent Explosive Disorder, Eating Disorders, Premenstrual Disorder, Non-
Affective Psychoses Screen, Pathological Gambling, Neurasthenia, Personality 
Disorders Screens
III. Functioning and physical disorders Suicidality, 30-day Functioning, 30-day 
Psychological Distress, Physical Comorbidity
IV. Treatment 
Services, Pharmacoepidemiology  
V. Risk factors 
Personality, Social networks, Childhood experiences, Family Burden
VII.  Socio-demographics 
Employment, Finances, Marriage, Children, Childhood Demographics, Adult 
Demographics
VII. Methodological  
Part I – Part II Selection, Interviewer Observations  


----- Page 4 (native text) -----
Kessler and Üstün
96
training programme that includes an intelligent 40-
hour CD-ROM-based self-study module in addition
to a three-day face-to-face training module that
requires the trainee to travel to an authorized CIDI-
TRC. The latter is designed for individuals who have
successfully completed the self-study module, as indi-
cated by passing the self-administered tests
embedded throughout the CD-ROM. Remedial
training elements are embedded in the CD-ROM
whenever a trainee fails an embedded test. Trainees
who successfully complete the certification process at
the end of this program are given access to all WMH-
CIDI training materials for use in training
interviewers and supervisors. They are also given
copies of the WMH-CIDI CAI and DDE programs
and the computerized diagnostic algorithms. A PDF
copy of the WMH-CIDI and contact information for
WMH-CIDI training can be obtained from the CIDI
Web page at www.who.int/msa/cidi. 
The validity of CIDI diagnostic assessments 
A number of DIS and CIDI validity studies were
carried out prior to the time the WMH Survey
Initiative was launched. These studies aimed to
determine whether the diagnoses generated by these
instruments are consistent with those obtained inde-
pendently by trained clinical interviewers who
administer semi-structured research diagnostic
interviews to a probability sample of survey respon-
dents who previously completed the DIS or CIDI.
Wittchen (1994) reviewed these studies up through
the early 1990s. Only a handful of DIS or CIDI
validity studies have been published since that time
(Kessler, Wittchen, Abelson, McGonagle, Schwarz,
Kendler, Knauper and Zhao, 1998; Wittchen, Üstün
and Kessler, 1999; Brugha, Jenkins, Taub, Meltzer
and Bebbington, 2001). Results show that DIS and
CIDI diagnoses are significantly related to indepen-
dent clinical diagnoses, but that individual-level
concordance is far from perfect. Some part of this
lack of concordance is doubtless due to unreliability
of clinical interviews. Indeed, the literature is clear
in showing that test-retest reliability is higher for
diagnostic classifications based on DIS-CIDI inter-
views than semi-structured clinical interviews.
However, there is also the issue of validity, which is
presumably higher in semi-structured clinical inter-
views than in fully structured DIS-CIDI interviews.
As a result of concerns about validity, considerable
interest existed among the developers of the WMH-
CIDI to improve the validity of the CIDI for use in
the WMH surveys.
Based on previous evaluations of the CIDI by
survey methodologists in preparation for the US
National Comorbidity Survey (NCS) (Kessler,
Wittchen et al., 1998; Kessler, Mroczek and Belli,
1999; Kessler, Wittchen, Abelson and Zhao, 2000),
four main methodological problems were the focus
of our work revising the diagnostic sections of 
the WMH-CIDI. One was that respondents might
not understand some of the CIDI questions, a
number of which included multiple clauses and
vaguely defined terms. A second was that some
respondents might not understand the task implied
by the questions, which sometimes required careful
memory search that was unlikely to be carried 
out unless respondents were clearly instructed to 
do so. A third was that respondents might not 
be motivated to answer accurately, especially in
light of the fact that many CIDI questions deal with
potentially embarrassing and stigmatizing experi-
ences. A fourth was that respondents might not be
able to answer some CIDI questions accurately, 
especially those that asked about characteristics 
of mental disorders that are difficult to remember
(for example, age of onset, number of lifetime
episodes). 
A considerable amount of methodological
research has been carried out by survey researchers
on each of the four methodological problems
enumerated in the last paragraph (for example,
Turner and Martin, 1985; Tanur, 1992; Sudman,
Bradburn and Schwarz, 1996). This research has
advanced considerably over the past two decades as
cognitive psychologists have become interested in
the survey interview as a natural laboratory for
studying cognitive processes (Schwarz and Sudman,
1994; 1996; Sirken, Herrmann, Schechter, Schwarz,
Tanur and Tourangeau, 1999). A number of impor-
tant insights have emerged from this work that
suggest practical ways of improving the accuracy of
self-reported psychiatric assessments. As described
below, we used these insights to help develop the
WMH-CIDI. The next four sections of the paper
provide a quick review of these insights as well as
use of them to address each of the four method-
ological problems enumerated in the last
paragraph.


----- Page 5 (native text) -----
WMH Survey Initiative Version of the CIDI
97
Question comprehension
It is obvious that ambiguous questions are likely to be
misconstrued. It is perhaps less obvious, though, just
how ambiguous most structured questions are and
how often respondents must ‘read between the lines’.
In the first systematic study of this issue, Belson
(1981) debriefed a sample of survey respondents on a
set of standard survey questions and found that more
than 70% of respondents interpreted some questions
differently from the researcher, leading Belson to
conclude that subtle misinterpretations are pervasive
in survey situations. Similar conclusions have been
obtained in other survey debriefing studies
(Oksenberg, Cannell and Kanton, 1991). Our own
debriefing studies of the CIDI found much the same
result – a great many respondents misunderstood
important aspects of key diagnostic questions.
How is it possible for so much misunderstanding
to occur? As Oksenberg and her colleagues discov-
ered, the answer lies partly in the fact that many
terms in surveys are vaguely defined. Beyond this is
the more fundamental fact that the survey interview
situation is a special kind of interaction in which the
standard rules of conversation – rules that help fill in
the gaps in meaning that exist in most speech – do
not apply. Unlike the situation in normal conversa-
tional practice, the respondent in the survey
interview often has only a vague notion of the person
to whom he or she is talking or the purpose of the
conversation (Cannell, Fowler and Marquis, 1968).
The person who asks the questions (the interviewer)
is not the person who formulated the questions (the
researcher), and the questioner is often unable to
clarify the respondent’s uncertainties about the
intent of the questions. Furthermore, the flow of
questions in the survey interview is established prior
to the beginning of the conversation, which means
that normal conversational rules of give-and-take in
question-and-answer sequences do not apply. This
leads to more misreading than in normal conversa-
tions 
even 
when 
questions 
are 
seemingly
straightforward (Clark and Schober, 1992), a
problem that is compounded when the topic of the
interview is one that involves emotional experiences
that are in many cases difficult to describe with
clarity.
Clinical interviews attempt to deal with this
problem by being ‘interviewer based’ (Brown, 1989);
that is, by training the interviewer to have a deep
understanding of the criteria being evaluated,
allowing the interviewer to query the respondent as
much as necessary to clarify the meaning of ques-
tions, and leaving the ultimate judgment about the
rating with the interviewer rather than the respon-
dent. Indeed, one might say that the interview is, in
some sense, administered to the interviewer rather
than to the respondent in that the responses of
interest are responses to interviewer-based questions
of the following sort: ‘Interviewer, based on your
conversation with the respondent, would you say
that he or she definitely, probably, possibly, probably
not, or definitely does not meet the requirements of
Criterion A?’ Fully structured psychiatric interviews
like the CIDI cannot use this interviewer-based
approach because, by definition, they are designed so
that interviewer judgment plays no part in the
responses. These ‘respondent-based’ interviews use
totally structured questions that the respondent
answers, often in a yes-no format, either after reading
the questions to themselves or after having an inter-
viewer read the questions aloud. When the criterion
of interest is fairly clear, there may be little difference
between interviewer-based and respondent-based
interviewing. It is a good deal more difficult, though,
to assess conceptually complex criteria with fully
structured questions. 
In an effort to investigate the problem of question
misunderstanding in the CIDI as part of the pilot
studies for an early CIDI survey, Kessler and his
colleagues (Kessler, Wittchen et al., 1998; Kessler et
al., 1999) carried out a series of debriefing interviews
with community respondents who were administered
sections of the CIDI and then asked to explain what
they thought the questions meant and why they
answered the way they did. A great deal of misunder-
standing was found. However, enormous variation
across questions was also found in the frequency of
misunderstanding. Four discriminating features were
found among questions that had high versus low
levels of misunderstanding.
First, some commonly misunderstood questions
are simply too complex for many respondents to
grasp. Second, some commonly misunderstood ques-
tions involve vaguely defined terms rather than
complex concepts. A third type of commonly misun-
derstood CIDI question involves questions about odd
experiences that could plausibly be interpreted in
more than one way, such as being asked about seeing


----- Page 6 (native text) -----
Kessler and Üstün
98
and hearing things that others do not. Many respon-
dents have a tendency to normalize these questions
and respond positively when the correct answer is
negative. A fourth type of commonly misunderstood
CIDI question, finally, involves a contextual misun-
derstanding – that is, a misunderstanding that
derives more from the position of the question in 
the flow of the interview than from lack of clarity 
in the question. A good example is the evaluation of
Criterion A in the DSM-III-R diagnosis of simple
phobia, which stipulates that the fear of circum-
scribed stimuli must be ‘persistent’. CIDI 1.0
operationalized this criterion by asking ‘Did this
strong unreasonable fear continue for months or
even years?’ Although seemingly not ambiguous in
itself, pilot work by Kessler and his colleagues found
that this question was misunderstood by a great many
respondents because of the location of the question in
the instrument. Specifically, this question followed
an open-ended question that asked the respondent to
give an example of a specific fear. In many cases the
respondent would respond to this open-ended ques-
tion by describing the autonomic arousal symptoms
that occur on exposure to the stimulus such as feeling
dizzy or having trouble breathing. When the follow-
up question was administered right after this
description – asking whether this fear continued for
months or even years – the question was sometimes
misunderstood as asking about the duration of the
arousal symptoms. The respondent would invariably
answer no, the nausea or dizziness or other physiolog-
ical symptoms typically lasted no more than a few
hours and certainly never lasted months or years.
Confusions of this sort can lead to substantial errors
in fully structured clinical assessments, especially
when they concern required symptoms.
Following the work of Kessler et al. (2000), we
carried out detailed CIDI debriefing interviews with
volunteer respondents in methodological studies of
the WMH-CIDI in an effort to pinpoint CIDI ques-
tions with each of the above four types of
comprehension problems. Misunderstandings based
on complex questions are addressed by breaking
down the original CIDI questions into less complex
subquestions. Especially complex questions are
presented in a respondent booklet (RB) that
provides a visual aid as the questions are being read
by the interviewer. Misunderstandings based on the
vagueness of terms are addressed by introducing clar-
ifications and examples. Misunderstandings based on
normalization of questions about odd experiences are
addressed by prefacing the questions with clarifica-
tion that we are actually asking about odd
experiences and that it is important for us to learn
how often these experiences occur. Contextual
misunderstandings, finally, are resolved by reordering
questions to remove the contextual effects and by
adding clarifying clauses in questions where residual
confusion might exist. Although the number of
modifications of this sort are so large that each one
cannot be reviewed here, the appendix to this paper
presents one example of each of the four types of
modifications to illustrate the types of changes we
made to the CIDI in developing the WMH-CIDI.
Task comprehension
Respondents not only sometimes misunderstand
survey questions, but they also sometimes misunder-
stand the fundamental task they are being asked to
carry out. Debriefing studies have shown that misun-
derstandings of the second sort are especially
common with the diagnostic stem questions in the
CIDI (Kessler et al., 2000). These stem questions are
the first questions asked in each diagnostic section.
They are used to determine whether a lifetime
syndrome of a particular sort might have ever
occurred. The questions provide what are, in effect,
brief vignettes and ask the respondent whether they
ever had an experience of this sort. If so, additional
questions assess the specifics of the syndrome. If not,
the remaining questions about this syndrome are
skipped. Substantial confusion arises from respon-
dents’ failure to understand the purpose of such stem
questions. In particular, only about half of pilot
respondents in the Kessler study interpreted these
questions as they were intended by the authors of the
CIDI, namely, as a request to engage in active
memory search and report episodes of the sort in the
question. The other respondents interpreted the
question as a request to report whether a memory of
such an episode was readily accessible. These latter
respondents did not believe that they were being
asked to engage in active memory search and did not
do so. Not surprisingly, these respondents were much
less likely than those who understood the intent of
the question to remember lifetime episodes. 
Why did so many respondents misinterpret the
intent of these lifetime recall questions? As Marquis


----- Page 7 (native text) -----
WMH Survey Initiative Version of the CIDI
99
and Cannell (1969) discovered in their early
research on standard interview practice, respondents
are generally ill-informed about the purposes of the
research and poorly motivated to participate actively.
Furthermore, cues from interviewers often reinforce
this inclination to participate in a half-hearted way.
For example, when an interviewer asks a question
that requires considerable thought, the respondent is
likely to assume in the absence of instructions to the
contrary that the interviewer is operating under
normal conversational rules and, as such, is really
asking for an immediate and appropriate answer.
Cannell et al. (1981) shows that this conversational
artifact can be minimized by explicitly instructing
respondents to answer completely and accurately.
The use of such instruction can substantially
improve the quality of data obtained in surveys.
Based on this result, we built in clarifying statements
throughout the WMH-CIDI aimed at informing
respondents that accuracy was important. See the
appendix for an example of such a statement.
Motivation
One problem with emphasizing to respondents the
need to work hard at a series of demanding and
potentially embarrassing recall tasks is that more
respondents than otherwise may refuse the job.
Recognition of this problem among survey method-
ologists has led to the development of motivational
techniques intended to increase the chances that
respondents will accept the job of answering
completely and accurately. Three techniques that
have proven to be particularly useful in this regard
are the use of motivational components in instruc-
tions, the use of contingent reinforcement strategies
embedded in interviewer feedback probes, and the
use of respondent commitment questions. 
Motivational instructions
There is evidence that the use of introductory
remarks at the beginning of a survey that clarify the
research aims can help motivate respondents to
provide a more complete and accurate report than
they would otherwise (Cannell et al., 1981).
Debriefing shows that respondents are more willing
to undertake laborious and possibly painful memory
searches if they recognize some altruistic benefit of
doing so. Even such an uncompelling rationale as ‘it
is important for our research that you take your time
and think carefully before answering’ has motiva-
tional force. This is even more so when instructions
include statements that have universalistic appeal,
such as: ‘accuracy is important because social policy
makers will be using these results to make decisions
that affect the lives of all of us.’ Based on this
evidence, we developed and presented a statement
containing a clear rationale for administering the
interview at the onset of the WMH-CIDI interview
schedule and emphasized the importance of the
survey for social policy purposes. See the appendix
for this text. In addition, in the case of especially
important questions that require long-term recall to
answer correctly, the questions are included in the
RB and a written instruction is included at the top of
the page in capital letters urging the respondent to
‘take your time and think carefully before answering’.
Contingent reinforcement
Consistent with research on behavioural modifica-
tion of verbal productions through reinforcement
(see, for example, Centers, 1964), several survey
researchers have demonstrated that verbal reinforcers
such as ‘thanks’ and ‘that’s useful’ can significantly
affect the behaviour of survey respondents (Marquis
et al., 1969). Based on this observation, Cannell and
his associates developed a method for training inter-
viewers to use systematic feedback – both positive
and negative – to reinforce respondent effort in
reporting (Oksenberg, Vinokur and Cannell, 1979a).
The central feature of this method is the use of struc-
tured feedback statements coordinated with the
content and timing of instructions aimed at rein-
forcing respondent performance. It is important to
recognize that it is performance that is being rein-
forced rather than the content of particular answers.
For example, a difficult recall question may be pref-
aced with the instruction ‘This next question may be
difficult, so please take your time before answering.’
In contingent feedback instruction, interviewers issue
some expression of gratitude whenever the respon-
dent seems to consider his or her answer carefully,
whether 
they 
remember 
anything 
or 
not.
Alternatively, the interviewer might instruct the
precipitous respondent: ‘You answered that awfully
quickly. Was there anything (else), even something
small?’ Such invitations to reconsider would occur
whenever the respondent gives an immediate answer
whether or not anything was reported.


----- Page 8 (native text) -----
Kessler and Üstün
100
Experiments carried out by Cannell and his associ-
ates (Miller and Cannell, 1977; Vinokur, Oksenberg
and Cannell, 1979) have documented that the
combined use of these contingent reinforcement
probes with instructions explaining the importance
of careful and accurate reporting leads to substantial
improvement in recall of health-related events in
general population surveys, including validated dates
of medical events. Importantly, their results also
show that self-enhancing response biases are reduced
when these strategies are used, as indicated by both a
decreased tendency to under-report potentially
embarrassing conditions and behaviours (for
example, gynaecological problems, seeing an X-rated
movie) and a decreased tendency to over-report self-
enhancing behaviours (for example, the number of
books read in the last 3 months, reading the editorial
page of the newspaper the previous day). Based on
these results, the Cannell contingent feedback
approach is included as a fundamental part of the
interviewer training materials developed for the
WMH surveys. 
Commitment questions
Instructions that define the nature of interviewer
expectations for respondent behaviour help to estab-
lish a perspective on the interview that can have
motivational force. The literature on cognitive
factors in surveys contains many examples of the
subtle ways in which perspectives established in
questions subsequently influence respondent behav-
iours (see, for example, Loftus and Palmer, 1974).
This same literature shows that perspective can have
motivational force when it implies a common
purpose (Clark et al., 1992). That is, if a question is
posed in such a way that it implies that hard work
will be invested in arriving at an answer, it is incum-
bent on the respondent either to demur explicitly or
tacitly accept the task of working hard as part of the
common understanding between interviewer and
respondent. By answering the question, the respon-
dent, in effect, makes a commitment to honour the
injunction implied in the perspective of the question
and this implied commitment, in turn, creates moti-
vation to this task (Marlatt, 1972). Based on this
type of thinking, Cannell and his colleagues showed
that it is possible to motivate respondents to accept
the goal of serious and active reporting by asking an
explicit commitment question as part of the inter-
view. Experimental studies carried out by Cannell
and his associates (Oksenberg et al., 1979a;
Oksenberg, Vinokur and Cannell, 1979b; Cannell et
al., 1981) have shown that commitment questions
improve accuracy of recall. Based on this result, we
added a commitment question in the screening
section of the WMH-CIDI just before the adminis-
tration of lifetime diagnostic stem questions. See the
appendix for the text of this question. 
The ability to answer accurately
Episodic and semantic memories
Research on basic cognitive processes has shown that
memories are organized and stored in structured sets
of information packages commonly called schemas
(Markus and Zajonc, 1985). When the respondent
has a history of many instances of the same experi-
ence that cannot be discriminated, the separate
instances tend to blend together in memory to form a
special kind of memory schema called a ‘semantic
memory’, a general memory for a prototypical experi-
ence (Jobe, White, Kelley, Mingay, Sanchez and
Loftus, 1990; Means and Loftus, 1991). For example,
the person may have a semantic memory of what
panic attacks are like but, due to the fact that he has
had many such attacks in his lifetime, cannot specify
details of any particular panic attack. In comparison,
when the respondent has had only a small number of
lifetime experiences of a certain sort or when one
instance stands out in memory as much different
from the others, a memory can probably be recovered
for that particular episode. This is called an ‘episodic
memory’. 
In the case of memories of illness experiences,
memory schemas tend to include not only semantic
memories of prototypic symptoms but also personal
theories about causes, course, and cure (Leventhal,
Nerenz and Steele, 1984; Skelton and Croyle, 1991).
Some of these theories will conceptualize the experi-
ence in illness terms and others as a moral failing, a
punishment from God, or a normal reaction to stress
(Gilman, 1988). These interpretations influence the
extent to which different memory cues are capable of
triggering the schemas. 
The effects of memory schemas and the difference
between semantic and episodic memories are central
themes in research on autobiographical memory.
Indeed, we must determine whether episodic memories


----- Page 9 (native text) -----
WMH Survey Initiative Version of the CIDI
101
can be recovered and whether the respondent is
answering the questions by referring to episodic
memories or by drawing inferences of what the past
must have been like on the basis of more general
semantic memories. Research shows that people are
more likely to recover episodic memories for experi-
ences that are recent, distinctive, and unique, while
for experiences that are frequent, typical, and
regular, people will rely more on semantic memories
(Brewer, 1986; Belli, 1988; Menon, 1994). 
Asking questions without knowing the limits of memory
When a survey question is designed to ask about a
particular instance of an experience, it must be posed
in such a way that the respondent knows he is being
asked to recover an episodic memory. Furthermore,
the researcher must have some basis for assuming
that an episodic memory can be recovered for this
experience. If it cannot, a question that asks for such
a memory implicitly invites the respondent to infer
or estimate rather than remember and this can have
adverse effects on quality of reporting later in the
interview (Pearson, Ross and Dawes, 1992). In
comparison, when a question is designed to recover a
semantic memory or to use semantic memories to
arrive at an answer by estimation, that should be
made clear. 
One difficulty with these injunctions in the case
of retrospective recall questions about lifetime
psychiatric disorder is uncertainty about what level
of recall accuracy to expect. Therefore, as part of the
WMH-CIDI pilot work, we debriefed pilot respon-
dents with an explicit eye towards pinpointing
questions that were difficult to answer. When ques-
tions of this sort were discovered, an attempt was
made to revise the questions to reduce the memory
problem either by allowing explicitly for estimation
(for example, explicitly asking respondents to
provide a rough estimate), by providing categorical
responses that reduce the complexity of the task, or
by decomposing the question into sub-questions that
mimic effective memory search processes. Examples
of question wording modifications that employ each
of these strategies are presented in the appendix.
The lifetime review section
The previous four sections of the paper review a
number of strategies that we use to optimize data
quality in the WMH-CIDI either by improving
understanding, by enhancing respondent commit-
ment, or by adjusting questions to recognize that
some respondents will be less able than others to
provide completely accurate responses. We use some
additional strategies to deal with two or more of
these problems at once. The most important of the
latter was a life review section that we administer
near the beginning of the interview in an effort to
both motivate and facilitate active memory search in
answering diagnostic stem questions. This section
starts out with an introduction that explains to
respondents that the questions might be difficult 
to answer because they require respondents to review
their entire lives. The introduction then goes on to
say that despite this difficulty it was very important
for the research that these questions be answered
accurately. The introduction ends with the injunc-
tion to ‘please take your time and think carefully
before answering’ and a commitment question that
asks respondents if they were willing to do this.
The diagnostic stem questions for all core diag-
noses are administered directly following the
commitment question. The questions are all
included in the RB with a written instruction to
‘take your time and think carefully before answering’.
Interviewers were instructed to read the diagnostic
stem questions slowly in an effort to emphasize their
importance and to use motivational probes to
encourage active memory search. Our intent in
developing this section was that we could both
explain the serious and difficult nature of the task
and motivate respondents to engage in active
memory search we hoped to stimulate by combining
all the stem questions after a fairly detailed motiva-
tional introduction. We also recognize, based on our
debriefing studies, that CIDI respondents quickly
learn the logic of the stem-branch structure after a
few sections and recognize that they can shorten the
interview considerably by saying no to the stem ques-
tions. This problem has been removed by asking all
the stem questions near the beginning of the inter-
view before the logic of the stem-branch structure
became clear. Furthermore, respondents told us in
debriefing interviews that their energy flagged as the
interview progressed, making it much more difficult
to carry out a serious memory search later in the
interview than at the beginning.
As previously noted, Cannell and his associates
carried out experiments that documented powerful


----- Page 10 (native text) -----
Kessler and Üstün
102
effects of commitment questions on the accuracy of
survey responses (Oksenberg et al., 1979a; 1979b;
Cannell et al., 1981). A similar experiment was
carried out in conjunction with the NCS to evaluate
the effects of using a lifetime review section in
conjunction with commitment and motivational
probes. A random sample of 200 community respon-
dents was randomized either to the standard version
of the CIDI or to a version that was identical except
that it included the life review section. As reported
in more detail elsewhere (Kessler, Wittchen et al.,
1998), this experiment documented that the life
review section led to a significant increase in the
proportion of respondents who endorsed diagnostic
stem questions. For example, while 26.7% of respon-
dents in the standard CIDI condition endorsed the
‘sad, blue, or depressed’ stem question for major
depression, a significantly higher 40.6% did so in the
life-review condition. Importantly, a clinical validity
study documented that this increased prevalence of
stem endorsement was not accompanied by a reduc-
tion in sensitivity with regard to clinical diagnoses,
documenting that additional true cases were discov-
ered by the use of the life review section and the
accompanying commitment and motivation probes.
These results were the basis of adopting the lifetime
review section in the WMH-CIDI.
Substantive modifications of diagnostic sections
In addition to the methodological modifications
described above, a number of important substantive
modifications were made to the diagnostic assess-
ments in the WMH-CIDI aimed at addressing
current uncertainties about the prevalence, impair-
ment, and appropriate diagnostic criteria for the
disorders assessed in the interview. Perhaps the most
important of these uncertainties concerns diagnostic
thresholds. This uncertainty arose, in no small part,
as a reaction to the results of early DIS and CIDI
surveys, which showed that as much as 50% of the
general population of some countries meet lifetime
criteria for one or more ICD or DSM mental disor-
ders and as many as 30% meet criteria for such a
disorder in the past 12 months (WHO International
Consortium in Psychiatric Epidemiology, 2000; Bijl
et al., 2003). These percentages seemed implausibly
high to many critics, leading to the suggestion that
the lay-administered diagnostic interviews in these
surveys were upwardly biased (Brugha, Bebbington
and Jenkins, 1999; Wittchen et al., 1999). However,
clinical calibration studies showed that the preva-
lence estimates in these surveys were not upwardly
biased (Kessler, Wittchen et al., 1998; Eaton,
Neufeld, Chen and Cai, 2000), leading critics to
conclude that the ICD and DSM systems themselves
are overly inclusive (Pincus, Zarin and First, 1998;
Regier, Kaelber, Rae, Farmer, Knauper, Kessler and
Norquist, 1998; Üstün, Chatterji and Rehm, 1998). 
This conclusion was instrumental in causing an
APA task force to add a clinical significance crite-
rion to many disorders in the DSM-IV in order to
remind readers of the basic definition of a mental
disorder in the introduction of the manual as
requiring clinically significant distress or impair-
ment. However, even when this additional
requirement was applied post hoc to DIS and CIDI
surveys carried out in the US, the 12-month preva-
lence of having at least one DSM disorder,
equivalent to approximately 37 million adults in the
US, continued to substantially exceed the number
who could be helped with current treatment
resources (Narrow, Rae, Robins and Regier, 2002). In
recognition of this problem, several more restrictive
definitions have been proposed that can be used to
narrow the number of people qualifying for treat-
ment (National Advisory Mental Health Council,
1993; Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration, 1993; Regier, 2000; Narrow et al.,
2002; Regier and Narrow, 2002).
Others, however, have argued against the proposal
to narrow the definition of mental disorders
(Mechanic, 2003) and have, in some cases, even
argued that the definitions should be expanded to
include what would currently be considered
subthreshold cases (see, for example, Merikangas,
Zhang, Avenevoli, Acharyya, Neuenschwander and
Angst, 2003). These critics have noted that research
shows many syndromes currently defined as mental
disorders to be extremes on continua that appear not
to have meaningful thresholds (see Preisig,
Merikangas and Angst, 2001). This is important for
research purposes because exploration of the full
continua rather than the currently established diag-
nostic thresholds yields greater power in studies of
genetic and environmental risk factors (Benjamin,
Ebstein and Lesch, 1998).With regard to diagnostic
thresholds, these critics note that research has shown
subthreshold cases on some of these continua to be


----- Page 11 (native text) -----
WMH Survey Initiative Version of the CIDI
103
quite impaired (for examples, Judd, Paulus, Wells and
Rapaport, 1996) and to have significantly elevated
risk of serious outcomes such as suicide attempts and
hospitalization for emotional problems (Kessler,
Barber, Beck, Berglund, Cleary, McKenas, Pronk,
Simon, Stang, Üstün and Wang, 2003). This means
that the development of early interventions to treat
these subthreshold cases might prevent progression
along a given severity continuum, thereby reducing
the prevalence of serious cases in a cost-effective
fashion (Eaton, Badawi and Melton, 1995). Removal
of these subthreshold cases from the ICD or DSM
systems, in comparison, might result in the impor-
tance of developing interventions for these cases to
be ignored as well as to a distortion occurring in the
reality that mental disorders, like physical disorders,
vary widely in seriousness (Spitzer, 1998; Kendell,
2002).
The final adjudication between these competing
views will doubtless take years to occur and will rely
on emerging information about the genetics of
mental disorders as well as on information about
treatment response across the range of the symptom
severity continuum. To the extent that epidemiolog-
ical data will play a part, they will, at a minimum,
need to include assessments of subthreshold cases,
assessments of symptom severity in dimensional
terms, and evaluation of the association between
symptom severity and impairment. The WMH-CIDI
is designed to do all three of these things, as briefly
discussed in the next three subsections. 
Subthreshold disorders
Our general approach in modifying WMH-CIDI
diagnostic sections is to include as much information
as possible about subthreshold cases, with the precise
nature of the subthreshold assessment guided by the
literature and our preliminary studies. For example,
in the case of depression, even though the diagnostic
criteria require dysphoria or anhedonia that persists
most of the day, we found that a great many people
otherwise meet the criteria for a major depressive
episode except that their symptoms persist only for
about half the day or sometimes less than half the
day. We include these people in our assessment of
depressive disorders. In addition, we include people
with as few as two symptoms in their worst lifetime
episode of depression in order to capture cases of
minor depression even though larger numbers are
required in the ICD and DSM systems to be consid-
ered a major depressive episode. We also include
people with depressive episodes as short as 3 days if
they report ever having episodes of this sort most
months for an entire year in a row. This is done to
allow an assessment of recurrent brief depression
(Angst, Merikangas, Scheidegger and Wicki, 1990). 
To take a second example, in the case of panic we
carry out a complete assessment of people who report
at least one lifetime limited symptom attack or panic
attack. Age of onset and the circumstances
surrounding the single attack were collected. Parallel
information is collected about the first lifetime
attack among people who meet criteria for a panic
disorder. Separate information is obtained from the
latter people about age of onset of the transition from
panic attacks to panic disorder. Previous research has
shown that only about half of the people who have a
single lifetime panic attack go on to develop panic
disorder (Eaton, Kessler, Wittchen and Magee,
1994). The information collected in the WMH-CIDI
allows us to obtain separate prevalence estimates of
panic attacks and panic disorder as well as to study
the separate predictors of progression from panic
attacks to panic disorder. A similar distinction is
made between specific fears and phobias, with sepa-
rate dating of age of onset of the fear, and avoidance.
As a final example, we include a complete assess-
ment of generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) for
respondents who report having episodes that persist
at least one month, the original duration require-
ment in DSM-III, rather than requiring the 6-month
minimum episode duration stipulated in DSM-IV
and ICD-10. The decision by the developers of the
DSM to increase the 1-month minimum duration
requirement for GAD in DSM-III to six months in
DSM-III-R was based on the fact that the vast
majority of patients with GAD in treatment samples
had comorbid depression unless their episodes of
GAD persisted for at least six months (Breslau and
Davis, 1985). However, subsequent epidemiological
research showed that pure cases of GAD with shorter
durations exist in the general population, but seldom
come to clinical attention because professional help-
seeking is often driven by comorbid disorders. Yet
this does not mean that people with recurrent
episodes of GAD lasting less than 6 months are not
impaired. Indeed, the largest and most comprehen-
sive study of this matter, carried out by Maier et al.


----- Page 12 (native text) -----
Kessler and Üstün
104
(2000) in the WHO study of mental disorders in
primary care, found that the 1-month duration
requirement is optimal for distinguishing cases of
GAD from non-cases in terms of role impairment.
The decision to require a minimum duration of 1
month rather than 6 months in the WMH-CIDI is
based on this result. For a similar reason we assess
cases of subthreshold GAD who fail to report all the
psycho-physiological symptoms required by DSM-IV
or ICD-10.
Symptom persistence and severity 
The focus of the CIDI, like that of the DIS before it,
has largely been on lifetime disorders, although a 12-
month version of the CIDI was developed in the last
revision of the instrument. The standard lifetime
version of the CIDI provides only superficial infor-
mation about recent disorders by asking no more
than a single question – ‘How recently have you had
[the disorder]?’ – to learn about recency after the
assessment of lifetime symptom clustering. This
makes it impossible to characterize the persistence of
disorders over the recent past or to know whether
respondents with a lifetime disorder have met full
criteria during the recent past. As 12-month preva-
lence is of great interest for needs assessment, this
superficial consideration of 12-month prevalence is a
serious limitation. The WMH-CIDI addresses this
problem by obtaining information about 12-month
symptoms and persistence of symptoms over the past
year. In the case of panic and intermittent explosive
disorder, this is done by asking about number of
attacks in the past 12 months as well as about the
number of months when the respondent had at least
one attack. In the case of episodic disorders, such as
depression and GAD, 12-month duration is assessed
by asking how many weeks out of the past 52 the
respondent has been in an episode. 
Similar data are obtained in the WMH-CIDI to
increase understanding of long-term course. In the
standard version of the CIDI, information on course
is limited to two questions about age of onset and age
of recency of the disorder. The WMH-CIDI expands
this assessment to ask about persistence in the
interval between these two ages along the same lines
used to assess 12-month persistence (for example,
with questions about lifetime number of panic and
anger attacks, lifetime number of episodes of depres-
sion and mania and GAD, typical and longest
durations of episodes, and number of years in which
the respondent experienced at least one attack or
one episode of the disorder). In keeping with the
prior comments on the limits of autobiographical
memory, and consistent with the results of our
methodological pilot studies, we recognize that
respondents 
with 
complex 
histories 
of
psychopathology will be unable to recover episodic
memories in answering these long-term recall ques-
tions. As a result, the questions are worded in such a
way as to make it clear that we are looking for
semantic memories. Even with this limitation in
mind, though, these data can be extremely useful 
in distinguishing between broad categories of people
who have had only one or two, a few, more than a
few, or a large number of attacks or episodes of
episodic disorders.
The WMH-CIDI also includes much more exten-
sive information on symptom severity than the
standard CIDI. Each diagnostic section contains
explicit questions about the depth of the distress
caused by the disorder along with a 12-month
symptom severity scale based on a fully structured
version of a standard clinical scale. For example, the
quick self-report version of the Inventory of
Depressive Symptomatology (Rush, Gullion, Basco,
Jarrett and Trivedi, 1996) is used to assess the
severity of 12-month depression, while a structured
version of the Panic Disorder Severity Scale (Shear,
Brown, Barlow, Money, Sholomskas, Woods,
Gorman and Papp, 1997) is used to assess the
severity of 12-month panic. These scales are admin-
istered only to respondents who meet the
subthreshold diagnostic requirements for the disorder
in question and who report that they had symptoms
in the past 12 months. Our hope in embedding these
standard clinical symptom severity scales in the
WMH-CIDI is that they will help create a crosswalk
between the findings in epidemiological surveys and
the findings in clinical studies.
Internal impairment 
The issue of impairment is related to the issue of
clinical significance. The standard CIDI asks only
one dichotomous disorder-specific role impairment
question for all disorders: ‘Did (the disorder) ever
interfere a lot with your life or activities?’ No ques-
tions about impairment are asked independent of
disorders. This is inadequate for evaluating whether


----- Page 13 (native text) -----
WMH Survey Initiative Version of the CIDI
105
there is clinically significant role impairment associ-
ated with a particular syndrome or for investigating
the implications of changing diagnostic thresholds
on evaluations of impairment. As a result, the
WMH-CIDI has substantially expanded the number
of the within-section questions about the impair-
ments caused by individual disorders. These are
called ‘internal’ impairment questions because they
ask respondents to evaluate the impairment caused
by a given disorder. As described below, the WMH-
CIDI also includes two important sections that assess
‘external’ impairment, by which we mean overall
impairment in various areas of functioning without
reference to the cause of the impairment. Although
most of the WMH-CIDI internal impairment ques-
tions focus on the worst lifetime impairment due to a
particular disorder, we also include five questions in
each diagnostic section that assess impairment
among 12-month cases. Four of these are the
Sheehan Disability Scales (Leon, Olfson, Portera,
Farber and Sheehan, 1997), which ask respondents
to rate the impairments caused by a focal disorder
during the one month in the past year when it was
most severe in each of four areas of life (household
duties, employment, social life, and close personal
relationships) on a 0–10 scale that uses a visual
analogue scale with impairment categories of none
(0), mild (1–3), moderate (4–6), severe (7–9), and
very severe (10). The fifth question asks respondents
to estimate the total number of days out of 365 in the
past 12 months when they were totally unable to
work or carry out their other usual activities because
of the focal disorder. 
External impairment 
Two sections of the WMH-CIDI assess external
impairment. The first is the section on 30-day func-
tioning, which is made up of the WHO Disability
Assessment Schedule (WHO-DAS; World Health
Organization, 1998; Rehm, Üstün, Saxena, Nelson,
Chatterji, Ivis and Adlaf, 1999). The WHO-DAS
assesses both the persistence (number of days in the
past 30) and severity (during the days when difficul-
ties in functioning occurred) of difficulties in the
respondent’s functioning during the 30 days before
the interview due to all physical and mental health
problems. The dimensions of functioning assessed in
the WHO-DAS are keyed to the major categories in
the 
WHO 
International 
Classification 
of
Functioning, Disability, and Health (World Health
Organization, 2001). The second section of the
WMH-CIDI that assesses external impairment is 
the section on employment, which includes the
WHO Health and Work Performance Questionnaire
(HPQ) (Kessler, Barber et al., 2003). The HPQ is an
expansion of the work impairment section of the
WHO-DAS that assesses the workplace costs of
illness in terms of absenteeism, decrements in perfor-
mance while on the job, and critical workplace
incidents (such as work-related accidents). The HPQ
was developed in order to provide data to employers
and government health policy makers about the 
indirect costs of illness on the productive capacity of
the labour force. 
Why assess both internal and external impairment?
It is important to obtain both internal (disorder-
specific) and external (global) assessments of
impairment. Disorder-specific assessments are impor-
tant because they can be used to make direct
comparisons among different mental and physical
disorders. These direct comparisons are becoming
increasingly central to healthcare resource allocation
decisions as evidence-based medicine becomes the
basis for more and more triage decisions. However,
disorder-specific assessments are limited by the fact
that they require respondents to make inferences
about the cause of their impairments. This can be
difficult, especially among the large number of
people with comorbid conditions who might have a
hard time sorting out which of their conditions
causes various aspects of impairment.
It is important to obtain external assessments
because they allow the researcher to overcome the
limitation of disorder-specific assessments by empiri-
cally estimating the relative effects of different
disorders from prediction equations in which
measures of the prevalence of these disorders and
their comorbidities are included as predictors of
global impairment. However, as it is not possible to
make detailed assessments of all possible disorders for
inclusion in such prediction equations, estimates of
the impairments due to specific disorders based on
analysis of such equations are necessarily imperfect.
Furthermore, replication of results involving the esti-
mated effects of a focal disorder on impairment using
external comparisons requires measurement of
exactly the same set of control conditions across


----- Page 14 (native text) -----
Kessler and Üstün
106
studies. This is infeasible. As a result, the internal
assessment of impairment is more feasible despite its
conceptual limitations in comparison to the external
assessment of impairment. 
Ranking the impairments of mental and physical disorders
In order to provide comparative information on the
impairments of mental and physical disorders, a
checklist of chronic physical disorders is included in
the WMH-CIDI. Internal impairment is assessed
with the five questions described above for one
randomly selected chronic condition per respondent.
The random sampling strategy was used because
comprehensive assessment of internal impairment
for all possible chronic physical disorders would be
too time-consuming for a one-session survey devoted
to mental disorders. However, by taking care to carry
out a random selection for each respondent from
among all the conditions reported by that respon-
dent, it is possible to weight the internal impairment
data by the number of conditions reported to recover
an equal-probability sample for each chronic condi-
tion for purposes of comparative assessment of
within-disorder role impairments.
The chronic conditions checklist was modified
from the list used in the National Health Interview
Survey (NHIS) (National Center for Health
Statistics, 2003) to ask about the lifetime occur-
rence, age of onset, and recency of commonly
occurring chronic conditions that are thought to be
associated with substantial role impairment. A
number of methodological studies have found that
such checklists yield valid data about disorders
brought to medical attention or that significantly
limit activities when compared to independent
medical records (Halabi, Zurayk, Awaida, Darwish
and Saab, 1992; Heliovaara, Aromaa, Klaukka,
Knekt, Joukamaa and Impivaara, 1993; Edwards,
Winn, Kurlantzick, Sheridan, Berk, Retchin and
Collins, 1994; Gross, Bentur, Elhayany, Sherf and
Epstein, 1996; Kriegsman, Penninx, van Eijk, Boeke
and Deeg, 1996; Mackenbach, Looman and van der
Meer, 1996). For example, moderate to high agree-
ment (Cohen’s κ; Cohen, 1960) has been found
between self-reports and medical records regarding
arthritis (κ= 0.41), asthma (κ= 0.55), diabetes (κ=
0.82), and high blood pressure (κ= 0.73) (Edwards et
al., 1994). These are lower bound estimates because
the medical record is not a ‘gold standard’, especially
for chronic conditions often not brought to medical
attention (such as arthritis), for poorly defined
conditions (such as back pain), and for symptom-
based conditions in which the medical record merely
reproduces symptoms that are based on self-report
(such as chronic headaches).
In the case of symptom-based conditions, a
number of more extensive scales are used instead of
the single yes-no questions in the chronic conditions
checklist. For example, we include a brief screening
scale to assess migraines that reproduces physician
diagnoses much more accurately than a single check-
list question (Lipton, Dodick, Sadovsky, Kolodner,
Endicott, Hettiarachchi and Harrison, 2003). Other
symptom-based conditions that are assessed with
screening scales include chronic fatigue syndrome,
irritable bowel syndrome, insomnia, and unexplained
chronic pain disorder. 
Comparative analyses of internal impairment
could add important information to the growing body
of data that physical disorders often cause substantial
role impairments (Zeiss and Lewinsohn, 1988; Wells
et al., 1989; Wells, Stewart, Hays, Burnam, Rogers,
Daniels, Berry, Greenfield and Ware, 1989; Stewart,
Greenfield and Hays, 1989; Ormel, Von Korff, Üstün,
Pini, Korten and Oldehinkel, 1994; Hays, Wells,
Sherbourne, Rogers and Spritzer, 1995; van den Bos,
1995; Verbrugge and Patrick, 1995; Penninx,
Beekman, Ormel, Kriegsman, Boeke, van Eijk and
Deeg, 1996; Kempen, Ormel, Brilman and Relyveld,
1997; Ormel, Kempen, Deeg, Brilman, van Sonderen
and Relyveld, 1998; Kempen, Sanderman, Miedema,
Mayboom-de and Ormel, 2000) and mental disorders
(Rhode, Lewinsohn and Seeley, 1990; Broadhead,
Blazer, George and Tse, 1990; Tweed, 1993; Coryell,
Scheftner, Keller, Endicott, Maser and Klerman,
1993; Ormel et al., 1994; Ormel et al., 1998; Bijl and
Ravelli, 2000). Such results have led to an interest
among health policy researchers in the possibility
that expanded outreach and guideline-concordant
treatment of impairing chronic disorders might
represent an investment opportunity for employers
(Kessler, Greenberg, Mickelson, Meneades and
Wang, 2001) as well as for governments (Murray and
Lopez, 1996). However, not all mental disorders have
been studied in this way. The WMH-CIDI assess-
ment of internal impairment for each mental
disorder and for one random chronic physical condi-
tion allows this to be done.


----- Page 15 (native text) -----
WMH Survey Initiative Version of the CIDI
107
The WMH-CIDI assessment of external impair-
ment has the potential to be even more important in
this regard. A central limitation of the existing liter-
ature on the role impairments of chronic conditions
is the lack of attention to the co-occurrence of
multiple disorders in the same patient. Many people
with chronic disorders suffer from more than one
disorder (Dewa and Lin, 2000). Pure disorders are, in
general, less impairing than co-occurring disorders in
clinical samples (Ormel et al., 1994). The co-
occurrence of mental disorders with chronic physical
disorders is of special importance in this regard, as
strong patterns of co-occurrence with mental disor-
ders have been found for a number of commonly
occurring physical disorders both in general popula-
tion samples (Neeleman, Ormel and Bijl, 2001) and
in primary care samples (Berardi, Berti Ceroni,
Leggieri, Rucci, Üstün and Ferrari, 1999).
Clinical studies have found excess impairment
associated with co-occurring mental disorders among
people with chronic physical disorders (Sullivan,
LaCroix, Russo and Walker, 2001). As efforts
increase to rationalize the allocation of healthcare
resources guided by the criteria of evidence-based
medicine, consideration of the role played by co-
occurring mental disorders in causing impairment
among patients with chronic physical disorders
becomes all the more important. The inclusion of
the external impairment in the WMH-CIDI makes it
possible to carry out such analyses in general popula-
tion samples by using information about mental
disorders, physical disorders, and their comorbidities
to predict external impairment. 
Part I and Part II diagnoses
The WMH-CIDI is quite a long instrument, with an
average administration time of approximately 2
hours for the full interview. This long administration
time can create practical complications, the most
important of them being that it is often necessary to
administer the interview in two sessions. In order to
address this length problem, a case-control approach
is used in developing the WMH-CIDI whereby a
subsample of respondents who complete the first half
of the interview (Part I), which includes all core diag-
nostic assessments, and who report having no lifetime
history of disorder, are terminated at this mid-point of
the interview. All respondents who meet criteria for
any lifetime mental disorders in the Part I interview,
in comparison, are retained in the second half of the
interview (Part II) along with a probability sub-
sample of non-cases. The default value for the
non-case probability of selection is 25%, although
this can be changed depending on the interests of the
investigator. This sampling fraction leads to Part II
samples typically retaining between 33% and 67% of
all Part I respondents. This case-control subsampling
fraction yields a high ratio of controls to cases for all
but the most prevalent disorders. Statistical power
analysis show that increasing the number of controls
to cases above these levels yields very little improve-
ment in power (Schlesselman, 1982). As the main
purposes of carrying out a WMH-CIDI survey are to
estimate prevalence and correlates of mental disor-
ders, this result implies that the subsampling of
non-cases into Part II retains most of the efficiency of
the full sample for central analyses while substantially
reducing field costs.
Once the Part II subsampling approach is in place,
it becomes clear that average interview length is
reduced whenever a section is moved from Part I to
Part II. Several important, but lengthy, diagnostic
sections in the WMH-CIDI were included in Part II
for this reason. These include the assessments of
post-traumatic stress disorder, obsessive-compulsive
disorder, and non-affective psychosis. It should be
noted that the high comorbidity of these Part II
disorders with the disorders assessed in Part I means
that the great majority of respondents with these
disorders are selected into the Part II sample, leading
to only a small loss of information about the Part II
disorders by placing them in Part II rather than in
Part I. In addition, disorders that are included in the
WMH-CIDI for exploratory purposes are all placed
in Part II. Included here are eating disorders, neuras-
thenia, nicotine dependence, pathological gambling,
premenstrual disorder, and a screen for personality
disorders. 
Options for additional subsampling of the assess-
ment of these exploratory disorders within the Part II
sample (for example, only a random 50% of Part II
respondents receive the assessment of pathological
gambling) are built into the WMH-CIDI skip logic
for investigators who vary in their level of interest in
these exploratory disorders. In addition, a series of
four diagnostic sections are included in Part II for
retrospectively reported childhood and adolescent
disorders. These sections, which are modelled on


----- Page 16 (native text) -----
Kessler and Üstün
108
those developed by Lee Robins for the DSM-IV
version of the DIS, include assessments of Attention-
Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder, Conduct Disorder,
Oppositional-Defiant Disorder, and Separation
Anxiety Disorder. 
Expansions of other WMH-CIDI sections
As noted previously, the main reason for developing
the WMH-CIDI is to expand the instrument beyond
its initial focus on diagnoses to include assessments
of risk factors, consequences, and treatment. The
WMH-CIDI includes 14 sections of this sort. Six
sections assess socio-demographics (employment,
finances, marriage, children, adult and childhood
demographics for the Part I sample, adult demo-
graphics for the Part II sample). Two sections assess
treatment (services, pharmacoepidemiology). The
other six sections assess external impairment,
chronic conditions, non-specific psychological
distress, social networks, family burden, and child-
hood experiences. We already commented on the
external impairment and chronic conditions
sections. A few comments are in order about several
of the other sections.
Socio-demographics
Basic information about socio-demographic variables
– such as age, sex, race, education, marital status, and
employment status – is included in all community
surveys. For the most part, though, this information
is cross-sectional – it assesses the respondent’s
current status on these variables rather than his or
her history. This is fine for ascribed socio-economic
characteristics (such as sex and race), which do not
change over time, but it misses important informa-
tion about the dynamics of achieved statuses, such as
marital status and employment status, which change
over time. This loss of information can be important
if dynamic information is relevant to mental health.
Given the focus of the WMH-CIDI diagnostic
sections on lifetime course, we feel that it is impor-
tant to include dynamic information about achieved
statuses in the interview schedule. As a result, sepa-
rate sections of the interview are devoted to the
respondent’s history in each of the three main areas
of achieved social status – employment, marriage,
and childbearing. 
The details of the assessment differ across the
three sections, but the basic approach is the same.
We begin by asking about timing of initial entry into
roles (for example ages at first dating, first marriage,
first employment, first sexual intercourse, first
becoming pregnant (females) or causing a woman to
become pregnant (males), first having an abortion,
first giving birth). We then ask about role history
(for example, age at onset and duration of each
marriage, age of each child, stability of employment
history). Information about current role incumbency
(for example, current employment status, current
marital status, number and ages of children, which
children live with the respondent), which is the
focus of the assessment in most surveys, is only the
final part of the assessments. The exception is Part I
respondents terminated before the Part II interview,
who are administered a brief socio-demographic
battery that focuses only on current status. 
The additional socio-demographic sections –
childhood demographics, adult demographics, and
finances – also obtain much more detail about these
areas than in most other surveys. The section on
childhood demographics asks about age of parents
when the respondent was born, size of sib-ship and
birth order, marital status of parents, nativity,
number of generations in the country among natives,
age at immigration among the foreign born, country
of origins for people who were originally from
another country, native tongue, education, child-
hood religion and religiosity, urbanicity of childhood
residence, and stability of childhood residence. The
section on adult demographics asks about whether
parents are living or dead, age and cause of death of
each deceased parent, race-ethnicity, subjective
closeness of racial-ethnic identification, citizenship,
religious preference, religiosity, amount of time
during adulthood when the respondent was in a jail
or prison or correctional facility, amount of time
homeless, amount of time institutionalized in a
hospital or nursing home, and current subjective
social class position. The section on finances asks
both about objective finances and subjective finan-
cial stress. With regard to objective finances,
information is obtained both on income and assets.
Income information is obtained for the entire house-
hold broken down by income of the respondent, the
respondent’s spouse, other family members, income
from government assistance programmes, and other
income. This disaggregation of income is very useful
in analyses of social class and mental illness, where it


----- Page 17 (native text) -----
WMH Survey Initiative Version of the CIDI
109
is possible to distinguish associations that might be
due to direct selection (respondent income), assorta-
tive mating (spouse income), and other sources.
Treatment and pharmacoepidemiology
Treatment, like impairment, is assessed in the WMH-
CIDI 
both 
internally 
and 
externally. 
In 
the internal assessment, respondents who meet
criteria for a particular disorder are asked at the end of
the diagnostic section whether they ever sought
professional treatment for that disorder and, if so, at
what age they first sought this treatment. They are
also asked if they ever obtained treatment that they
considered helpful for the disorder and, if so, how
many different professionals they had to see before
they received helpful treatment. Respondents who say
they never received helpful treatment are asked how
many professionals they ever saw for the disorder. This
kind of information, when coupled with information
on age at onset of the disorder, can be used to study
patterns and predictors of delays in initial treatment
contact after first onset of a mental disorder.
Analyses of this sort in epidemiological samples
consistently find pervasive delays in initial treatment
contact after first onset of a mental disorder that are
inversely related to age at onset, cohort, and illness
severity (Kessler, Olfson and Berglund, 1998; Olfson,
Kessler, Berglund and Lin, 1998). It is also unclear
whether patient reports of being helped would be
confirmed in objective evaluations. Nonetheless,
patient perception, even if not entirely accurate, has
to be considered an important dimension of treatment
effectiveness that has not previously been seriously
considered in psychiatric epidemiological surveys. 
In the external assessment of treatment, the
WMH-CIDI asks respondents about ever having
treatment for problems with their emotions or
mental health. Questions about inpatient treatment
include asking about lifetime hospitalization, age of
first hospitalization, number of lifetime hospitaliza-
tions, amount of time spent in hospitals for these
problems over the life course, and hospitalization in
the past 12 months. Questions about outpatient
treatment include asking about treatment from each
of a wide range of professionals. For each type of
professional seen, information is recorded on age of
first receiving treatment and age of most recent
treatment. For those who received treatment in the
past 12 months, information is obtained on number
of visits with each type of professional, average dura-
tion of time with the professional, whether the
respondent is still in treatment and, if not, whether
the termination of treatment occurred because the
respondent completed the course of treatment or
quit. Summary questions are then asked of all respon-
dents who were in any type of 12-month treatment
about all the money spent out of pocket for treat-
ment with all professionals over that interval of time,
reasons for seeking treatment, and reasons for termi-
nating treatment among those who did terminate.
Respondents who did not receive any treatment in
the past 12 months are asked whether they ever felt
that they might need professional help for their
emotions or mental health in the past 12 months. If
so, they are asked about reasons for not seeking
professional help.
A separate pharmacoepidemiology section asks
about the use of prescription and non-prescription
medications in the past 12 months for ‘problems with
your emotions, nerves, mental health, substance use,
energy, concentration, sleep, or ability to cope with
stress’. An exhaustive list of prescription medications
is provided as a visual aid in answering these ques-
tions. Interviewers are instructed to use motivational
probes to encourage respondents to think carefully
and exhaustively to list all medications taken during
the recall period. Interviewers are also instructed to
have respondents get their medicine bottles if they
still have them in order to copy down information
about the name of the medicine and the recom-
mended dose. For each medicine taken, questions are
then asked about number of days taken out of the
past 365, dose, whether the medicine is taken under
the supervision of a doctor. If not, information is
collected about where the respondent obtains the
medicine. If taken under the supervision of a doctor,
a question is asked whether the doctor is a psychia-
trist, some other mental health specialist, a primary
care doctor, or some other kind of doctor. If taken
under professional supervision, a question is asked
how about the respondent failed to take the medi-
cine at the recommended dose and times. Finally,
questions are asked about whether the medicine is
still being taken and, if not, reasons for terminating
use, including side effects.
Non-specific psychological distress 
The Part II interview includes screening scales about


----- Page 18 (native text) -----
Kessler and Üstün
110
the frequency of non-specific psychological distress
during the 30 days before the interview and in the
worst month of the past year. These scales were
developed originally for use in the NHIS in order to
screen for Serious Mental Illness (SMI) (defined as
any DSM anxiety or mood or psychotic disorder asso-
ciated with a Global Assessment of Functioning
score less than 60). They have subsequently been
adopted not only by the NHIS, but also by a number
of other large ongoing national government health
surveys in the US as well as by the Australian and
Canadian governments for use in their ongoing health
surveys. The 10 questions in the scales were selected
from a large item pool aimed at sensitively measuring
the first principal factor of non-specific psychological
distress, which is consistently found in community
surveys of distress, in the clinically significant range of
its distribution (Furukawa, Andrews, Slade and
Kessler, 2003). 
A validation study carried out in a community
sample showed that the 10-question scale does an
excellent job of screening for SMI (Kessler, Barker,
Colpe, Epstein, Gfroerer, Hiripi, Howes, Normand,
Manderscheid, Walters and Zaslavsky, 2003).
However, the sensitivity and specificity of the scale
might vary across populations making it useful to
include the scale in WMH-CIDI surveys so that new
calibrations can be made across many different popu-
lations. When accurate rules of this sort exist, this
brief screening scale can be very useful as an inexpen-
sive mental health needs surveillance tool in ongoing
general-purpose tracking surveys. Calibration rules
and software for transforming scores on this scale into
individual-level predicted probabilities of SMI and
other global measures of disorder are being posted as
they are developed, not only for the US but also for all
countries in the WMH Survey Initiative.
Family burden
Although the questions on internal and external
impairment do an excellent job of assessing the ways
in which mental disorders affect the people who have
these disorders, the effects on the families of the
mentally ill are ignored. This is a major gap as there
is clear evidence that mental disorders can create
enormous family burdens (Saunders, 2003; Tsang,
Tam, Chan and Chang, 2003). In an effort to correct
this situation, a separate section was developed for
the WMH-CIDI on family burden. Unlike all other
sections of the interview, this section treats the
respondent as the ‘family member’ whose burden is
being assessed rather than as the person whose
mental health is being assessed. This was based on
concerns that respondents would be unable to
provide accurate informant information on the
burdens their disorders imposed on their loved ones.
An additional virtue of this method is that it
provides an easy way to integrate information on
burden into population estimates, something that
would be extremely difficult to do without enumer-
ating networks if the respondent was treated as the
focal respondent whose illness affected many
different family members rather than as a representa-
tive family member who might be burdened by the
illness of any number of family members. 
The logic of the section requires us to begin by
defining a network of first-degree relatives. This is
done by asking the respondent how many living first-
degree relatives he has, separately reporting the
number of parents, siblings, children, and whether or
not he has a spouse. The respondent is then told that
we have a few questions about the health problems of
these individuals. After enumerating the network in
this way, the respondent is asked if any of these indi-
viduals has any of 12 serious health problems. These
include the following, in the order they are asked:
cancer; serious heart problems; a serious memory
problem, like senility or dementia; mental retarda-
tion; a permanent physical disability, like blindness
or paralysis; any other serious chronic physical
illness; alcohol or drug problems; serious depression;
serious anxiety; schizophrenia or psychosis; manic-
depression; or any other serious chronic mental
illness. Note that the threshold of problems is set
high (for example, ‘serious depression’ rather than
‘depression’) and that open-ended questions are
included about other serious chronic physical and
mental illnesses at the end of the lists of explicit
physical and mental disorders. The open ends are put
at the end so that the earlier explicit disorders can
provide a context for defining the severity level we
want respondents to be thinking about when
responding to the open-ended questions. 
Respondents who report having any first-degree
relatives with any of the 12 health problems are then
asked a series of questions about how these problems,
taken as a whole, affect the life of the respondent.
Included here are questions about the respondent


----- Page 19 (native text) -----
WMH Survey Initiative Version of the CIDI
111
helping to wash or dress the ill person, helping with
practical things (for example, paperwork, housework,
local transportation, and taking medications), and
spending more time with the ill person(s) or giving
them more emotional support than they would if the
illness(es) were not present. The respondent then
estimates the number of hours per week he or she
spends doing things related to the health problems of
these family members and the amount of money he
spends per month because of these problems.
Emotional effects of the problems on the respondent
are then briefly assessed (for example, extent of
worry, anxiety, depression, and embarrassment
caused by the problems). Finally, the Sheehan
Disability Scales are used to have the respondent rate
the extent to which family member health problems
interfere with his or her functioning in the same four
areas of functioning used in the assessment of
internal impairment (household duties, employment,
social life, and close personal relationships).
The use of the Sheehan scales makes it possible to
compare the effects on functioning of the respon-
dent’s own illnesses compared to the illnesses of
family members. More generally, by creating 48
separate variables (for each of the 12 illnesses for
each of the four types of first-degree relatives, using
counts to deal with the situation where more than
one family member of a given type has a particular
type of illness), regression analysis can be used to
examine the relative effects of different types of
illnesses on the various dimensions of family burden
included in the assessment. It is also possible, using
this same analysis approach, to study whether partic-
ular aspects of burden are greater for female than
male focal respondents exposed to the same profile
of family illness, to examine how burden changes
when the structural relationship between the focal
respondent and the ill person changes (for example,
the illness of a child versus of a parent), and to eval-
uate the effects of network illness comorbidity on
respondent burden. As far as we are aware, none of
these has up to now been the subject of systematic
analysis across a wide range of illness categories
considered together in a large-scale community
survey, although each of them has long been studied
in small-scale focused studies of patients and their
families (for example, Chakrabarti, Kulhara and
Verma, 1993; Rupp and Keith, 1993). The inclusion
of the family burden section in the WMH-CIDI
makes it possible to carry out this systematic kind of
analysis.
Childhood experiences
The final section in the WMH-CIDI that we want to
mention is the section on childhood experiences.
The WMH collaborators agreed early on that the
WMH surveys were uniquely positioned to study 
the lifetime effects of traumatic life experiences, with
a special emphasis on the long-term effects of child-
hood adversities. As a result, a fairly extensive series
of questions is included in the WMH-CIDI about
childhood experiences. The questions about child-
hood traumatic events are placed in the trauma
checklist within the PTSD section. The remaining
questions are included in a separate section on child-
hood experiences. This section begins by asking
whether the respondent lived with both of his or her
biological parents until age 16 and, if not, to explain
his or her living situation up to that age. The nature
and age at each important transition obtained in
response to this question are recorded for such events
as death of a parent, parental divorce, adoption, and
the like. Respondents who report living with both
parents up to age 16 are then asked whether a parent
was ever away from home for six months or longer
due to such things as hospitalization, imprisonment,
or military service. The respondent’s age at, and the
duration of, each such event are recorded. A ques-
tion is then asked about whether the respondent was
ever away from home for 6 months or longer due to
such things as hospitalization, boarding school, foster
care, or residential treatment. The respondent’s age
at, and the duration of, each such event are recorded. 
The remainder of the section focuses on respon-
dent reports about their mothers and fathers or, in
the absence of a mother or father during their child-
hood, the man and woman who served as the
equivalents of mother and father. Focusing on the
main parent figure, respondents are asked their
biological relationship to this individual (for
example, grandfather or step-father) as well as the
closeness and warmth of their interpersonal relation-
ships during the years the respondent was growing
up. A modified version of the Parental Bonding
Instrument (Parker, 1989) is used to classify parent-
child 
relationships 
as 
either 
authoritarian,
authoritative, overprotective, or neglectful. A modi-
fied version of the Conflict Tactics Scale (Straus,


----- Page 20 (native text) -----
Kessler and Üstün
112
Hamby, Finkelhor, Moore and Runyan, 1998) is used
to assess the frequency and intensity of parental
violence towards the respondent during the respon-
dent’s childhood. Questions are also asked about
neglect and sexual abuse. Information is then
obtained on parent education, employment status,
occupation if they were employed, and the stability
of their employment during the respondent’s child-
hood. Finally, a modified version of the Family
History Research Diagnostic Criteria Interview
(Andreasen, Endicott, Spitzer and Winokur, 1977) is
used to assess parental psychopathology during the
respondent’s childhood. Separate assessments are
made here of parental depression, panic disorder,
GAD, substance-use disorder, and antisocial person-
ality disorder. 
Overview and future directions 
As noted in the introduction, the CIDI was origi-
nally developed by WHO to be a tool that could help
coordinate the efforts of psychiatric epidemiologists
around the world to carry out community surveys in
which results could be directly compared and cumu-
lated by virtue of using the same instrument. The
WMH-CIDI continues in this tradition by refining
the diagnostic assessments in the original CIDI and
by adding sections that examine risk factors, conse-
quences, and treatment. Like the original CIDI, the
WMH-CIDI was designed to generate diagnoses
using the definitions and criteria of both the ICD
and DSM systems (ICD-10 and DSM-IV). In addi-
tion, like the original CIDI, the WMH-CIDI has
been translated into a number of languages using the
standard WHO translation and back-translation
protocol.
An important WMH-CIDI development is the
establishment of an explicit protocol for modifying
the instrument. In the past, reluctance on the part of
the WHO CIDI Advisory Committee (WHO CIDI-
AC) to work with investigators who proposed
modifications led to idiosyncratic changes made by
individual users in different surveys that reduced
comparability across studies. The new protocol for
modifying the WMH-CIDI calls for users who want
to modify diagnostic questions to include both the
original WMH-CIDI questions and the proposed
new questions in their modified version of the instru-
ment and to carry out blind clinical follow-up
interviews in a stratified probability sample of
concordant and discordant cases in order to evaluate
whether the new questions increase consistency of
WMH-CIDI diagnoses with clinical diagnoses. In
cases where the old and new questions cannot logi-
cally be included in the same instrument, a split
ballot approach is stipulated in which random sub-
samples receive one or the other in the same study. 
Stipulations for the design, instrumentation, and
quality control of WMH-CIDI clinical reappraisal
studies have been established to guarantee endorse-
ment of results by the WHO CIDI-AC. Suggestions
for such methodological studies and results of these
studies will be posted on the WMH-CIDI Web page
along with author attributions. Replication of posi-
tive results in a second endorsed methodological
study will lead to proposed changes being adopted in
the next revision of the WMH-CIDI. A similar
system of making proposed modifications and expan-
sions of the CIDI in ways that do not change 
the diagnostic questions will also be posted on the
WMH-CIDI Web page in order to create a library of
potentially useful alternative questions for future
users. Included here, for example, might be expanded
questions about childhood adversity, a new section
on coping, or more elaborate questions about the
nature of specific fears aimed at subtyping specific
phobias. As with other proposed modifications and
expansions of the instrument, author attributions
will be included with each of these postings. 
Acknowledgements
This paper is a report of the National Comorbidity Survey
Replication (NCS-R). The NCS-R is supported by the
National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH; U01-
MH60220) with supplemental support from the National
Institute of Drug Abuse (NIDA), the Substance Abuse
and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA),
the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation (RWJF; Grant
044708), and the John W. Alden Trust. In addition to
these sources, the creation of the WMH-CIDI was
supported by unrestricted educational grants from the John
D. 
and 
Catherine 
T. 
MacArthur 
Foundation,
GlaxoSmithKline, Eli Lilly and Company, and Pfizer.
Collaborating NCS-R investigators include Ronald C.
Kessler (Principal Investigator, Harvard Medical School),
Kathleen Merikangas (Co-Principal Investigator, NIMH),
James Anthony (Michigan State University), William
Eaton (The Johns Hopkins University), Meyer Glantz
(NIDA), Doreen Koretz (Harvard University), Jane
McLeod (Indiana University), Mark Olfson (Columbia
University College of Physicians and Surgeons), Harold


----- Page 21 (native text) -----
WMH Survey Initiative Version of the CIDI
113
Pincus (University of Pittsburgh), Greg Simon (Group
Health Cooperative), Michael Von Korff (Group Health
Cooperative), Philip Wang (Harvard Medical School),
Kenneth Wells (UCLA), Elaine Wethington (Cornell
University) and Hans-Ulrich Wittchen (Institute of
Clinical Psychology, Technical University Dresden and
Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry). The authors appre-
ciate the helpful comments on earlier drafts of Robert
Belli, Beth-Ellen Pennell, Norbert Schwarz, and Hans-
Ulrich Wittchen. Portions of this paper were previously
published in Kessler et al. (2000) and are used here with the
permission of the publisher, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
A complete list of NCS publications and the full text of all
NCS-R instruments can be found at http://www.hcp.med.
harvard.edu/ncs. Send correspondence to NCS@hcp.med.
harvard.edu.
The development of the WMH-CIDI depended on the
efforts of a great many individuals. Clinical research experts
who worked with us on specific diagnostic sections include
the following: Jules Angst (major depression, mania),
Gavin Andrews (anxiety disorders), James Anthony
(substance disorders), Naomi Breslau (post-traumatic
stress disorder), Emil Coccaro (intermittent explosive
disorder), Ian Falloon (non-affective psychosis), Abby
Fyer (agoraphobia, specific phobia), Josep Maria Haro
(family burden), Richard Heimberg (social phobia), David
Katzelnick (obsessive-compulsive disorder), Martin Keller
(generalized anxiety disorder), Mark Lenzenweger (person-
ality disorders), Armand Lorenger (personality disorders),
Bruce Lydiard (irritable bowel syndrome), Susan McElroy
(intermittent explosive disorder), Kathleen Merikangas
(major depression, mania, nicotine dependence), Dan
Mroczek (non-specific psychological distress), Tom Roth
(sleep disorders), John Rush (major depresson), Marc
Schuckit (substance use disorders), Kathy Shear (panic
disorder, separation anxiety disorder), Derrick Silove (sepa-
ration anxiety disorder), Dan Stein (post-traumatic stress
disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder), Mauricio Tohen
(bipolar disorder), Michael von Korff (chronic pain
disorder), Lynn Wallisch (pathological gambling), Philip
Wang (services, pharmacoepidemiology), Ken Winters
(pathological gambling), and Hans-Ulrich Wittchen
(anxiety disorders). Survey methodology experts who
worked with us on the various question wording studies and
refinements discussed in the first half of the paper include
Robert Belli, Charles Cannell, Barbel Knauper, Beth-Ellen
Pennell, and Norbert Schwarz. The WMH-CIDI built of
the pioneering work of Lee Robins in developing the
Diagnostic Interview Schedule and the original CIDI and
of Hans-Ulrich Wittchen in developing a number of impor-
tant CIDI innovations in his M-CIDI. Neither the original
DIS nor the CIDI and its extensions would have been
possible without the vision of Darrel Regier, who launched
the programme of research that led to the DIS and the
CIDI and subsequently the WMH-CIDI.
References
Aguilar-Gaxiola S, Alegria M, Andrade L, Bijl RV,
Caraveo-Anduaga JJ, DeWit DJ, Kolody B, Kessler RC,
Üstün TB, Vega WA, Wittchen HU. The International
Consortium in Psychiatric Epidemiology. In E
Dragomirecká, A Palcová and H Papezová eds. Social
Psychiatry in Changing Times. Prague, Czech Republic:
Prague Psychiatric Center, 2000.
Alegria M, Kessler RC, Bijl R, Lin E, Heeringa S, Takeuchi
DT, Kolody B. Comparing mental health service use
data across countries. In G Andrews ed. Unmet Need in
Mental Health Service Delivery. Cambridge, United
Kingdom: Cambridge University Press, 2000, 97–118.
Andreasen NC, Endicott J, Spitzer RL, Winokur G. The
family history method using diagnostic criteria.
Reliability and validity. Arch Gen Psychiatry 1977; 34:
1229–35.
Angst J, Merikangas K, Scheidegger P, Wicki W. Recurrent
brief depression: a new subtype of affective disorder. J
Affect Dis (Amsterdam) 1990; 19: 87–98.
Belli RF. Color blend retrievals: compromise memories or
deliberate compromise responses? Mem Cognit 1988;
16: 314–26.
Belson WA. The Design and Understanding of Survey
Questions. Aldershot: Gower, 1981.
Benjamin J, Ebstein RP, Lesch KP. Genes for personality
traits: implications for psychopathology. Int J
Neuropsychopharmacol 1998; 1: 153–68.
Berardi D, Berti Ceroni G, Leggieri G, Rucci P, Üstün TB,
Ferrari G. Mental, physical and functional status in
primary care attenders. Int J Psychiatry Med 1999; 29:
133–48.
Bijl RV, de Graaf R, Hiripi E, Kessler RC, Kohn R, Offord
DR, Üstün TB, Vicente B, Vollebergh WA, Walters EE,
Wittchen HU. The prevalence of treated and untreated
mental disorders in five countries. Health Aff
(Millwood) 2003; 22: 122–33.
Bijl RV, Ravelli A. Current and residual functional
disability associated with psychopathology: findings
from the Netherlands Mental Health Survey and
Incidence Study (NEMESIS). Psychol Med 2000; 30:
657–68.
Breslau N, Davis GC. DSM-III generalized anxiety
disorder: an empirical investigation of more stringent
criteria. Psychiatry Res 1985; 15: 231–8.
Brewer WF. What is autobiographical memory? In DC
Rubin ed. Autobiographical Memory. New York:
Cambridge University Press, 1986, 25–49.
Broadhead WE, Blazer DG, George LK, Tse CK.
Depression, disability days, and days lost from work in a
prospective epidemiologic survey. JAMA 1990; 264:
2524–8.
Brown GW. Life events and measurement. In GW Brown,
TO Harris eds. Life Events and Illness. New York:
Guilford Press, 1989, 3–45.


----- Page 22 (native text) -----
Kessler and Üstün
114
Brugha TS, Bebbington PE, Jenkins R. A difference that
matters: comparisons of structured and semi-structured
psychiatric diagnostic interviews in the general popula-
tion. Psychol Med 1999; 29: 1013–20.
Brugha TS, Jenkins R, Taub N, Meltzer H, Bebbington PE.
A general population comparison of the Composite
International Diagnostic Interview (CIDI) and the
Schedules for Clinical Assessment in Neuropsychiatry
(SCAN). Psychol Med 2001; 31: 1001–13.
Cannell CF, Fowler FJ, Jr., Marquis KH. The influence of
interviewer and respondent psychological and behav-
ioral variables on the reporting in household inter-
views. Vital Health Stat 1 1968; 2: 1–65.
Cannell CF, Miller PV, Oksenberg L. Research on inter-
viewing techniques. In S Leinhardt ed. Sociological
Methodology. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1981,
389–437.
Centers R. A laboratory adaptation of the conversational
procedure for the conditioning of verbal operants.
Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology 1964; 67:
334–9.
Chakrabarti S, Kulhara P, Verma SK. The pattern of
burden in families of neurotic patients. Soc Psychiatry
Psychiatr Epidemiol 1993; 28: 172–7.
Clark HH, Schober MF. Asking questions and influencing
answers. In JM Tanur ed. Questions about Questions:
Inquiries into the Cognitive Bases of Surveys. New
York: Russell Sage Foundation, 1992, 15–48.
Cohen J. A coefficient of agreement for nominal scales.
Educational and Psychological Measurement 1960; 20:
37–46.
Coryell W, Scheftner W, Keller M, Endicott J, Maser J and
Klerman GL. The enduring psychosocial consequences
of mania and depression. Am J Psychiatry 1993; 150:
720–7.
Dewa CS, Lin E. Chronic physical illness, psychiatric
disorder and disability in the workplace. Soc Sci Med
2000; 51: 41–50.
Eaton WW, Badawi M, Melton B. Prodromes and precur-
sors: epidemiologic data for primary prevention of
disorders with slow onset. Am J Psychiatry 1995; 152:
967–72.
Eaton WW, Kessler RC, Wittchen HU, Magee WJ. Panic
and panic disorder in the United States. Am J
Psychiatry 1994; 151: 413–20.
Eaton WW, Neufeld K, Chen LS, Cai G. A comparison 
of self-report and clinical diagnostic interviews for
depression: diagnostic interview schedule for clinical
assessment in neuropsychiatry in the Baltimore
Epidemiologic Catchment Area follow-up. Arch Gen
Psychiatry 2000: 217–22.
Edwards WS, Winn DM, Kurlantzick V, Sheridan S, Berk
ML, Retchin S, Collins JG. Evaluation of National
Health Interview Survey Diagnostic Reporting.
National Center for Health Statistics. Vital Health Stat
2 1994; 120: 1–116.
Furukawa TA, Andrews G, Slade T, Kessler RC. The
performance of the K6 and K10 screening scales for
psychological distress in the Australian National
Survey of Mental Health and Well-Being. Psychol Med
2003; 33: 357–62.
Gilman S. Disease and Representation: Images of Illness
from Madness to AIDS. Ithaca NY: Cornell University
Press, 1988.
Gross R, Bentur N, Elhayany A, Sherf M, Epstein L. The
validity of self-reports on chronic disease: characteris-
tics of underreporters and implications for the planning
of services. Public Health Rev 1996; 24: 167–82.
Halabi S, Zurayk H, Awaida R, Darwish M, Saab B.
Reliability and validity of self and proxy reporting of
morbidity data: a case study from Beirut, Lebanon. Int J
Epidemiol 1992; 21: 607–12.
Hays RD, Wells KB, Sherbourne CD, Rogers W, Spritzer
K. Functioning and well-being outcomes of patients
with depression compared with chronic general medical
illnesses. Arch Gen Psychiatry 1995; 52: 11–19.
Heliovaara M, Aromaa A, Klaukka T, Knekt P, Joukamaa
M, Impivaara O. Reliability and validity of interview
data on chronic diseases. The Mini-Finland Health
Survey. J Clin Epidemiol 1993; 46: 181–91.
Jobe JB, White AA, Kelley CL, Mingay DL, Sanchez MJ,
Loftus EF. Recall strategies and memory for health care
visits. Milbank Q 1990; 68: 171–89.
Judd LL, Paulus MP, Wells KB, Rapaport MN.
Socioeconomic burden of subsyndromal depressive
symptoms and major depression in a sample of the
general population. Am J Psychiatry 1996; 153:
1411–17.
Kempen GI, Ormel J, Brilman EI, Relyveld J. Adaptive
responses among Dutch elderly: the impact of eight
chronic conditions on health-related quality of life. Am
J Public Health 1997; 87: 38–44.
Kempen GI, Sanderman R, Miedema I, Mayboom-de JB,
Ormel J. Functional decline after congestive heart
failure and acute myocardial infarction and the impact
of psychological attributes. A prospective study. Quality
Life Res 2000; 9: 439–50.
Kendell RE. Five criteria for an improved taxonomy of
mental disorders. In JE Helzer, JJ Hudziak eds. Defining
Psychopathology in the 21st Century DSM-V and
Beyond. Washington DC: American Psychiatric
Publishing, 2002, 3–17.
Kessler R. The World Health Organization International
Consortium in Psychiatric Epidemiology (ICPE): Initial
work and future directions – the NAPE lecture 1998.
Acta Psychiatr Scand 1999; 99: 2–9. 
Kessler RC, Barber C, Beck A, Berglund PA, Cleary PD,
McKenas D, Pronk N, Simon G, Stang P, Üstün TB,
Wang PS. The World Health Organization Health and
Work Performance Questionnaire (HPQ). J Occup
Environ Med 2003; 45: 156–74. 
Kessler RC, Barker PR, Colpe LJ, Epstein A, Gfroerer JC,


----- Page 23 (native text) -----
WMH Survey Initiative Version of the CIDI
115
Hiripi E, Howes MJ, Normand S-LT, Manderscheid RW,
Walters EE, Zaslavsky AM. Screening for serious
mental illness in the general population. Arch Gen
Psychiatry 2003; 60: 184–9.
Kessler RC, Greenberg PE, Mickelson KD, Meneades LM,
Wang PS. The effects of chronic medical conditions on
work loss and work cutback. J Occup Environ Med
2001; 43: 218–25.
Kessler RC, Merikangas K. The National Comorbidity
Survey Replication (NCS-R). International Journal of
Methods in Psychiatric Research 2004; (this issue).
Kessler RC, Mroczek DK and Belli RF. Retrospective adult
assessment of childhood psychopathology. In D Shaffer,
CP Lucas, JE Richters eds. Diagnostic Assessment in
Child and Adolescent Psychopathology. New York:
Guilford Press, 1999, 256–84.
Kessler RC, Olfson M, Berglund PA. Patterns and predic-
tors of treatment contact after first onset of psychiatric
disorders. Am J Psychiatry 1998; 155: 62–9.
Kessler RC, Üstün TB. The World Health Organization
World Mental Health 2000 Initiative. Hospital
Management International 2000: 195–6.
Kessler RC, Wittchen H-U, Abelson JM, McGonagle K,
Schwarz N, Kendler KS, Knauper B, Zhao S.
Methodological studies of the Composite International
Diagnostic Interview (CIDI) in the US National
Comorbidity Survey. International Journal of Methods
in Psychiatric Research 1998; 7: 33–55.
Kessler RC, Wittchen HU, Abelson JM, Zhao S.
Methodological issues in assessing psychiatric disorder
with self-reports. In AA Stone, JS Turrkan, CA
Bachrach, JB Jobe, HS Kurtzman, VS Cain eds. The
Science of Self-Report: Implications for Research and
Practice. Mahwah NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
2000, 229–25.
Kriegsman DM, Penninx BW, van Eijk JT, Boeke AJ, Deeg
DJ. Self-reports and general practitioner information on
the presence of chronic diseases in community dwelling
elderly. A study on the accuracy of patients’ self-reports
and on determinants of inaccuracy. J Clin Epidemiol
1996; 49: 1407–17.
Leon AC, Olfson M, Portera L, Farber L, Sheehan DV.
Assessing psychiatric impairment in primary care with
the Sheehan Disability Scale. Int J Psychiatry Med
1997; 27: 93–105.
Leventhal H, Nerenz D, Steele DJ. Illness representations
and coping with health threats. In A Baum, SE Taylor,
JE Singer eds. Handbook of Psychology and Health 4.
Hillsdale NJ: Erlbaum, 1984, 219–52.
Lipton RB, Dodick D, Sadovsky R, Kolodner K, Endicott J,
Hettiarachchi J, Harrison W. A self-administered
screener for migraine in primary care: The ID
Migraine(TM) validation study. Neurology 2003; 61:
375–82.
Loftus EF, Palmer JC. Reconstruction of automobile
destructions: an example of the integration between
language and memory. Journal of Verbal Language and
Verbal Behavior 1974; 13: 585–9.
Mackenbach JP, Looman CW, Van der Meer JB.
Differences in the misreporting of chronic conditions,
by level of education: the effect on inequalities in
prevalence rates. Am J Public Health 1996; 86: 706–11.
Maier W, Gansicke M, Freyberger HJ, Linz M, Heun R,
Lecrubier Y. Generalized anxiety disorder (ICD-10) in
primary care from a cross-cultural perspective: a valid
diagnostic entity? Acta Psychiatr Scand 2000; 101:
29–36.
Markus H, Zajonc RB. The cognitive perspective in social
psychology. In G Lindzey, E Aronson eds. The
Handbook of Social Psychology. New York: Random
House, 1985, 137–230.
Marlatt GA. Task structure and the experimental modifi-
cation of verbal behavior. Psychol Bull 1972; 78:
335–50.
Marquis KH, Cannell CF. A Study of Interviewer-
Respondent Interaction in the Urban Employment.
Ann Arbor MI: Survey Research Center, University of
Michigan, 1969.
Means B, Loftus EF. When personal history repeats itself:
decomposing memories for recurring events. Applied
Cognitive Psychology 1991; 5: 297–318.
Mechanic D. Is the prevalence of mental disorders a good
measure of the need for services? Health Aff
(Millwood) 2003; 22: 8–20.
Menon A. Judgments of behavioral frequencies: memory
search and retrieval strategies. In N Schwartz, S
Sudman eds. Autobiographical Memory and the
Validity of Retrospective Reports. New York: Springer-
Verlag, 1994, 161–72.
Merikangas KR, Zhang H, Avenevoli S, Acharyya S,
Neuenschwander M, Angst J. Longitudinal trajectories
of depression and anxiety in a prospective community
study: the Zurich Cohort Study. Arch Gen Psychiatry
2003; 60: 993–1000.
Miller PV, Cannell CF. Communicating measurement
objectives in the survey interview. In DM Hirsch, PV
Miller, FG Kline eds. Strategies for Communication
Research 6. Beverly Hills CA: Sage, 1977.
Murray CJL, Lopez AD. The Global Burden of Disease: A
Comprehensive Assessment of Mortality and Disability
from Diseases, Injuries and Risk Factors in 1990 and
Projected to 2020. Cambridge MA: Harvard University
Press, 1996.
Narrow WE, Rae DS, Robins LN, Regier DA. Revised
prevalence estimates of mental disorders in the United
States: using a clinical significance criterion to recon-
cile two surveys’ estimates. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2002;
59: 115–23.
National Advisory Mental Health Council. Health care
reform for Americans with severe mental illnesses:
report of the National Advisory Mental Health
Council. Am J Psychiatry 1993; 150: 1447–65.


----- Page 24 (native text) -----
Kessler and Üstün
116
National Center for Health Statistics DoDS. 2003
National Health Interview Survey (NHIS). Hyattsville
MD: US Department of Health and Human Services,
CDC, 2003.
Neeleman J, Ormel J, Bijl RV. The distribution of psychi-
atric and somatic ill-health: associations with person-
ality and socioeconomic status. Psychosom Med 2001;
63: 239–47.
Oksenberg L, Cannell CF, Kanton G. New strategies for
pretesting survey questions. Journal of Official Statistics
1991; 7: 349–65.
Oksenberg L, Vinokur A, Cannell CF. The effects of
instructions, commitment and feedback on reporting in
personal interviews. In CF Cannell, L Oksenberg, JM
Converse eds. Experiments in Interviewing Techniques.
DHEW Publication No. (HRA) 78-3204. Washington
DC: Department of Health, Education, and Welfare,
1979a, 133–99.
Oksenberg L, Vinokur A, Cannell CF. Effects of commit-
ment to being a good respondent on interview perfor-
mance. In CF Cannell, L Oksenberg, JM Converse eds.
Experiments in Interviewing Techniques. DHEW
Publication No. (HRA) 78-3204. Washington DC:
Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, 1979b,
74–108.
Olfson M, Kessler RC, Berglund PA and Lin E. Psychiatric
disorder onset and first treatment contact in the United
States and Ontario. Am J Psychiatry 1998; 155:
1415–22.
Ormel J, Kempen GI, Deeg DJ, Brilman EI, Van Sonderen
E, Relyveld J. Functioning, well-being, and health
perception in late middle-aged and older people:
comparing the effects of depressive symptoms and
chronic medical conditions. J Am Geriatr Soc 1998; 46:
39–48.
Ormel J, Von Korff N, Üstün TB, Pini S, Korten A,
Oldehinkel T. Common mental disorders and disability
across cultures: results from the WHO collaborative
study on psychological problems in general health care.
JAMA 1994; 272: 1741–8.
Parker G. The Parental Bonding Instrument: psychometric
properties reviewed. Psychiatr Dev 1989; 7: 317–35.
Pearson RW, Ross M, Dawes RM. Personal recall and the
limits of retrospective questions in surveys. In JM Tanur
ed. Questions about Questions: Inquiries into the
Cognitive Bases of Surveys. New York: Russell Sage
Foundation, 1992, 65–94.
Penninx BW, Beekman AT, Ormel J, Kriegsman DM,
Boeke AJ, Van Eijk JT, Deeg DJ. Psychological status
among elderly people with chronic diseases: does type
of disease play a part? J Psychosom Res 1996; 40:
521–34.
Pincus HA, Zarin DA, First M. ‘Clinical Significance’ and
DSM-IV. Arch Gen Psychiatry 1998; 55: 1145.
Preisig M, Merikangas KR and Angst J. Clinical signifi-
cance and comorbidity of subthreshold depression and
anxiety in the community. Acta Psychiatr Scand 2001;
104: 96–103.
Regier DA. Community diagnosis counts [Commentary].
Arch Gen Psychiatry 2000; 57: 223–4.
Regier DA, Kaelber CT, Rae DS, Farmer ME, Knauper B,
Kessler RC, Norquist GS. Limitations of diagnostic
criteria and assessment instruments for mental disor-
ders. Implications for research and policy. Arch Gen
Psychiatry 1998; 55: 109–15.
Regier DA, Narrow WE. Defining clinically significant
psychopathology with epidemiologic data. In JE Helzer,
JJ Hudziak eds. Defining Psychopathology in the 21st
Century: DSM-V and Beyond. Washington DC:
American Psychiatric Publishing, 2002, 19–30.
Rehm J, Üstün TB, Saxena S, Nelson CB, Chatterji S, Ivis
F, Adlaf E. On the development and psychometric
testing of the WHO screening instrument to assess
disablement in the general population. International
Journal of Methods in Psychiatric Research 1999; 8:
110–23.
Rhode P, Lewinsohn P, Seeley J. Are people changed by
the experience of having an episode of depression? A
further test of the scar hypotheses. J Abnorm Psychol
1990; 99: 264–71.
Robins LN, Helzer JE, Croughan JL, Ratcliff KS. National
Institute of Mental Health Diagnostic Interview
Schedule: its history, characteristics and validity. Arch
Gen Psychiatry 1981; 38: 381–9.
Robins LN, Regier DA. Psychiatric Disorders in America:
The Epidemiologic Catchment Area Study. New York:
The Free Press, 1991.
Robins JN, Wing J, Wittchen HU, Helzer JE, Babor TE,
Burke J, Farmer A, Jablenski A, Pickens R, Regier DA,
Sartorius N, Towle LH. The Composite International
Diagnostic Interview. An epidemiologic instrument
suitable for use in conjunction with different diagnostic
systems and in different cultures. Arch Gen Psychiatry
1988; 45: 1069–77.
Rupp A, Keith SJ. The costs of schizophrenia. Assessing
the burden. Psychiatr Clin North Am 1993; 16:
413–23.
Rush AJ, Gullion CM, Basco MR, Jarrett RB, Trivedi MH.
The Inventory of Depressive Symptomatology (IDS):
psychometric properties. Psychol Med 1996; 26:
477–86.
Saunders JC. Families living with severe mental illness: a
literature review. Issues Ment Health Nurs 2003; 24:
175–98.
Schlesselman J. Case-control Studies: Design, Conduct,
Analysis. New York: Oxford University Press, 1982.
Schwarz N, Sudman S. Autobiographical Memory and the
Validity of Retrospective Reports. New York: Springer
Verlag, 1994.
Schwarz 
N, 
Sudman 
S. 
Answering 
Questions:
Methodology 
for 
Determining 
Cognitive 
and
Communicative Processes in Survey Research. 1 edn.


----- Page 25 (native text) -----
WMH Survey Initiative Version of the CIDI
117
San Francisco: Jossey-Bass Publishers, 1996.
Shear MK, Brown TA, Barlow DH, Money R, Sholomskas
DE, Woods SW, Gorman JM, Papp LA. Multicenter
collaborative panic disorder severity scale. Am J
Psychiatry 1997; 154: 1571–5.
Sirken MG, Herrmann DJ, Schechter S, Schwarz N, Tanur
JM and Tourangeau R. Cognition and Survey Research.
New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1999.
Skelton JA, Croyle RT. Mental Representation in Health
and Illness. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1991.
Spitzer RL. Diagnosis and need for treatment are not the
same. Arch Gen Psychiatry 1998; 55: 120.
Stewart A, Greenfield S, Hays RD. Functional status and
well-being of patients with chronic conditions. JAMA
1989; 262: 907–13.
Straus MA, Hamby SL, Finkelhor D, Moore DW, Runyan
D. Identification of child maltreatment with the
Parent-Child Conflict Tactics Scales: development and
psychometric data for a national sample of American
parents. Child Abuse Negl 1998; 22: 249–70.
Substance 
Abuse 
and 
Mental 
Health 
Services
Administration. Final notice establishing definitions
for (1) children with a serious emotional disturbance,
and (2) adults with a serious mental illness. Fed Regist
1993; 58: 29422–5.
Sudman S, Bradburn N, Schwarz N. Thinking about
Answers: The Application of Cognitive Processes to
Survey Methodology. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1996.
Sullivan MD, LaCroix AZ, Russo JE, Walker EA.
Depression and self-reported physical health in patients
with coronary disease: mediating and moderating
factors. Psychosom Med 2001; 63: 248–56.
Tanur JM. Questions about Questions: Inquiries into the
Cognitive Bases of Surveys. New York: Russell Sage
Foundation, 1992.
Tsang HW, Tam PK, Chan F, Chang WM. Sources of
burdens on families of individuals with mental illness.
Int J Rehabil Res 2003; 26: 123–30.
Turner C, Martin E. Surveying Subjective Phenomena.
New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 1985.
Tweed DL. Depression-related impairment: estimating
concurrent and lingering effects. Psychol Med 1993; 23:
373–86.
Üstün TB, Chatterji S and Rehm J. Limitations of diag-
nostic paradigm: it doesn’t explain ‘need’. Arch Gen
Psychiatry 1998; 55: 1145–8.
van den Bos GA. The burden of chronic disease in terms
of disability, use of health care and healthy life
expectancies. Eur J Public Health 1995; 5: 29–34.
Verbrugge LM and Patrick DL. Seven chronic conditions:
their impact on US adults’ activity levels and use of
medical services. Am J Public Health 1995; 85: 173–82.
Vinokur A, Oksenberg L and Cannell CF. Effects of feed-
back and reinforcement on the report of health infor-
mation. In CF Cannell, L Oksenberg and JM Converse
eds. Experiments in Interviewing Techniques. Ann
Arbor MI: Survey Research Center, University of
Michigan, 1979.
Wells KB, Stewart A, Hays RD, Burnam M, Rogers W,
Daniels M, Berry S, Greenfield S and Ware J. The func-
tioning and well-being of depressed patients: results
from the Medical Outcomes Study. JAMA 1989; 262:
914–19.
WHO 
International 
Consortium 
in 
Psychiatric
Epidemiology. Cross-national comparisons of the preva-
lences and correlates of mental disorders. Bull World
Health Organ 2000; 78: 413–26.
Wittchen H-U. Reliability and validity studies of the
WHO Composite International Diagnostic Interview
(CIDI): a critical review. J Psychiatr Res 1994; 28:
57–84.
Wittchen H-U, Üstün TB and Kessler RC. Diagnosing
mental disorders in the community. A difference that
matters. Psychol Med 1999; 29: 1021–7.
World Health Organization. Composite International
Diagnostic Interview. Geneva, Switzerland: World
Health Organization, 1990.
World 
Health 
Organization. 
WHO 
Disablements
Assessment Schedule II (WHO-DAS II). Geneva,
Switzerland: World Health Organization, 1998.
World Health Organization. International Classification
of Functioning, Disability and Health. Geneva,
Switzerland: World Health Organization, 2001.
Zeiss A, Lewinsohn P. Enduring deficits after remission of
depression: a test of the ‘scar’ hypotheses. Behav Res
Ther 1988; 26: 151–8.
Correspondence: RC Kessler, Department of Health
Care Policy, Harvard Medical School, 180 Longwood
Avenue, Boston, MA, USA 02115.
Telephone (+1) 617-432-3587.
Fax (+1) 617-432-3588.
Email: kessler@hcp.med.harvard.edu.
Also:
T Bedirhan Üstün, Global Programme on Evidence for
Health Policy, World Health Organization, Avenue
Appia 20, 1211 Geneva 27, Switzerland.
Telephone (+41) 22-791-3609.
Fax (+41) 22-791-4885.
Email: ustunb@who.ch.
Appendix: examples of WMH-CIDI modifications
Question comprehension
Breaking down complex questions into less complex sub-
questions
A good example of a complex question is the stem ques-
tion for dysphoria in the depression section. This is a very


----- Page 26 (native text) -----
Kessler and Üstün
118
important question because failure to endorse it or a
parallel question about anhedonia leads to the respondent
being skipped out of further questions about depression.
The question in the standard CIDI is as follows: ‘In your
lifetime, have you ever had two weeks or longer when
nearly every day you felt sad, empty, or depressed for most
of the day?’ This is an exceedingly complex question, as it
asks about a cluster of emotions (sad, empty, or depressed)
over a duration of time (2 weeks or longer), which itself
can have internal variation in duration both across days
(nearly every day) and within days (most of the day).
Debriefing studies show that most respondents miss at least
one of these core components. Therefore, we decompose
the question in the WMH-CIDI. We begin by asking about
a shorter period of time and omit mention of between-day
variation in duration: ‘Have you ever in your life had a
period lasting several days or longer when most of the day
you felt sad, empty, or depressed?’ Positive responses are
then followed by a duration question: ‘Did you ever have a
period of this sort that lasted most of the day, nearly every
day, for two weeks or longer?’ (The underlines are an indi-
cation to interviewers to emphasize these words.) This
question is then followed by a within-day duration ques-
tion: ‘Think of times lasting two weeks or longer when
these problems with your mood were more severe and
frequent. During those times, did these feelings usually last
less than one hour, between one and three hours, between
three and five hours, or more than five hours?’ The reader
might think that this last question is unnecessary, as the
question before it asked about dysphoria lasting ‘most of
the day’. However, pilot studies of the WMH-CIDI showed
clearly that this aspect of the question was the least likely
to be heard by respondents, leading to quite a few respon-
dents who endorsed this question reporting in a follow-up
question that their low mood lasted only for an hour or
two. Based on this result, the follow-up question about
within-day duration was retained in the final WMH-CIDI.
A separate follow-up question about between-day duration
(whether the dysphoria lasted every day, nearly ever day,
most days, half the days, or less than half the days over the
2 weeks) was found not to be necessary, as all pilot respon-
dents responded ‘every’ or ‘nearly every day’. 
Clarifying vaguely defined terms 
A good example of a vaguely defined term is the single
standard dichotomous CIDI question about role impair-
ment that is used in every diagnostic section of the CIDI:
‘Did (SYNDROME) interfere with your life and activities
a lot?’ This is a critical question, as it is used to opera-
tionalize the impairment component of the DSM-IV
requirement that a syndrome cause clinically significant
distress or impairment to qualify as a disorder. Yet both the
word ‘interfere’ and the words ‘a lot’ are ambiguous.
Furthermore, the fact that the question is dichotomous,
and that it requires an intensity qualifier to be answered
positively (it is not enough for the syndrome to interfere; it
must interfere a lot), creates a source of confusion. This
was clearly visible in pilot studies carried out by Kessler et
al. (2000), who found that respondents who endorsed the
standard CIDI question often responded ‘some’ or ‘a little’
to a follow-up question that asked ‘How much did it inter-
fere with these activities – would you say a lot, some, or
only a little?’
It might seem strange that a respondent who has just
responded ‘yes’ to a question about whether there was ‘a
lot’ of interference would characterize the interference as
less intense in the very next question, but the fact that this
frequently occurs illustrates that survey respondents often
fail to listen carefully to secondary clauses in dichoto-
mously worded questions. Recognizing this problem, the
WMH-CIDI converts the dichotomous yes-no question
about a lot of interference into a dimensional question
that focuses the respondent’s attention on the intensity of
interference by asking ‘How much did [SYNDROME]
interfere . . . – not at all, a little, some, a lot, or extremely?’
A small split ballot experiment in a pilot study carried out
by Kessler et al. (2000) found that this wording change
resulted in a significantly lower proportion of people
reporting that the interference was severe enough to be
characterized as ‘a lot’ than in the standard dichotomous
CIDI question.
In addition to turning the dichotomous response
scale into a polychotomous scale, the WMH-CIDI also
expands the standard CIDI interference question to make
sure respondents broadly review all major areas in their life
before answering. The fully modified question is: ‘How
much did [SYNDROME] interfere with either your work,
your social life, or your personal relationships – not at all, a
little, some, a lot, or extremely?’ In order to clarify the
intensity level implied by the various response categories,
a follow-up question is then asked in the WMH-CIDI to
all respondents who report any interference: ‘How often
were you unable to carry out your daily activities because
of [SYNDROME] – often, sometimes, rarely, or never?’ 
Clarifying questions about odd experiences that could be
normalized
The standard version of CIDI introduces the psychosis
questions with the statement: ‘Now I want to ask you
about some ideas you might have had about other people.’
The questioning then begins by asking about delusions
rather than about hallucinations. The first question is:
‘Have you ever believed people were spying on you?’ This
is followed by questions about believing that people are
spying on you and talking about you behind your back.
Each time a positive response is given, the interviewer


----- Page 27 (native text) -----
WMH Survey Initiative Version of the CIDI
119
asks: ‘How did you know this was happening?’ An open-
ended response is recorded and rated for plausibility. A
great many people answer these questions positively, the
vast majority of whom give plausible answers. This is not
surprising, as the experiences asked about are all quite
common. The first genuinely odd experience isn’t asked
about until the fourth question in the series: ‘Have you ever
believed that you were being secretly tested or experi-
mented on?’ This is followed by two remaining questions
about delusions that could be interpreted in plausible
terms: whether someone ever ‘plotted against you’ or ‘tried
to hurt you or poison you’; whether the respondent ever
thought that ‘someone you never met was in love with you’;
and a question about whether the respondent ever was
convinced that his or her spouse or partner was being
unfaithful even though they said this was not true. 
These are followed by questions about more bizarre
delusions, such as mind reading (for example, ‘Have you
ever believed that someone was reading your mind?’)
thought control (for example, ‘Have you ever been
convinced that you were under the control of some power
or force, so that your actions and thoughts were not your
own?’), and being able to receive special messages through
the mass media. Finally, the symptom assessment finishes
with questions about visual, auditory, olfactory, and tactile
hallucinations. Most of these questions are purposefully
worded in a way that is designed to normalize them. For
example, the auditory hallucinations question asks: ‘Have
you more than once heard things other people couldn’t
hear, such as a voice.’ This normalized phrasing leads to
confusion, as a great many respondents in general popula-
tion samples respond positively and then, in response to
the follow-up question ‘How do you explain hearing things
other people couldn’t hear?’ respond by saying ‘I have very
good hearing.’
The philosophy behind this approach to assessing
psychosis is that psychotics will be more willing to admit
their symptoms if these symptoms are normalized. A great
difficulty with this approach is that it generates an enor-
mous number of false positives. This substantially compli-
cates the process of screening for psychosis and also
introduces the strong possibility of errors in classifying false
positives as cases based on misleading open-ended
responses. In addition, a question can be raised whether
true psychotics, particularly those with paranoid tenden-
cies, will be motivated positively or negatively to respond
positively to normalized questions that they might perceive
as trying to trick them into reporting their clearly abnormal
experiences. The philosophy behind the WMH-CIDI
approach is the opposite: to make it clear to respondents
that we are asking about odd experiences; to motivate
reporting with an introduction that validates the experi-
ences and points to the importance of learning more about
them; and beginning the questioning with hallucinations
rather than delusions in order to reinforce the introductory
remarks about the questions being about odd behaviours. 
The WMH-CIDI introduction is as follows: ‘The
next questions are about unusual things, like seeing visions
or hearing voices. We believe that these things may be
quite common, but we don’t know for sure because previous
research has not done a good job of asking about them. So
please take your time and think carefully before answering.’
One can see in this introduction a number of the method-
ological refinements discussed in the body of the paper:
clarification of the nature of the questions; validation of
the experiences; motivation for honest reporting; and facil-
itation of serious memory search by legitimating the
respondent not answering immediately in order to think.
The questions themselves are worded in such a way as to
avoid confusion. Compare, for example, the WMH-CIDI
question about auditory hallucinations with the standard
CIDI question about the same symptom: ‘The next ques-
tion is about hearing voices that other people could not
hear. I don’t mean having good hearing, but rather hearing
things that other people said did not exist, like strange
voices coming from inside your head talking to you or
about you, or voices coming out of the air when there was
no one around. Did you ever hear voices in this way?’ 
Contextual misunderstanding
Contextual misunderstanding is a type of misunder-
standing that derives from the position of the question in
the flow of the interview. An example was given there
about confusion in a question regarding the duration of
phobic fears. The standard question order in the CIDI was
modified to correct this problem. A number of similar
small but important cases of a related sort were found and
corrected in developing the WMH-CIDI. One additional
example: in asking about number of lifetime manic
episodes, the standard CIDI comes directly after a question
about the duration of the respondent’s longest lifetime
manic episode. The number-of-episodes question then
follows, asking about the number of ‘these’ lifetime
episodes. Debriefing shows that the word ‘these’ in the
context of this placement leads a number of respondents
incorrectly to believe that the interviewer is asking about
episodes that were equally as long as the longest lifetime
episode, resulting in an underestimate of the number of
lifetime manic episodes. A person who had, say, 30 manic
episodes, only four of which went on as long as the longest
episode, might respond ‘three’ rather than ‘30’ to this ques-
tion about number of episodes. This problem was corrected
in the WMH-CIDI by a change in question placement. 
Task comprehension 
Survey respondents are often unaware that interviewers
want them to engage in active memory search in


----- Page 28 (native text) -----
Kessler and Üstün
120
answering complex questions. Indeed, it often occurs that
investigators who write survey questions without cognitive
debriefing pilot studies themselves fail to appreciate the
cognitive complexity involved in answering some survey
questions. This is all the more true for interviewers, who,
in the absence of special training in the use of feedback
methods aimed at stimulating thoughtful responding, will
be more concerned with the accuracy of recording answers
than in the accuracy of the answers being given. The
WMH-CIDI includes clarifications in a number of places
to make this task clear to respondents. Earlier, the paper
discussed one of the most important places where this is
done, in the life review section of the interview. See this
section of the paper for the example. 
There are numerous other places in the instrument
where the same principle is used to remind the respondent
to think carefully. One of the most consistent of these is in
the important question about age of disorder onset, which
appears in each diagnostic section of the interview. The
standard CIDI question asks ‘How old were you the first
time you [HAD THE SYNDROME].’ We know from
debriefing interviews that many respondents have a very
difficult time remembering their age of onset, especially for
accretion disorders. Therefore, it is important both to
make it clear that we are looking for a serious memory
search and to deal with the possibility that we may be
asking for more than the respondent knows. As described
in the body of the paper, we deal with the first of these
issues in the WMH-CIDI by asking what is known in the
survey methodology literature as a ‘prequest’, a question
designed to create a clarifying context for the substantive
question that follows it: ‘Can you remember your exact age
the very first time you [HAD THE SYNDROME]?’ Even
though a great many respondents answer ‘no’, this question
is extremely important in making the task clear to respon-
dents. We are interested in a precise answer, which means
that serious memory search will be required.
It is also noteworthy that we try to be equally clear
when we want estimates rather than precise information.
This is important because it is not possible to motivate
respondents to engage in active memory search throughout
an entire long interview. Instead, we need to pick and
choose the especially important questions where extra
effort is thought to be needed as well as to be clear both to
ourselves and to respondents when we are willing to settle
for approximations. So, for example, questions concerning
lifetime course of illness (for example, ‘About how many
different years in your life did you have [SYNDROME]?’)
explicitly ask for approximations by using the word ‘about’.
In addition, interviewers are trained both to accept
approximations as answers to these questions and to probe
for rough estimates if respondents say they are unable to
provide exact responses. In a similar way, we use structured
response categories with prespecified ranges rather than
open-ended responses in cases where we ask estimation
questions that will be difficult to answer and we recognize
the inability to obtain accurate fine-grained responses
from most respondents. 
Motivation
Motivational instructions and commitment questions
We developed a statement at the beginning of the life
review section to emphasize the importance of careful
response in order to encourage complete and accurate
answers. As noted earlier, a commitment question is used in
conjunction with the motivational instructions to make
sure that the respondent is aware of and acknowledges the
importance of responding carefully. The statement and
commitment question are as follows: ‘[READ SLOWLY]
The next questions are about health problems you may have
had at any time in your life. It is important for the research
that you think carefully before answering. Are you willing to
do this?’ In cases where the respondent does not answer ‘yes’
to the commitment question, the interviewer is instructed
to offer to reschedule the interview for a time when the
respondent is more able to give serious thought to the ques-
tions. If respondents persist in saying that they are unwilling
to think carefully before answering, the interviewer is
instructed to terminate the interview and to code the
respondent as a refusal.
Contingent reinforcement
Contingent reinforcement is an interviewer feedback
strategy rather than a question-wording strategy. The
interviewer training manual for the WMH-CIDI (which is
available only to researchers who participate in the official
WMH-CIDI training described earlier in the paper) focuses
considerable attention on the use of this directive feedback
strategy. A variety of probes are provided to interviewers to
reinforce apparent effort in providing thoughtful answers.
These are very simple feedback responses, like ‘thanks’ and
‘that’s useful’, which are administered whether the response
is positive or negative, so long as effort appears to be
invested in providing a thoughtful answer. Responses that
might be thought to imply a value judgment, like ‘good’ or
‘excellent’, are not used. 
A variety of probes are also provided to give nega-
tive feedback for apparently superficial responses.
Sometimes these take the form of a follow-up question to a
seemingly superficial negative response (for example, ‘are
you sure there was nothing?’). At other times they take the
form of an injunction (for example, ‘please take your time
and think carefully’). At still other times the probe can
take the form of an observation followed by a request (for
example, ‘You answered that one awfully quickly. Could


----- Page 29 (native text) -----
WMH Survey Initiative Version of the CIDI
121
you take a minute to think hard and make sure you didn’t
forget anything?’). Our experience is that the long versions
of the negative probes are most useful early in the inter-
view, when respondents who give superficial answers are
being trained to be more thoughtful. Periodic short posi-
tive feedback probes, with the rare use of a short negative
probe at the first signs of the recurrence of superficial
responding, generally are used throughout the remainder
of the interview. 
The ability to answer accurately
We use two broad strategies to deal with the realization
that autobiographical memory has limits. The main one is
to accept these limits and revise our questions so as to
settle for less detail than we would ideally like to have.
The other is to push the limits of memory by decomposing
questions in ways that mimic successful memory search
strategies and bound uncertainty. We already gave exam-
ples earlier in the appendix of the first of these two strate-
gies. As illustrated in these examples, we always signal to
respondents when we want approximations rather than
exact responses. This is done either by building into the
question an explicit reference to wanting an approxima-
tion or by providing structured response categories in
rough groupings that indicate the level of approximation
we are looking for in responses. Perhaps the best example
of this approach is the question series described earlier in
the appendix about age of disorder onset. As noted in that
earlier description, we begin this series with the prequest:
‘Can you remember your exact age the very first time you
[HAD THE SYNDROME]?’ Respondents who answer ‘yes’
are dealt with easily by asking them to report this exact
age. Respondents who say ‘no’, in comparison, are asked
for an estimate: ‘About how old were you the first time?’ 
This same question series also illustrates the use of
the second strategy used to deal with the limits of autobio-
graphical memory: decomposing questions and bounding
uncertainty for respondents who vary in accuracy of recall.
As information about age of onset is of great importance
for a variety of substantive research questions, special
effort was invested in pushing for the limits of memory
among respondents who reported that they could not
recall the exact age when the syndrome first began. This is
done using special probes to ask respondents to go back-
wards in time sequentially. This requires flexibility on the
part of interviewers, as a good many respondents who
answer ‘no’ to the question about exact recall volunteer, in
conjunction with that answer, that the syndrome has been
going on ‘my whole life’ or ‘as long as I can remember’. 
This kind of inexact information is useful because it
implies a very early age of onset. To confirm this, though,
such responses are probed for clarification of an upper
bound by asking ‘Was it before you first started school?’ If
the respondent answers ‘yes’, the question sequence ends,
with a fairly narrow bounding of uncertainty in an early
age range. If, however, the respondent does not answer
‘yes’ to this first probe (for example, if the respondent says
‘I can’t really remember’ or ‘I don’t think so’ or something
similar), interviewers then move up the age range incre-
mentally until they find an interval of time at which the
respondent feels secure in saying that the syndrome was
definitely in existence as of that point in the life course
(for example, ‘Was it before you were a teenager?’ If not,
‘Was it before you turned 20?’ and so forth). Our experi-
ence in pilot studies, which has been confirmed in WMH
surveys, is that most uncertainty among respondents who
begin by saying that their inability to provide an exact age
is due to the syndrome going on ‘as long as I can
remember’ can be bounded before the teenage years.
Among respondents who do not volunteer a
comment to the effect that the syndrome has been going
on ‘as long as I can remember’ in response to the exact age
question, in comparison, the interviewer begins by probing
for such a response (‘Did it go on as long as you can
remember?’). If so, then probing proceeds as if this
response was volunteered. If respondents say that the
syndrome did not go on as long as they can remember, in
comparison, debriefing studies show that recall is quite
certain for a fairly specific time in the life course, but not
for a particular age. Therefore, the same series of probes
moving up the age range is used as described in the last
paragraph, with a final request for a best estimate of the
onset age once an upper bound age range is reached.
Responses that are given in ranges (for example, ‘It started
during my teens, but I can’t remember the exact age’) are
recorded initially as ranges and then analysed as the upper
end of the range in order to provide a consistently conserv-
ative lower bound estimate.
