

----- Page 1 (native text) -----
computer programs
J. Synchrotron Rad. (2005). 12, 537–541
doi:10.1107/S0909049505012719
537
Journal of
Synchrotron
Radiation
ISSN 0909-0495
Received 29 September 2004
Accepted 21 April 2005
# 2005 International Union of Crystallography
Printed in Great Britain – all rights reserved
ATHENA, ARTEMIS, HEPHAESTUS: data analysis
for X-ray absorption spectroscopy using IFEFFIT
B. Ravela* and M. Newvilleb
aNaval Research Laboratory, Washington, DC 20375, USA, and bThe University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL 60637, USA. E-mail: ravel@phys.washington.edu
A software package for the analysis of X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS)
data is presented. This package is based on the IFEFFIT library of numerical
and XAS algorithms and is written in the Perl programming language using the
Perl/Tk graphics toolkit. The programs described here are: (i) ATHENA, a
program for XAS data processing, (ii) ARTEMIS, a program for EXAFS data
analysis using theoretical standards from FEFF and (iii) HEPHAESTUS, a
collection of beamline utilities based on tables of atomic absorption data. These
programs enable high-quality data analysis that is accessible to novices while still
powerful enough to meet the demands of an expert practitioner. The programs
run on all major computer platforms and are freely available under the terms of
a free software license.
Keywords: XAS; data analysis; FEFF; IFEFFIT.
1. Introduction
Users of X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) beamlines and prac-
titioners of XAS require software that meets a broad range of
analytic, programmatic and social goals. To meet these goals we have
developed a collection of programs providing a rich graphical inter-
face to the extensive analytical and numerical capabilities of the
popular IFEFFIT library (Newville, 2001). In this report we present
the main features of the three programs: (i) ATHENA, a program for
XAS data processing, (ii) ARTEMIS, a program for analysis of
extended X-ray absorption ﬁne structure (EXAFS) data using
theoretical standards computed by the popular FEFF program
(Zabinsky
et
al.,
1995;
Ankudinov
et
al.,
1998)
and
(iii)
HEPHAESTUS, a collection of beamline utilities based on tables of
atomic absorption data. All three programs are written in the Perl
programming language (Wall et al., 1996), use the Perl/Tk graphical
toolkit (Lidie & Walsh, 2002) for their user interface, and use the
PGPLOT (Pearson, 1997) package for plotting data.
The development of this software project has been directed by a
number of equally important motivations:
Versatile
XAS
and
numerical
algorithms.
ATHENA
and
ARTEMIS use the programmers interface to IFEFFIT, as described
by Newville (2001). Thus both programs have complete access to all
the features of IFEFFIT, including all the capabilities of the programs
AUTOBK (Newville et al., 1993) and FEFFIT (Newville et al., 1995).
In this article, any analytic functionality ascribed to ATHENA or
ARTEMIS is actually performed by IFEFFIT via its programming
interface.
Graphical user interface. The Perl/Tk toolkit provides a full-
featured forms-based environment for interacting with and proces-
sing data.
Simple for novices, powerful for experts. Those already familiar
with analysis of XAS data will ﬁnd ATHENA and ARTEMIS quite
easy to begin using and will quickly familiarize themselves with the
many features of those programs. Novices to absorption spectroscopy
ﬁnd that a usable graphical user interface combined with excellent
analytic algorithms considerably lowers the barrier of entry into their
new ﬁeld of research. For the expert practitioner of the art of XAS
data analysis, ATHENA and ARTEMIS provide sophisticated
capabilities allowing the user to exploit deeply the information
content of their measured data.
Useful
at
the
beamline,
useful
at
home.
ATHENA
and
HEPHAESTUS compliment the data-acquisition software found at
XAS beamlines. Since ATHENA can read most raw data formats, it
provides ﬂexible powerful data-processing capabilities right at the
beamline. The utilities provided by HEPHAESTUS are useful while
planning and executing XAS experiments.
Free of cost, free source code. IFEFFIT, ATHENA, ARTEMIS and
HEPHAESTUS are available on the web. Because this software is
free of cost, high-quality XAS analysis is available even to students
and to scientists in developing countries. Because the code is licensed
under very liberal terms, users are free to examine the code, under-
stand its algorithms, modify the code to better suit their research
needs, and share the codes with their colleagues.
Portability. ATHENA, ARTEMIS and HEPHAESTUS work on
most common computer platforms including all versions of Microsoft
Windows, Macintosh OSX, Linux, BSD, Solaris and other common
unixes. This is possible because all of the tools upon which they rely,
IFEFFIT, Perl, Perl/Tk and PGPLOT, themselves operate on all
these platforms. Additionally ATHENA and ARTEMIS save data to
project ﬁles which are easily transferable between users, even those
working on different platforms. These project ﬁles capture the state
of the program, all data and FEFF calculations, and all parameters
associated with the data and FEFF calculations. Reimporting a
project ﬁle thus restores the state of the data analysis project, even on
a different computer.
At
the
time
of
this
writing,
ATHENA,
ARTEMIS
and
HEPHAESTUS are employed by a community of several hundred
users. Avigorous electronic mailing list is devoted to discussion of the
use of these programs as well as to the science and practice of XAS.


----- Page 2 (native text) -----
2. Features of ATHENA
ATHENA is used for all the main steps in data processing including
conversion of raw data to ðEÞ spectra, background subtraction,
Fourier transforming and plotting. As such it is useful for data
visualization at the beamline as well as for processing of data in
preparation for data analysis. The normal view of the ATHENA
window is shown in Fig. 1.
Data conversion from its raw form is handled in a ﬂexible manner,
creating ðEÞ spectra from transmission, ﬂuorescence or electron
yield experiments. The conversion utility allows for on-the-ﬂy
summation of data from a multi-element detector. Alternately, each
column of multi-element data can be imported as individual data
groups for later inspection and summation. ATHENA also supports
powerful preprocessing of data as it is imported, including automated
deglitching, truncation, alignment and constraint of analysis para-
meters.
Background subtraction is performed using the AUTOBK algo-
rithm (Newville et al., 1993) which determines an empirical back-
ground spline based on a distinction between data and background in
terms of Fourier components. Edge-step normalization of the data is
determined by a linear pre-edge subtraction and regression of a
quadratic polynomial beyond the edge. The difference between
these two polynomials extrapolated to the edge energy E0 is
used as the normalization constant in the deﬁnition of ðEÞ =
½ðEÞ  0ðEÞ=0ðE0Þ: Normalized data are typically presented
after subtracting the curvature of the regressed quadratic and the
difference in slope between the post- and pre-edge polynomials after
the edge. ðkÞ are obtained by conversion of the abscissa of ðEÞ by
the formula k = ð2me=h- 2ÞðE  E0Þ1=2: E0 is determined automatically
as the data is imported by ﬁnding the ﬁrst large peak in the ﬁrst
derivative of the 0ðEÞ spectrum, but can also be set interactively to
the tabulated atomic value, to the position of half the edge step height
or to any arbitrary value selected by the user.
ATHENA provides utilities for most common chores involved in
the preparation of EXAFS data for analysis. There are tools for
energy calibration of spectra, alignment of data, use of reference
spectra, deglitching (i.e. the removal of spurious points from spectra)
and merging of data by calculating the average and standard devia-
tion at each point in a set of spectra. There is a utility for performing
log-ratio/phase-difference analysis (Bunker, 1983) of back-trans-
formed spectra. ATHENA also provides a tool for the energy cali-
bration of dispersive XAS spectra (Hagelstein et al., 1997).
ATHENA provides tools for the analysis of near-edge spectra.
There are utilities for calculation of difference spectra, for ﬁtting line
shapes (arctangent, Gaussian, Lorentzian) to spectra, and for ﬁtting
linear combinations of standard spectra to unknown spectra.
ATHENA can also import and display the results of FEFF8 calcu-
lations (Ankudinov et al., 1998) for comparison with measured data.
The most powerful feature of ATHENA is that processing and
displaying many data sets simultaneously is as simple as for a single
data set. In Fig. 1, the upper row of buttons labeled with the letters E,
k, R, and q are for plotting single data sets in energy, k-space, R-space
or back-transformed k-space, respectively. The lower row of buttons
will plot multiple data sets. It is simple to mark any subset of imported
data sets for plotting in this manner. ATHENA keeps track of all
changes made to the parameters of any data set and will auto-
matically perform background removal and Fourier transforms as
needed. The parameters controlling background removal and Fourier
transforms can be adjusted for each data set individually or
constrained in a ﬂexible manner between data sets.
ATHENA comes with extensive documentation accessible within
the program and a number of examples demonstrating its many
features.
Features
which
are
planned
for
implementation
in
ATHENA include principle component analysis, self-absorption
corrections for ﬂuorescence data, and dead-time corrections for data
measured with solid-state detectors.
3. Features of ARTEMIS
ARTEMIS works within the framework of FEFF’s multiple-scat-
tering path expansion (Zabinsky et al., 1995; Rehr & Albers, 1990).
This means that the data are described as a summation of one or more
scattering paths as computed by FEFF. For each path, the XAFS
equation must be evaluated. This means that values of the parametric
terms in the EXAFS equation, N, S2
0, E0, R and 2, must be
speciﬁed for each path included in the ﬁt. The path expansion and
how it is parameterized and used in a ﬁt is described elsewhere
(Newville et al., 1995; Ravel, 2000). As discussed in those references,
EXAFS analysis can be quite subtle and complicated. By providing a
graphical forms-based mechanism for handling the many book-
keeping chores required by FEFF and IFEFFIT, ARTEMIS makes
basic analysis chores simple and sophisticated analysis problems
tractable.
Shown in Fig. 2 is the ARTEMIS window in its data view. The data-
processing parameters, including the range of the Fourier transform
from k-space and the ﬁtting range in R-space, are set in the main
window. The far right panel is used to control how plots are displayed.
The middle panel is a list of all data sets, FEFF calculations and paths
used in the ﬁt. This list is integral to the generation of plots and is
used to determine which view is displayed in the main window. Other
views (not shown) allow the user to set ﬁtting parameters, to examine
log ﬁles from previous ﬁts, to manage FEFF calculations or to manage
computer programs
538
Ravel and Newville
 Data analysis for XAS using IFEFFIT
J. Synchrotron Rad. (2005). 12, 537–541
Figure 1
The main window of the ATHENA program. The data sets imported into
ATHENA are listed on the right. The analysis parameters for the selected data set
are displayed in the main panel on the left.


----- Page 3 (native text) -----
individual FEFF paths and the mathematical expressions used to
evaluate the terms in the EXAFS equation.
ARTEMIS includes access to the functionality of the ATOMS
(Ravel, 2001) program, which converts crystallographic data into a
format suitable for FEFF. This interface can read crystallographic
data either in the form of an ATOMS input ﬁle or a crystallographic
information ﬁle (CIF) (Hall et al., 1991). These data are then
converted into a FEFF input ﬁle or can be converted into a form
suitable for export to a molecule viewer. For materials that are not
crystalline or do not have a crystalline analogue, FEFF input ﬁles
prepared in some other way can be imported directly into ARTEMIS.
A simple interface to FEFF is included in ARTEMIS. This is little
more than a simple text editor for altering the contents of the input
ﬁle as needed and a button for launching an external instance of
FEFF. Fortunately, this simple interface is quite adequate for the
needs of EXAFS data analysis. After the FEFF run, ARTEMIS
displays a page containing a concise interpretation of the paths
computed by FEFF including the path distances, degeneracy, atomic
species in the path, whether the path is single- or multiple-scattering,
and estimated importance of the path. ARTEMIS has tools for
organizing and plotting the results of the calculation, including
plotting the individual contributions of each path in both k- and
R-space.
ARTEMIS has several features which facilitate the creation and
examination of ﬁtting models. One such is the automated generation
of parameters appropriate for a ﬁrst-shell ﬁt. When a FEFF calcu-
lation is made or imported, a set of ﬁtting parameters are auto-
matically generated. In many cases, a ﬁt can be run immediately
which will give a physically reasonable result. Because all ﬁtting
problems are unique, this fully automated ﬁt is usually incomplete,
but it provides a sensible starting point for almost any ﬁtting problem
from which the user can begin to reﬁne the ﬁtting model. ARTEMIS
provides convenient plotting in k-, R- or back-transformed k-space of
the data, the ﬁt and any number of the individual paths used in the ﬁt.
Numerous tools are available to check the consistency and sensibility
of the parameters used in the ﬁt and to evaluate the results of the ﬁt.
For instance, if one of the parametric terms in the EXAFS equation
for any path evaluates to a suspicious value (e.g. a negative 2, a very
large energy correction E0 or a very large change in path length),
ARTEMIS will issue a warning message explaining the possible
problem to the user. Warnings about large changes in path length
or E0 are particularly important as they might indicate that an
inappropriate structural model was used in the FEFF calculation or
that the ﬁt has settled upon an unphysical solution (Michalowicz &
Vlaic, 1998).
We acknowledge that there is a potential limitation of using FEFF
calculations with an assumed distance in the analysis. That distance
cannot be reﬁned too far from its starting value (typically, less than
0.1 A˚ 1). Outside that range the scattering amplitude and phase from
the FEFF calculation should be recalculated with the new distance. In
practice, we ﬁnd that this is not a serious limitation, but can cause
some slight errors especially at the beginning of an analysis. This is
one of the reasons that ARTEMIS issues a warning about a distance
that is too different from that used in the FEFF calculation. To
overcome this limitation, the analysis package would have to recal-
culate the scattering contributions whenever the path distance
changes too much. This is an area for future development.
After a ﬁt ﬁnishes, ARTEMIS displays a log ﬁle which includes a
statistical analysis of the ﬁt. The major ﬁtting statistics, including the
reduced 2 ﬁtting metric and the R-factor are displayed along with
uncertainties in and correlations between all ﬁtting parameters.
Furthermore, the parameteric terms of the EXAFS equation are
evaluated for each path used in the ﬁt. This information along with
easy graphical display of the paths can be used to evaluate the
importance of each path to the ﬁtting result.
While ARTEMIS is certainly well suited to simple ﬁrst-shell
analysis of single data sets, it is a very powerful tool applicable to the
most challenging ﬁtting models. Among its advanced features are:
(i) Simultaneous reﬁnement of multiple data sets.
(ii) Reﬁnement using multiple k-weightings for any data set.
(iii) Use of multiple FEFF calculations in a single ﬁt.
(iv) Co-reﬁnement of a background spline to reveal correlations
between the spline and the ﬁtting parameters.
(v) Arbitrary constraints between and restraints on parameters.
4. Features of HEPHAESTUS
HEPHAESTUS is a container application for several small utilities
based on the periodic table of elements and on a database of
absorption cross sections and other data for the elements. All
calculations made by HEPHAESTUS use one of several published
compilations of atomic cross sections. The default is that of Elam et al.
(2002). The other sources of absorption data are by McMaster et al.
(1969), Chantler (1995), Cromer & Liberman (1970) and Henke et al.
(1993). It is easy to switch between the data resources to compare
their results for common calculations.
Currently there are seven utilities in HEPHAESTUS. In the same
order as the icons in the button bar on the left side of Fig. 3, they are:
(i) Display the absorption and ﬂuorescence line energies of the
elements using a periodic table interface.
(ii) Compute the absorption length and quantity of sample
required for measurement given the chemical formula and density of
a material.
(iii) Display chemical data such as melting point and electro-
negativity of the elements using a periodic table interface.
(iv) Compute the ideal gas mixture for ion chambers of various
lengths and internal pressures.
(v) Display a chart showing the electronic transitions associated
with the various absorption lines.
(vi) Find all absorption edges in the vicinity of a given energy or of
the harmonics of that energy.
computer programs
J. Synchrotron Rad. (2005). 12, 537–541
Ravel and Newville
 Data analysis for XAS using IFEFFIT
539
Figure 2
The main window of the ARTEMIS program. Shown in the main panel is the view
for setting the Fourier transform and ﬁt range parameters. The middle panel lists all
data sets and FEFF paths used in the ﬁt and provides a history of all ﬁts performed
within the project. The panel on the right contains plotting controls.


----- Page 4 (native text) -----
(vii) Find all ﬂuorescence lines in the vicinity of a given energy.
(viii) Plot the real and imaginary parts of the complex scattering
factors of the elements using a periodic table interface.
HEPHAESTUS includes extensive built-in documentation and a
tool for converting between energies and wavelengths.
5. ATHENA and ARTEMIS as teaching tools
As discussed in x1, one of the motivations for these programs is to
provide an entry into data analysis for students and non-experts in
XAS. In our own teaching experience we have found these programs
to be good pedagogical tools with relatively shallow learning curves.
With plotting and data handling tightly integrated into a graphical
user environment, users are freed from such minutiae as deciphering
raw data formats, constructing ðEÞ spectra or performing Fourier
transforms. The user can arrive quickly at the point of considering the
scientiﬁc content of her data.
Analysis of EXAFS data using theoretical standards from FEFF
can be a daunting task. Along with processing the measured data, the
user must run the FEFF program, organize its output and construct a
ﬁtting model using the contributions from the various scattering paths
generated by FEFF. In some cases, tens or even hundreds of these
paths might be required for adequate data analysis. ARTEMIS
organizes all these tasks for the users. It integrates wrappers for
ATOMS and FEFF and helps organize the paths from the FEFF
calculation. The time for learning FEFF-based data analysis for new
users is shortened and complex analysis is facilitated for experienced
users. As an example, ARTEMIS makes it simple to plot the data
along with the contributions from any number of scattering paths in
k- or R-space, allowing the user to quickly evaluate which parts of the
FEFF calculation are relevant to the data analysis. An extensive log
ﬁle is presented upon completion of the ﬁt, allowing the user to
evaluate the quality of the ﬁt, the reasonableness of the ﬁtting
parameters and the effects of the ﬁtting parameters on the FEFF
paths used in the ﬁt.
6. Free software and the scientific method
Full disclosure of experimental procedures and results are integral
aspects of the scientiﬁc method. Because scientiﬁc work should be
independently reproducible, sufﬁcient detail of sample preparation,
experimental procedure, theoretical background and interpretation
of the data are normally required for most scientiﬁc publications. For
data such as XAS that are interpreted with the aid of complex
computer programs such as those described here, we believe that the
algorithms used in the analysis be also disclosed fully, both for the
purposes of review and improvement. The source code for the
programs described here are freely available and distributed under a
free software license (The Open Source Initiative, 2004) allowing use,
modiﬁcation and re-distribution of the source code with very few
restrictions. All users are allowed to study, modify and improve these
programs to meet their own scientiﬁc needs and to disseminate these
changes to others. Because of this license, we believe that these
programs make a suitable basis for study and development of new
EXAFS algorithms.
7. Resources
There are many examples in the XAS literature demonstrating the
use of the software and analysis principles described in this paper.
Some articles that demonstrate excellent analysis and good practices
for reporting both the parameters used in the analysis and the results
of the analysis include these references: Kelly et al. (2002) and
Kolobov et al. (2004).
A project page for IFEFFIT exists at SourceForge.net, http://
sourceforge.net/projects/ifefﬁt/. Information about IFEFFIT can be
found at http://cars.uchicago.edu/ifefﬁt. A link to the IFEFFIT
mailing list can also be found there. ATHENA, ARTEMIS and
HEPHAESTUS have their own web pages, http://FEFF.phys.
washington.edu/~ravel/software/exafs/. ATHENA, ARTEMIS and
HEPHAESTUS as well as IFEFFIT are being actively developed.
The source codes for ATHENA, ARTEMIS and HEPHAESTUS
are available at the web sites mentioned above. The codes are also
packaged in ways that facilitate their installation on the various
computer platforms. Automated installer packages are available for
Windows, Macintosh OSX and Debian Linux. The source code
packages include build scripts which make them easy to install on any
other Unix-like platform.
We would like to thank S. Kelly and everyone on the IFEFFIT
mailing list for their enthusiasm and support for this project.
D. Barton contributed code for importing CIF ﬁles. Versions 0.8.038
of ATHENA, 0.8.0 of ARTEMIS and 0.08 of HEPHAESTUS are
shown in this paper. Newer versions will, no doubt, be available by
the time of publication. The screen shots in this article were made on
a GNU/Linux computer with a KDE desktop. The programs may be
different in appearance on other systems.
References
Ankudinov, A. L., Ravel, B., Rehr, J. J. & Conradson, S. D. (1998). Phys. Rev.
B, 58, 7565–7576.
Bunker, G. (1983). Nucl. Instrum. Methods, 207, 437–444.
Chantler, C. T. (1995). J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 24, 71.
Cromer, D. T. & Liberman, D. (1970). J. Chem. Phys. 53, 1891–1898.
Elam, W., Ravel, B. & Sieber, J. (2002). Radiat. Phys. Chem. 63, 121–128.
Hagelstein, M., San Miguel, A., Fontaine, A. & Goulon, J. (1997). J. Phys. IV
(Colloque), 7(C2), 303–308.
Hall, S., Allen, F. & Brown, I. (1991). Acta Cryst. A47, 655–685.
Henke, B. L., Gullikson, E. M. & Davis, J. C. (1993). Atom. Data Nucl. Data
Tables, 54, 181–342.
Kelly, S., Kemner, K., Fowle, D., Boyanov, M., Bunker, B. & Yee, N. (2002).
Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 66, 3855–3871.
computer programs
540
Ravel and Newville
 Data analysis for XAS using IFEFFIT
J. Synchrotron Rad. (2005). 12, 537–541
Figure 3
The HEPHAESTUS program, showing the absorption and ﬂuorescence line energy
utility. The various utilities provided by HEPHAESTUS are accessed by the button
bar on the left.


----- Page 5 (native text) -----
Kolobov, A., Fons, P., Frenkel, A., Ankudinov, A., Tominaga, J. & Uruga, T.
(2004). Nature Mater. 3, 703–708.
Lidie, S. & Walsh, N. (2002). Mastering Perl/Tk, 1st ed. Cambridge: O’Reilly.
McMaster, W. H., Grande, N. K.-D., Mallett, J. H. & Hubbell, J. H. (1969).
Compilation of X-ray Cross Sections. Lawrence Radiation Laboratory
Report UCRL-50174. Springﬁeld, VA: National Bureau of Standards.
Michalowicz, A. & Vlaic, G. (1998). J. Synchrotron Rad. 5, 1317–1320.
Newville, M. (2001). J. Synchrotron Rad. 8, 322–324.
Newville, M., Lıvinsˇ, P., Yacoby, Y., Rehr, J. J. & Stern, E. A. (1993). Phys. Rev.
B, 47, 14126–14131.
Newville, M., Ravel, B., Haskel, D., Rehr, J. J., Stern, E. A. & Yacoby, Y.
(1995). Physica B, 208/209, 154–156.
Pearson, J. (1997). PGPLOT Graphic Library version 5.2.0, http://www.astro.
caltech.edu/~tjp/pgplot/.
Ravel, B. (2000). EXAFS Analysis Using FEFF and FEFFIT, http://
feff.phys.washington.edu/~ravel/course/.
Ravel, B. (2001). J. Synchrotron Rad. 8, 314–316.
Rehr, J. J. & Albers, R. C. (1990). Phys. Rev. B, 41, 8139–8149.
The Open Source Initiative (2004). The Open Source Initiative, http://
www.opensource.org/.
Wall, L., Christiansen, T. & Schwartz, R. L. (1996). Programming Perl, 2nd ed.
Cambridge: O’Reilly.
Zabinsky, S. I., Rehr, J. J., Ankudinov, A., Albers, R. C. & Eller, M. J. (1995).
Phys. Rev. B, 52, 2995–3009.
computer programs
J. Synchrotron Rad. (2005). 12, 537–541
Ravel and Newville
 Data analysis for XAS using IFEFFIT
541
