

----- Page 1 (native text) -----
COMPASSION: THE
PHILOSOPHICAL
DEBATE
I. COMPASSION AND REASON
Compassion is controversial. For about twenty-five hundred years it
has found both ardent defenders, who consider it to be the bedrock of
the ethical life, and equally determined opponents, who denounce it as
"irrational" and a bad guide to action. These opponents have strongly
influenced the rhetoric of contemporary debates about the emotion.
Contrasts between "emotion" and "reason" are ubiquitous in the law,
and in public life generally - particularly where appeals to compassion
are at issue. These contrasts are seldom drawn with clarity. We are
rarely told whether "irrational," as applied to emotion, means "not
involving thought" or "involving thought that is in some way substan-
dard and bad." In the process, we frequently encounter traces of the
historical debate - but in an unclear and degenerate form. For this
reason it seems worthwhile to study the historical debate closely, as-
sessing it in connection with our evolving theory of compassion. It will
turn out, I believe, that most of the contemporary opponents of com-
passion do not share the philosophical position with which they appear
to ally themselves.
To set the stage, let us consider the way in which the attack on
compassion as "irrational" has figured in one recent legal debate. In a
jury instruction case1 (concerning the same rules for sentencing under
which O. J. Simpson would have been sentenced, had he been con-
victed), Justice O'Connor argues that "the sentence imposed at the
penalty stage should reflect a reasoned moral response to the defen-
dant's background, character, and crime rather than mere sympathy or
i California v. Brown, 479 US 542-3 (1987).
354
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511840715.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 2 (native text) -----
THE PHILOSOPHICAL DEBATE
emotion." The assessment of penalty, she continues, is a "moral in-
quiry" and not "an emotional response" - assuming without argument
that these are two utterly distinct categories. Justice Brennan, too, holds
that "mere sympathy" must be left to one side.
Nor is this depreciation confined to the opponents of emotion. For
Justice Blackmun, while urging that compassionate emotion has a valu-
able and ineliminable role to play in criminal sentencing,2 still accepts
the contrast between emotion and reason-based moral judgment, say-
ing that although the reaction of the juror "at times might be a rational
or moral one, it also may arise from sympathy or mercy, human quali-
ties that are undeniably emotional in nature." This puts him in a weak
and apologetic position, one that seems unlikely to persuade. More
recently, Justice Thomas has assailed appeals to compassion that focus
on the disadvantaged background of a criminal defendant, suggesting
that such appeals are irrational because of their failure to give people
sufficient credit for agency and responsibility (see Chapter 8, section
II).
Much the same is true of quite a few legal and economic theorists
who argue for some measure of reliance on emotion in public reason-
ing: again and again, one finds "empathy," "sympathy," and even
"passion" in general contrasted with "reason" or "rationality," in a
way that inevitably puts the advocates of emotion on the defensive
from the start, given the normative connotations of the term "ra-
tional."3 What they end up saying, it seems, is that there are certain
elements of the personality that do not clarify or enrich the understand-
ing,4 that are in and of themselves pretty unreliable and substandard -
2 Ibid., at pp. 561-3. A further problem with Blackmun's opinion, from the point of view
of the tradition, is that it speaks of the juror's "sympathy or mercy," thus conflating the
emotion with a nonemotional attribute of judgment of which the antiemotion tradition
approves.
3 See Massaro (1989), Henderson (1987); Gewirtz (1988), one of the most eloquent
defenses of the role of emotion in law, still speaks of "the nonrational emotions." A
more careful defense of emotion in law, which does not fall into this trap, is Minow and
Spelman (1988). On the side of economics, Frank (1988), though entitled Passions
within Reason, does not in fact locate passion within reason, but consistently treats
emotions as irrational forces that may nonetheless have valuable consequences.
4 This is not true of Gewirtz, who writes the interesting sentence, "But while the nonra-
tional emotions can distort, delude, or blaze uncontrollably, they have worth in them-
selves and can also open, clarify, and enrich understanding" (Gewirtz [1988], p. 1050).
It is hard to see why Gewirtz should call an element that can "open, clarify, and enrich
understanding" "nonrational," unless he is using the language of rationality in a purely
355
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511840715.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 3 (native text) -----
PART II: COMPASSION
but that we should rely on them anyway in certain legal contexts. It is
no wonder that critics of compassion such as Richard Posner find this
a weak position, an invitation to let into the law whatever brutish and
undiscriminating forces happen to be around.5
Both sides in this debate fall short because they fail to examine this
strong opposition between compassion and reason. The claim that
compassion is "irrational" might mean one of two things. It might
mean that compassion is a noncognitive force that has little to do with
thought or reasoning of any kind. This position, as Chapter 6 has
argued, cannot bear serious scrutiny. On the other hand, it might mean
that the thought on which compassion is based is in some normative
sense bad or false thought; this is in fact what the serious anticompas-
sion tradition holds. But to hold this, as we shall see, one must defend
a substantive and highly controversial ethical position, one that has
been defended by Plato, the Stoics, Spinoza, and, in some respects,
Kant, but one that very few of the contemporary opponents of the
emotion would actually be prepared to endorse (though I think Justice
Thomas might). In this way, a more precise analysis of the emotion
and the historical debate about its normative role can clear the ground
for a more adequate contemporary approach.
II. THREE CLASSIC OBJECTIONS
The pro-compassion tradition has assumed that many of life's misfor-
tunes do serious harm to "undeserving" people. But for Socrates, a
good person cannot be harmed.6 And Socratic thinking about virtue
and self-sufficiency inaugurated a tradition of thought that opposes
compassion, as a moral sentiment unworthy of the dignity of both
giver and recipient, and based on false beliefs about the value of exter-
nal goods. According to this tradition, whose most influential expo-
nents are the Greek and Roman Stoics, the most important thing in life
is one's own reason and will - what the Roman Stoic Epictetus calls
descriptive and non-normative sense, meaning by it something like, "not concerned with
the maximizing of individual satisfactions."
5 See also the treatment of emotion in Posner (1992): here, emotions seem to be treated
as completely impervious to reasoning and argument.
6 Plato, Apology 41D, cf. 30DC; on this see Vlastos (1991), and my review in Nussbaum
(1991).
356
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511840715.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 4 (native text) -----
THE PHILOSOPHICAL DEBATE
one's "moral purpose" (prohairesis). This faculty of moral choice is the
possession of all humans, and its virtuous use is always within our
power, no matter what the world does. Moral purpose is a source of
human equality: it is the possession of male and female, slave and free.
Its dignity outshines all circumstantial differences and renders them
trivial. Vastly superior in dignity and worth to any other good thing, it
suffices all by itself, well used, for a flourishing life. Thus the only way
to be damaged by life with respect to one's flourishing is to make bad
choices or become unjust; the appropriate response to such deliberate
badness is blame, not compassion. Blame, unlike compassion, respects
the primacy of moral purpose in each person, treating people not as
victims and subordinates but as dignified agents. As for the events of
life that most people take to be occasions for compassion - losses of
loved ones, loss of freedom, ill health, and so on - they do, of course,
occur, but they are of only minor importance.7
Thus compassion has a false cognitive/evaluative structure, and is
objectionable for that reason alone. It acknowledges as important what
has no true importance. Furthermore, in the process compassion insults
the dignity of the person who suffers, implying that this is a person
who really needs the things of this world, whereas no virtuous person
has such needs.8 (Kant calls this an "insulting kind of beneficence,
expressing the sort of benevolence one has for an unworthy person.")9
If one respects the faculty of moral purpose in a human being, one will
not feel compassion, for one will see that faculty as a source of equal
human worth, undiminished by any catastrophe. If we include the
judgment of similar possibilities, compassion also frequently insults the
dignity of the person who gives it: it is an acknowledgment that her
7 It appears that for Socrates they can affect the degree of one's flourishing, though not
flourishing itself: see Vlastos (1991). The Stoics refuse to admit even this much.
8 See the extensive development of this line of argument in Nietzsche: especially Dawn
135 ("To offer pity is as good as to offer contempt"); Zarathustra, "On the Pitying."
Nietzsche actually makes three related points here: (1) pity denigrates the person's own
efforts by implying that they are insufficient for flourishing; (2) pity inappropriately
inflates the importance of worldly goods; (3) pity has bad consequences, undermining
self-command and practical reason.
9 Kant, Doctrine of Virtue, 35, Akad. p. 457, trans. Ellington. Kant's entire argument in
this passage is very close to, is indeed appropriated as a whole by, Nietzsche, a fact that
ought to give pause to those who think Nietzsche's view cruel or proto-Fascist. The two
add a further argument: that pity adds to the suffering that there is in the world, by
making two people suffer rather than only one (Kant, ibid.; Nietzsche, Dawn 134).
357
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511840715.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 5 (native text) -----
PART II: COMPASSION
own most central prospects may be brought low by fortune.10 As Kant
puts it, adopting some aspects of the Platonic/Stoic position, "Such
benevolence is called softheartedness and should not occur at all among
human beings."11
This position on compassion becomes the basis for Plato's assault on
tragedy in the Republic.12 The good person, he argues, will be "most
of all sufficient to himself for flourishing living, and exceptionally more
than others he has least need of another . . . Least of all, then, is it a
terrible thing to him to be deprived of a son or brother or money or
anything of that sort" (387DE). Accordingly, speeches of lamentation
and requests for compassion, if retained at all, must be assigned to
characters whom the audience will perceive as weak and error-ridden,
so that these judgments will be repudiated by the spectator.13 The Stoics
take this line of thought further, insisting that the true hero for the
young should be Socrates, with his calm, self-sufficient demeanor in
misfortune, his low evaluation of worldly goods. Tragic heroes, by
contrast, should be regarded with scorn, as people whose errors in
evaluative judgment have brought them low. (Epictetus defines tragedy
as "what happens when chance events befall fools.") This Stoic posi-
tion on compassion and value is taken over with little change by Spi-
noza, and seriously influences the accounts in Descartes, Smith, and
Kant.14 It is given an especially complex and vivid development in the
thought of Nietzsche, whose connection to Stoicism has not, I think,
been sufficently understood.15
10 See Nietzsche, Dawn 251 (called "Stoical"), 133; Zarathustra IV, "The Sign."
11 Kant, Doctrine of Virtue, 34, Akad. p. 122.
12 See Nussbaum (1992) for a detailed analysis.
13 Thus they are to be ascribed to "women, and not very good women at that, and to the
inferior among men." See Nussbaum (1992) for subtle differences between Books II-
III and Book X on this point; and for Stoic developments, see Nussbaum (1993a). See
also Halliwell (1984, 1989).
14 Descartes tries to bind a middle ground, granting that any noncallous person will feel
compassion for the suffering of others, but claiming that the strong and magnanimous
person will feel it in a way that does not so prominently involve the judgment of
similarity: the sadness of such compassion is not bitter, and is rather like the experi-
ence, he says, of the tragic spectator {Les Passions de Vame, Art. 187). Smith approves
of compassion up to a point, but thinks that all emotions must be strictly kept in
bounds by a rather Stoic sort of "self-command." For Kant's complex position, see the
following discussion.
15 I analyze the Stoic roots of Nietzsche's position on pity, and draw some new interpre-
tive consequences, in Nussbaum (1993b). An important new development in Nietz-
358
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511840715.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 6 (native text) -----
THE PHILOSOPHICAL DEBATE
It is important to see that the motivation underlying the repudiation
of compassion is at its root a strongly egalitarian and cosmopolitan
one. Although the pro-compassion tradition, in its Rousseauian incar-
nation, can claim to be a champion of egalitarian-democratic ideas,
using compassion to motivate a more equal distribution of basic re-
sources, the opponents claim that their own stance is the one that more
appropriately respects human equality, and the infinite worth of human
dignity that is its source. To the pro-compassion tradition, differences
in class and rank create differences in the worth or success of lives. To
grant this much, the anti-compassion position holds, is to grant that
the world and its morally irrelevant happenings can in effect forge
different ranks and conditions of humanity. The believer in equal hu-
man worth should not acknowledge this: she should take her bearings
from that basic human endowment that is not unequally distributed,
and she should honor that equal basic endowment by treating that, and
that only, as the measure of a life. To suggest that there is anything we
could add to a human being's moral faculties that would either aug-
ment or diminish their value is to suggest that people are not truly
equal in value. The Stoic repudiation of compassion can easily look
like mere hard-heartedness or repressiveness; but it expresses, at its
core, this idea of the dignity of humanity.
Similarly, the most shocking aspect of Stoic "indifference" - the
injunction not to be upset at the deaths of loved ones, including even
one's own children - should be seen as closely linked to the Stoics'
egalitarian cosmopolitanism. All human beings are equal in worth, and
we are fundamentally not members of families or cities, but kosmopol-
itai, members of the "city-state of the universe." This means that we
should have equal concern for all; and that equal concern is incompat-
ible with special attachments to kin. We may appropriately give our
own family members or fellow citizens a disproportionate measure of
our concern and energy, because that is the post where life has placed
us, and it would be ineffectual to attempt to do good in all places. But
we should recognize that this organizational issue, not some special
sche's line of attack is that, following (in different ways) both ancient Cynicism and
contemporary Romanticism, he holds that most of the standard occasions for pity are
not only not really bad for people, but are actually good: loneliness, hardship, poverty,
chastity, are all favorable conditions for philosophical creation. See especially Geneal-
ogy of Morals III.8, and Will to Power 910 (1968).
359
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511840715.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 7 (native text) -----
PART II: COMPASSION
value in one's own family, or ration, is what justifies the disproportion-
ate investment.16 The Greek Stoics went further, holding that the very
existence of the family jeopardizes proper concern, breeding jealousies
and hostilities; children should be raised communally.17
Notice that Stoic impartiality is independent of Stoic indifference.
One might insist on equal concern for all human beings without deny-
ing that the world's damages are significant and important. Such a
modified Stoic could make a place for compassion, provided that it was
evenly distributed. Thus the Stoic attack needs to say more about why,
given the nature of the emotion, this is an unlikely result.
In addition to charging compassion with falsity in judgment, then,
the classic attacks make two further objections. The first concerns the
partiality and narrowness of compassion; the second concerns its con-
nection to anger and revenge. Compassion, the first argument goes,
binds us to our own immediate sphere of life, to what has affected us,
to what we see before us or can easily imagine. Because the imagination
plays such an important role in it, it is subject to distortion through the
unreliability of that faculty. But this means that it is very likely to
present an unbalanced picture of the world, effacing the equal value
and dignity of all human lives, their equal need for resources and for
aid in time of suffering. This argument, first introduced by the ancient
Stoics, is given an especially vivid form by Adam Smith, who argues
that to rely on "pity" as a social motive will, on this account, produce
very unbalanced and inconsistent results:18
Let us suppose that the great empire of China, with all its myriads of
inhabitants, was suddenly swallowed up by an earthquake, and let us con-
sider how a man of humanity in Europe, who had no sort of connexion with
that part of the world, would be affected upon receiving intelligence of this
dreadful calamity. He would, I imagine, first of all, express very strongly his
sorrow for the misfortune of that unhappy people, he would make many
melancholy reflections upon the precariousness of human life, and the vanity
of all the labours of man, which could thus be annihilated in a moment. . .
16 I present here a schematic version of the Stoic position, which does not fit all thinkers.
This argument about the justification of particular ties is adopted by Smith (1976),
"On Universal Benevolence."
17 See Schofield (1999); and, on the complex doctrine of eros that goes with this view of
family, see Nussbaum (1995b).
18 Smith (1976), p. 136; see the excellent account of these aspects of Smith's thought in
Coase (1976). See also Posner (1990), pp. 411-13.
360
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511840715.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 8 (native text) -----
THE PHILOSOPHICAL DEBATE
And when all this fine philosophy was over, when all these humane senti-
ments had been once fairly expressed, he would pursue his business or his
pleasure, take his repose or his diversion, with the same ease and tranquillity,
as if no such accident had happened. The most frivolous disaster which
could befal himself would occasion a more real disturbance. If he was to
lose his little finger to-morrow, he would not sleep to-night; but, provided
he never saw them, he will snore with the more profound security over the
ruin of a hundred millions of his brethren, and the destruction of that
immense multitude seems plainly an object less interesting to him, than this
paltry misfortune of his own.19
In short: broaden the emotion as we may through education, com-
passion remains narrow and unreliable. It takes in only what the person
has been able to see or imagine, and its psychology is limited by the
limitations of the sensory imagination. As we saw in Chapter 6, Smith
believes that empathy is extremely important in generating compassion.
If that is so, and if empathy for the similar and the near at hand - or
for whatever report has managed to make "interesting" - is easier, then
compassion will partake of that unevenness. But this means that it is
an insufficient, and even a dangerous, moral and social motive.
Finally, the classic attack examines the connection between compas-
sion and the roots of other more objectionable emotions. The person
who feels compassion accepts certain controversial evaluative judg-
ments concerning the place of "external goods" in human flourishing.
She accepts the idea that tragic predicaments can strike people through
no fault of their own, and that the losses people thus suffer matter
deeply. But a person who accepts those judgments accepts that chil-
dren, spouse, citizenship, and other externals all really matter for hu-
man flourishing. This means that she allows her own good to rest in
the hands of fortune. And to admit one's own vulnerability to fortune
is to have all the raw material not only for compassion, but also for
fear and anxiety and grief; and not only for these, but for anger and
the retributive disposition as well. What Stoic analyses bring out again
and again is that the repudiation of compassion is not in the least
connected with callousness, brutality, or the behavior of the boot-in-
the-face tyrant. In fact, in this picture it is compassion itself that is
19 As Smith's editors note, this passage may recall Hume . . . Treatise, II.iii.13: " 'Tis not
contrary to reason to prefer the destruction of the whole world to the scratching of my
finger."
361
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511840715.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 9 (native text) -----
PART II: COMPASSION
closely connected with cruelty. The person who has compassion for
another acknowledges the importance of certain worldly goods and
persons, which can in principle be damaged by another's agency. The
response to such damages will be compassion if the damaged person is
someone else; but if the damaged person is oneself, and the damage is
deliberate, the response will be anger - and anger that will be propor-
tional to the intensity of the initial evaluative attachment.
In short, this tradition claims that the soft soul of the compassionate
can be invaded by the serpents of resentment and hatred. When Seneca
writes to Nero reproving compassion,20 he hardly aims to encourage
Nero in his tendencies toward brutality. On the contrary: his project is
to get Nero to care less about insults to his reputation, about wealth
and power generally. This, Seneca argues, will make him a more gentle
and humane ruler. But not only is this project not hindered by the
removal of compassion, it demands it, because it demands the removal
of attachments to external goods. So long as Nero, that budding actor
who loved to sing the role of Agave in Euripides' Bacchae, indulges in
tragic weeping over the vicissitudes of life, so long is he not to be
trusted with the fate of his people. Cruelty, according to Seneca, is not
the opposite of compassion. It is an excessive form of retributive anger,
which, in turn, is simply a circumstantial inflection or modality of the
same evaluative judgments that have, in other circumstances, compas-
sion as their inflection.21 So compassion is cruelty's first cousin; the
difference between them is made by fortune.
This line of argument is developed vividly by Nietzsche, who argues,
with the Stoics, that a certain sort of "hardness" toward the vicissitudes
of fortune is the only way to get rid of the desire for revenge. The
"veiled glance of pity," which looks inward on one's own possibilities
with "a profound sadness," acknowledging one's own weakness and
inadequacy - this glance of the compassionate is, he argues, the basis
of much hatred directed against a world that makes human beings
suffer, and against all those, in that world, who are not brought low,
who are self-respecting and self-commanding: "It is on such soil, on
swampy ground, that every weed, every poisonous plant grows . . .
2.0 Seneca, On Mercy; the term is misericordia.
21 See On Anger and On Mercy; the argument is discussed in Nussbaum (1994), Chapter
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511840715.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 10 (native text) -----
THE PHILOSOPHICAL DEBATE
Here the worms of vengefulness and rancor swarm."22 Or, as Zarathu-
stra puts it, "The spirit of revenge, my friends, has so far been the
subject of man's best reflection: and where there was suffering, one
always wanted punishment also."23
This Stoic insight is now developed further in an account of the
original motives for punishment, itself indebted to Stoic antecedents.24
Nietzsche argues that punishment is a form of exchange, in which the
injured party is paid back for his pain and suffering by the pleasure of
inflicting suffering on the original wrongdoer, and by the additional
pleasure of being allowed to "despise and mistreat" the person who
has at one time had him in his power (Genealogy II.5-6). This way of
seeing things frequently leads to cruelty, as the one who has been put
down by the offense revels in the chance to put the offender down.
"And might one not add," he comments, "that, fundamentally, this
world has never since lost a certain odor of blood and torture?" (II.6)
In certain ways, Nietzsche prefers this simple revenge morality to a
morality based on the idea that the human being is, as such, worthless
and disgusting (II.7). But, like the Stoics, he is quick to point out that
the interest in taking revenge is a product of weakness and lack of
power - of that excessive dependence on others and on the goods of
the world is the mark of a weak, not of a strong and self-sufficient,
human being or society. The compassionate person is as such a weak
person.
But if compassion is in this way bound up with the inclination to
revenge, and if the task of a strong society is to contain and control the
inclination to revenge, then one might well conclude that society has
reasons to extirpate compassion in its citizens, young and old, rather
than fostering it. One might have thought that the containment of
revenge is a prominent theme in the tragic tradition, almost as promi-
nent as the themes of the fragility of fortune and the value of compas-
sion.25 But if the anti-compassion tradition is right, tragedy breeds
revenge even while it appears to argue against it; the real elimination
22 Nietzsche, Genealogy of Morals (trans. Kaufmann), III.14.
23 Nietzsche, Thus Spoke Zarathustra (trans. Kaufmann), "On Redemption."
24 Especially, perhaps, to Seneca's On Anger - see Nussbaum (1994), Chapter 11.
25 On this see Posner (1988), who finds the tragic tradition a valuable source of insight
into the control of revenge, and its unsuitability as a principle of social order.
363
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511840715.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 11 (native text) -----
PART II: COMPASSION
of revenge requires the banishment of the tragic poets from the city.
And if the city is to be a city of law, and if it is a particular job of the
legal system to make certain that revenge does not carry the day, then
one might well conclude that a legal system will have especially strong
reasons to avoid tragic compassion, and to discourage citizens from
basing their judgments on it.
III. MERCY WITHOUT COMPASSION
What will the attitude of the good and self-sufficient person be toward
the misfortunes of others? Here we arrive at an area of considerable
complexity in the anti-compassion position. When others suffer the
losses that are usually taken to be occasions for compassion, the good
Stoic will, of course, not have compassion for them. Her paramount
sentiment will be one of respect for the dignity of humanity in each
and every human being, no matter how unfortunate; and she will
therefore respect the sufferer, seeing his or her virtue and will as in
principle sufficient for flourishing life. Insofar as the sufferer falls short
of virtue, especially by adopting an inappropriate attitude toward her
own misfortune, grieving and calling out for compassion, the Stoic will
be critical. Epictetus urges a tough, mocking attitude. One should try
to get the sufferer not to moan about fortune in this undignified way,
but to take charge of herself and her life. "Wipe your own nose,"
Epictetus tells the passive pupil. Marcus Aurelius, gentler, urges a lofty
parental attitude: think of the person who is moaning about fortune as
like a child who has lost a toy. The suffering of this child is real enough,
and one should console her - remembering all the while, of course, that
it is childish to care so much about a mere toy (V.36).
Such a noncompassionate person will be concerned in some ways
with the material side of life. She will give benefits to others, and she
will do so without selfish holding back, since she herself does not need
these things. This point is repeatedly stressed in the anti-compassion
tradition, in particular by Seneca (in On Benefits). But this willingness
to benefit, at least in the Stoics and in Spinoza, comes about not
because these goods are seen as important, but because they are seen
as unimportant. Indeed, one of the great merits this tradition sees in its
moral position is that it ascribes all true value to things concerning
which there could not possibly be bitter competition among persons.
364
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511840715.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 12 (native text) -----
THE PHILOSOPHICAL DEBATE
As Spinoza puts it, "The highest good of those who pursue virtue is
common to all, and all can equally enjoy it."26 (Nietzsche, in his char-
acteristically extreme way, goes a step further: the true philosopher will
be delighted to get rid of all worldly goods and to live in utter poverty
and loneliness, leaving the goods of the world for others - for he will
know that this sort of suffering actually increases his capacity for
philosophical excellence.)27 But this means that the commitment to
secure material goods to those who do happen to like them rests on a
fragile foundation, and is at every step constrained by the anti-
compassion person's feeling that they should not have liked those goods
so much. I shall return to this point.28
The wise person of the anti-compassion tradition is not always
"hard." Believing that the only serious harms that befall others are the
harms that they have caused themselves through their folly and wrong-
doing, the Stoic nonetheless believes that it is extremely difficult to be
good. He therefore faces the benighted condition of most mortals -
including their incessant demands for compassion - with concern for
their development and well-being. Not angered on account of his own
personal damage, not feeling himself dragged down by the bad acts of
another, he will be free to ask what corrections and instructions, even
what punishments, are most likely to do good for the wrongdoer's life
as a whole, and for society as a whole. Seneca argues in On Anger and
On Mercy that this is the right way to defeat the retributive attitude -
by rising above the cares that support it. The punishments of the wise
person will be free from the harshness and cruelty that he connects
with ordinary vulnerability. They will be as judiciously selected as are
a doctor's prescriptions; and frequently they will be merciful.
Mercy is defined as the inclination of the judgment toward leniency
in selecting penalties: the merciful judge will often choose a penalty
milder than the one appointed in law for the offense. This bending or
waiving of punishment will frequently be preferred by the good person,
Seneca argues, for several different reasons. First, it is expressive of his
own strength and dignity: it shows that he does not need to inflict pain
in order to be a whole person. Second, it displays understanding of the
26 Ethics, Part IV, Proposition 36. This good, of course, is knowledge.
27 For references, see note 15 to this chapter.
28 For the damage that this position does to Cicero's political thought, and, thence, to the
foundations of modern thought about transnational duties, see Nussbaum (2000c).
365
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511840715.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 13 (native text) -----
PART II: COMPASSION
difficulties of human life, which make it almost impossible not to err in
some respect; it displays, too, the awareness that the punisher is himself
an imperfect person, liable to error. Third, it is socially useful, since it
awakens trust and mutual goodwill, rather than fear and antagonism.29
What we see here, in effect, is a translation of the cognitive structure
of compassion into the terms appropriate to the anti-compassion tra-
dition's conception of the self-sufficiency of virtue. For in Senecan
mercy, we have, as in compassion, an acknowledgment of the difficul-
ties and struggles peculiar to human life - in this case, struggles to
perfect one's own moral purpose - coupled with an acknowledgment
that one is oneself a fellow human being of the one who receives mercy.
But compassion took as its focus chance events that virtue does not
control; in giving these importance it told lies (so the Stoic claims)
about the human good. Mercy, by contrast, takes as its focus the uphill
struggle to be virtuous and to perfect one's moral purpose. It places the
accent in the right place, as the anti-compassion tradition sees it, and
ascribes importance to what really has importance. It still says, as
compassion does, that to live well is difficult for a human being, and
that it is highly likely that a person who makes reasonably good efforts
will come to grief somehow. But compassion focuses on occasions
where the coming to grief, was not the person's fault. According to its
opponents, there are no such cases, since either there is no real coming
to grief, or it is the person's fault. Mercy focuses on fault, and refuses -
as Seneca emphasizes repeatedly - ever to let the person off the hook
for that fault. Mercy is mitigation in sentencing, not a verdict of not
guilty. Mercy simply says, look, I don't need to hurt you; and you were
probably having a tough time being good, since it is very hard to be
good. So, like a good doctor or a good parent, I am going to tell you
firmly that you are bad, but punish you lightly.
It is in this lofty, affectionately parental attitude - combined with a
deep respect for the dignity of humanity in each person - that the Stoic
tradition finds a cement that will, they claim, hold society together far
better than compassion, inspiring a mutual gentleness not tinged with
fearfulness or a gnawing sense of personal need. One of the most
eloquent defenses of this social vision can be found in Nietzsche's
29 On these arguments, see further in Nussbaum (1994), Chapter 11; and "Equity and
Mercy" in Nussbaum (1999a).
366
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511840715.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 14 (native text) -----
THE PHILOSOPHICAL DEBATE
Genealogy of Morals, following the passage on pity and revenge that I
have already discussed. Nietzsche now argues that in a strong and self-
sufficient person or society, the interest in retribution will gradually
overcome itself in the direction of mercy:
As its power increases, a community ceases to take the individual's trans-
gressions so seriously, because they can no longer be considered as danger-
ous and destructive to the whole as they were formerly . . . As the power and
self-confidence of a community increase, the penal law always becomes more
moderate; every weakening or imperiling of the former brings with it a res-
toration of the harsher forms of the latter. The "creditor" always becomes
more humane to the extent that he has grown richer; finally, how much in-
jury he can endure without suffering from it becomes the actual measure of
his wealth. It is not unthinkable that a society might attain such a conscious-
ness of power that it could allow itself the noblest luxury possible to it -
letting those who harm it go unpunished. "What are my parasites to me?" it
might say. "May they live and prosper: I am strong enough for that!"
The justice which began with "everything is dischargeable, everything
must be discharged," ends by winking and letting those incapable of dis-
charging their debt go free: it ends, as does every good thing on earth, by
overcoming itself. This self-overcoming of justice: one knows the beautiful
name it has given itself - mercy; it goes without saying that mercy remains
the privilege of the most powerful man, or better, his - beyond the law.30
Like Seneca, Nietzsche stresses that mercy does not deny that wrong-
doing has taken place; it does not rewrite the law concerning offenses.
Justice is still there intact in the merciful deed: but, springing from a
powerful and secure nature, from the self-respect of that nature and its
respect for others, it is able to waive the pleasure of retribution and
"overcome itself" in the direction of gentleness.31
The debate over compassion constructs, in effect, two visions of po-
litical community and of the good citizen and judge within it. One
vision is based upon the emotions; the other urges their removal. One
sees the human being as both aspiring and vulnerable, both worthy and
insecure; the other focuses on dignity alone, seeing in reason a bound-
30 Nietzsche, Genealogy of Morals II. 10.
31 See also Dawn 202, where Nietzsche deplores the custom of turning to the courts for
revenge, and speaks of "our detestable criminal codes, with their shopkeeper's scales
and the desire to counterbalance guilt with punishment." Here he goes further than in
the Genealogy, wishing to do away with penal institutions altogether, replacing them
with reformative "medical" institutions.
367
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511840715.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 15 (native text) -----
PART II: COMPASSION
less and indestructible worth. One sees the central task of community
as the provision of support for basic needs; bringing human beings
together through the thought of their common weakness and risk, it
constructs a moral emotion that is suited to supporting efforts to aid
the worst off. The other sees a community as a kingdom of free respon-
sible beings, held together by the awe that they feel for the worth of
reason in one another; the function of their association will be to assist
the moral development of each by judgments purified of passion. Each
vision, in its own way, pursues both equality and freedom. The former
aims at equal support for basic needs and hopes through this to pro-
mote equal opportunities for free choice and self-realization; the other
starts from the fact of internal freedom - a fact that no misfortune can
remove - and finds in this fact a source of political equality. One sees
freedom of choice as something that needs to be built up for people
through worldly arrangements that make them capable of functioning
in a fully human way; the other takes freedom to be an inalienable
given, independent of all material arrangements. One aims to defeat the
selfish and grasping passions through the imagination of suffering, and
through a gradual broadening of concern; the other aims to remove
these passions completely, overcoming retaliation with self-command
and mercy. One attempts to achieve benevolence through softhearted-
ness; the other holds, with Kant, that this softheartedness "should not
be at all among human beings." One holds that "it is the weakness of
the human being that makes it sociable."32 The other holds that weak-
ness is an impediment to community, that only the truly self-sufficient
person can be a true friend. We see that the debate between the friends
and enemies of compassion is no merely formal debate concerning the
type of thought process or the type of faculty that should influence
choice in public life. Nor is it a debate between partisans of reason and
partisans of some mindless noncognitive force. It is a substantive debate
about ethical value. Now we must adjudicate that debate.
IV. VALUING EXTERNAL GOODS
The historical debate does not provide a full response to the Stoic
objections, because the defenders of compassion do not grapple with
32 See Rousseau (1979), p. 221; as elsewhere I substitute "human being" for "man."
368
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511840715.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 16 (native text) -----
THE PHILOSOPHICAL DEBATE
their opposition in a sustained manner. The anti-compassion tradition
was for centuries the dominant tradition in the history of Western
philosophy, as Nietzsche plausibly states. So great is the influence of
this Stoic tradition that even Adam Smith, in some respects an eloquent
defender of the public role of compassion, ends up denigrating all
emotional softness rather harshly, in the highly Stoic section of his
work dealing with the virtue of self-command.33 Similarly, The Wealth
of Nations is profoundly influenced by the view that poverty does not
diminish human dignity. Again, in international morality and law, the
influence of Stoic cosmopolitanism, through Cicero, on thinkers such
as Grotius and Kant runs deep, shaping contemporary views about
duties of material aid.34 Whereas the anti-compassion tradition exhibits
great continuity and unity of argument, the pro-compassion tradition
is more scattered, including novelists as well as political theorists, psy-
chologists as well as philosophers; its members are not on the whole
clearly aware of one another's arguments.
Before we turn to the debate itself, we should bear one fact in mind.
The anti-compassion tradition does indeed consider this emotion (and
indeed, in the case of Spinoza and the Stoics, all other emotions) to be
irrational in the normative sense; it does indeed construct a sharp, and
prejudicial, opposition between emotion and reason. But it does so in
a rather different way from the way in which emotion and reason are
sometimes contrasted in modern legal and political discussions. The
severe tradition does not deny that emotions are full of thought. In
fact, insofar as its members follow the Stoics, they hold the strong
cognitive position on emotion that I have been trying to defend in a
modified form.35 What is wrong with compassion (like other emotions)
is not that it is not discerning and aimed at truth. What is wrong with
33 Smith (1976), pp. 237-62, which contrasts the "rules of perfect prudence, of strict
justice, and of proper benevolence" with the passions, which "are very apt to mislead
him; sometimes to drive him and sometimes to seduce him to violate all the rules which
he himself, in all his sober and cool hours, approves of." I think that it is difficult to
make a consistent whole of Smith's position on the passions. The earlier chapters of
the work defend passion as a form of perception that is highly responsive to reasoning
and, it seems, at least partly constituted by reasoning; there Smith seems to be influ-
enced more by Shaftesbury and perhaps Aristotle than by the Stoics.
34 See Nussbaum (2000c).
35 This is true of all the Stoics and Spinoza; it is true of Epicurus and Plato with some
qualification; it is not true of Kant, whose position on emotion is an odd amalgam of
Humean positive analysis and Stoic normative analysis.
369
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511840715.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 17 (native text) -----
PART II: COMPASSION
it is that it latches onto false beliefs. It is irrational not in the way that
hunger is irrational, but in the way that a belief in the flatness of the
earth is irrational: false, based on inadequate evidence, cultural preju-
dice, false premises, and bad argument; it is therefore capable of being
set right by true premises and good arguments. That is why, in the
thought of the Stoics and Spinoza, it is philosophy that can liberate the
human being from bondage to emotion. This would not have been the
case had emotion been an ineluctable animal force.
Many modern opponents of emotion, however, do not distinguish
clearly between the claim that emotion is noncognitive and the claim
that it is irrational in the Stoic sense. They get considerable mileage out
of the long philosophical tradition that opposes emotion to reason,
relying on the authority of this tradition rather than on argument for
the appropriateness of the contrast. And yet they do not endorse the
traditional meaning of the contrast, a meaning inseparable from this
tradition's controversial moral position on the worth of external goods.
It is not clear that they could endorse the anti-compassion tradition in
its authentic form, without rendering their own position far more con-
troversial than it appears to be.
Let us now ask how the friend of compassion should answer its
opponents' charges. First and most basic is the charge of falsity: com-
passion ascribes to chance misfortunes an importance they do not really
possess, insulting, in the process, the dignity of both its receiver and its
giver. It should be replaced by respect for the indestructible dignity of
the sufferer's humanity.
The first thing we should say in response to this charge is that it is,
so far, much too blunt. For why are we forced to make an all-or-
nothing choice between having compassion for a suffering person and
having respect for that person's dignity? Why can't we make distinc-
tions, having compassion in connection with the wrongs luck has
brought her way and at the same time having respect and awe for the
way in which a good person will bear these ills with strength? We do
not have to say that the person's moral humanity cancels out the loss
in order to respect humanity when we see it. Nor do we need to say
that the virtuous use of our moral faculties is sufficient for human
flourishing in order to admire excellence as the Stoics wish us to do.
Indeed, it is difficult to know what we would be admiring in such a
3 7 0
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511840715.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 18 (native text) -----
THE PHILOSOPHICAL DEBATE
case if we did take the Stoic position that the loss was not a serious
loss. For then, where would the fortitude be in bearing the event with
dignity? Tragedy elicits wonder at human excellence not by showing its
heroes untouched by the deaths of children, by rape, war, and material
deprivation,36 but precisely by showing how these horrible things do
cut to the very core of the personality - and yet do not altogether
destroy it.
There is something important in the Stoic position. The worth of
humanity should elicit respect, even when the world has done its worst;
and the excellent use of one's human faculties should elicit admiration,
even when circumstances do not cooperate. The Stoic ideal of equal
humanity, fundamental to Enlightenment political thought, does place
many constraints on proper compassion, instructing us not to give the
accidents of life undue importance in any of our dealings with others,
including our responses to their misfortunes. It tells us that we must
not interpret differences of material circumstances as negating a fun-
damental human similarity, which is a proper foundation for moral
claims. On the other hand, compassion itself standardly includes the
thought of common humanity, insofar as it comes joined with the
judgment of similar possibilities: in this way it appears to be an ally of
respect, not its enemy. And the respect we have for the equal humanity
of others should, it seems, lead us to be intensely concerned with their
material happiness, not indifferent to it. The fact that a certain individ-
ual is a bearer of human capacities gives that person a claim on our
material concern, so that these capacities may receive appropriate sup-
port. We do not properly respect those capacities if we do neglect the
needs they have for resources, or deny that hardships can deprive
human beings of flourishing.
Nor are we prevented from respecting the dignity of each human
36 Tragedies typically do not focus on the loss of fortune or status, since the real hero
does not attach the excessive value to these things that many people do, as I go on to
discuss; at the other extreme, they also rarely focus on deprivation so extreme that it
deprives people of the chance to act and think well - extreme hunger, for example; for
tragedies must contain action and poetic speech. But this does not imply that extreme
hunger is not one of the most acute of tragedies. Short of this, tragedy frequently does
concern itself with material deprivation - consider, for example, the plight of Philocte-
tes, in which both the pain of his illness and the need to forage for food are continually
stressed.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511840715.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 19 (native text) -----
PART II: COMPASSION
being if we grant, as we must, that the failure of external support can
affect a person's capacity for virtue and choice itself, if it occurs early
enough in a process of development, or is sufficiently prolonged. The
Stoic would like to believe that no experience of worldly helplessness
can touch us, that we are never victims - and that this is our dignity.
Modern followers of the Stoics frequently make a similar move, insist-
ing that the portrayal of certain people or groups as victims is inconsis-
tent with respecting their agency. But we can acknowledge the extent
to which we are at the world's mercy - the extent, for example, to
which people who are malnourished, or ill, or treated with contempt
by their society have a harder time developing their capacities for
learning and choice - even ethical choice - without denying that our
basic capacities and our agency deserve respect and sustenance, just by
being there in whatever form. Indeed, it is only when we have noticed
that and noticed how these capacities need support from the material
world, and therefore exert a claim against our own comfort and effort,
that we have appropriately respected them.
In another way as well, the attack is too blunt. For it takes an all-or-
nothing position on the importance of external goods for flourishing:
either compassion all over the place, or no compassion at all. But the
pro-compassion tradition is not prevented from judging that some oc-
casions for compassion are illegitimate, and based upon false evalua-
tions. As I have said, compassion takes up not the actual point of view
of any and every sufferer, but rather the point of view of an onlooker
who appraises the seriousness of what has happened. The normative
suitability of this emotion, as of fear and grief and anger, depends on
whether the person gets the appraisals right, using a defensible theory
of value. Thus compassion should not be given to my Roman aristocrat
who misses an evening of peacock's tongues, no matter how much he
minds this. On the other hand, compassion should be given to the
person who is unaware of the extent of her illness or deprivation
because of mental impairment or the social deformation of preferences.
The pro-compassion tradition is preoccupied with getting the theory of
value right, criticizing those who attach inappropriate importance to
money, status, or pleasure. (Both Aristotle and Rousseau make this
critique central to their thought.) This tradition agrees with Nietzsche
that people should not find weakness everywhere they turn, or moan
372
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511840715.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 20 (native text) -----
THE PHILOSOPHICAL DEBATE
about any and every loss; to a great extent, they should make the best
of what life brings their way, relying on their own inner resources.37
On the other hand, it is no use denying that some losses are worth
weeping about - and these include some that the sufferer herself may
not even notice.
We might say that the Stoic objector depicts the person who needs
the goods of fortune as a type of pathological narcissist: incapable of
respecting others because she is boundlessly needy and wrapped up in
her own demands. But of course we need not imagine the needs of the
compassionate as boundless: the child we imagined in Chapter 4 had
made a fundamental developmental step when she allowed others their
legitimate demands on her, and relinquished, with mourning, her own
aim to have absolute control. Indeed, we can turn the criticism around:
it is actually the Stoic agent who more closely resembles the pathologi-
cal narcissist, in her inability to mourn, her rage for control, her un-
willingness to allow that other people may make demands that compro-
mise the equanimity of the self. I shall pursue these suspicions in Part
III.
Is the Stoic's sweeping position on external goods even consistent? It
is very difficult to see how there can be an ethical theory at all if there
is no value attached to any external good: for morality seems to be all
about arranging for the appropriate distribution of those things. Cour-
age, justice, moderation - all these virtues deal with our need for
externals; that is why, as Aristotle said, we cannot imagine needless
gods having the virtues. If Stoics give any advice at all for this-worldly
behavior, it has to be because they consider something valuable. Stoic
ethical theory, notoriously, tries to deal with this question through the
theory of the "preferred" and "dispreferred" indifferents: things that
nature has set us to pursue and that it is therefore reasonable to pursue,
provided that no impediment intervenes. But the theory holds that we
are never to invest these things with real value, or to think of them as
37 For this as Aristotle's position, see Nussbaum (1986), Chapter 11, and Nussbaum
(1992). Aristotle stresses that a person may be "dislodged" from eudaimonia by chance
reversals of a very severe sort; nonetheless, even in such catastrophes, the person's
nobility may still "shine through" in the way misfortune is borne: and he will use the
material of life as well as possible. Thus he will merit our respect (Nicomachean Ethics
373
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511840715.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 21 (native text) -----
PART II: COMPASSION
necessary for our eudaimonia. This theory has real problems justifying
difficult or risky courses of action, which seem to require a greater
investment in the world than the letter of the theory can deliver.
Sometimes, therefore, Stoics seem to go further in the direction of
valuing the external than their theory really permits. Thus, Seneca urges
the slave-owner to treat the slave with respect, to renounce physical
cruelty and sexual abuse - conceding, apparently, that these things,
albeit external to virtue, do matter. Other Stoics, similarly, risked their
lives for political liberty - again, apparently granting that this matters.
Ultimately, it would appear that the Stoics are not only inconsistent
when they ascribe value to these things while denying that they do so;
they are also incoherent, in the sence that they draw the line in an
arbitrary place. Why object to cruelty and not to the institution of
slavery itself? Why object to sexual abuse and torture, and not to social
conditions that keep people in a state of hunger and poverty?38 To
pursue the twistings and turnings of the Stoic reply to such charges
would take us far from our topic; let it suffice to say that they do not
seem able to reply without heavy reliance on a teleology of nature and
a notion of divine commandment.
The friend of compassion may add that if we need a decent theory
of value to guide us, compassion, as standardly exemplified and taught
in tragic drama, has a pretty good theory to offer. The standard occa-
sions for compassion, throughout the literary and philosophical tradi-
tion - and presumably in the popular thought on which the tradition
draws - involve losses of truly basic goods, such as life, loved ones,
freedom, nourishment, mobility, bodily integrity, citizenship, shelter.
Compassion seems to be, as standardly experienced, a reasonably reli-
able guide to the presence of real value. And this appears to be so
ubiquitously, and without elaborate prior training. Perhaps this is be-
cause compassion has an evolutionary history that connects it to at-
tempts by our species to respond well to predicaments affecting the
entire group. Perhaps it is, instead, because all societies have concep-
tions of the good that do attach value to such losses, and because
38 This is the part of Stoic theory that has had deep influence on international law,
through Cicero's distinction of duties into two classes. We still believe that torture must
be stopped, even if it is in another country, but that hunger can be allowed to continue;
in accepting this (I would say arbitrary and indefensible) division in our duties, we are
following the Stoics. See Nussbaum (2000c).
374
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511840715.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 22 (native text) -----
THE PHILOSOPHICAL DEBATE
parents communicate these values to their children early in their devel-
opmental history. In any case, it is because of its intimate connection
to a true "core theory" of value that compassion so often subverts
ambitious false theories of value, as in my account of "breakthroughs"
of Nazi rationalizations about the meaning of the suffering inflicted on
Jews. When W. H. Auden wished to describe the human obtuseness he
saw around him in Europe in the late 1930s, he wrote:
Intellectual disgrace
Stares from every human face,
And the seas of pity lie
Locked and frozen in each eye.
The poem connects these two failures: intellectual obtuseness is inti-
mately bound up with the freezing of the imagination, "pity" with the
possibility of an accurate vision of value. The connection is a contin-
gent one, but it appears to be deeply rooted.
One further distinction can now be drawn. The anti-compassion
tradition suggests that the pitier is too enamored of the idea that people
are victims of circumstance, too inclined to see that state of weakness
as a good thing. By encouraging strong attachments to the "goods of
fortune" the pitier encourages people to be needy, and this is problem-
atic. But in fact the defender of compassion is not bound to embrace as
good any and every sort of human neediness and dependency. I have
just argued that some forms of felt neediness derive from inappropriate
evaluations, and that they should therefore, as the Stoic says, be al-
tered. But even with respect to those "external goods" that are en-
dorsed by the compassionate person's own reflection as of enormous
importance for flourishing, this person is not required to wish on peo-
ple the maximum vulnerability. There are ways of arranging the world
so as to bring these good things more securely within people's grasp:
and acknowledging our deep need for them provides a strong incentive
for so designing things. Obviously there are some important features of
human life that nobody ever fully controls; one cannot make oneself
immortal, one cannot will that one's children should be healthy and
happy, one cannot will oneself happiness in love. But nonetheless,
differences in class, race, gender, wealth, and power do affect the extent
to which the sense of helplessness governs the daily course of one's life.
The compassionate person need not think it a good thing that people
375
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511840715.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 23 (native text) -----
PART II: COMPASSION
should experience painful vulnerability every day with respect to their
daily food, that citizens should every day feel their political freedom to
be in jeopardy, that relationships of friendship and love should be
jeopardized by tensions produced by hierarchies of race and gender.
These are all instances of vulnerability; but it would be a ludicrous
travesty of the pro-compassion position to say that all vulnerability is
a good thing. The pitier does not wish to keep diphtheria around just
so that Riickert's children will have a special poetic vulnerability to
disaster that gives the audience of Mahler's Kindertotenlieder a moving
experience of compassion. To the extent that a type of disaster is
eliminated, compassion for the sufferers of that disaster will disappear;
and the pro-compassion position is perfectly entitled to say that this is
a good thing.39 To make these discriminations, compassion needs to be
combined with an adequate theory of the basic human goods: but there
is no reason to assume that it must have a bad such theory.
This response suggests a further point. It is a commonplace that
women tend to be more emotional than men. This commonplace, how-
ever, is vague and uninformative, without further elaboration. It would
seem that two quite different things are going on when we discover (to
the extent that we do) that women's lives are dominated by grief, and
fear, and deep personal love, and compassion, to a greater extent than
are the lives of men. The first underlying factor is a difference in
appraisal. The moral education of women in many societies cultivates,
to a greater extent than does the moral education of men, the high
evaluation of personal relationships of love and care that are the basis
for most of the other emotions; men, by contrast, are often encouraged
to follow a more Stoic norm, seeking separateness and self-sufficiency.
Where these differences are concerned, we should simply ask what the
correct theory of value is; that correct theory (which presumably would
include at least some high valuation of some external goods) should be
taught to all, and will give all a basis for some compassion, both given
and received.
The second underlying factor is altogether different: the lives of
women in many parts of the world are socially and materially shaped
39 Such a development does not make Mahler's work incapable of arousing emotion; it
simply shifts the content of the "things such as might happen" thought. Instead of
thinking that the death of children from diphtheria is a possibility for me, I need only
think that the death of children - or, indeed, of loved ones - is such a possibility.
3 7 6
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511840715.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 24 (native text) -----
THE PHILOSOPHICAL DEBATE
so that, with respect to the very same external goods, they have less
control and greater helplessness. Unequal access to food and medical
treatment, to political privileges, to control over the course and out-
come of a marriage40 - all of this is a basis for fear and grief, and for
the onlooker's compassion. In this case, the unequal vulnerability
should not and need not be endorsed as good by the friend of compas-
sion.
But is it good to raise the floor of security? One common form of
the anti-compassion position holds that this makes society inefficiently
soft and indulgent. When good things are guaranteed completely inde-
pendently of people's efforts, this discourages effort. Societies will pro-
duce more energetic citizens if they leave them to fend for themselves
in important matters. This position needs careful scrutiny, and no
doubt in some areas of economic life it makes an important point. But,
once again, as a general objection to central cases of compassion it is
far too crude. It is true that only a bad parent will give a child every-
thing she asks for, since that would undermine the development of
effort and strength of purpose. In Chapter 4, we insisted that loss and
frustration are inevitable parts of appropriate development. On the
other hand, there are many things that no good parent would expect a
child to get on her own. It may well be true that my daughter, who has
always been well fed without having to look for her food, would be a
bad forager if she were suddenly thrust into a situation in which she
had to hunt for food on her own. So would I. But I am sure that this
does not make it a bad thing that I fed her regularly, as my parents fed
me. I see no merit at all in spending a lot of time foraging for food, an
activity that certainly impedes the development of other important
human capacities. We may think of the task of society in a similar way.
Society is a bad "parent" if it gives everything on demand in a way
that discourages the development of effort across the board. On the
other hand, this does not make it a bad thing for society to concern
itself with the provision of the necessary conditions for any meaningful
functioning. In fact, there are many sorts of vulnerability and need that
do nobody any good, and some things, therefore, for which any good
society should not ask its members to forage. Society expresses concern
for the active development of citizens' higher capacities when it does
40 See, for example, Sen (1990).
377
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511840715.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 25 (native text) -----
PART II: COMPASSION
support their health, nutrition, and education, when it does not force
them to fight for their political freedom41 - when, in general, it focuses
on the provision of the basic goods that are the most common objects
of compassion in central cases.42
In short, what is needed is a subtle and multifaceted inquiry into
human flourishing and its material and social conditions, asking what
things are important, and how far they can be secured to people with-
out losing what makes them important. The pro-compassion person
claims that it is her side of the debate that is equipped to conduct this
inquiry, since her opponent is debarred from it by his dogmatic insis-
tence that none of these things is of any importance at all. And she
makes a further claim: her opponent, lacking a sense of the interde-
pendence of human beings and their natural world, cannot make sense
of something that he himself holds to be of fundamental importance,
namely benevolence.
No member of the anti-compassion tradition expresses indifference
to benevolence. Indeed, Stoics and their followers typically hold that
one of the virtues of their position is that it promotes benevolence by
minimizing competitive grasping for goods. If people respect themselves
as self-commanding beings, complete in themselves, they will be less
inclined to define themselves in terms of money and status, and
therefore free to give generously to others. Seneca distinguishes care-
fully between the lofty reason-governed benevolence of the Stoic and
the soft, needy giving characteristic of compassion. Spinoza makes
much of the way in which removal of emotional need will minimize
destructive competition. Kant speaks in a Stoic voice when he says that
when we get rid of pity, that "insulting kind of benevolence," we will
still be able to think of the needs of others with "an active and rational
benevolence." This benevolent disposition will include an active at-
tempt to understand the situation of another - what Kant calls human-
41 Pace Nietzsche, who makes the ludicrous claim that guarantees of freedom of speech
and press undermine "the will to assume responsibility for oneself," making people
"small, cowardly and hedonistic" (see Twilight of the Idols, "Skirmishes," 38). He
concludes: "The highest type of free men should be sought where the highest resistance
is constantly overcome: five steps from tyranny, close to the threshold of the danger of
servitude . . . The people who had some value, attained some value, never attained it
under liberal institutions: it was great danger that made something of them that merits
respect." This is precisely the position that we should not adopt.
42. See Nussbaum (2000a).
378
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511840715.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 26 (native text) -----
THE PHILOSOPHICAL DEBATE
itas practica and Teilnehmende Empfindung - but will repudiate the
softhearted commiseration characteristic of compassion (Mitleid,
Barmherzigkeit), which "can be called communicable (like a suscepti-
bility to heat or to contagious diseases)."43
The question is, however, what sense such Stoic-affiliated thinkers
can make of the need for benevolence, when they hold the dignity of
reason to be complete in itself. They are right to say that Stoicism
reduces competitiveness, and in that sense makes benevolence easier;
but it seems at the same time to rob benevolence of its point. If people
can exercise their most important capacities without material support,
this very much diminishes the significance and the urgency of that
support. The original Stoics at this point invoke teleology: Zeus's prov-
idence has made each person's survival naturally an object of concern
to him, and it is therefore appropriate to concern oneself with the
"goods of nature" when nothing else interferes, even though, strictly
speaking, they have no true worth.44 But Kant and other modern Stoics
can help themselves to no such religious picture; so the status of benev-
olence in their theories becomes problematic. We are put on our guard
when Kant expresses himself as follows:
It was a sublime way of representing the wise man, as the Stoic conceived
him, when he let the wise one say: I wish I had a friend, not that he might
give me help in poverty, sickness, captivity, and so on, but in order that I
might stand by him and save a human being. But for all that, the very same
wise man, when his friend is not to be saved, says to himself: What's it to
me? i.e. he rejected commiseration.45
Kant here follows the Stoic tradition in insisting that there is no
good way to register emotional distress at the present misfortune of
another. So long as disaster is merely impending, the Stoic may move
under the guidance of "prudent caution" to ward it off. But there is no
good affect corresponding to present distress: one simply should say,
"What's it to me?"46 Kant now immediately tries to salvage the moti-
vational foundations of benevolence by insisting that, since active be-
43 Kant, Doctrine of Virtue 34, Akad. p. 456-7, Ellington trans, p. I Z I .
44 On the difficulties of interpreting the Stoic position here, see Lesses (1989), and further
references in Nussbaum (1994), Chapter 10.
45 Kant, Doctrine of Virtue 34, Akad. p. 457, Ellington trans, pp. 121-2.
46 On the Stoic doctrine of the eupatheiai, or good affects, see Nussbaum (1994) Chapter
3 79
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511840715.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 27 (native text) -----
PART II: COMPASSION
nevolence is a duty, it is also a duty to seek out circumstances in which
one will witness poverty and deprivation:
Thus it is a duty not to avoid places where the poor, who lack the most
necessary things, are to be found; instead, it is a duty to seek them out. It is
a duty not to shun sickrooms or prisons and so on in order to avoid the pain
of pity, which one may not be able to resist. For this feeling, though painful,
nevertheless is one of the impulses placed in us by nature for effecting what
the representation of duty might not accomplish by itself.47
This fascinating passage shows us as clearly as any text the tensions
of the anti-compassion position, when it tries to defend benevolence.
In what spirit, we may ask, does the Kantian visit places "where the
poor are to be found"? In a truly Stoic spirit, performing a moral duty
with no thought of the universality and importance of human need, no
thought of his own personal similarity to the sufferers? But then what
will the sight of this misery mean to him, and how will it inspire
benevolence? Won't he be likely to have some contempt for these peo-
ple, insofar as they are depressed at their lot? Won't he want to remind
them that "a good will is good not because of what it effects or
accomplishes, . . . it is good only through its willing, i.e. good in it-
self"?48 He might then reflect, gazing at them, that
[e]ven if, by some especially unfortunate fate or by the niggardly provision
of stepmotherly nature, this will should be wholly lacking in the power to
accomplish its purpose . . . yet would it, like a jewel, still shine by its own
light as something which has its full value in itself. Its usefulness or fruitless-
ness can neither augment nor diminish this value. Its usefulness would be, as
it were, only the setting to enable us to handle it in ordinary dealings or to
attract to it the attention of those who are not yet experts, but not to
recommend it to real experts or to determine its value.49
And won't he then say to himself: I am a real expert, and I see here, in
this place where the poor are to be found, not the squalor itself, not
the poverty, but the pure light of human dignity, which has full value
in itself and cannot possibly be increased by my gifts?
For Kant, this cannot be the complete response of the good person.
47 Kant, Doctrine of Virtue 35, Akad. p. 35, Ellington p. 122.
48 Kant, Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals, section 1, Akad. p. 394, Ellington p. 7.
49 Kant, Grounding, section 1, Akad. p. 394, Ellington trans, pp. 7-8.
380
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511840715.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 28 (native text) -----
THE PHILOSOPHICAL DEBATE
Duties to promote the happiness of others have fundamental impor-
tance in Kant's ethics. Because they are not supported by any teleolog-
ical scheme, they play a fundamentally different part for Kant from
their role in Stoic ethics. That is, while the Stoic can promote happiness
without thinking the goods of fortune important (saying that the good
person is simply following Zeus's command in distributing these
things), Kant must ascribe some real importance to them. But this
means that he must accept as true at least some of the propositions
that the Stoics denounce as false, propositions that prove sufficient for
compassion. It will be true of the good Kantian agent that, while
respecting human dignity, he also believes that people may suffer seri-
ous calamities through no fault of their own. And this really means
that such a person will have compassion.
Nowhere in Kant's ethics does he give analyses and definitions of
the passions. Surprisingly enough - influenced as he is by both the Stoic
and the Spinozistic tradition, as well as by Rousseau - he never states
what he takes to be the cognitive ingredients of compassion, or indeed
of anger or fear. Instead, influenced, it would seem, by the Pietism of
his social context, he treats all these passions as if they derived from a
prerational nature and were fundamentally impulsive and noncognitive
in character. This creates problems for his moral thought in other areas
as well: for example, in Perpetual Peace, his acceptance of the innate
and impulsive character of anger and hatred limits the proposals he
can make for its containment or reform.50 Consistently with this posi-
tion, he understands virtue not in the Aristotelian way, as involving a
reasonable shaping or enlightening of the passions, but in a suppressive
or oppositional way, as involving the mastery of emotions and other
sensuous inclinations.51 He argues, in fact, that virtue presupposes
"apathy" (Stoic apatheia), by which he means the condition in which
"the feelings arising from sensible impressions lose their influence on
moral feeling only because respect for the law is more powerful than
all of these feelings together" (408). The "true strength of virtue is the
50 See Nussbaum (1997b).
51 See, for example, Akad. p. 407: "Two things are required for internal freedom: to be
master of oneself in a given case (animus sui compos), and to be lord over oneself
(imperium in semitipsum), i.e., to subdue one's emotions (Affekten) and to govern one's
passions (Leidenschaften) . . . Therefore, insofar as virtue is based on internal freedom,
it contains a positive command for man, namely, that he should bring all his capacities
and inclinations under his authority (that of reason)."
381
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511840715.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 29 (native text) -----
PART II: COMPASSION
mind at rest. . . That is the state of health in the moral life; emotion,
on the contrary, even when it is aroused by the representation of the
good, is a momentarily glittering appearance which leaves one languid"
(4O9).
In the case of compassion, Kant's apparent solution to the tension
between his Stoicism and his non-Stoic interest in external goods is to
invoke compassion as a motive fortunately planted in us by nature in
order to bring about what the representation of duty might not. Given
that natural fact about us, it is our duty to cultivate that emotional
motive by placing ourselves in circumstances naturally suited to arous-
ing it. Thus compassion becomes a requirement of duty: "to make use
of this susceptibility for furthering an active and rational benevolence
is . . . a particular, though only conditional duty, which goes by the
name of humanity (Menschheit), because here man is regarded not
merely as a rational being but also as an animal endowed with reason"
(p. 456). It is therefore an indirect duty to develop our "natural (sensi-
tive) feelings for others, and to make use of them as so many means
for sympathy based on moral principles" (p. 457).
But if the motives connected with compassion are required for be-
nevolence, and in consequence a part of our duty, isn't this more than
an accident of human psychology? Kant's position seems to be that
compassion is just an internally unintelligent indicator, a bell that goes
off in the presence of suffering, conditioning us to recognize suffering
as a morally relevant feature of a situation. But such a mechanism
seems much too crude to do the work that Kant needs it to do. A bell
ringing doesn't tell us what the relevant feature of the situation is, or
help us to recognize that feature in new situations. In order for the
passion to help solve the problem of moral discernment, it has to have
intelligence and selectivity. Kant needs the intentional content of the
passion, its complex evaluations, in order to tell the onlooker what is
going on here, and why it matters. These evaluations are profoundly
non-Stoic, and would require him to confront more fully than he does
his own difference from Stoicism. Because Kant treats the passion as
noncognitive, he is never forced to explore the extent of his difference
from the Stoics on softheartedness, and he can speak as if he agrees
with the wise man when, in reality, his position is very different. His
own complex and ultimately non-Stoic view would have been better
served by accepting the cognitive view of compassion and admitting
382
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511840715.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 30 (native text) -----
THE PHILOSOPHICAL DEBATE
that the onlooker needs compassion's judgments of the worth of exter-
nal goods for animal-rational human beings. Without these evalua-
tions, he will be like a Martian onlooker, and only some external
commandment - with which the Stoics can supply him, but Kant can-
not - would make him intervene.
Kant's failure to endorse as good the evaluations embodied in com-
passion derives from his general noncognitive view of the passions. But
it has, as well, another source, which is more cognitive in nature. Kant
has a deep conviction that there is something humiliating in being the
recipient of compassion. He holds that respect and self-respect require
distance and not too much loving concern; on the other hand, the
principle of practical love enjoins closeness and attentive concern. Kant
believes that these two moral forces can be balanced, but that they do
pull the good moral agent to some extent in contradictory directions:
... we regard ourselves as being in a moral (intelligible) world in which, by
analogy with the physical world, the association of rational beings (on earth)
is effected through attraction and repulsion. According to the principle of
mutual love they are directed constantly to approach one another; by the
principle of respect which they owe one another they are directed to keep
themselves at a distance. Should one of these great moral forces sink, "so
then would nothingness (immorality) with gaping throat drink up the whole
realm of (moral) beings like a drop of water" . . .
It seems that this conception of our relation to one another, unlike the
arguments we have already considered, does pose problems for the
cognitions associated with benevolent compassion: for we are warned
that we will insult the other person's separateness and agency if we step
too close. But this warning can be heeded by the friend of compassion,
who is not required to treat its recipient intrusively or condescendingly.
As we have already argued, compassion can coexist with respect for
agency. Indeed, it is only when we see to what extent need for external
goods is involved in the development of agency itself that we have the
deepest possible basis for respecting and promoting human freedom.
Nietzsche's view encounters a problem about beneficence similar to
Kant's problem, and more acutely. For Nietzsche, unlike Kant, insists
on the complete unity between our bodily and our spiritual natures,
insisting that the human being is an animal who dwells entirely in the
world of nature. He appears to endorse the tragic position that the
383
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511840715.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 31 (native text) -----
PART II: COMPASSION
world can intervene in our flourishing in very fundamental ways. But
then it is especially odd that in his critique of compassion he refuses to
conclude that human beings need worldly goods in order to function.
In all of his rather abstract and romantic praise of solitude and asceti-
cism, we find no sign of the simple truth that a hungry person cannot
think well, that a person who lacks shelter, basic health care, and the
other necessities of life is not likely to become a self-expressing philos-
opher or artist, no matter what her innate equipment.
Indeed, Nietzsche repeatedly asserts the false romantic view that
suffering, including basic physical suffering, ennobles and strengthens
the spirit: "it almost determines the order of rank how profoundly
human beings can suffer" (Beyond Good and Evil 270). It therefore
"becomes regard for the 'general welfare' not only not to lessen suffer-
ing, but perhaps even to increase it - not only for oneself but also for
others" ("On Ethics," 1868).52 In Ecce Homo, the answer to the lovely
chapter title "Why I Am So Wise" has much to do with pain and
hunger, as Nietzsche attributes the profundity of his philosophy to
physical illness and nutritional disorder. Dawn, for example, was pro-
duced by "that sweetening and spiritualization which is almost insepa-
rably connected with an extreme poverty of blood and muscle"
("Wise," 1). In a fragment of 1887 (Will to Power 910), Nietzsche
wishes that others too will enjoy the improving nobility of bodily
suffering: "To those human beings who are of any concern to me I
wish suffering, desolation, sickness, ill-treatment, indignities ..."
Nietzsche, in short, takes up the extreme and absurd position that
the absence of external goods is an improving test for the spirit. Strong
spirits survive, and weak spirits go under. This position keeps coming
back to plague political thought, and has not been repudiated in our
own time. Once again we should insist: the plausible idea that people
need some incentives if they are to exercise their effort well does not
imply that they should have to "forage" for their daily food and strug-
gle for their basic political freedoms. What is more, Nietzsche, the
apostle of the body and of an enmattered view of the spirit, is the last
52 Cf. also Will to Power 1030: "a full and powerful soul not only copes with painful,
even terrible losses, deprivations, robberies, insults; it emerges from such hells with a
greater fullness and powerfulness; and, most essential of all, with a new increase in the
blissfulness of love."
384
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511840715.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 32 (native text) -----
THE PHILOSOPHICAL DEBATE
person who should be saying such things. His romanticism and his
materialism are fundamentally at odds.53
And because Nietzsche does not consistently grasp the fact that if
our abilities are physical abilities they have physical necessary condi-
tions, he does not understand what the democratic and socialist move-
ments of his day are all about. The pro-compassion tradition, as devel-
oped by Rousseau, made compassion's thought about external goods
the basis for the modern development of democratic-egalitarian think-
ing. Since Nietzsche does not get the basic idea, he does not see what
Rousseau is trying to do. And thus, invoking Epictetus, Spinoza, and
Kant as his mentors, he can proceed as if it does not really matter how
people live from day to day, how they get their food. Thus again,
having concluded that the absence of political liberty is a confirming
test to the truly strong spirit,54 he is able to dismiss J. S. Mill as a
"flathead" (Will to Power 30) and as a "respectable but mediocre
Englishm[a]n" (Beyond Good and Evil 253), capable only of an En-
glish "narrowness, aridity, and industrious diligence." He pronounces
that "[t]he highest type of free men should be sought where the highest
resistance is constantly overcome: five steps from tyranny, close to the
threshold of the danger of servitude."55 Meanwhile, his fictional imag-
ining of the "higher men" and the prophet who educates them takes
place at a level of social and material abstractness that makes Rous-
seau's and Mill's issues simply disappear from view. Who provides
basic welfare support for Zarathustra? What are the "higher men"
doing all the day long?56 What are other people doing who have
therefore no chance to become "higher men"? What are the conditions
of political freedom in the city of the Motley Cow? The reader does
not know, and the author does not seem to care. This happens not
53 At Will to Power 367, Nietzsche seems to see the point: "My kind of 'pity.' - This is a
feeling for which I find no name adequate: I see it when I see precious capabilities
squandered . . . Or when I see anyone halted, as a result of some stupid accident, at
something less than he might have become."
54 Nietzsche, "Skirmishes of an Untimely One," Twilight of the Idols 38.
55 Ibid.
56 On Nietzsche's romanticism, and his interest in human pride and self-realization, see
Posner (1988), pp. 146-8. Even though, as Posner suggests, Nietzsche is simply not
interested in the economic side of life, he does criticize socialist and democratic move-
ments, and should have been more willing to engage in the kind of economic thinking
that would show him what they were all about.
385
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511840715.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 33 (native text) -----
PART II: COMPASSION
from cruelty, but from Stoicism. Nietzsche's Stoicism is on a collision
course with his respect for the needs of the embodied human being.
V. PARTIALITY AND CONCERN
I turn now to the objection about partiality. Here we have a serious
objection to compassion that does not assail the worth of its basic
evaluative commitments, an objection that is pressed not only by the
Stoic-Kantian tradition, but also by the Utilitarian tradition, which
takes the importance of human suffering as primary, and by some
members of the pro-compassion tradition as well. The objection, as
Adam Smith makes it, does not deny that compassion is a valuable
emotion, based in central cases on true beliefs. The problem is that
each of its judgments needs to be equipped with a correct ethical
theory. The judgment of seriousness needs a correct account of the
value of external goods; the judgment of nondesert needs a correct
theory of social responsibility; the eudaimonistic judgment needs a
correct theory of proper concern. The problem is not simply that soci-
eties frequently teach false theories in these areas: that would not give
us reason to turn from compassion to a more abstract system of rules,
since those too might embody error. The problem is that the psycholog-
ical mechanisms by which human beings typically arrive at compassion
- empathy and the judgment of similar possibilities - typically rest on
the senses and the imagination in a way that makes them in principle
narrow and uneven.
We should grant that there is a major issue here. The objector has
correctly identified a serious problem in compassion-based reasoning.
We see this problem, for example, in any approach to social welfare
that relies on individual philanthropy; such approaches typically pro-
duce uneven and at times arbitrary results. We see the difficulty even
more clearly when we focus on aid to people in other nations: for
typically people find it difficult to extend their compassion that far,
encompassing people whom they do not know and whose sufferings
(as Adam Smith put it well) they cannot long find interesting.
We can make the objection stronger by bringing in our own obser-
vations about shame and disgust. It is highly likely that people will
learn compassion under circumstances that divide and rank-order hu-
man beings, creating in-groups and out-groups. The emotional factors
386
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511840715.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 34 (native text) -----
THE PHILOSOPHICAL DEBATE
that produce such divisions are too deep-seated to be easily eradicated.
But they create boundaries to compassion that are also difficult to
eradicate. Thus if we rely on compassion we may well reinforce hier-
archies of class, race, and gender.
Notice that this objection, unlike our first objection, is not exactly
an objection to compassion itself: it does not say that people should
not have compassion. It says, instead, that compassion requires an
appropriate education in connection with a correct theory of concern;
and that, even then, people so rarely extend their compassion evenly
and appropriately that it would not be good to rely upon it too much.
Just as we should concede that compassion needs a correct theory of
the importance of various external goods, so too we should concede
that it needs a correct view of the people who should be the objects of
our concern. While there is reason to think that we more often than
not get it right about the importance of various external goods, there
is reason to think that we are more unreliable about the people who
should be the objects of our concern. I have suggested that the central
cases of compassion involve a notion of common humanity - so here,
as with the evaluation of basic goods, we seem to be on the right track,
whether on account of culture or of biology. But it is very easy for the
promising notion of common humanity to be derailed by local loyalties
and their associated rivalries, obtuseness, and even hatred. This un-
evenness has its source in the other emotions that surround compas-
sion, and also in the psychological mechanisms themselves that stan-
dardly undergird the emotion.
We ought to make some serious concessions to this argument. We
should concede, first, that an education in proper compassion needs to
be designed with these problems in view. In the next chapter I shall
discuss ways in which moral education can address them. We should
also concede that the argument gives us reason to rely a good deal
more on appropriately informed political institutions than on the vicis-
situdes of personal emotion. But this does not mean that we should not
consult emotion in the process of designing the institutions. In the next
chapter I shall give some examples of ways in which the structure of
institutions can embody the insights of a properly educated compas-
sion, so that we do not need to rely too heavily on the vicissitudes of
the compassion of individual people.
But why, then, should we rely on the emotion at all, rather than
387
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511840715.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 35 (native text) -----
PART II: COMPASSION
going directly to the appropriate principles and institutions? And why
appeal to the compassion of citizens at all, rather than urging them to
follow the correct rules?
If the account of development that I have sketched in Chapter 4 is
at all plausible, people do not get to altruism without proceeding
through the intense particular attachments of childhood, without en-
larging these gradually through guilt and gratitude, without extending
their concern through the imagining that is characteristic of compas-
sion. Compassion is our species' way of hooking the good of others to
the fundamentally eudaimonistic (though not egoistic) structure of our
imaginations and our most intense cares. The good of others means
nothing to us in the abstract or antecedently. It is when it is brought
into relation with that which we already understand - with our intense
love of our parents, our passionate need for comfort and security - that
such things start to matter deeply. The imagination of similar possibil-
ities that is an important mechanism in human (if not necessarily in
divine) compassion does important moral work by extending the
boundaries of that which we can imagine; the tradition claims that only
when we can imagine the good or ill of another can we fully and
reliably extend to that other our moral concern.
Hierocles, a perhaps nonorthodox Stoic of the first and second cen-
turies A.D., has a vivid metaphor for this process. Imagine, he says, that
each of us lives in a set of concentric circles - the nearest being one's
own body, the furthest being the entire universe of human beings. The
task of moral development is to move the circles progressively closer to
the center, so that one's parents become like oneself, one's other rela-
tives like one's parents, strangers like relatives, and so forth.57 In other
words, to demand from the start equal concern, or any other norma-
tively good type of properly ranked concern, is unrealistic; no human
mind can achieve this. One has to build on the meanings one under-
stands, or one is left with an equality that is empty of urgency - what
57 See the discussion in Long and Sedley (1987), p. 349. The job of a reasonable person
is to "draw the circles somehow towards the centre," and "the right point will be
reached if, through our own initiative, we reduce the distance of the relationship with
each person." Adam Smith also proposes evening out one's concern through imagina-
tion, but finds it implausible that one could do this by building up the importance of
the distant; he prefers to cut down the importance of the close (Smith [1976], i39ff.).
Neither the Stoics nor Smith propose a complete evening out, since they attach impor-
tance to close personal and family ties.
388
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511840715.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 36 (native text) -----
THE PHILOSOPHICAL DEBATE
Aristotle, attacking Plato's removal of the family, called a "watery"
concern all around.58 Fairbairn's goal of "mature dependence" requires
a gradual movement outward from the intense dependency of child-
hood; it is subverted by the absence of such concern. Compassion's
psychological mechanisms promote this movement.
This point is brilliantly developed in Dickens's portrait of the Utili-
tarian upbringing of the young Gradgrinds, who, lacking in intense
particular attachments, end up being totally unable to comprehend the
needs of people at a distance, or to invest human lives and the external
goods that support them with a human worth and significance. Their
minds and hearts become thoroughly listless, lacking in any motiva-
tional energy for good; and one political proposal seems very much
like another, since they have no ability to imagine or feel what is at
stake.59 Rather than being energetically impartial - their father's origi-
nal aim - they are, instead, both empty and blind. Moreover, as the
collapse of both Tom and Louisa shows, the goal of producing a
balanced adult personality, capable of good deliberation and energetic
concern for others, is very much undercut by stunting the early emo-
tions, which, so stunted, may return later in more dangerous and
unbalanced forms.
We can see the same point in a darker light by thinking again about
the morality of Nazism. As Jonathan Glover has argued in the material
I examined in Chapter 6, a basic sort of compassion for suffering
individuals, built on meanings learned in childhood, sometimes breaks
through even the most carefully constructed layers of ideology and
rationalization - most easily when the potential victim is physically
present, and/or when some reminder of one's love of one's own children
or family serve to connect the victim to one's own life. These elemen-
tary emotions appear to be the most reliable part of the personality,
when theory has been massively distorted. As Rousseau suggests, there
is something quasi-natural about our tendency to have compassion for
the sufferings of those close to us, in the sense that the emotion is likely
to arise in some form in all human beings and to steer us to at least
some genuinely moral connections. By contrast, an abstract moral the-
ory uninhabited by those connections of imagination and sympathy
58 Politics II.4. For excellent accounts of Aristotle's views, see Sherman (1989) and Price
(1989).
59 See Nussbaum (1995a).
389
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511840715.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 37 (native text) -----
PART II: COMPASSION
can easily be turned to evil ends, because its human meaning is unclear.
Thus, as Glover also shows, there were Nazis who said, perhaps sin-
cerely, that they believed themselves to be following the precepts of a
Kantian morality of duty. Certainly a rule-based morality, unanimated
by the resources of the imagination, can too easily become confused
with a submissiveness to cultural rules, or to rules handed down by
authority.
A further literary example will illustrate this point. In Theodor Fon-
tane's novel Effi Briest, Instetten, a successful civil servant who has
married a much younger wife, discovers years later that she has had an
affair during the early days of their marriage. Because he can think of
moral decision only as a process of following social rules, he proves
unable to allow his distant instincts of love and forgiveness to come
forward. He insists that he must do what is required of a man in his
situation. He shoots the rival, banishes the wife, brings up his child to
lack all love for her mother, and finds his own life increasingly hollow
and pointless. Before Effi's untimely death, she says to her parents that
her husband acted as well as he could - for a man who had never really
felt love.
In a very interesting article by Julia Annas, Instetten has been in-
voked as an example of the limitations of Kantian morality.60 This
seems not quite right, for he clearly follows a social code of honor
more than any truly moral principle. But his failure does show what is
wrong with bringing people up to live by rules alone rather than by a
combination of rules with love and imagination. Imagination is of no
use without a moral code of some sort; Effi's own failure makes this
point clearly. But it is also true that compassion guides us truly toward
something that lies at the core of morality, and without which any
moral judgment is a ghastly simulacrum. In that way, Effi, though
inconstant and flawed, has a connection to the core of what is impor-
tant in life that Instetten lacks. And the novel's moral center, in a
paradoxical sense, is the faithful dog Rollo, who knows only sympathy
and love, and whose loyalty remains uncorrupted by either Effi's am-
bition or Instetten's false values of honor and shame.61 In short: com-
passion does not supply a complete morality; far from it. But there is
60 Annas (1984). I am unable to do justice here to the subtlety of Annas's argument.
61 Thus the novel's conclusion is reminiscent of the argument of George Pitcher's book,
discussed in Chapter 2: dogs have much to teach us about unconditional love.
390
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511840715.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 38 (native text) -----
THE PHILOSOPHICAL DEBATE
reason to trust it as guide to something that is at the very heart of
morality.
In a sense, the developmental argument begun in Chapter 4 and contin-
ued here speaks already about adult rationality, by talking about the
production of a person capable of "mature dependence." Furthermore,
since moral development is never complete, the process of "drawing
the circles somehow toward the center" is one that takes a lifetime. But
we can also make the argument in a nongenetic way, holding that the
judgments characteristic of compassion are essential for the health of a
complete adult rationality.
Theories of rationality neglect this insight to their cost. Economic
accounts of human motivation as based on rational self-interest have
recently been criticized, both in philosophy and in economics itself,
on the grounds that such accounts fail to do justice to the way in
which good reasoning ascribes value to the lives of others, distin-
guishing between their instrumental role in one's own life and their
flourishing itself. A leading example of such criticism is Amartya Sen's
famous lecture "Rational Fools,"62 which argues that we cannot give
either a good predictive account of human action or a correct nor-
mative theory of rationality without mentioning the sympathetic con-
cern people have for the good of others, as a factor independent of
their concern for their own satisfactions. For people very often sacrifice
their own interests and well-being, and in many cases even their lives,
for the well-being of those they love, or for good social consequences
that they prize. They also stand by commitments and promises that
they have made, even when to do so requires major personal sacrifice.
One cannot, Sen argues, explain the behavior of loving members of
families, or of soldiers who give their lives for their country, or of
many other decent and unselfish acts, without pointing to patterns of
action that are uneconomic - and this seems correct.63 Batson's ex-
62 In Sen (1982); Sen's views will be further discussed in Chapter 8, section VII.
63 Notice that the family altruism to which Sen alludes is not the "altruism" assumed in
standard economic models, which is really a kind of instrumental dependency, contin-
gent on the bond's serving the good of the agent in some way. On the sympathetic
decency of many ordinary people, and for many examples of the sort of behavior Sen
has in mind, see the remarkable account of rescuers of Jews in Nazi Europe in Oliner
and Oliner (1988).
391
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511840715.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 39 (native text) -----
PART II: COMPASSION
perimental work and the evolutionary account of Sober and Wilson
have given further support to his contention. Finally, Clark's elaborate
account of the operations of compassion in daily life shows that even
Americans - who might justly be suspected of being more like Homo
economicus than many other people - are motivated by compassion
in all sorts of ways, even when they believe that other Americans are
not.64
But one cannot fully articulate Sen's own more complex predictive
and normative theory of reasoning without prominently including the
emotions in which parts of that reasoning are embodied. He himself
stresses that compassion (his preferred term is "sympathy") is actually
a prominent motive in the rational conduct he describes; and the judg-
ments about the sufferings of others that he ascribes to his rational
agent are the very ones that we have identified as sufficient for compas-
sion. Indeed, we might conclude, thinking about the contrast between
Dickens's Utilitarian children and Sen's more completely rational
agents, that compassion itself is the eye through which people see the
good and ill of others, and its full meaning. Without it, the abstract
sight of the calculating intellect is value-blind.
We should not conclude from these observations that formal eco-
nomic models of human conduct are useless and that we should rely
on the impressions of the heart alone. The partiality objection shows
us that we should not depend on the vicissitudes of personal emotion,
but should build its insights into the structure of rules and institutions.
Similarly, we need formal models for the purposes of description and
prediction, and there is no reason at all why they cannot be built upon
a richer theory of human motivation.
In short: we should not let the truth in the partiality objection lead
us to turn away from compassion as an ethical guide. It must be
combined with an ethical code, but it supplies something that lies at
the heart of any good ethical code, without which rules and principles
are dangerously blind. The right solution to its partiality problems is
to work on compassion's developmental history, trying to get the three
judgments right through appropriate education and institutional de-
sign. I shall return to this issue in the following chapter.
64 Clark notes that men, in particular, often make this claim, describing themselves as
more sympathetic than most people.
392
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511840715.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 40 (native text) -----
THE PHILOSOPHICAL DEBATE
VI. 
REVENGE AND MERCY
We now face the argument about revenge, which seems difficult for the
friend of compassion to answer. For it tells her that she cannot have a
form of reasoning that she prizes without also taking on attitudes that
she herself views with alarm. All the major pro-compassion philoso-
phers are also deeply worried about anger and revenge. Aristotle insists
that the virtuous disposition in the area of retaliation is called praotes,
mildness of temper; and he insists that the virtuous person will be more
likely to err in the direction of deficient than of excessive retributive
anger: "For the mild person is not inclined to retribution, but rather to
sympathetic understanding" (Nicomachean Ethics IV.5, Ilz6az-^). In-
terestingly enough, then, he does not just deny that building in a role
for compassion commits him to a robust interest in revenge, he even
suggests that the sympathetic understanding characteristic of compas-
sion offers an antidote to revenge. Let us see how this connection might
work.
First of all, the defender of compassion can insist once again that
the opponent's picture of her position is far too crude. For just as she
is not committed to saying that any and every calamity is an appropri-
ate occasion for compassion, so too she is not committed to saying that
any and every damage, slight, or insult is an occasion for retributive
anger. By far the largest number of the social ills caused by revenge
concern damages to fortune, status, power, and honor, to which the
defenders of compassion standardly do not (except to a very moderate
degree) ascribe true worth. A brief perusal of Seneca's On Anger bears
out this claim. For although once in a while he does represent anger
over a damage that an Aristotelian would think serious, far more
frequently he shows powerful and pampered people committing acts of
violence over trivial slights - a slave's breaking of a cup, a host's less-
than-attentive treatment, a subordinate's less-than-fawning subservi-
ence. None of this is the subject matter of tragedy. And when we get
our concerns adjusted, our occasions for intense anger will be fewer.
Descartes' account of the compassion of the generous person is right at
home here: for the person he depicts has confidence in his own worth
and virtue, and therefore, though he does feel compassion, he lacks the
instability characteristic of someone who depends in every way on the
external goods of fortune.
393
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511840715.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 41 (native text) -----
PART II: COMPASSION
In short, we should simply deny that the excesses of anger give us
reason to remove it. We should boldly tell the Stoics that anger is
sometimes justified and right. It is an appropriate response to injustice
and serious wrongdoing. Indeed, extirpating anger would extirpate a
major force for social justice and the defense of the oppressed. If we
are worried that anger may spill over onto inappropriate objects, we
should focus on that problem, not try to remove anger completely. And
if we are worried that angry individuals may inappropriately turn to
personal revenge, rather than accepting legal solutions, once again, we
should focus on that problem, rather than trying to extirpate anger
altogether.
We can add that the conceptual symmetry between compassion and
retributive anger is less perfect than the opponent makes it out to be.
For any serious human suffering not caused by the sufferer's own fault
is an occasion for compassion. But for anger to get going, we require,
in addition, the thought that the damage was willingly inflicted by an
agent, and that this agent acted in an inappropriate and unfair way.65
Many occasions for compassion do not meet these requirements.
Deaths of loved ones from illness or accident, famines, natural disasters
- all will be occasions for anger as well as compassion only to the
extent that we think that they ought to have been prevented. Sometimes
we do think this about a disaster; but often we do not. We may be
inclined to anger anyway, as a way of seizing control of a situation in
which we feel helpless. But if the anger has no plausible blameworthy
object, it will not get very far, and we should be highly critical of any
anger that is based on false beliefs about agency.
This leaves us with the general Stoic point, reinforced by Spinoza's
remarkable analysis of emotional ambivalence,66 that the very view of
the world that makes a conceptual space for compassion includes, by
definition, strong attachments to external objects and therefore leaves
a conceptual space for revenge. But we have already said that many of
the legitimate interests of the anti-compassion moral tradition can be
met by a theory that is far less extreme than the original Stoic norma-
tive theory, and that we have many reasons to adopt a less extreme
65 On the many ancient analyses of anger that make this point, see Nussbaum (1994),
Chapters 7 and 11. For an excellent modern treatment, see Murphy and Hampton
(1988).
66 See Chapter 10 of this volume.
394
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511840715.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 42 (native text) -----
THE PHILOSOPHICAL DEBATE
theory. This should make us conclude that the bare conceptual connec-
tion between compassion and revenge is not sufficient to warrant the
extirpation of the attachments leading to compassion. What we should
focus on, instead, is how to channel emotional development in the
direction of a more mature and inclusive and less ambivalent type of
love. Compassion itself, by extending the agent's concern to people
with whom she is not in a relation of painful dependence, makes a
powerful contribution toward that development.
Furthermore, when we move the outer circles closer to the self, as
an education in proper compassion urges, our inclination to favor
projects of revenge toward these distant people, should we even have
such projects, will be likely to diminish. Through this channeling of
concern we will become concerned for others as for members of our
own families, and see any damage befalling them as a damage to
ourselves as well. Thus if we are justifiably angry with them, as we
frequently will be, we will have reasons to handle the dispute without
destruction. Compassion, and the empathy that is its frequent precur-
sor, show the significance of vindictive acts for those who suffer them:
by moving these victims closer to us, it makes us think twice before
undertaking such acts. A spectator who had seen Euripides' Trojan
Woman, right at the time of the decision to kill all of the male citizens
of Melos and enslave all of the women and children, would become
less likely to support such a policy - for she would see the revenge
from the point of view of these suffering women and children, and
would prove unable to dehumanize them in her thought. As I have
already argued, compassion cuts through the dehumanizing strategies
that are frequently enlisted in the service of cruelty of many kinds. It
thus qualifies the motive to take revenge and forges an alliance among
all human beings.
We may go further, returning to the point I stressed in responding
to the partiality objection. Relationships between people that are me-
diated only by rule and not by empathy frequently prove more fragile
in times of hostility, more prone to a dehumanizing type of brutality.67
Again and again, the literature on violence indicates that the personal-
ity that is deficient in empathy is a danger to others. If one cannot
house the other person in one's imagination, one has much less reluc-
67 See, again, Glover (1999).
395
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511840715.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 43 (native text) -----
PART II: COMPASSION
tance to do something terrible.68 To the authoritarian personality -
rule-following and rigid - theorists of genocide have typically counter-
posed a "liberal" personality, one that can allow the self to be entered
by the reality of another person's life.69 Of course, people may be
empathic toward some and not toward others - there we have, again,
the partiality objection, which has real force. But if one is standardly
empathic toward a person, it is much less likely that one will be brutal
toward that very person. Empathic torturers such as Hannibal Lecter
are far rarer than people whose imaginations are blunted, who simply
refuse the acknowledgment of humanity.70
Let us now return to the topic of law. I have said that anger need
not be connected with an inclination to take personal revenge: instead,
the interest in punishing the offender can be channeled by the legal
system. Indeed, this idea is a deep part of the tragic tradition itself. As
an attentive spectator of tragedies and reader of novels, the pro-
compassion person will have recognized that private revenge is an
especially unsatisfactory, costly way to effect the punishment of offend-
ers, one that usually simply ensures that the exchange of damages will
perpetuate itself without limit. Out of his interest in a punishment that
is balanced and contained, that does not poison the entire climate of
social life, he will develop a keen interest in systems of law and the
legal codification of offenses and punishments.71
At the conclusion of Aeschylus' Oresteia, the Furies are not banished
from the city: instead they are civilized, and made a part of Athena's
judicial system. Now called Eumenides, for their kindly intentions to-
ward the people of Athens, they cease to snarl, to crouch like dogs, to
sniff for blood. But they do not cease to demand punishment for crime:
and in that sense to place them at the heart of the judicial institutions
of the city is to announce that these dark forces cannot be cut off from
the rest of human life without impoverishing it. For these forces are
forms of acknowledgment of the importance of the goods that crime
may damage.72 In that sense, compassion and revenge do go hand in
68 See Lifton (1986), Hilberg (1985).
69 See Adorno et al. (1950).
70 See also Vetlesen (1994) and, on the psychology of genocide in Bosnia, Vetlesen (1997).
71 On this see Posner (1988), who perceptively suggests that this is one of the most
important contributions of literature to the law.
72 See Gewirtz (1988) and Posner (1988).
396
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511840715.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 44 (native text) -----
THE PHILOSOPHICAL DEBATE
hand: for compassion understands the significance of a wrong, and of
the victim's suffering. It therefore demands of the legal system some
appropriate acknowledgment of the meaning of that suffering, and of
the fact that it was unjustly inflicted.
Now we can return to the topic of mercy. The anti-compassion
tradition was proud of its ability to render punishments that were
merciful, not vindictive, dictated by thought about the good of society
and the good of the offender. It connected the ability to be merciful
with a lofty detachment from the ills of human life. It urged that
without that detachment one will have the unseemly spectacle of weak
and anxious people tearing one another limb from limb. But things
are not so simple. For mercy is, in a sense, an anomaly in a Stoic
system of justice. Mercy does differ from compassion: for it presup-
poses that the offender has done a wrong, and deserves some punish-
ment for that wrong. It does not say that the trouble the offender is
in came to her through no fault of her own. Nonetheless, as our
analysis has revealed, it has much in common with compassion as well
- for it focuses on obstacles to flourishing that seem too great to
overcome. It says yes, you did commit a deliberate wrong, but the fact
that you got to that point was not altogether your fault. It focuses on
the social, natural, and familial features of the offender's life that offer
a measure of extenuation for the fault, even though the commission of
the fault itself meets the law's strict standards of moral accountability.
In order to do this, it takes up a narrative attitude toward the offender's
history that is very similar to the sympathetic perception involved in
compassion. It follows the offender's whole history in considerable
detail, scrutinizing it for extenuating features.73 Sometimes these fea-
tures will prove to be so central to the commission of the offense that
we may after all judge that the offender should not be found guilty -
if, for example, we find evidence of delusion or insanity. At many
other times, however, this same process of sympathetic scrutiny will
allow us to convict the offender and to assign some penalty - but will
move us to lighten the penalty, as we take note of the severe obstacles
73 This is not meant in any way to rule out compassion for the victims of crime; in
"Equity and Mercy" (in Nussbaum [1999a]) I discuss this issue further, arguing that
the impact of crime on the victim is pertinent to the placing of the offense in a
particular class of offenses, and that the discretionary consideration of the offender's
story that may result in mercy should take place at a separate and later stage.
397
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511840715.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 45 (native text) -----
PART II: COMPASSION
this person faced, on the way to becoming the sort of person who
could commit that offense.
It is likely74 that this merciful attitude is at odds with the norms of
the original Greek Stoics, focused as they were on the strict dichotomy
between what is up to us and what is not. It represents an attempt on
the part of Seneca and the Roman Stoics to respond to an Aristotelian
tradition in which compassion and mercy are very closely linked in the
way that I have suggested - through the sympathetic imagining of the
possibilities and obstacles that the other person's life contains. Seneca
does not endorse compassion, because he does not give up the Stoic
idea that what really bears down on people from outside is no occasion
for weeping. But it becomes very difficult to see how he can avoid
recognizing compassion as appropriate in some circumstances, given
that he so stresses the obstacles to good action created by the circum-
stances of life. The very exercise of imagination that leads to mercy
seems closely linked to compassion - the only difference being that
mercy still judges that the offender meets some very basic conditions of
responsibility and blame. But it seems to be Seneca's view that the fact
that the offender got to be immoral and blameworthy was not fully
that person's own doing - so at that earlier stage, compassion creeps,
unnamed, into Seneca's account.
Mercy, in short, is no special virtue of the anti-compassion tradition,
as its partisans sometimes seem to suggest. It is perfectly at home in the
pro-compassion tradition, so long as that tradition does not take up the
position that people are never to blame for any of the wrongs that they
do, that everything bad is the result of luck. But no sensible expositor
of the tradition has taken that view. And, in a way, mercy is more at
home in the pro-compassion tradition than in the rival camp: for com-
passion invites the sort of close narrative scrutiny of particular lives that
is likely, as well, to reveal extenuating circumstances in cases where there
is culpability. The somewhat lofty detachment of the Stoic is less likely
to reveal such circumstances, unless, like Seneca, he is so interested in
the obstacles to good action that he verges close to compassion.
The friend of compassion has had to qualify her position in many ways
under pressure of the opponents' challenges. Compassion will be a
74 See "Equity and Mercy" (Nussbaum 1999a).
398
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511840715.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 46 (native text) -----
THE PHILOSOPHICAL DEBATE
valuable social motive only if it is equipped with an adequate theory of
the worth of basic goods, only if it is equipped with an adequate
understanding of agency and fault, and only if it is equipped with a
suitably broad account of the people who should be the object of an
agent's concern, distant as well as close. These judgments must be
engendered through a good developmental process. On the other hand,
compassion supplies an essential life and connectedness to morality,
without which it is dangerously empty and rootless. In central cases,
well represented in Greek tragedy, compassion embodies correct eval-
uations, and directs our concern to all who share with us a common
humanity. Learned in childhood relationships, these connections are
important in making morality discerning rather than obtuse. Thus com-
passion is a needed complement to respect, without which, as Kant
holds, benevolence will be likely to be lacking in energy (but for more
cognitive reasons than those that Kant gives). We should not attempt
to produce a good society through the motive of compassion alone,
since it is only within the limits of reason, so to speak, that compassion
proves worthwhile rather than quirky and unreliable. On the other
hand, so constrained, it provides an extremely important bridge from
the child's narrow and self-referential concerns to a broader moral
world.
One final concession must be made to the Kantian challenge. This
is, that we should be on our guard lest the invitation to weep over the
distress of others should motivate self-indulgent and self-congratulatory
behavior, rather than real helpfulness. People can all-too-easily feel that
they have done something morally good because they have had an
experience of compassion - without having to take any of the steps to
change the world that might involve them in real difficulty and sacri-
fice. Greek tragedy existed in a culture in which the objects of tragic
compassion were rarely given relief and almost never justice. At the
worst, the experience of tragic contemplation can even involve an
aestheticizing of the person's plight that has a most unwholesome
moral character. This does not mean that compassion by itself has bad
tendencies; it means that people are frequently too weak to keep their
attention fixed on a course of action, and that a momentary experience
is frequently much easier for them than a sustained commitment. This
gives us reasons to insist on going beyond compassion and to focus, as
does Kant, on action and institutions.
On the other hand, we must also recall Aristotle's reminder that an
399
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511840715.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 47 (native text) -----
PART II: COMPASSION
action is morally virtuous only when it is done with the correct motives.
Helping others without love of mankind and without compassionate
concern for their situation has some moral value. But if we follow
Aristotle rather than Kant in thinking that the moral emotions them-
selves can be cultivated and made part of a good character, we will feel
that the grudging way in which an unsympathetic person performs
these duties is morally incomplete. If we imagine the man whom Kant
describes, in whose heart nature has placed little sympathy, and who is
"by temperament cold and indifferent to the sufferings of others"
(Grounding, Akad. p. 398), we should not conclude, as does Kant, that
this is an unfortunate but morally irrelevant trait. We should conclude
that this person is morally incomplete, insofar as he is the product of a
moral development that has not sufficiently attended to the value of
the lives of others. His vision of the human world is skewed. The
freezing of the "seas of pity" is, after all, a precursor of "intellectual" -
and hence moral - "disgrace."
4 0 0
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511840715.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press
