

----- Page 1 (native text) -----
Graduate Texts in Mathematics 107 
Editorial Board 
F. W. Gehring P. R. Halmos (Managing Editor) 
c. C. Moore 


----- Page 2 (native text) -----
Graduate Texts in Mathematics 
1 
TAKEUTIIZARING. Introduction to Axiomatic Set Theory. 2nd ed. 
2 
OXTOBY. Measure and Category. 2nd ed. 
3 
SCHAEFFER. Topological Vector Spaces. 
4 
HILTON/STAMMBACH. A Course in Homological Algebra. 
5 
MACLANE. Categories for the Working Mathematician. 
6 
HUGHES/PIPER. Projective Planes. 
7 
SERRE. A Course in Arithmetic. 
8 
TAKEUTI/ZARING. Axiomatic Set Theory. 
9 
HUMPHREYS. Introduction to Lie Algebras and Representation Theory. 
10 
COHEN. A Course in Simple Homotopy Theory. 
11 
CONWAY. Functions of One Complex Variable. 2nd ed. 
12 
BEALS. Advanced Mathematical Analysis. 
13 
ANDERSON/FuLLER. Rings and Categories of Modules. 
14 
GOLUBITSKy/GUILLEMIN. Stable Mappings and Their Singularities. 
15 
BERBERIAN. Lectures in Functional Analysis and Operator Theory. 
16 
WINTER. The Structure of Fields. 
17 
ROSENBLATT. Random Processes. 2nd ed. 
18 
HALMos. Measure Theory. 
19 
HALMos. A Hilben Space Problem Book. 2nd ed., revised. 
20 
HUSEMOLLER. Fibre Bundles. 2nd ed. 
21 
HUMPHREYS. Linear Algebraic Groups. 
22 
BARNES/MACK. An Algebraic Introduction to Mathematical Logic. 
23 
GREUB. Linear Algebra. 4th ed. 
24 
HOLMES. Geometric Functional Analysis and its Applications. 
25 
HEWITT/STROMBERG. Real and Abstract Analysis. 
26 
MANES. Algebraic Theories. 
27 
KELLEY. General Topology. 
28 
ZARISKI/SAMUEL. Commutative Algebra. Vol. I. 
29 
ZARISKIISAMUEL. Commutative Algebra. Vol. 11. 
30 
JACOBSON. Lectures in Abstract Algebra I: Basic Concepts. 
31 
JACOBSON. Lectures in Abstract Algebra 11: Linear Algebra. 
32 
JACOBSON. Lectures in Abstract Algebra III: Theory of Fields and Galois Theory. 
33 
HIRSCH. Differential Topology. 
34 
SPITZER. Principles of Random Walk. 2nd ed. 
35 
WERMER. Banach Algebras and Several Complex Variables. 2nd ed. 
36 
KELLEy/NAMIOKA et al. Linear Topological Spaces. 
37 
MONK. Mathematical Logic. 
38 
GRAUERT/FRITZSCHE. Several Complex Variables. 
39 
ARVESON. An Invitation to C*-Algebras. 
40 
KEMENy/SNELL/KNAPP. Denumerable Markov Chains. 2nd ed. 
41 
APOSTOL. Modular Functions and Dirichlet Series in Number Theory. 
42 
SERRE. Linear Representations of Finite Groups. 
43 
GILLMAN/JERISON. Rings of Continuous Functions. 
44 
KENDIG. Elementary Algebraic Geometry. 
45 
LOEVE. Probability Theory I. 4th ed. 
46 
LOEVE. Probability Theory II. 4th ed. 
47 
MOISE. Geometric Topology in Dimensions 2 and 3. 
continued after Index 


----- Page 3 (native text) -----
Peter J. Olver 
Applications of 
Lie Groups to 
Differential Equations 
Springer-Verlag 
New York Berlin Heidelberg Tokyo 


----- Page 4 (native text) -----
Peter J. Olver 
School of Mathematics 
University of Minnesota 
Minneapolis, MN 55455 
U.S.A. 
Editorial Board 
P. R. Halmos 
Managing Editor 
Department of 
Mathematics 
University of Santa Clara 
Santa Clara, CA 95053 
U.S.A. 
F. W. Gehring 
Department of 
Mathematics 
University of Michigan 
Ann Arbor, MI48109 
U.S.A. 
AMS Classifications: 22E70, 34-01, 70H05 
With 10 illustrations. 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Olver, Peter J. 
Applications of lie groups to differential equations. 
(Graduate texts in mathematics; 107) 
Bibliography: p. 
Includes index. 
1. Differential equations. 
2. Lie groups. 
I. Title. 
II. Series. 
QA372.055 
1986 
515.3'5 
85-17318 
© 1986 by Springer-Verlag New York Inc. 
Softcover reprint of the hardcover I st edition 1986 
c. C. Moore 
Department of 
Mathematics 
University of California 
at Berkeley 
Berkeley, CA 94720 
U.S.A. 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be translated or reproduced in any 
form without written permission from Springer-Verlag, 175 Fifth Avenue, New York, 
New York 10010, U.S.A. 
Typeset by J. W. Arrowsmith Ltd., Bristol, England. 
9 8 7 6 5 432 1 
ISBN-13: 978-1-4684-0276-6 
DOl: 10.1007/978-1-4684-0274-2 
e-ISBN-13: 978-1-4684-0274-2 


----- Page 5 (native text) -----
Preface 
This book is devoted to explaining a wide range of applications of con-
tinuous symmetry groups to physically important systems of differential 
equations. Emphasis is placed on significant applications of group-theoretic 
methods, organized so that the applied reader can readily learn the basic 
computational techniques required for genuine physical problems. The first 
chapter collects together (but does not prove) those aspects of Lie group 
theory which are of importance to differential equations. Applications 
covered in the body of the book include calculation of symmetry groups 
of differential equations, integration of ordinary differential equations, 
including special techniques for Euler-Lagrange equations or Hamiltonian 
systems, differential invariants and construction of equations with pre-
scribed symmetry groups, group-invariant solutions of partial differential 
equations, dimensional analysis, and the connections between conservation 
laws and symmetry groups. Generalizations of the basic symmetry group 
concept, and applications to conservation laws, integrability conditions, 
completely integrable systems and soliton equations, and bi-Hamiltonian 
systems are covered in detail. The exposition is reasonably self-contained, 
and supplemented by numerous examples of direct physical importance, 
chosen from classical mechanics, fluid mechanics, elasticity and other 
applied areas. Besides the basic theory of manifolds, Lie groups and alge-
bras, transformation groups and differential forms, the book delves into the 
more theoretical subjects of prolongation theory and differential equations, 
the Cauchy-Kovalevskaya theorem, characteristics and integrability of 
differential equations, extended jet spaces over manifolds, quotient mani-
folds, adjoint and co-adjoint representations of Lie groups, the calculus of 
variations and the inverse problem of characterizing those systems which 
are Euler-Lagrange equations of some variational problem, differential 


----- Page 6 (native text) -----
vi 
Preface 
operators, higher Euler operators and the variational complex, and the 
general theory of Poisson structures, both for finite-dimensional Hamil-
tonian systems as well as systems of evolution equations, all of which have 
direct bearing on the symmetry analysis of differential equations. It is hoped 
that after reading this book, the reader will, with a minimum of difficulty, 
be able to readily apply these important group-theoretic methods to the 
systems of differential equations he or she is interested in, and make new 
and interesting deductions concerning them. If so, the book can be said to 
have served its purpose. 
A preliminary version of this book first appeared as a set of lecture notes, 
distributed by the Mathematical Institute of Oxford University, for a gradu-
ate seminar held in Trinity term, 1979. It is my pleasure to thank the staff 
of Springer-Verlag for their encouragement for me to tum these notes into 
book form, and for their patience during the process of revision that turned 
out to be far more extensive than I originally anticipated. 


----- Page 7 (native text) -----
Acknowledgements 
Let me first express my gratitude to the National Science Foundation for 
supporting my summer research during the period in which this book was 
being written. 
It is unfortunately impossible to mention all those colleagues who have, 
in some way, influenced my mathematical career. However, the following 
people deserve an especial thanks for their direct roles in aiding and abetting 
the preparation of this book (needless to say, I accept full responsibility 
for what appears in it!). 
Garrett Birkhoff-my thesis advisor, who first introduced me to the 
marvellous world of Lie groups and expertly guided my first faltering steps 
in the path of mathematical research. 
T. Brooke Benjamin, and the staff of the Mathematical Institute at Oxford 
University-who encouraged me to present the first version of this materials 
as a seminar during Trinity term, 1979 and then typed up as lecture 
notes. 
Willard Miller, Jr.-who encouraged me to come to Minnesota and 
provided much needed encouragement during the preparation of the book, 
including reading, criticizing and suggesting many improvements on the 
manuscript. 
David Sattinger-who first included what has become Sections 2.2-2.4 
in his lecture notes on bifurcation theory, and provided further encourage-
ment after I came to Minnesota. 
Ian Anderson-who played an indispensible role in the present develop-
ment of the variational complex and higher order Euler operators of Section 
5.4, who helped with the historical material, and who read, criticized and 
helped improve the manuscript of the book as it appeared. 


----- Page 8 (native text) -----
viii 
Acknowledgements 
Yvette Kosmann-Schwarzbach-for having the time and patience to read 
the entire manuscript, and for many valuable comments, criticisms and 
corrections. 
Darryl'Holm, Henry Hermes and Juha Pohjanpelto-whose many com-
ments and suggestions on the manuscript led to much-needed improvements. 
Phillip Rosenau-whose problems and suggestions never failed to get 
me thinking. 
Debbie Bradley, Catherine Rader and Kaye Smith-who selflessly and 
wholeheartedly took on the arduous task of typing the manuscript, and did 
such a wonderful job. 
My mother, Grace Olver, and father, Frank Olver-for their unfailing 
support and influence in my life. 
And, of course, my wife, Chehrzad Shakiban, and children, Parizad and 
Sheehan-whose love, patience and understanding were essential to it all! 


----- Page 9 (native text) -----
Table of Contents 
Introduction 
Notes to the Reader 
CHAPTER 1 
Introduction to Lie Groups 
1.1. Manifolds 
Change of Coordinates 
Maps Between Manifolds 
The Maximal Rank Condition 
Submanifolds 
Regular Submanifolds 
Implicit Submanifolds 
Curves and Connectedness 
1.2. Lie Groups 
Lie Subgroups 
Local Lie Groups 
Local Transformation Groups 
Orbits 
1.3. Vector Fields 
Flows 
Action on Functions 
Differentials 
Lie Brackets 
Tangent Spaces and Vectors Fields on Submanifolds 
Frobenius' Theorem 
1.4. Lie Algebras 
One-Parameter Subgroups 
Subalgebras 
The Exponential Map 
xv 
xxiii 
1 
2 
6 
7 
8 
8 
11 
12 
13 
14 
18 
19 
21 
22 
24 
27 
31 
32 
34 
38 
39 
42 
45 
47 
49 


----- Page 10 (native text) -----
x 
Lie Algebras of Local Lie Groups 
Structure Constants 
Commutator Tables 
Infinitesimal Group Actions 
1.5. Differential Forms 
Pull-Back and Change of Coordinates 
Interior Products 
The Differential 
The de Rham Complex 
Lie Derivatives 
Homotopy Operators 
Integration and Stokes' Theorem 
Notes 
Exercises 
CHAPTER 2 
Symmetry Groups of Differential Equations 
2.1. Symmetries of Algebraic Equations 
Invariant Subsets 
Invariant Functions 
Infinitesimal Invariance 
Local Invariance 
Invariants and Functional Dependence 
Methods for Constructing Invariants 
2.2. Groups and Differential Equations 
2.3. Prolongation 
Systems of Differential Equations 
Prolongation of Group Actions 
Invariance of Differential Equations 
Prolongation of Vector Fields 
Infinitesimal Invariance 
The Prolongation Formula 
Total Derivatives 
The General Prolongation Formula 
Properties of Prolonged Vector Fields 
Characteristics of Symmetries 
2.4. Calculation of Symmetry Groups 
2.5. Integration of Ordinary Differential Equations 
First Order Equations 
Higher Order Equations 
Differential Invariants 
Multi-parameter Symmetry Groups 
Solvable Groups 
Systems of Ordinary Differential Equations 
2.6. Nondegeneracy Conditions for Differential Equations 
Local Solvability 
Invariance Criteria 
The Cauchy-Kovalevskaya Theorem 
Characteristics 
Table of Contents 
49 
51 
51 
52 
55 
57 
58 
58 
60 
62 
65 
67 
68 
70 
77 
78 
79 
79 
81 
86 
86 
89 
92 
97 
99 
100 
103 
104 
106 
108 
111 
113 
117 
118 
119 
133 
134 
140 
142 
148 
154 
158 
161 
161 
165 
166 
167 


----- Page 11 (native text) -----
Table of Contents 
Normal Systems 
Prolongation of Differential Equations 
Notes 
Exercises 
CHAPTER 3 
Group-Invariant Solutions 
3.1. Construction of Group-Invariant Solutions 
3.2. Examples of Group-Invariant Solutions 
3.3. Classification of Group-Invariant Solutions 
The Adjoint Representation 
Classification of Subgroups and Subalgebras 
Classification of Group-Invariant Solutions 
3.4. Quotient Manifolds 
Dimensional Analysis 
3.5. Group-Invariant Prolongations and Reduction 
Extended Jet Bundles 
Differential Equations 
Group Actions 
The Invariant Jet Space 
Connection with the Quotient Manifold 
The Reduced Equation 
Local Coordinates 
Notes 
Exercises 
CHAPTER 4 
Symmetry Groups and Conservation Laws 
4.1. The Calculus of Variations 
The Variational Derivative 
Null Lagrangians and Divergences 
Invariance of the Euler Operator 
4.2. Variational Symmetries 
Infinitesimal Criterion of Invariance 
Symmetries of the Euler-Lagrange Equations 
Reduction of Order 
4.3. Conservation Laws 
Trivial Conservation Laws 
Characteristics of Conservation Laws 
4.4. Noether's Theorem 
Divergence Symmetries 
Notes 
Exercises 
CHAPTER 5 
Generalized Symmetries 
5.1. Generalized Symmetries of Differential Equations 
Differential Functions 
xi 
170 
170 
176 
180 
186 
188 
193 
202 
203 
206 
210 
213 
218 
221 
223 
226 
227 
228 
230 
231 
232 
239 
242 
246 
247 
248 
251 
253 
256 
257 
259 
261 
265 
268 
270 
277 
283 
286 
289 
292 
294 
294 


----- Page 12 (native text) -----
xii 
Table of Contents 
Generalized Vector Fields 
Evolutionary Vector Fields 
Equivalence and Trivial Symmetries 
Computation of Generalized Symmetries 
Group Transformations 
Symmetries and Prolongations 
The Lie Bracket 
Evolution Equations 
5.2. Recursion Operators 
Frechet Derivatives 
Criteria for Recursion Operators 
The Korteweg-de Vries Equation 
5.3. Generalized Symmetries and Conservation Laws 
Adjoints of Differential Operators 
Characteristics of Conservation Laws 
Variational Symmetries 
Group Transformations 
Noether's Theorem 
Self-Adjoint Linear Systems 
Action of Symmetries on Conservation Laws 
Abnormal Systems and Noether's Second Theorem 
5.4. The Variational Complex 
The D-Complex 
Vertical Forms 
Total Derivatives of Vertical Forms 
Functionals and Functional Forms 
The Variational Differential 
Higher Euler Operators 
The Total Homotopy Operator 
Notes 
Exercises 
CHAPTER 6 
Finite-Dimensional Hamiltonian Systems 
6.1. Poisson Brackets 
Hamiltonian Vector Fields 
The Structure Functions 
The Lie-Poisson Structure 
6.2. Symplectic Structures and Foliations 
The Correspondence Between One-Forms and Vector Fields 
Rank of a Poisson Structure 
Symplectic Manifolds 
Maps Between Poisson Manifolds 
Poisson Submanifolds 
Darboux'Theorem 
The Co-adjoint Representation 
6.3. Symmetries, First Integrals and Reduction of Order 
First Integrals 
295 
297 
298 
299 
303 
306 
307 
309 
314 
317 
318 
319 
322 
322 
323 
325 
327 
328 
330 
335 
336 
340 
341 
343 
345 
346 
352 
356 
359 
365 
369 
378 
379 
381 
383 
385 
387 
388 
389 
389 
390 
391 
394 
396 
397 
398 


----- Page 13 (native text) -----
Table of Contents 
Hamiltonian Symmetry Groups 
Reduction of Order in Hamiltonian Systems 
Reduction Using Multi-parameter Groups 
Hamiltonian Transformation Groups 
The Momentum Map 
Notes 
Exercises 
CHAPTER 7 
Hamiltonian Methods for Evolution Equations 
7.1. Poisson Brackets 
Lie Derivatives of Differential Operators 
The Jacobi Identity 
Functional Multi-vectors 
7.2. Symmetries and Conservation Laws 
Distinguished Functionals 
Lie Brackets 
Conservation Laws 
7.3. Bi-Hamiltonian Systems 
Recursion Operators 
Notes 
Exercises 
References 
Symbol Index 
Author Index 
Subject Index 
xiii 
399 
401 
406 
407 
410 
417 
418 
423 
424 
427 
427 
430 
436 
437 
437 
438 
443 
449 
453 
454 
457 
475 
483 
487 


----- Page 14 (native text) -----
Introduction 
When beginning students first encounter ordinary differential equations 
they are, more often than not, presented with a bewildering variety of special 
techniques designed to solve certain particular, seemingly unrelated types 
of equations, such as separable, homogeneous or exact equations. Indeed, 
this was the state of the art around the middle of the nineteenth century, 
when Sophus Lie made the profound and far-reaching discovery that these 
special methods were, in fact, all special cases of a general integration 
procedure based on the invariance of the differential equation under a 
continuous group of symmetries. This observation at once unified and 
significantly extended the available integration techniques, and inspired Lie 
to devote the remainder of his mathematical career to the development and 
application of his monumental theory of continuous groups. These groups, 
now universally known as Lie groups, have had a profound impact on all 
areas of mathematics, both pure and applied, as well as physics, engineering 
and other mathematically-based sciences. The applications of Lie's con-
tinuous symmetry groups include such diverse fields as algebraic topology, 
differential geometry, invariant theory, bifurcation theory, special functions, 
numerical analysis, control theory, classical mechanics, quantum mechanics, 
relativity, continuum mechanics and so on. It is impossible to overestimate 
the importance of Lie's contribution to modern science and mathematics. 
Nevertheless, anyone who is already familiar with one of these modern 
manifestations of Lie group theory is perhaps surprised to learn that its 
original inspirational source was the field of differential equations. One 
possible cause for the general lack of familiarity with this important aspect 
of Lie group theory is the fact that, as with many applied fields, the Lie 
groups that do arise as symmetry groups of genuine physical systems of 
differential equations are often not particularly elegant groups from a purely 


----- Page 15 (native text) -----
xvi 
Introduction 
mathematical viewpoint, being neither semi-simple, nor solvable, nor any 
of the other special classes of Lie groups so popular in mathematics. 
Moreover, these groups often act nonlinearly on the underlying space (taking 
us outside the domain of representation theory) and can even be only locally 
defined, with the transformations making sense only for group elements 
sufficiently near the identity. The relevant group actions, then, are much 
closer in spirit to Lie's original formulation of the subject in terms of local 
Lie groups acting on open subsets of Euclidean space, and runs directly 
counter to the modern tendencies towards abstraction and globalization 
which have enveloped much of present-day Lie group theory. Historically, 
the applications of Lie groups to differential equations pioneered by Lie 
and Noether faded into obscurity just as the global, abstract reformulation 
of differential geometry and Lie group theory championed by E. Cartan 
gained its ascendency in the mathematical community. The entire subject 
lay dormant for nearly half a century until G. Birkhoff called attention to 
the unexploited applications of Lie groups to the differential equations of 
fluid mechanics. Subsequently, Ovsiannikov and his school began a system-
atic program of successfully applying these methods to a wide range of 
physically important problems. The last two decades have witnessed a 
veritable explosion of research activity in this field, both in the applications 
to concrete physical systems, as well as extensions of the scope and depth 
of the theory itself. Nevertheless, many questions remain unresolved, and 
the full range of applicability of Lie group methods to differential equations 
is yet to be determined. 
Roughly speaking, a symmetry group of a system of differential equations 
is a group which transforms solutions of the system to other solutions. In 
the classical framework of Lie, these groups consist of geometric transforma-
tions on the space of independent and dependent variables for the system, 
and act on solutions by transforming their graphs. Typical examples are 
groups of translations and rotations, as well as groups of scaling symmetries, 
but these certainly do not exhaust the range of possibilities. The great 
advantage oflooking at continuous symmetry groups, as opposed to discrete 
symmetries such as reflections, is that they can all be found using explicit 
computational methods. This is not to say that discrete groups are not 
important in the study of differential equations (see, for example, Hejhal, 
[1], and the references therein), but rather that one must employ quite 
different methods to find or utilize them. Lie's fundamental discovery was 
that the complicated nonlinear conditions of invariance of the system under 
the group transformations could, in the case of a continuous group, be 
replaced by equivalent, but far simpler, linear conditions reflecting a form 
of "infinitesimal" invariance of the system under the generators of the 
group. In almost every physically important system of differential equations, 
these infinitesimal symmetry conditions-the so-called defining equations 
of the symmetry group of the system-can be explicitly solved in closed 
form and thus the most general continuous symmetry group of the system 


----- Page 16 (native text) -----
Introduction 
xvii 
can be explicitly determined. The entire procedure consists of rather 
mechanical computations, and, indeed, several symbolic manipulation com-
puter programs have been developed for this task. 
Once one has determined the symmetry group of a system of differential 
equations, a number of applications become available. To start with, one 
can directly use the defining property of such a group and construct new 
solutions to the system from known ones. The symmetry group thus provides 
a means of classifying different symmetry classes of solutions, where two 
solutions are deemed to be equivalent if one can be transformed into the 
other by some group element. Alternatively, one can use the symmetry 
groups to effect a classification of families of differential equations depend-
ing on arbitrary parameters or functions; often there are good physical or 
mathematical reasons for preferring those equations with as high a degree 
of symmetry as possible. Another approach is to determine which types of 
differential equations admit a prescribed group of symmetries; this problem 
is also answered by infinitesimal methods using the theory of differential 
invariants. 
In the case of ordinary differential equations, invariance under a one-
parameter symmetry group implies that we can reduce the order of the 
equation by one, recovering the solutions to the original equation from 
those of the reduced equation by a single quadrature. For a single first order 
equation, this method provides an explicit formula for the general solution. 
Multi-parameter symmetry groups engender further reductions in order, 
but, unless the group itself satisfies an additional "solvability" requirement, 
we may not be able to recover the solutions to the original equation from 
those of the reduced equation by quadratures alone. If the system of ordinary 
differential equations is derived from a variational principle, either as the 
Euler-Lagrange equations of some functional, or as a Hamiltonian system, 
then the power of the symmetry group reduction method is effectively 
doubled. A one-parameter group of "variational" symmetries allows one 
to reduce the order of the system by two; the case of multi-parameter 
symmetry groups is more delicate. 
Unfortunately, for systems of partial differential equations, the symmetry 
group is usually of no help in determining the general solution (although 
in special cases it may indicate when the system can be transformed into 
a more easily soluble system such as a linear system). However, one can 
use general symmetry groups to explicitly determine special types of sol-
utions which are themselves invariant under some subgroup of the full 
symmetry group of the system. These "group-invariant" solutions are found 
by solving a reduced system of differential equations involving fewer 
independent variables than the original system (which presumably makes 
it easier to solve). For example, the solutions to a partial differential equation 
in two independent variables which are invariant under a given one-para-
meter symmetry group are all found by solving a system of ordinary 
differential equations. Included among these general group-invariant sol-


----- Page 17 (native text) -----
xviii 
Introduction 
utions are the classical similarity solutions coming from groups of scaling 
symmetries, and travelling wave solutions reflecting some form of transla-
tional invariance in the system, as well as many other explicit solutions of 
direct physical or mathematical importance. For many nonlinear systems, 
these are the only explicit, exact solutions which are available, and, as such, 
play an important role in both the mathematical analysis and physical 
applications of the system. 
In 1918, E. Noether proved two remarkable theorems relating symmetry 
groups of a variational integral to properties of its associated Euler-
Lagrange equations. In the first of these theorems, Noether shows how each 
one-parameter variational symmetry group gives rise to a conservation law 
of the Euler-Lagrange equations. Thus, for example, conservation of energy 
comes from the invariance of the problem under a group of time translations, 
while conservation of linear and angular momenta reflect translational and 
rotational invariance of the system. Chapter 4 is devoted to the so-called 
classical form of this Noether theorem, in which only the geometrical types 
of symmetry groups are used. Noether herself proved a far more general 
result and gave a one-to-one correspondence between symmetry groups and 
conservation laws. The general result necessitates the introduction of "gen-
eralized symmetries" which are groups whose infinitesimal generators 
depend not only on the independent and dependent variables of the system, 
but also the derivatives of the dependent variables. The corresponding group 
transformations will no longer act geometrically on the space of independent 
and dependent variables, transforming a function's graph point-wise, but 
are nonlocal transformations found by integrating an evolutionary system of 
partial differential equations. Each one-parameter group of symmetries of 
a variational problem, either geometrical or generalized, will give rise to a 
conservation law, and, conversely, every conservation law arises in this 
manner. The simplest example of a conserved quantity coming from a true 
generalized symmetry is the Runge-Lenz vector for the Kepler problem, 
but additional recent applications, including soliton equations and elasticity, 
has sparked a renewed interest in the general version of Noether's theorem. 
In Section 5.3 we prove a strengthened form of Noether's theorem, stating 
that for "normal" systems there is in fact a one-to-one correspondence 
between nontrivial variational symmetry groups and nontrivial conservation 
laws. The condition of normality is satisfied by most physically important 
systems of differential equations; abnormal systems are essentially those with 
nontrivial integrability conditions. An important class of abnormal systems, 
which do arise in general relativity, are those whose variational integral 
admits an infinite-dimensional symmetry group depending on an arbitrary 
function. Noether's second theorem shows that there is then a nontrivial 
relation among the ensuing Euler-Lagrange equations, and, consequently, 
nontrivial symmetries giving rise to only trivial conservation laws. Once 
found, conservation laws have many important applications, both physical 
and mathematical, including existence results, shock waves, scattering 


----- Page 18 (native text) -----
Introduction 
XIX 
theory, stability, relativity, fluid mechanics, elasticity and so on. See the 
notes on Chapter 4 for a more extensive list, including references. 
Neglected for many years following Noether's prescient work, general-
ized symmetries have recently been found to be of importance in the study 
of nonlinear partial differential equations which, like the Korteweg-de Vries 
equation, can be viewed as "completely integrable systems". The existence 
of infinitely many generalized symmetries, usually found via the recursion 
operator methods of Section 5.2, appears to be intimately connected with 
the possibility of linearizing a system, either directly through some change 
of variables, or, more subtly, through some form of inverse scattering 
method. Thus, the generalized symmetry approach, which is amenable to 
direct calculation as with ordinary symmetries, provides a systematic means 
of recognizing these remarkable equations and thereby constructing an 
infinite collection of conservation laws for them. (The construction of the 
related scattering problem requires different techniques such as the prolong-
ation methods of Wahlquist and Estabrook, [1].) 
A number of the applications of symmetry group methods to partial 
differential equations are most naturally done using some form of Hamil-
tonian structure. The finite-dimensional formulation of Hamiltonian systems 
of ordinary differential equations is well known, but in preparation for the 
more recent theory of Hamiltonian systems of evolution equations, we are 
required to take a slightly novel approach to the whole subject of Hamil-
tonian mechanics. Here we will de-emphasize the use of canonical coordin-
ates (the p's and q's of classical mechanics) and concentrate instead on the 
Poisson bracket as the cornerstone of the subject. The result is the more 
general concept of a Poisson structure, which is easily extended to include 
the infinite-dimensional theory of Hamiltonian systems of evolution 
equations. An important special case of a Poisson structure is the Lie-
Poisson structure on the dual to a Lie algebra, originally discovered by Lie 
and more recently used to great effect in geometric quantization, representa-
tion theory, and fluid and plasma mechanics. In this general approach to 
Hamiltonian mechanics, conservation laws can arise not only from symmetry 
properties of the system, but also from degeneracies of the Poisson bracket 
itself. In the finite-dimensional set-up, each one-parameter Hamiltonian 
symmetry group allows us to reduce the order of a system by two. In its 
modern formulation, the degree of reduction available for multi-parameter 
symmetry groups is given by the general theory of Marsden and Weinstein, 
which is based on the concept of a momentum map to the dual of the 
symmetry Lie algebra. In more recent work, there has been a fair amount 
of interest in systems of differential equations which possess not just one, 
but two distinct (but compatible) Hamiltonian structures. For such a "bi-
Hamiltonian system", there is a direct recursive means of constructing an 
infinite hierarchy of mutually commuting· flows (symmetries) and con-
sequent conservation laws, indicating the system's complete integrability. 
Most of the soliton equations, as well as some of the finite-dimensional 


----- Page 19 (native text) -----
xx 
Introduction 
completely integrable Hamiltonian systems, are in fact bi-Hamiltonian 
systems. 
Underlying much of the theory of generalized symmetries, conservation 
laws, and Hamiltonian structures for evolution equations is a subject known 
as the "formal calculus of variations", which constitutes a calculus 
specifically devised for answering a wide range of questions dealing with 
complicated algebraic identities among objects such as the Euler operator 
from the calculus of variations, generalized symmetries, total derivatives 
and more general differential operators, and several generalizations of the 
concept of a differential form. The principal result in the formal variational 
calculus is the local exactness of a certain complex-called the "variational 
complex"-which is in a sense the proper generalization to the variational 
or jet space context of the de Rham complex from algebraic topology. In 
recent years, this variational complex has been seen to play an increasingly 
important role in the deveiopment of the algebraic and geometric theory 
of the calculus of variations. Included as special cases of the variational 
complex are: 
(1) a solution to the "inverse problem of the calculus of variations", which 
is to characterize those systems of differential equations which are the 
Euler-Lagrange equations for some variational problem; 
(2) the characterization of "null Lagrangians", meaning those variational 
integrals whose Euler-Lagrange expressions vanish identically, as total 
divergences; and 
(3) the characterization of trivial conservation laws, also known as "null 
divergences", as "total curls". 
Each of these results is vital to the development of our applications of Lie 
groups to the study of conservation laws and Hamiltonian structures for 
evolution equations. Since it is not much more difficult to provide the proof 
of exactness of the full variational complex, Section 5.4 is devoted to a 
complete development of this proof and application to the three special 
cases of interest. 
Although the book covers a wide range of different applications of Lie 
groups to differential equations, a number of important topics have 
necessarily been omitted. Most notable among these omissions is the connec-
tion between Lie groups and separation of variables. There are two reasons 
for this first, there is an excellent, comprehensive text-Miller, [3]-already 
available; second, except for special classes of partial differential equations, 
such as Hamilton-Jacobi and Helmholtz equations, the precise connections 
between symmetries and separation of variables is not well understood at 
present. This is especially true in the case of systems of linear equations, 
or for fully nonlinear separation of variables; in neither case is there even 
a good definition of what separation of variables really entails, let alone 
how one uses symmetry properties of the system to detect coordinate systems 
in which separation of variables is possible. I have also not attempted to 


----- Page 20 (native text) -----
Introduction 
xxi 
cover any of the vast area of representation theory, and the consequent 
applications to special function theory; see Miller, [1] or Vilenkin, [1]. 
Bifurcation theory is another fertile ground for group-theoretic applications; 
I refer the reader to the lecture notes of Sattinger, [1], and the references 
therein. Applications of symmetry groups to numerical analysis are given 
extensive treatment in Shokin, [1]. Extensions of the present methods to 
boundary value problems for partial differential equations can be found in 
the books of BIuman and Cole, [1], and Seshadri and Na, [1], and to free 
boundary problems in Benjamin and Olver, [1]. Although I have given an 
extensive treatment to generalized symmetries in Chapter 5, the related 
concept of contact transformations introduced by Lie has not been covered, 
as it seems much less relevant to the equations arising in applications, and, 
for the most part, is subsumed by the more general theory presented here; 
see Anderson and Ibragimov, [1], and the references therein for these types 
of transformation groups. Finally, we should mention the use of Lie group 
methods for differential equations arising in geometry, including, for 
example, motions in Riemannian manifolds, cf. Ibragimov, [1], or symmetric 
spaces and invariant differential operators associated with them, cf. 
Helgason, [1], [2]. 


----- Page 21 (native text) -----
Notes to the Reader 
The guiding principle in the organization of this book has been so as to 
enable the reader whose principal goal is to apply Lie group methods to 
concrete problems to learn the basic computational tools and techniques 
as quickly as possible and with a minimum of theoretical diversions. At the 
same time, the computational applications have been placed on a solid 
theoretical foundation, so that the more mathematically inclined reader can 
readily delve further into the subject. Each chapter following the first has 
been arranged so that the applications and examples appear as quickly as 
feasible, with the more theoretical proofs and explanations coming towards 
the end. Even should the reader have more theoretical goals in mind, though, 
I would still strongly recommend that they learn the computational tech-
niques and examples first before proceeding to the more theoretical develop-
ments. It has been said that it is far easier to abstract a general mathematical 
theory from a single well-chosen example than it is to apply an existing 
abstract theory to a specific example, and this, I believe, is certainly the 
case here. 
For the reader whose main interest is in applications, I would recommend 
the following strategy for reading the book. The principal question is how 
much of the introductory theory of manifolds, vector fields, Lie groups and 
Lie algebras (which has, for convenience, been collected together in Chapter 
1 and Section 2.1), really needs to be covered before one can proceed to 
the applications to differential equations starting in Section 2.2. The answer 
is, in fact, surprisingly little. Manifolds can for the most part be thought 
of locally as open subsets of a Euclidean space IR m in which one has the 
freedom to change coordinates as one desires. Geometrical symmetry groups 
will just be collections of transformations on such a subset which satisfy 
certain elementary group axioms allowing one to compose successive sym-


----- Page 22 (native text) -----
xxiv 
Notes to the Reader 
metries, take inverses, etc. The key concept in the subject is the infinitesimal 
generator of a symmetry group. This is a vector field (of the type already 
familiar in vector calculus or fluid mechanics) on the underlying manifold 
or subset of IR m whose associated flow coincides with the one-parameter 
group it generates. One can regard the entire group of symmetries as being 
generated in this manner by composition of the basic flows of its infinitesimal 
generators. Thus a familiarity with the basic notation for and correspondence 
between a vector field and its flow is the primary concept required from 
Chapter 1. The other key result is the infinitesimal criterion for a system of 
algebraic equations to be invariant under such a group of transformations, 
which is embodied in Theorem 2.8. With these two tools, one can plunge 
ahead into the material on differential equations starting in Section 2.2, 
referring back to further results on Lie groups or manifolds as the need 
arises. 
The generalization of the infinitesimal invariance criterion to systems of 
differential equations rests on the important technique of "prolonging" the 
group transformations to include not only the independent variables and 
dependent variables appearing in the system, but also the derivatives of the 
dependent variables. This is most easily accomplished in a geometrical 
manner through the introduction of spaces whose coordinates represent 
these derivatives: the "jet spaces" of Section 2.3. The key formula for 
computing symmetry groups of differential equations is the prolongation 
formula for the infinitesimal generators in Theorem 2.36. Armed with this 
formula (or, at least the special cases appearing in the following example) 
and the corresponding infinitesimal invariance criterion, one is ready to 
compute the symmetry groups of well-nigh any system of ordinary or partial 
differential equations which may arise. Several illustrative examples of the 
basic computational techniques required are presented in Section 2.4; 
readers are also advised to try their hands at some additional examples, 
either those in the exercises at the end of Chapter 2, or some system of 
differential equations of their own devising. 
At this juncture, a number of options as to what to pursue next present 
themselves. For the devotee of ordinary differential equations, Section 2.5 
provides a detailed summary of the basic method .of Lie for integrating 
these equations using symmetry groups. See also Sections 4.2 and 6.3 for 
the case of ordinary differential equations with some form of variational 
structure, either in Lagrangian or Hamiltonian form. Those interested in 
determining explicit group-invariant solutions to partial differential 
equations can move directly on to Chapter 3. There the basic method for 
computing these solutions through reduction is outlined in Section 3.1 and 
illustrated by a number of examples in Section 3.2. The third section of this 
chapter addresses the problem of classification of these solutions, and does 
require some of the more sophisticated results on Lie algebras from Section 
1.4. The final two sections of Chapter 3 are devoted to the underlying theory 
for the reduction method, and are not required for applications, although 


----- Page 23 (native text) -----
Notes to the Reader 
xxv 
a discussion of the important Pi theorem from dimensional analysis does 
appear in Section 3.4. 
The reader whose principle interest is in the derivation of conservation 
laws using Noether's theorem can move directly from Section 2.4 to Chapter 
4, which is devoted to the "classical" form of this result. A brief review 
of the most basic concepts required from the calculus of variations is 
presented in Section 4.1. The introduction of symmetry groups and 
the basic infinitesimal invariance criterion for a variational integral is the 
subject of Section 4.2, along with the reduction procedures available for 
ordinary differential equations which are the Euler-Lagrange equations for 
some variational problem. The third section introduces the general notion 
of a conservation law. Here the treatment is more novel; the guiding concept 
is the correspondence between conservation laws and their "characteristics", 
although the technically complicated proof of Theorem 4.26 can be safely 
omitted on a first reading. Once one learns to deal with conservation laws 
in characteristic form, the statement and implementation of Noether's 
theorem is relatively straightforward. 
Beginning with Chapter 5, a slightly higher degree of mathematical 
sophistication is required, although one can still approach much of the 
material on generalized symmetries and conservation laws from a purely 
computational point of view with only a minimum of the Lie group 
machinery. The most difficult algebraic manipulations have been relegated 
to Section 5.4, where the variational complex is developed in its full glory 
for the true aficionado. Incidentally, Section 5.4, along with Chapter 7 on 
Hamiltonian structures for evolution equations are the only parts of the 
book where the material on differential forms in Section 1.5 is used to any 
great extent. Despite their seeming complexity, the proofs in Section 5.4 
are a substantial improvement over the current versions available in the 
literature. 
Chapter 6 on finite-dimensional Hamiltonian systems is by-and-Iarge 
independent of much of the earlier material in the book. Up through the 
reduction method for one-parameter symmetry groups, not very much of 
the material on Lie groups is required. However, the Marsden-Weinstein 
reduction theory for multi-parameter symmetry groups does require some 
of the more sophisticated results on Lie algebras from Sections 1.4 and 3.3. 
Chapter 7 depends very much on an understanding of the Poisson bracket 
approach to Hamiltonian mechanics adopted in Chapter 6, and, to a certain 
extent, the formal variational calculus methods of Section 5.4. Nevertheless, 
acquiring a basic agility in the relevant computational applications is not 
that difficult. 
The exercises which appear at the end of each chapter vary considerably 
in their range of difficulty. A few are fairly routine calculations based on 
the material in the text, but a substantial number provide significant 
extensions of the basic material. The more difficult exercises are indicated 
by an asterisk; one or two, signaled by a double asterisk, might be better 


----- Page 24 (native text) -----
xxvi 
Notes to the Reader 
classed as miniature research projects. A number of the results presented 
in the exercises are new; otherwise, I have tried to give the most pertinent 
references where appropriate. Here references have been selected more on 
the basis of direct relevance for the problem as stated rather than on the 
basis of historical precedence. 
At the end of each chapter is a brief set of notes, mostly discussing the 
historical details and references for the results discussed there. While I 
cannot hope to claim full historical accuracy, these notes do represent a 
fair amount of research into the historical roots of the subject. I have tried 
to determine the origins and subsequent history of many of the important 
developments in the area. The resulting notes undoubtedly reflect a large 
number of personal biases, but, I hope, may provide the groundwork for 
a more serious look into the fascinating and, at times, bizarre history of 
this subject, a topic which is well worth the attention of a true historian of 
mathematics. Although I have, for the most part, listed what I determined 
to be significant papers in the historical development of the subject, owing 
to the great duplication of efforts over the decades, I have obviously been 
unable to provide an exhaustive listing of all the relevant references. I 
sincerely apologize to those authors whose work does playa significant role 
in the development, but was inadvertently missed from these notes. 
