

----- Page 1 (native text) -----
Publisher’s version  /   Version de l'éditeur: 
Reviews of Modern Physics, 81, 1, pp. 163-234, 2009-02-02
READ THESE TERMS AND CONDITIONS CAREFULLY BEFORE USING THIS WEBSITE. 
https://nrc-publications.canada.ca/eng/copyright
Vous avez des questions? Nous pouvons vous aider. Pour communiquer directement avec un auteur, consultez la 
première page de la revue dans laquelle son article a été publié afin de trouver ses coordonnées. Si vous n’arrivez 
pas à les repérer, communiquez avec nous à PublicationsArchive-ArchivesPublications@nrc-cnrc.gc.ca.
Questions? Contact the NRC Publications Archive team at 
PublicationsArchive-ArchivesPublications@nrc-cnrc.gc.ca. If you wish to email the authors directly, please see the 
first page of the publication for their contact information. 
NRC Publications Archive
Archives des publications du CNRC
This publication could be one of several versions: author’s original, accepted manuscript or the publisher’s version. / 
La version de cette publication peut être l’une des suivantes : la version prépublication de l’auteur, la version 
acceptée du manuscrit ou la version de l’éditeur.
For the publisher’s version, please access the DOI link below./ Pour consulter la version de l’éditeur, utilisez le lien 
DOI ci-dessous.
https://doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.81.163
Access and use of this website and the material on it  are subject to the Terms and Conditions set forth at
Attosecond physics
Krausz, Ferenc; Ivanov, Misha
https://publications-cnrc.canada.ca/fra/droits
L’accès à ce site Web et l’utilisation de son contenu sont assujettis aux conditions présentées dans le site
LISEZ CES CONDITIONS ATTENTIVEMENT AVANT D’UTILISER CE SITE WEB.
NRC Publications Record / Notice d'Archives des publications de CNRC:
https://nrc-publications.canada.ca/eng/view/object/?id=1245a958-9c93-4116-bfdb-f447e8a53c48
https://publications-cnrc.canada.ca/fra/voir/objet/?id=1245a958-9c93-4116-bfdb-f447e8a53c48


----- Page 2 (native text) -----
Attosecond physics
Ferenc Krausz
Department für Physik, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universitat, Am Coulombwall 1, D-85748
Garching, Germany and Max-Planck-Institut für Quantenoptik, Hans-Kopfermann-Strasse 1,
D-85748 Garching, Germany
Misha Ivanov
Steacie Institute for Molecular Sciences, National Research Council of Canada, 100
Sussex Drive, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1A 0R6
Published 2 February 2009
Intense ultrashort light pulses comprising merely a few wave cycles became routinely available by the
turn of the millennium. The technologies underlying their production and measurement as well as
relevant theoretical modeling have been reviewed in the pages of Reviews of Modern Physics Brabec
and Krausz, 2000. Since then, measurement and control of the subcycle ﬁeld evolution of few-cycle
light have opened the door to a radically new approach to exploring and controlling processes of the
microcosm. The hyperfast-varying electric ﬁeld of visible light permitted manipulation and tracking of
the atomic-scale motion of electrons. Striking implications include controlled generation and
measurement of single attosecond pulses of extreme ultraviolet light as well as trains of them, and
real-time observation of atomic-scale electron dynamics. The tools and techniques for steering and
tracing electronic motion in atoms, molecules, and nanostructures are now becoming available,
marking the birth of attosecond physics. In this article these advances are reviewed and some of the
expected implications are addressed.
DOI: 10.1103/RevModPhys.81.163
PACS numbers: 42.65.Re, 32.80.t
CONTENTS
I. Introduction
164
A. Time and length scales in the microcosm
165
B. Concepts for resolving microscopic structure and
dynamics
166
C. Revolutions in time-resolved metrology
166
1.
Microwave electronics
167
2.
Ultrafast optics
167
3.
Lightwave electronics
167
D. Evolution of the study of transient phenomena
168
II. Concepts for Ultrafast Measurements and Control
169
A. General connection between measurement and
control
169
B. Concepts for ultrafast measurements
169
1.
Gating, both time and frequency resolved
169
2.
Spectral interferometry
170
C. Evolution of ultrafast control
170
1.
Early approaches
170
2.
Advanced control via pulse shaping
171
D. Principles of attosecond control and measurement of
electronic dynamics
172
III. Intense, Controlled Light Fields
172
A. Light-wave control: Brief history and current state
of the art
172
B. Light waveform synthesis
173
C. Towards ultrastrong controlled light ﬁelds
174
IV. Lightwave Electronics
174
A. Signiﬁcant variations of atomic electron density
within the wave cycle of light
175
B. Semiclassical modeling of strong ﬁeld-matter
interaction
176
C. Single-electron interference within the wave cycle of
light
179
1.
Above-threshold ionization and sub-fs
electron pulses
179
2.
High-order harmonic emission and sub-fs
photon pulses
179
D. Electron scattering
182
1.
Elastic backscattering and high-energy
electron emission
182
2.
Inelastic scattering: Multiple electron
emission and inner-shell excitation
183
V. Basic Concepts for Attosecond Control and
Metrology
184
A. Conditions for experimental implementation
184
B. Light waveform control
184
C. Attosecond metrology using nonlinear XUV optics
185
D. Light-ﬁeld-controlled attosecond metrology
186
1.
Attosecond streak imaging
187
2.
Quantum analysis: The light ﬁeld as an
electron phase modulator
188
3.
Attosecond frequency-resolved optical
gating
190
4.
Attosecond spectral shear interferometry
190
E. Lightwave electronics at work: From measurement
to control of sub-fs pulses
192
1.
Modulation of recollision electrons:
Measuring the creation of a sub-fs pulse
192
2.
Modulation of recollision electrons:
Controlling the creation of a sub-fs pulse
193
3.
Reproducible generation and measurement
of single sub-fs XUV pulses
194
4.
Breaking the 100-as barrier
196
REVIEWS OF MODERN PHYSICS, VOLUME 81, JANUARY–MARCH 2009
0034-6861/2009/811/16372
©2009 The American Physical Society
163


----- Page 3 (native text) -----
VI. Sub-fs Electron and Photon Pulses: Current Status
and Future Prospects
197
A. Atomic electrons interacting with few-cycle ﬁelds:
Atomic HHG
197
B. Relativistic electrons interacting with few-cycle light
198
1.
Intense attosecond VUV to soft-x-ray
pulses via surface HHG?
198
2.
Attosecond electron and hard-x-ray pulses?
200
3.
Next-generation accelerators driven by
few-cycle light?
201
VII. Real-Time Observation and Control of Atomic-Scale
Electron and Nuclear Dynamics
201
A. Electronic motion in atoms: Excitation, relaxation,
and correlations
201
1.
Electronic excitation and relaxation
dynamics: Attosecond streaking and
tunneling spectroscopy
202
2.
Electronic relaxation and rearrangement:
Attosecond absorption spectroscopy
207
3.
Electron wave-packet motion: Attosecond
photoelectron spectroscopy
207
4.
Shedding light on electron-electron
interactions: Attosecond coincidence
spectroscopy
209
B. Electronic and nuclear motion in complex systems:
From simple diatomics to biomolecules and clusters
210
1.
Attosecond photoelectron spectroscopy
210
2.
Attosecond high harmonic imaging
212
3.
Attosecond electron diffraction
213
C. Electronic motion in solids and systems on surfaces
215
1.
Extension of attosecond spectroscopy to
condensed matter
215
2.
Challenges
217
D. Future prospects: Steering and imaging atomic-scale
electronic motion
217
1.
Steering electrons with the electric ﬁeld of
synthesized light
217
2.
4D imaging of electrons with subatomic
resolution in space and time
219
VIII. Conclusions and Outlook
219
Glossary of Abbreviations
220
Acknowledgments
221
References
221
I. INTRODUCTION
Electrons have played a central role in the scientiﬁc
and technological revolution of the 20th century.1 It is
widely anticipated that in the 21st century their role as a
key driver of scientiﬁc and technological advances will
be increasingly taken over by photons. We disagree with
this assessment. Some half a century after the discovery
of the transistor and the laser, our insight into and inﬂu-
ence upon the atomic-scale motion of electrons in mat-
ter is still in its infancy. Consequently, the advance of
science and technology by research on electrons is by no
means over. On the contrary, it is just beginning, given
the fact that the experimental tools and techniques for
real-time observation and steering of electronic dynam-
ics on the atomic scale are now becoming available.
In the microcosm, the borders between biology, chem-
istry, and physics tend to disappear. The gaps between
these apparently so disparate ﬁelds are bridged by the
microscopic motion of electrons in atoms, molecules,
and nanoscale structures. Electronic motion inside at-
oms is behind the emission of visible, ultraviolet, and
x-ray light.2 Electronic dynamics on the molecular scale
is responsible for the transport of bioinformation and
initiates changes in the chemical composition and func-
tion of biological systems. The speed of information pro-
cessing can be increased by ever faster switching of elec-
tronic currents in ever smaller nanometer-scale circuitry.
Details of these motions often occur on time scales of
tens to ten thousands of attoseconds 1 as=10−18 s and
require commensurate measurement and control tech-
niques for their observation and steering, respectively.
What are the most efﬁcient ways of putting atoms into
highly excited states that allow x-ray light ampliﬁcation
and thus creation of compact x-ray lasers? Can the func-
tion of biomolecules be manipulated and novel molecu-
lar structures be formed by steering electrons in chemi-
cal bonds? How does charge transfer occur in molecules
assembled on surfaces and how can it be optimized for
more efﬁcient solar cells or for ﬁghting radiation dam-
age during biological imaging? What are the ultimate
size and speed limits of electronic information process-
ing and magnetic information storage, and how can we
approach these limits? How can energy be most efﬁ-
ciently transported into high-density matter to ignite
nuclear fusion? Answers to these scientiﬁc and techno-
logical questions will require insight into and possibly
control of microscopic electron motion.
We address here i the key concepts and experimen-
tal tools which provide the means of observing and con-
trolling the atomic-scale motion of electrons in real time,
ii the theoretical models critical for connecting experi-
mental observables with microscopic variables, and iii
expected implications of this revolution in technology.3
1For a general review, see Huebener 2005.
2The requirement of atomic-scale electronic motion for light
emission can be circumvented only by accelerating them to
relativistic energies. Only relativistic electrons can radiate vis-
ible or shorter-wavelength light in the absence of sub-
atomic-scale interactions.
3To make sure that we draw clear borderlines between facts
and conclusions based upon experiments, on the one hand, and
our visions, expectations and prediction necessarily containing
a speculative component on the other hand, comments of the
latter type will be systematically introduced by phrases such as
“we believe,” “we expect,” ”in our opinion,” etc. In this way,
we are making an attempt to write not a conventional review,
but a review and foresight article in combination, with the two
components clearly separated. We feel that, at this early stage
of its evolution, the advancement of attosecond physics is best
served this way.
164
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 4 (native text) -----
A. Time and length scales in the microcosm
Structure and dynamics in the microcosm are inher-
ently connected by the laws of quantum mechanics.
Take, for example, a particle put in a superposition of its
ground state 0x of energy W0 and the ﬁrst excited
state 1x of energy W1. Such a superposition state is
referred to as a wave packet. Change in the position of
its center of mass is the closest quantum mechanical ana-
log of classical motion. Solution of the Schrödinger
equation for the particle’s wave function x yields an
oscillatory motion with the oscillation period Tosc
=2/W, where W=W1−W0. The larger the energy
separation W between the two eigenstates, the faster is
the particle’s motion in the superposition state. This en-
ergy separation is dictated by the spatial extent of the
potential conﬁning the motion, in addition to the parti-
cle’s mass. Quantum mechanics connects the rapidity of
dynamics with the extension of structure.
The millielectronvolt-scale energy spacing of vibra-
tional energy levels implies that molecular vibrations oc-
cur on a time scale of tens to hundreds of femtoseconds
Fig. 1. This deﬁnes the characteristic time scale for the
motion of atoms in a molecule, including those resulting
in irreversible structural changes during chemical reac-
tions Zewail, 2000. The motion of individual electrons
in semiconductor nanostructures, molecular orbitals,
and the inner shells of atoms occurs on progressively
shorter intervals of time ranging from tens of femtosec-
onds to less than an attosecond. Motion within nuclei is
predicted to unfold even faster, typically on a zeptosec-
ond time scale.
For a wave packet made of two bound eigenstates, the
oscillation period Tosc=2/W also determines the
response time of the particle to an external perturbation.
For example, a two-level atom responds to the radiation
ﬁeld similar to a classical damped electron oscillator of
eigenfrequency
0=2/Tosc
Siegman,
1986;
Boyd,
2003, with T0=2/0 the response time of the atom to
an external perturbation. Going from two-level atoms to
plasmas, we see similar behavior. The rapidity of collec-
tive motion of free electrons is dictated by the plasma
oscillation period Tp, which is inversely proportional to
the square root of the density of electrons N, Tp
=2/e0me/N Kruer, 2003. Here e and me are the
electron’s charge and mass, respectively, and 0 is the
dielectric constant. A characteristic length scale in a free
electron gas in the absence of any static structure is the
mean distance between adjacent electrons: meanN−1/3.
For a mean distance comparable to atomic dimensions,
mean0.1 nm, we obtain Tp120 as. This is close to the
oscillation period of valence electron wave packets in
bound atomic or molecular systems. Thus the motion of
electrons inside atoms, in molecular orbitals, or conﬁned
in nanometer-scale potentials in semiconductors, like the
collective dynamics of free electrons in high-density ion-
ized gases, solid-density plasmas, or fusion targets, is
naturally measured in attoseconds; see Fig. 2. Attosec-
ond physics is the science of electrons in motion, both
collective and individual, on atomic and molecular scales
and in high-density mesoscopic systems.
FIG. 1. Color Characteristic length and time scales for structure and dynamics in the microcosm, respectively.
165
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 5 (native text) -----
B. Concepts for resolving microscopic structure and dynamics
Looking into the microcosm with high resolution in
space or time requires a physical quantity with a well-
controlled spatial or temporal gradient, respectively.
Both types of gradients arise in waves, with the wave-
length and the oscillation period determining the steep-
ness of the spatial and temporal gradients of the oscil-
lating ﬁelds, respectively. In waves these variations are
periodic. Periodic spatial or temporal gradients can be
efﬁciently utilized for resolving structures or dynamics
quasiperiodic
on
the
same
scale.
For
example,
Angstrom-resolution x-ray crystallography or single-
molecule imaging Neutze et al., 2000 and frequency-
domain spectroscopy draw on this concept. Measure-
ment
of
the
frequency-domain
response
over
a
sufﬁciently wide range via x-ray diffraction, absorption,
or scattering may, in principle, allow retrieval of the
electronic structure and linear temporal response on a
subatomic scale in space and time using Kramers-Kronig
relationships.4
However, uncovering the location of an individual
specimen in isolated assemblies e.g., macromolecular
structures on surfaces, or the relative timing of isolated
brief events becomes increasingly challenging with in-
creasing distance in space or time. Stationary metrology
also fails when it comes to reconstructing a nonlinear
response. Under these circumstances, measurements
must be performed with an isolated temporal or spatial
gradient. In general, direct space- or time-domain ap-
proaches offer transparent and intuitive measurement
tools.5 In space, the technique has become known as
microscopy. The gradient is introduced by the radial
proﬁle of a focused light or electron beam or by a tip. In
the temporal domain, a sharp gradient is introduced by a
physical quantity rapidly varying in time in a controlled
fashion. Its use for measuring brief time intervals and
processes taking place within these intervals has been
dubbed chronoscopy, or time-resolved metrology.
The concept of streak imaging constitutes an instruc-
tive example of using a sharp temporal gradient for
chronoscopy Fig. 3. Here the steep gradient is intro-
duced by a voltage ramped within a fraction of a nano-
second but results in subpicosecond resolution. Tempo-
ral resolution can be generally much better than the
duration t of the signal gradient. How much better de-
pends on the signal-to-noise ratio S/N Fig. 4, yielding
the noise-limited resolution tnoisetN/S. Timing jit-
ter tjitter also limits the temporal resolution if the mea-
surement requires averaging: tresolutiontnoise
2
+tjitter
2
.
The temporal resolution depends on the duration of the
measuring transient, the signal-to-noise ratio, and the
reproducibility of timing with respect to the process un-
der study.
C. Revolutions in time-resolved metrology
Three radically different technologies have paved the
way for advancing time-resolved metrology from the
4See, e.g., Abbamonte et al. 2004 and Wernet et al. 2004.
5By advocating direct time- or space- domain approaches
we do not mean to discard their frequency- and momentum-
domain counterparts. When linear response allows their use,
they are not only valuable alternatives to direct methods, but
also able to complement them to increase their precision.
106
103
1
10-3
MeV
keV
meV
Nucleonic motion
within nuclei
Electronic motion on
atomic/molecular scales
Atomic motion on
molecular scales
Energy spacing
eV
10-21
10 18
10-15
10-12
zepto
pico
femto
atto
Time [seconds]
Motion of individual electrons in
1
10
100
1000
10000
Conduction band
Density of free electrons [cm ]
-3
(
) (charge transfer)
Time [attoseconds]
10
25
10
23
10
21
eV]
-
Fusion matter
Inner shell
Outer shells / valence band
Collective motion of free electrons in
Solid matter / biomolecules
plasmons
Ionized matter
[
FIG. 2. Color Characteristic time scales for microscopic motion and its connection with energy spacing between relevant
stationary states upper panel; characteristic time scales for the motion of one or several electrons and for the collective motion
of an electronic ensemble lower panel.
166
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 6 (native text) -----
nanosecond
to
the
attosecond
regime:
microwave
electronics→picoseconds,
ultrafast
optics→femto-
seconds, and lightwave electronics→attoseconds Fig.
5. Technological breakthroughs triggered each of these
developments: transistors for fast switching of electric
current, lasers and nonlinear optics for ultrashort light
pulse generation and measurement, and synthesized
light waveforms for steering electrons on the atomic
scale.
1. Microwave electronics
For a long time, electrical signals provided the steep-
est controlled gradients for measuring fast-evolving phe-
nomena. The invention of the transistor triggered rapid
evolution of high-speed electrical transients from nano-
seconds toward picoseconds Fig. 5. Their spectrum
spans several octaves from radio to microwaves. How-
ever, the refractive index of any material varies substan-
tially over this spectral range due to lattice vibrations.
As a result, the distortion-free propagation length of
few-picosecond electrical signals is as short as a few mil-
limeters. This length scales quadratically with the dura-
tion of transients, preventing any substantial further im-
provement in the speed of practically useful electrical
transients. Advancement of time-domain metrology be-
yond this frontier called for a new technology.
2. Ultrafast optics
The refractive index of transparent optical materials is
nearly constant in the visible or near-infrared spectral
range over relative bandwidths of several percent, creat-
ing the potential for robust femtosecond transients. This
potential was exploited by coherent light ampliﬁcation
in a broadband laser medium and the use of nonlinear
optical techniques. The resultant ultrashort laser pulses6
approached the 1-fs barrier by the turn of the millen-
nium. As with high-speed electronics, increasing disper-
sion toward the ultraviolet due to subpetahertz elec-
tronic
transitions
limits
the
fastest
robust
optical
transients to several femtoseconds. Again, a radically
new technology was required for further advance.
3. Lightwave electronics
Controlled variation of the amplitude or frequency of
light pushed the frontiers of ultrafast science close the
femtosecond frontier. However, light exhibits much
steeper gradients than those of the cycle-averaged quan-
tities: the subcycle slopes in the oscillating ﬁeld. With the
advent of controlled few-cycle light waves, a controlled
force that is variable on the electronic i.e., attosecond
time scale and rivals interatomic forces became available
and opened the door for versatile attosecond control
and metrology.
In nonlinear interactions, electronic motion induced
by the controlled light force may exhibit even steeper
gradients than the light ﬁeld itself, giving way to the
generation of attosecond electron and photon extreme
6For recent reviews, see Brabec and Krausz 2000; Keller
2003. Early reviews include DeMaria et al. 1969; Bradley
and New 1974; Greenhow and Schmidt 1974; Smith et al.
1974. Also see Akhmanov et al. 1992; Diels and Rudolph
1996.
High-voltage ramp, V(t)
t
High-
, V(t)
V(t)
Incident
light pulse
Photo-
electrons
Streak image
Fluorescent
screen
FIG. 3. Color Schematic of a microwave-
controlled
streak
camera.
Photoelectrons
knocked off from a photocathode by a short
light pulse to be measured are deﬂected on
their way to a screen by a transverse micro-
wave voltage ramp Vt to an extent depend-
ing on their instant of release Bradley et al.,
1971; Schelev et al., 1971. The temporally
varying deﬂection “streaks” the location of
the impact of the electrons on the screen,
mapping the temporal proﬁle of the light
pulse to a spatial distribution, “streak image,”
of electrons on a ﬂuorescent screen.
Signal, S
noise
t
N
t S

 
2
2
resolution
noise
jitter
t
t
t



 
jitter
t

Noise, N
Extension of gradient, t
FIG. 4. Color online Typical reference clocking signal gra-
dients tainted with noise and jitter for triggering or probing
fast processes.
167
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 7 (native text) -----
ultraviolet XUV or x-ray pulses. The resultant pulse
see Fig. 5 is synchronized with the generating light
ﬁeld, allowing the sub-fs pulse to be used either as a
“starter gun” pump for triggering ultrafast dynamics
that can be referenced to the sub-fs laser ﬁeld transient
or as a “photoﬁnish” probe taking a snapshot of micro-
scopic motion initiated and subsequently steered by
the few-cycle light wave or another signal derived from
it. The speed of metrology and control is no longer re-
stricted by the femtosecond pulse envelope but can uti-
lize attosecond ﬁeld oscillations see Secs. V and VII.
By analogy with microwave electronics, this radically
new technology has been dubbed lightwave electronics
Goulielmakis et al., 2007. As microwave electronics
controls electronic currents in nanoscale circuits on a
picosecond time scale, lightwave electronics controls
atomic-scale currents on the attosecond scale and con-
stitutes the technological backbone of attosecond sci-
ence.
As usual, this revolution was also preceded by much
research,
including
proposals
for
sub-fs
pulse
generation7 and measurement,8 and the advancement of
femtosecond technology and strong-ﬁeld interactions,
including high-order harmonic generation.9 These ad-
vances paved the way to the birth of attosecond technol-
ogy at the turn of the millennium.
D. Evolution of the study of transient phenomena
Before 1900 it was already known that short ﬂashes of
light permit the recording of rapid phenomena by spark
photography. In 1864, Toepler extended the technique to
study microscopic dynamics Krehl and Engemann,
1995. He generated sound waves with a short light
spark and subsequently photographed them with a sec-
ond spark that was delayed electronically with respect to
the ﬁrst one initiating the motion. By taking pictures of
the sound wave as a function of the delay time, he ob-
tained a complete history of sound-wave phenomena.
Pump-probe spectroscopy was created. Abraham and
Lemoine 1899 improved the technique by deriving the
pump and probe ﬂash from the same spark with a vari-
able optical path length between them. The resultant
optical synchronism between the triggering and photo-
graphing ﬂash opened the way to improving the reso-
lution of pump-probe spectroscopy to the limit dictated
by the ﬂash duration.
With these milestones, the conceptual framework for
studying transient microscopic phenomena was com-
plete. Subsequent progress in time-resolved measure-
ments was driven by developing sources of ever shorter
light ﬂashes and techniques for their measurement. The
resolution of time-resolved spectroscopy was limited by
the nanosecond duration of pulses of incoherent light
for more than half a century Fig. 6. Broadband lasers
and nonlinear optical techniques for the generation and
measurement of ultrashort laser pulses improved the re-
solving power of pump-probe spectroscopy from several
nanoseconds to several femtoseconds, by six orders of
magnitude within merely two and a half decades Fig. 6.
The creation of femtosecond technology—four decades
after the ﬁrst observation of intermediates of chemical
reactions by Norrish and Porter 1949 and Eigen
1954—permitted real-time observation of the breakage
and formation of chemical bonds, a ﬁeld triggered by
Zewail 1994, 2000.
7Hänsch, 1990; Farkas and Tóth, 1992; Harris et al., 1993;
Corkum et al., 1994; Kaplan, 1994; Ivanov et al., 1995; Kaplan
and Shkolnikov, 1995; Antoine et al., 1996; Protopapas et al.,
1996; Antoine et al., 1997; Christov et al., 1997; Kan et al., 1997;
Schafer and Kulander, 1997; de Bohan et al., 1998; Harris and
Sokolov, 1998; Lappas and L’Huillier, 1998; Tempea et al.,
1999.
8Constant et al., 1997; Scrinzi et al., 2001a, 2001b.
9Reviewing this early work is beyond the scope of this paper.
The reader is referred to Salieres et al., 1999; Joachain et al.,
2000; Agostini and DiMauro, 2004; Eden, 2004; Scrinzi et al.,
2005; Pfeifer, Spielmann, and Gerber, 2006.
Controlled microwave voltage,
current transient: V(t), I(t)
Controlled light amplitude:
aL(t)
EL(t)
Time
Time
Controlled light field: EL(t)
and sub-fs (electron
or X-ray) pulse: IX(t)
EL(t)
IX(t)
pico-
second
femto-
second
atto-
second
1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
1950
1940
10-9
10-12
10-15
10-18
Year
2010
Microwave
electronics
Ultrafast
optics
Controlled
light waves
Laser
Transistor
Lightwave
electronics
Lightwave
electronics
:
:
:
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Laser
Transistor
Duration of gradient,
[seconds]
t
FIG. 5. Color Evolution of ultrafast science. The duration of the fastest controlled signal gradients dictates the speed of control
and resolution of probing of microscopic processes. Microwave electronics, ultrafast optics, and lightwave electronics offer con-
trolled transient for these purposes on successively shorter time scales, with picosecond, femtosecond, and attosecond gradients.
168
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 8 (native text) -----
Progress in temporal resolution was again halted in
the mid-1980s, when the duration of the shortest laser
pulses approached the oscillation period of the light
wave carrying the pulse. Breaking the femtosecond bar-
rier and providing thereby real-time access to intra-
atomic electron dynamics came about at the turn of the
millennium and permitted the observation of electronic
motion deep inside i.e., in inner shells of atoms
Drescher et al., 2002 and control of atomic-scale elec-
tron motion in real time Baltuška, Udem, et al., 2003.
II. CONCEPTS FOR ULTRAFAST MEASUREMENTS AND
CONTROL
A. General connection between measurement and control
The measurement and control of ultrafast processes
are inherently intertwined. In pump-probe spectroscopy,
the triggering of a process must be precisely timed with
respect to the observing clock: in femtosecond chemistry
this capability has been exploited not only for time-
resolved measurements10 but also for control Rice and
Zhao, 2000; Brumer and Shapiro, 2003.
Any measurement process controls the appearance of
a certain signal. Insight into the dynamics hinges on un-
derstanding the time-dependent changes of this signal.
For instance, photoelectron spectra11 may constitute this
signal. The fact that these spectra change in a controlled
and reproducible way upon varying the time delay be-
tween the pump and probe in time-resolved photoelec-
tron spectroscopy is also a manifestation of ultrafast
control over the whole process.
Attosecond technology entails the ability to control
and shape not only the envelopes of the laser pulses but
also the subcycle structure of the ﬁeld oscillations, ex-
tending both measurement and control techniques into
the new realm of light-wave engineering and lightwave
electronics. Attosecond control and metrology are based
on this revolution in technology, but, at the same time,
they draw on concepts that have been successfully ap-
plied on longer time scales.
B. Concepts for ultrafast measurements
1. Gating, both time and frequency resolved
For sampling the evolution of the electric ﬁeld Et of
a light pulse, we need a narrow temporal gate Gt−	
with its delay 	 scanned across the pulse to be measured:
S	 

−

EtGt −	dt.
1
If the gate is much shorter than the process traced, the
measured signal S	 yields the temporal evolution of
the process,12 here Et. The fastest gate femtosecond
metrology can offer is the femtosecond laser pulse itself.
If we replace Gt−	 with Et−	 in Eq. 1, S	 is the
linear autocorrelation of the pulse. It allows retrieval of
the pulse envelope aLt in Eq. 6 for transform-limited
pulses only. In the more general case of chirped pulses,
one has to resort to nonlinear autocorrelation. The most
powerful and robust version is frequency-resolved opti-
cal gating FROG; Trebino et al., 1997, which acquires
the spectrogram of the signal,
S,	 =	
−

EtGt −	eitdt	
2
.
2
It is the set of spectra of all gated chunks of Et as the
gate Gt−	 is scanned across the signal by varying 	.
10For reviews, see Zewail, 1994; de Boeij et al., 1998; Neu-
mark, 2001; Stolow, 2003a, 2003b; Stolow et al., 2004.
11Time-resolved photoelectron spectroscopy is key to observ-
ing dynamics in real time including structural dynamics in mol-
ecules as well as electronic dynamics on surfaces. Some early
publications include Seel and Domcke, 1991; Baumert et al.,
1993; Assion et al., 1996; Cyr and Hayden, 1996; Greenblatt et
al., 1997; Blanchet et al., 1999; Lehr et al., 1999. For reviews,
see Haight, 1995; Petek and Ogawa, 1997; Neumark, 2001;
Reid, 2003; Stolow, 2003a, 2003b; Stolow et al., 2004; Bauer,
2005; Suzuki, 2006.
12Note that the pulse measurement by streak camera in Fig. 3
can also be modeled by a similar equation except that 	 must
be replaced with x/vdefl, where vdefl is the speed at which the
electron beam’s position x is scanned across the screen by the
deﬂecting ﬁeld, and instead of the ﬁeld it is the cycle-averaged
temporal intensity proﬁle of the pulse, It
Et2, that is
sampled.
10
-18
10
-15
10
-12
10
-9
10
-6
Pump-probe
spectroscopy
(Toepler)
atto
Optical synchronization
of pump & probe pulse
(Abraham & Lemoine)
Real-time observation
of the breakage of
a chemical bond
(Zewail)
Real-time
observation
of electronic
motion deep
inside atoms
Vibrational
period of H
Atomic unit
of time
Observation of
intermediates of
chemical reactions
(Eigen, Norrish, Porter)
1900
1950
2000
femto
pico
nano
micro
Year
Briefest events measured [seconds]
Electronic dynamics
Structural dynamics
1850
2
FIG. 6. Color Evolution of techniques for real-time observa-
tion of microscopic processes. Discontinuities in the slope of
briefest measured events vs years indicate revolutions in tech-
nology.
169
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 9 (native text) -----
The gate can generally be complex or even purely imagi-
nary phase gate. Knowledge of the spectrogram allows
one to reconstruct both the gate Gt Trebino, 2000
and the signal’s complex pulse envelope aLt; see Eq.
6.
2. Spectral interferometry
The temporal evolution of a signal can be inferred
from measuring the amplitudes and relative phases of
their spectral components. The latter can be accessed by
converting spectral phase variations into modulation of
signal amplitude. Spectral phase interferometry for di-
rect electric ﬁeld reconstruction SPIDER; Iaconis and
Walmsley, 1998 implements this concept. Let E
=aexpi be the complex Fourier transform of
Et with the real spectral amplitude a and phase
. We generate a second pulse—a “replica” Ereplicat
of the ﬁrst—delayed in time by 	 and shifted sheared in
frequency by a small amount . Its Fourier transform
will be
areplicaexpireplica = a + expi +  −i	.
3
Spectrally resolved interference of the two pulses at the
detector yields the SPIDER interferogram
SSPIDER 
 aexpi
+ areplicaexpireplica2
= aexpi + a + 
expi +  −i	2
= a2 + a2 +  + 2aa + 
cos
	 − +  −.
4
It allows one to ﬁnd the spectral phase  from the
variation of the phase difference +− across
the spectrum: the interferogram maps this phase varia-
tion onto modulation of the amplitude. Since a can
be measured independently, the complex envelope aLt
of the pulse see Eq. 6, can be completely recon-
structed. SPIDER also relies on a well-controlled tem-
poral gradient, to impose the frequency shear. One can
think of propagating the original pulse and its time-
delayed replica in a medium which shifts the photon en-
ergy of the delayed pulse in a controlled way. This im-
plies that some property of the medium must have been
changed within the delay interval, requiring the pres-
ence of a controlled temporal gradient. By increasing
the separation between the two pulses, the steepness of
this gradient can be lowered at the expense of increased
demands on the spectrometer’s resolving power. Thus
we conclude that the use of spectral interferometry does
not obviate the need for a gradient in time, but may
substantially relax the requirements on its steepness.
The price to pay is the need for high spectral resolution
and shot-to-shot timing stability in averaging measure-
ments.
C. Evolution of ultrafast control
By analyzing ultrafast measurements, we have seen
how time- and frequency-domain approaches comple-
ment each other. A similar symbiosis comes to light in
the evolution of approaches to controlling microscopic
dynamics. Here we show that early control approaches
may be regarded as two limits of a general approach,
which converge on the attosecond time scale.
1. Early approaches
The connection between time-domain measurement
and control becomes transparent when considering the
time-domain wave-packet control scenario in Fig. 7
Rice and Zhao, 2000. A pump pulse promotes the mol-
ecule into an excited electronic state, initiating nuclear
motion. A properly timed control pulse catches the
nuclear wave packet at the right place on its trajectory
along the excited electronic potential energy surface
PES to induce a transition toward the desired out-
come.
Timing between oscillations of two narrowband opti-
cal ﬁelds was shown to be an alternative approach to
controlling dynamics Brumer and Shapiro, 2003. In
Fig. 8 we show an example of controlling the transition
between an initial state i and a ﬁnal state f with the
superposition of the ﬁelds Et=E1 exp−iLt+c.c.
inducing
a
three-photon
transition
and
Et
=E3 exp−it+i+c.c. of frequency =3L inducing
a one-photon transition. Our control knob is the rela-
tive phase  between the two colors. In the lowest order
FIG. 7. Color Nuclear wave-packet control in a molecule
with short pulses; PES, potential energy surface. A pump pulse
initiates vibrational motion by exciting the molecule into an
excited electronic state. Depending on its time delay with re-
spect to the pump, a control pulse catches the vibrational wave
packet at different parts of its trajectory. Control 1 promotes it
up to the ground state of the molecular ion. At a different
delay control 2 the molecule will be electronically deexcited,
dumping the wave packet back to an excited vibrational mani-
fold of the ground electronic surface.
170
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 10 (native text) -----
of perturbation theory, the total transition probability is
given by
Wif 
 d32E1
6 + d12E3
2
+ 2d3d1E1
3E3 cos + if,
5
where d1 and d3 are the corresponding transition ma-
trix elements and if is the relative phase between
them.13 Changing  controls the transition probability,
shifting the outcome between the minima and maxima
of the interference pattern. Figure 8b shows the total
electric ﬁeld Et=Et+Et for E1=E3 and for two
values of . Although the approach was conceived in the
framework of quantum physics, its functioning can be
traced directly to the controlled subcycle modulation of
the classical ﬁeld oscillations in Fig. 8b Franco and
Brumer, 2006. Thus the simplest manifestation of light-
wave engineering, which uses only two colors, already
appears here—even though the evolution of the con-
trolled system towards its ﬁnal state occurs only on a
multicycle multi-fs scale due to the perturbative nature
of the interaction.
2. Advanced control via pulse shaping
The two control scenarios described above are pro-
foundly connected. The nuclear wave packet created in
Fig. 7 is a coherent superposition of many states v. The
transform-limited pump pulse populates these states in
phase, while the control pulse generates interference of
multiple pathways, the outcome of which depends on
the relative phases between the complex amplitudes
avt=av0exp−iWvt. These phases are controlled via
the time delay between the pump and control pulses
Fig. 9.
We do not have to rely on the free evolution of the
wave packet to adjust the phases of constituent states for
the desired interference in the ﬁnal state. The same goal
can be achieved by changing the relative phases of those
colors that populate the intermediate states or complete
the transition to the ﬁnal state. Moreover, using strong
laser ﬁelds we can also reshape laser-dressed potential
energy surfaces14 and thus alter the wave packet’s tem-
poral evolution.
State-of-the-art pulse-shaping technology Weiner et
al., 1988; Weiner, 1995 allows ﬂexible changes of phase,
amplitude, and even polarization Brixner and Gerber,
2001; Brixner et al., 2004 of different spectral compo-
nents that make up a femtosecond pulse. In the time
domain, it controls the evolution of cycle-averaged
quantities such as the amplitude vector and the instan-
taneous frequency of the ﬁeld oscillations, on a time
scale of several tens of femtoseconds. Key ingredients of
this technology are feedback loops and learning algo-
13Note that this result is based on the perturbation theory and
is not applicable at high light intensities or for transitions be-
tween nonstationary dressed states, where the phases  be-
come time dependent.
14The idea of Born-Oppenheimer potential energy surfaces
PESs shaped by a laser ﬁeld is quite general. For the effects
of resonant ﬁelds in creating “light-induced potential energy
surfaces” see Bandrauk et al. 1994 for an overview. Various
applications of this concept for molecular control Chang et al.,
2003; Sola, 2004 include laser catalysis of reactive scattering
Shapiro
and
Zeiri,
1986.
For
time-dependent
Born-
Oppenheimer PESs shaped by nonresonant ﬁelds see Ivanov et
al., 1996; Corkum et al., 1997; Niikura, Corkum, and Ville-
neuve, 2003; Sussman et al., 2005, 2006.
Pump
Probe / Control
f
i
v
( )
a
v
v
~
(0)exp(
)
a
iW t

v t
v
FIG. 9. Color Frequency-domain interpretation of wave-
packet control with short pulses. Multiple pathways via various
intermediate states interfere, with their interference controlled
by the relative phases determined by the free wave-packet
evolution.
(b)
| f >
L
L
L
(a)
= 0
= 0.6 
 = 3L
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
-2
-1
0
1
2
Time [fs]
| i >


-
-
Field [arb. units]
FIG. 8. Color Coherent control of quantum transition by
changing the relative phase between two waves of different
frequency. On the left panel, transition between initial and ﬁ-
nal states can proceed via two pathways, involving the absorp-
tion of one and three photons. Its probability is controlled by
the relative phase  between the two colors, L and 3L. The
right panel shows that changing the relative phase  results in
shaping of the electric ﬁeld oscillations on the subcycle, i.e.,
sub-fs, time scale, in this example for L=800 nm. Solid line,
=0; dashed line, =0.6. Although timing is varied on a
sub-fs scale the controlled transition usually unfolds over a
much longer period.
171
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 11 (native text) -----
rithms, allowing efﬁcient optimization toward the de-
sired outcome.15
D. Principles of attosecond control and measurement of
electronic dynamics
In the quest for attosecond-scale control and metro-
logy of electron dynamics, the fs-scale gradient of cycle-
averaged quantities such as the amplitude and frequency
of visible light could be steepened by using shorter-
wavelength light. In practice, both the efﬁciency of co-
herent light generation and, not independently, the po-
larizability of matter diminish dramatically toward the
XUV and x-ray regimes. With complex, large-scale in-
frastructures these limitations may be overcome, but a
versatile, laboratory-scale technology for implementing
control and metrology on the attosecond time scale re-
quires a radically new approach. In our opinion, it will
rely on controlled subcycle, i.e., subfemtosecond, varia-
tion of strong laser ﬁelds in the visible and nearby spec-
tral ranges.
Subcycle light waveform control requires bandwidths
of the order of an octave or more, implying “single”-
cycle pulses in the Fourier limit see Sec. III.A. Extend-
ing the bandwidth to several octaves will permit on-
demand light waveform synthesis see Sec. III.B,
resulting in electric ﬁelds with strengths varying from
zero to several volts per angstrom within less than
100 as. The resultant tailored force will permit control of
electron motion on the atomic scale. We envision that
light-wave engineering and lightwave electronics will
open a new approach to controlling and exploring the
microcosm: rather than controlling transitions between
electronic quantum states of deﬁnite energy by such
cycle-averaged quantities as the amplitude and fre-
quency of light, electron wave packets will be steered
with attosecond light forces.
III. INTENSE, CONTROLLED LIGHT FIELDS
Microwave electronics has allowed the temporal evo-
lution of electric current and voltage to be controlled up
to microwave frequencies of tens of gigahertz, creating
the basis for high-speed data processing and short-
distance communication.16 Ultrafast optics has permit-
ted controlled modulation of light up to terahertz fre-
quencies, revolutionizing long-distance telecommunica-
tion as well as exploration and control of the motion of
atoms in microscopic systems. Nonlinear optics and ul-
trafast optics allow one to convert controlled terahertz
amplitude modulation of light into controlled terahertz-
frequency electric ﬁelds, by means of optical rectiﬁca-
tion of femtosecond light pulses.17 However, even these
fastest electric ﬁelds synthesized are far too slow for
controlling and tracing the motion of electrons on atomic
scales, which requires an electric force variable at peta-
hertz frequencies. Petahertz-frequency sub-PHz to few
PHz electric ﬁelds are present in near-infrared NIR,
visible VIS, and ultraviolet UV radiation henceforth,
brieﬂy, light. Here we review the recent emergence of
light waves with controlled evolution of the ﬁeld Sec.
III.A and discuss future prospects for scaling the tech-
nology of light ﬁeld control to bandwidths far beyond an
octave Sec. III.B and ﬁeld strengths in the relativistic
regime Sec. III.C.
A. Light-wave control: Brief history and current state of the
art
Consider the electric ﬁeld of a linearly polarized light
pulse. For pulses with bandwidths below one octave the
light ﬁeld ELt can be decomposed into a carrier wave
and an amplitude envelope,
ELt = aLte−iLt+ + c.c.,
6
in a physically meaningful manner Brabec and Krausz,
1997.18 Here aLt=aLte−iLt is the complex enve-
lope, aLt is the time-dependent real ﬁeld amplitude,
and Lt stands for a possible sweep chirp of the car-
rier frequency L. Last but not least,  determines the
timing of the ﬁeld oscillations with respect to the pulse
peak, tpeak=/L see Fig. 10 and has been referred to
as the carrier-envelope CE phase.
In relatively narrowband /L1 pulses, a change
of the CE phase has no measurable physical conse-
quence. Measurement of the shape of a light wave and
its control based on this measurement rely on using
pulses with bandwidth  constituting substantial frac-
tion of L. In the absence of spectral phase variation,
such pulses comprise merely a few oscillation cycles of
the electromagnetic ﬁeld, henceforth referred to as few-
cycle pulses. A change in the CE phase changes signiﬁ-
cantly their temporal evolution Fig. 10. In turn, this
change affects the atomic-scale motion of electrons
driven by these ﬁelds, which can be utilized for measur-
ing the CE phase19 see Sec. IV. Along with the mea-
surement of the complex envelope aLt see Sec. II.B it
determines the waveform, opening a route to light wave-
form control, outlined in Fig. 11a. With  known, the
desired waveform can be realized by passing the pulse
15The work of Judson and Rabitz 1992 led to a series of
beautiful experiments including Assion et al., 1998, 2001; Bar-
tels et al., 2000, 2004; Brixner, Damrauer, and Gerber, 2001;
Brixner, Damrauer, Niklaus, and Gerber, 2001; Levis et al.,
2001; Brixner et al., 2003; Daniel et al., 2003; Wohlleben et al.,
2003, 2004, 2005; Vogt et al., 2005.
16For a recent review, see Pozar 2004.
17For a recent review, see Xu and Zhang 2006.
18Note that we changed the sign convention in deﬁning  as
compared with that used by Brabec and Krausz 2000 to con-
form with the more customary convention of Eq. 9.
19Strong-ﬁeld CE phase effects have been predicted by Hal-
jan et al., 1997; Cormier and Lambropoulos, 1998; de Bohan et
al., 1998; Tempea et al., 1999; Dietrich et al., 2000; Nakajima
and Watanabe, 2006.
172
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 12 (native text) -----
through a thin optical medium of length L, shifting the
CE phase by
L = 2Ln/L,
7
where L is the carrier wavelength. The dephasing
length
which
offsets
the
CE
phase
by
,
Ldeph
=1/2n/L
−1, amounts in transparent optical materials
to tens of microns, permitting CE phase adjustments by
a small translation of thin prisms Xu et al., 1996.
The
above
approach
to
light
waveform
control
requires a single-shot measurement of . Stabilizing
the frequency comb of femtosecond laser oscillators
Hänsch, 1997; Reichert et al., 1999; Telle et al., 1999
obviated the need for single-shot phase measurement by
providing pulse trains with stabilized pulse-to-pulse CE
phase shift.20 Selection and ampliﬁcation of pulses with
constant but unknown  from the pulse train yielded
intense few-cycle pulses with stabilized and adjustable
CE phase.21 With these pulses in place, measurement of
 can be performed over many pulses via signal aver-
aging to produce intense few-cycle pulses with con-
trolled waveform see Fig. 11b. Figure 12 shows the
ﬁrst controlled and completely characterized light wave.
Lightwave engineering is now approaching the single-
cycle limit Cavalieri, Goulielmakis, et al., 2007; Gouliel-
makis, Schultze, et al., 2008 and being extended to UV
Shverdin et al., 2005 and IR frequencies Fuji et al.,
2006; Manzoni et al., 2006; Hauri et al., 2007.
B. Light waveform synthesis
For atomic-scale electronic motion control we need to
control the steering force on a sub-fs time scale. So far,
the room for subcycle tailoring of the light waveform has
been modest. Indeed, comparison of the cosine- and
sine-shaped few-cycle waves in Fig. 10b shows merely a
few percent difference in the electric ﬁeld. More ﬂexibil-
ity in subcycle shaping of the ﬁeld requires a spectrum
stretching substantially beyond an octave.
Self-phase-modulation SPM Alfano and Shapiro,
1970 and cascaded stimulated Raman scattering Ka-
plan, 1994; Harris and Sokolov, 1997; Sokolov et al.,
2001, 2005 of intense laser pulses proved most efﬁcient
for broadening the spectrum of an optical pulse.22 In a
gas-ﬁlled, hollow-core ﬁber Nishioka et al., 1995; Nisoli
et al., 1996, 1997; Sartania et al., 1997; Oishi et al., 2005;
Suda et al., 2005 or in a self-induced plasma wave guide
Hauri et al., 2004; Couairon et al., 2006; Guandalini et
al., 2006; Chen et al., 2007, SPM permits efﬁcient spec-
tral broadening of powerful femtosecond pulses. These
can be compressed to the few-cycle regime using disper-
sion control with multilayer chirped mirrors Szipöcs et
al., 1994; Sting et al., 1995; Jung et al., 1997; Matuschek et
al., 1998; Tempea et al., 1998. Recently, the latter ap-
proach has led to a supercontinuum stretching from
250 nm to 1000 nm, using 5-fs input pulses Gouliel-
makis, Koehler, et al., 2008; see Fig. 13a. Phase modu-
lation with twin pulses may result in further progress
Yamashita et al., 2006; Matsubara et al., 2007. We be-
lieve
that
covering
the
wavelength
range
of
0.12–1.2 m 1–10 eV with a supercontinuum gen-
erated by an intense few-fs pulse is within reach.
Control of the amplitude and phase of the generated
spectral components can be realized by separating them
in space Weiner, 1995 and addressing the amplitudes
and phases of the individual channels independently. Ex-
tending this control over several octaves is a challenge.
Figure 13b outlines a possible implementation based
on the work of Binhammer et al. 2005, 2006 using a
prism-based system. Another route drawing on several
discrete spectral channels separated by dichroic chirped
mirrors is also being pursued Goulielmakis et al., 2007.
Figure 14 shows several possible waveforms and demon-
strates that superimposing waves of frequencies span-
ning several octaves permits efﬁcient attosecond shaping
of light waveforms. Attosecond sampling of the gener-
ated waveform Sec. V will allow its measurement and
completes the toolbox of lightwave engineering.
20Apolonski et al., 2000; Holzwarth et al., 2000; Jones et al.,
2000; Kakehata et al., 2001; Ye and Cundiff, 2005; Li et al.,
2007; Yu et al., 2007. For detailed discussion, see Cundiff, 2002;
Udem et al., 2002; Cundiff and Ye, 2003.
21Baltuška, Udem, et al., 2003; Baltuška, Uiberacker, et al.,
2003; Kakehata et al., 2004, 2006; O’Keeffe et al., 2004; Lee et
al., 2005; Gagnon et al., 2006; Hong et al., 2006; Li et al., 2006;
Imran et al., 2007; Mashiko et al., 2007; Wu et al., 2007.
22For a review, see Zheltikov 2006a.
FIG. 10. Color Laser pulses containing two oscillation cycles
within the full width at half maximum of their intensity proﬁle,
with sine- and cosine-shaped waveforms, with their a ampli-
tude envelopes and b ﬁeld oscillations coinciding.
173
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 13 (native text) -----
C. Towards ultrastrong controlled light ﬁelds
Today, light waveform control has been realized at
power levels where the electric ﬁeld—upon suitable
focusing—can rival the atomic Coulomb ﬁeld. State-of-
the-art attosecond technology draws its tools from the
interaction of light ﬁelds with electrons, either bound or
of low positive energy, at these ﬁelds strengths. There
exist several proposals for extending lightwave electron-
ics to relativistic interactions, holding promise of enrich-
ing attosecond science with high-ﬂux, high-energy elec-
tron and photon pulses of subfemtosecond duration see
Sec. VI. A concept23 at Max Planck Institute of Quan-
tum Optics draws on three well-established technolo-
gies: i chirped-pulse ampliﬁcation CPA,24 for provid-
ing subpicosecond to several-picosecond pulses with
high energy; ii noncollinear optical parametric ampliﬁ-
cation
NOPA
over
a
near-octave-spanning
bandwidth,25, which was recently scaled to multiterawatt
power levels;26 and iii chirped multilayer mirrors
Szipöcs et al., 1994; Steinmeyer et al., 1999 for ultra-
wideband, high-throughput dispersion control scalable
for handling ultrahigh powers. The emerging source
dubbed Petawatt Field Synthesizer may extend attosec-
ond electron steering into the highly relativistic regime.
IV. LIGHTWAVE ELECTRONICS
We use the term lightwave electronics to refer to a
microscopically27 signiﬁcant response of electrons to
light oscillations on the time scale of the laser cycle and
below. Our discussion begins by assessing the conditions
for the appearance of such a response. As shown, it oc-
23Proposed
by
Karsch
2004,
for
more
details,
see
www.attoworld.de/PFS.html.
24Invented by Strickland and Mourou 1985, for a recent re-
view, see Mourou, Tajima, and Bulanov 2006.
25Takeuchi and Kobayashi, 1994; Gale et al., 1995; Cerullo et
al., 1997, 1998, 1999; Wilhelm et al., 1997; Shirakawa and
Kobayashi, 1998; Shirakawa et al., 1998, 1999; Riedle et al.,
2000; Kobayashi et al., 2001; Zavelani-Rossi et al., 2001; Bal-
tuška et al., 2002a, 2002b, 2002c; Dubietis et al., 2006.
26Tavella et al., 2006, 2007; Witte et al., 2006; Renault et al.,
2007.
27This attribute is meant to stress that no light propagation
over a macroscopic distance, which is sensitive to even minis-
cule changes in the refractive index, is needed to “feel” this
response.
Source of intense
few-cycle light
Strong-field
light-electron
interaction
Source of intense
few-cycle light with
stabilized C-E phase
Strong-field
light-electron
interaction
target
0


0

0

0

target

Before measurement:
After measurement &
phase adjustment:
target
0


Controlled
few-cycle light:
L
target
L
(
)
L
( )
( )
. .
_____
i
t
E
a t e
c c

 


(a)
(b)
-
-
-
-
-
-
target
0


:
:


tar
L
_____

t
FIG. 11. Color Control of the waveform of few-cycle laser pulses relies on measurement of the CE phase by a strong-ﬁeld
light-electron interaction. a Once the measurement is performed yielding 0, the required CE phase target can be set by
imposing an external phase shift =target−0, leading to the desired waveform. b If the ultrashort-pulse source delivers pulses
with a stabilized CE phase, its adjustment to the required value can be performed inside the source via an electronic feedback
loop, obviating the need for fast phase measurement.
L
Time [fs]
4
3
2
1
0
300
350
400
450
500
550
-2
0
2
4
6
8
5
10
Frequency [THz]
7
[THz]
Spectral intensity
[arb. units]
Light electric field,
( ) [10 V/cm]
E
t
FIG. 12. Color Electric ﬁeld solid line of the ﬁrst com-
pletely characterized light wave Goulielmakis et al., 2004.
The measurement has been performed with an attosecond
streak camera, described in Sec. V, and yields the temporal
evolution, direction, and strength of the ﬁeld. The pulses are
carried at a wavelength of L=750 nm with a duration full
width at half maximum of 4.3 fs. Dashed line: electric ﬁeld
calculated from the measured spectrum inset by Fourier
transform, assuming that all spectral components are in phase.
Adapted from Goulielmakis et al., 2004.
174
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 14 (native text) -----
curs naturally in few-cycle strong-ﬁeld interactions and
plays a key role in developing attosecond technology.
Below, we deal with the atomic response to light
ﬁelds. Therefore we use the atomic Hartree system of
units. The corresponding expressions are obtained from
the usual CGS units by setting the electron mass me, the
electron charge e, and the Planck constant  equal to
unity. In these units, the natural scales derive from the
physics of the hydrogen atom. The unit of energy is
27.21 eV, twice the ionization potential of hydrogen.
The unit of time is 24.2 as, 1/2 times the electron orbit
time around the nucleus in the ﬁrst Bohr orbit. The unit
of length is the radius of this orbit, equal to 0.529 Å. The
unit of the electric ﬁeld strength is that of the nucleus
experienced
by
the
electron
in
this
orbit,
5.14
109 V/cm. A linearly polarized laser ﬁeld with such
electric
ﬁeld
amplitude
has
the
intensity
of
3.5
1016 W/cm2. The speed of light in these units is c
=137.
A. Signiﬁcant variations of atomic electron density within the
wave cycle of light
In atoms and small molecules transitions between
ground and excited electronic states typically lie in the
UV-VUV range. As discussed in Sec. I.A, this implies a
near-instantaneous response of the electronic system to
NIR and VIS light ﬁelds. The scale of the corresponding
distortions to the electron density can be estimated from
electronic polarizabilities, with the static polarizability
st offering a good estimate for NIR-VIS light. The di-
pole moment induced by the nonresonant electric ﬁeld
E0 cos Lt is dstE0 cos Lt. At the same time, d
NeR, where Ne is the number of active electrons
typically electrons in the valence shell and R is the
characteristic displacement per electron. These two
equations yield RstE0/Ne. Given that polarizabil-
ities typically do not exceed a few atomic units per par-
ticipating electron, we see that microscopically signiﬁ-
cant distortion of the electron density can be induced
only with light ﬁeld strengths approaching typical inter-
atomic ﬁeld strengths. This implies the onset of ioniza-
tion, which will dominate modiﬁcation of the electronic
cloud. Then, signiﬁcant changes within one wave cycle
imply ionization rates comparable to the light frequency.
This is feasible only with a few-cycle laser pulse Spiel-
mann et al., 1998; otherwise, ionization will saturate be-
fore the desired intensity is reached Lambropoulos,
1985. The unprecedented ionization rate achievable
with few-cycle light beneﬁts the efﬁcient generation of
coherent XUV and THz radiation Gildenburg and
Vvedenskii, 2007 likewise.
Thus a microscopically signiﬁcant change in the elec-
tron density of atomic systems within the wave cycle of
visible light requires few-cycle light ﬁelds. The resultant
atomic-scale electronic motion unfolds on the attosec-
ond time scale, is highly sensitive to the subcycle evolu-
tion of the light ﬁeld, and lies at the heart of lightwave
electronics. We now examine this motion more closely.
In the dipole approximation, for a linearly polarized
laser ﬁeld the interaction potential energy for an elec-
tron at position r=x,y,z is in atomic units with e
=me==1
Vr,t = Vatomr + xELt,
8
where we assume that the laser electric ﬁeld
ELt = E0ftcosLt + 
9
is polarized along the x axis and positive when pointing
in the direction of increasing x coordinate, see Fig. 15.
Here ft is a real-valued envelope function, peaked at
t=0, f0=1. A snapshot of the total potential at the
peak of the ﬁeld oscillation, cosLt+=−1, along the
direction x of laser polarization, is shown in the elliptical
inset of Fig. 15. The strong electric ﬁeld suppresses the
barrier that keeps electrons bound, allowing them to
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
0.0
0.4
0.8
1.2
1.6
2.0
2.4
0
20
40
60
Phase [rad]
optical
CaF
CaF
,
f
f
Synthesized
waveform
UV/VIS/NIR
supercontinuum
Thin rotatable
CaF plates
Wavelength [ m]
μ
(b)
f
f
2
2
2
Spectral intensity [arb. units]
f
f
(a)
FIG. 13. Color Toward ultrawideband optical waveform syn-
thesis. a Spectral supercontinuum generated by self-phase
modulation of 5-fs, 0.2-mJ, 750-nm laser pulses in a self-
induced plasma channel created in a cell ﬁlled with helium at a
pressure of 25 bars solid curve. Dotted curve, dashed-dotted
curve, spectral intensity and phase, respectively, obtained from
numerical simulation. Adapted from Goulielmakis, Koehler, et
al., 2008. b Possible implementation of arbitrary light wave-
form synthesis by adjusting the phase and amplitude of spec-
tral components independently in separate channels. The UV-
transparent CaF2 prisms separate the spectral components of
the incident continuum, the amplitude and phase of which are
then controlled in the Fourier plane of a 4f conﬁguration: ro-
tation of thin CaF2 plates will result in tuning the phases
whereas translation of the plates coated with a thin metal layer
of variable thickness will permit amplitude control. Courtesy
of E. Goulielmakis.
175
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 15 (native text) -----
tunnel out each time the oscillating electric ﬁeld passes
its maxima, twice every laser cycle.28 As a result, the
duration of the electron wave packet which emerges on
the other side of the barrier is a small fraction of the half
oscillation of the driving ﬁeld, less than 1 fs in a NIR
ﬁeld.29
Once the electron appears at the tunnel exit, it is ac-
celerated away from the parent ion until the ﬁeld re-
verses its direction in about a quarter cycle. At ﬁeld
strengths of 109 V/cm, the total spatial excursion of the
electron driven by a NIR laser ﬁeld reaches several tens
of angstroms, greatly exceeding the size of an atom or a
small molecule. If the electron is freed with substantial
probability within a single half cycle in a few-cycle ﬁeld,
such an excursion causes a dramatic change in the mi-
croscopic electron density distribution.
The electron’s motion during these oscillations de-
pends on the phase of the electric ﬁeld ELt at which
ionization has occurred, 0=Lt0+. If the electron is
returned, which may happen for the phases 0 after the
peak of the oscillating ﬁeld, it may recollide with the
parent ion; see the inset in Fig. 15. Upon return, the
electron wave packet may interact with other electrons
left behind in their bound states. Many interactions are
conﬁned to a fraction of the optical cycle, giving rise to a
wealth of subfemtosecond phenomena. Figure 15 sum-
marizes the most important ones, which will be dis-
cussed.
B. Semiclassical modeling of strong ﬁeld-matter interaction
Our previous discussion of intense laser-atom interac-
tion relied on the semiclassical model introduced by
Corkum 1993, Kulander et al. 1993, and Schafer et al.
1993.30 It is based on the single active electron SAE
approximation,31 a key ingredient in our understanding
of the interaction between an intense infrared laser ﬁeld
and an atom or a small molecule. This approximation
assumes that only one electron actively participates in
the ionization of the atom or molecule by the low-
frequency laser ﬁeld. Other electrons are involved only
in the screening of the nucleus, creating an effective
single-electron potential. The SAE approximation is jus-
tiﬁed when the energies of multielectron excitations are
large compared to the laser frequency and signiﬁcantly
exceed those of single-electron excitations.32
The ﬁrst building block of the semiclassical model is
tunnel ionization or, more generally, optical ﬁeld ioniza-
tion, often modeled using the Keldysh theory or its re-
ﬁned
versions.33
Once
the
electronic
wave
packet
emerges on the other side of the tunneling barrier at x0
see inset in Fig. 15, it is pulled far away within a small
28Recently, this process was observed in real time; see Uiber-
acker et al., 2007, and Fig. 49 in Sec. VII.
29A tutorial discussion of this process can be found in Ivanov
et al. 2005.
30This model had an important precursor: the so-called
“atomic antenna” model Kuchiev, 1987. Relevant early work
also includes Corkum et al., 1989; Krause et al., 1992.
31Detailed discussion can be found in Kulander et al., 1993;
see also Schafer and Kulander, 1990. Later important work
includes Muller and Kooiman, 1998.
32These conditions are met by noble gases, where the SAE
approximation has been extremely successful. For alkaline-
metal atoms, nonlocal modiﬁcations of the single-electron po-
tential are already required but the SAE approximation still
performs well Sheehy et al., 1999; Gaarde et al., 2000. In small
molecules, the SAE approximation is still applicable, but in
polyatomic systems, especially when charge-transfer excita-
tions are located within a few electron-volts from the ground
electronic state, this approximation fails see Lezius et al.,
2001; Markevitch et al., 2003.
33For reviews, see Delone and Krainov, 1985; Faisal, 1987;
Reiss, 1992; Becker and Faisal, 2005. For earlier references,
see Keldysh, 1964; Perelomov et al., 1966a, 1966b; Perelomov
and Popov, 1967; Faisal, 1973; Reiss, 1980a, 1980b.
1 eV
-5
5
10
-10
0
Time [fs]
Synthesized
light electric
field, E (t)
10 eV
Spectral
UV/VIS/NIR wavepackets
-
-
L
10 eV
Coherent superposition of
wavepackets with varying
phase & amplitude
channels
+
FIG. 14. Color Representa-
tive optical waveforms lower
panel that have been numeri-
cally synthesized from coherent
superposition
of
quasimono-
chromatic wave packets shown
on the right-hand side of the
upper panel delivered in N
=18 spectral channels of the su-
percontinuum stretching over
1–10 eV left-hand side of the
upper panel. Courtesy of E.
Goulielmakis.
176
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 16 (native text) -----
fraction of the electric ﬁeld oscillation cycle. Conse-
quently, the Coulomb attraction to the parent ion
quickly becomes a small perturbation compared to the
laser ﬁeld. The simplest approximation is to neglect the
Coulomb ﬁeld after ionization. This is the basis of the
quantum strong-ﬁeld approximation SFA see footnote
32, a theoretical workhorse in strong-ﬁeld physics. Once
Vatomr is dropped in Eq. 8, the center-of-mass motion
of the quantum wave packet is described by
x¨ = −ELt.
10
A further essential assumption of the semiclassical
model is that the electron appears at the “exit” of the
tunneling barrier x0 with zero velocity vt0=0. Then Eq.
10 yields for the electron’s velocity equal to its ki-
netic momentum in atomic units
vt = vt0 + ALt −ALt0 = ALt −ALt0.
11
Here the vector potential ALt is deﬁned by ELt
=−dAL/dt. In the limit of a slowly varying envelope,
df/dtLf, we have
ALt  −E0/LftsinLt + ,
12
which is valid down to the few-cycle regime. In this limit,
Eq. 11 yields
vt = ALt −ALt0
 E0
L
ft0sin 0 −E0
L
ftsinLt + ,
13
where 0=Lt0+ is the phase of the laser ﬁeld at the
instant of ionization. Figure 16 shows vt for different
instants of release. The ﬁnal momentum is
(iv) excitation of bound
electrons upon inelastic collision
Possible consequences
of recollision (i-iv)
(iii) detachment of another
electron: non-sequential
double ionization (NSDI)
(i) energetic electron emission
by elastic backscattering
of the electron
r
Time
EL(t)
field
ectory
V
(x)+xE (t
E t)
+
t
release @
tr
recollision @
-Ip
0
x
Energy
e-
e-
0
(ii) energetic photon emission
upon the electron recombining
into its ground state
( )
-
:
-
Free electrons
with non-zero
kinetic energy:
above-threshold
ionization (ATI)
tr
EL(t)
t0
c
r
(
L
EL(t
0
ћΩ
-
-
t0
+
t
ћΩ
EL(t), laser
x(t), electron traj
0
x0
x( )t
0)
atom
FIG. 15. Color Optical ﬁeld ionization of an atom at moment t0 and subsequent recollision of the detached electron at moment
tr with the parent ion in a strong, linearly polarized ultrashort-pulsed laser ﬁeld. i–iv Possible consequences of recollision. Inset:
Release and recollision of electron that returns with highest energy to the parent ion, resulting—via process ii—in the highest-
energy photons emitted.
,
0
v
Final
electron
velocity
EL(t)
Instants of release t0
Instantaneous
electron
velocity
Time
v
0
FIG. 16. Color Temporal variation of the electron velocity
component parallel to the electric ﬁeld of a linearly polarized
light wave for different moments of release. The electron’s ﬁ-
nal velocity vf shown on the right-hand side sensitively de-
pends on the instant of release.
177
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 17 (native text) -----
vf = ALt → −ALt0
= −ALt0
 E0/Lft0sin 0.
14
Further integration yields the electron trajectory
xt  x0 + E0
L
2 ftcosLt +  −ft0cosLt0 + 
+ E0
L
ft0sinLt0 + t −t0.
15
For an instant of release shortly after the ﬁeld oscillation
peak, xt is sketched in Fig. 15. In a few-cycle, linearly
polarized laser ﬁeld, ionization is signiﬁcant only a few
times near the strongest ﬁeld oscillation peaks. Figure 17
illustrates trajectories launched shortly after the oscilla-
tion peak and returning to the core with maximum ki-
netic energy, which are responsible for emission of the
highest-energy photons upon recombination and elec-
trons upon elastic backscattering. Predictions of this
simple classical model including the assumption vt0=0
have been checked against full quantum mechanical
simulations, with good agreement in the strong-ﬁeld
limit de Bohan et al., 2002.
Is this classical analysis useful if the ﬁnal step of the
strong-ﬁeld interaction has to be handled quantum me-
chanically? For example, high-order harmonic genera-
tion HHG; see Sec. IV.C.2 is governed by the interfer-
ence of the “continuum” electron wave packet c
revisiting the core with the portion of the wave function
left behind in the ground atomic state g. Classical
analysis enters via the quantum-classical correspon-
dence. The wave packet c evolves as
cr,t 
 wit0expiSr,t,t0.
16
Here S is the action along the classical trajectory that
starts at the moment t0 with zero initial velocity and ar-
rives at the point r at the moment t and wit0 is the
ionization rate. The moment t0 is uniquely deﬁned by
the r and t, i.e., t0=t0t,r. In general, the action and
trajectories are quite complicated. However, in the SFA
the result is relatively simple:
Sr,t,t0 = p + ALtr −1
2
t0
t
p + ALt2dt,
17
where ALt is the vector potential of the laser ﬁeld, p is
the electron’s drift canonical momentum, and vt=p
+ALt is the instantaneous kinetic momentum. The
relevant canonical momentum p is deﬁned by the as-
sumption that, at the moment of ionization t0, vt0=p
+ALt0=0. The ﬁrst term in Eq. 17 gives the spatial
dependence of the wave function, which in the SFA is a
plane wave. The second term describes the energy-
dependent contribution to its phase—the integral of the
instantaneous kinetic energy of the electron along the
trajectory. Equations 16 and 17 imply that the wave
packet’s instantaneous wavelength and instantaneous
carrier frequency are determined by the instantaneous
EL(t): sine wave
Electron trajectory, x(t)
Ionization threshold
Ionization rate
Ix(t): XUV intensity
XUV
photon
Electron
,
EL(t)
EL(t)
EL(t)
EL(t)
FIG. 17. Color Trajectories of electrons returning to the vicinity of the core with maximum kinetic energy solid green lines for
a laser pulse consisting of two oscillation cycles within the full width at half maximum of its cycle-averaged intensity proﬁle e.g.,
a 5-fs pulse at a carrier wavelength of L=750 nm. We have set =−/2, i.e., used a “sine-shaped” electric ﬁeld waveform.
Dashed line sketches time dependence of ionization rate.
178
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 18 (native text) -----
values of the electron’s momentum and kinetic energy,
respectively. Equations 16 and 17 establish the link
between the quantum wave function and the underlying
classical evolution.34
Another key aspect of c is the dynamics in the plane
perpendicular to the x direction. The wave packet
launched by tunnel ionization is conﬁned laterally dur-
ing tunneling. The Heisenberg uncertainty relationship
implies transverse velocity distribution, which has a
width see, for example, Ivanov et al. 2005
v,spr  EL
1/2/2Ip1/4
18
in each transverse direction.35 This reduces the probabil-
ity of recollision as
c2 
 wiv,sprtr −t0−2,
19
where tr is the moment of return recollision. A further
reduction factor of 1/tr−t0 in the recollision probabil-
ity at the moment tr arises due to the longitudinal
spreading of the wave packet.
C. Single-electron interference within the wave cycle of light
The interaction of atoms with strong ﬁelds provides
textbook examples for one manifestation of quantum
physics: the interference of a particle with itself. Elec-
tron wave packets released from the same valence elec-
tronic state ground state near subsequent wave crests
and moving in the same direction will interfere with
each other, resulting in the appearance of electrons at
discrete energies spaced by the laser photon energy
above-threshold ionization ATI; see Fig. 18a Ago-
stini et al., 1979. Similarly, interference of the photon
wavepackets emitted upon each recollision twice per
laser cycle gives rise to periodic modulations of the
emitted energetic photon spectrum, leading to HHG
McPherson et al., 1987; Ferray et al., 1988; see Fig.
18b. The discrete ATI and HHG emission structure
results from single-electron interference and the tempo-
ral coherence of the driving light wave.
The probability of tunnel ionization decreases expo-
nentially with decreasing ﬁeld strength. Consequently,
atoms driven by a few-cycle wave eject only a few elec-
tron wave packets with signiﬁcantly differing energy dis-
tributions due to signiﬁcant differences between the ﬁeld
amplitudes in the subsequent half cycles of the pulse.
This has two major implications: the emission of the
most energetic electrons i can be conﬁned to a single
wave cycle at the peak of the pulse, and ii its temporal
proﬁle is most sensitive to the CE phase of the pulse.
This opens the door to controlling electron dynamics in
the sub-fs domain lightwave electronics and—by allow-
ing measurement of the CE phase—control of light
waveforms light-wave engineering.
1. Above-threshold ionization and sub-fs electron pulses
An easily accessible physical quantity is the ﬁnal ve-
locity vf of electrons ejected from strongly driven atoms.
According to Eq. 14, it is given by the vector potential
of the ﬁeld ALt at the instant of release t0. Figure 19a
plots the laser-induced change of electron velocity, v
=−ALt0, for the “sine-shaped” electric ﬁeld waveform
of Fig. 17. The dashed line sketches the ionization prob-
ability, i.e., the initial temporal proﬁle of the released
electron wave packets. As indicated in Fig. 17, the four
central half cycles of ELt have sufﬁciently large ampli-
tude to open a window—a “slit” in the time domain—
for releasing the wave packet. The electron’s ﬁnal mo-
mentum is dictated by ALt0, which—for the sine-
shaped electric ﬁeld waveform—opens either one or two
slits for high-energy electron emission toward the left
and right detectors,36 respectively. Figure 19b reveals
that emission of the highest-energy ATI electrons in-
deed occurs in a twin or in a single sub-fs pulse, depend-
ing on the few-cycle waveform driving the interaction
Lindner et al., 2005.
2. High-order harmonic emission and sub-fs photon pulses
In the previous section, we dealt with electrons whose
motion toward the detector is undisturbed by the parent
34Lewenstein et al., 1995; Salieres et al., 2001; Corsi et al.,
2006; Kanai et al., 2007 For an earlier reference, see Volkov,
1935.
35Spreading is reduced if part of the electron’s ground-state
wave function is driven into excited bound states; see Hu et al.
2001. This effect, which is ignored in the SFA, might play an
important role in generating low-order harmonics, typically up
to Ip.
36We use this terminology by assuming the laser ﬁelds to be
polarized horizontally.
Energy [eV]
Harmonic order
25 nm
12.5 nm
7.5 nm
21
51
81
111
0.1
0
10
20
10-3
10-4
10-5
10-6
10-7
10-8
10-9
10-10
(a)
(b)
]
(a)
(b)
Electron counts [arb. units]
Photon counts [arb. units]
FIG. 18. Color Implications of single-electron interference in
a strongly driven atom. a Energy distribution of above-
threshold ionized ATI electrons produced by a multicycle
femtosecond laser pulse. Courtesy of G. Paulus. Inset: Angular
interference pattern of ATI electrons. Courtesy of M. Vrak-
king. b Spectral distribution of high order harmonic emission.
Adapted from Macklin et al., 1993. Inset: Spatial intensity pro-
ﬁle of few-cycle driven harmonics at a photon energy of
100 eV, implying a coherent near-diffraction-limited laser-
like beam. Courtesy of M. Uiberacker.
179
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 19 (native text) -----
atomic or molecular37 ion. However, depending on the
phase at the instant of ionization, 0, oscillations in the
laser ﬁeld may bring the electron back to its parent ion.
In Eq. 13, the ﬁrst term describes the drift velocity of
the electron, which changes the sign near the maximum
of the electric ﬁeld, at 0=0. Electrons released after the
peak of the ﬁeld, 00, return to the core see the
shaded part of the electron emission probability in Fig.
20. The respective trajectories as a function of the in-
stant of release t0 or the phase 0 are given by Eq. 15.
The return time tr can be obtained by setting xtr=0 in
Eq. 15 for trt0. Figure 20 shows recolliding electron
trajectories38 obtained with this procedure upper panel
along with the energy of the electrons at tr, in units of
Up, where in atomic units
Upt = E0
2f2t/4L
2
20
is the cycle-averaged wiggle energy of the electron in the
laser ﬁeld given by Eq. 9, also known as the pondero-
motive potential.
Figure 20 conveys several important messages. First, it
shows that the moment of return is uniquely determined
by the moment of ionization. Second, the maximum en-
ergy of the returning electron Wmax, reaches about
3.2Up, yielding for the maximum photon energy emitted
during recollision Kulander et al., 1992; Corkum,
199339
max  3.2Up + Ip,
21
where Ip is the ionization potential. For few-cycle laser
ﬁelds, valence electrons in rare gas atoms with high Ip,
such as neon or helium, may survive in the ground state
37High-order harmonic generation in molecules has been re-
viewed by Bandrauk et al. 2007.
38For strong IR and visible ﬁelds the electron oscillation am-
plitude during its ﬁrst excursion exceeds the Bohr radius by
two orders of magnitude. Hence the initial offset of the elec-
tron’s place of creation from the origin in Eq. 15 can be ne-
glected on this scale, x00.
39max can be enhanced with chirped few-cycle pulses Car-
rera and Chu, 2007.
Time of release,t0 [fs]
Towards
Towards
detector
detector
Towards “
detector
f
vf
“left
left”
Laser-induced
change in electron
velocity, Δv
“right”
v
kinetic energy [eV]
10
20
30
10
20
30
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
Electron
/2
  
/2
  
(a)
(b)
Electron counts [arb. units]
FIG. 19. Attosecond “double-slit” experiment Lindner et al.,
2005. a A sine-shaped few-cycle pulse not shown ionizes
atoms via optical-ﬁeld ionization. Electrons are created with
zero velocity at the instant of ionization, hence the change
imposed by the laser ﬁeld solid line is equal to their ﬁnal
velocity. “Slits” corresponding to a particular ﬁnal velocity are
shown by black and gray ellipses. The dashed line sketches the
ionization rate. b Kinetic energy distributions of electrons
arriving at the right and left detectors, depicted in black and
gray, respectively. Adapted from Lindner et al., 2005. The left
panel shows spectra for the case shown in a: the modulation
of the spectrum on the right detector indicates interference
between electrons released at two instants separated by the
oscillation cycle, whereas the absence of pronounced modula-
tion on the left detector reveals that electron emission in this
direction is conﬁned to a single ionization event, in accordance
with the model shown in a. By reversing the laser ﬁeld right
panel, the situation is reversed. The measured spectra set an
upper limit of 500 as for the duration of emitted electron wave
packets. The experiment demonstrates attosecond control of
electron emission from atoms using waveform-controlled few-
cycle light.
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
Return time, tr [cycles]
Return energy, Wr [in units of Up]
EL(t)
Electron
emission
probability
Recolliding electron trajectories, x(t)
short
,
long
trajectories
FIG. 20. Color Recolliding electron trajectories in atoms ion-
ized with linearly polarized light. Top panel sketches electron
trajectories—distance from the ion vertical coordinate vs
time horizontal coordinate. Depending on the moment of
ionization, electrons return at different times with different
energies, shown with changing color. Bottom panel shows en-
ergy of the returning electron vs return time Wrtr in units of
Up, see Eq. 20, for the selected laser cycle. This dependence
indicates that electron wave packets returning along short and
long trajectories carry positive and negative chirp, respectively.
Courtesy of A. L’Huillier. See also Varjú, Johnsson, et al.,
2005.
180
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 20 (native text) -----
up to intensities of several times 1015 W/cm2. For NIR
and IR light, Wmax can reach hundreds and thousands of
eV, respectively. Third, for each recollision energy, ex-
cept for the maximum, there are two trajectories along
which the electron can acquire the same energy by the
time it returns to the core. These two sets of trajectories
have been termed short and long trajectories. Last but
not least, the electron wave packet returning to the core
is heavily chirped. As a consequence, its duration is sub-
stantially longer 1 fs than the duration of the original
wave packet released by optical ﬁeld ionization see,
e.g., Niikura et al. 2005.
This classical picture is reﬂected in the quantum
analysis based on Eqs. 16 and 17.40 As the returning
electron reencounters its parent ion, the unbound con-
tinuum part of its wave function c, with its fast-
oscillating phase, can interfere with the bound part of
the electron wave function g. This interference creates
fast-moving volumes of constructive and destructive in-
terference, resulting in hyperfast oscillations of the elec-
tron density, as illustrated in Fig. 21. The one-active-
electron dipole moment of our atom induced by the
laser ﬁeld, dt=d, includes these fast oscillations
via the term41
dht = gdc + c.c.,
22
resulting in the harmonic emission intensity
Iht 
 d¨ ht2.
23
To assess the emission spectrum, we write the bound
part of the wave function as g=grexp−iWgt. After
spatial integration in the expression of the matrix ele-
ment given by Eq. 22, dht will beat with the frequency
t given by the time derivative of the phase of c mi-
nus the time derivative of the phase of g. These deriva-
tives are the energies of bound and returning wave pack-
ets
Wg=−Ip,
and,
from
Eq.
17,
Wrtr=vtr2/2,
respectively, so that tr=Wrtr+Ip. The beat fre-
quency follows the curve Wrtr in Fig. 20, obtained from
classical trajectories. The harmonic emission spectrum
will contain all these frequencies up to the maximum
frequency max given by Eq. 21, determined by the
maximum energy of the returning electron. Analysis of
the spectrogram
H,	 =	 d¨ htGt −	expitdt	
2
,
24
where Gt−	 is a gating function e.g., Gaussian, al-
lows us to study when different frequencies are emitted
Yakovlev and Scrinzi, 2003.42 Figure 22 shows the spec-
trogram of the harmonic emission from a macroscopic
volume of gas exposed to a few-cycle NIR laser pulse.
The time-frequency distribution of emission consists of
branches resembling their classical counterpart, Wrtr in
Fig. 20.
Figure 22a reveals a crucial correction to the simple
classical approach. Quantum mechanically, the emission
extends beyond the classical cutoff max with exponen-
tially decreasing spectral intensities for max, as re-
vealed in Fig. 22b. In this range the temporal chirp of
emission is almost negligible. This is of great practical
importance to attosecond technology: ﬁltering highest-
energy emission around max with a bandpass ﬁlter
yields isolated for a cosine-shaped pulse, Figs. 22a and
22b or twin for a sine-shaped pulse, Figs. 22c and
22d emission bursts. These bursts are predicted to be
near-Fourier-limited XUV pulses with sub-fs duration.
The disappearance of periodic modulation of the cut-
off
emission
in
the
ﬁrst
HHG
experiments
with
waveform-stabilized, few-cycle pulses Fig. 23a pro-
vided the ﬁrst indication of the emergence of a single,
isolated pulse of sub-fs duration from a few-cycle strong-
ﬁeld interaction Baltuška, Udem, et al., 2003. A shift of
the CE phase of the few-cycle driver by /2 introduced
quasiperiodic modulation in the cutoff range with a
maximum modulation depth, see Fig. 23b, in accor-
dance with the prediction of Fig. 22d. These experi-
ments have demonstrated the feasibility of controlling
sub-fs
coherent
XUV
emission
with
waveform-
reproducible few-cycle light. Complete temporal charac-
terization of the emitted radiation will be addressed in
Sec. V.
40Lewenstein et al., 1994; Kopold et al., 2000; Salieres et al.,
2001; Becker et al., 2002; Miloševic and Becker, 2002; Frolov et
al., 2007a, 2007b; Mineo et al., 2007; Pérez-Hernández and
Plaja, 2007.
41Equation 22 is also a matrix element describing the re-
combination of the returning electron back to its original
ground state, a process observed recently via particle detection
Williams et al., 2007.
42See also Kim et al., 2001, 2006; Pukhov et al., 2003; Chip-
perﬁeld et al., 2005; Carrera et al., 2006.
k
g
c
Re[
+
]


2
d t( )
h
g
c
[
+
]


d t+
(
)
/π Ω
h
FIG. 21. Color Interference of recolliding wave packet with
the ground state part of the same electron wave function, at
two adjacent moments of time left and right set of panels.
Top and bottom panels show real part of the total wave func-
tion and the electron density, respectively. Interference leads
to oscillations of electron density and hence of the induced
dipole moment. Courtesy of D. Villeneuve.
181
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 21 (native text) -----
D. Electron scattering
1. Elastic backscattering and high-energy electron emission
We now turn our attention to the elastic scattering of
the recolliding electron Fig. 15. The scattering breaks
the phase of the electron’s wiggling motion and abruptly
changes the direction of the electron velocity. Equation
13 yields for the instant just before the recollision de-
noted by tr−0
vtr −0 = ALtr −ALt0.
25
As before, we assume that the laser ﬁeld is linearly po-
larized and the electron is moving along the direction of
the laser polarization for ttr. Upon elastic scattering,
the electron changes the direction of its velocity while
keeping its absolute value the same:
v
2tr + 0 + v
2 tr + 0 = ALtr −ALt02,
26
where v and v stand for the momentum vector com-
ponents parallel and perpendicular to the laser polariza-
tion. At the end of the laser pulse, these two compo-
nents become
v,f = vtr + 0 −ALtr,
v,f = vtr + 0.
27
As an example, take a closer look at backscattering.
Then v=0 and the relationship between the momenta
before and after the collision is
vtr + 0 = −vtr −0 = −ALtr + ALt0.
28
At the end of the pulse we then have
v,f = vtr + 0 −ALtr = −2ALtr + ALt0.
29
This result is different from the ﬁnal momentum −ALt0
for the case when no collision was present. The back-
scattered electron’s ﬁnal momentum is sensitive to the
Emission time / wave cycle
-0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
150
125
100
75
50
10-2
(c)
(d)
10-1
Yield [arb
Photon energy,  [eV]
100
filter
Time
EL(t)
Emission time / wave cycle
Yield [arb
-0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
150
125
100
75
50
Photon energy,  [eV]
10-2
100
(a)
(b)
10-1
filter
Time
I (t)
-
-2
(c)
(d)
-1
. units]
0
EL(t
. units]
-
-2
(a)
(b)
-1
x
Bandpass
Bandpass
0
EL(t)
EL(t
I (t)
x
FIG. 22. Color online a, c The spectrogram H,	 of the
atomic high-harmonic emission from a gas of neon atoms ex-
posed to a few-cycle NIR laser pulse 	L=5 fs, L=800 nm;
for further parameters used for the calculation, see Yakovlev
and Scrinzi, 2003. b, d Emission spectra. a, b are calcu-
lated for a cosine-shaped driving pulse. From Yakovlev and
Scrinzi, 2003. c, d are for a sine-shaped driving pulse calcu-
lated for the same parameter set Yakovlev, 2007. Propagation
tends to eliminate the contribution of multiple returns. Filter-
ing out high-energy emission yields a a single or c twin
sub-fs XUV pulse. Courtesy of V. Yakovlev.
60
70
80
90
100
110
50
XUV filter
EL(t):cosine waveform
Electron trajectory
with highest return
energy W
Ix (t): XUV intensity
(a)
,
Photon energy [eV]
x
,
r
(b)
60
70
80
90
100
110
50
0
1
ħΩ
XUV filter
Intensity [arb. units]
Photon energy [eV]
Intensity [arb. units]
0
1
x
ħΩ
Electron trajectory
with highest return
energy W
,
r
Ix (t): XUV intensity
EL(t):sine waveform
FIG. 23. Color High-order harmonic spectra obtained ex-
perimentally
with
a
few-cycle
NIR
pulse
	L=5 fs,
L
=750 nm with a cosine-shaped and b sine-shaped wave-
forms Baltuška, Udem, et al., 2003. The cosine wave leads to
a smooth spectrum in the cutoff range, indicating emission in a
single burst of potentially sub-fs duration, whereas the appear-
ance of modulation for the sine wave is in accordance with the
prediction of Fig. 22d and suggests that emission is delivered
in two bursts half a cycle apart.
182
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 22 (native text) -----
values of the vector potential at the moment of ioniza-
tion and the moment of recollision.43
In a few-cycle laser ﬁeld the ﬁnal energy and the num-
ber of the highest-energy backscattered electrons is a
sensitive probe of the subcycle ﬁeld evolution. Owing to
this sensitivity and the intuitive insight provided by a
simple “billiard-ball” model44 into the underlying physi-
cal process, backscattered electrons constitute a reliable
tool for determining the CE phase. Simultaneous detec-
tion of electrons ejected in both directions along the la-
ser polarization offers robustness against laser ampli-
tude noise. This “stereo-ATI” detection scheme was
invented by Paulus Paulus et al., 2001 and subsequently
used for the ﬁrst unambiguous determination of the CE
phase of few-cycle light Paulus et al., 2003; Miloševic et
al., 2006; see Fig. 24. Recently, it also permitted single-
shot measurement of the CE phase Wittmann et al.,
2008. The stereo-ATI technique is about to become a
standard diagnostic tool in attosecond laboratories—an
elegant example of how fundamental physics provides a
practical tool for laser engineers.45
2. Inelastic scattering: Multiple electron emission and inner-
shell excitation
Electron recollision does not have to be elastic. The
recollision electron acts like an antenna Kuchiev, 1987,
which an atom extends into the laser ﬁeld to absorb en-
ergy. The energy of the recolliding electron can some-
times dramatically exceed the binding energy of valence
electrons. As a consequence, the recolliding electron
may knock off a second electron from the electronic
shell of the parent ion.
Efﬁcient double ionization of noble gas atoms in in-
frared laser ﬁelds was ﬁrst observed by L’Huillier et al.
1983. Recent experiments, in particular those using el-
liptically polarized light or correlated detection of both
electrons, have established recollision as the origin of
this process, now referred to as nonsequential double
ionization NSDI; Fittinghoff et al., 1992, Walker et al.,
1993, 1994.46 The elliptical ﬁeld tends to deﬂect the re-
turning electron wave packet from its target. The trans-
verse velocity, induced by the transverse component of
the ﬁeld, is, in the limit of a slowly varying envelope, see
Eq. 12,
vt = At −At0
 E
L
ftcosLt +  −E
L
ft0cos 0,
30
where E=E0 and  is the ﬁeld ellipticity. When the
resultant transverse drift exceeds v,spr given by Eq.
43If the recollision occurs near the zero of the electric ﬁeld,
i.e., when ALtrE0/L see Eq. 12, the ﬁnal energy after
backscattering may reach values of up to 10Up. Detailed analy-
sis can be found in Walker et al., 1996 and Goreslavski and
Popruzhenko, 1999. For earlier references, see, Corkum, 1993;
Schafer et al., 1993; Yang et al., 1993.
44This is a reasonable approximation for energetic backscat-
tered electrons, which spend little time near the core.
45Solid-state phase meters are also being developed: Apolon-
ski et al., 2004; Fortier et al., 2004; Mücke et al., 2004; Irvine et
al., 2006; Van Vlack and Hughes, 2007.
46Correlated measurement for the spectra of both electrons
yields insight into the collision dynamics. See Becker and
Faisal, 2005; furthermore, Moshammer et al., 2000; Weber et
al., 2000a, 2000b; Rottke et al., 2002; Weckenbrock et al., 2003,
2004; Eremina et al., 2003, 2004; Alnaser, Tong, et al., 2004;
Alnaser, Voss, et al., 2004; de Jesus et al., 2004; Rudenko et al.,
2004; Zeidler et al., 2005; Zrost et al., 2006. Recent work in-
cludes Figueira de Morisson Faria et al., 2006; Ruiz et al., 2006;
Ho and Eberly, 2007.
10
20
30
40
50
10
2
10
4
10
6
10
20
30
40
50
10
2
10
4
10
6
10
20
30
40
10
2
10
4
10
6
Electron counts
Energy [
]
- Sine
,  = /2
Cosine waveform,  = 
- Sine
,  = 3/2
20
30
40
50
10
2
4
10
6
Cosinewaveform  = 0
50
eV
-Sine waveform,  = /2
-Cosine waveform,  = 
Sine waveform, = 3/2
10
10
Cosine waveform,  = 0
FIG. 24. Color Sensitivity of backscattered electrons to the
CE phase. Left panels, energy distribution of ATI electrons
emitted parallel to the electric ﬁeld vector of the few-cycle
ionizing ﬁeld 	L=5 fs, L=750 nm towards the right and left
detectors of Fig. 19, shown in black and gray colors, respec-
tively. Adapted from Paulus et al., 2003. The high energy
shoulders originate from backscattering upon recollision. The
highest-energy electrons are emitted for a “cosine-shaped”
light waveform. Note that while the maximum electron energy
is the same in both directions for a “sine-shaped” wave, the
yield of electrons scattered to opposite directions with ener-
gies above 20 eV differ signiﬁcantly by a factor of more than
2 owing to the difference in the ﬁeld strengths at the moment
of ionization. As a result, the method also permits single-shot
determination of the CE phase even for the symmetric case of
a sine waveform, which was demonstrated experimentally
Wittmann et al., 2008. The calibration of the stereo-ATI
“phase meter” can be subjected to a self-consistency check by
shifting the CE phase in a known way, by simply changing the
path length in a thin glass plate; see Eq. 7.
183
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 23 (native text) -----
18, the returning electron misses the parent ion.
Dietrich et al. 1994 demonstrated that increasing ellip-
ticity gradually suppressed both HHG and NSDI in the
same way, providing conclusive evidence for electron
recollision being responsible for both phenomena. Re-
cently, NSDI was also found to be controllable with the
waveform of a few-cycle pulse.
Attosecond control over the recollision Zeidler et al.,
2005 provides a unique opportunity for unraveling mul-
tielectron interactions and dynamics triggered by colli-
sions Rudenko et al., 2004; Zrost et al., 2006. Inelastic
recollision in a molecule may induce structural dynamics
in the molecular ion see, e.g., Niikura et al., 2002; Ni-
ikura, Légaré, et al., 2003; Liu et al., 2004; Kling et al.,
2006; Gräfe and Ivanov, 2007; Tong and Lin, 2007a,
2007b, for further discussion, see Sec. VII.
V. BASIC CONCEPTS FOR ATTOSECOND CONTROL
AND METROLOGY
A. Conditions for experimental implementation
The atomic-scale electron dynamics discussed in the
previous section unfold within the wave cycle. They are
extraordinarily sensitive to the subcycle evolution of the
ﬁeld. Relatively small changes in the driving light wave-
form see Fig. 10b affect the energy distribution of
high-energy photons Fig. 23 and electrons Fig. 24
originating from the strong-ﬁeld interaction. This indi-
cates two possible approaches to precision attosecond
metrology.
For multicycle waves of laser light and attosecond
pulse trains, one has to make sure that the subcycle
electron-light interaction is repeated over several or
many oscillation cycles under precisely the same condi-
tions. Then, and only then, no information is lost due to
the accumulation of attosecond signals originating from
individual cycles during the multicycle interaction pe-
riod. Multicycle attosecond metrology can draw either
on periodically repeated recollisions or on sub-fs photon
pulse trains emerging from them. In the former case, the
multicycle light wave generates the recollision electron
and triggers the process under study in a correlated fash-
ion in one and the same interaction within each wave
cycle. Then one of the two correlated processes can
serve as a clock for the other. The concept, ﬁrst demon-
strated by Niikura et al. 2002 and Niikura, Legare, et al.
2003 for a diatomic molecule, relies on exploiting such
correlations in the time domain.47
Ideally, this technique would require a light pulse with
a constant amplitude i.e., ﬂat-top intensity proﬁle to
make sure that both the processes under study as well as
the reference process used as a clock unfold in the same
way in each wave cycle.48 Similar requirements hold
when a train of sub-fs pulses, with adjacent bursts
spaced by a half or a full cycle of the generating laser
ﬁeld, are used in conjunction with its multicycle driver.
Ideally, a constant-amplitude light wave would be re-
quired to produce a PHz train of identical sub-fs pulses.
Even with this in place, metrology would have to be
restricted to processes terminating within the laser wave
cycle to avoid multiple start and exposure while the pro-
cess is under way. Realistic multicycle drivers have bell-
shaped envelopes; consequently, the attosecond pulse
trains produced by them have burst parameters varying
signiﬁcantly across the train. Complicated temporal pro-
ﬁles resulting even from simple processes triggered by
these trains are rather difﬁcult to retrieve, making high
demand on the S/N ratio.49
These shortcomings can be overcome using few-cycle
attosecond technology, which draws on a light wave con-
sisting of easily distinguishable50 oscillation cycles with
well-controlled temporal evolution. This permits trigger-
ing of a microscopic process within any selected wave
cycle with subcycle precision. Thus the process can be
initiated with attosecond timing precision with respect to
an entire light wave, rather than only to one of many
possible cycles. An excellent example is a single sub-fs
photon or electron pulse that can be generated with at-
tosecond timing with respect to the generating few-cycle
light wave. Subsequently it can be used either i for
initiating motion with attosecond timing with respect to
an extended light wave or ii for probing the motion
that was triggered and steered by waveform-controlled
light on subcycle as well as multicycle time scales.
In both scenarios, timing relative to the whole light
waveform
is
critical
for
controlling
and
observing
atomic-scale electronic motion. From the control per-
spective, it allows one to trigger the motion with attosec-
ond accuracy with respect to the steering light force.
From the measurement perspective, it enables a few-
cycle light pulse to probe the triggered motion on both
attosecond and, if needed, longer time scales.
B. Light waveform control
Energetic photon and electron emission from few-
cycle-ionized atoms Figs. 23 and 24, respectively as
47Essentially the same concept underlies the core-hole-clock
technique used for studying ultrafast sub-fs to several femto-
seconds dynamics with the core hole decay serving as a clock.
See Brühwiler et al., 2002; Brena et al., 2004; Föhlisch et al.,
2005; Nordlund et al., 2007.
48It is challenging to produce a light wave with a rectangular
temporal intensity proﬁle it would require the same band-
width as that of a few-cycle pulse. Instead of using such a
pulse, Niikura et al. 2002 were able to fulﬁll this condition by
exploiting high-order nonlinearity involved in triggering the
process: it conﬁned the interaction to the central portion of the
multicycle pulse, where the amplitude was nearly constant.
49Other than CRAB, see Sec. V.D.4, adiabatic phase expan-
sion Varjú et al., 2005 and two-color probing Huo, Zeng,
Leng, et al., 2005 have been proposed for this purpose.
50The cycles may be distinguished due to signiﬁcant differ-
ences in either their period or their amplitude. Both options
require a superposition of light frequencies covering about an
octave or more.
184
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 24 (native text) -----
well as terahertz emission from the emerging plasma
Kress, 2006; Gildenburg and Vvedenskii, 2007 carries
direct information about the CE phase. With this param-
eter, the waveform is uniquely determined. Controlling
of the shape of light waveforms is a ﬁrst manifestation of
attosecond control and metrology.
The stereo-ATI technique offers the highest control
precision: it allows the CE phase to be determined with
an accuracy of 100 mrad for a 6-fs, 750-nm laser pulse,
implying a timing accuracy of the ﬁeld oscillations cycles
with respect to the pulse peak of approximately 40 as
Paulus et al., 2005.51 Forty attoseconds before or after
the pulse peak the cycle-averaged intensity is reduced
by merely 0.01% with respect to its value on the pulse
peak in a 6 fs pulse. This extraordinary sensitivity is a
direct consequence of the highly nonlinear atomic re-
sponse to the ﬁeld. Recently, this sensitivity could be
further improved by single-shot measurements Witt-
mann et al., 2008. Few-cycle-driven HHG opened an-
other route to on-line monitoring of the CE phase
Cavalieri, Goulielmakis, et al., 2007; Haworth et al.,
2007.52
Measurements often require signal accumulation over
many laser shots. This prompts an important question
regarding the robustness of the few-cycle waveforms
generated. The degree of stabilization of the CE phase
in the laser oscillator meanwhile reached the level of
accuracy of its measurement Fuji et al., 2005. Delivery
of few-cycle pulses with undistorted shape requires con-
trol of optical delay to within 1–2 fs over a spectral
band of several hundred terahertz. Dispersion in optical
components introduces delay differences of several or
more picoseconds over this band. The required disper-
sion control with an accuracy of 10−3 or better over more
than 100 THz of optical bandwidth can be afforded by
chirped multilayer mirrors Szipöcs et al., 1994; Stingl et
al., 1995; Jung et al., 1997, with their programmable
counterparts: acousto-optic ﬁlters Tournois, 1997; Ka-
plan and Tournois, 2004, with frequency-domain modu-
lators Zeek et al., 1999; Yamane et al., 2003; Yamashita
et al., 2006, or with their combinations Baltuška et al.,
2002a, 2002b, 2002c. Preserving a selected waveform on
target is even more challenging, given that a path length
change by several microns through optical components
shifts the CE phase considerably. Active compensation
of CE phase drifts is therefore indispensable Baltuška,
Udem, et al., 2003. The standard f–2f interference tech-
nique, which was used for stabilizing the frequency
comb of oscillators Apolonski et al., 2000; Holzwarth et
al., 2000; Jones et al., 2000, is unable to accurately moni-
tor extracavity CE phase drifts53 Dombi et al., 2004;
Paulus et al., 2005. Precision high-ﬁeld waveform syn-
thesis relies on CE phase metrology based on strong-
ﬁeld interactions discussed above.
There is yet another effect that requires attention: the
wave front of a continuous-wave laser beam delivered
in the fundamental Gaussian mode of a stable laser
resonator
Siegman,
1986
advances
by
a
phase
z=−arctanz/zR with respect to a plane wave carried
at the same wavelength Gouy, 1890 as the wave propa-
gates through the focal region. Here zR=w0
2/L de-
notes the Rayleigh distance and w0 the beam radius in
the focal plane. In a pulse, the Gouy effect shifts the CE
phase as it propagates through the focal region. Within
the Rayleigh range, the resultant shift was found to be a
linear function of distance from the position z=0 of
the beam waist, Gouyz/2z/zR Fig. 25, Lindner
et al., 2004.54 Within an interaction length of L, the CE
phase gets shifted by Gouyz=L in addition to the
dispersion-induced shift L, given by Eq. 7; hence
constant waveform requires
L + GouyL  1.
31
C. Attosecond metrology using nonlinear XUV optics
Conceptually, the most straightforward approach to
characterizing a short pulse is to use the pulse to mea-
sure itself, e.g., using autocorrelation as discussed in Sec.
II.B.1. In the case of an XUV pulse, this would require a
suitable XUV nonlinearity Kobayashi et al., 2007. In
the XUV or soft x-ray regime, multiphoton resonant ab-
sorption or ionization provides options for implement-
ing nonlinear autocorrelation. For XUV photon ener-
gies
less
than
the
atomic
ionization
potential,
measurement of the two-photon ionization yield as a
function of delay between two replicas of the XUV
pulse resulted in the second-order autocorrelation of
this pulse Kobayashi et al., 1998; Sekikawa et al., 2002.
Recently this technique has been used to measure trains
of sub-fs pulses via cycle-averaged intensity autocorre-
lation Tzallas et al., 2003, 2005; Nikolopoulos et al.,
2005 as well as the fringe-resolved interferometric au-
tocorrelation Nabekawa et al., 2006. Detecting doubly
charged instead of singly charged helium extended the
photon energy range of the technique to 79 eV Na-
bekawa et al., 2005.
Watanabe and co-workers recently succeeded in over-
coming this limitation by realizing two-photon above-
threshold ionization ATI and detecting photoelectrons
instead of ions Miyamoto et al., 2004; Hasegawa et al.,
2005. They demonstrated the ﬁrst autocorrelation and
FROG measurement of a single, sub-fs pulse Sekikawa
et al., 2004; Kosuge et al., 2006. Unfortunately, the rel-
evant two-photon cross sections become prohibitively
low toward shorter wavelengths Nikolopoulos and
51For a theoretical analysis, see Zhang et al., 2007.
52Recently, Wu and Yang 2007 pointed out that bound-state
dynamics at weak ﬁelds may be affected by the C-E phase and
hence can possibly be used for its measurement.
53Even though it is currently widely used for this purpose.
54Note that Gouyz is different from z both in sign and
slightly in magnitude, owing to the broad bandwidth and non-
Gaussian beam proﬁle of the few-cycle wave used Lindner et
al., 2004.
185
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 25 (native text) -----
Lambropoulos, 2001, preventing straightforward exten-
sion of this metrology toward SXR frequencies.55
D. Light-ﬁeld-controlled attosecond metrology
Two ways were found out of this corner. In one class
of experiments a train of attosecond pulses was charac-
terized by measuring the relative phase between the
high-order harmonics comprising the train Paul et al.,
2001; Aseyev et al., 2003; Mairesse et al., 2003; López-
Martens et al., 2005. The technique was dubbed
RABBITT.56 In the other class, a single sub-fs pulse was
measured by attosecond streaking Drescher et al., 2001;
Hentschel et al., 2001; Kienberger et al., 2004. These
two apparently different approaches have common
roots, as we show in this section.
From an experimental point of view, both techniques
draw on cross correlation between the sub-fs pulse or
pulse train; henceforth, brieﬂy, pulse and a femtosecond
laser pulse. The interaction medium is a gas of atoms
from which the XUV pulse ejects photoelectrons Fig.
26 in the presence of the strong laser ﬁeld. Because the
same laser ﬁeld was previously used for generation of
the sub-fs XUV pulse, the two ﬁelds are inherently syn-
chronized. In the absence of resonances, the temporal
proﬁle of the XUV-induced photoemission rate follows
the intensity proﬁle aXt2 of the incident XUV pulse.
The laser ﬁeld modulates the ﬁnal electron momentum
and energy distribution. Measuring the modulated elec-
tron spectra as a function of the time delay between the
XUV pulse and the laser pulse contains all information
required for complete retrieval of both the laser ﬁeld
and the XUV pulse Mairesse and Quéré, 2005; Quéré et
al., 2005. In contrast to autocorrelation, the technique
55Novel techniques based on relativistic interactions ad-
dressed in Sec. VI.B may lead to femto- and attosecond x-ray
pulses intense enough for nonlinear x-ray optics and x-ray-
pump or x-ray-probe spectroscopy Schweigert and Mukamel,
2007.
56The reconstruction of attosecond beating by interference of
two-photon transitions. Together with its more advanced ver-
sions, developed by Salieres and co-workers and L’Huillier and
co-workers, this technique has been used for characterizing
and optimizing attosecond pulse trains in a number of experi-
ments, e.g., Aseyev et al., 2003; Dinu et al., 2003; Mairesse et
al., 2003, 2004; López-Martens et al., 2005; for recent reviews,
see Agostini and DiMauro, 2004; Corkum and Krausz, 2007;
Goulielmakis et al., 2007.
-Cosine
wave
vphase
v group = c
Cosine wave
vphase
vgroup
= c
v group= c
vphase
-Sine wave
z
0
Lint
0
-/2
+/2
Gouy(z)
vphase
(z)
z
0
-zR
+zR
-Cosinewave
vphase
vgroup = c
Cosine wave
vphase
vgroup = c
vgroup = c
vphase
-Sine wave
z
0
Lint
c
-/2
+/2
Gouy(z)
vphase (z)
z
0
-zR
+zR
R
-zR
+z
FIG. 25. Color Few-cycle pulse propagation through the beam focus. The pulse envelope propagates at the group velocity, which
in vacuum equals the speed of light, vgroup=c. The carrier wave suffers a phase advance due to the Gouy effect. As a consequence,
it rushes on ahead of the envelope as the pulse propagates through the beam focus. Propagation from the far ﬁeld to the focus and
from the focus to the far ﬁeld causes a Gouy phase shift of /2 each, turning a “cosine”-shaped waveform into a “sine”-shaped
one at the beam waist and to a “cosine”-shaped waveform in the far ﬁeld behind focus. Courtesy of G. Paulus.
dN/dW
0
Time
Electron energy
Time
X
Emission rate
of photoelectrons
Intensity of
incident XUV pulse
Final electron
distribution
without
with
laser field
Delay, 
EL(t)
EXUV(t)
d
0
2
out
|
( )|
t

2
|a
t |
( )
EL(t)
EXUV(t)
FIG. 26. Color Concept of light-ﬁeld-controlled attosecond
metrology. An ultrashort XUV pulse creates—in the presence
of a strong laser ﬁeld—a photoelectron, the temporal emission
proﬁle of which replicates that of the XUV pulse. The laser
ﬁeld modiﬁes the ﬁnal energy distribution of ejected photo-
electrons. Measurement of this modiﬁcation, as a function of
delay between the XUV pulse and the laser ﬁeld, offers the
potential for sampling both processes the XUV intensity and
the laser ﬁeld with attosecond resolution.
186
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 26 (native text) -----
can easily be scaled to shorter wavelengths, because the
strong laser ﬁeld obviates the need for an intense short-
wavelength pulse.
A quantum analysis of XUV photoionization in the
presence of the laser ﬁeld reveals common grounds of
this versatile attosecond metrology: the oscillating ﬁeld
of the laser acts as an attosecond phase gate, or phase
modulator, on the electron wave packet released by the
sub-fs pulse.57 We show in this section how the generic
concept of electron phase modulation, in speciﬁc cir-
cumstances, allows streaking, shearing, and spectral in-
terferometry of the sub-fs electron wave packet and
thereby leads in a natural way to the extension of
streak imaging Bradley et al., 1971; Schelev et al., 1971,
FROG Kane and Trebino, 1993; Trebino and Kane,
1993, SPIDER Iaconis and Walmsley, 1998, and to-
mographic methods Beck et al., 1993; Walmsley and
Wong, 1996 into the attosecond regime. The ultimate
light-based ultrafast metrology, drawing on the oscillat-
ing light ﬁeld as a gate, therefore naturally uniﬁes appar-
ently very different measurement concepts of time-
resolved science.
1. Attosecond streak imaging
We time the strong laser ﬁeld such that the XUV
pulse ﬁts within the time window of the central half
cycle of the laser electric ﬁeld, as shown in Fig. 27. The
laser ﬁeld is supposed to be weak enough not to ionize
atoms, but strong enough to impart substantial momen-
tum to the photoelectrons liberated by the XUV pulse
what is meant by “substantial” is discussed at the end of
this section. We assume that the photoelectron is re-
leased with large initial kinetic energy,
W0 = v0
2/2 = X −Ip  Ip,
32
where X is the carrier frequency of the incident XUV
pulse
EXt = aXte−iXt + c.c.
33
As a consequence, the electron quickly leaves the atom;
therefore neglect of the Coulomb potential after the ab-
sorption of the energetic XUV photon is a reasonable
approximation. The ﬁnal velocity of an electron ejected
at the moment t with initial velocity v0 is vf=v0
−exALt see Eq. 11, where the laser ﬁeld is linearly
polarized along the x direction, with ex the correspond-
ing unit vector. The change in the electron’s velocity
along the x direction is
vt = −ALt.
34
Within any half cycle between negative and positive
maxima, ALt is a monotonic function of time see Fig.
27. Consequently, the temporal distribution of the out-
going electron wave packet, which traces the temporal
proﬁle of the sub-fs XUV pulse, is mapped one to one
onto a corresponding ﬁnal velocity distribution of pho-
toelectrons Fig. 27. The resultant streak image pro-
vides direct time-domain information on the electron
wave packet’s emission time and hence the duration of
the XUV pulse Drescher et al., 2001; Itatani et al., 2002;
Kitzler et al., 2002.58
When contrasting this optical-ﬁeld-driven “streak
camera” with its microwave-driven predecessor Fig. 3,
the vastly increased streaking speed is most striking.
However, there is a more profound difference. In con-
trast with its predecessor, here the streaking ﬁeld is vir-
tually jitter-free and acts directly at the location and in-
stant of electron emission, preventing the initial velocity
spread from impeding resolution as it does in conven-
tional streak cameras. Moreover, the initial velocity mo-
mentum distribution can be measured together with the
temporal emission proﬁle, yielding information on the
duration and chirp of the XUV pulse, as explained with
the example of a linearly chirped XUV pulse in Fig. 28.
The optical-ﬁeld-driven streak camera offers more de-
grees of freedom. One may observe electrons at an
angle to the laser polarization. Assuming v0AL, one
obtains
vf
2
2 = v0
2
2 + AL
2 t
2
cos 2 −ALtcos v0
2 −AL
2 tsin2 
 W0 + 2Uptcos 2 sin2Lt + 
+ 8W0Uptcos  sinLt + ,
57Here the ﬁeld acts upon a freed electron. Zheltikov 2006b
showed that it can also probe bound-state dynamics.
58For recent theoretical advances, see Kazansky and Kabach-
nik, 2006, 2007a; and Yudin et al., 2007.
L
( )
( )
t
A t


4
Velocity
change along
the EL vector
-500 as
0
500 as
Laser electric field, E (t)
t7
t2
t3
t4
t5
t6
t1
v
v t( )

7
Velocity
-500 as
0
500 as
L
t7
t2
t3
t4
t5
t6
Electron releasetime, t
Temporal emission
profile of photoelectrons
t1
v0
Time
6
5
3
2
1
v t( )
v t( )
v t( )
v t( )
v t( )
v t( )
v t( )
Electron
velocity
distribution
FIG. 27. Color Concept of optical-ﬁeld-driven attosecond
streaking. Photoelectrons released in a laser ﬁeld parallel to
the direction of electric ﬁeld red line suffer a change of their
initial velocities that is proportional to the vector potential of
the ﬁeld black line at the instant of release. This function is
monotonic within a half wave cycle of the ﬁeld, mapping the
intensity proﬁle of a sub-fs XUV pulse into a corresponding
ﬁnal velocity or energy distribution of photoelectrons.
187
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 27 (native text) -----
 = 1 −2Upt/W0sin2  sin2Lt + 
35
Drescher et al., 2001; Itatani et al., 2002; Quéré et al.,
2005. The observation angle  is the angle the ﬁnal ve-
locity makes with the x direction and the approximate
expression is valid in the limit of a slowly varying enve-
lope; see Eq. 12. This expression allows us to select the
optimum detection geometry for various applications.
Observation of electrons along the laser polarization
direction is referred to as parallel detection geometry, 
0; see Fig. 29a. In the case of W0Up, this geometry
offers the largest streaking owing to the third term in
Eq. 35 and the advantage of direct correspondence of
the streak image with the wave packet’s temporal proﬁle
for a near-transform-limited pulse; see Fig. 27. These
beneﬁts come in combination with the possibility of a
large collection angle. In fact, cos  does not change
much within a detection cone as large as ±30°. The dis-
advantage of this geometry is that the laser-induced en-
ergy shift W depends on the initial electron energy.
This dependence becomes signiﬁcant if the bandwidth of
the electron wave packet is comparable to its mean en-
ergy. For this case, the perpendicular detection geometry,
/2, shown in Fig. 29b may be more advantageous,
because the third term in Eq. 35 vanishes, and with it
the dependence of streaking on the initial energy.
Attosecond streaking maps the temporal proﬁle of a
sub-fs pulse to a distribution of ﬁnal electron energies.
Hence the resolution limit t, indicating the duration of
the shortest pulse that can be measured, is dictated by
the condition that the laser-ﬁeld-induced change in the
electron energy should be comparable to the initial en-
ergy spread of the wave packet given by the ionizing
XUV pulse. For the most favorable conditions, in the
parallel detection geometry near the peak of the laser
ﬁeld, these considerations yield
t  1/LWmax,
36
where Wmax=v0E0/L is the maximum energy shift in-
duced by the streaking ﬁeld at t1 and t3 in Fig. 29a
Kienberger et al., 2004. This is an order-of-magnitude
estimate. As always, with good S/N this resolution limit
can be improved Smirnova et al., 2005; Yakovlev et al.,
2005; Goulielmakis et al., 2008.
2. Quantum analysis: The light ﬁeld as an electron phase
modulator
We now address the quantum treatment of photoion-
ization in the presence of an intense laser ﬁeld Itatani et
al., 2002; Kitzler et al., 2002. This will allow us to look at
laser-affected photoelectron spectra from various per-
spectives, unifying all advanced measurement and re-
construction approaches of modern ultrafast metrology:
streak imaging, frequency-resolved optical gating, spec-
tral shearing interferometry, and tomographic tech-
niques.
Consider the bound wave function of our atom g
=grexp−iWgt=grexpiIpt. In the absence of the
laser ﬁeld, ﬁrst-order perturbation theory in terms of the
XUV ﬁeld deﬁned by Eq. 33 yields the amplitude of
populating the state with ﬁnal velocity v,
av = −i
−T
T
exp−i1
2
t
T
v2dtaXt
e−itdvexpi
−T
t
Ipdtdt.
37
Here dv is the transition matrix element between the
ground state and the free state with momentum v we
detect only electrons ejected parallel to the laser polar-
ization direction; thus the electron momentum can be
described by a scalar variable. T is some distant mo-
ment in time, so that the XUV pulse begins past t=−T
and ends before t= +T. Performing the integrals in the
0
E t
L( )
Unperturbed
spectrum
E t
L( )
Time
v = -A t
L( )
0
Intensity of
electron
emission
Velocity change
along the
vector
EL
Final
electron
velocity
distribution
FIG. 28. Color Attosecond streak imaging of sub-fs pulses
carrying lowest-order linear chirp. The linear chirp causes a
linear sweep of initial photoelectron velocities. The laser ﬁeld
also sweeps the electron velocity, the sign and strength of
which depends on the timing of the streaking ﬁeld. During the
positive half cycle of ELt, see top panel, the two sweeps
counteract each other, reducing the ﬁnal width of the streaked
spectrum as compared to the one expected for a Fourier-
limited XUV pulse of identical bandwidth. In an adjacent half
cycle ELt0 the sweeps add, enhancing the broadening of
the “streak image,” as shown in the lower panel. Thus com-
parison of streak images recorded with vector potentials of
different slopes at the instant of release yields not only the
duration but also the chirp of a sub-fs pulse.
188
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 28 (native text) -----
exponents, using Eq. 32, dropping a constant phase
factor, and letting T→, we obtain
av = −i
−

v,teiv2/2tdt,
38
where we have introduced
v,t = aXtdve−iv0
2/2t,
39
which plays the role of a quantum-mechanical distribu-
tion released by the XUV pulse Yakovlev et al., 2005;59
here v0
2/2=−Ip. In Eq. 38 we recognize the Fourier
transform of v,t. In the absence of resonances within
the band of transition energies determined by the spec-
tral width of the XUV pulse, dv is a smooth function
with nearly constant phase and dv is known from
experiment. Hence the complex envelope of the XUV
pulse aXt could be determined by a simple inverse
Fourier transform of av. Unfortunately, a simple pho-
toelectron experiment measures av2 and not av,
with the phase of the transition amplitude remaining un-
known.
To retrieve the unknown phase, we switch on the
streaking ﬁeld. In the framework of the SFA, the ampli-
tude of populating the state with the ﬁnal velocity v be-
comes
av = −i
−T
T
exp−i1
2
t
T
v + ALt2dt
aXte−iXtdv + ALt
expi
−T
t
Ipdtdt,
40
where the ﬁrst exponent in the integrand comes from
the second term in Eq. 17. Assuming that the dipole
matrix element is not affected much by the laser ﬁeld,
d„v+ALt…dv, and with T→, we can rewrite Eq.
40 in the form
aAv = −i
−

,texp−i1
2
t
T
v + ALt2dtdt
= −i
−

v,teiteiv2/2tdt,
41
where
59A release distribution was also derived for the Auger decay
Smirnova et al., 2003, forming the basis of attosecond Auger
spectroscopy Sec. VII.C.
vx
vy
vy
vx
3
w
w0
w
w0
w
y
0
dN/dW
vx
vy
vy
1
v
vz
(a)
vx
vz
L
0
y
y
w
w
w
vx
vx
w
w0
w0
L 3
x
v0
v
vf
Detection
cone
L 1
vx
vy
vy
v=-A t( )
L
x
vz
vy
(b)
x
z
Detection
cone
w
2
L
v -A t
=
( )=0
2
L
dN/dW
dN/dW
v -A t
=
( )
v -A t
=
( )
v -A t
=
( )=0
v=-A t( )
dN/dW
dN/dW
dN/dW
v
v
E t( )
L
t1t1
t2t2
t3t3
L
t1t1
t2t2
t3t3
E t( )
vy
FIG. 29. Color Attosecond streaking: a parallel and b perpendicular detection geometries. Distribution of ﬁnal electron
velocities and corresponding energy distribution of electrons collected within the detection cone for three representative instants
of electron release within the central half oscillations cycle of the few-cycle streaking light ﬁeld. The laser-streaked electron spectra
are illustrated for the hypothetical case of an XUV pulse duration much shorter than the half period of the streaking ﬁeld.
189
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 29 (native text) -----
t = −v
t

ALtdt −1
2
t

AL
2 tdt
 vE0
L
2 ftcosLt +  + E0
2t
4L
2 f2t
+ E0
2
8L
3 f2tsin 2Lt + 
42
with the approximation applicable if Eq. 12 is valid.
According to Eq. 41, quantum mechanically the streak-
ing laser ﬁeld works as an attosecond electron phase
modulator Kosik et al., 2005; Quéré et al., 2005. As we
show in the following sections, this fact allows us to ben-
eﬁt from well-established femtosecond pulse retrieval
techniques in reconstructing both the XUV pulse and
the streaking laser ﬁeld from the measurement of a set
of laser-streaked photoelectron spectra,
Av,t0 = aAv,t02,
43
recorded for different values of t0, where t0 is the mo-
ment of arrival of the sub-fs pulse.
We now relate this quantum treatment to the classical
approach of the previous section. If the XUV pulse and
hence the released electron wave packet are short com-
pared with the laser oscillation half cycle, the phase t
can be Taylor expanded about the moment of release t0.
If we restrict expansion to the linear term t0
+/tt0t−t0 in Eq. 41, the resultant linear phase
modulation shifts the spectrum of the electron wave
packet and hence its mean energy by W=Wf−W0
=vf
2/2−v0
2/2=−/t. Calculating the ﬁrst derivative of
t given by Eq. 42 using the approximation W
W0⇒vv0 in Eq. 41 leads us back to the classical
expression for the laser-induced electron energy shift as
given by Eq. 35. If the XUV pulse is longer than the
laser wave cycle, the electron wave packet experiences
several periodic modulations of its phase, leading to en-
ergy shifts in multiples of the laser photon energy L.
The ﬁnal photoelectron spectrum is then composed of a
series of sidebands separated by multiples of L from
the unperturbed spectrum.60 This spectral structure is
the result of quantum-mechanical interference and can-
not be accounted for by our classical model. Only sub-fs
conﬁnement of the released electron wave packet, i.e.,
attosecond technology, enables classical physics to ac-
count for the main features of intense light-electron in-
teraction Drescher and Krausz, 2005.
3. Attosecond frequency-resolved optical gating
We rewrite Eq. 41 to explicitly include the adjustable
delay 	 between the phase-modulating laser pulse and
the XUV pulse:
Av,	 = aAv,	2 =	
−

v,tGt −	eiv2/2tdt	
2
,
Gt −	 = eit−	.
44
The analogy with Eq. 2 is evident. The streaked pho-
toelectron spectrum is the gated Fourier transform of
the electron release distribution v,t. Here the gate is
not an amplitude gate as in standard FROG techniques,
but a phase gate. Due to its sub-fs gradients, it is well
suited to resolving sub-fs transients. Hence Av,	 can
be viewed as an attosecond spectrogram and the itera-
tive algorithms developed for complete retrieval of fem-
tosecond pulses from FROG measurements61 can be
used to extract both v,t and the phase gate t.
From them, the complex amplitude of the sub-fs XUV
pulse aXt, as well as the complete evolution of the
streaking electric ﬁeld ELt, can be reconstructed. The
method was dubbed CRAB-FROG brieﬂy, CRAB.62
At least, in principle, it is applicable to retrieving arbi-
trarily complex and extended attosecond pulse struc-
tures including trains of pulses and femtosecond laser
ﬁelds including multicycle ﬁelds. CRAB generalizes
RABBITT in that it is, in principle, capable of recon-
structing not only the average characteristics of sub-fs
pulses in the train, but also each individual pulse, al-
though such a retrieval imposes increasing demands on
S/N with increasing complexity of the spectrogram see
Fig. 30 for the case of a sequence of merely four XUV
bursts. When implemented with a few-cycle NIR ﬁeld
and sub-optical-period XUV emission durations, CRAB
constitutes an extremely powerful method of attosecond
metrology. Due to a large redundancy of information in
the spectrogram, it can, with good S/N, substantially im-
prove the resolution given by Eq. 36.
4. Attosecond spectral shear interferometry
The attosecond FROG described in the previous sec-
tion naturally leads us to the attosecond version of
SPIDER. This becomes obvious by a closer glance at
Figs. 30c and 30d, showing streaking spectrograms of
sub-fs XUV radiation composed of two identical bursts
of 150 as duration spaced by the half period TL/2 of the
streaking ﬁeld. The spectral fringes spaced by 2L
3 eV appear to be due to spectral interference be-
tween the two electron wave packets released by the two
XUV replicas, which is caused by the difference in phase
shift =t+TL/2−	−t−	 imposed by the streak-
ing ﬁeld upon the wave packets. At selected delays 	, the
two released wave packets coincide with adjacent zero
60They can be used for measuring the duration of femtosec-
ond XUV pulses, see Schins et al., 1994, 1996; Glover et al.,
1996; Bouhal et al., 1997; Toma, et al., 2000; Ge, 2006.
61Such as, e.g., the principal component generalized projec-
tions algorithm, PCGPA Kane, 1999.
62Complete reconstruction of attosecond bursts via FROG
Mairesse and Quéré, 2005; Quéré et al., 2005.
190
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 30 (native text) -----
transitions of the streaking ﬁeld ELt−	, when the vec-
tor potential passes its maximum and minimum. Recall-
ing the relationship between the initial and ﬁnal electron
velocities vf=v0−ALtrelease, we realize that one wave
packet is shifted up in the ﬁnal energy while the other is
shifted down; see Fig. 31a. Note that the streaking ﬁeld
strength is adjusted here to be much weaker than in
the case of streak imaging Fig. 27. Since the two repli-
cas are also time delayed with respect to each other,
SPIDER is, in principle, only a small step from here: one
merely has to generate two XUV replicas from one and
the same XUV pulse that we want to characterize
Cormier et al., 2005. The modulated spectrum in Fig.
31a then becomes the perfect attosecond version of a
SPIDER interferogram Quéré et al., 2003; Remetter
et al., 2006.
In attosecond metrology, there is a regime Sekikawa
et al., 2003 where SPIDER- Cormier et al., 2005; Kosik
et al., 2005; Quéré et al., 2005 and FROG-type charac-
terization methods almost merge Smirnova et al., 2005;
Yakovlev et al., 2005. Let the original sub-fs pulse with-
out splitting it into two interact with a weak streaking
ﬁeld. Without the streaking ﬁeld, absorption of the XUV
photon generates a photoelectron spectrum but the
measurement is blind to the spectral phase of the pho-
toelectron wave packet. With a perturbative streaking
ﬁeld present, the liberated electron can still absorb one
photon from the IR ﬁeld, creating an upshifted “replica”
of the original photoelectron spectrum. Stimulated emis-
sion of a laser photon will create a downshifted replica.
Interference of these replicas with the original spectrum
transforms the spectral phase into amplitude modula-
tion, just as in SPIDER, except that here one has to deal
with three interfering spectral shapes and not two; see
Fig. 31b.
Despite complications in experimental implementa-
tion or numerical reconstruction, attosecond SPIDER
may become the method of choice for pulses approach-
ing the atomic unit of time 24 as, because SPIDER has
no fundamental resolution limit. In practice, the time
resolution will be limited by the precision of controlling
the energy shear, which in turn is dictated by the quality
of controlling the timing of the attosecond pulse with
respect to the streaking ﬁeld. Beyond attosecond pulse
metrology, attosecond spectral shearing interferometry
may also ﬁnd intriguing applications in exploring corre-
lated multielectron processes Smirnova et al., 2005; see
Sec. VII.
110
100
90
110
100
90
110
100
90
-5
0
5
-5
0
5
[eV]
Time
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
-
-
(f)
Photoelectron energy
-10
10 -10
delay [fs]
10
FIG. 30. Color Calculated attosecond streaking spectro-
grams.
Top
panels
show
spectrograms
for
a
a
single
transform-limited 150-as pulse and b the same pulse disper-
sively stretched to a duration of 620 as. Middle panels show
the same for two pulses separated by half the oscillation cycle
of the streaking ﬁeld. Bottom panels show corresponding
traces for four pulses. The traces have been calculated for par-
allel detection geometry, see Fig. 29a, and for a laser peak
intensity of I=51010 W/cm2 at a wavelength of L=800 nm.
Adapted from Quere et al., 2005.
,
f
-T/4
+TL/4
,
(a)
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
-W [in units of
-
L
0
(b)
/ t
    
W0
Finalelectron
energy, W
-TL/4
0
+TL/4
Streaking laser field, E t( )
L
Electron release time
W t( )

Electron
distribution
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Streaked
W-
0
L]
Unstreaked
ω
0
0.5
Spectral intensity [arb.units]
+ωL
FIG. 31. Color SPIDER for attosecond XUV pulses. a
SPIDER interferogram in the form of a photoelectron energy
distribution; see green area for two delayed replicas of the
XUV pulse, slightly sheared by a weak IR ﬁeld red line shows
electric ﬁeld of the shearing IR ﬁeld. The amount of spectral
shear between the two electron wave packets released by the
two sub-fs XUV bursts can be adjusted by the strength of the
streaking ﬁeld. It is preferable that the spectral shear is small
as compared to the width of the unperturbed electron energy
spectrum, a demand precisely opposite to that required for the
best possible resolution in streak imaging. b In the presence
of a weak IR ﬁeld, two spectral replicas of the same sub-fs
XUV pulse corresponding to stimulated absorption or emis-
sion of a single photon green dashed lines on the inset may—
together
with
the
main
unperturbed
photoelectron
spectrum—combine to SPIDER-like interferogram in the total
spectrum.
191
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 31 (native text) -----
E. Lightwave electronics at work: From measurement to
control of sub-fs pulses
The quantum-mechanical description of a strong light
ﬁeld interacting with an electron ejected from an atom
revealed that the light ﬁeld modulates the phase of the
outgoing electron’s wave function. It is this sub-fs phase
gate that light-ﬁeld-controlled attosecond metrology is
based upon. The electron can be released by either pho-
toexcitation or collisional excitation. It must be timed,
with sub-fs precision, to the streaking laser ﬁeld, which
modulates the electron’s quantum phase. This require-
ment can be met only by optical synchronization. There-
fore the “starter gun” must be derived from the streak-
ing ﬁeld. Photoemission can be linear, induced by an
XUV photon pulse via single-photon absorption, or
nonlinear, induced by a strong light ﬁeld. Our observ-
able can be a characteristic of the modulated electrons
themselves, such as their ﬁnal energy and momentum
distributions as considered in the previous section, or
the energy and momentum distributions of the photons
they produce upon recollision. The observables are mea-
sured as a function of the delay of the streaking ﬁeld
with respect to electron release. Using a waveform-
controlled few-cycle streaking ﬁeld, the complete history
of the motion—including attosecond-scale dynamics and
possible slower femtosecond-scale evolution—can be
retrieved.
On the basis of different combinations of triggering of
the electron release and observation of their modulated
quantum phase, many variations of attosecond control
and metrology are conceivable. Two combinations have
been demonstrated so far. One of them provides a pro-
found insight into the atomic process responsible for
sub-fs XUV pulse generation. The other one permits
complete temporal characterization of the sub-fs pulse
at the location where it can be used for attosecond spec-
troscopy. We review them in this section.
1. Modulation of recollision electrons: Measuring the creation
of a sub-fs pulse
Consider the electron liberated by a strong, linearly
polarized laser ﬁeld and its subsequent recollision with
its parent ion Fig. 15. Light-ﬁeld-controlled attosecond
metrology offers a simple recipe for gaining time-
domain insight into recollision: i modulate the elec-
tron’s phase or amplitude with a weak auxiliary light
ﬁeld and ii monitor the response of the products of
recollision e.g., photon emission to this modulation.
Measuring this response versus delay of the modulating
ﬁeld with respect to the electron’s release provides in-
depth time-domain information on the dynamics of
recollision and concomitant sub-fs XUV emission Du-
dovich, Levesque, et al., 2006; Dudovich, Smirnova, et
al., 2006.
In the example sketched in Fig. 32a, a weak light
ﬁeld oscillating at 2L is added to the fundamental light
of frequency L that drives ionization and recollision.
This introduces a small additional phase shift 2 to the
quantum phase 1 that the electron accumulates in the
fundamental ﬁeld from ionization at t0 until recollision
at tr:
1+2tr,	  1tr + 2tr,	,
2tr,	  −
trt0
t0
vt,trA2t −	dt,
45
where A2t−	=A2 sin2Lt−	 is the vector potential
of the second ﬁeld and vt,tr is the velocity of the elec-
tron returning to the core at tr.63 Although 2 is much
smaller than 1, it has a large effect. Because 2tr
−/L,	=−2tr,	, the weak ﬁeld breaks the symme-
63The total phase is given by the second term in the classical
action in Eq. 17, with the vector potential ALt=A1t
+A2t. Expanding the square in Eq. 17 and keeping terms
linear in weak second harmonic ﬁeld, we obtain Eq. 45.
0
1
2
3
4
5
1
-
(a)
(b)
16
18
20
22
24
26
Delay / wave cycle
0.5
0
1
-0.5
0
1
2
3
4
5
Time / wave cycle
Electric field [arb. units]
Hamonic order
FIG. 32. Color Gating and control of electron recollision. a
Adding weak second harmonic blue solid line to the funda-
mental ﬁeld red line driving ionization and subsequent recol-
lision breaks the symmetry between two electron trajectories
starting at adjacent half cycles of the fundamental ﬁeld illus-
tration on the top due to a corresponding asymmetry in the
total ﬁeld dashed line. This symmetry breaking yields even
high-order harmonics. b Harmonic spectral intensity in false-
color representation vs delay between the fundamental wave
and the weak second harmonic modulating ﬁeld. The white
line indicates the variation of the delay which maximizes even
harmonics of different order. From Dudovich, Smirnova, et al.,
2006.
192
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 32 (native text) -----
try between the left and the right trajectories64 of elec-
trons returning to the core; see Fig. 32a. As a result,
even harmonics of L appear in the harmonic spectrum,
which can be measured as a function of the delay 	 or
equivalently of the relative phase =2L	 of the modu-
lating light with respect to the fundamental ﬁeld releas-
ing the electron wave packet; see Fig. 32b. The mea-
surement reveals the relative phase of the modulating
ﬁeld that maximizes the yield in any even harmonic:
max2N, see white line in Fig. 32b. At the same time,
for weak 2L ﬁeld the relative phase maxtr maximizing
2 in Eq. 45 and hence even harmonic emission at a
given tr can be reliably calculated using the SFA. Equat-
ing these measured and calculated quantities with each
other, max2N=maxtr, maps emission frequency to
emission time within the time interval of recollision,
yielding the group delay versus frequency of the emitted
sub-fs pulse Dudovich, Smirnova, et al., 2006.
2. Modulation of recollision electrons: Controlling the creation
of a sub-fs pulse
A simple increase of the modulating ﬁeld amplitude
turns the previous measurement into control. By varying
, the emission can be switched completely between odd
and even harmonics Dudovich, Smirnova, et al., 2006.
Adjusting the modulating ﬁeld so that even and odd har-
monics are similar in strength implies that the sub-fs
pulses repeat every cycle rather than the half cycle of
the fundamental Mauritsson et al., 2006.65
If atoms are driven by a cosine-shaped few-cycle ﬁeld
Fig. 33a, adding its second harmonic with appropriate
phase Fig. 33b suppresses the half cycles neighboring
the central one Figs. 33c and 33d, conﬁning highest-
order harmonic emission to the recollision following the
most intense, central half cycle. The result is a broad
continuum near the cutoff, as shown in Fig. 33f Oishi
et al., 2006.66 Adding a weak sub-fs pulse or pulse train
to the fundamental ﬁeld provides yet another way of
controlling HHG.67
The trajectory of recolliding electrons can also be ma-
nipulated by adding an orthogonally polarized moderate
deﬂecting ﬁeld to the fundamental ﬁeld. By creating a
pulse with temporally varying ellipticity of its polariza-
tion, linear polarization can be conﬁned to the central
wave cycle of the strong driving ﬁeld, conﬁning emission
from a broad range of harmonics to a single recollision
at the pulse peak.68 The technique was dubbed polariza-
tion gating. Its recent implementation with waveform-
controlled few-cycle light resulted in a continuum ex-
tending over some 25 eV at photon energies near 40 eV
Sola, Mével, et al., 2006; Sola, Zair, et al., 2006.
Ultrafast depletion of the ground state by ionization
on the leading edge of a few-cycle laser pulse Sekikawa
et al., 200469 and propagation effects in wave guides
Christov et al., 2000 as well as in gas jets Gaarde et al.,
2006 can also select a single pulse.
64We use this terminology by assuming the laser ﬁelds to be
polarized horizontally.
65One attosecond burst per cycle may also emerge from
HHG in asymmetric molecules Lan, Lu, Cao, Li, and Wang,
2007.
66Related work includes Watanabe et al., 1994; Kim, Kim,
Kim, et al., 2004; Taranukhin, 2004; Zamith et al., 2004; Pfeifer
et al., 2006a, 2006b; Fleischer and Moiseyev, 2006; Cao, Lu,
Lan, Hong, and Wang et al., 2007; Lan, Lu, Cao, Li, and Wang,
2007; Zeng et al., 2007.
67Bandrauk and Shon, 2002; Schafer et al., 2004; Biegert et al.,
2006; Figueira de Morisson Faria et al., 2006; Heinrich et al.,
2006; Chen, Li, Chi, and Yang, 2007; Figueira de Morisson
Faria and Salieres, 2007.
68Budil et al., 1993; Corkum et al., 1994; Ivanov et al., 1995;
Altucci et al., 1998; Platonenko and Strelkov, 1999; Kovacev et
al., 2003; Tcherbakoff et al., 2003; Chang, 2004; López-Martens
et al., 2004; Strelkov et al., 2004; Zair et al., 2004; Huo, Zeng,
Li, and Xu, 2005; Kim et al., 2005; Shan et al., 2005; Strelkov
et al., 2005; Strelkov, 2006; Altucci et al., 2007.
69See also Bouhal et al., 1997, 1998; Cao et al., 2006; and
Pfeifer et al., 2007.
35
0
1
0
Harmonic order
21
23
25
27
29
31
35
33
(e)
(f)
Time [fs]
10
5
0
5
10
15
15
Fundamental field
SH field
Synthesized field
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
25
Wavelength [nm]
30
0
1
0
1
0
1
-1
0
0.1
-0.1
0
1
-1
Synthesized field
Fundamental field
Spectral intensity [arb. units]
Squared fields [arb. units]
Laser electric field [arb. units]
FIG. 33. Color A few-cycle ﬁeld c and d, synthesized, a
from a fundamental wave, and b its second harmonic, is used
to produce high-harmonic radiation with f a broad unmodu-
lated continuum, for isolated sub-fs XUV pulse generation.
For comparison, e shows the harmonic spectrum obtained
with the fundamental driver ﬁeld alone. From Oishi et al.,
2006.
193
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 33 (native text) -----
3. Reproducible generation and measurement of single sub-fs
XUV pulses
In this section we review the ﬁrst experiments demon-
strating the ability of controlled few-cycle light waves to
control and measure subfemtosecond electronic tran-
sients. The laser pulse ﬁrst generates the sub-fs pulse in
a reproducible fashion attosecond control and subse-
quently samples it with sub-100-as resolution attosec-
ond measurement. Employing the same light wave for
generation and measurement ensures sub-fs synchro-
nism between the XUV pulse and the sampling ﬁeld.
Figure 34 illustrates the apparatus developed for
sub-fs pulse generation and measurement at Vienna
University of Technology. Figure 35 provides informa-
tion on the diagnostics required for making attosecond
metrology work in a second-generation beamline. In
60
70
80
90
100
110
0
1
Intensity [arb.
50
Ne gas
Few-femtosecond,
few-cycle
laser pulse
L  750 nm
  5
W
0.3 mJ
Photon energy [eV]
Time-of-flight
electron
spectrometer
Near-
-limited
XUV/soft-X-
beam
XUV pulse
knocks electrons
free in the
presence of the
few-cycle laser
field
]
,
λ
L
fs
L 
Atomic
gas
-
-
- -
units
diffraction
ray
FIG. 34. Color Schematic of
the ﬁrst attosecond metrology
beamline
using
waveform-
controlled few-cycle light and
isolated sub-fs XUV pulses Vi-
enna
University
of
Technol-
ogy.
Few-cycle
waveform-controlled pulse
Time-of-flight
electron or
ion spectrometer
CCD
Target
Background pressure:
10 mbar
-9
XUV grating
Adjustable
iris
HHG target
Turbo pumps
Pressure with
gas flow: 10 mbar
-2
Differential
pumping stages
Filter & vacuum
separation
XUV
CCD
XUV mirror
(focusing)
Mirror
Stereo-ATI electron detector
measures carrier-envelope phase
Interferometric
autocorrelator
measures pulse
duration
ACF
XUV
NIR
Two-component NIR/XUV mirror-delay stage
FIG. 35. Color Schematic of a the AS-1 attosecond metrology beamline at Max Planck Institute of Quantum Optics.
194
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 34 (native text) -----
these systems, few-cycle-driven high-order harmonics
are generated in neon, with the peak intensity of the
few-cycle driver adjusted to result in cutoff emission
near 100 eV; see inset in Fig. 34. The XUV radiation,
emitted in a collimated laserlike beam with a divergence
much smaller than that of the focused laser beam, is
passed through a metal ﬁlter blocking the laser light.
The two collinear beams are reﬂected by a two-
component Mo/Si multilayer mirror, which serves sev-
eral
purposes.
It
ﬁlters
XUV
photons
in
the
90–100 eV energy band, allows an adjustable delay to
be introduced between the laser ﬁeld and the XUV
pulse, and focuses both beams into a second target of
atoms where the XUV pulse liberates electrons in the
presence of the laser ﬁeld. The photoelectrons’ ﬁnal en-
W0
…...........
W0
…...........
75
W0
85
h
x
(a)
Mo/Si mirror
Final electron
energy [eV]
65
…...........
dN/dW
dN/dW
EL(t)
(c)
 v0AL(t)
W(t) =
dN/dW
 1.2 fs
 1.2 fs
(b)
W t
 v A t
h
x
W0

dN/dW
L(t)
(c)
t)

 1.2 fs
 1.2 fs
(b)
W(t) =  v0AL(t)
h
EL(t)
(t)

L
E
E
Time
Time
h
x

75
85
Final electron
energy [eV]
65
75
85
Final electron
energy [eV]
65
FIG. 36. Color Attosecond streak images of single and twin
sub-fs XUV pulses. a In the absence of the streaking ﬁeld
ELt, photoelectrons arrive at the detector with a kinetic en-
ergy equal to the XUV photon energy 95 eV minus their
binding energy 21.5 eV in neon. The width of their energy
spread is determined by the bandwidth of the incident XUV
pulse 9 eV, which in turn is controlled by that of the Mo/Si
mirror dotted line in Fig. 34. b The streak image of twin
pulses generated by a near-sinusoidal waveform allows calibra-
tion of the attosecond streak camera: 20-eV energy shift cor-
responds to a time interval of TL/21.2 fs. c Streak image of
a single sub-fs XUV pulse generated with a near-cosine wave-
form. No delay between the XUV pulse and its generating
few-cycle wave has been introduced. The measurement yields
an upper limit of 0.5 fs for the duration of the 95-eV XUV
pulse and its absolute timing with respect to the generating
wave: the sub-fs XUV pulse emerges near the zero transition
of the laser ﬁeld following the pulse peak. The laser-induced
change in the electron’s ﬁnal energy, Wt, is derived from the
momentum change, t=−ALt, see Eq. 34 and Fig. 27, as
Wt0t=−0ALt, by utilizing 0.
W(t) = v0AL(t)
Electron kinetic energy [eV]
Vector potential,
-AL(t) [fsMV/cm]
Delay [fs]
0
4
-4
8
65
75
85
-20
-10
0
10
20
Time [fs]
0
1
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
-0.4
-0.2
0.0
0.2
-0.4
x = 250as
XUV pulse
0
100
Measurement
Simulation
60
70
80
90
100
Final electron energy, Wf [eV]
60
70
80
90
100
60
70
80
90
100
Electron counts / bin
In the absence
of the laser field
(a)
(c)
(b)

(t
 0
-AL(t
-
-
-
Intensity [arb units]
-
-
-
-
-
-
f
60
Instantaneous
energy shift [eV]
FIG. 37. Color Attosecond streaking spectrogram of an
XUV pulse, recorded with a few-cycle streaking ﬁeld. The
streak images exhibit little broadening at any timing, indicating
that the XUV pulse is near Fourier limited and is much shorter
than TL/2. As a consequence, one does not need to know its
detailed structure to determine ELt. The shift of the ﬁrst mo-
ment “center of mass” of the streaked spectra is proportional
to ALt. From the vector potential white line the electric
ﬁeld can be determined by differentiation. The result is plotted
in Fig. 12. Since the XUV pulse appears to be near Fourier
limited, its characteristics can be determined from a couple of
streak images recorded at delays for which streaking is stron-
gest, indicated with dashed lines in a. As analyzed in Fig. 28,
these streaked spectra b are very sensitive to lowest-order
linear chirp. The absence of any measurable difference be-
tween the two streak images, see central and right panels of
b, indicate that the pulse is indeed close to its Fourier limit.
Together with the unstreaked photoelectron spectrum shown
on the left of b, these images allow for complete reconstruc-
tion of the intensity proﬁle green line and temporal chirp
violet line of the sub-fs XUV pulse, as shown in c.
195
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 35 (native text) -----
ergy distribution is analyzed in a time-of-ﬂight spectrom-
eter.
The ﬁrst attosecond streaking experiment Hentschel
et al., 2001 was performed using orthogonal detection
geometry Fig. 29b. Although the CE phase of the
few-cycle driver pulse was not stabilized, single sub-fs
XUV pulses were observed in the experiment. Recently,
Gaarde and co-workers have indeed found numerically
that propagation effects and far-ﬁeld spatial ﬁltering can
effectively isolate a single attosecond burst for a broad
range of the CE phase values Gaarde et al., 2006;
Gaarde and Schafer, 2006.
Figure 36 reviews the follow-up experiments, per-
formed with phase-stabilized pulses in the parallel ge-
ometry in Fig. 29a Kienberger et al., 2004. The results
reveal controlled emission of a single or double sub-fs
XUV pulse70 and corroborate predictions of the semi-
classical theory summarized in Fig. 22. For an accurate
measurement of the XUV pulse as well as the few-cycle
laser wave, the XUV pulse has been delayed in steps of
150 as to scan its arrival time in the second target across
the laser wave. Figure 37a shows the result of this mea-
surement Goulielmakis et al., 2004, a particularly
simple attosecond streaking spectrogram. As discussed
in Sec. V.D.3, FROG-type algorithms allow complete re-
construction of the complex amplitude envelope aXt of
the sub-fs XUV pulse see Eq. 33, and the few-cycle
laser ﬁeld ELt.71 Given the shortness and simplicity of
the XUV pulse proﬁle, from the measurements summa-
rized in Fig. 37, reconstruction of ALt and aXt was
straightforward and did not require iterative steps, yield-
ing the laser ﬁeld ELt shown in Fig. 12 and a near-
transform-limited XUV pulse duration of 0.25 fs full
width at half maximum as shown in Fig. 37c Kien-
berger et al., 2004.
4. Breaking the 100-as barrier
Chirp-free harmonic emission is restricted to a rela-
tively narrow bandwidth of about 10–15 % of the cutoff
energy. Below-cutoff harmonics result from electrons re-
turning to the core along short and long trajectories see
Figs. 20 and 22. They produce emission at increasingly
different moments, requiring trajectory selection72 and
dispersion control Kim, Kim, Baik, et al., 2004; López-
Martens et al., 2005; see Fig. 38. Along with few-cycle
polarization gating, they permitted the production of
isolated 36-eV pulses of 130 as in duration Sansone
et al., 2006,73 see the low-energy spectrogram in Fig. 39.
Using waveform-controlled sub-1.5-cycle NIR laser
pulses and chirped XUV multilayers for spectral ﬁltering
and dispersion control Wonisch et al., 2004, 2006; Mor-
lens et al., 2005, isolated sub-100-as pulses at 85 eV
photon energy have also been demonstrated Gouliel-
makis, Schultze, et al., 2008; see the high-energy spec-
trogram in Fig. 39. These pulses are delivered with a ﬂux
of 1011 photons/s, allowing for time-resolved measure-
ments of electron processes with a resolution approach-
ing the atomic unit of time 24 as.
70While the single pulse is needed for pump-probe studies,
the double pulse is ideal for time-domain interferometry Ish-
ikawa, 2006; Remetter et al., 2006.
71By detecting electrons ejected in opposite directions, the
method can be generalized to measuring the ﬁeld evolution in
arbitrarily polarized laser pulses Popruzhenko et al., 2007;
Shvetsov-Shilovski et al., 2007.
72Antoine et al., 1996, 1997; Lee et al., 2001; López-Martens et
al., 2005; Merdji et al., 2006; Cao, Lu, Lan, Wang, and Yang,
2007; Cao, Lu, Lao, Wang, and Li, 2007.
73There is an extensive literature on the optimization of
single sub-fs pulse generation, see, e.g., Cao et al., 2006;
Chakraborty et al., 2006; Lan et al., 2006; Lan, Lu, Cao, Wang,
and Hong, 2007; Ishikawa et al., 2007; Popov et al., 2007.
Time [fs]
Al film
Iris
0
0.5
1
400
33
35
13
15
17
19
29
21
23
25
27
31
600
-600
-400
-200
0
200
400
Harmonic order
Time [as]
200
0
-200
-400
-600
-800
1
0.5
0
(c)
(b)
Time [fs]
0
0.5
1
400
33
35
13
15
17
19
29
21
23
25
27
31
600
-600
-400
-200
0
200
400
Harmonic order
Time [as]
200
0
-200
-400
-600
-800
1
0.5
0
(c)
(b)
Al film
Iris
33
35
13
29
27
31
Harmonic order
15
17
19
21
23
25
XUV intensity [arb. units]
XUV group delay [as]
XUV intensity [arb. units]
(a)
45
20
40
25
30
35
55
50
Photon energy [eV]
(a)
FIG. 38. Color Generation of trains of near-single-cycle
170-as pulses by trajectory and dispersion control López-
Martens et al., 2005. a Emission from short trajectories, see
Fig. 20, was selected by spatial ﬁltering with an iris. b Mea-
sured group delay vs XUV frequency harmonic order. The
green curve was obtained without any dispersion added, indi-
cating a positive frequency sweep, in accordance with the the-
oretical predictions for short trajectories; see Figs. 20 and 22.
The blue and red curves were obtained with dispersion com-
pensation via one and three 200-nm-thick aluminum ﬁlters
placed in the XUV beam, respectively. c Corresponding tem-
poral proﬁles of the transmitted XUV pulses. Courtesy of A.
L’Huillier.
196
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 36 (native text) -----
VI. SUB-fs ELECTRON AND PHOTON PULSES:
CURRENT STATUS AND FUTURE PROSPECTS
High-order harmonic generation HHG from atoms
and molecules has so far been the only source of sub-fs
pulses suitable for spectroscopic use. The technique has
played a central role in establishing attosecond technol-
ogy, but the limited photon energy and photon ﬂux cur-
rently available may stall its dynamic expansion. Prom-
ising routes to higher photon energy and yield include
atomic HHG driven at longer wavelengths and exploita-
tion of the interaction of relativistic electrons with in-
tense laser light. They are discussed below.
A. Atomic electrons interacting with few-cycle ﬁelds: Atomic
HHG
The physics of atomic HHG has been reviewed in Sec.
IV.C.2. Here we address possible ways of scaling the
technique to higher photon energies at experimentally
useful ﬂux levels. Such an advance will require us to
overcome current limitations. The most fundamental is
reabsorption of the harmonics by the generation me-
dium itself. Absorption-limited HHG has been demon-
strated up to photon energies of 100 eV with conver-
sion efﬁciencies ranging from 10−4 to 10−6 over the
spectral range of 10–100 eV, respectively.74 Absorption
rapidly decreases for increasing harmonic photon ener-
gies above 100 eV. Here another limiting effect becomes
dominant: dephasing between the driving wave and the
harmonic wave due to free-electron-induced dispersion,
limiting the coherent growth of the harmonic wave.
However, unlike absorption, dephasing does not consti-
tute an ultimate limitation. It can be overcome by peri-
odic readjustment of the phase difference between the
driving and the harmonic wave, a technique called quasi-
phase-matching QPM.75
If we can maintain phasing of the driving wave with
the growing harmonic wave by a suitable QPM scheme,
see, e.g., Seres et al., 2007 and prevent self-defocusing
from occurring by some guiding structure or beam
shaping, dispersion-induced destruction of the driving
pulse will become a major limitation. For ionizing ﬁelds,
free electrons lead to two dispersion-related processes:
temporal broadening and blueshift of the carrier fre-
quency. Both effects lower the maximum ponderomotive
potential see Eq. 20 and hence decrease max see
Eq. 21 during propagation, limiting the growth of the
near-cutoff
harmonics.
We
denote
the
dispersion-
induced pulse destruction length as Ldisp.
How can plasma-induced dispersion be minimized?
By lowering ionization. This, however, lowers the maxi-
mum harmonic photon energy. Use of a longer, i.e., in-
frared IR driver wavelength may offer a way out.
Then, according to Eq. 21, any selected max achiev-
able at NIR can be produced at reduced intensity
EIR2=ENIR2NIR/IR2 as compared to the intensity
ENIR2 required at NIR, and consequently at an expo-
nentially reduced ionization rate wi. This weakens the
radiating atomic dipole, dh
wi Eqs. 16 and 22, but
the enhanced coherent buildup may overcompensate
this detrimental effect Yakovlev et al., 2007; Ivanov et
al., 2008.
Indeed, the harmonic photon yield Fh at max is pro-
portional to Nhdh2, with Nh denoting the number of
74Constant et al., 1999; Schnürer et al., 1999; Hergott et al.,
2002; Takahashi et al., 2002, 2004; Goulielmakis, Schultze, et
al., 2008.
75Phase-matched and quasi-phase-matched QPM HHG in
the VUV-XUV-SXR spectral range has been experimentally
demonstrated by Kapteyn, Murnane, and co-workers, see, e.g.,
Rundquist et al., 1998; Durfee et al., 1999; Gibson et al., 2003,
2004; Paul et al., 2003; Zhang et al., 2004, 2005 for a review,
see, Paul et al., 2006, and Zepf et al., 2007. Rapid destruction
of the driver pulse due to strong ionization prevented the po-
tential of QPM HHG from being fully exploited.
0
0,2
0,3
0,5
0,7
0,9
1,0
0
1
Delay [fs]
a
(b)
0
10
20
30
40
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
(a)
-4
-2
0
2
4
80 as
80 eV
130 as
≈
τ
36 eV
≈
≈
τ
 ≈
Photoelectron energy [eV]
x
x
x
x

FIG. 39. Color Current frontiers of attosecond technology.
a Attosecond streaking spectrograms of isolated XUV pulses
generated and recorded with few-cycle, a 3.5 fs and b
5 fs 750-nm pulses. Low-energy spectrogram: carrier pho-
ton energy 36 eV; target atoms: argon Sansone et al., 2006.
High-energy spectrogram: carrier photon energy 80 eV; tar-
get atoms: neon Goulielmakis, Schultze, et al., 2008. Mea-
surements yielded XUV pulse durations of 78 and 130 as, re-
spectively.
197
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 37 (native text) -----
dipoles radiating max in phase. Ultimately, Nh is pro-
portional to Ldisp. The difference in refractive index be-
tween the fundamental and high-order harmonic waves
induced by free electrons of density Ne scales as
nL
Ne
wi. As a consequence, Ldisp
1/n
1/Ne

1/wi. The maximum achievable photon yield at fre-
quency max therefore scales as
Fh 
 Nhdh2 
 1/wiEL.
46
This result predicts favorable scaling with wavelength,
given that a moderate increase of L allows dramatic
reduction of wiEL owing to the extremely nonlinear
dependence of the tunnelling rate on the laser ﬁeld
strength EL, which scales as 1/L. Equation 46 is valid
as long as dispersion is dominated by free electrons. A
more elaborate analysis of Yakovlev et al. 2007 cor-
roborates the above conclusions.
IR-driven HHG was pioneered by L’Huillier and co-
workers Balcou et al., 1992 and DiMauro and co-
workers Sheehy et al., 1999, followed by studies of
Bellini 2000 and Shan and Chang 2001. As pointed
out by DiMauro, a long driver wavelength beneﬁts
HHG and strong-ﬁeld interaction in many ways Schultz
et al., 2007; Tate et al., 2007 and may result in keV at-
tosecond pulses Seres et al., 2005.
B. Relativistic electrons interacting with few-cycle light
1. Intense attosecond VUV to soft-x-ray pulses via surface
HHG?
So far, we have been concerned with light-matter in-
teractions at intensities where the electric ﬁeld is strong
enough to ionize atoms, but too weak to accelerate the
freed electrons to speeds approaching the speed of light
in vacuum, c. The electron’s quiver energy in the light
ﬁeld becomes comparable to its rest energy when the
normalized amplitude of the vector potential
a0 = eA0/mec
47
becomes comparable to or larger than unity, deﬁning the
regime of relativistic light-electron interactions. In terms
of laser intensity IL and laser wavelength L, it can
be
expressed
as
a0
2=ILL
2 /1.371018 W m2/cm2.
Present-day femtosecond laser technology allows a0 to
approach 100 Mourou et al., 2006. As ionization occurs
at much lower intensities, bound-electron nonlinear op-
tics is virtually “switched off” for a01. That is, nonlin-
ear response of matter associated with the motion of
electrons near the atomic core is relevant only at the
leading edge of ultraintense laser pulses, with only a tiny
fraction of the laser pulse “feeling” this response. How-
ever, in this regime, free electrons respond in a nonlin-
ear fashion. Indeed, the magnetic component of the Lor-
entz force vBL becomes comparable to that of the
electric component EL. As the electron’s velocity v is
initially acquired from EL, modiﬁcation of this velocity
by BL implies a nonlinear response of the electron to the
ﬁeld.
The main advantage of free-electron or relativistic
nonlinear optics over its counterpart based on bound
electrons is that the ﬁeld strength can be increased vir-
tually without limitation. Higher intensities tend to in-
duce a more pronounced nonlinear response, offering
the potential for more efﬁcient conversion of low-
energy laser photons into high-energy photons and
electrons. Striking examples of this potential include the
predicted conversion of more than 10% of the laser
pulse energy into that of a relativistic electron bunch
accelerated in a broken plasma wave “bubble” in the
fs
IL= 1021 W/cm2
Al filter
Reflected & filtered
Incident
Electron density, ne [10
cm-3]
Target surface
solid
vacuum
(a)
(b)
20eV> >70eV

X= 84 as
 =1.55 eV
L=5 fs
L
Plasma
Target
23
Target surface
Solid
Vacuum
Distance from target surface /λ L
L
(b)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
Reflected
pulse
Incident pulse
L
Time / T
0
1
0
-1
1
FIG. 40. Color High-order harmonic generation on a surface
exposed to ultrashort-pulsed laser radiation at relativistic in-
tensities. a Incident and reﬂected few-cycle laser wave, with
the latter containing high-frequency components. Their isola-
tion by a band-pass ﬁlter in this example between 20 eV and
70 eV is predicted to result in a single burst of attosecond
duration. b Temporal evolution of the electron density of a
preformed plasma with scale length Lp=L/4 upon exposure
to a p-polarized, cosine-shaped few-cycle NIR pulse 	L=5 fs,
L=750 nm incident at 45° at the surface with its peak at mo-
ment t=0 and a peak amplitude of the normalized vector po-
tential of a0=3. The relativistic motion of the plasma surface
excursions on the order of L/4 over periods of TL/4 is evi-
dent in the evolution of the electron density distribution
shown in false-color representation. Sharpening the oscilla-
tion peaks of the reﬂected pulse are conspicuous, indicative of
a highly efﬁcient conversion 10% of the incident IR light
into UV or VUV light with sub-fs temporal structure. From
Tsakiris et al., 2006.
198
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 38 (native text) -----
forward direction76 Pukhov and Meyer-ter-Vehn, 2002
or into sub-fs and as VUV and XUV emission upon
reﬂection from or transmission through a solid surface.77
In particular, the relativistic interaction of a few-cycle
pulse with a solid surface Fig. 40 has been predicted to
result in attosecond pulses with unprecedented power
Naumova, Nees, et al., 2004; Gordienko et al., 2005;
Baeva et al., 2006a, 2006b; Tsakiris et al., 2006. The
theoretically predicted slow roll-off of the harmonic in-
tensity according to the power law Ih
−5/2 Gordienko
et al., 2004, later corrected to Ih
−8/3 in Baeva et al.
2006a was recently corroborated experimentally to
keV photon energies Dromey et al., 2006, 2007.78 The-
oretical analysis also indicates that i reﬂected light
from the oscillating plasma mirror suffers a Doppler up-
shift up to
max  4max
2
L = 41 + a0
2L
48
and the emission of these photons is conﬁned to small
fractions of the laser period, of the order of
	cutoff  TL/4max
2
,
49
resulting in a periodic train of high-energy photon
bursts. Recently Baeva et al. 2006a have reﬁned this
simple model for the super-relativistic regime, a01.
Driving the interaction with a few-cycle laser ﬁeld and
suitable spectral ﬁltering Tsakiris et al., 2006 or longer
pulses with time-dependent ellipticity of their polariza-
tion Baeva et al., 2006b may lead to single attosecond
pulse generation;79 see Fig. 41 Tsakiris et al., 2006; Gei-
ssler et al., 2007. A train of sub-fs pulses was recently
76Invented by Pukhov and Meyer-ter-Vehn 2002 in numeri-
cal studies and ﬁrst demonstrated experimentally by Faure et
al., 2004; Geddes et al., 2004; Mangles et al., 2004. For a review,
see Pukhov and Gordienko, 2006. Geissler and Meyer-ter-
Vehn 2006 were the ﬁrst to point out the beneﬁts of few-cycle
driver pulses.
77Reﬂection: Naumova, Sokolov, et al., 2004; Pirozhkov et al.,
2006; Tsakiris et al., 2006; Geissler et al., 2007. Transmission:
Mikhailova et al., 2005. For a discussion of relativistic nonlin-
ear optical phenomena, see Bulanov et al., 1994; Lichters et al.,
1996; Gordienko et al., 2004; Mourou et al., 2006.
78Different contributions to the process are discussed in
Tarasevitsch et al., 2007, and Thaury et al., 2007.
79Spatial ﬁltering can also isolate a single pulse in case of
L-sized interaction volume Naumova, Nees, et al., 2004.
FIG. 41. Color Attosecond pulses from surface HHG, pre-
dicted by numerical simulations. Left panels, high-order har-
monic spectra generated by a Gaussian-shaped few-cycle NIR
laser pulse 	L=5 fs, L=0.8 m, a0=20 impinging at a 45°
angle of incidence on a planar target with a step-like density
proﬁle red lines and as transmitted through different spectral
ﬁlters green lines. Right panels, corresponding temporal pro-
ﬁle of the reﬂected radiation transmitted through the ﬁlters.
The simulations predict isolated attosecond pulses in different
spectral ranges. From Tsakiris et al., 2006.
0
Conversion efficiency, ηX
Normalized vector potential, a
20eV> >70eV

80eV> >200eV

400eV> >1000eV

10-1
10-2
10-3
10-4
10-5
10-6
10-7
10-8
1
10
100
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
FIG. 42. Color Production efﬁciency of ﬁltered attosecond
pulses emerging from few-cycle-driven surface harmonic gen-
eration for three different spectral ranges isolated by the ﬁl-
ters speciﬁed in Fig. 41. as a function of the normalized vector
potential. Simulation parameters other than the vector poten-
tial are the same as in Fig. 41. From Tsakiris et al., 2006.
199
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 39 (native text) -----
observed from the interaction driven by a multicycle la-
ser pulse Nomura et al., 2009.
Figure 41 reveals several striking differences when
compared with atomic HHG. First, isolated sub-fs pulse
generation appears to be feasible for a wide range of
frequencies including bands far below max. Second, in-
crease of the ﬁlter bandwidth does not compromise the
quality of single-pulse isolation up to bandwidths of
more than an octave, implying isolated soft-x-ray pulses
of a few attoseconds in duration. Last but not least, the
efﬁciency of few-cycle-driven surface HHG is predicted
to surpass that of atomic HHG by several orders of mag-
nitude Fig. 42. If these predictions can be veriﬁed, few-
cycle-driven surface HHG will open up a new chapter in
attosecond science.
2. Attosecond electron and hard-x-ray pulses?
Several theoretical studies suggest that the interaction
of ultraintense few-cycle light with relativistic electrons
may result in the production of isolated attosecond rela-
tivistic electron Naumova, Sokolov, et al., 2004; Ma et
al., 2006; Sakai et al., 2006; Varin and Piché, 2006 and
hard-x-ray Zhang et al., 2006 pulses. As an example,
here we review a scheme proposed by Saldin et al. 2004
and Zholents and Fawley 2004, in which a few-cycle
pulse acts as a sub-fs electron energy modulator, permit-
ting sub-fs bunch slicing. The concept draws on the in-
teraction of a strong, but nonrelativistic, few-cycle light
ﬁeld with an ultrashort femtosecond bunch of ul-
trarelativistic electrons W1 MeV, in the static, peri-
odic magnetic ﬁeld of an undulator80 and explained in
Fig. 43. A several-millijoule energy, cosine-shaped, few-
cycle near-infrared pulse 	L=5 fs at L=800 nm is
capable—within merely two magnet periods—of intro-
ducing a sub-fs, central peak energy offset of some
40–50 MeV, which exceeds by a factor of 2 the energy
shift induced in any other portion of the bunch. If the
initial energy spread of the electron bunch is a small
fraction of this light-induced energy shift, selecting the
upshifted energy band at the output of a magnetic chi-
cane Fig. 43 results in a sub-fs ultrarelativistic electron
bunch. Injection of this sub-fs electron bunch into a sec-
ond undulator with a much shorter magnet period may
allow generation of sub-fs hard-x-ray pulses up to peak
powers at the 100-GW level Saldin et al., 2004 by free-
electron lasing Kroll et al., 1981; Feldhaus et al., 2005.
80The utility of this interaction, known as the inverse free-
electron laser Palmer, 1972; Courant et al., 1985; Sears et al.,
2005, has been demonstrated for manipulating relativistic
electron bunches, including microbunching Liu et al., 1998;
Sung et al., 2006, phase locking to a laser wave Kimura et al.,
2001, 2004 as well as acceleration Musumeci et al., 2005.
?L
Energy
gain of
electrons
Energy
transfer
to
electrons
Propagation
Sub-fs
electron
bunch
?w
Magnetic undulator
Magnetic chicane
S
S
S
N
N
N
+
-
L
Energy
gain of
electrons
Energy
transfer
to
electrons
Propagation
Sub-fs
electron
bunch
u
Magnetic undulator
Magnetic chicane
S
S
S
N
N
N
+
-
λ
FIG. 43. Color Principle of sub-fs electron bunch slicing, by light-ﬁeld-induced energy modulation of a relativistic electron beam.
Energy transfer between the wiggling electron beam and the copropagating laser beam ELt polarized along the direction of the
wiggling
motion
can
take
place
owing
to
the
transverse
component
vxt
of
the
electron’s
velocity:
dW/dt
=−vxtELt. The direction of energy transfer at the interface of bending magnets, where vxt is maximum, is depicted by arrows
in the bottom panel. The undulator period  u is chosen such that the electron beam is delayed by the laser wavelength L with
respect to the laser wave upon traveling one undulator period. As a consequence, those sub-laser-wavelength, sub-fs portions of
the electron bunch that gain energy in one undulator period will also gain energy in the next one. In between, electrons will lose
energy, repeatedly, from one undulator period to the next. This inverse free-electron laser IFEL effect results in an electron
beam carrying an energy spectrum modulated following the oscillating electric ﬁeld of the laser ﬁeld at the output of the undulator.
If IFEL is implemented with a cosine-shaped few-cycle laser ﬁeld, maximum energy shift will be conﬁned to a fraction of the half
laser cycle at the pulse peak. This sub-fs portion of the electron bunch can be sliced out with a magnetic chicane and an aperture.
200
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 40 (native text) -----
3. Next-generation accelerators driven by few-cycle light?
Byer and his co-workers recognized that the peak ac-
celeration gradient of 50 MeV/m of conventional
radio-frequency rf accelerators can potentially be in-
creased to GeV/m by using laser instead of rf ﬁelds in
dielectric instead of metal structures for acceleration.81
Efﬁcient operation of such a laser-driven vacuum accel-
erator relies on few-cycle driver pulses with a controlled
CE phase.82 The use of intense waveform-controlled
few-cycle light in future linear electron accelerators will
naturally
lead
to
high-energy
attosecond
electron
bunches and thereby extend the frontier of attosecond
science into high-energy physics.
VII. REAL-TIME OBSERVATION AND CONTROL OF
ATOMIC-SCALE ELECTRON AND NUCLEAR DYNAMICS
Real-time observation of microscopic motion requires
the ability to trigger and subsequently probe the process
under scrutiny.83 The instants of triggering and probing
must be deﬁned with an accuracy sufﬁcient to resolve
details of the motion. This accuracy is dictated by the
duration of the triggering and probing events, the accu-
racy of controlling the delay between them, and the S/N
ratio, see Fig. 4. Dynamical information is provided by
an observable varying as a function of the delay between
triggering and probing events in a pump-probe measure-
ment Fig. 44. This quantity varies on the time scale at
which the motion occurs, affording the observer real-
time access to the process. If the observable also yields
information on the location of the moving particles, a
series of freeze-frame pump-probe images allows re-
trieval of the microscopic motion. We refer to this as
four-dimensional 4D imaging.
Microscopic dynamics outside the atomic core fall into
two major categories: i motion of atoms as a whole
leading to structural rearrangements in molecules and
condensed matter and ii motion of electrons inside and
between atoms. The natural time scales for these par-
ticles to travel atomic distances extend from several
femtoseconds to several picoseconds and from several
attoseconds to tens of femtoseconds, respectively Figs.
1 and 2. Real-time observation and control of atomic
motion relies on femtosecond laser techniques, using
cycle-averaged quantities such as ﬁeld amplitude and
carrier frequency for initiating, probing, and controlling
dynamics. Attosecond technology constitutes a radical
shift: the oscillatory laser ﬁeld along with a sub-fs XUV
pulse takes over this job, potentially improving the res-
olution of probing and the precision of control by orders
of magnitude.
The main technological pillars for attosecond science
are shown in Fig. 45. Depending on the type of micro-
scopic process to be studied and the questions to be
asked, these tools are to be used in different combina-
tions. Tables I–III provide an overview of the toolbox
within attosecond technology, summarizing the different
options of how to trigger, steer, probe, and image elec-
tronic and nuclear dynamics. Many of the tools listed are
already available, other will hopefully emerge in the
near future. In this section we review the status and ad-
dress some prospects of attosecond spectroscopy and
control. In doing so, we ﬁrst consider the simplest case
of isolated atoms Sec. VII.A and then move towards
ever more complex systems, from simple diatomic mol-
ecules, through large biomolecules and supramolecular
assemblies, to mesoscopic systems and condensed mat-
ter. We show how tools from our attosecond toolbox
Tables I–III, referred to using the code I–III/A–E/1–
2, are to be combined to address a wealth of questions
in a wide range of different systems.
A. Electronic motion in atoms: Excitation, relaxation, and
correlations
Electronic motion inside or around atoms can be trig-
gered with sub-fs precision either by optical-ﬁeld ioniza-
tion or by a sub-fs VUV, XUV, or x-ray pulse. In this
section we address schemes for attosecond spectroscopy
based on these scenarios and review experiments.
81Huang et al., 1996; Salamin and Keitel, 2000; Wang et al.,
2001, 2007; Plettner et al., 2005.
82Plettner et al., 2006.
83Kinematically complete collision experiments also provide
insight into attosecond dynamics, but a delayed probe for real-
time observation is not available in these experiments. See,
e.g., Moshammer et al., 1997; Chatzidimitriou-Dreismann et al.,
2003.
Pump pulse
Probe pulse
Sample
Detector
Photons, electrons,
or ions
Photon or electron
energy or momentum
distribution
FIG. 44. Color Principle of pump-probe time-resolved
spectroscopy.
Real-time observation
& control of electronic motion
on atomic & sub-atomic length scales
Strong
controlled
infrared
visible
ultraviolet
light
fields
,
,
,
Synchronized
sub
VUV, XUV,
-
pulses
-fs
X ray
for
Advanced
detection
systems
differential
ion, electron,
photon
detection
FIG. 45. Major technological pillars of attosecond science.
201
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 41 (native text) -----
1. Electronic excitation and relaxation dynamics: Attosecond
streaking and tunneling spectroscopy
Core excitation of atoms causes a wealth of multielec-
tron processes. Figure 46 presents a few examples. They
unfold on a time scale ranging from tens of attoseconds
to tens of femtoseconds. Direct time-domain access
promises to yield deeper insight into these processes and
to identify ways of affecting them. This, in turn, may
TABLE I. Toolbox of attosecond technology: triggering and steering the motion of electrons.
202
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 42 (native text) -----
pave the way toward the development of compact, efﬁ-
cient XUV and x-ray lasers.
We assume that the atoms are hit by a sub-fs XUV or
x-ray henceforth, brieﬂy, XUV pulse. Depending on
the XUV photon energy, atoms may be ionized or ex-
cited in several ways, as shown in Fig. 46. Core-level
excitation typically triggers numerous intra-atomic and
molecular processes including shakeup of one or more
electrons and a number of subsequent relaxation pro-
cesses, such as Auger decay, Coster-Kronig decay, or
cascaded decay phenomena. Inner-valence ionization,
on the other hand, usually does not open a channel for
double ionization, but can—if the ion is in close proxim-
ity to other atoms e.g., in a cluster or in an endohedral
fullerene—result in energy transfer to its neighbor via
TABLE II. Toolbox of attosecond technology: probing and imaging the motion of electrons.
203
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 43 (native text) -----
interatomic and molecular Coulombic decay.84
Two approaches to accessing sub-fs electron dynamics
in the time domain have been demonstrated so far: at-
tosecond streaking spectroscopy AST is an extension
of streaking to positive-energy electrons containing
atom-speciﬁc dynamic information such as Auger elec-
trons, whereas in attosecond tunneling spectroscopy
ATS electrons shaken up to the valence band are re-
leased from negative-energy bound states by tunnel
ionization; see Fig. 46. Both approaches have in com-
mon that the sub-fs electric ﬁeld transients of VIS and
NIR light sample the process under study. As the prob-
ability of laser-ﬁeld-induced transitions in these tech-
niques may approach or even reach 100%, the sub-fs
XUV pulse initiating the dynamics is allowed to have a
low ﬂux type IE1-IIC1 spectroscopy; see Tables I and
II, leading to a weak-pump–strong-probe scenario.
Energetic excitation of atoms or molecules usually
leads to ejection of one or more electrons. Their
temporal evolution often carries information about
inner-atomic
dynamic
processes.
For
instance,
the
emission of Auger electrons mirrors the decay of a core
hole. Therefore resolving the emission process in time
by AST provides direct information on the temporal
evolution of inner-shell dynamics. Figure 47 shows simu-
lated streak images of Auger electron spectra versus de-
lay between the sub-fs triggering XUV pulse and the
few-cycle probing laser ﬁeld Drescher et al., 2002.
These spectrograms, if recorded with satisfactory S/N ra-
tio, allow retrieval of the temporal evolution of the elec-
tron emission and hence of the core-hole decay, as dis-
cussed in Sec. V.D.3. Drawing on this concept, AST
resulted in the ﬁrst real-time observation of the decay of
84Cederbaum et al., 1997; Marburger et al., 2003; Averbukh et
al., 2004; Jahnke et al., 2004; Averbukh and Cederbaum, 2006;
Morishita et al., 2006; Öhrwall et al., 2004; Barth et al., 2006;
Kuleff and Cederbaum, 2007; Vaval and Cederbaum, 2007.
TABLE III. Toolbox of attosecond technology: detecting observables in attosecond time-resolved experiments.
204
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 44 (native text) -----
an inner-shell vacancy Drescher et al., 2002.85
The lifetime of the inner-shell vacancy acquired in the
above time-resolved measurement can also be inferred
85Short-pulse-induced
Auger
decay
was
realized
before
Schins et al., 1994, 1996, nevertheless with the decay remain-
ing unresolved because of the long sub-ps duration of the
x-ray excitation.
Time delay[fs]
0
1
2
3
4
5
38
[eV]
46
44
42
40
36
e
L
L
ω
ω
Photo electron energy
FIG. 48. Color Attosecond streaking spectrogram of two
coalescent Lorentz resonances decaying over disparate time
scales: 	h,1=0.4 fs and 	h,2=40 fs. Simultaneous launching of
Auger electrons with different emission times manifests itself
in the appearance of a broad oscillating feature displaying the
short-lived emission and sidebands spaced by L from the
peak of the main lines indicated by arrows with their long
temporal extension reﬂecting the duration of the long-lived
emission. From Wickenhauser et al., 2006.
FIG. 46. Color Electronic excitation via XUV and x-ray pho-
tons followed by relaxation, which can be probed in real time
via attosecond streaking spectroscopy and attosecond tunnel-
ing spectroscopy. The new spectroscopies draw on nonlinear
free-free and bound-free electronic transitions, respectively, in-
duced by waveform-controlled few-cycle light. a, f Valence-
electron emission, b core-electron emission, accompanied by
c Auger decay or d valence-band excitation shakeup, or
both e. g Resonant core-level excitation and subsequent h
participant and i spectator decay. The basic idea for the
graphical representation is borrowed from Brühwiler et al.,
2002.
h < TL/2
/2
h > TL/2
/2
-2 -1
1
2
h = 0.2 fs
a
h = 0.5 fs
b
-2 -1
0
1
2
h = 1 fs
c
Delay [fs]
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
h = 2 fs
h = 5 fs
d
e
Sampling by laser field
Resolution  100 as
Sampling by pulse envelope
Resolution  1 fs
-
-
0
h = 0.2 fs
a

(a)
a
h = 0.5 fs
b

fs
b
-
-
 = 1 fs
c
h = 2 fs
h = 5
d
e
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
30
50
50
30
40
40
30
40
-2 -1
0
1
2
-
-
50
50
50
40
40
30
30
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Photoelectron kinetic energy [eV]
FIG. 47. Color Streaking spectrograms of Auger electron
emission, simulated by V. Yakovlev and A. Scrinzi for different
core-hole decay times, a 	h=0.2 fs, b 	h=0.5 fs, c 	h=1 fs,
d 	h=2 fs, e 	h=5 fs, using a few-cycle NIR streaking laser
ﬁeld 	L=5 fs, L=0.75 m and a sub-fs 	X=0.5 fs XUV ex-
citation pulse. Depending on whether the electron emission
time 	h is shorter or longer than the half wave cycle TL/2, the
spectrograms look different. For 	hTL/2, we see variations
of the streaked spectra within the laser cycle left panels. This
subcycle variation in the streaked spectra tends to disappear as
the emission time becomes longer than TL/2. Instead, side-
bands spaced by the laser photon energy appear for a delay
range dictated by the duration of emission and the laser pulse.
Variation of the sideband amplitude vs delay is the convolution
of the emission process and the amplitude envelope of the
laser ﬁeld. If the laser pulse is short enough, the duration of
electron emission can be determined by deconvolution. In the
sub-fs domain, the process is sampled by the oscillating ﬁeld,
whereas in the femtosecond domain, the pulse envelope takes
over the role of the “sampling function.” It has to offer a res-
olution on the order of TL/2, if all details of the motion, pos-
sibly ranging from the sub-fs to multi-fs regime, are to be un-
covered. This is ensured only by a few-cycle streaking ﬁeld.
From Drescher et al., 2003.
205
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 45 (native text) -----
from
time-integral,
spectrally
resolved
brieﬂy,
frequency-domain
measurements
Jurvansuu
et
al.,
2001. However, retrieval of dynamics from frequency-
domain spectroscopy becomes challenging when the ﬁ-
nal state of the dynamical evolution can be reached via
several channels, resulting in complex spectral structures
due to resonances between competing quantum transi-
tions. A prominent example is the Fano resonance,
which emerges whenever a positive-energy state can be
accessed by more than one quantum pathways; see Figs.
46f–46i. Fano resonances have been ubiquitous in
time-integral studies.86 AST was found to be capable of
exploring details of complex temporal dynamics related
to coherent excitation of several nearby Fano reso-
nances, which are only partially accessible by frequency-
domain spectroscopy Wickenhauser et al., 2005, 2006;
Zhao and Lin, 2005, see Fig. 48, and to be sensitive to
off-diagonal elements of the excitation density matrix,
opening the way to monitor decoherence.
AST can probe not only relaxation but also excitation
of the electronic shell. Indeed, detailed comparison of
the temporal history of the electron emission processes
populating states A and B in Figs. 46b and 46d may
shed light on how part of the absorbed photon energy
ends up promoting another electron into an excited state
shakeup in Fig. 46d.
AST probes positive-energy freed electrons; see
Figs. 46b–46d. Alternatively, intra-atomic or intramo-
lecular processes can also be interrogated by probing
intermediate states of negative-energy bound elec-
trons. This is exactly what ATS does by probing the
population of valence-band energy levels that are unoc-
cupied before excitation; see Figs. 46d and 46e. In
this way, ATS is capable of tracing how valence states
are being populated and subsequently depleted, follow-
ing a core-level excitation, allowing real-time observa-
tion of both excitation and subsequent relaxation of the
electronic shell of a core-excited atom Uiberacket et al.,
2007, or, e.g., the dynamics of excited electronic states
in a dissociating molecule Gagnon et al., 2007.
While AST relies on electron energy analysis IIIB1,
ATS draws on counting ions of different charge states
IIIA1. Again, as a ﬁrst step, a core electron is ejected
by a sub-fs XUV pulse Fig. 46b. The ﬁrst question
that arises is how the electronic shell of the ion gets
excited, i.e., how does “shakeup” occur? Is it instanta-
86Examples include photoabsorption Beutler, 1935; Fano,
1935, 1961, electron, neutron, and Raman scattering Adair et
al., 1949; Simpson and Fano, 1963; Cerdeira et al., 1973, and
show up in such disparate systems as atoms Lambropoulos
and Zoller, 1981; Rzazewski and Eberly, 1981, quantum-well
structures and quantum dots Göres et al., 2000, and scanning
tunneling microscopes Madhaven et al., 1998.
FIG. 49. Color Attosecond real-time observation of light-ﬁeld-induced electron tunneling Uiberacker et al., 2007. A 250-as,
95-eV XUV pulse sets a valence electron free from neon atoms. The excess photon energy gives way to shakeup, promoting an
electron to an excited state in the valence band. A time-delayed, waveform-controlled, few-cycle pulse 	L=5 fs, L=0.75 m
probes the transient population of the shakeup states by ﬁeld ionization, resulting in doubly charged neon ions, Ne2+. The squares
and the line ﬁve-point average depict the number of Ne2+ ions measured as a function of delay between the XUV excitation and
the probing NIR laser ﬁeld. The steplike increase in Ne2+ yield with the steps approximately separated by half the laser period
provides conclusive evidence for optical ﬁeld ionization responsible for the depletion of excited valence states, in accordance with
the theory of nonadiabatic tunneling by Yudin and Ivanov 2001a. The inset zooms in onto the central subcyle ionization step,
plotting data dots, squares, triangles obtained from different measurements, which reproducibly indicate that shakeup and
tunneling occur within less than 400 attoseconds. Kazansky and Kabachnik 2007c proposed a modiﬁcation of the above scheme
for studying tunneling in the absence of shakeup.
206
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 46 (native text) -----
neous as it is currently understood or is it possibly de-
layed? In principle, ATS may provide the answer by
sampling the buildup of population in previously unoc-
cupied valence states, such as state C in Fig. 46d. But
how can this population be probed with attosecond res-
olution using a femtosecond laser?
Theory87 Yudin and Ivanov, 2001b predicts that not
only in the conventional tunneling regime of Wb2Up,
but also in the intermediate regime of WbUp libera-
tion of electrons with binding energies of Wb!10 eV,88
by intense several-cycle NIR or IR pulses occurs via
nonadiabatic tunneling, with subcycle yield localized
within small fractions of the half oscillation cycles near
the wave crests. Proof-of-principle ATS experiments
Uiberacker et al., 2007 corroborated this prediction
see Fig. 49. The observed 400-as rise time of the Ne2+
yield indicates that shakeup occurs too fast to be re-
solved with the current tools. Nevertheless, this sub-fs
probe is sufﬁciently fast to sample a wide range of inner-
shell relaxation processes. This potential was proven by
tracing multielectron relaxation in xenon Penent et al.,
2005 following a 95 eV as excitation Uiberacker et al.,
2007. With recently improved tools, sub-1.5-cycle NIR
waveforms Schultze et al., 2007 and sub-100-as XUV
pulses Goulielmakis et al., 2008, details of shakeup and
nonadiabatic tunneling may also come to light.
With the increase of the excitation photon energy to-
wards the keV frontier and possibly beyond, AST and
ATS will provide direct, time-domain access to a vast
range of electronic dynamics, including those in mag-
netic materials. With their time resolution approaching
the atomic unit, comparative ATS and AST studies may
shed light on how energy absorbed by an atom is distrib-
uted among its electrons and how the electronic shell of
the atom is re-arranged following the loss of one or
more electrons Breidbach and Cederbaum, 2005 and
thereby on the fundamental question of electron corre-
lations.
2. Electronic relaxation and rearrangement: Attosecond
absorption spectroscopy
In the previous section we discussed how attosecond
electron dynamics can be probed with strong, controlled
light ﬁelds. Alternatively, sub-fs XUV pulses can also be
used as probe pulses. Transient absorption spectroscopy
Loh et al., 2007, 2008 with isolated attosecond XUV
and x-ray pulses IID1–IIID1; see Tables II and III will
also provide unprecedented insight into the relaxation
dynamics and rearrangement of the electronic system of
atoms or molecules following controlled excitation by a
waveform-controlled few-cycle IR or VIS pulse IC1-2;
see Table I or by an intense possibly shaped sub-fs
XUV or x-ray pulse ID1-2; see Table I. Isolated at-
tosecond XUV pulses with a spectral width of several
10 eV Schultze et al., 2007; Goulielmakis et al., 2008
provide ideal prerequisites for implementing attosecond
absorption spectroscopy AAS by extending the experi-
ments of Loh et al. 2007, 2008 into the time domain of
the electronic response of matter Breidbach and Ceder-
baum, 2005. This spectroscopy may give an answer to a
long-standing question in atomic and molecular physics:
How does the electronic system rearrange after the sud-
den removal or excitation of an electron?
3. Electron wave-packet motion: Attosecond photoelectron
spectroscopy
Consider the simplest case when a single-electron
bound wave packet is formed in an atom. Angle-
resolved sub-fs XUV photoelectron spectra have been
predicted to be sensitive to the instantaneous intra-
atomic or intramolecular electron density near the core,
enabling us to trace its dynamic changes with attosecond
resolution Yudin et al., 2005, 2006. As an example, con-
sider the electron wave-packet dynamics induced by a
strong linearly polarized IR ﬁeld during optical ﬁeld ion-
ization Smirnova, Spanner, and Ivanov, 2006. The laser
ﬁeld depletes the ground state stepwise, every half cycle,
via tunneling. While doing so, it also “shakes up” the
electron, populating several excited states; see Fig. 50.
87For a review of strong-ﬁeld ionization, see Popov, 2004. For
earlier papers, see Keldysh, 1964; Perelomov et al., 1966a,
1966b; Perelomov and Popov, 1967; Reiss, 1980a, 1980b, and
Faisal, 1987.
88For pulses approaching the single-cycle limit, which may
become available in the foreseeable future, this condition may
be further relaxed toward a few electron-volts.
XUV ionization
yield [arb. u.]
L [arb
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
2
4
6
8
10
XUV ionization
yield [arb. units]
EL
2
. units]
Population of
ground state
Total population
of all bound states
Time [fs]
FIG. 50. Color Attosecond XUV probing of strong-ﬁeld dy-
namics of a bound electron. Solid curve shows how the yield of
ions created by XUV-induced ionization depends on the ar-
rival time of the XUV pulse, relative to oscillations of the
two-cycle, NIR driving ﬁeld. As the bound electron wave
packet bx,t is stretched away from the core near the NIR
ﬁeld oscillation peaks, the high-momentum components de-
crease, because stretching the wave packet in coordinate space
implies compression in momentum space. This reduces the
bound-free transition matrix element and accounts for dips in
the XUV yield near the maxima of the NIR ﬁeld. Oscillations
of the total yield at the end of the laser pulse suggest that
nonadiabatic excitation during the laser pulse results in bound-
state dynamics following the laser pulse. From Smirnova et al.,
2006.
207
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 47 (native text) -----
This implies the formation and subsequent dynamics of
an electronic wave packet bound to the core. The step-
like decrease of the bound state population due to ﬁeld
ionization is, not surprisingly, also reﬂected in the XUV
ionization yield Fig. 50, which, however, shows much
richer dynamics. Its origin becomes transparent when
we realize that XUV absorption occurs near the core,
from the high-momentum components of the wave func-
tion. Consequently, attosecond photoelectron spectros-
copy APS uncovers the dynamics of these components
in the bound electron wave packet bx,t.89 Extended
with spin-sensitive detection, spin-orbit wave-packet dy-
namics Santra et al., 2006 can also be studied in real
time. Experimental implementation will draw on tech-
niques IC1-IID1-IIIB1/2 for triggering, probing, and de-
tection, respectively; see Tables I–III.
In the above example, a sub-fs XUV pulse was used to
explore the motion of a bound-electron wave packet in-
side an atom. Smirnova, Patchkovskii, and Spanner
2007 proposed that—along with some control over the
ionizing IR ﬁeld—it can also be used for determining the
spatiotemporal characteristics of the detached electron
wave packet, as it recollides with its parent ion. In this
case, the atom works like the tip of a STM microscope—
XUV photons can only be absorbed by free electrons in
its vicinity.
Attosecond atomic molecular electron dynamics can
also be initiated via resonant single-photon excitation
for tracing intra-atomic electron motion and electron-
electron interaction in real time. Consider the prototypi-
cal case of a helium atom Hu and Collins, 2006, 2007
exposed to a broadband VUV pulse which promotes
one of the two electrons from the ground state 1s into
the superposition state np with n=2,3,4,.... In this way,
an electron wave packet is launched into an atomic or-
bit; see Fig. 51a. This electron wave packet oscillates
between the core and its outer turning point, while the
other electron resides close to the nucleus in its ground
state. The strength of interaction between these two
electrons is therefore varying in time. The simulations of
Hu and Collins 2006 predict that the probability of
double ionization induced by a time-delayed sub-fs
XUV probe pulse signiﬁcantly varies with the center of
gravity position of the outer electron. If the attosecond
probe arrives when the outer electron is closest to the
inner one, i.e., correlation between the two electrons is
strongest, e.g., at a delay of 	=5.5 fs in Fig. 51b, double
ionization is most probable. On the other hand, it is least
likely when the electron reaches its outer turning point,
e.g., at 	=6.5 fs in Fig. 51b. The double ionization yield
can be measured by collecting He2+ as a function of de-
lay 	 between the UV pump and the XUV probe pulse.
Implementation therefore relies on techniques ID1-
IID1-IIIA1 for pumping, probing, and detection, respec-
tively; see Tables I–III. The variation of the pump-
probe-induced double ionization yield versus 	, once
measured, will display the motion of the excited electron
wave packet in real time. Detection of ejected electrons
in coincidence, discussed in the next section, will yield
89This dynamics is even richer in multielectron systems; see
Eichmann
et
al.,
2000;
Zon,
2000;
Lezius
et
al.,
2001;
Markevitch et al., 2003; Bryan et al., 2006. These studies can
also be extended to situations when the electron wave packet
is promoted into the continuum and may provide access to
effects such as Rabi ﬂopping from continuum states Dimitro-
vski et al., 2004.
XUV probing,
Free evolution
pumping,
He (1s np)
He (1s2)
pump = 23.7eV
2e ejection
probe = 90 eV
(a)
 = 5.5 fs
 = 5.9 fs
 = 6.3 fs
 = 6.7 fs
Electron energy, W2 [eV]
35
25
15
5
35
25
15
5
35
25
15
5
35
25
15
5
35
25
15
5
?
180 240 300 360
240 300 360
240 300
240 300 360
 = 7.1 fs
 = 7.5 fs
= 7.9 fs
= 8.3 fs
180 240 300 360 180 240 300 360 180 240 300 360 180 240
360
300
(a)
(b)
(c)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(d)
(h)
4 5
6
7
8
9 10 11
0.55
0.60
0.65
0.70
Total cross section
[1036 cm4 s]
(b)
VUV
,

 = 5.5 fs
 = 5.9 fs
 = 6.3 fs
 = 6.7 fs
Electron energy, W2 [eV]
35
25
15
5
35
25
15
5
35
25
15
5
35
25
15
5
35
25
15
5

180 240 300 360
240 300 360
240 300
240 300 360
 = 7.1 fs
 = 7.5 fs
= 7.9 fs
= 8.3 fs
180 240 300 360 180 240 300 360 180 240 300 360 180 240
360
300
(a)
(b)
(c)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(d)
(h)
l

35
25
15
5
180
35
25
15
5
2 [deg]
180

35
25
15
5
360 180

Time delay [fs]
(c)
FIG. 51. Color Tracing intra-atomic electron motion and
electron-electron interactions in helium Hu and Collins,
2006. a Relevant interactions with the VUV pump pump
=23.7 eV, 	pump=1.5 fs and XUV probe pulse probe=90 eV,
	probe=250 as. b Calculated probability of XUV-induced
double ionization vs pump-probe delay. c Contour plots
showing the angular and energy distribution of the second
electron for the ﬁrst electron emitted along the XUV ﬁeld po-
larization 1=90 deg vs delay 	. The second electron is
ejected with the largest probability in the opposite direction
2=270 deg. The total energy the two electrons carry is
35 eV. If ionization occurs when the excited electron wave
packet is at its outer turning point around 	=6.5 and 8.5 fs,
the inner electron beneﬁts from the vicinity of the core and
picks up almost all of the incoming XUV photon energy. The
outer electron is set free by the sudden change of the potential
as the inner electron leaves the atom shakeoff. 1 fs sooner or
later, when the outer electron arrives at the core, the two elec-
trons share the available excess energy, leaving the atom with
comparable energy. Adapted from Hu and Collins, 2006.
208
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 48 (native text) -----
further insight into interaction between the two elec-
trons and the way they share the energy of the absorbed
XUV photon.
4. Shedding light on electron-electron interactions: Attosecond
coincidence spectroscopy
Measurement of the ﬁnal momenta of all correlated
particles
produced
in
a
pump-probe
exposure
in
coincidence90 offers unprecedented insight into corre-
lated electron dynamics.91 In what follows, three proto-
typical interactions will exemplify the concept: i simul-
taneous two-electron ejection induced by a single
XUV photon, ii photoelectron and Auger electron
emission following absorption of a single XUV photon,
and iii XUV-pulse-triggered, strong-IR-ﬁeld-controlled
electron-electron collision.
Simultaneous two-electron photoemission. The intrigu-
ing questions of how the energy of the absorbed XUV
photon is shared between the two ejected electrons and
how this energy sharing depends on the distance be-
tween electrons in the intra-atomic dynamics discussed
in the previous section can be answered by combining
the attosecond pump-probe experiments ID1-IID1; see
Tables I and II outlined in Fig. 51a with coincidence
detection IIIB2 or IIIC2; see Table III. The results of
Hu and Collins 2006 summarized in Fig. 51c predict
pronounced variations of the energy sharing between
the two electrons as the moment of ionization is varied.
Correlation between two free electrons released by an
attosecond XUV pump pulse can also be resolved in
time by the same method Hu and Collins, 2007.
Auger decay. Inner shell XUV photoionization often
results in the ejection of two electrons, one via photo-
emission Fig. 46b, with energy WP, the other via Au-
ger decay Fig. 46c, with energy WA. When probing
Auger decay via standard AST, the XUV pump pulse
should be shorter than the process resolved. Smirnova et
al. 2005 showed how coincidence detection allows one
to abandon this stringent requirement. Consider a sub-fs
Auger decay initiated by a substantially longer, few-fs
XUV pulse. The total energy of the two electrons liber-
ated in the correlated process is ﬁxed by the relatively
well-deﬁned energy of the absorbed XUV photon: WP
+WA=X−Ip
++. The large uncertainty in WA caused by
the ultrafast decay translates into an equally large un-
certainty in WP; see Fig. 52a. Correlated spectra of
such shape appear whenever a two-particle energy con-
servation law is present.92
The correlated process can be completely character-
ized by attosecond streaking of the two-electron spectra
in a weak IR laser ﬁeld. The ﬁeld creates energy-shifted
“replicas” of the original spectrum via one-photon ab-
sorption and emission, with the spectral phase encoded
in the interference of these replicas with the original
spectrum Fig. 52b. Just as in SPIDER Fig. 31, the
time resolution is not limited by the XUV pulse dura-
tion, but rather by the jitter between the XUV and IR
pulses and by noise.
90Cold-target
recoil-ion-momentum
spectroscopy
COLTRIMS enables one to perform kinematically complete
experiments. See, e.g., Cocke and Olson 1991, Ullrich et al.
1997, and Dörner et al. 2000.
91Nicolaides et al., 2002; Mercouris et al., 2004, 2007a, 2007b;
Emmanouilidou and Rost, 2007; Morishita, Watanabe, and
Lin, 2007.
92See, e.g., Chan et al., 2002, 2003, 2004; and Fedorov et al.,
2004, 2005.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
0
1
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
(b)
Auger line
Width of XUV
(a)
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
0
1
2
3
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
0
1
2
3
–
(0)
A
P = Const
(c)
(d)
|g>
|1>
|2>
XUV
pump
Time [fs]
(b)
Auger line
Width of XUV
(a)
2
3
P
P
P =
(b)
Auger line
Width of XUV
-3
-2
-1
-3
-2
-1
WA – WA
(0)[in units of
]
L
W
W
W + W
[in units of
]
L
FIG. 52. Color Tracing sub-fs Auger decay triggered with a
1.2-fs
XUV
pulse
and
probed
with
a
weak
Ipeak
1010 W/cm2 NIR L=800 nm few-cycle streaking ﬁeld via
concidence detection Smirnova et al., 2005. a Correlated
spectrum of the liberated photoelectron and Auger electron.
b Correlated electron spectrum recorded in the presence of a
weak IR ﬁeld, which creates sidebands of the original spec-
trum. c Model Auger decay. d Reconstruction of the decay
dynamics: solid line is the exact decay, dots represent numeri-
cal reconstruction from a simulated spectrum containing 105
coincidence counts and recorded with a 160-meV energy reso-
lution with 100-as jitter between the pump and probe pulses.
The result indicates that a temporal resolution below the
atomic unit of time 24 as may be feasible using a 1 fs XUV
pump pulse. From Smirnova et al., 2005.
209
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 49 (native text) -----
This approach can be used for any process resulting in
the emission of two charged particles with ﬁxed total
energy, such as two-electron single-photon ionization.
Processes of particular interest include shakeoff, Zeno
and anti-Zeno stages of decay Kofman and Kurizki,
2000, electron rearrangements in the core, and nonex-
ponential decay due to a structured continuum.
Nonsequential double ionization. With coincidence de-
tection, strong-ﬁeld-controlled recollision provides time-
domain access to the process of nonsequential double
ionization. If the temporal evolution of the strong laser
ﬁeld is well controlled and known, the vector potential
connects the moments of liberation of the two electrons
after recollision with their ﬁnal momenta. The SFA
along with a few additional assumptions93 offers a simple
means of tagging the moments of liberation by the vec-
tor potential ALt, which induces changes in the ﬁnal
velocities of the ejected electrons that depends on their
moments of creation. Coincidence measurement of the
ﬁnal electron velocities then allows retrieval of the his-
tory of their liberation. This approach provided insight94
into NSDI and inneratomic electron thermalization fol-
lowing the recollision Liu et al., 2006.
If the recolliding electron is previously freed by the
strong laser ﬁeld, there is a direct connection between its
energy Wr and the instant of recollision tr, as shown by
Fig. 20. Recent theoretical studies backed by experi-
ments suggest that liberation of the electron with a
sub-fs XUV pulse and its subsequent control with a
polarization-shaped laser pulse will allow one to ma-
nipulate
tr
and
Wr
of
the
recolliding
electron
independently.95 Along with advances in theory96 re-
quired for reliable retrieval of the moments at which the
two electrons appear in the continuum after collision,
this attosecond control may provide insight into the dy-
namics of electron-electron collision, as well as into
more complex multielectron collision phenomena.
B. Electronic and nuclear motion in complex systems: From
simple diatomics to biomolecules and clusters
The fundamental theory for molecules is that of the
electronic structure. In the Born-Oppenheimer approxi-
mation electrons are considered to instantly adjust to
the current position of the nuclei. The equilibrium mo-
lecular structure is determined by the minimum of the
electron energy. Change in this energy with nuclear po-
sition creates the force setting the atoms in motion. The
resultant rearrangement of atoms is responsible for a
change of chemical composition and biological function.
Consequently, the fundamental time scale of chemistry
and biochemistry is deﬁned by the atomic motion in
molecules. It unfolds on a femtosecond scale Fig. 1 and
has been traced by femtosecond laser pulses in real
time.97
Recent work suggests that attosecond-scale electronic
dynamics in molecules may affect chemical changes.98
Insight into electronic wave-packet motion in molecules
Breidbach and Cederbaum, 2003; Krause et al., 2005;
Remacle and Levine, 2006a may also shed light on the
microscopic mechanisms behind many chemical and bio-
logical phenomena such as electron delocalization in
aromatic molecules Poater et al., 2005, biological en-
ergy conversion processes Mirkin and Ratner, 1992; Mi-
yashita et al., 2005, DNA damage and repair Yavin et
al., 2005, long-range electron transfer in biomolecules
Szent-Györgyi, 1941; Gray and Winkler, 2005, and its
role in biological signal transduction. Transferring elec-
trons efﬁciently inside and between molecules Gold-
smith et al., 2005 is also a prerequisite for molecular
electronics99 and molecular photovoltaics. Molecule-
substrate electron transfer, on the other hand, may be
relevant to ﬁghting radiation damage in biological imag-
ing with atomic resolution Fill et al., 2008. Insight into
the interplay between collective and collisional pro-
cesses is of key importance to explore and possibly uti-
lize collective phenomena in many-body systems; clus-
ters offer an ideal test bed for addressing these
phenomena Fennel et al., 2007.
Motivated by a number of questions, we review ap-
proaches to accessing electron dynamics in ever more
complex atomic assemblies directly in the time domain.
1. Attosecond photoelectron spectroscopy
Just as in atoms, electronic motion in molecules can
be triggered by creating a coherent superposition of two
or more electronic states. Here we review how this mo-
tion can be tracked by APS, by measuring the angular
momentum distribution of photoelectrons produced by
93Supported by extensive classical simulations of double ion-
ization in strong laser ﬁeld performed by Haan, Eberly, and
co-workers: Haan et al., 2002, 2006; Panﬁli et al., 2002; Ho et
al., 2005.
94See, e.g., Weckenbrock et al., 2004, and Zeidler et al., 2005.
95Bandrauk and Shon, 2002; Schafer et al., 2004; Johnsson et
al., 2005, 2006; Kitzler and Lezius, 2005; Biegert et al., 2006;
Figueira de Morisson Faria et al., 2006; Kitzler et al., 2006.
96See, e.g., Becker et al., 1994, 2000, 2001; Brabec et al., 1996;
Becker et al., 1997, 2002: Lohr et al., 1997; Becker and Faisal,
2000, 2002; Maeda et al., 2000; Goreslavskii et al., 2001; Yudin
and Ivanov, 2001b; Figueira de Morisson Faria et al., 2002;
Haan et al., 2002; Panﬁli et al., 2002; Popruzhenko et al., 2002;
Figueira de Morisson Faria, Liu, et al., 2004; Figueira de Moris-
son Faria, Schomerus, et al., 2004; Jaron-Becker et al., 2004,
2006; Ho et al., 2005; Prauzner-Bechcicki et al., 2005; Haan et
al., 2006, 2007; Haan and Smith, 2007.
97For a comprehensive review of femtochemistry, see Zewail,
2000. The state of the art of this evolving ﬁeld is well repre-
sented by Gessner et al., 2006.
98The theoretical literature on coupled electronic and nuclear
dynamics in molecules is expanding towards the sub-fs domain.
Relevant work include Martinez et al., 1996, 1997; Kawata et
al., 1999; Harumiya et al., 2002; Kono et al., 2004, 2006; Zhu et
al., 2004; Amano and Takatsuka, 2005; Awasthi et al., 2005; Hu
et al., 2005; Nguyen and Bandrauk, 2006; Takahashi and Takat-
suka, 2006; Takatsuka, 2006, 2007; Nest et al., 2007. For a re-
view, see Levine, 2005.
99For recent reviews, see, e.g., Jortner and Ratner, 1997; Fer-
inga, 2001; Nitzan, 2001.
210
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 50 (native text) -----
a time-delayed sub-fs XUV pulse probing, IID1; detec-
tion, IIIB2; see Tables II and III.100 Consider the sim-
plest case: a coherent superposition of the two lowest-
energy states of the H2
+ molecular ion,
r,t = c11re−iW1t + c22re−iW2t,
50
where indices 1 and 2 represent the 1g ground elec-
tronic state and 2u the lowest excited electronic state,
respectively. In their simulations, Bandrauk et al. 2004
created this state with a sub-fs VUV pulse and probed
the unfolding wave-packet dynamics with a 100 as XUV
probe via photoionization. They found that the unfold-
ing intramolecular electronic motion Fig. 53a can be
traced by collecting photoelectrons in two opposite di-
rections along the molecular axis aligned with the light
ﬁelds Fig. 53b.101 102
Inspired by the experiments of Weinkauf et al. 1995,
1996, 1997, theoretical studies of electronic wave-
packet dynamics have been extended for the charge
hole or electron transport in large, biologically rel-
evant systems.103 Complexity arises here in several ways:
the initially localized wave packet created by photoex-
citation is composed of a large number of stationary
electronic states and electron correlation must be con-
sidered during charge transport. Beyond its relevance to
molecular electronics, photovoltaics, and biology, elec-
100Scrinzi et al., 2001a, 2001b; Bandrauk et al., 2004; Yudin et
al., 2005, 2006; Chelkowski et al., 2006. In the femtosecond
regime, the technique was demonstrated by Strasser et al.,
2007.
101The measurement also reveals the spectral phase of the
attosecond probing pulse Itakura, 2007.
102Studies were extended to asymmetric molecules Remacle
et al., 2007.
103Martinez et al., 1996, 1997; Remacle and Levine, 1997,
1999, 2006a; Cederbaum and Zobeley, 1999; Remacle et al.,
1999; Breidbach and Cederbaum, 2003, 2005; Hennig et al.,
2005; Kuleff et al., 2005.
0.025
0.020
0.015
0.010
0.005
0.000
-0.005
-0.010
-0.015
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Time delay [fs]
(b)
Asymmetry factor
-
-
-
Time [fs]
R [arb. units]
9.0
8.5
8.0
7.5
7.0
6.5
6.0
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
1
0
(a)
s
[
.
]
350 as
0
FIG. 53. Color Proposal for inducing attosecond electron
wave-packet dynamics by a 0.8-fs, 115-nm VUV pump pulse in
H2
+ and probing it with a time-delayed 0.1-fs, 20-nm XUV
pulse Bandrauk et al., 2004. Both pulses are polarized parallel
to the molecular axis. a Contour plot of the electron prob-
ability distribution along the molecular axis for an internuclear
distance of eight atomic units vs pump-probe delay. b Asym-
metry factor P−−P+/P−+P+ vs delay, where P+ and P−rep-
resent the probability of observing the electron liberated by
the XUV probe in the positive or negative direction along the
molecular axis, respectively. Adapted from Bandrauk et al.,
2004.
80 82 84
86
88
90
92
94
0.5
0.75
1
1.25
1.5
Photoelectron
energy [eV]
Time delay [fs]
t = 0 fs
t = 0.5 fs
(b)
(a)
t = 0.25 fs
t = 0.75 fs
t = 0 fs
t = 0.5 fs
t = 0.25 fs
t = 0.75 fs
FIG. 54. Color Computed ultrafast positive charge hole mi-
gration in a tryptophane-terminated tetrapeptide Remacle
and Levine, 2006a, 2007. a The hole density shown in red
indicates that the charge swings across the entire peptide from
the aromatic amino acid on the left to the N end on the right
within less than one femtosecond, following excitation of the
electronic wave packet on an attosecond time scale. This hy-
perfast charge migration is proposed to be probed by measur-
ing the kinetic energy distribution of photoelectrons released
by a time-delayed sub-fs XUV pulse. b A series of such
freeze-frame spectra calculated for a 250-as, 95-eV probe pulse
at different pump-probe delays. From Remacle and Levine,
2007.
211
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 51 (native text) -----
tron charge transfer in extended molecular systems may
also play a key role in the fragmentation of large mol-
ecules observed by Weinkauf, Schlag, and co-workers
1995, 1996. The concept of “charge-directed reactivity”
Weinkauf et al., 1997; Remacle et al., 1998 may offer a
new route to chemical reaction control.
APS, possibly combined with coincidence detection of
the reaction products IIIC2; see Table III, lends itself
to unraveling the mysteries and implications of charge
transfer in molecular systems. Viability of this approach
depends on the sensitivity of this probing in large sys-
tems. Results of Levine and Remacle 2006 give us
grounds to be optimistic. Figure 54a depicts hole mi-
gration in a tryptophane-terminated tetrapeptide follow-
ing sub-fs photoionization implemented either with a
cosine-shaped few-cycle wave: IC1, or with an intense
VUV pulse: ID1; see Table I. Figure 54b reveals that
the sub-fs photoelectron probe is highly sensitive to the
unfolding charge migration Remacle and Levine, 2007,
offering a means of monitoring it with attosecond
resolution.104 In our view, real-time observation and
possibly control of electron transfer in large molecular
systems, such as DNA Kato et al., 2004, is among the
most exciting challenges attosecond technology faces to-
day.
APS was proposed for observing ultrafast electron
and structural motion in clusters Georgescu et al., 2007.
Experiments of this kind may address fundamental
questions about the way collisions destroy collective dy-
namics in many-body systems Fennel et al., 2007 and
offer information that no conventional time-integrated
measurement can provide due to dissipation Georgescu
et al., 2007.
2. Attosecond high harmonic imaging
HHG from laser-atom or laser-molecule interaction
carries information on the structure Lein, Hay, et al.,
2002 and dynamics Averbukh, 2004 of the bound elec-
tronic wave function interfering with the returning wave
packet.105
Look at the component of the dipole moment respon-
sible for high-frequency emission during recollision,
dht=bdc+c.c. As compared with Eq. 22, we re-
placed g with b to allow the bound portion of the
wave function to be different from the ground state g.
In the framework of the SFA, stationary phase analysis
of dht Ivanov et al., 1996 implies that, in good ap-
proximation, at every moment t the transition matrix el-
ement is proportional to the matrix element between the
bound wave packet and a single continum state corre-
sponding to the instantaneous velocity vxtr of the clas-
sical electron recolliding with the parent ion at this mo-
ment in time. This velocity vxtr of the recolliding
electron determines the frequency of the emitted radia-
tion:
tr = vx
2tr/2 + Ip.
51
Now consider harmonic generation by a diatomic mol-
ecule see Fig. 55, and approximate the electronic
ground state as a linear superposition of two atomic or-
bitals A centered at each of the two nuclei:
b = 1
2
Ar −R/2 +  Ar + R/2,
52
where  =1 and  =−1 correspond to even and odd su-
perposition, respectively, and R is the vector connecting
the two nuclei; see Fig. 55. The recombination matrix
element becomes a sum of two identical contributions
from each atomic orbital each of the two nuclei. These
two amplitudes interfere with each other much as in
Young’s double-slit experiment:
dhtr 
 dh
Atr
1 +  expitr,
53
where dh
Atr is the contribution from a single atom and
tr=vxtrR cos. For more complex molecules, the
induced dipole will contain interference of several am-
plitudes with relative phases determined by the scatter-
ing centers’ positions. The resultant interference in the
104The sub-fs photoelectron probe is also sensitive to struc-
tural changes which did not occur in this example, due to
dynamic shifts of core levels following rearrangement. In case
of fragmentation, coincidence detection of photoelectrons and
fragments may help in retrieving the complex electron-nuclear
dynamics. Another option is to map out the kinetic energy
release of the molecular ion fragments following a Coulomb
explosion after the probe pulse Stapelfeldt et al., 1998; Lin et
al., 2006; Tong and Lin, 2006.
105Lein, Hay, et al., 2002; Niikura et al., 2002; Lein et al., 2003;
Averbukh, 2004; Itatani et al., 2004; Kanai et al., 2005; Lein,
2005; Niikura et al., 2005; Vozzi et al., 2005; Zimmerman et al.,
2005; Baker et al., 2006; Chirila and Lein, 2006a, 2006b; Le,
Morishita, and Lin, 2008, Morishita et al., 2008; for a review,
see Lein, 2007.
R

( )
tr
v t( )
x
r
FIG. 55. Color Origin of interference in harmonic emission
from a diatomic molecule. Returning electron with velocity vx
interferes with the ground state wave function—a superposi-
tion of atomic orbitals centered around the two nuclei spaced
by R. The phase delay accumulated by the returning electron
between the two nuclei is tr=vxtrR cos . From Lein,
Hay, et al., 2002.
212
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 52 (native text) -----
harmonic emission spectrum therefore reﬂects the struc-
ture of the molecule. This theoretical prediction Lein,
Hay, et al., 2002 has stimulated further theoretical
activity.106 Experiments for diatomic and triatomic mol-
ecules Itatani et al., 2004; Kanai et al., 2005; Vozzi et al.,
2005 have demonstrated clear minima in the harmonic
spectra, even though their exact origin is currently un-
clear the minima appear to shift with the intensity of
the driving ﬁeld. With molecular alignment Torres et
al., 2007 and/or elliptic polarization of the driving ﬁeld
Kitzler et al., 2007, attosecond high harmonic imaging
AHI hold promise for imaging molecular structures
and multielectron dynamics. However, theory will have
to meet a formidable challenge, especially for poly-
atomic molecules: quantitative description of rich laser-
driven multielectron dynamics.107
AHI also provides access to nuclear motion Lein,
2005; Baker et al., 2006, 2008; Wagner et al., 2006. For
example, one can excite vibrations in a neutral molecule
and probe them via a high-order harmonic generation
signal, which shows modulations as a function of the vi-
brational motion Wagner et al., 2006. Alternatively,
one can probe the dynamics in the ion. As soon as the
electron is liberated from the molecule, a molecular ion
is formed. The equilibrium conﬁguration of the molecu-
lar ion is usually different from that of the neutral mol-
ecule. As a consequence, the nuclei are set in motion at
the same instant t0 as the electron is liberated. This cor-
relation along with the chirped nature of the recolliding
electron wave packet, see Fig. 20, permits one to map
the nuclear motion onto the frequency spectrum of the
harmonic emission. Drawing on the theoretical analysis
of Lein 2005, Baker et al. 2006, 2008 put this concept
into practice. This pioneering experiment is reviewed in
Fig. 56. Implemented with a few-cycle ideally single-
cycle IR laser pulse, AHI may allow one to capture
both electronic and nuclear rearrangement in molecules
within the ﬁrst few femtoseconds following excitation.
3. Attosecond electron diffraction
Observation of short-lived transient structures calls
for the combination of ultrafast probing techniques with
those of conventional diffraction: following excitation by
an ultrashort pump pulse the sample is exposed to a
delayed electron or x-ray probe pulse. Time-resolved
x-ray and electron diffraction as well as microscopy have
recently attained sub-ps resolution with x-ray pulses
emitted from laser-driven plasma sources108 and with
electron bunches with energies ranging from 30 to
300 keV, corresponding to de Broglie wavelengths of
0.06 to 0.02 Å that are produced by femtosecond
106See, e.g., Zhou et al., 2005a, 2005b; Chirila and Lein, 2006a,
2006b; Gordon et al., 2006; Le et al., 2006; Santra and Gordon,
2006; Patchkovskiim et al., 2006; and, for a review, Lein, 2007.
107In atoms and diatomic molecules, correlated multielectron
mostly two-electron dynamics has been extensively studied;
see, e.g., Watson et al., 1997; Tong and Chu, 1998; Chu and
Chu, 2001; Lein, Engel, et al., 2001; Lein, Gross, et al., 2001,
2002; Lein, Kreibich, et al., 2002; Becker and Faisal, 2005; Cail-
lat et al., 2005; Krause et al., 2005; Klamroth, 2006; Gordon et
al., 2006; Jordan et al., 2006; Patchkovskiim et al., 2006; Ro-
hringer et al., 2006; Santra and Gordon, 2006; Gräfe and
Ivanov, 2007; Volkova et al., 2007; Walters et al., 2007; Xie et
al., 2007.
108For reviews, see Rousse et al., 2001; Bressler and Chergui,
2004; Pfeifer, Spielmann, and Gerber, 2006.
FIG. 56. Color Probing initial temporal evolution of nuclear
coordinates in a molecule, following sudden excitation by ion-
ization. The nuclear motion is mapped onto the spectral inten-
sity distribution of high-order harmonics via the energy chirp
of the recolliding electron responsible for the harmonic emis-
sion Baker et al., 2006. For the simplest case of a diatomic
molecule, such as H2 or D2, the internuclear separation starts
increasing at the moment of ionization. For increasing recolli-
sion instants tr,1, tr,2, and tr,3 it increasingly deviates from the
initial value upper panel. The induced dipole responsible for
the harmonic emission includes the overlap between vibra-
tional wave functions in the neutral molecule and its ion. This
overlap decreases with increasing internuclear separation in
the ion, reducing the harmonic intensity. The monotonic de-
pendence of the recollision energy Wr on the recollision time tr
for either short or long trajectories Fig. 20 gives a one-to-one
map between harmonic energy tr=Wrtr+Ip and the recol-
lision time tr. The red line in the lower panel connects tr
with tr for short trajectories. From the decrease of the har-
monic signal and knowledge of Wrtr, the different internu-
clear separations at different moments of time following ion-
ization can be determined. The technique is called PACER:
probing attosecond dynamics by chirp encoded recollisions.
Adapted from Baker et al., 2007.
213
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 53 (native text) -----
photoemission followed by acceleration via a dc ﬁeld.109
Electron scattering cross sections exceed those of
x-ray scattering typically by ﬁve to six orders of magni-
tude, but this comes at the expense of rapid pulse broad-
ening due to Coulomb repulsion and/or velocity disper-
sion, which has so far limited resolution to a few
hundred femtoseconds. In this section we discuss pos-
sible ways of improving the temporal resolution of ul-
trafast electron diffraction to the few-fs and sub-fs re-
gime using the recolliding electron in an ionizing
molecule or a microwave-accelerated, phase-focused
single-electron pulse for recording diffraction images of
transient molecular structure.
Electron diffraction upon recollision can be used to
record and retrieve information on molecular structure
Lein, Marangos, et al., 2002; Spanner et al., 2004; Yur-
chenko et al., 2004; Morishita et al., 2008; Murray and
Ivanov, 2008; Okunishi et al., 2008; Ray et al., 2008; Zhou
et al., 2008 and was recently demonstrated experimen-
tally Meckel et al., 2008. When the electron returns to
the parent ion, “elastic” scattering takes a diffraction
image of the parent molecule.110 In laser-induced elec-
tron diffraction, temporal conﬁnement of the recolliding
electron wave packet adds sub-fs temporal resolution to
the spatial resolution dictated by the de Broglie wave-
length
of
the
returning
electron.
With
NIR
L
0.8 m and IR L2 m light one may achieve
recollision energies Wr in excess of 0.1 and 1 keV, re-
spectively see Fig. 20, implying a de Broglie wave-
length of 1 Å and well below 1 Å, respectively. Few-
cycle ideally single-cycle laser pulses will beneﬁt the
technique by maximizing Wr and suppressing multiple
recollision and related undesirable interference effects
Spanner et al., 2004; Yurchenko et al., 2004; Hu and
Collins, 2005.
Figure 57 shows results of the calculations of Spanner
et al. 2004 for a diatomic molecule aligned perpendicu-
larly to laser polarization. The diffraction image is clear
when proper directions and energies corresponding to a
ﬁxed moment of recollision are selected; see Fig. 57b.
When implemented with a sub-two-cycle IR laser pulse,
this technique offers subfemtosecond resolution com-
bined with subangstrom resolution.
Both AHI and laser-induced diffraction imaging rely
on ionization. However, in many cases ionization is an
invasive
probe,
inducing
signiﬁcant
atomic
re-
arrangements between the instants of release and recol-
lision; see Fig. 56. The following proposal aims at over-
coming these restrictions.
Microwave-accelerated sub-fs single-electron pulses.
The electron bunches used by conventional ultrafast
electron diffraction typically contain several thousand
electrons. Repulsion space charge between them limits
the pulse duration to several hundred femtoseconds on
target. Zewail and co-workers were the ﬁrst to propose
the use of single-electron pulses produced at megahertz
repetition rates with femtosecond laser oscillators Lo-
bastov et al., 2005. In order to advance the state of the
109Since ﬁrst demonstrations in the 10–100-ps range Mourou
and Williamson, 1982; Williamson et al., 1984; Elsayed-Ali and
Mourou, 1988 the technique evolved to sub-ps resolution ow-
ing to developments by Ahmed Zewail and Dwayne Miller
Williamson and Zewail, 1991; Williamson et al., 1992, 1997;
Ihee et al., 2001; Siwick et al., 2003; Dwyer et al., 2007a, 2007b;
Shorokov and Zewail, 2008. For reviews, see Srinivasan et al.,
2003; Zewail, 2006.
110Laser-induced electron diffraction is related to a well-
established imaging technique, in which an electron freed by a
picosecond synchrotron pulse takes an image of the core po-
tential of the parent ion on its way out of the molecule in what
is often referred to as a “half collision.” Angle-resolved pho-
toelectron spectra then reveal structural dynamics with pico-
second resolution; see, e.g., Becker and Shirley, 1996; Gessner
et al., 2002; Kugeler et al., 2004; Weber et al., 2004; Rolles et al.,
2005.
x
y
-6
-
-6
33
y
| |
-2
0
2
4
10
10
10
-4
-6
(a)
(b)
Vx [arb. units]
Vy
3
0
3
6
6
3
0
3
33
Vy
|ψ|
-4
2
0
10
-2
10
10
(a)
(b)
[arb. units]
[arb. units]
FIG. 57. Color Laser-induced recollision imaging of molecu-
lar structure by diffraction of strong-ﬁeld-driven recollision
electron Spanner et al., 2004. Driving ﬁeld: 	L=5 fs, L
=0.8 m. a Transverse momentum distribution of the recol-
liding electron diffracted off its parent diatomic molecule. The
molecule is aligned parallel to the y axis and the driving laser
ﬁeld is polarized parallel to the x axis. Different colors in a
correspond to different orders of magnitude, from red to green
to blue to violet to black. b Selected cuts of the spectrum,
which correspond to the ﬁxed maximum electron energy dur-
ing recollision, show clear diffraction pattern. The pattern is
particularly clear for electrons scattered at large angles left
part of the black circle, right part of the red circle in panel a.
Adapted from Spanner et al., 2004.
214
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 54 (native text) -----
art of ultrafast electron diffraction by this approach, two
conditions must be met. First, sufﬁciently intense few-fs
pump pulses at megahertz rate must be available. Re-
cent advances in scaling the pulse energy from femtosec-
ond Ti:sapphire oscillators afford promise of fulﬁlling
this condition Naumov et al., 2005. Second, broadening
of the electron pulse on its way from the photocathode
to the target due to a spread of the initial electron ve-
locity must be minimized. In the nonrelativistic limit this
spread limits the duration of a dc-ﬁeld-accelerated elec-
tron bunch on target to111
	e = 2.34Wi/Eacc ps,
54
where Wi is the initial energy spread of electrons in eV
and Eacc is the acceleration ﬁeld in MV/m Schelev et al.,
1971. Note that the temporal spread due to velocity dis-
persion is independent of the distance of the target from
the photocathode. Vacuum breakdown limits Eacc to less
than 10 MV/m Kinoshita et al., 1987, whereas Wi
typically ranges between 0.25 and 1 eV, preventing the
delivery of electron pulses on target with a duration sub-
stantially less than 0.2 ps by applying a dc accelerating
ﬁeld.
Fill et al. 2006 proposed to accelerate single elec-
trons released from a photocathode by a femtosecond
laser pulse in a microwave cavity to overcome this limi-
tation Fig. 58. The microwave acceleration permits ap-
plying higher ﬁelds due to increased breakdown thresh-
old and, more importantly, time dependence of the
accelerating ﬁeld, Eacct=E0 sint+, results in differ-
ent energy gain for particles with different initial ener-
gies or release moments. With proper choice of  differ-
ent
initial
energies
and
release
instants
can
be
simultaneously corrected Monastyrskiy et al., 2005.
Figure 58b depicts the simulated single-electron
wave-packet duration on target along with the corre-
sponding optimum phase as a function of target distance
from the accelerating cavity for a 10 fs spread full width
at half maximum of the instants of release achievable
with a 10-fs laser pulse. For a target distance of L
1 cm, a 40-kV electron pulse can have a duration of
less than 1 fs on target, demonstrating the power of mi-
crowave phase focusing. However, this pulse will be
locked to the microwave ﬁeld rather than to the fs laser
pulse Veisz et al., 2007. Therefore the resolution of a
laser-pump–electron-probe experiment will be limited
by the jitter between the fs laser and the microwave
ﬁeld. They could already be synchronized to better than
10 fs Ma et al., 2001. Further progress along with tech-
niques for measurement Baum and Zewail, 2006; Reck-
enthaeler et al., 2008 may allow single-electron diffrac-
tion to access transient electronic structures with atomic
resolution in space and time.
C. Electronic motion in solids and systems on surfaces
The broadest variety of electronic phenomena occurs
in condensed matter. The spectrum of excitations local-
ized in isolated particles is enriched with a number of
delocalized
transitions,
charge-transfer
processes
in
guest-host systems, a wealth of collective excitations
such as excitons, plasmons or polaritons, charge screen-
ing on surfaces, and hot electron as well as electron-hole
dynamics. These dynamics often unfold on a few-fs to
sub-fs time scale. Capturing them in real time and con-
trolling them on the electronic time scale with the elec-
tric ﬁeld of light will allow researchers to explore and
approach the limits of electron-based information tech-
nologies. Here we address the ﬁrst steps towards at-
tosecond resolution becoming commonplace in solid-
state and surface science and related challenges.
1. Extension of attosecond spectroscopy to condensed matter
Time-resolved two-photon photoemission spectros-
copy has been the most widely used approach to captur-
ing transient electron states in solids and surfaces. In its
ﬁrst implementations an ultrashort VIS or UV pump
pulse excites electrons to states above the Fermi level
and a time-delayed VIS or UV probe pulse raises the
electrons’ energy to positive values, resulting in photo-
emission. The time evolution of the transient population
111From an experimental perspective, Eq. 54 gives the ar-
rival time jitter on target of single electrons with respect to the
femtosecond pulse that released them. In quantum mechanics,
it is the duration of the electron wave packet on target.
(a)
Electron beam
Micowave
pill-box cavity
Femtosecond
laser beam
Target
Photocathode
Photocathode - target distance,
[mm]
L
Electron pulse duration,
[fs]
p
Microwave phase,
[rad]
opt
5
1
0.3
0.1
10
30
100
200
1.4
1.0
0.6
0.2
L
FIG. 58. Color online Proposal for a miniature microwave
electron accelerator based on a pill-box microwave cavity. a
The thin photocathode is illuminated from the back side. Ac-
celerated electrons leave the cavity through a small hole on the
right side. b Minimum electron wave-packet duration on tar-
get that can be achieved by optimizing phase focusing by the
microwave ﬁeld squares; optimum microwave phase, opt, at
the instant of release of the electron circles. From Fill et al.,
2006.
215
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 55 (native text) -----
of excited states can then be retrieved by analyzing the
photoelectrons’ energy and momentum distribution ver-
sus pump-probe delay.112
At increasing excitation intensities, a pump-pulse-
induced electron emission background Riffe et al., 1993
will emerge and extend to ever higher kinetic energies.
This undesirable background tends to blur the photo-
electron spectrum created by a low-photon-energy
probe pulse. Pioneered by Haight and co-workers, ex-
tension of time-resolved photoemission to VUV probing
photon energies elegantly circumvented this problem.113
In principle, femtosecond VUV-XUV photoelectron
spectroscopy can readily be extended to the attosecond
domain by using a UV pump pulse with a duration of
about 1 fs or less and a sub-fs XUV probe pulse excita-
tion, ID1; probing, IID1; detection, IIIB1-2; see Tables
I–III, respectively. The former tool is not yet available
but is expected to enrich the attosecond toolbox in the
foreseeable future Graf et al., 2008. Alternatively, one
may attempt to extend attosecond spectroscopies that
have already been successfully demonstrated in the gas
phase Fig. 46 to solid matter; see Fig. 59. ATS may not
be readily applicable to solids because the intense probe
tends to generate large bound-excited-state populations
before and during inducing photoemission Quéré et al.,
2000. AST triggering, IE1; probing, IIC1; detection,
IIIB1-2; see Tables I–III, respectively does not suffer
from this problem.
Following the ﬁrst observation of the laser-assisted
photoelectric effect from a solid by Miaja-Avila et al.
2006, Cavalieri, Müller, et al. 2007 performed an at-
tosecond spectroscopic experiment in a solid; see Fig. 60.
The experiment has revealed i a sub-fs emission time
both for the delocalized conduction-band electrons re-
112The technique was been ﬁrst demonstrated in the picosec-
ond time domain by Williams et al. 1982 and Yen et al. 1982
and with the improvement of the time resolution into the fem-
tosecond tens of fs region by Schoenlein et al., 1988; Bokor,
1989; Fann et al., 1992; Schmuttenmaer et al., 1994; Wolf et al.,
1996; Höfer et al., 1997; Ogawa et al., 1997. Phase-coherent
detection has provided sub-optical-cycle resolution Ogawa et
al., 1997, but retrieval of the dynamic processes from these
interferometric time-resolved measurements is a nontrivial
problem. For a review, see Petek and Ogawa, 1997.
113Haight and Silbermann, 1989; Haight, 1995; Bauer et al.,
2001; Siffalovic et al., 2002. For a review, see Bauer, 2005.
A. Cavalieri, N. M
EL(t)
Auger
decay
Photo-
emission
&
shake up
Auger
decay
&
shake up
Valence
photo-
emission
Core-level
photo-
emission
Energy
0
EX(t)
A. Cavalieri, N. M
Attosecond
streaking
spectroscopy
Attosecond
tunneling spectroscopy
-
-
FIG. 59. Color Electronic excitation and relaxation processes
in solids and possible ways of tracing these dynamics in real
time.
FIG. 60. Color Attosecond real-time observation of elec-
tronic charge transport in a solid Cavalieri, Müller, et al.,
2007. Electrons were liberated by a single, 300-as, 95-eV XUV
pulse in the presence of 5-fs, 750-nm, waveform-controlled
pulses in a tungsten crystal. Both p-polarized pulses impinged
on the sample at grazing incidence. a, b The unperturbed
XUV-induced photoelectron spectrum and the corresponding
streaking spectrogram, respectively, of core-level electron
emission from the 4f level and valence-band electron emis-
sion from the Fermi edge recorded with the few-cycle NIR
ﬁeld. c The center-of-mass energy shift of the recorded
streaked spectra, revealing a 110 as delay in emission of core
electrons with respect to the emission of conduction band elec-
trons. Courtesy of A. Cavalieri.
216
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 56 (native text) -----
leased from states near the Fermi edge as well as for the
localized core electrons originating from the 4f state,
and ii a delay in emission of the latter by approxi-
mately 100 as. Real-time access to atomic-scale charge
transport dynamics in solids is now a reality.
2. Challenges
A thorough review of electron motions unfolding
within a few femtoseconds or less in solids and on sur-
faces is beyond the scope of this paper. Here we choose
a few examples to demonstrate the tremendous poten-
tial for gaining new, in-depth insight into fundamental
processes in condensed matter with the help of attosec-
ond tools and techniqes.
Charge screening in solids is one manifestation of
many-body interactions Mahan, 1993. It is predicted to
establish within the inverse plasma frequency, on time
scales ranging from hundreds of attoseconds in metals
Alducin et al., 2004; Borisov et al., 2004; Silkin et al.,
2007 to tens of femtoseconds in semiconductors Huber
et al., 2001. One long-standing mystery in solid-state
physics has been the high-energy tail of metallic x-ray
spectra. Screening of the hole and electron created upon
x-ray absorption has been assumed to be responsible for
the observed anomalous behavior see, e.g., Yue and
Doniach, 1973; Canright, 1988, but lack of reliable data
on the screening time has prevented validation of theo-
retical models so far. Attosecond probing of screening
will also clarify the existence of unscreened bare Cou-
lomb collisions on ultrashort time scales Kwong and
Bonitz, 2000 and that of transient excitonic states in
metals before the onset of screening Cao et al., 1997;
Schöne and Ekardt, 2000. The dynamics of surface ex-
citations is yet another area offering many challenges
Echenique et al., 2004.
Electron transfer across interfaces plays a central role
in surface chemistry. Insight into charge transfer dynam-
ics in macromolecular assemblies Siffalovic et al., 2004
and between adsorbate and bulk conduction-band
states will contribute to the advancement of molecular
electronics
Nitzan
and
Ratner,
2003;
Zhu,
2004;
Remacle and Levine, 2006b and beneﬁt the develop-
ment of more efﬁcient solar cells O’Reagan and Graet-
zel, 1991. So far, the core-hole-clock technique has been
the only approach providing access to charge transfer
dynamics on a few-femtosecond or shorter time scale.114
It is based on high-resolution spectroscopy of autioniza-
tion following resonant core excitation. The lifetime of
the core hole provides an internal reference for clocking
charge transfer from the excited bound state, allowing
one to determine electron transfer times with sub-fs res-
olution Schnadt et al., 2002; Föhlisch et al., 2005, but
require careful analysis of competing relaxation chan-
nels in molecular adsorbates Kirchmann et al., 2006.
Direct sub-fs probing will therefore be particularly help-
ful in complex molecular architectures Barth et al.,
2005.
Collective electronic motion in nanosystems. Nano-
scopic materials have attracted interest because of their
engineerable electrical and optical properties. Collective
electron density ﬂuctuations play a role in most of their
potential applications. Of particular interest are those
that can be excited at metal-vacuum or metal dielectric
interfaces: surface plasmons Raether, 1988. The pros-
pect of nanoplasmonic devices Barnes et al., 2003; Van
Duyne, 2004 and applications ranging from medical and
pharmaceutical screening through environmental moni-
toring to subwavelength optics has stimulated efforts to
gain an insight into the fundamental dynamics of plas-
mon excitations Kubo et al., 2005, 2007 and identify
ways of controlling it. The natural time scale of collec-
tive electron dynamics in metallic nanosystems is less
than 1 fs. A combination of photoelectron emission mi-
croscopy with AST will provide access to these dynamics
with nanometer and sub-fs resolution Stockman et al.,
2007.
D. Future prospects: Steering and imaging atomic-scale
electronic motion
1. Steering electrons with the electric ﬁeld of synthesized light
Here we address two questions related to extending
attosecond control of electronic motion to complex sys-
tems ranging from simple diatomic molecules through
complex biomolecules to nanostructures and assem-
blies. First, can synthesized waveform-controlled light
ﬁelds be used for steering electron wave packets in mol-
ecules on the electronic time scale where nuclear motion
is essentially frozen? Second, can such light ﬁeld control
on electronic to chemical time scales affect the outcome
of structural re-arrangements or chemical reactions?
Barth and Manz 2006a, 2006b suggested that the
former question may be answered afﬁrmatively. In their
numerical experiment, a circularly polarized few-cycle
UV laser pulse was applied to a Mg-porphyrin model
system. This pulse induced a giant unidirectional ring
current, with its strength and direction controlled by the
instantaneous amplitude and the direction of rotation of
the UV electric ﬁeld; see Fig. 61. Beyond demonstrating
the control of electronic motion in a molecule, this study
also revealed a route to generating—for a period of a
few femtoseconds—a unipolar nonoscillating magnetic
ﬁeld of unprecedented strength. Barth and Manz pre-
dicted
that
a
UV
pulse
of
moderate
intensity
1012 W/cm2 would be able to generate a giant ring
current on the order of 0.1 mA within a molecule. A
magnetic ﬁeld on the order of 104 T would be required
to induce the same ring current Steiner et al., 2005.
We begin our discussion of the second question by
reviewing a recent experiment on sub-fs control of elec-
tron localization during breakup of a D2
+ molecule
114For reviews, see Wurth and Menzel, 2000; Brühwiler et al.,
2002; Föhlisch, 2006.
217
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 57 (native text) -----
Kling et al., 2006.115 Ionization of D2 was followed by
electron recollision with the molecular ion D2
+, exciting
the remaining bound electron into the dissociative u
state, still in the presence of the ionizing few-cycle laser
pulse, which creates a coherent superposition of the
ground g and ﬁrst excited u state. This implies elec-
tron oscillation between the left and right nuclei as the
nuclei move apart. Beyond some critical internuclear
distance, the electron can no longer tunnel through the
potential barrier emerging between the two nuclei.
Which of the two nuclei will catch the electron is deter-
mined by the phase of the oscillatory electron motion
relative to the dissociation. This phase, in turn, is con-
trolled with attosecond precision by the carrier-envelope
phase of the waveform;116 see Fig. 62. The experiment
reveals that i attosecond electron motion does affect
chemical changes and ii attosecond shaping of the light
ﬁeld in a femtosecond pulse can be used to control it
Weitzel, 2007.
Nevertheless, an electron wave packet composed of
many stationary states means population of many poten-
tial energy surfaces PESs. Different PESs often lead to
different products. That is, exciting a large number of
electronic states will create multiple multidimensional
rovibrational wave packets which will evolve along their
potential energy surfaces towards different outcomes.
However, this does not necessarily mean that attosecond
waveform engineering and sub-fs electron wave packet
formation and steering has no future in controlling mo-
lecular dynamics.
One may speculate on a new approach: creating an
electron wave packet with a sub-fs UV pulse and subse-
quently steering it with the shaped waveform of a light
ﬁeld that is strong enough to induce substantial dynamic
shifts of the potential surfaces. Under these circum-
stances stationary PESs lose their meaning and the light-
ﬁeld-steered electron wave-packet motion may possibly
have a dominant inﬂuence on the outcome of reactions
115For theoretical research, see Haljan et al., 1997; Bandrauk
et al., 2004; Roudnev et al., 2004; Hu et al., 2006; Roudnev and
Esry, 2007; Tong and Lin, 2007a, 2007b.
116He et al. 2007 proposed that electron localization can be
made more efﬁcient by independent start using a two-pulse
control scheme.
t = 4.53 fs
t = 4.84 fs
t = 5.14 fs
t = 5.44 fs
Mg-porphyrin
t = 4.53 fs
t = 4.84 fs
t = 5.14 fs
t = 5.44 fs
Mg-porphyrin
FIG. 61. Induction of unidirectional electronic ring currents in
molecules. The upper panel shows an eight-cycle circularly po-
larized UV pulse propagating along the z axis to impinge upon
a Mg-porphyrin molecule, with its plane aligned perpendicular
to the z axis. The arrows indicate the time evolution of the
ﬁeld acting on the molecule. The lower panel shows several
snapshots of instantaneous electron density distribution during
the central part of the driver pulse, revealing a ring current
driven by the rotating electric ﬁeld. From Barth and Manz,
2006a, 2006b.
Left
Left
Right
Left
Right
D
D
2
+
+
e-
e-
D
D
D+
D+
Time
Time
Laser electric field
2
FIG. 62. Color Controlling electron localization during mo-
lecular dissociation with the electric ﬁeld of light Kling et al.,
2006. Laser-induced ionization and subsequent recollision of
the freed electron triggers dissociation of the molecular ion
D2
+. Controlling the electric ﬁeld evolution in the ionizing
few-cycle NIR laser ﬁeld allows one to control the motion of
the remaining electron with its probability distribution shown
in green around the nuclei spheres while they move apart. A
cosine-shaped waveform with its peak ﬁeld pointing to the left
or to the right forces the electron to stick—with a high
probability—to the atom leaving the molecule to the right or
left directions, respectively.
218
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 58 (native text) -----
in complex systems.117 This approach, if it were to work,
would be new in that synthesized light ﬁelds Fig. 14
would shape the density of bonding electrons in a
molecule118 in a desired way on the electronic, i.e., at-
tosecond, time scale while maintaining this control over
molecular, i.e., femtosecond, time scales, allowing the
desired unimolecular reaction to be completed. Only ex-
periments will tell us whether reality lives up to these
visions.
An important question for the development of science
and technology is whether electron-based information
processing and storage can possibly be down-scaled to
atomic dimensions and sped up to the atomic time scale,
i.e., to optical frequencies. Can these ultimate limits be
approached, or reached and implemented in practical
devices by exploiting electric interactions electronics,
magnetic interactions spintronics, or collective electron
motion plasmonics? Can the electric ﬁeld of infrared
or visible light be used to control electric signals in fu-
ture atomic-scale chips,119 just as microwave ﬁelds do in
current state-of-the-art nanoscale circuits, realizing the
ultimate electron-based information technology: solid-
state lightwave electronics? Answering these questions
may be one of the central missions of attosecond sci-
ence.
2. 4D imaging of electrons with subatomic resolution in space
and time
In the experiments discussed in this section, tracing of
electronic motion meant real-time observation of transi-
tions of electrons between quantum states of different
energies. No explicit information about changes of the
probability distribution of the electrons’ position has
been acquired. Angle-resolved attosecond photoelec-
tron spectra may provide access to dynamic changes in
the electron distribution in simple systems, but this ap-
proach may encounter difﬁculties in more complex
structures. Only microscopy and diffraction allows ac-
quisition of direct information on the electron density
distribution irrespective of the complexity of the system.
First, consider possibilities in microscopy. The avail-
ability of light pulses with characteristics controlled on a
sub-fs scale offers several ways of furnishing well-
established microscopic techniques with attosecond res-
olution. In photoemission electron microscopy PEEM
the continuous-wave UV or XUV light source must sim-
ply be replaced with one emitting this radiation in the
form of attosecond bursts Stockman et al., 2007. In
scanning tunneling microscopy STM, on the other
hand, electron emission from the nanometer-sized tip
may be conﬁned to several hundred attoseconds by
launching electrons with a cosine-shaped few-cycle light
pulse via optical ﬁeld ionization Hommelhoff et al.,
2006. Last but not least, ultrafast electron microscopy
UEM, Shorokhov and Zewail, 2008 may be advanced
into the few-fs and possibly sub-fs regime by microwave
Fill et al., 2006; Veisz et al., 2007 and optical Plettner et
al., 2006 acceleration. In this way several-nanometer
PEEM and angstrom STM, UEM resolution in space
can be combined with attosecond resolution in time.
The extension of diffraction imaging from the three
spatial dimensions to the fourth, temporal, dimension is
conceptually even more straightforward. Again, the
electron or x-ray beam used for mapping the electron
density in molecules or crystals must be replaced with a
short pulse. The high multi-keV particle energy recon-
ciles the apparently conﬂicting requirements of narrow
relative energy distribution "1% and ultrashort pulse
duration. The ultrashort electron or x-ray pulse allows
recording snapshots of the dynamic evolution of the
electron density distribution following excitation by a
short pump pulse. Dynamic changes in the electron dis-
tribution may occur due to i the motion of the nuclei;
the electron cloud virtually instantly adjusts to this mo-
tion; or ii electronic excitation. The former process
evolves on a multi-fs time scale and mirrors atomic re-
arrangement in molecules or solids. It has already been
imaged with sub-ps time resolution.120 Electronic rear-
rangements may unfold within attoseconds. An example
is shown in Fig. 63. The above-discussed techniques for
sub-fs x-ray Sec. VI and electron Sec. VII.B.3 pulse
generation will open the way to 4D imaging of electronic
as well as nuclear motion with picometer resolution in
space and attosecond resolution in time.
VIII. CONCLUSIONS AND OUTLOOK
The emerging experimental and theoretical tools of
attoseconds physics provide, for the ﬁrst time, real-time
access to the motion of electrons on atomic and sub-
atomic scales. Access means both capture and steering
with a speed matched to the rapidity of the fastest elec-
tronic phenomena. Microscopic motion of electrons
plays a key role in advancing the technology of compact
x-ray sources, or pushing electronics and magnetic stor-
age to ever smaller dimensions and ever higher speeds;
in triggering chemical reactions; in biological signal
transduction and the damage and repair mechanisms of
DNA; and in the undesirable and desired radiation-
117The concept of relating site-selective reactivity to charge
transfer, i.e., the existence of nonstationary electronic states, in
large molecules Weinkauf et al., 1997, based on the assump-
tion: “reactivity follows charge,” is a ﬁrst push in this direction.
118By superimposing many orbitals and adjusting this super-
position during the pulse.
119Note that this light-ﬁeld control of electric current is dif-
ferent from earlier demonstrations, where quantum interfer-
ence governed by the cycle-averaged intensity rather than the
electric ﬁeld of light has controlled injection of electric cur-
rent in semiconductors see Costa et al., 2007, and references
therein.
120For reviews, see Pfeifer, Spielmann, et al., 2006; Zewail,
2006.
219
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 59 (native text) -----
induced damage to biological matter in cancer diagnos-
tics and therapy, respectively.121
The emergence and expected future evolution of at-
tosecond science demonstrate how different scientiﬁc
disciplines and technologies, several of which have been
recognized with the Nobel Prize, build upon each other
to push the frontiers of science and technology. Lasers
Nobel Prize: Basov, Prokhorov, Townes and perturba-
tive nonlinear optics Nobel Prize: N. Bloembergen
have permitted the generation and metrology of femto-
second laser pulses with well-controlled amplitude,
opening the way to controlling and tracking chemical
dynamics Nobel Prize: A. H. Zewail. Chirped-pulse
ampliﬁcation and chirped multilayer mirrors have per-
mitted routine generation of intense light pulses and
pushing—with the generation of quasi-single-cycle laser
light—the frontiers of ultrafast optics to its ultimate
limit set by the oscillation cycle of the light ﬁeld. Adding
the frequency-comb technique Nobel Prize: T. W.
Hänsch to these technologies has permitted control
over the attosecond evolution of ultrastrong light ﬁelds,
which along with photoelectron spectroscopy Nobel
Prize: K. M. Siegbahn has opened the door to control-
ling and measuring the atomic-scale motion of electrons.
With the advent of lightwave electronics Fig. 5,
sub-fs tools have become available for direct attosecond
real-time observation of the motion of electrons in at-
oms, molecules, and solids. Based on strong-ﬁeld inter-
actions, current sub-fs electron and photon pulses are
delivered with particle energies limited to 100 eV. Fu-
ture expansion of attosecond science to relativistic light-
electron interactions affords promise of a dramatic in-
crease in energy and further decrease in duration of the
probing particles. The capability of recording movies of
any microscopic motion outside the atomic core will be
the consequence of these advances.
GLOSSARY OF ABBREVIATIONS
AAS
Attosecond absorption spectroscopy
AHI
Attosecond harmonic imaging
APS
Attosecond photoelectron spectroscopy
AST
Attosecond streaking spectroscopy
ATI
Above-threshold ionization
ATS
Attosecond tunneling spectroscopy
CE
Carrier
envelope
phase
of
ultrashort
pulses
COLTRIMS Cold-target
recoil-ion-momentum
spec-
troscopy
CRAB
Complete
reconstruction
of
attosecond
bursts
FROG
Frequency-resolved optical gating
FWHM
Full width at half maximum e.g., of a
pulse intensity proﬁle
HHG
High-order harmonic radiation
IFEL
Inverse free electron laser
IR
Infrared radiation
NSDI
Nonsequential double ionization
NIR
Near-infrared radiation
PES
Potential energy surface
QPM
Quasi-phase-matching of high-order har-
monic generation
RABBITT
Reconstruction of attosecond beating by
interference of two-photon transitions
SAE
Single active electron model
SFA
Strong-ﬁeld approximation
SPM
Self-phase modulation
S/N
Signal-to-noise ratio
SPIDER
Spectral phase interferometry for direct
electric ﬁeld reconstruction
UEM
Ultrafast electron microscopy
VIS
Visible radiation
VUV
Vacuum ultraviolet radiation
XUV
Extreme ultraviolet radiation
121For questions that may serve as a compass for the
possible
future
evolution
of
attosecond
physics,
see
www.attoworld.de
Electron wave
function
Diffraction
image
Cloud of atoms
Attosecond
hard x-ray pulses
FIG. 63. Color Schematic of attosecond diffraction imaging
of dynamic changes of atomic-scale electron distribution. As
an example, hydrogen atoms excited into the 1S-2P coherent
superposition state have been exposed to 100-as, 1-Å x-ray
pulses in a numerical experiment Yakovlev, 2007. From the
recorded
freeze-frame
diffraction
images
shown
on
the
screens, the instantaneous electron density distribution can be
determined. From a series of such images electronic motion
can be reconstructed with attosecond resolution in time and
picometer resolution in space. Courtesy of V. Yakovlev.
220
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 60 (native text) -----
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We
are
grateful
to
Andre
Bandrauk,
Joachim
Burgdörfer, Paul Corkum, Lorenz Cederbaum, Raphy
Levine, and Albert Stolow for illuminating discussions
and Adrian Cavalieri, Reinhard Kienberger, and Anne
L’Huillier for careful reading of the manuscript and
making numerous valuable comments. We thank Adrian
Cavalieri, Eleftherios Goulielmakis, Ulrich Heinzmann,
Raphy Levine, Anne L’Huillier, Katsumi Midorikawa,
Gerhard Paulus, Valer Tosa, Matthias Uiberacker, and
Dave Villeneuve for making artwork and/or results prior
to publication available for this work. We gratefully ac-
knowledge several calculations and simulations of Vlad
Yakovlev for this review. Last but not least, we are in-
debted to Barbara Ferus for drawing and editing the
artwork and to Bettina Schütz for her support in making
the manuscript ready for submission. F.K. acknowledges
support of the Munich Centre for Advanced Photonics
www.munich-photonics.de. M.I. acknowledges support
of the Bessel prize of the A. v. Humboldt Foundation
and the NSERC Special Research Opportunity fund.
REFERENCES
Abbamonte, P., K. D. Finkelstein, M. D. Collins, and S. M.
Gruner, 2004, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 237401.
Abraham, H., and T. Lemoine, 1899, Compt. Rend. 129, 206.
Adair, R., C. Bockelman, and R. Peterson, 1949, Phys. Rev. 76,
308.
Agostini, P., and L. F. DiMauro, 2004, Rep. Prog. Phys. 67, 813.
Agostini, P., F. Fabre, G. Mainfray, G. Petite, and N. K. Rah-
man, 1979, Phys. Rev. Lett. 42, 1127.
Akhmanov, S. A., V. A. Vysloukh, and A. S. Chirkin, 1992,
Optics of Femtosecond Laser Pulses AIP, New York.
Alducin, M., J. I. Juaristi, and P. M. Echenique, 2004, Surf. Sci.
559, 233.
Alfano, R. R., and S. L. Shapiro, 1970, Phys. Rev. Lett. 24, 584.
Alnaser, A. S., X. M. Tong, T. Osipov, S. Voss, C. M. Maharjan,
P. Ranitovic, B. Ulrich, B. Shan, Z. Chang, C. D. Lin, and C.
L. Cocke, 2004, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 183202.
Alnaser, A. S., S. Voss, X.-M. Tong, C. M. Maharjan, P. Rani-
tovic, B. Ulrich, T. Osipov, B. Shan, Z. Chang, and C. L.
Cocke, 2004, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 113003.
Altucci, C., Ch. Delﬁn, L. Roos, M. B. Gaarde, A. L’Huillier, I.
Mercer, T. Starczewski, and C.-G. Wahlström, 1998, Phys.
Rev. A 58, 3934.
Altucci, C., V. Tosa, and R. Velotta, 2007, Phys. Rev. A 75,
061401R.
Amano, M., and K. Takatsuka, 2005, J. Chem. Phys. 122,
084113.
Antoine, Ph., A. L’Huillier, and M. Lewenstein, 1996, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 77, 1234.
Antoine, Ph., D. B. Milosevic, A. L’Huillier, M. B. Gaarde, P.
Salieres, and M. Lewenstein, 1997, Phys. Rev. A 56, 4960.
Apolonski, A., P. Dombi, G. G. Paulus, M. Kakehata, R.
Holzwarth, T. Udem, Ch. Lemell, K. Torizuka, J. Burgdörfer,
T. W. Hänsch, and F. Krausz, 2004, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92,
073902.
Apolonski, A., A. Poppe, G. Tempea, C. Spielmann, T. Udem,
R. Holzwarth, T. Hänsch, and F. Krausz, 2000, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 85, 740.
Aseyev, S. A. Y. Ni, L. J. Frasinski, H. G. Muller, and M. J. J.
Vrakking, 2003, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 223902.
Assion A., T. Baumert, M. Bergt, T. Brixner, B. Kiefer, V.
Seyfried, M. Strehle, and G. Gerber, 1998, Science 282, 919.
Assion A., T. Baumert, U. Weichmann, and G. Gerber, 2001,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 5695.
Assion, A., M. Geisler, J. Helbing, and V. Seyfried, T.
Baumert, 1996, Phys. Rev. A 54, R4605.
Averbukh, V., 2004, Phys. Rev. A 69, 043406.
Averbukh, V., and L. S. Cederbaum, 2006, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96,
053401.
Averbukh, V., I. B. Müller, and L. S. Cederbaum, 2004, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 93, 263002.
Awasthi, M., Y. V. Vanne, and A. Saenz, 2005, J. Phys. B 38,
3973.
Baeva, T., S. Gordienko, and A. Pukhov, 2006a, Phys. Rev. E
74, 046404.
Baeva, T., S. Gordienko, and A. Pukhov, 2006b, Phys. Rev. E
74, 065401R.
Baker, S., J. S. Robinson, C. A. Haworth, C. C. Chirila, M.
Lein, J. W. G. Tisch, and J. P. Marangos, 2007, J. Mod. Opt.
54, 1011.
Baker, S., J. S. Robinson, C. A. Haworth, H. Teng, R. A.
Smith, C. C. Chirila, M. Lein, J. W. G. Tisch, and J. P. Maran-
gos, 2006, Science 312, 424.
Baker, S., J. S. Robinson, M. Lein, C. C. Chirilã, R. Torres, H.
C. Bandulet, D. Comtois, J. C. Kieffer, D. U. Villenenve, J.
W. Tisch, and J. P. Marangos, 2008, Phys. Rev. Lett. 101,
053901.
Balcou, P., C. Cornaggia, A. S. L. Gomes, L. A. Lompre, and
A. L’Huillier, 1992, J. Phys. B 25, 4467.
Baltuška, A., T. Fuji, and T. Kobayashi, 2002a, Opt. Lett. 27,
306.
Baltuška, A., T. Fuji, and T. Kobayashi, 2002b, Opt. Lett. 27,
1241.
Baltuška, A., T. Fuji, and T. Kobayashi, 2002c, Phys. Rev. Lett.
88, 133901.
Baltuška, A., T. Udem, M. Uiberacker, M. Hentschel, E. Goul-
ielmakis, C. Gohle, R. Holzwarth, V. S. Yakovlev, A. Scrinzi,
T. W. Hänsch, and F. Krausz, 2003, Nature London 421, 611.
Baltuška, A., M. Uiberacker, E. Goulielmakis, R. Kienberger,
V. S. Yakovlev, T. Udem, T. W. Hänsch, and F. Krausz, 2003,
IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron. 9, 972.
Bandrauk, A. D., E. Aubanel, and J. M. Gauthier, 1994, Mol-
ecules in Laser Fields Dekker, New York.
Bandrauk, A. D., S. Barmaki, S. Chelkowski, and G. Lafmago
Kamta, 2007, in Progress in Ultrafast Laser Science Volume
III, edited by K. Yamanouchi Kluwer, Amsterdam, p. 1.
Bandrauk, A. D., S. Chelkowski, and H. S. Nguyen, 2004, Int.
J. Quantum Chem. 100, 834.
Bandrauk, A. D., and N. H. Shon, 2002, Phys. Rev. A 66,
031401.
Barnes, W. L., A. Dereux, and T. W. Ebbesen, 2003, Nature
London 424, 824.
Bartels, R., S. Backus, E. Zeek, L. Misoguti, G. Vdovin, I. P.
Christov, M. M. Murnane, and H. C. Kapteyn, 2000, Nature
London 406, 164.
Bartels, R., H. C. Kapteyn, M. M. Murnane, I. P. Christov, and
H. Rabitz, 2004, Phys. Rev. A 70, 043404.
Barth, I., and J. Manz, 2006a, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 128, 7043.
Barth, I., and J. Manz, 2006b, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 45, 2962.
Barth, J. V., G. Costantini, and K. Kern, 2005, Nature Lon-
don 437, 671.
221
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 61 (native text) -----
Barth, S., S. Marburger, S. Joshi, V. Ulrich, O. Kugeler, and U.
Hergenhahn, 2006, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 8, 3218.
Bauer, M., 2005, J. Phys. D 38, R253.
Bauer, M., C. Lei, K. Read, R. Tobey, J. Gland, M. M. Mur-
nane, and H. Kapteyn, 2001, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 025501.
Baum, P., and A. H. Zewail, 2006, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
103, 16105.
Baumert, T., R. Thalweiser, and G. Gerber, 1993, Chem. Phys.
Lett. 209, 29.
Beck, M., M. G. Raymer, I. A. Walmsley, and V. Wong, 1993,
Opt. Lett. 18, 2041.
Becker, A., and F. H. M. Faisal, 1994, Phys. Rev. A 50, 3256.
Becker A., and F. H. M. Faisal, 2000, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 3546.
Becker A., and F. H. M. Faisal, 2002, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89,
193003.
Becker, A., and F. H. M. Faisal, 2005, J. Phys. B 38, R1.
Becker, A., F. H. M. Faisal, Y. Liang, S. Augst, Y. Beaudoin,
M. Chaker, and S. L. Chin, 2000, J. Phys. B 33, L547.
Becker, A., L. Plaja, P. Moreno, M. Nurhuda, and F. H. M.
Faisal, 2001, Phys. Rev. A 64, 023408.
Becker, U., and D. Shirley, 1996, Eds., Vuv and Soft X-Ray
Photoionization Plenum, New York.
Becker, W., F. Grasbon, R. Kopold, D. B. Milosevic, G. G.
Paulus, and H. Walther, 2002, Adv. At., Mol., Opt. Phys. 48,
35.
Becker, W., A. Lohr, M. Kleber, and M. Lewenstein, 1997,
Phys. Rev. A 56, 645.
Bellini, M., 2000, Appl. Phys. B: Lasers Opt. 70, 773.
Beutler, H., 1935, Z. Phys. 93, 177.
Biegert, J., A. Heinrich, C. P. Hauri, W. Kornelis, P. Schlup, M.
P. Anscombe, M. B. Gaarde, K. J. Schafer, and U. Keller,
2006, J. Mod. Opt. 53, 87.
Binhammer, T., E. Rittweger, R. Ell, F. X. Kärntner, and U.
Morgner, 2005, IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 41, 1552.
Binhammer, T., E. Rittweger, U. Morgner, R. Ell, and F. X.
Kärntner, 2006, Opt. Lett. 31, 1552.
Blanchet, V., M. Z. Zgierski, T. Seideman, and A. Stolow, 1999,
Nature London 401, 52.
Bokor, J., 1989, Science 246, 1130.
Borisov, A. D. Sánchez-Portal, R. Díez Muino, and P. M. Ech-
enique, 2004, Chem. Phys. Lett. 387, 95.
Bouhal, A., R. Evans, G. Grillon, A. Mysyrowicz, P. Breger, P.
Agostini, R. C. Constantinescu, H. G. Muller, and D. von der
Linde, 1997, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 14, 950.
Bouhal, A., P. Salières, P. Breger, P. Agostini, G. Hamoniaux,
A. Mysyrowicz, A. Antonetti, R. Constantinescu, and H. G.
Muller, 1998, Phys. Rev. A 58, 389.
Boyd, R., 2003, Nonlinear Optics, 2nd ed. Academic, New
York.
Brabec, T., M. Yu. Ivanov, and P. B. Corkum, 1996, Phys. Rev.
A 54, R2551.
Brabec, T., and F. Krausz, 1997, Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 3282.
Brabec, T., and F. Krausz, 2000, Rev. Mod. Phys. 72, 545.
Bradley, D. J., B. Liddy, and W. E. Sleat, 1971, Opt. Commun.
2, 391.
Bradley, D. J., and G. H. C. New, 1974, Proc. IEEE 62, 313.
Breidbach, J., and L. S. Cederbaum, 2003, J. Chem. Phys. 118,
3983.
Breidbach, J., and L. S. Cederbaum, 2005, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94,
033901.
Brena, B., D. Nordlund, M. Odelius, H. Ogasawara, A. Nils-
son, and L. G. M. Pettersson, 2004, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93,
148302.
Bressler, C., and M. Chergui, 2004, Chem. Rev. Washington,
D.C. 104, 1781.
Brixner, T., N. H. Damrauer, and G. Gerber, 2001, Adv. At.,
Mol., Opt. Phys. 46, 1.
Brixner, T., N. H. Damrauer, G. Krampert, P. Niklaus, and G.
Gerber, 2003, J. Mod. Opt. 50, 539.
Brixner, T., N. H. Damrauer, P. Niklaus, and G. Gerber, 2001,
Nature London 414, 57.
Brixner, T., and G. Gerber, 2001, Opt. Lett. 26, 557.
Brixner, T., G. Krampert, T. Pfeifer, R. Selle, G. Gerber, M.
Wollenhaupt, O. Graefe, C. Horn, D. Liese, and T. Baumert,
2004, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 208301.
Brühwiler, P. A., O. Karis, and N. Martensson, 2002, Rev. Mod.
Phys. 74, 703.
Brumer, P. W., and M. Shapiro, 2003, Principles of the Quan-
tum Control of Molecular Processes Wiley, New York.
Bryan, W. A., S. L. Stebbings, J. McKenna, E. M. L. English,
M. Suresh, J. Wood, B. Srigengan, I. C. E. Turcu, J. M. Smith,
E. J. Divall, C. J Hooker, A. J. Langley, J. L. Collier, I. D.
Williams, and W. R. Newell, 2006, Nat. Phys. 2, 379.
Budil, K. S., P. Salieres, M. D. Perry, and A. L’Huillier, 1993,
Phys. Rev. A 48, R3437.
Bulanov, S. V., N. M. Naumova, and F. Pegoraro, 1994, Phys.
Plasmas 1, 745.
Caillat, J., J. Zanghellini, M. Kitzler, O. Koch, W. Kreuzer, and
A. Scrinzi, 2005, Phys. Rev. A 71, 012712.
Canright, G. S., 1988, Phys. Rev. B 38, 1647.
Cao, J., Y. Gao, R. J. D. Miller, and D. A. Mantell, 1997, Phys.
Rev. B 56, 1099.
Cao, W., P. Lu, P. Lan, W. Hong, and X. Wang, 2007, J. Phys. B
40, 869.
Cao, W., P. Lu, P. Lan, X. Wang, and Y. Li, 2007, Phys. Rev. A
75, 063423.
Cao, W., P. Lu, P. Lan, X. Wang, and G. Yang, 2006, Phys. Rev.
A 74, 063821.
Cao, W., P. Lu, P. Lan, X. Wang, and G. Yang, 2007, Opt.
Express 15, 530.
Carrera, J. J., and S. Chu, 2007, Phys. Rev. A 75, 033807.
Carrera, J. J., X. M. Tong, and S. Chu, 2006, Phys. Rev. A 74,
023404.
Cavalieri, A. L., E. Goulielmakis, B. Horvath, W. Helml, M.
Schultze, M. Fiess, V. Pervak, L. Veisz, V. S. Yakovlev, M.
Uiberacker, A. Apolonski, F. Krausz, and R. Kienberger,
2007, New J. Phys. 9, 242.
Cavalieri, A. L., N. Müller, Th. Uphues, V. S. Yakovlev, A.
Baltuška, B. Horvath, B. Schmidt, L. Blümel, R. Holzwarth,
S. Hendel, M. Drescher, U. Kleineberg, P. M. Echenique, R.
Kienberger, F. Krausz, and U. Heinzmann, 2007, Nature
London 449, 1029.
Cederbaum. L., and J. Zobeley, 1999, Chem. Phys. Lett. 307,
205.
Cederbaum, L. S., J. Zobeley, and F. Tarantelli, 1997, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 79, 4778.
Cerdeira, F., T. Fjeldly, and M. Cardona, 1973, Phys. Rev. B 8,
4734.
Cerullo, G., M. Nisoli, and S. De Silvestri, 1997, Appl. Phys.
Lett. 71, 3616.
Cerullo, G., M. Nisoli, S. Stagira, and S. De Silvestri, 1998,
Opt. Lett. 23, 1283.
Cerullo, G., M. Nisoli, S. Stagira, S. De Silvestri, G. Tempea, F.
Krausz, and K. Ferencz, 1999, Opt. Lett. 24, 1529.
Chakraborty, H. S., M. B. Gaarde, and A. Couairon, 2006, Opt.
Lett. 31, 3662.
222
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 62 (native text) -----
Chan, K. W., C. K. Law, and J. H. Eberly, 2002, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 88, 100402.
Chan, K. W., C. K. Law, and J. H. Eberly, 2003, Phys. Rev. A
68, 022110.
Chan, K. W., C. K. Law, M. V. Fedorov, and J. H. Eberly, 2004,
J. Mod. Opt. 51, 1779.
Chang, B. Y., H. Rabitz, and I. Sola, 2003, Phys. Rev. A 68,
031402.
Chang, Z., 2004, Phys. Rev. A 70, 043802.
Chatzidimitriou-Dreismann, C. A., M. Vos, C. Kleiner, and T.
Abdul-Redah, 2003, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 057403.
Chelkowski, S., A. D. Bandrauk, and P. B. Corkum, 2004,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 083602.
Chelkowski, S., G. L. Yudin, and A. D. Bandrauk, 2006, J.
Phys. B 39, S409.
Chen, J. G., C. Li, F. P. Chi, and Y. J. Yang, 2007, Chin. Phys.
Lett. 24, 86.
Chen, X., X. Li, J. Liu, P. Wei, X. Ge, R. Li, and Z. Xu, 2007,
Opt. Lett. 32, 2402.
Chipperﬁeld, L. E., L. N. Gaier, P. L. Knight, J. P. Marangos,
and J. W. G. Tisch, 2005, J. Mod. Opt. 52, 243.
Chirile C. C., and M. Lein, 2006a, J. Mod. Opt. 53, 113.
Chirile C. C., and M. Lein, 2006b, Phys. Rev. A 73, 023410.
Christov, I. P., H. C. Kapteyn, and M. M. Murnane, 2000, Opt.
Express 7, 362.
Christov, I. P., M. M. Murnane, and H. C. Kapteyn, 1997, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 78, 1251.
Chu, X., and S.-I. Chu, 2001, Phys. Rev. A 64, 063404.
Cocke, C. L., and R. E. Olson, 1991, Phys. Rep. 205, 153.
Constant, E., D. Garzella, P. Breger, E. Mevel, C. Dorrer, C.
Le Blanc, F. Salin, and P. Agostini, 1999, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82,
1668.
Constant, E., V. D. Taranukhin, A. Stolow, and P. B. Corkum,
1997, Phys. Rev. A 56, 3870.
Corkum, P. B., 1993, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 1994.
Corkum, P. B., N. Burnett, and F. Brunel, 1989, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 62, 1259.
Corkum, P. B., N. H. Burnett, and M. Yu. Ivanov, 1994, Opt.
Lett. 19, 1870.
Corkum, P. B., M. Yu. Ivanov, and J. Wright, 1997, Annu. Rev.
Phys. Chem. 48, 387
Corkum, P. B., and F. Krausz, 2007, Nat. Phys. 3, 381.
Cormier, E., and P. Lambropoulos, 1998, Eur. Phys. J. D 2, 15.
Cormier, E., I. Walmsley, E. M. Kosik, A. S. Wyatt, L. Corner,
and L. F. DiMauro, 2005, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 033905.
Corsi, C., A. Pirri, E. Sali, A. Tortora, and M. Bellini, 2006,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 023901.
Costa, L., M. Betz, M. Spasenovic, A. D. Bristow, and H. M.
Van Driel, 2007, Nat. Phys. 3, 632.
Couairon, A., J. Biegert, C. P. Hauri, W. Kornelis, F. W. Hel-
bing, U. Keller, and A. Mysyrowicz, 2006, J. Mod. Opt. 53, 75.
Courant, E. D., C. Pellegrini, and W. Zakowicz, 1985, Phys.
Rev. A 32, 2813.
Cundiff, S. T., 2002, J. Phys. D 35, R43.
Cundiff, S. T., and J. Ye, 2003, Rev. Mod. Phys. 75, 325.
Cyr, D. R., and C. C. Hayden, 1996, J. Chem. Phys. 104, 771.
Daniel, C., J. Full, L. González, C. Lupulescu, J. Manz, A.
Merli, Š. Vajda, and L. Wöste, 2003, Science 299, 536.
de Boeij, W. P., M. Pshenichnikov, and D. Wiersma, 1998,
Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 49, 99.
de Bohan, A., Ph. Antoine, D. B. Milosevic, and B. Piraux,
1998, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 1837.
de Bohan, A., B. Piraux, L. Ponce, R. Taieb, V. Veniard, and
A. Maquet, 2002, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 113002.
De Jesus, V. L. B., B. Feuerstein, K. Zrost, D. Fischer, A.
Rudenko, F. Afaneh, C. D. Schröter, R. Moshammer, and J.
Ullrich, 2004, J. Phys. B 37, L161.
Delone, N. B., and V. P. Krainov, 1985, Atoms in Strong Light
Fields Springer, Berlin.
DeMaria, A. J., W. H. Glenn, M. J. Brienza, and M. E. Mack,
1969, Proc. IEEE 57, 2.
Diels, J. C., and W. Rudolph, 1996, Ultrashort Laser Pulse Phe-
nomena Academic, New York.
Dietrich, P., N. H. Burnett, M. Yu. Ivanov, and P. B. Corkum,
1994, Phys. Rev. A 50, R3585.
Dietrich, P., F. Krausz, and P. Corkum, 2000, Opt. Lett. 25, 16.
Dimitrovski, D., E. A. Solov’ev, and J. S. Briggs, 2004, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 93, 083003.
Dinu, L. C., H. G. Muller, S. Kazamias, G. Mullot, F. Augé, Ph.
Balcou, P. M. Paul, M. Kovacev, P. Breger, and P. Agostini,
2003, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 063901.
Dombi, P., A. Apolonski, Ch. Lemell, G. G. Paulus, M. Kake-
hata, R. Holzwarth, T. Udem, K. Torizuka, J. Burgdörfer, T.
W. Hänsch, and F. Krausz, 2004, New J. Phys. 6, 39.
Dörner, R., V. Mergel, O. Jagutzki, L. Spielberger, J. Ullrich,
R. Moshammer, and H. Schmidt-Böcking, 2000, Phys. Rep.
330, 95.
Drescher, M., M. Hentschel, R. Kienberger, G. Tempea, Ch.
Spielmann, G. A. Reider, P. B. Corkum, and F. Krausz, 2001,
Science 291, 1923.
Drescher, M., M. Hentschel, R. Kienberger, M. Uiberacker, V.
Yakovlev, A. Scrinzi, Th. Westerwalbesloh, U. Kleineberg, U.
Heinzmann, and F. Krausz, 2002, Nature London 419, 803.
Drescher, M., and F. Krausz, 2005, J. Phys. B 38, S727.
Dromey, B., S. Kar, C. Bellei, D. C. Carroll, R. J. Clarke, J. S.
Green, S. Kneip, K. Markey, S. R. Nagel, P. T. Simpson, L.
Willengale, P. McKenna, D. Neely, Z. Najmudin, K. Krush-
elnick, P. A. Norreys, and M. Zepf, 2007, Phys. Rev. Lett. 99,
085001.
Dromey, B., M. Zepf, A. Gopal, K. Lancaster, M. S. Wei, K.
Krushelnick, M. Tatarakis, N. Vakakis, S. Moustaizis, R.
Kodama, M. Tampo, C. Stoeckl, R. Clarke, H. Habara, D.
Neely, S. Karsch, and P. Norreys, 2006, Nat. Phys. 2, 456.
Dubietis, A., R. Butkus, and A. P. Piskarskas, 2006, IEEE J.
Sel. Top. Quantum Electron. 12, 163.
Dudovich, N., J. Levesque, O. Smirnova, D. Zeidler, D. Com-
tois, M. Yu. Ivanov, D. M. Villeneuve, and P. B. Corkum,
2006, Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 253903.
Dudovich, N., O. Smirnova, J. Levesque, M. Yu. Ivanov, Y.
Mairesse, D. M. Villeneuve, and P. B. Corkum, 2006, Nat.
Phys. 2, 781.
Durfee, C. G., A. R. Rundquist, S. Backus, C. Herne, M. M.
Murnane, and H. C. Kapteyn, 1999, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 2187.
Dwyer, J. R., R. E. Jordan, C. T. Hebeisen, M. Harb, R. Ern-
storfer, T. Dartigalongue, and R. J. D. Miller, 2007a, J. Mod.
Opt. 54, 905.
Dwyer, J. R., R. E. Jordan, C. T. Hebeisen, M. Harb, R. Ern-
storfer, T. Dartigalongue, and R. J. D. Miller, 2007b, J. Mod.
Opt. 54, 923.
Echenique, P. M., R. Berndt, E. V. Chulkov, T. Fauster, A.
Goldmann, and U. Höfer, 2004, Surf. Sci. Rep. 52, 219.
Eden, J. G., 2004, Prog. Quantum Electron. 28, 197.
Eichmann, U., M. Dörr, H. Maeda, W. Becher, and W. Sand-
ner, 2000, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 3550.
Eigen, M., 1954, Discuss. Faraday Soc. 17, 194.
Elsayed-Ali, H. E., and G. Mourou, 1988, Appl. Phys. Lett. 52,
223
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 63 (native text) -----
103.
Emmanouilidou, A., and J. M. Rost, 2007, Phys. Rev. A 75,
022712.
Eremina, E., X. Liu, H. Rottke, W. Sandner, A. Dreischuh, F.
Lindner, F. Grasbon, G. G. Paulus, H. Walther, R. Mosham-
mer, B. Feuerstein, and J. Ullrich, 2003, J. Phys. B 36, 3269.
Eremina, E., X. Liu, H. Rottke, W. Sandner, M. G. Schätzel,
A. Dreischuh, G. G. Paulus, H. Walther, R. Moshammer, and
J. Ullrich, 2004. Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 173001.
Faisal, F. H. M., 1973, J. Phys. B 6, L89.
Faisal, F. H. M., 1987, Theory of Multiphoton Processes Ple-
num, New York.
Fann, W. S., R. Storz, H. W. K. Tom, and J. Bokor, 1992, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 68, 2834.
Fano, U., 1935, Nuovo Cimento 12, 154.
Fano, U., 1961, Phys. Rev. 124, 1866.
Farkas, Gy., and Cs. Tóth, 1992, Phys. Lett. A 168, 447.
Faure, J., Y. Glinec, A. Pukhov, S. Kiselev, S. Gordienko, E.
Lefebvre, J.-P. Rousseau, F. Burgy, and V. Malka, 2004, Na-
ture London 431, 541.
Fedorov M. V., M. A. Efremov, A. E. Kazakov, K. W. Chan, C.
K. Law, and J. H. Eberly, 2004, Phys. Rev. A 69, 052117.
Fedorov M. V., M. A. Efremov, A. E. Kazakov, K. W. Chan, C.
K. Law, and J. H. Eberly, 2005, Phys. Rev. A 72, 032110.
Feldhaus, J., J. Arthur, and J. B. Hastings, 2005, J. Phys. B 38,
S799.
Fennel, T., L. Ramunno, and T. Brabec, 2007, Phys. Rev. Lett.
99, 233401.
Feringa, B. L., 2001, Ed., Molecular Switches Wiley-VCH,
Weinheim.
Ferray, M., A. L’Huillier, X. F. Li, L. A. Lompré, G. Mainfray,
and C. Manus, 1988, J. Phys. B 21, L31.
Figueira de Morisson Faria, C., X. Liu, W. Becker, and H.
Schomerus, 2004, Phys. Rev. A 69, 021402.
Figueira de Morisson Faria, C., and P. Salieres, 2007, Laser
Phys. 17, 390.
Figueira de Morisson Faria, C., P. Salieres, P. Villain, and M.
Lewenstein, 2006, Phys. Rev. A 74, 053416.
Figueira de Morisson Faria, C., H. Schomerus, and W. Becker,
2002, Phys. Rev. A 66, 043413.
Figueira de Morisson Faria, C., H. Schomerus, X. Liu, and W.
Becker, 2004, Phys. Rev. A 69, 043405.
Fill, E. E., F. Krausz, and M. G. Raizen, 2008, New J. Phys. 10,
093015.
Fill, E., L. Veisz, A. Apolonski, and F. Krausz, 2006, New J.
Phys. 8, 272.
Fittinghoff, D., P. R. Bolton, B. Chang, and K. C. Kulander,
1992, Phys. Rev. Lett. 69, 2642.
Fleischer, A., and N. Moiseyev, 2006, Phys. Rev. A 74, 053806.
Föhlisch, A., 2006, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process. 85, 351.
Föhlisch, A., P. Feulner, F. Hennies, A. Fink, D. Menzel, D.
Sanchez-Portal, P. M. Echenique, and W. Wurth, 2005, Nature
London 436, 373.
Fortier, T. M., P. A. Roos, D. J. Jones, S. T. Cundiff, R. D. R.
Bhat, and J. E. Sipe, 2004, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 147403.
Franco, I., and P. Brumer, 2006, Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 040402.
Frolov, M. V., A. V. Flegel, N. L. Manakov, and A. F. Starace,
2007a, Phys. Rev. A 75, 063407.
Frolov, M. V., A. V. Flegel, N. L. Manakov, and A. F. Starace,
2007b, Phys. Rev. A 75, 063408.
Fuji, T., N. Ishii, C. Y. Teisset, X. Gu, Th. Metzger, A. Bal-
tuška, N. Forget, D. Kaplan, A. Galvanauskas, and F. Krausz,
2006, Opt. Lett. 31, 1103.
Fuji, T., J. Rauschenberger, Ch. Gohle, A. Apolonski, T.
Udem, V. S. Yakovlev, G. Tempea, T. W. Hänsch, and F.
Krausz, 2005, New J. Phys. 7, 116.
Gaarde, M. B., M. Murakami, and R. Kienberger, 2006, Phys.
Rev. A 74, 053401.
Gaarde, M. B., and K. J. Schafer, 2002, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89,
213901.
Gaarde, M. B., and K. J. Schafer, 2006, Opt. Lett. 31, 3188.
Gaarde, M. B., K. J. Schafer, K. C. Kulander, B. Sheehy, D.
Kim, and L. F. DiMauro, 2000, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 2822.
Gagnon, E., P. Ranitovic, X-M. Tong, C. L. Cocke, M. Mur-
nane, H. Kapteyn, and A. Sandhu, 2007, Science 317, 1374.
Gagnon, E., I. Thomann, A. Paul, A. Lytle, S. Backus, M.
Murnane, H. Kapteyn, and A. Sandhu, 2006, Opt. Lett. 31,
1866.
Gale, G. M., M. Cavallari, T. J. Driscoll, and F. Hache, 1995,
Opt. Lett. 20, 1562.
Ge, Y., 2006, Phys. Rev. A 74, 015803.
Geddes, C. G. R., Cs. Toth, J. van Tilborg, E. Esarey, C. B.
Schroeder, D. Bruhwiler, C. Nieter, J. Cary, and W. P. Lee-
mans, 2004, Nature London 431, 538.
Geissler, M., and J. Meyer-ter-Vehn, 2006, private commnica-
tion.
Geissler, M., S. Rykovanov, J. Schreiber, J. Meyer-ter-Vehn,
and G. D. Tsakiris, 2007, New J. Phys. 9, 218.
Georgescu, I., U. Saalmann, and J. M. Rost, 2007, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 99, 183002.
Gessner, O., Y. Hikosaka, B. Zimmermann, A. Hempelmann,
R. R. Lucchese, J. H. D. Eland, P.-M. Guyon, and U. Becker,
2002, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 193002.
Gessner, O., A. M. D. Lee, J. P. Shaffer, H. Reisler, S. V.
Levchenko, A. I. Krylov, J. G. Underwood, H. Shi, A. L. L.
East, D. M. Wardlaw, E. t. H. Chrysostom, C. C. Hayden, and
A. Stolow, 2006, Science 311, 219.
Gibson, E. A., A. Paul, N. Wagner, R. Tobey, S. Backus, I. P.
Christov, A. Aquila, E. M. Gullikson, D. T. Attwood, M. M.
Murnane, and H. C. Kapteyn, 2003, Science 302, 95.
Gibson, E. A., A. Paul, N. Wagner, R. Tobey, D. Gaudiosi, S.
Backus, I. P. Christov, M. M. Murnane, and H. C. Kapteyn,
2004, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 033001.
Gildenburg, V. B., and N. V. Vvedenskii, 2007, Phys. Rev. Lett.
98, 245002.
Glover, T. E., R. W. Schoenlein, A. H. Chin, and C. V. Shank,
1996, Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, 2468.
Göres, J., D. Goldhaber-Gordon, S. Heemeyer, M. A. Kastner,
Hadas Shtrikman, D. Mahalu, and U. Meirav, 2000, Phys.
Rev. B 62, 2188.
Goldsmith, R. H., L. E. Sinks, R. F. Kelley, L. J. Betzen, W.
Liu, E. A. Weiss, M. A. Ratner, and M. R. Wasielewski, 2005,
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 102, 3540.
Gordienko, S., A. Pukhov, O. Shorokhov, and T. Baeva, 2004,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 115002.
Gordienko, S., A. Pukhov, O. Shorokhov, and T. Baeva, 2005,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 103903.
Gordon, A., F. Kaertner, N. Rohringer, and R. Santra, 2006,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 223902.
Goreslavskii S. P., and S. V. Popruzhenko, 1999, J. Phys. B 32,
L531.
Goreslavskii S. P., S. V. Popruzhenko, R. Kopold, and W.
Becker, 2001, Phys. Rev. A 64, 053402.
Goulielmakis, E., S. Koehler, B. Reiter, M. Schultze, A. J. Ver-
hoef, E. E. Serebryannikov, A. M. Zheltikov, and F. Krausz,
2008, Opt. Lett. 33, 1407.
224
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 64 (native text) -----
Goulielmakis, E., E. M. Schultze, M. Hofstetter, V. S. Yakov-
lev, J. Gagnon, M. Uiberacker, A. L. Aquila, E. M. Gullik-
son, D. T Attwood, R. Kienberger, F. Krausz, and U.
Kleineberg, 2008, Science 320, 1614.
Goulielmakis, E., M. Uiberacker, R. Kienberger, A. Baltuška,
V. Yakovlev, A. Scrinzi, Th. Westerwalbesloh, U. Kleineberg,
U. Heinzmann, M. Drescher, and F. Krausz, 2004, Science
305, 1267.
Goulielmakis, E., V. Yakovlev, A. L. Cavalieri, M. Uiberacker,
V. Pervak, A. Apolonskiy, R. Kienberger, U. Kleineberg, and
F. Krausz, 2007, Science 317, 769.
Gouy, C. R., 1890, Acad. Sci., Paris, C. R. 110, 1251.
Graf, U., M. Fiess, M. Schultze, R. Kienberger, F. Krausz, and
E. Goulielmakis, 2008, Opt. Express 16, 18956.
Gräfe, S., and M. Yu. Ivanov, 2007, Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 163603.
Gray, H. B., and J. R. Winkler, 2005, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 102, 3534.
Greenblatt, B. J., M. T. Zanni, and D. M. Neumark, 1997, Sci-
ence 276, 1675.
Greenhow, R. C., and A. J. Schmidt, 1974, in Advances in
Quantum Electronics, edited by D. W. Goodwin Academic,
London, Vol. 2, p. 158.
Guandalini, A., P. Eckle, M. Anscombe, P. Schlup, J. Biegert,
and U. Keller, 2006, J. Phys. B 39, S257.
Haan, S. L., L. Breen, A. Karim, and J. H. Eberly, 2006, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 97, 103008.
Haan, S. L., L. Breen, A. Karim, and J. H. Eberly, 2007, Opt.
Express 15, 767.
Haan, S. L., and Z. S. Smith, 2007, Phys. Rev. A 76, 053412.
Haan, S. L., P. S. Wheeler, R. Panﬁli, and J. H. Eberly, 2002,
Phys. Rev. A 66, 061402.
Haight, R., 1995, Surf. Sci. Rep. 21, 275.
Haight, R., and J. A. Silbermann, 1989, Phys. Rev. Lett. 62,
815.
Haljan, P., M. Yu. Ivanov, and P. B. Corkum, 1997, Laser Phys.
7, 839.
Hänsch, T. W., 1990, Opt. Commun. 80, 71.
Hänsch, T. W., 1997, private communication.
Harris, S. E., J. J. Macklin, and T. W. Hänsch, 1993, Opt. Com-
mun. 100, 487.
Harris, S. E., and A. V. Sokolov, 1997, Phys. Rev. A 55, R4019.
Harris, S. E., and A. V. Sokolov, 1998, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81,
2894.
Harumiya, K., H. Kono, Y. Fujimura, I. Kawata, and A. D.
Bandrauk, 2002, Phys. Rev. A 66, 043403.
Hasegawa, H., E. J. Takahashi, Y. Nabekawa, K. L. Ishikawa,
and K. Midorikawa, 2005, Phys. Rev. A 71, 023407.
Hauri, C. P., W. Kornelis, F. W. Helbing, A. Heinrich, A.
Couairon, A. Mysyrowicz, J. Biegert, and U. Keller, 2004,
Appl. Phys. B: Lasers Opt. 79, 673.
Hauri, C. P., et al., 2007, Opt. Lett. 32, 868.
Haworth, C. A., L. E. Chipperﬁeld, J. S. Robinson, P. L.
Knight, J. P. Marangos, and J. W. G. Tisch, 2007, Nat. Phys. 3,
52.
He, F., C. Ruiz, and A. Becker, 2007, Phys. Rev. Lett. 99,
083002.
Heinrich, A., W. Kornelis, M. P. Anscombe, C. P. Hauri, P.
Schlup, J. Biegert, and U. Keller, 2006, J. Phys. B 39, S275.
Hennig, H., J. Breidbach, and L. S. Cederbaum, 2005, J. Chem.
Phys. 122, 134104.
Hentschel, M., R. Kienberger, Ch. Spielmann, G. A. Reider,
N. Milosevic, T. Brabec, P. Corkum, U. Heinzmann, M.
Drescher, and F. Krausz, 2001, Nature London 414, 509.
Hergott, J.-F., M. Kovacev, H. Merdji, C. Hubert, Y. Mairesse,
E. Jean, P. Breger, P. Agostini, B. Carré, and P. Salières, 2002,
Phys. Rev. A 66, 021801R.
Ho, P. J., and J. H. Eberly, 2007, Opt. Express 15, 1845.
Ho, P. J., R. Panﬁli, S. L. Heen, and J. H. Eberly, 2005, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 94, 093002.
Höfer, U., I. L. Shumay, Ch. Reuß, U. Thomann, W. Wallauer,
and T. Fauster, 1997, Science 277, 1480.
Holzwarth, R., T. Udem, T. W. Hänsch, J. C. Knight, W. J.
Wadsworth, P. St. J. Russell, 2000, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 2264.
Hommelhoff, P., Y. Sortais, A. Aghajani-Talesh, and M. A.
Kasevich, 2006, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 077401.
Hong, K. H., J. Lee, B. Hou, J. A. Nees, E. Power, and G. A.
Mourou, 2006, Appl. Phys. Lett. 89, 031113.
Hu, J., K.-L. Han, and G.-Z. He, 2005, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95,
123001.
Hu, J., M.-S. Wang, K.-L. Han, and G.-Z. He, 2006, Phys. Rev.
A 74, 063417.
Hu, S. X., and L. A. Collins, 2005, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 073004.
Hu, S. X., and L. A. Collins, 2006, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 073004.
Hu, S. X., and L. A. Collins, 2007, J. Mod. Opt. 54, 943.
Hu, S. X., D. B. Miloševic´, W. Becker, and W. Sandner, 2001,
Phys. Rev. A 64, 013410.
Huang, Y. C., D. Zheng, W. M. Tullock, and R. L. Byer, 1996,
Appl. Phys. Lett. 68, 753.
Huber, R., F. Tauser, A. Brodschelm, M. Bichler, G. Ab-
streiter, and A. Leitenstorfer, 2001, Nature London 414,
286.
Huebener, R., 2005, Electrons in Action: Roads to Modern
Computers and Electronics Wiley-VCH Verlag, Weinheim.
Huo, Y., Z. Zeng, Y. Leng, R. Li, Z. Xu, C. Guo, Z. Sun, and
Y. Rhee, 2005, Opt. Lett. 30, 564.
Huo, Y., Z. Zeng, R. Li, and Z. Xu, 2005, Opt. Express 13,
9897.
Iaconis, C., and I. Walmsley, 1998, Opt. Lett. 23, 792.
Iaconis, C., and I. Walmsley, 1999, IEEE J. Quantum Electron.
35, 501.
Ihee, H., V. A. Lobastov, U. M. Gomez, B. M. Goodson, R.
Srinivasan, C.-Y. Ruan, and A. H. Zewail, 2001, Science 291,
458.
Imran, T., Y. S. Lee, C. H. Nam, K. H. Hong, T. J. Yu, and J. H.
Sung, 2007, Opt. Express 15, 104.
Irvine, S. E., P. Dombi, Gy. Farkas, and A. Y. Elezzabi, 2006,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 146801.
Ishikawa, K. L., 2006, Phys. Rev. A 74, 023806.
Ishikawa, K. L., E. J. Takahashi, and K. Midorikawa, 2007,
Phys. Rev. A 75, 021801R.
Itakura, R., 2007, Phys. Rev. A 76, 033810.
Itatani, J., J. Levesque, D. Zeidler, H. Niikura, H. Pepin, J. C.
Kieffer, P. B. Corkum, and D. M. Villeneuve, 2004, Nature
London 432, 867.
Itatani, J., F. Quéré, G. L. Yudin, M. Yu. Ivanov, F. Krausz,
and P. Corkum, 2002, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 173903.
Ivanov, M. Yu., T. Brabec, and N. Burnett, 1996, Phys. Rev. A
54, 742.
Ivanov, M. Yu., P. B. Corkum, T. Zuo, and A. Bandrauk, 1995,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 2933.
Ivanov, M. Yu., D. Matusek, and J. Wright, 1996, Phys. Rev. A
54, 5159.
Ivanov, M. Yu., M. Spanner, and O. Smirnova, 2005, J. Mod.
Opt. 52, 165.
Ivanov, M. Yu., V. Yakovlev, and F. Krausz, 2008, in Mid-
Infrared Coherent Sources and Applications, edited by M.
225
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 65 (native text) -----
Ebrahim-Zade and I. Sorokina Springer, Dordrecht, The
Netherlands, p. 589.
Jahnke, T., A. Czasch, M. S. Schöfﬂer, S. Schössler, A. Knapp,
M. Käsz, J. Titze, C. Wimmer, K. Kreidi, R. E. Grisenti, A.
Staudte, O. Jagutzki, U. Hergenhahn, H. Schmidt-Böcking,
and R. Dörner, 2004, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 163401.
Jaron´-Becker, A., A. Becker, and F. H. M. Faisal, 2004, Phys.
Rev. A 69, 023410.
Jaron´-Becker, A., A. Becker, and F. H. M. Faisal, 2006, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 96, 143006.
Joachain, C. J., M. Dörr, and N. Klystra, 2000, Adv. At., Mol.,
Opt. Phys. 42, 225.
Johnsson, P., R. López-Martens, S. Kazamias, J. Mauritsson, C.
Valentin, T. Remetter, K. Varjú, M. B. Gaarde, Y. Mairesse,
H. Wabnitz, P. Salières, Ph. Balcou, K. J. Schafer, and A.
L’Huillier, 2005, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 013001.
Johnsson, P., K. Varjú, T. Remetter, E. Gustafsson, J. Maurits-
son, R. López-Martens, S. Kazamias, C. Valentin, Ph. Balcou,
M. B. Gaarde, K. J. Schafer, and A. L’Huillier, 2006, J. Mod.
Opt. 53, 233.
Jones, D. J., S. A. Diddams, J. K. Ranka, A. Stentz, R. S.
Windeler, J. L. Hall, and S. T. Cundiff, 2000, Science 288, 635.
Jordan, G., J. Caillat, C. Ede, and A. Scrinzi, 2006, J. Phys. B
39, S341.
Jortner, J., and M. Ratner, 1997, Eds., Molecular Electronics
Blackwell, Oxford.
Judson, R. S., and H. Rabitz, 1992, Phys. Rev. Lett. 68, 1500.
Jung, J. D., F. X. Kärnter, N. Matuschek, D. H. Sutter, F.
Morier-Genoud, G. Zhang, U. Keller, V. Scheuer, M. Tilsch,
and T. Tschudi, 1997, Opt. Lett. 22, 1009.
Jurvansuu, M., A. Kivimäki, and S. Aksela, 2001, Phys. Rev. A
64, 012502.
Kakehata, M., H. Takada, Y. Kobayashi, and K. Torizuka,
2004, Opt. Express 12, 2070.
Kakehata, M., H. Takada, Y. Kobayashi, and K. Torizuka,
2006, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A 182, 220.
Kakehata, M., H. Takada, Y. Kobayashi, K. Torizuka, Y. Fuji-
hira, T. Homma, and H. Takahashi, 2001, Opt. Lett. 26, 1436.
Kan, C., N. H. Burnett, C. E. Capjack, and R. Rankin, 1997,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 2971.
Kane, D. J., 1999, IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 35, 421.
Kane, D. J., and R. Trebino, 1993, Opt. Lett. 18, 823.
Kanai, T., S. Minemoto, and H. Sakai, 2005, Nature London
435, 470.
Kanai, T., E. J. Takahashi, Y. Nabekawa, and K. Midorikawa,
2007, Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 153904.
Kaplan, A. E., 1994, Phys. Rev. Lett. 73, 1243.
Kaplan, A. E., and P. Shkolnikov, 1995, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75,
2316.
Kaplan, D., and P. Tournois, 2004, Ultrafast Optics IV, edited
by F. Krausz, G. Korn, P. B. Corkum, and I. A. Walmsley
Springer-Verlag, New York, p. 105.
Karsch, S., 2004, private communication.
Kato, H. S., M. Furukawa, M. Kawai., M. Taniguchi, T. Kawai,
T. Hatsui, and N. Kosugi, 2004, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 086403.
Kawata, I., H. Kono, and Y. Fujimura, 1999, J. Chem. Phys.
110, 11152.
Kazansky, A. K., and N. M. Kabachnik, 2006, J. Phys. B 39,
5173.
Kazansky, A. K., and N. M. Kabachnik, 2007a, J. Phys. B 40,
2163.
Kazansky, A. K., and N. M. Kabachnik, 2007b, J. Phys. B 40,
3413.
Kazansky, A. K., and N. M. Kabachnik, 2007c, J. Phys. B 40,
F299.
Keldysh, L. V., 1964, Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 47, 1945 Sov. Phys.
JETP 20, 1307 1965.
Keller, U., 2003, Nature London 424, 831.
Kienberger, R., E. Goulielmakis, M. Uiberacker, A. Baltuška,
V. Yakovlev, F. Bammer, A. Scrinzi, Th. Westerwalbesloh, U.
Kleineberg, U. Heinzmann, M. Drescher, and F. Krausz,
2004, Nature London 427, 817.
Kim, C. M., I. J. Kim, and C. H. Nam, 2005, Phys. Rev. A 72,
033817.
Kim, H. T., V. Tosa, and C. H. Nam, 2006, J. Phys. B 39, S265.
Kim, I. J., C. M. Kim, H. T. Kim, G. H. Lee, Y. S. Lee, J. Y.
Park, D. J. Cho, and C. H. Nam, 2004, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94,
243901.
Kim, J.-H., D. G. Lee, H. J. Shin, and C. H. Nam, 2001, Phys.
Rev. A 63, 063403.
Kim, T. K., C. M. Kim, M. G. Baik, G. Umesh, and C. H. Nam,
2004, Phys. Rev. A 69, 051805R.
Kimura, W., M. Babzien, I. Ben-Zvi, L. P. Campbell D. B.
Cline, C. E. Dilley, J. C. Gallardo, S. C. Gottschalk, K. P.
Kusche, R. H. Pantell, I. V. Pogorelsky, D. C. Quimby, J.
Skaritka, L. C. Steinhauer, V. Yakimenko, and F. Zhou, 2004,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 054801.
Kimura, W., A. van Steenbergen, M. Babzien, I. Ben-Zvi, L. P.
Cambell, D. B. Cline, C. E. Dilley, J. C. Gallardo, S. C.
Gottschalk, P. He, K. P. Kusche, Y. Liu, R. H. Pantell, I. V.
Pogorelsky, C. C. Quimby, J. Skaritka, L. C. Steinhauer, and
V. Yakimenko, 2001, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 4041.
Kinoshita, K., M. Ito, and Y. Suzuki, 1987, Rev. Sci. Instrum.
58, 932.
Kirchmann, P. S., P. A. Loukakos, U. Bovensiepen, M. Wolf, S.
Vijayalakshmi, F. Hennies, A. Pietsch, M. Nagasono, A.
Föhlisch, and W. Wurth, 2007, in Ultrafast Phenomena XV,
Proceedings of the 15th International Conference, edited by P.
Corkum et al., Springer Series in Chemical Physics Vol. 88
Springer, Berlin, p. 612.
Kitzler, M., and M. Lezius, 2005, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 253001.
Kitzler, M., N. Milosevic, A. Scrinzi, F. Krausz, and T. Brabec,
2002, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 173904.
Kitzler, M., K. O’Keeffe, and M. Lezius, 2006, J. Mod. Opt. 53,
57.
Kitzler, M., X. Xie, A. Scrinzi, and A. Baltuška, 2007, Phys.
Rev. A 76, 011801R.
Klamroth, T., 2006, J. Chem. Phys. 124, 144310.
Kling, M. F., Ch. Siedschlag, A. J. Verhoef, J. I. Khan, M.
Schultze, Th. Uphues, Y. Ni, M. Uiberacker, M. Drescher, F.
Krausz, and M. J. J. Vrakking, 2006, Science 312, 246.
Kobayashi, T., A. Shirakawa, and T. Fuji, 2001, IEEE J. Sel.
Top. Quantum Electron. 7, 525.
Kobayashi, Y., T. Sekikawa, Y. Nabekawa, and S. Watanabe,
1998, Opt. Lett. 23, 64.
Kobayashi, Y., D. Yoshitomi, K. Iwata, H. Takada, and K.
Torizuka, 2007, Opt. Express 15, 9748.
Kofman, A. G., and G. Kurizki, 2000, Nature London 405,
546.
Kono, H., Y. Sato, M. Kanno, K. Nakai, and T. Kato, 2006,
Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn. 79, 196.
Kono, H., Y. Sato, N. Tanaka, T. Kato, K. Nakai, S. Koseki,
and Y. Fujimura, 2004, Chem. Phys. 304, 203.
Kopold, R., D. B. Miloševic´, and W. Becker, 2000, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 84, 3831.
Kosik, E. M., L. Corner, A. S. Wyatt, E. Cormier, I. A. Walms-
226
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 66 (native text) -----
ley, and L. F. DiMauro, 2005, J. Mod. Opt. 52, 361.
Kosuge, A., T. Sekikawa, X. Zhou, T. Kanai, S. Adachi, and S.
Watanabe, 2006, Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 263901.
Kovacev, M., Y. Mairesse, E. Priori, H. Merdji, O. Tcherbakoff,
P. Monchicourt, P. Breger, E. Mevel, E. Constant, P. Salieres,
B. Carré, and P. Agostini, 2003, Eur. Phys. J. D 26, 79.
Krause, J., K. Schafer, and K. Kulander, 1992, Phys. Rev. Lett.
68, 3535.
Krause, P., T. Klamroth, and P. Saalfrank, 2005, J. Chem. Phys.
123, 074105.
Krehl. P., and S. Engemann, 1995, Shock Waves 5, 1.
Kress, M., T. Löfﬂer, M. D. Thomson, R. Dörner, H. Gimpel,
K. Zrost, T. Ergler, R. Moshammer, U. Morgner, J. Ullrich,
and H. G. Roskos, 2006, Nat. Phys. 2, 327.
Kroll, N. M., P. L. Morton, M. N. Rosenbluth, 1981, IEEE J.
Quantum Electron. QE-17, 1436.
Kruer, W. L., 2003, The Physics of Laser-Plasma Interactions
Westview, Boulder.
Kubo, A., Y. S. Jung, H. K. Kim, and H. Petek, 2007, J. Phys. B
40, S259.
Kubo, A., K. Onda, H. Petek, Z. Sun, Y. S. Jung, and H. K.
Kim, 2005, Nano Lett. 5, 1123.
Kuchiev, M. Yu, 1987, Pis’ma Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 45, 404
JETP Lett. 45, 319 1987.
Kugeler, O., G. Prümper, R. Hentges, J. Viefhaus, D. Rolles,
U. Becker, S. Marburger, and U. Hergenhahn, 2004, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 93, 033002.
Kulander, K. C., K. J. Schafer, and J. L. Krause, 1992, Atoms in
Intense Laser Fields, edited by M. Gavrila Academic, New
York, p. 247.
Kulander, K. C., K. J. Schafer, and J. L. Krause, 1993, in Super-
Intense
Laser-Atom
Physics,
edited
by
B.
Piraux,
A.
L’Huillier, and K. Rzazewski, Vol. 316 of NATO Advanced
Study Institute Series B: Physics Plenum, New York, p. 95.
Kuleff, A. I., J. Breidbach, and L. S. Cederbaum, 2005, J.
Chem. Phys. 123, 044111.
Kuleff, A. I., and L. S. Cederbaum, 2007, Phys. Rev. Lett. 98,
083201.
Kwong, N.-H., and M. Bonitz, 2000, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 1768.
Lambropoulos, P., 1985, Phys. Rev. Lett. 55, 2141.
Lambropoulos, P., and P. Zoller, 1981, Phys. Rev. A 24, 379.
Lan, P., P. Lu, W. Cao, Y. Li, and X. Wang, 2007, Phys. Rev. A
76, 021801R.
Lan, P., P. Lu, W. Cao, X. Wang, and W. Hong, 2007, Opt. Lett.
32, 1186.
Lan, P., P. Lu, W. Cao, X. Wang, and G. Yang, 2006, Phys. Rev.
A 74, 063411.
Lappas, D. G., and A. L’Huillier, 1998, Phys. Rev. A 58, 4140.
Le, A.-T., T. Morishita, and C. D. Lin, 2008, Phys. Rev. A 78,
023814.
Le, Anh-Thu, X.-M. Tong, and C. D. Lin, 2006, Phys. Rev. A
73, 041402.
Lee, D. G., H. J. Shin, Y. H. Cha, K. H. Hong, J.-H. Kim, and
C. H. Nam, 2001, Phys. Rev. A 63, 021801R.
Lee, Y. S., J. H. Sung, C. H. Nam, T. J. Yu, and K. H. Hong,
2005, Opt. Express 13, 2969.
Lehr, L., M. T. Zanni, C. Frischkorn, R. Weinkauf, and D. M.
Neumark, 1999, Science 284, 635.
Lein, M., 2005, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 053004.
Lein, M., 2007, J. Phys. B 40, R135.
Lein, M., P. P. Corso, J. P. Marangos, and P. L. Knight, 2003,
Phys. Rev. A 67, 023819.
Lein, M., V. Engel, and E. K. U. Gross, 2001, Opt. Express 8,
411.
Lein, M., E. K. U. Gross, and V. Engel, 2001, Phys. Rev. A 64,
023406.
Lein, M., E. K. U. Gross, and V. Engel, 2002, Laser Phys. 12,
487.
Lein, M., N. Hay, R. Velotta, J. P. Marangos, and P. L. Knight,
2002, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 183903.
Lein, M., T. Kreibich, E. K. U. Gross, and V. Engel, 2002, Phys.
Rev. A 65, 033403.
Lein, M., J. P. Marangos, and P. L. Knight, 2002, Phys. Rev. A
66, 051404R.
Levine, R. D., 2005, Molecular Reaction Dynamics Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, England.
Levine, R. D., and F. Remacle, 2006, private communication.
Levis, R. J., G. Menkir, and H. Rabitz, 2001, Science 292, 709.
Lewenstein, M., Ph. Balcou, M. Yu. Ivanov, A. L’Huillier, and
P. B. Corkum, 1994, Phys. Rev. A 49, 2117.
Lewenstein, M., P. Salieres, and A. L’Huillier, 1995, Phys. Rev.
A 52, 4747.
Lezius, M., V. Blanchet, D. M. Rayner, D. M. Villeneuve, A.
Stolow, and M. Yu. Ivanov, 2001, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 51.
L’Huillier, A., and P. Balcou, 1993, Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 774.
L’Huillier, A., L. A. Lompre, G. Mainfray, and C. Manus,
1983, Phys. Rev. A 27, 2503.
Li, C., E. Moon, H. Mashiko, C. M. Nakamura, P. Ranitovic, C.
M. Maharjan, C. L. Cocke, and Z. Chang, 2006, Opt. Express
14, 11468.
Li, C., E. Moon, H. Wang, H. Mashiko, C. M. Nakamura, J.
Tackett, and Z. Chang, 2007, Opt. Lett. 32, 796.
Lichters, R., J. Meyer-ter-Vehn, and A. Pukhov, 1996, Phys.
Plasmas 3, 3425.
Lin, C. D., X. M. Tong, and T. Morishita, 2006, J. Phys. B 39,
S419.
Lindner, F., G. G. Paulus, H. Walther, A. Baltuška, E. Goul-
ielmakis, M. Lezius, and F. Krausz, 2004, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92,
113001.
Lindner, F., M. G. Schätzel, H. Walther, A. Baltuška, E. Goul-
ielmakis, F. Krausz, D. B. Milosevic, D. Bauer, W. Becker,
and G. G. Paulus, 2005, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 040401.
Liu, X., C. Figueira de Morisson Faria, W. Becker, and P. B.
Corkum, 2006, J. Phys. B 39, L305.
Liu, X., H. Rottke, E. Eremina, W. Sandner, E. Goulielmakis,
K. O. Keeffe, M. Lezius, F. Krausz, F. Lindner, M. G. Schät-
zel, G. G. Paulus, and H. Walther, 2004, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93,
263001.
Liu, Y., X. J. Wang, D. B. Cline, M. Babzien, J. M. Fang, J.
Gallardo, K. Kusche, I. Pogorelsky, J. Skaritka, and A. van
Steenbergen, 1998, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 4418.
Lobastov, V. A., R. Srinivasan, and A. H. Zewail, 2005, Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 102, 7069.
Loh, Z.-H., C. H. Greene, and S. R. Leone, 2008, Chem. Phys.
350, 7.
Loh, Z.-H., M. Khalil, R. E. Correa, R. Santra, C. Buth, and S.
R. Leone, 2007, Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 143601.
Lohr, A., M. Kleber, R. Kopold, and W. Becker, 1997, Phys.
Rev. A 55, R4003.
López-Martens,
R.,
J.
Mauritsson,
P.
Johnsson,
and
A.
L’Huillier, 2004, Phys. Rev. A 69, 053811.
López-Martens, R., K. Varjú, P. Johnsson, J. Mauritsson, Y.
Mairesse, P. Salieres, M. B. Gaarde, K. J. Schafer, A. Persson,
S. Svanberg, C.-G. Wahlström, and A. L’Huillier, 2005, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 94, 033001.
Ma, L.-S., R. K. Shelton, H. C. Kapteyn, M. M. Murnane, and
227
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 67 (native text) -----
J. Ye, 2001, Phys. Rev. A 64, 021802.
Ma, Y.-Y., Z.-M. Sheng, Y.-T. Li, W.-W. Chang, X.-H. Yuan, M.
Chen, H.-C. Wu, J. Zheng, and J. Zhang, 2006, Phys. Plasmas
13, 110702.
Macklin, J., J. D. Kmetec, and C. L. Gordon III, 1993, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 70, 766.
Madhaven, V., W. Chen, T. Jamneala, M. F. Crommie, and N.
S. Wingreen, 1998, Science 280, 567.
Maeda, H., M. Dammasch, U. Eichmann, W. Sandner, A.
Becker, and F. H. M. Faisal, 2000, Phys. Rev. A 62, 035402.
Mahan, G. D., 1993, Many-Particle Physics, 2nd ed. Plenum,
New York.
Mairesse, Y., A. De Bohan, L. J. Frasinski, H. Merdji, L. C.
Dinu, P. Monchicourt, P. Breger, M. Kovacev, T. Auguste, B.
Carré, H. G. Muller, P. Agostini, and P. Salieres, 2004, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 93, 163901.
Mairesse, Y., A. De Bohan, L. J. Frasinski, H. Merdji, L. C.
Dinu, P. Monchicourt, P. Bréger, M. Kovacev, R. Taieb, B.
Carré, H. G. Muller, P. Agostini, and P. Salieres, 2003, Science
302, 1540.
Mairesse, Y., and F. Quéré, 2005, Phys. Rev. A 71, 011401R.
Mangles, S. P. D., C. D. Murphy, Z. Najmudin, A. G. R. Tho-
mas, J. L. Collier, A. E. Dangor, E. J. Divall, P. S. Foster, J.
G. Gallacher, C. J. Hooker, D. A. Jaroszynski, A. J. Langley,
W. B. Mori, P. A. Norreys, F. S. Tsung, R. Viskup, B. R.
Walton, and K. Krushelnick, 2004, Nature London 431, 535.
Manzoni, C., C. Vozzi, E. Benedetti, G. Sansone, S. Stagira, O.
Svelto, S. De Silvestri, M. Nisoli, and G. Cerullo, 2006, Opt.
Lett. 31, 963.
Marburger, S., O. Kugeler, U. Hergenhahn, and T. Möller,
2003, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 203401.
Markevitch, A. N., S. M. Smith, D. A. Romanov, H. B. Schle-
gel, M. Yu. Ivanov, and R. J. Levis, 2003, Phys. Rev. A 68,
011402R.
Martinez, T. J., M. Ben-Nun, and R. D. Levine, 1996, J. Phys.
Chem. 100, 7884.
Martinez, T. J., M. Ben-Nun, and R. D. Levine, 1997, J. Phys.
Chem. 101, 6389.
Mashiko, H., C. M. Nakamura, C. Li, E. Moon, H. Wang, J.
Tackett, and Z. Chang, 2007, Appl. Phys. Lett. 90, 161114.
Matsubara, E., K. Yamane, T. Sekikawa, and M. Yamashita,
2007, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 24, 985.
Matuschek, N., F. X. Kärtner, and U. Keller, 1998, IEEE J. Sel.
Top. Quantum Electron. 4, 197.
Mauritsson, J., P. Johnsson, E. Gustafsson, A. L’Huillier, K. J.
Schafer, and M. B. Gaarde, 2006, Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 013001.
McPherson, A, G. Gibson, H. Jara, U. Johann, T. S. Luk, I. A.
McIntyre, K. Boyer, C. K. Rhodes, 1987, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B
4, 595.
Meckel, M., D. Comtois, D. Zeidler, A. Staudte, D. Pavicic, H.
C. Bandulet, H. Pépin, J. C. Kieffer, R. Dörner, D. M. Ville-
neuve, and P. B. Corkum, 2008, Science 320, 1478.
Mercouris, T., Y. Komninos, and C. A. Nicolaides, 2004, Phys.
Rev. A 69, 032502.
Mercouris, T., Y. Komninos, and C. A. Nicolaides, 2007a, Phys.
Rev. A 75, 013407.
Mercouris, T., Y. Komninos, and C. A. Nicolaides, 2007b, Phys.
Rev. A 76, 033417.
Merdji, H., M. Kovacev, W. Boutu, P. Salieres, F. Vernay, and
B. Carré, 2006, Phys. Rev. A 74, 043804.
Miaja-Avila, L., C. Lei, M. Aeschlimann, J. L. Gland, M. M.
Murnane, H. C. Kapteyn, and G. Saathoff, 2006, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 97, 113604.
Mikhailova, Yu. M., V. T. Platonenko, and S. G. Rykovanov,
2005, JETP Lett. 81, 571.
Miloševic D., and W. Becker, 2002, Phys. Rev. A 66, 063417.
Miloševic D., G. G. Paulus, D. Bauer, and W. Becker, 2006, J.
Phys. B 39, R203.
Mineo, H., K. Nagaya, M. Hayashi, and S. H. Lin, 2007, J.
Phys. B 40, 2435.
Mirkin, C. A., and M. A. Ratner, 1992, Annu. Rev. Phys.
Chem. 43, 719.
Miyamoto, N., M. Kamei, D. Yoshitomi, T. Kanai, T. Sekikawa,
T. Nakajima, and S. Watanabe, 2004, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93,
083903.
Miyashita, O., M. Y. Okamura, and J. N. Onuchic, 2005, Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 102, 3558.
Monastyrskiy, M., S. Andreev, D. Greenﬁeld, G. Bryukhnev-
ich, V. Tarasov, and M. Yu Schelev, 2005, in High-Speed Pho-
tography and Photonics, edited by B. J. Thompson SPIE,
Bellingham, WA, Vol. 5580 p. 324.
Morishita, T., A.-T. Le, Z. Chen, and C. D. Lin, 2008, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 100, 013903.
Morishita, T., S. Watanabe, and C. D. Lin, 2007, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 98, 083003.
Morishita, Y., X.-J. Liu, N. Saito, T. Lischke, M. Kato, G.
Prümper, M. Oura, H. Yamaoka, Y. Tamenori, I. H. Suzuki,
and K. Ueda, 2006, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 243402.
Morlens, A.-S., P. Balcou, P. Zeitoun, C. Valentin, V. Laude,
and S. Kazamias, 2005, Opt. Lett. 30, 1554.
Moshammer, R., B. Feuerstein, W. Schmitt, A. Dorn, C. D.
Schröter, J. Ullrich, H. Rottke, C. Trump, M. Wittmann, G.
Korn, K. Hoffmann, and W. Sandner, 2000, Phys. Rev. Lett.
84, 447.
Moshammer, R., W. Schmitt, J. Ullrich, H. Kollmus, A. Cas-
simi, R. Dörner, O. Jagutzki, R. Mann, R. E. Olson, H. T.
Prinz, H. Schmidt-Böcking, and L. Spielberger, 1997, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 79, 3621.
Mourou, G., T. Tajima, and S. V. Bulanov, 2006, Rev. Mod.
Phys. 78, 309.
Mourou, G., and S. Williamson, 1982, Appl. Phys. Lett. 41, 44.
Mücke, O. D., T. Tritschler, M. Wegener, U. Morgner, F. X.
Kärtner, G. Khitrova, H. M. Gibbs, 2004, Opt. Lett. 29, 2160.
Muller, H. G., and F. C. Kooiman, 1998, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81,
1207.
Murray, R., and M. Ivanov, 2008, J. Mod. Opt. 55, 2513.
Musumeci, P., S. Ya. Tochitsky, S. Boucher, C. E. Clayton, A.
Doyuran, R. J. England, C. Joshi, C. Pellegrini, J. E. Ralph, J.
B. Rosenzweig, C. Sung, S. Tolmachev, G. Travish, A. A.
Varfolomeev, A. A. Varfolomeev, Jr., T. Yarovoi, and R. B.
Yoder1, 2005, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 154801.
Nabekawa, Y., H. Hasegawa, E. J. Takahashi, and K. Mi-
dorikawa, 2005, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 043001.
Nabekawa, Y., T. Shimizu, T. Okino, K. Furusawa, H. Hase-
gawa, K. Yamanouchi, and K. Midorikawa, 2006, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 97, 153904.
Nakajima, T., and S. Watanabe, 2006, Opt. Lett. 31, 1920.
Naumov, S., A. Fernandez, R. Graf, P. Dombi, F. Krausz, and
A. Apolonskiy, 2005, New J. Phys. 7, 216.
Naumova, N. M., J. A. Nees, I. V. Sokolov, B. Hou, and G.
Mourou, 2004, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 063902.
Naumova, N., I. Sokolov, J. Nees, A. Maksimchuk, V.
Yanovsky, and G. Mourou, 2004, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 195003.
Nest, M., R. Padmanaban, and P. Saalfrank, 2007, J. Chem.
Phys. 126, 214106.
Neumark, D. M., 2001, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 52, 255.
228
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 68 (native text) -----
Neutze, R., R. Wouts, D. van der Spoel, E. Weckert, and J.
Hajdu, 2000, Nature London 406, 752.
Nicolaides, C. A., T. Mercouris, and Y. Komninos, 2002, J.
Phys. B 35, L271.
Niikura, H., P. B. Corkum, and D. M. Villeneuve, 2003, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 90, 203601.
Niikura, H., F. Légaré, R. Hasbani, A. D. Bandrauk, M. Y.
Ivanov, D. M. Villeneuve, and P. B. Corkum, 2002, Nature
London 417, 917.
Niikura, H., F. Légaré, R. Hasbani, M. Y. Ivanov, D. M. Ville-
neuve, and P. B. Corkum, 2003, Nature London 421, 826.
Niikura, H., D. M. Villeneuve, and P. B. Corkum, 2005, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 94, 083003.
Nikolopoulos, L. A. A., E. P. Benis, P. Tzallas, D. Charalambi-
dis, K. Witte, and G. D. Tsakiris, 2005, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94,
113905.
Nikolopoulos, L. A. A., and P. Lambropoulos, 2001, J. Phys. B
34, 545.
Nishioka, H., W. Odajima, K. Ueda, and H. Takuma, 1995,
Opt. Lett. 20, 2505.
Nisoli, M., S. De Silvestri, and O. Svelto, 1996, Appl. Phys.
Lett. 68, 2793.
Nisoli, M., S. De Silvestri, O. Svelto, R. Szipöcs, K. Ferencz, C.
Spielmann, S. Sartania, and F. Krausz, 1997, Opt. Lett. 22,
522.
Nitzan, A., 2001, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 52, 681.
Nitzan, A., and M. A. Ratner, 2003, Science 300, 1384.
Nguyen, N. A., and A. D. Bandrauk, 2006, Phys. Rev. A 73,
032708.
Nomura, Y., R. Hörlein, P. Tzallas, B. Dromey, S. Rykovanov,
Zs. Major, J. Osterhoff, S. Karsch, L. Veisz, M. Zepf, D.
Charalambidis, F. Krausz, and G. D. Tsakiris, 2009, Nat. Phys.
to be published.
Nordlund, D., H. Ogasawara, H. Bluhm, O. Takahashi, M.
Odelius, M. Nagasono, L. G. M. Pettersson, and A. Nilsson,
2007, Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 217406.
Norrish, R. G. W., and G. Porter, 1949, Nature London 164,
658.
Ogawa, S., H. Nagano, H. Petek, and A. Heberle, 1997, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 78, 1339.
Öhrwall, G., M. Tchaplyguine, M. Lundwall, R. Feifel, H.
Bergersen, T. Rander, A. Lindblad, J. Schulz, S. Peredkov, S.
Barth, S. Marburger, U. Hergenhahn, S. Svensson, and O.
Björneholm, 2004, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 173401.
Oishi, Y., M. Kaku, A. Suda, F. Kannari, and K. Midorikawa,
2006, Opt. Express 14, 7230.
Oishi, Y., A. Suda, F. Kannari, and K. Midorikawa, 2005, Rev.
Sci. Instrum. 76, 093114.
O’Keeffe, K., P. Jöckl, H. Drexel, V. Grill, F. Krausz, and M.
Lezius, 2004, Appl. Phys. B: Lasers Opt. 78, 583.
Okunishi, M., T. Morishita, G. Prümper, K. Shimada, C. D.
Lin, S. Watanabe, and K. Ueda, 2008, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100,
143001.
O’Reagan, B., and M. Grätzel, 1991, Nature London 353,
737.
Palmer, R., 1972, J. Appl. Phys. 43, 3014.
Panﬁli, R., S. L. Haan, and J. H. Eberly, 2002, Phys. Rev. Lett.
89, 113001.
Patchkovskii, S., Z. X. Zhao, T. Brabec, and D. Villeneuve,
2006, Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 123003.
Paul, A., R. Bartels, I. P. Christov, H. C. Kapteyn, M. M. Mur-
nane, and S. Backus, 2003, Nature London 421, 51.
Paul, A., E. A. Gibson, X. Zhang, A. Lytle, T. Popmintchev, X.
Zhou, M. M. Murnane, I. P. Christov, and H. C. Kapteyn,
2006, IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 42, 14.
Paul, P. M., E. S. Toma, P. Berger, G. Mullot, F. Auge, Ph.
Balcou, H. G. Muller, and P. Agostini, 2001, Science 292,
1689.
Paulus, G. G., F. Grasbon, H. Walther, P. Villoresi, M. Nisoli,
S. Stagira, E. Priori, and S. De Silvestri, 2001, Nature Lon-
don 414, 182.
Paulus, G. G., F. Lindner, H. Walther, A. Baltuška, E. Goul-
ielmakis, M. Lezius, and F. Krausz, 2003, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91,
253004.
Paulus, G. G., F. Lindner, H. Walther, A. Baltuška, and F.
Krausz, 2005, J. Mod. Opt. 52, 221.
Penent, F., J. Paladoux, J. P. Lablanquie, L. Andric, R. Feitel,
and J. H. D. Eland, 2005, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 083002.
Perelomov, A. M., and V. S. Popov, 1967, Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz.
52, 514 Sov. Phys. JETP 25, 336 1967.
Perelomov, A. M., V. S. Popov, and M. V. Terent’ev, 1966a, Zh.
Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 50, 1393 Sov. Phys. JETP 23, 924 1966.
Perelomov, A. M., V. S. Popov, and M. V. Terent’ev, 1966b, Zh.
Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 51, 309 Sov. Phys. JETP 24, 207 1967.
Pérez-Hernández, J. A., and L. Plaja, 2007, Phys. Rev. A 76,
023829.
Petek, H., and S. Ogawa, 1997, Prog. Surf. Sci. 56, 239.
Pfeifer, T., L. Gallmann, M. J. Abel, D. M. Neumark, and S. R.
Leone, 2006a, Opt. Lett. 31, 975.
Pfeifer, T., L. Gallmann, M. J. Abel, D. M. Neumark, and S. R.
Leone, 2006b, Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 163901.
Pfeifer, T., A. Jullien, M. J. Abel, P. M. Nagel, L. Gallmann, D.
M. Neumark, and S. R. Leone, 2007, Opt. Express 15, 17120.
Pfeifer, T., C. Spielmann, and G. Gerber, 2006, Rep. Prog.
Phys. 69, 443.
Pirozhkov, A. S., S. V. Bulanov, T. Zh. Esirkepov, M. Mori, A.
Sagisaka, and H. Daido, 2006, Phys. Plasmas 13, 013107.
Platonenko, V. T., and V. Strelkov, 1999, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 16,
435.
Plettner, T., R. L. Byer, E. Colby, B. Cowan, C. M. S. Sears, J.
E. Spencer, and R. H. Siemann, 2005, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95,
134801.
Plettner, T., P. P. Lu, and R. L. Byer, 2006, Phys. Rev. ST Accel.
Beams 9, 111301.
Poater, J., M. Duran, M. Solá, and B. Silvi, 2005, Chem. Rev.
Washington, D.C. 105, 3911.
Popov, A. M., O. V. Tikhonova, and E. A. Volkova, 2007, La-
ser Phys. 17, 103.
Popov, V. S., 2004, Phys. Usp. 47, 855.
Popruzhenko, S. V., Ph. A. Korneev, S. P. Goreslavski, and W.
Becker, 2002, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 023001.
Popruzhenko, S. V., N. I. Shvetsov-Shilovski, S. P. Goreslavski,
W. Becker, and G. G. Paulus, 2007, Opt. Lett. 32, 1372.
Pozar, D. M., 2004, Microwave Engineering, 3rd ed. Wiley,
New York.
Prauzner-Bechcicki, J. S., K. Sacha, B. Eckhardt, and J.
Zakrzewski, 2005, Phys. Rev. A 71, 033407.
Protopapas, M., D. G. Lappas, C. H. Keitel, and P. L. Knight,
1996, Phys. Rev. A 53, R2933.
Pukhov, A., and S. Gordienko, 2006, Philos. Trans. R. Soc.
London, Ser. A 364, 623.
Pukhov, A., S. Gordienko, and T. Baeva, 2003, Phys. Rev. Lett.
91, 173002.
Pukhov, A., and J. Meyer-ter-Vehn, 2002, Appl. Phys. B 74,
355.
Quéré, F., S. Guizard, Ph. Martin, G. Petite, H. Merdji, B.
229
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 69 (native text) -----
Carré, J.-F. Hergott, and L. Le Déroff, 2000, Phys. Rev. B 61,
9883.
Quéré, F., J. Itatani, G. L. Yudin, and P. B. Corkum, 2003,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 073902.
Quéré, F., Y. Mairesse, and J. Itatani, 2005, J. Mod. Opt. 52,
339.
Raether, H., 1988, Ed., Surface Plasmons Springer, Berlin.
Ray, D., B. Ulrich, I. Bocharova, C. Maharjan, P. Ranitovic, B.
Gramkow, M. Magrakvelidze, S. De, I. V. Litvinyuk, A.-T.
Le, T. Morishita, C. D. Lin, G. G. Paulus, and C. L. Cocke,
2008, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 143002.
Reckenthaeler, P., M. Centurion, V. S. Yakovlev, M. Lezius, F.
Krausz, and E. E. Fill, 2008, Phys. Rev. A 77, 042902.
Reichert, J., R. Holzwarth, T. Udem, and T. W. Hänsch, 1999,
Opt. Commun. 172, 59.
Reid, K. L., 2003, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 54, 397.
Reiss, H. R., 1980a, Phys. Rev. A 22, 1786.
Reiss, H. R., 1980b, J. Opt. Soc. Am. 7, 574.
Reiss, H. R., 1992, Prog. Quantum Electron. 16, 1.
Remacle, F., R. Kienberger, F. Krausz, and R. D. Levine, 2007,
Chem. Phys. 338, 342.
Remacle, F., and R. D. Levine, 1997, J. Chem. Phys. 107, 3382.
Remacle, F., and R. D. Levine, 1999, J. Chem. Phys. 110, 5089.
Remacle, F., and R. D. Levine, 2006a, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 103, 6793.
Remacle, F., and R. D. Levine, 2006b, Faraday Discuss. 131,
45.
Remacle, F., and R. D. Levine, 2007, Z. Phys. Chem. Munich
221, 647.
Remacle, F., R. D. Levine, and M. A. Ratner, 1998, Chem.
Phys. Lett. 285, 25.
Remacle, F., R. D. Levine, E. W. Schlag, and R. Weinkauf,
1999, J. Phys. Chem. A 103, 10149.
Remetter, T., P. Johnsson, J. Mauritsson, K. Varjú, Y. Ni, F.
Lépine, E. Gustafsson, M. Kling, J. Kahn, R. López-Martens,
K. J. Schafer, M. J. J. Vrakking, and A. L’Huillier, 2006, Nat.
Phys. 2, 323.
Renault, A., D. Z. Kandula, S. Witte, A. L. Wolf, R. Th. Zink-
stok, W. Hogervorst, and K. S. E. Eikema, 2007, Opt. Lett. 32,
2363.
Rice, S., and M. Zhao, 2000, Optical Control of Molecular Dy-
namics Wiley, New York.
Riedle, E., M. Beutter, S. Lochbrunner, J. Piel, S. Schenkl, S.
Sporlein, and W. Zinth, 2000, Appl. Phys. B: Lasers Opt. 71,
457.
Riffe, D. M., X. Y. Wang, M. C. Downer, D. L. Fisher, T.
Tajima, J. L. Erskine, and R. M. More, 1993, J. Opt. Soc. Am.
B 10, 1424.
Rohringer, N., A. Gordon, and R. Santra, 2006, Phys. Rev. A
74, 043420.
Rolles, D., M. Braune, S. Cvejanovic´, O. Geßner, R. Hentges,
S. Korica, B. Langer, T. Lischke, G. Prümper, A. Reinköster,
J. Viefhaus, B. Zimmermann, V. McKoy, and U. Becker,
2005, Nature London 437, 711.
Rottke, H., C. Trump, M. Wittmann, G. Korn, W. Sandner, R.
Moshammer, A. Dorn, C. D. Schröter, D. Fischer, J. P. Cre-
spo Lopez-Urrutia, P. Neumayer, J. Diepenwisch, C. Höhr, B.
Feuerstein, and J. Ullrich, 2002, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 013001.
Roudnev, V., and B. D. Esry, 2007, Phys. Rev. A 76, 023403.
Roudnev, V., B. D. Esry, and I. Ben-Itzhak, 2004, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 93, 163601.
Rousse, A., C. Rischel, and J.-C. Gauthier, 2001, Rev. Mod.
Phys. 73, 17.
Rudenko, A., K. Zrost, B. Feuerstein, V. L. B. de Jesus, C. D.
Schröter, R. Moshammer, and J. Ullrich, 2004, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 93, 253001.
Ruiz, C., L. Plaja, L. Roso, and A. Becker, 2006, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 96, 053001.
Rundquist, A., C. G. Durfee, III, S. Backus, C. Herne, Z.
Chang, M. M. Murnane, and H. C. Kapteyn, 1998, Science
280, 1412.
Rzazewski, K., and J. H. Eberly, 1981, Phys. Rev. Lett. 47, 408.
Sakai, K., S. Miyazaki, S. Kawata, S. Hasumi, and T. Kikuchi,
2006, Laser Part. Beams 24, 321.
Salamin, Y. I., and C. H. Keitel, 2000, Appl. Phys. Lett. 77,
1082.
Saldin, E. L., E. A. Schneidmiller, and M. V. Yurkov, 2004,
Opt. Commun. 239, 161.
Salieres, P., B. Carre, L. Le Deroff, F. Grasbon, G. G. Paulus,
H. Walther, R. Kopold, W. Becker, D. B. Milosevic, A. San-
pera, and M. Lewenstein, 2001, Science 292, 902.
Salieres, P., A. L’Huillier, P. Antoine, and M. Lewenstein, 1999,
Adv. At., Mol., Opt. Phys. 41, 83.
Sansone, G., E. Benedetti, F. Calegari, C. Vozzi, L. Avaldi, R.
Flammini, L. Poletto, P. Villoresi, C. Altucci, R. Velotta, S.
Stagira, S. De Silvestri, and M. Nisoli, 2006, Science 314, 443.
Santra, R., and R. W. Dunford, and L. Young, 2006, Phys. Rev.
A 74, 043403.
Santra, R., and A. Gordon, 2006, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 073906.
Sartania, S., Z. Cheng, M. Lenzer, G. Tempea, C. Spielmann,
and F. Krausz, 1997, Opt. Lett. 22, 1562.
Schafer, K. J., M. B. Gaarde, A. Heinrich, J. Biegert, and U.
Keller, 2004, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 023003.
Schafer, K. J., and K. C. Kulander, 1990, Phys. Rev. A 42, 5794.
Schafer, K. J., and K. C. Kulander, 1997, Phys. Rev. Lett. 78,
638.
Schafer, K. J., B. Yang, L. F. DiMauro, and K. C. Kulander,
1993, Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 1599.
Schelev, M. Ya., M. C. Richardson, and A. J. Alcock, 1971,
Appl. Phys. Lett. 18, 354.
Schins, J. M., P. Breger, P. Agostini, R. C. Constantinescu, H.
G. Muller, A. Bouhal, G. Grillon, A. Antonetti, and A. Mysy-
rowicz, 1996, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 13, 197.
Schins, J. M., P. Breger, P. Agostini, R. C. Constantinescu, H.
G. Muller, G. Grillon, A. Antonetti, and A. Mysyrowicz,
1994, Phys. Rev. Lett. 73, 2180.
Schmuttenmaer, C. A., M. Aeschlimann, H. E. Elsayed-Ali, R.
J. D. Miller, D. A. Mantel, J. Cao, and Y. Gao, 1994, Phys.
Rev. B 50, 8957.
Schnadt, J., P. A. Brühwiler, L. Patthey, J. N. O’Shea, S. Sö-
dergren, M. Odellus, R. Ahuja, O. Karis, M. Bässler, P. Per-
sson, H. Siegbahn, S. Lunell, and N. Martensson, 2002, Na-
ture London 418, 620.
Schneider, T., P. L. Chocian, and J.-M. Rost, 2002, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 89, 073002.
Schnürer, M., Z. Cheng, M. Hentschel, G. Tempea, P. Kálmán,
T. Brabec, and F. Krausz, 1999, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 722.
Schoenlein, R. W., J. G. Fujimoto, G. L. Eesley, and T. W.
Capehart, 1988, Phys. Rev. Lett. 61, 2596.
Schöne, W.-D., and W. Ekardt, 2000, Phys. Rev. B 62, 13464.
Schultz, K. D., C. I. Blaga, R. Chirla, P. Colosimo, J. Cryan, A.
M. March, C. Roedig, E. Sistrunk, J. Tate, J. Wheeler, P. Ago-
stini, and L. F. DiMauro, 2007, J. Mod. Opt. 54, 1075.
Schultze, M., E. Goulielmakis, M. Uiberacker, M. Hofstetter,
J. Kim, D. Kim, F. Krausz, and U. Kleineberg, 2007, New J.
Phys. 9, 243.
230
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 70 (native text) -----
Schweigert, I. V., and S. Mukamel, 2007, Phys. Rev. A 76,
012504.
Scrinzi, A., M. Geissler, and T. Brabec, 2001a, Phys. Rev. Lett.
86, 412.
Scrinzi, A., M. Geissler, and T. Brabec, 2001b, Laser Phys. 11,
169.
Scrinzi, A., M. Yu. Ivanov, R. Kienberger, and D. M. Ville-
neuve, 2005, J. Phys. B 39, R1.
Sears, C. M. S., E. R. Colby, B. M. Cowan, R. H. Siemann, J.
E. Spencer, R. L. Byer, and T. Plettner, 2005, Phys. Rev. Lett.
95, 194801.
Seel, M., and W. Domcke, 1991, J. Chem. Phys. 95, 7806.
Sekikawa, T., T. Kanai, and S. Watanabe, 2003, Phys. Rev. Lett.
91, 103902.
Sekikawa, T., T. Katsura, S. Miura, and S. Watanabe, 2002,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 193902.
Sekikawa, T., A. Kosuge, T. Kanai, and S. Watanabe, 2004,
Nature London 432, 605.
Seres, J., E. Seres, A. J. Verhoef, G. Tempea, C. Streli, P.
Wobrauschek, V. Yakovlev, A. Scrinzi, C. Spielmann, and F.
Krausz, 2005, Nature London 433, 596.
Seres, J., V. S. Yakovlev, E. Seres, Ch. Streli, P. Wobrauschek,
C. Spielmann, and F. Krausz, 2007, Nat. Phys. 3, 878.
Shan, B., and Z. Chang, 2001, Phys. Rev. A 65, 011804R.
Shan, B., S. Ghimire, and Z. Chang, 2005, J. Mod. Opt. 52, 277.
Shapiro, M., and Y. Zeiri, 1986, J. Chem. Phys. 85, 6449.
Sheehy, B., J. D. D. Martin, L. F. DiMauro, P. Agostini, K. J.
Schafer, M. B. Gaarde, and K. C. Kulander, 1999, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 83, 5270.
Shirakawa, A., and T. Kobayashi, 1998, Appl. Phys. Lett. 72,
147.
Shirakawa, A., I. Sakane, and T. Kobayashi, 1998, Opt. Lett.
23, 1292.
Shirakawa, A., I. Sakane, M. Takasaka, and T. Kobayashi,
1999, Appl. Phys. Lett. 74, 2268.
Shorokov, D., and A. H. Zewail, 2008, Phys. Chem. Chem.
Phys. 10, 2879.
Shverdin, M. Y., D. R. Walker, D. D. Yavuz, G. Y. Yin, and S.
E. Harris, 2005, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 033904.
Shvetsov-Shilovski, N. I., S. P. Goreslavski, S. V. Popruzhenko,
W. Becker, and G. G. Paulus, 2007, Laser Phys. Lett. 4, 726.
Siegman, A., 1986, Lasers University Science Books, Mill Val-
ley.
Siffalovic, P., M. Drescher, and U. Heinzmann, 2002, Euro-
phys. Lett. 60, 924.
Siffalovic, P., M. Michelswirth, P. Bartz, B. Decker, C. Agena,
C. Schäfer, S. Molter, R. Ros, M. Bach, M. Neumann, D.
Andelmetti, J. Mattay, U. Heinzmann, and M. Drescher,
2004, J. Biotechnol. 112, 139.
Silkin, V. M., M. Quijada, R. Díez Muino, E. V. Chulkov, and
P. M. Echenique, 2007, Surf. Sci. 601, 4546.
Simpson, J., and U. Fano, 1963, Phys. Rev. Lett. 11, 158.
Siwick, B. J., J. R. Dwyer, R. E. Jordan, and R. J. D. Miller,
2003, Science 302, 1382.
Smirnova, O., S. Patchkovskii, and M. Spanner, 2007, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 98, 123001.
Smirnova, O., M. Spanner, and M. Ivanov, 2006, J. Phys. B 39,
S323.
Smirnova, O., V. S. Yakovlev, and M. Ivanov, 2005, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 94, 213001.
Smirnova, O., V. S. Yakovlev, and A. Scrinzi, 2003, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 91, 253001.
Smith, P. W., M. A. Duguay, and E. P. Ippen, 1974, Prog. Quan-
tum Electron. 3, 107.
Sokolov, A., M. Y. Shverdin, D. R. Walker, D. D. Yavuz, A. M.
Burzo, G. Y. Yin, and S. E. Harris, 2005, J. Mod. Opt. 52, 285.
Sokolov, A., D. R. Walker, D. D. Yavuz, G. Y. Yin, and S. E.
Harris, 2001, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 033402.
Sola, I., 2004, Phys. Rev. A 69, 033401.
Sola, I. J., E. Mével, L. Elouga, E. Constant, V. Strelkov, L.
Poletto, P. Villoresi, E. Benedetti, J-P. Caumes, S. Stagira, C.
Vozzi, G. Sansone, and M. Nisoli, 2006, Nat. Phys. 2, 319.
Sola, I. J., A. Zair, R. López-Martens, P. Johnsson, K. Varjú, E.
Cormier, J. Mauritsson, A. L’Huillier, V. Strelkov, E. Mével,
and E. Constant, 2006, Phys. Rev. A 74, 013810.
Spanner, M., O. Smirnova, and M. Yu. Ivanov, 2004, J. Phys. B
37, L243.
Spielmann, C., C. Kan, N. H. Burnett, T. Brabec, M. Geissler,
A. Scrinzi, M. Schnürer, and F. Krausz, 1998, IEEE J. Sel.
Top. Quantum Electron. 4, 249.
Srinivasan, R., V. A. Lobastov, C.-Y. Ruan, and A. H. Zewail,
2003, Helv. Chim. Acta 86, 1761.
Stapelfeldt, H., E. Constant, H. Sakai, and P. B. Corkum, 1998,
Phys. Rev. A 58, 426.
Steiner, E., A. Soncini, and P. W. Fowler, 2005, Org. Biomol.
Chem. 3, 4053.
Steinmeyer, G., D. H. Sutter, L. Gallmann, N. Matuschek, and
U. Keller, 1999, Science 286, 1507.
Stingl, A., M. Lenzner, C. Spielmann, and F. Krausz, 1995,
Opt. Lett. 20, 602.
Stockman, M., M. Kling, U. Kleineberg, and F. Krausz, 2007,
Nat. Photonics 1, 539.
Stolow, A., 2003a, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 54, 89.
Stolow, A., 2003b, Int. Rev. Phys. Chem. 22, 377.
Stolow, A., A. E. Bragg, and D. M. Neumark, 2004, Chem.
Rev. Washington, D.C. 104, 1719.
Strasser, D., F. Goulay, and S. R. Leone, 2007, J. Chem. Phys.
127, 184305.
Strelkov, V. V., 2006, Phys. Rev. A 74, 013405.
Strelkov, V., A. Zair, O. Tcherbakoff, R. López-Martens, E.
Cormier, E. Mével, and E. Constant, 2004, Appl. Phys. B:
Lasers Opt. 78, 879.
Strelkov, V., A. Zair, O. Tcherbakoff, R. López-Martens, E.
Cormier, E. Mevel, and E. Constant, 2005, J. Phys. B 38,
L161.
Strickland, A. D., and G. Mourou, 1985, Opt. Commun. 56,
219.
Suda, A., M. Hatayama, K. Nagasaka, and K. Midorikawa,
2005, Appl. Phys. Lett. 86, 111116.
Sung, C., S. Ya. Tochitsky, S. Reiche, J. B. Rosenzweig, C.
Pellegrini, and C. Joshi, 2006, Phys. Rev. ST Accel. Beams 9,
120703.
Sussman, B. J., M. Yu. Ivanov, and A. Stolow, 2005, Phys. Rev.
A 71, 051401.
Sussman, B. J., D. Townsend, M. Yu. Ivanov, and A. Stolow,
2006, Science 314, 278.
Suzuki, T., 2006, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 57, 555.
Szent-Györgyi, A., 1941, Science 93, 609.
Szipöcs, R., K. Ferencz, C. Spielmann, and F. Krausz, 1994,
Opt. Lett. 19, 201.
Takahashi, E., Y. Nabekawa, and K. Midorikawa, 2004, Appl.
Phys. Lett. 84, 4.
Takahashi, E., Y. Nabekawa, T. Otsuka, M. Obara, and K. Mi-
dorikawa, 2002, Phys. Rev. A 66, 021802R.
Takahashi, S., and K. Takatsuka, 2006, J. Chem. Phys. 124,
144101.
231
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 71 (native text) -----
Takatsuka, K., 2006, J. Chem. Phys. 124, 064111.
Takatsuka, K., 2007, J. Phys. Chem. A 111, 10196.
Takeuchi, S., and T. Kobayashi, 1994, J. Appl. Phys. 75, 2757.
Taranukhin, V. D., 2004, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 21, 419.
Tarasevitsch, A., K. Lobov, C. Wünsche, and D. von der
Linde, 2007, Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 103902.
Tate, J., T. Auguste, H. G. Muller, P. Salieres, P. Agostini, and
L. F. DiMauro, 2007, Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 013901.
Tavella, F., A. Marcinkevicius, and F. Krausz, 2006, Opt. Ex-
press 14, 12822.
Tavella, F., Y. Nomura, L. Veisz, V. Pervak, A. Marcinkevicius,
and F. Krausz, 2007, Opt. Lett. 32, 2227.
Tcherbakoff, O., E. Mevel, D. Descamps, J. Plumridge, and E.
Constant, 2003, Phys. Rev. A 68, 043804.
Telle, H. R., G. Steinmeyer, A. E. Dunlop, J. Stenger, D. H.
Sutter, and U. Keller, 1999, Appl. Phys. B: Lasers Opt. 69,
327.
Tempea, G., M. Geissler, and T. Brabec, 1999, J. Opt. Soc. Am.
B 16, 669.
Tempea, G., F. Krausz, Ch. Spielmann, and K. Ferencz, 1998,
IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron. 4, 193.
Thaury, C., F. Quéré, J.-P. Geindre, A. Levy, T. Ceccotti, P.
Monot, M. Bougeard, F. Réau, P. d’Oliveira, P. Audebert, R.
Marjoribanks, and Ph. Martin, 2007, Nat. Phys. 3, 424.
Toma, E. S., H. G. Muller, P. M. Paul, P. Breger, M. Cheret, P.
Agostini, C. Le Blanc, G. Mullot, and G. Cheriaux, 2000,
Phys. Rev. A 62, 061801R.
Tong, X. M., and S-I. Chu, 1998, Phys. Rev. A 57, 452.
Tong, X. M., and C. D. Lin, 2006, Phys. Rev. A 73, 042716.
Tong, X. M., and C. D. Lin, 2007a, Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 123002.
Tong, X. M., and C. D. Lin, 2007b, J. Phys. B 40, 641.
Torres, R., N. Kajumba, J. G. Underwood, J. S. Robinson, S.
Baker, J. W. G. Tisch, R. de Nalda, W. A. Bryan, R. Velotta,
C. Altucci, I. C. E. Turcu, and J. P. Marangos, 2007, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 98, 203007.
Tournois, P., 1997, Opt. Commun. 140, 245.
Trebino, R., 2000, Frequency-Resolved Optical Gating: The
Measurement of Ultrashort Laser Pulses Kluwer Academic,
Norwell, MA.
Trebino, R., K. W. DeLong, D. N. Fittinghoff, J. N. Sweetser,
M. A. Krumbügel, B. A. Richman, and D. J. Kane, 1997, Rev.
Sci. Instrum. 68, 3277.
Trebino, R., and D. J. Kane, 1993, J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 10, 1101.
Tsakiris, G. D., K. Eidmann, J. Meyer-ter-Vehn, and F. Krausz,
2006, New J. Phys. 8, 19.
Tzallas, P., D. Charalambidis, N. A. Papadogiannis, K. Witte,
and G. Tsakiris, 2003, Nature London 426, 267.
Tzallas, P., D. Charalambidis, N. A. Papadogiannis, K. Witte,
and G. D. Tsakiris, 2005, J. Mod. Opt. 52, 321.
Udem, T., R. Holzwarth, and T. W. Hänsch, 2002, Nature Lon-
don 416, 233.
Uiberacker, M., T. Uphues, M. Schultze, A. J. Verhoef, V. Ya-
kovlev, M. F. Kling, J. Rauschenberger, N. M. Kabachnik, H.
Schröder, M. Lezius, K. L. Kompa, H.-G. Muller, M. J. J.
Vrakking, S. Hendel, U. Kleineberg, U. Heinzmann, M.
Drescher, and F. Krausz, 2007, Nature London 446, 627.
Ullrich, J., R. Moshammer, R. Doerner, O. Jagutzki, V. Mer-
gel, H. Schmidt-Böcking, and L. Spielberger, 1997, J. Phys. B
30, 2917.
Van Duyne, R. P., 2004, Science 306, 985.
Van Vlack, C., and S. Hughes, 2007, Phys. Rev. Lett. 98,
167404.
Varin, C., and M. Piché, 2006, Phys. Rev. E 74, 045602R.
Varjú, K., P. Johnsson, R. López-Martens, T. Remetter, E.
Gustafsson, J. Mauritsson, M. B. Gaarde, K. J. Schafer, Ch.
Erny, I. Sola, A. Zaïr, E. Constant, E. Cormier, E. Mével, and
A. L’Huillier, 2005, Laser Phys. 15, 888.
Varjú, K., Y. Mairesse, P. Agostini, P. Breger, B. Carré, L. J.
Frasinski, E. Gustafsson, P. Johnsson, J. Mauritsson, H. Mer-
dji, P. Monchicourt, A. L’Huillier, and P. Salieres, 2005, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 95, 243901.
Vaval, N., and L. S. Cederbaum, 2007, J. Chem. Phys. 126,
164110.
Veisz, L., G. Kurkin, K. Chernov, V. Tarnetsky, A. Apolonski,
F. Krausz, and E. Fill, 2007, New J. Phys. 9, 451.
Volkov, D. M., 1935, Z. Phys. 94, 250.
Volkova, E. A., A. M. Popov, and O. V. Tikhonova, 2007, Opt.
Spectrosc. 102, 159.
Vogt, G., G. Krampert, P. Niklaus, P. Nuernberger, and G. Ger-
ber, 2005, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 068305.
Vozzi, C., F. Calegari, E. Benedetti, J.-P. Caumes, G. Sansone,
S. Stagira, M. Nisoli, R. Torres, E. Heesel, N. Kajumba, J. P.
Marangos, C. Altucci, and R. Velotta, 2005, Phys. Rev. Lett.
95, 153902.
Wagner, N., A. Wuest, I. Christov, T. Popmintchev, X. Zhou,
M. Murnane, and H. Kapteyn, 2006, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 103, 13279.
Walker, B., E. Mevel, B. Yang, P. Breger, J. P. Chambaret, A.
Antonetti, L. F. DiMauro, and P. Agostini, 1993, Phys. Rev. A
48, R894.
Walker, B., B. Sheehy, L. F. DiMauro, P. Agostini, K. J. Scha-
fer, and K. C. Kulander, 1994, Phys. Rev. Lett. 73, 1227.
Walker, B., B. Sheehy, K. C. Kulander, and L. F. DiMauro,
1996, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 5031.
Walmsley, I. A., and V. Wong, 1996, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 13,
2453.
Walters, Z. B., S. Tonzani, and C. Greene, 2007, J. Phys. B 40,
F277.
Wang, P. X., Y. K. Ho, X. Q. Yuan, Q. Kong, N. Cao, A. M.
Sessler, E. Esarey, and Y. Nishida, 2001, Appl. Phys. Lett. 78,
2253.
Wang, W., P. X. Wang, Y. K. Ho, Q. Kong, Y. Gu, and S. J.
Wang, 2007, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 78, 093103.
Watanabe, S., K. Kondo, Y. Nabekawa, A. Sagisaka, and Y.
Kobayashi, 1994, Phys. Rev. Lett. 73, 2692.
Watson, J. B., A. Sanpera, D. G. Lappas, P. L. Knight, and K.
Burnett, 1997, Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 1884.
Weber, T., A. O. Czasch, O. Jagutzki, A. K. Müller, V. Mergel,
A. Kheifets, E. Rotenberg, G. Meigs, M. H. Prior, S. Daveau,
A. Landers, C. L. Cocke, T. Osipov, R. Díez Muiño, H.
Schmidt-Böcking, and R. Dörner, 2004, Nature London 431,
437.
Weber, T., M. Weckenbrock, A. Staudte, L. Spielberger, O.
Jagutzki, V. Mergel, F. Afaneh, G. Urbasch, M. Vollmer, H.
Giessen, and R. Dörner, 2000a, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 443.
Weber, T., M. Weckenbrock, A. Staudte, L. Spielberger, O.
Jagutzki, V. Mergel, F. Afaneh, G. Urbasch, M. Vollmer, H.
Giessen, and R. Dörner, 2000b, J. Phys. B 33, L127.
Weckenbrock, M., A. Becker, A. Staudte, S. Kammer, M.
Smolarski, V. R. Bhardwaj, D. M. Rayner, D. M. Villeneuve,
P. B. Corkum, and R. Dörner, 2003, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91,
123004.
Weckenbrock, M., D. Zeidler, A. Staudte, Th. Weber, M.
Schoefﬂer, M. Meckel, S. Kammer, M. Smolarski, O. Jag-
utzki, V. R. Bhardwaj, D. M. Rayner, D. M. Villeneuve, P. B.
Corkum, and R. Dörner, 2004, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 213002.
232
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 72 (native text) -----
Weiner, A. M., 1995, Prog. Quantum Electron. 19, 161.
Weiner, A. M., J. P. Heritage, and E. M. Kirschner, 1988, J.
Opt. Soc. Am. B 5, 1563.
Weinkauf, R., P. Schanen, A. Metsala, E. W. Schlag, M. Bürgle,
and H. Kessler, 1996, J. Chem. Phys. 100, 18567.
Weinkauf, R., P. Schanen, D. Yang, S. Soukara, and E. W.
Schlag, 1995, J. Chem. Phys. 99, 11255.
Weinkauf, R., E. W. Schlag, T. J. Martinez, and R. D. Levine,
1997, J. Chem. Phys. 99, 11255.
Weitzel, K.-M., 2007, ChemPhysChem 8, 213.
Wernet, Ph., D. Nordlund, U. Bergmann, M. Cavalleri, M.
Odelius, H. Ogasawara, L. A. Näslund, T. K. Hirsch, L.
Ojamäe, P. Glatzel, L. G. M. Pettersson, and A. Nilsson, 2004,
Science 304, 995.
Wickenhauser, M., J. Burgdörfer, F. Krausz, and M. Drescher,
2005, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 023002.
Wickenhauser, M., J. Burgdörfer, F. Krausz, and M. Drescher,
2006, J. Mod. Opt. 53, 247.
Wilhelm, T., J. Piel, and E. Riedle, 1997, Opt. Lett. 22, 1494.
Wille, K., 2000, The Physics of Particle Accelerators Oxford
University Press, Oxford.
Williams, I. D., J. McKenna, J. Wood, M. Suresh, W. A. Bryan,
S. L. Stebbings, E. M. L. English, C. R. Calvert, B. Srigengan,
E. J. Divall, C. J. Hooker, A. J. Langley, and W. R. Newell,
2007, Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 173002.
Williams, R. T., R. R. Royt, J. C. Rife, J. P. Long, and M. N.
Kabler, 1982, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. 21, 509.
Williamson, J. C., J. Cao, H. Ihee, H. Frey, and A. H. Zewail,
1997, Nature London 386, 159.
Williamson, J. C., M. Dantus, S. B. Kim, and A. H. Zewail,
1992, Chem. Phys. Lett. 196, 529.
Williamson, J. C., and A. H. Zewail, 1991, Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 88, 5021.
Williamson, S., G. Mourou, and J. C. M. Li, 1984, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 52, 2364.
Witte, S., R. Th. Zinkstok, A. L. Wolf, W. Hogervorst, W. Ub-
achs, and K. S. E. Eikema, 2006, Opt. Express 14, 8168.
Wittmann, T., B. Horvath, W. Helml, M. G. Schätzel, X. Gu, A.
L. Cavalieri, G. G. Paulus, and R. Kienberger, 2008, unpub-
lished.
Wohlleben, W., T. Buckup, J. L. Herek, R. J. Cogdell, and M.
Motzkus, 2003, Biophys. J. 85, 442.
Wohlleben, W., T. Buckup, J. L. Herek, H. Hashimoto, R. J.
Cogdell, and M. Motzkus, 2004, in Femtochemistry and Fem-
tobiology: Ultrafast Events in Molecular Science, edited by J.
L. Hynes and M. Martin Elsevier, Burlington MA, p. 91.
Wohlleben, W., T. Buckup, J. L. Herek, and M. Motzkus, 2005,
ChemPhysChem 6, 850.
Wolf, M., E. Knoesel, and T. Hertel, 1996, Phys. Rev. B 54,
R5295.
Wonisch, A., U. Neuhäusler, N. M. Kabachnik, T. Uphues, M.
Uiberacker,
V.
Yakovlev,
F.
Krausz,
M.
Drescher,
U.
Kleineberg, and U. Heinzmann, 2006, Appl. Opt. 45, 4147.
Wonisch, A., Th. Westerwalbesloh, W. Hachmann, N. Kabach-
nik, U. Kleineberg, and U. Heinzmann, 2004, Thin Solid
Films 464-465, 473.
Wu, K., X. Yang, and H. Zeng, 2007, Appl. Phys. B: Lasers
Opt. 88, 189.
Wu, Y., and X. Yang, 2007, Phys. Rev. A 76, 013832.
Wurth, W., and D. Menzel, 2000, Chem. Phys. 251, 141.
Xie, X., G. Jordan, M. Wickenhauser, and A. Scrinzi, 2007, J.
Mod. Opt. 54, 999.
Xu, J., and X.-C. Zhang, 2006, THz Science and Technology
Peking University Press, Beijing, China.
Xu, L., C. Spielmann, A. Poppe, T. Brabec, F. Krausz, and T.
W. Hänsch, 1996, Opt. Lett. 21, 2008.
Yakovlev, V., 2007, private communication.
Yakovlev, V. S., F. Bammer, and A. Scrinzi, 2005, J. Mod. Opt.
52, 395.
Yakovlev, V. S., M. Ivanov, and F. Krausz, 2007, Opt. Express
15, 15351.
Yakovlev, V. S., and A. Scrinzi, 2003, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91,
153901.
Yamane, K., Z. Zhang, K. Oka, R. Morita, M. Yamashita, and
A. Suguro, 2003, Opt. Lett. 28, 2258.
Yamashita, M., K. Yamane, and R. Morita, 2006, IEEE J. Sel.
Top. Quantum Electron. 12, 213.
Yang, B., K. J. Schafer, B. Walker, K. C. Kulander, P. Agostini,
and L. F. DiMauro, 1993, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 3770.
Yavin, E., A. K. Boal, E. D. A. Stemp, E. M. Boon, A. L.
Livingston, V. L. O’Shea, S. S. David, and J. K. Barton, 2005,
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 102, 3546.
Ye, J., and S. T. Cundiff, 2005, in Femtosecond Optical Fre-
quency Comb Technology, edited by J. Ye and S. T. Cundiff
Springer Science # Business Media, New York, p. 12.
Yen, R., J. M. Liu, N. Bloembergen, T. K. Yee, J. G. Fujimoto,
and M. M. Salour, 1982, Appl. Phys. Lett. 40, 185.
Yu, T. J., K.-H. Hong, H.-G. Choi, J. H. Sung, I. W. Choi, D.-K.
Ko, J. Lee, J. Kim, D. E. Kim, C. H. Nam, 2007, Opt. Express
15, 8203.
Yudin, G. L., A. D. Bandrauk, and P. Corkum, 2006, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 96, 063002.
Yudin, G. L., S. Chelkowski, J. Itatani, A. D. Bandrauk, and P.
Corkum, 2005, Phys. Rev. A 72, 051401R.
Yudin, G. L., and M. Ivanov, 2001a, Phys. Rev. A 64, 013409.
Yudin, G. L., and M. Y. Ivanov, 2001b, Phys. Rev. A 63,
033404.
Yudin, G. L., S. Patchkovskii, P. B. Corkum, and A. D. Ban-
drauk, 2007, J. Phys. B 40, F93.
Yue, J. T., and Doniach, 1973, Phys. Rev. B 8, 4578.
Yurchenko, S. N., S. Patchkovskii, I. Litvinyuk, P. Corkum, and
G. Yudin, 2004, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 223003.
Zair, A., O. Tcherbakoff, E. Mével, E. Constant, R. López-
Martens, J. Mauritsson, P. Johnsson, and A. L’Huillier, 2004,
Appl. Phys. B: Lasers Opt. 78, 869.
Zamith, S., Y. Ni, A. Gürtler, L. D. Noordam, H. G. Muller,
and M. J. J. Vrakking, 2004, Opt. Lett. 29, 2303.
Zavelani-Rossi, M., G. Cerullo, S. De Silvestri, L. Gallmann,
N. Matuschek, G. Steinmeyer, U. Keller, G. Angelow, V.
Scheuer, and T. Tschudi, 2001, Opt. Lett. 26, 1155.
Zeek, E., K. Maginnis, S. Backus, U. Russek, M. Murnane, G.
Mourou, and H. Kapteyn, 1999, Opt. Lett. 12, 1540.
Zeidler, D., A. Staudte, A. B. Bardon, D. M. Villeneuve, R.
Doerner, and P. B. Corkum, 2005, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 203003.
Zeng, Z., Y. Cheng, X. Song, R. Li, and Z. Xu, 2007, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 98, 203901.
Zepf, M., B. Dromey, M. Landreman, P. Foster, and S. M.
Hooker, 2007, Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 143901.
Zewail, A., 2000, J. Phys. Chem. A 104, 5660.
Zewail, A., 2006, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 57, 65.
Zewail, A. H., 1994, Femtochemistry Volume I and II World
Scientiﬁc, Singapore.
Zhang, J., L. Bai, S. Gong, Z. Xu, and D.-S. Guo, 2007, Opt.
Express 15, 7261.
Zhang, P., Y. R. Song, and Z. G. Zhang, 2006, Acta Phys. Sin.
233
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009


----- Page 73 (native text) -----
55, 6208.
Zhang, X., A. R. Libertun, A. Paul, E. Gagnon, S. Backus, I. P.
Christov, M. M. Murnane, and H. C. Kapteyn, R. A. Bartels,
Y. Liu, and D. T. Attwood, 2004, Opt. Lett. 29, 1357.
Zhang, X., A. Lytle, T. Popmintchev, A. Paul, N. Wagner, M.
M. Murnane, H. C. Kapteyn, and I. P. Christov, 2005, Opt.
Lett. 30, 1971.
Zhao, Z. X., and C. D. Lin, 2005, Phys. Rev. A 71, 060702R.
Zhou, X., Z. Chen, T. Morishita, A.-T. Le, and C. D. Lin, 2008,
Phys. Rev. A 77, 053410.
Zhou, XiaoXin, X. M. Tong, Z. X. Zhao, and C. D. Lin, 2005a,
Phys. Rev. A 72, 033412.
Zhou, XiaoXin, X. M. Tong, Z. X. Zhao, and C. D. Lin, 2005b,
Phys. Rev. A 71, 061801.
Zheltikov, A. M., 2006a, Phys. Usp. 49, 605.
Zheltikov, A. M., 2006b, Phys. Rev. A 74, 053403.
Zholents, A. A., and W. M. Fawley, 2004, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92,
224801.
Zhu, X.-Y., 2004, Surf. Sci. Rep. 56, 1.
Zhu, C., S. Nangia, A. W. Jasper, and D. G. Truhlar, 2004, J.
Chem. Phys. 121, 7658.
Zimmermann, B., M. Lein, and J. M. Rost, 2005, Phys. Rev. A
71, 033401.
Zon, B. A., 2000, J. Exp. Theor. Phys. 91, 899.
Zrost, K., A. Rudenko, T. Ergler, B. Feuerstein, V. L. B. de
Jesus, C. D. Schröter, R. Moshammer, and J. Ullrich, 2006, J.
Phys. B 39, S371.
234
Ferenc Krausz and Misha Ivanov: Attosecond physics
Rev. Mod. Phys., Vol. 81, No. 1, January–March 2009
