

----- Page 1 (native) -----
Pharmaceuticals and Personal Care Products in the Environment: Agents
of Subtle Change?
Christian G. Daughton1 and Thomas A. Ternes2
'Environmental Sciences Division, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, ORD/NERL, Las Vegas, Nevada USA; 2ESWE-lnstitute for Water
Research and Water Technology, Wiesbaden-Schierstein, Germany
During the last three decades, the impact of chemical pollution has focused almost exclusively on
the conventional "priority" pollutants, especially those acutely toxic/carcinogenic pesticides and
industrial intermediates displaying persistence in the environment. This spectrum of chemicals,
however, is only one piece of the larger puzzle in "holistic" risk assessment. Another diverse group
of bioactive chemicals receiving comparatively little attention as potential environmental pollutants
includes the pharmaceuticals and active ingredients in personal care products (in this review
collectively termed PPCPs), both human and veterinary, including not just prescription drugs and
biologics, but also diagnostic agents, "nutraceuticals," fragrances, sun-screen agents, and
numerous others. These compounds and their bioactive metabolites can be continually introduced
to the aquatic environment as complex mixtures via a number of routes but primarily by both
untreated and treated sewage. Aquatic pollution is particularly troublesome because aquatic
organisms are captive to continual life-cycle, multigenerational exposure. The possibility for
continual but undetectable or unnoticed effects on aquatic organisms is particularly worrisome
because effects could accumulate so slowly that major change goes undetected until the
cumulative level of these effects finally cascades to irreversible change-change that would
otherwise be attributed to natural adaptation or ecologic succession. As opposed to the
conventional, persistent priority pollutants, PPCPs need not be persistent if they are continually
introduced to surface waters, even at low parts-per-trillion/parts-per-billion concentrations (ng-pg/L).
Even though some PPCPs are extremely persistent and introduced to the environment in very high
quantities and perhaps have already gained ubiquity worldwide, others could act as if they were
persistent, simply because their continual infusion into the aquatic environment serves to sustain
perpetual life-cycle exposures for aquatic organisms. This review attempts to synthesize the
literature on environmental origin, distribution/occurrence, and effects and to catalyze a more
focused discussion in the environmental science community. Key words: aquatic, drugs, ecologic
health, ecologic risk assessment, emerging risk, pharmaceuticals, pollution, sewage. - Environ
Health Perspect 1 07(suppl 6):907-938 (1999).
http.//ehpnetl.niehs.nih.gov/docs/1999/suppl6/907-938daughton/abstract.html
Summary
Risks associated with previously unknown,
unrecognized, unanticipated, or unsuspected
chemical pollutants in the environment have
long been a major concern of environmental
scientists. The importance of identifying such
emerging risks is reflected in one of the top five
goals of the Strategic Plan 2000 for the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency's (U.S.
EPA) Office of Research and Development.
Early identification and investigation of
potential environmental pollution issues
before they worsen are critical for protecting
ecologic and human health. It is also impor-
tant to rule out issues that could be of concern
but prove otherwise, so that limited resources
can be redirected. Ecosystem change is
effected by human activities primarily via
three routes: habitat fragmentation, alteration
of community structure (e.g., via nonindige-
nous species), and chemical pollution. The
scope of the former two is highly delineated
and obvious compared with the latter. During
the last three decades, the impact of chemical
pollution has focused almost exclusively on
the conventional "priority" pollutants. This
group of chemicals, however, is only one piece
of the larger puzzle.
One large class of chemicals receiving
comparatively little attention comprises the
pharmaceuticals and active ingredients in per-
sonal care products (PPCPs), which are used
in large amounts throughout the world; quan-
tities of many are on par with agrochemicals.
Escalating introduction to the marketplace of
new pharmaceuticals is adding exponentially
to the already large array of chemical classes,
each with distinct modes of biochemical
action, many of which are poorly understood.
In contrast to agrochemicals, most of these
products are disposed or discharged into the
environment on a continual basis via domes-
tic/industrial sewage systems and wet-weather
runoff. The bioactive ingredients are first sub-
jected to metabolism by the dosed user; the
excreted metabolites and unaltered parent
compounds can then be subjected to further
transformations in sewage treatment facilities.
The literature shows, however, that many of
these compounds survive biodegradation,
eventually being discharged into receiving
waters; metabolic conjugates can even be con-
verted back to their free parent forms. Many
of these PPCPs and their metabolites are
ubiquitous and display persistence in, and bio-
concentration from, surface waters on par
with those of the widely recognized organo-
chlorine pollutants. Additionally, by way of
continual infusion into the aquatic environ-
ment, those PPCPs that might have low per-
sistence can display the same exposure
potential as truly persistent pollutants since
their transformation/removal rates can be
compensated by their replacement rates.
Although certain biochemical actions of
many drugs in humans have been elucidated,
these actions are not necessarily always the
ones responsible for the purported physiologic
target effects. Sometimes the known pathways
of action may have nothing to do with the
actual desired effect, as the actual mechanism
remains totally unknown. Understanding of
the complex biochemical signaling pathways is
currently too limited to design drugs that act
only via targeted routes, and even then, if their
activity can be limited to a single type of
receptor, the tissue distribution of the receptor
may not be fully known. Unpredicted and
unknown side effects are often the norm. The
possible actions and biochemical ramifications
on nontarget aquatic biota are even less under-
stood; many are totally unknown. The few
that are known to elicit subtle but dramatic
effects on aquatic life at very low concentra-
tions, however, may point to an ill-defined
vulnerability in aquatic ecosystems. A major
concern is not necessarily acute effects to
Address
correspondence
to
C.G.
Daughton,
Environmental Chemistry Branch, Environmental
Sciences Division, U.S. EPA, ORD/NERL, 944 East
Harmon Ave., Las Vegas, Nevada 89119. Telephone:
(702) 798-2207.
Fax:
(702) 798-2142.
E-mail:
daughton.christian@epa.gov
The authors thank the following people for taking
their valuable time to helpfully review both technical
and policy aspects of this manuscript: 0. Conerly (for
the U.S. EPA Office of Water), M. Firestone (for the
U.S. EPA Office of Pollution, Prevention, and Toxics),
and EHP's anonymous reviewers, all of whom con-
tributed to improving the quality of the manuscript. We
also thank G. Wayne Sovocool for assistance in verify-
ing chemical structures and associated chemical data.
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (U.S.
EPA), through its Office of Research and Development,
partially funded and collaborated in the research
described here. This manuscript has been reviewed by
U.S. EPA and approved for publication. Mention of trade
names or commercial products does not constitute
endorsement or recommendation by U.S. EPA for use.
Received 23 June 1999; accepted 9 September
1999.
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 107, Supplement 6 * December 1999
.l
907

----- Page 2 (native) -----
DAUGHTON AND TERNES
nontarget species (effects amenable to moni-
toring once they are understood), but rather
the manifestation of perhaps imperceptible
effects that can accumulate over time to ulti-
mately yield truly profound changes-those
whose causes would be obscured by time and
that would not be distinguishable from nat-
ural events. The specter of subtle, cumulative
effects could reduce the usefulness of current
toxicity-directed screening methods in testing
waste effluents for toxicologic end points due
to PPCPs. Subtle effects, from low concentra-
tions of bioactive PPCPs, whose continual
expression over long periods of time in certain
nontarget populations, could lead to cumula-
tive, insidious, adverse impacts that would
otherwise be attributed to natural change/
adaptation or ecologic succession-any "sig-
nal" would be lost among the noise. Current
comprehensive environmental risk assessments
and epidemiologic studies do not factor in
exposures/body burdens from PPCPs and
therefore may be flawed by over simplicity.
It is useful to note that the data reported
and evaluated in this review reflect the diverse
and uneven nature of the PPCP literature
published for source/origin, occurrence, dis-
tribution, transport, transformation, ecologic
exposure and effects, risk assessment, and test
strategies. The comprehensiveness of the pub-
lished literature in each of these areas and
across the broad spectrum of PPCP classes is
very unequal. This review therefore does not
present an exhaustive and rounded view of
this emerging topic but rather summarizes
most of the significant papers in an inte-
grated, comprehensive manner, and thereby
elucidates many of the questions that still
need to be addressed by the environmental
science community. This review aims to cat-
alyze a discussion on the potential importance
of PPCPs in the environment and presents
recommendations for focusing further
research (Table 1).
Introduction
For the purposes of this discussion, pharma-
ceutical (and veterinary and illicit) drugs (and
the ingredients in cosmetics, food supple-
ments, and other personal care products),
together with their respective metabolites and
transformation products, will collectively be
referred to as pharmaceuticals and personal
care products. PPCPs are continually infused
into the environment via sewage treatment
facilities and wet weather runoff. In many
instances, untreated sewage is discharged into
receiving waters (e.g., flood overload events,
domestic "straight-piping," or sewage waters
lacking municipal treatment). In the United
States alone, possibly more than a million
homes do not have sewage systems but instead
rely on direct discharge of raw sewage into
streams by straight-piping or by outhouses not
connected to leach fields (1). A number of
Canadian cities are reported to discharge 3.25
billion liters per day (over 1 trillion liters per
year) of essentially untreated sewage into sur-
face waters and the ocean (2). Raw/treated
sewage is also disposed of from some locales in
the deep ocean where it may possibly remix
with upper waters.
We hope that this overview of PPCPs in
the environment will a) catalyze a concerted
effort among environmental chemists and
ecotoxicologists to survey sewage treatment
effluents, surface waters/groundwaters, and
potable water for the presence of PPCPs and
their bioactive transformation products and
to determine their origins; b) elucidate the
spectrum of possible physiologic effects of
PPCPs on nontarget species, especially those
that are aquatic; and c) promote discussion of
whether this is an environmental issue deserv-
ing further investigation. We believe that a
scientific debate on this topic is warranted
given the evidence that has been accumulat-
ing over the last two decades on the occur-
rence of various pharmaceuticals in sewage
effluent and in both surface waters and
groundwaters. The big unknown is whether
the combined low concentrations from each
of the numerous PPCPs and their transfor-
mation products have any significance with
respect to ecologic function, while recogniz-
ing that immediate effects could escape detec-
tion if they are subtle and that long-term
cumulative consequences could be insidious.
Another question is whether the pharmaceu-
ticals remaining in water used for domestic
purposes poses long-term risks for human
health after lifetime ingestion via potable
waters multiple times a day of very low, sub-
therapeutic doses of numerous pharmaceuti-
cals; this issue, however, is not addressed in
this review.
The hypothesis is further complicated by
the fact that while the concentration of indi-
vidual drugs in the aquatic environment could
be low (sub-parts per billion or sub-nanomo-
lar, often referred to as micropollutants), the
presence of numerous drugs sharing a specific
mode of action could lead to significant effects
through additive exposures. It is also signifi-
cant that drugs, unlike pesticides, have not
been subjected to the same scrutiny regarding
possible adverse environmental effects. They
have therefore enjoyed several decades of unre-
stricted discharge to the environment, mainly
via sewage treatment works. This is surprising
especially since certain pharmaceuticals are
designed to modulate endocrine and immune
systems and cellular signal transduction and as
such (as opposed to pesticides and other indus-
trial chemicals already undergoing scrutiny as
endocrine disruptors) have obvious potential as
endocrine disruptors in the environment.
Exposure to PPCPs in the environment,
especially for aquatic organisms, may differ
from that of pesticides and other industrial
chemicals in one significant respect-expo-
sures may be of a more chronic nature because
PPCPs are constantly infused into the envi-
ronment wherever humans live or visit,
whereas pesticide fluxes are more sporadic and
have greater spatial heterogeneity. It is quite
apparent that little information exists from
which to construct comprehensive risk assess-
ments for the vast majority of PPCPs having
the potential to enter the environment.
Although little is known of the occurrence
and effects of pharmaceuticals in the environ-
ment, more data exist for antibiotics than for
any other therapeutic class. This is a result of
their extensive use in both human therapy
and animal husbandry, their more easily
detected effects end points (e.g., via microbial
and immunoassays), and their greater chances
of introduction into the environment, not
just by sewage treatment plants, but also by
run-off and groundwater contamination,
especially from confined animal feeding oper-
ations (CAFOs). The literature on antibiotics
is much more developed because of the obvi-
ous issues of direct effects on native micro-
biota (and consequent alteration of microbial
community structure) and development of
resistance in potential human pathogens.
Because of the considerably larger literature
on antibiotics, this review only touches on the
issue; for the same reason, this discussion only
touches on steroidal drugs (those purposefully
designed to modulate endocrine systems).
For the purposes of this document, phar-
maceuticals will refer to nonbiologic drugs
(i.e., those that do not comprise proteina-
ceous or nucleotide material). The number of
biologics approved by the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) is growing, and
their fate in the environment is unknown.
This overview covers only a subset of the
commercially available classes of pharmaceu-
ticals and active ingredients in personal care
products. The subset of classes discussed in
this review comprises the primary classes for
which the limited data on environmental
occurrence and effects on nontarget species
can be found, in a highly fragmented,
disjointed, and disparate literature.
Pharmaceutical drugs are chemicals used
for diagnosis, treatment (cure/mitigation),
alteration, or prevention of disease, health
condition, or structure/function of the
human body. The definition is extended to
veterinary pharmaceuticals and can also be
applied to illicit (recreational) drugs. It also
must be noted that the active ingredient in a
drug may or may not be the actual formu-
lated parent compound. For example, pro-
drugs such as the esters of clofibric acid, a
metabolite of certain lipid regulators, are con-
verted from pharmacologically inactive parent
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 107, Supplement 6 * December 1999
908

----- Page 3 (native) -----
PHARMACEUTICALS IN THE ENVIRONMENT
Table 1. Conclusions, potential research needs, and recommendations.
Research needs and recommendations
Of all the aspects of pharmaceuticals in the environment, the one that is perhaps the
best developed is chemical identification and quantitation.
The trend in pharmaceuticals toward higher potency (e.g., enantiomerically pure
drugs) while serving to reduce the burden of pharmaceuticals in the environment
will add an additional challenge to the analytical effort required to characterize
environmental samples because the required detection levels will be even further
lowered from the current ppt-ppb levels.
Identification of nontarget (unsuspected) toxicants in complex waste streams by
toxicity-directed assay of fractions is insufficient (because of the exponential
complexity of stressor-receptor combinations). Direct, rigorous chemical characteri-
zation of problematic samples must play a role in identifying toxicants that might
present previously unrealized (e.g., subtle) effects in nontarget organisms.
Source and occurrence
Wide arrays of PPCPs representing a diverse spectrum of modes of action are used
throughout the world in large quantities, rivaling those of agrochemicals.
The major sources of PPCPs in the environment are primarily STW effluent and,
secondarily, terrestrial run-off (e.g., from CAFOs).
Some PPCPs (e.g., blood lipid regulators such as clofibric acid, X-ray contrast media,
and musks) are ubiquitous and extremely persistent in the environment.
Only a very small percentage of commercially used PPCPs have even been investi-
gated for their occurrence in the environment. Drug classes that will experience
huge usage rates (e.g., impotence drugs such as sildenafil citrate) have no associ-
ated environmental occurrence or exposure data.
Although the genotoxic potency of industrial wastewaters is often the highest, the
overall loadings of genotoxic compounds to surface waters are far greater (up to
several orders of magnitude) from municipal treatment plants-and antineoplastic
drugs might play the largest role.
Aquatic monitoring efforts that focus on accumulation of pollutants in filter feeders
may be grossly underestimating the levels of many pollutants, simply because
functional MXR systems keep these pollutants at abnormally low concentrations
within their cells. The corollary to this is that many aquatic organisms may be more
susceptible to more hydrophilic toxicants (those that MXR systems are less effective
at dealing with).
Fate
The low concentrations of individual PPCPs (possibly exceeding the catabolic
enzyme affinities of sewage microbiota), coupled with their metabolic "novelty,"
leads to incomplete removal from STWs.
Compared with POPs, there is a paucity of information on the fate, especially,
biotransformation and phototransformation, of PPCPs.
The low volatility of PPCPs means that their distribution through the environment
will primarily occur through aqueous transport and food-chain dispersal. The polar,
nonvolatile nature of most drugs prevents their escape from the aquatic realm.
(`Global distillation" presumed to occur with POPs would not be a factor.)
Drug conjugates potentially act as storage "reservoirs" from which the free parent
drug can later be released (e.g., via hydrolysis) in the environment.
A feature distinguishing PPCPs from the currently recognized persistent organic
pollutants (POPs) is the higher polarity of the parent PPCPs. This, coupled with their
low concentrations, necessitates more work in the area of analysis, especially
preconcentration. More development is also required for sensitive chemical analysis
approaches to polar pollutants, which are not directly amenable to conventional
protocols.
The environmental monitoring community would benefit from additional analytical
methods, including improved cleanup/preconcentration techniques, possibly based
on highly specific approaches such as immunochemical or molecular imprinting [a
highly sensitive, specific, and cost-effective technique that has already shown
promise for nerve gas hydrolysis products, e.g., (147)].
In the absence of comprehensive ecotoxicity tests that can accommodate the wide
range of PPCPs and broad spectrum of possibly subtle effects, screening must also
rely on rigorous chemical characterization-often for nontarget analytes. The results
can then be used to direct subsequent toxicologic testing.
Standard reference materials for pharmaceuticals and their metabolites need to be
made more widely available at lower cost to environmental researchers to aid in
monitoring activities. The NIST/EPA/NIH Mass Spectral Library (148) needs to be
expanded to encompass a larger set of pharmaceuticals (those that are directly
amenable to gas chromatography) as well as their derivatives; these spectra are
currently available only in specialty databases such as Pfleger/Maurer/Weber (3,4).
Non-El (electron ionization) spectra need to be produced for the nonvolatile PPCPs
(e.g., see http.//www.chemicalsoftde/a.htm).
A systematic survey of potential drugs in waterways (especially those receiving
hospital effluents) and their sources should be undertaken for those PPCPs that are
most persistent or that elicit effects on aquatic life at very low concentrations (e.g.,
clofibric acid, antineoplastics, amino-nitro musks, SSR1s, chemosensitizers). To date
(and very roughly), occurrence data for only about 50 nonantibiotic drugs (of the
thousands in use today) have been published; numerous others may be present in
the aquatic environment.
Screening: Given the large numbers of pharmaceuticals that could be present in
receiving waters, a rough screening approach is needed for assessing the potential
of pharmaceuticals to occur. Samples with high potential could then be subjected to
more rigorous analysis for individual targets. A possible approach might rely on
analyses for only two widely used PPCPs/metabolites/inactive ingredients. The first
would serve as a "conservative" indicator, one that is relatively easily biodegraded
and whose presence would indicate that the possibility is high that many other (less
degradable drugs) are also present. The second would also be ubiquitously used in
large quantities but would be relatively persistent and relatively easily analyzed
(e.g., musks). By monitoring its presence in receiving waters (and determining
subsequent concentration gradients), the dilution of any drug (from the source) could
be determined.
Monitoring programs focusing on aquatic systems should consider that bioaccumu-
lated tissue concentrations may be aberrant, depending on the degree of MXR
induction or inhibition.
The nearly unknown ramifications of PPCPs in the environment (fate, transport,
effects) warrant a more precautionary view on their environmental disposition.
Environmental scientists need to focus more attention on this concern. An effort
similar to that which was invested in elucidating the environmental transformation
and fate of pesticides and industrial 'toxics' (especially POPs) may need to be made
for PPCPs.
Fate studies that simply follow disappearance (removal) of a PPCP will underesti-
mate the level of parent compound (e.g., because of reservoirs of conjugates) and
completely miss any bioactive metabolites.
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 107, Supplement 6
* December 1999
Chemical identification
Conclusion/finding
909

----- Page 4 (native) -----
DAUGHTON AND TERNES
Table 1. Continued.
Research needs and recommendations
Exposure
An extreme diversity of stressor-receptor possibilities (most of which have yet to be
identified) exists for nontarget species exposed to PPCPs and their metabolites
entering the environment and serves to exacerbate an already complex problem.
The bioconcentration/bioaccumulation potential for at least some PPCPs (e.g., nitro
musks) matches that for many of the more persistent organohalogen POPs.
Because the main source of PPCPs in the environment (STWs) allows for continual,
year-long introduction of these chemicals into the environment, outright persistence
of an individual PPCP does not play the overwhelming role ordinarily found in govern-
ing exposure. Even relatively short-lived PPCPs could effect significant chronic
exposures, as they are continually infused to the aquatic environment. Aquatic
organisms are captives of their environment and therefore suffer perpetual exposure.
Organisms in less polluted waters may be at more risk from newly introduced
chemicals than those in more polluted areas simply because their levels of MXR are
not as fully developed.
Even naturally occurring PPCPs (e.g., nutraceuticals) could present risks to nontarget
species because their usage serves to redistribute and extend their normal occur-
rence in the environment, promoting exposure to nontarget organisms that other-
wise would never occur, and possibly resulting in higher concentrations in surface
waters than would normally occur at their geographic sites of origin.
Aquatic exposure can be increased in receiving waters having lower flows (e.g.,
smaller streams or during dry weather). On the other hand, wet weather and sea-
sonal transitions can disrupt STWs and lead to poor removal efficiencies.
Discharge of untreated sewage maximizes exposure.
Effects
Some PPCPs (e.g., nitro and amino-nitro musks) show very high acute aquatic
toxicity. Others (e.g., SSRIs) can elicit constellations of significant but subtle effects
across numerous species. These effects are not necessarily readily detectable but
have the potential to lead to ecologic change that would be erroneously attributed
to natural change.
Although pharmaceuticals with broad modes of action (e.g., antineoplastics) may
pose cause for concern in nontarget species, recent evidence shows that those with
highly specific mechanisms (e.g., SSR1s) can elicit profound effects at extremely low
concentrations.
It is clear that aquatic life can be exquisitely sensitive to at least some PPCPs (e.g.,
SSR1s). Between-species, between-sex, and between-drug effects can also vary
widely.
Gross within-class differences regarding aquatic effects possibly make the approach
of assessing ecologic risk on a class-by-class basis untenable. For example, some
SSRIs are extremely potent, whereas others have almost no effect. A trend among
individual drugs of a given class concerning effects on one species may not hold for
other end points in the same species.
Simple extrapolations of aquatic effects from higher concentrations do not necessar-
ily have any predictive value for lower concentrations.
Antineoplastics harbor potential concern for environmental effects, not just for their
acute toxicity but for their ability to effect subtle genetic changes, the cumulative
impact of which over time could lead to more profound ecologic change.
Chemosensitizers-those chemicals that inhibit multixenobiotic transporters-may
play key roles in potentiating the effects of PPCPs. Little is known, however, as to
how prevalent this ability is among pollutants.
The capacity of MXR can be overwhelmed by nonspecific agents that simply competi-
tively overwhelm the MXR mechanism, but which otherwise would not be toxic.
Since many drugs are relatively polar (in contrast to most 'conventional` pollutants),
the defensive utility of MXR may not be effective for many PPCPs.
The EDSTAC screening strategy will focus initially on only the three primary hormone
systems-estrogen, androgen, and thyroid-hormone systems of relatively unknown
importance to invertebrates.
Guidance is needed to determine those aquatic (and to a lesser extent, certain
nonaquatic) organisms most susceptible to exposure to PPCPs.
Although little is known regarding nontarget effects in the aquatic environment, the
SSRls have the most data pointing to the potential for subtle behavioral/reproduc-
tive effects (at low concentrations), and the musks (nitro/amino) for acute effects,
but nothing is known about their occurrence or fate in the environment. Much more
research is needed to establish whether aquatic exposures are significant for PPCPs.
Although the introduction of PPCPs to STWs might remain relatively constant, wet
weather and seasonal transitions (leading to overflows or upsets) can lead to
increased aquatic exposures that must be accounted for in determining exposure
ranges.
Monitoring MXR activity in aquatic organisms should be pursued as a means of
measuring overall health due to exposure.
Perhaps more concern should be directed at exposure of organisms in more pristine
aquatic locations than those in areas receiving established, known pollutant loads
because the former are more at risk to effects from the introduction of a new
pollutant since they have lower MXR activity. Similarly, the introduction of a pollu-
tant to a pristine aquatic environment may pose more toxicological significance than
for a more polluted environment.
Detection of exposure of fish to many drugs can be facilitated through the analysis
of bile.
Practically no aquatic toxicity data, especially behavioral effects, exists for PPCPs,
even for those known to occur ubiquitously (e.g., blood lipid regulators, musks). This
is a major unaddressed area. Although some studies have been done peripherally
(e.g., MEIC) (125), none have been dedicated to PPCPs in the aquatic environment.
Ecotoxicity tests need to better accommodate subtle end points (e.g., behavioral/
genetic modifications), whose continued expression over long periods of time in
certain populations could lead to adverse impacts that would otherwise be attrib-
uted to natural change. These tests need to address the higher levels of organization
as expressed on the population/community structure level.
Ecotoxicity screening procedures must be developed that take into consideration the
modes of action (currently largely unknown) of PPCPs on nontarget species.
Research is particularly needed to identify those PPCPs that act as chemosensitizers
for aquatic organisms. Quick assays for multixenobiotic resistance/inhibition (e.g.,
those using dyes) (34) would be particularly valuable.
More attention is required to identify those PPCPs that modulate the endocrine
systems of, or act as behavioral/developmental signaling agents in, aquatic species
(e.g., retinoid receptors).
Environmental Health Perspectives
* Vol 107, Supplement 6
* December 1999
Conclusion/finding
910

----- Page 5 (native) -----
PHARMACEUTICALS IN THE ENVIRONMENT
Table 1. Continued.
Research needs and recommendations
The approach of assessing ecologic risk on a class-by-class basis (either by chemical or
by mode of action) may not be feasible given that some drugs within the same class
(e.g., SSR1s) display effects at concentrations differing by many orders of magnitude.
Evidence that the persistence and bioaccumulative potential of at least some PPCPs
can be similar to the problematic organohalogen POPs should necessitate their
consideration in comprehensive risk assessments. Over the decades, innumerable
epidemiologic studies have purported correlations of various disease states with the
body burdens of particular pesticides/industrial pollutants. The findings of these
studies may well be flawed, as they made no attempt to also consider the possible
effects of PPCP body burdens. Any comprehensive risk assessment must factor in
the exposures/body burdens of all pollutants, regardless of origin-and PPCPs are
perhaps the most ignored remaining major class of pollutants.
Mitigation, pollution prevention, and regulation
The removal efficiencies of most PPCPs from STWs is poorly understood. And then,
in those instances where efficiencies have been determined, only the disappearance
of the parent compound has been tracked-this approach ignores the issue of fate
(e.g., bioactive metabolites, and conjugates of the parent PPCP).
Direct discharge of untreated sewage to surface waters would probably be the
major source in the environment for those PPCPs that are otherwise easily removed
by conventional STW processes. As such, individual direct discharge sources
possibly have the most profound impact on the loading of the more easily degraded
PPCPs in the environment.
Highly bioactive nonprescription chemicals are used in huge quantities and repre-
sent an unregulated source of (hormonally) active agents.
The continued development of optically pure pharmaceuticals may eventually serve
to reduce both the burden of pharmaceuticals in the environment and the exposure
to daughter enantiomers that might have untoward effects.
Dosages of drugs could be reduced by the co-administration of inhibitors of microso-
mal oxidases and multi-drug transporters to enhance intestinal uptake.
The advent of gene therapy might help to ease the use of pharmaceuticals.
Research planning
No coordinated effort aimed at studying PPCPs in the environment yet exists.
While resources continue to be focused on environmental fate/toxicology of conven-
tional POPs, yielding only incremental enhancement of our knowledge base, a fraction
of these same resources could yield significant advancements in the analogous
understanding of PPCPs in the environment.
The approval of pharmaceuticals needs to be better coupled with meaningful
ecologic risk assessments (and followed up with confirmatory environmental survey
ERA studies after market introduction).
When determining ecologic risk, consideration must be given to both additive
effects (drugs of like-mode of action) and to synergistic effects (adverse interactions
between drugs of different classes).
Even though the concentration of any one drug might be very low, the additive
effects of multiple drugs sharing a like mode of action must be considered. This
approach is already adopted under the Food Quality Protection Act (FOPA), in which
the exposure risks for humans from pesticides having common mechanisms of action
must be combined in calculating total risk; dioxins and PCBs are also assessed this
way (e.g., via TEFs).
Epidemiologic studies (both ecologic and human) should start to give equal consider-
ation/weight to the body burdens/fluxes of PPCPs. Comprehensive risk assessments
may not be possible without considering the simultaneous presence of pesticides,
PPCPs, and other industrial chemicals.
Assessment of risk should proceed on two fronts: a) studies focused on PPCPs already
in wide use, and b) requirement for studies prior to registration of new PPCPs.
Prevention of direct discharge of untreated sewage to the environment would have
the greatest impact on reducing the discharge of less persistent PPCPs. Small,
unregulated sources (e.g., `straight-piping`) may have the largest impacts (analo-
gous to the overall smog impact of exhaust emissions from a small number of
vehicles not in compliance). Reuse of treated wastewater would reduce impacts on
surface waters.
The disposal of pharmaceuticals (e.g., unwanted/expired drugs) to the domestic
waste system (sewage and garbage) should be discouraged (this could be addressed
with a new labeling requirement).
More attention may be needed in ensuring that the degradation of pharmaceuticals
to innocuous products in waste treatment plants is maximized. This could entail the
development of new or improved treatment technology.
Drugs should be screened for MXR inhibitory activity.
Land disposal (or use) of sewage sludge may need to be carefully monitored for
release of PPCPs.
Physicians should resist the temptation to over-prescribe in response to unfounded
patient demands. Prescriptions should be written for no more than the requisite
course. More emphasis should be placed on patient education with respect to
prescribing unneeded medications.
Sales of prescription drugs over the Internet may need to be regulated.
The multifaceted nature of PPCPs in the environment will require the collaborative
efforts of different regulatory and scientific agencies, such as the U.S. EPA, the FDA,
the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, and the OECD. A single
agency should be responsible for research coordination and facilitating interorgani-
zation communication.
An interagency strategic research plan covering occurrence, exposure, and effects
for nontarget species, ecologic risk assessment, and mitigation would be very
useful. The PPCP industry, university partners, and other stakeholders should be
actively involved.
The literature on the occurrence, fate, and effects of PPCPs in the environment is
sometimes hard to access and is highly fragmented, uneven, and difficult to assess
and integrate A concerted effort will be required to bring this disparate literature
together into a useful body of knowledge.
A web-based electronic database on occurrence, concentrations, and ecotoxicologic
data (peer reviewed) for PPCPs in the environment would be highly useful.
Environmental Health Perspectives
* Vol 107, Supplement 6
* December 1999
Risk assessment
Conclusion/finding
911

----- Page 6 (native) -----
DAUGHTON AND TERNES
compounds to the physiologically active form.
With the exception of antibiotics and antineo-
plastics, the objective for most drug classes is
simply to control symptoms and not to actu-
ally cure conditions. As such, many drugs are
taken for very long periods, sometimes a good
portion of the user's lifetime.
Although drugs are usually designed with
a specific mode of action in mind (e.g.,
methotrexate universally affects all organisms
in the same manner-by inhibiting nucleic
acid synthesis), they can also have numerous
effects on nontarget, or as yet unknown,
receptors and possibly cause side effects in the
target organism. Furthermore, and of equal
importance, nontarget organisms can have
receptors, or receptor tissue distributions, that
do not exist in the target organisms, and
therefore unexpected effects can result from
unintentional exposure. This is a primary
basis for the hypothesis of this paper.
Pharmaceuticals in
the Environment
Sources and Oriis
The possibility that pharmaceuticals can enter
the environment from a number of different
routes and possibly cause untoward effects in
biota has been noted in the scientific litera-
ture for several decades, but its significance
has gone largely unnoticed. This probably
results in large part from the international
regulation of drugs by human health agen-
cies, which usually have limited expertise in
environmental issues. Traditionally, drugs
were rarely viewed as potential environmental
pollutants; there was seldom serious consider-
ation as to their fates once they were excreted
from the user. Then again, until the 1990s,
any concerted efforts to look for drugs in the
environment would have met with limited
success because the requisite chemical analysis
tools with sufficiently high separatory effi-
ciencies, to resolve the drugs from the
plethora of other substances-native and
anthropogenic alike, and low detection limits
(i.e., nanograms per liter or parts per trillion),
were not commonly available. Other obsta-
cles, which still exist to a large degree, are that
many pharmaceuticals and cosmetic ingredi-
ents and their metabolites are not available in
the widely used environmentally oriented
mass spectral libraries. These are available in
specialty libraries such as Pfleger (e.g., 3,4),
which are not frequently used by environ-
mental chemists. Analytical reference stan-
dards, when available, are often difficult to
acquire, and are quite costly. The majority of
drugs are also highly water soluble. This pre-
cludes the application of straightforward, con-
ventional sample clean-up/preconcentration
methods, coupled with direct gas chromato-
graphic separation, that have been used for
years for "conventional" pollutants, which
tend to be less polar and more volatile.
Drugs in the environment did not capture
the attention of the scientific or popular press
until the last couple of years, with some sig-
nificant overviews/reviews presented by
Halling-S0renson et al. (5), Montague (6),
Raloff (7), Roembke et al. (8), Ternes et al.
(9), and Velagaleti (10), among others. The
evidence supports the case that PPCPs refrac-
tory to degradation and transformation [see
Halling-S0renson et al. (5) for summary of
published transformation studies] do indeed
have the potential to reach the environment.
What is not known, however, is whether
these chemicals and their transformation
products can elicit physiologic effects on
biota at the low concentrations (ng-ug/L) at
which they are observed to occur. Another
unknown is the actual quantity of each of the
numerous commercial drugs that is ingested/
disposed. With respect to determining the
potential extent of the problem, this contrasts
sharply with pesticides in which usage is
much better documented and controlled.
A list of the PPCPs covered in this review,
together with their chemical names, struc-
tures, and some representative environmental
occurrence/effects data, is presented in Table
2. These chemicals, together with their syn-
thetic precursors and transformation products,
are continually released into the environment
in enormous quantities as a result of their
manufacture, use (via excretion, mainly in
urine and feces), and disposal of unused/
unwanted drugs and those that have expired,
both directly into the domestic sewage system
and via burial in landfills. Although largely
unknown, there is evidence that large quanti-
ties of prescription and nonprescription,
"over-the-counter" (OTC) drugs are never
consumed (for any number of reasons) (11),
and many of these are undoubtedly eventually
disposed down toilets or via domestic refuse.
A striking difference between pharmaceu-
ticals and pesticides with respect to environ-
mental release is that pharmaceuticals have
the potential for ubiquitous direct release into
the environment worldwide-anywhere that
humans live or visit. Even areas considered
relatively pristine (e.g., national parks) are
subject to pharmaceutical exposures, espe-
cially given that some parks have very large,
aging sewage treatment systems, some of
which discharge into park surface waters and
some of which overflow during wet weather
events and infrastructure failures (e.g.,
Yellowstone National Park) (12,13). Other
possible sources include disposal of unwanted
illicit drugs and synthesis byproducts into
domestic sewage systems by clandestine drug
operations; disposal of raw products and
intermediates (e.g., ephedrine) via toilets is
not uncommon in illegal laboratories. Also,
in contrast to pesticides, pharmaceuticals in
any stage of clinical testing (not yet approved
for dispensing by the FDA) are subject to
release into the environment, although their
overall concentrations would be very low.
Some drugs are excreted essentially
unaltered in their free form (e.g., methotrexate
and platinum antineoplastics), often with the
help of active cellular "multidrug transporters"
for moderately lipophilic drugs. Others are
metabolized to various extents, which is partly
a function of the individual patient and the
circadian timing of the dose (the P450 micro-
somal oxidase system is a major route of for-
mation of more polar, more easily excreted
metabolites). Still others are converted to more
soluble forms by formation of conjugates (with
sugars or peptides). The subsequent transfor-
mation products-metabolites and conjugates
from eukaryotic and prokaryotic metabolism,
and from physicochemical alteration-add to
the already complex picture of thousands of
highly bioactive chemicals. The FDA refers to
all metabolites and physicochemical transfor-
mation products, for example, those that range
from the dissociated parent compound to pho-
tolysis products, for a given drug as structurally
related substances (SRSs), which can have
greater or lesser physiologic activity than the
parent drug.
As in mammals, the metabolic disposition
of lipophilic xenobiotics, such as numerous
drugs, in vertebrate aquatic species is largely
governed by what is referred to as Phase I and
Phase II reactions (14); less is known about
invertebrate metabolism. Phase I makes use of
monooxygenases (e.g., cytochrome P450),
reductases, and hydrolases (for esters and epox-
ides) to add reactive functional groups to the
molecule. Phase II uses covalent conjugation
(glucuronidation) to make the molecule
hydrophilic and more excretable. These reac-
tions are catalyzed by glycosyltransferases and
sulfotransferases (for hydroxyaromatics and
carboxy groups), glutathione S-transferases (for
electrophilic functional groups such as halo-
gens, nitro groups, or unsaturated/conjugated
sites), acetyltransferases (for primary amines or
hydrazines), and aminoacyltransferases (for
forming peptides from carboxy groups using
free amino acids). This metabolic strategy cre-
ates metabolites successively more polar than
the parent compound, thereby enhancing
excretion (Figure 1). Considerable interspecies
and intraspecies diversity, however, can be
observed in actual metabolic potentials. Many
drugs and metabolic products, especially those
over 400 Da, are concentrated in the bile of
fish (vs blood or fat) (15). Although the total
amount excreted via the urine may be higher,
Guarino and Lech (15) recommend bile analy-
sis to maximize the chance of detecting drugs,
especially their conjugates, in fish in order to
confirm exposure. They also report that the
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 107, Supplement 6 * December 1999
912

----- Page 7 (native) -----
PHARMACEUTICALS IN THE ENVIRONMENT
Table 2. PPCPs identified in environmental samples-or having significance with respect to aquatic life.
CAS RN
Trade names, comments,
Structure and
MW
and nontarget
Compound
CAS name
Formula
Use/origin
Environmental occurrence
species effects
Acetaminophen
HO
0
103-90-2
Analgesic/anti-
Efficiently removed by POTW (18);
e.g., Tylenol; Daphnia
l k 11151.17
inflammatory
POTW max. effluent: 6.0 pg/L;
immobilization EC50
H
cH3
C8H9N02
not detected in surface waters ( 18)
0.27-0.90 mM (125)
N-(4-Hydroxyphenyl)acetamide;
(Paracetamol)
Acetylsalicylic acid
COOH
50-78-2
Analgesic/anti-
Ubiquitous. One of first pharmaceuticals
Efficiently removed by
CH3
180.16
inflammatory
identified in sewage influent/effluent;
POTWs; Daphnia
cH3
C9H804
POTW removal efficiency 81% (18);
immobilization EC50
POTW max. effluent: 1.5 pg/L; max. in
0.9-8.2 mM (125)
2-(Acetyloxy)benzoic acid;
surface waters: 0.34 pg/L. Sewage
(Aspirin)
effluent: 1 pg/L (40)
Betaxolol
A
63659-18-7
Beta-blocker
POTW max. effluent: 0.19 pg/L; max.
e.g., Betoptic
CH,3
307.43
(antihypertensive,
in surface waters: 0.028 pg/L (73)
H,C
C18H29NO3
antiglaucoma)
OH
1-[4-[2-(Cyclopropylmethoxy)
ethyl]-phenoxy]-3-[(1 -methyl-
ethyl)aminol-2-propanol
Bezafibrate
COOH
41859-67-0
Lipid regulator
Loading of - 300 g/day in German
Among highest reported
°
C/H
361.82
POTW (18); POTW removal efficiency
values for occurrence in
N
H
C19H20CIN04
83% (18); POTW max. effluent: 4.6 pg/L;
STW effluent and
Cl
max. in surface waters: 3.1 pg/L.
surface waters; e.g.,
Influent concentration of 1.2 pg/L in
Befizal
2-[4-[2-[(4-Chlorobenzoyl)-
Brazilian STWs (69) with removal
amino]ethyl]phenoxy]-2-
efficiencies ranging from 27-50%
methylpropanoic acid
Biphenylol
OH
90-43-7
Antiseptic,
POTWs in Germany: biphenylol
e.g., Dowicide A
170.21
fungicide
routinely found in both influents
C12H100
(up to 2.6 pg/L) and effluents (70),
but removal was extensive
2-Biphenylol
2-Hydroxydiphenyl
Bisoprolol
CH
3o° CH3
66722-44-9
Beta-blocker
POTW max. effluent: 0.37 pg/L.; max.
e.g., Concor
HIC~~N
11
J0
<
325.45
(antihypertensive)
in surface waters: 2.9 pg/L (73)
H3Co-N<O
CH3
C18H31NO4
H
1-[4-[[2-(1 -Methylethoxy)-
ethoxy]methyl]phenoxy]-3-
[(1 -methylethyl)amino]-2-propanol
Carazolol
H
57775-29-8
Beta-blocker
POTW max. effluent: 0.12 pg/L; max.
e.g., Conducton
/ N\ /\
298.38
(antihypertensive,
in surface waters: 0.11 pg/L (73)
OH
C8H122N202
antianginal,
Nc
H3
antiarrhythmic)
CH3
1-(9H-Carbazol-4-yloxy)-3-
[(1 -methylethyl)amino]-2-propanol
Carbamazepine
298-46-4
Analgesic;
Loading of over 100 g/day in German
e.g., Tegratal; only
236.27
antiepileptic
POW)(18); but load in effluent can be
1-2% excreted free
N0
<
C15H12N2O
114 g/day; POTW removal efficiency
( 18); 10,11-epoxy-
o0NH2
7% (18); POTW max. effluent: 6.3 pg/L;
carbamazepine major
5H-Dibenz[b,lazepine-5-
max. in surface waters: 1.1 pg/L
metabolite; also
carboxamide
excreted as
glucuronides
4-Chloro-3,5-xylenol
OH
88-04-0
Antiseptic
POTWs in Germany: 4-chloroxylenol
e.g., Benzytol
(Chloroxylenol)
J,
156.61
occasionally found in both influents
C8H9CIO
and effluents (< 0.1 pg/L) (70)
H3C
CH3
cl
4-Chloro-3,5-dimethylphenol
Chlorophene
,
OH ,
120-32-1
Antiseptic
POTWs in Germany: chlorophene
e.g., Santophen 1
ci
4-Chloro-2-(phenylmethyl)phenol;
(o-Benzyi-p-chlorophenol)
218.68
C13H11C10
routinely found in both influents (up to
0.71 pg/L) and effluents (70); removal
not as extensive as for biphenylol.
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 107, Supplement 6 * December 1999
913

----- Page 8 (native) -----
DAUGHTON AND TERNES
Table 2. Continued.
CAS RN
Trade names, comments,
Structure and
MW
and nontarget
Compound
CAS name
Formula
Use/origin
Environmental occurrence
species effects
II.
7
.I*
*--
T tS
{
--
1.
OH
H
Cl
N'-.t
.
C(CH3i3
H2N
cl
4-Amino-3,5-dichloro-a-
[[(1,1 -dimethylethyl)amino]-
methyl]benzenemethanol
0
0->
0
CH3
Cl
H3C
CH3
cl
2-(4-Chlorophenoxy)-2-methyl -
propanoic acid ethyl ester
0O>COOH
,,,.-
H3C
CH3
2-(4-Chlorophenoxy)-2-
methylpropanoic acid;
e.g., Regulipid
nci
10
t p\C
NH
N,N-Bis(2-chloroethyl)tetra-
hydro-2H-1,3,2-oxazaphos-
phorin-2-amine 2-oxide;
e.g., Cycloblastin
COO Na+
H3C-k\
N)H
CH3
H
H
H
3,5-Bis(acetylamino)-2,4,6-tri-
iodobenzoic acid sodium salt
HC
0
N
N
clX
7-Chloro-1 ,3-dihydro-1 -
methyl-5-phenyl-2H-1 ,4-
benzodiazepin-2-one
COO-Na+ci
H
N
cl
2-[(2,6-Dichlorophenyl)-
aminolbenzeneacetic acid-Na
37148-27-9
P2-Sympathomimetic
PU IW max. effluent: 0.08 pg/L; max.
e.g., Monores
277.19
C12H18C12N20
637-07-0
242.70
C12H15C103
882-09-7
214.66
C10H1 1C03
50-18-0
261.09
C7H15C12N202P
737-31 -5
635.90
Cl 1 H813N2NaO4
439-1 4-5
284.74
C16H13CIN20
15307-79-6
318.13
C14H10CI2N02Na
(bronchodilator)
in surface waters: 0.05 pg/L ( 18)
Lipid regulator
Not detected in POTW effluent ( 18),
not detected in surface waters.
River water'.
40 ng/L (40)
Polar, active
One of first prescription drugs/metab-
metabolite of
lites ever reported in sewage influent/
lipid regulators
effluent: Missouri STW effluent avg.
(clofibrate, etofyllin
2.1 kg/day (38); 0.8-2.0 pg/L in raw
clofibrate
sewage and activated sludge effluent
[theofibratel,
(37). Loading of over 50 g/day in Ger-
etofibrate)
man POTW (18); POTW removal effi-
ciency 51% (18); POTW max. effluent:
1.6 pg/L; max. in surface waters: 0.55
pg/L. Swiss rural/urban lakes: 1-9 ng/L
(ppt); North Sea (up to 7.8 ng/L) (67). In-
fluent concentration of 1 pg/L in Brazil-
ian STWs (69) with removal efficiencies
ranging from 15-34%. Up to 270 ng/L
in German tap waters (23)
Antineoplastic
POTW max. effluent: 0.02 pg/L; not
detected in surface waters ( 18).
Hospital sewage 146 ng/L (149) and
19 ng/L-4.5 pg/L (82); POTW
receiving hospital waste: influent up
to 143 ng/L, effluent up to 17 ng/L
X-Ray contrast
media (radio-
paque medium)
Psychiatric drug
(anxiolytic; muscle
relaxant)
Resistant to biodegradation and yields
refractory, unidentified metabolites (91).
In German surface waters, median
concentration of 0.23 pg/L (92; isolated
maximum values above 100 pg/L
indicate that locally very high
concentrations can occur, especially
in small streams containing a high
percentage of STW discharges.
POTW max. effluent: 0.04 pg/L; not
detected in surface waters (18).
Groundwater from a Superfund site
near Atlantic City, New Jersey:
10-40 pg/L)88).
Analgesic/anti-
Loading of -100 g/day in German
inflammatory
POTW (18); POTW removal efficiency
69% (18); POTW max. effluent: 2.1 pg/L;
max. in surface waters: 1.2 pg/L.
Influent to Swiss STWs 500-1800 ng/L
and effluents more than 50% as much;
Swiss lakes/rivers 1-12 ng/L, with
lower order streams 11-310 ng/L (71).
Influent concentration of 0.8 pg/L in
Brazilian STWs (69) with removal
efficiencies ranging from 9-75%.
e.g., Bioscleran;
rapidly hydrolyzed
upon ingestion
Active metabolite of
clofibrate; formed via
hydrolysis very soon
after ingestion; excreted
primarily as glucuronide
(very little as the free
acid); presence in POTWs
indicates hydrolysis
of conjugate ( 18)
Oxazaphosphorine
(structural isomer of
ifosfamide); high
dosages (over 100
mg/kg); up to 50%
excreted unaltered;
mutagen/carcinogen;
resistant to microbial
degradation
e.g., Hypaque Sodium;
very high annual world-
wide usage rates
e.g., Valium; Daphnia
immobilization EC50
0.01 5-0.049 mM
(125)
e.g., Voitaren; lab
data show rapid
and extensive
photodegradation to
multiple products (71)
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 107, Supplement 6
* December 1999
Clenbuterol
Clofibrate
Clofibric acid
Cyclophosphamide
(Cyclophosphane)
Diatrizoate (Na)
Diazepam
Diclofenac-Na
914

----- Page 9 (native) -----
PHARMACEUTICALS IN THE ENVIRONMENT
Table 2. Continued.
CAS RN
Trade names, comments,
Structure and
MW
and nontarget
Compound
CASname
Formula
Use/origin
Environmental occurrence
species effects
Dimethylamino-
58-15-1
Analgesic/anti-
Loading of over 50 g/day in German
e.g., Piridol
phenazone
{,,
231.30
inflammatory
POTW (18); POTW removal efficiency
(Aminopyrine)
I
CH
C13H17N30
38% (18); POTW max. effluent: 1.0 pg/L;
°
N`c
3
max. in surface waters: 0.34 pg/L
H3C',N
H3
CH3
4-Dimethylaminoantipyrine
177a-Ethinyl estradiol
OH
H
57-63-6
Oral contraceptive
Up to 7 ng/L in PO1W effluent (26). Not
Prime synthetic suspect
CH<
296.41
(in combination
detected in German surface water
regarding estrogenic
[H T
1
C20H2402
with progestogens)
above 0.5 ng/L (9), but found in Dutch
effects in fish; the
Rhine water up to 4.3 ng/L (150).
natural estrogen is
HO
H
17p-estradiol;
HO
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
(1 7a)-1 9-Norpregna-1,3,5
(1 0)-trien-20-yne-3,17-diol
Etofibrate
N
31637-97-5
Lipid regulator
Not detected in POTW effluent (18);
e.g., Lipo-Merz;
363.80
not detected in surface waters.
rapidly hydrolyzed upon
<"
H3C CH 0
C18-18C1NO5
ingestion
0
H3C CH3W
y
3-Pyridinecarboxylic acid 2-
[2-(4-chlorophenoxy)-2-methyl-
1-oxopropoxylethyl ester
Fenfluramine
CH3
458-24-2
Sympathomimetic
While no one has looked for
Popular diet (anorectic)
1J-s
231.26
amine (anorexic)
fenfluramine in sewage, it is known to
drug removed from the
(NCH
C12H 6F3N
enhance the release of serotonin (5-HT),
U.S. market in 1998 by
and in the crayfish, 5-HT in turn triggers
the FDA because of
cF3
release of ovary-stimulating hormone-
heart valve damage;
CF3
resulting in larger oocytes with
e.g., hydrochloride:
N-Ethyl-a-methyl-3-[trifluoro-
enhanced amounts of vitellin
Pondimin
methyl] benzeneethanamine
(consequences unknown) (74). Similarly,
in fiddler crabs, fenfluramine (dose of
125 nmol) stimulates (through 5-HT) the
production of gonad-stimulating
hormone-accelerating testicular
maturation (75).
Fenofibrate
o
CH3
49562-28-9
Lipid regulator
Efficiently removed by POTW (18);
e.g., Fenobrate;
cl O,
,
360.84
POTW max. effluent: 0.03 pg/L;
rapidly hydrolyzed upon
H3C CH3
C20H21C104
not detected in surface waters.
ingestion
0
2-[4-(4-Chlorobenzoyl)-
phenoxy]-2-methylpropanoic
acid 1-methylethyl ester
Fenofibric acid
o
42017-89-0
Polar, active
Loading of over 50 g/day in German
Formed via hydrolysis
cl
H
o
318.84
metabolite
PO1W (18); POTW removal efficiency
very soon after
,
7UH3C
CH3
C17H15C104
of fenofibrate
64% (18); POW max. effluent: 1.2 pg/L;
ingestion; excreted
,- H3c
cH3
max. in surface waters: 0.28 pg/L.
primarily as glucuronide
o
Influent concentration of 0.4 pg/L in
(very little as free acid);
2-[4-(4-Chlorobenzoyl)phenoxy]-
Brazilian STWs (69) with removal
presence in POTWs
2-methylpropanoic acid
efficiencies ranging from 6-45%.
indicates hydrolysis of
conjugate ( 18)
Fenoprofen
CH3
31879-05-7
Analgesic/anti-
Not detected in POTW effluent or
e.g., Fenopron
242.27
inflammatory
surface waters (18,69).
a-Methyl-3-phenoxy-
benzeneacetic acid
Fenoterol
OH
13392-18-2
P2-Sympathomimetic
PO1W max. effluent: 0.06 pg/L; max. in
e.g., Airum
HO
,_
N 3Y
cH3
OH
OH
5-[1 -Hydroxy-2-[[2-(4-hydroxy-
phenyl)-1 -methylethyl]
amino]ethyl]-1 ,3-benzenediol
303.36
C17HC7,40
(bronchodilator)
surface waters: 0.061 pg/L (18)
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 107, Supplement 6 * December 1999
915

----- Page 10 (native) -----
DAUGHTON AND TERNES
Table 2. Continued.
CAS RN
Trade names, comments,
Structure and
MW
and nontarget
Compound
CAS name
Formula
Use/origin
Environmental occurrence
species effects
Fluoroquinolone
{
e.g.,
Antibiotics
As one of only many classes of
Gyrase inhibitors
carboxylic acids
N
85721-33-1
pharmaceuticals, antibiotics in general
(needed for DNA
331.35
have been investigated for their
replication); excreted
F
COH
C17H18FN303
occurrence in the environment more than
mainly as parent
11
any other class of PPCPs. Their ubiquitous
compound
occurrence in the environment is a
Large class; e.g.,
leading proposed cause of the rise in
ciprofloxacin
resistance among pathogenic bacteria.
Strongly sorbs to soil (151,152). Highly
active in hospital wastewaters (62,153)
Fluoxetine
H
54910-89-3
Antidepressant
Not yet searched for in environmental
e.g., Prozac;
CH3
309.33
(SSRI)
samples
Fluoxetine elicits
F3C
N
C17H18F3NO
significant spawning in
11C
Imale mussels at 10- M
NMethyl--y-[4-(trifluoro-
(f1l50eg/L) and in
methyl)phenoxy]benzene-
propanamine
Fluvoxamine
OCH3
54739-18-3
Antidepressant
Not yet searched for in environmental
e.g., Luvox;
318.34
(SSRI)
samples
Fluvoxamine elicits
NNNz.aNN H2
C15H21F3N202
significant spawning in
F3C
male mussels at 10-9 M
(-0.318 pg/L) and in
5-Methoxy-1-[4-(trifluoro-
females at 10-7 M.
methyl)phenyl]-1-pentanone
Fluvoxamine is the most
O-(2-aminoethyl)oxime
powerful spawning
inducer ever identified
for bivalves (76)
Gemfibrozil
CH3
25812-30-0
Lipid regulator
Loading of over 50 g/day in German
e.g., Lopid
o
COOH
250.34
PO1W (18); POTW removal efficiency
H3C
O
z H3
C15H2203
69% (18); POTW max. effluent: 1.5 pg/L;
CH3
max. in surface waters: 0.51 pg/L.
Influent concentration of 0.3 pg/L in
5-(2,5-Dimethylphenoxy)-2,2-
Brazilian STWs (69) with removal
dimethylpentanoic acid
efficiencies ranging from 16-46%
Gentisic acid
490-79-9
Hydroxylated
Efficiently removed by POTW (18);
A minor ultimate
COOH
154.12
metabolite of
POTW max. effluent: 0.59 pg/L; max. in
metabolite
H
C7H604
acetylsalicylic acid
surface waters: 1.2 pg/L. Average
gentisic acid concentrations in POTW
HO
influents of 4.6 pg/L (70) with no
2,5-Dihydroxybenzoic acid
detectable amounts in the effluents
o-Hydroxyhippuric
o
487-54-7
Metabolite of
Efficiently removed by POTW (18); not
acid
,
kN
195.17
acetylsalicylic acid
detected in POTW effluent or surface
[ti, HNj3 COOH
C9H9N04
waters (18); average o-hydroxyhippuric
OH
acid concentrations in POTW influents
N-(2-Hydroxybenzoyl)glycine
of 6.8 pg/L; no detectable amounts in
effluents (70)
Ibuprofen
CH3
15687-27-1
Analgesic/anti-
Loading of over 200 g/day in German
e.g., Advil; excreted
CH3
COOH
206.28
inflammatory
POTW (18); PO1W removal efficiency
substantially by humans
C13H1802
90% (18); POTW max. effluent: 3.4 pg/L;
in free form or
H3C
max. in surface waters: 0.53 pg/L.
conjugated (72)
Influent concentration of 0.3 pg/L in
a-Methyl-4-(2-methylpropyl)-
Brazilian STWs (69) with removal
benzeneacetic acid
efficiencies ranging from 22-75%.
STW influents up to 3.3 pg/L, POTW
removal >95%, surface waters up to
8 ng/L; one of few studies to look
at metabolites (72)
Ifosfamide
H
3778-73-2
Antineoplastic
POTW max. effluent: 2.9 pg/L; not
Oxazaphosphorine
CNspj0o~
l
261.09
detected in surface waters (18).
(structural isomer of
C7H15C12N202P
Hospital sewage 24 ng/L (149). Hospital
cyclophosphamide); high
K)
effluent: max 1.91 pg/L, median
dosages (over 100 mg/kg).
N,3-bis(2-chloroethyl)tetra-
109 ng/L; POTW influent/effluent
Up to 50% excreted
hydro-2H-1,3,2-oxazaphos-
max 43 ng/L, median 6.5-9.3 ng/L (83).
unaltered, but generally
phorin-2-amine 2-oxide;
Found to be totally refractory to
-20%; fate of metabolites
e.g., Holoxan
removal by POTW (83)
unknown (83)
Environmental Health Perspectives
*Vol 107, Supplement 6 * December 1999
916

----- Page 11 (native) -----
PHARMACEUTICALS IN THE ENVIRONMENT
Table 2. Continued.
CAS RN
Trade names, comments,
Structure and
MW
and nontarget
Compound
CAS name
Formula
Use/origin
Environmental occurrence
species effects
Indomethacine
o
cl
53-86-1
Analgesic/anti-
Loading of -10 g/day in German POTW
e.g., Amuno
\
/
357.79
inflammatory
(18); POTW removal efficiency 75% (18);
CH3
C19H16CIN04
POTW max. effluent: 0.60 pg/L; max.
H3 C Oin surface waters: 0.20 pg/L. Influent
H3CO
COOH
concentration of 0.95 pg/L in Brazilian
1-(4-Chlorobenzoyl)-5-meth-
STWs (69) with removal efficiencies
oxy-2-methyl-1 H-indole-3-
ranging from 71-83%
acetic acid
lohexol
OH
66108-95-0
X-Ray contrast
Very low aquatic toxicity reported by
O
H
OH
821.14
(radiopaque) media;
Steger-Hartmann et al. (93)
C19H2613N309
e.g., Omnipaque
OH
H
H
OH
HO-
N
r
N
H
o
5-[Acetyl(2,3-dihydroxypropyl)-
amino]-N,IV-bis(2,3-dihydroxy-
propyl)-2,4,6-triiodo-1 ,3-benzene-
dicarboxamide
lopamidol
N,N-Bis[2-hydroxy-1-(hydroxy-
60166-93-0
X-Ray contrast
Concentrations as high as 15 pg/L in
methyl)ethyl]-5-[(2-hydroxy-
777.09
(radiopaque) media;
municipal STW effluents (92), and
1 -oxopropyl)aminoJ-2,4,6-triiodo-
C17H2213N308
e.g., Isovue
median concentration of 0.49 pg/L
1 ,3-benzenedicarboxamide
lopromide
OH
73334-07-3
X-Ray contrast
Resistant to biodegradation and yields
0
N"
oH
791.12
(radiopaque) media;
refractory, unidentified metabolites
Very high annual
OH
C18H2413N308
e.g., Ultravist
(91). Reported by Ternes et al. (92)
worldwide usage rates.
O
l
OH
in rivers. Concentrations as high as
Parent compounds
0--11
H,~
H
1 1 pg/L in municipal STW effluents (92)
possibly low toxicity
zO>N H<H
COH
(93). Metabolites have
p
°
unknown aquatic
N,At -Bis(2,3-dihydroxypropyl)-
toxicology. Extremely
2,4,6-triiodo-5-[(methoxy-
persistent
acetyl)amino]-N-methyl-1 ,3-
benzenedicarboxamide
lotrolan
OH
79770-24-4
X-Ray contrast
Very low aquatic toxicity reported by
OH
1626.2
(radiopaque) media;
Steger-Hartmann et al. (93)
O
C37H4816N6018
e.g., Isovist
NH
H OHH
l
/
I
\
l/
>NH
OH
OH
5,5'-[(1 ,3-Dioxo-1 ,3-propane-
diyl)bis(methylimino)]-bis[N,IV-
bis[2,3-dihydroxy-1 -(hydroxy-
methyl)propylj-2,4,6-triiodo-
1 ,3-benzenedicarboxamide]
Ketoprofen
o
CH3
22071-15-4
Analgesic/anti-
POTW max. effluent: 0.38 pg/L;
e.g., Oruvail
254.28
inflammatory
max. in surface waters: 0.12 pg/L (18).
<
OOH
C16H1403
Influent concentration of 0.5 pg/L in
Brazilian STWs (69) with removal
3-Benzoyl-a-methyl-
efficiencies ranging from 48-69%
benzeneacetic acid
Meclofenamic acid
COOH
cl
H
N
CH3
cl
2-[(2,6-Dichloro-3-methyl-
phenyl)aminolbenzoic acid
644-62-2
296.15
C14H11C12N02
Analgesic/anti-
Not detected in PO1W effluent or
inflammatory
surface waters ( 18,69)
Used mainly in
veterinary medicine;
e.g., Arquel
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 107, Supplement 6 * December 1999
917

----- Page 12 (native) -----
DAUGHTON AND TERNES
Table 2. Continued.
CAS RN
Trade names, comments,
Structure and
MW
and nontarget
Compound
CAS name
Formula
Use/origin
Environmental occurrence
species effects
Methylbenzylidene
H3C
CH3
36861-47-9
Sunscreen agent
Bioconcentrated in roach from German
e.g., Eusolex 6300
camphor
CH3
254.37
lakes (115)
0
C18H220
N
N
H3C
3-(4-Methylbenzyliden)
camphor
Metoprolol
OH
37350-58-6
Beta-blocker
Loading of nearly 400 g/day in German
Tartrate: e.g., Lopressor;
O
N
CH3
267.37
(antihypertensive)
POTW (18); POTW removal efficiency
principal metabolite:
_A
~
H'IT>
C15H25NO3
83% (18); POTW max. effluent: 2.2 pg/L;
metaprolol acid
H3C
O
CH3
max. in surface waters: 2.2 pg/L
1 -[4-(2-Methoxyethyl)
phenoxy]-3-[(1 -methylethyl)
amino]-2-propanol
C(CH3)3
O
OCH3
02N
NO2
CH3
2,6-Dinitro-3-methoxy-4-
tert-butyl toluene
C(CH3)3
02N
NO2
H3C
CH3
NO2
1 -tert-Butyl-3,5-dimethyl-
2,4,6-trinitrobenzene (MX)
Musk ketone
C(CH3)3
(a nitro musk)
02N
NO2
H3C
CH3
0
CO3
1 -tert-Butyl-3,5-dimethyl-2,6-
dinitro-4-acetylbenzene (MK)
Musk moskene
H
C
(a nitro musk)
02N
H3
H3C
H3c H
NO2
4,6-Dinitro-1 ,1 ,3,3,5-
pentamethylindane
C(CH3)3
02N
NO2
H3C
CH3
CH3
1 -tert-Butyl-2,6,-dinitro-
3,4,5-trimethylbenzene
83-66-9
268.27
C12H16N205
81 -1 5-2
297.27
C12H15N306
81-14-1
294.31
C14H18N205
116-66-5
278.31
C14H18N204
145-39-1
266.30
C13H18N204
The first of two
major classes of
synthetic musks-
the "nitro" musks.
Widely used in a
wide array of
fragrances for
cosmetics and
other personal
care products.
Introduced to
commerce
in late 1800s
Synthetic musks first began to be
identified in environmental samples almost
20 years ago. Yamagishi et al. (100, 101)
performed the first comprehensive
monitoring effort, identifying musk
xylene and musk ketone in freshwater
fish, marine shellfish, river water, and
STW wastewater. Musk xylene was
found in all samples, and musk ketone
was found in 80% of the 74 samples
analyzed. Concentrations in STW effluents
ranged from 25 to 36 ng/L (musk xylene)
and from 140 to 410 ng/L (musk ketone).
Concentrations of musk xylene in fish
muscle were in the tens of ppb, while
those for musk ketone were less than
10 pg/kg, with highest values in fish
downstream of STWs. In contrast, for
shellfish, the concentrations ranged
lower, between 1 and 5.3 pg/kg,
presumably because of their lower lipid
contents. In river water, musk xylene
occurred in all samples, whether
upstream or downstream of STWs, and
ranged from 1 to 23 ng/L; musk ketone
was generally in the same range, but
in distinct contrast, was not detectable
in upstream samples
Winkler et al. (104) measured musks in
31 particulate matter and water
samples from the Elbe River (Germany).
In all particulate matter samples
were found musk ketone (4-22 ng/g),
Galaxolide (148-736 ng/g), and
Tonalide (194-770 ng/g); Celestolide
was found in 23 of the particulate
matter samples (4-43 ng/g). The values
for the three most prevalent musks
were within the same magnitude as
The nitro musks are
being phased out of use
in many parts of the
world because of
toxicity concerns. Musk
xylene was introduced
in 1888
Environmental Health Perspectives
- Vol 107, Supplement 6 * December 1999
Musk ambrette
(a nitro musk)
Musk xylene
(a nitro musk)
Musk tibetene
(a nitro musk)
918

----- Page 13 (native) -----
PHARMACEUTICALS IN THE ENVIRONMENT
Table 2. Continued.
CAS RN
Trade names, comments,
Structure and
MW
and nontarget
Compound
CAS name
Formula
Use/origin
Environmental occurrence
species effects
Galaxolide (HHCB)
c
CH3
1222-05-5
that for 15 PAHs, and exceeded those
(a polycyclic musk)
H3C>b
3
258.40
for 14 common polychlorinated organic
H3C<
C18H260
pollutants (only HCB and p,p-DIDT
H3C
were of similar concentration). Also
CH3
found in all the water samples were
1,3,4,6,7,8-Hexahydro-4,6,6,7,8,8-
musk ketone (2-10 ng/L), Galaxolide
hexamethyl-cyclopenta-(g)-2-
(36-152 ng/L), and Tonalide
benzopyrane
(24-88 ng/L); Celestolide was only
Tonalide (AHTN)
CH3
H3C
CH3
1506-02-1
found at 2-8 ng/L. These higher values
(a polycyclic musk)
4
,
258.40
exceeded those for all the
0
C18H260
The second of two
polychlorinated organics and the PAHs
H3C
CH3
major classes of
H3C
CH3
synthetic musks-
Draisci et al. (106) examined freshwater
7-Acetyl-1,1,3,4,4,6-hexa-
the `polycyclic
fish in Italy and identified two of five
The nitro musks are
methyltetraline
musks. Widely used
targeted musks in most fish samples;
being phased out of use
Celestolide (ADBI)
CH3
CH3
CH3
13171-00-1
in a wide array of
Galaxolide and Tonalide were
in many parts of the
(a polycyclic musk)
H
244.38
fragrances for
identified at levels ranging from less
world because of
H3C
l
C17H240
cosmetics and other
than 4 ng/g to 105 ng/g (ppb) in fish
toxicity concerns. Musk
N
personal care
muscle tissue. Eschke et al. (cited in 107)
xylene was introduced
products. Introduced
identified Galaxolide, Tonalide, and
in 1888
0H3
to commerce
Celestolide in the fatty tissue of
4-Acetyl-1,1-dimethyl-6-
in 1950s
bream and perch from the Ruhr River
tert-butylindane
(Germany) at average concentrations
ranging from 2.5 to 4.6 mg/kg (ppm).
MOller et al. (98) identified in the Swiss
river Glatt, Galaxolide, Tonalide,
and Celestolide at ng/L concentrations
(136, 75, and 3.2, respectively);
they also found the nitro-musks
(tibetene, ambrette, moskene, ketone,
xylene) at ng/L concentrations
(0.04, <0.03, 0.08, 8.3, and 0.62,
respectively)a
Musk xylene
C(CH33
Transformation
Behecti et al. ( 111) tested the acute
The amino musks show
derivatives
02N
NH2
products of nitro
toxicity of four reduced analogs of musk
greater toxicity than the
reduced
musks, resulting
xylene on Daphnia magna. The
parent nitro musks
(aminated)
H3C
CH3
from microbial
p-aminodinitro compound exhibited the
N02
reduction of the
most toxicity of the four, with EC50
nitro groups.
values averaging 0.25 pg/L (0.25 ppb).
1-tert-Butyl-3,5-dimethyl-2-amino-
Gatermann et al. (96) identified in sewage
4,6-dinitrobenzene
influent/effluent and in Elbe River
(Germany) musk xylene and musk ketone
1-tert-Butyl-3,5-dimethyl-4-amino-
together with their amino derivatives:
2,6-dinitrobenzene
4- and 2-amino-musk xylenes and
2-amino musk ketone. Sewage influent:
1-tert-Butyl-3,5-dimethyl-2,4-diamino-
musk xylene and musk ketone at 150
6-nitrobenzene
and 550 ng/L, respectively; in the
effluent, concentrations 10 and 6 ng/L,
1 -tert-Butyl-3,5-dimethyl-2,4,6-tri-
respectively. Amino derivatives not
aminobenzene
detectable in influent, but concentrations
in the effluents dramatically increased:
2-amino musk xylene (10 ng/L),
4-amino musk xylene (34 ng/L),
and 2-amino musk ketone (250 ng/L
Nadolol
O
H
42200-33-9
Beta-blocker
POTW max. effluent: 0.06 pg/L; not
e.g., Corgard
Nado_ol
309.40
(antihypertensive)
detected in surface waters (18)
N,
H OH
-H
C17H27N04
(H3Cl3c-
5-[3-[(1 ,1-Dimethylethyl)-amino]-2-
hydroxypropoxy]-1 ,2,3,4-tetrahydro-
2,3-naphthalenediol
CH3
COOOH
H3CO
(S)-6-Methoxy-ca-methyl-2-
naphthaleneacetic acid
22204-53-1
230.26
C14H1403
Analgesic/anti-
Loading of over 50 g/day in German
inflammatory
POTW (18); POTW removal efficiency
66% (18); POTW max. effluent: 0.52 pg/L;
max. in surface waters: 0.39 pg/L.
Influent concentration of 0.6 pg/L in
Brazilian STWs (69) with removal
efficiencies ranging from 15-78%.
Environmental Health Perspectives
* Vol 107, Supplement 6
* December 1999
Naproxen
e.g., Naprosyn
919

----- Page 14 (native) -----
DAUGHTON AND TERNES
Table 2. Continued.
CAS RN
Trade names, comments,
Structure and
MW
and nontarget
Compound
CAS name
Formula
Use/origin
Environmental occurrence
species effects
Paroxetine
H
61869-08-7
Antidepressant
Not yet searched for in environmental
Compared with
N
329.37
(SSRI)
samples
fluoxetine and
C19H20FN03
fluvoxamine, paroxetine
does not elicit spawning
behavior in molluscs;
e.g., Paxil
F
(3S-trans)-3-[(1 ,3-Benzodioxol-
5-yloxy)methyl]-4-(4-
fluorophenyl)piperidine
Phenazone
60-80-0
Analgesic
Loading of -10 g/day in German
e.g., Parodyne
(Antipyrine)
188.23
POTW (18); POTW removal efficiency
0
N
CH3
C11H12N20
33% (18); PO1W max. effluent: 0.41 pg/L;
N`
max. in surface waters: 0.95 pg/L
CH3
1 ,2-Dihydro-1 ,5-dimethyl-2-
phenyl-3H-pyrazol-3-one
Propranolol
CH3
525-66-6
Beta-blocker
Loading of over 500 g/day in German
e.g., Avlocardyl;
fN1CH,
259.35
(antihypertensive)
POTW (18); POW removal efficiency
principal metabolite:
OH
H
3
C16H21NO2
96% (18); POW max. effluent:
4-hydroxypropanolol;
OH o]0.29 pg/L; max. in surface waters:
Daphnia immobilization
0.59 pg/L
EC50 0.01-0.06mM
1-[(1-Methylethyl)amino]-3-
(125)
(1 -naphthalenyloxy)-2-propanol
Propyphenazone
479-92-5
Analgesic/anti-
Grinsted (Denmark) landfill leachates:
e.g., Isoprochin
tlI,J230.31
inflammatory
0.3-4.0 mg/L directly beneath and
o
N
CH3
C14H18N20
declining depending on depth and
distance along plume (21); prevalent
in Berlin waters (23)
H3C
CH3
CH3
4-Isopropylantipyrine
Salbutamol
OH
18559-94-9
,B2-Sympathomimetic
POTW max. influent: 0.17 pg/L; max.
e.g., sulfate: Ventolin
albuterol (in U.S.)
o
o
v / sC{CH3)3N239.31
(bronchodilator)
in surface waters: 0.035 pg/L (18)
HO
NC(CH)
C13H21N03
HO
OH
al-[[(1 1-Dimethylethyl)-
aminolmethyl]-4-hydroxy-
1 ,3-benzenedimethanol
Salicylic acid
COOH
69-72-7
Primary hydrolytic
Up to 54 pg/L in PO1W effluent but
Efficiently removed by
OH
138.12
metabolite of
efficiently removed in effluent (18);
POTWs; the free form of
C7H603
acetylsalicylic acid,
POTW max. effluent: 0.14 pg/L; max.
salicylic acids
keratolytic, dermatice,
in surface waters: 4.1 pg/L. Average
represents only one
2-Hydroxybenzoic acid;
preservative of food
salicylic acid concentrations in POW
(minor) of several
e.g., Duofilm
influents of 55 pg/L and in effluents
ultimate metabolites
of 0.5 pg/L (70)
Sulfonamides
large class
NA
Antibiotics
Grinsted (Denmark) landfill leachates:
0.04-6.47 mg/L directly beneath and
declining depending on depth and
distance along plume (21)
Terbutaline
OH
23031-25-6
j32-Sympathomimetic
PO1W max. effluent: 0.12 pg/L; not
e.g., sulfate: Brethaire
HO_
H
.
-
225.29
(bronchodilator)
detected in surface waters (18)
C12H19N03
T
t
-~~C(CH3)3
OH
5-[2-[(1,1-Dimethylethyl) amino-
1 -hydroxyethyl]-1 ,3-benzenediol
Environmental Health Perspectives
m Vol 107, Supplement 6 * December 1999
920

----- Page 15 (native) -----
PHARMACEUTICALS IN THE ENVIRONMENT
Table 2. Continued.
CAS RN
Trade names, comments,
Structure and
MW
and nontarget
Compound
CAS name
Formula
Use/origin
Environmental occurrence
species effects
3,4,5,6-Tetrabromo-
OH
576-55-6
Antiseptic, fungicide
POTWs in Germany: tetrabromo-o-cresol
o-cresol
Br
CH3
423.72
found in both influents and
C7H4Br40
effluents (<0.1 pg/l) (70)
Br
Br
Br
Timolol
,s
26839-75-8
Beta-blocker
POTW max. effluent: 0.07 pg/L; max.
e.g., hemihydrate:
C(vo-<
CH3)3
CH316.42
(antihypertensive)
in surface waters: 0.01 pg/L (18)
Betimol
I I
~
~~HC13H24N403S
0
J
OH
(S)-1-[(1 1-Dimethylethyl)-
amino]-3-[[4-(4-morpholinyl)-
1 ,2,5-thiadiazol-3-yl]oxy]-2-propanol
Tolfenamic acid
COOH
CH3
13710-19-5
Analgesic/anti-
Not detected in POTW effluent or
Veterinary NSAID
H
ci
261.71
inflammatory
surface waters (18); in Brazilian STW
e.g., Tolfedine
N
,-
C14H12CIN02
effluent 1.6 pg/L (69)
2-[(3-Chloro-2-methylphenyl)-
amino]benzoic acid
Triclosan
cl
OH
3380-34-5
Antiseptic
0.05-0.15 pg/L in water (113).
e.g., Irgasan DP 300
N
o
N
289.54
Antibacterial widely used for 30 years
fI< ,\,
C12H7C1302
in a vast array of consumer products.
c
l
I
Its usage as a preservative and
disinfectant continues to grow.
5-Chloro-2-(2,4-dichloro-
Triclosan's use in commercial products
phenoxy)phenol
spans footwear (in hosiery and insoles
of shoes called "odor-eaters"), hospital
handsoap, acne creams (e.g., Clearasil),
and rather recently as a slow-release
product called Microban, which is
incorporated in a wide variety of plastic
products (from children's toys to kitchen
utensils, such as cutting boards)
Verapamil
H3
52-53-9
Cardiac drug (calcium
No occurrence data
pM concentrations and
H3C
CN
CH3
454.61
ion influx inhibitor)
lower greatly increase
H3CO
r NN
N
OCH3
C27H38N204
(antihypertensive)
toxicity of certain drugs
H3C0co
9CH3
for many aquatic
H3CO
OCH3
organisms (32) because
a-[3-[[2-(3,4-Dimethoxyphenyl)-
of inhibition of
ethyl]methylaminolpropyl]-
"multidrug transporters";
3,4-dimethoxy-ax-(1-methyl-
removal of other drugs is
ethyl)benzeneacetonitrile);
reduced, lengthening the
e.g., hydrochloride: Vasolan
exposure time; Daphnia
immobilization EC50
0.11-0.67 mM 1125)
Abbreviations: CAS RN, Chemical Abstracts Service Registry Number; max, maximum; MW, molecular weight; NA, not applicable. "in the first survey of Canadian aquatic life ( 154), maximum musk lipid-
concentrations from populated areas in Canada showed values in distinct contrast with those from Europe: musk ketone 12.2-17.7 pg/g lipid; mussels, winter flounder, clams); 0.2-0.7 (trout, eel, lobster);
Galaxolide: 0.01-3.0 pg/g in the same samples. For a given sample, the lipid concentrations of musk ketone (the dominant nitro musk) were several-fold to over an order of magnitude greater than the con-
centrations for the predominant polycyclic (Galaxolide); most samples contained lower concentrations of musk xylene and Tonalide. These data contrast with those from Europe-the concentrations of
nitro and polycyclics are comparable in Canada, whereas the nitro musks are 1-3 orders of magnitude lower than the polycyclics in Europe (presumably reflecting different usage patterns and the fact that
the nitro musks have not been restricted in the West). In comparison with Europe, insignificant quantities of amino metabolites of nitro musks were found in Canadian aquatic life, presumably a reflection
of the lower degree of sewage treatment in Canada [e.g.,(2)J.
ratio of drug concentrations in bile to that in
the surrounding water can increase many
orders of magnitude as exposure duration
increases (15). Detection of exposure of fish
to many drugs can thereby be facilitated
through the analysis of bile.
The introduction ofdrugs into the environ-
ment is partly a function of the quantity of
drugs manufactured, the dosage frequency and
amount [the 200 most frequently prescribed
drugs, representing about two-thirds of all
prescriptions filled in the United States for the
most recently documented year, are listed in
RxList (16)], the excretion efficiency of the
parent compound and metabolites, propensity
of the drug to sorb to solids, and the metabolic
transformation capability of subsequent sewage
treatment (or landfill) microorganisms. Publidy
owned wastewater treatment plants (POTWs)
receive influent from both domestic, munici-
pal, and industrial (including pharmaceutical
manufacture) sewage systems. The processed
liquid effluents from primary and secondary
treatments are then discharged to surface waters
and the residual solids (sludge) to landfills/
farms; land disposal, including manure from
treated animals at CAFOs, creates the potential
for introduction into groundwaters or surface
waters (via wet weather run-off). Theoretically,
PPCPs in sewage sludge applied to crop lands
could be taken up by plants.
Compounds surviving the various phases
of metabolism and other degradative or
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 107, Supplement 6 * December 1999
921

----- Page 16 (native) -----
DAUGHTON AND TERNES
Phase
Phase II
Drug
Metabolite
M
etabolite
Ph-ase
PhasellI
* Oxidation
Conjugation with:
* Reduction
* Glucuronic acid
* Hydrolysis
Sulfate
:Amino acid
Figure 1. Metabolic approach to increasing the polarity
(and excretability) of drugs.
sequestering actions (i.e., display environ-
mental persistence) can then pose an exposure
risk for organisms in the environment. Even
the less/nontoxic conjugates (glucuronides)
can later be converted back to the original
bioactive compounds via enzymatic (3-
glucuronidases) or chemical hydrolysis (e.g.,
acetylsalicylic acid can be hydrolyzed to the
free salicylic acid). Some degradation products
can even be more bioactive than the parent
compound. Therefore, conjugates can essen-
tially act as storage reservoirs from which the
free drugs can later be released into the envi-
ronment. Up to 90% of certain drugs can
become conjugated (17,18), conjugation vary-
ing as a function of chemical class. These path-
ways of introduction into the environment
have been summarized by Velagaleti (10).
Sewage treatment plants. Treatment
facilities, primarily POTWs or sewage treat-
ment works (STWs), which include privately
owned works as well, play a key role in the
introduction of pharmaceuticals into the
environment [see Rogers (19) for a review of
the fate of synthetic chemicals in sewage
treatment plants]. STWs were designed to
handle human waste of mainly natural origin,
primarily via the acclimated degradative
action of microorganisms (the efficiency of
metabolism of a given drug can increase with
duration of treatment because of enzyme
induction and cellular adaptation) and the
coagulation/flocculation of suspended solids;
sometimes, tertiary treatment (e.g., chemi-
cal/ultraviolet [LJV] oxidation) is used. Most
anthropogenic chemicals introduced along
with this normal waste suffer unknown fates.
Two primary mechanisms remove substances
from the incoming waste stream: a) microbial
degradation to lower molecular weight prod-
ucts, leading sometimes to complete mineral-
ization
CO2 and H20; and b) sorption to
filterable solids, which are later removed with
the sludge.
Although the microbiota of sewage
treatment systems may have been exposed to
many PPCPs for a number of years, two fac-
tors work against the effective microbial
removal of these substances from STWs. First,
the concentrations of most drugs are probably
so low that the lower limits for enzyme affini-
ties may not be met. For example, the daily
loadings of PPCPs into STWs are largely a
function of the serviced human population,
the
dosages/duration
of
medications
consumed, and the metabolic/excretory
half-lives, which are all large variables. As
an example, the daily load of a subset of phar-
maceuticals to a particular POTW near
Frankfurt/Main, Germany, ranged from tens
to hundreds of grams, with approximate indi-
vidual removal efficiencies varying widely
from 10 to 100% but trending to around
60% (18). This particular POTW serviced
about a third of a million people at a flow rate
of roughly 60,000 m3/day. Despite the num-
ber of studies on treatment efficiencies, a
widespread investigation is still lacking for the
differences in removal efficiencies for distinct
types of STWs as well as for individual treat-
ment techniques. The extent to which a par-
ticular plant uses primary, secondary, and
tertiary technologies will greatly influence
removal
efficiencies;
the technologies
employed vary widely among cities. The
biodegradative fate of most compounds in
STWs is governed by nongrowth-limiting
(enzyme-saturating) substrate concentrations
(copiotrophic metabolism). In contrast,
PPCPs are present in STWs at concentrations
at enzyme-subsaturating levels, which necessi-
tates oligotrophic metabolism. These micro-
pollutants might be handled by only a small
subset of specialist oligotrophic organisms
whose occurrence is probably more prevalent
in native environments characterized by low-
carbon fluxes (e.g., sediments and associated
pore waters, where desorption mass transfer is
limiting) than in STWs. This means that
degradation of PPCPs may occur more preva-
lently in the receiving waters/sediments than
in STWs.
Second, many new drugs are introduced
to the market each year; some of these drugs
are from entirely, new classes never seen
before by the microbiota of an STW. Each of
these presents a new challenge to biodegrada-
tion. A worst-case scenario may not be
unusual
the concentration of a drug leaving
an STW in the effluent could essentially be
the same as that entering. Only the several-
fold to multiple order of magnitude dilution
when the effluent is mixed into the receiving
water, assuming a sufficiently high natural
flow, serves to reduce the concentration; obvi-
ously, smaller streams have increased poten-
tial for having higher concentrations of any
PPCP that has been introduced. In general,
most pharmaceuticals resist extensive micro-
bial degradation (e.g., mineralization) (10).
Although some parent drugs often show poor
solubility in water (10), leading to preferen-
tial sorption to suspended particles, they can
thereby sorb to colloids and therefore be dis-
charged in the aqueous effluent. Metabolites,
including breakdown products and conju-
gates, will partition mainly to the aqueous
effluent. Some published data demonstrate
that many parent drugs do make their way
into the environment (see references cited in
Table 2 under "Environmental Occurrence").
The efficiency of removal of pharmaceuti-
cals by STWs is largely unknown. Currently,
the most extensive study of treatment effi-
cienlcy (18) reports removal from German
STWs of 14 drtigs representing five broad
physiologic categories. Removal of the parent
coMpound (keep in mind that possible subse-
quent metabolites were not accounted for)
ranged from 7% (carbamazepiine, an anti-
epileptic) to 96% (propranolol, a beta-
blocker); most removal efficiencies averaged
about 60%. Fenofibrate, acetominophen, and
salicylic acid, o-hydroxyhippuric acid, and gen-
tisic acid (acetylsalicylic acid metabolites)
could not be detected in effluent; salicylic acid
was found in the influent at concentrations up
to 54 pg/L. It is important to understand that
absent the stoichiometric accounting of meta-
bolic products, one cannot distinguish
between the three major fates of a substance:
a) degradation to lower molecular weight com-
pounds, b) physical sequestration by solids
(and subsequent removal as sludge), and
c) conjugates that can later be hydrolyzed to
yield the parent compound (e.g., clofibric and
fenofibric acid conjugates) (18). Therefore, by
simply following disappearance (removal) of a
substance, one cannot conclude that it was
structurally altered or destroyed
it may sim-
ply reside in another state or form. Identifying
metabolic products is difficult not only because
of the number of metabolites (sometimes sev-
eral per parent compound) but also because
standard reference materials are difficult to
obtain commercially and can be costly.
Despite high removal rates in STWs for
some drugs, upsets in the homeostasis of a
treatment plant can result in higher than nor-
mal discharges. For example, Ternes (18)
found that wet weather runoff dramatically
reduced the removal rates for certain drugs
(e.g., several nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs [NSAIDs] and lipid regulators) in a
facility located close to Frankfurt/Main.
During the increased period of influent flow,
the removal rate dropped to below 5% from
over 60% previously; several days were
required for the removal rates to recover.
Clearly, even for drugs efficiently removed,
the operational state of the STW can have a
dramatic effect on the removal efficiencies.
Other transients that could affect removal
include transitions between seasons and spo-
radic plug-flow influx of toxicants from vari-
oUs sources. Overflows from STW failure or
overcapacity events (e.g., floods, excessive
water use) lead to direct, untreated introduc-
tion of sewage into the environment. In
efforts to improve tributary conditions (by
increasing stream flow), some cities have con-
sidered increasing the percentage of annual
overflow events (e.g., see the Portland,
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol
07 Supplement 6 * December 1999
922

----- Page 17 (native) -----
PHARMACEUTICALS IN THE ENVIRONMENT
Oregon, proposal (20). The highest concen-
tration in an STW effluent reported by
Ternes (18) was for bezafibrate (4.6 pg/L);
the highest concentration in surface water
also was for bezafibrate (3.1 pg/L ppb).
Landfills. PPCPs can be introduced to
landfills both directly via domestic and indus-
trial routes and indirectly via sewage sludge.
Holm et al. (21) first reported leachates carry-
ing pharmaceuticals from a landfill. Large
amounts of numerous sulfonamides (antibi-
otics) and barbiturates from domestic waste
and from a pharmaceutical manufacturer were
disposed of at a Danish landfill over a 45-year
period. High concentrations (ppm) of many
of these drugs were found in leachates close to
the landfill; these compounds even accounted
for 5% of the total nonvolatile organic carbon
found in the leachate. It was also found that
the concentrations dropped off dramatically
tens of meters down gradient, presumably a
result of microbial attenuation.
Drinking water. Few pharmaceuticals
have been identified in domestic drinking
water, probably because of the dearth of mon-
itoring efforts and because the required detec-
tion limits are too low for current routine
analytical technology. In Germany, however,
clofibric acid concentrations up to 165 ng/L
(22) and 270 ng/L (23) have been measured
in tap water; the presumed source was from
recharged groundwaters that had been conta-
minated by sewage. Stumpf et al. (24) and
Ternes et al. (9) found several pharmaceuti-
cals in German drinking water in the lower
nanograms-per-liter range, with a maximum
of 70 ng/L for clofibric acid. Additionally,
these investigators found that diclofenac,
bezafibrate, phenazone, and carbamazepine
were sometimes present. In the majority of the
samples analyzed, however, no drugs were
observed. The investigations performed to
date therefore indicate that contamination of
drinking water does not appear to be a general
problem. Depending on the water source for
drinking water production, however, certain
facilities can experience contamination, espe-
cially if the source is polluted groundwater
and if polishing technology does not remove
the PPCP [e.g., see Heberer et al. (23) and
Stumpf et al. (24)]. A major unaddressed
issue regarding human health is the long-term
effects of ingesting via potable waters very low,
subtherapeutic doses of numerous pharmaceu-
ticals multiple times a day for many decades.
This concern especially relates to infants,
fetuses, and people suffering from certain
enzyme deficiencies (which can even be food-
induced, e.g., microsomal oxidase inhibition
by grapefruit juice).
Drinking water regulations. Regulations
designed to safeguard receiving waters (from
sewage treatment) and drinking water were
historically designed to protect the consumer
from the obvious threats of pathogens, widely
used industrial chemicals, and certain
radionuclides. The treatment processes used
by state-of-the-art POTWs evolved from the
need to remove these limited sets of contami-
nants. In areas ofwater scarcity, the future will
see more and more reuse of treated sewage to
meet drinking water needs. This will impose a
severe burden on water providers to ensure
that all chemical contaminants have been
removed to the greatest extent possible. It will
also require the ability to identify as many of
the plethora of potential chemicals in the
upgraded water as possible.
According to the National Research
Council (NRC) (25), more than two dozen
major U.S. utilities release so much effluent
to receiving waters that when the natural
flows are low, the discharged waste composes
50% of the eventual flow. Any residual,
unidentified contaminants therefore are
diluted 2-fold at best. In more densely popu-
lated countries (e.g., United Kingdom), this
figure can rise as high as 90% of flow during
times of low rainfall (26).
Domestic animals. Whereas the concen-
tration of many drugs is greatly attenuated
through sewage treatment plants, larger quan-
tities of many pharmaceuticals are used in
various animal husbandry operations, espe-
cially CAFOs. With aquaculture in particular,
which uses many anti-infectives and anesthet-
ics, the chance for introduction into the
immediate environment is greatly enhanced,
and the possibility of direct human consump-
tion of therapeutic quantities is correspond-
ingly heightened. Even in the United States
the extremely large populations of pet dogs
and cats are recipients of numerous drugs
(e.g., tranquilizers and antidepressants)-
some prescribed by veterinarians and others
intended for their owners' use as pet owners
sometimes administer medications to their
pets to test off-label uses for themselves.
PPCPs (both veterinary drugs and OTC
products) used with terrestrial domestic ani-
mals can be dispersed into the environment
through the same routes as those PPCPs used
for humans, with the added major route of
run-off/leaching ofon-ground fecal material.
Significant Aspects
of Ecotoxicology
Shortcomings of effluent toxicologic
screening: comprehensive chemical charac-
terization cannot be replaced-chemical
characterization and toxicity screening
must be better integrated. There are two
debates in the realm of ecotoxicology, both of
which have ramifications with respect to per-
forming ecologic risk assessments (ERAs) for
PPCPs. The first is the relevance of purpose-
fully simplified, defined-species toxicity tests
to predicting/extrapolating pollutant impacts
on the more highly organized and complex
structural/functional levels of communities or
ecosystems (processes) [see Boudou and
Ribeyre (27)]; this is truer for PPCPs than
for pesticides, as the former were generally
never designed to have any intended effects
on wildlife and therefore any knowledge as to
what types of effects to look for is clearly
more limited. Can changes in a complex sys-
tem be predicted from knowledge of a small
subset of the underlying components? The
second is the question of whether it is neces-
sary to know the spectrum of possible physio-
logic effects, given a multitude of organisms,
or possible mechanisms (modes) of action
before looking for and ascribing causation to
changes at the population level and higher.
Considering this, one can only pose at this
time the rhetorical question as to whether the
risk posed by the presence of pollutants in
complex waste streams (e.g., PPCPs in STW
effluents) can be detected/quantified by the
use of current toxicity screening tests never
designed to embrace the spectrum of end
points (some exquisitely subtle) that may be
involved. The most conservative approach
would be one that captures the coordinated
use of toxicity-directed screening and chem-
istry-directed characterization, feeding the
results of each to the other, to better reveal
the nature ofany stressors.
Although most pharmaceuticals are
designed to target specific metabolic pathways
in humans and domestic animals, they can
have numerous often unknown effects on
metabolic systems of nontarget organisms,
especially invertebrates. Although many non-
target organisms share certain receptors with
humans, effects on nontarget organisms are
usually unknown. It is important to recognize
that for many drugs, their specific modes of
action even in the target species are also
unknown. For these drugs, it is impossible to
predict what effects they might have on non-
target organisms. Without knowing the mode
of action, coupled with not knowing the pos-
sible receptors, it is impossible to design ratio-
nal toxicity testing procedures at the organism
level. In the final analysis, given the vast array
of mechanisms of drug action and side effects,
the total number ofdifferent toxicity tests pos-
sibly required to screen the effluent from a
typical STW could be impractically large. The
current batteries of acute/chronic toxicity tests
used for ecotoxicity screening merely supply
gross indications of directly measurable acute
effects. Even if the known mode of action is
considered when selecting ecotoxicity tests [as
recommended by Henschel et al. (28)], this
falsely presupposes that other modes of action
are nonexistent or nominal.
Regulatory agencies only in the last few
years have recognized that pharmaceuticals
should be screened to determine possible
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 107, Supplement 6 * December 1999
923

----- Page 18 (native) -----
DAUGHTON AND TERNES
effects on nontarget species. The world's first
requirement for ecotoxicity testing as a pre-
requisite for registration of a pharmaceutical
was established in 1995 and first imple-
mented in Germany according to European
Union (EU) guideline 92/18 EWG for veteri-
nary pharmaceuticals. For a more in-depth
discussion, see Henschel et al. (28), and for a
general discussion of the issues in aquatic
ecotoxicology, see Boudou and Ribeyre (27).
Screening waste effluent and receiving
waters for toxicologic effects can at best be
only partially effective because the range of
physiologic effects is too broad and relevant to
a vast array of aquatic and terrestrial organ-
isms, spanning everything from acute toxicity
to very subtle behavioral or genetic changes, of
which the consequences are not immediately
manifested and can be detected only over long
periods of time. There are too many scenarios
to discuss in an efficient, comprehensive man-
ner. The complexity of accounting for a wide
range of mechanisms of action was made clear
in the National Research Council's recent
report on endocrine disruptors (29). Although
for this class of pollutants the number of
modes of action is very large, they represent
only a subset of those for PPCPs in general.
Quite clearly, any successful toxicity-directed
methodology for risk assessment of complex
effluents or environmental samples should
also make use of a well-developed knowledge
of the chemical constituents and their modes
of action; current approaches are not yet suffi-
ciently comprehensive. The complexity of this
task is further magnified when the effect and
necessarily its mode of action have not even
been elucidated.
A popular means of attempting to identify
the toxic constituents, using toxicity identifi-
cation and evaluation, in complex waste such
as sewage effluent is that of bioassay-directed
fractionation screening (30), in which chemical
separation techniques yield distinct chemical-
class fractions that are then subjected to toxic-
ity testing. Those fractions showing activity
against the selected end point are then sub-
jected to chemical identification protocols.
Even if one accepts the limitations of selecting
appropriate end points (the number with
environmental relevance would be enormous),
this extremely time-consuming approach
would miss any combined effects, whether
antagonistic or synergistic, of multiple chemi-
cals. Direct, rigorous chemical characteriza-
tion of problematic samples clearly must play
a role in the identification of toxicants that
might elicit previously unrealized toxic effects
in nontarget organisms.
The trend toward optically pure phar-
maceuticals: fewer side effects and lower
concentrations. Most pharmaceuticals are
racemic mixtures. For a specific optically
active drug, it is theorized that only one of its
optical isomers is responsible for the desired
physiologic, therapeutic effects; the other iso-
mers are at best inactive, or even worse,
responsible for many of the untoward side-
effects that most drugs display. A recent trend
in the pharmaceutical industry, and now sup-
ported by the FDA, is to produce only the
optically pure therapeutic isomer (31). This
has the potential to not only lessen side
effects, but for some drugs, the total dosage
can be lessened by at least 50%. This could
help in reducing the burden on sewage treat-
ment plants. The significance of the indus-
try's switch to optically pure isomers is that
the number of metabolites and other SRSs
entering the environment will be reduced at
least by half, and the use of the active ingredi-
ent will also be reduced by at least 50%
because the potency will effectively increase.
At the same time, however, the trend of phar-
maceuticals toward higher potency will
increase the difficulty of environmental moni-
toring because the required detection levels
will be lowered.
Synergistic effects andpotentiation: the
potentially critical role of "multixenobiotic
resistance." The biochemical interactions of
drugs, often leading to adverse effects, is well
known in humans. Little is known, however,
of this interplay in aquatic organisms. The fol-
lowing is provided as an example of the com-
plex potential for adverse drug interactions
(one actually leading to increased exposure), as
it also illuminates the interwoven pathways
that ultimately determine exposure. Mostly
during this decade, a new mechanism for
elimination of xenobiotics from organisms
(first observed in tumor cells) has been eluci-
dated-multidrug transporters. This excretory
system, also called multixenobiotic trans-
porters, comprises proteins that facilitate the
active export of potentially toxic substances,
primarily those of moderate lipophilicity,
from inside cells. The best-known transporters
are the P-glycoproteinlike (Pgp) transporters
(P is for permeability altering), or P170
(because of their 170-kDa mass), which have
been well characterized in mammals, espe-
cially tumor cells, and bacteria.
The toxicologic significance of these
nonspecific transporters in maintaining a first
line of defense against exposure to multiple
xenobiotics in aquatic species has been largely
pioneered and reviewed by Epel (32) and by
Kurelec and co-workers (33-35); this system
confers what has become known as multidrug
or multixenobiotic resistance (MDR or
MXR). Although these protective proteins
have not been found in all aquatic organisms,
they have been found in many, especially fil-
ter feeders and bottom dwellers (those having
potentially high exposures to xenobiotics).
This extrusion pump protein system, and
possibly others as yet identified, facilitate the
removal and prevent the entrance of those
compounds not metabolized or conjugated.
They seem to have nonspecific recognition,
working for many pesticides, drugs, and nat-
ural toxins alike. The action of this trans-
porter system can be inhibited by certain
substances such as verapamil (a-[3-[[2-(3,4-
dimethoxyphenyl)ethyl]methylamino]propyl]-
3,4-dimethoxy-ox-( 1 -methylethyl)benzene
acetonitrile), a cardiac drug-calcium ion
influx inhibitor-that directly binds to the
active site of Pgp. Exposure to verapamil at
micromolar concentrations and lower greatly
increases the toxicity of a number of drugs or
other xenobiotics for many aquatic organisms
(32), as the toxicant cannot be readily
removed from the exposed organism; exposure
time is thereby lengthened by its intracellular
accumulation. This elimination system does
not function for highly hydrophobic sub-
stances (e.g., DDT, polychlorinated biphenyls
[PCBs]) and as such might play a more critical
role in eliciting effects from exposure to the
less hydrophobic PPCPs. Xenobiotics may
irreversibly inhibit (cyclosporine A inhibits
ATPase), competitively inhibit (verapamil,
quinidine, reserpine at low concentrations or
high concentrations of general lipophilic com-
pounds such as petroleum oil), or indirectly
modulate (e.g., via phosphorylation) MXR
regulation or expression (staurosporine
inhibits protein kinase C Pgp regulator),
resulting in its reversal.
The slow escalation, by induction or
genetic enrichment, of MXR occurrence and
activity among aquatic organisms can give the
illusion that the toxicity potential in the
aquatic environment is stable or even decreas-
ing when in reality it may be increasing. The
introduction of a new substance, at what
would normally be a no-effect level, that dis-
rupts the activity of MX1R could thereby lead
to a profound cascade of unanticipated and
unaccounted-for toxic events-a phenome-
non akin to what is being termed toxicant-
induced loss of tolerance in humans.
Organisms in an aquatic environment that
have adapted via MXR to certain levels of a
suite of toxicants could experience widespread
interspecies toxic events should their MXR be
inhibited by the addition of a single agent
capable of inhibiting MXR, even one that
ordinarily would elicit no effect on its own.
The resulting effects would be inexplicable if
considered solely on the basis of exposure to
the new toxicant.
Little is known about which xenobiotics
have activity within this relatively newly
identified class of chemicals, referred to as
chemosensitizers, or their frequency of occur-
rence in the environment. Smital and Kurelec
(35), however, showed that unidentified
agents in samples from polluted waters
enhance the accumulation of aromatic amines
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 107, Supplement 6 * December 1999
924

----- Page 19 (native) -----
PHARMACEUTICALS IN THE ENVIRONMENT
in clams, mussels, snails, and sponges. Some
examples of known MXR inhibitors (34,35),
other than verapamil include trifluoroper-
azine (Stelazine, which is a calmodulin antag-
onist and an antipsychotic tranquilizer),
reserpine (antihypertensive), quinidine and
amiodarone (anti-arrythmics), cyclosporins
(immunosuppressants), anthracyclines (non-
cytotoxic cytotoxin analogs), and proges-
terone (steroid); some natural substances such
as agent(s) in grapefruit juice are also known
to inhibit the P-glycoprotein system (36).
Environmental Studies on
Pharmaceuticals
Given the numbers and quantities of pharma-
ceuticals manufactured and used throughout
the world and that many of these chemicals
are designed to have profound physiologic
effects, comparatively little research has been
published on their occurrence in the environ-
ment, effects on nontarget organisms, or
assessment of environmental impact. Literally
thousands of distinct drugs are approved for
use throughout the world. Many of these are
manufactured and used in very large quanti-
ties. The world's combined literature (the vast
majority of these studies have originated in
Europe, but the issue applies equally world-
wide) has addressed only a very small percent-
age of these compounds, and the huge array
of associated metabolites and other transfor-
mation products, many of which undoubt-
edly have strong physiologic activity, simply
compounds the magnitude of the problem.
When
drugs
are
detected
in
the
environment (e.g., surface waters), their con-
centrations are generally in the ng/L-ig/L
(ppt-ppb) range. Although parts-per-billion
concentrations may not pose much acute risk,
it is completely unknown whether other
receptors in nontarget organisms are sensitive.
It must also be recognized that even though
individual concentrations of any drug might
be low, the combined concentrations from
drugs sharing a common mechanism of
action could be substantial. Exposures in the
aquatic environment are of particular concern,
since aquatic organisms (as opposed to those
spending at least some time in terrestrial set-
tings) are subject to continual, unabated life-
cycle exposures. This is a highly significant
consideration for pharmaceuticals (or bio-
active metabolites) that are refractory to
structural transformations and are continually
introduced into surface waters from sewage
treatment plants. Moreover, the polar, non-
volatile nature of most drugs prevents their
escape from the aquatic realm. Effectively,
even PPCPs with relatively short environ-
mental half-lives assume the qualities of
highly persistent pollutants because they are
continually replenished by infusion to the
aquatic environment from STWs.
Environmental Occurrences
(Note: The names, structures, Chemical
Abstracts Service Registry Numbers, and some
of the data for environmental occurrences
cited in this paper are summarized in Table
2.) Probably the first report of a prescription
drug in the environment (sewage treatment
effluent) was made over 20 years ago by
Garrison et al. (37), who reported clofibric
acid (the active metabolite from the lipid reg-
ulators clofibrate, etofibrate, and theofibrate)
concentrations of 0.8-2.0 pg/L in raw sewage
and activated sludge effluent. They also found
the ubiquitous caffeine and nicotine to be the
two most prevalent compounds in influent
and effluent from activated sludge, but they
did not find the parent dofibrate in any sam-
ple. In parallel, Hignite and Azarnoff (38)
reported salicylic acid and dofibric acid in the
influent and effluent from a Kansas City,
Missouri, municipal sewage treatment plant
[the history of clofibric acid identified in the
environment has been summarized by Stan
and Heberer (39)]. Clofibric acid was rou-
tinely detected in the effluent of this Missouri
STW at an average effluent rate of 2.1 kg/day;
over a 10-month period its loading remained
in the tight range of 0.76-2.92 kg/day.
Similarly, salicylic acid, a hydrolytic metabo-
lite of aspirin, averaged 8.6 kg/day but ranged
more widely from 0.55 to 28.7 kg/day. Stan
and Heberer also observed that the influent
concentrations of clofibric acid were only 20%
higher than the effluent concentrations, show-
ing that this chemical resisted removal by the
STW. In contrast, for salicylic acid, the influ-
ent concentration was about an order of mag-
nitude higher than the effluent, showing more
efficient removal.
It therefore was clearly recognized over 20
years ago that the continual, daily introduc-
tion of kilogram quantities of drugs from a
given STW into receiving waters could result
in sustained concentrations with the potential
to lead to exposures in aquatic organisms.
Little more transpired in the literature, how-
ever, during the next 15 years, although
clofibric acid continued to appear in a num-
ber of monitoring efforts that did not target
PPCPs. The most complete investigation to
date of the occurrence of pharmaceuticals in
both the influent and effluent of POTWs
(and also in various surface waters) has been
published by Ternes (18).
The distribution of pharmaceuticals is a
large function of their production volumes,
which can rival those for many pesticides.
There are thousands of registered drugs that
are dispensed both as prescriptions and OTC;
this makes it difficult to estimate usage rates
for those pharmaceuticals sold via both routes
(e.g., many analgesics). In Germany, roughly
2,900 drugs are permitted in human medi-
cine alone (18). Many countries dispense
drugs in the absence of prescriptions. The
two primary sources for release into the envi-
ronment are from human and veterinary
applications. Ternes (18) states that at least
for lipid regulators and NSAIDs the source is
almost entirely from human usage, as these
drugs are infrequently (or never) used in vet-
erinary medicine. In general, the literature
shows that most pharmaceuticals, when
detected, are present in surface waters in a
concentration range of 1 ng/L-1 pg/L. To
put this in perspective, Richardson and
Bowron (40) state that 1,000 kg of a chemi-
cal distributed evenly among the rivers in
England and Wales would yield a concentra-
tion of about 0.1 pg/L. Many pharmaceuti-
cals are consumed in amounts far exceeding
this; in fact, Richardson and Bowron report
170 pharmaceuticals used annually in excess
of this amount.
Terrestrial and Atmospheric Exposure
Minor route for PPCPs in contrast to
pesticides. The majority of PPCPs introduced
into the environment is undoubtedly into
aquatic systems; the terrestrial environment
receives only a secondary input. Although the
primary source for terrestrial exposure is proba-
bly from disposal of biosolids from STWs and
from animal wastes both applied to land and
stored in open-air pits (waste lagoons), other
possible sources for veterinary pharmaceuticals
result from animal dips and direct deposition
of dung from medicated animals. To date,
most attention has been focused on the appli-
cation of animal wastes to land, primarily
because of the suspected introduction of
antibiotics and nutrients, not because of
PPCPs other than veterinary antibiotics, which
are used in comparatively smaller amounts. It
should be noted, however, that even though
the introduction of veterinary antibiotics into
the environment, both terrestrial and aquatic,
via animal wastes is widely discussed, the topic
has experienced little attention in the peer-
reviewed literature (41,42). This topic also
relates directly to the human health concern of
introducing/promoting antibiotic resistance in
bacteria, both native to and introduced into
the environment [see section on "Antibiotics"
and Williams and Heymann (43)].
The polar nature of the majority of
drugs/metabolites leads to facile leaching from
land disposal areas into groundwater or wet
weather runoff into surface waters. The
remainder (largely those designed to pass the
blood-brain barrier) have lipophilic character,
rendering them prone to bioconcentration
from consumption of water or bioaccumula-
tion from consumption of tissue.
Dung-feeding fauna such as birds, beetles,
worms, flies, and microorganisms could experi-
ence immediate exposure to excreted terrestrial
veterinary pharmaceuticals and metabolites.
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 107, Supplement 6 * December 1999
925

----- Page 20 (native) -----
DAUGHTON AND TERNES
These organisms in turn could suffer effects
themselves from exposure or, alternatively,
pass on accumulated residues further up the
food chain. All other routes of dispersal to
other environmental compartments also play
roles, with the distinct exception of direct
volatilization, because nearly all PPCPs, with
the exception of medical gases and fragrances
in contrast with many other anthropogenic
compounds are polar or otherwise nonvolatile.
The major volatile pharmaceuticals are the
inhalable anesthetics (e.g., halothane); these
hydrofluoroalkanes are known to oxidize in
the atmosphere, like the conventional
hydro[chloro]fluorocarbon refrigerants, to
yield the highly persistent, toxic, and ubiqui-
tous product trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). This
source ofTFA is believed to be minor (44).
Drug Classes and
Environmental Occurrences
Hormones/Mimics
Potentialfor receptor interaction may not
be rare. An excellent overview of hormone
systems is given by the Endocrine Disruptor
Screening and Testing Advisory Committee
(EDSTAC) (45). Steroids were the first phys-
iologic compounds to be reported in sewage
effluent (46-49) and as such were the first
pharmaceuticals to capture the attention of
environmental scientists. Estrogenic drugs,
primarily synthetic xenoestrogens, are used
extensively in estrogen-replacement therapy
and in oral contraceptives, in veterinary med-
icine for growth enhancement, and in athletic
performance enhancement. A special issue of
The Science ofthe Total Environment (50) is
devoted to drugs (especially hormones) as
pollutants in the aquatic environment.
Although the synthetic oral contraceptive
(170x-ethynylestradiol) occurs generally at low
concentration (< 7 ng/L) in POTW effluent,
it is still suspected, in combination with the
steroidal estrogens 173-estradiol and estrone
[30], of causing vitellogenin production
(feminization) in male fish. Feminization is a
phenomenon first observed for fish in sewage
treatment lagoons in the mid-1980s (26). An
overview of pharmaceutical hormones in the
environment is presented by Arcand-Hoy
et al. (51). The estrogenic activity of various
waters (from sewage to drinking water) has
been shown to vary dramatically, spanning six
orders of magnitude. Some other widely used
synthetic hormone modulators include
Proscar/Propecia (finasteride: an androgen
hormone inhibitor) and various thyroxine
analogs (thyroid hormones); nothing is
known of the environmental fates of these
compounds. In general, the lipophilicity of
these hormones is sufficiently great that at
least a large portion are removed via sorptive
processes in sewage treatment (52,53) and
therefore partition to the sludge; but even the
low concentrations that remain in the efflu-
ents may be capable of exerting physiologic
effects in aquatic biota.
In addition to these synthetic steroids and
xenoestrogens is a suite of naturally occurring
estrogen hormones, for example, phytoestro-
gens such as the complex series of leguminous
isoflavonoids, including genistein, daidzein,
and glycitein in soy. Further complicating
the picture are a host of newly suspected
endocrine-disrupting compounds (EDCs),
more recently referred to as hormonally active
agents (HAAs) by the NRC (29), which have
gained attention in the last few years, primarily
as a result of the 1996 publication Our Stolen
Future by Colburn et al. (54). These inadver-
tent EDCs include such commonly recognized
industrial pollutants and products as halo-
genated dioxins/furans, PCBs, organohalogen
pesticides, phthalates, and bisphenol A.
The issue of screening many of the major
commercial chemicals (over 87,000 total) for
endocrine disruption potential has been for-
malized with the creation of the EDSTAC,
which had been charged by the U.S. EPA
with the task of implementing a screening
and testing program by August 1999 (45).
The Chemical Manufacturers Association
(CMA) also has launched an intensive health
effects investigation for over 3,000 high-vol-
ume chemicals (called the Health and
Environmental Research Initiative) (55). It is
significant, however, that pharmaceuticals are
not specifically targeted by the EDSTAC (or
the CMA) in its tiered screening program that
focuses on pesticides, commodity chemicals,
naturally occurring nonsteroidal estrogens
(phytoestrogens and mycotoxins), food addi-
tives, cosmetics, nutritional supplements, and
representative mixtures (for possible synergis-
tic effects). Even though the strategy gives top
priority to "chemicals with widespread expo-
sure at the national level" (55), PPCPs are not
specially targeted. It is also significant that the
screening strategy will initially focus on only
the three primary hormone systems-estro-
gen, androgen, and thyroid-hormone
systems of relatively unknown importance to
invertebrates (45).
A controversial hypothesis regarding
multiple toxicants (sharing a common mode
of action), when each is present at a low level,
is that of synergism. Evidence of synergism
among estrogenic mimics (where the effect
can be elicited at orders-of-magnitude lower
concentration than predicted by additive
action) was reported by Arnold et al. (56).
This study created much controversy by pur-
porting synergistic action of low-level chemi-
cal mixtures. Subsequent studies by Gaido et
al. (57) and others rebutted this hypothesis.
They did not find any evidence of synergism
in mixtures of mild estrogenic pollutants.
McLachlan (58) later withdrew the article by
Arnold et al. (56), but the issue has not been
put to rest, especially given Arnold's other
publications on this subject including Arnold
et al. (59) and references cited therein.
Another controversial issue is that of inverted
(U-shaped) dose-response in which toxicity
diminution tracks lower concentrations down
to a certain level, at which point toxicity
again increases. Consequently, higher dose
effects might not be useful in predicting the
type or magnitude of effects from lower doses
(29). This unresolved issue, coupled with the
controversy of whether toxicity thresholds
necessarily exist, could severely impede
EDSTAC's ability to reach its objective
because the concentration ranges that must
be investigated would be greatly expanded.
Low molecular weight nonpeptidyl
molecules can mimic hormones. Another
subclass of hormonelike substances includes
those that are being purposefully designed to
mimic the activity of therapeutically signifi-
cant hormones. A long-sought objective has
been to obviate the need for hormone-
replacement therapy (e.g., insulin) by design-
ing small synthetic (nonpeptidyl) molecules
that mimic the hormone's effect yet can be
ingested orally, taken up by the gut, and
remain stable for a sufficiently long period of
time in the blood. The first report of a
"designer" hormone mimic (60,61), a poly-
benzimidazole that activates the receptor for a
cytokine that regulates white blood cell pro-
duction, perhaps portends the advent of
many synthetic hormone mimics in therapeu-
tic medicine. If the finding can be general-
ized, it could mean that the possible routes of
hormone disruption by simple molecules
could extend beyond that of the estrogen/
androgen system.
With the exception of estrogenic mimics,
the possibility of disrupting the activity of pro-
teinaceous hormones by lower molecular
weight anthropogenic chemicals has been held
in low regard. This view has been based on the
fact that a relatively large, complex proteina-
ceous molecule (the hormone) neatly "fits"
within the complex three-dimensional domain
of its target receptor, whereas in contrast a
much smaller nonproteinaceous molecule
would have little to offer in terms of recogni-
tion specificity. It has been believed that the
complexity of larger proteins such as insulin
was required to enable recognition by the cor-
responding receptors; smaller compounds sim-
ply did not convey enough three-dimensional
information to have high-binding constants
for one or multiple receptors.
The report by Tian et al. (60) demonstrates
for the first time that a relatively small non-
peptide molecule can bind to a receptor nor-
mally dedicated to a proteinaceous hormone.
While this has high therapeutic significance
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 107, Supplement 6 * December 1999
926

----- Page 21 (native) -----
PHARMACEUTICALS IN THE ENVIRONMENT
(this research might catalyze concerted
attempts to develop the first protein-
mimicking and therefore perhaps hormone-
mimicking low molecular weight drugs), it also
alludes to the possibility that existing anthro-
pogenic compounds might have a greater
chance of interacting with hormone receptors
than was previously believed. Although the
synthetic substance was three to six orders of
magnitude less potent, its ability to bind to the
receptor was undisputed (in the mouse in vitro
and, more importantly, in vivo).
Antibiotics
In addition to pathogen resistance, genotoxi-
city may be a concern. A large body of litera-
ture exists on antibiotics in the environment.
Veterinary and animal husbandry, especially
aquaculture, usage plays a major role in their
introduction into the environment. In one
study of hospital effluent, fluoroquinolones
was the chemical class contributing the major
portion to overall DNA toxicity (62); cipro-
floxacin, for example, was identified at 3-87
pg/L. Hirsch et al. (41) analyzed German
STW effluents and groundwaters/surface
waters for 18 antibiotics representing macro-
lides, sulfonamides, penicillins, and tetracy-
clines. Although the penicillins (susceptible to
hydrolysis) and the tetracyclines (can precipi-
tate with calcium and similar cations) were not
found, the others were detected in the micro-
gram per liter range. Indeed, the rampant,
widespread (and sometimes indiscriminate) use
of antibiotics, coupled with their subsequent
release into the environment, is the leading
proposed cause of accelerated/spreading resis-
tance among bacterial pathogens, which is
exacerbated by the fact that resistance is main-
tained even in the absence of continued selec-
tive pressure (an irreversible occurrence).
Sufficiently high concentrations could also
have acute effects on bacteria. Such exposures
could easily lead to altered microbial commu-
nity structures in nature and thereby affect the
higher food chain. Their use in aquaculture
results in eventual human consumption. For a
discussion of promotion of antibiotic resis-
tance, see the policy article by Witte (63).
Hartmann et al. (62) propose that genotoxic-
ity in hospital effluent may result more from
antibiotics than from antineoplastics.
Recently, a number of stream surveys
documented the significant prevalence of
native bacteria that display resistance to a
wide array of antibiotics including vanco-
mycin (64). Isolates from wild geese near
Chicago, Illinois, are reported to be resistant
to ampicillin, tetracycline, penicillin, and ery-
thromycin (65). All these reports could sim-
ply indicate that the natural occurrence of
antibiotic resistence in native bacterial popu-
lations is much higher than expected or that
these bacteria are being selected for by the
uncontrolled release of antibiotics into the
environment. If the latter is true then, exclud-
ing the significance of antibiotics themselves
in the environment, their occurrence can be
viewed as marking or indicating the possible
presence of other PPCPs.
Blood Lipid Regulators
Fibrates-high usage. Fibric acid metabo-
lites-ubiquitous, persistent pollutants.
Clofibric acid was the first prescription drug
(actually an SRS) reported in a sewage efflu-
ent (37,39), and it continues to be one of the
most frequently reported PPCPs in monitor-
ing studies. Clofibric acid (2-[41-chlorophe-
noxy-2-methyl propanoic acid), the active
metabolite from a series of widely used blood
lipid regulators, and which also happens to be
structurally related to the phenylalkanoic acid
herbicide mecoprop (the methylphenoxy
structural analog), has captured much atten-
tion from investigators in Europe. Stan et al.
(22) first reported clofibric acid in Berlin tap
water at concentrations between 10 and 165
ng/L. Heberer and Stan (66) found clofibric
acid at levels up to 4 pg/L in groundwater
under a sewage treatment farm; they also
found clofibric acid concentrations up to 270
ng/L in drinking water samples. They con-
cluded that it is not removed by sewage/water
treatment processes.
Buser et al. (67) report finding clofibric
acid in various Swiss waters ranging from
rural to urban lakes. Concentrations ranged
from 1-9 ng/L (ppt), whereas the parallel
concentrations for mecoprop were higher at
8-45 ng/L; little of either compound was
found in a relatively remote mountain lake,
indicating no atmospheric deposition.
Because this drug is not manufactured in
Switzerland, its route of introduction into the
environment had to be through medical use
and subsequent excretion/disposal. Although
these concentrations are very low, they are
significant in that they are similar to the con-
centrations found for any of the conventional
ubiquitous and persistent pollutants, some-
times referred to as persistent organic pollu-
tants (POPs) or persistent bioaccumulative
toxicants (PBTs) such as lindane [see Jones
and de Voogt (68) for an overview]. In one
of the lakes studied, Buser et al. (67) calcu-
lated steady-state amounts of clofibric acid to
be roughly 19 kg (with export and import
amounts balancing each other). Perhaps more
significantly, they also found amounts of
clofibric acid up to 7.8 ng/L in the North
Sea; the parallel concentrations of mecoprop
in the same North Sea samples were lower,
up to only 2.7 ng/L, indicating that meco-
prop was less persistent than clofibric acid.
Stumpf et al. (24) and Ternes (18)
reported bezafibrate, gemfibrozil, and clofibric/
fenofibric acids in river waters at the
nanogram per liter level. Stumpf et al. (69)
reported that the removal efficiencies from
Brazilian STWs for clofibric/fenofibric acids,
bezafibrate, and gemfibrozil ranged from only
6-50%, verifying extremely limited degrada-
tion for these compounds. This chemical class
is ubiquitous because the daily human dosages
are generally high (grams per day). Buser et al.
(67) concluded that the concentrations seen in
urban Swiss and German rivers, coupled with
essentially the same concentrations in the
North Sea, lead to an annual input of 50-100
tons of clofibric acid into the North Sea. The
concentration of clofibric acid in the environ-
ment is more a function of dilution than of
degradation. Clofibric acid is the most widely
and routinely reported drug found in open
waters. It would be expected that its occur-
rence in other parts of the world would parallel
these studies.
Nonopioid Analgesics/Nonsteroidal
Anti-Inflammatory Drugs
Stumpf et al. (24) were the first to identify
diclofenac, ibuprofen, acetylsalicylic acid, and
ketoprofen in sewage and river water. Ternes
(18) reported levels of diclofenac, indometa-
cine, ibuprofen, naproxen, ketoprofen, and
phenazone in POTW effluent exceeding 1
pg/L; all these except ketoprofen were also
found in surface waters at concentrations sev-
eralfold lower. In another study, Ternes et al.
(70) reported average concentrations of
acetylsalicylic acid generally less than 1 pg/L
in most POTW effluents as well as less than
0.14 pg/L in rivers. They also reported sali-
cylic acid concentrations of 54 pg/L in
POTW influents, with two other acetylsali-
cylic metabolites, gentisic acid (4.6 pg/L) and
o-hydroxyhippuric acid (6.8 pg/L). While low
levels (0.5 pg/L) of salicylic acid appeared in
the effluents, no detectable amounts of the
metabolites could be found. Ternes et al. (70)
also found naproxen in all POTW effluents
examined and in river waters (-0.05-0.4
,g/L); two veterinary NSAIDs, meclofenamic
and tofenamic acids, were not detectable in
any river sample. In their screening of waters
in Berlin, Heberer et al. (23) found that the
most prevalent drugs, other than clofibric
acid, were the NSAIDs diclofenac, ibuprofen,
and propyphenazone. In groundwater from a
drinking water plant, they found diclofenac,
ibuprofen, and N-methylphenacetin (from
phenacetin) (23). In the influent to Swiss
STWs, Buser et al. (71) found diclofenac at
concentrations of 0.5-1.8 pg/L, whereas the
concentrations in the respective effluents were
only moderately reduced (at most 50%). In
the receiving water (Swiss lakes/rivers), they
found 11-310 ng/L but only 1-12 ng/L in
exiting waters. They concluded that photoly-
sis was the major cause of the diminished
concentrations of diclofenac in surface waters
Environmental HeaJth Perspectives * Vol 1 07, Supplement 6 * December 1999
927

----- Page 22 (native) -----
DAUGHTON AND TERNES
(71). Buser et al. (72) showed that ibuprofen,
while present in influents at 1-3.3 pg/L, was
easily degraded to yield low effluent concen-
trations (nanograms/liter) in contrast to other
NSAIDs, which were more refractory. This
study is also one of the few that examined
the enantiomeric selectivity in the degrada-
tion of the parent optical isomers as well as
the production of metabolites.
Bea-Blockers/f2-SympathomimetiCs
Hirsch et al. (73) and Ternes (18) identified
the beta-blockers metoprolol and propra-
nolol, with lesser amounts of betaxolol, biso-
prolol, and nadolol, in POTW effluent. Only
metoprolol and propranolol were found in
surface waters at concentrations just above
the limit of detection. The P2-sympath-
omimetics (bronchodilators) terbutalin and
salbutamol (albuterol in the United States),
but rarely clenbuterol and fenoterol, were
detected in POTW effluent and only at low
concentrations, less than 0.2 pg/L. They were
rarely seen in surface waters. It may be signifi-
cant to note that medications delivered by
inhalers could result in portions of the dose
being deposited externally because of
improper dosing technique.
Fenfluramine (N-ethyl-a-methyl-3-[triflu-
oromethyl] benzene ethanamine hydro-
chloride), known as Pondimin in addition to
other brand names, is a sympathomimetic
amine, which was used as a popular diet
(anorectic) drug and was removed from the
U.S. market in 1998 by the FDA because of
heart valve damage. Although no one has
looked for fenfluramine in sewage, it is known
to enhance the release of serotonin (3-(2-
aminoethyl)indol-5-ol or 5-hydroxytrypta-
mine creatinine sulfate [5-HT]); in the
crayfish, 5-HT in turn triggers release of
ovary-stimulating hormone, resulting in larger
oocytes with enhanced amounts of vitellin
(consequences unknown) (74). Similarly, in
fiddler crabs, fenfluramine at a dose of 125
nmol stimulates (through 5-HT) the produc-
tion of gonad-stimulating hormone, which
accelerates testicular maturation (75).
Antdepressant/Obsessive-Compulsive
Regulators
Subtle but possibly profound effects on non-
target [aquatic] species. Selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitors (SSRls) are a major class
of widely prescribed antidepressants that
includes Prozac, Zoloft, Luvox, and Paxil.
These drugs enjoy widespread and heavy use.
One of the few series ofstudies reported in the
literature that addresses the effects of drugs on
nontarget organisms (albeit not the intent of
the studies) was performed in a quest for more
effective spawning inducers for economically
important bivalves (76). Fong's studies and
those of other physiologists studying the
function of serotonin in a wide array of
aquatic creatures could prove highly signifi-
cant in any discussion of the importance of
low levels of pharmaceuticals in the environ-
ment. Fong's work is perhaps the most signifi-
cant to date for showing the potential for
dramatic physiologic effects on nontarget
species (in this case invertebrates) by low
(ppb) concentrations of pharmaceuticals.
Serotonin is a biogenic amine common in
both vertebrate and invertebrate nervous sys-
tems. SSRIs increase serotonin neurotransmis-
sion by inhibiting its reuptake at the synapses
by inhibiting the transporter enzymes. In
addition to playing a key role in mammalian
neurotransmission, serotonin is involved in a
wide array of physiologic regulatory roles in
molluscs, among most other creatures. For
bivalves, reproductive functions including
spawning, oocyte maturation, and parturition
are regulated by serotonin, (76). Serotonin
controls a wide spectrum of additional behav-
iors and reflexes in molluscs, including heart-
beat rhythm, feeding/biting, swimming motor
patterns, beating of cilia, and induction of lar-
val metamorphosis (77). It also stimulates
release of various neurohormones in crus-
taceans (hyperglycemic hormone, red pig-
ment-dispersing hormone, neurodepressing
hormone, and molt-inhibiting hormone) and
ovarian maturation (78).
It has long been known that serotonin at
concentrations of 10A to 10-3 M (-0.18-1.8
g/L) induces spawning in bivalves. Some
commercial farmers make use of this by
adding serotonin to induce spawning. Fong
(76) found that Prozac (fluoxetine) and
Luvox (fluvoxamine) are the most potent
inducers ever found, eliciting spawning
behavior in zebra mussels at aqueous concen-
trations many orders of magnitude lower
than serotonin. Fluoxetine elicited significant
spawning in male mussels at concentrations
of 10-7 M (-150 pg/L); females were an order
of magnitude less sensitive at 10-6 M.
Fluvoxamine was the most potent of the
SSRIs, eliciting significant spawning in male
mussels, at 10-9 M (40.318 pg/L); females
were two orders of magnitude less sensitive, at
10-7 M. In males, spawning was complete in
the first hour, while females were slower
(within 2 hr). Paxil (paroxetine) was the least
potent of these three SSRIs, eliciting male
spawning, but to a lesser degree, at 10-
M,
and having no inducing effect on females at
any concentration. It should be noted that
Fong states that the evidence is not clear
whether these compounds are indeed acting
as SSRIs, or via some other mechanism. It is
also unknown how these compounds are
taken up by molluscs (76).
In another study, Fong et al. (79) showed
that fluvoxamine induces significant parturition
in fingernail dams at 1 nM; 1 nM fluvoxamine
also potentiated the effect of 10 pM 5-HT by
almost 5-fold. Paroxetine was less potent,
requiring a concentration of 10 pM to effect
significant parturition. In contrast, even at
concentrations of 100 pM, fluoxetine dis-
played no effect, although it was capable at 5
pM of potentiating 5-HT at concentrations
that were otherwise subthreshold. It is inter-
esting that the order of potency for inducing
parturition in clams differs from the order for
induction of spawning in mussels (above).
This points to the complexity of considering
any approach involving extrapolations from
one species to another or from one drug to
another within a given class.
In crustaceans, Kulkarni et al. (74) found
that fluoxetine significantly potentiates the
effect of 5-HT in crayfish, enhancing the
release of ovary-stimulating hormone, which
results in larger oocytes with enhanced
amounts of vitellin; any ecologic consequences
of higher vitellin protein levels are unknown.
Similarly, in fiddler crabs, fluoxetine at a dose
of 125 nmol stimulates (through 5-HT) the
production of gonad-stimulating hormone,
which accelerates testicular maturation (75).
It is clear that aquatic life can be exquisitely
sensitive to at least some of this class of com-
pounds. Although some SSRIs are extremely
potent, others have almost no effect, which
possibly makes the approach of assessing
ecologic risk on a class-by-class basis infeasible.
Concentration of SSRIs plays a compli-
cated role with respect to effects. For exam-
ple, Couper and Leise (77) found that while
injected fluoxetine induced significant meta-
morphosis in a gastropod, 10-4 M induced
less metamorphosis than 10-6 M. Simple
extrapolations of effects from higher concen-
trations do not necessarily have any relevance
to effects at lower concentrations.
The potential for SSRIs to elicit subtle
effects on aquatic life is further extended by
serotonin reuptake mechanisms that also are a
factor in snails and squids (76), particularly
in the regulation of aggression (80). Yet
another example of a subtle effect that would
go unnoticed is the fighting behavior of lob-
sters, in which serotonin causes behavior
reversal by stimulating subordinates to engage
in fighting against dominants by reducing
their propensity to retreat (80).
Antiepileptics
Antiepileptics are ubiquitous andprevalent
due to poor STW removal. Carbamazepine
was the drug detected most frequently and in
highest concentrations during a study by
Ternes (18). This drug was detected in all
POTWs and receiving waters, with a maxi-
mum concentration of 6.3 pig/L. Ternes
hypothesized that the ubiquitous occurrence
resulted from the very low removal efficiency
from POTWs, which was calculated to be
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 107, Supplement 6 * December 1999
928

----- Page 23 (native) -----
PHARMACEUTICALS IN THE ENVIRONMENT
only 7%. Sacher et al. (81) found carba-
mazepine levels in the river Rhine in Germany
up to 0.90 pg/L and always above 0.1 pg/L.
Antneoplastics
Antineoplastics are highly [genoltoxic
compounds, primarily from hospitals, with
poor removalfrom STWs. Antineoplastic
agents, antitumor agents primarily used only
within hospitals for chemotherapy, are found
sporadically and in a range of concentrations,
probably because only small amounts are
introduced to STWs via domestic sewage
because of their long-lived physiologic reten-
tion. These compounds act as nonspecific
alkylating agents (i.e., specific receptors are
not involved) and therefore have the potential
to act as either acute or long-felt stressors
(mutagens/carcinogens/teratogens/embry-
otoxins) in any organism. The fact that two
oxazaphosphorines, ifosfamide and cyclo-
phosphamide, were found in certain effluents
in the low microgram-per-liter range indicates
that these highly toxic compounds, which are
probably refractory to microbial degradation
at POTWs (82), can find their way into the
environment. Indeed, Steger-Hartmann et al.
(82) found levels of cyclophosphamide in
sewage influent from servicing hospitals rang-
ing from undetectable to 143 ng/L; the levels
in the effluent reached 17 ng/L.
Additional evidence pointing to the
refractory nature of ifosfamide is presented by
Kummerer et al. (83), who found that con-
centrations of ifosfamide in hospital effluent
matched the predicted values of up to 1.91
pg/L; also the concentrations in the influent
and effluent of POTWs that serviced
chemotherapy hospitals were essentially
unchanged (influent/effluent maximum, 43
ng/L; median, 6.5-9.3 ng/L). Kiimmerer
et al. (83) found ifosfamide to be totally
refractory to removal by POTWs and to
totally resist alteration during a 2-month
bench-scale POTW simulation.
Another class of antineoplastics, the
platinates, includes carboplatin and cisplatin.
Although the stability of these compounds in
sewage systems is unknown, Kummerer et al.
(84) calculated that if they were present in
hospital sewage effluents as the intact parent
compound, they could be present at daily
average concentrations of up to 600 ng/L (on
the basis of total platinum). Although the
majority of the dose for these compounds is
excreted in the urine in the first day, a large
amount (-30%) resides in the body and is
slowly excreted over a period of years and
therefore could be excreted to residential
sewage systems. Falter and Wilken (85)
showed that while these compounds are diffi-
cult to determine analytically, their potential
to remain in the aqueous phase after sewage
treatment is high.
White and Rasmussen (86), in the most
detailed overview to date on the genotoxicity
of wastewaters, elaborate that while the geno-
toxic potency of industrial wastewaters is
often the highest, the overall loading of geno-
toxic compounds to surface waters is far
greater, up to several orders of magnitude,
from municipal treatment plants. They pre-
sent a striking correlation between the occur-
rence of direct-acting mutagens in surface
waters and the human population served by
the discharging STWs. This correlation
points to the activities/metabolism of
humans, not industrial activities, as the origin
for these mutagens. A number of possible
sources for the mutagens are discussed, an
obvious one ofwhich is antineoplastic drugs.
These data point to antineoplastics as a
class of drugs of potential concern for envi-
ronmental effects, not just for their acute tox-
icity but perhaps more for their ability to
effect subtle genetic changes, the cumulative
impact of which over time can lead to more
profound ecologic change. Hospitals are the
major source of genotoxic drugs. POTWs
that service hospitals, especially multiple hos-
pitals, are likely candidates for releasing these
chemicals into surface waters.
Impotence Drugs
This class ofdrugs displays widespread use,
new modes ofaction, and unknown effects on
nontarget organisms. Even though a number
of drugs from various chemical classes have
been used over the years for treating impo-
tence, the emergence of Viagra (sildenafil cit-
rate) has focused tremendous attention on this
market. The significance of this therapeutic
class of drugs, with new ones awaiting FDA
approval, is that they all tend to have distinct
modes of action, most of which differ from
those of traditional drugs. While potential
effects on wildlife are totally unknown, the fact
that Viagra, for example, works by inhibiting a
phosphodiesterase responsible for regulating
the concentration of cyclic guanosine mono-
phosphate, which indirectly relaxes muscles
and increases blood flow (87), gives cause for
concern regarding the disruption of this com-
mon phosphodiesterase in unintended target
species. Impotence drugs will prove to have
very high usage rates, especially since they are
one of the most common drugs available with-
out prescription over the Internet, yielding
high potential for environmental exposure and
possibly nontarget effects.
TranqulAizers
Little is known about possible occurrence of
tranquilizers. Ternes (18) reported diazepam
in almost half of the POTWs but only in low
concentrations of less than 0.04 pg/L; it could
not be detected in surface waters. Genicola
(88) reports diazepam in the groundwater
from a monitoring well at a Superfund site
near Atlantic City, New Jersey. Concentrations
were approximately 10-40 pg/L and probably
originated in a landfill in which pharmaceutical
manufacturers disposed ofchemicals.
Retinoids
High usage rates andprofound activity in
amphibians lends cause for concern.
Retinoids, low molecular weight lipophilic
derivatives of vitamin A, can have profound
effects upon the development of various
embryonic systems (89), especially amphibians
in which retinoic acid receptors have been
hypothesized to play a role in frog deformities.
Although naturally occurring, retinoids have
been used for a number of years for a wide
array of medical conditions including skin dis-
orders (e.g., Accutane [isotretinoin] for acne),
antiaging treatments (e.g., Retin-A [tretinoin]
for skin wrinkles), and cancer (e.g., Vesanoid
[tretinoin] for leukemia). Isotretinoin (13-cis-
retinoic acid) is related to both retinoic acid
and retinol (vitamin A). Tretinoin is among
the top 200 prescribed drugs in the United
States. Methoprene, an insecticidal synthetic
retinoic acid mimic, is photolabile and yields
numerous photo-products, some ofwhich also
elicit strong retinoic acid activity (90).
Although retinoic acids would also be expected
to be photolabile (and therefore not persis-
tent), their products may also still possess
receptor activity.
Diagnostic Contrast Media
Diagnostic contrast media have very high
usage rates, display considerable persis-
tence, show no evidencefor mineralization,
and have low physiologic activity. Detailed
X-ray images of soft tissues are routinely cap-
tured by the use of contrast media. Some of
the more widely used members of contrast
media are highly substituted and sterically
hindered amidated, iodinated aromatics such
as diatrizoate and iopromide (91), which are
used worldwide at annual rates exceeding
3,000 tons. Kalsch (91) found these com-
pounds to be quite resistant to transformation
in STWs and in river waters. When transfor-
mations were effected, they merely termi-
nated with unidentified resistant metabolites.
Ternes et al. (92) recently reported significant
amounts of iopromide in rivers.
In municipal STW effluents, Ternes et al.
(92) found concentrations as high as 15 pg/L
(iopamidol) and 11 pg/L (iopromide). In an
STW close to Frankfurt/Main, they found
two other contrast agents, diatrizoate and
iomeprol, at concentrations up to 8.7 pg/L, as
well as iothalamic acid and ioxithalamic acid
in the nanogram-per-liter range. In rivers and
streams, five iodinated diagnostics were
repeatedly detected, with median values up to
0.49 pg/L for iopamidol and up to 0.23 pg/L
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 107, Supplement 6 * December 1999
929

----- Page 24 (native) -----
DAUGHTON AND TERNES
for diatrizoate. Isolated maximum values above
100 pg/L for diatrizoate indicated that rela-
tively high local concentrations can occur,
especially in small streams containing a high
percentage of STW discharges. Maximum
groundwater concentrations for iodinated con-
trast agents ranged up to 2.4 ,ug/L and may
well represent a worst case with respect to
occurrence of pharmaceuticals in native waters.
In Germany alone, individual contrast agents
can experience annual usage rates of 100
tonnes. Such high usage, coupled with ineffi-
cient human metabolism (95% unmetabo-
lized) and ineffective elimination of iodinated
contrast agents by STWs, can lead to very high
environmental accumulations and persistence.
Despite these negative attributes, contrast
agents have no bioaccumulation potential and
low toxicity (93); Steger-Hartmann et al. (93)
also found no acute toxicity for bacteria
(Vibrio fisheri), algae (Scenedesmus subspica-
tus), crustaceaens (Daphnia), and fish (Danio
rerio, Leuciscus idus melanotus) exposed to
no more than 10 g/L of iohexol, iotrolan,
diatrizaote, or iopromide.
Personal Care Products in the
Environment
For the purposes of this review, personal care
products are defined as chemicals marketed
for direct use by the consumer (excluding
OTC medication with documented physio-
logic effects) and having intended end uses
primarily on the human body (products not
intended for ingestion, with the exception of
food supplements). In general, these chemi-
cals are directed at altering odor, appearance,
touch, or taste while not displaying signifi-
cant biochemical activity. Most of these
chemicals are used as the active ingredients or
preservatives in cosmetics, toiletries, or fra-
grances. They are not used for treatment of
disease, but some may be intended to prevent
diseases (e.g., sunscreen agents). In contrast to
drugs, almost no attention has been given to
the environmental fate or effects of personal
care products-the focus has traditionally
been on the effects from intended use on
human health. Many of these substances are
used in very large quantities frequently more
than recommended.
Table 3. Personal care products produced in Germany
(1993).
Product category
Tons produced
Bath additives
162,300
Shampoos, hair tonic
103,900
Skin care products
75,500
Hair sprays, setting lotions, hair dyes
71,000
Oral hygiene products
69,300
Soaps
62,600
Sun screens
7,900
Perfumes, aftershaves
6,600
Total
559,100
Personal care products differ from pharma-
ceuticals in that large amounts can be directly
introduced to the environment. For example,
these products can be released directly into
recreational waters or volatilized into the air
(e.g., musks). Because of this direct release they
can bypass possible degradation in POTWs.
Also, in contrast to pharmaceuticals, less is
known about the effects of this broad and
diverse class of chemicals on nontarget organ-
isms, especially aquatic organisms. Data are
also limited on the unexpected effects on
humans. For example, common sunscreen
ingredients, 2-phenylbenzimidazole-5-sulfonic
acid and 2-phenylbenzimidazole, can effect
DNA breakage when exposed to UV-B (94).
The quantities of personal care products
produced commercially can be very large. For
example, in Germany alone the combined
annual output for eight separate categories
has been estimated (95) at 559,000 tons for
1993 (Table 3). A few examples are given
below of common personal care products that
are ubiquitous pollutants and that may
possess substantial bioactivity.
Fragrances (musks) are ubiquitous, persis-
tent, bioaccumulativepollutants that are some-
times highly toxic; amino musk transformation
products are toxicologically significant.
Synthetic musks comprise a series of struc-
turally similar chemicals (which emulate the
odor but not the structure of the expensive,
natural product from the Asian musk deer)
used in a broad spectrum of fragranced con-
sumer items, both as fragrance and as fixative.
Included are the older, synthetic nitro musks
(e.g., ambrette, musk ketone, musk xylene,
and the lesser known musks moskene and
tibetene) and a variety of newer, synthetic
polycyclic musks that are best known by their
individual trade names or acronyms. The poly-
cyclic musks (substituted indanes and tetralins
are the major musks used today, accounting
for almost two-thirds of worldwide produc-
tion) and especially the inexpensive nitro
musks (nitrated aromatics accounting for
about one-third of worldwide production) are
used in nearly every commercial fragrance for-
mulation (cosmetics, detergents, toiletries) and
most other personal care products with fra-
grance; they are also used as food additives and
in cigarettes and fish baits (96).
The nitro musks are under scrutiny in a
number of countries because of their persis-
tence and possible adverse environmental
impacts and therefore are beginning to be
phased out in some countries. Musk xylol has
proved carcinogenic in a rodent bioassay and
is significantly absorbed through human skin;
from exposure to combined sources, a person
could absorb 240 pg/day (97). The human
lipid concentration of various musks parallels
that of other bioaccumulative pollutants such
as PCBs (98). Worldwide production of
synthetic musks in 1988 was 7000 tons (96);
worldwide production for nitro musks in
1993 was 1,000 tons, two-thirds of which
were musk xylene (99).
Synthetic musks first began to be identi-
fied in environmental samples almost 20 years
ago (100,101). By 1981, Yamagishi et al.
(100) had identified musk xylene and musk
ketone in gold fish (Carassius auratus langs-
dorfii) in Japanese rivers and not much later
(101) in river water, sewage, marine mussels
(Mytilus edulis), and oysters (Crassosterea
gigas). Yamagishi's studies comprised the first
comprehensive monitoring efforts, identify-
ing musk xylene and musk ketone in freshwa-
ter fish, marine shellfish, river water, and
STW waters. Musk xylene was found in all
samples, and musk ketone was found in 80%
of the 74 samples analyzed. Concentrations
in STW effluents ranged from 25 to 36 ng/L
for musk xylene and from 140 to 410 ng/L
for musk ketone. Concentrations of musk
xylene in fish muscle were in the tens of parts
per billion, whereas those for musk ketone
were less than 10 pg/kg, with highest values
occurring in fish downstream of STWs. In
contrast, for shellfish the concentrations were
lower, between 1 and 5.3 pg/kg, presumably
because of their lower lipid contents. In river
water, musk xylene occurred in all samples,
whether upstream or downstream of STWs
and ranged between 1 and 23 ng/L; those of
musk ketone were generally in the same
range, but in distinct contrast they were not
detectable in upstream samples.
Geyer et al. (102) have published an excel-
lent review on residues of nitro musk fra-
grances in fish and mussels as well as in breast
milk and human lipids and the current eco-
toxicologic and toxicologic knowledge for
these personal care products. Residues of
musk xylene and musk ketone found in the
fillet of freshwater fish (e.g., pike, eel, brass,
Zander, rainbow trout) from rivers of North
Germany were between 10 and 350 pg/kg
lipid and 10 and 380 pg/kg lipid for musk
xylene and musk ketone, respectively. In mus-
sels (Mytilus edulis) 10-30 pg/kg lipid of both
fragrances were detected. In human breast
milk from German women, musk xylene and
musk ketone were detected between 10 and
240 mg/kg lipid (102). Recently, the litera-
ture has a number of additional publications
from Europe, especially Germany and
Switzerland. Rimkus et al. (103) give a brief
overview of the occurrence of musks in the
environment. Kafferlein et al. (99) and Geyer
et al. (102) published the most thorough
reviews to date on the occurrence (in the envi-
ronment and in personal care products), trans-
formation, and toxicology of the ubiquitous
musk xylene; these reviews summarize many
more occurrence studies (for musk xylene)
than mentioned here.
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 107, Supplement 6 * December 1999
930

----- Page 25 (native) -----
PHARMACEUTICALS IN THE ENVIRONMENT
Musks are refractory to biodegradation
(other than reduction of nitro musks to
amino derivatives), which explains why they
have been measured in water bodies through-
out the world (96). They also are very
lipophilic [octanol-water partition coeffi-
cients are similar to those for DDT and hexa-
chlorocyclohexane (104)] and therefore can
bioconcentrate/bioaccumulate (102,103).
Concern has been expressed regarding devel-
opmental toxicity in aquatic organisms. Musk
ambrette (2,6-dinitro-3-methoxy-4-tert-butyl
toluene) may play a role in damaging the
nervous system (105).
Draisci et al. (106) examined freshwater
fish in Italy and identified two of five targeted
polycyclic musks in most fish samples; a hexa-
hydro-hexamethylcyclopental-benzopyran
(HHCB, trade name Galaxolide) and an
acetylhexamethyltetralin (AHTN, trade name
Tonalide) were identified at levels ranging
from less than 4 ng/g (ppb) to 105 ng/g in fish
muscle tissue. In the Swiss river Glatt, Muller
et al. (98) identified Galaxolide, Tonalide, and
Celestolide (ADBI, 4-acetyl-6-tert-butyl-1,1-
dimethylindane) at concentrations of 136, 75,
and 3.2 ng/L, respectively; they also found the
nitro musks tibetene, ambrette, moskene,
ketone, and xylene at concentrations of 0.04,
<0.03, 0.08, 8.3, and 0.62 ng/L, respectively.
Eschke et al. (cited in 107) identified
Galaxolide, Tonalide, and Celestolide in the
fatty tissue of bream and perch from the Ruhr
River, Germany, at average concentrations
between 2.5 and 4.6 mg/kg (ppm), illustrating
the extreme bioaccumulation potential for
these compounds. Recently, Heberer et al.
(108) investigated the contamination of sur-
face waters in Berlin, Germany, (and vicinity)
receiving high percentages of treated sewage
and found maximum concentrations above 10
pg/L for the polycyclic musks Galaxolide,
Tonalide, and Celestolide.
Winkler et al. (104) measured musks in
31 particulate matter and water samples from
the Elbe River, Germany. In all particulate
matter samples, concentrations for musk
ketone were 4-22 ng/g, for Galaxolide
148-736 ng/g, and for Tonalide 194-770
ng/g; Celestolide was found at concentrations
of 4-43 ng/g in 23 of the particulate matter
samples. The values for the three most preva-
lent musks were within the same order of
magnitude as those for 15 polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons (PAHs) and exceeded those for
14 common polychlorinated organic pollu-
tants (only hexachlorobiphenyl [HCB] and
p,p'-DDT were of similar concentration).
Also found in all the 31 water samples were
musk ketone (2-10 ng/L), Galaxolide
(36-152 ng/L), and Tonalide (24-88 ng/L);
Celestolide was found only at 2-8 ng/L.
These higher values exceeded those for all the
polychlorinated organics and the PAHs. The
occurrences of individual musks are some-
times correlated as a result of their use as mix-
tures in commercial products. In Germany,
the nitro musks are being replaced by the
polycyclic musks, therefore resulting in lower
concentrations for musk ketone (104).
It is not surprising that musks have been
detected in air. Kallenborn et al. (109)
detected three polycyclic musks and two nitro
musks in Norwegian outdoor air samples.
The polycyclic musks were more prevalent.
Concentrations of all these musks ranged
from low picograms per cubic meter to hun-
dreds of picograms per cubic meter. The
most common was the polycyclic musk
Galaxolide, but the relative ratios among the
musks are a function of usage (which varies
among countries) and photolability.
Although the significance of the aquatic
toxicity of the nitro and polycyclic musks is
debatable [genotoxicity from the polycyclics
seems to not be a concern) (110), the
aminobenzene (reduced) versions of the nitro
musks can be highly toxic; these reduced
derivatives are undoubtedly created under the
anaerobic conditions of sewage sludge diges-
tion. Behecti et al. (111) tested the acute tox-
icity of four reduced analogs of musk xylene
on Daphnia magna. The p-aminodinitro
compound exhibited the most toxicity of the
four, with extremely low median effective
concentration (EC50) values averaging 0.25
pg/L (0.25 ppb).
Recently, the amino transformation prod-
ucts of nitro musks were identified in sewage
treatment effluent and in the Elbe River,
Germany. Gatermann et al. (96) identified
musk xylene and musk ketone together with
their amino derivatives 4- and 2-amino musk
xylenes and 2-amino musk ketone. In sewage
treatment influent, the concentrations of
musk xylene and musk ketone were 150 and
550 ng/L, respectively. In the effluent, their
concentrations dropped to 10 and 6 ng/L,
respectively. In contrast, although the amino
derivatives could not be detected in the influ-
ent, their concentrations in the effluents dra-
matically increased, showing extensive
transformation of the parent nitro musks: 2-
amino musk xylene (10 ng/L), 4-amino musk
xylene (34 ng/L), and 2-amino musk ketone
(250 ng/L). It was concluded that the amino
derivatives could be expected in sewage efflu-
ent at concentrations more than an order of
magnitude higher than the parent nitro
musks. In the Elbe, 4-amino musk xylene was
found at higher concentrations (1-9 ng/L)
than the parent compound.
Given that the amino nitro musk trans-
formation products a) are more water soluble
than the parent musks, b) still have significant
octanol-water partition coefficients (high bio-
concentration potential), and c) are more
toxic than the parent nitro musks, more
attention should be focused on these com-
pounds. Because synthetic musks are ubiqui-
tous, used in large quantities, introduced into
the environment almost exclusively via
treated sewage effluent, and are persistent and
bioconcentratable, they are prime candidates
for monitoring in both water and biota as
indicators for the presence of other PPCPs.
Their analysis, especially in biota, has been
thoroughly discussed by Gatermann et al.
(96) and by Rimkus et al. (103).
Preservatives
Parabens (alkyl-p-hydroxybenzoates) are one
of the most widely and heavily used suites of
antimicrobial preservatives in cosmetics (skin
creams, tanning lotions, etc.), toiletries, phar-
maceuticals, and even foodstuffs (up to 0.1%
wt/wt). Although the acute toxicity of these
compounds is very low, Routledge et al.
(112) report that these compounds (methyl
through butyl homologs) display weak estro-
genic activity in several assays. Although the
risk from dermal application in humans is
unknown, the probable continual introduc-
tion of these benzoates into sewage treatment
systems and directly to recreational waters
from the skin leads to the question of risk to
aquatic organisms. Butylparaben showed the
most competitive binding to the rat estrogen
receptor at concentrations one to two orders
of magnitude higher than that of nonylphenol
and showed estrogenic activity in a yeast
estrogen screen at 10-6 M
.
Disinfectants/Antiseptics
Triclosan (Irgasan DP 300, a chlorinated
diphenyl ether: 2,4,4'-trichloro-2'-hydroxy-
diphenyl ether) is an antiseptic agent that has
been widely used for almost 30 years in a vast
array of consumer products. Its use as a pre-
servative and disinfectant continues to grow;
for example, it is incorporated at < 1% in
Colgate's Total toothpaste, the first toothpaste
approved by the FDA to fight gingivitis.
While triclosan is registered with the U.S.
EPA as a pesticide, it is freely available OTC.
Triclosan's use in commercial products
includes footwear (in hosiery and insoles of
shoes called Odor-Eaters), hospital handsoap,
acne creams (e.g., Clearasil), and rather
recently as a slow-release product called
Microban, which is incorporated into a wide
variety of plastic products from children's toys
to kitchen utensils such as cutting boards.
Many of these uses can result in direct dis-
charge of triclosan to sewage systems, and as
such this compound can find its way into
receiving waters depending on its resistance
to microbial degradation. Okumura and
Nishikawa (113) found traces of triclosan
ranging from 0.05 to 0.15 pg/L in water.
Although triclosan has long been regarded as a
biocide, a toxicant having a wide-ranging,
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol
1 07, Supplement 6 * December 1999
931

----- Page 26 (native) -----
DAUGHTON AND TERNES
nonspecific mechanism(s) of action-in this
case gross membrane disruption, McMurry et
al. (114) report that triclosan is rather an
antibacterial having particular enzymatic tar-
gets (lipid synthesis). As such, bacteria could
develop resistance to triclosan. As with all
antibiotics in the environment, this could lead
to development of resistance and change in
microbial community structure (diversity).
A wide array of disinfectants are used in
rather large amounts not just by hospitals,
but also by households and livestock breeders.
These compounds are often substituted phe-
nolics as well as others such as triclosan.
Biphenylol, 4-chlorocresol, chlorophene, bro-
mophene, 4-chloroxylenol, and tetrabromo-o-
cresol (70) are some of the active ingredients,
at percentage volumes of < 1-20%. A survey
of 49 STWs in Germany (70) routinely
found biphenylol and chlorophene in both
influents, up to 2.6 pg/L for biphenylol and
up to 0.71 pg/L for chlorophene, and efflu-
ents. The removal of chlorophene from the
effluent was less extensive than for bipheny-
lol, with surface waters having concentrations
similar to that of the effluents.
Sunscreen Agents
The occurrence of sunscreen agents (UV
filters) in the German lake Meerfelder Maar
was investigated by Nagtegaal et al. (115).
The combined concentrations of six sunscreen
agents (SSAs) identified in perch (Percafluvi-
atilis) in the summer of 1991 were as high as
2.0 mg/kg lipid and in roach (Rutilus rutilus
L) in the summer of 1993, as high as 0.50
mg/kg lipid. Methylbenzylidene camphor
(MBC) was detected in roach from three
other German lakes. These lipophilic SSAs
seem to occur widely in fish from small lakes
used for recreational swimming. Both fish
species had body burdens of SSA on par with
PCBs and DDT. The bioaccumulation factor,
calculated as quotient of the MBC concentra-
tion in the whole fish (21 pg/kg) versus that in
the water (0.004 pg/L), exceeded 5,200, indi-
cating high lipophilicity. The fact that SSAs
(e.g., 2-hydroxy-4-methoxybenzophenone
[oxybenzone] and 2-ethylhexyl-4-methoxycin-
namate) can be detected in human breast milk
[16 and 417 ng/g lipid, respectively (116)]
shows the potential for dermal absorption and
bioconcentration in aquatic species. No data
have been published on newer SSAs such as
avobenzene (1-[4-(1,1-dimethylethyl)phenyl]-
3(4-methoxyphenyl)-1 ,3-propanedione).
Nutraeuticals/Herbal Remedies
During the last several years, the popularity of
nutritional supplements was codified by the
creation of a new term for the subclass of
highly bioactive food supplements called
nutraceuticals (117), also referred to as
nutriceuticals. Nutraceuticals are a rapidly
growing commercial class of bioactive com-
pounds, usually botanicals, intended as sup-
plements to the diet. Nutraceuticals and
many herbal remedies can have potent physi-
ologic effects. These are a mainstay of alterna-
tive medicine and have enjoyed explosive
growth in use in the United States and other
countries during the last decade. Many are
used as food supplements that have either
proven or hypothesized biologic activity but
are not classified as drugs by the FDA, pri-
marily because a given botanical usually has
not one but an array of distinct compounds
whose assemblage elicits the putative effect
and because these arrays cannot be easily stan-
dardized. As such they are not regulated and
are available OTC (heavily promoted via the
Internet). Even in those cases in which the
natural product is identical to a prescription
pharmaceutical (e.g., the Chinese red-yeast
product Cholestin newly introduced to the
United States contains lovastatin, an active
ingredient in the approved prescription drug
Mevacor used to lower cholesterol levels),
a recent ruling (118) prevented the FDA
from regulation.
With the accelerating inverted age
structure of our society, coupled with the
U.S. 1994 Dietary Supplement Health and
Education Act (DSHEA) (119) (which eases
regulations on the introduction and market-
ing of supplements), the use of nutraceuticals
could greatly escalate. The significance of
dietary supplements in the United States
was epitomized by the creation of the
Office of Dietary Supplements (ODS) via the
DSHEA in 1995 under the National
Institutes of Health (NIH) (119). The ODS
maintains a searchable database (International
Bibliographic Information on Dietary
Supplements [IBIDS]) of published scientific
literature on dietary supplements (120). The
NIH was also mandated to create the
National Center for Complementary and
Alternative Medicine (NCCAM, 121) to
"facilitate the evaluation of alternative
medical treatment modalities to determine
their effectiveness."
Although these substances are readily
available OTC, albeit in poorly character-
ized/standardized forms, an effort is under-
way to patent various nutraceuticals by
standardizing the extracts and thereby making
them available only by prescription. This
effort is being pioneered by PharmaPrint, Inc.
(Irvine, CA) (122), which has applied to
FDA for various investigational new drug
applications. The patenting of hundreds of
multiple-molecule nutraceuticals for thera-
peutic purposes could lead to more wide-
spread use of these substances.
As an example, a recent addition to this
class is a substance called huperzine A, an
alkaloid extracted from a Chinese moss,
which has been documented to improve
memory. It is therefore experiencing strong
demand for treating Alzheimer's disease and
has captured the attention of those who fol-
low the nutraceutical market because of its
true pharmaceutical qualities. The signifi-
cance of this particular compound is that it
possesses acute biologic activity as
a
cholinesterase inhibitor identical to that of
organophosphorus and carbamate insecti-
cides. It is so effective that the medical com-
munity is concerned about its abuse/misuse,
especially since it is legal. While huperzine A,
and alkaloids in general (compounds with
heterocyclic nitrogen, proton-accepting
group, and strong bioactivity), are naturally
occurring compounds, their susceptibility to
biodegradation in STWs or in open waters
is unknown. This is the case for almost
all nutraceuticals.
Another example is Kava, which is pre-
pared from the root of Piper methysticum,
long used throughout the South Pacific
because of its mild narcotic effect among a
host of other effects. The active ingredients in
Kava are believed to be a suite of lipophilic
lactones comprising substituted 0c-pyrones
(methysticin, kavain, yangonin, and others)
(123). These compounds display a host of
effects in humans, but nothing is known
about their effects on other organisms or fate
in STWs.
There are countless other nutraceuticals,
both new and ancient, experiencing vigorous
consumption. These few examples illustrate
the unknowns regarding whether these com-
pounds are being excreted, surviving sewage
treatment, and then eliciting effects on
aquatic organisms. Nutraceuticals and herbal
remedies would have the same potential fate
in the environment as pharmaceuticals, with
the added dimension that their usage rates
could be much higher, as they are readily
available and taken without the controls of
prescription medication. Because these com-
pounds are natural products, however,
they would be expected to be more easily
biodegraded.
Although the argument can be made that
naturally occurring compounds would not
pose an ecologic risk, this ignores that a) the
concentrations of these compounds in efflu-
ents could be higher than they are in the
environment in which they occur naturally,
and b) many of these substances/mixtures
come only from isolated parts of the world
(e.g., Kava, huperzine), and their use/disper-
sal in other parts of the world would essen-
tially make them anthropogenic. The use of
these compounds serves to redistribute their
normal occurrence in the environment, and
even though they might be naturally occur-
ring, this promotes exposure to organisms
that normally would never occur.
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 107, Supplement 6 * December 1999
932

----- Page 27 (native) -----
PHARMACEUTICALS IN THE ENVIRONMENT
Nontarget Organism Exposure
to and Effects from PPCPs
Environmental Exposure
Persistence is not critical if the source is
constant, leading to perpetual aquatic
exposure. Many PPCP ingredients seem to
have considerable persistence in the environ-
ment; blood lipid regulators and musks are
examples. Although environmental persis-
tence usually is a major determinant of expo-
sure in the environment, for pollutants that
are used on a continual basis and are intro-
duced to the environment through STWs,
the supply is continually replenished. In the
absence of very short half-lives, exposures
even to nonpersistent compounds could be
significant. This is especially true for aquatic
organisms, which are captives of their envi-
ronment and perpetually exposed.
Seasonal variations in pharmaceutical infu-
sion to surface waters from sewage treatment
effluents may not be a factor. No seasonal
variations were noted for musks; weekly varia-
tions of severalfold in concentration have been
noted in the River Elbe in Germany (104).
Effects on Nontarget Organisms
Although acute data are lacking, subtle
effects might be the major concern. The
potential effects of PPCPs on nontarget
species, especially on aquatic organisms, are
mostly unknown. No concerted research
effort has focused on the ecotoxicology of
PPCPs. Some isolated studies, however, have
included pharmaceuticals in various toxicity
assays relevant to aquatic life. One study in
particular was begun in Scandinavia.
In 1989 under the direction of the
Scandinavian Society of Cell Toxicology
(SSCT), an international toxicologic evalua-
tion study was initiated-Multicenter
Evaluation of In Vitro Cytotoxicity Tests
(MEIC). While the main purpose of the
MEIC was to thoroughly investigate a select
list of chemicals for evaluating human toxic-
ity by employing and benchmarking a wide
battery of in vitro and in vivo tests, the MEIC
generated a range of ecotoxicologic data for
various species including fish, amphibians,
crustaceans, and single-cell eukaryotes. Of the
50 selected chemicals, at least 18 were drugs.
Although limited and focusing on the more
common, obvious end points, the MEIC data
sets are some of the only available that catalog
the effects of certain drugs on aquatic life.
The MEIC was concluded in 1996, and the
data are still being evaluated. A database of
SSCT's MEIC cytotoxicity data can be found
at the web site for the Cytotoxicology
Laboratory, Uppsala, Sweden (CTLU) (124).
An example of one of the MEIC studies
relevant to aquatic effects is the study by
Lilius et al. (125) that presents effects data for
all 50 MEIC chemicals on two species of the
crustacean Daphnia. Of 50 MEIC reference
chemicals, 18 pharmaceuticals had immobi-
lization EC50 values ranging from below 0.01
mM (e.g., 0.0037 for amitriptyline and
0.0017 for thioridazine) to less than 10 mM
(e.g., 6 mM for phenobarbital and 8.2 mM
for aspirin); 9 of the 18 drugs had EC50 val-
ues below 0.1 mM. In comparison, the EC50
values for a range of common industrial
chemicals and pesticides were generally in the
same millimolar range (e.g., phenol, 0.078;
2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid, 0.65; nico-
tine, 0.023; potassium cyanide, 0.0086; lin-
dane, 0.005). Another MEIC study (126)
reports data from a number of tests relevant
to the aquatic environment (several crus-
taceans, rotifer, and Microtox). Using the
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-
operation and Development) Test Guideline
202, Part II (chronic Daphnia reproduction),
Kalbfus and Kopf (127) reported results for
clofibrate and salicylic acid: for clofibrate,
NOEC (no observed effect concentration) of
10 pg/L and EC50 (24 hr) of 106 pg/L,
whereas the NOEC for salicylic acid was
three orders of magnitude higher (10 mg/L);
the clofibrate NOEC concentrations for algae
and luminescence bacteria ranged between 5
and 40 jg/L, whereas those for salicylic acid
were between 15 and 60 mg/L.
Acute toxicity, the major type of end
point investigated with nontarget species, is
only one of many possible ecotoxicologic end
points of concern. Investigation of multi-
generational life-cycle effects is almost
entirely lacking for any nontarget species.
This is surprising, as in the aquatic environ-
ment-given that exposures to PPCPs would
be more constant than episodic-organisms
are exposed for their entire life cycles. Perhaps
more important, however, subtle behavioral
modifications or genetic alterations have the
potential to lead to profound long-term eco-
logic effects for which it could prove
extremely difficult to pinpoint the cause.
Acute toxicity should not be a primary con-
cern because it can be so easily detected, and
mitigation measures can be designed in a
timely manner. Rather, concern should be
directed toward effects occurring undetected
that can lead to long-term adverse impacts,
which in turn are perceived simply as natural
variation or evolution. This concern is ampli-
fied compared with that for pesticides, as
nearly nothing is known about the effects of
PPCPs on aquatic or terrestrial life. We do
know, however, that these substances have
the potential to be profoundly bioactive
through a constellation of different modes of
action. The toxicologic data that exist for
nontarget species are almost exclusively
focused on antibiotics and woefully lacking
for fish [see Halling-S0renson et al. (5) for a
tabulated summary of effects data]. The
studies of Fong et al. (76,79), presented ear-
lier under "Antidepressants," are the best
examples to date of subtle effects resulting
from low concentrations. Another overlooked
issue regarding effects is that of organisms
from lower trophic levels whose presence is
critical to community homeostasis.
Subtle Effects-Beyond Our Notice
Acute toxicity is only a smallpart ofa larger
puzle. Many drugs that are used successfully
to modify the behavior of humans could have
unforeseen effects on nontarget organisms.
These effects could be so subtle that their con-
sequences may be imperceptible but neverthe-
less profound when elicited over long periods
of time. For example, subtle behavioral effects
could be responsible for changing any number
of attributes for a particular species, resulting
in changes over numerous generations that
would otherwise be deemed part of normal
adaption/evolution. Many drugs even have
unpredicted or unanticipated effects in
humans. Such unforeseen biologic effects
could prove even more profound and
unexpected with nontarget species.
The ability to elicit numerous subtle
effects across a wide range of species is
embodied by no single class of pharmaceuti-
cals better than SSRIs. This class of drugs
shows the potential for PPCPs to elicit a con-
stellation of effects that would be hard to
detect in natural settings, or to tease apart
from what would otherwise be considered
normal behavior.
Perhaps the most important concern
regarding the exposure of aquatic and terres-
trial organisms to PPCPs is that the effects
could be so subtle that they would escape any
effort to detect them, with the result that
imperceptible changes could accumulate until
they had a significant impact-not necessarily
on the individual organisms but rather on the
population or community, perhaps after gen-
erations of change. Subtle effects via regula-
tion by any of the countless pathways/
networks of signal transduction in aquatic
species can range from modification or rever-
sal of attraction and boldness to avoidance
and shyness affecting all behavior characteris-
tics spanning the range from feeding to mat-
ing to directional sensing (e.g., chemotaxis,
gravitaxis). On the surface, the result would
simply be attributed to natural adaptation or
confounded by other natural changes.
Kurelec (128) has formalized a concept,
genotoxic disease syndrome (GDS), that
embodies the idea of nonobvious change as
effected in the aquatic environment, especially
as exacerbated by compromising the activity
of MXR defense systems. As proposed, GDS
is seen as the gradual accumulation of a wide
spectrum of toxic events, none of which alone
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 107, Supplement 6 * December 1999
933

----- Page 28 (native) -----
DAUGHTON AND TERNES
results in an obvious outcome. The cumulative
effects fall under the general, diffuse, ill-
defined alteration/impairment/inhibition of
enzyme systems, protein turnover, metabolism,
and cytotoxic repair, leading to reduced fitness,
gradual degeneration/atrophy oftissues/organs,
reduced growth, accelerated aging, impaired
immunologic systems, impaired reproduction,
higher incidence of disease, and impaired
adaptation/survival/succession.
Kurelec (33) reported another example of
behavioral alteration. The MXR inhibitor ver-
apamil when added to polluted river waters (at
a level of - 1 ppm that normally did not affect
fish) elicited dramatic avoidance attempts by
the fish, escalating to the point of frantic
escape attempts when 2-aminoanthracene was
also added at a concentration 0.53 PM, which
would otherwise not elicit a response.
The significance of subtle and cumulative
impacts is only beginning to be recognized by
environmental toxicologists. Weiss (129)
wrote that just as the predicted rise in "crack
babies" whose pregnant mothers used
cocaine was never observed-rather only a
small but significant 3% reduction in IQ was
observed-the same subtle effects are very
likely occurring from environmental toxi-
cants. Weiss points out that the effects on
humans by lead (Pb), methyl mercury, PCBs,
and endocrine disruptors in general probably
are manifested in almost undetectable
changes, and these may accumulate over time
to yield truly profound changes that would
not be distinguishable from natural events.
The specter of subtle, cumulative effects
could make current toxicity-directed screen-
ing largely useless in any effort to test waste
effluents for toxicologic end points.
Abnormal behavior can masquerade as
seemingly normal deviation within a natural
statistical variation. Change can occur so
slowly that it appears to result from natural
events, with no reason to presume artificial
causation. It is difficult to connect the issues of
cause and ultimate effect, in part because of
the ambiguous and subjective nature of subtle
effects, but especially when these effects are
confounded as aggregations of numerous,
unrelated interactions. Weiss (130) points out
that statistical tests based on means and p val-
ues are incapable of detecting the very subtle
changes that low-level toxicants can impart.
Slight shifts within the statistical distributions
of any particular characteristic expressed
among a population are not necessarily
reflected by statistics of the mean/median;
these changes may well be more obvious, how-
ever, when considering an individual organism
rather than looking across a population.
Another aspect to gradual, undetected
changes relates to community composition/
organization, especially in microorganisms, in
which the composition of species can be
affected over time (i.e., successional effects) as
a result of the presence of anthropogenic
chemicals (131). The pressure for succession
can result from adverse effects (e.g., toxicity
preferentially to one species over another) or
from conferring an advantage to one species
(e.g., use of the toxicant as a nutrient source).
Succession of community structure tends to
occur on such a long time line that cause and
effect issues are rarely considered.
A number of toxicity testing approaches
have been developed over the years, some of
which employ less obvious end points for the
nonspecific detection of the presence, but
not the identities, of toxicants. One of the
best known rapid approaches uses the reduc-
tion in light output of a bioluminescent bac-
terium (e.g., Microtox) (132). Another more
recent example (133) automatically detects
changes in the gravitaxis of a unicellular fla-
gellate-indeed, a subtle end point in itself
and one that would probably go unnoticed
and undoubtedly lead to die off. Such
approaches are badly needed for detecting
changes in toxicant concentrations in waste-
water effluents and for directing subsequent
chemical characterization to identify the
putative toxicants.
Environmental Assessment
Although various levels of prospective ERA via
standardized tests are required in the United
States and Europe as part of the drug registra-
tion process (see "Approach of Regulatory
Agencies" below), meaningful effort on this
front is simply not possible with the currently
limited state of knowledge on environmental
fate, transport, and effects of pharmaceuticals;
to date, retrospective studies (e.g., ERAs based
on environmental survey) are rare. Examples of
prospective ecologic assessments can be seen in
Henschel et al. (28), who performed these
assessments for four high-use pharmaceuticals
in Germany: salicylic acid (the main metabo-
lite of acetylsalicylic acid, aspirin), paracetamol
(4-acetamidophenol, acetominophen-
analgesic/antipyretic), clofibric acid (chloro-
phenoxyisobutyric acid; blood lipid regulator),
and methotrexate (4-amino- 10-methyl-folic
acid; chemotherapy folic acid antagonist that
disrupts nucleotide synthesis). Unmetabolized,
the loading of these drugs into bodies of water
in Germany could be hundreds of tons per
year. Henschel et al. (28) found that although
all four drugs would have passed traditional
ecotoxicity screening, methotrexate would not
have passed at least one nonstandard test. This
showed that the current guidelines could be
underestimating nontarget effects.
The OECD, an intergovernmental organi-
zation with representatives from 29 countries,
publishes the OECD Test Guidelines (134), a
collection of methods used to assess the hazards
of chemicals and of chemical preparations
such as pesticides and pharmaceuticals.
Assessment of methodology for aquatic toxic-
ity of chemicals has been recently reviewed by
the OECD (135). General information on
ecologic risk assessment is available from the
U.S. EPA (136).
The enormous array of pharmaceuticals
will continue to diversify and grow as the
human genome is mapped. Today, there are
about 500 distinct biochemical receptors at
which drugs are targeted; U.S. private R&D
investment in new pharmaceuticals in 1998
was nearly $18 billion. The number of targets
is expected to increase up to 20-fold (yielding
3,000-10,000 drug targets) in the near future
according to the Pharmaceutical Research &
Manufacturers Association (137). In 1998,
the FDA approved 30 new nonbiologic drugs,
one of which was Viagra (138). The FDA
Modernization Act of 1997 (139) will also
help to accelerate this growth. Most of the
new drugs have totally unpublished environ-
mental transformation/fate/effects properties;
two examples of highly prescribed new drugs
are Viagra (sildenafil: 1-[[3-(6,7-dihydro- 1-
methyl-7-oxo-3-propyl- 1 H-pyrazolo[4,3-d] -
pyrimidin-5-yl)-4ethoxyphenyl]-sulfonyl]-4-
methylpiperazine]) and Propecia/Proscar
(finasteride: [5a- 17P-N-( 1,1-dimethylethyl)-
3-oxo-4-azaandrost- 1 -ene- 1 7-carboxamide;
used in treating male baldness and benign
prostatic hyperplasia). This explosion in new
drugs will severely exacerbate our limited
knowledge of drugs in the environment and
possibly increase the exposure/effects risks to
nontarget organisms. Finally, the current pro-
liferation of web sites offering prescription
drugs by mail will only exacerbate the growing
use/misuse of a wide array of drugs.
Approach of Regulatory
Agencies
There are only two major activities with
respect to managing the release of pharma-
ceuticals in the environment. One results
from the research that has occurred in vari-
ous European/Scandinavian countries over
the last few decades, culminating in guide-
lines from the EU. The other comes from
the FDA. It is important to understand,
however, that responsibility in the United
States for monitoring drugs in the environ-
ment does not currently rest with either the
FDA or the U.S. EPA. Few other alternative
approaches for assessing ecologic risk posed
by pharmaceuticals have been proposed. In
one of the more comprehensive approaches,
Roembke et al. (8) used the basic ecologic
risk assessment approach, upon which the
U.S. EPA's current approach (136) is based,
to discuss alternatives; in particular, they
noted that acute effects testing cannot be
relied upon by itself-chronic effects testing
is extremely important.
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 107, Supplement 6 * December 1999
934

----- Page 29 (native) -----
PHARMACEUTICALS IN THE ENVIRONMENT
European Union Activities
Agency for the Evaluation ofMedicinal
Products-EMEAICVMP/055196 In the
early 1980s, government regulators [e.g.,
European Commission-Pharmaceuticals
and Cosmetics (EEC) which sets rules gov-
erning medicinal products in the EU (140)]
first showed concern over the release of veteri-
nary pharmaceuticals and their metabolites
into the environment and any untoward
effects they might have on biota: "the poten-
tial risks for the environment resulting from
the use of the medicinal product." Veterinary
medicinals were targeted presumably because
they were perceived as having a more direct
route of introduction to the environment
(e.g., fish farms, parasite dips, farm runoff).
Only much later has concern been expressed
with respect to human drugs, but no regula-
tions/guidelines have been established. An
analogous directive has yet to be published by
the EU for human pharmaceuticals. A good
overview of the approach used by the EEC
was published by Henschel et al. (28) and
Montforts et al. (42).
In EMEA/CVMP/055/96-final (141), the
CVMP (European Committee for Veterinary
Medicinal Products) sets forth its final guid-
ance for risk assessments for veterinary med-
ical products, excluding biologics. The
guidance elaborates on the phased-assessments
set forth in EEC Directive 92/18/EEC, where
Phase I assesses the potential for release to the
environment [derivation of predicted environ-
mental concentrations (PECs)]; for more
information on establishing PECs for expo-
sure assessment, see OECD (142). Phase II is
broken into two tiers: tier A evaluates possible
fate and effects, and tier B (should cause for
concern regarding specific biologic species
result from tier A findings) looks at effects on
specific biota that might receive exposure.
ERAs are required for new veterinary drugs.
The report must include potential for environ-
mental exposure (considering patterns of use
and routes of administration [internal vs exter-
nal], metabolism/excretion [metabolites repre-
senting less than 20% of the dose are excluded
from concern], and disposal), fate and effects,
and any needed risk management strategies.
The guidance mandates the use of worst-case
exposure scenarios. EMEA's guidelines are also
being developed specifically for environmental
impact assessments of veterinary medicinals by
EMEA (143).
Effects testing includes algal growth
inhibition, fish acute/chronic/bioaccumula-
tion exposure, avian dietary and reproduc-
tive, earthworm toxicity, terrestrial plant
growth, and activated sludge respiration
inhibition. The guidance document seems to
recognize
the
incredible
diversity of
stressor-receptor possibilities that could
result from pharmaceuticals and their metabo-
lites entering the environment: "there may be
considerable variation in receptor specificity/
sensitivity between species" (143). This is
complicated further by the fact that the
mode(s) of action responsible for the desired
therapeutic effect of many drugs is poorly
understood (sometimes totally unknown). For
example, although various modes of action for
the disease-modifying agents used to treat
rheumatoid arthritis (e.g., methotrexate and
hydroxychloroquine, intended for use in
chemotherapy and malaria, respectively) have
been known for many years, the actual mecha-
nisms by which the symptoms of this particu-
lar disease are alleviated are mostly unknown.
It would therefore be impossible to forecast
what type of effects could be anticipated.
Biocides. The new EU Biocide Directive
(144) covers the commercialization of bioci-
dal products (e.g., disinfectants), but few of
these are used in personal care products.
Significantly, however, the Directive empha-
sizes ecotoxicologic issues (on par with
human health issues), including fate and
ecologic effects.
FDA
Concern regarding introduction of pharma-
ceuticals to the environment in the United
States is addressed by the FDA, which requires
Environmental Assessments (EAs), as required
under National Environmental Policy Act of
1969) (NEPA), and the specifics of which are
set forth
in "Guidance
for Industry:
Environmental Assessment of Human Drug
and Biologics Application" (145) for all drug
applications/actions meeting minimum crite-
ria. As with the EU's approach, concern rests
primarily on acute and chronic effects as mea-
sured by traditional toxicity tests. Much less
concern is expressed for behavioral effects,
whether avoidance, breeding, etc. The FDA
does, however, recognize "extraordinary cir-
cumstances" where there is the potential for
serious harm to the environment or for an
action to "significantly affect the quality of the
human environment" (145). This notion
includes not just toxicity to environmental
organisms but also "environmental effects
other than toxicity, such as lasting effects on
ecological dynamics" (145). Clearly this could
cover subtle behavioral modifications from
which effects accumulate over time/genera-
tions, eventually leading to measurable change
but unrecognized as such. NEPA [40 CFR
1508.27; also see Appendix C in the FDA
document (145)] also defines "significantly"
around two issues-"context" and "intensity"
(severity of impact). Among the 10 issues with
respect to "intensity," one relates to:
Whether the action is related to other
actions with individually insignificant
but cuLmulatively significant impacts.
Significance exists if it is reasonable to
anticipate a cumulatively significant
impact on the environment.
The FDA's approach is very similar to
that of the EU. The FDA requires an EA if
the expected environmental concentration
(EEC, analogous to the PEC
predicted
environmental concentration) at the point of
entry to the aquatic environment (the
expected introduction concentration [EIC)
exceeds
1 ppb. The EIC is calculated assum-
ing that all the drug product produced for 1
year enters POTWs, that the drug's usage is
spread across the country in proportion to the
population, and that none of the parent drug
is metabolized or transformed; this can be
altered if transformation data are available,
but if metabolites or other SRSs are present at
greater than 10% of the parent level, then
toxicology must also be known. Its value is
calculated as the product of a) kilogram per
year of active product produced for use,
b) reciprocal of the influent to POTWs (liters
per day), c) reciprocal of 365 days/year, and
d) 109 pg/kg.
Like the EMEA, the FDA uses a tiered
approach to determine if regulatory actions are
required. This approach centers around assess-
ment factors used to determine when ecotoxic-
ity testing is not needed. An assessment factor
is calculated by dividing the test end point
(e.g., lethal dose or EC50) by the maximum
EEC (which is equal to the greater of EEC or
EIC). Lower factors necessitate more extensive
testing. Further testing is also necessitated by
drugs that bioaccumulate or with SRSs that are
more toxic than the parent drug. The weakest
aspect to this approach is that the toxicity of
the SRSs is assessed from what is known for
human toxicology rather than for potential
nontarget organisms. Moreover, given the
current knowledge of fate, transport, and eco-
toxicity of anthropogenic chemicals, there are
simply too many unknowns to be able to pre-
dict whether a pharmaceutical (or its transfor-
mation products) will find its way into the
environment at a particular concentration.
The FDA also requires EAs for drugs that
also occur naturally in the environment if
their usage and subsequent discharge (to
POTWs, landfills, etc.) will alter the natural,
ambient concentration.
A significant shortcoming of either of
these two current regulatory approaches to
determining ecologic risk results from not
taking into account the cumulative (addi-
tive/synergistic/antagonistic) impacts of drugs
affecting the same receptors. The EEC value
for any given drug could easily be exceeded
when the cumulative concentrations of like-
mode-of-action drugs are considered, espe-
cially in those instances where numerous
competing drugs are commercially available
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol
07, Supplement 6 * December 1999
935

----- Page 30 (native) -----
DAUGHTON AND TERNES
in any class. Needless to say, this approach
also ignores the possibility of synergistic
effects from drugs of other classes.
Conclusions and
Recommendations
This review aims to catalyze a discussion in
the environmental science community to
determine the significance of PPCPs in the
environment and to foster further research
efforts, if warranted. The intent is not to out-
line a tiered approach for a research strategy,
but rather to highlight where further research
might be needed in each of various areas orga-
nized around the "risk paradigm," as set forth
by the National Research Council (146)
(Table 1). A step-wise strategy to determine if
a major research effort needs to be launched
would require efforts at establishing the inci-
dence of PPCP occurrence in the environ-
ment coupled with parallel determinations of
whether effects among a wide spectrum of
aquatic organisms can occur at documented
concentrations of PPCPs and whether cost-
effective modifications of STW operation can
dramatically improve removal efficiencies.
The authors' personal recommendations and
summary of significant conclusions are pre-
sented in Table 1. It is hoped that this broad
overview presents a wide perspective and
proper context for this emerging problem.
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1. Pressley SA. N. Carolina effort seeks to wipe out outhouses.
Washington Post, p. A03, Sunday, 25 April 1999. Available:
http.//search. washingtonpost.com [cited 31 August 19991.
2. Bonner M, Wristen KG. The National Sewage Report Card
(Number Two): Rating the Treatment Methods and Discharges
of 21 Canadian Cities. Sierra Legal Defence Fund Report.
August 1999. Sierra Legal Defence Fund, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada. Available: http.//www.sierralegal.org/reports.htm
3. Pfleger K. Mass Spectral and GC Data of Drugs, Poisons,
Pesticides, Pollutants and Their Metabolites. 2nd rev ed. Vols
1-3 published in 1992. Weinheim, Germany:VCH, 1999.
4. Pfleger K. Mass Spectral and GC Data of Drugs, Poisons,
Pesticides, Pollutants and Their Metabolites. Vol 4. 2nd rev ed
and expanded ed. Weinheim, Germany:VCH, 1999.
5. Halling-Sorenson B, Nors Nielsen S, Lanzky PF, Ingerslev F,
Holten Lutzhoft HC, Jergensen SE. Occurrence fate and effects
of pharmaceutical substances in the environment - a review.
Chemosphere 36(2):357-393 (1998).
6. Montague P. Drugs in the Water. Rachel's Environment &
Health Weekly #614. Available: gopher://ftp.std.com.70/
1 l/periodicals/rachel [cited 3 September 19981.
7. Raloff J. Drugged waters-Does it matter that pharmaceuticals
are turning up in water supplies? Science News 153:187-189
(1998).
8. Roembke J, Knacker Th, Stahischmidt-Allner P. Studie dber
Umweltprobleme im Zusammenhang mit Arzneimitteln. [Study
about environmental problems in context with drugs.] F+E
Vorhabens Nr. 106 04 121 Umweltbundesamt Berlin. German
Report of the Research and Development Project no 106 04 121
of Federal Ministry of Research and Development, Berlin,
Germany, 1996.
9. Ternes TA, Hirsch R, Stumpf M, Eggert T, Schuppert B, Haberer
K. Nachweis und Screening von Arzneimittelruckstanden
Diagnostika und Antiseptika in der aquatischen Umwelt.
[Identification and screening of pharmaceuticals diagnostics
and antiseptics in the aquatic environment.] Bundesministerium
fur
Bildung
Wissenschaft
Forschung
Technologie
(BMBF)/53170. German Report of the Federal Ministry of
Education, Science, Research and Technology, (Ref no
02WU9567/3). Bonn, Germany, 1999.
10. Velagaleti R. Behavior of pharmaceutical drugs (human and ani-
mal health) in the environment. Drug Inform J 31:715-722 (1997).
11. Bosch X. Household antibiotic storage [Letter]. Science 281:785
(1998).
12. Associated Press. Wyoming officials considering Yellowstone
pollution fines. Las Vegas Review-Journal, p. 9B, 31 October
1998.
13. Milstein M. Park sewage systems on the verge of failure inter-
nal report states. Available. http.//wwwbhllingsgazette.comarn1.
htm [cited 8 March 1999]1
14. James MO. Overview of in vivo metabolism of drugs by aquatic
species. Vet Hum Toxicol 28(suppl 1):2-8 (1986).
15. Guarino AM, Lech JJ. Metabolism disposition and toxicity of
drugs and other xenobiotics in aquatic species. Vet Hum Toxicol
28(suppl 1):38-44 (1986).
16. RxList. The Internet Drug Index (The Top 200 Prescriptions: 1998
US Prescriptions Based on More than 2.4 Billion U.S.
Prescriptions). Available via: http.//www.rxlist.com/(at:
http.//www.rxlist.com/top200.htm) [cited 30 August 1999].
17. Forth W, Henschler D, Rummel W, Starke K. Aligemeine und
spezielle Pharmakologie und Toxikologie. 6th rev ed. [General
and special pharmaceutics and toxicology.] Mannheim/Leipzig/
Wien/Zurich:Wissenschaftsverlag, 1996.
18. Ternes TA. Occurrence of drugs in German sewage treatment
plants and rivers. Water Res 32(11):3245-3260 (1998).
19. Rogers HR. Sources behaviour and fate of organic contaminants
during sewage treatment and in sewage sludges. Sci Total
Environ 185:3-26 (1996).
20. Learn S. Sewage tradeoff: add overflow, help tributaries. The
Oregonian, Thursday 22 April 1999. Available: http.//www.ore-
gonlive.com/news/99/04/stO42215.html [cited 31 August 1999).
21. Holm JV, Rugge K, Bjerg PL, Christensen TH. Occurrence and
distribution of pharmaceutical organic compounds in the
groundwater downgradient of a landfill (Grindsted, Denmark).
Environ Sci Technol 29(5):1415-1420 (1995).
22. Stan H-J, Heberer T, Linkerhagner M. Occurrence of clofibric
acid in the aquatic system-is the use in human medical care
the source of the contamination of surface ground and drinking
water? Vom Wasser 83:57-68 (1994).
23. Heberer T, Schmidt-Baumler K, Stan H-J. Occurrence and distrib-
ution of organic contaminants in the aquatic system in Berlin.
Part
I: Drug residues and other polar contaminants in Berlin sur-
face and ground water. Acta Hydrochim Hydrobiol 26(5):272-278
(1998).
24. Stumpf M, Ternes TA, Haberer K, Seel P, Baumann W.
Nachweis von Arzneimittelruckstanden in Klaranlagen und
Flielgewassern [Determination of drugs in sewage treatment
plants and river water]. Vom Wasser 86:291-303 (1996).
25. J.R. When sewage is recycled for drinking. Science News
153:186 (1998).
26. Routledge EJ, Sheahan D, Desbrow C, Brighty GC, Waldock M,
Sumpter JP. Identification of estrogenic chemicals in STW efflu-
ent. 2: In vivo responses in trout and roach. Environ Sci Technol
32:1559-1 565 (1998).
27. Boudou A, Ribeyre F. Aquatic ecotoxicology: from the ecosys-
tem to the cellular and molecular levels. Environ Health
Perspect 1 05(suppl 1 ):21-35 (1997).
28. Henschel K-P, Wenzel A, Diedrich M, Fliedner A. Environmental
hazard assessment of pharmaceuticals. Reg Toxicol Pharmacol
25:220-225 (1997).
29. National Research Council. Hormonally Active Agents in the
Environment. Washington, DC:National Academy Press, 1999.
Available: http.//books.nap.edu/books/0309064 198/html [cited
31 August 1999).
30. Desbrow C, Routledge EJ, Brighty GC, Sumpter JP, Waldock M.
Identification of estrogenic chemicals in STW effluent. 1.
Chemical Fractionation and in vitro biological screening. Environ
Sci Technol 32(11):1549 (1998).
31. Rogers RS. Sepracor: Skating on thin 'ice'. Chem Eng News 30:
11-13 (1998).
32. Epel D. Use of multidrug transporters as first lines of defense
against toxins in aquatic organisms. Comp Biochem Physiol A
120:23-28 (1998).
33. Kurelec B. The multixenobiotic resistance mechanism in aquatic
organisms. Crit Rev Toxicol 22(1)23-43 (1992).
34. Kurelec B. A new type of hazardous chemical: the chemosensi-
tizers of multixenobiotic resistance. Environ Health Perspect
105 (suppl 4):855-60 (1997).
35. Smital T, Kurelec B. The chemosensitizers of multixenobiotic
resistance mechanism in aquatic invertebrates: a new class of
pollutants. Mutat Res 399(1):43-53 (1998).
36. Soldner A, Christians U, Susanto M, Wacher V, Silverman J,
Benet LZ. Grapefruit juice activates P-glycoprotein-mediated
drug transport. Pharwaceut Ret 16(4):478 (1999).
37. Garrison AW, Pope JD, Allen FR. GC/MS Analysis of organic
compounds in domestic wastewaters. In: Identification and
Analysis of Organic Pollutants in Water (Keith CH, ed). Ann
Arbor, Ml:Ann Arbor Science Publishers, 1976;517-556.
38. Hignite C, Azarnoff DL. Drugs and drug metabolites as environ-
mental contaminants: chlorophenxoyisobutyrate and salicylic
acid in sewage water effluent. Life Sci 20:337-342 (1977).
39. Stan HJ, Heberer T. Pharmaceuticals in the aquatic environ-
ment. Analysis Mag 25(7):20-23 (1997).
40. Richardson ML, Bowron JM. The fate of pharmaceutical chemi-
cals in the aquatic environment. J Pharm Pharmacol 37:1-12
(1985).
41. Hirsch R, Ternes T, Haberer K, Kratz K-L. Occurrence of antibi-
otics in the aquatic environment. Sci Total Environ 225(1-
2):109-1 18 (1999).
42. Montforts MHMM, Kalf DF, van Vlaardingen PLA, Linders JBHJ.
The exposure assessment for veterinary medicinal products. Sci
Total Environ 225(1-2):1 19-133 (1999).
43. Williams RJ, Heymann DL. Containment of antibiotic resis-
tance. Science 279:1153-1154 (1998).
44. Jordan A, Frank H. Trifluoroacetate in the environment.
Evidence for sources other than HFC/HCFCs. Environ Sci
Technol 33:522-527 (1999).
45. Endocrine Disruptor Screening and Testing Advisory Committee.
Final Report. August 1998. Available: http.//www.epa.gov/
opptintr/opptendo/finalrpt.htm. Also EDSTAC HomePage. EPA's
Endocrine Disruptor Screening and Testing Advisory Committee
(EDSTAC) Home Page. Available: http.//www.epa.gov/oppt-
intr/opptendo/index.htm [cited 31 August 19991.
46. Aherne GW, Briggs R. The relevance of the presence of certain
synthetic steroids in the aquatic environment. J Pharm
Pharmacol 41:735-736 (1989).
47. Shore LS, Gurevita M, Shemesh M. Estrogen as an environmen-
tal pollutant. Bull Environ Contam Toxicol 51:361-66 (1993).
48. Tabak HH, Bunch RL. Steroid hormones as water pollutants.
I: Metabolism of natural and synthetic ovulation-inhibiting hor-
mones by microorganisms of activated sludge and primary settled
sewage. Dev lnd Microbiol 11:367-376 (1970).
49. Tabak HH, Bloomhuff RN, Bunch RL. Steroid hormones as water
pollutants. Il: Studies on the persistence and stability of natural
urinary and synthetic ovulation-inhibiting hormones and treated
wastewaters. Dev lnd Microbiol 22:497-519 (1981).
50. Ternes T, Wilken R-D, eds. Drugs and Hormones as Pollutants
of the Aquatic Environment: Determination and Ecotoxicological
Impacts. Sci Total Environ 225(1-2):176 pp (1999).
51. Arcand-Hoy LD, Nimrod AC, Benson WH. Endocrine-modulating
substances in the environment: estrogenic effects of pharma-
ceutical products. lnt J Toxicology 17(2):139-158 (1998).
52. Johnson AC, Williams RJ, Ulahannan T. Comment on identifica-
tion of estrogenic chemicals in STW effluent. 1: Chemical fraction-
ation and in vitro biological screening. Environ Sci Technol
33(2):369-370 (1999).
53. Routledge EJ, Waldock M, Sumpter JP. Response to Comment
on identification of estrogenic chemicals in STW effluent. 1.
Chemical fractionation and in vitro biological screening [Letter
response]. Environ Sci Technol 33(2):371 (1999).
54. Colburn T, Dumanoski D, Myers JP. Our Stolen Future: Are We
Threatening Our Fertility, Intelligence, and Survival? A Scientific
Detective Story. New York:Plume/Penguin, 1997. Also see
http.//www.osf-facts.org [cited 4 September 1999).
55. Chemical Manufacturers Association. The Chemical Industry's
Health and Environmental Effects Research Initiative. Available:
http.//www. cmahq. com/CMA Website3. nsf/ pages/healthre-
search [cited 31 August 1999].
56. Arnold SF, Klotz DM, Collins BM, Vonier PM, Guillette LJ Jr,
McLachlan JA. Synergistic activation of estrogen receptor with
combinations
of
environmental
chemicals.
Science
272:1489-1492 (1996).
57. Gaido KW, McDonnell DP, Korach KS, Safe SH. Estrogenic
activity of chemical mixtures: Is there synergism? CIIT Activities
17(2):1-7 (1997).
58. McLachlan JA. Synergistic effect of environmental estrogens:
report withdrawn. Science 277:459d-463d (1997).
59. Arnold SF, Bergeron JM, Tran DO, Collins BM, Vonier PM,
Crews D, Toscano WA Jr, McLachlan JA. Synergistic responses
of steroidal estrogens in vitro (yeast) and in vivo (turtles).
Biochem Biophys Res Commun 235(2(:336-342 (1997).
60. Tian S-S, Lamb P, King AG, Miller SG, Kessler L, Luengo Jl,
Averill L, Johnson RK, Gleason JG, Pelus LM, Dillon SB, Rosen
J. A small nonpeptidyl mimic of granulocyte-colony-stimulating
factor. Science 281:257-259 (1998).
61. Barinaga M. Small molecule fills hormone's shoes. Science
281:149-1 51 (1998).
82. Hartmann A, Alder AC, Koller T, Widmer RM. Identification of
936
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 107, Supplement 6 * December 1999

----- Page 31 (native) -----
PHARMACEUTICALS IN THE ENVIRONMENT
fluoroquinolone antibiotics as the main source of umuC geno-
toxicity in native hospital wastewater. Environ Toxicol Chem
17(3):377-382 (1998).
63. Witte W. Medical consequences of antibiotic use in agriculture.
Science 279:996-997 (1998).
64. Ash RJ, Mauch B, Moulder W, Morgan M. Antibiotic-resistant
bacteria in U.S. rivers. Abstract no Q-383. In: Proceedings of the
Conference of the American Society for Microbiology 99th
Annual Meeting, June 1999, Chicago, llinois. Herndon, VA:ASM
Press, http.//www.asmusa.org/mtgsrc/absprgbk.htm
65. Eichorst S, Pfeifer A, Magill NG, Tischler ML. Antibiotic resis-
tance among bacteria isolated from wild populations of resi-
dent Canada Geese in a suburban setting. Abstract no Q-402.
In: Proceedings of the American Society for Microbiology 99th
Annual Meeting, June 1999, Chicago, Illinois.
66. Heberer T, Stan H-J. Determination of clofibric acid and N-
(phenylsulfonyl)-sarcosine in sewage river and drinking water.
lnt J Environ Anal Chem 67:113-124 (1997).
67. Buser H-R, Muller MD, Theobald N. Occurrence of the pharma-
ceutical drug clofibric acid and the herbicide mecoprop in vari-
ous Swiss lakes and in the North Sea. Environ Sci Technol
32:188-192 (1998).
68. Jones KC, de Voogt P. Persistent organic pollutants (POPs):
state of the science. Environ Pollut 100(1-3):209-221 (1999).
69. Stumpf M, Ternes TA, Wilken R-D, Rodrigues SV, Baumann W.
Polar drug residues in sewage and natural waters in the state
of Rio de Janeiro Brazil. Sci Total Environ 225(1):135-141
(1999).
70. Ternes TA, Stumpf M, Schuppert B, Haberer K. Simultaneous
Determination of antiseptics and acidic drugs in sewage and
river. Vom Wasser 90:295-309 (1998).
71. Buser H-R, Poiger T, Muller MD. Occurrence and fate of the
pharmaceutical drug diclofenac in surface waters: rapid pho-
todegradation in a lake. Environ Sci Technol 32:3449-3456
(1998).
72. Buser H-R, Poiger T, MOller MD. Occurrence and environmental
behavior of the pharmaceutical drug ibuprofen in surface
waters and in wastewater. Environ Sci Technol 33:2529-2535
(1999).
73. Hirsch R, Ternes TA, Haberer K, Kratz K-L. Determination of
Betablockers and -sympathomimetics in the aquatic environ-
ment. Vom Wasser 87:263 (1996).
74. Kulkarni GK, Nagabhushanam R, Amaldoss G, Jaiswal RG,
Fingerman M. In vivo stimulation of ovarian development in the
red swamp crayfish Procambarus clarkii (Girard) by 5-hydrox-
ytryptamine. Invert Reprod Devel 21(3):231-240 (1992).
75. Sarojini R, Nagabhushanam R, Fingerman M. In vivo evaluation
of 5-hydroxytryptamine stimulation of the testes in the fiddler
crab Uca pugilator: a presumed action on the neuroendocrine
system. Comparat Biochem Physiol 106C(2):321-325 (1993).
76. Fong PP. Zebra mussel spawning is induced in low concentra-
tions of putative serotonin reuptake inhibitors. Biol Bull
194:143-149 (1998).
77. Couper JM, Leise EM. Serotonin injections induce metamorpho-
sis in larvae of the gastropod mollusc llyanassa obsoleta. Biol
Bull 191:178-86(1996).
78. Sarojini R, Nagabhushanam R, Fingerman M. Mode of Action of
the Neurotransmitter 5-Hydroxytryptamine in Stimulating
Ovarian Maturation in the Red Swamp Crayfish Procambarus
clarkii: an in vivo and in vitro study. J Exp Zool 271:395-400
(1995).
79. Fong PP, Huminski PT, d'Urso LM. Induction of potentiation of
parturition in fingernail clams (Sphaerium striatinum) by selec-
tive serotonin re-uptake inhibitors (SSRls). J Exp Zool
280(3(:260-264 (1998).
80. Huber R, Smith K, Delago A, lsaksson K, Kravitz EA. Serotonin
and aggressive motivation in crustaceans: altering the decision
to retreat. Proc NatI Acad Sci 94:5939-5942 (1997).
81. Sacher F, Lochow E, Bethmann D, Brauch H-J. Occurrence of
drugs in surface waters. Vom Wasser 90:233 (1998).
82. Steger-Hartmann T, Kummerer K, Hartmann A. Biological degra-
dation of cyclophosphamide and its occurrence in sewage
water. Ecotoxicol Environ Safety 36:174-179 (1997).
83. KOmmerer K, Steger-Hartmann T, Meyer M. Biodegradability of
the anti-tumour agent ifosfamide and its occurrence in hospital
effluents and communal sewage. Wat Res 31(11):2705-2710
(1997).
84. Kummerer K, Helmers E, Hubner P, Mascart G, Milandri M,
Reinthaler F, Zwakenberg M. European hospital as a source for
platinum in the environment in comparison with other sources.
Sci Total Environ 225(1-2):155-165 (1999).
85. Falter R, Wilken R-0. Determination of carboplatinum and cis-
platinum by interfacing HPLC with ICP-MS using ultrasonic neb-
ulisation. Sci Total Environ 225(1-2):167-176 (1999).
86. White PA, Rasmussen JB. The genotoxic hazards of domestic
wastes in surface waters. Mutat Res 410:223-236 (1998).
87. Wilson EK. Impotence drugs: more than Viagra. Chem Eng
News 29:29-33 (1998).
88. Genicola FA. Personal communication. New Jersey Dept.
Environmental Protection Office of Quality Assurance.
Communication, 3 June 1999.
89. Maden M. Retinoic acid in development and regeneration.
J Biosciences 21(3(:299-312 (1996).
90. La Clair JJ, Bantle JA, Dumont J. Photoproducts and metabo-
lites of a common insect growth regulator produce developmen-
tal deformities in Xenopus. Environ Sci Technol 32(10):1453-
1461 (1998).
91. Kalsch W. Biodegradation of the iodinated X-ray contrast media
diatrizoate and iopromide. Sci Total Environ 225(1-2):143-153
(1999).
92. Ternes TA, Hirsch R. Occurrence and behavior of iodinated con-
trast media in the aquatic environment. Environ Sci Technol, in
press.
93. Steger-Hartmann T, L[nge R, Schweinfurth H. Umweltverhalten
und
bkotoxikologische
Berwertung
von
iodhaltigen
Rontgenkontrastmitteln. [Environmental behavior and ecotoxi-
cological assessment.] Vom Wasser 91:185-194 (1998).
94. Stevenson C, Davies RJH. Photosensitization of guanine-spe-
cific DNA damage by 2-phenylbenzimidazole and the sunscreen
agent 2-phenylbenzimidazole-5-sulfonic acid. Chem Res Toxicol
12)1Q):38 (1999).
95. Statistisches Bundesamt 1993. Monatlicher Produktionseilbericht -
Produktion ausgewdhiter Korperpflegemittel in Deutschland.
[Monthly Production Report - Production of Selected Personal
Care Products in Germany.] Wiesbaden, Germany: Statistische
Bundesamt,
96. Gatermann R, Huhnerfuss H, Rimkus G, Attar A, Kettrup A.
Occurrence of musk xylene and musk ketone metabolites in the
aquatic environment. Chemosphere 36(11):2535-2547 (1998).
97. Bronaugh RL, Yourick JJ, Havery DC. Dermal exposure assess-
ment for the fragrance musk xylol. Abstract No 274. In:
Proceedings of the Society of Toxicology 1998 Annual Meeting.
98. Muller S, Schmid P, Schlatter C. Occurrence of nitro and non-
nitro benzenoid musk compounds in human adipose tissue.
Chemosphere 33(1):17-28 (1996).
99. Kafferlein HU, Goen T, Angerer J. Musk xylene: analysis, occur-
rence, kinetics, and toxicology. Crit Rev Toxicol 28(5):431-476
(1998).
100. Yamagishi T, Miyazaki T, Horii S, Kaneko S. Identification of musk
xylene and musk ketone in freshwater fish collected from the
Tama River, Tokyo. Bull Environ Contam Toxicol 26:656-662 (1981).
101. Yamagishi T, Miyazaki T, Horii S, Akiyama K. Synthetic musk
residues in biota and water from Tama River and Tokyo Bay
(Japan). Arch Environ Contam Toxicol 12:83-89 (1983).
102. Geyer HJ, Rimkus G, Wolf M, Attar A, Steinberg C, Kettrup A.
Synthetische Nitromoschus-Duftstoffe and Bromocyclen - neue
Umweltchemikalien in Fischen und Muscheln bzw. Muttermilch
und Humanfett. [Synthetic nitro musk fragrances and bromocy-
cden-new environmental chemicals in fish and mussels as
well as in breast milk and human lipids.] Z Umweltchem Okotox
6)1):9-17 (1994).
103. Rimkus GG, Butte W, Geyer HJ. Critical considerations on the
analysis and bioaccumulation of musk xylene and other synthetic
nitro musks in fish. Chemosphere 35)7):1497-1507 (1997).
104. Winkler M, Kopf G, Hauptvogel C, Neu T. Fate of artificial musk
fragrances associated with suspended particulate matter (SPM)
from the River Elbe (Germany) in comparison to other organic
contaminants. Chemosphere 37(6):1139-1156 (1998).
105. Kirschner EM. Boomers quest for agelessness. Chem Eng News
75(16):19-25 (1997).
106. Draisci R, Marchiafava C, Ferretti E, Palleschi L, Catellani G,
Anastasio A. Evaluation of musk contamination of freshwater
fish in Italy by accelerated solvent extraction and gas chro-
matography with mass spectrometric detection. J Chromatogr A
814:187-197 (1998).
107. Mersch-Sundermanno V, Kevekordeso S, Jentero C. Lack of
mutagenicity of polycyclic musk fragrances in Salmonella
typhimurium. Toxicol in Vitro 12(4(:389-393 (1998).
108. Heberer Th, Gramer S, Stan H-J. Occurrence and distribution of
organic contaminants in the aquatic system in Berlin. Part iii:
Determination of synthetic musks in Berlin surface water apply-
ing solid-phase microextraction (SPME) and gas chromatogra-
phy-mass spectrometry (GC/MS). Acta Hydrochim Hydrobiol
27:150-156 (1999).
109. Kallenborn R, Gatermann R, Planting S, Rimkus GG, Lund M,
Schlabach M, Burkow IC. Gas chromatographic determination
of synthetic musk compounds in Norwegian air samples.J
Chromatogr A 846)1-2(:295-306 (1999).
110. Kevekordes S, Mersch-Sundermann V, Diez M, Bolten C,
Dunkelberg H. Genotoxicity of polycyclic musk fragrances in the
sister-chromatid exchange test. Anticancer Res 18:449-452
(1998).
111. Behechti A, Schramm K-W, Attar A, Niederfeliner J, Kettrup A.
Acute aquatic toxicities of four musk xylene derivatives on
Daphnia magna. Water Res 32(5):1704-1707 (1998).
112. Routledge EJ, Parker J, Odum J, Ashby J, Sumpter JP. Some
alkyl hydroxy benzoate preservatives (parabens) are estrogenic.
Toxicol Appi Pharmacol 153:12-19 (1998).
113. Okumura T, Nishikawa Y. Gas chromatography--mass spectrom-
etry determination of triclosans in water sediment and fish
samples via methylation with diazomethane. Analytica Chimica
Acta 325(3):175-184 (1996).
114. McMurry LM, Oethinger M, Levy SB. Triclosan targets lipid syn-
thesis. Nature 394(6693):531-532 (1998).
115. Nagtegaal M, Ternes TA, Baumann W, Nagel R. Nachweis von
UV-Filtersubstanzen
in Wasser und Fischen aus dem
Meerfelder Maar in der Eifel. Detection of UV-sunscreen agents
in water and fish of the Meerfelder Maar the Eifel Germany.
UWSF-Z for Umweltchem Okotox 9(2):79-86 (1997).
116. Hany J, Nagel R. Nachweis von UV-Filtersubstanzen in
Muttermilch. [Detection of UV-sunscreen agents in breast milk.]
Deutsche Lebensmittel 91:341-245 (1995).
117. Borman S. End run around FDA? Chem Eng News 1:45-47 (1998).
Also: Zeisel SH. Regulation of "nutraceuticals." Science
285:1853-1855 (1999).
118. Pharmanex, Inc. v. Donna Shalala. 2:97 CV 0262 K, 1999.
Available http://www.ljx.com/LJXfiles/fda/cholestin.html [cited
10 November 19991.
119. Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act of 1994 (DSHEA).
Pub L no 103-417, 108 Stat. 4325 (1994). Available:
http://odp.od.nih.gov/ods/about/law.html [cited 10 November
1 999].
120. NIH Office of Dietary Supplements. The International
Bibliographic Information on Dietary Supplements (IBIDS)
Database. Available: http://odp.odnih.gov/ods/databases/ibids.htmI
[cited 31 August 1999].
121. National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine.
Home Page. Available: http.//altmed.od.nih.gov/ nccam [cited
31 August 1999).
122. PharmaPrint. Home Page. Available: http.//wvvwpharmaprint.com
[cited 31 August 1999].
123. Shao Y, He K, Zheng B, Zheng G. Reversed-phase high-perfor-
mance liquid chromatographic method for quantitative analysis
of the six major kavalactones in Piper methysticum. J
Chromatogr A 825:1-8 (1998).
124. Cytotoxicology Laboratory, Uppsala. Home Page. Available:
http.//vwww.ctlu.se/CTLULHOME html. Available: http.//www.
ctlu.se/CTLU MEIC.html[cited 31 August 1999].
125. Lilius H, Hastbacka T, lsomaa B. A comparison of the toxicity of
30 reference chemicals to Daphnia magna and Daphnia pulex.
Environ Toxicol 14(12):2085-2088 (1995).
126. Calleja MC, Personne G, Geladi P. The predictive potential of a
battery of ecotoxicological tests for human acute toxicity.
Altern Lab Animals 21:330-349 (1993).
127. Kalbfus W, Kopf W. Erste Ans3tze zur dkotoxikologischen
Bewertung von Pharmaka in Oberflachengewassern (First
Attempts for the Ecotoxicological Assessment of Drugs in
Surface Waters). 51. Fachtagung Bayerisches Landesamt fOr
Wasserwirtschaft, 1996 [51st Meeting of Bavarian Ministry of
Water Economy, 1996). Munich, Germany, 1997.
128. Kurelec B. The genotoxic disease syndrome. Mar Environ Res
35:341-348 (1993).
129. Weiss B. Environmental health: nickel-and-diming it [Letter].
Science 282:1644 (1998).
130. Weiss B. A risk assessment perspective on the neurobehavioral
toxicity of endocrine disruptors. Toxicol
Ind Health
14(1-2(:341-359 (1998).
131. Grimes DJ, Singleton FL, Colwell RR. Allogenic succession of
marine bacterial communities in response to pharmaceutical
waste. J Appi Bateriol 57:247-261 (1984).
132. Azur Environmental. Microtox® Rapid Toxicity Testing System.
Available: http.//www.azurenv.com/mtox.htm [cited 31 August
1 999].
133. Tahedl H, Hader D-P. Fast examination of water quality using
the automatic biotest ECOTOX based on the movement behav-
ior of a freshwater flagellate. Wat Res 33(2):426-432 (1999).
134. OECD (Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and
Development). OECD's Guidelines for the Testing of Chemicals
Currently Available Test Guidelines, Draft Test Guidelines, and
Guidance and Review Documents. List Revised, October 1999.
Available: http.//www.oecd.org/ehs/test/testlist.htm [cited 10
November 1999).
Environmental Health Perspectives V Vol 107, Supplement 6 * December 1999
937

----- Page 32 (native) -----
DAUGHTON AND TERNES
135. OECD. (Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and
Development). Detailed Review Paper on Aquatic Testing
Methods for Pesticides and Industrial Chemicals. Part 1: Report,
1998, OECD Series on Testing and Assessment No. 11,
ENV/MC/CHEM(98)19/PART1. Available: http.//www.oecd.org/
ehs/ehsmono/index. htm#TESTING [cited 1 September 1999).
Also: Detailed Review Paper on Aquatic Testing Methods for
Pesticides and Industrial Chemicals
- Part 2: Annexes, 1998,
OECD
Series
on
Testing
and Assessment
No.
11,
ENV/MC/CHEM(98)19/PART2. Available: http.//wsw.oecd.org/
ehs/ehsmono/index.htm#TESTING [cited 1 September 19991.
136. U.S. EPA. Final Guidelines for Ecological Risk Assessment. Risk
Assessment Forum. EPA/630/R-95/002F. Washington, DC:U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, April 1998. Available:
http.//wwvvw.epa.gov/ncea/ecorsk.htm [cited 1 September 19991.
137. PhRMA (Pharmaceutical Research & Manufacturers Association).
Industry Profile 1998. Available: http.//www.phrma.org/ publica-
tions/lindustry/profile98/exec.htmlr[cited 31 August 1999].
138. PhRMA (Pharmaceutical
Research & Manufacturers
Association). New Drug Approvals in 1998. Available:
http.//www.phrma.org/charts/nda_c98.html[cited 31 August
1 999].
139. FDA (Food and Drug Administration) Modernization Act of 1997.
Available: http://www.fda.gov/opacom/backgrounders,
modact.htm
and
http.//www.fda.gov/cdrh/modact-
modem.html [cited 31 November 1999].
140. Eudralex (Rules Governing Medicinal Products in the European
Union). Vol 5: Pharmaceutical legislation: Veterinary Medicinal
Products. Available: http.//dg3.eudra.org/ eudralex/vol-
5/home.htm [cited 31 August 1999].
141. EMEA (The European Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal
Products: Veterinary Medicines Evaluation Unit). Note for
Guidance: Environmental Risk Assessment for Veterinary
Medical
Products
other
than
GMO-Containing
and
Immunological Products. The European Agency for the
Evaluation of Medicinal Products Veterinary Medicines
Evaluation Unit. EMEA/CVMP/055/96-Final, 1997. Available:
http://www.eudra.org/vetdocs/PDFs/GUIDE/005596en.pdf
[cited 11 November 1999].
142. OECD (Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and
Development). Environmental Exposure Assessment Strategies
for Existing Industrial Chemicals in OECD Member Countries.
1999,
Series
on
Testing
and Assessment
No.
17,
ENV/JM/MON0(99)10. Available: http.//www.oecd.org/ehs/
ehsmono/index. htm#TESTING[cited 1 September 1999].
143. The European Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products:
Veterinary Medicines Evaluation
Unit. Guideline on
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIAS) for Veterinary
Medicinal Products - Phase I. The European Agency for the
Evaluation of Medicinal Products Veterinary Medicines
Evaluation Unit. Canary Wharf, England. EMEA/CVMP/
592/98-consultation,
10 December
1998. Available:
http.//www.eudra.org/vetdocs/PDFs/VICH/059298en.pdf [cited
11 November1999].
144. Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council No.
98/8/EC (16 February 1998): On the placing of biocidal products
on the market. Available: http.//www.retroscreen.com/
BiocidalDirective/biocidal-directive.htm [cited 10 November
1 9991.
145. FDA (Food and Drug Administration). Guidance for Industry:
Environmental Assessment of Human Drug and Biologics
Application. CDER/CBER CMC 6, rev 1, 39 pp, July 1998.
Available: http.//www.fda.gov/cber/guidelines.htm [cited:
1
September 1999].
146. National Research Council, Science and Judgment in Risk
Assessment. Washington, DC:National Academy Press, 1994,
672 pp. Available: http.//books.nap.edu/catalog/2125.html
[cited 31 August 19991.
147. Jenkins AL, Uy OM, Murray GM. Polymer-based lanthanide
luminescent sensor for detection of the hydrolysis product of
the nerve agent soman in water. Anal Chem 71(2):373-378
(1999).
148. National Institute of Standards and Technology. NIST/EPA/NIH
Mass Spectral Library - NIST 98). Available: http.//
www.nist.gov/srd/nistla.htm [cited 1 September 19991.
149. Steger-Hartmann T, Kummerer K, Schecker J. Trace analysis of
the antineoplastics ifosfamide and cyclophosphamide in
sewage water by two-step solid-phase extraction and gas chro-
matography-mass spectrometry. J Chromatogr A 726:179-184
(1996).
150. Belfroid AC, Van der Horst A, Vethaak AD, Schafer AJ, Rijs GBJ,
Wegener J, Cofino WP. Analysis and occurrence of estrogenic
hormones and their glucuronides in surface water and waste
water in the Netherlands. Sci Total Environ 225(1-2):101-108
(1999).
151. Burhenne J, Ludwig M, Nikoloudis P, Spiteller M. Photolytic
degradation of fluoroquinolone carboxylic acids in aqueous
solution. Part l: Primary photoproducts and half-lives. Environ
Sci Pollut Res 4(1):10-15 (1997).
152. Burhenne J, Ludwig M, Spiteller M. Photolytic degradation of
fluoroquinolone carboxylic acids in aqueous solution. Part Il:
Isolation and structural elucidation of polar photometabolites.
Environ Sci Pollut Res 4(2):61-67 (1997).
153. Hartmann A, Golet EM, Gartiser S, Alder AC, Koller T,
Widmer RM. Primary DNA damage but not mutagenicity cor-
relates with Ciprofloxacin concentrations in German hospital
wastewaters. Arch Environ Contam Toxicol 36:115-119
11999).
154. Gatermann R, Hellou J, Huhnerfuss H, Rimkus G, Zitko V.
Polycyclic and nitro musks in the environment: a comparison
between Canadian and European aquatic biota. Chemosphere
38(14):3431-3441 (1999).
938
Environmental Health Perspectives * Vol 107. Supplement 6 * December 1999