

----- Page 1 (native) -----
Atmos. Chem. Phys., 6, 3181–3210, 2006
www.atmos-chem-phys.net/6/3181/2006/
© Author(s) 2006. This work is licensed
under a Creative Commons License.
Atmospheric
Chemistry
and Physics
Estimates of global terrestrial isoprene emissions using MEGAN
(Model of Emissions of Gases and Aerosols from Nature)
A. Guenther1, T. Karl1, P. Harley1, C. Wiedinmyer1, P. I. Palmer2, and C. Geron3
1Atmospheric Chemistry Division, National Center for Atmospheric Research, 1850 Table Mesa Drive, Boulder Colorado,
80305, USA
2School of Earth and Environment, University of Leeds, Leeds, LS2 9JT, UK
3National Risk Management Research Laboratory, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 109 TW Alexander Dr., Research
Triangle Park, NC, 27711, USA
Received: 16 November 2005 – Published in Atmos. Chem. Phys. Discuss.: 3 January 2006
Revised: 2 June 2006 – Accepted: 29 June 2006 – Published: 2 August 2006
Abstract. Reactive gases and aerosols are produced by ter-
restrial ecosystems, processed within plant canopies, and can
then be emitted into the above-canopy atmosphere.
Esti-
mates of the above-canopy ﬂuxes are needed for quantita-
tive earth system studies and assessments of past, present
and future air quality and climate. The Model of Emissions
of Gases and Aerosols from Nature (MEGAN) is described
and used to quantify net terrestrial biosphere emission of iso-
prene into the atmosphere. MEGAN is designed for both
global and regional emission modeling and has global cov-
erage with ∼1 km2 spatial resolution. Field and laboratory
investigations of the processes controlling isoprene emission
are described and data available for model development and
evaluation are summarized. The factors controlling isoprene
emissions include biological, physical and chemical driving
variables. MEGAN driving variables are derived from mod-
els and satellite and ground observations. Tropical broadleaf
trees contribute almost half of the estimated global annual
isoprene emission due to their relatively high emission fac-
tors and because they are often exposed to conditions that
are conducive for isoprene emission.
The remaining ﬂux
is primarily from shrubs which have a widespread distribu-
tion. The annual global isoprene emission estimated with
MEGAN ranges from about 500 to 750 Tg isoprene (440
to 660 Tg carbon) depending on the driving variables which
include temperature, solar radiation, Leaf Area Index, and
plant functional type. The global annual isoprene emission
estimated using the standard driving variables is ∼600 Tg
isoprene.
Differences in driving variables result in emis-
sion estimates that differ by more than a factor of three for
speciﬁc times and locations. It is difﬁcult to evaluate iso-
Correspondence to: A. Guenther
(guenther@ucar.edu)
prene emission estimates using the concentration distribu-
tions simulated using chemistry and transport models, due to
the substantial uncertainties in other model components, but
at least some global models produce reasonable results when
using isoprene emission distributions similar to MEGAN es-
timates. In addition, comparison with isoprene emissions es-
timated from satellite formaldehyde observations indicates
reasonable agreement. The sensitivity of isoprene emissions
to earth system changes (e.g., climate and land-use) demon-
strates the potential for large future changes in emissions.
Using temperature distributions simulated by global climate
models for year 2100, MEGAN estimates that isoprene emis-
sions increase by more than a factor of two. This is consid-
erably greater than previous estimates and additional obser-
vations are needed to evaluate and improve the methods used
to predict future isoprene emissions.
1
Introduction
Chemicals produced by the biosphere include volatile com-
pounds that are emitted into the air where they can have a
substantial impact on the chemistry of the atmosphere. These
biogenic gases are dominated by volatile organic compounds
(VOCs) both in total mass and number of compounds. The
impact of biogenic VOCs on global chemistry and climate
has been investigated using global models (e.g., Houweling
et al., 1998; Guenther et al., 1999a; Granier et al., 2000;
Poisson et al., 2000; Collins et al., 2002; Sanderson et al.,
2003) while regional air quality models have included bio-
genic VOC emissions in efforts to develop pollution control
strategies (e.g., Pierce et al., 1998). Biogenic VOC emis-
sions were included as inputs to regulatory regional oxidant
Published by Copernicus GmbH on behalf of the European Geosciences Union.

----- Page 2 (native) -----
3182
A. Guenther et al.: MEGAN estimates of global isoprene
models in the mid 1980s (Pierce and Waldruff, 1991) and
by the 1990s were routinely included in chemical transport
models, but typically as off-line, static emission inventories.
There is increasing demand for biogenic emission algorithms
that can be integrated into regional and global models. This
facilitates studies of earth system interactions and feedbacks
and ensures consistency between landcover and weather vari-
ables used for atmospheric and land surface process models.
Although hundreds of biogenic VOC have been identiﬁed,
two compounds dominate the annual global ﬂux to the at-
mosphere: methane and isoprene. Biogenic methane emis-
sions have primarily been associated with microbial sources,
although Keppler et al. (2006) have recently proposed that
living foliage is a major source of atmospheric methane. In
contrast, terrestrial plant foliage is thought to be the source of
>90% of atmospheric isoprene. Minor sources of isoprene
include microbes, animals (including humans) and aquatic
organisms (Wagner et al., 1999). Methane and isoprene each
comprise about a third of the annual global VOC emission
from all natural and anthropogenic sources. The remaining
third is the sum of hundreds of compounds. Methane is a
long-lived (years) compound with a relatively well mixed
distribution throughout the atmosphere while isoprene is
short-lived (minutes to hours) with atmospheric concentra-
tions that vary several orders of magnitude over a time scale
of less than one day and over spatial scales of less than a
few km. As a result, we can be relatively certain of the an-
nual global emission of methane, based on estimates of the
global atmospheric burden and the average lifetime; how-
ever, the annual global isoprene emission is much less well
constrained. Satellite-derived global distributions of isoprene
oxidation products (e.g., formaldehyde and carbon monox-
ide) are beginning to provide constraints on global isoprene
emission rates but they too are associated with signiﬁcant un-
certainties and they cannot provide estimates of past (pre-
satellite era) and future emissions. There remains a need for
models that can estimate past, current and future isoprene
emissions.
In the early 1990s, the International Global Atmospheric
Chemistry (IGAC) Global Emissions Inventory Activity
(GEIA) initiated working groups to develop global emission
inventories on a 1 degree by 1 degree grid for use in global
chemistry and transport models (Graedel et al., 1993). The
IGAC-GEIA natural VOC working group developed a model
of emissions of isoprene and other VOC (Guenther et al.,
1995). A regional biogenic emission model, the Biogenic
Emissions Inventory System or BEIS (Pierce and Waldruff,
1991), was developed in the mid 1980s and replaced by a sec-
ond generation model, BEIS2 (Pierce et al., 1998), in the mid
1990s. This manuscript describes the Model of Emissions
of Gases and Aerosols from Nature (MEGAN) which was
developed to replace both the Guenther et al. (1995) global
emission model and the BEIS/BEIS2/BEIS3 regional emis-
sion models. We focus in this paper on isoprene emissions
and will describe MEGAN procedures for simulating emis-
sions of other gases and aerosols elsewhere. Field and lab-
oratory investigations of the processes controlling isoprene
emission are described in this manuscript and data available
for model development and evaluation are summarized. The
model procedures are described and predicted emissions and
the associated uncertainties are discussed and compared to
top down emission estimates. Model simulations of the re-
sponse of isoprene emissions to earth system changes (e.g.,
climate, chemistry and landcover) are presented and used to
identify major uncertainties. Other aspects of isoprene emis-
sion (e.g., biological roles, inﬂuence on atmospheric chem-
istry) have been described elsewhere (e.g., Fuentes et al.,
2000).
2
Isoprene observations
Enclosure methods were ﬁrst used to study biogenic VOC
emissions in the late 1920s (Isidorov, 1990).
In the fol-
lowing 75 years, investigators enclosed thousands of leaves,
branches and whole plants in bags, jars, and cuvettes to char-
acterize ﬂuxes of isoprene and other VOCs.
The earliest
studies focused on monoterpenes (see Went, 1960; Isidorov,
1990) but the co-discovery of abundant emissions of iso-
prene from some plant species by Rasmussen and Went
(1965) in the U.S. and Sanadze (1957) in the former So-
viet Union led to considerable interest in emissions of this
compound. Wiedinmyer et al. (2004) reviewed the scien-
tiﬁc literature describing enclosure measurements of foliar
emissions of isoprene and other biogenic VOC (BVOC) and
have compiled this information into an online database (see
http://bvoc.acd.ucar.edu). The database includes the results
of ∼140 studies that have characterized isoprene emissions
from hundreds of plant species using enclosure measurement
systems.
Rasmussen and Went (1965) extrapolated a few biogenic
VOC enclosure observations to the global scale by simply
multiplying a typical emission rate by the global area cov-
ered by vegetation and the fraction of the year that plants are
growing. The resulting annual total (isoprene plus all other
non-methane biogenic VOC) ﬂux estimate of 438 Tg (1012 g)
is about a factor of three lower than the estimate of Guenther
et al. (1995). This simple approach can be used to establish
an upper bound global isoprene emission estimate. The high-
est leaf-level isoprene emission rates are ∼150 µg g−1 h−1.
If all leaves emitted continuously at this rate, the global an-
nual isoprene emission would exceed 25 Gt (1015 g). How-
ever, the actual global annual isoprene emission is about 2%
of this rate due to environmental conditions that are not opti-
mal for isoprene emission and because not all plants have the
ability to emit substantial amounts of isoprene.
Guenther et al. (1995) relied primarily on enclosure mea-
surement studies to assign leaf level isoprene emission fac-
tors to 72 global ecosystems.
The emission factors for
about half of these ecosystems were assigned based on
Atmos. Chem. Phys., 6, 3181–3210, 2006
www.atmos-chem-phys.net/6/3181/2006/

----- Page 3 (native) -----
A. Guenther et al.: MEGAN estimates of global isoprene
3183
observations reported in twenty publications and the remain-
ing ecosystems were assigned default values. Only three of
the twenty publications included studies from tropical re-
gions even though the tropics were estimated to contribute
∼80% of global annual isoprene emissions. Furthermore,
the emission activity algorithms that describe the response
of isoprene to temperature and light were based on inves-
tigations of temperate plants growing in temperate weather
conditions and had not been evaluated by any measurements
in the tropics.
Thousands of isoprene emission rate measurements have
been made using enclosure techniques in the decade since the
Guenther et al. (1995) model was developed. Many of these
enclosure measurements have been incorporated into the iso-
prene emission factors used for MEGAN. Recent studies
have also shown that much of the observed isoprene variabil-
ity among plant species with signiﬁcant emission rates (e.g.,
Quercus, Liquidambar, Nyssa, Populus, Salix, and Robinia
species) can be attributed to weather, plant physiology and
the location of a leaf within the canopy rather than genet-
ics (Geron et al., 2000). Other studies have characterized
how emissions respond to various factors including leaf age
(Monson et al., 1994; Petron et al., 2001), nutrient availabil-
ity (Harley et al., 1994), past weather conditions (Sharkey et
al., 2000) and the chemical composition of the atmosphere
(Velikova et al., 2005; Rosentiel et al., 2003). Of particular
importance for global modeling, many more measurements
have been conducted in tropical landscapes (Keller and Ler-
dau, 1999; Guenther et al., 1999a; Kesselmeier et al., 2000;
Klinger et al., 2002; Kuhn et al., 2002; Harley et al., 2004).
Accompanying these emission measurements have been ef-
forts to process tree inventory data into a format suitable for
characterizing regional isoprene emission distributions.
Enclosure measurements of isoprene emission rates can
be extrapolated to the whole canopy scale using canopy en-
vironment models. The resulting canopy emission rate es-
timates are associated with substantial uncertainties due to
1) a limited understanding of chemical sinks and deposition
losses within vegetation canopies, 2) artiﬁcially disturbed
emission rates due to the enclosure, 3) differences between
the functioning of individual ecosystem components (e.g.
leaves) and the entire ecosystem, and 4) limited sample size
within the enclosure (relative to the whole landscape), as
well as uncertainties associated with canopy microclimate
models themselves. Direct measurements of above canopy
ﬂuxes are suitable for characterizing whole canopy ﬂuxes
and are fortunately becoming increasingly available to pa-
rameterize key global ecosystems. Above canopy isoprene
ﬂux measurement systems continue to become more reli-
able and widespread than in the past. Isoprene ﬂuxes can
now be measured routinely using eddy ﬂux techniques such
as relaxed eddy accumulation (e.g., Guenther et al., 1996)
and eddy covariance (Guenther and Hills, 1998). In addi-
tion to these direct ﬂux measurement methods, inverse mod-
eling and gradient approaches use isoprene concentrations
obtained from aircraft and tethered balloon sampling plat-
forms to characterize isoprene emissions across spatial scales
of tens to hundreds of km2 (e.g., Greenberg et al., 1999). The
geographical distribution of the ﬁeld measurements at ∼90
sites used to assign the isoprene emission factor distributions
described in this manuscript is illustrated in Fig. 1. Measure-
ments from more than 80 laboratory studies were also incor-
porated into the development of the model algorithms and
emission factors described in this manuscript. While these
studies have greatly improved our ability to simulate regional
to global isoprene emissions, it should be recognized that the
results continue to be based on a very limited set of observa-
tions relative to the large variability that occurs in the earth
system.
3
MEGAN model description
MEGAN estimates the net emission rate (mg compound m−2
earth surface h−1) of isoprene and other trace gases and
aerosols from terrestrial ecosystems into the above-canopy
atmosphere at a speciﬁc location and time as
Emission=[ε][γ ][ρ]
(1)
where ε (mg m−2 h−1) is an emission factor which repre-
sents the emission of a compound into the canopy at stan-
dard conditions, γ (normalized ratio) is an emission activ-
ity factor that accounts for emission changes due to devia-
tions from standard conditions and ρ (normalized ratio) is
a factor that accounts for production and loss within plant
canopies. The use of standard conditions enables emission
rates observed under various conditions to be incorporated
into the model. It does not imply that all ﬁeld observations
should be made at these conditions. The MEGAN canopy-
scale emission factor differs from most other biogenic emis-
sion models which use a leaf-scale emission factor. Although
canopy-scale measurements are becoming more available,
the MEGAN canopy-scale emission factors are still primar-
ily based on leaf and branch-scale emission measurements
that are extrapolated to the canopy-scale using a canopy en-
vironment model. The standard conditions for the MEGAN
canopy-scale emission factors include a leaf area index, LAI,
of 5 and a canopy with 80% mature, 10% growing and 10%
old foliage; current environmental conditions including a so-
lar angle (degrees from horizon to sun) of 60 degrees, a pho-
tosynthetic photon ﬂux density (PPFD) transmission (ratio of
PPFD at the top of the canopy to PPFD at the top of the atmo-
sphere) of 0.6, air temperature=303 K, humidity=14 g kg−1,
wind speed=3 m s−1 and soil moisture=0.3 m3 m−3; average
canopy environmental conditions of the past 24 to 240 h in-
clude leaf temperature=297 K and PPFD=200 µmol m−2 s−1
for sun leaves and 50 µmol m−2 s−1 for shade leaves. The
factor γ is equal to unity at these standard conditions. Note
that a solar angle of 60 degrees and a PPFD transmission of
0.6 results in a PPFD of ∼1500 µmol m−2 s−1 at the top of
www.atmos-chem-phys.net/6/3181/2006/
Atmos. Chem. Phys., 6, 3181–3210, 2006

----- Page 4 (native) -----
3184
A. Guenther et al.: MEGAN estimates of global isoprene
ISOPRENE 
FIELD STUDY 
LOCATIONS
Fig. 1. Geographic distribution of Olson et al. (2001) ecoregions and the locations of isoprene ﬁeld measurement studies used to develop
isoprene emission factors.
the canopy. Emissions are calculated for each plant func-
tional type (PFT) and summed to estimate the total emis-
sion for a location. MEGAN is a global scale model with
a base resolution of ∼1 km2 (30 s latitude by 30 s longitude)
enabling both regional scale and global scale simulations.
The recommended approach for estimating each of the
variables in Eq. (1) is application dependent. MEGAN in-
cludes a standard method as well as options that provide
ﬂexibility for users with limited availability of driving vari-
ables or computational resources.
The standard approach
and available options, and the required driving variables, are
summarized in Table 1. The model algorithms and driving
variables are described in more detail in the following sec-
tions and are available at http://bai.acd.ucar.edu.
3.1
Emission factor, ε
Isoprene is emitted by soil bacteria, algae, and in the breath
of animals (including humans) as well as plants (Wagner et
al. 1999). Only vegetation emissions have been shown to
occur at levels that can inﬂuence atmospheric composition
although relatively little is known about soil bacteria. The
isoprene emission rates of different plant species range from
<0.1 to >100 µg g−1 h−1. Very low and very high emitters
often occur within a given plant family and even within some
globally important plant genera including Quercus (oaks),
Picea (spruce), Abies (ﬁrs) and Acacia. The large taxonomic
variability makes the characterization of isoprene emission
factor distributions a challenging task.
MEGAN uses an approach that divides the surface of
each grid cell into different PFTs and non-vegetated surface.
The PFT approach enables the MEGAN canopy environment
model to simulate different light and temperature distribu-
tions for different canopy types (e.g., broadleaf trees and
needle trees). In addition, PFTs can have different LAI and
leaf age seasonal patterns (e.g., evergreen and deciduous).
MEGAN accounts for regional ε variations using geographi-
cally gridded databases of emission factors for each PFT. For
example, the needle evergreen tree isoprene ε of one grid cell
can differ from that of a neighboring location.
Four different emission factor schemes are illustrated in
Tables 1 and 2. The number of vegetation types identiﬁed in
a scheme ranges from one (PFT-1) to unlimited (PFT-REG).
Classiﬁcation schemes with more categories can be collapsed
into those with fewer categories. The PFT-REG scheme is
used for regional emission modeling simulations. The stan-
dard MEGAN global classiﬁcation scheme, PFT-7, includes
seven PFTs: broadleaf evergreen trees, broadleaf deciduous
trees, needle evergreen trees, needle deciduous trees, shrubs,
crops, and grass plus other ground cover (e.g., sedges, forbs,
and mosses). The PFT-1 scheme, designed for simple sim-
ulations, has a single isoprene ε for each location and re-
quires considerably less computational resources and fewer
driving variables. The global distribution of the MEGAN
PFT-1 emission factor is shown in Fig. 2 with a base reso-
lution of 30 s (∼1 km). Emission factor hotspots include the
southeastern U.S. and southeastern Australia. Figure 2 il-
lustrates the considerable variation in ε that occurs on both
global and regional (10–100 km) scales. The small scale vari-
ability estimated by MEGAN is important for regional mod-
eling simulations due to the short lifetime of isoprene and the
non-linear chemistry that determines the impact of isoprene
on the chemistry of the atmosphere.
Table 3 illustrates how the global average isoprene emis-
sion factors differ between and within PFTs. Broadleaf trees
and shrubs have the highest average emission factor. The av-
erage needle evergreen tree isoprene emission factor is about
Atmos. Chem. Phys., 6, 3181–3210, 2006
www.atmos-chem-phys.net/6/3181/2006/

----- Page 5 (native) -----
A. Guenther et al.: MEGAN estimates of global isoprene
3185
Table 1. Description of standard method and available options for calculating MEGAN variables in Eqs. (1) and (2).
Variable
Standard method
Alternative methods
Emission factor (ε)
Use the MEGAN PFT speciﬁc ε and PFT
cover databases
1. MEGAN PFT-1 database, with a single ε for each
location.
2. MEGAN PFT-speciﬁc ε with user provided PFT
cover distributions. This approach can be used for
past and future simulations.
3. PFT-REG database which can be extended with
user supplied data.
Canopy environment
emission activity fac-
tor (γCE)
The MEGAN canopy environment model
is used to estimate hourly leaf-level PPFD
and temperature of sun and shade leaves
at each canopy depth as function of
PFT type, monthly LAI, hourly tempera-
ture, solar radiation (including diffuse and
PPFD fractions), wind speed, humidity,
and soil moisture.
Equations (4–9) are
then used to estimate γCE from current
and past canopy climate.
1. Solar radiation can be estimated from cloud cover.
Diffuse and PPFD fractions can be estimated from
solar radiation and sun angle.
2. Hourly weather conditions can be estimated from
daily minimum and maximum temperature and
daily average values of solar radiation, humidity,
wind speed, and soil moisture.
3. MEGAN PFT-1 ε database which requires only
one PFT and LAI value for each location.
4. The MEGAN PCEEA algorithm, described by
Eqs. (10) through (15), which requires only LAI,
solar transmission, and monthly temperature and
PPFD.
Leaf age emission ac-
tivity factor (γage)
Estimate with Eqs. (16–19) as a function
of current and previous (within the past 7
to 30 days) LAI and average temperature.
1. Assume a constant value (γage=1).
2. Estimate γage as a function of LAI using Eq. (16).
3. Use Eq. (16) with user provided estimates of leaf
age (Fmat, Fnew, Fgro , Fsen in Eq. 16).
Soil moisture emis-
sion
activity
factor
(γSM)
Estimate with Eq. (20) as a function of
soil moisture and wilting point
1. Assume a constant value (γSM=1).
2. Use γSM distributions provided on MEGAN data
portal.
Canopy loss and pro-
duction (ρISO,ISO)
Estimate with Eq. (21) as a function of
canopy depth, friction velocity, and chem-
ical lifetime
1. Assume a constant value (ρISO,ISO=0.96).
a factor of six lower than the average broadleaf tree emission
factor. The needle deciduous tree and grass PFTs have aver-
age emission factors that are about a factor of 20 lower than
the average broadleaf tree emission factor, while the crop
isoprene emission factor is about two orders of magnitude
lower. The substantial differences in these global average
isoprene emission factors demonstrates the value of the PFT-
7 approach but Table 3 also shows that there is considerable
variability associated with the isoprene emission factors as-
signed to different species within a single PFT. For example,
the isoprene emission factor for broadleaf trees ranges from
0.1 to 30 mg m−2 h−1. Global total isoprene emissions can
be approximated using a constant emission factor for each of
the seven PFTs but this will introduce signiﬁcant errors due
to correlations between ε and γ distributions. For example,
the broadleaf trees that grow in montane and boreal regions
often have high isoprene emission factors but low isoprene
emission activity factors. Furthermore, there will be sub-
stantial errors in estimates for any location where ε deviates
signiﬁcantly from the PFT average ε.
www.atmos-chem-phys.net/6/3181/2006/
Atmos. Chem. Phys., 6, 3181–3210, 2006

----- Page 6 (native) -----
3186
A. Guenther et al.: MEGAN estimates of global isoprene
Table 2. Examples of plant species assignments for MEGAN PFT classiﬁcation schemes.
Plant species
Classiﬁcation schemes
Scientiﬁc name
Common name
PFT-1
PFT-7
PFT-CLM
PFT-REG
Pinus Ponderosa
Ponderosa Pine
Veg
Needle evergreen Tree
Needle
evergreen
temperate tree
Pine tree
Larix decidua
European larch
Veg
Needle deciduous tree
Needle deciduous bo-
real
Larch tree
Hymenaea courbaril
Jatoba
Veg
Broadleaf evergreen tree
Broadleaf
evergreen
tropical tree
Broadleaf
evergreen
tropical tree
Quercus douglasii
Blue oak
Veg
Broadleaf deciduous tree
Broadleaf
deciduous
temperate tree
Deciduous oak tree
Larrea tridentata
Creosote bush
Veg
Shrub
Broadleaf evergreen
shrub
Tall desert shrub
Juniperus horizontalis
Creeping juniper
Veg
Shrub
Not applicable
Needle evergreen
shrub
Pseudoroegneria spicata
Bluebunch wheatgrass
Veg
Grass and other ground cover
C3 non-arctic grass
Bunchgrass
Sphagnum capillifolium
Peat moss
Veg
Grass and other ground cover
Not applicable
Moss
Zea mays
Corn
Veg
Crop
Corn
Corn
Oryza sativa
Rice
Veg
Crop
Not Applicable
Rice
Table 3. Global average emission factors, ε (mg isoprene m−2 h−1), land area (106 km2) and percent contribution to the annual global and
regional isoprene emission associated with major plant functional types. The range of land area estimates is based on the PFT databases
described in Table 2.
Broadleaf
Needle
Needle
Evergreen and
Evergreen
Deciduous
Grass
Decid. Trees
Trees
Trees
Shrubs
Crops
and other
Global ε:
Average
12.6
2.0
0.7
10.7
0.09
0.5
Range
0.1 to 30
0.01–13
0.01–2
0.1 to 30
0.01 to 1
0.004 to 1.2
Global land area
13.4 to 38.5
8.6 to 20.0
1.3 to 3.9
15.6 to 24.4
8 to 36.5
17.2 to 38.6
Isoprene
Tropical
45%
<0.01%
<0.01%
28%
0.3%
0.6%
Emission
Temperate
4.8%
0.3%
<0.01%
4.5%
<0.01%
0.3%
Mediterranean
0.2%
0.1%
<0.01%
1.5%
<0.01%
<0.01%
Boreal/Tundra
0.3%
0.4%
<0.01%
1.0%
<0.01%
0.2%
Arid lands
0.3%
0.1%
<0.01%
11%
<0.01%
0.2%
Global
51%
1.1%
<0.01%
46%
0.3%
1.4%
Isoprene emission factor distributions for each PFT were
estimated by combining the isoprene observations described
in Sect. 2 with landcover information that includes ground
measurement inventories, satellite based inventories, and
ecoregion descriptions. The available landcover and isoprene
observations differ considerably for different PFTs and geo-
graphic regions. In some cases, vegetation inventories were
combined with satellite observations to generate high reso-
lution (e.g., 30 m to 1 km) species composition distributions,
while in other cases general descriptions were used to char-
acterize global ecoregions. A description of these methods is
given below.
Since geographical distributions of PFTs and PFT-speciﬁc
isoprene emission factors change with time, the distributions
used to estimate emissions should be representative of the
time period being simulated. Climate and land management
change can substantially modify species composition and to-
tal vegetation cover, and therefore PFT and ε values, on time
scales of weeks to centuries. Emission model investigations
of changes in species composition and total vegetation have
estimated that signiﬁcant (10%) isoprene emission changes
can occur on a time scale of 25 years for climate driven
changes (Martin and Guenther, 1995), 10 years for land
management practices such as overgrazing (Guenther et al.,
1999b) and two years for land management practices such
as cropland abandonment (Schaab et al., 2000). Other land
management practices, such as forest clear-cutting, could re-
sult in large changes in isoprene emissions over a period of
weeks. These studies show that global PFT and ε databases
are needed on a time scale of ∼25 years for simulating global
earth system changes.
A considerably shorter time scale,
weeks to a decade, may be required for regional studies in-
vestigating the impacts of land cover change.
Atmos. Chem. Phys., 6, 3181–3210, 2006
www.atmos-chem-phys.net/6/3181/2006/

----- Page 7 (native) -----
A. Guenther et al.: MEGAN estimates of global isoprene
3187
Jackson
Atlanta
Memphis
Charlotte
Nashville
Frankfort
St. Louis
Montgomery
Charleston
Little Rock
Jefferson City
Atlanta
Sydney
Canberra
Adelaide
Melbourne
Newcastle
Sydney
Isoprene
Emission Factor
mg/m2/h
< 1
1 - 2
2 - 4
4 - 8
8 - 12
12 - 16
> 16
Fig. 2. Global distribution of landscape-average isoprene emission factors (mg isoprene m−2 h−1). Spatial variability at the base resolution
(∼1 km) is shown by regional images of the southeastern U.S. and southeastern Australia.
3.1.1
Trees
Trees have been the focus of most isoprene emission rate
measurement studies and there is a relatively large database
for assigning tree emission factors. Trees are also economi-
cally valuable which has led to the compilation of high res-
olution geographically referenced tree inventories in Eura-
sia (e.g., France, Germany, United Kingdom, Japan, China,
Russia), North America (e.g., U.S., Canada), Africa (south
of the equator), Australia and New Zealand. Biogenic emis-
sion inventories have been developed using summaries (i.e.,
county, province, national totals) based on this information
(e.g., Geron et al., 1994; Klinger et al., 2002; Otter et al.,
2003; and Simpson et al., 1999). MEGAN integrates plot
level species composition data, where available, and regional
summaries, for other regions, into the MEGAN PFT-REG
database which currently covers all or parts of Eurasia, North
America, Australia and New Zealand. The MEGAN PFT-
REG distributions and associated species speciﬁc emission
factors are used as the basis for weighted average emission
factors used with the PFT-CLM, PFT-7, and PFT-1 databases
to maintain consistency between regional and global esti-
mates.
For regions without quantitative tree inventories, isoprene
emission factors are assigned to the 867 ecoregions in the
digital terrestrial ecoregion database developed by Olson et
al. (2001) and illustrated in Fig. 1. The assigned ε are based
on ecoregion descriptions of common plant species and avail-
able isoprene emissions measurements.
A default value,
based on the global average for other regions, is assigned
if no measurements are available for characterizing trees in
the ecoregion. This scheme provides global coverage using
an approach that contains sufﬁcient resolution to simulate
biogeographical units with similar isoprene emission char-
acteristics. The Olson et al. (2001) database is the product
of over 1000 biogeographers, taxonomists, conservation bi-
ologists and ecologists from around the world. Most ecore-
gions include a fairly detailed description of the dominant
www.atmos-chem-phys.net/6/3181/2006/
Atmos. Chem. Phys., 6, 3181–3210, 2006

----- Page 8 (native) -----
3188
A. Guenther et al.: MEGAN estimates of global isoprene
Broadleaf Trees 
Shrubs
Fineleaf Evergreen Trees 
Fineleaf Deciduous Trees 
Grass and other
Crops
< 0.05
0.25 - 0.5
0.5 - 1
1 - 2
2 - 4
4 - 8
8 - 16
Isoprene
Emission
Factor
(mg/m2/h)
0.05-0.25
16 - 33
Fig. 3. Global distribution of isoprene emission factors for the MEGAN PFTs.
plant species found within the region. Uncertainties asso-
ciated with ε distributions for tropical broadleaf trees are a
major component of the overall uncertainty in global iso-
prene emission estimates. Figure 1 shows that there are other
large regions, such as boreal forests and tundra forests of
Siberia, with no reported observations. All of the dominant
tree genera in Siberia have been sampled in other regions but
Siberian tree species could have different emission charac-
teristics. Accurate emission rates for any region are strongly
dependent on the availability of accurate emission rate mea-
surements of the regionally dominant species.
Figure 3 illustrates the global distribution of PFT spe-
ciﬁc isoprene emission factors.
Broadleaf tree isoprene
emission factors are close to the PFT global average of
12.6 mg m−2 h−1 in most regions but are <1 mg m−2 h−1 and
∼20 mg m−2 h−1in other regions. Needle evergreen tree ε
range from >4 mg m−2 h−1 in Canada to <0.5 in the U.S.
and Europe. The isoprene emission factors for needle de-
ciduous trees are generally very low since this PFT is domi-
nated by trees, e.g., larch (Larix), that do not emit substantial
amounts of isoprene.
3.1.2
Shrubs, grass and other vegetation
In comparison with trees, there are relatively few measure-
ments of isoprene emission factors for shrub, grass, and
other plant species.
In addition, there is less quantitative
data on distributions of these plants due to their lesser eco-
nomic importance. However, some countries (e.g., United
States, United Kingdom) have landcover characterization ef-
forts that include shrubs and ground cover and this informa-
tion is being incorporated into the MEGAN emission factors.
Shrub emission factors are based on available shrub emis-
sion measurements and descriptions of shrub species distri-
butions from quantitative ground surveys, in the U.S. only, or
estimates based on descriptions of dominant species in each
of the 867 Olson ecoregions. The resulting emission fac-
tor distribution is illustrated in Fig. 3. The relatively large
uncertainty associated with shrub emission factors and the
substantial global emission results in a large contribution of
shrub isoprene emission to the overall uncertainty in global
isoprene emission estimates.
Isoprene emission is rarely observed from plants that are
entirely “non-woody”. A rare example is the spider-lily, Hy-
menocallis americana (Geron et al., 2006). However, there
are a number of isoprene-emitting plants that fall within the
MEGAN PFT for grass and other vegetation. Some of the
Atmos. Chem. Phys., 6, 3181–3210, 2006
www.atmos-chem-phys.net/6/3181/2006/

----- Page 9 (native) -----
A. Guenther et al.: MEGAN estimates of global isoprene
3189
important isoprene emitting genera in this category include
Phragmites (a reed), Carex (a sedge), Stipa (a grass) and
Sphagnum (a moss). Reported isoprene emission factors for
herbaceous cover range from ∼0.004 mg m−2 h−1 for grass-
lands in Australia (Kirstine et al., 1998) and central U.S.
(Fukui and Doskey, 1998) to ∼0.4 mg m−2 h−1 for a grass-
land in China (Bai et al., 2006) and ∼1.2 mg m−2 h−1 for
forests and wetlands in southern U.S. (Zimmerman, 1979),
northern U.S. (Isebrands et al., 1999), Canada (Klinger et al.,
1994) and Scandanavia (Janson et al., 1999). One of these
three values is assigned to the grass and other vegetation PFT
in each of the 867 ecoregions to develop the emission factor
distribution shown in Fig. 3.
3.1.3
Crops
At least one enclosure measurement has characterized each
of the 25 globally dominant crop genera and none have been
found to emit isoprene (see http://bvoc.acd.ucar.edu). How-
ever, agricultural landscapes are isoprene sources in at least
some regions. Plantations of isoprene-emitting trees (e.g.,
poplar, eucalyptus, oil palms) are major isoprene sources at
some locations. In addition, isoprene-emitting plants are in-
troduced into croplands to increase nitrogen availability and
to provide windbreaks. Nitrogen ﬁxing plants grown in crop-
lands to provide “green manure” include Velvet bean (Mu-
cuna pruriens, a legume) in cornﬁelds and Azolla, an aquatic
fern, in rice paddies. Both of these plants produce substantial
amounts of isoprene (Silver and Fall, 1995). While the use of
Velvet bean is relatively limited, Azolla is widely used in the
major rice producing regions (Clark, 1980). Tropical kudzu
(Pueraria phaseoloides) is the most widely used “green ma-
nure” plant in tropical agricultural lands.
Although there
are no reported isoprene emission measurements for tropi-
cal kudzu, all other examined Pueraria species have been
identiﬁed as isoprene emitters (e.g., Guenther et al., 1996).
We have used the global crop distribution database of Leff
et al. (2004) to identify agricultural landscapes (oil palm and
rice) where isoprene emissions are likely higher than in other
agricultural regions. The elevated isoprene emission associ-
ated with oil palm plantations is primarily due to oil palms
while rice ﬁeld isoprene emission is primarily from Azolla,
which grows in some but not all rice ﬁelds, and not from
the rice plants. Additional studies are needed to character-
ize the distribution of Azolla in rice ﬁelds but presently an
isoprene ε of 1 mg m−2 h−1 is assigned to crop PFT in land-
scapes dominated by rice ﬁelds. An isoprene emission factor
of 10 mg m−2 h−1 is assigned to crop PFT in areas dominated
by oil palm plantations and a value of 0.01 mg m−2 h−1 is as-
signed to all other regions.
3.2
Emission activity factor (γ )
Experimental evidence over the past two decades has impli-
cated a number of physical and biological factors in modify-
ing the capacity of a leaf to emit isoprene. Among these fac-
tors are incident PPFD and leaf temperature, which control
emissions on short (seconds to minutes) time scales (Guen-
ther et al., 1993), but which also inﬂuence the isoprene emis-
sion capacity of a leaf over longer (hours to weeks) time
scales (Monson et al., 1994; Sharkey et al., 2000; Geron
et al., 2000; Petron et al., 2001). A leaf’s ability to emit
isoprene is clearly inﬂuenced by leaf phenology; generally
speaking, very young leaves of isoprene-emitting species
emit no isoprene, mature leaves emit maximally, and as
leaves senesce, emission capacity gradually declines. Al-
though studies indicate that isoprene emission is less sen-
sitive than photosynthesis to decreasing soil moisture (Pego-
raro et al., 2004), increasing drought directly effects isoprene
emission (as well as indirectly mediating emissions through
changes in leaf temperature). Finally, there is growing ev-
idence that changes in the composition of the atmosphere,
e.g., increased CO2 (Rosenstiel et al., 2003) and episodic
increases in ozone (Velikova et al., 2005), may affect iso-
prene emission capacity. The available observations of the
response of isoprene emission to CO2 and O3 variations are
not suitable for developing robust numerical algorithms and
so have not been incorporated into the current version of
MEGAN.
The emission activity factor describes variations due to the
physiological and phenological processes that drive isoprene
emission rate changes. The total emission activity factor is
the product of a set of non-dimensional emission activity fac-
tors that are each equal to unity at standard conditions,
γ = γCE · γage · γSM
(2)
where γCE describes variation due to LAI and light, temper-
ature, humidity and wind conditions within the canopy envi-
ronment, γage makes adjustments for effects of leaf age, and
γSM accounts for direct changes in γ due to changes in soil
moisture. Descriptions of the methods used to estimate each
of the activity factors included in Eq. (2) are given below.
3.2.1
Canopy environment (γCE)
Isoprene emissions are strongly dependent on leaf tempera-
ture and PPFD incident on the leaf (Guenther et al., 1993).
Incident PPFD and temperature of leaves within a canopy
can differ substantially from above canopy conditions but can
be estimated for sun and shade leaves in each layer using a
canopy environment model. The canopy average inﬂuence
of leaf PPFD and temperature, γCE, is estimated as
γCE = CCE · γPT · LAI
(3)
where CCE (=0.57 for the MEGAN canopy environment
model) is a factor that sets the emission activity to unity
at standard conditions, γPT is the weighted average, for all
leaves, of the product of a temperature emission activity fac-
tor (γT ) and a PPFD emission activity factor (γP ), and LAI is
leaf area index. Note that γP decreases with inceasing LAI.
www.atmos-chem-phys.net/6/3181/2006/
Atmos. Chem. Phys., 6, 3181–3210, 2006

----- Page 10 (native) -----
3190
A. Guenther et al.: MEGAN estimates of global isoprene
Leaves in direct sunlight often experience temperatures
that are a degree or more higher than ambient air while
shaded leaves are often cooler than ambient air temperature.
PPFD can be very low on shaded leaves in dense canopies
and the PPFD of sun leaves depends on the angle between
the sun and the leaf.
Guenther et al. (1995) used a rela-
tively simple canopy environment model to estimate PPFD
on sun and shade leaves at several canopy depths and as-
sumed that leaf temperature was equal to air temperature.
The non-linear relationships between isoprene emission and
environmental conditions, coupled with the strong correla-
tion between PPFD and temperature, will result in a sig-
niﬁcant underestimation of isoprene emissions if canopy or
daily average PPFD and temperature are used (rather than
calculating emissions for each canopy level and each hour
of the day). Lamb et al. (1996) evaluated the use of several
canopy environment models for predicting whole canopy iso-
prene ﬂuxes and found that the results from both simple and
complex canopy models were within the uncertainty range
of observed isoprene ﬂuxes. Although detailed canopy envi-
ronment models may not always substantially improve iso-
prene emission estimates, these models may be important for
investigating how changes in environmental conditions will
perturb isoprene emission rates. The integration of MEGAN
within the land surface model component of an earth system
model will allow investigations of interactions between iso-
prene emissions and environmental conditions. The standard
MEGAN canopy environment model is based on the methods
described by Guenther et al. (1999a). This model estimates
incident PPFD and temperature of sun and shade leaves at
ﬁve canopy depths. It includes a leaf energy balance model
that is driven by wind speed, humidity, solar insolation, am-
bient temperature, and soil moisture. The model also calcu-
lates whole canopy latent and sensible heat ﬂuxes that can
be evaluated by above canopy measurements. Other canopy
environment models can be used with MEGAN by setting
CCE so that γCE is equal to unity for the MEGAN standard
conditions.
The algorithms described by Guenther et al. (1993) and
modiﬁed by Guenther et al. (1999a) have been used ex-
tensively to simulate the response of isoprene emission to
changes in light and temperature on a time scale of seconds
to minutes. The Guenther et al. (1999a) algorithms simulate
emission variations as
γP =CP [(α · PPFD)/((1 + α2 · PPFD2)0.5)]
(4)
γT =Eopt · [CT 2· exp(CT 1·x)/(CT 2−CT 1·(1−exp(CT 2·x)))](5)
where PPFD is the leaf level photosynthetic photon ﬂux den-
sity (µmol m−2 s−1), x=[(1/Topt)–(1/T)]/0.00831, T is leaf
temperature (K), CT 1 (=95), CT 2 (=230), CP,α, Eopt, and
Topt are empirical coefﬁcients.
MEGAN extends this al-
gorithm by estimating CP,α,Eopt, and Topt using Eqs. (6)
through (9) instead of using the constant values recom-
mended by Guenther et al. (1999a). The main advantage of
this approach is improved simulations of the variations in iso-
prene emission associated with past temperature and PPFD
conditions. The light and temperature conditions of the past
day(s) result in substantial deviations from the Guenther et
al. (1993) algorithms that could be due to changes in produc-
tion of the isoprene substrate, dimethylallyl pyrophosphate
(DMAPP), and/or variations in the activity of isoprene syn-
thase (Fall and Wildermuth, 1998), the enzyme that converts
DMAPP to isoprene. Variations in DMAPP supply could
be due to changes in production, either availability of the
carbon precursor (pyruvate) or adenosine triphosphate (ATP)
used for phosphorylation, or changes in DMAPP consump-
tion. Variations in isoprene synthase activity and DMAPP
have been observed but are not well characterized (Brugge-
mann et al., 2002; Wolfertz et al., 2003). Isoprene emis-
sion rates, measured at standard light and temperature condi-
tions, are higher when warm sunny conditions have occurred
during the previous day(s) and are lower if there were cool
shady conditions (Sharkey et al., 2000). Petron et al. (2001)
found that exposure to high or low temperatures can inﬂu-
ence isoprene emission for several weeks. The time required
to reach a new, lower, steady-state isoprene emission capac-
ity following a step decrease in temperature was longer than
that required to reach a new, higher, equilibrium following
an increase in temperature, indicating that down regulation
of isoprene emission is a slower process than up regulation.
The factors controlling these variations may operate over a
continuous range of time scales, but for modeling purposes
MEGAN currently considers only 24 and 240 h. The average
leaf level PPFD of the past 24 h (P24) and past 240 h (P240)
inﬂuence the estimated emission activity by adjusting the co-
efﬁcients in Eq. (4) as follows,
α = 0.004 −0.0005 ln(P240)
(6)
CP = 0.0468 · exp(0.0005 · [P24 −P0]) · [P240]0.6
(7)
where P0 is equal to 200 µmol m−2 s−1 for sun leaves and
50 µmol m−2 s−1 for shade leaves.
MEGAN estimates the coefﬁcients in Eq. (5) as a function
of the average leaf temperature over the past 24 (T24) and
240 (T240) h, as follows,
Topt=313 + (0.6 · (T240−297))
(8)
Eopt=2.034·exp(0.05·(T24−297))·exp(0.05·(T240−297)).(9)
The coefﬁcients used for Eqs. (6–9) are based on observa-
tions reported by Petron et al. (2001), Monson et al. (1994),
Sharkey et al. (2000), Geron et al. (2000), and Hanson and
Sharkey (2001). Although these ﬁve studies report results
that are qualitatively similar, there remain signiﬁcant uncer-
tainties associated with these algorithms.
Figure 4 shows the response of γCE estimates to variations
in LAI, solar angle and transmission, and temperature. Iso-
prene emission increases exponentially with temperature up
Atmos. Chem. Phys., 6, 3181–3210, 2006
www.atmos-chem-phys.net/6/3181/2006/

----- Page 11 (native) -----
A. Guenther et al.: MEGAN estimates of global isoprene
3191
to a maximum that is dependent on the average temperature
that the canopy has experienced during the past 240 h. Both
the magnitude of the emissions and the temperature at which
the maximum occurs are dependent on the past temperature.
The result is that MEGAN predicts lower (higher) isoprene
emissions in cool (warm) climates than would be simulated
by the Guenther et al. (1993) algorithms. However, MEGAN
predictions of the isoprene emission response to short term
(<24 h) temperature variations is often less than that pre-
dicted by models that do not calculate leaf temperature, e.g.,
BEIS2/BEIS3 or Guenther et al. (1995). This is because leaf
transpiration tends to result in leaf temperature increases that
are less than ambient temperature increases.
Above canopy PPFD is determined by solar angle
and transmission.
MEGAN estimates of γCE increase
nearly linearly with PPFD transmission for canopies that
have experienced high PPFD levels (e.g., 24 h average of
600 µmol m−2 s−1 for sun leaves) during the past day. The
emission increase begins to saturate at high PPFD transmis-
sion for low solar angles or if the average PPFD has been low
during the previous day.
Figure 4 shows that estimated isoprene emission increases
nearly linearly with LAI until LAI exceeds ∼1.5 and is
nearly constant for LAI>5. The relationship between LAI
and γCE depends on solar angle and on canopy charac-
teristics, which differ with PFT. Isoprene emissions from
canopies with clumped leaves increase relatively slowly with
increasing LAI for LAI<3 in contrast to canopies with
horizontal leaves that exhibit a stronger LAI dependence
for LAI<3. Figure 4 also shows that MEGAN predicts a
stronger initial increase with LAI, and a lack of increase with
higher LAI, for low solar angles (e.g., <30 degrees).
As an alternative to using a detailed canopy environment
model that calculates light and temperature at each canopy
depth, we have developed a parameterized approach, referred
to here as the parameterized canopy environment emission
activity (PCEEA) algorithm, based on the results of the pro-
cedures described above. The PCEEA approach for estimat-
ing the canopy environment emission activity factor is as fol-
lows,
γCE = γLAI · γP · γT
(10)
where γLAI, γP and γT account for variations associated
with LAI, PPFD and temperature.
The relationships be-
tween these factors and canopy scale isoprene emissions are
based on MEGAN canopy environment model simulations
for the canopies and environmental conditions that dominate
global isoprene emissions (i.e., warm broadleaf forests). The
canopy-scale isoprene emission response to PPFD variations
is simulated as
γP = 0
a < 0, a > 180
(11a)
γP = sin(a)[2.46(1 + 0.0005 · (Pdaily −400))φ · 0.9φ2]
0 < a < 180
(11b)
0
1
2
3
4
270
280
290
300
310
320
Above Canopy Air Temperature (K)
Emission Activity
T24=280K
T24=290K
T24=297K
T24=304K
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
PPFD Transmission
Emission Activity
a = 15
a = 45
a = 70
PPFD24=600/150
PPFD24=400/100
PPFD24=100/50
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
0
2.5
5
7.5
10
Leaf Area Index (m2 m-2)
Emission Activity
clumped
horizontal
mixed
a = 40
a = 20
Fig. 4. MEGAN estimates of isoprene emission response to current
temperature (top), PPFD transmission (middle) and LAI (bottom).
The response to current temperature is estimated for leaves exposed
to different average temperatures (280 K, 290 K, 297 K and 305 K)
during the past 24 to 240 h (T24=T240 in each case). The response
to current PPFD transmission is estimated for leaves exposed to dif-
ferent solar angles (15, 45 and 70 degrees) and for average PPFD
levels for the past 24 to 240 h (PPFD24=PPFD240 in each case) that
include 600 and 150 µmol m−2 s−1, respectively, for sun leaves and
shade leaves, 400 and 100 µmol m−2 s−1 for sun and shade leaves,
and 100 and 50 µmol m−2 s−1 for sun and shade leaves. The re-
sponse to LAI (for a constant PPFD transmission of 60%) is es-
timated for different canopy leaf orientations (clumped, horizontal
and mixed leaves with a solar angle of 60 degrees) and solar angles
(20 and 40 degrees with a mixed leaf orientation).
where
Pdaily
is
daily
average
above
canopy
PPFD
(µmol m−2 s−1) representative of the simulation period (typ-
ically a week to a month), a is solar angle (degrees) and φ is
above canopy PPFD transmission (non-dimensional) which
is estimated as
φ = Pac/(sin(a)Ptoa)
(12)
where
Pac
is
above
canopy
PPFD,
Ptoa
is
PPFD
(µmol m−2 s−1) at the top of the atmosphere which can be
approximated as
Ptoa = 3000 + 99 · cos(2 · 3.14 · (DOY −10)/365)
(13)
where DOY is day of year.
www.atmos-chem-phys.net/6/3181/2006/
Atmos. Chem. Phys., 6, 3181–3210, 2006

----- Page 12 (native) -----
3192
A. Guenther et al.: MEGAN estimates of global isoprene
The temperature response factor, γT , is estimated as
γT =Eopt·CT 2· exp(CT 1·x)/(CT 2−CT 1·(1−exp(CT 2·x))) (14)
where
x=[(1/Topt)–(1/Thr)]/0.00831,
Eopt=1.75·exp(0.08
(Tdaily–297)), Thr is hourly average air temperature (K),
Tdaily is daily average air temperature (K) representative of
the simulation period (typically a week to a month), CT 1
(=80), CT 2 (=200), are empirical coefﬁcients and Topt is es-
timated using Eq. (8) with Tdaily used in place of T240. Emis-
sion responses to LAI variations are estimated as
γLAI = 0.49LAI/[(1 + 0.2LAI2)0.5].
(15)
The PCEEA approach is intended for applications that need
to minimize the computational resources or have limited
availability of driving variables. The PCEEA algorithm esti-
mates annual global isoprene emissions that are within ∼5%
of the value estimated using the standard MEGAN canopy
environment model. However, differences can exceed 25%
for estimates at speciﬁc times and locations.
3.2.2
Leaf age
Leaves begin to photosynthesize soon after budbreak but iso-
prene is not emitted in substantial quantities for days after
the onset of photosynthesis (Guenther et al., 1991). In ad-
dition, old leaves eventually lose their ability to photosyn-
thesize and produce isoprene. Guenther et al. (1999a) devel-
oped a simple algorithm to simulate the reduced emissions
expected for young and old leaves based on the observed
monthly LAI change. An increase in foliage was assumed
to imply a higher proportion of young leaves while decreas-
ing foliage was associated with the presence of older leaves.
This algorithm required a time step of one month, assumed
that young leaves and old leaves had the same emission rate,
and included variables that could not easily be quantiﬁed.
The following procedures to account for leaf age effects on
isoprene emission estimates reduce these deﬁciencies.
MEGAN assumes a constant value, γage=1, for evergreen
canopies. Deciduous canopies are divided into four fractions:
new foliage that emits negligible amounts of isoprene (Fnew),
growing foliage that emits isoprene at less than peak rates
(Fgro), mature foliage that emits isoprene at peak rates (Fmat)
and old foliage that emits isoprene at reduced rates (Fold).
The canopy-weighted average factor is calculated as
γage = FnewAnew + FgroAgro + FmatAmat + FoldAold
(16)
where Anew (=0.05), Agro (=0.6), Amat (=1.125), and Aold
(=1) are the relative emission rates assigned to each canopy
fraction.
The values of these emission factors are based
on the observations of Petron et al. (2001), Goldstein et
al. (1998), Monson et al. (1994), Guenther et al. (1991) and
Karl et al. (2003).
The canopy is divided into leaf age fractions based on the
change in LAI between the current time step (LAIc) and the
previous time step (LAIp). In cases where LAIc=LAIp then
Fmat=0.8, Fnew=0, Fgro=0.1, Fold=0.1. When LAIp>LAIc
then Fnew and Fgro are equal to zero, Fold is estimated as
[(LAIp–LAIc)/LAIp] and Fmat=1–Fold.
In the ﬁnal case,
where LAIp<LAIc, Fold=0 and the other fractions are cal-
culated as
Fnew = 1 −(LAIp/LAIc) for t <= ti
(17a)
Fnew = [ti/t][1 −(LAIp/LAIc)] for t > ti
(17b)
Fmat = (LAIp/LAIc) for t <= tm
(17c)
Fmat = (LAIp/LAIc)+[(t−tm)/t][1−(LAIp/LAIc)] for t>tm
(17d)
Fgro = 1 −Fnew −Fmat
(17e)
where t is the length of the time step (days) between LAIc
and LAIp, ti is the number of days between budbreak and the
induction of isoprene emission, tm is the number of days be-
tween budbreak and the initiation of peak isoprene emission
rates, and tg=tm for t>tm and tg=t for t≤tm. The time step,
t, depends on the LAI database that is used but generally is
between one week and one month. Petron et al. (2001) grew
plants under conditions typical of temperate regions and ob-
served an emission pattern that suggests a ti of about 12 days
and tm of about 28 days. Goldstein et al. (1998) ﬁeld obser-
vations in a temperate forest indicate a similar value for tm.
Monson et al. (1994) found that ti and tm are temperature de-
pendent and are considerably less for vegetation growing at
high temperatures. These observations suggest that the tem-
perature dependence of these variables can be estimated as
ti = 5 + (0.7 · (300 −Tt)) for ti ≤303
(18a)
ti = 2.9 for ti > 303
(18b)
tm = 2.3 · ti
(19)
where Tt is the average ambient air temperature (K) of the
preceding time step interval.
MEGAN simulations using
a constant ti and tm result in global annual isoprene emis-
sions that are ∼5% lower than estimates based on a variable
ti. However, the emission rates estimated using variable ti
and tm can be as much as 20% higher in tropical regions
and 20% lower in boreal regions when foliage is rapidly ex-
panding. The differences are more pronounced when LAI
variations have a higher time resolution (i.e., weekly rather
than monthly). Equations (18) and (19) are important for
higher resolution simulations and when foliage is expanding
but otherwise have only a minimal impact on estimated emis-
sions.
3.2.3
Soil moisture
Plants require both carbon dioxide and water for growth.
Carbon dioxide is taken up through leaf stomatal openings
and water is usually obtained from the soil. However, large
quantities of water are lost through stomata creating a need
Atmos. Chem. Phys., 6, 3181–3210, 2006
www.atmos-chem-phys.net/6/3181/2006/

----- Page 13 (native) -----
A. Guenther et al.: MEGAN estimates of global isoprene
3193
for adequate soil moisture in order to continue carbon up-
take. Field measurements have shown that plants with inad-
equate soil moisture can have signiﬁcantly decreased stom-
atal conductance and photosynthesis, in comparison to well-
watered plants, and yet can maintain approximately the same
isoprene emission rates (Guenther et al., 1999b). However,
isoprene emission does begin to decrease when soil moisture
drops below a certain level and eventually becomes negligi-
ble when plants are exposed to extended severe drought (Pe-
goraro et al., 2004). MEGAN can simulate the response of
isoprene emission to drought through two mechanisms. Iso-
prene emissions are indirectly inﬂuenced by the soil mois-
ture dependence of stomatal conductance which inﬂuences
the leaf temperature estimated by the MEGAN canopy envi-
ronment model. In addition, MEGAN includes an emission
activity factor, dependent on soil moisture, estimated as
γSM = 1
θ > θ1
(20a)
γSM = (θ −θw)/1θ1
θw < θ <
θ1
(20b)
γSM = 0
θ < θw
(20c)
where θ is soil moisture (volumetric water content, m3 m−3),
θw (m3 m−3) is wilting point (the soil moisture level below
which plants cannot extract water from soil) and 1θ1 (=0.06)
is an empirical parameter based on the observations of Pe-
goraro et al. (2004), and θ1=θw+1θ1. MEGAN uses the
high resolution (∼1 km2) wilting point database developed
by Chen and Dudhia (2001) which assigns θw values that
range from 0.01 for sand to 0.138 m3 m−3 for clay soils. Soil
moisture varies signiﬁcantly with depth and the ability of a
plant to extract water is dependent on root depth. MEGAN
uses the PFT dependent approach described by Zeng (2001)
to determine the fraction of roots within each soil layer and
applies the weighted average γSM for each soil layer. This
approach allows soil moisture estimates from any soil depth
to be used in Eq. (20).
Including the inﬂuence of soil moisture on isoprene emis-
sion (Eq. 20) reduces annual global isoprene emissions by
only ∼7% but can reduce regional emissions to zero for days
to months. As expected, the soil moisture emission activ-
ity factor has the greatest impact on isoprene emissions es-
timated for arid regions. However, signiﬁcant reductions in
estimated emissions also occur in regions that have moderate
to high total annual precipitation but also have dry seasons
with little rainfall.
3.2.4
Other factors that inﬂuence isoprene emission activ-
ity
Isoprene emission activity can also be inﬂuenced by other
environmental conditions including ozone (Velikova et al.,
2005) and carbon dioxide (Buckley, 2001; Rosenstiel et al.,
2003) concentrations, nitrogen availability (Harley et al.,
1994), and physical stress (e.g., Alessio et al., 2004). In ad-
dition, there may be signiﬁcant diurnal variations that are not
entirely explained by variations in environmental conditions
(Funk et al., 2003). Emission activity factors accounting for
these processes will be included in MEGAN as more reliable
algorithms are developed. Existing observations have been
used to qualitatively assess the importance of these factors
and are discussed in Sect. 6.
3.3
Canopy loss and production, ρ
Chemicals emitted into the canopy airspace do not always
escape to the above-canopy atmosphere. Some molecules
are consumed by biological, chemical and physical processes
on soil and vegetation surfaces while others react within the
canopy atmosphere. Some emissions escape to the above-
canopy atmosphere in a different chemical and/or physi-
cal (i.e., gas to particle conversion) form.
MEGAN in-
cludes a factor, ρ, that accounts for losses and transforma-
tions in the canopy. The resulting emission estimate is a net
canopy emission but is not the net ﬂux. The net ecosystem-
atmosphere isoprene ﬂux is the sum of the MEGAN net
emission rate estimate and an above-canopy deposition rate
that can be estimated from an above-canopy concentration
and a deposition velocity. The MEGAN canopy loss factor
for isoprene, ρISO,ISO, is the ratio of isoprene emitted into
the above canopy atmosphere to the isoprene emitted into
the canopy atmosphere. Additional factors account for the
emission of gases and aerosols produced from the oxidation
of isoprene within the canopy. For example, the MEGAN
canopy production factor for the isoprene oxidation prod-
uct formaldehyde, ρCH2O,ISO, is the ratio of formaldehyde
(produced from isoprene oxidation) emitted into the above
canopy atmosphere to the isoprene emitted into the canopy
atmosphere.
Inverse modeling of within-canopy gradients of isoprene
suggests that at least 90% of the isoprene emitted by tropi-
cal and temperate forests escapes to the above-canopy atmo-
sphere (Karl et al., 2004; Stroud et al., 2005). The remainder
is removed through a combination of chemical losses and dry
deposition. While ambient mixing ratios within the canopy
and roughness layer can change on the order of 10–30% due
to chemistry (Makar et al., 1999), the bias of canopy scale
isoprene ﬂux measurements is small (i.e., on the order of 5–
10%). This can be attributed to (1) near ﬁeld effects within
the canopy and (2) limited processing time between the loca-
tion of isoprene emission (occurring mostly within the upper
canopy) and the top of the canopy. Comparisons between
canopy-scale emissions based on leaf-level emission mea-
surements extrapolated with a canopy environment model
and above-canopy ﬂux measurements tend to show that any
loss of isoprene is less than the uncertainty associated with
these two approaches (Guenther et al., 1996; Guenther et al.,
2000; Spirig et al., 2005).
Variations in isoprene canopy production and loss are es-
timated as
ρISO,ISO = 1 −D/[λ · u∗· τ + D]
(21)
www.atmos-chem-phys.net/6/3181/2006/
Atmos. Chem. Phys., 6, 3181–3210, 2006

----- Page 14 (native) -----
3194
A. Guenther et al.: MEGAN estimates of global isoprene
where D is canopy depth (m), u* is friction velocity (m s−1),
τ is the above-canopy isoprene lifetime (s) and λ is an em-
pirically determined parameter. Canopy depth is the distance
from the top to the bottom of the canopy and can be consid-
erable less than canopy height. Equation (21) is parameter-
ized with the above-canopy isoprene lifetime, rather than the
within-canopy lifetime, because this is the value more read-
ily available for atmospheric modeling. D and λ are PFT
dependent and are assigned D=15 and λ=0.3 for the generic
PFT-1 canopy.
Since values of ρISO,ISO range only from
0.93 to 0.99 for most conditions, Table 1 includes assign-
ing a constant value, ρISO,ISO=0.96 for isoprene emission
estimation efforts. The variability is greater for more reac-
tive compounds such as the sesquiterpene, β-caryophyllene,
for which the canopy loss factor ρCARY,CARY can vary from
<0.1 to >0.6 depending on environmental conditions. Equa-
tion (21) is based on measured isoprene emission proﬁles
and turbulence proﬁles obtained during recent tropical and
temperate forest ﬁeld studies (Karl et al., 2004; Stroud et
al., 2005). The variation of the isoprene lifetime inside the
canopy was scaled to the above-canopy lifetime and based
on measured O3 proﬁles and modeled OH and NO3 levels
reported by Stroud et al. (2005). A random walk model sim-
ilar to the one described by Baldocchi (1997) and Strong et
al. (2004) was used to estimate the ﬁrst order decay of iso-
prene. Trajectories for 5000 particles were released at 4 lev-
els and computed for typical daytime conditions. The chem-
ical loss by the ensemble mean was used to assess ρISO,ISO
integrated over the whole canopy.
Model simulations of the impact of isoprene on at-
mospheric chemistry depend on estimates of net isoprene
emission as well as estimates of the regional uptake of
isoprene and its oxidation products, e.g. methylvinylke-
tone, methacrolein and peroxyacetyl nitrate (PAN), from the
above-canopy atmosphere. Karl et al. (2004) conclude that
current model procedures can underestimate the uptake of
these oxidation products which would cause an overestimate
of the impact of isoprene on oxidants and other atmospheric
constituents. They also report that isoprene oxidation prod-
ucts deposit more rapidly during night than predicted by stan-
dard dry deposition schemes. During daytime, the net effect
of deposition and in-canopy production of these compounds
can be on the same order. These observations raise the pos-
sibility that various products of isoprene chemistry are taken
up by the forest canopy more efﬁciently then previously as-
sumed. This could lead to an incorrect characterization of
the impact of isoprene by chemistry and transport models
that have correctly simulated isoprene emission rates and ox-
idation schemes, and could explain why some chemistry and
transport models are forced to use isoprene emission rates
that are lower than observed.
4
Driving variables
The MEGAN algorithms described in Sect. 3 require esti-
mates of landcover (LAI and PFT distributions) and weather
(solar transmission, air temperature, humidity, wind speed,
and soil moisture) conditions. The standard driving variables
used for MEGAN are described in this section and are com-
pared with alternative databases.
4.1
Leaf area
MEGAN requires leaf area estimates with a time step of ∼4
to 40 days in order to simulate seasonal variations in leaf
biomass and age distribution. MEGAN does not assume that
LAI is uniformly spread over a grid cell but assumes that
foliage covers only that part of the grid cell containing veg-
etation. The average LAI for vegetated areas is estimated
by dividing the grid average LAI by the fraction of the grid
that is covered by vegetation. We refer to this as LAIv (the
LAI of vegetation covered surfaces) and we set an upper
limit of LAIv=6 to eliminate the very high values that can
be estimated for grids with very little vegetation. The stan-
dard MEGAN LAIv database (MEGAN-L) was estimated by
this approach using the LAI estimates of Zhang et al. (2004)
and estimates of vegetation cover fraction from Hansen et
al. (2003). These data were processed to include values for
missing data and urban areas.
Figure 5 illustrates how LAIv variations with time and lo-
cation result in isoprene emission variations of more than an
order of magnitude, independent of variation in other driv-
ing variables which are held constant in these simulations.
These emission variations are driven by changes in only leaf
age and quantity. Isoprene is reduced by more than a factor
of ﬁve at higher latitudes in winter but varies only ∼15% for
croplands, forests and grasslands during the growing season.
Most of the extra-tropical regions of the southern hemisphere
do not exceed a level of 30% of the maximum emission while
tropical forests regions rarely fall below a level of 70%.
Table 4 includes descriptions of six LAI databases that
have been used to estimate global isoprene emissions with
MEGAN. Satellite-derived LAI estimates provide high res-
olution variability but are not available for all years. Dy-
namic vegetation models allow predictions of past and fu-
ture emissions. The MEGAN-L database contains monthly
estimates for years 2000 to 2005 at 30 s (∼1 km2) resolu-
tion. Table 4 includes a comparison of annual global isoprene
emissions estimated with alternative LAIv databases. The
estimates range from 11% lower to 29% higher than the
MEGAN-L values. Some of the differences are due to in-
terannual variations, which can be seen in Fig. 6 by the com-
parison of July average isoprene emissions estimated with
the AVHRR3 databases for years 1990 and 2000. The emis-
sion estimates using MODIS based estimates of LAI, includ-
ing the MEGAN-L database, are generally ∼20% lower than
emission estimates using the other LAI databases. All of the
Atmos. Chem. Phys., 6, 3181–3210, 2006
www.atmos-chem-phys.net/6/3181/2006/

----- Page 15 (native) -----
A. Guenther et al.: MEGAN estimates of global isoprene
3195
January
March
May
July
September
November
LAI and 
leaf age
normalized
isoprene 
emission 
0 - 0.1
0.1 - 0.22
0.22 - 0.34
0.34 - 0.46
0.46 - 0.58
0.58 - 0.7
0.70 - 0.82
0.82 - 0.94
0.94 - 1.06
Fig. 5. Monthly normalized isoprene emission rates estimated with MEGAN for 2003. Rates are normalized by the emission estimated for
standard LAI (=5 m2 m−2) and leaf age (80% mature leaves). These normalized rates illustrate the variations associated with changes in
only LAI and leaf age; i.e. all other model drivers are held constant.
databases shown in Fig. 6 have regions of more than a fac-
tor of 3 lower emissions and regions with more than a factor
of 3 higher emissions. However, the regions with the great-
est percent differences tend to be areas with relatively low
emissions.
4.2
PFT distributions
The PFT databases described in Table 4 use a variety of in-
puts including satellite observations, vegetation inventories,
ecosystem maps, and ecosystem model output. The satellite
data provide the highest spatial and temporal resolution while
only models can be used to simulate future scenarios. Vege-
tation inventories based on ﬁeld observations are expected to
provide the most accurate estimates of PFT distributions but
they have limited coverage.
Landcover data were processed to generate the MEGAN
PFT categories from each data source shown in Table 4.
Landcover data that included PFT estimates (AVHRR1-P,
MODIS1-P), were converted into the MEGAN PFT scheme
with a straightforward collapsing of their ﬁfteen PFTs into
the seven MEGAN PFTs. The ecosystem scheme databases
(HYDE, GED, IBIS, IMAGE, MODIS2, SPOT) contain a
discrete landcover type for each location that is based on ei-
ther observed vegetation distribution maps, vegetation model
output or satellite observations. A PFT distribution was as-
sumed for each ecosystem type in each database. For ex-
ample, the temperate mixed forest ecosystem in the GED
database was assumed to be composed of 20% broadleaf
deciduous trees, 20% broadleaf evergreen trees, 40% nee-
dle evergreen trees, 1% needle deciduous trees, 1% shrubs,
1% crops, 2% herbaceous and 15% bare ground or water.
These subjective PFT assignments were based on qualita-
tive descriptions of the ecosystems. The IMAGE database
includes estimates for years 2000 and 2100 and the HYDE
database has estimates for 50 year intervals between 1700
and 1950 and 20 year intervals between 1950 and 1990.
The AVHRR2 and MODIS3 databases use satellite derived
tree cover data that include total cover, and deciduous and
broadleaf fractions. These provide the most direct estimates
for the MEGAN tree PFTs and constrain the total fraction
assigned to the other three MEGAN PFTs.
The standard
MEGAN PFT database (MEGAN-P) combines the MODIS3
database with quantitative tree inventories based on ground
observations where available (e.g., Kinnee et al., 1997). The
global distribution of each PFT in the MEGAN database is
www.atmos-chem-phys.net/6/3181/2006/
Atmos. Chem. Phys., 6, 3181–3210, 2006

----- Page 16 (native) -----
3196
A. Guenther et al.: MEGAN estimates of global isoprene
Table 4. MEGAN global input databases. Annual global isoprene emissions estimated for alternative (present day) databases are compared
(% difference) to the emission estimated with the standard (MEGAN-P, MEGAN-L and MEGAN-W) databases.
Data
Spatial
Time
Base
Global Emission
type
Name
scale
period
description
data
(% difference)
Base data reference
PFT
AVHRR1-P
∼50 km
∼2000
PFT
AVHRR
−7%
Bonan et al. (2002)
PFT
MODIS1-P
∼50 km
∼2000
PFT
MODIS
+15%
Tian et al. (2004)
PFT
MODIS2
∼50 km
∼2000
ecosystem
MODIS
+18%
Friedl et al. (2002)
PFT
G95-P
∼50 km
∼2000
ecosystem
Inventory
+2%
Olson (1992)
PFT
HYDE
∼50 km
1700–1990
ecosystem
Model, inventory
−13%
Klein Goldewijk et al. (2001)
PFT
IMAGE
∼50 km
2000–2100
ecosystem
Model
−11%
Alcamo et al. (1998)
PFT
MAPPS-P
∼50 km
2000, 2100
ecosystem
Model
+24%
Neilson (1995)
PFT
IBIS
∼8 km
1992
ecosystem
Model, inventory
+3%
Ramankutty and Foley (1999)
PFT
SPOT
∼1 km
∼2000
ecosystem
SPOT
−7%
http://www-gvm.jrc.it/glc2000/
PFT
AVHRR2
∼1 km
∼2000
land char.
AVHRR
+2%
DeFries (2000); Hansen (2000)
PFT
MODIS3
∼1 km
∼2000
land char.
AVHRR/MODIS
−0.3%
DeFries (2000); Hansen (2003)
PFT
MEGAN-P
∼1 km
2001
land char.
MODIS, inventory
standard case
Kinnee et al. (1997)
LAI
AVHRR1-L
∼50 km
∼2000
Monthly
AVHRR
−11%
Bonan et al. (2002)
LAI
MODIS1-L
∼50 km
∼2000
Monthly
MODIS
+12%
Tian et al. (2004)
LAI
AVHRR3
∼50 km
1981–2000
Monthly
AVHRR
+25%
Myneni et al. (1997)
LAI
G95-L
∼50 km
∼2000
Monthly
model, AVHRR
+24%
Guenther et al. (1995)
LAI
MAPSS-L
∼50 km
∼2000, 2100
Monthly
model
+29%
Neilson (1995)
LAI
MEGAN-L
∼1 km
2000–2005
Monthly
MODIS
standard case
Zhang et al. (2004)
Weather
IIASA
∼50 km
1960–1990 mean
Hourly
observations
+13%
Leemans and Cramer (1992)
Weather
CRU
∼50 km
1900s–1980s
Hourly
observations
−11%
a
Weather
HadCM2
∼300 km
1980s, 2080s
Hourly
A1 scenario
+15
b
Weather
CSM1
∼300 km
1990s, 2090s
Hourly
A1 scenario
−11%
c
Weather
MEGAN-W
∼200 km
1979–2004
Hourly
NCEP obs/model
standard case
Kanamitsu et al. (2002)
Weather
MM5
∼100 km
2001–2004
Hourly
MM5 obs/model
−14%
Dudhia and Bresch (2002)
a http://ipcc-ddc.cru.uea.ac.uk/obs/get 30yr means.html
b http://ipcc-ddc.cru.uea.ac.uk/sres/hadcm2 download/is92/gcm data.html
chttp://www.ccsm.ucar.edu/experiments/ccsm1.0/b030.A1/
shown in Fig. 7. The regions dominated by broadleaf trees
are the major global isoprene sources. Shrubs dominate at
high latitudes, where, despite relatively high emission fac-
tors, cool weather generally results in low isoprene emis-
sions. However, shrubs have a fairly wide global distribution
and so contribute to isoprene emissions in many regions.
Global vegetation cover area estimated with the eleven
databases ranges from about 90 to 120×106 km2, which rep-
resents ∼60 to 80% of the global land surface. Most of the
PFT database estimates are within ∼10% of the mean value
of 104×106 km2. While there is considerable variation in es-
timates of crops, grass/other and needle deciduous tree areas,
these PFTs make only a small contribution to the global to-
tal isoprene emission. Shrub and needle evergreen tree area
estimates from the different PFT databases agree relatively
well.
Area estimates of broadleaf trees, which contribute
half of the total global isoprene emission, are more variable
and thus are a signiﬁcant component of the overall uncer-
tainty in global annual emissions. However, the sum of total
broadleaf tree area plus shrub area is less variable and all but
one database is within 20% of the 40×106 km2 of broadleaf
tree plus shrub area estimated by the MEGAN-P database.
Figure 8 shows that large differences in regional isoprene
emission estimates (> factor of 4) are obtained using the dif-
ferent PFT databases. All of the databases have areas of both
lower and higher emission so that the global total estimates,
shown in Table 4, range only from 13% lower to 24% higher
than the value estimated with the MEGAN-P database.
Ecosystem databases can be used to generate reasonable
estimates of annual global isoprene emissions but may not
produce accurate regional distributions. For example, the 72
ecosystem types in the GED database used for the Guenther
et al. (1995) emission inventory were assigned PFT distribu-
tions that resulted in a global annual emission within a few
percent of the MEGAN-P database, but Fig. 8 shows that
there are large regional differences.
Global total emissions from all of the databases derived
directly from 1 km resolution satellite data agree reasonably
well. However, large global total differences in PFT area
estimates occur among databases that are based on MODIS
observations but use different procedures to assign PFT ar-
eas. This indicates that the method for assigning PFT cover
has a greater effect than the satellite sensor that is used. Ap-
proaches (e.g., DeFries et al., 2000) that use continuous veg-
etation ﬁelds (e.g. percent tree cover, percent broadleaf veg-
etation, percent herbaceous cover) provide more objective
PFT distributions.
Atmos. Chem. Phys., 6, 3181–3210, 2006
www.atmos-chem-phys.net/6/3181/2006/

----- Page 17 (native) -----
A. Guenther et al.: MEGAN estimates of global isoprene
3197
AVHRR1-L
G95-L
AVHRR3-2000
MODIS1-L
MAPSS-L
AVHRR3-1990
<-66
-66 to -50
-50 to -33
-33 to -15
-15 to 20
20 to 50
50 to 100
100 to 200
> 200
Isoprene 
emission
relative to 
base case
(% difference)
Fig. 6. Percent difference in July 2003 average isoprene emission estimated by MEGAN with the LAI databases described in Table 2 in
comparison with the standard MEGAN-L database.
4.3
Weather
MEGAN weather input variables include ambient tempera-
ture, PPFD, humidity, wind speed and soil moisture. Fig-
ure 9 shows that both seasonal and spatial weather variations
can result in monthly average isoprene emission estimates
that vary by more than an order of magnitude. In partic-
ular, the cool weather conditions at high latitudes result in
much lower isoprene emissions. Previous estimates of sea-
sonal variations in tropical rainforests have fairly constant
monthly emission rates (Guenther et al., 1995) but MEGAN
estimates much larger (factor of 3) variations. These large
seasonal variations are a result of the MEGAN algorithms
that account for the inﬂuence of the weather of the past 24 to
240 h. These predictions generally agree with the substantial
seasonal variations in isoprene emissions reported for tropi-
cal rainforest sites (e.g., Guenther et al., 1999a; Andreae et
al., 2002; Trostdorf et al., 2004) but additional observations
are needed for a rigorous evaluation.
The sensitivity of MEGAN hourly isoprene emission es-
timates to different global weather data was examined us-
ing the databases listed in Table 4. These include estimates
based on interpolated observations (IIASA and CRU), esti-
mates from global weather models with assimilated obser-
vations (NCEP-DOE reanalysis and MM5), and two global
climate models (HadCM2 and CSM1). The NCEP-DOE re-
analysis, which is the only one that included soil moisture,
was used as the standard database (MEGAN-W). The NCEP-
DOE soil moisture was used to estimate γSM for all emission
estimates. Hourly estimates were generated from 4 times
daily values for MEGAN-W, MM5 and CSM1 data and from
monthly mean values for IIASA, CRU and HadCM2. Hourly
temperature and PPFD variations were estimated for an aver-
age day for each month for the latter databases. The annual
global emission estimated for the ﬁve alternative databases
are within ∼15% of the MEGAN-W estimate. However, re-
gional estimates differ by as much as a factor of two to three
for speciﬁc locations and months. The difference in isoprene
emission estimated for alternatives of the same database type
(e.g., observational) is similar to the level of difference be-
tween database types (e.g., observational compared to cli-
mate models).
The Guenther et al. (1995) isoprene emission estimates
used the IIASA database without including diurnal temper-
ature variations (which underestimated emissions) but also
used a method for estimating PPFD from cloud cover (based
on Pierce and Waldruff, 1991) that overestimated emissions.
The two compensating errors resulted in an annual global
www.atmos-chem-phys.net/6/3181/2006/
Atmos. Chem. Phys., 6, 3181–3210, 2006

----- Page 18 (native) -----
3198
A. Guenther et al.: MEGAN estimates of global isoprene
Broadleaf Trees 
Shrubs
Fineleaf Evergreen Trees 
Fineleaf Deciduous Trees 
Grass and other
Crops
Percent
Cover
5 - 10
10 - 20
20 - 40
40 - 70
70 - 100
 < 5
Fig. 7. Global distributions of the MEGAN PFTs.
emission estimate that is within ∼3% of the emission based
on a diurnal temperature range and more accurate estimates
of surface solar radiation.
5
Isoprene emission estimates
Guenther et al. (1995) estimated a global annual emission of
∼570 Tg of isoprene (503 Tg of carbon), which was some-
what higher than prior estimates which had ranged from
∼200–500 Tg of isoprene. The higher emission estimate of
Guenther et al. (1995) is primarily due to increased emis-
sion factors, although there were also substantial differences
in other model components. Earlier isoprene emission fac-
tor measurements tended to underestimate the canopy aver-
age emissions because they were biased towards leaves and
branches from the lower part of the canopy or were otherwise
not representative. Wang et al. (1998) used methods similar
to Guenther et al. (1995) and estimated a global annual iso-
prene emission that was ∼20% higher. This difference was
attributed to the use of a diurnal temperature cycle, rather
than monthly average temperatures.
5.1
MEGAN isoprene emission estimates
The annual global isoprene emission estimated by MEGAN
using the standard MEGAN input databases for year 2003
is ∼600 Tg isoprene.
This estimate is similar to the an-
nual global emission (570 Tg isoprene) reported by Guen-
ther et al. (1995). The contribution of individual PFTs and
biomes to the total global emission estimated using MEGAN
is shown in Table 3. Emissions from tropical broadleaf trees
are nearly half of the total ﬂux. Tropical (28%), arid land
(11%) and temperate (4.5%) shrub emission estimates indi-
cate an important source, yet there are very few emission
measurements from these shrubs. Temperate broadleaf trees
contribute ∼5% of the estimated total.
Monthly average isoprene emissions estimated using
MEGAN with the standard driving variables are shown in
Fig. 10. Emissions range from >150 mg isoprene m−2 day−1
(e.g., some locations in Australia, eastern U.S., and Amazon)
to <1 mg isoprene m−2 day−1 (e.g., higher latitudes in win-
ter). Figures 5 through 9 show that monthly variation in iso-
prene distributions are controlled by weather and, to a lesser
degree, by LAI variations.
Isoprene emission estimates based on the 20 year
AVHRR3 LAIv database indicates that interannual LAI vari-
ations result in ∼4% variation in global annual isoprene
Atmos. Chem. Phys., 6, 3181–3210, 2006
www.atmos-chem-phys.net/6/3181/2006/

----- Page 19 (native) -----
A. Guenther et al.: MEGAN estimates of global isoprene
3199
AVHRR1-P
G95-P
HYDE
MODIS1-P
MAPSS-P
IBIS
AVHRR2
MODIS2
SPOT
IMAGE
Isoprene 
emission
relative to
base case
(% difference)
< -80
-80 to -50
-50 to -20
-20 to 25
25 to 100
> 400
100 - 400
Fig. 8. Percent difference in July 2003 average isoprene emission estimated by MEGAN with the PFT databases described in Table 2 in
comparison with the standard MEGAN-P database.
emissions. However, isoprene emission estimates for spe-
ciﬁc regions and months, especially arid landscapes and bo-
real forests, vary by more than 30% due to interannual LAI
variations. NCEP-DOE database interannual weather varia-
tions for years 1996 to 2004 result in ∼8% variation in global
annual isoprene emissions but differences for speciﬁc months
and locations exceed 50%.
The annual global isoprene emission estimated by
MEGAN using the alternative driving variable databases,
listed in Table 4, range from ∼15% lower to ∼30% higher.
Weather, PFT and LAI databases all contribute to these dif-
ferences in estimated emissions. Emission estimates for spe-
ciﬁc regions and months can differ by more than a factor of 3
but are typically within ∼30% for the regions that dominate
global emissions.
www.atmos-chem-phys.net/6/3181/2006/
Atmos. Chem. Phys., 6, 3181–3210, 2006

----- Page 20 (native) -----
3200
A. Guenther et al.: MEGAN estimates of global isoprene
January
March
May
July
September
November
PPFD and
temperature
normalized
isoprene
emission
 < 0.03
0.03 - 0.06
0.06 - 0.12
0.12 - 0.18
0.18 - 0.24
0.24 - 0.36
0.36 - 0.48
0.48 - 0.6
 > 0.6
Fig. 9. Monthly normalized isoprene emission rates estimated with MEGAN for 2003. Rates are normalized by the emission estimated for
standard temperature (=303 K) and PPFD transmission (60%). These normalized rates illustrate the variations associated with changes only
in temperature and PPFD transmission; i.e. all other model drivers are held constant.
5.2
Top-down emission estimates using satellite observa-
tions
Recent
studies
have
demonstrated
that
formaldehyde
(HCHO) column data from the Global Ozone Monitoring
Experiment (Palmer et al., 2001) provide important con-
straints to regional and global isoprene emission estimates
(e.g., Abbot et al., 2003; Palmer et al., 2003; Shim et al.,
2005). Formaldehyde is a high yield oxidation product of
VOCs. Palmer et al. (2003) developed a methodology to re-
late HCHO columns to emissions of its parent VOC, taking
into account the lifetimes of HCHO and the VOC.
Over North America during the growing season, isoprene
is the dominant contributor to measured HCHO columns
(Palmer et al., 2003). The spatial distribution and magni-
tude of GOME HCHO columns is consistent with in situ
surface data (Palmer et al., 2003); and the seasonal and in-
terannual variability of HCHO columns is broadly consis-
tent with MEGAN isoprene emission estimates (Abbot et
al., 2003). Typical monthly mean values for GOME HCHO
columns over North America during summer months are
1–2.5×1016 molec cm−2, with the largest values over the
Southeast United States (Fig. 11); the ﬁtting uncertainty of
the columns is ∼4×1015 molec cm−2. Isoprene emissions,
estimated from these data using a regression between mod-
eled isoprene ﬂuxes and modeled HCHO columns, have an
estimated uncertainty of ∼30% (Palmer et al., 2006). This
study also found that MEGAN isoprene ﬂux estimates were
within a factor of 2 of above-canopy ﬂuxes measured over
a growing season in northern Michigan (r=0.55). Past work
has shown that GOME isoprene emission estimates are spa-
tially correlated with BEIS2 isoprene emission estimates but
have a signiﬁcant positive bias, and have a negative bias
relative to the Guenther et al. (1995) isoprene emission es-
timates (Palmer et al., 2003).
There remain a number of
differences between GOME and MEGAN isoprene emis-
sion estimates in both the magnitude and the distribution of
isoprene emissions, particularly over the Southeast United
States (Fig. 11). These discrepancies could be due to a num-
ber of unresolved issues with both the model chemistry and
MEGAN estimates.
The HCHO yield from isoprene oxidation has been the
subject of only a few studies (e.g., Atkinson and Arey, 2003,
and references therein) but the intermediate chemical kinet-
ics are generally thought to be fairly well known at NOx
levels >1 ppbv, as often experienced over North America.
Atmos. Chem. Phys., 6, 3181–3210, 2006
www.atmos-chem-phys.net/6/3181/2006/

----- Page 21 (native) -----
A. Guenther et al.: MEGAN estimates of global isoprene
3201
January
March
May
July
September
November
Isoprene 
Emission
mg/m2/day
< 2
2 - 4
4 - 8
8 - 16
16 - 30
30 - 50
50 - 100
100 - 150
> 150
Fig. 10. Monthly average isoprene emission rates estimated with MEGAN for 2003.
 
	
	




	





 !
"
Fig. 11. Monthly mean HCHO columns over North America for June–August 2001. GOME observed (top panels) and GEOS-CHEM
modeled using MEGAN (bottom panels) vertical columns are shown on a 2×2.5 degree grid for 10:00–12:00 LT and for cloud cover <40%.
www.atmos-chem-phys.net/6/3181/2006/
Atmos. Chem. Phys., 6, 3181–3210, 2006

----- Page 22 (native) -----
3202
A. Guenther et al.: MEGAN estimates of global isoprene
Terpenes, sesquiterpenes, and other highly reactive VOCs
emitted by vegetation, also lead to the production of HCHO
but current model calculations suggest that they make a
relatively small contribution to observed HCHO columns
(Palmer et al., 2006). Better quantitative understanding of
the HCHO yields from these reactive VOCs is required.
Work has begun to assess the role of anthropogenic hydro-
carbons on the observed HCHO column signal. Aircraft ob-
servations during the Texas Air Quality Study in August–
September 2000 (Wert et al., 2003) saw HCHO plumes of
100 km length originating from a number of smoke stacks
close to Houston; the primary source of this HCHO was
saturated alkenes (Wert et al., 2003). Analysis of GOME
data does not show an enhancement over these regions (Mar-
tin et al., 2004), possibly due its crude horizontal resolu-
tion (320×40 km2). However, Martin et al. (2004) found
that anthropogenic VOCs play a role in determining HCHO
columns over eastern Texas although biogenic VOCs appear
to dominate on a regional scale. The role of anthropogenic
VOCs in determining HCHO columns is a subject of ongo-
ing work, but taking into account these possible contamina-
tions to the analysis of the observed HCHO columns will not
explain the model discrepancy in the observed seasonal vari-
ability shown by Fig. 11. It is possible that the GOME data
is observing a large-scale stress factor that affects isoprene
emissions (e.g., ozone) but is not accounted for by MEGAN.
Initial studies of GOME HCHO data have focused on
North America because there is a relative abundance of in
situ observations with which to evaluate the HCHO column
data and the methodology used to estimate isoprene emis-
sions (Palmer et al., 2003). Extending this analysis to the rest
of the world is clearly desirable but requires careful separa-
tion of the biomass burning and anthropogenic contributions
to HCHO from the biogenic signal, as discussed above. Tak-
ing this difﬁculty into consideration, Shim et al. (2005) con-
ducted Bayesian inversions for 10 biogenic, biomass burn-
ing, and industrial sources over 8 separate continental regions
based on GOME HCHO measurements. GEOS-CHEM was
used as the forward model. Over the selected inversion re-
gions, isoprene is the major contributor to the observed vari-
ability of HCHO columns. They showed that the posteriori
isoprene emissions are generally higher at northern mid lat-
itudes but lower in the tropics compared to the Guenther
et al. (1995) estimates.
The posteriori annual global iso-
prene emission estimate is 641 Tg isoprene which is only 7%
higher than the MEGAN estimate for 2003. The posteriori
biomass burning HCHO sources are higher by a factor of 2–
4 over the regions with signiﬁcant biomass burning except
for India. The industrial HCHO sources are higher by ∼20%
except for northern East Asia and India (∼60%). The poste-
riori uncertainties of isoprene emissions are greatly reduced
but are still high at ∼90%, reﬂecting the relatively large un-
certainties in GOME retrievals.
6
Isoprene emission response to earth system changes
Isoprene emissions are a dynamic part of the earth system
and respond to changes in the physical, chemical and bio-
logical components of this system. Our current limited un-
derstanding of the likely response of isoprene emissions to
these changes is based primarily on studies using greenhouse
grown plants. Additional studies are needed under realistic
growth conditions that include synergistic variables. Predic-
tions of future isoprene emissions are very challenging due to
the uncertainties in characterizing future physical, chemical
and biological variables and the isoprene emission response
to each. Potential interactions add additional complications.
It is difﬁcult to predict even the sign of the response of iso-
prene emission to the multiple effects of some driving vari-
ables. For example, increasing CO2 levels may reduce iso-
prene emission activity (a direct effect) but increase LAI and
the abundance of isoprene emitters (indirect effects).
Figure 12 illustrates MEGAN predictions of the response
of July average isoprene emissions to past and future changes
in PFT distributions, LAI and weather using the databases
described in Table 4. Estimates of PFT changes generally
indicate that isoprene emissions have increased in the past
50 to 300 years and will decrease over the next 50 to 100
years. This is primarily due to simulated changes in agricul-
tural land use and is dependent on the assumed PFT distri-
butions. Future increases in isoprene are predicted for some
regions due to climate driven PFT and LAI changes. Future
temperature simulations predict a substantial increase in iso-
prene emissions in most regions. Predicted changes in PPFD
result in increased emissions in some regions and decreases
in other regions. The MEGAN estimates clearly show that
isoprene emissions are sensitive to earth system changes but
there are large uncertainties associated with these estimates
and it is currently not possible to make robust predictions of
future changes in isoprene emissions. The potential impor-
tance of the known driving variables is discussed below.
6.1
Physical climate
Physical climate inﬂuences isoprene emissions through phys-
iological and ecological processes that operate on different
time scales. The relationship between isoprene emission and
these driving variables is non-linear and the response de-
pends on canopy structure, climate (e.g., a temperature in-
crease in a warm climate may have a different effect than in
a cool climate), and the temporal and spatial pattern of these
changes. MEGAN isoprene emission estimates increase with
increasing leaf temperature which is primarily driven by air
temperature but is also inﬂuenced by solar radiation, humid-
ity, wind speed and soil moisture. MEGAN isoprene emis-
sion estimates are less sensitive to air temperature changes
than they would be if the model assumed that leaf temper-
ature is equal to air temperature. This behavior reﬂects the
ability of broadleaf canopies to minimize leaf temperature
Atmos. Chem. Phys., 6, 3181–3210, 2006
www.atmos-chem-phys.net/6/3181/2006/

----- Page 23 (native) -----
A. Guenther et al.: MEGAN estimates of global isoprene
3203
HYDE 1700 landcover
MAPSS 2100 LAI
HYDE 1950 landcover
HYDE 1800 landcover
HadCM2 2080 PPFD
HadCM2 2080 Temperature
IMAGE 2100 landcover
MAPSS 2100 landcover
HYDE 1900 landcover
IMAGE 2050 landcover
< -80
Isoprene 
emission
relative to
year 2000
(% difference)
100 - 400
-80 to -50
-50 to -33
-10 to 10
> 400
50 to 100
10 to 50
-33 to -10
Fig. 12. Percent difference (future/past–present) in July average isoprene emission estimated by MEGAN with past/future databases (Table 2)
in comparison with MEGAN present day estimates.
increases by transpiring. However, this ability is diminished
during drought conditions. MEGAN predicts a greater re-
sponse to changes in temperature and PPFD than models
that use the Guenther et al. (1993) algorithms which account
only for short term temperature and PPFD variations. Thus
MEGAN isoprene emission estimates are more sensitive to
long-term changes in temperature and PPFD. Model simu-
lations of isoprene emission response to long-term climate
variations are difﬁcult to evaluate due to a lack of observa-
tional studies that are needed to characterize this behavior.
In addition to the direct effects of climate, estimates of long-
term changes in isoprene emissions must also consider the
indirect effects of climate-driven changes in vegetation. Our
ability to predict the response of isoprene to these vegetation
www.atmos-chem-phys.net/6/3181/2006/
Atmos. Chem. Phys., 6, 3181–3210, 2006

----- Page 24 (native) -----
3204
A. Guenther et al.: MEGAN estimates of global isoprene
changes is limited both by uncertainties in model predictions
of these changes and uncertainties in assigning emission fac-
tors to the landcover types used in these models.
Previous studies have described the potential sensitivity of
isoprene emissions to long-term (centuries) changes in physi-
cal climate. Adams et al. (2001) estimate that global isoprene
emissions are presently more than a factor of 2 higher than
they were during the last glacial maximum. The estimated
increase was associated with the direct effect of higher leaf
temperature, resulting in a 60% increase in isoprene emis-
sions, and the indirect effect of climate-induced changes in
vegetation distributions, resulting in a 40% increase in iso-
prene emissions. They note that lower BVOC emissions dur-
ing the last glacial maximum would signiﬁcantly increase
OH which could contribute to the low methane concentra-
tions observed in ice core samples. Several studies have ex-
amined the response of global isoprene emission to potential
future climate (Turner et al., 1991; Sanderson et al., 2003;
Wiedinmyer et al., 2006). Turner et al. predict that climate-
induced landcover changes will result in a 25% increase in
isoprene emissions while Sanderson et al. and Wiedinmyer et
al. predict slight (∼5%) decreases in isoprene emission. All
three studies predict a much larger (35% to 70%) increase
associated with increased temperature. They all assumed a
similar isoprene emission response to temperature change so
it is likely that the differences in estimated emissions are pri-
marily due to differences in the climate model predictions.
MEGAN simulations using the IMAGE and MAPSS-P
PFT databases predict isoprene emission responses to future
(year ∼2100) PFT distributions that range from a 30% de-
crease with IMAGE to a 6% increase with MAPSS. The dif-
ference is primarily because IMAGE accounts for changes in
cropland area while MAPSS does not. MEGAN isoprene
emission distributions shown in Fig. 12 demonstrate that
these changes vary considerably for different regions. These
MEGAN simulations, and the results of previous studies de-
scribed above, demonstrate that future PFT changes could
result in signiﬁcant isoprene emission variations, especially
at regional scales, but it is difﬁcult to even predict whether
these PFT changes will result in an increase or decrease in
emissions.
Global climate model predictions of future PPFD result
in small (∼5%) changes in annual global isoprene emissions
that range from a small increase (HadCM2) to a small de-
crease (CSM1). CSM1 estimates of future PPFD resulted
in regional isoprene emission changes ranging from about
−50% to +50%. The isoprene emission changes associated
with HadCM2 PPFD estimates are shown in Fig. 12 and
range from −16% to +58%. Solar radiation trends observed
at sites in the U.S., China and other locations (e.g., Liepert,
2002; Che et al., 2005) indicate that substantial reductions
(>10%) in solar transmission have occurred in many regions
in the past four decades. The response of isoprene emis-
sion is sensitive to the pattern of solar radiation decrease,
i.e., whether there is an increase in the number of overcast
days or a change in the transmission on clear days, but Fig. 4
shows that isoprene emission is expected to decrease nearly
linearly with solar transmission.
The response of isoprene to future temperature increases is
highly dependent on the model and scenario used to predict
future temperatures. For a given prediction of future tem-
perature increases, the associated isoprene emission increase
predicted by MEGAN is ∼40% higher than what would
be predicted by previous studies (e.g., Turner et al., 1991;
Sanderson et al., 2003; Wiedinmyer et al., 2006). This is
because MEGAN includes algorithms (Eqs. 8 and 9) that ac-
count for changes in the temperature of the past 24 to 240 h.
As a result, MEGAN predicts that annual global isoprene
emissions in the year 2100 could be more than a factor of
2 higher than present day emissions. Isoprene emission in-
creases of more than a factor of 3 are estimated for some
regions. PPFD and temperature variations tend to be corre-
lated which can result in larger increases in isoprene emis-
sions. For example, the HadCM2 simulation predicts a 4%
increase in annual global emission due to PPFD alone and a
72% increase due to temperature alone. An increase of 81%
is estimated when both PPFD and temperature are consid-
ered.
There are large uncertainties associated with predictions
of the response of isoprene emission to future temperature
changes. Uncertainties include predictions of future temper-
ature conditions (the climate models listed in Table 4 pre-
dict temperatures that differ by several degrees K), indirect
effects on landcover characteristics and the direct response
of isoprene emission (e.g., Eqs. 8 and 9). However, much
of the difference between the MEGAN estimates described
in this paper and the results of previous modeling studies is
due to the addition of an algorithm for simulating long term
temperature variations (i.e., Eq. 8). The need for this type of
algorithm is clearly demonstrated by the broad agreement be-
tween observational studies (e.g. Sharkey et al., 2000; Geron
et al., 2000; Petron et al., 2001; Hanson and Sharkey, 2001)
showing that over periods of days to weeks, plants adapt to
higher temperatures by increasing their emission rates more
than would be expected by observing their response to di-
urnal temperature variations alone. MEGAN assumes this
phenomenon is applicable to temperature changes on annual
to decadal time scales as well, although this remains to be
demonstrated.
6.2
Chemical climate
Laboratory and ﬁeld enclosure measurements have shown
that the chemical composition of the atmosphere can inﬂu-
ence isoprene emission rates (e.g., Rosenstiel et al., 2003;
Velikova et al., 2005). Aerosols in the atmosphere or de-
posited on leaf surfaces can indirectly inﬂuence isoprene
emissions by modifying light levels. Atmospheric nitrogen,
ozone, and CO2concentrations can have both direct and indi-
rect impacts on isoprene emissions. The indirect effects are
Atmos. Chem. Phys., 6, 3181–3210, 2006
www.atmos-chem-phys.net/6/3181/2006/

----- Page 25 (native) -----
A. Guenther et al.: MEGAN estimates of global isoprene
3205
associated with their ability to inﬂuence climate and plant
species distributions. The direct effects are related to bio-
chemical and physiological responses.
Isoprene emission from plants can be signiﬁcantly sup-
pressed by high CO2 concentrations (Rosenstiel et al., 2003)
but minimal decreases have been observed in some ﬁeld stud-
ies (Buckley, 2001; Rapparini et al., 2004).
Pegoraro et
al. (2004) found that isoprene emission correlates with inter-
nal CO2 concentration which is a function of ambient CO2
levels and stomatal conductance. A lower stomatal conduc-
tance, which occurs with higher vapor pressure deﬁcits and
water stress, reduces the internal CO2 concentration and so
can reduce the impact of elevated CO2 levels on isoprene
emission. This suggests that the elevated CO2 concentra-
tions that can substantially decrease isoprene emission from
well-watered plants will have less of an impact under most
ﬁeld conditions. Elevated CO2 tends to increase foliar den-
sity which can result in an increase in isoprene emission.
Centritto et al. (2004) found that a decrease in isoprene per
unit leaf area was balanced by increased leaf area associated
with elevated CO2 levels. However, isoprene emission from
most plant canopies is limited by light and not leaf area, so
increased foliage will have the greatest impact on isoprene
emission from open canopies. Elevated CO2 concentrations
may result in changes in species distributions, which can also
have a signiﬁcant but generally unpredictable impact on land-
scape average isoprene emission factors. This has the poten-
tial to signiﬁcantly impact isoprene emissions but it is not
known how this will affect regional to global scale isoprene
emission.
Harley et al. (1994) observed a strong correlation be-
tween nitrogen fertilization and isoprene emission from pot-
ted plants. This indicates that increased nitrogen availability
from fertilizer application or atmospheric deposition could
lead to elevated isoprene emissions. Field studies of this phe-
nomenon are needed in order to assess the potential impact
on regional or global isoprene emissions.
Large increases in the emission of isoprene have been ob-
served from leaves exposed to short-term elevated ozone lev-
els (Velikova et al., 2005). The response occurs rapidly and
persists for hours after ozone levels are reduced. In contrast,
Ennis et al. (1990) found that isoprene emission did not re-
spond to long term exposure to elevated ozone. This may
indicate that isoprene emissions are not inﬂuenced by the
long-term average ozone but respond only when plants are
exposed to short-term ozone concentration ﬂuctuations. The
response of isoprene emissions to ozone and other stresses
is likely complex and a reliable description of this behavior
will require a better understanding of the biochemical and
physiological processes that control emissions.
6.3
Land management
Landscape-scale isoprene emissions are very sensitive to
changes in foliar density and species composition that are
a direct or indirect result of land management practices. Ex-
amples of practices that have had major impacts on regional
isoprene emissions include overgrazing, cropland abandon-
ment, tree plantations, selective logging, ﬁre suppression and
urbanization. Guenther et al. (1999a) examined the response
of a subtropical rangeland to overgrazing.
They estimate
that a shrub invasion associated with overgrazing resulted
in a factor of 3 increase in isoprene emissions. Schaab et
al. (2000) simulated the effects on regional isoprene emis-
sions of cropland-to-woodland conversion in southern France
over a 35-year period and estimated that regional isoprene
emissions increased by a factor of four (∼50% increase per
decade). The impact of urbanization on isoprene emission is
dependent on the landscape that is being converted and on
urban tree planting practices. Cities in drier regions tend to
have more vegetation than the natural landscape while cities
in wetter regions typically have less vegetation than the po-
tential natural state. The recognition that some vegetation
has very high VOC emission rates could lead municipal gov-
ernments to recommend or mandate the planting of trees with
low isoprene emissions.
Tree plantations represent a small fraction (∼5%) of to-
tal forest land but they dominate in some regions and the
global total is rapidly increasing. The total land area cov-
ered by tree plantations has increased by about a factor of
10 in the past century, with much of the increase in the
tropics.
Landcover inventories (e.g., FAO, Global Forest
Resource Assessment 2000, National Forestry Action Plans
(NFAP) / Forest Resources Assessment (FRA), FAO http:
//www.fao.org/forestry/fo/fra/index.jsp, 2001) indicate that
at least half of this land area is covered by bamboo or trees
(e.g., Eucalyptus, Cocos, Elaeis, Casuarina, Picea, Popu-
lus, Salix and Platanus) with high isoprene emissions that are
likely to cause a large regional increase (greater than a factor
of 10) in isoprene emission. While the impact of this land
management activity on global scale emissions is currently
minimal, the regional perturbations could be signiﬁcant.
Fire suppression during the past century has led to large
increases in tree foliar density distributions in many regions
(e.g., the western United States). Increased foliar density
is expected to increase isoprene emissions but the change
in species composition may be equally important. Brown
and Smith (2000) summarize the response of various ecosys-
tems to ﬁre and note that large changes in species composi-
tion occur with varying ﬁre frequency. Fire resistant species
include trees that emit isoprene (e.g., oaks) and those that do
not (e.g., pines). The impact of ﬁre suppression on isoprene
emission appears to be ecosystem dependent but is likely to
result in large emission changes in many ecosystems.
www.atmos-chem-phys.net/6/3181/2006/
Atmos. Chem. Phys., 6, 3181–3210, 2006

----- Page 26 (native) -----
3206
A. Guenther et al.: MEGAN estimates of global isoprene
7
Conclusions and implications for atmospheric chem-
istry modeling
Global geographically-referenced estimates of isoprene
emission are necessary for characterizing global carbon cy-
cling, distributions of trace gases and aerosols and their
radiative forcing, and investigations of regional air quality
(Guenther, 2002; Geron et al., 1994; Sanderson et al., 2003).
The isoprene emission rates recommended in the mid to
late 1990s (e.g., Guenther et al., 1995; Pierce et al., 1998)
were more than a factor of two greater than those previ-
ously used in regional air quality models and global chem-
istry and transport models (e.g., Zimmerman et al., 1979;
Pierce and Waldruff, 1991; Muller, 1992). The higher iso-
prene emission rates resulted in unrealistically high predic-
tions of boundary layer isoprene and ozone concentrations
when they were introduced into some chemistry and trans-
port models (e.g., Houweling et al., 1998). This led to the de-
velopment of global isoprene emission inventories that were
based on the Guenther et al. (1995) geographical and sea-
sonal emission distributions but included a scaling factor to
uniformly reduce emissions by 20% or more (e.g., Houwel-
ing et al., 1998; Poisson et al., 2000) or reduce isoprene emis-
sions by as much as a factor of three in selected landscapes
(Bey et al., 2001). The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC) Working Group on Atmospheric Chemistry
and Greenhouse Gases (Ehhalt and Prather, 2001) recom-
mended using a global isoprene emission rate that is 56%
lower than the Guenther et al. (1995) estimates. This emis-
sion reduction was used to produce chemistry and transport
model simulations of CO and isoprene concentrations that
were similar to observations. However, the poor model per-
formance could have been due to factors other than isoprene
emission rates. For example, deposition rates, chemical oxi-
dation schemes, or boundary layer dynamics could have been
responsible. The ability of other models (e.g., Granier et al.,
2000; Sanderson et al., 2003) to simulate reasonable distri-
butions of chemical constituents when using annual global
isoprene emissions of ∼500 Tg carbon (∼570 Tg isoprene),
indicates that the rates estimated by Guenther et al. (1995)
and by MEGAN are not unrealistic. Future improvements
in simulations of the relevant chemical, physical, and bio-
logical processes in global chemistry and transport models
may provide stronger constraints on isoprene emissions. At
present, these models neither conﬁrm nor disprove the va-
lidity of the emission rates estimated by MEGAN. How-
ever, top-down emission estimates based on satellite mea-
surements of formaldehyde distributions (see Sect. 6.2) gen-
erally agree with the emission rates estimated by MEGAN.
While considerable progress has been made in improv-
ing our understanding of the processes controlling isoprene
emission rates for some regions and seasons, substantial un-
certainties remain. Robust algorithms that accurately predict
the response of isoprene emission to long term changes in
the physical (e.g., temperature and light) and chemical (e.g.,
carbon dioxide and ozone) environments are needed and re-
quire additional observations, primarily by using enclosure
methods with controlled environments. Advances in aircraft
regional ﬂux measurement capabilities and top-down remote
sensing approaches will improve our ability to constrain re-
gional to global scale isoprene emissions. The isoprene emis-
sion calculation methods developed for MEGAN require sig-
niﬁcant reﬁnement but are currently suitable for chemistry
and transport modeling on regional and global scales.
Acknowledgements. We are grateful to G. Pﬁster (NCAR) and
R. Wright (USEPA) for valuable comments on this manuscript. We
thank U. Vanchindorj and H.-M. Hsu for processing some of the
landcover and weather datasets and Angie Jardine for assistance
in creating some ﬁgures. P. I. Palmer acknowledges support from
the NASA Atmospheric Composition Modeling and Analysis
Program and the Atmospheric Chemistry Program of the U.S.
National Science Foundation. This work was partially supported
by an interagency agreement from the USEPA National Risk
Management Lab in Research Triangle Park, NC. The National
Center for Atmospheric Research is sponsored by the National
Science Foundation.
Edited by: F. J. Dentener
References
Abbot, D., Palmer, P., Martin, R., Chance, K., Jacob, D.,
and Guenther, A.:
Seasonal and interannual variability of
isoprene emissions as determined by formaldehyde column
measurements from space, Geophys. Res. Lett., 17, 1886,
doi:10.1029/2003GL017336, 2003.
Adams, J., Constable, J., Guenther, A., and Zimmerman, P.: An
estimate of natural volatile organic compound emissions from
vegetation since the last glacial maximum, Chemosphere- Global
Change Science, 3, 73–91, 2001.
Alcamo, J., Leemans R., and Kreileman, E. (Eds.): Global change
scenarios of the 21st century. Results from the IMAGE 2.1
model, Pergamon & Elseviers Science, London, pp. 296, 1998.
Alessio, G. A., De Lillis, M., Fanelli, M., Pinelli, P., and Loreto, F.:
Direct and indirect impacts of ﬁre on isoprenoid emissions from
Mediterranean vegetation, Functional Ecology, 18(3), 357–364,
2004.
Andreae, M. O., Artaxo, P., Brandao, C., Carswell, F. E., Cic-
cioli, P., da Costa, A. L., Culf, A. D., Esteves, J. L., Gash,
J., and Grace, J.: Biogeochemical cycling of carbon, water,
energy, trace gases, and aerosols in Amazonia:
The LBA-
EUSTACH experiments, J. Geophys. Res., 107(D20), 8066,
doi:10.1029/2001JD000524, 2002.
Atkinson, R. and Arey, J.: Atmospheric chemistry of biogenic or-
ganic compounds, Acc. Chem. Res., 31, 574–583, 1998.
Bai, J., Baker, B., Liang, B., Greenberg, J., and Guenther, A.: Iso-
prene and monoterpene emissions from an Inner Mongolia grass-
land, Atmos. Environ., in press, 2006.
Baldocchi, D.: Flux footprints within and over forest canopies,
Boundary-Layer Meteorology, 85(2), 273–292, 1997.
Bey, I., Jacob, D. J., Yantosca, R. M., Logan, J. A., Field, B. D.,
Fiore, A. M., Li, Q., Liu, H. Y., Mickley, L. J., and Schultz,
Atmos. Chem. Phys., 6, 3181–3210, 2006
www.atmos-chem-phys.net/6/3181/2006/

----- Page 27 (native) -----
A. Guenther et al.: MEGAN estimates of global isoprene
3207
M. G.: Global modeling of tropospheric chemistry with assim-
ilated meteorology: Model description and evaluation, J. Geo-
phys. Res., 106, 23 073–23 096, 2001.
Bonan, G. B., Levis, S., Kergoat, L., and Oleson, K. W.: Land-
scapes as patches of plant functional types: An integrating con-
cept for climate and ecosystem models, Global Biogeochem. Cy-
cles, 16(2), 1021, doi:10.1029/2000GB001360, 2002.
Brown, J. and Smith, J.: Wildland ﬁre in ecosystems: effects of ﬁre
on ﬂora, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Ogden,
UT, 2000.
Bruggemann, N. and Schnitzler, J. P.: Diurnal variation of dimethy-
lallyl diphosphate concentrations in oak (Quercus robur L.)
leaves, Physiol. Plant., 115, 190–196, 2002.
Buckley, P. T.: Isoprene emissions from a Florida scrub oak species
grown in ambient and elevated carbon dioxide, Atmos. Environ.,
35, 631–634, 2001.
Centritto, M., Nascetti, P., Petrilli, L., Raschi, A., and Loreto, F.:
Proﬁles of isoprene emission and photosynthetic parameters in
hybrid poplars exposed to free-air CO2 enrichment, Plant Cell
and Environment, 27(4), 403–412, 2004.
Che, H., Shi, G., Zhang, X., Arimoto, R., Zhao, J., Zhao, L.,
Wang, B., and Chen, Z.: Analysis of 40 years of solar ra-
diation data from China, Geophys. Res. Lett., 32, L06803,
doi:10.1029/2004GL022322, 2005.
Chen, F. and Dudhia, J.: Coupling an Advanced Land Surface –
Hydrology Model with the Penn State – NCAR MM5 Model-
ing System. Part I: Model Implementation and Sensitivity, Mon.
Wea. Rev., 129(4), 569–585, 2001.
Clark, W.: China’s Green Manure Revolution, Science, 80(1) 69–
73, 1980.
Collins, W. J., Derwent, R. G., Johnson, C. E., and Stevenson, D. S.:
The oxidation of organic compounds in the troposphere and their
global warming potentials, Climatic Change, 52(4), 28, 2002.
DeFries, R., Hansen, M., Townshend, J. R. G., Janetos, A. C., and
Loveland, T. R.: A new global 1 km data set of percent tree cover
derived from remote sensing, Global Change Biology, 6, 247–
254, 2000.
Dudhia, J. and Bresch, J. F.: A global version of the PSU-NCAR
mesoscale model, Mon. Wea. Rev., 130, 2989–3007, 2002.
Ehhalt, D. and Prather, M.: Atmospheric Chemistry and Green-
house Gases, in: Climate Change 2001; Working Group 1: The
Scientiﬁc Basis, edited by: Houghton, J., Ding, Y., Griggs, D.,
Noguer, M., van der Linden, P., and Xiaosu, D., Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 2001.
Ennis, C. A., Lazrus, A. L., Zimmerman, P. R., and Monson, R.
K.: Flux determination and physiological response in exposure
of red spruce to gaseous hydrogen peroxide, ozone, and sulfur
dioxide., Tellus Series B – Chemical and Physical Meteorology,
42B, 183–199, 1990.
Fall, R. and Wildermuth, M. C.: Isoprene synthase: From bio-
chemical mechanism to emission algorithm, J. Geophys. Res.,
103(D19), 25, 1998.
Friedl, M. A., McIver, D. K., Hodges, J. C. F., Zhang, X. Y., Mu-
choney, D., Strahler, A. H., Woodcock, C. E., Gopal, S., Schnei-
der, A., Cooper, A., Baccini, A., Gao, F., and Schaaf, C.: Global
Land Cover Mapping from MODIS: Algorithms and Early Re-
sults, Remote Sens. Environ., 83(1–2), 287–302, 2002.
Fuentes, J. D., Lerdau, M., Atkinson, R., Baldocchi, D., Botten-
heim, J. W., Ciccioli, P., Lamb, B., Geron, C., Gu, L., Guenther,
A., Sharkey, T. D., and Stockwell, W.: Biogenic Hydrocarbons
in the Atmospheric Boundary Layer: A Review, Bull. Amer. Me-
teorol. Soc., 81(7), 1537–1576, 2000.
Fukui, Y. and Doskey, P. V.: Air-surface exchange of nonmethane
organic compounds at a grassland site: Seasonal variations and
stressed emissions, J. Geophys. Res., 103(D11), 13, 1998.
Funk, J. L., Jones, C. G., Baker, C. J., Fuller, H. M., Giardina, C. P.,
and Lerdau, M. T.: Diurnal variation in the basal emission rate
of isoprene, Ecological Applications, 13(1), 269, 2003.
Geron, C. D., Guenther, A. B., and Pierce, T. E.: An improved
model for estimating emissions of volatile organic compounds
from forests in the eastern United States (Paper 94JD00246), J.
Geophys. Res., 99(D6), 12 773, 1994.
Geron, C., Guenther, A., Sharkey, T., and Arnts, R. R.: Tempo-
ral variability in basal isoprene emission factor, Tree Physiology,
20(12), 799–805, 2000.
Geron, C., Owen, S., Guenther, A., Greenberg, J., Rasmussen, R.,
Bai, J. H., Li, Q. J., and Baker, B.: Volatile organic compounds
from vegetation in southern Yunnan Province, China: Emission
rates and some potential regional implications, Atmos. Environ.,
40(10), 1759–1773, 2006.
Goldstein, A., Goulden, M., Munger, J. W., Wofsy, S., and Geron,
C.: Seasonal course of isoprene emissions from a midlatitude
forest, J. Geophys. Res., 103, 31 045–31 056, 1998.
Graedel, T. E., Bates, T. S., Bouwman, A. F., Cunnold, D., Dignon,
J., Fung, I., Jacob, D. J., Lamb, B. K., Logan, J. A., Marland, G.,
Middleton, P., Pacyna, J. M., Placet, M., and Veldt, C.: A com-
pilation of inventories of emissions to the atmosphere, Global
Biogeochem. Cycles, 7, 1–26, 1993.
Granier, C., Petron, G., Muller, J. F., and Brasseur, G.: The impact
of natural and anthropogenic hydrocarbons on the tropospheric
budget of carbon monoxide, Atmos. Environ., 34(29–30), 5255–
5270, 2000.
Greenberg, J. P., Guenther, A., Zimmerman, P., Baugh, W., Geron,
C., Davis, K., Helmig, D., and Klinger, L. F.: Tethered balloon
measurements of biogenic VOCs in the atmospheric boundary
layer, Atmos. Environ., 33(6), 855–867, 1999.
Guenther, A. B., Monson, R. K., and Fall, R.:
Isoprene and
monoterpene emission rate variability: Observations with euca-
lyptus and Emission Rate Algorithm Development, J. Geophys.
Res., 96, 10 799–10 808, 1991.
Guenther, A. B., Zimmerman, P. R., Harley, P. C., Monson, R. K.,
and Fall, R.: Isoprene and Monoterpene Emission Rate Variabil-
ity – Model Evaluations and Sensitivity Analyses, J. Geophys.
Res.-Atmos., 98(D7), 12 609–12 617, 1993.
Guenther, A., Hewitt, C. N., Erickson, D., Fall, R., Geron, C.,
Graedel, T., Harley, P., Klinger, L., Lerdau, M., Mckay, W.
A., Pierce, T., Scholes, B., Steinbrecher, R., Tallamraju, R.,
Taylor, J., and Zimmerman, P. A.:
Global-Model of Natu-
ral Volatile Organic-Compound Emissions, J. Geophys. Res.-
Atmos., 100(D5), 8873–8892, 1995.
Guenther, A., Greenberg, J., Harley, P., Helmig, D., Klinger, L.,
Vierling, L., Zimmerman, P., and Geron, C.: Leaf, branch, stand
and landscape scale measurements of volatile organic compound
ﬂuxes from US woodlands, Tree Physiology, 16(1–2), 17–24,
1996.
Guenther, A., Baugh, B., Brasseur, G., Greenberg, J., Harley, P.,
Klinger, L., Serca, D., and Vierling, L.: Isoprene emission es-
timates and uncertainties for the Central African EXPRESSO
www.atmos-chem-phys.net/6/3181/2006/
Atmos. Chem. Phys., 6, 3181–3210, 2006

----- Page 28 (native) -----
3208
A. Guenther et al.: MEGAN estimates of global isoprene
study domain, J. Geophys. Res.-Atmos., 104(D23), 30 625–
30 639, 1999a.
Guenther, A., Archer, S., Greenberg, J., Harley, P., Helmig,
D., Klinger, L., Vierling, L., Wildermuth, M., Zimmerman,
P., and Zitzer, S.: Biogenic hydrocarbon emissions and land-
cover/climate change in a subtropical savanna, Phys. Chem.
Earth Part B – Hydrology Oceans and Atmosphere, 24(6), 659–
667, 1999b.
Guenther, A., Geron, C., Pierce, T., Lamb, B., Harley, P., and
Fall, R.: Natural emissions of non-methane volatile organic com-
pounds; carbon monoxide, and oxides of nitrogen from North
America, Atmos. Environ., 34(12–14), 2205–2230, 2000.
Guenther, A. B. and Hills, A. J.: Eddy covariance measurement of
isoprene ﬂuxes, J. Geophys. Res., 103(D11), 13, 1998.
Guenther, A.:
The contribution of reactive carbon emissions
from vegetation to the carbon balance of terrestrial ecosystems,
Chemosphere, 49(8), 837–844, 2002.
Hansen, M., DeFries, R., Townshend, J. R. G., and Sohlberg, R.:
Global land cover classiﬁcation at 1 km resolution using a deci-
sion tree classiﬁer, Int. J. Remote Sens., 21, 1331–1365, 2000.
Hansen, M., DeFries, R. S., Townshend, J. R. G., Carroll, M.,
Dimiceli, C., and Sohlberg, R. A.: Global Percent Tree Cover
at a Spatial Resolution of 500 Meters:
First Results of the
MODIS Vegetation Continuous Fields Algorithm” Earth Inter-
actions, 7(10), 1–15, 2003.
Hanson, D. T. and Sharkey, T. D.: Rate of acclimation of the capac-
ity for isoprene emission in response to light and temperature,
Plant, Cell & Environment, 24(9), 937–946, 2001.
Harley, P. C., Litvak, M. E., Sharkey, T. D., and Monson, R. K.: Iso-
prene Emission from Velvet Bean-Leaves – Interactions among
Nitrogen Availability, Growth Photon Flux-Density, and Leaf
Development, Plant Physiology, 105(1), 279–285, 1994.
Harley, P., Vasconcellos, P., Vierling, L., Pinheiro, C., Greenberg,
J., Guenther, A., Klinger, L., Almeida, S., Neill, D., Baker, T.,
Phillips, O., and Malhi, Y.: Variation in potential for isoprene
emissions among Neotropical forest sites, Global Change Biol-
ogy, 10, 630–650, 2004.
Houweling, S., Dentener, F., and Lelieveld, J.: The impact of non-
methane hydrocarbon compounds on tropospheric photochem-
istry, J. Geophys. Res., 103, 10 673–10 696, 1998.
Isebrands, J. G., Guenther, A. B., Harley, P., Helmig, D., Klinger,
L., Vierling, L., Zimmerman, P., and Geron, C.: Volatile organic
compound emission rates from mixed deciduous and coniferous
forests in Northern Wisconsin, USA, Atmos. Environ., 33(16),
2527–2536, 1999.
Isidorov, V.:
Organic Chemistry of the Earth’s Atmosphere,
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1990.
Janson, R., De Serves, C., and Romero, R.: Emission of isoprene
and carbonyl compounds from a boreal forest and wetland in
Sweden, Agric. For. Meteorol., 98–9, 671–681, 1999.
Kanamitsu, M., Ebisuzaki, W., Woollen, J., Yang, S. K., Hnilo, J. J.,
Fiorino, M., and Potter, G. L.: NCEP-DOE AMIP-II reanalysis
(R-2), Bull. Amer. Meteorol. Soc., 83(11), 1631–1643, 2002.
Karl, T., Guenther, A., Spirig, C., Hansel, A., and Fall, R.: Seasonal
variation of biogenic VOC emissions above a mixed hardwood
forest in northern Michigan, Geophys. Res. Lett., 30(23), 2186,
2003.
Karl, T., Potosnak, M., Guenther, A., Clark, D., Walker, J., Her-
rick, J. D., and Geron, C.: Exchange processes of volatile organic
compounds above a tropical rain forest: Implications for model-
ing tropospheric chemistry above dense vegetation, J. Geophys.
Res.-Atmos., 109(D18), D18306, doi:10.1029/2004JD004738,
2004.
Keller, M. and Lerdau, M.: Isoprene emission from tropical forest
canopy leaves, Global Biogeochem. Cycles, 13, 19–29, 1999.
Kesselmeier, J., Kuhn, U., Wolf, A., Andreae, M. O., Ciccioli, P.,
Brancaleoni, E., Frattoni, M., Guenther, A., Greenberg, J., Vas-
concellos, P. D., de Oliva, T., Tavares, T., and Artaxo, P.: Atmo-
spheric volatile organic compounds (VOC) at a remote tropical
forest site in central Amazonia, Atmos. Environ., 34(24), 4063–
4072, 2000.
Keppler, F., Hamilton, J. T. G., Braß, M., and R¨ockmann, T.:
Methane emissions from terrestrial plants under aerobic condi-
tions, Nature, 439, 187–191, doi:10.1038/nature04420, 2006.
Kinnee, E., Geron, C., and Pierce, T.: United States land use inven-
tory for estimating biogenic ozone precursor emissions, Ecolog-
ical Applications, 7(1), 46–58, 1997.
Kirstine, W., Galbally, I., Ye, Y., and Hooper, M.: Emissions of
volatile organic compounds (primarily oxygenated species) from
pasture, J. Geophys. Res., 103(D9), 10, 1998.
Klein Goldewijk, K.: Estimating global land use change over the
past 300 years: The HYDE database, Global Biogeochem. Cy-
cles, 15(2), 417–433, 2001.
Klinger, L., Zimmerman, P., Greenberg, J., Heidt, L., and Guenther,
A.: Carbon trace gas ﬂuxes along a successional gradient in the
Hudson Bay lowland, J. Geophys. Res., 99, 1469–1494, 1994.
Klinger, L. F., Li, Q. J., Guenther, A. B., Greenberg, J. P., Baker, B.,
and Bai, J. H.: Assessment of volatile organic compound emis-
sions from ecosystems of China, J. Geophys. Res., 107(D21),
4603, doi:10.1029/2001JD001076, 2002.
Kuhn, U., Rottenberger, S., Biesenthal, T., Wolf, A., Schebeske, G.,
Ciccioli, P., Brancaleoni, E., Frattoni, M., Tavares, T. M., and
Kesselmeier, J.: Isoprene and monoterpene emissions of Ama-
zonian tree species during the wet season: Direct and indirect in-
vestigations on controlling environmental functions, J. Geophys.
Res.-Atmos., 107, 8071, 2002.
Lamb, B., Allwine, E., Dilts, S., Westberg, H., Pierce, T., Geron,
C., Baldocchi, D., Guenther, A., Klinger, L., Harley, P., and Zim-
merman, P.: Evaluation of forest canopy models for estimating
isoprene emissions, J. Geophys. Res., 101, 22 787–22 798, 1996.
Leemans, R. and Cramer, W.: IIASA database for mean monthly
values of temperature, precipitation, and cloudiness on a global
terrestrial grid: Digital raster data on a 30 minute geographic
(lat/long) 320 times 720 grid, in: Global ecosystems Database
Version 1.0: Disc A, NOAA National Geophyscial Data Center,
Boulder, CO, 1992.
Leff, B., Ramankutty, N., and Foley, J. A.: Geographic distribution
of major crops across the world, Global Biogeochem. Cycles, 18,
GB1009, doi:10.1029/2003GB002108, 2004.
Liepert, B. G.: Observed reductions of surface solar radiation at
sites in the United States and worldwide from 1961 to 1990, Geo-
phys. Res. Lett., 29(10), doi:10.1029/2002GLO14910, 2002.
Makar, P., Fuentes, J., Wang, D., Staebler, R., and Wiebe, H.:
Chemical processing of biogenic hydrocarbons within and above
a temperate deciduous forest, J. Geophys. Res., 104(D3), 3581–
3603, 1999.
Martin, P. H. and Guenther, A. B.: Insights into the dynamics of
forest succession and non-methane hydrocarbon trace gas emis-
Atmos. Chem. Phys., 6, 3181–3210, 2006
www.atmos-chem-phys.net/6/3181/2006/

----- Page 29 (native) -----
A. Guenther et al.: MEGAN estimates of global isoprene
3209
sions, J. Biogeography, 22, 493–499, 1995.
Martin, R. V., Parrish, D. D., Ryerson, T. B., Nicks Jr., D. K.,
Chance, K., Kurosu, T. P., Fried, A., Wert, B. P., Jacob, D. J.,
and Sturges, E. D.: Evaluation of GOME satellite measurements
of tropospheric NO2 and HCHO using regional data from air-
craft campaigns in the southeastern United States, J. Geophys.
Res., 109, D24307, doi:10.1029/2004JD004869, 2004.
Monson, R., Harley, P., Litvak, M., Wildermuth, M., Guenther, A.,
Zimmerman, P., and Fall, R.: Environmental and developmen-
tal controls over the seasonal pattern of isoprene emission from
aspen leaves, Oecologia, 99, 260–270, 1994.
Muller, J. F.: Geographical-Distribution and Seasonal-Variation of
Surface Emissions and Deposition Velocities of Atmospheric
Trace Gases, J. Geophys. Res.-Atmos., 97(D4), 3787–3804,
1992.
Myneni, R. B., Nemani, R. R., and Running S. W.: Estimation of
global leaf area index and absorped par using radiative transfer
models, IEEE Trans. Geosci. Rem. Sens., 35, 1380–1393, 1997.
Neilson, R. P.: A model for predicting continental-scale vegetation
distribution and water balance, Ecological Applications, 5, 362–
385, 1995.
Olson, J.:
World ecosystems (WE1.4):
Digital raster data on
a 10 minute geographic 1080×2160 grid, Global Ecosytems
Database, Version 1.0: Disc A., N. G. D. Center, Boulder CO,
Nat. Ocean. Atmos. Admin., 1992.
Olson, D. M., Dinerstein, E., Wikramanayake, E. D., Burgess, N.
D., Powell, G. V. N., Underwood, E. C., D’Amico, J. A., Itoua, I.,
Strand, H. E., Morrison, J. C., Loucks, C. J., Allnutt, T. F., Rick-
etts, T. H., Kura, Y., Lamoreux, J. F., Wettengel, W. W., Hedao,
P., and Kassem, K. R.: Terrestrial Ecoregions of the World: A
New Map of Life on Earth., BioScience, 51(11), 933–938, 2001.
Otter, L., Guenther, A., Wiedinmyer, C., Fleming, G., Harley, P.,
and Greenberg, J.: Spatial and temporal variations in biogenic
volatile organic compound emissions for Africa south of the
equator, J. Geophys. Res., 108(13), doi:10.1029/2002JD002609,
2003.
Palmer, P. I., Jacob, D. J., Chance, K., Martin, R. V., Spurr, R. J.
D., Kurosu, T. P., Bey, I., Yantosca, R., Fiore, A., and Li, Q.
B.: Air mass factor formulation for spectroscopic measurements
from satellites: Application to formaldehyde retrievals from the
Global Ozone Monitoring Experiment, J. Geophys. Res., 106,
14 539–14 550, 2001.
Palmer, P. I., Jacob, D. J., Fiore, A. M., Martin, R. V., Chance,
K., and Kurosu, T. P.: Mapping isoprene emissions over North
America using formaldehyde column observations from space,
J. Geophys. Res., 108(D6), 4180, doi:10.1029/2002JD002153,
2003.
Palmer, P., Abbot, D., Fu, T.-M., Jacob, D., Chance, K., Kurosu,
T., Guenther, A., Wiedinmyer, C., Stanton, J., Pilling, M., Press-
ley, S., Lamb, B., and Sumner, A.: Quantifying the seasonal and
interannual variability of North American isoprene emissions us-
ing satellite observations of formaldehyde column, J. Geophys.
Res., in press, 2006.
Pegoraro, E., Rey, A., Bobich, E., Barron-Gafford, G., Grieve, A.,
Malhi, Y., and Murthy, R.: Effect of CO2 concentration and
vapour pressure deﬁcit on isoprene emission from leaves of Pop-
ulus deltoides during drought, Functional Plant Biology, 31(12),
1137–1147, 2004.
Petron, G., Harley, P., Greenberg, J., and Guenther, A.: Seasonal
temperature variations inﬂuence isoprene emission, Geophys.
Res. Lett., 28 (9), 1707–1710, 2001.
Pierce, T. E. and Waldruff, P. S.: Pc-Beis – a Personal-Computer
Version of the Biogenic Emissions Inventory System, J. Air
Waste Manage. Assoc., 41(7), 937–941, 1991.
Pierce, T., Geron, C., Bender, L., Dennis, R., Tonnesen, G., and
Guenther, A.: Inﬂuence of increased isoprene emissions on re-
gional ozone modeling, J. Geophys. Res.-Atmos., 103(D19),
25 611–25 629, 1998.
Poisson, N., Kanakidou, M., and Crutzen, P. J.: Impact of non-
methane hydrocarbons on tropospheric chemistry and the oxidiz-
ing power of the global troposphere: 3-dimensional modelling
results, J. Atmos. Chem., 36, 157–230, 2000.
Ramankutty, N. and Foley, J. A.: Estimating historical changes
in land cover: North American croplands from 1850 to 1992,
Global Ecology and Biogeography, 8, 381–396, 1999.
Rapparini, F., Baraldi, R., Miglietta, F., and Loreto, F.: Isoprenoid
emission in trees of Quercus pubescens and Quercus ilex with
lifetime exposure to naturally high CO2 environment, Plant, Cell
and Environment, 27, 381–391, 2004.
Rasmussen, R. and Went, F.: Volatile organic material of plant ori-
gin in the atmosphere, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 53, 215–220, 1965.
Rosenstiel, T. N., Potosnak, M. J., Grifﬁn, K. L., Fall, R., and Mon-
son, R. K.: Increased CO2 uncouples growth from isoprene emis-
sion in an agriforest ecosystem, Nature, 421, 256–259, 2003.
Sanadze, G.: The nature of gaseous substances emitted by leaves
of Robinia pseudoacacia, Soobshch. Akad. Nauk Gruz. SSR, 27,
747–750, 1957.
Sanderson, M. G., Jones, C. D., Collins, W. J., Johnson, C. E., and
Derwent, R. G.: Effect of climate change on isoprene emissions
and surface ozone levels, Geophys. Res. Lett., 30(18), 1936,
2003.
Schaab, G., Steinbrecher, R., Lacaze, B., and Lenz, R.: Assessment
of long-term vegetation changes on potential isoprenoid emission
for a Mediterranean-type ecosystem in France, J. Geophys. Res.-
Atmos., 105(D23), 28 863–28 873, 2000.
Sharkey, T. D., Singsaas, E. L., Lerdau, M. T., and Geron, C.:
Weather effects on isoprene emission capacity and applications
in emissions algorithms, Ecol. Appl., 9, 1132–1137, 2000.
Shim,
C.,
Wang,
Y.,
Choi,
Y.,
Palmer,
P.,
Abbot,
D.,
Chance, K.:
Constraining global isoprene emissions with
Global Ozone Monitoring Experiment (GOME) formalde-
hyde column measurements, J. Geophys. Res., 110, D24301,
doi:10.1029/2004JD005629, 2005.
Silver, G. M. and Fall, R.: Characterization of Aspen Isoprene Syn-
thase, an Enzyme Responsible for Leaf Isoprene Emission to the
Atmosphere, J. Biological Chemistry, 270(22), 13 010–13 016,
1995.
Simpson, D., Winiwarter, W., Borjesson, G., Cinderby, S., Ferreiro,
A., Guenther, A., Hewitt, C. N., Janson, R., Khalil, M. A. K.,
Owen, S., Pierce, T. E., Puxbaum, H., Shearer, M., Skiba, U.,
Steinbrecher, R., Tarrason, L., and Oquist, M. G.: Inventory-
ing emissions from nature in Europe, J. Geophys. Res.-Atmos.,
104(D7), 8113–8152, 1999.
Strong, C., Fuentes, J. D., and Baldocchi, D.: Reactive hydrocarbon
ﬂux footprints during canopy senescence, Agric. For. Meteorol.,
127(3–4), 159–173, 2004.
Stroud, C., Makar, P., Karl, T., Guenther, A., Geron, C., Turnipseed,
A., Nemitz, E., Baker, B., Potosnak, M., and Fuentes, J.:
www.atmos-chem-phys.net/6/3181/2006/
Atmos. Chem. Phys., 6, 3181–3210, 2006

----- Page 30 (native) -----
3210
A. Guenther et al.: MEGAN estimates of global isoprene
Role of Canopy-Scale Photochemistry in Modifying Biogenic-
Atmosphere Exchange of Reactive Terpene Species: Results
from the CELTIC Field Study, J. Geophys. Res., 110, D17303,
doi:10.1029/2005JD005775, 2005.
Tian, Y., Dickinson, R. E., Zhou, L., Myneni, R. B., Friedl,
M., Schaaf, C. B., Carroll, M., and Gao, F.: Land bound-
ary conditions from MODIS data and consequences for the
albedo of a climate model, Geophys. Res. Lett., 31(5), L05504,
doi:1029/2003GL019104, 2004.
Trostdorf, C., Gatti, L., Yamazaki, A., Martins, W., Potosnak, M.,
Guenther, A., Martins, W., and Munger, J.: Seasonal cycles
of isoprene concentrations in the Amazonian rainforest, Atmos.
Chem. Phys. Discuss., 4, 1291–1310, 2004,
http://www.atmos-chem-phys-discuss.net/4/1291/2004/.
Turner, D. P., Baglio, J. V., Wones, A. G., Pross, D., Vong, R.,
Mcveety, B. D., and Phillips, D. L.: Climate change and Isoprene
emissions from vegetation, Chemosphere, 23, 37–56, 1991.
Velikova, V., Pinelli, P., Pasqualini, S., Reale, L., Ferranti, F., and
Loreto, F.: Isoprene decreases the concentration of nitric oxide
in leaves exposed to elevated ozone, New Phytologist, 166(2),
419–426, 2005.
Wagner, W., Nemecek-Marshall M., and Fall, R.: Three Distinct
Phases of Isoprene Formation during Growth and Sporulation of
Bacillus subtilis, J. Bacteriology, 181(15), 4700–4703, 1999.
Wang, Y. and Jacob, D. J.: Anthropogenic forcing on tropospheric
ozone and OH since preindustrial times, J. Geophys. Res., 103,
31 123–31 135, 1998.
Went, F. W.: Blue hazes in the atmosphere, Nature, 187(4738), 641–
643, 1960.
Wert, B. P., Trainer, M., Fried, A., Ryerson, T. B., Henry, B., Pot-
ter, W., Angevine, W. M., Atlas, E., Donnelly, S. G., Fehsenfeld,
F. C., Frost, G. J., Goldan, P. D., Hansel, A., Holloway, J. S.,
Hubler, G., Kuster, W. C., Nicks, D. K., Neuman, J. A., Parrish,
D. D., Schaufﬂer, S., Stutz, J., Sueper, D. T., Wiedinmyer, C.,
and Wisthaler, A.: Signatures of terminal alkene oxidation in air-
borne formaldehyde measurement during TexAQS 2000, J. Geo-
phys. Res., 108(D3), 4104, doi:10.1029/2002JD002502, 2003.
Wiedinmyer, C., Guenther, A., Harley, P., Hewitt, C. N., Geron, C.,
Artaxo, P., Steinbrecher, R., and Rasmussen, R.: Global organic
emissions from vegetation, in: Emissions of Atmospheric Trace
Compounds, edited by: Granier, C., Kluwer Publishing Co., Dor-
drecht, The Netherlands, 2004.
Wiedinmyer, C., Tie, X., Guenther, A., Neilson,, R., and Granier,
C.:
Future Changes in Biogenic Isoprene Emissions:
How
Might They Affect Regional and Global Atmospheric Chem-
istry?, Earth Interact., 10(3), EI174, doi:10.1175/EI174.1, 2006.
Wolfertz, M., Sharkey, T. D., Boland, W., Kuhnemann, F., Yeh, S.,
and Weise, S. E.: Biochemical regulation of isoprene emission,
Plant Cell and Environment, 26(8), 1357–1364, 2003.
Zeng, X.: Global Vegetation Root Distribution for Land Modeling,
J. Hydrometeorol., 2(5), 525–530, 2001.
Zhang, P. Anderson, B., Barlow, M., Tan, B., and Myneni,
R.:
Climate related vegetation characteristics derived from
MODIS LAI and NDVI, J. Geophys. Res., 109, D20105,
doi:10.1029/2004JD004720, 2004.
Zimmerman, P.: Testing of hydrocarbon emissions from vegeta-
tion, leaf litter and aquatic surfaces and development of a method
for compiling biogenic emission inventories, EPA-450-4-70-004,
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Research Triangle Park,
NC, 1979.
Atmos. Chem. Phys., 6, 3181–3210, 2006
www.atmos-chem-phys.net/6/3181/2006/