

----- Page 1 (native) -----
Why do many psychiatric disorders emerge during adolescence?
Jay N. Giedd1,*, Matcheri Keshavan2, and Tomáš Paus3,4,*
1Child Psychiatry Branch, National Institute of Mental health, Bethesda, U.S.A.
2Beth Israel and Deaconess Medical center and Harvard University, Boston, U.S.A; and Wayne
State University, Detroit, Michigan, U.S.A.
3Brain & Body Centre, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, United Kingdom
4Montreal Neurological Institute. McGill University, Montreal, Canada
Abstract
What do we know about the maturation of the human brain during adolescence? Do structural changes
in cerebral cortex reflect synaptic pruning? Are increases in white-matter volume driven by
myelination? Is the adolescent brain more or less sensitive to reward? These are but a few questions
we ask in this review while attempting to indicate how findings obtained in the healthy brain help in
furthering our understanding of mental health during adolescence.
Introduction
Across cultures and centuries, adolescence has been noted as a time of dramatic changes in
body and behavior. Although most teenagers successfully navigate the transition from
dependence upon a caregiver to becoming a self-sufficient adult member of the society,
adolescence is also a time of increasing incidence of several classes of psychiatric illnesses,
including anxiety and mood disorders, psychosis, eating disorders, personality disorders and
substance abuse. The pathophysiology of these disorders is being increasingly understood as
arising from aberrations of maturational changes that normally occur in the adolescent brain.
In this review we will address the neurobiological changes that occur during adolescence and
discuss their possible relationship to the emergence of psychopathology. We will focus on three
major disorders, namely schizophrenia, substance use disorders and affective/anxiety disorder,
because our understanding of their developmental neurobiological basis has increased
considerably in the recent years.
Typical development: findings and interpretations
The last 15 years have seen an impressive accumulation of knowledge about the development
of structure and function of the human brain. Studies carried out with magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) in children and adolescents have allowed investigators to chart trajectories of
grey and white-matter volumes, cortical thickness and, more recently, other structural
properties of white matter such as fractional anisotropy and magnetization-transfer ratio, as
well age-related changes in brain activity (Box 1)1-4.
*Corresponding authors
NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 October 16.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Rev Neurosci. 2008 December ; 9(12): 947–957. doi:10.1038/nrn2513.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 2 (native) -----
Brain structure
Most of the existing literature on age-related changes in brain structure has been reviewed in
detail elsewhere 5, 6. Here we note only the most salient findings.
Volumes of cortical grey-matter appear to increase during childhood, reaching peak levels
around the time of the puberty onset, after which they gradually decline; this is the case mostly
for the frontal and parietal but not temporal lobes 7. Local volume of cortical grey-matter
declines during childhood and adolescence in most regions, with the slope of the decline
varying from flat (e.g. anterior portion of the superior temporal gyrus [STG]) to steep (posterior
portion of the STG) and, in some cases, displaying a non-linear relationship with age, for
example inverted “U” in post-central gyrus and “U” shaped [between 10 and 20 years] in the
mid-dorsolateral frontal cortex 8, 9 (Fig. 1)8, 10-13.
Volumes of white matter show a rather clear linear increase throughout childhood and
adolescence, with the maximum volumes reached often as late as in the third decade of life
14. It appears that the slope of the age-related increase is steeper in males compared with females
7, 15. More recently, diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) has been employed to assess age-related
changes in the human brain during childhood and adolescence. Overall, DTI studies reveal
age-related decreases in magnitude and increases in directionality of water diffusion in a
number of white matter regions, many of which are identical to those revealed by the above
MRI studies 16-18, such as the arcuate fasciculus. Such changes in DTI-derived measures may
indicate ongoing maturation of the axon and/or its myelin sheath.
Brain activity
The overall picture to be gleaned from the existing descriptive studies of age-related changes
in brain activity is less coherent. This is due to the fact that a given functional MRI (fMRI)
study focuses on a particular brain function, which is assessed with behavioural paradigms that
often differ across laboratories. Interpretation of fMRI is also more challenging than that of
structural findings, owing to the indirect nature of the fMRI signal (Box 1) and the large number
of potential confounders, such as levels of anxiety/arousal during scanning, varying
performance across participants or different cognitive strategies used by different participants
in the same task - all of which may interact with the effects of age. We will touch here on two
sets of fMRI studies that focused respectively, on cognitive control (or executive functions)
and on experiencing gains and losses of various rewards during adolescence.
A number of the initial studies that investigated how task-related brain activity changes during
development focused on executive functions such as working memory and response inhibition.
But as we reviewed previously6, many of such “executive” abilities are fully developed by the
time a child enters adolescence (Fig. 4 in 6). On the other hand, certain aspects of executive
function, such as planning time19 and delayed gratification, improve significantly from mid-
adolescence (∼16 years of age) onward, as indicated by behavioural studies. Using fMRI,
Kwon and colleagues20 found age-related (age 7 to 22 yr) increases in the BOLD signal in the
prefrontal and parietal cortices during the performance of a working-memory task even after
factoring out inter-individual differences in performance. Similar BOLD increases were
observed in these regions during the performance of a variety of tasks involving some form of
response inhibition, including the Stroop task21, anti-saccade task22, the Stop task23 and, to a
certain extent, during the performance of a go/no-go task24 and the Eriksen flanker task25.
Adolescence has been traditionally associated with risk-taking and sensation-seeking
behaviour26. In this context, several investigators used functional MRI to examine possible
differences between children, adolescents and young adults in brain activity during the
experience of gains or losses of various rewards. Given its role in reward and motivation27,
Giedd et al.
Page 2
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 October 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 3 (native) -----
the nucleus accumbens (or ventral striatum) has been the focus of the majority of these studies.
If adolescents were “driven” by reward seeking, one would expect heightened engagement of
this structure during tasks that involve reward seeking. This appeared to be the case in
participants in some28, 29 but not other30 studies. For example, Bjork and colleagues30
described an increase from early adolescence to young adulthood (12 to 28 years) in the BOLD
signal in the nucleus accumbens during the anticipation of monetary gains; this was the case
even when self-reported level of excitement, when seeing anticipatory cues, was taken into
account. It is worthwhile to point out that, in the same study, excitement correlated positively
with the BOLD signal in the nucleus accumbens even when age was taken into account. This
observation highlights the importance of considering various aspects of behaviour when
interpreting fMRI findings.
Although functional imaging studies are beginning to illuminate functional maturation of
neural circuits involved, for example, in executive functions and reward processing, future
studies need to substantially increase sample size and to enhance the behavioural
characterization of the performance in the scanner in order to learn more about brain-behaviour
relationships during adolescence.
The age-related changes in brain structure and function during adolescence described above
have been interpreted using various conceptual frameworks. Changes in synaptic pruning and
myelination have been the most popular explanations for the structural findings in adolescence,
whereas age-related alterations in neural connectivity and neurotransmission might underlie
the functional changes associated with adolescence. We will now address, in a critical manner,
such mechanistic interpretations.
Adolescence = pruning + myelination?
It is the case that MRI-based estimates of the volume of cortical grey-matter and cortical
thickness appear to decrease during adolescence. This has been often interpreted as an
indication of “synaptic pruning”, a process by which “redundant” synapses overproduced in
the early years of life are being eliminated (see Purves and colleagues31 for a critical appraisal
of “neural Darwinism”).
The initial evidence for accelerated synaptic pruning during development came from post
mortem studies by Peter Huttenlocher and colleagues who described a decrease in the number
of dendritic spines in the human cerebral cortex during childhood and adolescence 10, 32, 33.
It should be noted, however, that these studies were limited by the low number of specimens
available for the different stages of human development, especially the adolescent period.
Furthermore, most of the data do not actually indicate accelerated pruning of synapses during
adolescence but a rather gradual decrease in their numbers, beginning (in several cortical
regions) in childhood. A more definite evidence of synapse elimination during adolescence
was provided by studies carried out by Pasko Rakic and colleagues in non-human primates34,
35. Using electron microscopy, they did observe a dramatic decrease in the number of synapses
in the visual cortex (and other cortical areas) during puberty (between the age of 2.5 and 5
years), whether expressed as a number of synapses per neuron or per 1 mm3 of neuropil
(∼45% loss). But it is unlikely that this decrease in synaptic density translates into a decrease
in cortical volume: Bourgeois and Rakic commented that “changes in the density of synapses
affect very little either the volume or surface of the cortex because the total volume of synaptic
boutons ... is only a very small fraction of the cortical volume” and concluded that “... a decline
of synaptic number during puberty should have a rather small effect on the overall volume of
the cortex”35. Finally, it is often assumed that age-related changes in cortical grey-matter,
glucose metabolism and synaptic density follow similar developmental trajectories from birth
to adulthood and, hence, may reflect the same cellular events; this is clearly not the case - again
especially not during adolescence (Fig. 1).
Giedd et al.
Page 3
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 October 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 4 (native) -----
If the number of synapses per se is unlikely to change the cortical volume/thickness, then what
other cellular elements could affect it? About 10% of the (mouse) cortex is occupied by glial
cells and about 60% by neuropil, the latter consisting of dendritic and axonal processes 36. It
is conceivable that a reduced number of synapses, and a corresponding decrease in metabolic
requirements, would be accompanied by a reduction in the number of glial cells, leading to a
decrease in the regional volume or thickness of cortical grey-matter. But it is perhaps even
more likely that the apparent loss of grey matter reflects an increase in the degree of myelination
of intra-cortical axons. Myelination of intra-cortical fibres progresses gradually from birth to
adulthood 37, 38. The more myelinated the fibres are, the less “grey” the cortex would appear
on regular T1-weighted images. Such a “partial-volume” effect could result in an apparent loss
of cortical grey-matter6.
Given the well-documented histology-based increase in the degree of myelination of white-
matter pathways during the first two decades of human life39, it is perhaps not surprising that
any changes in the volume or “density” of white matter, as revealed by computational analyses
of T1-weighted images, are attributed to changes in myelination. Again, assumptions based on
previous knowledge influence the interpretation of new data. Quite often we read articles that
report age-related changes in myelination only to realize that what had been actually measured
were volumes of white matter. Is it only a matter of semantics or could other, myelination-
independent processes affect volume and/or other features of white matter? In one of our large
studies of human adolescence, we have observed a dissociation between age-related changes
in the volume of white matter and those in magnetization transfer ratio (MTR), the latter being
an indirect index of the amount of myelin in white matter. Although white-matter volume
increased with age during male adolescence, MTR values decreased, thus indicating a decrease
in the amount of myelin per unit of volume (Fig. 2)40
If myelin does not increase, what could be driving the observed increase in white matter volume
during adolescence in males? Our tentative answer is a change in axonal caliber: the larger the
calibre, the fewer axons fit in the same unit of the imaged volume, which would result in a
relative decrease in the myelination index40. Although more work is needed to confirm this
initial observation, it serves as a reminder that most of the MRI sequences are not specific
enough to interpret MRI-based findings as reflecting a single neurobiological process, such as
myelination.
Overall, as tempting as it might be to interpret descriptive findings obtained with structural
MRI using mechanistic neurobiological processes such as synaptic pruning or myelination, the
evidence that supports such interpretations is limited. There is a pressing need to acquire direct
evidence using experimental models in which investigators can combine in vivo and ex vivo
methods to bring together descriptive and mechanistic levels of analysis. Until this happens,
we suggest that a more cautious and open-minded approach is warranted,
Neural connectivity
Two key features characterize functional organization of the mammalian brain: specialization
and integration. Clearly, structural and functional maturation of neural pathways connecting a
set of specialized brain regions is therefore a condition sine qua non for the successful
development of cognitive, motor and sensory functions from infancy, through childhood and
adolescence, and into adulthood. There are many different “connectivities”. Anatomic
connectivity allows one to determine, using injection of radioactive tracers into the brain of
experimental animals, efferent and afferent projections of small populations of neurons. This
is not the same as anatomic “connectivity” assessed with DTI-based tractography, which does
not allow one to identify point-to-point (or cell-to-cell) connections between distinct neural
populations. Functional connectivity captures the correlational relationship across a set of brain
regions “engaged” during a particular task or measured at rest. However, such correlations do
Giedd et al.
Page 4
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 October 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 5 (native) -----
not provide information regarding the causality and/or directionality of inter-regional
interactions. Finally, effective connectivity attempts to address the latter either by manipulation
of brain activity in one region and evaluating the effect of such manipulation elsewhere, or by
employing mathematic models 41.
In an example of studies investigating functional connectivity during childhood and
adolescence, one study researched memory encoding in subjects between 11 and 19 years of
age 42. The study revealed an age-related decrease in the fMRI signal in the left medial
temporal-lobe while subjects viewed a series of novel photographs of natural outdoor scenes,
as compared with viewing the same scene over and over (control condition). The authors used
voxel-wise regression analysis to identify the brain regions in which the fMRI signal correlated
with the fMRI signal measured in two subregions of the left medial temporal-lobe, namely the
hippocampus and the entorhinal cortex, structures known to participate in the encoding of novel
information. This analysis revealed an age-related increase in the correlation between the left
entorhinal cortex and the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. This work nicely illustrates the
importance of including analyses of functional connectivity in developmental studies: although
the fMRI signal decreased with age in one of the memory-relevant structures (entorhinal
cortex), the hypothesized interaction between this structure and other brain regions (prefrontal
cortex) actually increased with age.
A second study investigated functional connectivity in the context of possible neural substrates
of resistance to peer influences (RPI) in early adolescence (10-year old children)43. This study
aimed to determine whether the probability with which an adolescent follows the goals set by
peers or those set by himself/herself might depend on the interplay between the following three
neural systems. First, the action-observation network, which is considered by many to represent
the neural substrate of imitation; it consists of frontal and parietal regions involved in the
preparation and execution of actions. So-called ‘mirror neurons’ within the inferior premotor
cortex and/or inferior frontal gyrus, as well as in the anterior inferior parietal lobe, are active
both when subjects perform a specific action themselves and when they observe another
individual performing the same action. Second, the biological-motion processing network,
which plays an important role in extracting socially relevant cues, such as those imparted by
the movements of eyes or hands. Neurons within the superior temporal sulcus (STS) respond
selectively to the presentation of dynamic bodies, body parts or faces. Third, the executive
network, which supports a number of cognitive processes underlying decision making, working
memory and the suppression of alternative programs interfering with planned actions; it
consists of a set of regions in the lateral and medial prefrontal-cortex (PFC). In the scanner,
we asked the subjects to watch brief video clips containing face or hand/arm actions that were
executed in neutral or angry ways, and measured changes in fMRI signals. Outside the scanner,
we administered an RPI questionnaire44. We found that the children with high RPI scores
showed stronger inter-regional correlations in brain activity across the three networks while
watching angry hand-actions, as compared with children who had low RPI scores (Fig. 3). The
pattern of inter-regional correlations identified by this method included both regions involved
in action observation (the fronto-parietal as well as temporo-occipital systems) and regions in
the prefrontal cortex. Thus, what distinguished subjects with high and low resistance to peer
influences was not the magnitude of the BOLD response in the individual brain regions but
the degree of functional connectivity43.
Neurochemistry
The efficacy of communication across neuronal networks depends critically on the state of the
various neurotransmitter systems (Box 2)45-49..
In adults, positron emission tomography (PET) is one of the in vivo techniques used to assess
the state of neurotransmitter systems, such as the activity of enzymes involved in the synthesis
Giedd et al.
Page 5
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 October 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 6 (native) -----
or metabolism of a given neurotransmitter or the number of the receptors. Owing to radiation
concerns, however, PET cannot be used in healthy children and adolescents. Therefore, we
derive most of the knowledge of developmental changes in neurotransmitters from post
mortem studies in human and non-human primates.
We now consider developmental changes in the dopaminergic system, which has often been
conceptualized as underlying adolescent-specific changes in motivational behaviour50. The
existing data are not entirely consistent with this view, however. In the monkey, levels of the
catecholamine-synthesizing enzyme tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) do not change during postnatal
development in cortical layers I and VI. In layer III, TH levels are the highest during infancy
(5-7 months) in the entorhinal cortex 51 and during puberty (2-3 years) in the prefrontal cortex
52.
In humans, two recent post mortem studies evaluated age-related changes in TH, COMT, and
a number of dopamine receptors in the human prefrontal cortex; COMT is a dopamine-
metabolizing enzyme that is particularly important for dopaminergic transmission in the
prefrontal cortex. No differences in COMT activity were found between infants (5-11 months),
adolescents (14-18 yr) and young adults (20-24 yr) 53; COMT activity increased only in
adulthood (31 to 43 yr). A different study showed that TH levels in the human prefrontal cortex
were the highest in neonates and, by adolescence, declined to the levels observed in adults54.
The same was true, in the same region, for expression of the dopamine D2 receptor (DRD2)
gene. By contrast, expression of DRD1 was the highest in adolescents (14 to 18 years) and
young adults (20 to 24 years) in all layers of the prefrontal cortex. Levels of DRD4 in the PFC
did not change with age. These findings illustrate that, contrary to prior assumptions,
developmental changes in the different elements of dopaminergic transmission during
adolescence are complex, with very if any peaking during adolescence. As such, these age-
related variations - in particular in the prefrontal cortex - are not very likely to account for
differences between adolescents and adults in motivation-related modulation of cortical
activity.
Relationship to psychopathology in adolescence
Results of the National Comorbidity Survey Replication study, which entailed in-person
household assessments of over 9,000 people representative of the United States population
(conducted from February 2001 to April of 2003), have indicated that the peak age of onset
for having any mental health disorder is 14 years 55. Anxiety disorders, bipolar disorder,
depression, eating disorder, psychosis including schizophrenia, and substance abuse all most
commonly emerge during adolescence 55, 56 (Fig. 4). The emergence of certain
psychopathology is likely related to anomalies or exaggerations of typical adolescent
maturation processes acting in concert with psychosocial (e.g. school, relationships) and/or
biological environmental factors (e.g. pubertal hormonal changes, drugs of abuse), as will be
discussed later. In this paper, we focus on schizophrenia, affective and anxiety disorders, and
substance-use disorders because they are among the most well studied, common and disabling
disorders that emerge during adolescence, and serve to highlight aberrations in the key
developmental domains of cognition, affect and motivational behavior56, 57
Schizophrenia
Schizophrenia is a common disorder with a life-time prevalence of about 1%. It typically begins
in adolescence or early adulthood, and is characterized by unusual beliefs and experiences,
namely delusions and hallucinations - collectively termed “positive” symptoms, social
withdrawal and flat affect - that is “negative” symptoms, and cognitive impairments, notably
in executive functions. Earlier onset of schizophrenia during adolescence or even before is
associated with more severe impairments58.The emerging ability to think abstractly during
Giedd et al.
Page 6
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 October 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 7 (native) -----
adolescence permits the application of advanced reasoning to social and interpersonal
processes. These abilities are critically impaired in patients with schizophrenia, which led Irwin
Feinberg to propose a relationship between late- adolescent onset schizophrenia and changes
that occur during adolescent brain development 59. For example, the amount of “delta” sleep
and duration normally decreases during healthy adolescence 59. In adolescents and young
adults with schizophrenia, this reduction in delta sleep is even more pronounced. Delta sleep
represents the summed synchronous electrical activities of large assemblies of cortical neurons.
Based on these observations, Feinberg speculated that schizophrenia might be a consequence
of an exaggeration of the typical synaptic elimination that takes place during adolescence.
Subsequently, several lines of evidence have lent support to this hypothesis that an
“exaggeration of typical adolescent changes” has occurred in patients with schizophrenia 60.
In addition to the exaggerated reductions in delta sleep in adolescent patients with
schizophrenia 61, patients with schizophrenia have also prominent reductions in the level of
membrane phospholipid precursors in the prefrontal cortex 62, prefrontal metabolism 63 and
volumes of gray matter in frontal cortex 64; all these are consistent with an exaggeration of the
changes that occur in typical development. In a rare condition of childhood-onset schizophrenia
(onset prior age of 12 years), which is phenomenologically similar to the adolescent or adult-
onset schizophrenia, the typical decrease in frontal gray-matter that is seen in healthy subjects
during adolescence was exaggerated 4-fold 64. Recent data suggest similar gray-matter losses
occurring before illness onset, in persons deemed to be at clinical risk for schizophrenia, i.e.
in the prodromal phase before the onset of the characteristic psychotic symptoms of this illness
65
Direct evidence of a decrease in the number of synapses and other neural elements in
schizophrenia comes from post mortem studies that have indicated a decreased density of
synaptic spines 66, reduction in neuropil 67, and decreased expression of the synaptic marker
synaptophysin 68 in the brain of schizophrenia patients. Although the above evidence supports
a neurodevelopmental pathophysiology of schizophrenia, it does not provide indications
regarding its aetiology. The cause of schizophrenia likely lies in the interplay between genetic
and the environmental factors, perhaps involving pre- and peri-natal adverse events, suboptimal
post-natal environment during infancy and childhood, and biological stressors during
adolescence.
Substance Abuse
Adolescents are more likely to experiment with drugs. Substance-abuse disorders in adults
typically begin during teenage years; they may be preceded by behavioral disturbances and
poor adjustment in childhood as shown by recent results from the National Child Development
Study 69. Earlier onset of drug use predicts a greater severity of the addiction problem70 and
may serve as a “gateway” to the use of multiple substances later in life 71.
An important risk factor for substance use includes personality traits, including high novelty
seeking and low harm avoidance 72, 73. Across a wide array of mammalian species, adolescents
exhibit increased risk taking, novelty seeking, and a greater valuation of social factors 74, 75.
While these characteristics foster independence from the natal family, they also increase the
risk for harmful behaviors including substance use and abuse. Some investigators have
speculated that risk-taking and reward-seeking behaviors in adolescents might be related to a
heightened sensitivity for reward 28. As reviewed above, this notion has been supported by
fMRI studies that found greater feedback-related activity using a monetary reward task in
reward circuitry, namely the nucleus accumbens 29. However, other studies found the opposite
pattern, namely lower accumbens activity in response to monetary gains in adolescents as
compared with young adults 30. On the other hand, activity of medial-frontal circuitry, which
is implicated in conflict monitoring and decision-making, increases from adolescence to
Giedd et al.
Page 7
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 October 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 8 (native) -----
adulthood during fMRI tasks in which participants assume some risk of penalty in pursuit of
an explicit reward. However, this developmental difference is reduced when potential penalties
in the task are severe76.
Compounding these social and behavioral risks is the possibility that adolescents may have
less aversive biological responses to substances of abuse. In adolescent rats, nicotine,
amphetamine, and alcohol produce less pronounced acute effects and milder withdrawal
responses77, 78. Under the influence of alcohol, for instance, adolescent rats are less sensitive
to developing motor impairment79, getting a “hangover”80, or becoming sedated. These
developmental differences might be related to immaturity of the developing GABA-a receptor
systems81.
By contrast to their possibly more rewarding and less aversive responses, adolescents may be
more prone to the deleterious effects of substance abuse. Thus, the hippocampus of adolescent
rats is unusually susceptible to ethanol-induced inhibition of long-term potentiation, making
the rats more sensitive to the memory-impairing effect of alcohol82. The mechanism for this
effect, which occurs at alcohol concentrations as low as 5 mM, equivalent to a single drink,
appears to be largely mediated via alcohol’s effect on NMDA receptors, occurs at the single-
cell level and is not confined to the hippocampus 83.
Clearly, some neural alterations that take place during adolescence predispose to risk whereas
others, such as memory impairments, may be actually the result of the abuse. Morphometric
studies of humans are in support of this notion. For instance, in youths with a family history
of alcohol abuse the right amygdala is smaller even prior to the onset of problem drinking,
whereas hippocampal volumes are reduced only after a history of alcohol use 84, 85.
Exposure to substances of abuse in adolescence may also increase the likelihood of addictive
disorders emerging later in life. Thus, exposure to nicotine during adolescence, but not in the
post-adolescent period, increases the reinforcing effects of nicotine in a self-administration
paradigm in adult rats 86.
Affective and Anxiety Disorders
Affective disorders, such as major depression, are common and serious disorders of
adolescence; adolescent onset is associated with more severe and disabling forms of these
illnesses87, 88. Anxiety symptoms frequently precede depression in adolescence89 and during
childhood 90.
Structural MRI studies of adolescents with anxiety and affective disorders have reported
structural anomalies in the superior temporal gyrus, ventral prefrontal cortex and
amygdala91-93. An fMRI study of depressed and anxious adolescents reported anomalous
amygdala response to social stimuli94. In another fMRI study, adults but not adolescents were
able to engage the orbitofrontal cortex when asked to switch from an emotional assessment of
a face (i.e. How afraid does it make you feel?) to a non-emotional one (i.e. How wide is the
nose?)95. The abnormal engagement of brain regions to emotional facial expressions in
adolescents may underlie realistic appraisal of emotions and thereby predispose to anxiety and
depression.
Hormonal changes that occur during adolescence are likely to account for at least part of the
risk for mood and anxiety disorders. Indeed, an intriguing clue to the biology of depression,
anxiety and panic disorders is the change from equal female:male prevalence prepuberty to a
2:1 female:male prevalence after puberty. Epidemiological evidence indicates that it is only
after Tanner stage III that the sex differences in the incidence of depression emerge96. The
Giedd et al.
Page 8
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 October 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 9 (native) -----
finding that pubertal status predicts the sex difference in prevalence better than chronologic
age97, 98 suggests that sex hormones play a part in the pathophysiology of these disorders.
A recent mouse study examining tetra-hydro-progesterone (THP), a steroid derived from
progesterone, provides a possible mechanism for this phenomenon99. This hormone is released
during stress and has an anxiolytic effect that is mediated by activation of GABA-A receptors,
which are also activated by alcohol and benzodiazepines. However, when it binds to a particular
subtype of the GABA-A receptor, namely the alpha4-beta2-delta receptor subtype THP has
the opposite effect to that of alcohol and benzodiazepines: it increases anxiety. The expression
of the alpha4-beta2-delta receptor in the CA1 region of the hippocampus surges after puberty
and is accompanied by increased anxiety as measured on an elevated maze paradigm.
Moreover, blocking the formation of THP alleviated the increase in anxiety in adolescent
mice99. Whether stress-related hormone effects on the brain explain differences in rates of
anxiety and depressive disorders in prepubescents versus adult awaits further investigation.
In summary, robust changes in hormones and hormonal receptors, increasingly powerful
emotional responses to social stimuli, and rapid alterations in motivation and reward systems
may underlie the onset of anxiety and depressive disorders during adolescence.
Conclusions and future directions
The relationship between typical changes in the adolescent brain and the onset of
psychopathology is not a unitary phenomenon, but an underlying theme may be conceptualized
as “moving parts get broken”. Adolescence is characterized by major changes in the neural
systems that subserve higher cognitive functions, reasoning and interpersonal interactions,
cognitive control of emotions, risk-vs-reward appraisal and motivation. Not surprisingly, when
not adequately surmounted, it is precisely these challenges that increase the risk of cognitive,
affective and addictive disorders. Understanding the basis of these disorders therefore requires
a comprehensive knowledge of how the brain is put together. Many advances are being made,
though a lot remains to be learned.
An emerging theme from pediatric neuroimaging studies is that the journey of brain
development is often as important as the destination. For example, IQ is predicted by the
developmental trajectory of cortical thickness, not by the adult size100. Large individual
variability in brain anatomy and function call for longitudinal study designs that capture the
nuances of heterochronous developmental curves. The first phases of longitudinal studies have
mapped developmental trajectories for typical development but less so for some psychiatric
illnesses. The next phases should go beyond simply mapping brain growth and begin to discern
the adverse as well as protective factors that influence those trajectories.
A common initial approach to assessing causal influences on brain development is to discern
the relative effects of genetic versus non-genetic factors. This is best addressed through
comparisons of monozygotic and dyzygotic twins. Results from an ongoing pediatric
longitudinal neuroimaging project at the Child Psychiatry Branch of the National Institute of
Mental Health indicate significant age-by-heritability interactions, with gray-matter
heritability generally decreasing with age and white-matter heritability generally increasing
with age101. Heritability-by-age interactions may be related to the timing of gene expression,
which in turn may relate to the timing of the onset of illness. Postmortem human and animal
studies indicate that ‘developmental’ genes have diverse effects at various stages of brain
development. But differences in heritability in different age groups may also reflect the
cumulative effect of experience on brain structure; depending on certain inherent traits (e.g.
musical talents or personality), it is only with time that specific experiences start to shape the
brain.
Giedd et al.
Page 9
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 October 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 10 (native) -----
Multivariate analyses of twin data indicate that a relatively small number of shared genetic and
environmental factors account for a substantial portion of the variance across multiple
neuroanatomic structures102. Ongoing studies of specific gene effects on brain maturation may
help to sharpen our understanding of brain development mechanisms and provide insight into
the etiologies of various pathologies. The Saguenay Youth Study, carried out in a
geographically isolated population with the known founder effect, will facilitate our search for
genes that influence brain and behaviour during adolescence103. Finally, genetics may also
provide biologically relevant subtypes of neuropsychiatric disorders that are obscured in
current diagnostic schemes.
The marked sex differences in age of onset, prevalence and symptomatology for nearly every
neuropsychiatric disorder may provide important clues as to their pathophysiology. The most
obvious outward physical manifestations of puberty are caused by changing levels of
hormones11. Perhaps this has contributed to the tendency to attribute all of the cognitive and
behavioral changes of adolescence to “raging hormones”104. But the relationship between
hormones, brain and behavior is complex, reciprocal and poorly understood. Steroid hormones
affect neuronal activity and morphology throughout development. Most neurons have receptors
for adrenal and gonadal hormones that, when these receptors are activated they can affect
neurotransmitter function. Short-term effects are mediated by membrane-bound receptors,
whereas long-term effects alter gene expression via intraneuronal or nuclear receptors.
Conversely, the dramatic hormonal changes of puberty are triggered by alterations in excitatory
and inhibitory inputs to gonadotropin-releasing hormone neurons in the pituitary. Behaviorally,
hormonal effects drive aggression and sexual interest but their impact on impulse control,
logical problem solving and other cognitive tasks has not been well established.
Social and cultural factors for boys and girls are profoundly different and the relationship of
these differences to manifest pathology should be explored. In the biological realm, sex
differences likely stem directly from different genes on the X or Y chromosomes or indirectly
through the effects of different hormone levels. Studies of subjects with sex-chromosome
variations (e.g. XO, XXY, XXYY, XXX, XXXXY) or anomalous hormone levels (e.g.
congenital adrenal hyperplasia, androgen insensitivity syndrome, familial male precocious
puberty) will be useful to sort out the relative contributions of gene and hormone effects. For
instance, males with an extra X chromosome (XXY or Klinefelter’s syndrome) have a high
incidence of language disorders, ADHD, and social skills deficits that are reflected in
differences in cortical thickness, consistent with reports in the literature for XY subjects with
those disorders105. Girls with Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia, which is characterized by
intrauterine exposure to high levels of testosterone, have an entirely different pattern of
structural findings, indicating differential effects of sex chromosomes and hormones on the
brain106.
Although neuroimaging is beginning to establish correlations between brain structure/
physiology and behavior, the link between typical behavioral changes and psychopathology
has not been firmly established. For example, the neural circuitry underlying “moodiness” in
an adolescent may not be the same circuitry involved in depression or bipolar disorder.
Neuroimaging data can help develop neuroanatomical models of cognitive, affective and social
processes based on findings from developmental psychology107. Imaging studies of healthy
adolescents are also helping to construct age-appropriate structural and functional brain
templates.
Newer imaging approaches are being developed. Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy studies
at high magnetic field can help to quantify neurotransmitter systems, such as glutamate and
GABA, as well as markers of neurogenesis108. Combining multiple imaging modalities on the
same individuals, such as structural MRI, fMRI, diffusion tensor imaging, magnetization
Giedd et al.
Page 10
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 October 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 11 (native) -----
transfer imaging, EEG or MEG, will enhance our ability to interpret the signals for each of the
modalities. Being able to examine simultaneously inter-individual variation from cellular to
macroscopic levels will be instrumental in bridging gaps between genes, brain, and behavior.
Studies of the neural substrates of adolescent behavior and decision-making will need to be
integrated better with social and educational science. Laboratory studies of teenagers using
hypothetical situations in calm environments without peer influence may have little relevance
for understanding real-world decision making that occurs often in the context of intense
physical or emotion arousal, conflicting priorities, and in the presence of peers109.
Many questions about adolescent brain development and its impact on disease can best be
investigated in animal models. Modeling the adolescent phase in animals is useful for the
investigation of risk for addictive and other early-onset neuropsychiatric disorders86. While
animal models that represent the full phenotypic spectrum of a psychiatric disorder, such as
schizophrenia or depression, are non-existent, individual phenotypic components of disorders
- such as developmental alterations that might be associated with the illness - can be used to
construct animal models that are aimed at unraveling disease mechanisms and that allow testing
novel interventions110.
Another translational approach involves combined in vivo (e.g. MRI) and postmortem studies
in animals; such studies are essential for clarifying the nature of neurobiological changes
driving the MRI findings. Of immediate relevance will be studies that attempt to discern the
degree to which changes in cortical gray-matter, as detected by MRI, are related to dendritic
arborization, intracortical myelination or the encroachment of white matter on the inner cortical
border.
Adolescence is a time of substantial neurobiological and behavioral change. These changes
are usually beneficial and optimize the brain for the challenges ahead, but may also confer a
vulnerability to certain types of psychopathology. The technologies to elucidate the
relationship between specific neurobiological maturational processes and specific normative
or pathologic changes are already in place. Applying these tools to understand when and how
deviations from typical development occur may enhance our ability to prevent or treat disorders
affecting a substantial number of people.
Box 1: Neuroimaging
Magnetic resonance imaging has revolutionized the way we can study structure and function
of the human brain in living human beings throughout the entire life span1. The principles
of MRI are relatively straightforward; in most applications, MR signal is based on magnetic
properties of the hydrogen atoms, which constitute the most abundant substance in the
human body, water. By placing the human body in a strong static magnetic field (B0; 0.5
to 7.0 T) and applying a brief pulse of electromagnetic energy, we can make the little dipoles
formed by the hydrogen nuclei rotate away from their axes and, in turn, measure the time
it takes for the nuclei to “relax” back to their original position. By changing slightly the
static magnetic field at different positions along/across the B0, we can establish the spatial
origin of the signal and, eventually, create a 3-dimensional (3D) image of the measurement.
What is measured depends on the combination of various imaging parameters or, in the
terminology of the MR physicists, on the acquisition sequence.
For imaging brain structure, the most common acquisition sequences include T1-weighted
(T1W) and T2-weighted (T2W) images, diffusion-tensor images (DTI) and magnetization-
transfer images (MT). The T1W and T2W images are typically used for quantifying the
volume of grey and white matter (global and regional), and estimating the cortical thickness
or other morphological properties of the cerebral cortex, such as its folding. Using DTI and
Giedd et al.
Page 11
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 October 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 12 (native) -----
MT imaging, one can assess different properties of white matter, again in both a global and
regional manner. The various features of brain structure that can be extracted from these
four types of images are described below. In addition to the above sequences, less common
but often even more informative acquisitions include T1 and T2 relaxometry (i.e.
measurement of the actual relaxation times 2) and magnetic resonance spectroscopy 3.
For imaging brain function, the most common MR parameter to measure is so-called blood
oxygenation-level dependent (BOLD) signal. The BOLD signal reflects the proportion of
oxygenated and de-oxygenated blood in a given brain region at a given moment. A strong
correlation between the amount of synaptic activity and regional cerebral blood flow is the
reason why the BOLD signal is a good, albeit indirect, measure of brain “function” 4. In
the majority of functional MRI (fMRI) studies, one measures changes in BOLD signal in
response to various sensory, motor or cognitive stimuli. Therefore, only brain regions that
are likely to respond to such stimuli can be interrogated using a given paradigm.
Box 2: Basics of neurotransmission
Transmission of information from one neuron to the next involves several steps. Local
excitatory and inhibitory postsynaptic potentials (EPSPs and IPSPs) are continuously being
summed at the axonal hillock and, once a threshold value is reached, an action potential is
generated. The action potential then travels along the axon and, at the synapse, causes a
release of neurotransmitters. The so-called conduction velocity is higher in myelinated vs.
non-myelinated axons and in axons with larger vs. smaller diameter45-47. Neurotransmitters
are chemicals that either relay action potentials or modulate (e.g. amplify) this process.
Neurotransmitters include amino acids (e.g. glutamate and gamma amino-butyric acid
[GABA]), monoamines (e.g. dopamine, serotonin, norepinephrine), acetylcholine, and
many neuropeptides (e.g. oxytocin). Glutamate and GABA are the main excitatory and
inhibitory neurotransmitters, respectively, and dopamine is one of the most studied
neuromodulators. The action of a particular neurotransmitter is mediated by a receptor; a
given neurotransmitter can bind to a number of receptor subtypes that are found in different
brain regions, or different layers of the cerebral cortex, with varied densities48, 49. The very
complex interaction between different neurotransmitters released at any given time at the
synapse is going to determine the number of EPSPs and IPSPs generated on the post-
synaptic membrane and, in turn, firing of the neuron.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Glossary
Diffusion tensor imaging, Diffusion tensor imaging is a MRI-based technique allowing one to
characterize structural properties of white matter.; STS network, STS network consists of a set
of regions, located along the superior temporal sulcus, that are involved in processing of
biological motion related to the movement of different body parts, such as eyes, face, or the
entire body.; Delta sleep, Delta sleep is a stage of non-rapid eye movement (non-REM) sleep
characterized by slow, or delta waves [0.5-4Hz]; the more delta waves, the deeper the sleep.;
Tanner stage III, Tanner stage III is one of the five stages of puberty. Short of a physical exam,
pubertal stages can be assessed, for example, using Puberty Development Scale111, which is
an eight-item self-report measure of physical development based on the Tanner stages with
separate forms for males and females. For this scale, there are five categories of pubertal status:
Giedd et al.
Page 12
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 October 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 13 (native) -----
(1) prepubertal, (2) beginning pubertal, (3) midpubertal, (4) advanced pubertal, (5)
postpubertal..
References
1. Bushong, S. Magnetic resonance imaging. Vol. 3rd ed. Mosby Inc.; 2003.
2. Roberts TP, Mikulis D. Neuro MR: principles. J Magn Reson Imaging Oct;2007 26(4):823–837.
[PubMed: 17685415]
3. Keshavan MS, Kapur S, Pettegrew JW. Magnetic resonance spectroscopy in psychiatry: Potential,
pitfalls and promise. The American journal of psychiatry 1991;148(8):976–985. [PubMed: 1853987]
4. Logothetis NK, Pauls J, Augath M, Trinath T, Oeltermann A. Neurophysiological investigation of the
basis of the fMRI signal. Nature Jul 12;2001 412(6843):150–157. [PubMed: 11449264]
5. Lenroot RK, Giedd JN. Brain development in children and adolescents: insights from anatomical
magnetic resonance imaging. Neuroscience and biobehavioral reviews 2006;30(6):718–729.
[PubMed: 16887188]
6. Paus T. Mapping brain maturation and cognitive development during adolescence. Trends in cognitive
sciences Feb;2005 9(2):60–68. [PubMed: 15668098]
7. Giedd JN, Blumenthal J, Jeffries NO, et al. Brain development during childhood and adolescence: a
longitudinal MRI study. Nature neuroscience 1999;2(10):861–863.
8. Gogtay N, Giedd JN, Lusk L, et al. Dynamic mapping of human cortical development during childhood
through early adulthood. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America May 25;2004 101(21):8174–8179. [PubMed: 15148381]
9. Sowell ER, Peterson BS, Thompson PM, Welcome SE, Henkenius AL, Toga AW. Mapping cortical
change across the human life span. Nature neuroscience Mar;2003 6(3):309–315.
10. Huttenlocher PR, de Courten C. The development of synapses in striate cortex of man. Human
neurobiology 1987;6(1):1–9. [PubMed: 3583840]
11. Chugani HT, Phelps ME, Mazziotta JC. Positron-emission tomography study of human brain
functional development. Annals of neurology 1987;22:487–497. [PubMed: 3501693]
12. Huttenlocher PR. Synaptic density in human frontal cortex - developmental changes and effects of
aging. Brain research Mar 16;1979 163(2):195–205. [PubMed: 427544]
13. Rakic P, Bourgeois JP, Goldman-Rakic PS. Synaptic development of the cerebral cortex: implications
for learning, memory, and mental illness. Progress in brain research 1994;102:227–243. [PubMed:
7800815]
14. Pfefferbaum A, Mathalon DH, Sullivan EV, Rawles JM, Zipursky RB, Lim KO. A quantitative
magnetic resonance imaging study of changes in brain morphology from infancy to late adulthood.
Archives of neurology Sep;1994 51(9):874–887. [PubMed: 8080387]
15. DeBellis MD, Keshavan MS, Beers SR, Hall J, Frustaci K, Masalehdan A, Noll J, Boring AM. Sex
differences in brain maturation during childhood and adolescence. Cerebral Cortex 2001;11:552–
557. [PubMed: 11375916]
16. Klingberg T, Vaidya CJ, Gabrieli JD, Moseley ME, Hedehus M. Myelination and organization of the
frontal white matter in children: a diffusion tensor MRI study. Neuroreport Sep 9;1999 10(13):2817–
2821. [PubMed: 10511446]
17. Schmithorst VJ, Wilke M, Dardzinski BJ, Holland SK. Correlation of white matter diffusivity and
anisotropy with age during childhood and adolescence: a cross-sectional diffusion-tensor MR
imaging study. Radiology Jan;2002 222(1):212–218. [PubMed: 11756728]
18. Snook L, Paulson LA, Roy D, Phillips L, Beaulieu C. Diffusion tensor imaging of neurodevelopment
in children and young adults. NeuroImage Jul 15;2005 26(4):1164–1173. [PubMed: 15961051]
19. Steinberg L, Albert D, Cauffman E, Banich MT, Graham S, Woodland J. Age differences in sensation
seeking and impusivity as indexed by behaviour and self-report: evidence for a dual systems model.
Developmental psychology. in press
20. Kwon H, Reiss AL, Menon V. Neural basis of protracted developmental changes in visuo-spatial
working memory. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
Oct 1;2002 99(20):13336–13341. [PubMed: 12244209]
Giedd et al.
Page 13
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 October 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 14 (native) -----
21. Adleman NE, Menon V, Blasey CM, White CD, Warsofsky IS, Glover GH, Reiss AL. A
developmental fMRI study of the Stroop color-word task. NeuroImage May;2002 16(1):61–75.
[PubMed: 11969318]
22. Luna B, Thulborn KR, Munoz DP, et al. Maturation of widely distributed brain function subserves
cognitive development. NeuroImage 2001;13(5):786–793. [PubMed: 11304075]
23. Rubia K, Overmeyer S, Taylor E, Brammer M, Williams SC, Simmons A, Andrew C, Bullmore ET.
Functional frontalisation with age: mapping neurodevelopmental trajectories with fMRI.
Neuroscience and biobehavioral reviews Jan;2000 24(1):13–19. [PubMed: 10654655]
24. Tamm L, Menon V, Reiss AL. Maturation of brain function associated with response inhibition.
Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry Oct;2002 41(10):1231–1238.
[PubMed: 12364845]
25. Bunge SA, Dudukovic NM, Thomason ME, Vaidya CJ, Gabrieli JD. Immature frontal lobe
contributions to cognitive control in children: evidence from fMRI. Neuron Jan 17;2002 33(2):301–
311. [PubMed: 11804576]
26. Steinberg L. A Neurobehavioral Perspective on Adolescent Risk-Taking. Dev Rev Mar;2008 28(1):
78–106. [PubMed: 18509515]
27. Robbins TW, Everitt BJ. Neurobehavioural mechanisms of reward and motivation. Current opinion
in neurobiology Apr;1996 6(2):228–236. [PubMed: 8725965]
28. Galvan A, Hare TA, Parra CE, Penn J, Voss H, Glover G, Casey BJ. Earlier development of the
accumbens relative to orbitofrontal cortex might underlie risk-taking behavior in adolescents. J
Neurosci Jun 21;2006 26(25):6885–6892. [PubMed: 16793895]
29. Ernst M, Nelson EE, Jazbec S, McClure EB, Monk CS, Leibenluft E, Blair J, Pine DS. Amygdala
and nucleus accumbens in responses to receipt and omission of gains in adults and adolescents.
NeuroImage May 1;2005 25(4):1279–1291. [PubMed: 15850746]
30. Bjork JM, Knutson B, Fong GW, Caggiano DM, Bennett SM, Hommer DW. Incentive-elicited brain
activation in adolescents: similarities and differences from young adults. J Neurosci Feb 25;2004 24
(8):1793–1802. [PubMed: 14985419]
31. Purves D, White LE, Riddle DR. Is neural development Darwinian? Trends in neurosciences Nov;
1996 19(11):460–464. [PubMed: 8931267]
32. Huttenlocher PR. Synapse elimination and plasticity in developing human cerebral cortex. American
journal of mental deficiency Mar;1984 88(5):488–496. [PubMed: 6731486]
33. Huttenlocher PR, Dabholkar AS. Regional differences in synaptogenesis in human cerebral cortex.
The Journal of comparative neurology Oct 20;1997 387(2):167–178. [PubMed: 9336221]
34. Rakic P, Bourgeois JP, Eckenhoff MF, Zecevic N, Goldman-Rakic PS. Concurrent overproduction
of synapses in diverse regions of the primate cerebral cortex. Science (New York, NY 1986;232:232–
235.
35. Bourgeois JP, Rakic P. Changes of synaptic density in the primary visual cortex of the macaque
monkey from fetal to adult stage. J Neurosci Jul;1993 13(7):2801–2820. [PubMed: 8331373]
36. Braitenberg, V.; Schuz, A. Cortex: statistics and geometry of neuronal connectivity. Springer Verlag;
Heidelberg, Germany: 1998. 2nd thoroughly revised edition of: Anatomy of the cortex. Statistics and
geometry 1991 ed
37. Kaes, T. Die grosshirnrinde des menschen in ihren massen und ihrem fasergehalt. Gustav Disher;
Jena: 1907.
38. Conel, J. Postnatal development of the human cerebral cortex: the cortex of the seventy-two-month
infant. Vol. 8. Harvard Univ. Press; Cambridge, MA: 1967.
39. Yakovlev, P.; Lecours, A., editors. Blackwell Scientific; Oxford: 1967.
40. Perrin J, Leonard G, Perron M, et al. Growth of white matter in the adolescent brain: role of
testosterone and androgen receptor. Journal of Neuroscience. in press
41. Paus, T., editor. Maturation of structural and functional connectivity in the human brain. Springer-
Verlag; New York: 2007.
42. Menon V, Boyett-Anderson JM, Reiss AL. Maturation of medial temporal lobe response and
connectivity during memory encoding. Brain Res Cogn Brain Res Sep;2005 25(1):379–385.
[PubMed: 16122916]
Giedd et al.
Page 14
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 October 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 15 (native) -----
43. Grosbras MH, Jansen M, Leonard G, et al. Neural mechanisms of resistance to peer influence in early
adolescence. J Neurosci Jul 25;2007 27(30):8040–8045. [PubMed: 17652594]
44. Steinberg L, Monahan KC. Age differences in resistance to peer influence. Developmental psychology
Nov;2007 43(6):1531–1543. [PubMed: 18020830]
45. Hursh J. Conduction velocity and diameter of nerve fibers. American Journal of Physiology
1939;127:131–139.
46. Rushton WA. A theory of the effects of fibre size in medullated nerve. The Journal of physiology
Sep;1951 115(1):101–122. [PubMed: 14889433]
47. Schmidt-Nielson, K. Animal physiology: adaptation and environment. Vol. 5th ed.. Cambridge
University Press; Cambridge: 1997.
48. Eickhoff SB, Schleicher A, Scheperjans F, Palomero-Gallagher N, Zilles K. Analysis of
neurotransmitter receptor distribution patterns in the cerebral cortex. NeuroImage Feb 15;2007 34
(4):1317–1330. [PubMed: 17182260]
49. Zilles K, Palomero-Gallagher N, Schleicher A. Transmitter receptors and functional anatomy of the
cerebral cortex. Journal of anatomy Dec;2004 205(6):417–432. [PubMed: 15610391]
50. Tseng KY, O’Donnell P. Dopamine modulation of prefrontal cortical interneurons changes during
adolescence. Cereb Cortex May;2007 17(5):1235–1240. [PubMed: 16818475]
51. Erickson SL, Akil M, Levey AI, Lewis DA. Postnatal development of tyrosine hydroxylase- and
dopamine transporter-immunoreactive axons in monkey rostral entorhinal cortex. Cereb Cortex Jul-
Aug;1998 8(5):415–427. [PubMed: 9722085]
52. Rosenberg DR, Lewis DA. Postnatal maturation of the dopaminergic innervation of monkey
prefrontal and motor cortices: a tyrosine hydroxylase immunohistochemical analysis. The Journal of
comparative neurology Jul 31;1995 358(3):383–400. [PubMed: 7560293]
53. Tunbridge EM, Weickert CS, Kleinman JE, Herman MM, Chen J, Kolachana BS, Harrison PJ,
Weinberger DR. Catechol-o-methyltransferase enzyme activity and protein expression in human
prefrontal cortex across the postnatal lifespan. Cereb Cortex May;2007 17(5):1206–1212. [PubMed:
16835293]
54. Weickert CS, Webster MJ, Gondipalli P, Rothmond D, Fatula RJ, Herman MM, Kleinman JE, Akil
M. Postnatal alterations in dopaminergic markers in the human prefrontal cortex. Neuroscience Feb
9;2007 144(3):1109–1119. [PubMed: 17123740]
55. Kessler RC, Berglund P, Demler O, Jin R, Merikangas KR, Walters EE. Lifetime prevalence and age-
of-onset distributions of DSM-IV disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication.
Archives of general psychiatry Jun;2005 62(6):593–602. [PubMed: 15939837]
56. Hafner H, Riecher A, Maurer K, Loffler W, Munk-Jorgensen P, Stromgren E. How does gender
influence age at first hospitalization for schizophrenia? A transnational case register study.
Psychological medicine Nov;1989 19(4):903–918. [PubMed: 2594886]
57. Kessler RC, Wang PS. The descriptive epidemiology of commonly occurring mental disorders in the
United States. Annual review of public health 2008;29:115–129.
58. Kyriakopoulos M, Frangou S. Pathophysiology of early onset schizophrenia. International review of
psychiatry (Abingdon, England) Aug;2007 19(4):315–324.
59. Feinberg I. Schizophrenia: Caused by a fault in programmed synaptic elimination during adolescence?
Journal of psychiatric research 198283;17:319–334. [PubMed: 7187776]
60. Keshavan MS, Anderson S, Pettegrew JW. Is schizophrenia due to excessive synaptic pruning in the
prefrontal cortex? The Feinberg hypothesis revisited. Journal of psychiatric research May-Jun;1994
28(3):239–265. [PubMed: 7932285]
61. Keshavan MS, Reynolds CF, Miewald JM, Montrose DM, Sweeney JA, Vasko RC, Kupfer DJ. Delta
sleep deficits in schizophrenia: Evidence from automated analyses of sleep data. Archives of general
psychiatry 1998;55:443–448. [PubMed: 9596047]
62. Pettegrew JW, Keshavan MS, Panchalingam K, Strychor S, Kaplan DB, Tretta MG, Allen M.
Alterations in brain high-energy phosphate and membrane phospholipid metabolism in first-episode,
drug-naive schizophrenics. A pilot study of the dorsal prefrontal cortex by in vivo phosphorus 31
nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Archives of general psychiatry Jun;1991 48(6):563–568.
[PubMed: 1898445]
Giedd et al.
Page 15
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 October 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 16 (native) -----
63. Andreasen NC, Rezai K, Alliger R, Swayze VW 2nd, Flaum M, Kirchner P, Cohen G, O’Leary DS.
Hypofrontality in neuroleptic-naive patients and in patients with chronic schizophrenia. Assessment
with xenon 133 single-photon emission computed tomography and the Tower of London. Archives
of general psychiatry Dec;1992 49(12):943–958. [PubMed: 1360199]
64. Sporn AL, Greenstein DK, Gogtay N, et al. Progressive brain volume loss during adolescence in
childhood-onset schizophrenia. The American journal of psychiatry Dec;2003 160(12):2181–2189.
[PubMed: 14638588]
65. Sun D, Phillips L, Velakoulis D, et al. Progressive brain structural changes mapped as psychosis
develops in ‘at risk’ individuals. Schizophrenia research. Feb 8;2008
66. Garey LJ, Ong WY, Patel TS, Kanani M, Davis A, Mortimer AM, Barnes TR, Hirsch SR. Reduced
dendritic spine density on cerebral cortical pyramidal neurons in schizophrenia. Journal of neurology,
neurosurgery, and psychiatry Oct;1998 65(4):446–453.
67. Selemon LD, Rajkowska G, Goldman-Rakic PS. Abnormally high neuronal density in the
schizophrenic cortex. A morphometric analysis of prefrontal area 9 and occipital area 17. Archives
of general psychiatry Oct;1995 52(10):805–818. [PubMed: 7575100]discussion 819-820
68. Eastwood SL, Harrison PJ. Decreased synaptophysin in the medical temporal lobe in schizophrenia
demonstrated using immunoautoradiography. Neuroscience 1995;69:339–343. [PubMed: 8552231]
69. Maggs JL, Patrick ME, Feinstein L. Childhood and adolescent predictors of alcohol use and problems
in adolescence and adulthood in the National Child Development Study. Addiction (Abingdon,
England) May;2008 103(Suppl 1):7–22.
70. Chambers RA, Taylor JR, Potenza MN. Developmental neurocircuitry of motivation in adolescence:
a critical period of addiction vulnerability. The American journal of psychiatry Jun;2003 160(6):
1041–1052. [PubMed: 12777258]
71. Kandel DB, Yamaguchi K, Chen K. Stages of progression in drug involvement from adolescence to
adulthood: further evidence for the gateway theory. Journal of studies on alcohol Sep;1992 53(5):
447–457. [PubMed: 1405637]
72. Cloninger CR, Sigvardsson S, Bohman M. Childhood personality predicts alcohol abuse in young
adults. Alcoholism, clinical and experimental research Aug;1988 12(4):494–505.
73. Wills TA, Vaccaro D, McNamara G. Novelty seeking, risk taking, and related constructs as predictors
of adolescent substance use: an application of Cloninger’s theory. Journal of substance abuse 1994;6
(1):1–20. [PubMed: 8081104]
74. Adams, G.; Montemayor, R.; Gullotta, T. Biology of adolescent behavior and development. Sage
Publications; Newbury Park, CA: 1989.
75. Savin-Williams, R. Adolescence: an ethological perspective. Springer-Verlag; New York: 1987.
76. Bjork JM, Smith AR, Danube CL, Hommer DW. Developmental differences in posterior mesofrontal
cortex recruitment by risky rewards. J Neurosci May 2;2007 27(18):4839–4849. [PubMed:
17475792]
77. Levin ED, Rezvani AH, Montoya D, Rose JE, Swartzwelder HS. Adolescent-onset nicotine self-
administration modeled in female rats. Psychopharmacology Sep;2003 169(2):141–149. [PubMed:
12764575]
78. Spear LP. Alcohol’s effects on adolescents. Alcohol Res Health 2002;26(4):287–291. [PubMed:
12875039]
79. White AM, Truesdale MC, Bae JG, Ahmad S, Wilson WA, Best PJ, Swartzwelder HS. Differential
effects of ethanol on motor coordination in adolescent and adult rats. Pharmacology, biochemistry,
and behavior Oct;2002 73(3):673–677.
80. Doremus TL, Brunell SC, Varlinskaya EI, Spear LP. Anxiogenic effects during withdrawal from
acute ethanol in adolescent and adult rats. Pharmacology, biochemistry, and behavior May;2003 75
(2):411–418.
81. Silveri MM, Spear LP. The effects of NMDA and GABAA pharmacological manipulations on ethanol
sensitivity in immature and mature animals. Alcoholism, clinical and experimental research Apr;
2002 26(4):449–456.
82. White AM, Swartzwelder HS. Hippocampal function during adolescence: a unique target of ethanol
effects. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences Jun;2004 1021:206–220. [PubMed:
15251891]
Giedd et al.
Page 16
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 October 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 17 (native) -----
83. Li Q, Wilson WA, Swartzwelder HS. Differential effect of ethanol on NMDA EPSCs in pyramidal
cells in the posterior cingulate cortex of juvenile and adult rats. Journal of neurophysiology Feb;2002
87(2):705–711. [PubMed: 11826039]
84. Brown SA, Tapert SF. Adolescence and the trajectory of alcohol use: basic to clinical studies. Annals
of the New York Academy of Sciences Jun;2004 1021:234–244. [PubMed: 15251893]
85. De Bellis MD, Clark DB, Beers SR, Soloff PH, Boring AM, Hall J, Kersh A, Keshavan MS.
Hippocampal volume in adolescent-onset alcohol use disorders. The American journal of psychiatry
May;2000 157(5):737–744. [PubMed: 10784466]
86. Adriani W, Laviola G. Windows of vulnerability to psychopathology and therapeutic strategy in the
adolescent rodent model. Behavioural pharmacology Sep;2004 15(56):341–352. [PubMed:
15343057]
87. Andersen SL, Teicher MH. Stress, sensitive periods and maturational events in adolescent depression.
Trends in neurosciences Apr;2008 31(4):183–191. [PubMed: 18329735]
88. Birmaher B, Axelson D. Course and outcome of bipolar spectrum disorder in children and adolescents:
a review of the existing literature. Development and psychopathology Fall 2006;18(4):1023–1035.
89. Beesdo K, Bittner A, Pine DS, Stein MB, Hofler M, Lieb R, Wittchen HU. Incidence of social anxiety
disorder and the consistent risk for secondary depression in the first three decades of life. Archives
of general psychiatry Aug;2007 64(8):903–912. [PubMed: 17679635]
90. Reinherz HZ, Paradis AD, Giaconia RM, Stashwick CK, Fitzmaurice G. Childhood and adolescent
predictors of major depression in the transition to adulthood. The American journal of psychiatry
Dec;2003 160(12):2141–2147. [PubMed: 14638584]
91. Blumberg HP, Kaufman J, Martin A, et al. Amygdala and hippocampal volumes in adolescents and
adults with bipolar disorder. Archives of general psychiatry Dec;2003 60(12):1201–1208. [PubMed:
14662552]
92. De Bellis MD, Keshavan MS, Shifflett H, Iyengar S, Beers SR, Hall J, Moritz G. Brain structures in
pediatric maltreatment-related posttraumatic stress disorder: a sociodemographically matched study.
Biological psychiatry Dec 1;2002 52(11):1066–1078. [PubMed: 12460690]
93. DelBello MP, Zimmerman ME, Mills NP, Getz GE, Strakowski SM. Magnetic resonance imaging
analysis of amygdala and other subcortical brain regions in adolescents with bipolar disorder. Bipolar
disorders Feb;2004 6(1):43–52. [PubMed: 14996140]
94. Thomas KM, Drevets WC, Dahl RE, et al. Amygdala response to fearful faces in anxious and
depressed children. Archives of general psychiatry Nov;2001 58(11):1057–1063. [PubMed:
11695953]
95. Monk CS, McClure EB, Nelson EE, et al. Adolescent immaturity in attention-related brain
engagement to emotional facial expressions. NeuroImage Sep;2003 20(1):420–428. [PubMed:
14527602]
96. Angold A, Costello EJ. Puberty and depression. Child and adolescent psychiatric clinics of North
America Oct;2006 15(4):919–937. [PubMed: 16952768]ix
97. Hayward C, Sanborn K. Puberty and the emergence of gender differences in psychopathology. J
Adolesc Health Apr;2002 30(4 Suppl):49–58. [PubMed: 11943575]
98. Patton GC, Hibbert ME, Carlin J, Shao Q, Rosier M, Caust J, Bowes G. Menarche and the onset of
depression and anxiety in Victoria, Australia. Journal of epidemiology and community health Dec;
1996 50(6):661–666. [PubMed: 9039386]
99. Shen H, Gong QH, Aoki C, Yuan M, Ruderman Y, Dattilo M, Williams K, Smith SS. Reversal of
neurosteroid effects at alpha4beta2delta GABAA receptors triggers anxiety at puberty. Nature
neuroscience Apr;2007 10(4):469–477.
100. Shaw P, Greenstein D, Lerch J, et al. Intellectual ability and cortical development in children and
adolescents. Nature Mar 30;2006 440(7084):676–679. [PubMed: 16572172]
101. Wallace GL, Eric Schmitt J, Lenroot R, et al. A pediatric twin study of brain morphometry. Journal
of child psychology and psychiatry, and allied disciplines Oct;2006 47(10):987–993.
102. Schmitt JE, Wallace GL, Rosenthal MA, et al. A multivariate analysis of neuroanatomic relationships
in a genetically informative pediatric sample. NeuroImage Mar;2007 35(1):70–82. [PubMed:
17208460]
Giedd et al.
Page 17
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 October 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 18 (native) -----
103. Pausova Z, Paus T, Abrahamowicz M, et al. Genes, maternal smoking, and the offspring brain and
body during adolescence: design of the Saguenay Youth Study. Human brain mapping Jun;2007
28(6):502–518. [PubMed: 17469173]
104. Sisk CL, Foster DL. The neural basis of puberty and adolescence. Nature neuroscience Oct;2004 7
(10):1040–1047.
105. Shen D, Liu D, Liu H, Clasen L, Giedd J, Davatzikos C. Automated morphometric study of brain
variation in XXY males. NeuroImage Oct;2004 23(2):648–653. [PubMed: 15488414]
106. Giedd JN, Clasen LS, Lenroot R, et al. Puberty-related influences on brain development. Molecular
and cellular endocrinology Jul 25;2006 254-255:154–162. [PubMed: 16765510]
107. Ernst M, Mueller SC. The adolescent brain: insights from functional neuroimaging research.
Developmental neurobiology May;2008 68(6):729–743. [PubMed: 18383544]
108. Manganas LN, Zhang X, Li Y, et al. Magnetic resonance spectroscopy identifies neural progenitor
cells in the live human brain. Science (New York, NY Nov 9;2007 318(5852):980–985.
109. Steinberg L. Cognitive and affective development in adolescence. Trends in cognitive sciences Feb;
2005 9(2):69–74. [PubMed: 15668099]
110. Arguello PA, Gogos JA. Modeling madness in mice: one piece at a time. Neuron Oct 5;2006 52(1):
179–196. [PubMed: 17015235]
111. Peterson A, Crockett L, Richards M, Boxer A. A self-report measure of pubertal status: reliability,
validity, and initial norms. J Youth Adolesc 1988;17:117–133.
Giedd et al.
Page 18
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 October 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 19 (native) -----
Figure 1.
Schematic representations of developmental trajectories in local volume of cortical grey-matter
(A), glucose metabolism (B) and synaptic density (C). Plots of grey matter are based on data
by Gogtay et al8 and illustrate local grey-matter volume in the mid-dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex in red (plot E in Fig. 1 of the original report), angular gyrus of the parietal cortex in
black (plot I), posterior STS of the temporal cortex in purple (plot N), and the occipital pole
in green (plot K). Plots of glucose metabolism are based on data by Chugani et al11 and provide
information about the absolute values of local cerebral metabolic rate for glucose (LCMRglc)
in the frontal (red), parietal (black), temporal (purple) and occipital (green) cortex. Plots of
synaptic density are based on data by Huttenlocher and de Courten10 and Huttenlocher12, as
Giedd et al.
Page 19
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 October 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 20 (native) -----
re-plotted on semi-logarithmic scale by Rakic et al13 (Fig. 4 in their report), and provide
information about synaptic density in the prefrontal (red) and the striate (green) cortex. Note
the following features of the above trajectories, especially between childhood and adulthood.
To facilitate the comparison across the different plots, a vertical line was drawn at the age of
15 years. For cortical grey matter, different trajectories are observed in different cortical regions
((A). For glucose metabolism, the same trajectories are found in the four different lobes (B).
This is also the case for the trajectories in synaptic density in the prefrontal and occipital cortex
(C). Taken together, it is unlikely that a direct relationship exists between the three sets of
measures.
Giedd et al.
Page 20
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 October 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 21 (native) -----
Figure 2.
Sexual dimorphism in the maturation of white matter during adolescence. Top panel (A)
illustrates age-related changes in the relative (brain-size corrected) volume of white matter
summed across the frontal, parietal, temporal and occipital lobes. Bottom panel (B) illustrates
age-related changes in mean-centered values of magnetization-transfer ratio (MTR) in the lobar
white-matter; MTR provides an indirect index of myelination. The plots are based on data
obtained by Perrin et al40. Note that the opposite developmental trajectories in the volume and
MTR suggest that age-related increases in white matter during male adolescence are not driven
by myelination. See the original report for further information about the relationship between
Giedd et al.
Page 21
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 October 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 22 (native) -----
white matter and testosterone in male adolescents with different variants of androgen-receptor
gene.
Giedd et al.
Page 22
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 October 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 23 (native) -----
Figure 3.
Functional connectivity, indexed by inter-regional correlations in fMRI signal, during the
observation of angry hand movements in children differing in their resistance to peer
influences.
a, Latent Variable 1 (LV1) identified a combination of brain regions that, as a whole, correlated
with the Resistance-to-Peer-Influence (RPI) scores. Note that high correlations are observed
only for fMRI signal measured during the observation of Angry Hand Movements. b, Brains
scores (weighted sum of all voxels in an image for each subject, using the weights derived from
the brain LV1) derived from the fMRI signal measured during Angry Hand Movements plotted
as a function of RPI. c, Locations of brain regions identified by LV1; only regions visible on
Giedd et al.
Page 23
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 October 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 24 (native) -----
the lateral surface of the left and right hemispheres are shown. d, Correlation matrices depicting
inter-regional correlations of fMRI signal measured during the observation of Angry Hand
Movements, as revealed by LV1, in subjects with High (left) and Low (right) Resistance to
Peer Influence. The High and Low RPI subgroups correspond to the subjects with RPI scores
above and below the group median, respectively. e, Multidimensional scaling (MDS)
representations of the inter-regional correlations of the 26-D matrix depicted above; in the
MDS 2-D plots, strongly correlated regions are placed close together. Note, for example, the
close grouping of premotor (F03 and F04) and prefrontal (F08 and F09) fronto-cortical regions.
F01, Premotor cortex, dorsal, left; F02, Premotor cortex, dorsal, right; F03, Premotor cortex,
ventral, left; F04, Premotor cortex, ventral, right; F05, Frontal operculum, right; F06, Cingulate
motor area, left; F07 Insula, anterior, left; F08, Prefrontal cortex, ventro-lateral, right; F09,
Prefrontal cortex, dorso-lateral, left; F10, Prefrontal cortex, dorso-lateral, right; F11, Prefrontal
cortex, ventro-lateral, left; F12, Anterior cingulate cortex, right; F13, Orbito-frontal cortex,
lateral, left; F14, Prefrontal cortex, medial; P01, Posterior cingulate cortex; P02, Precuneus,
left; P03, Parietal cortex, dorso-lateral, right; P04, Parietal cortex, dorso-medial, right; T01,
Superior Temporal Sulcus, middle, right; T02, Superior Temporal Sulcus, posterior, right;
T03, Hippocampus, right; O01, Fusiform gyrus, left; CN, Caudate nucleus, right; CB1,
Cerebellum, right; CB2, Cerebellum, right; SC, Superior Colliculus, right.
Reprinted with permission from Grosbras et al.43.
Giedd et al.
Page 24
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 October 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 25 (native) -----
Figure 4.
Ranges of onset age for common psychiatric disorders. Recent data from the National
Comorbidity Survey Replication study55, 57, a nationally representative epidemiological
survey of mental disorders, suggest that about half of the population fulfill criteria for one or
other psychiatric disorders in their lifetimes. The majority of those with a mental disorder have
had the beginnings of the illness in childhood or adolescence. Some anxiety disorders such as
phobias and separation anxiety and impulse-control disorders begin in childhood, while other
anxiety disorders such as panic, generalized anxiety and post-traumatic stress disorder,
substance disorders and mood disorders begin later, with onsets rarely before early teens.
Schizophrenia typically begins in late adolescence or the early twenties, with men having a
somewhat earlier age of onset compared to women56. Psychiatric disorders with childhood or
adolescent onsets tend to be more severe, are frequently undetected early in the illness, and
accrue additional co-morbid disorders especially if untreated. It is therefore critical to focus
efforts on early identification and intervention.
Giedd et al.
Page 25
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 October 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript