

----- Page 1 (native) -----
Sensor Networks: Evolution, Opportunities,
and Challenges
CHEE-YEE CHONG, MEMBER, IEEE AND SRIKANTA P. KUMAR, SENIOR MEMBER, IEEE
Invited Paper
Wireless microsensor networks have been identified as one of
the most important technologies for the 21st century. This paper
traces the history of research in sensor networks over the past
three decades, including two important programs of the Defense
Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) spanning this
period: the Distributed Sensor Networks (DSN) and the Sensor
Information Technology (SensIT) programs. Technology trends that
impact the development of sensor networks are reviewed, and new
applications such as infrastructure security, habitat monitoring,
and traffic control are presented. Technical challenges in sensor
network development include network discovery, control and
routing, collaborative signal and information processing, tasking
and querying, and security. The paper concludes by presenting
some recent research results in sensor network algorithms, in-
cluding localized algorithms and directed diffusion, distributed
tracking in wireless ad hoc networks, and distributed classification
using local agents.
Keywords—Collaborative signal processing, microsensors, net-
work routing and control, querying and tasking, sensor networks,
tracking and classification, wireless networks.
I. INTRODUCTION
Networked microsensors technology is a key technology
for the future. In September 1999 [1], Business Week her-
alded it as one of the 21 most important technologies for the
21st century. Cheap, smart devices with multiple onboard
sensors, networked through wireless links and the Internet
and deployed in large numbers, provide unprecedented op-
portunities for instrumenting and controlling homes, cities,
and the environment. In addition, networked microsensors
provide the technology for a broad spectrum of systems in
the defense arena, generating new capabilities for reconnais-
sance and surveillance as well as other tactical applications.
Manuscript received January 7, 2003; revised March 17, 2003.
C.-Y. Chong was with Booz Allen Hamilton, San Francisco, CA 94111
USA. He is now with Alphatech, Inc. San Diego, CA 92121 USA (e-mail:
cchong@alphatech.com, cychong@ieee.org).
S. Kumar is with the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, Ar-
lington, VA 22203 USA (e-mail: skumar@ darpa.mil).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JPROC.2003.814918
Smart disposable microsensors can be deployed on the
ground, in the air, under water, on bodies, in vehicles,
and inside buildings. A system of networked sensors can
detect and track threats (e.g., winged and wheeled vehicles,
personnel, chemical and biological agents) and be used for
weapon targeting and area denial. Each sensor node will
have embedded processing capability, and will potentially
have multiple onboard sensors, operating in the acoustic,
seismic, infrared (IR), and magnetic modes, as well as
imagers and microradars. Also onboard will be storage,
wireless links to neighboring nodes, and location and po-
sitioning knowledge through the global positioning system
(GPS) or local positioning algorithms.
Networked microsensors belong to the general family of
sensor networks that use multiple distributed sensors to col-
lect information on entities of interest. Table 1 summarizes
the range of possible attributes in general sensor networks.
Current and potential applications of sensor networks in-
clude: military sensing, physical security, air traffic control,
traffic surveillance, video surveillance, industrial and man-
ufacturing automation, distributed robotics, environment
monitoring, and building and structures monitoring. The
sensors in these applications may be small or large, and the
networks may be wired or wireless. However, ubiquitous
wireless networks of microsensors probably offer the most
potential in changing the world of sensing [2].
While sensor networks for various applications may be
quite different, they share common technical issues. This
paper will present a history of research in sensor networks
(Section II), technology trends (Section III), new applica-
tions (Section IV), research issues and hard problems (Sec-
tion V), and some examples of research results (Section VI).
II. HISTORY OF RESEARCH IN SENSOR NETWORKS
The development of sensor networks requires technolo-
gies from three different research areas: sensing, commu-
nication, and computing (including hardware, software, and
0018-9219/03$17.00 © 2003 IEEE
PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, VOL. 91, NO. 8, AUGUST 2003
1247

----- Page 2 (native) -----
Table 1
Attributes of Sensor Networks
algorithms). Thus, combined and separate advancements in
each of these areas have driven research in sensor networks.
Examples of early sensor networks include the radar net-
works used in air traffic control. The national power grid,
with its many sensors, can be viewed as one large sensor net-
work. These systems were developed with specialized com-
puters and communication capabilities, and before the term
“sensor networks” came into vogue.
A. Early Research on Military Sensor Networks
As with many technologies, defense applications have
been a driver for research and development in sensor net-
works. During the Cold War, the Sound Surveillance System
(SOSUS), a system of acoustic sensors (hydrophones) on the
ocean bottom, was deployed at strategic locations to detect
and track quiet Soviet submarines. Over the years, other
more sophisticated acoustic networks have been developed
for submarine surveillance. SOSUS is now used by the
National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration
(NOAA) for monitoring events in the ocean, e.g., seismic
and animal activity [3]. Also during the Cold War, networks
of air defense radars were developed and deployed to defend
the continental United States and Canada. This air defense
system has evolved over the years to include aerostats
as sensors and Airborne Warning and Control System
(AWACS) planes, and is also used for drug interdiction.
These sensor networks generally adopt a hierarchical
processing structure where processing occurs at consecutive
levels until the information about events of interest reaches
the user. In many cases, human operators play a key role in
the system. Even though research was focused on satisfying
mission needs, e.g., acoustic signal processing and interpre-
tation, tracking, and fusion, it provided some key processing
technologies for modern sensor networks.
B. Distributed Sensor Networks Program at the Defense
Advanced Research Projects Agency
Modern research on sensor networks started around 1980
with the Distributed Sensor Networks (DSN) program at the
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA).
By this time, the Arpanet (predecessor of the Internet) had
been operational for a number of years, with about 200 hosts
at universities and research institutes. R. Kahn, who was
coinventor of the TCP/IP protocols and played a key role
in developing the Internet, was director of the Information
Processing Techniques Office (IPTO) at DARPA. He wanted
to know whether the Arpanet approach for communica-
tion could be extended to sensor networks. The network
was assumed to have many spatially distributed low-cost
sensing nodes that collaborate with each other but operate
autonomously, with information being routed to whichever
node can best use the information.
It was an ambitious program given the state of the art.
This was the time before personal computers and work-
stations; processing was done mostly on minicomputers
such as PDP-11 and VAX machines running Unix and VMS.
Modems were operating at 300 to 9600 Bd, and Ethernet
was just becoming popular.
Technology components for a DSN were identified in a
Distributed Sensor Nets workshop in 1978 [4]. These in-
cluded sensors (acoustic), communication (high-level proto-
cols that link processes working on a common application
in a resource-sharing network [5]), processing techniques
and algorithms (including self-location algorithms for sen-
sors), and distributed software (dynamically modifiable dis-
tributed systems and language design). Since DARPA was
sponsoring much artificial intelligence (AI) research at the
time, the workshop also included talks on the use of AI for
understanding signals and assessing situations [6], as well
as various distributed problem-solving techniques [7]–[9].
Since very few technology components were available off
the shelf, the resulting DSN program had to address dis-
tributed computing support, signal processing, tracking, and
test beds. Distributed acoustic tracking was chosen as the
target problem for demonstration.
Researchers at Carnegie Mellon University (CMU),
Pittsburgh, PA, focused on providing a network operating
system that allows flexible, transparent access to distributed
resources needed for a fault-tolerant DSN. They developed
1248
PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, VOL. 91, NO. 8, AUGUST 2003

----- Page 3 (native) -----
Fig. 1.
Components in the DSN test bed around 1985.
a communication-oriented operating system called Accent
[10], whose primitives support transparent networking,
system reconfiguration, and rebinding. Accent evolved into
the Mach operating system [11], which found considerable
commercial acceptance. Other efforts at CMU included
protocols
for
network
interprocess communication
to
support dynamic rebinding of active communicating com-
putations, an interface specification language for building
distributed system software, and a system for dynamic load
balancing and fault reconfiguration of DSN software. All
this was demonstrated in an indoor test bed with signal
sources, acoustic sensors, and VAX computers connected
by Ethernet.
Researchers at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology
(MIT), Cambridge, focused on knowledge-based signal
processing techniques [12] for tracking helicopters using a
distributed array of acoustic microphones by means of signal
abstractions and matching techniques. Signal abstractions
view signals as consisting of multiple levels, with higher
levels of abstraction (e.g., peaks) obtained by suppressing
detailed information in lower levels (e.g., spectrum). They
provide a conceptual framework for thinking about signal
processing systems that resemble what people use when
interactively processing and interpreting real-world signals.
By incorporating human heuristics, this approach was
designed for high signal-to-noise ratio situations where
models are lacking. In addition, MIT also developed the
Signal Processing Language and Interactive Computing
Environment (SPLICE) for DSN data analysis and algorithm
development, and Pitch Director’s Assistant for interactively
estimating fundamental frequency using domain knowledge.
Moving up the processing chain, tracking multiple targets
in a distributed environment is significantly more difficult
than centralized tracking. The association of measurements
to tracks and estimation of target states (position and ve-
locity) given associations have to be distributed over the
sensor nodes. In the 1980s, Advanced Decision Systems
(ADS), Mountain View, CA, developed a multiple-hy-
pothesis tracking algorithm to deal with difficult situations
involving high target density, missing detections, and false
alarms, and decomposed the algorithm for distributed
implementation [13], [14]. Multiple-hypothesis tracking is
now a standard approach for difficult tracking problems.
For demonstration, MIT Lincoln Laboratory developed
the real-time test bed for acoustic tracking of low-flying
aircraft [15]. The sensors were acoustic arrays (nine micro-
phones arranged in three concentric triangles with the largest
being 6 m across). A PDP11/34 computer and an array pro-
cessor processed the acoustic signals. The nodal computer
(for target tracking) consists of three MC68000 processors
with 256-kB memory and 512-kB shared memory, and a
custom operating system. Communication was by Ethernet
and microwave radio. Fig. 1 (extracted from [16]) shows the
acoustic array (nine white microphones), the mobile vehicle
node with an acoustically quiet generator in the back, and the
equipment rack with the acoustic/tracking node and gateway
node in the vehicle. Note the size of the system and that
practically all components in the network were custom built.
That was the state of the art in the early 1980s. The DSN test
bed was demonstrated with low-flying aircraft, which was
successfully tracked with acoustic sensors as well as TV
cameras. The tracking algorithm was fairly sophisticated,
since the acoustic propagation delay is significant relative to
the speed of the aircraft.
Another test bed in the DSN program was the distributed
vehicle monitoring test bed at the University of Massachu-
setts, Amherst. This was a research tool for empirically
investigating distributed problem solving in networks. The
distributed knowledge-based problem solving approach used
a functionally accurate, cooperative architecture consisting
of a network of Hearsay-II nodes (blackboard architecture
with knowledge sources). Different local node control
approaches were explored [17].
C. Military Sensor Networks in the 1980s and 1990s
Even though early researchers on sensor networks had
in mind large numbers of small sensors, the technology
for small sensors was not quite ready. However, planners
of military systems quickly recognized the benefits of
sensor networks, which become a crucial component of
network-centric warfare [18]. In platform-centric warfare,
platforms “own” specific weapons, which in turn own
sensors in a fairly rigid architecture. In other words, sensors
and weapons are mounted with and controlled by separate
platforms that operate independently. In network-centric
warfare, sensors do not necessarily belong to weapons or
platforms. Instead, they collaborate with each other over a
communication network, and information is sent to the ap-
propriate “shooters.” Sensor networks can improve detection
CHONG AND KUMAR: SENSOR NETWORKS: EVOLUTION, OPPORTUNITIES, AND CHALLENGES
1249

----- Page 4 (native) -----
and tracking performance through multiple observations,
geometric and phenomenological diversity, extended detec-
tion range, and faster response time. Also, the development
cost is lower by exploiting commercial network technology
and common network interfaces.
An example of network-centric warfare is the Cooperative
Engagement Capability (CEC) [19] developed by the U.S.
Navy. This system consists of multiple radars collecting data
on air targets. Measurements are associated by a processing
node “with reporting responsibility” and shared with other
nodes that process all measurements of interest. Since all
nodes have access to essentially the same information, a
“common operating picture” essential for consistent military
operations is obtained. Other military sensor networks in-
clude acoustic sensor arrays for antisubmarine warfare such
as the Fixed Distributed System (FDS) and the Advanced
Deployable System (ADS), and unattended ground sensors
(UGS) [20] such as the Remote Battlefield Sensor System
(REMBASS) and the Tactical Remote Sensor System
(TRSS).
D. Sensor Network Research in the 21st Century
Recent advances in computing and communication have
caused a significant shift in sensor network research and
brought it closer to achieving the original vision. Small and
inexpensive sensors based upon microelectromechanical
system (MEMS) [21] technology, wireless networking, and
inexpensive low-power processors allow the deployment of
wireless ad hoc networks for various applications. Again,
DARPA started a research program on sensor networks to
leverage the latest technological advances.
The recently concluded DARPA Sensor Information
Technology (SensIT) program [22] pursued two key re-
search and development thrusts. First, it developed new
networking techniques. In the battlefield context, these
sensor devices or nodes should be ready for rapid de-
ployment, in an ad hoc fashion, and in highly dynamic
environments. Today’s networking techniques, developed
for voice and data and relying on a fixed infrastructure, will
not suffice for battlefield use. Thus, the program developed
new networking techniques suitable for highly dynamic
ad hoc environments. The second thrust was networked
information processing, i.e., how to extract useful, reliable,
and timely information from the deployed sensor network.
This implies leveraging the distributed computing environ-
ment created by these sensors for signal and information
processing in the network, and for dynamic and interactive
querying and tasking the sensor network.
SensIT generated new capabilities relative to today’s
sensors. Current systems such as the Tactical Automated
Security System (TASS) [23] for perimeter security are
dedicated rather than programmable. They use technologies
based on transmit-only nodes and a long-range detection
paradigm. SensIT networks have new capabilities. The
networks are interactive and programmable with dynamic
tasking and querying. A multitasking feature in the system
allows multiple simultaneous users. Finally, since detection
ranges are much shorter in a sensor system, the software and
algorithms can exploit the proximity of devices to threats to
drastically improve the accuracy of detection and tracking.
The software and the overall system design supports low
latency, energy-efficient operation, built-in autonomy and
survivability, and low probability of detection of operation.
As a result, a network of SensIT nodes can support detection,
identification, and tracking of threats, as well as targeting
and communication, both within the network and to outside
the network, such as an overhead asset.
III. TECHNOLOGY TRENDS
Current sensor networks can exploit technologies not
available 20 years ago and perform functions that were
not even dreamed of at that time. Sensors, processors, and
communication devices are all getting much smaller and
cheaper. Commercial companies such as Ember, Crossbow,
and Sensoria are now building and deploying small sensor
nodes and systems. These companies provide a vision of
how our daily lives will be enhanced through a network
of small, embedded sensor nodes. In addition to products
from these companies, commercial off-the-shelf personal
digital assistants (PDAs) using Palm or Pocket PC operating
systems contain significant computing power in a small
package. These can easily be “ruggedized” to become
processing nodes in a sensor network. Some of these devices
even have built-in sensing capabilities, such as cameras.
These powerful processors can be hooked to MEMS devices
and machines along with extensive databases and communi-
cation platforms to bring about a new era of technologically
sophisticated sensor nets.
Wireless networks based upon IEEE 802.11 standards
can now provide bandwidth approaching those of wired
networks. At the same time, the IEEE has noticed the low
expense and high capabilities that sensor networks offer.
The organization has defined the IEEE 802.15 standard
for personal area networks (PANs), with “personal net-
works” defined to have a radius of 5 to 10 m. Networks of
short-range sensors are the ideal technology to be employed
in PANs. The IEEE encouragement of the development of
technologies and algorithms for such short ranges ensures
continued development of low-cost sensor nets [24]. Further-
more, increases in chip capacity and processor production
capabilities have reduced the energy per bit requirement for
both computing and communication. Sensing, computing,
and communications can now be performed on a single chip,
further reducing the cost and allowing deployment in ever
larger numbers.
Looking into the future, we predict that advances in
MEMS technology will produce sensors that are even more
capable and versatile. For example, Dust Inc., Berkeley,
CA, a company that sprung from the late 1990s Smart
Dust research project [25] at the University of California,
Berkeley, is building MEMS sensors that can sense and
communicate and yet are tiny enough to fit inside a cubic
millimeter. A Smart Dust optical mote uses MEMS to aim
submillimeter-sized mirrors for communications. Smart
Dust sensors can be deployed using a 3
10 mm “wavelet”
1250
PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, VOL. 91, NO. 8, AUGUST 2003

----- Page 5 (native) -----
Table 2
Three Generations of Sensor Nodes
Fig. 2.
Three generations of sensor nodes.
shaped like a maple tree seed and dropped to float to the
ground. A wireless network of these ubiquitous, low-cost,
disposable microsensors can provide close-in sensing
capabilities in many novel applications (as discussed in
Section IV).
Table 2 compares three generations of sensor nodes; Fig. 2
shows their sizes.
IV. NEW APPLICATIONS
Research on sensor networks was originally motivated by
military applications. Examples of military sensor networks
range from large-scale acoustic surveillance systems for
ocean surveillance to small networks of unattended ground
sensors for ground target detection. However, the avail-
ability of low-cost sensors and communication networks has
resulted in the development of many other potential applica-
tions, from infrastructure security to industrial sensing. The
following are a few examples.
A. Infrastructure Security
Sensor networks can be used for infrastructure security
and counterterrorism applications. Critical buildings and
facilities such as power plants and communication centers
have to be protected from potential terrorists. Networks of
video, acoustic, and other sensors can be deployed around
these facilities. These sensors provide early detection of
possible threats. Improved coverage and detection and a
reduced false alarm rate can be achieved by fusing the data
from multiple sensors. Even though fixed sensors connected
by a fixed communication network protect most facilities,
wireless ad hoc networks can provide more flexibility and
additional coverage when needed. Sensor networks can also
be used to detect biological, chemical, and nuclear attacks.
Examples of such networks can be found in [26], which also
describes other uses of sensor networks.
B. Environment and Habitat Monitoring
Environment and habitat monitoring [27] is a natural can-
didate for applying sensor networks, since the variables to be
monitored, e.g., temperature, are usually distributed over a
large region. The recently started Center for Embedded Net-
work Sensing (CENS) [28], Los Angeles, CA, has a focus on
environmental and habitat monitoring. Environmental sen-
sors are used to study vegetation response to climatic trends
and diseases, and acoustic and imaging sensors can identify,
track, and measure the population of birds and other species.
On a very large scale, the System for the Vigilance of the
Amazon (SIVAM) [29] provides environmental monitoring,
drug trafficking monitoring, and air traffic control for the
Amazon Basin. Sponsored by the government of Brazil, this
large sensor network consists of different types of intercon-
nected sensors including radar, imagery, and environmental
sensors. The imagery sensors are space based, radars are lo-
cated on aircraft, and environmental sensors are mostly on
the ground. The communication network connecting the sen-
sors operates at different speeds. For example, high-speed
networks connect sensors on satellites and aircraft, while
low-speed networks connect the ground-based sensors.
C. Industrial Sensing
Commercial industry has long been interested in sensing
as a means of lowering cost and improving machine (and
perhaps user) performance and maintainability. Monitoring
machine “health” through determination of vibration or
wear and lubrication levels, and the insertion of sensors
into regions inaccessible by humans, are just two examples
of industrial applications of sensors. Several years ago,
the IEEE and the National Institute for Standards and
Technology (NIST) launched the P1451 Smart Transducer
CHONG AND KUMAR: SENSOR NETWORKS: EVOLUTION, OPPORTUNITIES, AND CHALLENGES
1251

----- Page 6 (native) -----
Interface Standard [30] to enable full plug-and-play of
sensors and networks in industrial environments. Factories
have continued to automate production and assembly lines
with remote sensing nets, implementing sophisticated
on-line quality control tests enabled by the sensors. Remote,
wireless sensors in particular can enable a factory to be in-
strumented after the fact to ensure and maintain compliance
with federal safety and guidelines while keeping installation
costs low.
Spectral sensors are one example of sensing in an in-
dustrial environment. From simple optical devices such as
optrodes and pH probes to true spectral devices that can
function as miniature spectrometers, optical sensors can
replace existing instruments and perform material property
and composition measurements. Optical sensing is also
facilitated by miniaturization, as low-cost charge-coupled
device (CCD) array devices and microengineering enable
smaller, smarter sensors. The goal of this and other industrial
sensing is to enable multipoint or matrix sensing: inputs
from hundreds or thousands of sensors feed into databases
that can be queried in any number of ways to show real-time
information on a large or small scale.
D. Traffic Control
Sensor networks have been used for vehicle traffic mon-
itoring and control for quite a while. Most traffic intersec-
tions have either overhead or buried sensors to detect vehicles
and control traffic lights. Furthermore, video cameras are fre-
quently used to monitor road segments with heavy traffic,
with the video sent to human operators at central locations.
However, these sensors and the communication network that
connect them are costly; thus, traffic monitoring is gener-
ally limited to a few critical points. Inexpensive wireless ad
hoc networks will completely change the landscape of traffic
monitoring and control. Cheap sensors with embedded net-
working capability can be deployed at every road intersection
to detect and count vehicle traffic and estimate its speed. The
sensors will communicate with neighboring nodes to eventu-
ally develop a “global traffic picture” which can be queried
by human operators or automatic controllers to generate con-
trol signals.
Another more radical concept [33] has the sensors attached
to each vehicle. As the vehicles pass each other, they ex-
change summary information on the location of traffic jams
and the speed and density of traffic, information that may
be generated by ground sensors. These summaries propagate
from vehicle to vehicle and can be used by drivers to avoid
traffic jams and plan alternative routes.
V. HARD PROBLEMS AND TECHNICAL CHALLENGES
Sensors networks in general pose considerable technical
problems in data processing, communication, and sensor
management (some of these were identified and researched
in the first DSN program). Because of potentially harsh, un-
certain, and dynamic environments, along with energy and
bandwidth constraints, wireless ad hoc networks pose addi-
tional technical challenges in network discovery, network
control and routing, collaborative information processing,
querying, and tasking.
A. Ad Hoc Network Discovery
Knowledge of the network is essential for a sensor in the
network to operate properly. Each node needs to know the
identity and location of its neighbors to support processing
and collaboration. In planned networks, the topology of the
network is usually known a priori. For ad hoc networks, the
network topology has to be constructed in real time, and up-
dated periodically as sensors fail or new sensors are deployed
[31]. In the case of a mobile network, since the topology is
always evolving, mechanisms should be provided for the dif-
ferent fixed and mobile sensors to discover each other. Global
knowledge generally is not needed, since each sensor node
interacts only with its neighbors. In addition to knowledge
of the topology, each sensor also needs to know its own lo-
cation [32]. When self-location by GPS is not feasible or too
expensive, other means of self-location, such as relative po-
sitioning algorithms, have to be provided.
B. Network Control and Routing
The network must deal with resources—energy, band-
width, and the processing power—that are dynamically
changing, and the system should operate autonomously,
changing its configuration as required. Since there is no
planned connectivity in ad hoc networks, connectivity must
emerge as needed from the algorithms and software. Since
communication links are unreliable and shadow fading
may eliminate links, the software and system design should
generate the required reliability. This requires research into
issues such as network size or the number of links and
nodes needed to provide adequate redundancy. Also, for
networks on the ground, RF transmission degrades with
distance much faster than in free space, which means that
communication distance and energy must be well managed.
Protocols must be internalized in design and not require
operator intervention.
Alternative approaches to traditional Internet methods
[such as Internet Protocols (IP)], including mobile IP, are
needed. One of the benefits of not requiring IP addresses
at each node is that one can deploy network devices in
very large numbers. Also, in contrast to the case of IP,
routes are built up from geoinformation, on an as-needed
basis, and optimized for survivability and energy. This is a
way to form connections on demand, for data-specific or
application-specific purposes. IP is not likely to be a viable
candidate in this context, since it needs to maintain routing
tables for the global topology, and because updates in a
dynamic sensor network environment incur heavy overhead
in terms of time, memory, and energy.
Survivability and adaptation to the environment are
ensured through deploying an adequate number of nodes
to provide redundancy in paths, and algorithms to find
1252
PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, VOL. 91, NO. 8, AUGUST 2003

----- Page 7 (native) -----
the right paths. Diffusion routing methods, which rely
only upon information at neighboring nodes, are a way to
address this [33], although such methods may not achieve
the information-theoretic capacity of a spatially distributed
wireless network [34]. Another important design issue is
the investigation of how system parameters such as network
size, and density of nodes per square mile affect the tradeoffs
between latency, reliability, and energy.
C. Collaborative Signal and Information Processing
The nodes in an ad hoc sensor network collaborate to
collect and process data to generate useful information.
Collaborative signal and information processing over a net-
work is a new area of research and is related to distributed
information fusion. Important technical issues include the
degree of information sharing between nodes and how nodes
fuse the information from other nodes. Processing data from
more sensors generally results in better performance but also
requires more communication resources (and, thus, energy).
Similarly, less information is lost when communicating
information at a lower level (e.g., raw signals), but requires
more bandwidth. Therefore, one needs to consider the mul-
tiple tradeoffs between performance and resource utilization
in collaborative signal and information processing using
microsensors.
When a node receives information from another node,
this information has to be combined and fused with local
information. Fusion approaches range from simple rules
of picking the best result to model-based techniques that
consider how the information is generated. Again there is a
tradeoff between performance and robustness. Simple fusion
rules are robust but suboptimal while more sophisticated and
higher performance fusion rules may be sensitive to the un-
derlying models. In a networked environment, information
may arrive at a node after traveling over multiple paths. The
fusion algorithm should recognize the dependency in the
information to be fused and avoid double counting. Keeping
track of data pedigree is an approach used in networks with
large and powerful sensor nodes, but this approach may not
be practical for ad hoc networks with limited processing and
communication resources.
Sensor networks are frequently used in the detection,
tracking, and classification of targets [13]. Data association
is an important problem when multiple targets are present in
a small region. Each node must associate its measurements
of the environment with individual targets. In addition, tar-
gets detected by one node have to be associated with targets
detected by other nodes to avoid duplication and enable
fusion. Optimal data association is computationally expen-
sive and requires significant bandwidth for communication.
Thus distributed data association is also a tradeoff between
performance and resource utilization, requiring distributed
data association algorithms tailored to sensor nets.
Other processing issues include how to meet mission
latency and reliability requirements, and how to maxi-
mize sensor network operational life. A dense network
of cheap sensors may allow spatial sampling without the
need for expensive algorithms. These algorithms must be
asynchronous, as the processor speeds and communication
capabilities may vary or even disappear and reappear. Sensor
nodes must determine results with progressively increasing
accuracy, and so the processes can be terminated when
enough precision is gained.
D. Tasking and Querying
A sensor field is like a database with many unique features.
Data is dynamically acquired from the environment, as op-
posed to being entered by an operator. The data is distributed
across nodes, and geographically dispersed nodes are con-
nected by unreliable links. These features render the database
view more challenging, particularly for military applications
given the low-latency, real-time, and high-reliability require-
ments of the battlefield.
It is important that users have a simple interface to inter-
actively task and query the sensor network. An example of
a human-network interface is a handheld unit that accepts
speech input. The users should be able to command access
to information, e.g., operational priority and type of target,
while hiding details about individual sensors. One challenge
is to develop a language for querying and tasking, as well
as a database that can be readily queried. [35]. Other chal-
lenges include finding efficient distributed mechanisms for
query and task compilation and placement, data organization,
and caching.
Mobile platforms can carry sensors and query devices. As
a result, seamless internetworking between mobile and fixed
devices in the absence of any infrastructure is a critical and
unique requirement for sensor networks. For example, an air-
borne querying device could initiate a query, and then tell the
ground sensor network that it will be flying over a specific lo-
cation after a minute, where the response to the query should
be exfiltrated.
E. Security
Since the sensor network may operate in a hostile
environment, security should be built into the design and
not as an afterthought. Network techniques are needed to
provide low-latency, survivable, and secure networks. Low
probability of detection communication is needed for net-
works because sensors are being envisioned for use behind
enemy lines. For the same reasons, the network should be
protected again intrusion and spoofing.
VI. SOME RECENT RESULTS
Research sponsored by the DARPA SensIT and other
programs has addressed the challenges described previously.
The following are examples of some recent research results.
A. Localized Algorithms and Directed Diffusion [33]
As discussed previously, even though centralized al-
gorithms that collect data from multiple sensor nodes
CHONG AND KUMAR: SENSOR NETWORKS: EVOLUTION, OPPORTUNITIES, AND CHALLENGES
1253

----- Page 8 (native) -----
can potentially provide the best performance, they are
undesirable because of high communication cost and lack
of robustness and reliability. In localized (or distributed)
algorithms, the sensor nodes only communicate with sensors
within a neighborhood. Localized algorithms are attractive
because they are robust to network changes and node
failures. The communication cost also scales well with
increasing network size. However, localized algorithms are
difficult to design because of the potentially complicated
relationship between local behavior and global behavior.
Algorithms that are locally optimal may not perform well in
a global sense. How to optimally distribute the computation
of a centralized algorithm in a distributed implementation
continues to be a research problem.
Estrin et al. [33] developed directed diffusion routing al-
gorithms that belong to the class of localized algorithms. Dif-
fusion is a form of broadcast routing that does not specify a
destination node address (such as the IP address in Internet
protocols). Packets are forwarded to neighboring nodes, and
a direction or gradient is overlaid to control the broadcast or
forwarding of the packet, which eventually reaches the desti-
nation. The gradient could be based on geographic informa-
tion or other attributes such as power, congestion, and other
resources available in the network nodes. For example, if a
user application based at location
, is interested in events
occurring at and around location
, then the nodes around
would forward information packets to neighboring nodes
that are in the direction of
; and intermediate nodes would
also forward to their neighbors in the direction of
. Gradi-
ents can also be established in terms of information producers
and consumers via publish–subscribe mechanisms, and con-
sumer interests in specific information types propagated over
the network. Intermediate nodes may cache or transform the
data locally to increase efficiency, robustness and scalability.
Research results indicate the efficiency of directed dif-
fusion. It requires considerably less energy than standard
routing mechanisms such as flooding and omniscient mul-
ticast. For instance, simulation and experimental results of
directed diffusion in representative sensor networks [36] in-
dicate that multicast protocols (such as omniscient multicast
[36], which is an IP-based multicast routing technique) re-
quires less than half the energy required for flooding, and
diffusion requires only 60% of the energy needed for even
multicast. These savings are achieved by eliminating paths
spent delivering redundant data, and from in-network aggre-
gation such as through intermediate nodes suppressing du-
plicate location estimates.
B. Distributed Tracking in Wireless Ad Hoc Networks [37]
Tracking mobile targets is an important application of
sensor networks for both military and defense systems.
Even though target tracking has been widely studied for
sensor networks with large nodes and distributed tracking
algorithms are available [13], tracking in ad hoc networks
with microsensors poses different challenges due to com-
munication, processing and energy constraints. In particular,
the sensors should collaborate and share data to exploit
the benefits of sensor data fusion, but this should be done
without sending data requests to and collecting data from
all sensors, thus overloading the network and using up the
energy supply.
Zhao et al. [38] addressed the dynamic sensor col-
laboration problem in distributed tracking to determine
dynamically which sensor is most appropriate to perform
the sensing, what needs to be sensed, and to whom to
communicate the information. They developed the infor-
mation-driven sensor querying (IDSQ) approach, enabling
collaboration based upon resource constraints and the cost
of transmitting information. Each sensor computes the pre-
dicted information utility of a piece of nonlocal sensor data
and uses this measure to determine from which sensor to
request data. Information utility functions employed include
entropy, Mahalanobis distance, and a measure on expected
posterior distribution. This approach was demonstrated with
simulations as well as experimental data collected from the
field.
As discussed in Section V-C, data association is needed
in tracking multiple targets that are close to each other rela-
tive to the sensor measurement error. Again, distributed data
association algorithms are available for networks with large
nodes but are computationally too expensive to implement
on ad hoc networks. An approximate approach for cheap data
association (called identity management) was proposed and
demonstrated in [39].
C. Distributed Classification in Sensor Networks Using
Mobile Agents [40]
In a traditional sensor network, data is collected by indi-
vidual sensors and sent to (possibly multiple) fusion nodes
for processing. Because the bandwidth of a wireless sensor
network is typically lower than that of a wired network, a
sensor network’s communications requirements may exceed
their capacities. Mobile agents have been proposed as a so-
lution to this dilemma [40]. In a mobile-agent-based DSN,
data stay at each local site or sensor, while the integration or
fusion code is moved to the data. Communication bandwidth
requirement may be reduced if the agent is smaller in size
than the data. If this assumption holds, then the sensor net-
work is more scalable, since the performance of the network
is not affected by an increase in the number of sensors. The
network can also adapt better to the network load and agents
can be programmed to carry specific fusion processes. Dis-
tributed target classification has been used to demonstrate the
effectiveness of the approach.
VII. CONCLUSION
When the concept of DSNs was first introduced more than
two decades ago, it was more a vision than a technology
ready to be exploited. The early researchers in DSN were
severely handicapped by the state of the art in sensors,
computers, and communication networks. Even though the
1254
PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, VOL. 91, NO. 8, AUGUST 2003

----- Page 9 (native) -----
benefits of sensor networks were quickly recognized, their
application was mostly limited to large military systems.
Technological advances in the past decade have completely
changed the situation. MEMS technology, more reliable
wireless communication, and low-cost manufacturing have
resulted in small, inexpensive, and powerful sensors with
embedded processing and wireless networking capability.
Such wireless sensor networks can be used in many new
applications, ranging from environmental monitoring to in-
dustrial sensing, as well as traditional military applications.
In fact, the applications are only limited by our imagination.
Networks of small, possibly microscopic sensors embedded
in the fabric of society: in buildings and machinery, and even
on people, performing automated continual and discrete
monitoring, could drastically enhance our understanding of
our physical environment.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Mr. D. Shepherd, of
Strategic Analysis, Inc., for the immense help provided in
the preparation of this paper. C.-Y. Chong would like to
acknowledge the support of Dr. R. Kahn of the Corporation
for National Research Initiatives (CNRI), whose vision
started the DSN program, and the late Dr. B. Leiner of
the Research Institute for Advanced Computer Science
(RIACS), who guided the program when he was at DARPA.
REFERENCES
[1] “21 ideas for the 21st century,” Business Week, pp. 78–167, Aug. 30,
1999.
[2] “10 emerging technologies that will change the world,” Technol.
Rev., vol. 106, no. 1, pp. 33–49, Feb. 2003.
[3] C. E. Nishimura and D. M. Conlon, “IUSS dual use: Monitoring
whales and earthquakes using SOSUS,” Mar. Technol. Soc. J., vol.
27, no. 4, pp. 13–21, 1994.
[4] Proceedings of the Distributed Sensor Nets Workshop.
Pittsburgh,
PA: Dept. Comput. Sci., Carnegie Mellon Univ., 1978.
[5] R. F. Sproull and D. Cohen, “High-level protocols,” Proc. IEEE, vol.
66, pp. 1371–1386, Nov. 1978.
[6] P. Nii, E. Feigenbaum, J. Anton, and A. Rockmore, “Signal-to-
symbol transformation: HASP/SIAP case study,” AI Mag., vol. 3,
pp. 23–36, Spring 1982.
[7] R. R. Smith, “The contract net protocol: High-level communication
and control in a distributed problem solver,” IEEE Trans. Comput.,
vol. 29, pp. 1104–1113, Dec. 1980.
[8] V. Lesser and D. Corkill, “Functionally accurate, cooperative dis-
tributed systems,” IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern., vol. 11, pp.
81–96, Jan./Feb. 1981.
[9] R. B. Wesson, F. A. Hayes-Roth, J. W. Burge, C. Stasz, and C. A.
Sunshine, “Network structures for distributed situation assessment,”
IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern., vol. SMC-11, pp. 5–23, Jan./Feb.
1981.
[10] R. Rashid and G. Robertson, “Accent: A communication oriented
network operating system kernel,” in Proc. 8th Symp. Operating
System Principles, 1981, pp. 64–75.
[11] R. Rashid, D. Julin, D. Orr, R. Sanzi, R. Baron, A. Forin, D. Golub,
and M. Jones, “Mach: A system software kernel,” in 34th Computer
Society Int. Conf. (COMPCON), San Francisco, CA, 1989.
[12] C. Myers, A. Oppenheim, R. Davis, and W. Dove, “Knowledge-
based speech analysis and enhancement,” presented at the Int. Conf.
Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, San Diego, CA, 1984.
[13] C. Y. Chong, S. Mori, and K. C. Chang, “Distributed multitarget mul-
tisensor tracking,” in Multitarget Multisensor Tracking: Advanced
Applications, Y. Bar-Shalom, Ed.
Norwood, MA: Artech House,
1990, pp. 247–295.
[14]
, “Distributed tracking in distributed sensor networks,” pre-
sented at the Amer. Control Conf., Seattle, WA, 1986.
[15] R. T. Lacoss, “Distributed mixed sensor aircraft tracking,” presented
at the Amer. Control Conf., Minneapolis, MN, 1987.
[16] “Distributed sensor networks,” MIT Lincoln Laboratory, Lexington,
MA, Rep. No. ESD-TR-88-175, 1986.
[17] V. R. Lesser and D. D. Corkill, “The distributed vehicle monitoring
testbed: A tool for investigating distributed problem solving net-
works,” AI Mag., vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 15–33, Fall 1983.
[18] D. S. Alberts, J. J. Garska, and F. P. Stein. (1999) Network Centric
Warfare: Developing and Leveraging Information Superiority [On-
line] Available: http://www.dodccrp.org/NCW/ncw.html
[19] (1995) The cooperative engagement capability. [Online] Available:
http://techdigest.jhuapl.edu/td1604/APLteam.pdf
[20] Y. Carts-Powell. (2000, Apr.) Unattended ground sensors stop and
analyze the roses. OE Rep. [Online] Available: http://www.spie.org/
web/oer/april/apr00/cover2.html
[21] J. W. Gardner, V. K Varadan, and O. O. Awadelkarim, Microsensors,
MEMS and Smart Devices.
New York: Wiley, 2001.
[22] S. Kumar and D. Shepherd, “SensIT: Sensor information technology
for the warfighter,” in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. on Information Fusion,
2001, pp. TuC1-3–TuC1-9.
[23] J. Corella, “Tactical automated security system (TASS): Air force
expeditionary security,” presented at the SPIE Conf. Unattended
Ground Sensor Technologies and Applications, Orlando, FL, 2003.
[24] IEEE 802.15 Working Group for WPAN. [Online] Available: http://
grouper.ieee.org/groups/802/15/
[25] J. M. Kahn, R. H. Katz, and K. S. J. Pister, “Mobile networking for
smart dust,” in Proc. ACM/IEEE Int. Conf. Mobile Computing and
Networking (MobiCom), 1999, pp. 271–278.
[26] R. Hills. (2001, July/Aug.) Sensing for danger. Sci. Technol. Rep.
[Online] Available: http://www.llnl.gov/str/JulAug01/Hills.html
[27] D. Steere, A. Baptista, D. McNamee, C. Pu, and J. Walpole, “Re-
search challenges in environmental observation and forecasting sys-
tems,” in Proc. 6th Int. Conf. Mobile Computing and Networking
(MOBICOMM), 2000, pp. 292–299.
[28] B. Charny. (2002, Dec.) Wireless research senses the future.
ZDNet News [Online] Available: http://zdnet.com.com/2100-1105-
976377.html
[29] D.
Jensen.
(2002,
June)
SIVAM:
Communication,
naviga-
tion and surveillance for the Amazon. Avionics Mag. [Online]
Available:
http://www.aviationtoday.com/reports/avionics/pre-
vious/0602/0602sivam.htm
[30] K. Lee, “Wireless sensing and IEEE 1451,” presented at the Sensor
Conf./Expo 2001, Chicago, IL.
[31] B. Deb, S. Bhatnagar, and B. Nath, “A topology discovery algorithm
for sensor networks with applications to network management,”
Dept. Comput. Sci., Rutgers Univ., Tech. Rep. DCS-TR-441, 2001.
[32] J. Hightower and G. Borriello, “Location systems for ubiquitous
computing,” IEEE Computer, vol. 34, pp. 57–66, Aug. 2001.
[33] D. Estrin, R. Govindan, J. Heidemann, and S. Kumar, “Next century
challenges: Scalable coordination in sensor networks,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Mobile Computing and Networking (MOBICOM), 1999, pp.
263–270.
[34] P. Gupta and P. R. Kumar, “The capacity of wireless networks,” IEEE
Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 46, pp. 388–404, Mar. 2000.
[35] Y. Yao and J. E. Gehrke, “Query processing in sensors networks,” in
Proc. 1st Biennial Conf. Innovative Data Systems Research (CIDR
2003), Asilomar, CA, 2003.
[36] C. Intanagonwiwat, R. Govindan, D. Estrin, J. Heidemann, and
F. Silva, “Directed diffusion for wireless sensor networking,”
IEEE/ACM Trans. Networking, vol. 11, pp. 2–16, Feb. 2002.
[37] C. Y. Chong, F. Zhao, S. Mori, and S. Kumar, “Distributed tracking in
wireless ad hoc sensor networks,” in Proc. 6th Int. Conf. Information
Fusion, 2003, pp. 431–438.
[38] F. Zhao, J. Shin, and J. Reich, “Information-driven dynamic sensor
collaboration for tracking applications,” IEEE Signal Processing
Mag., vol. 19, pp. 61–72, Mar. 2002.
[39] J. Shin, L. J. Guibas, and F. Zhao, “A distributed algorithm for man-
aging multi-target identities in wireless ad-hoc sensor networks,”
presented at the 2nd Int. Workshop Information Processing in Sensor
Networks (IPSN’03), Palo Alto, CA, 2003.
CHONG AND KUMAR: SENSOR NETWORKS: EVOLUTION, OPPORTUNITIES, AND CHALLENGES
1255

----- Page 10 (native) -----
[40] H. Qi, S. S. Iyengar, and K. Chakrabarty, “Multi-resolution data in-
tegration using mobile agents in distributed sensor networks,” IEEE
Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern. C, vol. 31, pp. 383–391, Aug. 2001.
Chee-Yee Chong (Member, IEEE) received
the S.B., S.M., and Ph.D. degrees in electrical
engineering from the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology, Cambridge, in 1969, 1970, and
1973, respectively.
From 1973 to 1980, he was on the faculty of the
School of Electrical Engineering, Georgia Insti-
tute of Technology, Atlanta. From 1980 to 1991,
he was with Advanced Decision Systems (ADS),
Mountain View, CA. From 1991 to 2003, he was
with Booz Allen Hamilton, San Francisco, CA.
He is currently Chief Scientist at Alphatech, Inc., San Diego, CA. He par-
ticipated in the Distributed Sensor Networks (DSN) program for the Defense
Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) in the 1980s and developed
one of the first algorithms for distributed multiple-hypothesis tracking. He
is the author or coauthor of over 100 research technical reports, confer-
ence papers, journal papers, and book chapters. His research interests in-
clude centralized and distributed tracking and fusion, resource planning and
scheduling, reasoning with uncertainty, distributed decision making, and in-
tegration of system theory with artificial intelligence.
Dr. Chong is on the board of directors of the International Society of In-
formation Fusion (ISIF) and was one of its founders. He has been on the
organizing or program committees of the International Conferences of In-
formation Fusion, starting with the first one in 1998, and served on the Pro-
gram Committee for the American Automatic Control Conference. He is
also on the board of editors of the International Journal of Infusion Fusion.
He was an Associate Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATIC
CONTROL.
Srikanta P. Kumar (Senior Member, IEEE)
received the B.S. degree (Honors) in physics
in 1971 from Bangalore University, Bangalore,
India, the B.E. and M.E. degrees from the Indian
Institute of Science, Bangalore, India, in 1974
and 1976, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree
in engineering and applied science from Yale
University, New Haven, CT, in 1981.
From 1981 to 1982, he served on the faculty
of the State University of New York, Buffalo.
From 1982 to 1985, he served on the faculty
of the Electrical, Computer, and Systems Engineering Department of the
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY. From 1985 to 1998, he was a
tenured Faculty Member in electrical and computer science and engineering
at Northwestern University, Evanston, IL. While at Northwestern, he was
the Cofounder and Founding Director of the Executive Masters Program
on Information Technology, an interdisciplinary program involving the
McCormick School of Engineering, the Kellogg Business School, and
the Communications Department. He has also held Visiting Professor
positions at Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, and University
of Maryland campuses at College Park and Baltimore County. He is
currently Program Manager at the Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency (DARPA), Arlington, VA, and Senior Technical Advisor in the
Information Technology Laboratory of the National Institute of Standards
and Technology (NIST), Gaithersburg, MD. At DARPA, he formulated the
technical framework for research and technology development for several
programs; these include the Sensor Information Technology (SensIT)
program, the Network Modeling and Simulation (NMS) program, and
the Bio-Computation program. He has been also responsible for the
management and execution of these programs. He has published over 80
technical papers.
1256
PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, VOL. 91, NO. 8, AUGUST 2003