

----- Page 1 (native) -----
THELANCETNEUROLOGY-D-17-00665 revision 1 
                                                                        Submitted; confidential 
 
Page 1 of 50 
Diagnosis of Multiple Sclerosis: 2017 Revisions of the “McDonald” Criteria 
 
Alan J Thompson, Brenda L Banwell, Frederik Barkhof, William M Carroll, Timothy Coetzee, 
Giancarlo Comi, Jorge Correale, Franz Fazekas, Massimo Filippi, Mark S Freedman, Kazuo 
Fujihara, Steven L Galetta, Hans Peter Hartung, Ludwig Kappos, Fred D Lublin, Ruth Ann 
Marrie, Aaron E Miller, David H Miller, Xavier Montalban, Ellen M Mowry, Per Soelberg-
Sorensen, Mar Tintoré, Anthony L Traboulsee, Maria Trojano, Bernard MJ Uitdehaag, Sandra 
Vukusic, Emmanuelle Waubant, Brian G Weinshenker, Stephen C Reingold, Jeffrey A Cohen 
 
Faculty of Brain Sciences, University College London, London, UK (Prof AJ Thompson MD) 
Division of Neurology, Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Perelman School of Medicine, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA (Prof BL Banwell MD) 
Radiology & Nuclear Medicine Department, VU Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands 
and Institutes of Neurology and Healthcare Engineering, University College London, London, 
UK (Prof F Barkhof MD) 
Neurology Department, Sir Charles Gairdner Hospital, Perth, Australia (Prof WM Carroll MD) 
National Multiple Sclerosis Society, New York, NY, USA (T Coetzee PhD) 
Department of Neurology, Vita-Salute San Raffaele University-Ospedale San Raffaele, Milan, 
Italy (Prof G Comi MD) 
Institute for Neurological Research Dr. Raúl Carrea, FLENI, Buenos Aires, Argentina (Prof JD 
Correale MD) 
Department of Neurology, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria (Prof F Fazekas MD) 
The Neuroimaging Research Unit (NRU), San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Vita-Salute San 
Raffaele University, Milan, Italy (Prof M Filippi MD, FEAN) 
Department of Medicine, The Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, 
ON, Canada (Prof MS Freedman MD)

----- Page 2 (native) -----
THELANCETNEUROLOGY-D-17-00665 revision 1 
                                                                        Submitted; confidential 
 
Page 2 of 50 
Department of Multiple Sclerosis Therapeutics, Fukushima Medical University School of 
Medicine and Multiple Sclerosis & Neuromyelitis Optica Center, Southern TOHOKU Research 
Institute for Neuroscience, Koriyama, Fukushima, Japan (Prof K Fujihara MD) 
Department of Neurology, New York University Langone Medical Center, New York, NY, USA 
(Prof SL Galetta MD) 
Department of Neurology, Medical Faculty, Heinrich-Heine-University, Düsseldorf, Germany 
(Prof. HP Hartung MD) 
Neurologic Clinic and Policlinic, Departments of Medicine, Clinical Research, Biomedicine and 
Biomedical Engineering, University Hospital and University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland (Prof L 
Kappos MD) 
Corinne Goldsmith Dickinson Center for MS, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, NY, USA (Prof. FD Lublin MD, Prof AE Miller MD) 
Departments of Internal Medicine and Community Health Sciences, Rady Faculty of Health 
Sciences, Max Rady College of Medicine, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada (Prof 
RA Marrie MD, PhD) 
Queen Square MS Centre, Institute of Neurology, University College London, London, UK (Prof 
DH Miller MD) 
Centre d'Esclerosi Múltiple de Catalunya (Cemcat), Vall d’Hebron University Hospital, Barcelona, 
Spain (Prof X Montalban MD, M Tintoré MD) and Division of Neurology, University of Toronto, 
St Michael’s Hospital, Toronto, Canada (Prof X Montalban) 
Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA (EM Mowry MD) 
Danish Multiple Sclerosis Center, University of Copenhagen, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, 
Denmark (Prof P Soelberg Sorensen, MD) 
Division of Neurology, Department of Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, 
Canada (AL Traboulsee MD)

----- Page 3 (native) -----
THELANCETNEUROLOGY-D-17-00665 revision 1 
                                                                        Submitted; confidential 
 
Page 3 of 50 
Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Neurosciences and Sense Organs, University of Bari, 
Bari, Italy (Prof M Trojano MD) 
Department of Neurology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands (Prof 
BMJ Uitdehaag MD) 
Service de Neurologie, sclérose en plaques, pathologies de la myéline et neuro-inflammation, 
Hôpital Neurologique, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Bron, France; Centre des Neurosciences de 
Lyon, INSERM 1028 et CNRS UMR5292, Lyon, France; Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, 
Faculté de Médecine Lyon-Est, Villeurbanne, Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes, France (Prof S Vukusic 
MD) 
Department of Neurology, University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA 
(Prof E Waubant, MD) 
Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA (Prof BG Weinshenker MD) 
Scientific & Clinical Review Associates LLC, Salisbury, CT, USA (SC Reingold, PhD) 
Neurologic Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA (Prof JA Cohen MD) 
 
Correspondence to: 
Prof Jeffrey A Cohen, Neurologic Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH 44195 USA 
cohenj@ccf.org 
 
Title character count: 
74 (with spaces) 
Abstract word count: 
187 (150 maximum) 
Word count: 
4598 (4500 maximum) 
References 
99 (100 maximum) 
Tables: 
1 
Panels 
6 
Figures: 
0

----- Page 4 (native) -----
THELANCETNEUROLOGY-D-17-00665 revision 1 
                                                                        Submitted; confidential 
 
Page 4 of 50 
Abstract 
 
The 2010 McDonald criteria for diagnosis of multiple sclerosis (MS) are widely used in research 
and clinical practice. Scientific advances in the past seven years suggest that they may no 
longer provide the most up-to-date guidance for clinicians and researchers. The International 
Panel on Diagnosis of Multiple Sclerosis reviewed the 2010 McDonald Criteria and 
recommended revisions. The 2017 McDonald Criteria continue to apply primarily to patients 
experiencing a typical clinically isolated syndrome (CIS), define what is needed to fulfill 
dissemination in time and space, and stress the need for no better explanation for the 
presentation. The following changes were made: in patients with a typical CIS and clinical or 
MRI demonstration of dissemination in space, the presence of cerebrospinal-fluid-specific 
oligoclonal bands allows an MS diagnosis; symptomatic lesions can be used to demonstrate 
dissemination in space and/or time in patients with supratentorial, infratentorial, or spinal cord 
syndrome; and cortical lesions can be used to demonstrate dissemination in space. 
Recommended research to further refine the criteria includes (i) inclusion of optic nerve 
involvement; (ii) validation in diverse populations; and (iii) incorporation of advanced imaging, 
neurophysiological, and body fluid markers.

----- Page 5 (native) -----
THELANCETNEUROLOGY-D-17-00665 revision 1 
                                                                        Submitted; confidential 
 
Page 5 of 50 
Introduction 
 
Diagnostic criteria for multiple sclerosis (MS) have evolved over time, with the most recent 
recommendations from the International Panel on Diagnosis of MS (the Panel) appearing more 
than six years ago.1-5 The increasing incorporation of paraclinical assessments, especially 
imaging, to supplement clinical findings has allowed earlier, more sensitive, and more specific 
diagnosis.6 New data, emerging technology, and evolving consensus necessitate a periodic re-
examination of diagnostic criteria and their utility. The Panel reconvened under the auspices of 
the International Advisory Committee on Clinical Trials in MS (sponsored by the U.S. National 
MS Society and the European Committee for Treatment and Research in MS) for two meetings 
(November 2-5, 2016, Philadelphia and May 20-21, 2017, Berlin). Herein, we discuss issues 
related to misdiagnosis, differential diagnosis, and appropriate application of the McDonald 
(International) Criteria, with a particular emphasis on diagnosis in diverse populations and in 
patients with atypical presentations. We present recommendations concerning the MS 
diagnostic process, recommend specific revisions to the McDonald Criteria, and outline future 
research to refine the McDonald Criteria. 
 
Conduct of the Panel meetings and considerations related to the 2017 revisions to the 
McDonald Criteria 
 
Convening the Panel meetings was motivated by new data concerning (i) the performance of 
the 2010 McDonald Criteria in diverse populations; (ii) the relationship between MS and other 
diseases with potentially overlapping clinical and imaging features such as is seen in 
neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders (NMOSD); (iii) challenges in making the diagnosis in 
individuals with non-classical presentations; (iv) the frequency and consequences of 
misdiagnosis; and (v) cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and other paraclinical tests related to diagnosis

----- Page 6 (native) -----
THELANCETNEUROLOGY-D-17-00665 revision 1 
                                                                        Submitted; confidential 
 
Page 6 of 50 
of MS. The meetings were further informed by the proposed 2016 revisions of magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) criteria for diagnosis of MS by the European Magnetic Resonance 
Imaging in MS network (2016 MAGNIMS Criteria).7  
The Panel included international representation and expertise in clinical, imaging, and 
laboratory aspects of MS diagnosis. At the meetings, Panel members reviewed past criteria and 
made brief presentations covering proposed revisions. Relevant published and unpublished 
data guided subsequent group discussion and consensus building on proposed revisions. A 
priori rules to handle issues for which consensus could not be reached were specified. 
The Panel agreed that the 2010 McDonald Criteria performed well based on their 
utilization in clinical and research settings and in regulatory approval of multiple MS 
medications; major changes were not anticipated. Rather, the proposed changes outlined below 
were intended to (i) simplify or clarify components of the 2010 McDonald Criteria (Panels 1 and 
2); (ii) facilitate earlier diagnosis of MS when MS was likely but not diagnosable with the 2010 
McDonald Criteria; and (iii) preserve the specificity of the 2010 McDonald Criteria and promote 
their appropriate application to reduce the frequency of misdiagnosis. The Panel strived to 
ensure that proposed changes did not weaken the Criteria and were supported by reasonable 
evidence, not merely expert opinion. 
 
Utility and applicability of the McDonald Criteria 
 
Before considering potential revisions of the 2010 McDonald Criteria, the Panel reviewed issues 
related to MS diagnosis, appropriate utilization of the McDonald Criteria, and their applicability 
across patient populations. 
 
Misdiagnosis and differential diagnosis

----- Page 7 (native) -----
THELANCETNEUROLOGY-D-17-00665 revision 1 
                                                                        Submitted; confidential 
 
Page 7 of 50 
Misdiagnosis of MS remains an issue in clinical practice.8-11 The Panel identified several factors 
that potentially increase this risk. MS has heterogeneous clinical and imaging manifestations, 
which differ between patients and change within individual patients over time. There is no single 
pathognomonic clinical feature or diagnostic test; diagnosis of MS relies on the integration of 
clinical, imaging, and laboratory findings. MRI abnormalities associated with other diseases and 
non-specific MRI findings, which are common in the general population, can be mistaken for MS. 
The increasingly strong focus on timely diagnosis to alleviate uncertainty for patients and allow 
initiation of disease-modifying therapy (DMT) also may increase the risk of misdiagnosis.12 
As with any diagnostic criteria, a tradeoff exists between sensitivity (to allow efficient 
diagnosis in patients having MS) and specificity (avoiding erroneous diagnosis in patients who 
do not have MS).12 The positive and negative predictive power of diagnostic tests depend on the 
pre-test probability (likelihood) of the disorder, which has important implications for interpreting 
the available data concerning the utility of such tests (Panel 2). 
The clinician must remain vigilant for clinical features or diagnostic test results that 
suggest the possibility of an alternative diagnosis, so-called red flags.13-16 A recent multicenter 
case series demonstrated that a wide range of conditions can be mistaken for MS.11 Aside from 
NMOSD, the most frequent reason for misdiagnosis as MS was misinterpretation of nonspecific 
symptoms, neurologic signs, or MRI findings in common disorders (for example, migraine), 
which when reviewed carefully, in most patients, would not fulfill the 2010 McDonald Criteria. 
Misdiagnosis had harmful consequences in some patients, emphasizing the importance of 
appropriate application of the McDonald Criteria (Panel 3). 
Interpretation and integration of the history, physical examination, and results of imaging 
and laboratory testing by a clinician with expertise in MS remain fundamental in making a 
reliable diagnosis of MS or an alternative diagnosis. It is important to re-emphasize that the 
McDonald Criteria should only be applied in patients with a typical clinically isolated syndrome 
(CIS, Panel 1), that is, patients who already have a high likelihood of having MS. Care should

----- Page 8 (native) -----
THELANCETNEUROLOGY-D-17-00665 revision 1 
                                                                        Submitted; confidential 
 
Page 8 of 50 
be exercised in accepting historical events in the absence of contemporaneous or current 
objective evidence providing corroboration of those events (Panel 3). As with past McDonald 
Criteria, the Panel’s discussion emphasized rigor in interpreting clinical features and results of 
diagnostic studies to ensure the absence of atypical features and that there is no better 
diagnosis. 
 
Applicability of the McDonald Criteria in diverse populations 
Development of the McDonald Criteria was largely based on data from adult Caucasian 
European and North American populations with a typical CIS14 and age less than 50 years. The 
applicability of the 2010 McDonald Criteria has been reported in patients from Canada,17 Italy,18 
the Netherlands,19 Spain,20 and Russia.21 Additional studies concerning the applicability of the 
2010 McDonald Criteria in Asian,22-24 Middle Eastern,25,26 and Latin American27 populations have 
been published since 2010, though tended to be small. Based on those data, there is no 
evidence that the 2010 McDonald Criteria cannot be used in these populations. Vigilance is 
needed to exclude alternative diagnoses, particularly NMOSD in higher risk populations. In Latin 
America, infectious diseases and nutritional deficiencies also remain important.28 
Several studies support the applicability of the 2010 McDonald Criteria in children.29-36 The 
McDonald Criteria are generally most applicable for patients 11 years of age or older; special 
care is needed in patients younger than 11 years old in whom the likelihood of MS is lower.30 
Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM) is more common in children than in adults. 
Although ADEM typically is monophasic, some children with ADEM have recurrent clinical 
episodes and/or MRI evidence of accrual of new lesions, leading to MS diagnosis.37 The Panel 
agreed that the McDonald Criteria should not be applied to children at the time of ADEM 
presentation and that occurrence of a subsequent attack characteristic of MS is necessary to 
diagnose MS.38 Alternative diagnoses, including NMOSD, need to be excluded in all children in 
whom the diagnosis of MS is being considered. In the future, testing for antibodies reactive with

----- Page 9 (native) -----
THELANCETNEUROLOGY-D-17-00665 revision 1 
                                                                        Submitted; confidential 
 
Page 9 of 50 
myelin-oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG) may be useful to aid diagnosis of children with 
NMOSD who are aquaporin-4 (AQP4)-seronegative, children with ADEM followed by recurrent 
optic neuritis, and children with chronic relapsing optic neuritis.39-41 Children with syndromes 
having features overlapping ADEM, NMOSD, and MS require particular care to reach a final 
diagnosis. 
Although MS typically presents at age 20-50 years, approximately 0.5% of adults with MS 
have symptom onset at age 60 years or older.42,43 Older individuals are more likely to have a 
progressive course at presentation, either progressive from onset or following retrospectively 
recognized attacks, but occasionally they present with an acute attack. Careful attention to 
alternative diagnoses and particularly comorbidities is necessary. Age-related vascular white 
matter lesions may occasionally be periventricular, and seeking more than one periventricular 
lesion with morphology characteristic of MS may be prudent in this setting. Also, consideration 
of MS in an older individual is an example of a diagnostic scenario for which spinal cord MRI 
and/or CSF examination looking for findings supportive of MS or suggesting a different 
diagnosis are advised. With these caveats, the Panel agreed that the 2017 McDonald Criteria 
are likely to be applicable in older patients, but recommended further studies to support this 
conclusion. 
 
Neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders 
Substantial data concerning NMOSD have emerged since publication of the 2010 McDonald 
Criteria. Although clinical, imaging, and CSF features of MS and NMOSD may overlap, they are 
now understood to be distinct disorders.44 Diagnosis of NMOSD has been facilitated by the 
development and use of serologic testing for antibodies reactive with the AQP4 water channel 
and validation of the antibodies not only as a marker of NMOSD but also as a pathogenic 
factor.45,46 The range of recognized clinical and MRI manifestations of AQP4-associated 
NMOSD is wide and still evolving. Recent data suggest that some AQP4-seronegative patients

----- Page 10 (native) -----
THELANCETNEUROLOGY-D-17-00665 revision 1 
                                                                        Submitted; confidential 
 
Page 10 of 50 
with NMOSD features have antibodies reactive with MOG.47-51 However, testing for anti-MOG 
antibodies is not yet commercially available, and diagnostic sensitivity and specificity have not 
been fully validated. 
Panel members agreed that the 2010 McDonald Criteria and 2015 International Panel for 
NMO Diagnosis Criteria52 largely distinguish MS and NMOSD, though uncertain cases can 
occur, particularly with AQP4-seronegative patients. Because the treatments for MS and 
NMOSD are different (for example, interferon-beta, fingolimod, and natalizumab can exacerbate 
NMOSD53), the Panel recommended that NMOSD should be considered in any patient being 
evaluated for MS. Serologic testing for AQP4 and, when commercially available, MOG should 
be performed in all patients with features suggesting NMOSD (such as bilateral optic neuritis, 
severe brainstem involvement, longitudinally extensive spinal cord lesions, large cerebral 
lesions, or normal brain MRI or findings not fulfilling dissemination in space [DIS]), and 
considered in groups at higher risk for NMOSD (such as African-American, Asian, Latin 
American, and pediatric patients). 
 
Role of MRI in MS diagnosis 
 
MRI has been increasingly utilized to support the diagnosis of MS and to look for atypical 
radiological features arguing against MS. MAGNIMS and the Consortium of MS Centers 
recently proposed standardized MRI protocols for the diagnostic process, to determine 
prognosis, and for follow-up.54-56 Brain and spinal cord MRI remain the most useful paraclinical 
tests to aid the diagnosis of MS and can substitute for clinical findings in determination of 
dissemination in space (DIS) and/or time (DIT) in patients with a typical CIS. Involvement in four 
areas (periventricular, cortical/juxtacortical, infratentorial, and spinal cord) are characteristic of 
MS and can be utilized to fulfill the criteria for DIS. See Rovira A et al.55 for a description of 
typical MS lesion morphology.

----- Page 11 (native) -----
THELANCETNEUROLOGY-D-17-00665 revision 1 
                                                                        Submitted; confidential 
 
Page 11 of 50 
The Panel recommended that brain MRI be obtained in all patients being considered for 
an MS diagnosis, recognizing it may at times not be possible because of availability, cost, or 
contraindication. There was general agreement that, although spinal MRI is not mandatory in all 
cases, it is advisable when the presentation suggests a spinal cord localization, when there is a 
primary progressive course, when considering MS in a population in which MS is less common 
(for example, older individuals or non-Caucasians), or when additional data are needed to 
increase diagnostic confidence (for example when brain MRI findings only just fulfill the criteria 
for DIS).55,56 Spinal MRI appears less useful in the diagnosis of MS in children.34 
 
Role of CSF examination in MS diagnosis 
 
Although CSF examination has been de-emphasized in successive iterations of the McDonald 
Criteria, it remains a valuable diagnostic test.57 In the appropriate clinical setting, evidence of 
intrathecal antibody synthesis, though not specific for MS, supports the diagnosis.58 Conversely, 
CSF findings atypical of MS (for example, markedly elevated protein >100 mg/dL; pleocytosis 
with >50 cells/mm3; or presence of neutrophils, eosinophils, or atypical cells) suggest other 
diseases.59 
The Panel’s discussion of CSF recognized the importance of using appropriate and 
standardized technology.58-60 The qualitative demonstration of two or more CSF-specific 
oligoclonal bands (OCBs) more reliably indicates intrathecal antibody synthesis than other tests, 
such as IgG Index.58-60 Positive IgG Index results should be interpreted with caution when 
testing for OCBs is negative or not performed. The sensitivity of OCB testing depends on the 
method used; agarose gel electrophoresis with isoelectric focusing and immunoblotting or 
immunofixation for IgG is the most sensitive at present.58-60 Importantly, analysis of paired CSF 
and serum samples is essential to confirm that the OCBs are unique to CSF.

----- Page 12 (native) -----
THELANCETNEUROLOGY-D-17-00665 revision 1 
                                                                        Submitted; confidential 
 
Page 12 of 50 
While CSF examination is not mandatory in all cases (for instance, a typical CIS supported 
by characteristic MRI findings [Panel 1], unequivocal demonstration of DIS and DIT, and 
absence of atypical clinical or imaging features), there should be a low threshold for CSF 
examination to increase diagnostic confidence. CSF examination is strongly recommended: (i) 
when there is insufficient clinical and MRI evidence supporting a diagnosis of MS, particularly if 
initiation of long-term DMT is being considered; (ii) when there is a non-classical presentation, 
including patients with a progressive course at onset (primary progressive MS); (iii) when there 
are clinical, imaging, or laboratory features atypical of MS; and (iv) in populations in which 
diagnosing MS is less common (for example, children, older individuals, or non-Caucasians). 
While negative CSF OCBs does not rule out MS, particularly early in the condition and in 
children,58,59 caution should be exercised in diagnosing MS when CSF OCBs are not detected 
and, certainly, in the presence of atypical clinical, imaging, or CSF findings. 
 
2017 Revisions to the McDonald Diagnostic Criteria for multiple sclerosis 
 
The Panel reviewed the 2010 McDonald Criteria and made recommendations for revisions 
(Panels 4, 5, and 6; Table 1). 
 
Presence of CSF oligoclonal bands allows the diagnosis of MS in selected patients 
Multiple studies provide evidence that in adult patients with CIS, CSF OCBs are an independent 
predictor of the risk of a second attack when controlling for demographic, clinical, treatment, and 
MRI variables.61-69 After considering these data, the Panel recommended that with a typical CIS, 
fulfillment of clinical or MRI criteria for DIS, and no better explanation for the clinical 
presentation, demonstration of CSF OCBs in the absence of atypical CSF findings allows a 
diagnosis of MS to be made, even if the MRI findings on the baseline scan do not meet the 
criteria for DIT and in advance of either a second attack or MRI evidence of a new or active

----- Page 13 (native) -----
THELANCETNEUROLOGY-D-17-00665 revision 1 
                                                                        Submitted; confidential 
 
Page 13 of 50 
lesion on serial imaging.69 This consensus recommendation allows the presence of CSF OCBs 
to substitute for the requirement for fulfilling DIT in this situation. This criterion is similar to the 
laboratory-supported definite MS category in the earlier Poser criteria.2 
 
Incorporation of the symptomatic lesion in providing evidence for dissemination in space 
and time 
Previously, the symptomatic lesion in a patient presenting with brainstem or spinal cord 
syndrome could not be included as MRI evidence of DIS or DIT, to avoid “double counting.” 
Recent studies showed that inclusion of symptomatic lesions in the MRI determination of DIS or 
DIT increases MS diagnostic sensitivity with little or no reduction in specificity70,71 and was 
proposed in the 2016 MAGNIMS Criteria.7,72 On the basis of these data, the Panel 
recommended including symptomatic and asymptomatic MRI lesions in the determination of DIS 
and DIT. An exception relates to lesions in the optic nerve in a patient presenting with optic 
neuritis, for which there was felt to be insufficient supportive evidence to include as a site in 
determining DIS. 
 
Cortical lesions equivalent to juxtacortical lesions 
Juxtacortical lesions (Panel 1) are an area of predilection in MS, incorporated into the MRI 
criteria for DIS in the 1997 Barkhof imaging criteria.73 Based on histopathological studies, 
cortical lesions and juxtacortical lesions extending into the cortex are known to be typical of 
MS.74,75 With development of better techniques to identify cortical lesions, their potential to make 
a contribution to diagnosis has been appreciated.72,76,77 The Panel recommended that, in 
addition to juxtacortical lesions, cortical lesions can be used in fulfilling MRI criteria for DIS, 
although it recognized that standard MRI currently has limited ability to demonstrate cortical 
lesions or distinguish cortical lesions in MS from other etiologies. Care is needed to distinguish 
potential cortical lesions from artifacts.

----- Page 14 (native) -----
THELANCETNEUROLOGY-D-17-00665 revision 1 
                                                                        Submitted; confidential 
 
Page 14 of 50 
 
Primary progressive MS 
About 15% of patients with MS have a course characterized by gradual progression from onset 
(primary progressive MS).78 The McDonald Criteria were developed to make the diagnosis in 
patients with a CIS at onset then modified for use in patients with progression from onset. The 
diagnostic criteria for primary progressive MS remain the same in the 2017 McDonald Criteria 
as those outlined in the 2010 McDonald Criteria,5 aside from removal of the distinction between 
symptomatic and asymptomatic MRI lesions and that cortical lesions can be used (Panel 6). 
 
Integrating the disease course phenotypes with the McDonald Diagnostic Criteria 
The 2013 revised classification of MS clinical phenotypes and disease course maintained the 
distinction between MS with an attack onset versus a progressive course from onset.78 The 
revised classification incorporated further categorization as active or not (based on recent 
clinical relapse and/or MRI lesion activity) and progressive or not (based on clinical assessment 
of disability). The intent was for patients to be assessed over time and classified (and 
reclassified as needed) according to the disease course in a preceding time period, e.g. one 
year. The Panel recommended that a provisional disease course should be specified as soon as 
the MS diagnosis is made, and periodically re-evaluated based on accumulated information. 
 
Key proposals that require further evidence if they are to be adopted into diagnostic 
criteria 
 
Number of periventricular lesions 
The 2001 and 2005 McDonald Criteria required three or more periventricular lesions as one of 
the anatomic locations that could fulfill MRI criteria for DIS.3,4 In the 2010 McDonald Criteria, this 
requirement was changed to one or more periventricular lesions as one of the four anatomic

----- Page 15 (native) -----
THELANCETNEUROLOGY-D-17-00665 revision 1 
                                                                        Submitted; confidential 
 
Page 15 of 50 
locations (periventricular, juxtacortical, and infratentorial brain regions, and spinal cord).5 
However, non-specific white matter lesions are common in older individuals and in those with 
vascular risk factors including migraine; a single periventricular lesion is not uncommon.16 
Therefore, the 2016 MAGNIMS Criteria suggested that a single lesion might be insufficiently 
specific and proposed increasing the requirement to three periventricular lesions.7 In a recent 
analysis, changing the requirement from one periventricular lesion to three improved specificity 
of DIS from 0.37 to 0.46 but decreased sensitivity from 0.88 to 0.83.72 The Panel felt the modest 
improvement in specificity, comparable to that achieved when DIS and DIT are considered in 
combination,79,80 did not justify the added complexity of requiring a different number of lesions in 
different anatomic regions. Therefore, the Panel recommended the 2017 McDonald Criteria 
maintain the requirement for one periventricular lesion. For some patients, for example, older 
individuals or those with vascular risk factors including migraine, it may be prudent for the 
clinician to seek a higher number of periventricular lesions. 
 
Incorporation of the anterior visual system into the diagnostic criteria 
The visual system often provides an early and eloquent clinical sign of MS.81 The 2016 
MAGNIMS Criteria proposed the optic nerve as a fifth anatomic location to fulfill MRI criteria for 
DIS.7 In the 2017 Diagnostic Panel deliberations, there was substantial discussion concerning 
the potential advantages and disadvantages of MRI, visual evoked potentials (VEP), and optical 
coherence tomography (OCT) to objectively demonstrate optic nerve involvement and support a 
clinical suspicion of current or prior optic neuritis, including changes in the sensitivity of all three 
tests over time relative to the optic neuritis event.81 The recent MAGNIMS analysis showed that 
adding optic nerve involvement detected by MRI or VEP as a fifth anatomic site led to a minor 
improvement in sensitivity from 0.88 to 0.91 but substantially reduced specificity from 0.52 from 
0.41.72 The analysis did not include OCT.

----- Page 16 (native) -----
THELANCETNEUROLOGY-D-17-00665 revision 1 
                                                                        Submitted; confidential 
 
Page 16 of 50 
Despite recognizing optic nerve involvement as an important feature of MS, the Panel felt 
the data concerning the diagnostic sensitivity and specificity of MRI, VEP, or OCT to 
demonstrate optic nerve lesions in patients without a clear-cut history or clinical evidence of 
optic neuritis were insufficient to support incorporation into the McDonald Criteria at this time. 
Studies to validate MRI, VEP, or OCT in fulfilling DIS or DIT in support of MS diagnosis were 
identified as a high priority. 
 
Applicability of the McDonald Criteria in patients with non-classical presentations 
Radiologically isolated syndrome 
With increasing availability and utilization of MRI, patients with incidental T2 hyperintensities on 
brain imaging are common82 and include individuals with MRI findings strongly suggestive of MS 
lesions but with no neurologic manifestations or other clear-cut explanation, a condition termed 
radiologically isolated syndrome (RIS).83 Data concerning the population-based incidence and 
prevalence of RIS are limited but suggest that RIS is uncommon (in Sweden, incidence of 0.8 
cases of RIS per 100,000 person-years compared to 10.2 cases of MS per 100,000 person-
years84), but increased in healthy relatives of patients with MS.85 Approximately one-third of RIS 
cases are diagnosed with MS within five years of presentation, most often with a relapsing-
remitting course83,86 but occasionally with a primary progressive course.87,88 The factors 
predicting increased risk of subsequent MS diagnosis are similar to those predicting MS 
diagnosis after a CIS: younger age, higher cerebral lesion load, asymptomatic infratentorial or 
spinal cord lesions, gadolinium-enhancing lesions, presence of CSF OCBs, and abnormal 
VEP.87,89 
Some Panel members argued that individuals with RIS have a high likelihood of having 
MS and may already exhibit evidence of putative MS pathobiology, including fatigue,90 cognitive 
impairment,91 and thalamic atrophy,92 and that postponing an MS diagnosis and initiation of 
DMT might increase the risk of disability. Others argued that the risk of misdiagnosis is high in

----- Page 17 (native) -----
THELANCETNEUROLOGY-D-17-00665 revision 1 
                                                                        Submitted; confidential 
 
Page 17 of 50 
patients with MRI abnormalities only,11 and two-thirds of these patients will not receive an MS 
diagnosis within five years. The Panel reached consensus to continue to require clinical 
manifestations to make the diagnosis of MS and, as in the 2010 McDonald Criteria, to allow 
utilizing historical radiologic evidence for DIS and DIT in patients with RIS to support the 
diagnosis of MS once a typical CIS occurs. While the Panel considered allowing diagnosis of 
MS in patients with RIS and demonstration of DIS and DIT by MRI and demonstration of CSF 
OCBs, there was not general support for this proposal. It was identified as a high priority area 
for further research. 
 
Solitary sclerosis 
The Panel discussed rare patients who have an inflammatory lesion of the cerebral white matter, 
cervicomedullary junction, or spinal cord who develop progressive disability clinically 
indistinguishable from progressive forms of MS; may have CSF OCBs; but have no clinical or 
radiologic evidence of new lesion formation – a condition which has been termed progressive 
solitary sclerosis.93 The Panel agreed that, despite a progressive course, such patients do not 
satisfy the McDonald Criteria for MS, as they do not have DIS. Like RIS, solitary sclerosis was 
identified as a high priority area for further research. 
 
Possible MS 
Previous versions of the McDonald Criteria included a diagnostic category of “possible MS,” 
defined as a suspicion of MS (i.e., a patient with a CIS but not meeting the full criteria).5 The 
Panel considered expanding the category of possible MS to include patients with non-classical 
presentations, but did not reach consensus. The ability of revised criteria to differentiate 
between and inform about presentations that may eventually evolve to include clinical or MRI 
features confirmatory of MS (such as RIS, solitary sclerosis, or other non-classical presentations 
for which the MS criteria may be partially but not unequivocally fulfilled) needs more focused

----- Page 18 (native) -----
THELANCETNEUROLOGY-D-17-00665 revision 1 
                                                                        Submitted; confidential 
 
Page 18 of 50 
collaborative studies, in particular because such presentations are uncommon. 
 
Other high priority areas of research 
Many of the elements of the McDonald Criteria have come from data from academic MS 
specialty centers and have been derived largely from adult patients of Western European 
genetic/ethnic origins presenting with a typical CIS (i.e., with a high likelihood of MS). Validation 
of the 2017 McDonald Criteria will be needed in diverse populations, either prospectively or 
retrospectively, including those from Asia, Latin America, the Middle East, Africa, and other 
relatively less studied geographic locations; in suspected pediatric and late-onset MS; in 
patients with comorbidities with clinical or imaging manifestations that overlap those of MS; and 
in non-specialty and general practice clinical settings. 
The Panel identified further studies to validate the 2016 MAGNIMS Criteria in aggregate 
as a high priority. New MRI approaches also will need to be considered for future iterations of 
McDonald Criteria. Currently, the only feature to assess the chronicity of MRI lesions at the time 
of first assessment is presence or absence of gadolinium enhancement. Chronic T1-
hypointense lesions (“black holes”) were shown not to aid in determination of DIT.94 The role in 
MS diagnosis of more sensitive imaging methods to detect gray matter pathology (particularly to 
demonstrate subpial cortical and deep gray matter lesions74) and techniques to distinguish MS 
lesions from T2 hyperintensities in other conditions (e.g. central vein sign on T2*-
weighted/FLAIR* images95 or paramagnetic rim on T2*/phase/susceptibility-weighted 
images96,97) are being explored. The role of higher field strength imaging requires detailed 
investigation to determine if it is useful and practical, particularly in non-academic settings, given 
its improved ability to detect lesions and reveal their anatomic features.  
Currently, no laboratory test in isolation confirms the diagnosis of MS. While AQP4 
serologic testing generally differentiates NMOSD from MS,45 less is known about the 
performance of testing for MOG antibodies.41,47-49 Other diagnostic biomarkers have been

----- Page 19 (native) -----
THELANCETNEUROLOGY-D-17-00665 revision 1 
                                                                        Submitted; confidential 
 
Page 19 of 50 
proposed to differentiate between MS phenotypes or to monitor CNS damage, but none has 
been shown to reliably diagnose MS in individual patients, representing a major unmet need 
and area for future research. Finally, the possible contribution of evoked potential investigations 
besides VEP (e.g. somatosensory or motor) to diagnostic criteria should be further explored.  
With the growing interest in precision medicine and rapidly evolving technologies, it will be 
critical that the community develop an approach to validation of all paraclinical tests for MS 
diagnosis and incorporation into practice when appropriate. 
 
Conclusions 
 
Early MS diagnostic criteria were based primarily on clinical evidence.1 Subsequent criteria 
incorporated imaging and other paraclinical markers in response to technological advances and 
new data.2-5 The proposed 2017 revisions to the well established McDonald Criteria go beyond 
prior versions by revitalizing the role of CSF analysis, by reconsidering the value of imaging 
findings previously not included, such as symptomatic and cortical lesions, and by articulating 
more clearly cautions about misdiagnosis and differential diagnosis, all of which were supported 
by a sound evidence base. 
The 2017 McDonald Criteria should prove useful both in research settings and clinical 
practice. None of these changes invalidate the diagnosis of MS according to previous versions 
of the McDonald Criteria (any patient diagnosed with prior Criteria should also fulfill the 2017 
Criteria). It was recognized that application of new diagnostic criteria can have an impact on 
future recruitment into and interpretation of clinical trials and observational studies98 but should 
not affect registration of already-approved medications. Ability to accurately and more rapidly 
diagnose MS should facilitate enrolment in prospective clinical trials, and could increase the 
populations of subjects eligible for observational and natural history studies.

----- Page 20 (native) -----
THELANCETNEUROLOGY-D-17-00665 revision 1 
                                                                        Submitted; confidential 
 
Page 20 of 50 
While increasingly based on paraclinical tests, optimal diagnosis of MS requires the 
judgment of a clinician with MS-related expertise, aided by appropriate radiologic and other 
paraclinical assessments. The goal is to make a rapid and accurate diagnosis of MS, keeping 
fully in mind the potential dangers of misdiagnosis in an era with increasing numbers of 
treatment options for MS, which carry varying degrees of risk. The importance of correct 
diagnosis is further heightened by the observation that certain MS DMTs are contraindicated in 
some of the more common differential diagnoses, for example, NMOSD. The Panel is mindful of 
the challenges many patients experience in gaining access to clinicians with MS-related 
expertise and advocates a concerted global effort to address this critical workforce gap. 
 
Search strategy and selection criteria 
In preparation for the meetings, the Panel conducted literature searches (completed 15 April 
2017) in PubMed (English language, using search terms “multiple sclerosis” and “diagnosis” 
with a focus on publications since 2010 but also including earlier publications as appropriate). It 
reviewed papers on topics including, but not limited to, the role in diagnosis of magnetic 
resonance imaging, optical coherence tomography, evoked potentials, and cerebrospinal fluid 
analysis; of diagnosis in diverse populations (pediatric, Asian, and Latin American); in patients 
with non-classical presentations (e.g. radiologically isolated syndrome and solitary sclerosis); of 
differential diagnosis between multiple sclerosis, neuromyelitis spectrum disorders, and other 
neurological disorders; and the intersection of diagnosis with disease phenotype designation. 
 
Acknowledgements 
We thank Michael Hutchinson, Catherine Lubetzki, and Jerry Wolinsky for reviewing the 
manuscript and providing useful suggestions. The International Panel on Diagnosis of Multiple 
Sclerosis was convened under the auspices of the International Advisory Committee on Clinical 
Trials in Multiple Sclerosis, and its work was funded by the National Multiple Sclerosis Society

----- Page 21 (native) -----
THELANCETNEUROLOGY-D-17-00665 revision 1 
                                                                        Submitted; confidential 
 
Page 21 of 50 
and the European Committee for Treatment and Research in Multiple Sclerosis. There was no 
involvement of the sponsors in the design, collection, analysis or interpretation of data involved 
in the publication and no involvement in the writing of the manuscript or the decision to submit it 
for publication. 
 
Contributors 
JA Cohen, AJ Thompson, and SC Reingold drafted Panel meeting agendas, with review and 
agreement by all Panel members. BL Banwell, F Barkhof, G Comi, J Correale, M Filippi, K 
Fujihara, SL Galetta, FD Lublin, DH Miller, X Montalban, EM Mowry, M Tintoré, AL Traboulsee, 
and BG Weinshenker made specific topic-related presentations at the meetings. All Panel 
members attended both meetings, and actively participated in discussion and reaching 
consensus. JA Cohen, AJ Thompson, and SC Reingold prepared the initial drafts of this 
manuscript. All Panel members were given the opportunity to review drafts and make revisions 
prior to finalization, and approved the manuscript for submission. 
 
Declaration of interests  
Alan J Thompson reports personal fees and other from MedDay, Novartis, Eisai Ltd, Biogen 
Idec and TEVA, outside the submitted work; Editorial Board membership, The Lancet Neurology, 
receiving free subscription; Editor-in-Chief, Multiple Sclerosis Journal, honorarium from SAGE 
Publications; Chair, Scientific Advisory Board, International Progressive MS Alliance (PMSA), 
support for travel to international meetings; member, National MS Society (USA), Research 
Programs Advisory Committee, support for travel to international meetings; Chair, International 
Medical and Scientific Board, and Board Member (2005-2015) for Multiple Sclerosis 
International Federation (MSIF), support for travel to international meetings; member of MSIF 
International Medical and Scientific Board (2015-). He received honoraria and support for travel 
for lecturing from EXCEMED.

----- Page 22 (native) -----
THELANCETNEUROLOGY-D-17-00665 revision 1 
                                                                        Submitted; confidential 
 
Page 22 of 50 
Brenda L Banwell reports grants from the Multiple Sclerosis Scientific Research Foundation. 
Frederik Barkhof reports personal compensation for consulting from Apitope Ltd, Biogen Idec, 
GeNeuro, Genzyme-Sanofi, IXICO Ltd, Janssen Research, Merck-Serono, Novartis, Roche, 
and Teva; speakers’ fees from Biogen Idec and IXICO; and grants/pending grants from 
AMYPAD (IMI), Dutch MS Society, ECTRIMS-MAGNIMS, EuroPOND (H2020), NIHR UCLH 
Biomedical Research Centre (BRC), PICTURE (IMDI-NWO), and UK MS Society. 
William M Carroll reports grants or other support from Biogen, Genzyme, Merck, Roche, and 
Teva outside the submitted work, and service as Asia Pacific Editor for Multiple Sclerosis 
Journal. 
Timothy Coetzee reports no disclosures. 
Giancarlo Comi reports personal fees from Almirall, Biogen, Celgene, Excemed, Forward 
Pharma, Genzyme, Merck, Novartis, Roche, Sanofi, and Teva, outside the submitted work. 
Jorge Correale reports personal fees from Merck Argentina, Merck LATAM, Genzyme LATAM, 
Genzyme Global, , Novartis LATAM, Roche LATAM, and TEVA LATAM; grants and personal 
fees from Genzyme Argentina and Novartis Argentina; and grants from Biogen-IDEC, outside 
the submitted work. 
Franz Fazekas reports personal fees from Actelion, Biogen-IDEC, Genzyme-Sanofi, MedDay, 
Merck, Novartis, Parexel, and Teva Ratiopharm, outside the submitted work. 
Massimo Filippi reports personal fees from Biogen Idec, Merck-Serono, Novartis, and Teva 
Pharmaceutical Industries; and grants from Alzheimer’s Drug Discovery Foundation (ADDF), 
ARiSLA (Fondazione Italiana di Ricerca per la SLA), Biogen Idec, Cure PSP, Fondazione 
Italiana Sclerosi Multipla (FISM), the Jacques and Gloria Gossweiler Foundation (Switzerland), 
Italian Ministry of Health, Novartis, and Teva Pharmaceutical Industries, outside the submitted 
work.

----- Page 23 (native) -----
THELANCETNEUROLOGY-D-17-00665 revision 1 
                                                                        Submitted; confidential 
 
Page 23 of 50 
Mark S Freedman reports grants from Sanofi-Genzyme and other support from Actelion, 
Biogen Idec, Chugai, EMD Inc, Genzyme, Merck Serono, Novartis, Roche, Sanofi, and Teva 
Canada Innovation, outside the submitted work.  
Kazuo Fujihara reports grants from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and 
Technology of Japan, and the Ministry of Health, Welfare and Labor of Japan, during the 
conduct of the study; grants and personal fees from Asahi Kasei Medical, Astellas, Bayer 
Schering, Biogen, Chugai, Mitsubishi Tanabe, Nihon Pharmaceutical, Takeda, and Teijin; 
personal fees from Alexion, Daiichi Sankyo, Medimmune, Merck Serono, and Novartis; and 
grants from Chemo-Sero-Therapeutic Research Institute, Genzyme, Ono, and Teva, outside the 
submitted work.  
Steven L Galetta reports personal fees from Biogen, outside of the submitted work. 
Hans-Peter Hartung reports personal fees from Bayer Healthcare, Biogen, Geneuro, MedDay, 
Medimmune, Novartis, Octapharma, Receptos Celgene, Roche, Sanofi Genzyme, and Teva, 
outside the submitted work.  
Ludwig Kappos reports grants from Actelion, Alkermes, Allergan, Almirall, Bayer Health Care, 
Biogen Idec, CSL Behring, df-mp, The European Union, Excemed, GeNeuro SA, Genzyme, 
Merck, Mitsubishi, Novartis, Pfizer, Receptos, Roche, Roche Research Foundations, Sanofi-
Aventis, Santhera, Teva, UCB, Vianex, The Swiss Multiple Sclerosis Society, and the Swiss 
National Research Foundation, outside the submitted work. 
Fred D Lublin reports personal fees from Abbvie, Acorda, Actelion, Akros, Atara 
Biotherapeutics, Bayer Healthcare, EMD Serono, Forward pharma, Innate Immunotherapeutics, 
MedDay, Medimmune, Osmotica, Questcor/Malinckrodt, Receptos, Roche/Genentech, TG 
Therapeutics, and Xenoport; grants and personal fees from Biogen Idec, Celgene, 
Sanofi/Genzyme, and Teva Neuroscience; and grants from Transparency Life Sciences, outside 
the submitted work.

----- Page 24 (native) -----
THELANCETNEUROLOGY-D-17-00665 revision 1 
                                                                        Submitted; confidential 
 
Page 24 of 50 
Ruth Ann Marrie reports research funding from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research 
(CIHR), Crohn’s and Colitis Canada, Multiple Sclerosis Scientific Foundation, Multiple Sclerosis 
Society of Canada, National Multiple Sclerosis Society, Research Manitoba, and Rx & D Health 
Research Foundation; and other support from sanofi-aventis, outside the submitted work. 
Aaron E Miller reports research support from Biogen-IDEC, Genzyme/Sanofi, Mallinckrodt 
(Questcor), MedDay, Novartis, and Roche/Genentech; personal fees from Acorda Therapeutics, 
Adamas, Alkermes, Biogen-IDEC, Celgene, EMD Serono (Merck Serono), Genzyme/Sanofi, 
Mallinckrodt (Questcor), Mapi-Pharma, Novartis, Roche/Genentech, and Teva; and service on 
Speakers Bureaus for Biogen (unbranded disease awareness programs only) and 
Roche/Genentech (unbranded disease awareness programs only). 
David H Miller reports grants from Apitope and Biogen Idec; personal fees from Bayer Schering, 
GlaxoSmithKline, and Mitsubishi Pharma Europe; and grants and personal fees from Novartis, 
outside the submitted work. 
Xavier Montalban reports personal fees from Actelion, Almirall, Bayer, Biogen, Genzyme, 
Merck, Novartis, Receptos, Roche, Sanofi, and Teva, outside the submitted work 
Ellen M Mowry reports grants from Biogen and Genzyme, and other support from Teva and 
Up-To-Date, outside the submitted work. 
Per Soelberg Sorensen reports personal fees from Celgene, Forward Pharma, GSK, and 
MedDay Pharmaceuticals; grants and personal fees from Biogen, Merck, Sanofi-
Aventis/Genzyme, and TEVA; and grants from Roche, outside the submitted work. 
Mar Tintoré reports personal fees from Almirall, Bayer Healthcare, Merck Serono, Novartis, 
Roche, and Teva Neuroscience; grants and personal fees from Biogen Idec, Sanofi/Genzyme, 
outside the submitted work. 
Anthony L Traboulsee reports grants and personal fees from Biogen Idec, Chugai, Hoffman la 
Roche, and Sanofi Genzyme; grants from the Canadian Institute for Health Research and the

----- Page 25 (native) -----
THELANCETNEUROLOGY-D-17-00665 revision 1 
                                                                        Submitted; confidential 
 
Page 25 of 50 
Multiple Sclerosis Society Canada; and personal fees from Novartis, Teva Innovation, and the 
Consortium of MS Centers, outside the submitted work. 
Maria Trojano reports personal fees from Almirall, Biogen Idec, Merck, Novartis, Roche, 
Sanofi/Genzyme, and Teva; and grants from Biogen Idec, Merck, and Novartis, outside the 
submitted work;  
Bernard MJ Uitdehaag reports personal fees from Biogen IDEC, Genzyme, Merck Serono, 
Roche, and Teva, outside the submitted work. 
Sandra Vukusic reports grants and personal fees from Biogen, Merck-Serono, Novartis, Roche, 
Sanofi-Genzyme, and Teva; personal fees from Geneuro; and grants from Medday, outside the 
submitted work. 
Emmanuelle Waubant reports no disclosures from companies but has received honoraria as 
Co-Chief Editor of MS and Related Disorders and as Section Editor for Annals of Clinical and 
Translational Neurology. 
Brian G Weinshenker reports personal fees from Alexion, Biogen-Idec, Caladrius Biosciences, 
MedImmune, and Novartis, outside the submitted work; in addition, Dr. Weinshenker has a 
patent for NMO-IgG for diagnosis of neuromyelitis optica with royalties paid to RSR Ltd.; Oxford 
University; Hospices Civil de Lyon, MVZ Labor PD Dr. Volkmann und Kollegen GbR. 
Stephen C Reingold reports personal fees and other support from the National Multiple 
Sclerosis Society and the European Committee for Treatment and Research in Multiple 
Sclerosis, during the conduct of the study; personal fees and other support from F. Hoffmann-
LaRoche, Ionis Pharmaceuticals, Medday Pharmaceuticals SA, MedImmune Inc., Merck Serono, 
Novartis; other support from the Observatoire Français pour la Sclérose en Plaques; personal 
fees from Opexa Therapeutics, Teva Pharmaceuticals Industries, and TG Therapeutics; and 
personal fees and non-financial support from Scientific and Clinical Review Associates, LLC, 
outside the submitted work.

----- Page 26 (native) -----
THELANCETNEUROLOGY-D-17-00665 revision 1 
                                                                        Submitted; confidential 
 
Page 26 of 50 
Jeffrey A Cohen reports personal fees from Adamas and Celgene outside the submitted work, 
and as a Co-Editor of Multiple Sclerosis Journal – Experimental, Translational and Clinical.

----- Page 27 (native) -----
THELANCETNEUROLOGY-D-17-00665 revision 1 
                                                                        Submitted; confidential 
 
Page 27 of 50 
References 
 
1 
Schumacher GA, Beebe GW, Kibler RF, et al. Problems of experimental trials of therapy in 
multiple sclerosis:  Report by the panel on the evaluation of experimental trials of therapy 
in multiple sclerosis. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1965; 122: 552-68. 
2 
Poser CM, Paty DW, Scheinberg L, et al. New diagnostic criteria for multiple sclerosis:  
Guidelines for research protocols. Ann Neurol 1983; 13(3): 227-31. 
3 
McDonald WI, Compston DA, Edan G, et al. Recommended diagnostic criteria for multiple 
sclerosis: guidelines from the International Panel on the Diagnosis of Multiple Sclerosis. 
Ann Neurol 2001; 50: 121-27. 
4 
Polman CH, Reingold SC, Edan G, et al. Diagnostic criteria for multiple sclerosis: 2005 
revisions to the "McDonald Criteria". Ann Neurol 2005; 58: 840-46. 
5 
Polman CH, Reingold SC, Banwell B, et al. Diagnostic criteria for multiple sclerosis: 2010 
revisions to the McDonald Criteria. Ann Neurol 2011; 69(2): 292-302. 
6 
Brownlee WJ, Hardy TA, Fazekas F, Miller DH. Multiple Sclerosis 1.  Diagnosis of multiple 
sclerosis: progress and challenges. Lancet 2016; 389(10076): 1336-46. 
7 
Filippi M, Rocca MA, Ciccarelli O, et al. MRI criteria for the diagnosis of multiple sclerosis: 
MAGNIMS consensus guidelines. Lancet Neurol 2016; 15(3): 292-303. 
8 
Murray TJ, Murray SJ. Characteristics of patients found not to have multiple sclerosis. Can 
Med Assoc J 1984; 131: 336-37. 
9 
Poser CM. Misdiagnosis of multiple sclerosis and beta-interferon. Lancet 1997; 349(9069): 
1916. 
10 
Carmosino MJ, Brousseau KM, Arciniegas DB, Corboy JR. Initial evaluations for multiple 
sclerosis in a university multiple sclerosis center. Arch Neurol 2005; 62(4): 585-90. 
11 
Solomon AJ, Bourdette DN, Cross AH, et al. The contemporary spectrum of multiple 
sclerosis misdiagnosis: a multicenter study. Neurology 2016; 87(13): 1393-99.

----- Page 28 (native) -----
THELANCETNEUROLOGY-D-17-00665 revision 1 
                                                                        Submitted; confidential 
 
Page 28 of 50 
12 
Solomon AJ, Corboy JR. The tension between early diagnosis and misdiagnosis in 
multiple sclerosis. Nature Rev Neurol 2017; Epub ahead of print 11 Aug 2017. doi: 
10.1038/nrneurol.2017.106. 
13 
Rudick RA, Schiffer RB, Schwetz KM, Herndon RM. Multiple sclerosis.  The problem of 
incorrect diagnosis. Arch Neurol 1986; 43: 578-83. 
14 
Miller DH, Weinshenker BG, Filippi M, et al. Differential diagnosis of suspected multiple 
sclerosis: a consensus approach. Mult Scler 2008; 14: 1157-74. 
15 
Charil A, Yousry TA, Rovaris M, et al. MRI and the diagnosis of multiple sclerosis: 
expanding the concept of "no better explanation". Lancet Neurol 2006; 5(10): 841-52. 
16 
Aliaga ES, Barkhof F. MRI mimics of multiple sclerosis. Handb Clin Neurol 2014; 122: 291-
316. 
17 
Kang H, Metz LM, Trabousee AL, et al. Application and a proposed modification of the 
2010 McDonald criteria for the diagnosis of multiple sclerosis in a Canadian cohort of 
patients with clinically isolated syndromes. Mult Scler J 2014; 20(4): 458-63. 
18 
D'Alessandro R, Vignatelli L, Lugaresi A, et al. Risk of multiple sclerosis following clinically 
isolated syndrome: a 4-year prospective study. J Neurol 2013; 260: 1583-93. 
19 
Runia TF, Jafari N, Hintzen RQ. Application of the 2010 revised criteria for the diagnosis of 
multiple sclerosis to patients with clinically isolated syndromes. Eur J Neurol 2013; 20: 
1510-16. 
20 
Gomez-Moreno M, Diaz-Sanchez M, Ramos-Gonzalez A. Application of the 2010 
McDonald criteria for the diagnosis of multiple sclerosis in a Spanish cohort of patients 
with clinicaly isolated syndromes. Mult Scler J 2012; 18(1): 39-44. 
21 
Belova AN, Shalenkov IV, Shakurova DN, Boyko AN. Revised McDonald criteria for 
multiple sclerosis diagnostics in central Russia: sensitivity and specificity. Mult Scler J 
2014; 20(14): 1896-99.

----- Page 29 (native) -----
THELANCETNEUROLOGY-D-17-00665 revision 1 
                                                                        Submitted; confidential 
 
Page 29 of 50 
22 
Hsueh CJ, Kao H-W, Chen S-Y, et al. Comparison of the 2010 and 2005 versions of the 
McDonald MRI criteria for dissemination-in-time in Taiwanese patients with classic multiple 
sclerosis. J Neurol Sci 2013; 329: 51-54. 
23 
Huh S-Y, Kim S-H, Kim WB, et al. Evaluation of McDonald MRI criteria for dissemination in 
space in Korean patients with clinically isolated syndromes. Mult Scler J 2014; 20(4): 492-
95. 
24 
Piccolo L, Kumar G, Nakashima I, et al. Multiple sclerosis in Japan appears to be a milder 
disease compared to the UK. J Neurol 2015; 262: 831-36. 
25 
Alroughani R, Al Hashel J, Lamdhade S, Ahmed SF. Predictors of conversion to multiple 
sclerosis in patients with clinically isolated syndrome using the 2010 revised McDonald 
criteria. ISRN Neurol 2012; Article ID 792192 doi: 10.43/2012/792192. 
26 
Yamout B, Alroughani R, Al-Jumah M, et al. Consensus guidelines for the diagnosis and 
treatment of multiple sclerosis. Curr Med Res Opin 2013; 29(6): 611-21. 
27 
Patrucco L, Rojas JI, Miguez JS, Cristiano E. Application of the McDonald 2010 criteria for 
the diagnosis of multiple sclerosis in an Argentinean cohort of patients with clinically 
isolated syndromes. Mult Scler J 2013; 10(10): 1297-301. 
28 
da Rocha AJ, Litig IA, Nunes RH, Tilbery CP. Central nervous system infectious diseases 
mimicking multiple sclerosis: recognizing distinguishable features using MRI. Arq 
Neuropsiquiatr 2013; 71(9-B): 738-46. 
29 
Kornek B, Schmitl B, Vass K, et al. Evaluation of the 2010 McDonald multiple sclerosis 
criteria in children with a clinically isolated syndrome. Mult Scler J 2012; 18(12): 1768-74. 
30 
Sadaka Y, Verhey LH, Shroff MM, et al. 2010 McDonald Criteria for diagnosing pediatric 
multiple sclerosis. Ann Neurol 2012; 72: 211-23. 
31 
Sedani S, Lim MJ, Hemingway C, Wassmer E, Absoud M. Paediatric multiple sclerosis: 
examining utility of the McDonald 2010 criteria. Mult Scler J 2012; 18(5): 679-82.

----- Page 30 (native) -----
THELANCETNEUROLOGY-D-17-00665 revision 1 
                                                                        Submitted; confidential 
 
Page 30 of 50 
32 
Bigi S, Marrie RA, Verhey L, Yeh EA, Banwell B. 2010 McDonald criteria in a pediatric 
cohort: is positivity at onset associated with a more aggressive multiple sclerosis course? 
Mult Scler J 2013; 19(10): 1359-62. 
33 
Heussinger N, Kontopantelis E, Rompel O, Paulides M, Trollman R. Predicting multiple 
sclerosis following isolated optic neuritis in children. Eur J Neurol 2013; 20: 1292-96. 
34 
Hummel H-M, Bruck W, Dreha-Kulaczewski S, Gartner J, Wuerfel J. Pediatric onset 
multiple sclerosis: McDonald criteria 2010 and the contribution of spinal cord MRI. Mult 
Scler J 2013; 19(10): 1330-35. 
35 
Tantsis EM, Prelog K, Brilot F, Dale RC. Risk of multiple sclerosis after a first 
demyelinating syndrome in an Australian paediatric cohort: clinical, radiological features 
and application of the McDonald 2010 MRI criteria. Mult Scler J 2013; 19(13): 1749-59. 
36 
Williams MT, Tapos DO, Juhasz C. Use of the 2010 McDonald criteria can facilitate early 
diagnosis in pediatric multiple sclerosis in a predominantly black cohort. Pediatr Neurol 
2014; 51: 826-30. 
37 
Pohl D, Alper G, Van Haren K, et al. Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis.  Updates on 
an inflammatory CNS syndrome. Neurology 2016; 87(Suppl 2): S38-S45. 
38 
Krupp LB, Tardieu M, Amato MP, et al. International Pediatric Multiple Sclerosis Study 
Group criteria for pediatric multiple sclerosis and immune-mediated central nervous 
system demyelinating disorders: revisions to the 2007 definitions. Mult Scler J 2013; 
19(10): 1261-67. 
39 
Rostasy K, Mader S, Schanda K, et al. Anti-myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein 
antibodies in pediatric patients with optic neuritis. Arch Neurol 2012; 69(6): 752-56. 
40 
Hacohen Y, Absoud M, Deiva K, et al. Myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein antibodies are 
associated with a non-MS course in children. Neurol Neuroimmunol Neuroinflamm 2015; 
2(2): e81 doi: 10.1212/NXI.0000000000000081.

----- Page 31 (native) -----
THELANCETNEUROLOGY-D-17-00665 revision 1 
                                                                        Submitted; confidential 
 
Page 31 of 50 
41 
Hacohen Y, Mankad K, Chong WK, et al. Diagnostic algorithm for relapsing acquired 
demyelinating syndromes in children. Neurology 2017; 89(3): 269-78. 
42 
Kis B, Rumberg B, Berlit P. Clinical characteristics of patients with late-onset multiple 
sclerosis. J Neurol 2008; 255(5): 697-702. 
43 
Bermel RA, Rae-Grant AD, Fox RJ. Diagnosing multiple sclerosis at a later age: more than 
just progressive myelopathy. Mult Scler J 2010; 16(11): 1335-40. 
44 
Papadopoulos MC, Bennett JL, Verkman AS. Treatment of neuromyelitis optica: state-of-
the-art and emerging therapies. Nature Rev Neurol 2014; 10(9): 493-506. 
45 
Lennon VA, Wingerchuk DM, Kryzer TJ, et al. A serum antibody marker of neuromyelitis 
optica: distinction from multiple sclerosis. Lancet 2004; 364: 2106-12. 
46 
Lennon VA, Kryzer TJ, Pittock SJ, Verkman AS, Hinson SR. IgG marker of optic-spinal 
multiple sclerosis binds to the aquaporin-4 water channel. J Exp Med 2005; 202: 473-77. 
47 
Sato DK, Callegaro D, Lana-Peixoto MA, et al. Distinction between MOG antibody-positive 
and AQP4 antibody-positive NMO spectrum disorders. Neurology 2014; 82: 474-81. 
48 
Kaneko K, Sato DK, Nakashima S, et al. Myelin injury without astrocytopathy in 
neuroinflammatory disorders with MOG antibodies. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2016; 
87(11): 1257-59. 
49 
Waters P, Woodhall M, O'Connor KC, et al. MOG cell-based assay detects non-MS 
patients with inflammatory neurologic disease. Neurol Neuroimmunol Neuroinflamm 2015; 
2: e89 doi: 10.1212/NXI.0000000000000089. 
50 
Jarius S, Ruprecht K, Kleiter I, et al. MOG-IgG in NMO and related disorders: a multicenter 
study of 50 patients.  Part 1: Frequency, syndrome specificity, influence of disease activity, 
long-term course, association with AQP4-IgG, and origin. J Neuroinflammation 2016; 
13(1): 279. 
51 
Spadaro M, Gerdes LA, Krumholz M, et al. Autoantibodies to MOG in a distinct subgroup 
of adult multiple sclerosis. Neurol Neuroimmunol Neuroinflamm 2016; 3(5): e257.

----- Page 32 (native) -----
THELANCETNEUROLOGY-D-17-00665 revision 1 
                                                                        Submitted; confidential 
 
Page 32 of 50 
52 
Wingerchuk DM, Banwell B, Bennett JL, et al. International consensus diagnostic criteria 
for neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders. Neurology 2015; 85(2): 177-89. 
53 
Kimbrough DJ, Fujihara K, Jacob A, et al. Treatment of neuromyelitis optica: review and 
recommendations. Mult Scler Relat Disord 2012; 1(4): 180-87. 
54 
Wattjes MP, Rovira A, Miller D, et al. Evidence-based guidelines: MAGNIMS consensus 
guidelines on the use of MRI in multiple sclerosis - establishing disease prognosis and 
monitoring patients. Nat Rev Neurol 2015; 11(10): 597-606. 
55 
Rovira A, Wattjes MP, Tintore M, et al. MAGNIMS consensus guidelines on the use of MRI 
in multiple sclerosis - clinical implementation in the diagnostic process. Nat Rev Neurol 
2015; 11: 471-82. 
56 
Traboulsee A, Simon JH, Stone L, et al. Revised recommendations of the Consortium of 
MS Centers task force for a standardized MRI protocol and clinical guidelines for the 
diagnosis and follow-up of multiple sclerosis. AJNR Am J Neuroradiology 2016; 37(3): 
394-401. 
57 
Arrambide G, Tintore M. CSF examination still has value in the diagnosis of MS - 
commentary. Mult Scler J 2016; 22(8): 997-98. 
58 
Andersson M, Alvarez-Cermeno J, Bernardi G, et al. Cerebrospinal fluid in the diagnosis of 
multiple sclerosis: a consensus report. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1994; 57: 897-902. 
59 
Stangel M, Fredrikson S, Meinl E, Petzold A, Stuve O, Tumani H. The utility of 
cerebrospinal fluid analysis in patients with multiple sclerois. Nat Rev Neurol 2013; 9(5): 
267-76. 
60 
Freedman M, Thompson EJ, Deisenhammer F, et al. Recommended standard of 
cerebrospinal fluid analysis in the diagnosis of multiple sclerosis: a consensus statement. 
Arch Neurol 2005; 62(6): 865-70.

----- Page 33 (native) -----
THELANCETNEUROLOGY-D-17-00665 revision 1 
                                                                        Submitted; confidential 
 
Page 33 of 50 
61 
Tintore M, Rovira A, Brieva L, et al. Isolated demyelinating syndromes: comparison of CSF 
oligoclonal bands and different MRI criteria to predict conversion to CDMS. Mult Scler 
2001; 7(6): 359-63. 
62 
Tintore M, Rovira A, Rio J, et al. Do oligoclonal bands add information to MRI in first 
attacks of multiple sclerosis? Neurology 2008; 70: 1079-83. 
63 
Andreadou E, Chatzipanagiotou S, Constantinides VC, Rombos A, Stamboulis E, Nicolaou 
C. Prevalence of cerebrospinal fluid oligoclonal IgG bands in Greek patients with clinically 
isolated syndrome and multiple sclerosis. Clin Neurol Neurosurg 2013; 115(2094-2098). 
64 
Dobson R, Ramagopalan S, Davis A, Giovannoni G. Cerebrospinal fluid oligoclonal bands 
in multiple sclerosis and clinically isolated syndromes: a meta-analysis of prevalence, 
prognosis and effect of latitude. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2013; 84(8): 909-14. 
65 
Kuhle J, Disanto G, Adiutori R, et al. Conversion from clinically isolated syndrome to 
multiple sclerosis: a large multicentre study. Mult Scler J 2015; 21(8): 1013-24. 
66 
Tintore M, Rovira A, Rio J, et al. Defining high, medium, and low impact prognostic factors 
for developing multiple sclerosis. Brain 2015; 138(7): 1863-74. 
67 
Huss AM, Halbgebauer S, Ockl P, et al. Importance of cerebrospinal fluid analysis in the 
era of McDonald 2010 criteria: a German-Austrian retrospective multicenter study in 
patients with a clinically-isolated syndrome. J Neurol 2016; 263(12): 2499-504. 
68 
Martinelli V, Dalla Costa G, Messina MJ, et al. Multiple biomarkers improve prediction of 
multiple sclerosis in clinically isolated syndromes. Acta Neurol Scand 2017; 136(5): 454-61. 
69 
Arrambide G, Tintore M, Espejo C, et al. The value of oligoclonal bands in multiple 
sclerosis diagnostic criteria. Brain (submitted). 
70 
Brownlee WJ, Swanton JK, Miszkiel KA, Miller DH, Ciccarelli O. Should the symptomatic 
region be included in dissemination in space in MRI criteria for MS? Neurology 2016; 
87(7): 680-83.

----- Page 34 (native) -----
THELANCETNEUROLOGY-D-17-00665 revision 1 
                                                                        Submitted; confidential 
 
Page 34 of 50 
71 
Tintore M, Otero-Romero S, Rio J, et al. Contribution of the symptomatic lesion in 
establishing MS diagnosis and prognosis. Neurology 2016; 87(13): 1368-74. 
72 
Filippi M, Preziosa P, Meani A, et al. Revised McDonald Criteria versus MAGNIMS 2016 
Criteria in CIS patients suggestive of MS: a multicentre study. Lancet Neurol submitted. 
73 
Barkhof F, Filippi M, Miller DH, et al. Comparison of MRI criteria at first presentation to 
predict conversion to clinically definite multiple sclerosis. Brain 1997; 120(11): 2059-69. 
74 
Peterson JW, Bo L, Mork S, Chang A, Trapp BD. Transected neurites, apoptotic neurons, 
and reduced inflammation in cortical multiple sclerosis lesions. Ann Neurol 2001; 50(3): 
389-400. 
75 
Geurts JJG, Barkhof F. Gray matter pathology in multiple sclerosis. Lancet Neurology 
2008; 7: 841-51. 
76 
Filippi M, Rocca MA, Calabrese M, et al. Intracortical lesions.  Relevance for new MRI 
diagnostic criteria for multiple sclerosis. Neurology 2010; 75(22): 1988-94. 
77 
Preziosa P, Rocca MA, Mesaros S, et al. Diagnosis of multiple sclerosis: a multicentre 
study to compare revised McDonald-2010 and Filippi-2010 criteria. J Neurol Neurosurg 
Psychiatry 2017; Epub ahead of print 19 July 2017. pii: jnnp-2017-315863. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp-2017-315863. 
78 
Lublin FD, Reingold SC, Cohen JA, et al. Defining the clinical course of multiple sclerosis: 
the 2013 revisions. Neurology 2014; 83(3): 278-86. 
79 
Brownlee WJ, Miszkiel KA, Altmann DR, Ciccarelli O. Periventricular lesions and MS 
diagnostic criteria in young adults with typical clinical isolated syndromes. Mult Scler J 
2017; 23(7): 1031-34. 
80 
Arrambide G, Tintore M, Auger C, et al. Lesion topographies in multiple sclerosis 
diagnosis: a reappraisal Neurology (in press). 
81 
Balcer LJ, Miller DH, Reingold SC, Cohen JA. Vision and vision-related outcome 
measures in multiple sclerosis. Brain 2015; 138(Pt 1): 11-27.

----- Page 35 (native) -----
THELANCETNEUROLOGY-D-17-00665 revision 1 
                                                                        Submitted; confidential 
 
Page 35 of 50 
82 
Morris Z, Whiteley WN, Longstreth WT, et al. Incidental findings on brain magnetic 
resonance imaging: systematic review and meta-analysis. Br Med J 2009; 339: b3016 doi: 
10.1136/bmj.b3016. 
83 
Okuda DT, Mowry EM, Beheshtian A, et al. Incidental MRI anomalies suggestive of 
multiple sclerosis.  The radiologically isolated syndrome. Neurology 2009; 72(9): 800-05. 
84 
Forslin Y, Granberg T, Antwan Jumah A, et al. Incidence of radiologically isolated 
syndrome: a population-based study. AJNR Am J Neuroradiology 2016; 37: 1017-22. 
85 
Gabelic T, Ramasamy DP, Weinstock-Guttman B, et al. Prevalence of radiologically 
isolated syndrome and white matter signal abnormalities in healthy relatives of patients 
with multiple sclerosis. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2014; 35: 106-12. 
86 
Okuda DT, Siva A, Kantarci O, et al. Radiologically isolated syndrome: 5-year risk for an 
initial clinical event. PLoS ONE 2014; 9(3): e90509. 
87 
Okuda DT, Mowry EM, Cree BAC, et al. Asymptomatic spinal cord lesions predict disease 
progression in radiologically isolated syndrome. Neurology 2011; 76: 686-92. 
88 
Kantarci OH, Lebrun C, Siva A, et al. Primary progressive multiple sclerosis evolving from 
radiologically isolated syndrome. Ann Neurol 2016; 79(2): 288-94. 
89 
Lebrun C, le Page E, Kantarci O, et al. Impact of pregnancy on conversion to clinically 
isolated syndrome in a radiologically isolated syndrome cohort. Mult Scler J 2012; 18(9): 
1297-302. 
90 
Lebrun C, Cohen M, Clavelou P, SFSEP. Evluation of quality of life and fatigue in 
radiologically isolated syndrome. Rev Neurol (Paris) 2016; 172(6-7): 392-95. 
91 
Lebrun C, Blanc F, Brassat D, Zephir H, de Seze J, CFSEP. Cognitive function in 
radiologically isolated syndrome. Mult Scler J 2010; 16(8): 919-25. 
92 
Azevedo CJ, Overton E, Khadka S, et al. Early CNS neurodegeneration in radiologically 
isolated syndrome. Neurol Neuroimmunol Neuroinflamm 2015; 2: e102 
doi:10.12.12/NXI.0000000000000102.

----- Page 36 (native) -----
THELANCETNEUROLOGY-D-17-00665 revision 1 
                                                                        Submitted; confidential 
 
Page 36 of 50 
93 
Keegan BM, Kaufmann TJ, Weinshenker BG, et al. Progressive solitary  sclerosis.  
Gradual motor impairment from a single CNS demyelinating lesion. Neurology 2016; 
87(16): 1713-19. 
94 
Mitjana R, Tintore M, Rocca MA, et al. Diagnostic value of brain chronic black holes in T1-
weighted MR images in clinically isolated syndromes. Mult Scler J 2014; 20(11): 1471-77. 
95 
Sati P, Oh J, Constable RT, et al. The central vein sign and its clinical evaluation for the 
diagnosis of multiple sclerosis: a consensus statement from the North American Imaging 
in Multiple Sclerosis Cooperative. Nature Rev Neurol 2016; 12(12): 714-22. 
96 
Absinta M, Sati P, Gaitan MI, et al. Seven-tesla phase imaging of acute multiple sclerosis 
lesions: a window into the inflammatory process. Ann Neurol 2013; 74(5): 669-78. 
97 
Kilsdonk ID, Lopez-Soriano A, Kuijer JP, et al. Morphological features of MS lesions on 
FLAIR* at 7T and their relation to patient characteristics. J Neurol 2014; 261(7): 1356-64. 
98 
Sormani MP, Tintore M, Rovaris M, et al. Will Rogers phenomenon in multiple sclerosis. 
Ann Neurol 2008; 64(4): 428-33. 
99 
Miller D, Barkhof F, Montalban X, Thompson A, Filippi M. Clinically isolated syndromes 
suggestive of multiple sclerosis, part I: natural history, pathogenesis, diagnosis, and 
prognosis. Lancet Neurol 2005; 4: 281-88.

----- Page 37 (native) -----
THELANCETNEUROLOGY-D-17-00665 revision 1 
                                                                        Submitted; confidential 
 
Page 37 of 50 
Panel 1: Glossary 
 
Attack: Attack, relapse, exacerbation, and (when it is the first episode) CIS are synonyms. See 
CIS and relapse for descriptions. 
 
Clinically isolated syndrome: A monophasic clinical episode with patient-reported symptoms 
and objective findings reflecting a focal or multifocal inflammatory demyelinating event in the 
CNS, developing acutely or subacutely, with a duration of at least 24 hours, with or without 
recovery, and in the absence of fever or infection; similar to an MS relapse (attack, 
exacerbation) but in a patient not known to have MS.14,78,99 Thus, if the patient subsequently is 
diagnosed with MS (by fulfilling DIS and DIT and ruling out other diagnoses), the CIS was that 
patient’s first attack. A CIS may be monofocal (reflecting pathology in a single location) or 
multifocal; the specific manifestations of a CIS depend on the anatomic location(s) of the 
pathology. Typical presentations include unilateral optic neuritis, focal supratentorial syndrome, 
focal brainstem/cerebellar syndrome, or partial myelopathy. Examples of atypical presentations 
include bilateral optic neuritis, complete ophthalmoplegia, complete myelopathy, 
encephalopathy, headache, alteration of consciousness, meningismus, or isolated fatigue. See 
Brownlee WJ et al.6 for further discussion of typical and atypical presentations. 
 
Cortical MRI lesion: Lesion within the cerebral cortex. Typically, special MRI techniques such 
as double inversion recovery, phase-sensitive inversion recovery, magnetization-prepared rapid 
acquisition with gradient echo sequences are required to visualize these lesions.72,76,77 The 
lesions detected by these techniques are primarily of the leukocortical type; subpial lesions are 
rarely detected. Care is needed to distinguish potential cortical lesions from artifacts. See Filippi 
M et al.7 for illustrative examples.

----- Page 38 (native) -----
THELANCETNEUROLOGY-D-17-00665 revision 1 
                                                                        Submitted; confidential 
 
Page 38 of 50 
Dissemination in space: Development of lesions in distinct anatomic locations within the CNS, 
i.e. indicating a multifocal CNS process. 
 
Dissemination in time: Development/appearance of new CNS lesions over time. 
 
Exacerbation: Attack, relapse, exacerbation, and (when it is the first episode) CIS are 
synonyms. See CIS and relapse for descriptions. 
 
Infratentorial MRI lesion: T2-hyperintense lesion in the brainstem (typically near the surface), 
cerebellar peduncles, or cerebellum. See Brownlee WJ et al.6 for illustrative examples. 
 
Juxtacortical MRI lesion: T2-hyperintense cerebral white matter lesion abutting the cortex, 
without intervening white matter. See Aliaga ES and Barkhof,16 Brownlee WJ et al.,6 and Filippi 
M et al.7 for illustrative examples. 
 
Objective clinical or paraclinical evidence (as it relates to a current or historical attack): 
Abnormality on neurologic examination, imaging (MRI or OCT), or neurophysiologic testing 
(VEP) that corresponds to the anatomic location suggested by the symptoms of the CIS, for 
example, optic disc pallor or a relative afferent pupillary defect, optic nerve T2 hyperintensity on 
MRI, retinal nerve fiber layer thinning on OCT, or P100 latency prolongation on VEP in a patient 
reporting a previous episode of self-limited, painful, monocular visual impairment. Caution 
should be exercised in accepting symptoms accompanied only by patient-reported subjective 
alteration on examination as evidence of a current or prior attack. 
 
Periventricular MRI lesion: T2-hyperintense cerebral white matter lesion abutting the lateral 
ventricles without intervening white matter; includes lesions in the corpus callosum; excludes

----- Page 39 (native) -----
THELANCETNEUROLOGY-D-17-00665 revision 1 
                                                                        Submitted; confidential 
 
Page 39 of 50 
lesions in deep gray matter structures. See Aliaga ES and Barkhof16 and Brownlee WJ et al.6 for 
illustrative examples. 
 
Progressive course: An MS course characterized by steadily increasing objectively 
documented neurologic disability independent of relapses. Fluctuations, periods of stability, and 
superimposed relapses may occur. Primary progressive MS (a progressive course from disease 
onset) and secondary progressive MS (a progressive course following an initial relapsing-
remitting course) are distinguished.78 
 
Relapse: A monophasic clinical episode with patient-reported symptoms and objective findings 
reflecting a focal or multifocal inflammatory demyelinating event in the CNS, developing acutely 
or subacutely, with a duration of at least 24 hours, with or without recovery, and in the absence 
of fever or infection. Attack, relapse, exacerbation, and (when it is the first episode) CIS are 
synonyms. 
 
Radiologically isolated syndrome: MRI findings strongly suggestive of MS in a patient with no 
neurologic manifestations or other clear-cut explanation. 
 
Relapsing-remitting course: An MS course characterized by relapses with stable neurologic 
disability between episodes.78 
 
Spinal cord MRI lesion: Hyperintense lesion in the cervical, thoracic, or lumbar spinal cord 
seen on T2 plus STIR, proton-density images, or other appropriate sequence; or in two planes 
on T2 images. See Rovira A et al.,55 Brownlee WJ et al.,6 and Filippi M et al.7 for illustrative 
examples.

----- Page 40 (native) -----
THELANCETNEUROLOGY-D-17-00665 revision 1 
                                                                        Submitted; confidential 
 
Page 40 of 50 
CIS = clinically isolated syndrome, CNS = central nervous system, DIS = dissemination in space, 
DIT = dissemination in time, DMT = disease-modifying therapy, MRI = magnetic resonance 
imaging, MS = multiple sclerosis, OCT = optical coherence tomography, VEP = visual evoked 
potentials

----- Page 41 (native) -----
THELANCETNEUROLOGY-D-17-00665 revision 1 
                                                                        Submitted; confidential 
 
Page 41 of 50 
Panel 2: Validation of the McDonald Criteria 
 
In the context of validation of proposed diagnostic criteria for MS, the typical approach is to 
study (retrospectively or, preferably, with prospective follow-up) a population of patients 
experiencing a first symptom suggestive of MS (i.e., a CIS) and categorize them based on 
whether or not they fulfill the proposed diagnostic criteria and subsequently develop a second 
clinical attack typical of an MS relapse and indicating involvement of an anatomic location 
distinct from the initial attack. The need is to determine the rates of true positives (patients who 
fulfill the proposed diagnostic criteria and develop a second attack); false positives (patients 
who fulfill the proposed diagnostic criteria and do not develop a second attack); true negatives 
(patients who do not fulfill the proposed diagnostic criteria and do not develop a second attack); 
and false negatives (patients who do not fulfill the proposed diagnostic criteria and develop a 
second attack). Sensitivity = true positives / (true positives + false negatives). Specificity = true 
negatives / (true negatives + false positives). 
The performance of a diagnostic test (or, in this example, a proposed diagnostic criteria) in 
terms of positive and negative predictive value depends on the likelihood of the condition of 
interest (in this example, MS) in the study population. The McDonald Criteria and proposed 
revisions have largely been validated in patient populations that have a high likelihood of MS by 
virtue of their demographic features, mode of recruitment, and having had a typical CIS. Their 
positive predictive value will be lower in populations with a lower likelihood of MS. 
 
CIS = clinically isolated syndrome, DMT = disease-modifying therapy, MS = multiple sclerosis,

----- Page 42 (native) -----
THELANCETNEUROLOGY-D-17-00665 revision 1 
                                                                        Submitted; confidential 
 
Page 42 of 50 
Panel 3: Considerations to help avoid misdiagnosis of multiple sclerosis 
 
• 
Recognize that the McDonald Criteria were not developed to differentiate MS from other 
conditions but to identify MS or high likelihood of MS in patients with a typical CIS once 
other diagnoses have been deemed unlikely. 
• 
Integration of the history, examination, imaging, and laboratory evidence by a clinician with 
MS-related expertise remains fundamental in making a reliable diagnosis of MS or an 
alternative diagnosis. In addition to confirming DIS and DIT, diagnostic rigor in the 
interpretation of clinical data, imaging findings, and test results is necessary. 
• 
In the absence of a clear-cut typical CIS (see Glossary), caution should be exercised in 
making the diagnosis of MS, and it should be confirmed by further clinical and radiological 
follow-up. In such cases, the clinician should consider postponing making a definitive 
diagnosis and institution of long-term DMT, pending longer follow-up to accumulate 
additional evidence supporting the diagnosis. 
• 
Caution should be taken in accepting historical events as an attack in the absence of 
contemporaneous or current objective evidence providing corroboration. 
• 
There should be a low threshold for additional testing, including spinal cord MRI and/or CSF 
examination (i) when there is insufficient clinical and brain MRI evidence supporting a 
diagnosis of MS, particularly if initiation of long-term DMT is being considered; (ii) when 
there is a non-classical presentation, including patients with a progressive course at onset 
(primary progressive MS); (iii) when there are clinical, imaging, or laboratory features 
atypical of MS; and (iv) in populations in which diagnosing MS is less common (for example, 
children, older individuals, or non-Caucasians).

----- Page 43 (native) -----
THELANCETNEUROLOGY-D-17-00665 revision 1 
                                                                        Submitted; confidential 
 
Page 43 of 50 
CIS = clinically isolated syndrome, CSF = cerebrospinal fluid, DIS = dissemination in space, DIT 
= dissemination in time, DMT = disease modifying therapy, MRI = magnetic resonance imaging, 
MS = multiple sclerosis

----- Page 44 (native) -----
THELANCETNEUROLOGY-D-17-00665 revision 1 
                                                                        Submitted; confidential 
 
Page 44 of 50 
Panel 4: 2017 revisions to the McDonald Diagnostic Criteria for multiple sclerosis 
 
 
In a patient with a typical CIS and fulfillment of clinical or MRI criteria for DIS and no better 
explanation for the clinical presentation, demonstration of CSF-specific OCBs in the 
absence of other CSF findings atypical of MS allows a diagnosis of MS to be made. This 
recommendation is an addition to the 2010 McDonald Criteria.5 
 
Symptomatic and asymptomatic MRI lesions can be considered in the determination of DIS 
or DIT. MRI lesions in the optic nerve in a patient presenting with optic neuritis remain an 
exception and, due to insufficient evidence, cannot be utilized in fulfilling the McDonald 
Criteria. In the 2010 McDonald Criteria, the symptomatic lesion in a patient presenting with 
brainstem or spinal cord syndrome could not be included as MRI evidence of DIS or DIT.5 
 
Cortical and juxtacortical lesions can be used in fulfilling MRI criteria for DIS. Cortical lesions 
could not be used in fulfilling MRI criteria for DIS in the 2010 McDonald Criteria.5 
 
The diagnostic criteria for primary progressive MS in the revised 2017 McDonald Criteria 
remain the same as those outlined in the 2010 McDonald Criteria,5 aside from removal of 
the distinction between symptomatic and asymptomatic MRI lesions and that cortical lesions 
can be used. 
 
At the time of diagnosis, a provisional disease course should be specified (relapsing-
remitting, primary progressive, or secondary progressive) and whether the course is active 
or not, and progressive or not based on the prior year’s history. The phenotype should be 
periodically re-evaluated based on accumulated information. This recommendation is an 
addition to the 2010 McDonald Criteria.5

----- Page 45 (native) -----
THELANCETNEUROLOGY-D-17-00665 revision 1 
                                                                        Submitted; confidential 
 
Page 45 of 50 
CIS = clinically isolated syndrome, CSF = cerebrospinal fluid, DIS = dissemination in space, DIT 
= dissemination in time, MRI = magnetic resonance imaging, MS = multiple sclerosis, OCBs = 
oligoclonal bands

----- Page 46 (native) -----
THELANCETNEUROLOGY-D-17-00665 revision 1 
                                                                        Submitted; confidential 
 
Page 46 of 50 
Panel 5: 2017 McDonald Criteria for demonstration of DIS and DIT by MRI in a patient with 
a CIS 
 
DIS can be demonstrated by ≥1 T2-hyperintense lesionsa characteristic of MS in ≥2 of four 
areas of the central nervous system: 
 
Periventricularb 
 
Cortical/juxtacortical 
 
Infratentorial 
 
Spinal cord 
 
DIT can be demonstrated by: 
 
Simultaneous presence of gadolinium-enhancing and non-enhancing lesions at any timea 
OR 
 
A new T2-hyperintense and/or gadolinium-enhancing lesion on follow-up MRI, with 
reference to a baseline scan, irrespective of the timing of the baseline MRI 
 
CIS = clinically isolated syndrome, CNS = central nervous system, DIS = dissemination in space, 
DIT = dissemination in time, MRI = magnetic resonance imaging, MS = multiple sclerosis 
 
a Unlike the 2010 McDonald Criteria, no distinction between symptomatic and asymptomatic 
MRI lesions is required. 
b For some patients, for example, older individuals or those with vascular risk factors, it may be 
prudent for the clinician to seek a higher number of periventricular lesions.

----- Page 47 (native) -----
THELANCETNEUROLOGY-D-17-00665 revision 1 
                                                                        Submitted; confidential 
 
Page 47 of 50 
Table 1: The 2017 McDonald Criteria for diagnosis of multiple sclerosis in patients with 
an attacka at onset 
 
CLINICAL PRESENTATION 
ADDITIONAL DATA NEEDED FOR MS DIAGNOSIS 
≥2 clinical attacks and 
objective clinical evidence of 
≥2 lesions; or ≥2 clinical 
attacks and objective clinical 
evidence of 1 lesion and clear-
cut historical evidence of a 
prior attack involving a lesion 
in a distinct anatomic locationb 
Nonec 
≥2 clinical attacks and 
objective clinical evidence of 1 
lesion 
Dissemination in space, demonstrated by: 
An additional clinical attack implicating a different CNS site 
OR 
Demonstration of DIS by MRId 
1 clinical attack and objective 
clinical evidence of ≥2 lesions 
Dissemination in time, demonstrated by: 
A second clinical attack 
OR 
Demonstration of DIT by MRIe 
OR 
Demonstration of CSF-specific OCBsf 
1 clinical attack and objective 
clinical evidence of 1 lesion 
Dissemination in space and time, demonstrated by: 
For DIS: 
A second clinical attack implicating a different CNS site

----- Page 48 (native) -----
THELANCETNEUROLOGY-D-17-00665 revision 1 
                                                                        Submitted; confidential 
 
Page 48 of 50 
OR 
Demonstration of DIS by MRId 
 
AND 
 
For DIT: 
A second clinical attack 
OR 
Demonstration of DIT by MRIe 
OR 
Demonstration of CSF-specific OCBsf 
 
If the 2017 McDonald Criteria are fulfilled and there is no better explanation for the clinical 
presentation, the diagnosis is MS. If MS is suspected by virtue of a CIS but the 2017 McDonald 
Criteria are not completely met, the diagnosis is “possible MS.” If another diagnosis arises 
during the evaluation that better explains the clinical presentation, the diagnosis is “not MS.” 
 
CNS = central nervous system, CSF = cerebrospinal fluid, DIS = dissemination in space, DIT = 
dissemination in time, MRI = magnetic resonance imaging, MS = multiple sclerosis, OCBs = 
oligoclonal bands 
 
a An attack is defined in Panel 1: Glossary. 
b Clinical diagnosis based on objective clinical findings for two attacks is most secure. 
Reasonable historical evidence for one past attack, in the absence of documented objective 
neurological findings, can include historical events with symptoms and evolution characteristic

----- Page 49 (native) -----
THELANCETNEUROLOGY-D-17-00665 revision 1 
                                                                        Submitted; confidential 
 
Page 49 of 50 
for a prior inflammatory demyelinating attack; at least one attack, however, must be supported 
by objective findings. In the absence of residual objective evidence, caution is needed. 
c No additional tests are required to demonstrate DIS and DIT. However, unless MRI is not 
possible, brain MRI should be obtained in all patients in whom the diagnosis of MS is being 
considered. In addition, spinal cord MRI and/or CSF examination should be considered in 
patients with insufficient clinical and MRI evidence supporting MS, with a non-classical 
presentation, or with atypical features. If imaging or other tests (e.g. CSF) are undertaken and 
are negative, caution needs to be taken before making a diagnosis of MS, and alternative 
diagnoses should be considered. There must be no better explanation for the clinical 
presentation and objective evidence must be present to support a diagnosis of MS. 
d The MRI criteria for DIS are described in Panel 5. 
e The MRI criteria for DIT are described in Panel 5. 
f The presence of CSF OCBs does not demonstrate DIT per se but can substitute for 
demonstration of DIT.

----- Page 50 (native) -----
THELANCETNEUROLOGY-D-17-00665 revision 1 
                                                                        Submitted; confidential 
 
Page 50 of 50 
Panel 6: 2017 McDonald Criteria for diagnosis of MS in patients with a disease course 
characterized by progression from onset (primary progressive MS) 
 
Primary progressive MS may be diagnosed in patients with: 
 
One year of disability progression (retrospectively or prospectively determined) independent 
of clinical relapse 
 
Plus 2 out of 3 of the following criteria: 
 
≥1 T2-hyperintense lesions in ≥1 areas in the brain characteristic of MS (periventricular, 
cortical/juxtacortical or infratentorial)a 
 
≥2 T2-hyperintense lesions in the spinal corda 
 
Presence of CSF-specific OCBs 
 
CSF = cerebrospinal fluid, MS = multiple sclerosis, OCBs = oligoclonal bands 
 
a Unlike the 2010 McDonald Criteria, no distinction between symptomatic and asymptomatic 
MRI lesions is required.