

----- Page 1 (native) -----
HAL Id: hal-02012352
https://univ-lyon1.hal.science/hal-02012352v1
Submitted on 29 Jan 2024
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not.
The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.
L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.
The global spectrum of plant form and function
Sandra Diaz, J. Kattge, J. H. Cornelissen, I. J. Wright, S. Lavorel, Stéphane
Dray, B. Reu, M. Kleyer, C. Wirth, I. C. Prentice, et al.
To cite this version:
Sandra Diaz, J. Kattge, J. H. Cornelissen, I. J. Wright, S. Lavorel, et al.. The global spectrum of
plant form and function. Nature, 2016, 529 (7585), pp.167-71. ￿10.1038/nature16489￿. ￿hal-02012352￿

----- Page 2 (native) -----
1 4  j a n u a r y  2 0 1 6  |  V O L  5 2 9  |  N A T U R E  |  1 6 7
Article
doi:10.1038/nature16489
The global spectrum of plant form and 
function
Sandra Díaz1, Jens Kattge2,3, Johannes H. C. Cornelissen4, Ian J. Wright5, Sandra Lavorel6, Stéphane Dray7, Björn Reu8,9,  
Michael Kleyer10, Christian Wirth2,3,11, I. Colin Prentice5,12, Eric Garnier13, Gerhard Bönisch2, Mark Westoby5,  
Hendrik Poorter14, Peter B. Reich15,16, Angela T. Moles17, John Dickie18, Andrew N. Gillison19, Amy E. Zanne20,21,  
Jérôme Chave22, S. Joseph Wright23, Serge N. Sheremet’ev24, Hervé Jactel25,26, Christopher Baraloto27,28, Bruno Cerabolini29, 
Simon Pierce30, Bill Shipley31, Donald Kirkup32, Fernando Casanoves33, Julia S. Joswig2, Angela Günther2, Valeria Falczuk1, 
Nadja Rüger3,23, Miguel D. Mahecha2,3 & Lucas D. Gorné1
Vascular plants are the main entry point for energy and matter into the 
Earth’s terrestrial ecosystems. Their Darwinian struggle for growth, 
survival and reproduction in very different arenas has resulted in an 
extremely wide variety of form and function, both across and within 
habitats. Yet it has long been thought1–8 that there is a pattern to be 
found in this remarkable evolutionary radiation—that some trait con-
stellations are viable and successful whereas others are not.
Empirical support for a strongly limited set of viable trait combina-
tions has accumulated for traits associated with single plant organs, 
such as leaves7,9–12, stems13,14 and seeds15–17. Evidence across plant 
organs has been rarer, restricted geographically or taxonomically, and 
often contradictory18–29. How tightly whole-plant form and function 
are restricted at the global scale remains unresolved.
Here we present the first global quantitative picture of essential 
functional diversity of extant vascular plants. We quantify the volume, 
shape and boundaries of this functional space via joint consideration 
of six traits that together capture the essence of plant form and func-
tion: adult plant height, stem specific density, leaf size expressed as 
leaf area, leaf mass per area, leaf nitrogen content per unit mass, and 
diaspore mass. Our dataset, based on a recently updated communal 
plant trait database30, covers 46,085 vascular plant species from 423 
families and to our knowledge spans the widest range of growth-forms 
and geographical locations to date in published trait analyses, includ-
ing some of the most extreme plant trait values ever measured in the 
field (Table 1, Extended Data Fig. 1). On this basis we reveal that the 
trait space actually occupied is strongly restricted as compared to 
four alternative null hypotheses. We demonstrate that plant species 
largely occupy a plane in the six-dimensional trait space. Two key trait 
dimensions within this plane are the size of whole plants and organs 
on the one hand, and the construction costs for photosynthetic leaf 
area, on the other. We subsequently show which sections of the plane 
are occupied, and how densely, by different growth-forms and major 
taxonomic groups. The design opportunities and limits indicated by 
today’s global spectrum of plant form and function provide a founda-
tion to achieve a better understanding of the evolutionary trajectory 
of vascular plants and help frame and test hypotheses as to where and 
Earth is home to a remarkable diversity of plant forms and life histories, yet comparatively few essential trait combinations 
have proved evolutionarily viable in today’s terrestrial biosphere. By analysing worldwide variation in six major traits 
critical to growth, survival and reproduction within the largest sample of vascular plant species ever compiled, we found 
that occupancy of six-dimensional trait space is strongly concentrated, indicating coordination and trade-offs. Three-
quarters of trait variation is captured in a two-dimensional global spectrum of plant form and function. One major 
dimension within this plane reflects the size of whole plants and their parts; the other represents the leaf economics 
spectrum, which balances leaf construction costs against growth potential. The global plant trait spectrum provides a 
backdrop for elucidating constraints on evolution, for functionally qualifying species and ecosystems, and for improving 
models that predict future vegetation based on continuous variation in plant form and function.
1Instituto Multidisciplinario de Biología Vegetal (IMBIV), CONICET and FCEFyN, Universidad Nacional de Córdoba, Casilla de Correo 495, 5000 Córdoba, Argentina. 2Max Planck Institute for 
Biogeochemistry, Hans-Knöll-Straße 10, 07745 Jena, Germany. 3German Centre for Integrative Biodiversity Research (iDiv) Halle-Jena-Leipzig, Deutscher Platz 5e, 04103 Leipzig, Germany. 
4Systems Ecology, Department of Ecological Science, Vrije Universiteit, De Boelelaan 1085, 1081 HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 5Department of Biological Sciences, Macquarie University, 
Sydney, New South Wales 2109, Australia. 6Laboratoire d’Ecologie Alpine, UMR 5553, CNRS – Université Grenoble Alpes, 38041 Grenoble Cedex 9, France. 7Laboratoire de Biométrie et Biologie 
Evolutive, UMR5558, Université Lyon 1, CNRS, F-69622 Villeurbanne, France. 8Institute of Biology, University of Leipzig, Johannisallee 21, 04103 Leipzig, Germany. 9Escuela de Biología, 
Universidad Industrial de Santander, Cra. 27 Calle 9, 680002 Bucaramanga, Colombia. 10Landscape Ecology Group, Institute of Biology and Environmental Sciences, University of Oldenburg, 
D-26111 Oldenburg, Germany. 11Department of Systematic Botany and Functional Biodiversity, University of Leipzig, Johannisallee 21, 04103 Leipzig, Germany. 12AXA Chair in Biosphere and 
Climate Impacts, Grand Challenges in Ecosystems and the Environment and Grantham Institute – Climate Change and the Environment, Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, 
Silwood Park Campus, Buckhurst Road, Ascot SL5 7PY, UK. 13Centre d’Ecologie Fonctionnelle et Evolutive (UMR 5175), CNRS-Université de Montpellier - Université Paul-Valéry Montpellier - EPHE, 
34293 Montpellier Cedex 5, France. 14Plant Sciences (IBG-2), Forschungszentrum Jülich GmbH, D-52425 Jülich, Germany. 15Department of Forest Resources, University of Minnesota, St Paul, 
Minnesota 55108, USA. 16Hawkesbury Institute for the Environment, University of Western Sydney, Penrith New South Wales 2751, Australia. 17Evolution & Ecology Research Centre, School of 
Biological, Earth and Environmental Sciences, UNSW Australia, Sydney, New South Wales 2052, Australia. 18Collections , The Royal Botanic Gardens Kew, Wakehurst Place, Ardingly, West Sussex, 
RH17 6TN, UK. 19Center for Biodiversity Management, P.O. Box 120, Yungaburra, Queensland 4884, Australia. 20Department of Biological Sciences, George Washington University, Washington DC 
20052, USA. 21Center for Conservation and Sustainable Development, Missouri Botanical Garden, St Louis, Missouri 63121, USA. 22UMR 5174 Laboratoire Evolution et Diversité Biologique, CNRS 
& Université Paul Sabatier, Toulouse 31062, France. 23Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute, Apartado 0843-03092, Balboa, Ancón, Panama. 24Komarov Botanical Institute, Prof. Popov Street 2, 
St Petersburg 197376, Russia. 25INRA, UMR1202 BIOGECO, F-33610 Cestas, France. 26Université de Bordeaux, BIOGECO, UMR 1202, F-33600 Pessac, France. 27International Center for Tropical 
Botany, Department of Biological Sciences, Florida International University, Miami, Florida 33199, USA. 28INRA, UMR Ecologie des Forêts de Guyane, 97310 Kourou, French Guiana. 29Department 
of Theoretical and Applied Sciences, University of Insubria, Via J.H. Dunant 3, I-21100 Varese, Italy. 30Department of Agricultural and Environmental Sciences (DiSAA), University of Milan, Via G. 
Celoria 2, I-20133 Milan, Italy. 31Département de biologie, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Quebec J1K 2R1, Canada. 32Biodiversity Informatics and Spatial Analysis, Jodrell Building, The 
Royal Botanic Gardens Kew, Richmond TW9 3AB, UK. 33Unidad de Bioestadística, Centro Agronómico Tropical de Investigación y Enseñanza (CATIE), 7170 Turrialba, 30501, Costa Rica.
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

----- Page 3 (native) -----
1 6 8  |  N A T U R E  |  V O L  5 2 9  |  1 4  J a n u a r y  2 0 1 6
Article
RESEARCH
how ecological filtering and evolution might further shape the Earth’s 
plant trait space.
The trait space occupied by plants worldwide
Certain traits can be thought of as indexing positions of species along 
key dimensions of plant ecological strategy directly relevant to growth, 
survival and reproduction19,20,22,31–33. We chose six traits whose fun-
damental importance for ecological strategy has been established 
unequivocally and for which data have recently become available for 
an unprecedented number of species worldwide30. Among the six key 
traits (see Methods for details and references) adult plant height (H) 
corresponds with the ability to pre-empt light resources and disperse 
diaspores. Stem specific density (SSD) reflects a trade-off between 
growth potential and mortality risk from biomechanical or hydraulic 
failure. Leaf area (LA, size of an individual leaf) has important conse-
quences for leaf energy and water balance. Leaf mass per area (LMA) 
and leaf nitrogen content per unit mass (Nmass) express different aspects 
of leaf strategy for resource capture and conservation: LMA reflects 
a trade-off between carbon gain and longevity, while Nmass reflects 
a trade-off between the benefits of photosynthetic potential and the 
costs of acquiring nitrogen and suffering herbivory. Diaspore mass (the 
mass of an individual dispersed seed or spore; SM) reflects a trade-
off between seedling survival versus colonization ability in space and 
time. Ranges of trait variation span from 2 (SSD, Nmass) to 13 orders of 
magnitude (SM) (Table 1).
We investigated which portion of the six-dimensional trait space is 
occupied by vascular plants that now live on Earth. There are two pri-
mary reasons why plants might occupy a subset of the potential trait 
space: (1) values of independent traits are distributed along each axis 
in a clumped, non-uniform manner; and (2) there are inherent corre-
lations between the values of different traits. We therefore built four 
null models varying the trait distributions and their correlation struc-
ture. We computed the volume of the six-dimensional convex hull34, 
i.e. the smallest convex volume in hyperspace that contains the (log10- 
and z-transformed) observed values of H, SSD, LA, LMA, Nmass and 
SM (for a visualization see https://sdray.shinyapps.io/globalspectr/; 
Supplementary Application 1), and compared it against hypervolumes 
from four null hypotheses (hvnm1 to hvnm4; shown diagrammatically 
in Fig.1 and described in detail in Methods). Hypervolumes hvnm1 
to hvnm3 assume that the traits vary independently, resulting in a 
functional space spanning along six orthogonal axes. Null model 1 
assumes that any combination of trait values can arise and escape 
natural selection with equal probability (for example ref. 35), thus 
extreme and central values are equally likely, each trait having a 
uniform distribution, and hvnm1 approximating a hypercube. Null 
model 2 assumes that extreme trait values are selected against during 
evolution and each trait has a log-normal distribution, with hvnm2 
approximating a hypersphere. Null model 3 imposes no assumptions 
about trait distributions but instead allows each trait to be distrib-
uted as observed and assumes traits are independent of one other. 
Null model 4 assumes that extreme values are selected against (i.e., 
log-normally distributed) and maintains the observed correlation 
structure among traits. Relative to null models 1 to 3, null model 4 
collapses the multidimensional trait-space occupied by plants (hvnm4) 
into an elongated hyperellipsoid.
We found that the observed hypervolume (hvobs) is much smaller 
than hypervolumes expected under the first three null models (hvnm1 
to hvnm3) (Fig. 1). While closer in size to hvnm4, it is still 20% smaller. It 
also shows greater aggregation of species (‘lumpiness’) in multivariate 
hvnm1
Observed spectrum
hvnm4
hvobs
–18.05 %
–63.91 %
hvnm3
hvnm2
–98.05 %
–72.43 %
Null model 3  
Traits distributed
as observed and 
independent from 
each other
Null model 1 
Traits uniformly
distributed and 
independent 
from each other
Null model 2 
Traits normally
distributed and 
independent 
from each other
Null model 4  
Traits normally 
distributed and 
correlated as 
observed
Figure 1 | The volume in trait space occupied by vascular plant species 
is strongly constrained compared to theoretical null models. The five 
diagrams are pictorial representations based on three out of the six trait 
dimensions forming the hypervolumes under scrutiny. The hypervolumes 
are constructed on the basis of log10- and z-transformed observed values 
of H, SSD, LA, LMA, Nmass and SM (observed hypervolume = hvobs), or 
on the bases of four different null models of multivariate variation of 
those traits (hvnm1 to hvnm4) (see Methods). Numbers adjacent to arrows 
indicate percentage reductions in size of hvobs compared to the null-model 
hypervolumes (all significant at P < 0.001).
Table 1 | Range of variation in functional traits, geographic distribution and climatic conditions
Abbreviation
Range
No. of species
Adult plant height (m)
H
0.001* to 90†
24,720
Stem specific density (mg mm−3)
SSD
0.06‡ to 1.39§
11,356
Leaf area (mm2)
LA
0.79* to 2.79 × 106||
12,173
Leaf mass per area (g m−2)
LMA
4.9¶ to 1,507#
10,490
N content per unit leaf mass (mg g−1)
Nmass
2.48 to 68.98**
8,695
Diaspore mass (mg)
SM
5.15 × 10−6†† to 2.05 × 107‡‡
24,779
Diaspore mass (mg) excluding pteridophytes
SM
3.0 × 10−4§§ to 2.05 × 107‡‡
24,449
Latitude  (degrees)
55 S to 83.17 N
Altitude (m)
−59 to 5,249
Mean annual temperature (°C)
−27.22 to 29.97
Mean annual sum of precipitation (mm yr−1)
<5 to 7,693
Latitude and altitude are based on species occurrences in the Global Biodiversity Information Facility database (http://www.gbif.org). Mean annual temperature and annual sum of precipitation refer 
to CRU0.5 degree climatology.  *Wolffia arrhiza and Azolla microphylla; †Sequoia sempervirens and Eucalyptus regnans; ‡Utricularia vulgaris; §Caesalpinia sclerocarpa; ||Victoria amazonica; ¶Myriophyllum 
aquaticum; #Agave americana; Hakea erecta; **Dipcadi glaucum; ††Blechnaceae; ‡‡Lodoicea maldivica; §§Laelia undulata and Alectra vogelii.
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

----- Page 4 (native) -----
1 4  j a n u a r y  2 0 1 6  |  V O L  5 2 9  |  N A T U R E  |  1 6 9
Article RESEARCH
space than expected under each of the null models (Supplementary 
Table 1). Thus the restriction of the observed hypervolume mainly 
reflects correlations among the six traits, and also—to a smaller 
degree—a greater concentration than expected under multivariate 
normality. In sum, the trait hypervolume occupied by living vascular 
plants is strongly constrained, converging towards a relatively small 
set of successful trait combinations.
Main trends of variation
Within the observed worldwide plant trait space we identified the 
main independent dimensions of variation. Seventy-four percent of 
the variation in the six-dimensional space was accounted for by the 
plane defined by the first two principal components (PC), the only 
PC found to contain significant, non-redundant information (Fig. 2, 
Extended Data Table 1 and Extended Data Fig. 2; all PC displayed at 
https://sdray.shinyapps.io/globalspectrPC; Supplementary Application 
2). Within this plane two notable dimensions of trait variation stand 
out. One dimension runs from short species tending to have small 
diaspores to tall species tending to have large diaspores (lower left 
to upper right in Fig. 2a, ‘H–SM’, more strongly associated with PC1 
than PC2). The other (upper left to lower right in Fig 2a, ‘LMA–Nmass’, 
more strongly associated with PC2 than PC1) runs from species with 
cheaply ­constructed, ‘acquisitive’ leaves (low-LMA, nitrogen-rich) to 
species with ‘conservative’ leaves (high-LMA, nitrogen-poor) that are 
expected to have longer leaf lifespan and higher survival in the face of 
abiotic and biotic hazards7,10,36. Stem specific density (SSD) and leaf 
area (LA) also load heavily on the plane and are correlated with both 
the H–SM and the LMA–Nmass dimensions (Fig 2a, Extended Data 
Table 1). Although SSD and SM increase with plant height, at any 
given H there is considerable independent variation in both (Extended 
Data Fig. 3a, f), and at any given LMA and Nmass there is considera-
ble independent variation in LA (Extended Data Figs 3b, c). These 
general patterns are robust (Extended Data Table 1) with respect to 
species selection (for example, considering angiosperms rather than 
all species), to re-running analyses on a 45,507-species ‘gap-filled’ trait 
matrix rather than the 2,214-species six-trait matrix, and to exclusion 
of individual traits (for example, using only one rather than both leaf 
economic traits). The outer reaches of the main plane of variation 
represent extreme combinations of plant size and leaf structure and 
function (see circled numbers in Fig. 2a, and Extended Data Table 
2 for illustrative species), with a wide gradient of intermediate trait 
combinations between them, together expressing the rich variety of 
ways in which plants balance the challenges of growth, survival and 
reproduction.
Figure 2 | The global spectrum of plant form and function. a, Projection 
of global vascular plant species (dots) on the plane defined by principal 
component axes (PC) 1 and 2 (details in Extended Data Table 1 and 
Extended Data Fig. 2). Solid arrows indicate direction and weighing of 
vectors representing the six traits considered; icons illustrate low and 
high extremes of each trait vector. Circled numbers indicate approximate 
position of extreme poles of whole-plant specialization, illustrated by 
typical species (Extended Data Table 2). The colour gradient indicates 
regions of highest (red) to lowest (white) occurrence probability of species 
in the trait space defined by PC1 and PC2, with contour lines indicating 
0.5, 0.95 and 0.99 quantiles (see Methods, kernel density estimation). 
Red regions falling within the limits of the 0.50 occurrence probability 
correspond to the functional hotspots referred to in main text.  
b, c, location of different growth-forms (b) and major taxa (c) in the  
global spectrum.
–4
–2
0
2
4
–4
–2
0
2
PC1
–4
–2
0
2
2
3
4
5
LA
LMA
Nmass
1
4
PC1
PC2
Angiosperm
Gymnosperm
Pteridophyte
–4
–2
0
2
4
–4
–2
0
2
–4
–6
–2
0
2
4
PC1
PC2
PC2
Woody
Non-woody
a
b
c
SM
H
SSD
0.99
0.99
0.95
0.5
0.5
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

----- Page 5 (native) -----
1 7 0  |  N A T U R E  |  V O L  5 2 9  |  1 4  J a n u a r y  2 0 1 6
Article
RESEARCH
Major taxa, growth-forms, and functional hotspots
Different plant groups distribute unevenly in the global spectrum of 
form and function. Both herbaceous and woody growth-forms show 
considerable variation along the two main dimensions (Fig 2b). The 
two groups are offset along the H–SM dimension (Fig. 2b), with woody 
species, on average, being taller and having larger seeds and leaves; 
woody species also tend to have higher SSD and LMA than herba-
ceous species (Extended Data Fig. 3a–e). Also, although taller species 
have larger seeds in both herbaceous and woody species-groups, the 
relationship is only very weak in herbaceous species (Extended Data 
Figs 3f and 4). In sum, the distinction in traits between herbaceous and 
woody growth-forms goes beyond the obvious difference in height and 
stem structure that has been recognized since antiquity37. At the same 
time, there exist commonalities in trait coordination and trade-offs 
across both herbaceous and woody plants, shown here at a global scale 
for the first time. For example, herbaceous and woody plants overlap 
widely along the LMA-Nmass dimension (Fig. 2b), particularly in regard 
to Nmass (Extended Data Fig. 3c), and LMA and Nmass are largely inde-
pendent from LA in both groups (Extended Data Fig. 3b, c). Further, 
while neither SSD nor LMA increases with plant stature within either 
group (Extended Data Figs 3a, e and 4), LA increases with H in both 
(Extended Data Fig. 3d). These multivariate trends are summarised by 
the clear distinction of herbaceous and woody species-groups along 
PC1, and their broad overlap along PC2 (Extended Data Fig. 2a).
There are also strong differences in trait-space occupancy by major 
taxa. For gymnosperms, high costs of seed packaging and abortion 
are thought to set a lower bound on seed size38,39. Accordingly in 
Fig 2c gymnosperms are confined to the right hand side (see also 
Extended Data Fig. 2b, and, for examples, Extended Data Table 2). 
The emergence of angiosperms allowed a considerable extension into 
smaller seed size40 that is manifest in extant species. This also opened 
up lifestyles involving colonization of open ground, shorter lifespans 
and herbaceous growth-form (towards the left of Fig. 2a). The sec-
ond major angiosperm innovation whose footprint is evident in the 
trait space concerns xylem vessels. Angiosperm vessels are longer 
and larger-­diameter conduits than gymnosperm and pteridophyte 
tracheids, permitting much higher hydraulic conductivities. This, 
together with a greater density of leaf veins, has allowed angiosperms 
to deliver a faster transpiration stream while requiring less volume 
within the leaf41. These anatomical innovations have made it possible 
for angiosperms to extend the range of leaf stomatal conductances 
and photosynthetic capacities to higher values (requiring coordinated 
higher Nmass) and the range of LMA to lower values compared to gym-
nosperms and pteridophytes (Fig. 2c). Higher hydraulic conductivity 
presumably also enabled the evolution of very large leaves in angio-
sperms, and a far wider variety in leaf morphology too. Nevertheless, 
while angiosperm innovations have expanded trait space considerably 
towards higher leaf Nmass and LA and (compared with gymnosperms) 
lower diaspore mass, angiosperms also converged on the same zones 
of trait space as gymnosperms and pteridophytes, as seen in the lower 
right and lower left of the global trait plane (Fig. 2c).
There are two clear functional hotspots—areas of particularly 
dense species occupation—in trait space (Fig. 2a). The bimodality 
resides in H and in SSD, rather than in LMA, Nmass or LA (Extended 
Data Fig. 4). The first hotspot almost entirely corresponds to herba-
ceous plants and lies at the core of the distribution of both graminoid 
(grass-like) and non-graminoid herbs, having small, acquisitive leaves 
and small seeds. The second hotspot lies within the trait space occu-
pied by woody plants, positioned towards the upper right corner of 
Fig. 2a. It consists mostly of tree species of moderate to great height 
with large leaves and large seeds; plants other than angiosperms are 
almost completely absent from it. Many phylogenetically distant fam-
ilies and orders of angiosperms are represented within each hotspot 
(Supplementary Table 2), indicating that these prevalent ecological 
trait constellations represent successful solutions acquired repeatedly 
through the evolutionary history of vascular plants.
Discussion
Our findings show that the trait space currently occupied by vascular 
plants is quite restricted compared to the range of possibilities that 
would exist if traits varied independently. Importantly, this finding 
arises from the combined analysis of six traits describing different 
plant organs, and from a wider spread of taxa and life histories than 
has previously been possible. It yields the most comprehensive pic-
ture to date of how the remarkable functional diversity of vascular 
plants seen on Earth today has been able to evolve within very general 
constraints. This worldwide functional six-trait space is wide, diverse 
and lumpy, with its fringes occupied by species (indicated with circled 
numbers in Fig. 2a) ranging from the short model plant thale cress 
(Arabidopsis thaliana) to the 60-m tall Brazil Nut tree (Berthollettia 
excelsa), from flimsy watermilfoil (Myriophyllum spicatum) to tough 
monkey puzzle tree (Araucaria araucana), from the tender but toxic 
devil’s snare (Datura stramonium) to the hardy needlewood (Hakea 
leucoptera), from the minute leaves and seeds of heather (Calluna 
vulgaris) to the large leaves and seeds of lotus (Nelumbo nucifera) 
(description and additional illustrative species in Extended Data 
Table 2). Yet, this variation of the six key traits is largely concentrated 
into a plane.
Stem density, leaf size and diaspore size represent trade-offs within 
distinct aspects of plant biology32, and in previous studies of trends 
across different plant organs, these traits have shown considerable 
variation that is independent from whole-plant size and leaf carbon 
economy. However, those analyses were based on far more restricted 
datasets than considered here, in terms of growth-forms, habitats, or 
both, considering for example tropical woody species21–23,26, tem-
perate semiarid pine forests24, or countrywide herbaceous floras27. 
At the global scale of our study, these three traits do not constitute 
major independent dimensions; rather, substantial variation in them 
is captured by the plane that summarizes global variation in vascu-
lar plant design (Fig. 2). Our results are correlative and cannot prove 
rigorously why such a large share of the potential trait volume is not 
occupied. Still, from first principles many more combinations of traits 
than those observed seem feasible as far as biomechanics and evolu-
tionary genetics are concerned. We suggest the concentration into two 
dimensions and the lumpiness within that plane reflect the major trait 
constellations that are competent and competitive across the ecological 
situations available on Earth today.
The patterns described here pertain to fundamental aspects of form 
and function critical to growth, survival and reproduction of the vast 
majority of vascular plants on Earth. Importantly, plants converge and 
diverge in many more ways than explored here, through variation in 
a vast array of traits beyond the scope of our analysis, related to the 
fine-tuning of different taxa to specific abiotic and biotic conditions 
in their habitat (for example refs 42–44). Such variation fits within the 
more general patterns shown here.
More broadly, our findings are directly relevant to a number of 
long-running and emerging broad-scale scientific initiatives. First, 
our findings provide the widest empirical context so far for examining 
theories that have focused on plant ecological strategies—on differ-
ent aspects of the Darwinian struggle for existence. For example, the 
H–SM dimension could be seen as reflecting the r (colonization) ver-
sus K (exploitation) continuum4,45. The LMA–Nmass dimension reflects 
the A (adversity-selection) continuum4,46, acquisitive-conservative 
continuum5,7,19,20 or leaf economic spectrum10. The positions signalled 
by numbers 3, 4, and 5 in Fig. 2a (and described in Extended Data 
Table 2) could arguably roughly correspond to the stress-tolerant, 
ruderal, and competitor strategies of Grime3,11,19. Interestingly, the 
functional hotspots lie at intermediate positions on the plane rather 
than at any of these extreme positions (that is, r versus K, acquisitive 
versus conservative resource economy, C, S or R-strategy).
Second, the global spectrum we describe has potential to improve 
emerging large-scale vegetation and ecosystem models (for exam-
ple see refs 47–49) because we clearly show (Fig. 2a and Extended 
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

----- Page 6 (native) -----
1 4  j a n u a r y  2 0 1 6  |  V O L  5 2 9  |  N A T U R E  |  1 7 1
Article RESEARCH
Data Fig. 4) that only a limited set of combinations are observed 
from six plant traits most fundamental to survival, growth and 
reproduction.
More generally, our findings—as encapsulated in the plane of 
Fig. 2—establish a backdrop against which many other facets of plant 
biology can be placed into a broader context. Plant lineages, evolution-
ary trajectories, and historical and contemporary plant communities 
and biomes can be mapped onto this global trait spectrum. Trait vari-
ation in any given physical setting can be compared to the worldwide 
background. Model species such as Arabidopsis thaliana (located at 
one extreme of the spectrum) can be positioned against this backdrop, 
helping to judge how typical or otherwise their physiology and natural 
history might be. The global spectrum of plant form and function is 
thus, in a sense, a galactic plane within which we can position any 
plant—from star anise to sunflower—based on its traits.
Online Content Methods, along with any additional Extended Data display items and 
Source Data, are available in the online version of the paper; references unique to 
these sections appear only in the online paper.
received 16 September; accepted 26 November 2015. 
Published online 23 December 2015.
1.	
Schimper, A. Plant-geography upon a Physiological Basis (Oxford Univ. Press, 
1903).
2.	
Warming, E. Ecology of Plants (Clarendon, 1909).
3.	
Grime, J. P. Vegetation classification by reference to strategies. Nature 250, 
26–31 (1974).
4.	
Southwood, T. R. E. Habitat, the templet for ecological strategies? J. Anim. Ecol. 
46, 337–365 (1977).
5.	
Chapin, F. S. The mineral nutrition of wild plants. Annu. Rev. Ecol. Syst. 11, 
233–260 (1980).
6.	
Niklas, K. J. The Evolutionary Biology of Plants (Univ. of Chicago Press, 1997).
7.	
Reich, P. B., Walters, M. B. & Ellsworth, D. S. From tropics to tundra: global 
convergence in plant functioning. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 94, 13730–13734 
(1997).
8.	
Ackerly, D. Functional strategies of chaparral shrubs in relation to seasonal 
water deficit and disturbance. Ecol. Monogr. 74, 25–44 (2004).
9.	
Field, C. H. & Mooney, H. A. in On the Economy of Plant Form and Function (ed. 
Givnish, T. J.) pp. 25–49 (Cambridge Univ. Press, 1986).
10.	
Wright, I. J. et al. The worldwide leaf economics spectrum. Nature 428, 
821–827 (2004).
11.	
Pierce, S., Brusa, G., Vagge, I. & Cerabolini, B. E. L. Allocating CSR plant 
functional types: the use of leaf economics and size traits to classify woody 
and herbaceous vascular plants. Funct. Ecol. 27, 1002–1010 (2013).
12.	
Li, L. et al. Leaf economics and hydraulic traits are decoupled in five 
species-rich tropical-subtropical forests. Ecol. Lett. 18, 899–906 (2015).
13.	
Chave, J. et al. Towards a worldwide wood economics spectrum. Ecol. Lett. 12, 
351–366 (2009).
14.	
Zanne, A. E. et al. Angiosperm wood structure: Global patterns in vessel 
anatomy and their relation to wood density and potential conductivity. Am. J. 
Bot. 97, 207–215 (2010).
15.	
Salisbury, E. Seed size and mass in relation to environment. Proc. R. Soc. B 
186, 83–88 (1974).
16.	
Thompson, K. Seeds and Seed Banks. New Phytol. 106, 23–34 (1987).
17.	
Moles, A. T., Falster, D. S., Leishman, M. R. & Westoby, M. Small-seeded species 
produce more seeds per square metre of canopy per year, but not per 
individual per lifetime. J. Ecol. 92, 384–396 (2004).
18.	
Lambers, H. & Poorter, H. Inherent variation in growth rate between higher 
plants: a search for physiological causes and ecological consequences. Adv. 
Ecol. Res. 23, 187–261 (1992).
19.	
Grime, J. P. et al. Integrated screening validates primary axes of specialisation 
in plants. Oikos 79, 259–281 (1997).
20.	
Díaz, S. et al. The plant traits that drive ecosystems: evidence from three 
continents. J. Veg. Sci. 15, 295–304 (2004).
21.	
Wright, I. J. et al. Relationships among ecologically important dimensions of 
plant trait variation in seven neotropical forests. Ann. Bot. 99, 1003–1015 
(2007).
22.	
Poorter, L. et al. Are functional traits good predictors of demographic rates? 
Evidence from five neotropical forests. Ecology 89, 1908–1920 (2008).
23.	
Baraloto, C. et al. Decoupled leaf and stem economics in rain forest trees. Ecol. 
Lett. 13, 1338–1347 (2010).
24.	
Laughlin, D. C., Leppert, J. J., Moore, M. M. & Sieg, C. H. A multi-trait test of the 
leaf-height-seed plant strategy scheme with 133 species from a pine forest 
flora. Funct. Ecol. 24, 493–501 (2010).
25.	
Freschet, G. T., Cornelissen, J. H. C., Van Logtestijn, R. S. P. & Aerts, R. Evidence 
of the ‘plant economics spectrum’in a subarctic flora. J. Ecol. 98, 362–373 
(2010).
26.	
Patiño, S. et al. Coordination of physiological and structural traits in Amazon 
forest trees. Biogeosciences 9, 775–801 (2012).
27.	
Pierce, S., Bottinelli, A., Bassani, I., Ceriani, R. M. & Cerabolini, B. E. L. How well 
do seed production traits correlate with leaf traits, whole-plant traits and plant 
ecological strategies? Plant Ecol. 215, 1351–1359 (2014).
28.	
Price, C. A. et al. Are leaf functional traits ‘invariant’ with plant size and what is 
‘invariance’ anyway? Funct. Ecol. 28, 1330–1343 (2014).
29.	
Cornwell, W. K. et al. Functional distinctiveness of major plant lineages. J. Ecol. 
102, 345–356 (2014).
30.	
Kattge, J. et al. TRY–a global database of plant traits. Glob. Change Biol. 17, 
2905–2935 (2011).
31.	
Weiher, E. et al. Challenging Theophrastus: a common core list of plant traits 
for functional ecology. J. Veg. Sci. 10, 609–620 (1999).
32.	
Westoby, M., Falster, D. S., Moles, A. T., Vesk, P. A. & Wright, I. J. Plant ecological 
strategies: some leading dimensions of variation between species. Annu. Rev. 
Ecol. Syst. 33, 125–159 (2002).
33.	
Garnier, E., Navas, M. & Grigulis, K. Plant Functional Diversity - Organism Traits, 
Community Structure, and Ecosystem Properties (Oxford Univ. Press, 2016).
34.	
Cornwell, W. K., Schwilk, L. D. & Ackerly, D. D. A trait-based test for habitat 
filtering: convex hull volume. Ecology 87, 1465–1471 (2006).
35.	
Leimar, O. Evolutionary change and Darwinian demons. Selection 2, 65–72 
(2001).
36.	
Coley, P. D., Bryant, J. P. & Chapin, F. S. III. Resource availability and plant 
antiherbivore defense. Science 230, 895–899 (1985).
37.	
Theophrastus. Enquiry into Plants and Minor Works on Odours and Weather 
Signs (translated by Hort, A. F) (Heinemann, 1916).
38.	
Haig, D. & Westoby, M. Seed size, pollination costs and angiosperm success. 
Evol. Ecol. 5, 231–247 (1991).
39.	
Lord, J. M. & Westoby, M. Accessory costs of seed production and the evolution 
of angiosperms. Evolution 66, 200–210 (2012).
40.	
Eriksson, O., Friis, E. M. & Löfgren, P. Seed size, fruit size and dispersal spectra 
in angiosperms from the Early Cretaceous to the Late Tertiary. Am. Nat. 156, 
47–58 (2000).
41.	
Boyce, C. K., Brodribb, T. J., Feild, T. S. & Zwieniecki, M. A. Angiosperm leaf vein 
evolution was physiologically and environmentally transformative. Proc. R. Soc. 
B 276, 1771–1776 (2009).
42.	
Grubb, P. J. The maintenance of species-richness in plant communities: the 
importance of the regeneration niche. Biol. Rev. Camb. Philos. Soc. 52, 
107–145 (1977).
43.	
Grubb, P. J. in The Population Structure of Vegetation (ed. White, J.) pp. 595–­621 
(Springer, 1985).
44.	
Grime, J. P. Declining plant diversity: empty niches or functional shifts? J. Veg. 
Sci. 13, 457–460 (2002).
45.	
MacArthur, R. H. & Wilson, E. O. The Theory of Island Biogeography (Princeton 
Univ. Press, 1967).
46.	
Greenslade, P. Adversity selection and the habitat templet. Am. Nat. 122, 
352–365 (1983).
47.	
van Bodegom, P. M., Douma, J. C. & Verheijen, L. M. A fully traits-based 
approach to modeling global vegetation distribution. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 
111, 13733–13738 (2014).
48.	
Scheiter, S., Langan, L. & Higgins, S. I. Next-generation dynamic global 
vegetation models: learning from community ecology. New Phytol. 198, 
957–969 (2013).
49.	
Harfoot, M. B. J. et al. Emergent global patterns of ecosystem structure and 
function from a mechanistic general ecosystem model. PLoS Biol. 12, 
e1001841 (2014).
Supplementary Information is available in the online version of the paper.
Acknowledgements We are grateful to the many researchers who contributed 
to this study by making their data available, helping to check information, and/
or providing comments at various stages. The study was supported by the TRY 
initiative on plant traits (http://www.try-db.org). The TRY database is hosted at 
the Max Planck Institute for Biogeochemistry (Jena, Germany) and supported 
by DIVERSITAS/Future Earth, the German Centre for Integrative Biodiversity 
Research (iDiv) Halle-Jena-Leipzig, and BACI (grant ID 640176). The study has 
also been partially supported by the following institutions and grants to S.Di.: 
Universidad Nacional de Córdoba and CONICET, FONCyT (PICT 554) and SECyT 
(Argentina), The Leverhulme Trust, UK, and Inter-American Institute for Global 
Change Research (IAI) SGP-CRA2015 (supported by US National Science 
Foundation grant GEO-1138881).
Author Contributions Order in list of authors reflects overall participation in this 
article. S.Dí., J.K. and S.L. designed the study. S.Dí., J.K., J.H.C.C., I.J.W., S.L., M.K., 
C.W., E.G., I.C.P , M.W., H.P., P.B.R., A.T.M., J.D, A.N.G., A.E.Z., J.C., S.J.W., S.N.S., H.J., 
C.B., B.C., S.P., B. S. and D.K. contributed substantial amounts of data. S.Dí., J.K., 
G.B., A.G. and V.F. constructed the database. S.Dí., J.K., J.H.C.C., I.J.W., S.L., S.Dr., 
B.R., M.K., C.W., E.G., F.C., J.S.J., N.R., M.D.M. and L.D.G. carried out analyses. 
S.Di., J.K., J.H.C.C., I.J.W., S.L., M.K., C.W., I.C.P., M.W. and P.B.R. wrote the article 
with contributions from S.Dr., B.R., E.G., H.P., A.T.M., J.D., A.N.G., A.E.Z., J.C., S.J.W., 
S.N.S., H.J., C.B., B.C., S.P., B.S., DK, F.C., M.D.M. and L.D.G.
Author Information Reprints and permissions information is available at 
www.nature.com/reprints. The authors declare no competing financial 
interests. Readers are welcome to comment on the online version of the paper. 
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to  
S.Dí. (sandra.diaz@unc.edu.ar).
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

----- Page 7 (native) -----
Article
RESEARCH
Methods
Plant trait definitions and ecological meaning. Adult plant height (typical height 
of the upper boundary of the main photosynthetic tissues at maturity; hereafter H) 
is the most common measure of whole plant size and indicates ability to pre-empt 
resources, including the ability of taller plants to display their leaves above those of 
others and therefore outcompete them; it also relates to whole plant fecundity and 
facilitation of seed dispersal32,50–53. Taller plants intercept more light but, trading 
off against that, construction and maintenance costs and risk of breakage increase 
with height22,54. Large stature has been repeatedly selected for in different lineages 
during the evolution of land plants, although achieved very differently in different 
clades55.
Stem specific density (dry mass per unit of fresh stem volume; SSD) is a sec-
ond key index of construction costs and structural strength. Although SSD is 
more commonly measured on trees, here we used data for both herbaceous and 
woody species. At least among woody species, stem specific density is positively 
linked with plant mechanical strength, hydraulic safety and resistance to biotic 
agents13,14,56. In high-precipitation systems wood density underpins a succes-
sional continuum running from low-SSD, fast-growing, light-demanding species 
to high-SSD, slow-growing, shade-tolerant species. More broadly SSD characterizes 
a trade-off between fast growth with high mortality rates versus slow growth with 
high survival25,57.
Leaf area (one-sided surface area of an individual lamina; LA) is the most com-
mon measure of leaf size. It is relevant for light interception and has important 
consequences for leaf energy and water balance58–60. LA affects leaf temperature 
via boundary layer effects. The larger the lamina, the lower the heat exchange, the 
diffusion of carbon dioxide and water vapour per unit leaf area between a leaf and 
the surrounding air. LA is known to be constrained by climatic and microclimatic 
conditions and also by the allometric consequences of plant size, anatomy and 
architecture61–63.
Leaf dry mass per unit of lamina surface area (leaf mass per area; LMA) and 
leaf nitrogen content per unit of lamina dry mass (Nmass) reflect different aspects 
of leaf-level carbon-gain strategies, in particular the «leaf economic spectrum» 
running from “conservative” species with physically robust, high-LMA leaves with 
high construction costs per unit leaf area and long expected leaf lifespan (and thus 
duration of photosynthetic income) to “acquisitive” species with tender, low-cost 
low-LMA leaves, and short leaf lifespan5,9,10,18–20,32,64,65. LMA relates the area of 
light interception to leaf biomass, being an expression of how much carbon is 
invested per unit of light-intercepting area, and thus reflecting a trade-off between 
construction cost and longevity of lamina. Nmass is directly related to photosyn-
thesis and respiration, as the majority of leaf nitrogen is found in metabolically 
active proteins. Nmass reflects a trade-off between, on the one hand, two different 
costs that increase with higher Nmass (to acquire N, and potentially suffer more 
herbivory) and, on the other hand, the greater photosynthetic potential that higher 
Nmass allows.
Diaspore mass (mass of an individual seed or spore plus any additional struc-
tures that assist dispersal and do not easily detach; SM) indexes species along a 
dimension describing the trade-off between seedling competitiveness and survival 
on the one hand, and dispersal and colonization ability on the other16,66–68. As a 
broad generalization small seeds can be produced in larger numbers with the same 
reproductive effort and, at a given plant height, be dispersed further away from 
the parent plant and form persistent seed banks, whereas large seeds facilitate 
survival through the early stages of recruitment, and higher establishment in the 
face of environmental hazards (for example deep shade, drought, herbivory)32,69–72.
Dataset description. We compiled a global dataset containing 46,085 species 
and 601,973 cells, of which 92,212 correspond to quantitative species-level trait 
information, based on > 800,000 trait measurements for the six traits of interest 
on > 500,000 plant individuals. The vast majority of data were compiled from 
pre-existing smaller datasets contributed to the TRY Plant Trait Database30 (https://
www.try-db.org, accessed May 2015). The dataset was supplemented by published 
data not included in TRY and a small number of original unpublished data by W. 
J. Bond, J.H.C.C., S.Di., L. Enrico, M. T. Fernandez-Piedade, L.D.G., D.K., M.K., 
N. Salinas, E.-D. Schulze, K. Thompson, and R. Urrutia. The final dataset (BLOB) 
was derived from 175 studies10,11,13,20,21,23–25,56,57,64,65,73–235.
In this global analysis, each species, identified subspecies or local variety is 
represented by a single value for each trait. This value is the geometric mean of 
all the observations of a trait present in the TRY Plant Trait Database and addi-
tional databases incorporated to the present dataset. The number of observations 
per trait and species range from a single one (in the case of rare, geographically 
restricted species) to hundreds (in the case of common species with wide geo-
graphical distribution). In this way, the analysis incorporates the high intraspecific 
variation that is sometimes observed in widespread species30,185,236–238. In addition 
and fully acknowledging their existence, intraspecific variations are assumed to 
be comparatively small in the context of the vast range of variation contained in 
this worldwide dataset30.
Species names were standardized and attributed to families according to The 
Plant List (http://www.theplantlist.org/; accessed 2015). Attribution of families to 
higher-rank groups was made according to APG III (2009) (http://www.mobot.
org/MOBOT/research/APweb/). Information about primary growth-form (wood-
iness, woody, semi-woody, non-woody) and secondary growth-form (herbaceous 
non-graminoid, herbaceous graminoid, herbaceous non-graminoid/shrub, shrub, 
shrub/tree, tree, climber, succulent, other) was added based on a look-up table 
of categorical plant-traits30 (https://www.try-db.org/TryWeb/Data.php#3) and 
additional information from various sources; >86% species were allocated to cat-
egories according to primary growth-form, and >80% according to secondary 
growth-form.
Species distribution data were derived from the Global Biodiversity Information 
System (GBIF; http://www.gbif.org) and combined with 0.5 × 0.5 degree gridded 
long term climate information derived from CRU (http://www.cru.uea.ac.uk/data).
Trait measurement. In the case of published datasets, trait measurement methods 
are in the original publications listed in Dataset description. In the case of unpub-
lished records, they were measured following the protocols specified in the context 
of the LEDA project (https://www.leda-traitbase.org) or in ref. 239 (http://www.
nucleodiversus.org/index.php?mod=page&id=79). All data were unit-standard-
ized and subjected to error detection and quality control (see below).
Treatment of pteridophyte spore mass. The trait values for diaspore mass of pterido-
phytes were estimated based on literature data for spore radius (r). We made crude 
assumptions that spores would be broadly spherical, with volume = (4/3)πr3, and 
that their density would be 0.5 mg mm−3. Although these assumptions were clearly 
imprecise, we are confident they result in spore masses within the right order of 
magnitude (and several orders of magnitude smaller than seed mass of spermato-
phytes). Most data were from ref. 240, data for Sadleria pallida were from ref. 241, 
for Pteridium aquilinum from ref. 242, and for Diphasiastrum spp. from ref. 243.
Treatment of stem specific density in herbaceous species. Data on stem specific 
density (SSD) are available for a very large number of woody species, but only 
for very few herbaceous species. To incorporate this fundamental trait in our 
analysis, we complemented SSD of herbaceous species using an estimation based 
on leaf dry matter content (LDMC), a much more widely available trait, and its 
close correlation to stem dry matter content (StDMC, the ratio of stem dry mass 
to stem water-saturated fresh mass). StDMC is a good proxy of SSD in herba-
ceous plants with a ratio of approximately 1:1 (ref. 100), despite substantial dif-
ferences in stem anatomy among botanical families244, including those between 
non-monocotyledons and monocotyledons (where sheaths were measured). We 
used a data set of 422 herbaceous species collected in the field across Europe 
and Israel, and belonging to 31 botanical families144 to parameterize linear rela-
tionships of StDMC to LDMC. The slopes of the relationship were significantly 
higher for monocotyledons than for other angiosperms (F = 12.3; P < 0.001); 
within non-monocotyledons, the slope for Leguminosae was higher than that 
for species from other families. We thus used three different equations to predict 
SSD for 1963 herbaceous species for which LDMC values were available in TRY: 
one for monocotyledons (SSD = 0.888 × LDMC + 2.69), one for Leguminosae 
(SSD = 0.692 × LDMC + 47.65), and a third one for other non-monocotyledons 
(SSD = 0.524 × LDMC + 95.87).
Error detection and data quality control. The curation of the dataset faced a double 
challenge: (1) detecting erroneous entries (due to errors in sampling, measurement, 
unit conversion, etc.); and (2) ensuring that extreme values that correspond to 
truly extreme values of traits in nature are not mistakenly identified as outliers 
and therefore excluded from the dataset. To deal with these challenges, we took 
the following approach: Trait records measured on juvenile plants and on plants 
grown under non-natural environmental conditions were excluded from the data-
set. Duplicate trait records (same species, similar trait values, no information on 
different measurement locations or dates) and obvious errors (for example LMA 
< 0) were excluded from the dataset. We then identified potential outliers follow-
ing the approach described in ref. 30. Trait records with a distance of >4 stand-
ard deviations from the mean of species, genus, family or higher-rank taxonomic 
group were excluded from the dataset unless their retention could be justified 
from external sources. Trait records with a distance of >3 standard deviations 
from the mean of species, genus, family or phylogenetic group were identified, 
checked by domain experts for plausibility and retained or excluded accordingly. 
The remaining dataset was used to calculate species mean trait values. Finally, the 
ten most extreme species mean values of each trait (smallest and largest) were again 
checked for reliability against external sources.
Construction of observed and simulated six-trait convex hull hypervolumes. 
In order to explore the constraints underlying the trait space occupied by species 
in our dataset, we used the convex hull approach of ref. 34, which has been applied 
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

----- Page 8 (native) -----
Article RESEARCH
successfully to a wide range of datasets, including disjoint ones245. The application 
of a recently developed—and therefore less widely tested—method proposed for 
“holey” datasets245 yielded similar results.
We computed a six-dimensional convex hull volume (i.e. a six-dimensional 
measure of the minimum convex volume of trait space occupied by species in our 
dataset, hereafter Hvobs) on the basis of the observed values of H, SSD, LA, LMA, 
Nmass, and SM, and compared it to four null model volumes (hvnm1–4) constructed 
under four different sets of assumptions. In all four cases the null hypothesis was 
H0: Hvobs = hvnm and the alternative hypothesis was H1: Hvobs < hvnm (‘the vol-
ume of the convex hull defined by the observed species is smaller than the vol-
ume occupied by species if their traits were generated under the null hypothesis’). 
Observed data were log10-transformed and standardized to zero mean and unit 
variance (z-transformation). Percentages in Fig. 1 indicate the reduction in size of 
the observed hypervolume compared to the average of 999 hypervolumes gener-
ated from the assumptions of each null model (Monte-Carlo permutations246). To 
control for outliers, computation of volumes were performed on the observed and 
simulated convex hulls containing 95% of species located closest to the centroid. A 
visualization of the observed dataset and the four null models in three-dimensional 
trait spaces is available at https://sdray.shinyapps.io/globalspectr/ (Supplementary 
Application 1). The R script used for hypervolume computation is provided at ftp://
pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/pub/datasets/dray/Diaz_Nature/.
Null model 1. Species traits vary independently and each of them comes from a uni-
form distribution. This null model assumes that each of the six traits represents an 
independent axis of specialization (i.e. the traits define a six-­dimensional ­manifold) 
and that the occurrence of extreme and central values is equally probable. This uni-
form independent trait distribution represents a “Darwinian Demon”35 scenario, 
where any combination of trait values can arise from mutation and escape from 
the natural selection process with equal probability. Simulated data are generated 
by randomly and independently sampling from independent uniform distribu-
tions whose range limits are constrained to the 0.025 and 0.975 quantiles of the 
observed trait values. The shape of the hypervolume under this null model (hvnm1) 
is a hypercube.
Null model 2. Species traits vary independently and each of them comes from a nor-
mal distribution. This null model assumes that all six traits evolve independently, 
as in null model 1. However, extreme trait values are selected against during evolu-
tion. Simulated data were obtained by randomly and independently selecting from 
univariate normal distributions with standard deviation determined by the trans-
formed observed data. The corresponding hypervolume (hvnm2) is a hypersphere.
Null model 3. Species traits vary independently but —unlike in the previous 
­models— there is no assumption about the distribution of trait variation; each 
trait varies according to the observed univariate distributions. Simulated data 
were obtained by permuting the values for each trait independently and therefore 
destroying the covariance amongst traits. Under this null hypothesis (hvnm3) the 
hypervolume can take many potential shapes, emerging from the possible combi-
nations of independently sampled plant trait observations.
Null model 4. Species traits are normally distributed and follow the estimated cor-
relation structure of the observed dataset. This null model assumes that there are 
less than six independent axes of specialization and that extreme values are selected 
against. Simulated data were obtained by generating multivariate normal variables 
with standard deviations of the transformed observed data using the correlation 
structure of the observed dataset. The corresponding hypervolume (hvnm4) is a 
hyperellipsoid. Deviations of observed data from null model 4 can be explained 
by deviations of the transformed observed univariate distributions from normal 
distributions, either showing lower tails than those expected in a normal distri-
bution or by the non-observation of some combinations of extreme trait values, 
leading to truncated distributions, or by bimodal distributions.
Test for concentration of species within the observed convex hull. For each trait, values 
were partitioned in 10 bins so that the multivariate space was divided in 106 cells. 
The number of species per cell was computed and cumulative frequency curves 
were built for observed data and null models. For each null model, we simulated 
999 datasets and computed the 0.025–0.975 interquantile range and the median. 
We then determined N10 and N50, the minimum number of cells needed to cover 
10% or 50% of species.
Principal component analysis (PCA). We performed PCAs on different versions 
of the observed dataset and a gap-filled version using the statistical software pack-
age InfoStat247 and the R-function ‘princomp’. Again all analyses were carried out 
on the correlation matrix of log10-transformed variables (traits), which is equivalent 
to using standardized data (z-transformation), which is considered appropriate for 
data with different measurement scales248. The number of significant PCA axes 
to be retained in order to minimize both redundancy and loss of information was 
determined using the procedure proposed by ref. 249, which allows one to test the 
significance of dimensionality in PCA. A visualization of the space occupied by 
vascular plants in the space defined by all six PCA axes (three at a time) is availa-
ble at https://sdray.shinyapps.io/globalspectrPC (Supplementary Application 2).
Differences in the position of different major taxa and growth forms along PC1 
and PC2 were tested using analysis of variance (Extended Data Fig. 2). Because of 
the large number of data, we used an alpha level of 0.01 to reject the null hypoth-
esis. ANOVA was carried out using a linear mixed model to take into account 
the lack of homoscedasticity due to different group sizes. We used AIC and BIC 
criteria to select the best model considering heterogeneous variances. When the 
ANOVA null hypothesis was rejected, means were compared using Fisher's least 
significant difference (P = 0.01). Data were analysed using the lme function of 
the nlme250 and lme4251 R-packages252 interfaced by InfoStat Statistical Software 
version 2015 (ref. 247).
Test for robustness and representativeness of multivariate analysis results. In order to 
test if results shown in Fig. 2 and Extended Data Table 1 were robust with respect 
to the selection of traits and species and representative for vascular plants, we 
conducted a number of analyses: exclusion of gymnosperms and pteridophytes 
(‘angiosperms only’), exclusion of individual traits, and comparison to a gap-filled 
dataset representing about 15% of extant vascular plant species worldwide. The 
trait exclusion tests excluded the following individual traits, one at a time: LMA, 
Nmass and SSD, because analyses indicated that LMA and Nmass, although providing 
information on different aspects of leaf function (see Methods), are both part of 
the leaf economic spectrum7,10, and SSD and plant height both reflect plant size 
when woody and herbaceous plants are considered together. To test if the results of 
the multivariate analysis presented in Fig. 2 were representative of vascular plants, 
we constructed a gap-filled dataset based on those species that entered the global 
dataset via the TRY Plant Trait Database. We extracted 328,057 individual plant-
level trait observations, which provide a substantial number of additional data not 
used in the main analysis. We applied the data selection process as described above 
(section: Error detection and data quality control). The resulting dataset contained 
78% missing entries (gaps), which were filled by Bayesian hierarchical probabil-
istic matrix factorization (BHPMF)253–255. The gap-filled dataset was then used 
to calculate species mean trait values, resulting in a gap-filled dataset for 45,507 
species. To quantitatively compare the results of the PCA presented in Fig. 2 and 
Extended Data Table 1 with those of the angiosperms-only and the gap-filled data-
sets, we applied a Procrustes test256 using the ‘procrustes’ and ‘protest’ functions 
in R package ‘vegan’257. Function protest tests the non-randomness between two 
configurations. Significant results (for example significance < 0.05) indicate that 
the shapes of two datasets are non-random to each other, but similar.
Kernel density estimation. To estimate the occurrence probability of given com-
binations of trait values in a two-dimensional space defined by PC axes 1 and 2 
(Fig. 2), and bivariate trait combinations (Extended Data Fig. 4), we used two-­
dimensional kernel density estimation258. Because results depend on the choice of 
the bandwidth used for the smoothing kernel, we used unconstrained bandwidth 
selectors259. To visualize the occurrence probability of a given trait combination 
in the PCA space as well as for all possible bivariate trait combinations, we con-
structed contour plots from two-dimensional kernel density distributions. The 
colour gradient and contour lines in Fig. 2 and Extended Data Fig. 4 correspond 
to the 0.5, 0.95 and 0.99 quantiles of the respective probability distribution, thus 
highlighting the regions of highest and lowest trait occurrence probability. For 
kernel density estimation we used the ‘kde’ function and for optimal bandwidth 
selection carried out for each trait combination separately, we used the SAMSE 
pilot bandwidth selector260, both implemented in the R-package ‘ks’259. The R 
script used is provided at ftp://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/pub/datasets/dray/Diaz_Nature/.
Code availability. The R scripts used to generate the hypervolumes (Fig. 2) and 
kernel density analyses associated to Fig. 2 and Extended Data Fig. 4 are available 
at ftp://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/pub/datasets/dray/Diaz_Nature/.
50.	
Gaudet, C. L. & Keddy, P. A. A comparative approach to predicting competitive 
ability from plant traits. Nature 334, 242–243 (1988).
51.	
Westoby, M. A leaf-height-seed (LHS) plant ecology strategy scheme. Plant Soil 
199, 213–227 (1998).
52.	
Muller-Landau, H. C., Wright, S. J., Calderón, O., Condit, R. & Hubbell, S. P. 
Interspecific variation in primary seed dispersal in a tropical forest. J. Ecol. 96, 
653–667 (2008).
53.	
Moles, A. T. et al. Global patterns in plant height. J. Ecol. 97, 923–932 (2009).
54.	
Niklas, K. J. Influence of tissues density-specific mechanical-properties on the 
scaling of plant height. Ann. Bot. 72, 173–179 (1993).
55.	
Donoghue, M. J. Key innovations, convergence, and success: macroevolutionary 
lessons from plant phylogeny. Paleobiology 31, 77–93 (2005).
56.	
Preston, K. A., Cornwell, W. K. & Denoyer, J. L. Wood density and vessel traits as 
distinct correlates of ecological strategy in 51 California coast range 
angiosperms. New Phytol. 170, 807–818 (2006).
57.	
Wright, S. J. et al. Functional traits and the growth-mortality trade-off in tropical 
trees. Ecology 91, 3664–3674 (2010).
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

----- Page 9 (native) -----
Article
RESEARCH
89.	
Pyankov, V. I., Kondratchuk, A. V. & Shipley, B. Leaf structure and specific leaf 
mass: the alpine desert plants of the Eastern Pamirs, Tadjikistan. New Phytol. 
143, 131–142 (1999).
90.	
Carswell, F. E. et al. Photosynthetic capacity in a central Amazonian rain forest. 
Tree Physiol. 20, 179–186 (2000).
91.	
Fonseca, C. R., Overton, J. M., Collins, B. & Westoby, M. Shifts in trait-
combinations along rainfall and phosphorus gradients. J. Ecol. 88, 964–977 
(2000).
92.	
Shipley, B. & Lechowicz, M. J. The functional co-ordination of leaf morphology, 
nitrogen concentration, and gas exchange in 40 wetland species. Ecoscience 
7, 183–194 (2000).
93.	
Wilson, K. B., Baldocchi, D. D. & Hanson, P. J. Spatial and seasonal variability of 
photosynthetic parameters and their relationship to leaf nitrogen in a 
deciduous forest. Tree Physiol. 20, 565–578 (2000).
94.	
Koike, F. Plant traits as predictors of woody species dominance in climax forest 
communities. J. Veg. Sci. 12, 327–336 (2001).
95.	
Niinemets, Ü. Global-scale climatic controls of leaf dry mass per area, density, 
and thickness in trees and shrubs. Ecology 82, 453–469 (2001).
96.	
Bond-Lamberty, B., Wang, C. & Gower, S. T. Aboveground and belowground 
biomass and sapwood area allometric equations for six boreal tree species of 
northern Manitoba. Can. J. For. Res. 32, 1441–1450 (2002).
97.	
Bond-Lamberty, B., Wang, C., Gower, S. T. & Norman, J. Leaf area dynamics of 
a boreal black spruce fire chronosequence. Tree Physiol. 22, 993–1001 
(2002).
98.	
Meir, P. et al. Acclimation of photosynthetic capacity to irradiance in tree 
canopies in relation to leaf nitrogen concentration and leaf mass per unit area. 
Plant Cell Environ. 25, 343–357 (2002).
99.	
Shipley, B. Trade-offs between net assimilation rate and specific leaf area in 
determining relative growth rate: relationship with daily irradiance. Funct. Ecol. 
16, 682–689 (2002).
100.	 Shipley, B. & Vu, T. T. Dry matter content as a measure of dry matter 
concentration in plants and their parts. New Phytol. 153, 359–364 (2002).
101.	 Vendramini, F. et al. Leaf traits as indicators of resource-use strategy in floras 
with succulent species. New Phytol. 154, 147–157 (2002).
102.	 Cornelissen, J. H. C. et al. Functional traits of woody plants: correspondence of 
species rankings between field adults and laboratory-grown seedlings? J. Veg. 
Sci. 14, 311–322 (2003).
103.	 Loveys, B. R. et al. Thermal acclimation of leaf and root respiration: an 
investigation comparing inherently fast-and slow-growing plant species. Glob. 
Change Biol. 9, 895–910 (2003).
104.	 Mencuccini, M. The ecological significance of long-distance water transport: 
short-term regulation, long-term acclimation and the hydraulic costs of 
stature across plant life forms. Plant Cell Environ. 26, 163–182 (2003).
105.	 Ogaya, R. & Peñuelas, J. Comparative field study of Quercus ilex and Phillyrea 
latifolia: photosynthetic response to experimental drought conditions. Environ. 
Exp. Bot. 50, 137–148 (2003).
106.	 Pillar, V. D. & Sosinski, E. E. An improved method for searching plant functional 
types by numerical analysis. J. Veg. Sci. 14, 323–332 (2003).
107.	 Quested, H. M. et al. Decomposition of sub-arctic plants with differing nitrogen 
economies: a functional role for hemiparasites. Ecology 84, 3209–3221 
(2003).
108.	 Sack, L., Cowan, P. D., Jaikumar, N. & Holbrook, N. M. The ‘hydrology’of leaves: 
co-ordination of structure and function in temperate woody species. Plant Cell 
Environ. 26, 1343–1356 (2003).
109.	 Xu, L. & Baldocchi, D. D. Seasonal trends in photosynthetic parameters and 
stomatal conductance of blue oak (Quercus douglasii) under prolonged 
summer drought and high temperature. Tree Physiol. 23, 865–877 (2003).
110.	 Adler, P. B., Milchunas, D. G., Lauenroth, W. K., Sala, O. E. & Burke, I. C. 
Functional traits of graminoids in semi-arid steppes: a test of grazing histories. 
J. Appl. Ecol. 41, 653–663 (2004).
111.	 Cornelissen, J. H. C. et al. Leaf digestibility and litter decomposability are 
related in a wide range of subarctic plant species and types. Funct. Ecol. 18, 
779–786 (2004).
112.	 Fagúndez, J. & Izco, J. Seed morphology of Calluna salisb. (Ericaceae). Acta 
Botánica Malacitana 29, 215–220 (2004).
113.	 Givnish, T. J., Montgomery, R. A. & Goldstein, G. Adaptive radiation of 
photosynthetic physiology in the Hawaiian lobeliads: light regimes, static light 
responses, and whole-plant compensation points. Am. J. Bot. 91, 228–246 
(2004).
114.	 Hill, M. O., Preston, C. D. & Roy, D. B. PLANTATT - Attributes of British and Irish 
Plants: Status, Size, Life History, Geography and Habitats http://nora.nerc.ac.
uk/9535/1/PLANTATT.pdf (Centre for Ecology & Hydrology, NERC, 2004).
115.	 Kühn, I., Durka, W. & Klotz, S. BiolFlor: a new plant-trait database as a tool for 
plant invasion ecology. Divers. Distrib. 10, 363–365 (2004).
116.	 Sack, L. Responses of temperate woody seedlings to shade and drought: do 
trade-offs limit potential niche differentiation? Oikos 107, 110–127 (2004).
117.	 Von Holle, B. & Simberloff, D. Testing Fox’s assembly rule: does plant invasion 
depend on recipient community structure? Oikos 105, 551–563 (2004).
118.	 Bakker, C., Rodenburg, J. & Van Bodegom, P. M. Effects of Ca-and Fe-rich 
seepage on P availability and plant performance in calcareous dune soils. 
Plant Soil 275, 111–122 (2005).
119.	 Craine, J. M., Lee, W. G., Bond, W. J., Williams, R. J. & Johnson, L. C. 
Environmental constraints on a global relationship among leaf and root traits 
of grasses. Ecology 86, 12–19 (2005).
120.	 Gachet, S., Véla, E. & Tatoni, T. BASECO: a floristic and ecological database of 
Mediterranean French flora. Biodivers. Conserv. 14, 1023–1034 (2005).
58.	
Givnish, T. J. & Vermeij, G. J. Sizes and shapes of liane leaves. Am. Nat. 110, 
743–778 (1976).
59.	
Givnish, T. J. Comparative studies of leaf form: assessing the relative roles of 
selective pressures and phylogenetic constraints. New Phytol. 106, 131–160 
(1987).
60.	
Farquhar, G. D., Buckley, T. N. & Miller, J. M. Optimal stomatal control in 
relation to leaf area and nitrogen content. Silva Fennica 36, 625–637 
(2002).
61.	
Ackerly, D. D. & Donoghue, M. J. Leaf size, sapling allometry, and Corner’s 
rules: phylogeny and correlated evolution in maples (Acer). Am. Nat. 152, 
767–791 (1998).
62.	
Niklas, K. J. Plant Allometry: the Scaling of Form and Process (Univ. of Chicago 
Press, 1994).
63.	
Cornelissen, J. H. C. A triangular relationship between leaf size and seed size 
among woody species: allometry, ontogeny, ecology and taxonomy. Oecologia 
118, 248–255 (1999).
64.	
Poorter, H., Niinemets, U., Poorter, L., Wright, I. J. & Villar, R. Causes and 
consequences of variation in leaf mass per area (LMA): a meta-analysis. New 
Phytol. 182, 565–588 (2009).
65.	
Bocanegra-González, K. T., Fermández-Mendez, F. & Galvis-Jiménez, J. F. 
Grupos funcionales de árboles en bosques secundarios de la región Bajo 
Calima (Buenaventura, Colombia). Bol. Cient. Mus. Hist. Nat. 19, 17–40 
(2015).
66.	
Thompson, K., Band, S. R. & Hodgson, J. G. Seed size and shape predict 
persistence in soil. Funct. Ecol. 7, 236–241 (1993).
67.	
Moles, A. T. & Westoby, M. Seed size and plant strategy across the whole life 
cycle. Oikos 113, 91–105 (2006).
68.	
Schleicher, A., Biedermann, R. & Kleyer, M. Dispersal traits determine plant 
response to habitat connectivity in an urban landscape. Landscape Ecol. 26, 
529–540 (2011).
69.	
Leishman, M. R. & Westoby, M. Hypotheses on seed size: tests using the 
semiarid flora of western New South Wales, Australia. Am. Nat. 143, 890–906 
(1994).
70.	
Muller-Landau, H. C. The tolerance-fecundity trade-off and the maintenance of 
diversity in seed size. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 107, 4242–4247 (2010).
71.	
Thomson, F. J., Moles, A. T., Auld, T. D. & Kingsford, R. T. Seed dispersal distance 
is more strongly correlated with plant height than with seed mass. J. Ecol. 99, 
1299–1307 (2011).
72.	
Ben-Hur, E., Fragman-Sapir, O., Hadas, R., Singer, A. & Kadmon, R. Functional 
trade-offs increase species diversity in experimental plant communities. Ecol. 
Lett. 15, 1276–1282 (2012).
73.	
Schulze, E.-D. & Schulze, I. Distribution and control of photosynthetic 
pathways in plants growing in the Namib Desert with special regard to 
Welwitschia mirabilis. Madoqua 9, 5–13 (1976).
74.	
Schulze, E. D., Eller, B. M., Thomas, D. A., Willert, D. J. V. & Brinckmann, E. Leaf 
temperatures and energy balance of Welwitschia mirabilis in its natural habitat. 
Oecologia 44, 258–262 (1980).
75.	
Zheng, W. Silva Sinica: Volume 1–4 (China Forestry Publishing House, Beijing, 
1983).
76.	
Shipley, B. & Parent, M. Germination responses of 64 wetland species in 
relation to seed size, minimum time to reproduction and seedling relative 
growth rate. Funct. Ecol. 5, 111–118 (1991).
77.	
Fitter, A. H. & Peat, H. J. The ecological flora database. J. Ecol. 82, 415–425 
(1994).
78.	
Shipley, B. Structured interspecific determinants of specific leaf area in 34 
species of herbaceous angiosperms. Funct. Ecol. 9, 312–319 (1995).
79.	
Cornelissen, J. H. C. An experimental comparison of leaf decomposition rates 
in a wide range of temperate plant species and types. J. Ecol. 84, 573–582 
(1996).
80.	
Cornelissen, J. H. C., Diez, P. C. & Hunt, R. Seedling growth, allocation and leaf 
attributes in a wide range of woody plant species and types. J. Ecol. 84, 
755–765 (1996).
81.	
Atkin, O. K., Westbeek, M., Cambridge, M. L., Lambers, H. & Pons, T. L. Leaf 
respiration in light and darkness. Plant Physiol. 113, 961–965 (1997).
82.	
Gillison, A. N. & Carpenter, G. A generic plant functional attribute set and 
grammar for dynamic vegetation description and analysis. Funct. Ecol. 11, 
775–783 (1997).
83.	
Castro-Diez, P., Puyravaud, J. P., Cornelissen, J. H. C. & Villar-Salvador, P. Stem 
anatomy and relative growth rate in seedlings of a wide range of woody plant 
species and types. Oecologia 116, 57–66 (1998).
84.	
Atkin, O. K., Schortemeyer, M., McFarlane, N. & Evans, J. R. The response of 
fast-and slow-growing Acacia species to elevated atmospheric CO2: an 
analysis of the underlying components of relative growth rate. Oecologia 120, 
544–554 (1999).
85.	
Bahn, M. et al. in Land Use Changes in European Mountain Ecosystems: 
ECOMONT Concepts and Results (eds Cernusca, A., Tappeiner, U. & 
Bayfield, N.) pp. 247–255 (Blackwell Wissenschaft, 1999).
86.	
Hickler, T. Plant functional types and community characteristics along 
environmental gradients on Oland’s Great Alvar (Sweden). MSci. thesis, Univ. of 
Lund (1999).
87.	
Medlyn, B. E. et al. Effects of elevated [CO2] on photosynthesis in European 
forest species: a meta-analysis of model parameters. Plant Cell Environ. 22, 
1475–1495 (1999).
88.	
Meziane, D. & Shipley, B. Interacting determinants of specific leaf area in 22 
herbaceous species: effects of irradiance and nutrient availability. Plant Cell 
Environ. 22, 447–459 (1999).
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

----- Page 10 (native) -----
Article RESEARCH
121.	 Han, W., Fang, J., Guo, D. & Zhang, Y. Leaf nitrogen and phosphorus 
stoichiometry across 753 terrestrial plant species in China. New Phytol. 168, 
377–385 (2005).
122.	 Kirkup, D., Malcolm, P., Christian, G. & Paton, A. Towards a digital African flora. 
Taxon 54, 457–466 (2005).
123.	 Louault, F., Pillar, V. D., Aufrere, J., Garnier, E. & Soussana, J. F. Plant traits and 
functional types in response to reduced disturbance in a semi-natural 
grassland. J. Veg. Sci. 16, 151–160 (2005).
124.	 Moles, A. T. et al. A brief history of seed size. Science 307, 576–580 (2005).
125.	 Nakahashi, C. D., Frole, K. & Sack, L. Bacterial leaf nodule symbiosis in Ardisia 
(Myrsinaceae): does it contribute to seedling growth capacity? Plant Biol. 7, 
495–500 (2005).
126.	 Peco, B., de Pablos, I., Traba, J. & Levassor, C. The effect of grazing 
abandonment on species composition and functional traits: the case of 
dehesa grasslands. Basic Appl. Ecol. 6, 175–183 (2005).
127.	 Rentería, L., Jaramillo, V. J., Martinez-Yrízar, A. & Pérez-Jiménez, A. Nitrogen 
and phosphorus resorption in trees of a Mexican tropical dry forest. Trees 19, 
431–441 (2005).
128.	 Sack, L., Tyree, M. T. & Holbrook, N. M. Leaf hydraulic architecture correlates 
with regeneration irradiance in tropical rainforest trees. New Phytol. 167, 
403–413 (2005).
129.	 Schweingruber, F. H. & Landolt, W. The xylem database. http://www.wsl.ch/
dendropro/xylemdb/ Swiss Federal Research Institute WSL, updated 2014.
130.	 Sheremet’ev, S. N. Herbs on the soil moisture gradient (water relations and the 
structural-functional organization). KMK, Moscow 271 (2005).
131.	 Vile, D. Significations Fonctionnelle et Ecologique des Traits des Especes 
Vegetales: Exemple dans une Succession Post-Cultural Mediterraneenne et 
Generalisations. PhD thesis, Univ. Montpellier 2 (2005).
132.	 Bakker, C., Van Bodegom, P. M., Nelissen, H. J. M., Ernst, W. H. O. & Aerts, R. 
Plant responses to rising water tables and nutrient management in calcareous 
dune slacks. Plant Ecol. 185, 19–28 (2006).
133.	 Cavender-Bares, J., Keen, A. & Miles, B. Phylogenetic structure of Floridian 
plant communities depends on taxonomic and spatial scale. Ecology 87 
(Suppl), S109–S122 (2006).
134.	 Kazakou, E., Vile, D., Shipley, B., Gallet, C. & Garnier, E. Co-variations in litter 
decomposition, leaf traits and plant growth in species from a Mediterranean 
old-field succession. Funct. Ecol. 20, 21–30 (2006).
135.	 Kerkhoff, A. J. & Enquist, B. J. Ecosystem allometry: the scaling of nutrient 
stocks and primary productivity across plant communities. Ecol. Lett. 9, 
419–427 (2006).
136.	 Poorter, L. & Bongers, F. Leaf traits are good predictors of plant performance 
across 53 rain forest species. Ecology 87, 1733–1743 (2006).
137.	 Sack, L. & Frole, K. Leaf structural diversity is related to hydraulic capacity in 
tropical rain forest trees. Ecology 87, 483–491 (2006).
138.	 Sack, L., Melcher, P. J., Liu, W. H., Middleton, E. & Pardee, T. How strong is 
intracanopy leaf plasticity in temperate deciduous trees? Am. J. Bot. 93, 
829–839 (2006).
139.	 Campbell, C. et al. Acclimation of photosynthesis and respiration is 
asynchronous in response to changes in temperature regardless of plant 
functional group. New Phytol. 176, 375–389 (2007).
140.	 Cavender-Bares, J., Sack, L. & Savage, J. Atmospheric and soil drought reduce 
nocturnal conductance in live oaks. Tree Physiol. 27, 611–620 (2007).
141.	 Cornwell, W. K., Bhaskar, R., Sack, L. & Cordell, S. Adjustment of structure and 
function of Hawaiian Metrosideros polymorpha at high vs. low precipitation. 
Funct. Ecol. 21, 1063–1071 (2007).
142.	 Craven, D. et al. Between and within-site comparisons of structural and 
physiological characteristics and foliar nutrient content of 14 tree species at a 
wet, fertile site and a dry, infertile site in Panama. For. Ecol. Manage. 238, 
335–346 (2007).
143.	 Domingues, T. F., Martinelli, L. A. & Ehleringer, J. R. Ecophysiological traits of 
plant functional groups in forest and pasture ecosystems from eastern 
Amazonia, Brazil. Plant Ecol. 193, 101–112 (2007).
144.	 Garnier, E. et al. Assessing the effects of land-use change on plant traits, 
communities and ecosystem functioning in grasslands: a standardized 
methodology and lessons from an application to 11 European sites. Ann. Bot. 
99, 967–985 (2007).
145.	 Lavergne, S. & Molofsky, J. Increased genetic variation and evolutionary 
potential drive the success of an invasive grass. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 104, 
3883–3888 (2007).
146.	 Meir, P., Levy, P. E., Grace, J. & Jarvis, P. G. Photosynthetic parameters from two 
contrasting woody vegetation types in West Africa. Plant Ecol. 192, 277–287 
(2007).
147.	 Müller, S. C., Overbeck, G. E., Pfadenhauer, J. & Pillar, V. D. Plant functional 
types of woody species related to fire disturbance in forest–grassland 
ecotones. Plant Ecol. 189, 1–14 (2007).
148.	 Pierce, S., Ceriani, R. M., De Andreis, R., Luzzaro, A. & Cerabolini, B. The leaf 
economics spectrum of Poaceae reflects variation in survival strategies. Plant 
Biosyst. 141, 337–343 (2007).
149.	 Pierce, S., Luzzaro, A., Caccianiga, M., Ceriani, R. M. & Cerabolini, B. 
Disturbance is the principal α-scale filter determining niche differentiation, 
coexistence and biodiversity in an alpine community. J. Ecol. 95, 698–706 
(2007).
150.	 Price, C. A. & Enquist, B. J. Scaling mass and morphology in leaves: an 
extension of the WBE model. Ecology 88, 1132–1141 (2007).
151.	 Scherer-Lorenzen, M., Schulze, E.-D., Don, A., Schumacher, J. & Weller, E. 
Exploring the functional significance of forest diversity: a new long-term 
experiment with temperate tree species (BIOTREE). Perspect. Plant Ecol. Evol. 
Syst. 9, 53–70 (2007).
152.	 Schurr, F. M. et al. Colonization and persistence ability explain the extent to 
which plant species fill their potential range. Glob. Ecol. Biogeogr. 16, 449–459 
(2007).
153.	 Swaine, E. K. Ecological and Evolutionary Drivers of Plant Community Assembly in 
a Bornean Rain Forest. PhD thesis, Univ. of Aberdeen (2007).
154.	 Vaieretti, M. V., Díaz, S., Vile, D. & Garnier, E. Two measurement methods of leaf 
dry matter content produce similar results in a broad range of species. Ann. 
Bot. 99, 955–958 (2007).
155.	 Coomes, D. A., Heathcote, S., Godfrey, E. R., Shepherd, J. J. & Sack, L. Scaling of 
xylem vessels and veins within the leaves of oak species. Biol. Lett. 4, 302–306 
(2008).
156.	 Cornwell, W. K. et al. Plant species traits are the predominant control on litter 
decomposition rates within biomes worldwide. Ecol. Lett. 11, 1065–1071 
(2008).
157.	 Hoof, J., Sack, L., Webb, D. T. & Nilsen, E. T. Contrasting structure and function 
of pubescent and glabrous varieties of Hawaiian Metrosideros polymorpha 
(Myrtaceae) at high elevation. Biotropica 40, 113–118 (2008).
158.	 Kleyer, M. et al. The LEDA Traitbase: a database of life-history traits of the 
Northwest European flora. J. Ecol. 96, 1266–1274 (2008).
159.	 Kraft, N. J. B., Valencia, R. & Ackerly, D. D. Functional traits and niche-based 
tree community assembly in an Amazonian forest. Science 322, 580–582 
(2008).
160.	 Kurokawa, H. & Nakashizuka, T. Leaf herbivory and decomposability in a 
Malaysian tropical rain forest. Ecology 89, 2645–2656 (2008).
161.	 Quero, J. L. et al. Relating leaf photosynthetic rate to whole-plant growth: 
drought and shade effects on seedlings of four Quercus species. Funct. Plant 
Biol. 35, 725–737 (2008).
162.	 Reich, P. B. et al. Scaling of respiration to nitrogen in leaves, stems and roots of 
higher land plants. Ecol. Lett. 11, 793–801 (2008).
163.	 Royal Botanical Gardens Kew Seed Information Database (SID). Version 7.1. 
http://data.kew.org/sid/ (2015).
164.	 Scoffoni, C., Pou, A., Aasamaa, K. & Sack, L. The rapid light response of leaf 
hydraulic conductance: new evidence from two experimental methods. Plant 
Cell Environ. 31, 1803–1812 (2008).
165.	 Shiodera, S., Rahajoe, J. S. & Kohyama, T. Variation in longevity and traits of 
leaves among co-occurring understorey plants in a tropical montane forest. 
J. Trop. Ecol. 24, 121–133 (2008).
166.	 van Bodegom, P. M., Sorrell, B. K., Oosthoek, A., Bakker, C. & Aerts, R. 
Separating the effects of partial submergence and soil oxygen demand on 
plant physiology. Ecology 89, 193–204 (2008).
167.	 Bragazza, L. Conservation priority of Italian Alpine habitats: a floristic 
approach based on potential distribution of vascular plant species. Biodivers. 
Conserv. 18, 2823–2835 (2009).
168.	 Ciocarlan, V. The Illustrated Flora of Romania. Pteridophyta et Spermatopyta. 
(Editura Ceres Bucharest, 2009).
169.	 Craine, J. M. et al. Global patterns of foliar nitrogen isotopes and their 
relationships with climate, mycorrhizal fungi, foliar nutrient concentrations, 
and nitrogen availability. New Phytol. 183, 980–992 (2009).
170.	 Dunbar, S., Sporck, M. & Sack, L. Leaf trait diversification and design in seven 
rare taxa of the Hawaiian Plantago radiation. Int. J. Plant Sci. 170, 61–75 
(2009).
171.	 Fyllas, N. M. et al. Basin-wide variations in foliar properties of Amazonian 
forest: phylogeny, soils and climate. Biogeosciences 6, 2677–2708 (2009).
172.	 Green, W. USDA PLANTS Compilation, Version 1. http://bricol.net/downloads/
data/PLANTSdatabase/ National Plant Data Center Baton Rouge (2009).
173.	 Kattge, J., Knorr, W., Raddatz, T. & Wirth, C. Quantifying photosynthetic 
capacity and its relationship to leaf nitrogen content for global-scale terrestrial 
biosphere models. Glob. Change Biol. 15, 976–991 (2009).
174.	 Malhado, A. C. M. et al. Spatial trends in leaf size of Amazonian rainforest trees. 
Biogeosciences 6, 1563–1576 (2009).
175.	 Manning, P., Houston, K. & Evans, T. Shifts in seed size across experimental 
nitrogen enrichment and plant density gradients. Basic Appl. Ecol. 10, 
300–308 (2009).
176.	 Moretti, M. & Legg, C. Combining plant and animal traits to assess community 
functional responses to disturbance. Ecography 32, 299–309 (2009).
177.	 Paula, S. et al. Fire-related traits for plant species of the Mediterranean Basin: 
Ecological Archives E090-094. Ecology 90, 1420 (2009).
178.	 Poorter, L. Leaf traits show different relationships with shade tolerance in 
moist versus dry tropical forests. New Phytol. 181, 890–900 (2009).
179.	 Reich, P. B., Oleksyn, J. & Wright, I. J. Leaf phosphorus influences the 
photosynthesis-nitrogen relation: a cross-biome analysis of 314 species. 
Oecologia 160, 207–212 (2009).
180.	 Tecco, P. A., Diaz, S., Cabido, M. & Urcelay, C. Functional traits of alien plants 
across contrasting climatic and land-use regimes: do aliens join the locals or 
try harder than them? J. Ecol. 98, 17–27 (2009).
181.	 Wirth, C. & Lichstein, J. W. The Imprint of Species Turnover on Old-Growth Forest 
Carbon Balances-Insights from a Trait-Based Model of Forest Dynamics in 
Old-growth Forests - Function, Fate and Value 81–113 (eds. Wirth, C., Gleixner, G. 
& Heimann, M.) (Springer-Verlag, 2009).
182.	 Cerabolini, B. E. L. et al. Can CSR classification be generally applied outside 
Britain? Plant Ecol. 210, 253–261 (2010).
183.	 Domingues, T. F. et al. Co-limitation of photosynthetic capacity by nitrogen 
and phosphorus in West Africa woodlands. Plant Cell Environ. 33, 959–980 
(2010). 
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

----- Page 11 (native) -----
Article
RESEARCH
184.	 Hao, G. Y., Sack, L., Wang, A. Y., Cao, K. F. & Goldstein, G. Differentiation of leaf 
water flux and drought tolerance traits in hemiepiphytic and non-
hemiepiphytic Ficus tree species. Funct. Ecol. 24, 731–740 (2010).
185.	 Messier, J., McGill, B. J. & Lechowicz, M. J. How do traits vary across ecological 
scales? A case for trait-based ecology. Ecol. Lett. 13, 838–848 (2010).
186.	 Ordoñez, J. C. et al. Plant strategies in relation to resource supply in mesic to 
wet environments: does theory mirror nature? Am. Nat. 175, 225–239 (2010). 
187.	 Peñuelas, J. et al. Faster returns on ‘leaf economics’ and different 
biogeochemical niche in invasive compared with native plant species. Glob. 
Change Biol. 16, 2171–2185 (2010).
188.	 Powers, J. S. & Tiffin, P. Plant functional type classifications in tropical dry 
forests in Costa Rica: leaf habit versus taxonomic approaches. Funct. Ecol. 24, 
927–936 (2010).
189.	 Willis, C. G. et al. Phylogenetic community structure in Minnesota oak savanna 
is influenced by spatial extent and environmental variation. Ecography 33, 
565–577 (2010).
190.	 Blonder, B., Violle, C., Bentley, L. P. & Enquist, B. J. Venation networks and the 
origin of the leaf economics spectrum. Ecol. Lett. 14, 91–100 (2011).
191.	 Brown, K. A. et al. Assessing natural resource use by forest-reliant 
communities in Madagascar using functional diversity and functional 
redundancy metrics. PLoS One 6, e24107 (2011).
192.	 Butterfield, B. J. & Briggs, J. M. Regeneration niche differentiates functional 
strategies of desert woody plant species. Oecologia 165, 477–487 (2011).
193.	 Campetella, G. et al. Patterns of plant trait–environment relationships along a 
forest succession chronosequence. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 145, 38–48 (2011).
194.	 Craine, J. M. et al. Functional consequences of climate change-induced plant 
species loss in a tallgrass prairie. Oecologia 165, 1109–1117 (2011).
195.	 de Araujo, A. C. et al. LBA-ECO CD-02 C and N Isotopes in Leaves and 
Atmospheric CO2, Amazonas, Brazil. Oak Ridge National Laboratory 
Distributed Active Archive Center, Oak Ridge, Tennessee, USA  
http://dx.doi.org/10.3334/ORNLDAAC/1097 (2012).
196.	 Laughlin, D. C., Fule, P. Z., Huffman, D. W., Crouse, J. & Laliberte, E. Climatic 
constraints on trait-based forest assembly. J. Ecol. 99, 1489–1499 (2011).
197.	 Milla, R. & Reich, P. B. Multi-trait interactions, not phylogeny, fine-tune leaf size 
reduction with increasing altitude. Ann. Bot. 107, 455–465 (2011).
198.	 Onoda, Y. et al. Global patterns of leaf mechanical properties. Ecol. Lett. 14, 
301–312 (2011).
199.	 Prentice, I. C. et al. Evidence of a universal scaling relationship for leaf CO2 
drawdown along an aridity gradient. New Phytol. 190, 169–180 (2011).
200.	 Sandel, B., Corbin, J. D. & Krupa, M. Using plant functional traits to guide 
restoration: a case study in California coastal grassland. Ecosphere 2, art23 
(2011).
201.	 Tucker, S. S., Craine, J. M. & Nippert, J. B. Physiological drought tolerance and 
the structuring of tallgrass prairie assemblages. Ecosphere 2, art48 (2011).
202.	 Yguel, B. et al. Phytophagy on phylogenetically isolated trees: why hosts 
should escape their relatives. Ecol. Lett. 14, 1117–1124 (2011).
203.	 Adriaenssens, S. Dry Deposition and Canopy Exchange for Temperate Tree 
Species under High Nitrogen Deposition. PhD thesis, Ghent Univ. (2012).
204.	 Beckmann, M., Hock, M., Bruelheide, H. & Erfmeier, A. The role of UV-B 
radiation in the invasion of Hieracium pilosella—A comparison of German and 
New Zealand plants. Environ. Exp. Bot. 75, 173–180 (2012).
205.	 Choat, B. et al. Global convergence in the vulnerability of forests to drought. 
Nature 491, 752–755 (2012).
206.	 Craine, J., Towne, E. G., Ocheltree, T. & Nippert, J. Community traitscape of 
foliar nitrogen isotopes reveals N availability patterns in a tallgrass prairie. 
Plant Soil 356, 395–403 (2012).
207.	 Frenette-Dussault, C., Shipley, B., Léger, J. F., Meziane, D. & Hingrat, Y. 
Functional structure of an arid steppe plant community reveals similarities 
with Grime’s C-S-R theory. J. Veg. Sci. 23, 208–222 (2012).
208.	 Gallagher, R. V. & Leishman, M. R. A global analysis of trait variation and 
evolution in climbing plants. J. Biogeogr. 39, 1757–1771 (2012).
209.	 Guerin, G. R., Wen, H. & Lowe, A. J. Leaf morphology shift linked to climate 
change. Biol. Lett. 8, 882–886 (2012).
210.	 Gutiérrez, A. G. & Huth, A. Successional stages of primary temperate 
rainforests of Chiloé Island, Chile. Perspect. Plant Ecol. Evol. Syst. 14, 243–256 
(2012).
211.	 Guy, A. L., Mischkolz, J. M. & Lamb, E. G. Limited effects of simulated acidic 
deposition on seedling survivorship and root morphology of endemic plant 
taxa of the Athabasca Sand Dunes in well-watered greenhouse trials. Botany 
91, 176–181 (2012).
212.	 Han, W. et al. Floral, climatic and soil pH controls on leaf ash content in China’s 
terrestrial plants. Glob. Ecol. Biogeogr. 21, 376–382 (2012).
213.	 Minden, V., Andratschke, S., Spalke, J., Timmermann, H. & Kleyer, M. Plant 
trait–environment relationships in salt marshes: Deviations from predictions 
by ecological concepts. Perspect. Plant Ecol. Evol. Syst. 14, 183–192 (2012).
214.	 Minden, V. & Kleyer, M. Testing the effect–response framework: key response 
and effect traits determining above-ground biomass of salt marshes. J. Veg. 
Sci. 22, 387–401 (2011).
215.	 Pierce, S., Brusa, G., Sartori, M. & Cerabolini, B. E. L. Combined use of leaf size 
and economics traits allows direct comparison of hydrophyte and terrestrial 
herbaceous adaptive strategies. Ann. Bot. 109, 1047–1053 (2012).
216.	 Spasojevic, M. J. & Suding, K. N. Inferring community assembly mechanisms 
from functional diversity patterns: the importance of multiple assembly 
processes. J. Ecol. 100, 652–661 (2012).
217.	 Vergutz, L., Manzoni, S., Porporato, A., Novais, R. F. & Jackson, R. B. A Global 
Database of Carbon and Nutrient Concentrations of Green and Senesced 
Leaves. Oak Ridge National Laboratory Distributed Active Archive Center, 
Oak Ridge, Tennessee, USA http://dx.doi.org/10.3334/ORNLDAAC/1106 
(2012).
218.	 Williams, M., Shimabokuro, Y. E. & Rastetter, E. B. LBA-ECO CD-09 Soil and 
Vegetation Characteristics, Tapajos National Forest, Brazil. Oak Ridge National 
Laboratory Distributed Active Archive Center, Oak Ridge, Tennessee, USA 
http://dx.doi.org/10.3334/ORNLDAAC/1104 (2012).
219.	 Wright, J. P. & Sutton-Grier, A. Does the leaf economic spectrum hold within 
local species pools across varying environmental conditions? Funct. Ecol. 26, 
1390–1398 (2012).
220.	 Auger, S. & Shipley, B. Interspecific and intraspecific trait variation along short 
environmental gradients in an old-growth temperate forest. J. Veg. Sci. 24, 
419–428 (2013).
221.	 Blonder, B., Violle, C. & Enquist, B. J. Assessing the causes and scales of the 
leaf economics spectrum using venation networks in Populus tremuloides. 
J. Ecol. 101, 981–989 (2013).
222.	 Byun, C., Blois, S. & Brisson, J. Plant functional group identity and diversity 
determine biotic resistance to invasion by an exotic grass. J. Ecol. 101, 
128–139 (2013).
223.	 Chen, Y., Han, W., Tang, L., Tang, Z. & Fang, J. Leaf nitrogen and phosphorus 
concentrations of woody plants differ in responses to climate, soil and plant 
growth form. Ecography 36, 178–184 (2013).
224.	 Conti, G. & Díaz, S. Plant functional diversity and carbon storage–an  
empirical test in semi-arid forest ecosystems. J. Ecol. 101, 18–28  
(2013).
225.	 Conti, G., Enrico, L., Casanoves, F. & Diaz, S. Shrub biomass estimation in the 
semiarid Chaco forest: a contribution to the quantification of an underrated 
carbon stock. Ann. For. Sci. 70, 515–524 (2013).
226.	 Demey, A. et al. Nutrient input from hemiparasitic litter favors plant species 
with a fast-growth strategy. Plant Soil 371, 53–66 (2013).
227.	 Kichenin, E., Wardle, D. A., Peltzer, D. A., Morse, C. W. & Freschet, G. T. 
Contrasting effects of plant inter-and intraspecific variation on community-
level trait measures along an environmental gradient. Funct. Ecol. 27, 
1254–1261 (2013).
228.	 Pahl, A. T., Kollmann, J., Mayer, A. & Haider, S. No evidence for local adaptation 
in an invasive alien plant: field and greenhouse experiments tracing a 
colonization sequence. Ann. Bot. 112, 1921–1930 (2013).
229.	 Brando, P. M. et al. Abrupt increases in Amazonian tree mortality due to 
drought-fire interactions. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 111, 6347–6352 
(2014).
230.	 Everwand, G., Fry, E. L., Eggers, T. & Manning, P. Seasonal variation in the 
vapacity for plant trait measures to predict grassland carbon and water fluxes. 
Ecosystems (N. Y.) 17, 1095–1108 (2014).
231.	 Fry, E. L., Power, S. A. & Manning, P. Trait-based classification and manipulation 
of plant functional groups for biodiversity–ecosystem function experiments.  
J. Veg. Sci. 25, 248–261 (2014).
232.	 Iida, Y. et al. Linking functional traits and demographic rates in a subtropical 
tree community: the importance of size dependency. J. Ecol. 102, 641–650 
(2014).
233.	 Blonder, B. et al. Testing models for the leaf economics spectrum with leaf and 
whole-plant traits in Arabidopsis thaliana. AoB Plants 7, plv049 (2015). 
234.	 Meng, T.-T. et al. Responses of leaf traits to climatic gradients: adaptive 
variation versus compositional shifts. Biogeosciences Discuss. 12,  
7093–7124 (2015).
235.	 Burrascano, S. et al. Environmental filtering of wild boar rooting activity on 
understorey composition and functional traits. Community Ecol. 16, 244–253 
(2015).
236.	 Albert, C. H. et al. Intraspecific functional variability: extent, structure and 
sources of variation. J. Ecol. 98, 604–613 (2010).
237.	 Gillison, A. N. in Vegetation Ecology 2nd edn (eds. van der Maarel, E. & Franklin, 
J.) pp. 347–386 (Wiley Online Library, 2013).
238.	 Niinemets, Ü., Keenan, T. F. & Hallik, L. A worldwide analysis of within-canopy 
variations in leaf structural, chemical and physiological traits across plant 
functional types. New Phytol. 205, 973–993 (2015).
239.	 Pérez-Harguindeguy, N. et al. New handbook for standardised measurement 
of plant functional traits worldwide. Aust. J. Bot. 61, 167–234 (2013).
240.	 Page, C. N. The ferns of Britain and Ireland (Cambridge Univ. Press, 1997).
241.	 Lloyd, R. M. Spore morphology of the Hawaiian genus Sadleria (Blechnaceae). 
Am. Fern J. 66, 1–7 (1976).
242.	 Conway, E. Spore production in bracken (Pteridium aquilinum (L.) Kuhn). 
J. Ecol. 45, 273–284 (1957).
243.	 Stoor, A. M., Boudrie, M., Jérǒme, C., Horn, K. & Bennert, H. W. Diphasiastrum 
oellgaardii (Lycopodiaceae, Pteridophyta), a new lycopod species from Central 
Europe and France. Feddes Repert. 107, 149–157 (1996).
244.	 Büntgen, U., Psomas, A. & Schweingruber, F. H. Introducing wood 
anatomical and dendrochronological aspects of herbaceous plants: 
applications of the Xylem Database to vegetation science. J. Veg. Sci. 25, 
967–977 (2014).
245.	 Blonder, B., Lamanna, C., Violle, C. & Enquist, B. J. The n-dimensional 
hypervolume. Glob. Ecol. Biogeogr. 23, 595–609 (2014).
246.	 Manly, B. J. Randomization, Bootstrap and Monte Carlo Methods in Biology 
(Chapman & Hall, 1997).
247.	 Di Rienzo, J. A. et al. InfoStat version 2015. Grupo InfoStat, FCA, Universidad 
Nacional de Córdoba, Argentina. (Cordoba, 2015).
248.	 Jongman, R. H. G., ter Braak, C. J. F. & van Tongeren, O. F. R. Data Analysis in 
Community and Landscape Ecology. (Pudor, Wageningen, 1987).
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

----- Page 12 (native) -----
Article RESEARCH
255.	 Schrodt, F. et al. BHPMF – a hierarchical Bayesian approach to gap-filling and 
trait prediction for macroecology and functional biogeography. Glob. Ecol. 
Biogeogr. 24, 1510–1521 (2015).
256.	 Peres-Neto, P. R. & Jackson, D. A. How well do multivariate data sets match? 
The advantages of a Procrustean superimposition approach over the Mantel 
test. Oecologia 129, 169–178 (2001).
257.	 Oksanen, J. et al. vegan: Community Ecology Package, version 2.0–7.  
http://CRAN.R-project.org/package=vegan (2008).
258.	 Wand, M. & Jones, M. Kernel Smoothing (Chapman and Hall, 1995).
259.	 Duong, T. ks: Kernel density estimation and kernel discriminant analysis for 
multivariate data in R. J. Stat. Softw. 21, 1–16 (2007).
260.	 Duong, T. & Hazelton, M. Plug-in bandwidth matrices for bivariate kernel 
density Estimation. J. Nonparametr. Stat. 15, 17–30 (2003).
261.	 New, M., Hulme, M. & Jones, P. Representing twentieth-century space-time 
climate variability. Part I: Development of a 1961-90 mean monthly terrestrial 
climatology. J. Clim. 12, 829–856 (1999).
262.	 Whittaker, R. J. Communities and Ecosystems (Macmillan, 1975).
263.	 Warton, D. I., Wright, I. J., Falster, D. S. & Westoby, M. Bivariate line-fitting 
methods for allometry. Biol. Rev. Camb. Philos. Soc. 81, 259–291 (2006).
249.	 Dray, S. On the number of principal components: a test of dimensionality 
based on measurements of similarity between matrices. Comput. Stat. Data 
Anal. 52, 2228–2237 (2008).
250.	 Pinheiro, J., Bates, D., DebRoy, S. & Sarkar, D. Nlme: Linear and  
Nonlinear Mixed Effects Models. “nlme” R package version 3.1-108.  
http://CRAN.R-project.org/package=nlme (2013).
251.	 Bates, D., Maechler, M. & Bolker, B. Lme4: linear mixed-effects models using S4 
classes. R package version 0.999999-2. http://lme4.r-forge.r-project.org/ (2013).
252.	 R Development Core Team. R: A language and environment for statistical 
computing. https://www.r-project.org/ (R Foundation for Statistical 
Computing, 2014).
253.	 Shan, H. et al. Gap filling in the Plant Kingdom: trait prediction using 
Hierarchical Probabilistic Matrix Factorization. Proceedings of the 29th 
International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) http://arxiv.org/
abs/1206.6439 (2012).
254.	 Fazayeli, F., Banerjee, A., Kattge, J., Schrodt, F. & Reich, P. B.  
Uncertainty quantified matrix completion using Bayesian Hierarchical Matrix 
Factorization in 13th International Conference on Machine Learning and 
Applications (ICMLA), http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICMLA.2014.56 (2014).
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

----- Page 13 (native) -----
Article
RESEARCH
Extended Data Figure 1 | Climatic and geographical coverage of the 
dataset. a–d, Green points, occurrence according to GBIF (http://www.
gbif.org) of species with information on all six traits (a, c) and at least one 
trait (b, d). Upper panels (a, b) show distribution in major climatic regions 
of the world; grey, MAP and MAT as in CRU0.5 degree climatology261; 
Biome classification according to ref. 262. Lower panels (c, d) show 
distribution in the global map (Robinson projection); grey, land surface. 
Maps based on the R package ‘maps’, accessed at The Comprehensive R 
Archive Network (https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/maps/index.
html).
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

----- Page 14 (native) -----
Article RESEARCH
Extended Data Figure 2 | Tests of the distribution of growth-forms (a) 
and major taxa (b) in trait space. Woody and non-woody species differed 
significantly in their positions along PC1 but not along PC2. Angiosperms 
differed significantly from gymnosperms and pteridophytes in their 
positions along both axes; gymnosperms and pteridophytes differed 
in their position along PC1 but not along PC2 (see Methods for details 
of PCA analysis and a posteriori tests). Whiskers denote ± 3 s.d. from 
mean; n woody = 1,001; n non-woody = 1,209; n angiosperms = 2,120; 
n gymnosperms = 80; n pteridophytes = 14). Horizontal bars and dots 
within boxes indicate mean and median, respectively. Means with the same 
letter are not significantly different (Fisher’s least significant difference; 
P > 0.01).
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

----- Page 15 (native) -----
Article
RESEARCH
Extended Data Figure 3 | Selected bivariate relationships underlying the global spectrum of plant form and function, showing herbaceous (green) 
and woody (black) species separately. See Extended Data Fig. 4 for standardized major axes statistics (slope, r2, sample size) of these and all other 
pairwise trait combinations.
Plant height (m)
Stem specific density (mg mm−3)
10−2
10−1
1
101
102
0.1
0.3
1
a
non−woody
woody
Leaf area (mm2)
Leaf mass per area (g m−2)
101
103
105
101
102
103
b
Leaf area (mm2)
Leaf nitrogen content (mg g−1)
101
103
105
4
8
16
32
64
c
Plant height (m)
Leaf area (mm2)
10−2
10−1
1
101
102
101
103
105
d
Plant height (m)
Leaf mass per area (g m−2)
10−2
10−1
1
101
102
101
102
103
e
Plant height (m)
Diaspore mass (mg)
10−2
10−1
1
101
102
10−4 10−2
1
102 104
f
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

----- Page 16 (native) -----
Article RESEARCH
Extended Data Figure 4 | Bivariate relationships between the six 
traits that underlie the global spectrum of plant form and function. 
The lower left portion of the matrix shows two-dimensional probability 
density distributions of bivariate trait relationships derived through 
kernel density estimation (see Methods). The colour gradient indicates 
regions of highest (red) to lowest (white) occurrence probability of trait 
combinations with contour lines indicating 0.5, 0.95 and 0.99 quantiles. 
The upper right portion contains standardized major axis (SMA)263 
statistics (slope, r2, sample size n, and statistical significance, NS, P > 0.05; 
*0.05 > P > 0.01; **0.01 > P > 0.001; ***P < 0.001 ) for the corresponding 
relationships for all species (a), and for herbaceous (h) and woody species 
(w) separately. The diagonal displays the total sample sizes for each trait. 
For traits showing a strongly bimodal distribution, the all-species slope 
and correlation should be treated with caution. Pteridophytes show a 
discontinuous distribution in SM, but otherwise fall well within the 
general distribution of points; they represent less than 1% of the dataset, 
therefore including or excluding them does not significantly alter any of 
the relationships. SMAs were fitted using SMATR v.2 (http://www.bio.
mq.edu.au/ecology/SMATR/).
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

----- Page 17 (native) -----
Article
RESEARCH
Extended Data Table 1 | Principal component analyses (PCAs) of global plant trait data
Eigenvalues and trait loadings of principal components (PC1 and PC2) in six different PCAs. Main analysis corresponds to the PCA performed on 2,214 species for which values of all six traits were 
available, and which is reported in the main text and expressed graphically in Fig. 2. The rest of the columns correspond to PCAs carried out on angiosperms only (2,120 species), on all taxa but 
excluding LMA, Nmass or SSD one at a time (2,214 in all cases), and on a gap-filled dataset of 45,507 species with missing trait records imputed using BHPMF (See Methods). The results of all PCAs 
show strong similarity, indicating robustness of the pattern obtained in the main analysis. Only PC1 and PC2 were identified as significant (see Methods) and therefore are reported here. All PCAs were 
performed on the correlation matrix of log10-transformed traits.
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

----- Page 18 (native) -----
Article RESEARCH
Extended Data Table 2 | Description and illustrative examples of species at different positions at the margin of the global spectrum of plant 
form and function
Circled numbers in the first column refer to extreme poles of whole-plant specialization, whose approximate positions in the plane defined by PC1 and PC2 are indicated within circles in Fig. 2a.
Brief description and examples
1
Tall, very large-seeded trees with large leaves of intermediate LMA and Nmass. Examples include the
Neotropical Bertholettia excelsa (Brazil nut), Gustavia superba, Pentaclethra macroloba, and Omphalea
spp.
2
Relatively large-seeded shrubs and trees of various heights, with small, sclerophyllous, highly conservative
(high LMA, low Nmass) leaves. Examples include, among gymnosperms, monkey puzzle tree (Araucaria
araucana), giant sequoia (Sequoiadendron giganteum) and junipers (Juniperus spp.). Among angiosperms,
it includes members of the Proteaceae (e.g. the Australian Hakea and the South African Leucadendron
genera) and Myrtaceae families (Melaleuca uncinata and Eucalyptus dumosa).
3
Sclerophyllous, high-LMA, low-Nmass species, of small stature, leaves, and seeds, varying from shrubs (such
as Fumana thymifolia, heathers Calluna vulgaris and Erica tetralix, and chamise Adenostoma fasciculatum),
to small forbs or sub-shrubs (such as Diapensia lapponica, Draba spp. and Sedum spp.), to graminoids (e.g.
Muhlenbergia ramulosa and Aristida purpurea).
4
Submerged and semi-submerged aquatics (such as bladderwort Utricularia vulgaris, watermilfol
Myriophyllum spicatum, Zannichellia palustris, and Ranunculus aquatilis) and ephemeral, small-seeded and
small- and acquisitive-leaved (low LMA, high Nmass)) species of very short stature, with very low investment
in vegetative structures other than leaves (such as thale cress Arabidopsis thaliana, annual bluegrass Poa
annua, and Nama dichotoma).
5
Large-leaved, high-Nmass herbaceous plants with little carbon investment in support tissue. These are
illustrated by robust aquatic species such as larger pondweeds (Potamogeton spp.) and sacred lotus
(Nelumbo nucifera), species with nitrogen-rich secondary compounds (presumably anti-herbivore defences;
e.g. devil’s snare Datura stramonium, henbane Hyoscyamus niger), and some common crop and agricultural
weed species such as Beta vulgaris, Phaseolus vulgaris, Cannabis sativa, and Arctium minus. Also includes
Boreal ‘mega-herb’ Angelica archangelica.
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved