

----- Page 1 (native) -----
Life in the network: the coming age of computational social
science
David Lazer,
Harvard University
Alex (Sandy) Pentland,
MIT
Lada Adamic,
University of Michigan
Sinan Aral,
NYU
Albert Laszlo Barabasi,
Northeastern University
Devon Brewer,
Interdisciplinary Scientific Research
Nicholas Christakis,
Harvard University
Noshir Contractor,
Northwestern University
James Fowler,
UCSD
Myron Gutmann,
University of Michigan
Tony Jebara,
Columbia University
Gary King,
Harvard University
Michael Macy,
Cornell University
Deb Roy, and
MIT
Marshall Van Alstyne
Boston University
We live life in the network. When we wake up in the morning, we check our e-mail, make a
quick phone call, walk outside (our movements captured by a high definition video camera),
get on the bus (swiping our RFID mass transit cards) or drive (using a transponder to zip through
the tolls). We arrive at the airport, making sure to purchase a sandwich with a credit card before
boarding the plane, and check our BlackBerries shortly before takeoff. Or we visit the doctor
or the car mechanic, generating digital records of what our medical or automotive problems
are. We post blog entries confiding to the world our thoughts and feelings, or maintain personal
NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Science. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 September 16.
Published in final edited form as:
Science. 2009 February 6; 323(5915): 721–723. doi:10.1126/science.1167742.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 2 (native) -----
social network profiles revealing our friendships and our tastes. Each of these transactions
leaves digital breadcrumbs which, when pulled together, offer increasingly comprehensive
pictures of both individuals and groups, with the potential of transforming our understanding
of our lives, organizations, and societies in a fashion that was barely conceivable just a few
years ago.
The capacity to collect and analyze massive amounts of data has unambiguously transformed
such fields as biology and physics. The emergence of such a data-driven “computational social
science” has been much slower, largely spearheaded by a few intrepid computer scientists,
physicists, and social scientists. If one were to look at the leading disciplinary journals in
economics, sociology, and political science, there would be minimal evidence of an emerging
computational social science engaged in quantitative modeling of these new kinds of digital
traces. However, computational social science is occurring, and on a large scale, in places like
Google, Yahoo, and the National Security Agency. Computational social science could easily
become the almost exclusive domain of private companies and government agencies.
Alternatively, there might emerge a “Dead Sea Scrolls” model, with a privileged set of
academic researchers sitting on private data from which they produce papers that cannot be
critiqued or replicated. Neither scenario will serve the long-term public interest in the
accumulation, verification, and dissemination of knowledge.
What potential value might a computational social science, based in an open academic
environment, offer society, through an enhanced understanding of individuals and collectives?
What are the obstacles that stand in the way of a computational social science?
From individuals to societies
To date the vast majority of existing research on human interactions has relied on one-shot
self-reported data on relationships. New technologies, such as video surveillance, e-mail, and
‘smart’ name badges offer a remarkable, second-by-second picture of interactions over
extended periods of time, providing information about both the structure and content of
relationships. Consider examples of data collection in this area and of the questions they might
address:
Video recording and analysis of the first two years of a child’s life (1)
Precisely what kind of interactions with others underlies the development of language? What
might be early indicators of autism?
Examination of group interactions through e-mail data
What are the temporal dynamics of human communications—that is, do work groups reach a
stasis with little change, or do they dramatically change over time (2,3)? What interaction
patterns predict highly productive groups and individuals? Can the diversity of news and
content we receive predict our power or performance (4)?
Examination of face-to-face group interactions over time using sociometers
Small electronics packages (‘sociometers’) worn like a standard ID badge can capture physical
proximity, location, movement, and other facets of individual behavior and collective
interactions. What are patterns of proximity and communication within an organization, and
what flow patterns are associated with high performance at the individual and group levels
(5)?
Lazer et al.
Page 2
Science. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 September 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 3 (native) -----
Macro communication patterns
Phone companies have records of call patterns among their customers extending over multiple
years, and e-Commerce portals such as Google and Yahoo collect instant messaging data on
global communication. Do these data paint a comprehensive picture of societal-level
communication patterns? What does the “macro” social network of society look like (6), and
how does it evolve over time? In what ways do these interactions affect economic productivity
or public health?
Tracking movement
With GPS and related technologies, it is increasingly easy to track the movements of people
(7,8). Mobile phones, in particular, allow the large scale tracing of people’s movements and
physical proximities over time (9), where it may be possible to infer even cognitive
relationships, such as friendship, from observed behavior (10). How might a pathogen, such
as influenza, driven by physical proximity, spread through a population (11)?
Internet
The Internet offers an entirely different channel for understanding what people are saying, and
how they are connecting (12). Consider, for example, in this political season, tracing the spread
of arguments/rumors/positions in the blogosphere (13), as well as the behavior of individuals
surfing the Internet (14), where the concerns of an electorate become visible in the searches
they conduct. Virtual worlds, by their nature capturing a complete record of individual
behavior, offer ample opportunities for research, for example, experimentation that would be
impossible or unacceptable (15). Similarly, social network websites offer an unprecedented
opportunity to understand the impact of a person’s structural position on everything from their
tastes to their moods to their health (16), while Natural Language Processing offers increased
capacity to organize and analyze the vast amounts of text from the Internet and other sources
(17).
In short, a computational social science is emerging that leverages the capacity to collect and
analyze data with an unprecedented breadth and depth and scale. Substantial barriers, however,
might limit progress. Existing ways of conceiving human behavior were developed without
access to terabytes of data describing their minute-by-minute interactions and locations of
entire populations of individuals. For example, what does existing sociological network theory,
built mostly on a foundation of one-time ‘snapshot’ data, typically with only dozens of people,
tell us about massively longitudinal datasets of millions of people, including location, financial
transactions, and communications? The answer is clearly “something,” but, as with the blind
men feeling parts of the elephant, limited perspectives provide only limited insights. These
emerging data sets surely must offer some qualitatively new perspectives on collective human
behavior.
There are significant barriers to the advancement of a computational social science both in
approach and in infrastructure. In terms of approach, the subjects of inquiry in physics and
biology present different challenges to observation and intervention. Quarks and cells neither
mind when we discover their secrets nor protest if we alter their environments during the
discovery process (although, as discussed below, biological research involving humans offers
some similar concerns regarding privacy). In terms of infrastructure, the leap from social
science to a computational social science is larger than from, say, biology to a computational
biology, in large part due to the requirements of distributed monitoring, permission seeking,
and encryption. The resources available in the social sciences are significantly smaller, and
even the physical (and administrative) distance between social science departments and
engineering or computer science departments tends to be greater than for the other sciences.
The availability of easy-to-use programs and techniques would greatly magnify the presence
Lazer et al.
Page 3
Science. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 September 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 4 (native) -----
of a computational social science. Just as mass-market CAD software revolutionized the
engineering world decades ago, common computational social science analysis tools and the
sharing of data will lead to significant advances. The development of these tools can, in part,
piggyback on those developed in biology, physics and other fields, but also requires substantial
investments in applications customized to social science needs.
Perhaps the thorniest challenges exist on the data side, with respect to access and privacy.
Many, though not all, of these data are proprietary (e.g., mobile phone and financial
transactional data). The debacle following AOL’s public release of “anonymized” search
records of many of its customers highlights the potential risk to individuals and corporations
in the sharing of personal data by private companies (18). Robust models of collaboration and
data sharing between industry and the academy need to be developed that safeguard the privacy
of consumers and provide liability protection for corporations.
More generally, properly managing privacy issues is essential. As the recent NRC report on
GIS data highlights, it is often possible to pull individual profiles out of even carefully
anonymized data (19). To take a non-social science example: this past Summer NIH and the
Wellcome Trust abruptly removed a number of genetic databases from online access (20).
These databases were seemingly anonymized, simply reporting the aggregate frequency of
particular genetic markers. However, research revealed the potential for de-anonymization,
based on the statistical power of the sheer quantity of data collected from each individual in
the database (21).
A single dramatic incident involving a breach of privacy could produce a set of statutes, rules,
and prohibitions that could strangle the nascent field of computational social science in its crib.
What is necessary, now, is to produce a self-regulatory regime of procedures, technologies,
and rules that reduce this risk but preserve most of the research potential. As a cornerstone of
such a self-regulatory regime, Institutional Review Boards (IRBs) must increase their technical
knowledge enormously to understand the potential for intrusion and individual harm because
new possibilities do not fit their current paradigms for harm. For example, many IRBs today
would be poorly equipped to evaluate the possibility that complex data could be de-
anonymized. Further, it may be necessary for IRBs to oversee the creation of a secure,
centralized data infrastructure. Certainly, the status quo is a recipe for disaster, where existing
data sets are scattered among many different groups, with uneven skills and understanding of
data security, with widely varying protocols.
Researchers themselves must tackle the privacy issue head on by developing technologies that
protect privacy while preserving data essential for research (22). These systems, in turn, may
prove useful for industry in managing privacy of customers and security of their proprietary
data.
Finally, the emergence of a computational social science shares with other nascent
interdisciplinary fields (e.g., sustainability science) the need to develop a paradigm for training
new scholars. A key requirement for the emergence of an interdisciplinary area of study is the
development of complementary and synergistic explanations spanning different fields and
scales. Tenure committees and editorial boards need to understand and reward the effort to
publish across disciplines (23). Certainly, in the short run, computational social science needs
to be the work of teams of social and computer scientists. In the longer run, the question will
be: should academia be building computational social scientists, or teams of computationally
literate social scientists and socially literate computer scientists?
The emergence of cognitive science in the 1960s and 1970s offers a powerful model for the
development of a computational social science. Cognitive science emerged out of the power
of the computational metaphor of the human mind. It has involved fields ranging from
Lazer et al.
Page 4
Science. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 September 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 5 (native) -----
neurobiology to philosophy to computer science. It attracted the investment of substantial
resources to establish a common field, and it has created enormous progress for public good
in the last generation. We would argue that a computational social science has a similar
potential, and is worthy of similar investments.
References
1. Roy, D.; Patel, R.; DeCamp, P.; Kubat, R.; Fleischman, M.; Roy, B.; Mavridis, N.; Tellex, S.; Salata,
A.; Guiness, J.; Levit, M.; Gorniak, P. The Human Speechome Project. Twenty-eighth Annual Meeting
of the Cognitive Science Society; 2006.
2. Eckmann JP, Moses E, SergI D. Entropy of dialogues creates coherent structures in e-mail traffic.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 2004;101:14333–
14337. [PubMed: 15448210]
3. Kossinets G, Watts D. Empirical Analysis of an Evolving Social Network. Science 2006;311(5757):
88–90. [PubMed: 16400149]
4. Aral, S.; Van Alstyne, M. Network Structure & Information Advantage. Proceedings of the Academy
of Management Conference; Philadelphia, PA. 2007.
5. Pentland, A. Honest Signals: how they shape our world. MIT Press; Cambridge, MA: 2008.
6. Onnela, J-P.; Saramäki, J.; Hyvönen, J.; Szabó, G.; Lazer, D.; Kaskil, K.; Kertész, J.; Barabási, A-L.
Structure and tie strengths in mobile communication networks. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America; 2007.
7. Shaw, B.; Jebara, T. Minimum Volume Embedding. Proceedings of the Conference on Artificial
Intelligence and Statistics; 2007.
8. Jebara, T.; Song, Y.; Thadani, K. Spectral Clustering and Embedding with Hidden Markov Models.
Proceedings of the European Conference on Machine Learning; 2007.
9. González MC, Hidalgo CA, Barabási AL. Understanding individual human mobility patterns. Nature
2008;453:779–782. [PubMed: 18528393]
10. Eagle, N.; Pentland, A.; Lazer, D. Inferring friendships from behavioral data. HKS working paper;
2008.
11. Colizza V, Barrat A, Barthelemy M, Vespignani A. Prediction and predictability of global epidemics:
the role of the airline transportation network. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America 2006;103:2015–2020. [PubMed: 16461461]
12. Watts D. Connections A twenty-first century science. Nature 445:489. [PubMed: 17268455]
13. Adamic, L.; Glance, N. The Political Blogosphere and the 2004 U.S. Election Divided They Blog.
LinkKDD-2005; Chicago, IL: 2005.
14. J. Teevan. 2008. “How People Recall, Recognize and Re-Use Search Results,” To appear in ACM
Transactions on Information Systems (TOIS) special issue on Keeping, Re-finding, and Sharing
Personal Information.
15. Bainbridge W. The scientific research potential of virtual worlds. Science 2007;317(5837):472–476.
[PubMed: 17656715]
16. Lewis K, Kaufman J, Gonzalez M, Wimmer A, Christakis N. Tastes, Ties, and Time: A New (Cultural,
Multiplex, and Longitudinal) Social Network Dataset Using Facebook.com. Social Networks. 2009in
press
17. Gardie C, Wilkerson J. Text annotation for political science research. Journal of Information
Technology and Politics 2008;5:1–6.
18. Barbarao M, Zeller T Jr. A Face Is Exposed for AOL Searcher No. 4417749. New York Times. 2006
August 9;
19. National Research Council. Putting People on the Map: Protecting Confidentiality with Linked Social-
Spatial Data. In: Myron, P., editor. Gutmann and Paul Stern. Washington: National Academy Press;
2007.
20. Felch, J. DNA databases blocked from the public. LA Times; August 29. 2008
Lazer et al.
Page 5
Science. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 September 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 6 (native) -----
21. Homer N, Szelinger S, Redman M, Duggan D, Tembe W. Resolving Individuals Contributing Trace
Amounts of DNA to Highly Complex Mixtures Using High-Density SNP Genotyping Microarrays.
PLoS Genetics 2008;4(8):e1000167.10.1371/journal.pgen.1000167 [PubMed: 18769715]
22. Backstrom, L.; Dwork, C.; Kleinberg, J. Wherefore Art Thou R3579X? Anonymized Social
Networks, Hidden Patterns, and Structural Steganography. Proc. 16th Intl. World Wide Web
Conference; 2007.
23. Van Alstyne M, Brynjolfsson E. Could the Internet Balkanize Science? Science 1996;274:1479–1480.
24. Image courtesy of Sense Networks.
25. We will supply animation in supporting online materials.
Lazer et al.
Page 6
Science. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 September 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 7 (native) -----
Figure 1.
This figure summarizes the link structure within a community of political blogs (from 2004),
where red nodes indicate conservative blogs, and blue liberal. Orange links go from liberal to
conservative, and purple ones from conservative to liberal. The size of each blog reflects the
number of other blogs that link to it (10).
Lazer et al.
Page 7
Science. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 September 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 8 (native) -----
Figure 2.
The location (after adding randomized synthetic noise) of several hundred mobile devices in
the city of San Francisco. Each location is color coded to indicate which of 8 “tribes” (or social
clusters) each user belongs to. Tribes are computed by clustering (otherwise anonymized) users
according to how similar their movement patterns are over a few weeks. The movement
analysis is performed using the Minimum Volume Embedding algorithm (7,8,24)
Lazer et al.
Page 8
Science. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 September 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 9 (native) -----
Figure 3.
Patterns of email (blue) and face-to-face communication (read) within a German bank over a
period of one month. Productivity and information overload is correlated with the sum of both
types of communication, but not with either alone (25)
Lazer et al.
Page 9
Science. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2009 September 16.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript