

----- Page 1 (native) -----
Review summary:  
Biodiversity redistribution under climate change: impacts on ecosystems and human well-
being 
Gretta T. Pecl*, Miguel B. Araújo, Johann D. Bell, Julia Blanchard, Timothy C. Bonebrake, I-Ching 
Chen, Timothy D. Clark, Robert K. Colwell, Finn Danielsen, Birgitta Evengård, Lorena Falconi, 
Simon Ferrier, Stewart Frusher, Raquel A. Garcia, Roger Griffis, Alistair J. Hobday, Charlene 
Janion-Scheepers, Marta A. Jarzyna, Sarah Jennings, Jonathan Lenoir, Hlif I. Linnetved, Victoria Y. 
Martin, Phillipa C. McCormack, Jan McDonald, Nicola J. Mitchell, Tero Mustonen, John M. 
Pandolfi, Nathalie Pettorelli, Ekaterina Popova, Sharon A. Robinson, Brett R. Scheffers, Justine D. 
Shaw, Cascade J. B. Sorte, Jan M. Strugnell, Jennifer M. Sunday, Mao-Ning Tuanmu, Adriana 
Vergés, Cecilia Villanueva, Thomas Wernberg, Erik Wapstra, Stephen E. Williams 
* Corresponding author. Email: gretta.pecl@utas.edu.au, list of author affiliations available in the 
full article online.

----- Page 2 (native) -----
Figure caption:  As the global climate changes, human well-being, ecosystem function, and 
even climate itself are increasingly impacted by the shifting geography of life. Climate-driven 
changes in species distributions, or “range shifts,” affect human well-being both directly (for 
example, through emerging diseases and changes in food supply) and indirectly, by degrading 
ecosystem health. Some range shifts even create feedbacks (positive or negative) on the climate 
system, altering the pace of climate change.  
 
BACKGROUND: The success of human societies depends intimately on the living components of 
natural and managed systems.  Although the geographical range limits of species are dynamic and 
fluctuate over time, climate change is impelling a universal redistribution of life on Earth. For 
marine, freshwater, and terrestrial species alike, the first response to changing climate is often a shift 
in location, to stay within preferred environmental conditions. At the cooler extremes of their 
distributions, species are moving polewards, while range limits are contracting at the warmer range 
edge, where temperatures are no longer tolerable. On land, species are also moving to cooler, higher 
elevations, and, in the ocean, to colder water at greater depths. Because different species respond at 
different rates and to different degrees, key interactions among species are often disrupted, and new 
interactions develop. These idiosyncrasies can result in novel biotic communities and rapid changes 
in ecosystem functioning, with pervasive and sometimes unexpected consequences that propagate 
through and impact both biological and human communities.  
ADVANCES: At a time when the world is anticipating unprecedented increases in human 
population growth and demands, the ability of natural ecosystems to deliver ecosystem services is 
being challenged by the largest climate-driven global redistribution of species since the last glacial 
maximum. We demonstrate the serious consequences of this species redistribution for economic

----- Page 3 (native) -----
development, livelihoods, food security, human health, and culture, and we document feedbacks 
on climate itself. As with other impacts of climate change, species range shifts will leave 
“winners” and “losers” in their wake, radically re-shaping the pattern of human well-being 
between regions and different sectors and potentially leading to substantial conflict. The pervasive 
impacts of changes in species distribution transcend single systems or dimensions, with feedbacks 
and linkages between multiple interacting scales and through whole ecosystems, inclusive of 
humans. We argue that the negative effects of climate change cannot be adequately anticipated or 
prepared for unless species responses are explicitly included in decision-making and global 
strategic frameworks. 
OUTLOOK: Despite mounting evidence for the pervasive and significant impacts of a climate-
driven redistribution of Earth’s species, current global goals, policies, and international agreements 
fail to take account of these impacts. With the predicted intensification of species movements and 
their diverse societal and environmental impacts, awareness of ‘species on the move’ should be 
incorporated into local, regional and global assessments as standard practice. This will raise hope 
that future targets can be achievable, whether they be global sustainability goals, plans for regional 
biodiversity maintenance, or local fishing or forestry harvest strategies. and that society is prepared 
for a world of universal ecological change. Human society has yet to appreciate the implications of 
unprecedented species redistribution for life on earth, including for human lives. Even if greenhouse 
gas emissions stopped today, the responses required in human systems to adapt to the most serious 
of impacts of climate-driven species redistribution would be massive. Meeting these challenges 
requires governance that can anticipate and adapt to changing conditions, and minimize negative 
consequences.

----- Page 4 (native) -----
Revised Manuscript:  Confidential 
 
 
 
 
Title:  Biodiversity redistribution under climate change: impacts on ecosystems and human 
well-being 
 
 
One Sentence Summary: Climate-driven species redistribution significantly impacts human 
well-being, ecosystem function, and even climate itself. 
 
Authors:  Gretta T. Pecl*1,2, Miguel B. Araújo3,4,5, Johann D. Bell6,7, Julia Blanchard1,2, Timothy 
C. Bonebrake8, I-Ching Chen9, Timothy D. Clark1,10, Robert K. Colwell5,11,12,13, Finn 
Danielsen14, , Birgitta Evengård15, Lorena Falconi16, Simon Ferrier17, Stewart Frusher1,2, Raquel 
A. Garcia18,19, Roger B. Griffis20, Alistair J. Hobday2,21, Charlene Janion-Scheepers22, Marta A. 
Jarzyna23, Sarah Jennings2,24, Jonathan Lenoir25, Hlif I. Linnetved26, Victoria Y. Martin27, 
Phillipa C. McCormack28, Jan McDonald2,28, Nicola J. Mitchell29, Tero Mustonen30, John M. 
Pandolfi31, Nathalie Pettorelli32, Ekaterina Popova33, Sharon A. Robinson34, Brett R. Scheffers35, 
Justine D. Shaw36, Cascade J. B. Sorte37, Jan M. Strugnell38,39, Jennifer M. Sunday40, Mao-Ning 
Tuanmu41, Adriana Vergés42, Cecilia Villanueva1,2, Thomas Wernberg29,43, Erik Wapstra44, 
Stephen E. Williams16

----- Page 5 (native) -----
Affiliations: 
1 Institute for Marine and Antarctic Studies, Hobart, TAS 7001, Australia. 
2 Centre for Marine Socioecology, Hobart, TAS 7001, Australia. 
3 Department of Biogeography and Global Change, Museo Nacional de Ciencias Naturales, 
CSIC, 28006 Madrid, Spain. 
4 Centro de Investigação em Biodiversidade e Recursos Geneticos, Universidade de Évora, 
7000-890 Évora, Portugal. 
5 Department of Biology, Center for Macroecology, Evolution and Climate, University of 
Copenhagen, Universitetsparken 15, 2100, Copenhagen O, Denmark. 
6 Australian National Centre for Ocean Resources and Security, University of Wollongong, 
NSW 2522, Australia. 
7 Betty and Gordon Moore Center for Science and Oceans, Conservation International, 
Arlington, VA 22202, USA. 
8 School of Biological Sciences, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China 
9 Department of Life Sciences, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan 701, Taiwan 
(R.O.C.)  
10 CSIRO Agriculture and Food, Hobart, TAS 7000, Australia. 
11 Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT 
06269, USA. 
12 University of Colorado Museum of Natural History, Boulder, CO 80309, USA.

----- Page 6 (native) -----
13 Departmento de Ecologia, Universidade Federal de Goiás, CP 131, 74.001-970 Goiânia, 
Goiás, Brazil. 
14 NORDECO, Copenhagen DK-1159, Denmark. 
15 Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Clinical Microbiology, Umea University, 
90187 Umea, Sweden. 
16 College of Marine & Environmental Science, James Cook University, Townsville, QLD 
4811, Australia. 
17 CSIRO Land and Water, Canberra, ACT 2601, Australia 
18 Centre for Statistics in Ecology, the Environment and Conservation, Department of 
Statistical Sciences, University of Cape Town, Rondebosch 7701, Cape Town, South 
Africa. 
19 Centre for Invasion Biology, Department of Botany and Zoology, Faculty of Science, 
Stellenbosch University, Matieland 7602, South Africa. 
20 NOAA Fisheries Service, Silver Spring, MD 20912, USA. 
21 CSIRO Oceans and Atmosphere, Hobart, TAS 7000, Australia. 
22 Monash University, School of Biological Sciences, Clayton, VIC 3800, Australia. 
23 Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Yale University, New Haven, CT 
06520, USA.  
24 Tasmanian School of Business and Economics, University of Tasmania, Hobart, TAS 
7001, Australia.

----- Page 7 (native) -----
25 EDYSAN (FRE 3498 CNRS-UPJV), Université de Picardie Jules Verne, F-80037 Amiens 
Cedex 1, France. 
26 Institute of Food and Resource Economics, Faculty of Science, University of Copenhagen, 
Rolighedsvej 25, DK-1958 Frederiksberg C, Denmark. 
27 School of Environment, Science & Engineering, Southern Cross University, Lismore, 
NSW 2480, Australia. 
28 Faculty of Law, University of Tasmania, Hobart, TAS 7001, Australia. 
29 School of Biological Sciences, The University of Western Australia, Crawley WA 6009, 
Australia. 
30 Snowchange Cooperative, University of Eastern Finland, Joensuu, FIN 80100 Finland. 
31 School of Biological Sciences, ARC Centre of Excellence for Coral Reef Studies, The 
University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD 4072, Australia. 
32 Institute of Zoology, Zoological Society of London, Regent's Park, NW1 4RY London, 
UK. 
33 National Oceanography Centre, University of Southampton Waterfront Campus, European 
Way, Southampton, SO14 3ZH, UK. 
34 Centre for Sustainable Ecosystem Solutions, School of Biological Sciences, University of 
Wollongong, Wollongong, NSW 2522, Australia. 
35 Department of Wildlife Ecology and Conservation, Institute of Food and Agricultural 
Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611, USA.

----- Page 8 (native) -----
36 Centre for Biodiversity and Conservation Science, School of Biological Sciences, The 
University of Queensland, St Lucia, QLD 4072, Australia. 
37 Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of California, Irvine, CA 
92697, USA. 
38 Centre for Sustainable Tropical Fisheries and Aquaculture, College of Science and 
Engineering, James Cook University, Townsville, 4811 QLD, Australia.    
39 Department of Ecology, Environment and Evolution, School of Life Sciences, La Trobe 
University, Melbourne, VIC 3086, Australia.  
40 Biodiversity Research Centre, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4, 
Canada. 
41 Biodiversity Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei 115, Taiwan. 
42 Centre for Marine Bio-Innovation and Evolution & Ecology Research Centre, School of 
Biological, Earth and Environmental Sciences, University of New South Wales, Sydney, 
NSW 2052, Australia. 
43 Oceans Institute, The University of Western Australia, Perth, WA 6009, Australia.  
44 School of Biological Sciences, University of Tasmania, Hobart, TAS 7001, Australia. 
 
*Corresponding author. Email: Gretta.Pecl@utas.edu.au. All authors after the first author are 
alphabetical.

----- Page 9 (native) -----
Abstract: Distributions of the Earth’s species are changing at accelerating rates, increasingly 
driven by human-mediated climate change. Such changes are already altering the composition of 
ecological communities, but beyond conservation of natural systems, how and why does this 
matter? We review evidence that climate-driven species redistribution at regional to global scales 
is impacting ecosystem functioning, human well-being, and the dynamics of climate change 
itself. Production of natural resources required for food security, patterns of disease transmission, 
and processes of carbon sequestration are all altered by changes in species distribution.   
Consideration of these effects of biodiversity redistribution is critical, yet lacking in most 
mitigation and adaptation strategies, including the United Nation’s Sustainable Development 
Goals.

----- Page 10 (native) -----
Main Text:  
 
The history of life on Earth is closely associated with environmental change on multiple spatial 
and temporal scales (1). A critical component of this association is the capacity for species to 
shift their distributions in response to tectonic, oceanographic, or climatic events (2). Observed 
and projected climatic changes for the 21st-century, most notably global warming, are 
comparable in magnitude to the largest global changes in the past 65 million years (3, 4). The 
combined rate and magnitude of climate change is already resulting in a global-scale biological 
response. Marine, freshwater, and terrestrial organisms are altering distributions to stay within 
their preferred environmental conditions (5-8), and species are likely changing distributions more 
rapidly than they have in the past (9). Unlike the introduction of non-native species, which tends 
to be remarkably idiosyncratic and usually depends upon human-mediated transport, climate-
driven redistribution is ubiquitous, follows repeated patterns, and is poised to influence a greater 
proportion of the Earth’s biota. This redistribution of the planet’s living organisms is a 
substantial challenge for human society.  
 
Despite agreements to curb greenhouse gas emissions, the climate will continue to change for at 
least the next several hundred years given the inertia of the oceanic and atmospheric circulation 
systems (10), and species will continue to respond, often with unpredictable consequences. Since 
1880 there has been an average warming of 0.85°C globally (10), resulting in well-documented 
shifts in species distributions with far-reaching implications to human societies, yet governments 
have agreed to accept more than double this amount of warming in the future (i.e., the Paris COP 
21 2°C target). Moreover, current global commitments will only limit warming to 2.7-3.7°C,

----- Page 11 (native) -----
more than 3-4 times the warming already experienced (11). To date, all key international 
discussions and agreements regarding climate change have focused on the direct socio-economic 
implications of emissions and on funding mechanisms; shifting natural ecosystems have not yet 
been considered.  
 
Here, we review the consequences of climate-driven species redistribution for economic 
development and the provision of ecosystem services, including livelihoods, food security, and 
culture, as well as for feedbacks on the climate itself (Fig. 1, Table S1). We start by examining 
the impacts of climate-driven species redistribution on ecosystem health, human well-being, and 
the climate system, before highlighting the governance challenges these impacts individually and 
collectively create. Critically, the pervasive impacts of changes in species distribution transcend 
single systems or dimensions, with feedbacks and linkages among multiple interacting spatial 
and temporal scales and through entire ecosystems, inclusive of humans (Figs 2 & 3). We 
conclude by considering species redistribution in the context of earth systems and sustainable 
development. Our review suggests that the negative effects of climate change cannot be 
adequately mitigated or minimized unless species responses are explicitly included in decision-
making and strategic frameworks. 
 
Biological responses and ecosystem health 
 
Species are impacted by climate in many ways, including range shifts, changes in relative 
abundance within species ranges, and subtler changes in activity timing and microhabitat use 
(12, 13). The geographic distribution of any species depends upon its environmental tolerance,

----- Page 12 (native) -----
dispersal constraints, and biological interactions with other species (14). As climate changes, 
species must either tolerate the change, move, adapt, or face extinction (15). Surviving species 
may thus have increased capacity to live in new locations or decreased ability to persist where 
they are currently situated (e.g., 13). 
 
Shifts in species distributions across latitude, elevation, and with depth in the ocean have been 
extensively documented (Fig. 1). Meta-analyses show terrestrial taxa, on average, moving 
polewards by 17 km per decade (5), and marine taxa by 72 km per decade (6, 16). Just as 
terrestrial species on mountainsides are moving upslope to escape warming lowlands (e.g., 17), 
some fish species are driven deeper as the sea surface warms (e.g., 18).  
 
The distributional responses of some species lag behind climate change (6). Such lags can arise 
from a range of factors, including species-specific physiological, behavioural, ecological, and 
evolutionary responses (12). Lack of adequate habitat connectivity and access to microhabitats 
and associated microclimates are expected to be critical in increasing exposure to macroclimatic 
warming and extreme heat events, thus delaying shifts of some species (19). Furthermore, 
distribution shifts are often heterogeneous across geographic gradients when factors other than 
temperature drive species redistribution. For example, precipitation changes or interspecific 
interactions can cause downward elevation shifts as climate warms (20). Although species may 
adapt to changing climates, either through phenotypic plasticity or natural selection (e.g., 21), all 
species have limits to their capacity for adaptive response to changing environments (12) and 
these limits are unlikely to increase for species already experiencing warm temperatures close to 
their tolerance limits (22).

----- Page 13 (native) -----
The idiosyncrasies of species responses to climate change can result in discordant range shifts, 
leading to novel biotic communities as species separate or come into contact in new ways (23).  
In turn, altered biotic interactions hinder or facilitate further range shifts, often with cascading 
effects (24). Changes in predation dynamics, herbivory, host-plant associations, competition, and 
mutualisms can all have substantial impacts at the community level (16, 25). A case in point 
involves the expected impacts of crabs invading the continental shelf habitat of Antarctic sea-
floor echinoderms and mollusks—species that have evolved in the absence of skeleton-crushing 
predators (26). The community impacts of shifting species can be of the same or greater 
magnitude as the introduction of non-native species (16), itself recognized as one of the primary 
drivers of biodiversity loss (27). 
 
When species range shifts occur in foundation or habitat-forming species, they can have 
pervasive effects that propagate through entire communities (28). In some cases, impacts are so 
severe that species redistribution alters ecosystem productivity and carbon storage. For example, 
climate-driven range expansion of mangroves worldwide, at the expense of saltmarsh habitat, is 
changing local rates of carbon sequestration (29). The loss of kelp-forest ecosystems in Australia 
and their replacement by seaweed turfs has been linked to increases in herbivory by the influx of 
tropical fishes, exacerbated by increases in water temperature beyond the kelp’s physiological 
tolerance limits (30, 31). Diverse disruptions from the redistribution of species include effects on 
terrestrial productivity (32), impacts on marine community assembly (33), and threats to the 
health of freshwater systems from widespread cyanobacteria blooms (34).

----- Page 14 (native) -----
The effects on ecosystem functioning and condition arising from species turnover and changes in 
the diversity of species within entire communities are less well understood. The redistribution of 
species may alter the community composition in space and time (beta diversity), number of 
species co-occurring at any given location (alpha diversity) and/or the number of species found 
within a larger region (gamma diversity) (35). The diversity and composition of functional traits 
within communities may also change as a result of species range shifts (36), although changes in 
functional traits can also occur through alterations in relative abundance or community 
composition, without changes in species richness. Increasingly, evidence indicates that species 
diversity, which underlies functional diversity, has a positive effect on the mean level and 
stability of ecosystem functioning at local and regional scales (37). It therefore appears likely 
that any changes in diversity resulting from the redistribution of species will have indirect 
consequences for ecosystem condition.    
 
Extinction risk from climate change has been widely discussed and contested (38-40), and 
predictions of extinction risk for the 21st century are considerable (41). In some cases, upslope 
migration allows mountain-dwelling species to track suitable climate, but topography and range 
loss can sometimes trap species in isolated, eventually unsuitable, habitats (42). The American 
pika (Ochotona princeps) has been extirpated or severely diminished in some localities, 
signaling climate-induced extinction or at least local extirpation (43). Complicated synergistic 
drivers or extinction debt—a process in which functional extinction precedes physical 
extinction—may make climate-induced extinction seem a distant threat. However, the 
disappearance of Bramble Cay melomys (Melomys rubicola), an Australian rodent declared

----- Page 15 (native) -----
extinct due to sea-level rise (44), shows anthropogenic climate change has already caused 
irreversible species loss. 
 
Notwithstanding the rich body of evidence from the response to climate change of species and 
ecosystems in the fossil record (45), understanding more recent, persistent responses to climate 
change usually requires several decades of data to rigorously assess pre- and post-climate change 
trends at the level of species and ecosystems (46). Such long-term datasets for biological systems 
are rare, and recent trends of declining funding undermine the viability of monitoring programs 
required to document and respond to climate change.  
 
Human well-being 
 
The well-being of human societies is tied to the capacity of natural and altered ecosystems to 
produce a wide range of “goods and services.”  Human well-being, survival, and geographical 
distribution have always depended upon the ability to respond to environmental change. The 
emergence of early humans was likely conditioned by a capacity to switch prey and diets as 
changing climatic conditions made new resources available (47). However, recent technological 
changes in agriculture, forestry, and fisheries have weakened the direct link between human 
migration and survival. Now, human societies rely more on technological and behavioral 
innovation to accommodate human demography, trade/economics, and food production to 
changing species distribution patterns. The redistributions of species are expected to affect the 
availability and distribution of goods and services for human well-being in a number of ways,

----- Page 16 (native) -----
and the relative immobility of many human societies, largely imposed by jurisdictional borders, 
has limited capacity to respond to environmental change by migration.  
 
Redistributions of species are likely to drive significant changes in the supply of food and other 
products.  For example, the relative abundance of skipjack tuna in the tropical Pacific, which 
underpins government revenue and food security for many small island states, is expected to 
become progressively greater in eastern areas of the Western and Central Pacific Ocean, helping 
to offset the projected ubiquitous decline in the supply of fish from degraded coral reefs in that 
region (48). Conversely, it is estimated that an average of 34% of European forest lands, 
currently covered withwith valuable timber trees, such as Norway spruce, will be suitable only 
for Mediterranean oak forest vegetation by 2100, resulting in much lower economic returns for 
forest owners and the timber industry (49).  
 
The indirect effects of climate change on food webs are also expected to compound the direct effects on 
crops. For example, the distribution and abundance of vertebrate species that control crop pests are 
predicted to decline in European states, where agriculture makes important contributions to the gross 
domestic product (50). Shifts in the spatial distribution of agriculture will be required to counter the 
impact of these combined direct and indirect effects of changing climate. Geographic shifts in natural 
resource endowments and in systems supporting agriculture, forestry, fisheries and aquaculture, 
will result in winners and losers, with many of the negative effects likely to occur in developing 
countries (51). A prime example is the projected effect of climate change on the supply of coffee, 
with principal coffee growing regions expected to shift (52).

----- Page 17 (native) -----
Species range-shifts are also affecting the intrinsic and economic values of recreation and 
tourism, in both negative and positive ways (53). The build-up of jellyfish due to warmer 
temperatures in a Mediterranean lagoon has had a negative effect on local economies linked to 
recreation, tourism, and fishing (54). In southeast Australia, a range-extending sea urchin has 
overgrazed macro-algae, resulting in localized loss of up to 150 associated taxa and contributing 
to reduced catch limits for popular recreational fisheries species dependent on large seaweed 
(55). Impacts have been positive in some contexts, such as the recent emergence of highly-prized 
species in recreational fishing areas (53). 
 
Indirect effects from changes in species distributions that underpin society and culture can be 
dramatic. In the Arctic, changes in distributions of fish, wild reindeer, and caribou are impacting 
the food security, traditional knowledge systems, and endemic cosmologies of indigenous 
societies (Figs 1 & 2, 7). In partial response, the Skolt Sámi in Finland have introduced 
adaptation measures to aid survival of Atlantic salmon stocks faced with warming waters, and to 
maintain their spiritual relationship with the species. These measures include increasing the catch 
of pike to reduce predation pressure on salmon. In the East Siberian tundra, faced with melting 
permafrost, the Chukchi people are struggling to maintain their traditional nomadic reindeer 
herding practices (56, Fig. 2). Citizen-recording of climate-induced changes to complement 
assessments based on scientific sampling and remote sensing forms part of their strategy to 
maintain traditional practices.   
 
Human health is also likely to be seriously affected by changes in the distribution and virulence 
of animal-borne pathogens, which already account for 70% of emerging infections (57, 58).

----- Page 18 (native) -----
Movement of mosquitoes in response to global warming is a threat to health in many countries 
through predicted increases in the number of known, and potentially new, diseases (Fig. 3). The 
most prevalent mosquito-borne disease, malaria, has long been a risk for almost half of the 
world’s population, with more than 200 million cases recorded in 2014 (59). Malaria is expected 
to reach new areas with the poleward and elevational migration of Anopheles mosquito vectors 
(60). Climate-related transmission of malaria can result in epidemics due to lack of immunity 
among local residents (59), and will challenge health systems at national and international scales, 
diverting public and private sector resources from other uses.  
 
The winners and losers arising from the redistributions of species will re-shape patterns of 
human well-being among regions and sectors of industry and communities (61). Those regions 
with strongest climate drivers, with the most sensitive species, and where humans have least 
capacity to respond, will be among the most impacted. Developing nations, particularly those 
near the equator, are likely to experience greater climate-related local extinctions due to 
poleward and elevational range shifts (62) and will face greater economic constraints. In some 
cases, species redistribution will also lead to substantial conflict - the recent expansion of 
mackerel into Icelandic waters is a case in point (Fig. 1, Table S1).  The mackerel fishery in 
Iceland increased from 1700 tonnes in 2006 to 120,000 tonnes in 2010, resulting in “mackerel 
wars” between Iceland and competing countries that have traditionally been allocated mackerel 
quotas (63). Likewise, with upslope shift of climate zones in the Italian Alps, intensified conflict 
is anticipated between recreation and biodiversity sectors. For example, climate-driven 
contractions in the most valuable habitat for high-elevation threatened bird species and for ski

----- Page 19 (native) -----
trails are predicted to increase, along with an increase in the degree of overlap between the bird 
habitat and the areas most suitable for future ski trail construction (64).  
 
 
Climate feedbacks 
Species redistributions are expected to influence climate feedbacks via changes in albedo, 
biologically-driven sequestration of carbon from the atmosphere to the deep sea (the ‘biological 
pump’), and the release of greenhouse gases (65). For instance, terrestrial plants affect albedo via 
leaf area and color and regulate the global carbon cycle through CO2 atmosphere-land 
exchanges. Similarly, CO2 atmosphere-ocean exchanges are biologically modulated by CO2-
fixing photosynthetic phytoplankton and by the biological pump that exports carbon into deep 
ocean reservoirs (66).  
 
The climate-driven shifts in species distributions most likely to affect biosphere feedbacks 
involve redistribution of vegetation on land (Figs 2 & 4) and phytoplankton in the ocean. 
Decreased albedo, arising from the combined effect of earlier snowmelt and increasing shrub 
density at high latitudes, already contributes to increased net radiation and atmospheric heating, 
amplifying high-latitude warming (67). Thus, continued warming will decrease the albedo in the 
Arctic not only through a decline in snow cover, but also through a northward shift of coniferous 
trees (Fig. 2). Pearson et al. (68) projected that by 2050, vegetation in the Arctic will mostly shift 
from tundra (dominated by lichens and mosses with high albedo) to boreal forest (dominated by 
coniferous trees with low albedo). Additionally, the greenhouse effect may be amplified by top-
of-atmosphere radiative imbalance from enhanced evapotranspiration associated with the

----- Page 20 (native) -----
greening of the Arctic (69). At low latitudes, ongoing plant redistribution (e.g., mangrove 
expansion and forest dieback; 29) potentially amplifies climate warming through carbon-cycle 
feedbacks (70). However, future projections in the tropics are uncertain because of a lack of 
close climatic analogues from which to extrapolate (71). 
 
Species redistribution at high latitudes also affects vegetation state indirectly through pests like 
defoliators and bark beetles that are moving northward and upslope in boreal forests (72) (Figs 1, 
2 & 4). The combined effects of increasing temperatures and droughts increase plant stress, thus 
contributing to the severity of pest outbreaks and tree dieback. These processes in turn increase 
fuel loads and fire frequency (73), ultimately driving additional feedback through massive 
biomass burning and CO2 release. Finally, increased shrub canopy cover at high latitudes may 
locally reduce soil temperatures through a buffering effect (74), slowing the release of CO2 from 
permafrost degradation, thus potentially mitigating warming (75) (Fig. 2). 
 
Redistribution of marine phytoplankton is expected to impact the ocean’s biological and 
carbonate pumps and the production of atmospheric aerosols. The subpolar North Atlantic, 
which is already highly productive and stores around 25% of the ocean’s anthropogenic CO2 
(76), may experience phytoplankton changes due to retreat of the Arctic sea-ice and 
strengthening of ocean stratification. These changes are expected to lead, respectively, to 
northward movement of productive areas and suppression of the spring bloom, substantially 
altering CO2 exchanges between the ocean and the atmosphere at high latitudes (77), although 
the net effect is uncertain. Rising temperatures may also lead to changes in the composition of 
different plankton functional groups (78). Expected changes in the relative dominance of diatoms

----- Page 21 (native) -----
and calcareous plankton can strongly impact the biological cycling of carbon. Such a change was 
a possible contributor to CO2 differences between Pleistocene glacial and interglacial periods 
(79). Similarly, shifts from diatom- to flagellate-dominated systems in temperate latitudes and 
increased microbial remineralization, both associated with warming, are expected to reduce the 
efficiency of the biological pump and therefore affect atmospheric CO2 (80).  
 
Temperature-related changes in phytoplankton distributions will also affect production of 
dimethyl sulfide (DMS), which contributes sulfur particles to the atmosphere and seeds cloud 
formation (81). These particles are expected to decrease surface temperature, but they may also 
act as a greenhouse gas, so the net effect on climate warming is not yet clear. There is no simple 
relationship between DMS production and either phytoplankton biomass, chlorophyll 
concentration or primary production suggesting a complex regulation of DMS production by the 
whole marine planktonic ecosystem and the physical environment controlling it. Hence, current 
climate models cannot give an estimate of the strength or even the direction? of the 
phytoplankton-DMS-climate feedback. 
 
Climate-influenced links between terrestrial and marine regions may also lead to species 
redistribution and climate feedbacks. For example, episodic land-atmosphere-ocean deposition of 
iron (e.g. pulses of Sahara dust) produces phytoplankton blooms (82) and enhances carbon 
export via the biological pump. Changes to the phytoplankton-driven drawdown of atmospheric 
CO2 may therefore arise through changes in the spatial distribution of iron deposition, which may 
be affected by changes in drought conditions, agricultural practices, and large-scale atmospheric 
circulation (83). These complex processes – not only driven by climate-induced species

----- Page 22 (native) -----
redistribution, but also affecting the climate system itself - need to be incorporated into climate 
models to improve future projections (65).  
 
Governance challenges 
The impacts of the global redistribution of species on human welfare and ecosystem services 
require new governance mechanisms for biodiversity conservation and management. A dynamic 
and multi-level legal and policy approach is needed to address the effects of species range limits 
moving across local, national, and international jurisdictional boundaries. The development of 
international guidance where laws do not yet exist will need to account for different legal 
regimes, resources, and national capacities. 
 
Shifts in species distributions will require changes in the objectives of conservation law, which 
have traditionally emphasised in situ conservation and retention of historical conditions. 
Objectives should acknowledge that species will move beyond their traditional ranges, that novel 
ecosystems will inevitably be created and that historic ecosystems may disappear, as a 
consequence of such movements (84). The experience of trans-jurisdictional managed 
relocations (conservation introductions outside of historical ranges) may inform the development 
of risk assessment processes that must navigate the complex ethical challenges arising from 
novel interactions (85) and risks of collateral damage (86). Moreover, communication among 
relevant agencies throughout the new and former ranges of shifting species is essential, to avoid 
investing in protecting species in locations where they are no longer viable and yet failing to 
manage them appropriately in their new ranges.

----- Page 23 (native) -----
Legal instruments are typically slow to change and often privilege the protection of property and 
development rights. While this inertia provides certainty and stability, it underscores the need for 
flexible approaches that can respond quickly to novel threats arising from species movement, or 
to capitalize on new opportunities. For example, the “Landscape Resilience Program” of 
Australia’s Queensland government identified priority locations for new protected areas that 
would maximize available habitat for range-shifting species (87). Some jurisdictions with well-
developed land use and development processes have moved towards adaptive development 
approvals, and Australia’s fisheries management regime uses decision rules that automatically 
trigger new arrangements when pre-determined environmental conditions are reached (88). 
Mechanisms of this sort could be used more widely to implement adaptive management for 
broader conservation purposes, such as management plans with preset increases in protective 
strategies that are triggered, or the automatic expansion of protection for habitat outside 
protected areas when certain climatic indicators are observed.  
 
The changing distribution of species within countries, between countries, and between national 
borders and the global commons will require increased cooperation and governance across 
multiple scales among new stakeholders. The EU’s Habitats Directive (EC, 1992) and Birds 
Directive (EC, 1979) are early examples of a cooperative approach to identifying and protecting 
networks of habitat across national borders. Initiatives such as the Transfrontier Conservation 
Areas in Southern Africa (SADC Protocol, 1999) also provide useful insights to guide future 
multi-scale and cross-border initiatives. Some challenges may also be addressed by increased use 
of dynamic management techniques. Several countries are already implementing dynamic ocean

----- Page 24 (native) -----
management practices for bycatch protection (89), though equivalent applications in a terrestrial 
context are more limited. Collaborative initiatives with indigenous communities may also offer 
new opportunities for conservation of range-shifting species. Indigenous communities can 
provide traditional ecological knowledge that complements remote sensing and field data and 
provides historical context (56), and new management arrangements may incentivize 
conservation activities.  
 
Earth systems and sustainable development 
Human survival, for urban and rural communities, depends on other life on earth. The biological 
components of natural systems are “on the move,” changing local abundances and geographical 
distributions of species. At the same time, the ability of people and communities to track these 
pervasive species redistributions, and to adapt, is increasingly constrained by geo-political 
boundaries, institutional rigidities, and inertias at all temporal and spatial scales.  
 
In the coming century all people and societies will face diverse challenges associated with 
development and sustainability, many of which will be exacerbated by the redistribution of 
species on the planet (Figs 2 and 3). The impacts of species redistribution will intersect with at 
least 11 of the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) (Table S2), and will be 
particularly prominent for several of these SDGs.  
 
Zero Hunger (SDG 2) requires feeding more than nine billion people by 2050 (90). However, the 
ability to deliver food through agriculture will be altered through the direct effects of climate

----- Page 25 (native) -----
change and as the distributions and abundances of pollinators change, and as plant pathogens and 
pests become more prevalent or emerge in new places as a result of global warming (91, 92).  
Health and Well-Being (SDG 3) is made more challenging by tropical illnesses spreading to new 
areas (58) and changes in food security and the distribution of economic wealth on local, 
regional, and global scales. Moreover, human well-being is also related to many other facets of 
society and culture, including attachment to place (56, 93) and the living environment found 
around us. The mental health of indigenous and rural communities, in particular, may be affected 
as species redistribution alters the capacity for traditional practices, subsistence, or local 
industries. Effective Climate Action (SDG 13) necessitates accounting for the direct and indirect 
influences of shifting organisms and associated feedbacks on our biosphere, yet these processes 
and feedbacks are rarely accounted for in projections of future climate. Sustainable management 
and the conservation of Life Below Water and Life on Land (SDGs 14 & 15) are unlikely to be 
effective unless climate-driven alterations in species ranges and their profound ecosystem 
consequences are accounted for.  
 
Managing for movement 
Under extensive reshuffling of the world’s biota, how should conservation goals and strategies 
for policy and implementation be developed that maximize long-term resilience of biodiversity 
and human systems? How should natural resource management across diverse, multi-use, multi-
scale land and seascapes be integrated to maximize resilience of both human and natural 
systems? How should specific threats and stressors (including their interactions) be managed 
while minimizing impacts on valued ecosystem assets? For the scientific community to help 
develop mitigation and adaptation strategies in the face of widespread change in species

----- Page 26 (native) -----
distribution and ecosystem functioning, a better understanding of the mechanisms underlying 
such changes is needed. Scientists also need access to real-time data streams, and to integrate this 
information into decision-support frameworks. Moreover, scientists and their institutions need to 
rapidly communicate advances and outcomes to the broader public and to policy makers. 
However, the natural world responds in dynamic and unpredictable ways and the phenomenon of 
species redistribution is not, nor will it ever be, fully understood or completely predictable. This 
uncertainty necessitates flexible and dynamic governance so adaptation to changing conditions 
can be rapid, maximizing opportunities and minimizing negative consequences.  
 
Underlying biological processes 
Because knowledge of the biological and ecological processes underlying resilience of 
organisms to predicted average and extreme environmental conditions is limited, the traits on 
which natural/anthropogenic selection will act are uncertain. For example, specific physiological 
mechanisms have been hypothesized to underlie the thermal ranges of ectothermic organisms 
(94), yet a lack of universality in the proposed mechanisms highlights a need for novel, 
multidisciplinary investigations (see 95). Large-scale, multi-generational experimental research 
programs are required to provide a robust understanding of the adaptive responses of organisms 
to environmental change, and to determine the heritability of key traits, as recently has been 
achieved for sea turtles (96). Modeling approaches, lab and field-based experimental 
manipulations, and field-based monitoring programs need to be combined with more effective 
policy communication to understand and implement responses to species redistributions.

----- Page 27 (native) -----
Monitoring programs 
To best adjust to species redistributions, gaps in understanding need to be acknowledged and 
filled through hypothesis testing. Our understanding is weakest in poorly surveyed regions such 
as the tropics and Antarctica (8). As range shifts continue to unfold, there will be opportunities to 
refine our understanding of the process, but taking advantage of these opportunities requires 
access to consistent, high quality, near-real-time data on a series of environmental and biological 
parameters (97). 
The current absence of a global, comprehensive, coordinated biodiversity monitoring system is a 
major obstacle to our understanding of climate change implications for natural systems. Thus far 
there has been extensive global cooperation and progress in terms of coordinating the collection 
and the distribution of physical and chemical environmental monitoring data. For example, the 
Global Climate Observing System (GCOS) facilitated international agreement and a global 
commitment towards consistent monitoring of climate variables, ultimately supporting the 
development of spatio-temporally explicit and uncertainty-explicit predictions about changes in 
our climate (98). Ongoing efforts through the Group on Earth Observation Biodiversity 
Observation Network (GEO BON) and the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission 
Global Ocean Observing System (IOC GOOS) are beginning to implement the use of Essential 
Biodiversity Variables (EBV’s) (41) and ecosystem Essential Ocean Variables (eEOV’s) (99) 
respectively, but the process is slow and under-resourced. A global, robust biodiversity 
monitoring system that successfully integrates field and remote sensing data could significantly

----- Page 28 (native) -----
improve our ability to manage the changes to come, while potentially driving faster mitigation 
measures (100).  
 
Incorporating species on the move into integrated assessment models 
Understanding underlying biological processes and having access to real-time data is necessary 
but not sufficient for informed responses. Improved capacity to model linkages and feedbacks 
between species range-shifts and ecosystem functioning, food security, human health, and the 
climate is required. Modeling is essential to reliably project the potential impacts of alternative 
scenarios and policy options on human well-being, as the basis for evidence-based policy and 
decision support (101). One avenue forward is to incorporate species redistribution and its 
associated impacts into integrated assessment models (IAMs; 102), used widely within the 
climate science community, and now being rapidly mobilized and extended to address synergies 
and trade-offs between multiple SDGs (103). IAMs offer a promising approach for connecting 
processes, existing data, and scenarios of demographic, social, and economic change and 
governance. Although species distribution models are commonplace, advances are needed to 
connect species redistribution with ecosystem integrity (e.g., 104) and feedbacks between 
humans and the biosphere. 
 
Communication for public and policy 
How does the scientific community engage effectively with the public on the issue of species 
redistribution and its far-reaching impacts? Part of the answer could be citizen science and 
participatory observing approaches, in which community members are directly involved in data

----- Page 29 (native) -----
collection and interpretation (105). These are tools that can help address both data gaps and 
communication gaps (100). When properly designed and carefully tailored to local issues, such 
approaches can provide quality data, cost-effectively and sustainably, while simultaneously 
building capacity among local constituents and prompting practical and effective management 
interventions (e.g., 106). 
 
Concluding remarks 
The breadth and complexity of the issues associated with the global redistribution of species 
driven by changing climate is creating profound challenges, with species movements already 
affecting societies and regional economies from the tropics to polar regions. Despite mounting 
evidence for these impacts, current global goals, policies, and international agreements do not 
sufficiently consider species range-shifts in their formulation or targets. Enhanced awareness, 
supported by appropriate governance, will provide the best chance of minimizing negative 
consequences while maximizing opportunities arising from species movements – movements 
that with or without effective emission reduction will continue for the foreseeable future owing 
to the inertia in the climate system.

----- Page 30 (native) -----
References  
 
 
1. 
M. B. Davis, R. G. Shaw, Range Shifts and Adaptive Responses to Quaternary Climate Change. Science 
292, 673-679 (2001). 
2. 
B. R. Rosen, “Reef coral biogeography and climate through the late Cainozoic: just islands in the sun or a 
critical pattern of islands” in Fossils and climate, P.J. Brenchley Ed. (Geol. J. Special Issue 11, Wiley, 
Chichester, 1984), pp 201-262. 
3. 
N. S. Diffenbaugh, C. B. Field, Changes in Ecologically Critical Terrestrial Climate Conditions. Science 
341, 486-492 (2013). 
4. 
D. B. Kemp, K. Eichenseer, W. Kiessling, Maximum rates of climate change are systematically 
underestimated in the geological record. Nat Commun 6,  (2015). 
5. 
I.-C. Chen, J. K. Hill, R. Ohlemüller, D. B. Roy, C. D. Thomas, Rapid Range Shifts of Species Associated 
with High Levels of Climate Warming. Science 333, 1024-1026 (2011). 
6. 
E. S. Poloczanska et al., Global imprint of climate change on marine life. Nature Clim. Change 3, 919-925 
(2013). 
7. 
Conservation of Arctic Flora and Fauna (CAFF), "Arctic Biodiversity Assessment: Report for Policy 
Makers,"  (Akureyri, Iceland, 2013, http://www.arcticbiodiversity.is/the-report/report-for-policy-makers). 
8. 
J. Lenoir, J. C. Svenning, Climate-related range shifts – a global multidimensional synthesis and new 
research directions. Ecography 38, 15-28 (2015). 
9. 
A. M. Lawing, P. D. Polly, Pleistocene Climate, Phylogeny, and Climate Envelope Models: An Integrative 
Approach to Better Understand Species' Response to Climate Change. PLoS ONE 6, e28554 (2011). 
10. 
IPCC, "Climate Change 2014: Synthesis Report. Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the Fifth 
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change" (Geneva, Switzerland, 2014, 
https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/syr/). 
11. 
UNFCCC Conference of the Parties (COP), "Paris Agreement FCCC/CP/2015/L.9/Rev.1,"  (2015). 
12. 
S. E. Williams, L. P. Shoo, J. L. Isaac, A. A. Hoffmann, G. Langham, Towards an Integrated Framework 
for Assessing the Vulnerability of Species to Climate Change. PLoS Biol 6, e325 (2008). 
13. 
A. E. Bates et al., Defining and observing stages of climate-mediated range shifts in marine systems. Glob. 
Environ. Change 26, 27-38 (2014). 
14. 
A. T. Peterson et al., Ecological Niches And Geographic Distributions (MPB-49). Monographs In 
Population Biology (Princeton University Press, 2011). 
15. 
M. P. Berg et al., Adapt or disperse: understanding species persistence in a changing world. Global Change 
Biol. 16, 587-598 (2010). 
16. 
C. J. B. Sorte, S. L. Williams, J. T. Carlton, Marine range shifts and species introductions: comparative 
spread rates and community impacts. Global Ecol. Biogeogr. 19, 303-316 (2010). 
17. 
I.-C. Chen et al., Elevation increases in moth assemblages over 42 years on a tropical mountain. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 106, 1479-1483 (2009). 
18. 
N. K. Dulvy et al., Climate change and deepening of the North Sea fish assemblage: a biotic indicator of 
warming seas. J. Appl. Ecol. 45, 1029-1039 (2008).. 
19. 
B. R. Scheffers, T. A. Evans, S. E. Williams, D. P. Edwards, Microhabitats in the tropics buffer 
temperature in a globally coherent manner. Biol. Lett. 10,  (2014). 
20. 
J. Lenoir et al., Going against the flow: potential mechanisms for unexpected downslope range shifts in a 
warming climate. Ecography 33, 295-303 (2010). 
21. 
F. Valladares et al., The effects of phenotypic plasticity and local adaptation on forecasts of species range 
shifts under climate change. Ecol. Lett. 17, 1351-1364 (2014). 
22. 
M. B. Araújo et al., Heat freezes niche evolution. Ecol. Lett. 16, 1206-1219 (2013). 
23. 
S. E. Gilman, M. C. Urban, J. Tewksbury, G. W. Gilchrist, R. D. Holt, A framework for community 
interactions under climate change. Trends Ecol. Evol. 25, 325-331 (2010). 
24. 
A. Vergés et al., The tropicalization of temperate marine ecosystems: climate-mediated changes in 
herbivory and community phase shifts. Proc. R. Soc. Lond., B, Biol. Sci. 281,  (2014). 
25. 
A. E. Cahill et al., How does climate change cause extinction? Proc. R. Soc. Lond., B, Biol. Sci. 280,  
(2013). 
26. 
R. B. Aronson et al., No barrier to emergence of bathyal king crabs on the Antarctic shelf. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 112, 12997-13002 (2015). 
27. 
O. E. Sala et al., Global Biodiversity Scenarios for the Year 2100. Science 287, 1770-1774 (2000).

----- Page 31 (native) -----
28. 
P. L. Zarnetske, D. K. Skelly, M. C. Urban, Biotic Multipliers of Climate Change. Science 336, 1516-1518 
(2012). 
29. 
K. C. Cavanaugh et al., Poleward expansion of mangroves is a threshold response to decreased frequency 
of extreme cold events. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 111, 723-727 (2014). 
30. 
A. Verges et al., Long-term empirical evidence of ocean warming leading to tropicalization of fish 
communities, increased herbivory, and loss of kelp. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 113, 13791-13796 (2016). 
31. 
T. Wernberg et al., Climate-driven regime shift of a temperate marine ecosystem. Science 353, 169-172 
(2016). 
32. 
A. S. Weed, M. P. Ayres, J. A. Hicke, Consequences of climate change for biotic disturbances in North 
American forests. Ecol. Monogr. 83, 441-470 (2013). 
33. 
M. Fossheim et al., Recent warming leads to a rapid borealization of fish communities in the Arctic. Nat. 
Clim. Change 5, 673-677 (2015). 
34. 
H. W. Paerl, V. J. Paul, Climate change: Links to global expansion of harmful cyanobacteria. Water Res. 
46, 1349-1363 (2012). 
35. 
L. M. Ochoa-Ochoa, P. Rodríguez, F. Mora, O. Flores-Villela, R. J. Whittaker, Climate change and 
amphibian diversity patterns in Mexico. Biol. Conserv.150, 94-102 (2012). 
36. 
L. Buisson, G. Grenouillet, S. Villéger, J. Canal, P. Laffaille, Toward a loss of functional diversity in 
stream fish assemblages under climate change. Global Change Biol. 19, 387-400 (2013). 
37. 
T. H. Oliver et al., Biodiversity and Resilience of Ecosystem Functions. Trends Ecol. Evol. 30, 673-684 
(2015). 
38. 
J. R. Malcolm, C. Liu, R. P. Neilson, L. Hansen, L. E. E. Hannah, Global warming and extinctions of 
endemic species from biodiversity hotspots. Conserv. Biol. 20, 538-548 (2006). 
39. 
I. M. D. Maclean, R. J. Wilson, Recent ecological responses to climate change support predictions of high 
extinction risk. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 108, 12337-12342 (2011). 
40. 
M. C. Urban, Accelerating extinction risk from climate change. Science 348, 571-573 (2015). 
41. 
H. M. Pereira et al., Essential Biodiversity Variables. Science 339, 277-278 (2013). 
42. 
S. Dullinger et al., Extinction debt of high-mountain plants under twenty-first-century climate change. Nat. 
Clim. Change 2, 619-622 (2012). 
43. 
J. A. E. Stewart et al., Revisiting the past to foretell the future: summer temperature and habitat area predict 
pika extirpations in California. J. Biogeogr. 42, 880-890 (2015).. 
44. 
I. Gynther, N. Waller, L. K.-P. Leung, "Confirmation of the extinction of the Bramble Cay melomys 
Melomys rubicola on Bramble Cay, Torres Strait: results and conclusions from a comprehensive survey in 
August–September 2014 "  (Unpublished report to the Department of Environment and Heritage Protection, 
Queensland Government, Brisbane, 2016). 
45. 
S. Finnegan et al., Paleontological baselines for evaluating extinction risk in the modern oceans. Science 
348, 567-570 (2015). 
46. 
C. J. Brown et al., Ecological and methodological drivers of species’ distribution and phenology responses 
to climate change. Global Change Biol. 22, 1548-1560 (2016). 
47. 
J. S. Compton, Pleistocene sea-level fluctuations and human evolution on the southern coastal plain of 
South Africa. Quat. Sci. Rev. 30, 506-527 (2011). 
48. 
J. D. Bell et al., Mixed responses of tropical Pacific fisheries and aquaculture to climate change. Nat. Clim. 
Change 3, 591-599 (2013). 
49. 
M. Hanewinkel, D. A. Cullmann, M.-J. Schelhaas, G.-J. Nabuurs, N. E. Zimmermann, Climate change may 
cause severe loss in the economic value of European forest land. Nat. Clim. Change 3, 203-207 (2013). 
50. 
E. Civantos, W. Thuiller, L. Maiorano, A. Guisan, M. B. Araújo, Potential Impacts of Climate Change on 
Ecosystem Services in Europe: The Case of Pest Control by Vertebrates. BioScience 62, 658-666 (2012). 
51. 
B. M. Campbell et al., Reducing risks to food security from climate change. Glob. Food Sec 11, 34-43 
(2016). 
52. 
M. Baca, P. Läderach, J. Haggar, G. Schroth, O. Ovalle, An Integrated Framework for Assessing 
Vulnerability to Climate Change and Developing Adaptation Strategies for Coffee Growing Families in 
Mesoamerica. PLoS ONE 9, e88463 (2014). 
53. 
D. C. Gledhill et al., Collaborative approaches to accessing and utilising historical citizen science data: a 
case-study with spearfishers from eastern Australia. Mar. Freshw. Res. 66, 195-201 (2014).. 
54. 
J. Ruiz, L. Prieto, D. Astorga, A model for temperature control of jellyfish (Cotylorhiza tuberculata) 
outbreaks: A causal analysis in a Mediterranean coastal lagoon. Ecol. Modell. 233, 59 (2012).

----- Page 32 (native) -----
55. 
S. D. Ling, C. R. Johnson, S. D. Frusher, K. R. Ridgway, Overfishing reduces resilience of kelp beds to 
climate-driven catastrophic phase shift. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 106, 22341-22345 (2009). 
56. 
T. Mustonen, Communal visual histories to detect environmental change in northern areas: Examples of 
emerging North American and Eurasian practices. Ambio 44, 766-777 (2015). 
57. 
K. E. Jones et al., Global trends in emerging infectious diseases. Nature 451, 990-993 (2008). 
58. 
X. Wu, Y. Lu, S. Zhou, L. Chen, B. Xu, Impact of climate change on human infectious diseases: Empirical 
evidence and human adaptation. Environ. Int. 86, 14-23 (2016). 
59. 
“Malaria Fact Sheet,” WHO (2016, http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs094/en/). 
60. 
A. S. Siraj et al., Altitudinal Changes in Malaria Incidence in Highlands of Ethiopia and Colombia. Science 
343, 1154-1158 (2014). 
61. 
L. V. Weatherdon, A. K. Magnan, A. D. Rogers, U. R. Sumaila, W. W. L. Cheung, Observed and projected 
impacts of climate change on marine fisheries, aquaculture, coastal tourism, and human health: an update. 
Front. Mar. Sci. 3,  (2016). 
62. 
J. J. Wiens, Climate-Related Local Extinctions Are Already Widespread among Plant and Animal Species. 
PLoS Biol. 14, e2001104 (2016). 
63. 
O. S. Astthorsson, H. Valdimarsson, A. Gudmundsdottir, G. J. Óskarsson, Climate-related variations in the 
occurrence and distribution of mackerel (Scomber scombrus) in Icelandic waters. ICES J. Mar. Sci. 69, 
1289-1297 (2012). 
64. 
M. Brambilla, P. Pedrini, A. Rolando, D. E. Chamberlain, Climate change will increase the potential 
conflict between skiing and high-elevation bird species in the Alps. J. Biogeogr.,  (2016), 
doi:10.1111/jbi.12796. 
65. 
I. C. Prentice, S. Williams, P. Friedlingstein, "Biosphere feedbacks and climate change," Grantham 
Institute Briefing paper No 12  (Imperial College London, 2015). 
66. 
W. V. Reid et al., Earth System Science for Global Sustainability: Grand Challenges. Science 330, 916-917 
(2010). 
67. 
F. S. Chapin et al., Role of Land-Surface Changes in Arctic Summer Warming. Science 310, 657-660 
(2005). 
68. 
R. G. Pearson et al., Shifts in Arctic vegetation and associated feedbacks under climate change. Nat. Clim. 
Change 3, 673-677 (2013). 
69. 
A. L. Swann, I. Y. Fung, S. Levis, G. B. Bonan, S. C. Doney, Changes in Arctic vegetation amplify high-
latitude warming through the greenhouse effect. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 107, 1295-1300 (2010). 
70. 
M. P. Cox et al., Amazonian forest dieback under climate-carbon cycle projections for the 21st century. 
Theor. Appl. Climatol. 78, 137-156 (2004). 
71. 
R. A. Garcia, M. Cabeza, C. Rahbek, M. B. Araújo, Multiple Dimensions of Climate Change and Their 
Implications for Biodiversity. Science 344,  (2014). 
72. 
T. J. Cudmore, N. Björklund, A. L. Carroll, B. Staffan Lindgren, Climate change and range expansion of an 
aggressive bark beetle: evidence of higher beetle reproduction in naïve host tree populations. J. Appl. Ecol. 
47, 1036-1043 (2010). 
73. 
E. S. Kasischke, M. R. Turetsky, Recent changes in the fire regime across the North American boreal 
region—Spatial and temporal patterns of burning across Canada and Alaska. Geophys. Res. Lett. 33, 
L09703 (2006).. 
74. 
J. Chen et al., Microclimate in Forest Ecosystem and Landscape Ecology: Variations in local climate can 
be used to monitor and compare the effects of different management regimes. BioScience 49, 288-297 
(1999). 
75. 
D. Blok et al., The response of Arctic vegetation to the summer climate: relation between shrub cover, 
NDVI, surface albedo and temperature. Environ. Res. Lett. 6, 035502 (2011). 
76. 
C. L. Sabine et al., The Oceanic Sink for Anthropogenic CO2. Science 305, 367-371 (2004). 
77. 
A. Yool, E. E. Popova, A. C. Coward, Future change in ocean productivity: Is the Arctic the new Atlantic? 
J. Geophys. Res. 120, 7771-7790 (2015). 
78. 
J. J. Polovina, P. A. Woodworth, Declines in phytoplankton cell size in the subtropical oceans estimated 
from satellite remotely-sensed temperature and chlorophyll, 1998–2007. Deep Sea Res. Part II Top. Stud. 
Oceanogr. 77-80, 82-88 (2012). 
79. 
K. E. Kohfeld, C. L. Quéré, S. P. Harrison, R. F. Anderson, Role of Marine Biology in Glacial-Interglacial 
CO2 Cycles. Science 308, 74-78 (2005). 
80. 
P. C. Reid et al., Impacts of the Oceans on Climate Change. Adv. Mar. Biol. 56, 1-150 (2009).

----- Page 33 (native) -----
81. 
O. W. Wingenter et al., Unexpected consequences of increasing CO2 and ocean acidity on marine 
production of DMS and CH2ClI: Potential climate impacts. Geophys. Res. Lett. 34,  (2007). 
82. 
J. H. Martin, Glacial-interglacial CO2 change: The Iron Hypothesis. Paleoceanography 5, 1-13 (1990). 
83. 
S. A. Robinson, D. J. Erickson, Not just about sunburn – the ozone hole's profound effect on climate has 
significant implications for Southern Hemisphere ecosystems. Global Change Biol. 21, 515-527 (2015). 
84. 
P. McCormack, J. McDonald, Adaptation strategies for biodiversity conservation: has Australian law got 
what it takes? Environ. Plann. Law J. 31, 114-136 (2014). 
85. 
A. A. Burbidge et al., Is Australia ready for assisted colonization?: Policy changes required to facilitate 
translocations under climate change. Pac. Conserv. Biol.17, 259-269 (2011). 
86. 
A. Ricciardi, D. Simberloff, Assisted colonization: good intentions and dubious risk assessment. Trends 
Ecol. Evol. 24, 476-477 (2009). 
87. 
A. Reside et al., "Climate change refugia for terrestrial biodiversity: Defining areas that promote species 
persistence and ecosystem resilience in the face of global climate change" (National Climate Change 
Adaptation Research Facility, Gold Coast, 2013). 
88. 
J. McDonald, M. C. Styles, Legal Strategies for Adaptive Management under Climate Change. J. Environ. 
Law 26, 25-53 (2014). 
89. 
A. J. Hobday et al., Dynamic Ocean Management: Integrating Scientific and Technological Capacity with 
Law, Policy and Management Stanford Environ. Law J. 33,  (2014). 
90. 
H. C. J. Godfray et al., Food Security: The Challenge of Feeding 9 Billion People. Science 327, 812-818 
(2010). 
91. 
S. J. Hegland, A. Nielsen, A. Lázaro, A.-L. Bjerknes, Ø. Totland, How does climate warming affect plant-
pollinator interactions? Ecol. Lett. 12, 184-195 (2009). 
92. 
D. P. Bebber, M. A. T. Ramotowski, S. J. Gurr, Crop pests and pathogens move polewards in a warming 
world. Nature Clim. Change 3, 985-988 (2013). 
93. 
W. N. Adger, J. Barnett, K. Brown, N. Marshall, K. O'Brien, Cultural dimensions of climate change 
impacts and adaptation. Nature Clim. Change 3, 112-117 (2013). 
94. 
H. O. Pörtner et al., "Ocean systems," Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part 
A: Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change  (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom 
and New York, NY, USA, 2014). 
95. 
T. D. Clark, E. Sandblom, F. Jutfelt, Aerobic scope measurements of fishes in an era of climate change: 
respirometry, relevance and recommendations. J. Exp. Biol. 216, 2771-2782 (2013). 
96. 
J. N. Tedeschi et al., Heritable variation in heat shock gene expression: a potential mechanism for 
adaptation to thermal stress in embryos of sea turtles. Proc. R. Soc. Lond., B, Biol. Sci. 283,  (2016). 
97. 
N. Pettorelli et al., Satellite remote sensing for applied ecologists: opportunities and challenges. J. Appl. 
Ecol.51, 839-848 (2014). 
98. 
S. Bojinski et al., The Concept of Essential Climate Variables in Support of Climate Research, 
Applications, and Policy. Bull. Am. Meteorol. Soc. 95, 1431-1443 (2014). 
99. 
A. J. Constable et al., Developing priority variables (“ecosystem Essential Ocean Variables” — eEOVs) for 
observing dynamics and change in Southern Ocean ecosystems. J. Mar. Syst. 161, 26-41 (2016). 
100. 
N. Pettorelli et al., Framing the concept of satellite remote sensing essential biodiversity variables: 
challenges and future directions. Remote Sens. Ecol. Conserv., (2016), doi:10.1002/rse2.15. 
101. 
IPBES, "Summary for policymakers of the methodological assessment of scenarios and models of 
biodiversity and ecosystem services of the Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and 
Ecosystem Services" (Secretariat of the Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and 
Ecosystem Services, Bonn, Germany, 2016; http://www.ipbes.net/resources/publications/13). 
102. 
M. Harfoot et al., Integrated assessment models for ecologists: the present and the future. Global Ecol. 
Biogeogr. 23, 124-143 (2014). 
103. 
D. P. van Vuuren et al., Pathways to achieve a set of ambitious global sustainability objectives by 2050: 
Explorations using the IMAGE integrated assessment model. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 98, 303-323 
(2015). 
104. 
P. Lehodey, I. Senina, R. Murtugudde, A spatial ecosystem and populations dynamics model 
(SEAPODYM) – Modeling of tuna and tuna-like populations. Prog. Oceanogr. 78, 304-318 (2008). 
105. 
R. Bonney et al., Next steps for citizen science. Science 343, 1436-1437 (2014). 
106. 
F. Danielsen et al., A Multicountry Assessment of Tropical Resource Monitoring by Local Communities. 
BioScience 64, 236-251 (2014).

----- Page 34 (native) -----
107. 
B. Forbes, “Arctic Vegetation Cover: Patterns, Processes and Expected Change” in The New Arctic, B. 
Evengård, J. N. Larsen, P. Öyvind, Eds. (Springer, 2015). 
108. 
G. B. Hill, G. H. R. Henry, Responses of High Arctic wet sedge tundra to climate warming since 1980. 
Global Change Biol. 17, 276-287 (2011). 
109. 
D. Verbyla, The greening and browning of Alaska based on 1982-2003 satellite data. Glob. Ecol. Biogeogr. 
17, 547–555 (2008). 
110. 
E. Post et al., Ecological Dynamics Across the Arctic Associated with Recent Climate Change. Science 
325, 1355-1358 (2009). 
111. 
IPCC, "Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral 
Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change"  (Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, UK and New York, NY 2014). 
112. 
P. Martens et al., Climate change and future populations at risk of malaria. Glob. Environ. Change 9, S89-
S107 (1999). 
113. 
K. D. Lafferty, The ecology of climate change and infectious diseases. Ecology 90, 888-900 (2009). 
114. 
S. J. Ryan et al., Mapping Physiological Suitability Limits for Malaria in Africa Under Climate Change. 
Vector-Borne and Zoonotic Diseases 15, 718-725 (2015). 
115. 
S. I. Hay et al., Climate change and the resurgence of malaria in the East African highlands. Nature 415, 
905-909 (2002). 
116. 
C. Caminade et al., Impact of climate change on global malaria distribution. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
111, 3286-3291 (2014). 
117. 
"World health report: Executive summary," WHO (1996, 
http://www.who.int/whr/1996/media_centre/executive_summary1/en/index9.html). 
118. 
K. D. Tape, D. D. Gustine, R. W. Ruess, L. G. Adams, J. A. Clark, Range Expansion of Moose in Arctic 
Alaska Linked to Warming and Increased Shrub Habitat. PLoS ONE 11, e0152636 (2016). 
119. 
J. T. Kerr et al., Climate change impacts on bumblebees converge across continents. Science 349, 177-180 
(2015). 
120. 
N. Morueta-Holme et al., Strong upslope shifts in Chimborazo's vegetation over two centuries since 
Humboldt. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 112, 12741-12745 (2015). 
121. 
R. D. Loyola, P. Lemes, F. V. Faleiro, J. Trindade-Filho, R. B. Machado, Severe Loss of Suitable Climatic 
Conditions for Marsupial Species in Brazil: Challenges and Opportunities for Conservation. PLoS ONE 7, 
e46257 (2012). 
122. 
S. A. Robinson, J. Wasley, A. K. Tobin, Living on the edge – plants and global change in continental and 
maritime Antarctica. Global Change Biol.9, 1681-1717 (2003). 
123. 
C. Baker-Austin et al., Emerging Vibrio risk at high latitudes in response to ocean warming. Nature Clim. 
Change 3, 73-77 (2013). 
124. 
L. Comte, G. Grenouillet, Do stream fish track climate change? Assessing distribution shifts in recent 
decades. Ecography 36, 1236-1246 (2013). 
125. 
C. Toulmin, K. Brock, “Desertification in the Sahel: local pratice meets global narrative” in The End of 
Desertification?, R. Behnke, M. Mortimore, Eds. (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2016), pp. 37–63. 
126. 
W. M. Potts et al., Ocean warming, a rapid distributional shift, and the hybridization of a coastal fish 
species. Global Change Biol. 20, 2765-2777 (2014). 
127. 
C. J. Raxworthy et al., Extinction vulnerability of tropical montane endemism from warming and upslope 
displacement: a preliminary appraisal for the highest massif in Madagascar. Global Change Biol. 14, 1703-
1720 (2008). 
128. 
P. Lloyd, É. E. Plagányi, S. J. Weeks, M. Magno-Canto, G. Plagányi, Ocean warming alters species 
abundance patterns and increases species diversity in an African sub-tropical reef-fish community. Fish. 
Oceanogr. 21, 78-94 (2012). 
129. 
Y. Serisawa, Z. Imoto, T. Ishikawa, M. Ohno, Decline of the Ecklonia cava population associated with 
increased seawater temperatures in Tosa Bay, southern Japan. Fisheries Sci. 70, 189-191 (2004). 
130. 
H. Yamano, K. Sugihara, K. Nomura, Rapid poleward range expansion of tropical reef corals in response to 
rising sea surface temperatures. Geophys. Res. Lett. 38,  (2011). 
131. 
E. Vivekanandan, M. Rajagopalan, N. G. K. Pillai, “Recent trends in sea surface temperature and its impact 
on oil sardine” in Global Climate Change and Indian Agriculture. (Indian Council of Agricultural 
Research, chap. 20, New Delhi, 2009), pp. 89-92.

----- Page 35 (native) -----
132. 
S. E. Williams et al., "Species resilience: the key to understanding biodiversity in the rainforests of the 
Australian Wet Tropics” (Report to the National Environmental Research Program, Reef and Rainforest 
Research Centre Limited, Cairns, 2014). 
133. 
R. H. Taylor, P. R. Wilson, Recent increase and southern expansion of Adelie penguin populations in the 
Ross Sea, Antarctica, related to climatic warming. N. Z. J. Ecol. 14, 25-29 (1990). 
134. 
United Nations Sustainable Development Goals. (http://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/sustainable-
development-goals/). 
135. 
M. Schultz, T. D. Tyrrell, T. Ebenhard, "The 2030 Agenda and Ecosystems - A discussion paper on the 
links between the Aichi Biodiversity Targets and the Sustainable Development Goals,"  (SwedBio at 
Stockholm Resilience Centre, Stockholm, Sweden, 2016).

----- Page 36 (native) -----
Acknowledgments: We thank the attendees of the international Species on the Move conference 
held in Hobart, Tasmania February 2016. GP, EW and TW were supported by ARC FF’s 
(FT140100596, FT 110100597 and FT 110100174 respectively). RAG's participation was made 
possible by the South African National Research Foundation (KIC 98457 and Blue Skies 
449888). MAJ was funded by Yale Climate and Energy Institute. TM’s participation was 
supported by the (WAPEAT) (Finnish Academy 263465) Project. JMP was funded by the ARC 
Centre of Excellence for Coral Reef Studies and ARC DP130100250, JMSt was supported by 
ARC DP150101491 and SAR was funded by ARC DP110101714. Antonia Cooper (IMAS) 
assisted with the figures. The workshop and conference leading to this paper were supported by 
UTAS, IMAS, NOAA Fisheries Service, CSIRO, NCCARF Natural Ecosystems Network, The 
Ian Potter Foundation, Antarctic Climate & Ecosystems Cooperative Research Centre and the 
ARC Centre of Excellence for Environmental Decisions.

----- Page 37 (native) -----
Figure legends 
 
Fig. 1.  Climate-driven changes in the distribution of life on Earth are impacting ecosystem 
health, human well-being, and the dynamics of climate change, challenging local and 
regional systems of governance. Examples of documented and predicted climate-driven 
changes in the distribution of species throughout marine, terrestrial, and freshwater systems of 
the globe in tropical, temperate, and polar regions. Details of the impacts associated with each of 
these changes in distribution are given in Table S1, according to the numbered key, and the links 
to specific Sustainable Develoopment Goals are given in Table S2.   
 
Fig. 2. Species on the move drive greening of the Arctic. Changes in species distribution can 
lead to climate feedbacks, changes in ecosystem services, and impacts on human societies, with 
feedbacks and linkages between each of these dimensions, illustrated here through climate-
driven changes in Arctic vegetation. See Fig. 4 for a more comprehensive description of the 
direct and indirect climate feedbacks.  
 
Fig. 3: Mosquito species on the move as vectors of disease. Climate change has facilitated an 
increase in the distribution of disease vectors, with significant human cost and associated 
governance challenges. The bars on the human well-being graph represent the minimum and 
maximum range, and the boxes depict the 25th, 50th and 75th percentile of the distribution. 
 
Fig. 4. Climate feedbacks and processes driven by the redistribution of plant species at high 
latitudes. Climate affects vegetation at high latitudes directly through climatic processes, but

----- Page 38 (native) -----
also indirectly through pests like defoliators and bark beetles that are moving northward and 
upslope in boreal forests. Some processes increase warming (blue arrows), while others may 
serve to decrease warming (red arrows). Increasing shrub canopy cover in the Arctic at high 
latitudes may reduce soil temperatures locally through a buffering effect, potentially slowing 
down CO2 carbon release due to permafrost degradation, thus acting to slow climate warming. 
However, greening of the Arctic also decreases albedo, which accelerates warming. 
 
 
Supplementary Material 
 
Table S1:  Details of the impacts associated with each of the changes in distribution documented 
in Figure 1, according to the numbered key.   
 
Table S2:  Influence on achieving the Global Sustainable Development Goals of observed or 
predicted climate-driven changes in the distribution of species.

----- Page 39 (native) -----
Figure 1

----- Page 40 (native) -----
Figure 2

----- Page 41 (native) -----
Figure 3

----- Page 42 (native) -----
Figure 4