

----- Page 1 (native) -----
Geosci. Model Dev., 9, 1937–1958, 2016
www.geosci-model-dev.net/9/1937/2016/
doi:10.5194/gmd-9-1937-2016
© Author(s) 2016. CC Attribution 3.0 License.
Overview of the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 6
(CMIP6) experimental design and organization
Veronika Eyring1, Sandrine Bony2, Gerald A. Meehl3, Catherine A. Senior4, Bjorn Stevens5, Ronald J. Stouffer6, and
Karl E. Taylor7
1Deutsches Zentrum für Luft- und Raumfahrt (DLR), Institut für Physik der Atmosphäre, Oberpfaffenhofen, Germany
2Laboratoire de Météorologie Dynamique, Institut Pierre Simon Laplace (LMD/IPSL), CNRS,
Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris, France
3National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR), Boulder, CO, USA
4Met Ofﬁce Hadley Centre, Exeter, UK
5Max-Planck-Institute for Meteorology, Hamburg, Germany
6Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory/NOAA, Princeton, NJ, USA
7Program for Climate Model Diagnosis and Intercomparison (PCMDI),
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Livermore, CA, USA
Correspondence to: Veronika Eyring (veronika.eyring@dlr.de)
Received: 3 December 2015 – Published in Geosci. Model Dev. Discuss.: 14 December 2015
Revised: 15 April 2016 – Accepted: 27 April 2016 – Published: 26 May 2016
Abstract. By coordinating the design and distribution of
global climate model simulations of the past, current, and
future climate, the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project
(CMIP) has become one of the foundational elements of
climate science. However, the need to address an ever-
expanding range of scientiﬁc questions arising from more
and more research communities has made it necessary to re-
vise the organization of CMIP. After a long and wide com-
munity consultation, a new and more federated structure has
been put in place. It consists of three major elements: (1) a
handful of common experiments, the DECK (Diagnostic,
Evaluation and Characterization of Klima) and CMIP his-
torical simulations (1850–near present) that will maintain
continuity and help document basic characteristics of mod-
els across different phases of CMIP; (2) common standards,
coordination, infrastructure, and documentation that will fa-
cilitate the distribution of model outputs and the characteriza-
tion of the model ensemble; and (3) an ensemble of CMIP-
Endorsed Model Intercomparison Projects (MIPs) that will
be speciﬁc to a particular phase of CMIP (now CMIP6) and
that will build on the DECK and CMIP historical simulations
to address a large range of speciﬁc questions and ﬁll the sci-
entiﬁc gaps of the previous CMIP phases. The DECK and
CMIP historical simulations, together with the use of CMIP
data standards, will be the entry cards for models participat-
ing in CMIP. Participation in CMIP6-Endorsed MIPs by in-
dividual modelling groups will be at their own discretion and
will depend on their scientiﬁc interests and priorities. With
the Grand Science Challenges of the World Climate Research
Programme (WCRP) as its scientiﬁc backdrop, CMIP6 will
address three broad questions:
– How does the Earth system respond to forcing?
– What are the origins and consequences of systematic
model biases?
– How can we assess future climate changes given inter-
nal climate variability, predictability, and uncertainties
in scenarios?
This CMIP6 overview paper presents the background and ra-
tionale for the new structure of CMIP, provides a detailed
description of the DECK and CMIP6 historical simulations,
and includes a brief introduction to the 21 CMIP6-Endorsed
MIPs.
Published by Copernicus Publications on behalf of the European Geosciences Union.

----- Page 2 (native) -----
1938
V. Eyring et al.: Overview of the CMIP6 experimental design and organization
1
Introduction
The Coupled Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP) orga-
nized under the auspices of the World Climate Research Pro-
gramme’s (WCRP) Working Group on Coupled Modelling
(WGCM) started 20 years ago as a comparison of a handful
of early global coupled climate models performing experi-
ments using atmosphere models coupled to a dynamic ocean,
a simple land surface, and thermodynamic sea ice (Meehl et
al., 1997). It has since evolved over ﬁve phases into a ma-
jor international multi-model research activity (Meehl et al.,
2000, 2007; Taylor et al., 2012) that has not only introduced
a new era to climate science research but has also become
a central element of national and international assessments
of climate change (e.g. IPCC, 2013). An important part of
CMIP is to make the multi-model output publicly available in
a standardized format for analysis by the wider climate com-
munity and users. The standardization of the model output in
a speciﬁed format, and the collection, archival, and access of
the model output through the Earth System Grid Federation
(ESGF) data replication centres have facilitated multi-model
analyses.
The objective of CMIP is to better understand past,
present, and future climate change arising from natural, un-
forced variability or in response to changes in radiative forc-
ings in a multi-model context. Its increasing importance and
scope is a tremendous success story, but this very success
poses challenges for all involved. Coordination of the project
has become more complex as CMIP includes more models
with more processes all applied to a wider range of ques-
tions. To meet this new interest and to address a wide vari-
ety of science questions from more and more scientiﬁc re-
search communities, reﬂecting the expanding scope of com-
prehensive modelling in climate science, has put pressure on
CMIP to become larger and more extensive. Consequently,
there has been an explosion in the diversity and volume of
requested CMIP output from an increasing number of ex-
periments causing challenges for CMIP’s technical infras-
tructure (Williams et al., 2015). Cultural and organizational
challenges also arise from the tension between expectations
that modelling centres deliver multiple model experiments to
CMIP yet at the same time advance basic research in climate
science.
In response to these challenges, we have adopted a more
federated structure for the sixth phase of CMIP (i.e. CMIP6)
and subsequent phases. Whereas past phases of CMIP were
usually described through a single overview paper, reﬂect-
ing a centralized and relatively compact CMIP structure, this
GMD special issue describes the new design and organiza-
tion of CMIP, the suite of experiments, and its forcings, in a
series of invited contributions. In this paper, we provide the
overview and backdrop of the new CMIP structure as well as
the main scientiﬁc foci that CMIP6 will address. We begin
by describing the new organizational form for CMIP and the
pressures that it was designed to alleviate (Sect. 2). It also
contains a description of a small set of simulations for CMIP
which are intended to be common to all participating mod-
els (Sect. 3), details of which are provided in the Appendix.
We then present a brief overview of CMIP6 that serves as
an introduction to the other contributions to this special issue
(Sect. 4), and we close with a summary.
2
CMIP design – a more continuous and distributed
organization
In preparing for CMIP6, the CMIP Panel (the authors of this
paper), which traditionally has the responsibility for direct
coordination and oversight of CMIP, initiated a 2-year pro-
cess of community consultation. This consultation involved
the modelling centres whose contributions form the sub-
stance of CMIP as well as communities that rely on CMIP
model output for their work. Special meetings were orga-
nized to reﬂect on the successes of CMIP5 as well as the sci-
entiﬁc gaps that remain or have since emerged. The consulta-
tion also sought input through a community survey, the scien-
tiﬁc results of which are described by Stouffer et al. (2015).
Four main issues related to the overall structure of CMIP
were identiﬁed.
First, we identiﬁed a growing appreciation of the scientiﬁc
potential to use results across different CMIP phases. Such
approaches, however, require an appropriate experimental
design to facilitate the identiﬁcation of an ensemble of mod-
els with particular properties drawn from different phases of
CMIP (e.g. Rauser et al., 2014). At the same time, it was
recognized that an increasing number of Model Intercompar-
ison Projects (MIPs) were being organized independent of
CMIP, the data structure and output requirements were often
inconsistent, and the relationship between the models used in
the various MIPs was often difﬁcult to determine, in which
context measures to help establish continuity across MIPs or
phases of CMIP would also be welcome.
Second, the scope of CMIP was taxing the resources of
modelling centres making it impossible for many to consider
contributing to all the proposed experiments. By providing a
better basis to help modelling centres decide exactly which
subset of experiments to perform, it was thought that it might
be possible to minimize fragmented participation in CMIP6.
A more federated experimental protocol could also encour-
age modelling centres to develop intercomparison studies
based on their own strategic goals.
Third, some centres expressed the view that the punctu-
ated structure of CMIP had begun to distort the model devel-
opment process. Deﬁning a protocol that allowed modelling
centres to decouple their model development from the CMIP
schedule would offer additional ﬂexibility, and perhaps en-
courage modelling centres to ﬁnalize their models and sub-
mit some of their results sooner on their own schedule.
Fourth and ﬁnally, many groups expressed a desire for par-
ticular phases of CMIP to be more than just a collection of
Geosci. Model Dev., 9, 1937–1958, 2016
www.geosci-model-dev.net/9/1937/2016/

----- Page 3 (native) -----
V. Eyring et al.: Overview of the CMIP6 experimental design and organization
1939
Figure 1. CMIP evolution. CMIP will evolve but the DECK will provide continuity across phases.
MIPs, but rather to reﬂect the strategic goals of the climate
science community as, for instance, articulated by WCRP.
By focusing a particular phase of CMIP around speciﬁc sci-
entiﬁc issues, it was felt that the modelling resources could
be more effectively applied to those scientiﬁc questions that
had matured to a point where coordinated activities were ex-
pected to have substantial impact.
A variety of mechanisms were proposed and intensely de-
bated to address these issues. The outcome of these discus-
sions is embodied in the new CMIP structure, which has three
major components. First, the identiﬁcation of a handful of
common experiments, the Diagnostic, Evaluation and Char-
acterization of Klima (DECK) experiments (klima is Greek
for “climate”), and CMIP historical simulations, which can
be used to establish model characteristics and serves as its en-
try card for participating in one of CMIP’s phases or in other
MIPs organized between CMIP phases, as depicted in Fig. 1.
Second, common standards, coordination, infrastructure, and
documentation that facilitate the distribution of model out-
puts and the characterization of the model ensemble, and
third, the adoption of a more federated structure, building on
more autonomous CMIP-Endorsed MIPs.
Realizing the idea of a particular phase of CMIP being
centred on a collection of more autonomous MIPs required
the development of procedures for soliciting and evaluating
MIPs in light of the scientiﬁc focus chosen for CMIP6. These
procedures were developed and implemented by the CMIP
Panel. The responses to the CMIP5 survey helped inform a
series of workshops and resulted in a draft experiment de-
sign for CMIP6. This initial design for CMIP6 was published
in early 2014 (Meehl et al., 2014) and was open for com-
ments from the wider community until mid-September 2014.
In parallel to the open review of the design, the CMIP Panel
distributed an open call for proposals for MIPs in April 2014.
These proposals were broadly reviewed within WCRP with
the goal to encourage and enhance synergies among the dif-
ferent MIPs, to avoid overlapping experiments, to ﬁll gaps,
and to help ensure that the WCRP Grand Science Challenges
would be addressed. Revised MIP proposals were requested
and evaluated by the CMIP Panel in summer 2015. The se-
lection of MIPs was based on the CMIP Panel’s evaluation
of ten endorsement criteria (Table 1). To ensure community
engagement, an important criterion was that enough mod-
elling groups (at least eight) were willing to perform all of
the MIP’s highest priority (Tier 1) experiments and provid-
ing all the requested diagnostics needed to answer at least
one of its leading science questions. For each of the selected
CMIP6-Endorsed MIPs it turned out that at least ten mod-
www.geosci-model-dev.net/9/1937/2016/
Geosci. Model Dev., 9, 1937–1958, 2016

----- Page 4 (native) -----
1940
V. Eyring et al.: Overview of the CMIP6 experimental design and organization
Table 1. Main criteria for MIP endorsement as agreed with representatives from the modelling groups and MIPs at the WGCM 18th Session
in Grainau, Germany in October 2014.
No.
MIP endorsement criterion
1
The MIP and its experiments address at least one of the key science questions of CMIP6.
2
The MIP demonstrates connectivity to the DECK experiments and the CMIP6 historical simulations.
3
The MIP adopts the CMIP modelling infrastructure standards and conventions.
4
All experiments are tiered, well deﬁned, and useful in a multi-model context and do not overlap with other
CMIP6 experiments.
5
Unless a Tier 1 experiment differs only slightly from another well-established experiment, it must already have
been performed by more than one modelling group.
6
A sufﬁcient number of modelling centres ( ∼8) are committed to performing all of the MIP’s Tier 1 experiments
and providing all the requested diagnostics needed to answer at least one of its science questions.
7
The MIP presents an analysis plan describing how it will use all proposed experiments, any relevant observa-
tions, and specially requested model output to evaluate the models and address its science questions.
8
The MIP has completed the MIP template questionnaire.
9
The MIP contributes a paper on its experimental design to the GMD CMIP6 special issue.
10
The MIP considers reporting on the results by co-authoring a paper with the modelling groups.
elling groups indicated their intent to participate in Tier 1 ex-
periments at least, thus attesting to the wide appeal and level
of science interest from the climate modelling community.
3
The DECK and CMIP historical simulations
The DECK comprises four baseline experiments: (a) a his-
torical Atmospheric Model Intercomparison Project (amip)
simulation, (b) a pre-industrial control simulation (piCon-
trol or esm-piControl), (c) a simulation forced by an abrupt
quadrupling of CO2 (abrupt-4×CO2) and (d) a simulation
forced by a 1 % yr−1 CO2 increase (1pctCO2). CMIP also
includes a historical simulation (historical or esm-hist) that
spans the period of extensive instrumental temperature mea-
surements from 1850 to the present. In naming the experi-
ments, we distinguish between simulations with CO2 con-
centrations calculated and anthropogenic sources of CO2
prescribed (esm-piControl and esm-hist) and simulations
with prescribed CO2 concentrations (all others). Hereafter,
models that can calculate atmospheric CO2 concentration
and account for the ﬂuxes of CO2 between the atmosphere,
the ocean, and biosphere are referred to as Earth System
Models (ESMs).
The DECK experiments are chosen (1) to provide conti-
nuity across past and future phases of CMIP, (2) to evolve
as little as possible over time, (3) to be well established, and
incorporate simulations that modelling centres perform any-
way as part of their own development cycle, and (4) to be rel-
atively independent of the forcings and scientiﬁc objectives
of a speciﬁc phase of CMIP. The four DECK experiments
and the CMIP historical simulations are well suited for quan-
tifying and understanding important climate change response
characteristics. Modelling groups also commonly perform
simulations of the historical period, but reconstructions of
the external conditions imposed on historical runs (e.g. land-
use changes) continue to evolve signiﬁcantly, inﬂuencing the
simulated climate. In order to distinguish among the histor-
ical simulations performed under different phases of CMIP,
the historical simulations are labelled with the phase (e.g.
“CMIP5 historical” or “CMIP6 historical”). A similar ar-
gument could be made to exclude the AMIP experiments
from the DECK. However, the AMIP experiments are sim-
pler, more routine, and the dominating role of sea surface
temperatures and the focus on recent decades means that for
most purposes AMIP experiments from different phases of
CMIP are more likely to provide the desired continuity.
The persistence and consistency of the DECK will make
it possible to track changes in performance and response
characteristics over future generations of models and CMIP
phases. Although the set of DECK experiments is not ex-
pected to evolve much, additional experiments may become
enough well established as benchmarks (routinely run by
modelling groups as they develop new model versions) so
that in the future they might be migrated into the DECK.
The common practice of including the DECK in model de-
velopment efforts means that models can contribute to CMIP
without carrying out additional computationally burdensome
experiments. All of the DECK and the historical simulations
were included in the core set of experiments performed under
CMIP5 (Taylor et al., 2012), and all but the abrupt-4×CO2
simulation were included in even earlier CMIP phases.
Under CMIP, credentials of the participating atmosphere–
ocean general circulation models (AOGCMs) and ESMs are
established by performing the DECK and CMIP historical
simulations, so these experiments are required from all mod-
els. Together these experiments document the mean climate
and response characteristics of models. They should be run
for each model conﬁguration used in a CMIP-Endorsed MIP.
A change in model conﬁguration includes any change that
might affect its simulations other than noise expected from
Geosci. Model Dev., 9, 1937–1958, 2016
www.geosci-model-dev.net/9/1937/2016/

----- Page 5 (native) -----
V. Eyring et al.: Overview of the CMIP6 experimental design and organization
1941
different realizations. This would include, for example, a
change in model resolution, physical processes, or atmo-
spheric chemistry treatment. If an ESM is used in both CO2-
emission-driven mode and CO2-concentration-driven mode
in subsequent CMIP6-Endorsed MIPs, then both emission-
driven and concentration-driven control, and historical simu-
lations should be done and they will be identical in all forc-
ings except the treatment of CO2.
The forcing data sets that will drive the DECK and CMIP6
historical simulations are described separately in a series of
invited contributions to this special issue. These articles also
include some discussion of uncertainty in the data sets. The
data will be provided by the respective author teams and
made publicly available through the ESGF using common
metadata and formats.
The historical forcings are based as far as possible on ob-
servations and cover the period 1850–2014. These include:
– emissions of short-lived species and long-lived green-
house gases (GHGs),
– GHG concentrations,
– global gridded land-use forcing data sets,
– solar forcing,
– stratospheric aerosol data set (volcanoes),
– AMIP sea surface temperatures (SSTs) and sea ice con-
centrations (SICs),
– for simulations with prescribed aerosols, a new ap-
proach to prescribe aerosols in terms of optical prop-
erties and fractional change in cloud droplet effective
radius to provide a more consistent representation of
aerosol forcing, and
– for models without ozone chemistry, time-varying grid-
ded ozone concentrations and nitrogen deposition.
Some models might require additional forcing data sets (e.g.
black carbon on snow or anthropogenic dust). Allowing
model groups to use different forcing1 data sets might better
sample uncertainty, but makes it more difﬁcult to assess the
uncertainty in the response of models to the best estimate of
the forcing, available to a particular CMIP phase. To avoid
conﬂating uncertainty in the response of models to a given
forcing, it is strongly preferred for models to be integrated
with the same forcing in the entry card historical simulations,
and for forcing uncertainty to be sampled in supplementary
1Here, we distinguish between an applied input perturbation
(e.g. the imposed change in some model constituent, property, or
boundary condition), which we refer to somewhat generically as
a “forcing”, and radiative forcing, which can be precisely deﬁned.
Even if the forcings are identical, the resulting radiative forcing de-
pends on a model’s radiation scheme (among other factors) and will
differ among models.
simulations that are proposed as part of DAMIP. In any case
it is important that all forcing data sets are documented and
are made available alongside the model output on the ESGF.
Likewise to the extent modelling centres simplify forcings,
for instance by regridding or smoothing in time or some other
dimension, this should also be documented.
For the future scenarios selected by ScenarioMIP, forcings
are provided by the integrated assessment model (IAM) com-
munity for the period 2015–2100 (or until 2300 for the ex-
tended simulations). For atmospheric emissions and concen-
trations as well as for land use, the forcings are harmonized
across IAMs and scenarios using a similar procedure as in
CMIP5 (van Vuuren et al., 2011). This procedure ensures
consistency with historical forcing data sets and between the
different forcing categories. The selection of scenarios and
the main characteristics are described elsewhere in this spe-
cial issue, while the underlying IAM scenarios are described
in a special issue in Global Environmental Change.
An important gap identiﬁed in CMIP5, and in previous
CMIP phases, was a lack of careful quantiﬁcation of the ra-
diative forcings from the different speciﬁed external forcing
factors (e.g. GHGs, sulphate aerosols) in each model (Stouf-
fer et al., 2015). This has impaired attempts to identify rea-
sons for differences in model responses. The effective ra-
diative forcing or ERF component of the Radiative Forcing
MIP (RFMIP) includes ﬁxed SST simulations to diagnose
the forcing (RFMIP-lite), which are further detailed in the
corresponding contribution to this special issue. Although
not included as part of the DECK, in recognition of this de-
ﬁciency in past phases of CMIP we strongly encourage all
CMIP6 modelling groups to participate in RFMIP-lite. The
modest additional effort would enable the radiative forcing to
be characterized for both historic and future scenarios across
the model ensemble. Knowing this forcing would lead to a
step change in efforts to understand the spread of model re-
sponses for CMIP6 and contribute greatly to answering one
of CMIP6’s science questions.
An overview of the main characteristics of the DECK and
CMIP6 historical simulations appears in Table 2. Here we
brieﬂy describe these experiments. Detailed speciﬁcations
for the DECK and CMIP6 historical simulations are provided
in Appendix A and are summarized in Table A1.
3.1
The DECK
The AMIP and pre-industrial control simulations of the
DECK provide opportunities for evaluating the atmospheric
model and the coupled system, and in addition they establish
a baseline for performing many of the CMIP6 experiments.
Many experiments branch from, and are compared with, the
pre-industrial control. Similarly, a number of diagnostic at-
mospheric experiments use AMIP as a control. The idealized
CO2-forced experiments in the DECK (abrupt-4×CO2 and
1pctCO2), despite their simplicity, can reveal fundamental
forcing and feedback response characteristics of models.
www.geosci-model-dev.net/9/1937/2016/
Geosci. Model Dev., 9, 1937–1958, 2016

----- Page 6 (native) -----
1942
V. Eyring et al.: Overview of the CMIP6 experimental design and organization
Table 2. Overview of DECK and CMIP6 historical simulations providing the experiment short names, the CMIP6 labels, brief experiment
descriptions, the forcing methods, as well as the start and end year and minimum number of years per experiment and its major purpose.
The DECK and CMIP6 historical simulation are used to characterize the CMIP model ensemble. Given resource limitations, these entry
card simulations for CMIP include only one ensemble member per experiment. However, we strongly encourage model groups to submit at
least three ensemble members for the CMIP historical simulation as requested in DAMIP. Large ensembles of AMIP simulations are also
encouraged. In the “forcing methods” column, “All” means “volcanic, solar, and anthropogenic forcings”. All experiments are started on
1 January and end on 31 December of the speciﬁed years.
Experiment
short name
CMIP6 label
Experiment description
Forcing methods
Start
year
End
year
Minimum
no. years
per
simulation
Major purpose
DECK experiments
AMIP
amip
Observed SSTs
and SICs prescribed
All; CO2 concen-
tration prescribed
1979
2014
36
Evaluation, variability
Pre-industrial
control
piControl or
esm-piControl
Coupled atmosphere–
ocean pre-industrial
control
CO2 concentration
prescribed or
calculated
n/a
n/a
500
Evaluation, unforced
variability
Abrupt
quadrupling of
CO2 concen-
tration
abrupt-4×CO2
CO2 abruptly quadru-
pled and then held
constant
CO2 concentration
prescribed
n/a
n/a
150
Climate sensitivity,
feedback, fast responses
1 % yr−1 CO2
concentration
increase
1pctCO2
CO2 prescribed to
increase at 1 % yr−1
CO2 concentration
prescribed
n/a
n/a
150
Climate sensitivity,
feedback, idealized
benchmark
CMIP6 historical simulation
Past ∼1.5
centuries
historical or
esm-hist
Simulation of the
recent past
All; CO2 concen-
tration prescribed
or calculated
1850
2014
165
Evaluation
For nearly 3 decades, AMIP simulations (Gates et al.,
1999) have been routinely relied on by modelling centres
to help in the evaluation of the atmospheric component of
their models. In AMIP simulations, the SSTs and SICs are
prescribed based on observations. The idea is to analyse and
evaluate the atmospheric and land components of the climate
system when they are constrained by the observed ocean con-
ditions. These simulations can help identify which model er-
rors originate in the atmosphere, land, or their interactions,
and they have proven useful in addressing a great variety of
questions pertaining to recent climate changes. The AMIP
simulations performed as part of the DECK cover at least the
period from January 1979 to December 2014. The end date
will continue to evolve as the SSTs and SICs are updated
with new observations. Besides prescription of ocean con-
ditions in these simulations, realistic forcings are imposed
that should be identical to those applied in the CMIP histor-
ical simulations. Large ensembles of AMIP simulations are
encouraged as they can help to improve the signal-to-noise
ratio (Li et al., 2015).
The remaining three experiments in the DECK are
premised on the coupling of the atmospheric and oceanic cir-
culation. The pre-industrial control simulation (piControl or
esm-piControl) is performed under conditions chosen to be
representative of the period prior to the onset of large-scale
industrialization, with 1850 being the reference year. Histor-
ically, the industrial revolution began in the 18th century, and
in nature the climate in 1850 was not stable as it was al-
ready changing due to prior historical changes in radiative
forcings. In CMIP6, however, as in earlier CMIP phases, the
control simulation is an attempt to produce a stable quasi-
equilibrium climate state under 1850 conditions. When dis-
cussing and analysing historical and future radiative forcings,
it needs to be recognized that the radiative forcing in 1850
due to anthropogenic greenhouse gas increases alone was al-
ready around 0.25 W m−2 (Cubasch, 2013) although aerosols
might have offset that to some extent. In addition, there were
other pre-1850 secular changes, for example, in land use
(Hurtt et al., 2011), and as a result, global net annual emis-
sions of carbon from land use and land-use change already
were responsible in 1850 for about 0.6 Pg C yr−1 (Houghton,
2010). Under the assumptions of the control simulation, how-
ever, there are no secular changes in forcing, so the con-
centrations and/or sources of atmospheric constituents (e.g.
GHGs and emissions of short-lived species) as well as land
use are held ﬁxed, as are Earth’s orbital characteristics. Be-
cause of the absence of both naturally occurring changes in
forcing (e.g. volcanoes, orbital or solar changes) and human-
Geosci. Model Dev., 9, 1937–1958, 2016
www.geosci-model-dev.net/9/1937/2016/

----- Page 7 (native) -----
V. Eyring et al.: Overview of the CMIP6 experimental design and organization
1943
induced changes, the control simulation can be used to study
the unforced internal variability of the climate system.
An initial climate spin-up portion of a control simulation,
during which the climate begins to come into balance with
the forcing, is usually performed. At the end of the spin-up
period, the piControl starts. The piControl serves as a base-
line for experiments that branch from it. To account for the
effects of any residual drift, it is required that the piCon-
trol simulation extends as far beyond the branching point
as any experiment to which it will be compared. Only then
can residual climate drift in an experiment be removed so
that it is not misinterpreted as part of the model’s forced re-
sponse. The recommended minimum length for the piControl
is 500 years.
The two DECK climate change experiments branch from
some point in the 1850 control simulation and are designed
to document basic aspects of the climate system response to
greenhouse gas forcing. In the ﬁrst, the CO2 concentration
is immediately and abruptly quadrupled from the global an-
nual mean 1850 value that is used in piControl. This abrupt-
4×CO2 simulation has proven to be useful for characterizing
the radiative forcing that arises from an increase in atmo-
spheric CO2 as well as changes that arise indirectly due to
the warming. It can also be used to estimate a model’s equi-
librium climate sensitivity (ECS, Gregory et al., 2004). In
the second, the CO2 concentration is increased gradually at
a rate of 1 % per year. This experiment has been performed
in all phases of CMIP since CMIP2, and serves as a consis-
tent and useful benchmark for analysing model transient cli-
mate response (TCR). The TCR takes into account the rate
of ocean heat uptake which governs the pace of all time-
evolving climate change (e.g. Murphy and Mitchell, 1995).
In addition to the TCR, the 1 % CO2 integration with ESMs
that include explicit representation of the carbon cycle allows
the calculation of the transient climate response to cumula-
tive carbon emissions (TCRE), deﬁned as the transient global
average surface temperature change per unit of accumulated
CO2 emissions (IPCC, 2013). Despite their simplicity, these
experiments provide a surprising amount of insight into the
behaviour of models subject to more complex forcing (e.g.
Bony et al., 2013; Geoffroy et al., 2013).
3.2
CMIP historical simulations
In addition to the DECK, CMIP requests models to simu-
late the historical period, deﬁned to begin in 1850 and ex-
tend to the near present. The CMIP historical simulation and
its CO2-emission-driven counterpart, esm-hist, branch from
the piControl and esm-piControl, respectively (see details in
Sect. A1.2). These simulations are forced, based on observa-
tions, by evolving, externally imposed forcings such as so-
lar variability, volcanic aerosols, and changes in atmospheric
composition (GHGs and aerosols) caused by human activ-
ities. The CMIP historical simulations provide rich oppor-
tunities to assess model ability to simulate climate, includ-
ing variability and century timescale trends (e.g. Flato et al.,
2013). These simulations can also be analysed to determine
whether climate model forcing and sensitivity are consis-
tent with the observational record, which provides opportu-
nities to better bound the magnitude of aerosol forcing (e.g.
Stevens, 2015). In addition they, along with the control run,
provide the baseline simulations for performing formal de-
tection and attribution studies (e.g. Stott et al., 2006) which
help uncover the causes of forced climate change.
As with performing control simulations, models that in-
clude representation of the carbon cycle should normally
perform two different CMIP historical simulations: one with
prescribed CO2 concentration and the other with prescribed
CO2 emissions (accounting explicitly for fossil fuel combus-
tion). In the second, CO2 concentrations are predicted by
the model. The treatment of other GHGs should be identi-
cal in both simulations. Both types of simulation are useful
in evaluating how realistically the model represents the re-
sponse of the carbon cycle anthropogenic CO2 emissions, but
the prescribed concentration simulation enables these more
complex models to be evaluated fairly against those models
without representation of carbon cycle processes.
3.3
Common standards, infrastructure, and
documentation
A key to the success of CMIP and one of the motivations
for incorporating a wide variety of coordinated modelling
activities under a single framework in a speciﬁc phase of
CMIP (now CMIP6) is the desire to reduce duplication of
effort, minimize operational and computational burdens, and
establish common practices in producing and analysing large
amounts of model output. To enable automated processing
of output from dozens of different models, CMIP has led the
way in encouraging adoption of data standards (governing
structure and metadata) that facilitate development of soft-
ware infrastructure in support of coordinated modelling ac-
tivities. The ESGF has capitalized on this standardization to
provide access to CMIP model output hosted by institutions
around the world. As the complexity of CMIP has increased
and as the potential use of model output expands beyond
the research community, the evolution of the climate mod-
elling infrastructure requires enhanced coordination. To help
in this regard, the WGCM Infrastructure Panel (WIP) was
set up, and is now providing guidance on requirements and
establishing speciﬁcations for model output, model and sim-
ulation documentation, and archival and delivery systems for
CMIP6 data. In parallel to the development of the CMIP6
experiment design, the ESGF capabilities are being further
extended and improved. In CMIP5, with over 1,000 differ-
ent model/experiment combinations, a ﬁrst attempt was also
made to capture structured metadata describing the models
and the simulations themselves. Based upon the Common In-
formation Model (CIM, Lawrence et al., 2012), tools were
provided to capture documentation of models and simula-
www.geosci-model-dev.net/9/1937/2016/
Geosci. Model Dev., 9, 1937–1958, 2016

----- Page 8 (native) -----
1944
V. Eyring et al.: Overview of the CMIP6 experimental design and organization
tions. This effort is now continuing under the banner of the
international ES-DOC activity, which establishes agreements
on common Controlled Vocabularies (CVs) to describe mod-
els and simulations. Modelling groups will be required to
provide documentation following a common template and
adhering to the CVs. With the documentation recorded uni-
formly across models, researchers will, for example, be able
to use web-based tools to determine differences in model ver-
sions and differences in forcing and other conditions that af-
fect each simulation. Further details on the CMIP6 infras-
tructure can be found in the WIP contribution to this special
issue.
A more routine benchmarking and evaluation of the mod-
els is envisaged to be a central part of CMIP6. As noted
above, one purpose of the DECK and CMIP historical sim-
ulations is to provide a basis for documenting model sim-
ulation characteristics. Towards that end an infrastructure
is being developed to allow analysis packages to be rou-
tinely executed whenever new model experiments are con-
tributed to the CMIP archive at the ESGF. These efforts uti-
lize observations served by the ESGF contributed from the
obs4MIPs (Ferraro et al., 2015; Teixeira et al., 2014) and
ana4MIPs projects. Examples of available tools that target
routine evaluation in CMIP include the PCMDI metrics soft-
ware (Gleckler et al., 2016) and the Earth System Model
Evaluation Tool (ESMValTool, Eyring et al., 2016), which
brings together established diagnostics such as those used
in the evaluation chapter of IPCC AR5 (Flato et al., 2013).
The ESMValTool also integrates other packages, such as the
NCAR Climate Variability Diagnostics Package (Phillips et
al., 2014), or diagnostics such as the cloud regime metric
(Williams and Webb, 2009) developed by the Cloud Feed-
back MIP (CFMIP) community. These tools can be used to
broadly and comprehensively characterize the performance
of the wide variety of models and model versions that will
contribute to CMIP6. This evaluation activity can, compared
with CMIP5, more quickly inform users of model output, as
well as the modelling centres, of the strengths and weak-
nesses of the simulations, including the extent to which
long-standing model errors remain evident in newer models.
Building such a community-based capability is not meant
to replace how CMIP research is currently performed but
rather to complement it. These tools can also be used to com-
pute derived variables or indices alongside the ESGF, and
their output could be provided back to the distributed ESGF
archive.
4
CMIP6
4.1
Scientiﬁc focus of CMIP6
In addition to the DECK and CMIP historical simulations,
a number of additional experiments will colour a speciﬁc
phase of CMIP, now CMIP6. These experiments are likely
Figure 2. Schematic of the CMIP/CMIP6 experiment design. The
inner ring and surrounding white text involve standardized func-
tions of all CMIP DECK experiments and the CMIP6 historical
simulation. The middle ring shows science topics related speciﬁ-
cally to CMIP6 that are addressed by the CMIP6-Endorsed MIPs,
with MIP topics shown in the outer ring. This framework is super-
imposed on the scientiﬁc backdrop for CMIP6 which are the seven
WCRP Grand Science Challenges.
to change from one CMIP phase to the next. To maximize
the relevance and impact of CMIP6, it was decided to use
the WCRP Grand Science Challenges (GCs) as the scientiﬁc
backdrop of the CMIP6 experimental design. By promoting
research on critical science questions for which speciﬁc gaps
in knowledge have hindered progress so far, but for which
new opportunities and more focused efforts raise the possi-
bility of signiﬁcant progress on the timescale of 5–10 years,
these GCs constitute a main component of the WCRP strat-
egy to accelerate progress in climate science (Brasseur and
Carlson, 2015). They relate to (1) advancing understanding
of the role of clouds in the general atmospheric circulation
and climate sensitivity (Bony et al., 2015), (2) assessing the
response of the cryosphere to a warming climate and its
global consequences, (3) understanding the factors that con-
trol water availability over land (Trenberth and Asrar, 2014),
(4) assessing climate extremes, what controls them, how they
have changed in the past and how they might change in the
future, (5) understanding and predicting regional sea level
change and its coastal impacts, (6) improving near-term cli-
mate predictions, and (7) determining how biogeochemical
cycles and feedback control greenhouse gas concentrations
and climate change.
Geosci. Model Dev., 9, 1937–1958, 2016
www.geosci-model-dev.net/9/1937/2016/

----- Page 9 (native) -----
V. Eyring et al.: Overview of the CMIP6 experimental design and organization
1945
These GCs will be using the full spectrum of observa-
tional, modelling and analytical expertise across the WCRP,
and in terms of modelling most GCs will address their spe-
ciﬁc science questions through a hierarchy of numerical
models of different complexities. Global coupled models ob-
viously constitute an essential element of this hierarchy, and
CMIP6 experiments will play a prominent role across all
GCs by helping to answer the following three CMIP6 science
questions: How does the Earth system respond to forcing?
What are the origins and consequences of systematic model
biases? How can we assess future climate change given inter-
nal climate variability, climate predictability, and uncertain-
ties in scenarios?
These three questions will be at the centre of CMIP6. Sci-
ence topics related speciﬁcally to CMIP6 will be addressed
through a range of CMIP6-Endorsed MIPs that are organized
by the respective communities and overseen by the CMIP
Panel (Fig. 2). Through these different MIPs and their con-
nection to the GCs, the goal is to ﬁll some of the main scien-
tiﬁc gaps of previous CMIP phases. This includes, in particu-
lar, facilitating the identiﬁcation and interpretation of model
systematic errors, improving the estimate of radiative forc-
ings in past and future climate change simulations, facilitat-
ing the identiﬁcation of robust climate responses to aerosol
forcing during the historical period, better accounting of the
impact of short-term forcing agents and land use on climate,
better understanding the mechanisms of decadal climate vari-
ability, along with many other issues not addressed satisfac-
torily in CMIP5 (Stouffer et al., 2015). In endorsing a num-
ber of these MIPs, the CMIP Panel acted to minimize over-
laps among the MIPs and to reduce the burden on modelling
groups, while maximizing the scientiﬁc complementarity and
synergy among the different MIPs.
4.2
The CMIP6-Endorsed MIPs
Close to 30 suggestions for CMIP6 MIPs have been re-
ceived so far, of which 21 MIPs were eventually endorsed
and invited to participate (Table 3). Of those not selected
some were asked to work with other proposed MIPs with
overlapping science goals and objectives. Of the 21 CMIP6-
Endorsed MIPs, 4 are diagnostic in nature, which means that
they deﬁne and analyse additional output, but do not require
additional experiments. In the remaining 17 MIPs, a total
of around 190 experiments have been proposed resulting in
40 000 model simulation years with around half of these in
Tier 1. The CMIP6-Endorsed MIPs show broad coverage
and distribution across the three CMIP6 science questions,
and all are linked to the WCRP Grand Science Challenges
(Fig. 3).
Each of the 21 CMIP6-Endorsed MIPs is described in a
separate invited contribution to this special issue. These con-
tributions will detail the goal of the MIP and the major scien-
tiﬁc gaps the MIP is addressing, and will specify what is new
compared to CMIP5 and previous CMIP phases. The con-
Figure 3. Contributions of CMIP6-Endorsed MIPs to the three
CMIP6 science questions and the WCRP Grand Science Chal-
lenges. A ﬁlled circle indicates highest priority and an open circle,
second highest priority. Some of the MIPs additionally contribute
with lower priority to other CMIP6 science questions or WCRP
Grand Science Challenges.
tributions will include a description of the experimental de-
sign and scientiﬁc justiﬁcation of each of the experiments for
Tier 1 (and possibly beyond), and will link the experiments
and analysis to the DECK and CMIP6 historical simulations.
They will additionally include an analysis plan to fully jus-
tify the resources used to produce the various requested vari-
ables, and if the analysis plan is to compare model results to
observations, the contribution will highlight possible model
diagnostics and performance metrics specifying whether the
comparison entails any particular requirement for the simula-
tions or outputs (e.g. the use of observational simulators). In
addition, possible observations and reanalysis products for
model evaluation are discussed and the MIPs are encour-
aged to help facilitate their use by contributing them to the
obs4MIPs/ana4MIPs archives at the ESGF (see Sect. 3.3).
In some MIPs, additional forcings beyond those used in the
DECK and CMIP6 historical simulations are required, and
these are described in the respective contribution as well.
www.geosci-model-dev.net/9/1937/2016/
Geosci. Model Dev., 9, 1937–1958, 2016

----- Page 10 (native) -----
1946
V. Eyring et al.: Overview of the CMIP6 experimental design and organization
Table 3. List of CMIP6-Endorsed MIPs along with the long name of the MIP, the primary goal(s) and the main CMIP6 science theme as
displayed in Fig. 2. Each of these MIPs is described in more detail in a separate contribution to this special issue. MIPs marked with ∗are
diagnostic MIPs.
Short name of
MIP
Long name of MIP
Primary goal(s) in CMIP6
Main CMIP6
science theme
AerChemMIP
Aerosols and
Chemistry Model
Intercomparison
Project
(a) Diagnosing forcings and feedback of tropospheric aerosols, tropo-
spheric ozone precursors and the chemically reactive WMGHGs; (b) doc-
umenting and understanding past and future changes in the chemical
composition of the atmosphere; (c) estimating the global-to-regional cli-
mate response from these changes.
Chemistry/
Aerosols
C4MIP
Coupled Climate
Carbon Cycle
Model Intercom-
parison Project
Understanding and quantifying future century-scale changes in the global
carbon cycle and its feedback on the climate system, making the link
between CO2 emissions and climate change.
Carbon cycle
CFMIP
Cloud Feedback
Model Intercom-
parison Project
Improving assessments of cloud feedback via (a) improved understanding
of cloud-climate feedback mechanisms and (b) better evaluation of clouds
and cloud feedback in climate models. Also improving understanding of
circulation, regional-scale precipitation, and non-linear changes.
Clouds/
Circulation
DAMIP
Detection and
Attribution Model
Intercomparison
Project
(a) Estimating the contribution of external forcings to observed global
and regional climate changes; (b) observationally constraining future cli-
mate change projections by scaling future GHG and other anthropogenic
responses using regression coefﬁcients derived for the historical period.
Characterizing
forcings
DCPP
Decadal Climate
Prediction Project
Predicting and understanding forced climate change and internal vari-
ability up to 10 years into the future through a coordinated set of hindcast
experiments, targeted experiments to understand the physical processes,
and the ongoing production of skilful decadal predictions.
Decadal
prediction
FAFMIP
Flux-Anomaly-
Forced Model
Intercomparison
Project
Explaining the model spread in climate projections of ocean climate
change forced by CO2 increase, especially regarding the geographical
patterns and magnitude of sea level change, ocean heat uptake, and ther-
mal expansion.
Ocean/Land/
Ice
GeoMIP
Geoengineering
Model Intercom-
parison Project
Assessing the climate system response (including on extreme events) to
proposed radiation modiﬁcation geoengineering schemes by evaluating
their efﬁcacies, beneﬁts, and side effects.
Geoengineering
GMMIP
Global Monsoons
Model Intercom-
parison Project
(a) Improving understanding of physical processes in global monsoons
system; (b) better simulating the mean state, interannual variability, and
long-term changes of global monsoons.
Regional
phenomena
HighResMIP
High-Resolution
Model Intercom-
parison Project
Assessing the robustness of improvements in the representation of impor-
tant climate processes with weather-resolving global model resolutions
(∼25 km or ﬁner), within a simpliﬁed framework using the physical cli-
mate system only with constrained aerosol forcing.
Regional
phenomena
ISMIP6
Ice Sheet Model
Intercomparison
Project for CMIP6
Improving conﬁdence in projections of the sea level rise associated with
mass loss from the ice sheets of Greenland and Antarctica.
Ocean/Land/
Ice
LS3MIP
Land Surface,
Snow and Soil
Moisture
Providing a comprehensive assessment of land surface, snow, and soil
moisture-climate feedback, and diagnosing systematic biases in the land
modules of current ESMs using constrained land-module-only experi-
ments.
Ocean/Land/
Ice
LUMIP
Land-Use Model
Intercomparison
Project
Quantifying the effects of land use on climate and biogeochemical cy-
cling (past–future), and assessing the potential for alternative land man-
agement strategies to mitigate climate change.
Land use
Geosci. Model Dev., 9, 1937–1958, 2016
www.geosci-model-dev.net/9/1937/2016/

----- Page 11 (native) -----
V. Eyring et al.: Overview of the CMIP6 experimental design and organization
1947
Table 3. Continued.
OMIP
Ocean Model In-
tercomparison
Project
Providing a framework for evaluating, understanding, and improving
ocean, sea ice, and biogeochemical, including inert tracers, components
of climate and Earth system models contributing to CMIP6. Protocols are
provided to perform coordinated ocean/sea ice/tracer/biogeochemistry
simulations forced with common atmospheric data sets.
Ocean/Land/
Ice
PMIP
Paleoclimate Mod-
elling Intercompar-
ison Project
(a) Analysing the response to forcings and major feedback for past cli-
mates outside the range of recent variability; (b) assessing the credibility
of climate models used for future climate projections.
Paleo
RFMIP
Radiative Forcing
Model Intercom-
parison Project
(a) Characterizing the global and regional effective radiative forcing for
each model for historical and 4×CO2 simulations; (b) assessing the abso-
lute accuracy of clear-sky radiative transfer parameterizations; (c) identi-
fying the robust impacts of aerosol radiative forcing during the historical
period.
Characterizing
forcings
ScenarioMIP
Scenario Model
Intercomparison
Project
(a) Facilitating integrated research on the impact of plausible future sce-
narios over physical and human systems, and on mitigation and adap-
tation options; (b) addressing targeted studies on the effects of particular
forcings in collaboration with other MIPs; (c) help quantifying projection
uncertainties based on multi-model ensembles and emergent constraints.
Scenarios
VolMIP
Volcanic Forcings
Model Intercom-
parison Project
(a) Assessing to what extent responses of the coupled ocean–atmosphere
system to strong volcanic forcing are robustly simulated across state-of-
the-art coupled climate models; (b) identifying the causes that limit robust
simulated behaviour, especially differences in their treatment of physical
processes
Characterizing
forcings
CORDEX∗
Coordinated Re-
gional Climate
Downscaling
Experiment
Advancing and coordinating the science and application of regional cli-
mate downscaling (RCD) through statistical and dynamical downscaling
of CMIP DECK, CMIP6 historical, and ScenarioMIP output.
Impacts
DynVarMIP∗
Dynamics and Va-
riability Model In-
tercomparison
Project
Deﬁning and analysing diagnostics that enable a mechanistic approach
to confront model biases and understand the underlying causes behind
circulation changes with a particular emphasis on the two-way coupling
between the troposphere and the stratosphere.
Clouds/
Circulation
SIMIP∗
Sea Ice Model
Intercomparison
Project
Understanding the role of sea ice and its response to climate change by
deﬁning and analysing a comprehensive set of variables and process-
oriented diagnostics that describe the sea ice state and its atmospheric
and ocean forcing.
Ocean/Land/
Ice
VIACS AB∗
Vulnerability, Im-
pacts, Adaptation
and Climate
Services Advisory
Board
Facilitating a two-way dialogue between the CMIP6 modelling commu-
nity and VIACS experts, who apply CMIP6 results for their numerous re-
search and climate services, towards an informed construction of model
scenarios and simulations and the design of online diagnostics, metrics,
and visualization of relevance to society.
Impacts
A number of MIPs are developments and/or continuation
of long-standing science themes. These include MIPs specif-
ically addressing science questions related to cloud feedback
and the understanding of spatial patterns of circulation and
precipitation (CFMIP), carbon cycle feedback, and the un-
derstanding of changes in carbon ﬂuxes and stores (C4MIP),
detection and attribution (DAMIP) that newly includes 21st-
century GHG-only simulations allowing the projected re-
sponses to GHGs and other forcings to be separated and
scaled to derive observationally constrained projections, and
paleoclimate (PMIP), which assesses the credibility of the
model response to forcing outside the range of recent vari-
ability. These MIPs reﬂect the importance of key forcing and
feedback processes in understanding past, present, and future
climate change and have developed new experiments and sci-
ence plans focused on emerging new directions that will be
at the centre of the WCRP Grand Science Challenges. A few
new MIPs have arisen directly from gaps in understanding
in CMIP5 (Stouffer et al., 2015), for example, poor quantiﬁ-
cation of radiative forcing (RFMIP), better understanding of
www.geosci-model-dev.net/9/1937/2016/
Geosci. Model Dev., 9, 1937–1958, 2016

----- Page 12 (native) -----
1948
V. Eyring et al.: Overview of the CMIP6 experimental design and organization
ocean heat uptake and sea level rise (FAFMIP), and under-
standing of model response to volcanic forcing (VolMIP).
Since CMIP5, other MIPs have emerged as the modelling
community has developed more complex ESMs with inter-
active components beyond the carbon cycle. These include
the consistent quantiﬁcation of forcings and feedback from
aerosols and atmospheric chemistry (AerChemMIP), and, for
the ﬁrst time in CMIP, modelling of sea level rise from land
ice sheets (ISMIP6).
Some MIPs speciﬁcally target systematic biases focusing
on improved understanding of the sea ice state and its at-
mospheric and oceanic forcing (SIMIP), the physical and
biogeochemical aspects of the ocean (OMIP), land, snow
and soil moisture processes (LS3MIP), and improved un-
derstanding of circulation and variability with a focus on
stratosphere–troposphere coupling (DynVarMIP). With the
increased emphasis in the climate science community on the
need to represent and understand changes in regional circula-
tion, systematic biases are also addressed on a more regional
scale by the Global Monsoon MIP (GMMIP) and a ﬁrst
coordinated activity on high-resolution modelling (High-
ResMIP).
For the ﬁrst time, future scenario experiments, previously
coordinated centrally as part of the CMIP5 core experiments,
will be run as an MIP ensuring clear deﬁnition and well-
coordinated science questions. ScenarioMIP will run a new
set of future long-term (century timescale) integrations en-
gaging input from both the climate science and integrated
assessment modelling communities. The new scenarios are
based on a matrix that uses the shared socioeconomic path-
ways (SSPs, O’Neill et al., 2015) and forcing levels of the
Representative Concentration Pathways (RCP) as axes. As a
set, they span the same range as the CMIP5 RCPs (Moss et
al., 2010), but ﬁll critical gaps for intermediate forcing levels
and questions, for example, on short-lived species and land
use. The near-term experiments (10–30 years) are coordi-
nated by the decadal climate prediction project (DCPP) with
improvements expected, for example, from the initialization
of additional components beyond the ocean and from a more
detailed process understanding and evaluation of the predic-
tions to better identify sources and limits of predictability.
Other MIPs include speciﬁc future mitigation options, e.g.
the land use MIP (LUMIP) that is for the ﬁrst time in CMIP
isolating regional land management strategies to study how
different surface types respond to climate change and di-
rect anthropogenic modiﬁcations, or the geoengineering MIP
(GeoMIP), which examines climate impacts of newly pro-
posed radiation modiﬁcation geoengineering strategies.
The diagnostic MIP CORDEX will oversee the downscal-
ing of CMIP6 models for regional climate projections. An-
other historic development in our ﬁeld that provides, for the
ﬁrst time in CMIP, an avenue for a more formal communi-
cation between the climate modelling and user community
is the endorsement of the vulnerability, impacts, and adapta-
tion and climate services advisory board (VIACS AB). This
diagnostic MIP requests certain key variables of interest to
the VIACS community be delivered in a timely manner to be
used by climate services and in impact studies.
All MIPs deﬁne output streams in the centrally coordi-
nated CMIP6 data request for each of their own experiments
as well as the DECK and CMIP6 historical simulations (see
the CMIP6 data request contribution to this special issue for
details). This will ensure that the required variables are stored
at the frequency and resolution required to address the spe-
ciﬁc science questions and evaluation needs of each MIP and
to enable a broad characterization of the performance of the
CMIP6 models.
We note that only the Tier 1 MIP experiments are overseen
by the CMIP Panel, but additional experiments are proposed
by the MIPs in Tiers 2 and 3. We encourage the modelling
groups to participate in the full suite of experiments beyond
Tier 1 to address in more depth the scientiﬁc questions posed.
The call for MIP applications for CMIP6 is still open and
new proposals will be reviewed at the annual WGCM meet-
ings. However, we point out that the additional MIPs sug-
gested after the CMIP6 data request has been ﬁnalized will
have to work with the already deﬁned model output from the
DECK and CMIP6 historical simulations, or work with the
modelling group to recover additional variables from their
internal archives. We also point out that some experiments
proposed by CMIP6-Endorsed MIPs may not be ﬁnished un-
til after CMIP6 ends.
5
Summary
CMIP6 continues the pattern of evolution and adaptation
characteristic of previous phases of CMIP. To centre CMIP at
the heart of activities within climate science and encourage
links among activities within the World Climate Research
Programme (WCRP), CMIP6 has been formulated scientif-
ically around three speciﬁc questions, amidst the backdrop
of the WCRP’s seven Grand Science Challenges. To meet
the increasingly broad scientiﬁc demands of the climate-
science community, yet be responsive to the individual prior-
ities and resource limitations of the modelling centres, CMIP
has adopted a new, more federated organizational structure.
CMIP has now evolved from a centralized activity involv-
ing a large number of experiments to a federated activity, en-
compassing many individually designed MIPs. CMIP6 com-
prises 21 individual CMIP6-Endorsed MIPs and the DECK
and CMIP6 historical simulations. Four of the 21 CMIP6-
Endorsed MIPs are diagnostic in nature, meaning that they
require additional output from models, but not additional
simulations. The total amount of output from CMIP6 is es-
timated to be between 20 and 40 petabytes, depending on
model resolution and the number of modelling centres ulti-
mately participating in CMIP6. Questions addressed in the
MIPs are wide ranging, from the climate of distant past to
the response of turbulent cloud processes to radiative forc-
Geosci. Model Dev., 9, 1937–1958, 2016
www.geosci-model-dev.net/9/1937/2016/

----- Page 13 (native) -----
V. Eyring et al.: Overview of the CMIP6 experimental design and organization
1949
Figure 4. CMIP6 timeline for the preparation of forcings, the realization of experiments and their analysis.
ing, from how the terrestrial biosphere inﬂuences the uptake
of CO2 to how much predictability is stored in the ocean,
from how to best project near-term to long-term future cli-
mate changes while considering interdependence and differ-
ences in model performance in the CMIP6 ensemble, and
from what regulates the distribution of tropospheric ozone,
to the inﬂuence of land-use changes on water availability.
The last 3 years have been dedicated to conceiving and
then planning what we now call CMIP6. Starting in 2016, the
ﬁrst modelling centres are expected to begin performing the
DECK and uploading output on the ESGF. Forcings for the
DECK and CMIP6 historical simulations will be ready be-
fore mid-2016 so that these experiements can be started, and
by the end of 2016 the diverse forcings for different scenarios
of future human activity will become available. Past experi-
ence suggests that most centres will complete their CMIP
simulations within a few years while the analysis of CMIP6
results will likely go on for a decade or more (Fig. 4).
Through an intensiﬁed effort to align CMIP with spe-
ciﬁc scientiﬁc questions and the WCRP Grand Science Chal-
lenges, we expect CMIP6 to continue CMIP’s tradition of
major scientiﬁc advances. CMIP6 simulations and scientiﬁc
achievements are expected to support the IPCC Sixth Assess-
ment Report (AR6) as well as other national and international
climate assessments or special reports. Ultimately scientiﬁc
progress on the most pressing problems of climate variability
and change will be the best measure of the success of CMIP6.
Data availability
The model output from the DECK and CMIP6 historical sim-
ulations described in this paper will be distributed through
the Earth System Grid Federation (ESGF) with digital object
identiﬁers (DOIs) assigned. As in CMIP5, the model out-
put will be freely accessible through data portals after reg-
istration. In order to document CMIP6’s scientiﬁc impact
and enable ongoing support of CMIP, users are obligated
to acknowledge CMIP6, the participating modelling groups,
and the ESGF centres (see details on the CMIP Panel web-
site at http://www.wcrp-climate.org/index.php/wgcm-cmip/
about-cmip). Further information about the infrastructure
supporting CMIP6, the metadata describing the model out-
put, and the terms governing its use are provided by the
WGCM Infrastructure Panel (WIP) in their invited contribu-
tion to this special issue. Along with the data, the provenance
of the data will be recorded, and DOIs will be assigned to col-
lections of output so that they can be appropriately cited. This
information will be made readily available so that published
research results can be veriﬁed and credit can be given to the
modelling groups providing the data. The WIP is coordinat-
ing and encouraging the development of the infrastructure
needed to archive and deliver this information. In order to
run the experiments, data sets for natural and anthropogenic
forcings are required. These forcing data sets are described in
separate invited contributions to this special issue. The forc-
ing data sets will be made available through the ESGF with
version control and DOIs assigned.
www.geosci-model-dev.net/9/1937/2016/
Geosci. Model Dev., 9, 1937–1958, 2016

----- Page 14 (native) -----
1950
V. Eyring et al.: Overview of the CMIP6 experimental design and organization
Appendix A: Experiment speciﬁcations
A1
Speciﬁcations for the DECK
Here we provide information needed to perform the DECK,
including speciﬁcation of forcing and boundary conditions,
initialization procedures, and minimum length of runs. This
information is largely consistent with but not identical to the
speciﬁcations for these experiments in CMIP5 (Taylor et al.,
2009).
The DECK and CMIP6 historical simulations are re-
quested from all models participating in CMIP. The expec-
tation is that this requirement will be met for each model
conﬁguration used in the subsequent CMIP6-Endorsed MIPs
(an entry card). For CMIP6, in the special case where the
burden of the entry card simulations is prohibitive but the
scientiﬁc case for including a particular model simulation is
compelling (despite only partial completion of the entry card
simulations), an exception to this policy can be granted on a
model-by-model basis by the CMIP Panel, which will seek
advice from the chairs of the affected CMIP6-Endorsed MIP.
CMIP6 is a cooperative effort across the international cli-
mate modelling and climate science communities. The mod-
elling groups have all been involved in the design and imple-
mentation of CMIP6, and thus have agreed to a set of best
practices proposed for CMIP6. Those best practices include
having the modelling groups submit the DECK experiments
and the CMIP6 historical simulations to the ESGF, as well as
any CMIP6-Endorsed MIP experiments they choose to run.
Additionally, the modelling groups decide what constitutes a
new model version. The CMIP Panel will work with the MIP
co-chairs and the modelling groups to ensure that these best
practices are followed.
A1.1
AMIP simulation
As in the ﬁrst simulations performed under the Atmospheric
Model Intercomparison Project (AMIP, Gates et al., 1999),
SSTs and SICs in AMIP experiments are prescribed con-
sistent with observations (see details on this forcing data
set in the corresponding contribution to this special issue).
Land models should be conﬁgured as close as possible to the
one used in the CMIP6 historical simulation including tran-
sient land use and land cover. Other external forcings includ-
ing volcanic aerosols, solar variability, GHG concentrations,
and anthropogenic aerosols should also be prescribed consis-
tent with those used in the CMIP6 historical simulation (see
Sect. A2 below). Even though in AMIP simulations models
with an active carbon cycle will not be fully interactive, sur-
face carbon ﬂuxes should be archived over land.
AMIP integrations can be initialized from prior model in-
tegrations or from observations or in other reasonable ways.
Depending on the treatment of snow cover, soil water con-
tent, the carbon cycle, and vegetation, these runs may require
a spin-up period of several years. One might establish quasi-
equilibrium conditions consistent with the model by, for ex-
ample, running with ocean conditions starting earlier in the
1970s or cycling repeatedly through year 1979 before simu-
lating the ofﬁcial period. Results from the spin-up period (i.e.
prior to 1979) should be discarded, but the spin-up technique
should be documented.
For CMIP6, AMIP simulations should cover at least the
period from January 1979 through December 2014, but mod-
elling groups are encouraged to extend their runs to the end
of the observed period. Output may also be contributed from
years preceding 1979 with the understanding that surface
ocean conditions were less complete and in some cases less
reliable then.
The climate found in AMIP simulations is largely de-
termined by the externally imposed forcing, especially the
ocean conditions. Nevertheless, unforced variability (noise)
within the atmosphere introduces some non-deterministic
variations that hamper unambiguous interpretation of ap-
parent relationships between, for example, the year-to-year
anomalies in SSTs and their consequences over land. To as-
sess the role of unforced atmospheric variability in any par-
ticular result, modelling groups are encouraged to generate
an ensemble of AMIP simulations. For most studies, a three-
member ensemble, where only the initial conditions are var-
ied, would be the minimum required, with larger size ensem-
bles clearly of value in making more precise determination
of statistical signiﬁcance.
A1.2
Multi-century pre-industrial control simulations
Like laboratory experiments, numerical experiments are de-
signed to reveal cause and effect relationships. A standard
way of doing this is to perform both a control experiment
and a second experiment where some externally imposed ex-
periment condition has been altered. For many CMIP experi-
ments, including the rest of the experiments discussed in this
Appendix, the control is a simulation with atmospheric com-
position and other conditions prescribed and held constant,
consistent with best estimates of the forcing from the histor-
ical period.
Ideally the pre-industrial control (piControl) experiment
for CMIP would represent a near-equilibrium state of the cli-
mate system under the imposed conditions. In reality, sim-
ulations of hundreds to many thousands of years would be
required for the ocean’s depths to equilibrate and for biogeo-
chemical reservoirs to fully adjust. Available computational
resources generally preclude integrations long enough to ap-
proach equilibrium, so in practice shorter runs must sufﬁce.
Usually, a piControl simulation is initialized from the control
run of a different model or from observations, and then run
until at least the surface climate conditions stabilize using
1850 forcings (see Stouffer et al., 2004, for further discus-
sion). This spin-up period can be as long as several hundred
years and variables that can document the spin-up behaviour
should be archived (under the experiment labels piControl-
Geosci. Model Dev., 9, 1937–1958, 2016
www.geosci-model-dev.net/9/1937/2016/

----- Page 15 (native) -----
V. Eyring et al.: Overview of the CMIP6 experimental design and organization
1951
spinup or esm-piControl-spinup). At the very least the length
of the spin-up period should be documented.
Although equilibrium is generally not achieved, the
changes occurring after the spin-up period are usually found
to evolve at a fairly constant rate that presumably decreases
slowly as equilibrium is approached. After a few centuries,
these drifts of the system mainly affect the carbon cycle and
ocean below the main thermocline, but they are also manifest
at the surface in a slow change in sea level. The climate drift
must be removed in order to interpret experiments that use
the pre-industrial simulation as a control. The usual proce-
dure is to assume that the drift is insensitive to CMIP exper-
iment conditions and to simply subtract the control run from
the perturbed run to determine the climate change that would
occur in the absence of drift.
Besides serving as controls for numerical experimentation,
the piControl and esm-piControl are used to study the natu-
rally occurring, unforced variability of the climate system.
The only source of climate variability in a control arises
from processes internal to the model, whereas in the more
complicated real world, variations are also caused by exter-
nal forcing factors such as solar variability and changes in
atmospheric composition caused, for example, by human ac-
tivities or volcanic eruptions. Consequently, the physical pro-
cesses responsible for unforced variability can more easily be
isolated and studied using the control run of models, rather
than by analysing observations.
A DECK control simulation is required to be long enough
to extend to the end of any perturbation runs initiated from
it so that climate drift can be assessed and possibly removed
from those runs. If, for example, a historical simulation (be-
ginning in 1850) were initiated from the beginning of the
control simulation and then were followed by a future sce-
nario run extending to year 2300, a control run of at least
450 years would be required. As discussed above, control
runs are also used to assess model-simulated unforced cli-
mate variability. The longer the control, the more precisely
can variability be quantiﬁed for any given timescale. A con-
trol simulation of many hundreds of years would be needed
to assess variability on centennial timescales. For CMIP6
it is recommended that the control run should be at least
500 years long (following the spin-up period), but of course
the simulation must be long enough to reach to the end
of the experiments it spawns. It should be noted that those
analysing CMIP6 simulations might also require simulations
longer than 500 years to accurately assess unforced variabil-
ity on long timescales, so modelling groups are encouraged
to extend their control runs well beyond the minimum rec-
ommended number of years.
Because the climate was very likely not in equilibrium
with the forcing of 1850 and because different components
of the climate system differentially respond to the effects of
the forcing prior to that time, there is some ambiguity in de-
ciding on what forcing to apply for the control. For CMIP6
we recommend a speciﬁcation of this forcing that attempts to
balance conﬂicting objectives to
– minimize artiﬁcial climate responses to discontinuities
in radiative forcing at the time a historical simulation is
initiated, and
– minimize artefacts in sea level change due to thermal
expansion caused by unrealistic mismatches in condi-
tions in the centennial-scale averaged forcings for the
pre- and post-1850 periods. Note that any preindus-
trial multi-centennial observed trend in global-mean
sea level is most likely to be due to slow changes in
ice-sheets, which are likely not to be simulated in the
CMIP6 model generation.
The ﬁrst consideration above implies that radiative forcing
in the control run should be close to that imposed at the be-
ginning of the CMIP historical simulation (i.e. 1850). The
second implies that a background volcanic aerosol and time-
averaged solar forcing should be prescribed in the control
run, since to neglect it would cause an apparent drift in sea
level associated with the suppression of heat uptake due to
the net effect of, for instance, volcanism after 1850, and this
has implications for sea level changes (Gregory, 2010; Gre-
gory et al., 2013). We recognize that it will be impossible
to entirely avoid artefacts and artiﬁcial transient effects, and
practical considerations may rule out conformance with ev-
ery detail of the control simulation protocol stipulated here.
With that understanding, here is a summary of the recom-
mendations for the imposed conditions on the spin-up and
control runs, followed by further clariﬁcation in subsequent
paragraphs:
– Conditions must be time invariant except for those asso-
ciated with the mean climate (notably the seasonal and
diurnal cycles of insolation).
– Unless indicated otherwise (e.g. the background vol-
canic forcing), experiment conditions (e.g. greenhouse
gas concentrations, ozone concentration, surface land
conditions) should be representative of Earth around the
year 1850.
– Orbital parameters (eccentricity, obliquity, and longi-
tude of the perihelion) should be held ﬁxed at their 1850
values.
– Land use should not change in the control run and
should be ﬁxed according to reconstructed agricultural
maps from 1850. Due to the diversity of model ap-
proaches in ESMs for land carbon, some groups might
deviate from this speciﬁcation, and again this must be
clearly documented.
– The solar constant should be ﬁxed at its mean value (no
11-year solar cycle) over the ﬁrst two solar cycles of the
historical simulation (i.e. the 1850–1873 mean).
www.geosci-model-dev.net/9/1937/2016/
Geosci. Model Dev., 9, 1937–1958, 2016

----- Page 16 (native) -----
1952
V. Eyring et al.: Overview of the CMIP6 experimental design and organization
– A background volcanic aerosol should be speciﬁed that
results in radiative forcing matching, as closely as pos-
sible, that experienced, on average, during the historical
simulation (i.e. 1850–2014 mean).
– Models without interactive ozone chemistry should
specify the pre-industrial ozone ﬁelds from a data set
produced from a pre-industrial control simulation that
uses 1850 emissions and a mean solar forcing averaged
over solar cycles 8–10, representative of the mean mid-
19th century solar forcing.
– For models with interactive chemistry and/or aerosols,
the CMIP6 pre-industrial emissions dataset of reactive
gases and aerosol precursors should be used. For models
without internally calculated aerosol concentrations, a
monthly climatological dataset of aerosol physical and
optical properties should be used.
In the CO2-concentration-driven piControl, the value of the
global annual mean 1850 atmospheric CO2 concentration is
prescribed and held ﬁxed during the entire experiment. There
are some special considerations that apply to control simula-
tions performed by emission-driven ESMs (i.e. runs with at-
mospheric concentrations of CO2 calculated prognostically
rather than being prescribed). In the esm-piControl simula-
tion, emissions of CO2 from both fossil fuel combustion and
land-use change are prescribed to be zero. In this run any
residual drift in atmospheric CO2 concentration that arises
from an imbalance in the exchanges of CO2 between the at-
mosphere and the ocean and land (i.e. by the natural carbon
cycle in the absence of anthropogenic CO2 emissions) will
need to be subtracted from perturbation runs to correct for
a control state not in equilibrium. It should be emphasized
that the esm-piControl is an idealized experiment and is not
meant to mimic the true 1850 conditions, which would have
to include a source of carbon of around 0.6 Pg C yr−1 from
the already perturbed state that existed in 1850.
Due to a wide variety of ESMs and the techniques they use
to compute land carbon ﬂuxes, it is hard to make statements
that apply to all models equally well. A general recommen-
dation, however, is that the land carbon ﬂuxes in the emission
and concentration-driven control simulations should be sta-
ble in time and in approximate balance so that the net carbon
ﬂux into the atmosphere is small (less than 0.1 Pg C yr−1).
Further details on ESM experiments with a carbon cycle are
provided in the C4MIP contribution to this special issue.
The historical time-average volcanic forcing stipulated
above for the control run is likely to approximate the much
longer term mean. The volcanic aerosol radiative forcing es-
timates of Crowley (2000) for the historical period and the
last millennium are −0.18 and −0.22 W m−2, respectively.
Because the mean volcanic forcing between 1850 and 2014
is small, the discontinuity associated with transitioning from
a mean forcing to a time-varying volcanic forcing is also ex-
pected to be small. Even though this is the design objective, it
is likely that it will be impossible to eliminate all artefacts in
quantities such as historical sea level change. For this reason,
and because some models may deviate from these speciﬁca-
tions, it is recommended that groups perform an additional
simulation of the historical period but with only natural forc-
ing included. With this additional run, which is already called
for under DAMIP, the purely anthropogenic effects on sea
level change can be isolated.
The forcing speciﬁed in the piControl also has implica-
tions for simulations of the future, when solar variability and
volcanic activity will continue to exist, but at unknown lev-
els. These issues need to be borne in mind when designing
and evaluating future scenarios, as a failure to include vol-
canic forcing in the future will cause future warming and
sea level rise to be over-estimated relative to a piControl ex-
periment in which a non-zero volcanic forcing is speciﬁed.
This is accounted for by introducing a time-invariant non-
zero volcanic forcing (e.g. the mean volcanic forcing for the
piControl) into the scenarios. This is further speciﬁed in the
ScenarioMIP contribution to this special issue.
These issues, and the potential of different modelling cen-
tres adopting different approaches to account for their partic-
ular constraints, highlight the paramount importance of ade-
quately documenting the conditions under which this and the
other DECK experiments are performed.
A1.3
Abruptly quadrupling CO2 simulation
Until CMIP5, there were no experiments designed to quan-
tify the extent to which forcing differences might explain
differences in climate response. It was also difﬁcult to diag-
nose and quantify the feedback responses, which are medi-
ated by global surface temperature change (Sherwood et al.,
2015). In order to examine these fundamental characteristics
of models – CO2 forcing and climate feedback – an abrupt
4×CO2 simulation was included for the ﬁrst time as part
of CMIP5. Following Gregory et al. (2004), the simulation
branches in January of the CO2-concentration-driven piCon-
trol and abruptly the value of the global annual mean 1850
atmospheric CO2 concentration that is prescribed in piCon-
trol is quadrupled and held ﬁxed. As the system subsequently
evolves toward a new equilibrium, the imbalance in the net
ﬂux at the top of the atmosphere can be plotted against global
temperature change. As Gregory et al. (2004) showed, it is
then possible to diagnose both the effective radiative forc-
ing due to a quadrupling of CO2 and also effective equilib-
rium climate sensitivity (ECS). Moreover, by examining how
individual ﬂux components evolve with surface temperature
change, one can learn about the relative strengths of differ-
ent feedback, notably quantifying the importance of various
feedback associated with clouds.
In the abrupt-4×CO2 experiment, the only externally im-
posed difference from the piControl should be the change
in CO2 concentration. All other conditions should remain as
they were in the piControl, including any background vol-
Geosci. Model Dev., 9, 1937–1958, 2016
www.geosci-model-dev.net/9/1937/2016/

----- Page 17 (native) -----
V. Eyring et al.: Overview of the CMIP6 experimental design and organization
1953
canic aerosols. By changing only a single factor, we can un-
ambiguously attribute all climatic consequences to the in-
crease in CO2 concentration.
The minimum length of the simulation should be
150 years, but longer simulations would enable investiga-
tions of longer-timescale responses. Also there is value, as in
CMIP5, in performing an ensemble of short (∼5-year) simu-
lations, all prescribing global annual mean 1850 atmospheric
CO2 concentration but initiated at different times throughout
the year (in addition to the abrupt-4×CO2 simulation initi-
ated from the piControl in January). Such an ensemble would
reduce the statistical uncertainty with which the effective
CO2 radiative forcing could be quantiﬁed and would allow
more detailed and accurate diagnosis of the fast responses
of the system under an abrupt change in forcing (Bony et
al., 2013; Gregory and Webb, 2008; Kamae and Watanabe,
2013; Sherwood et al., 2015). Different groups will be able
to afford ensembles of different sizes, but in any case each
realization should be initialized in a different month and the
months should be spaced evenly throughout the year.
A1.4
1 % CO2 increase simulation
The second idealized climate change experiment was intro-
duced in the early days of CMIP (Meehl et al., 2000). It is
designed for studying model responses under simpliﬁed but
somewhat more realistic forcing than an abrupt increase in
CO2. In this 1pctCO2 experiment, the simulation is branched
from the piControl, and the global annual mean CO2 concen-
tration is gradually increased at a rate of 1 % yr−1 (i.e. expo-
nentially), starting from its 1850 value that is prescribed in
the piControl. A minimum length of 150 years is requested
so that the simulation goes beyond the quadrupling of CO2
after 140 years. Note that in contrast to previous deﬁnitions,
the experiment has been simpliﬁed so that the 1 % CO2 in-
crease per year is applied throughout the entire simulation
rather than keeping it constant after 140 years as in CMIP5.
Since the radiative forcing is approximately proportional to
the logarithm of the CO2 increase, the radiative forcing lin-
early increases over time. Drawing on the estimates of ef-
fective radiative forcing (for deﬁnitions see Myhre et al.,
2013) obtained in the abrupt-4×CO2 simulations, analysts
can scale results from each model in the 1 % CO2 increase
simulations to focus on the response differences in models,
largely independent of their forcing differences. In contrast,
in CMIP6 historical simulations (see Sect. A2), the forcing
and response contributions to model differences in simulated
climate change cannot be easily isolated.
As in the abrupt-4×CO2 experiment, the only externally
imposed difference from the piControl should be the change
in CO2 concentration. The omission of changes in aerosol
concentrations is the key to making these simulations easier
to interpret.
Models with a carbon cycle component will be driven
by prescribed CO2 concentrations, but terrestrial and marine
surface ﬂuxes and stores of carbon will become a key diag-
nostic from which one can infer emission rates that are con-
sistent with a 1 % yr−1 increase in model CO2 concentration.
This DECK baseline carbon cycle experiment is built upon
in C4MIP to diagnose the strength of model carbon climate
feedback and to quantify contributions to disruption of the
carbon cycle by climate and by direct effects of increased
CO2 concentration.
A2
The CMIP6 historical simulations
CMIP6 historical simulations of climate change over the pe-
riod 1850–2014 are forced by common data sets that are
largely based on observations. They serve as an important
benchmark for assessing model performance through evalu-
ation against observations. The historical integration should
be initialized from some point in the control integration (with
historical branching from the piControl and the esm-hist
branching from esm-piControl) and be forced by varying
time, externally imposed conditions that are based on obser-
vations. Both naturally forced changes (e.g. due to solar vari-
ability and volcanic aerosols) and changes due to human ac-
tivities (e.g. CO2 concentration, aerosols, and land use) will
lead to climate variations and evolution. In addition, there is
unforced variability which can obscure the forced changes
and lead to expected differences between the simulated and
observed climate variations (Deser et al., 2012).
The externally imposed forcing data sets that should be
used in CMIP6 cover the period 1850 through the end of
2014 and are described in detail in various other contribu-
tions to this special issue. In the CO2-concentration-driven
historical simulations, time-varying global annual mean con-
centrations for CO2 and other long-lived greenhouse gases
are prescribed. If a modelling center decides to represent ad-
ditional spatial and seasonal variations in prescribed green-
house gas forcings, this needs to be adequately documented.
Recall from Sect. A1.2 that the conditions in the control
should generally be consistent with the forcing imposed near
the beginning of the CMIP historical simulation. This should
minimize artiﬁcial transient effects in the ﬁrst portion of the
CMIP historical simulation. An exception is that for the CO2-
emission-driven experiments, the zero CO2 emissions from
fossil fuel and the land-use speciﬁcations for 1850 in the esm-
piControl could cause a discontinuity in land carbon at the
branch point.
As described in Sect. A1.2, the 1850 esm-piControl should
be developed for an idealized case that is stable in time and
balance so that the net carbon ﬂux into the atmosphere is
small. Meanwhile, the start of the esm-hist in 1850 should
be as realistic as possible and attempt to account for the fact
the land surface was not in equilibrium in 1850 due to prior
land-use effects (Houghton, 2010; Hurtt et al., 2011). Some
modelling groups have developed methods to achieve these
twin goals in a computationally efﬁcient manner, for exam-
ple, by performing pre-1850 off-line land model simulations
www.geosci-model-dev.net/9/1937/2016/
Geosci. Model Dev., 9, 1937–1958, 2016

----- Page 18 (native) -----
1954
V. Eyring et al.: Overview of the CMIP6 experimental design and organization
Table A1. Speciﬁcations in the DECK and CMIP6 historical simulations.
Experiment
Volcanic stratospheric aerosol
Solar variability
Anthropogenic forcings
amip
Time-dependent observations
Time-dependent observations
Time-dependent observations
piControl
Background volcanic aerosol that
results in radiative forcing matching, as
closely as possible, that was experi-
enced, on average, during the historical
simulation (i.e. 1850–2014 mean)
Fixed at its mean value (no
11-year solar cycle) over the
ﬁrst two solar cycles of the
historical simulation (i.e. the
1850–1873 mean)
Given that the historical simulations
start in 1850, the piControl should have
ﬁxed 1850 atmospheric composition,
not true pre-industrial
esm-piControl
As in piControl
As in piControl
As in piControl but with CO2 concen-
tration calculated, rather than prescribed.
CO2 from both fossil fuel combustion
and land-use change are prescribed to be
zero.
abrupt-4×CO2
As in piControl
As in piControl
As in piControl except CO2 that is 4
times that of piControl
1pctCO2
As in piControl
As in piControl
As in piControl except CO2 that is
increasing at 1 % yr−1
historical
Time-dependent observations
Time-dependent observations
Time-dependent observations
esm-hist
As in historical
As in historical
As in historical but with CO2 emissions
prescribed and CO2 concentration calcu-
lated (rather than prescribed)
to account for the land carbon cycle disequilibrium before
1850 and to adequately simulate carbon stores at the start of
the historical simulation (Sentman et al., 2011). Due to the
wide diversity of modelling approaches for land carbon in the
ESMs, the actual method applied by each group to account
for these effects will differ and needs to be well documented.
As discussed earlier, there will be a mismatch in the spec-
iﬁcation of volcanic aerosols between control and historical
simulations that especially affect estimates of ocean heat up-
take and sea level rise in the historical period. This can be
minimized by prescribing a background volcanic aerosol in
the pre-industrial control that has the same cooling effect as
the volcanoes included in the CMIP6 historical simulation.
Any residual mismatch will need to be corrected, which re-
quires a special supplementary simulation (see Sect. A1.2)
that should be submitted along with the CMIP6 historical
simulation.
For model evaluation and for detection and attribution
studies (the focus of DAMIP) there would be considerable
value in extending the CMIP6 historical simulations beyond
the nominal 2014 ending date. To include the more recent
observations in model evaluation, modelling groups are en-
couraged to document and apply forcing data sets represent-
ing the post-2014 period. For short extensions (up to a few
years) it may be acceptable to simply apply forcing from one
of the future scenarios deﬁned by ScenarioMIP. To distin-
guish between the portion of the historical period when all
models will use the same forcing data sets (i.e. 1850–2014)
from the extended period where different data sets might be
used, the experiment for 1850–2014 will be labelled histori-
cal (esm-hist in the case of the emission-driven run) and the
period from 2015 through near-present will likely be labelled
historical-ext (esm-hist-ext).
Even if the CMIP6 historical simulations are extended be-
yond 2014, all future scenario simulations (called for by Sce-
narioMIP and other MIPs) should be initiated from the end
of year 2014 of the CMIP6 historical simulation since the
“future” in CMIP6 begins in 2015.
Due to interactions within and between the components
of the Earth system, there is a wide range of variability
on various time and space scales (Hegerl et al., 2007). The
timescales vary from shorter than a day to longer than sev-
eral centuries. The magnitude of the variability can be quite
large relative to any given signal of interest depending on the
time and space scales involved and on the variable of inter-
est. To more clearly identify forced signals emerging from
natural variability, multiple model integrations (comprising
an ensemble) can be made where only the initial conditions
are perturbed in some way which should be documented. A
common way to do this is to simply branch each simulation
from a different point in the control run. Longer intervals be-
tween branch points will ensure independence of ensemble
members on longer timescales. By averaging many different
ensemble members together, the signal of interest becomes
clear because the natural variations tend to average out if the
ensemble size and averaging period are long enough. If the
variability in the models is realistic, then the spread of the
ensemble members around the ensemble average is caused
Geosci. Model Dev., 9, 1937–1958, 2016
www.geosci-model-dev.net/9/1937/2016/

----- Page 19 (native) -----
V. Eyring et al.: Overview of the CMIP6 experimental design and organization
1955
by unforced (i.e. internal) variability. To minimize the num-
ber of years included in the entry card simulations, only one
ensemble member is requested here. However, we strongly
encourage model groups to submit at least three ensemble
members of their CMIP historical simulation as requested in
DAMIP.
www.geosci-model-dev.net/9/1937/2016/
Geosci. Model Dev., 9, 1937–1958, 2016

----- Page 20 (native) -----
1956
V. Eyring et al.: Overview of the CMIP6 experimental design and organization
Acknowledgements. We thank the scientiﬁc community for their
engagement in the deﬁnition of CMIP6 and for the broad partici-
pation in the CMIP5 survey in 2013. We thank the co-chairs and
steering committee members of the CMIP6-Endorsed MIPs for
their continuous engagement in deﬁning CMIP6, and the modelling
groups and wider community for reviewing the CMIP6 design and
organization. We thank the WGCM Infrastructure Panel (WIP)
for overseeing the CMIP6 infrastructure, Martin Juckes for taking
the lead in preparing the CMIP6 data request, and the group of
scientists who are producing forcing datasets for CMIP6. Thanks
to Jonathan Gregory for raising awareness about the treatment of
volcanic forcing in the pre-industrial control experiment and its
consequence for sea level changes, and to Pierre Friedlingstein,
George Hurtt, Chris Jones, and David Lawrence for help in
deﬁning carbon cycle and land-use speciﬁcations in the DECK
experiments and CMIP6 historical simulations. Norbert Noreiks
is thanked for help in drafting the ﬁgures. Thanks to our topical
editor Julia Hargreaves, to Gavin Schmidt and the other two
anonymous reviewers, and to everyone who contributed to the
open discussions for constructive comments. GM and KET were
supported by the Regional and Global Climate Modeling Program
(RGCM) of the U.S. Department of Energy’s Ofﬁce of Biological &
Environmental Research (BER) (through Cooperative Agreement
no. DE-FC02-97ER62402 for GM), and GM received additional
support from the U.S. National Science Foundation. The National
Center for Atmospheric Research is sponsored by the National
Science Foundation.
The article processing charges for this open-access
publication were covered by a Research
Centre of the Helmholtz Association.
Edited by: J. Hargreaves
References
Bony, S., Bellon, G., Klocke, D., Sherwood, S., Fermepin, S., and
Denvil, S.: Robust direct effect of carbon dioxide on tropical
circulation and regional precipitation, Nat. Geosci., 6, 447–451,
2013.
Bony, S., Stevens, B., Frierson, D. M. W., Jakob, C., Kageyama, M.,
Pincus, R., Shepherd, T. G., Sherwood, S. C., Siebesma, A. P.,
Sobel, A. H., Watanabe, M., and Webb, M. J.: Clouds, circulation
and climate sensitivity, Nat. Geosci., 8, 261–268, 2015.
Brasseur, G. and Carlson, D.: Future directions for the World Cli-
mate Research Programme, Eos, Transactions American Geo-
physical Union, 96, doi:10.1029/2015EO033577, 2015.
CMIP Panel: WCRP Coupled Model Intercomparison Project
(CMIP), available at: http://www.wcrp-climate.org/index.php/
wgcm-cmip/about-cmip, 2016.
Crowley, T. J.: Causes of climate change over the past 1000 years,
Science, 289, 270–277, 2000.
Cubasch, U., Wuebbles, D., Chen, D., Facchini, M. C., Frame,
D., Mahowald, N., and Winther, J.-G.: Introduction, in: Cli-
mate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of
Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergov-
ernmental Panel on Climate Change, edited by: Stocker, T. F.,
Qin, D., Plattner, G.-K., Tignor, M., Allen, S. K., Boschung, J.,
Nauels, A., Xia, Y., Bex, V., and Midgley, P. M., Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA, 2013.
Deser, C., Knutti, R., Solomon, S., and Phillips, A. S.: Communi-
cation of the role of natural variability in future North American
climate, Nat. Clim. Change, 2, 775–779, 2012.
Eyring, V., Righi, M., Lauer, A., Evaldsson, M., Wenzel, S., Jones,
C., Anav, A., Andrews, O., Cionni, I., Davin, E. L., Deser, C.,
Ehbrecht, C., Friedlingstein, P., Gleckler, P., Gottschaldt, K.-D.,
Hagemann, S., Juckes, M., Kindermann, S., Krasting, J., Kunert,
D., Levine, R., Loew, A., Mäkelä, J., Martin, G., Mason, E.,
Phillips, A. S., Read, S., Rio, C., Roehrig, R., Senftleben, D.,
Sterl, A., van Ulft, L. H., Walton, J., Wang, S., and Williams,
K. D.: ESMValTool (v1.0) – a community diagnostic and perfor-
mance metrics tool for routine evaluation of Earth system models
in CMIP, Geosci. Model Dev., 9, 1747–1802, doi:10.5194/gmd-
9-1747-2016, 2016.
Ferraro, R., Waliser, D. E., Gleckler, P., Taylor, K. E., and
Eyring, V.: Evolving obs4MIPs to Support the Sixth Coupled
Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP6), B. Am. Meteorol.
Soc., doi:10.1175/BAMS-D-14-00216.1, online ﬁrst, 2015.
Flato, G., Marotzke, J., Abiodun, B., Braconnot, P., Chou, S. C.,
Collins, W., Cox, P., Driouech, F., Emori, S., Eyring, V., Forest,
C., Gleckler, P., Guilyardi, E., Jakob, C., Kattsov, V., Reason, C.,
and Rummukainen, M.: Evaluation of Climate Models, in: Cli-
mate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of
Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergov-
ernmental Panel on Climate Change, edited by: Stocker, T. F.,
Qin, D., Plattner, G.-K., Tignor, M., Allen, S. K., Boschung, J.,
Nauels, A., Xia, Y., Bex, V., and Midgley, P. M., Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA, 2013.
Gates, W. L., Boyle, J. S., Covey, C., Dease, C. G., Doutriaux, C.
M., Drach, R. S., Fiorino, M., Gleckler, P. J., Hnilo, J. J., Marlais,
S. M., Phillips, T. J., Potter, G. L., Santer, B. D., Sperber, K. R.,
Taylor, K. E., and Williams, D. N.: An Overview of the Results
of the Atmospheric Model Intercomparison Project (AMIP I), B.
Am. Meteorol. Soc., 80, 29–55, 1999.
Geoffroy, O., Saint-Martin, D., Olivie, D. J. L., Voldoire, A., Bellon,
G., and Tyteca, S.: Transient Climate Response in a Two-Layer
Energy-Balance Model. Part I: Analytical Solution and Parame-
ter Calibration Using CMIP5 AOGCM Experiments, J. Climate,
26, 1841–1857, 2013.
Gleckler, P. J., Doutriaux, C., Durack P. J., Taylor K. E., Zhang,
Y., Williams, D. N., Mason, E., and Servonnat, J.: A More
Powerful Reality Test for Climate Models, Eos Trans. AGU,
doi:10.1029/2016EO051663, 2016.
Gregory, J. and Webb, M.: Tropospheric adjustment induces a cloud
component in CO2 forcing, J. Climate, 21, 58–71, 2008.
Gregory,
J.
M.:
Long-term
effect
of
volcanic
forcing
on
ocean
heat
content,
Geophys.
Res.
Lett.,
37,
L22701,
doi:10.1029/2010gl045507, 2010.
Gregory, J. M., Ingram, W. J., Palmer, M. A., Jones, G. S.,
Stott, P. A., Thorpe, R. B., Lowe, J. A., Johns, T. C., and
Williams, K. D.: A new method for diagnosing radiative forc-
ing and climate sensitivity, Geophys. Res. Lett., 31, L03205,
doi:10.1029/2003gl018747, 2004.
Gregory, J. M., Bi, D., Collier, M. A., Dix, M. R., Hirst, A. C.,
Hu, A., Huber, M., Knutti, R., Marsland, S. J., Meinshausen, M.,
Rashid, H. A., Rotstayn, L. D., Schurer, A., and Church, J. A.:
Climate models without preindustrial volcanic forcing underes-
Geosci. Model Dev., 9, 1937–1958, 2016
www.geosci-model-dev.net/9/1937/2016/

----- Page 21 (native) -----
V. Eyring et al.: Overview of the CMIP6 experimental design and organization
1957
timate historical ocean thermal expansion, Geophys. Res. Lett.,
40, 1600–1604, 2013.
Hegerl, G. C., Zwiers, F. W., Braconnot, P., Gillett, N. P., Luo, Y.,
Marengo Orsini, J. A., Nicholls, N., Penner, J. E., and Stott,
P. A.: Understanding and Attributing Climate Change, in: Cli-
mate Change 2007: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of
Working Group I to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Inter-
governmental Panel on Climate Change, edited by: Solomon, S.,
Qin, D., Manning, M., Chen, Z., Marquis, M., Averyt, K. B., Tig-
nor, M., and Miller, H. L., Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge, UK and New York, NY, USA, 2007.
Houghton, R. A.: How well do we know the ﬂux of CO2 from land-
use change?, Tellus B, 62, 337–351, 2010.
Hurtt, G. C., Chini, L. P., Frolking, S., Betts, R. A., Feddema, J.,
Fischer, G., Fisk, J. P., Hibbard, K., Houghton, R. A., Janetos,
A., Jones, C. D., Kindermann, G., Kinoshita, T., Goldewijk, K.
K., Riahi, K., Shevliakova, E., Smith, S., Stehfest, E., Thomson,
A., Thornton, P., van Vuuren, D. P., and Wang, Y. P.: Harmoniza-
tion of land-use scenarios for the period 1500–2100: 600 years of
global gridded annual land-use transitions, wood harvest, and re-
sulting secondary lands, Climatic Change, 109, 117–161, 2011.
IPCC: Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contri-
bution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA, 2013.
Kamae, Y. and Watanabe, M.: Tropospheric adjustment to increas-
ing CO2: its timescale and the role of land-sea contrast, Clim.
Dynam., 41, 3007–3024, 2013.
Lawrence, B. N., Balaji, V., Bentley, P., Callaghan, S., DeLuca, C.,
Denvil, S., Devine, G., Elkington, M., Ford, R. W., Guilyardi,
E., Lautenschlager, M., Morgan, M., Moine, M.-P., Murphy, S.,
Pascoe, C., Ramthun, H., Slavin, P., Steenman-Clark, L., Tous-
saint, F., Treshansky, A., and Valcke, S.: Describing Earth system
simulations with the Metafor CIM, Geosci. Model Dev., 5, 1493–
1500, doi:10.5194/gmd-5-1493-2012, 2012.
Li, C., Stevens, B., and Marotzke, J.: Eurasian winter cooling in the
warming hiatus of 1998–2012, Geophys. Res. Lett., 42, 8131–
8139, 2015.
Meehl, G. A., Boer, G. J., Covey, C., Latif, M., and Stouffer, R. J.:
Intercomparison makes for a better climate model, Eos, Transac-
tions American Geophysical Union, 78, 445–451, 1997.
Meehl, G. A., Boer, G. J., Covey, C., Latif, M., and Stouffer, R.
J.: The Coupled Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP), B. Am.
Meteorol. Soc., 81, 313–318, 2000.
Meehl, G. A., Covey, C., Taylor, K. E., Delworth, T., Stouffer, R.
J., Latif, M., McAvaney, B., and Mitchell, J. F. B.: THE WCRP
CMIP3 Multimodel Dataset: A New Era in Climate Change Re-
search, B. Am. Meteorol. Soc., 88, 1383–1394, 2007.
Meehl, G. A., Moss, R., Taylor, K. E., Eyring, V., Stouffer, R.
J., Bony, S., and Stevens, B.: Climate Model Intercompar-
isons: Preparing for the Next Phase, Eos Trans. AGU, 59, 77,
doi:10.1002/2014EO090001, 2014.
Moss, R. H., Edmonds, J. A., Hibbard, K. A., Manning, M. R., Rose,
S. K., van Vuuren, D. P., Carter, T. R., Emori, S., Kainuma, M.,
Kram, T., Meehl, G. A., Mitchell, J. F. B., Nakicenovic, N., Riahi,
K., Smith, S. J., Stouffer, R. J., Thomson, A. M., Weyant, J. P.,
and Wilbanks, T. J.: The next generation of scenarios for climate
change research and assessment, Nature, 463, 747–756, 2010.
Murphy, J. M. and Mitchell, J. F. B.: Transient-Response of the
Hadley-Center Coupled Ocean-Atmosphere Model to Increasing
Carbon-Dioxide. 2. Spatial and Temporal Structure of Response,
J. Climate, 8, 57–80, 1995.
Myhre, G., Shindell, D., Breìon, F.-M., Collins, W., Fuglestvedt,
J., Huang, J., Koch, D., Lamarque, J.-F., Lee, D., Mendoza,
B., Nakajima, T., Robock, A., Stephens, G., Takemura, T., and
Zhang, H.: Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing, in:
Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution
of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Inter-
governmental Panel on Climate Change, edited by: Stocker, T. F.,
Qin, D., Plattner, G.-K., Tignor, M., Allen, S. K., Boschung, J.,
Nauels, A., Xia, Y., Bex, V., and Midgley, P. M., Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA, 2013.
O’Neill, B. C., Kriegler, E., Ebi, K. L., Kemp-Benedict, E., Ri-
ahi, K., Rothman, D. S., van Ruijven, B. J., van Vuuren, D. P.,
Birkmann, J., Kok, K., Levy, M., and Solecki, W.: The roads
ahead: Narratives for shared socioeconomic pathways describ-
ing world futures in the 21st century, Global Environ. Chang.,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2015.01.004, online ﬁrst, 2015.
Phillips, A. S., Deser, C., and Fasullo, J.: Evaluating Modes of Vari-
ability in Climate Models, Eos Trans. AGU, 95, 453–455, 2014.
Rauser, F., Gleckler, P., and Marotzke, J.: Rethinking the Default
Construction of Multimodel Climate Ensembles, B. Am. Meteo-
rol. Soc., 96, 911–919, 2014.
Sentman, L. T., Shevliakova, E., Stouffer, R. J., and Malyshev, S.:
Time Scales of Terrestrial Carbon Response Related to Land-
Use Application: Implications for Initializing an Earth System
Model, Earth Interact., 15, 1–16, 2011.
Sherwood, S. C., Bony, S., Boucher, O., Bretherton, C., Forster, P.
M., Gregory, J. M., and Stevens, B.: Adjustments in the Forcing-
Feedback Framework for Understanding Climate Change, B.
Am. Meteorol. Soc., 96, 217–228, 2015.
Stevens, B.: Rethinking the Lower Bound on Aerosol Radiative
Forcing, J. Climate, 28, 4794–4819, 2015.
Stott, P. A., Mitchell, J. F. B., Allen, M. R., Delworth, T. L., Gre-
gory, J. M., Meehl, G. A., and Santer, B. D.: Observational con-
straints on past attributable warming and predictions of future
global warming, J. Climate, 19, 3055–3069, 2006.
Stouffer, R. J., Weaver, A. J., and Eby, M.: A method for obtaining
pre-twentieth century initial conditions for use in climate change
studies, Clim. Dynam., 23, 327–339, 2004.
Stouffer, R. J., Eyring, V., Meehl, G. A., Bony, S., Senior, C.,
Stevens, B., and Taylor, K. E.: CMIP5 Scientiﬁc Gaps and Rec-
ommendations for CMIP6, B. Am. Meteorol. Soc., submitted,
2015.
Taylor, K. E., Stouffer, R. J., and Meehl, G. A.: A Sum-
mary of the CMIP5 Experiment Design, available at: http:
//cmip.llnl.gov/cmip5/docs/Taylor_CMIP5_design.pdf (last ac-
cess: 13 May 2016), 2009.
Taylor, K. E., Stouffer, R. J., and Meehl, G. A.: An Overview of
Cmip5 and the Experiment Design, B. Am. Meteorol. Soc., 93,
485–498, 2012.
Teixeira, J., Waliser, D., Ferraro, R., Gleckler, P., Lee, T., and
Potter, G.: Satellite Observations for CMIP5: The Genesis of
Obs4MIPs, B. Am. Meteorol. Soc., 95, 1329–1334, 2014.
www.geosci-model-dev.net/9/1937/2016/
Geosci. Model Dev., 9, 1937–1958, 2016

----- Page 22 (native) -----
1958
V. Eyring et al.: Overview of the CMIP6 experimental design and organization
Trenberth, K. and Asrar, G.: Challenges and Opportunities in Water
Cycle Research: WCRP Contributions, Surv. Geophys., 35, 515–
532, 2014.
van Vuuren, D. P., Edmonds, J., Kainuma, M., Riahi, K., Thomson,
A., Hibbard, K., Hurtt, G. C., Kram, T., Krey, V., Lamarque, J.
F., Masui, T., Meinshausen, M., Nakicenovic, N., Smith, S. J.,
and Rose, S. K.: The representative concentration pathways: an
overview, Climatic Change, 109, 5–31, 2011.
Williams, D. N., Balaji, V., Cinquini, L., Denvil, S., Duffy, D.,
Evans, B., Ferraro, R., Hansen, R., Lautenschlager, M., and Tren-
ham, C.: A Global Repository for Planet-Sized Experiments and
Observations, B. Am. Meteorol. Soc., doi:10.1175/bams-d-15-
00132.1, online ﬁrst, 2015.
Williams, K. and Webb, M.: A quantitative performance assessment
of cloud regimes in climate models, Clim. Dynam., 33, 141–157,
2009.
Geosci. Model Dev., 9, 1937–1958, 2016
www.geosci-model-dev.net/9/1937/2016/