

----- Page 1 (native) -----
Hormonal Modulation
of Plant Immunity
Corn´e M.J. Pieterse,1,2 Dieuwertje Van der Does,1
Christos Zamioudis,1 Antonio Leon-Reyes,3
and Saskia C.M. Van Wees1
1Plant-Microbe Interactions, Institute of Environmental Biology, Department of Biology,
Faculty of Science, Utrecht University, 3508 TB Utrecht, The Netherlands; email:
C.M.J.Pieterse@uu.nl, A.VanderDoes@uu.nl, C.Zamioudis@uu.nl, S.VanWees@uu.nl
2Centre for BioSystems Genomics, 6700 AB Wageningen, The Netherlands
3Laboratorio de Biotecnolog´ıa Agr´ıcola y de Alimentos, Universidad San Francisco de
Quito, Quito, Ecuador; email: aleon@usfq.edu.ec
Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2012. 28:489–521
First published online as a Review in Advance on
May 3, 2012
The Annual Review of Cell and Developmental
Biology is online at cellbio.annualreviews.org
This article’s doi:
10.1146/annurev-cellbio-092910-154055
Copyright c⃝2012 by Annual Reviews.
All rights reserved
1081-0706/12/1110-0489$20.00
Keywords
hormone cross talk, immune signaling network, phytohormones,
salicylic acid, jasmonic acid, immune suppression
Abstract
Plant hormones have pivotal roles in the regulation of plant growth,
development, and reproduction. Additionally, they emerged as cellular
signal molecules with key functions in the regulation of immune
responses to microbial pathogens, insect herbivores, and beneﬁcial
microbes. Their signaling pathways are interconnected in a complex
network, which provides plants with an enormous regulatory potential
to rapidly adapt to their biotic environment and to utilize their limited
resources for growth and survival in a cost-efﬁcient manner. Plants
activate their immune system to counteract attack by pathogens or
herbivorous insects. Intriguingly, successful plant enemies evolved
ingenious mechanisms to rewire the plant’s hormone signaling cir-
cuitry to suppress or evade host immunity. Evidence is emerging that
beneﬁcial root-inhabiting microbes also hijack the hormone-regulated
immune signaling network to establish a prolonged mutualistic
association, highlighting the central role of plant hormones in the
regulation of plant growth and survival.
489
Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2012.28:489-521. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Utrecht University on 04/12/13. For personal use only.
Click here for quick links to 
Annual Reviews content online, 
including:
• Other articles in this volume
• Top cited articles
• Top downloaded articles
• Our comprehensive search
Further
ANNUAL
REVIEWS

----- Page 2 (native) -----
Contents
INTRODUCTION. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 490
Hosting the Good, the Bad,
and the Ugly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 490
Innate Immunity to Plant
Pathogens. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 491
Plant Defenses Against Insect
Herbivores. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 491
Host Immune Responses to
Beneﬁcial Microbes . . . . . . . . . . . 491
Modulation of Plant Immunity:
A Matter of Hormones . . . . . . . . 492
THE SALICYLIC
ACID–JASMONIC ACID
BACKBONE OF THE PLANT
IMMUNE SIGNALING
NETWORK. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 492
Salicylic Acid Pathway . . . . . . . . . . . . 492
Jasmonic Acid Pathway . . . . . . . . . . . 495
Cross Talk Between the Salicylic
Acid and Jasmonic Acid
Pathways. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 496
MOLECULAR BASIS OF
SALICYLIC ACID–JASMONIC
ACID CROSS TALK . . . . . . . . . . . . 497
Molecular Players in Salicylic
Acid–Jasmonic Acid Cross
Talk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 498
Targets of Salicylic Acid
Antagonism in the Jasmonic
Acid Signaling Pathway . . . . . . . . 501
HORMONAL MODULATORS OF
THE SALICYLIC
ACID–JASMONIC ACID
BACKBONE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 502
Ethylene . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 502
Abscisic Acid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 504
Auxin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 504
Gibberellins. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 505
Cytokinins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 505
REWIRING OF THE HORMONE
SIGNALING NETWORK BY
PLANT ENEMIES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 505
Hormonal Modulation of Host
Immunity by the Model
Pathogen Pseudomonas
syringae . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 506
Hijacking Host Hormone
Integration by Insect
Herbivores. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 506
HORMONAL MODULATION OF
HOST IMMUNITY BY
BENEFICIAL MICROBES . . . . . . 508
CONCLUDING REMARKS . . . . . . . 510
Rhizosphere:
narrow zone of soil
immediately
surrounding the root
system that is
inﬂuenced by root
secretions and
associated microbes
INTRODUCTION
Hosting the Good, the Bad,
and the Ugly
Plants play a vital role in the sustainability of
life on Earth, as they ﬁx the solar energy
that drives nearly all living organisms. Plants
are exploited by a plethora of parasites, in-
cluding viruses, bacteria, fungi, oomycetes,
nematodes, insects, and even other plants.
To cope with their enemies, plants pos-
sess a highly sophisticated defense system
that, similar to the animal innate immune
system,
recognizes
nonself
molecules
or
signals from their own injured cells and
responds by activating an effective immune
response
against
the
invader
encountered
(Howe & Jander 2008, Jones & Dangl 2006).
Successful pathogens and insects can actively
interfere with the plant immune system to es-
tablish a prolonged interaction with the plant.
Beneﬁcial associations between plants and mi-
crobes are frequent in nature as well. They often
reside in the roots or the rhizosphere and signif-
icantly improve plant growth or help the plant
to overcome biotic or abiotic stress. Because
beneﬁcial microbes are initially recognized as
potential invaders, active interference with the
plant immune system is fundamental for the
establishment of an intimate mutualistic rela-
tionship with the plant (Zamioudis & Pieterse
2012).
490
Pieterse et al.
Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2012.28:489-521. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Utrecht University on 04/12/13. For personal use only.

----- Page 3 (native) -----
PAMPs: pathogen-
associated molecular
patterns
MAMPs: microbe-
associated molecular
patterns
ETI: effector-
triggered immunity
PTI: PAMP-
triggered immunity
Effector: molecule of
microbe or insect that
binds to a host protein,
commonly to suppress
host immunity
PGPR: plant-growth-
promoting
rhizobacteria
Innate Immunity to Plant Pathogens
According to their lifestyles, plant pathogens
are generally divided into necrotrophs and
biotrophs (Glazebrook 2005). Necrotrophic
pathogens ﬁrst destroy host cells, often through
the production of phytotoxins and cell-wall-
degrading enzymes, and then feed on the
contents. Biotrophic pathogens derive nu-
trients from living host tissues, commonly
through specialized feeding structures. Some
plant pathogens display both lifestyles, depend-
ing on the stage of their life cycle, and are called
hemi-biotrophs.
In recent years, exciting new discoveries
have greatly advanced our understanding of
how the coevolutionary arms race between
plants and pathogens has shaped the plant
immune system into a reﬁned defensive shield
capable of warding off the majority of harmful
organisms (Boller & Felix 2009, Thomma et al.
2011, Zipfel 2009). Currently, the evolutionary
development of the plant immune system
is represented as a zig-zag model ( Jones &
Dangl 2006). Pathogen-associated molecular
patterns
(PAMPs)
or
microbe-associated
molecular patterns (MAMPs), such as ﬂagellin,
chitin,
glycoproteins,
and
lipopolysaccha-
rides, or endogenous plant-derived signals
that arise from damage caused by pathogen
infection,
called
damage-associated
molec-
ular patterns (DAMPs), are recognized by
pattern-recognition receptors. This results in
the activation of PAMP-triggered immunity
(PTI). Successful pathogens acquired so-called
effector molecules to breach this ﬁrst line of
defense, either by preventing detection of
their PAMPs by the host (Bardoel et al. 2011,
De Jonge et al. 2010) or by suppressing PTI
signaling. In an ongoing arms race, plants
acquired a second line of defense in which
resistance (R) proteins mediate recognition of
these attacker-speciﬁc effectors, resulting in
effector-triggered immunity (ETI).
Plant Defenses Against
Insect Herbivores
Herbivorous insect species can be roughly di-
vided into two categories, tissue-chewing and
piercing-sucking, depending on their feeding
strategy (Schoonhoven et al. 2005). To fend
off insect herbivores, plants use two distinct
strategies: induced direct defense, which tar-
gets the attacker, and induced indirect defense,
which is aimed at recruiting the natural ene-
mies of the attacker (Dicke & Baldwin 2010,
Howe & Jander 2008, Wu & Baldwin 2010).
Direct defense includes the production of sec-
ondary chemicals or enzymes that act as toxins
or feeding deterrents, whereas indirect defense
involves the production of a blend of volatiles
that attracts predatory or parasitic enemies of
the herbivores. Relatively little is known about
the molecular recognition events that trigger
plant immunity to insect herbivores. In re-
sponse to tissue damage, endogenous plant sig-
nals (DAMPs) are produced that play an impor-
tant role in the perception of herbivory. More-
over, plants can recognize speciﬁc insects via
the perception of herbivore-associated molec-
ular patterns (HAMPs) from insect secretions
or plant compounds that are modiﬁed by the
insect while feeding (Hogenhout & Bos 2011,
Howe & Jander 2008, Wu & Baldwin 2010).
Host Immune Responses
to Beneﬁcial Microbes
In nature, plant roots abundantly form beneﬁ-
cial associations with soil-borne microbes that
are important for plant growth and survival.
Among the best-studied mutualistic microbes
are mycorrhizal fungi, Rhizobium bacteria,
and
plant-growth-promoting
rhizobacteria
(PGPR) and fungi (PGPF). Mycorrhizal fungi
can form a symbiosis with most terrestrial plant
species (Harrison 2005). They acquire mineral
nutrients from niches in the soil that are
unreachable for plant roots and deliver these to
the plants. Symbiotic Rhizobium bacteria induce
the formation of symbiotic structures (nodules)
in the roots of leguminous plants, where they
ﬁx atmospheric nitrogen for the plant (Spaink
2000). Beneﬁcial PGPR and PGPF of diverse
genera also live in close associations with plant
roots. They can stimulate plant growth by
producing phytostimulators or by suppressing
www.annualreviews.org • Hormonal Modulation of Plant Immunity
491
Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2012.28:489-521. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Utrecht University on 04/12/13. For personal use only.

----- Page 4 (native) -----
Salicylic acid (SA):
plant hormone
essential for the
immune response
against biotrophic
pathogens
Jasmonic acid ( JA):
plant hormone
essential for the
immune response
against necrotrophic
pathogens and
herbivorous insects
ET: ethylene
ABA: abscisic acid
GAs: gibberellins
CKs: cytokinins
Hormone cross talk:
interactions of
hormone signal
transduction pathways,
via shared signaling
components or
downstream of signal
transduction at the
gene expression level
plant diseases and pests in below- and above-
ground plant parts (Lugtenberg & Kamilova
2009, Pineda et al. 2010, Shoresh et al. 2010,
Van Wees et al. 2008). The establishment of
beneﬁcial plant-microbe associations requires
mutual recognition and a high degree of coor-
dination of plant immune responses (Harrison
2005, Zamioudis & Pieterse 2012).
Modulation of Plant Immunity:
A Matter of Hormones
Downstream of PTI or ETI activation, or other
early molecular recognition events of microbes
and insects, diverse plant hormones act as
central players in triggering the plant immune
signaling network (Bari & Jones 2009, Howe &
Jander 2008, Katagiri & Tsuda 2010, Pieterse
et al. 2009). Analogous to animal hormones,
plant hormones were originally recognized as
regulators of growth and development (Santner
& Estelle 2009). Salicylic acid (SA) and jas-
monic acid ( JA) with its derivatives (collectively
called jasmonates) are recognized as major
defense hormones (Browse 2009, Vlot et al.
2009). However, the hormones ethylene (ET)
(Van Loon et al. 2006a), abscisic acid (ABA)
(Ton et al. 2009), gibberellins (GAs) (Navarro
et al. 2008), auxins (Kazan & Manners 2009),
cytokinins (CKs) (Walters & McRoberts 2006),
brassinosteroids (Nakashita et al. 2003), and
nitric oxide (NO) (Moreau et al. 2010) function
as modulators of the plant immune signaling
network as well. Changes in hormone concen-
tration or sensitivity triggered during parasitic
interactions mediate a whole range of adaptive
plant responses, often at the cost of growth
and development (Walters & Heil 2007). The
composition and timing of the hormonal blend
produced can determine whether plant tissues
become more susceptible or resistant to the
invading organism (Verhage et al. 2010).
Antagonistic and synergistic interactions
between diverse hormone signal transduction
pathways add yet another layer of regulation.
This so-called hormone cross talk ( Jaillais
& Chory 2010, Mundy et al. 2006) provides
the plant with a powerful capacity to ﬁnely
regulate its immune response to the invader
encountered and to utilize its resources in a
cost-efﬁcient manner. Hormone cross talk is
a rapidly developing theme in plant immune
signaling research (Pieterse et al. 2009, Robert-
Seilaniantz et al. 2011a, Spoel & Dong 2008).
Here, we review recent advances in our un-
derstanding of hormone cross talk in immune
signaling network interactions between plants
and pathogens, pests, and beneﬁcial microbes.
Most of what we discuss is based on work with
themodelArabidopsis thaliana,butwhereappro-
priate, we include examples from other species
as well. First, we provide an overview of current
knowledge on the signal transduction pathways
of the two major defense hormones, SA and
JA, followed by progress in our understanding
of the molecular players in SA-JA cross talk.
Second, we review how other plant hormones
modulate the SA-JA backbone of the plant im-
mune signaling network. Third, we discuss the
role of hormone cross talk in the suppression
of plant defenses by microbial pathogens and
insect herbivores. Finally, we highlight how
beneﬁcial soil-borne microbes hijack plant
hormone signaling pathways to suppress host
defenses to establish a beneﬁcial association
with the host.
THE SALICYLIC ACID–JASMONIC
ACID BACKBONE OF THE PLANT
IMMUNE SIGNALING NETWORK
Salicylic Acid Pathway
The plant hormone SA plays a major role
in disease resistance signaling (Vlot et al.
2009). The SA response pathway is typically
(but not exclusively) effective against microbial
biotrophic pathogens (Glazebrook 2005). SA is
a phenolic compound that can be synthesized
from the primary metabolite chorismate via
two distinct enzymatic pathways, one involving
PHENYLALANINE
AMMONIA
LYASE
(PAL) and the other ISOCHORISMATE
SYNTHASE (ICS/SID2) (Garcion & M´etraux
2006) (Figure 1a). SA biosynthesis is trig-
gered during PTI and ETI upon recognition
492
Pieterse et al.
Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2012.28:489-521. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Utrecht University on 04/12/13. For personal use only.

----- Page 5 (native) -----
NONEXPRESSOR
OF PR GENES1
(NPR1): redox-
sensitive
transcriptional
regulator of SA
responses and
mediator of SA-JA
cross talk
of PAMPs or effectors of pathogens (Mishina
& Zeier 2007). Transient microbe-induced ef-
fects on Ca2+ levels are important early sig-
naling events upstream of SA biosynthesis
(Du et al. 2009). Subsequently, the lipase-like
proteins ENHANCED DISEASE SUSCEP-
TIBILITY1 (EDS1) and PHYTOALEXIN
DEFICIENT4 (PAD4) act in the onset of
SA biosynthesis during PTI. When ETI is
initiated by TIR-NBS-LRR-type R proteins,
SA biosynthesis is mediated by EDS1 and
PAD4 (Wiermer et al. 2005), but when
CC-NBS-LRR-type R proteins trigger ETI,
NON-RACE-SPECIFIC DISEASE RESIS-
TANCE1 (NDR1) functions in the onset of SA
production (Bernoux et al. 2011).
Signaling downstream of SA is largely
controlled by the regulatory protein NON-
EXPRESSOR OF PR GENES1 (NPR1),
which upon activation by SA acts as a tran-
scriptional coactivator of a large set of defense-
related genes (Dong 2004, Moore et al. 2011)
(Figure 1a). These PR (PATHOGENESIS-
RELATED) genes are a diverse group, but
several encode proteins with antimicrobial
activity (Van Loon et al. 2006b). Among the
best-characterized PR genes is PR-1, which is
often used as a robust marker for SA-responsive
gene expression. In addition, many WRKY
transcription factor genes are SA inducible.
WRKY transcription factors activate or repress
SA responses, which highlights their role in
both SA-mediated resistance and feedback
control of the SA signaling pathway (Rushton
et al. 2010, Wang et al. 2006).
Nuclear translocation of NPR1 is an impor-
tant regulatory step in SA signaling. In resting
cells, the majority of NPR1 is sequestered in the
cytoplasm as an oligomer through intermolec-
ular disulﬁde bonds that are facilitated by S-
nitrosylation of NPR1 via S-nitrosoglutathione
(Tada et al. 2008), a process in which NO is
covalently attached to a reactive cysteine thiol
to form an S-nitrosothiol (Lindermayr et al.
2005). The relatively small amount of NPR1
monomers that constitutively translocate to the
nucleus are ubiquitinylated and targeted to the
proteasome to prevent untimely activation of
NPR1 target genes (Spoel et al. 2009). SA-
induced changes in the cellular redox state ac-
commodate monomerization of NPR1 by the
activity of the thioredoxins TRX-H3 and TRX-
H5 (Tada et al. 2008). In SA-induced cells, large
amounts of monomeric NPR1 translocate to
the nucleus via nuclear pore proteins, such as
MODIFIER OF snc1 (MOS) 3, 6, and 7 (Cheng
et al. 2009, Monaghan et al. 2010). In the nu-
cleus, NPR1 monomers interact with members
of the TGA subclass of the basic leucine zipper
(bZIP) family of transcription factors that bind
to the promoters of SA-responsive genes, such
as PR-1, resulting in their activation (Despr´es
et al. 2000, Fan & Dong 2002). During this
process, NPR1 becomes phosphorylated and
subsequently ubiquitinylated by an E3 ubiqui-
tin ligase with high afﬁnity for phosphorylated
NPR1, after which it is targeted for degradation
by the proteasome. This clearance of phospho-
rylated NPR1 from the target gene promoter is
required for full induction of the SA-responsive
target genes, probably because it allows new
NPR1 monomers to reinitiate the transcription
cycle (Spoel et al. 2009).
Several
negative
regulators,
such
as
the
NPR1-interacting
proteins
NIM1-
INTERACTING1 (NIMIN1), 2, and 3, and
SUPPRESSOR
OF
npr1
INDUCIBLE1
(SNI1), keep SA- and NPR1-regulated genes
in check (Li et al. 1999, Pape et al. 2010,
Weigel et al. 2005), possibly to prevent un-
timely activation. NIMINs inhibit promoter
activity of defense genes likely by targeting
TGA transcription factors (Weigel et al. 2005),
whereas SNI1 exerts its negative effect through
association
with
defense
gene
promoters,
possibly via interaction with an unknown
DNA-binding protein (Song et al. 2011).
Upon activation of SA signaling, SNI1 is
removed from the promoter, likely through
its physical interaction with DNA damage
repair proteins SUPPRESSOR OF sni1 2
(SSN2)
and
RAS
ASSOCIATED
WITH
DIABETES51D (RAD51D). A complex of
RAD51 (a paralog of RAD51D) and BRCA2A
(BREAST
CANCER2A)
is
also
recruited
to the PR-1 promoter, which together with
www.annualreviews.org • Hormonal Modulation of Plant Immunity
493
Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2012.28:489-521. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Utrecht University on 04/12/13. For personal use only.

----- Page 6 (native) -----
Cytosol
Nucleus
NPR1
NPR1
GSNO
TRX-H3/H5
Cytosol
Nucleus
Ub
Ub
Ub
Proteasome
Proteasome
NPR1
α-LA
OPDA
JA
JA-Ile
WRKYs, PR-1
NINJA
TPL
EAR
MYCs
JAR1
VSP2, JAZs
Nuclear
pore (MOS)
NPR1
NPR1
NPR1
NPR1
NPR1
NPR1
TRX-H3/H5
Redox change
ICS/SID2
PAL
Ch
Phe
Biotrophic pathogen
Necrotrophic pathogen/
herbivorous insect
SA
NPR1
NPR1
WRKYs, PR-1
?
SNI1
NPR1
NIMIN
TGAs
SSN2
RAD51(D)
BRCA2A
Nuclear
pore (MOS)
NPR1
NPR1
a  SA signaling
b  JA signaling
Basal
Induced
Basal
Proteasome
EIN3/
EIL1
ERF1/
ORA59
HDA6
CUL1
COI1
ASK1
RBX
E2
JAZ
Jas
ZIM
ERF1, ORA59
PDF1.2
Induced
P
P
SNI1
?
CUL1
EIN3/
EIL1
COI1
JAZ
HDA6
Jas
ZIM
RBX
E2
ASK1
ERF1, ORA59
MYCs
NINJA
TPL
JAZ
Jas
ZIM
EAR
VPS2, JAZs
SCFCOI1 complex
494
Pieterse et al.
Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2012.28:489-521. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Utrecht University on 04/12/13. For personal use only.

----- Page 7 (native) -----
Systemic acquired
resistance (SAR):
SA-dependent
enhanced defensive
capacity of the entire
plant, acquired after a
primary, local
pathogen infection
JASMONATE ZIM
( JAZ): transcriptional
repressor protein with
a central role in JA
signaling and target of
different hormone
pathways
SSN2 and RAD51D positively regulates plant
immune gene expression, likely through a
direct effect on DNA accessibility (Durrant
et al. 2007, Song et al. 2011, Wang et al. 2010).
Once the SA pathway is activated at the site
of infection, a similar response is often trig-
gered in distal plant parts to protect undamaged
tissues against subsequent pathogen invasion.
This long-lasting and broad-spectrum induced
resistance is referred to as systemic acquired re-
sistance (SAR) (Vlot et al. 2009).
Jasmonic Acid Pathway
JA and its structurally related metabolites are
lipid-derived compounds that are synthesized
rapidly via the oxylipin biosynthesis path-
way upon pathogen or insect attack (Gfeller
et al. 2010). JA biosynthesis starts with the re-
lease of α-linolenic acid (α-LA) from mem-
brane lipids (Figure 1b). The subsequent en-
zymatic pathway reactions and their subcellu-
lar localization are well documented (Browse
2009, Wasternack 2007). Upon synthesis, JA
can be readily metabolized to methyl jas-
monate (MeJA) through the activity of JA CAR-
BOXYL METHYLTRANSFERASE ( JMT)
(Seo et al. 2001) or conjugated to amino acids
such as isoleucine via the JA conjugate synthase
JAR1 (Staswick & Tiryaki 2004), which results
in a biologically highly active enantiomer of
jasmonoyl-isoleucine ( JA-Ile) (Fonseca et al.
2009).
The
F-box
protein
CORONATINE
INSENSITIVE1 (COI1) is a key regulator
of the JA signaling pathway. Together with
JASMONATE ZIM ( JAZ) domain transcrip-
tional repressor proteins, COI1 functions as
a JA-Ile receptor in the E3 ubiquitin-ligase
SKP1-Cullin-F-box complex SCFCOI1 (Sheard
et al. 2010, Yang et al. 2009). Binding of
JA-Ile to COI1 leads to ubiquitinylation and
subsequent degradation of JAZ repressor pro-
teins via the proteasome (Pauwels & Goossens
2011). In resting cells, JAZ proteins act as
transcriptional repressors of JA signaling by
binding to positive transcriptional regulators,
such as the basic helix-loop-helix leucine
zipper proteins MYC2, 3, and 4 (Fernandez-
Calvo et al. 2011, Niu et al. 2011). The
adaptor protein NOVEL INTERACTOR
OF JAZ (NINJA) interacts with the ZIM
domain of most JAZ proteins (Pauwels et al.
2010).
Through
its
ERF-ASSOCIATED
AMPHIPHILIC REPRESSION (EAR) motif
(Kazan 2006), NINJA recruits the corepressor
TOPLESS (TPL), thereby preventing un-
timely activation of the JA pathway (Pauwels
et al. 2010). In JA-stimulated cells, the physical
interaction between JAZ proteins and tran-
scriptional activators is broken, which results
in derepression of the JA signaling pathway and
activation of a large number of JA-responsive
genes (Memelink 2009).
In
Arabidopsis,
two
major
branches
of
the JA signaling pathway are recognized:
the MYC branch and the ERF branch. The
MYC branch is controlled by MYC-type
transcription factors as described above and
includes
the
JA-responsive
marker
gene
VEGETATIVE
STORAGE
PROTEIN2
(VSP2). The ERF branch is regulated by
members of the APETALA2/ETHYLENE
RESPONSE
FACTOR
(AP2/ERF)
fam-
ily of transcription factors, such as ERF1
and
OCTADECANOID-RESPONSIVE
ARABIDOPSIS59 (ORA59) (Dombrecht et al.
2007, Lorenzo et al. 2003, McGrath et al. 2005,
Pr´e et al. 2008), and includes the JA-responsive
marker gene PLANT DEFENSIN1.2 (PDF1.2).
Activation of the ERF branch of the JA pathway
←−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
Figure 1
Schematic overview of the (a) salicylic acid (SA) and (b) jasmonic acid ( JA) signaling pathways, as summarized in the text. (a, b, left
panels) Basal SA and JA signaling in uninduced cells is depicted. (a, b, right panels) SA and JA signaling in induced cells is shown. Solid
arrows indicate established activities or accumulation of compounds; dashed arrows represent relatively low activities; and red
inhibition lines and crosses indicate repression of transcription. ORA59 ( gray text) is a hypothesized target of EIN3/EIL1.
Abbreviations: Ch, chorismate; P, phosphorylated protein; Phe, phenylalanine; Ub, ubiquitinylated protein.
www.annualreviews.org • Hormonal Modulation of Plant Immunity
495
Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2012.28:489-521. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Utrecht University on 04/12/13. For personal use only.

----- Page 8 (native) -----
requires both JA and ET signaling, but the
molecular basis of the role of COI1/JAZ in
the regulation of this branch, in contrast to the
MYC branch, is not well understood. Recently,
Zhu et al. (2011) showed that the ET-stabilized
transcription factors ETHYLENE INSEN-
SITIVE3 (EIN3) and EIN3-LIKE1 (EIL1)
interact directly with JAZ proteins and recruit
HISTONE DEACETYLASE6 (HDA6) as
a corepressor to inhibit the transcriptional
activity of EIN3/EIL1 in uninduced cells. In
JA- and ET-stimulated cells, COI1-dependent
degradation of JAZ proteins enhances the
transcriptional activity of EIN3/EIL1. This
results in the activation of ERF1 (and possibly
also ORA59) and its downstream target genes,
such as the ERF branch marker gene PDF1.2.
In general, the ERF branch of the JA pathway
is associated with enhanced resistance to
necrotrophic pathogens (Berrocal-Lobo et al.
2002, Lorenzo et al. 2003), whereas the MYC
branch of the JA pathway is associated with
the wound response and defense against insect
ASPIRIN-PROSTAGLANDIN ANTAGONISM
The antagonism between the SA and JA signaling pathways in
plants shows a striking resemblance to the effect of the anti-
inﬂammatory drug aspirin, the acetylated form of plant aspirin
SA, on prostaglandins in animal cells. Prostaglandins are hor-
monal pain messengers structurally related to JAs and play a role
in inﬂammation at sites of infection or tissue injury (Funk 2001).
Both JAs and prostaglandins are synthesized via the oxylipin
biosynthesis pathway, in which the enzymatic reactions leading
to JA and prostaglandin formation are similar (Pan et al. 1998). In
animal cells, aspirin antagonizes prostaglandin formation by tar-
geting enzyme activity and gene expression of CYCLOOXYGE-
NASE (COX) (Funk 2001), the counterpart of the key JA biosyn-
thesis enzyme ALLENE OXIDE SYNTHASE (AOS) in plants.
However, no inhibitory effect of SA on AOS enzyme activity has
been observed in plants (Laudert & Weiler 1998). Moreover,
the antagonistic effect of SA on pathogen-induced JA signaling
acts downstream of AOS (Leon-Reyes et al. 2010b), indicating
that the molecular mechanism underlying SA-JA cross talk differs
from the phenomenologically similar interaction between aspirin
and prostaglandins.
herbivores (Kazan & Manners 2012, Lorenzo
et al. 2004), although MYC2 also plays a role
in priming for enhanced pathogen defense
(Pozo et al. 2008, Van der Ent et al. 2009a).
Once the JA pathway is activated, e.g., at
the site of wounding or herbivory, a similar
JA-dependent response can be triggered in
distal, undamaged plant parts. This wound-
induced resistance involves chemical defenses
such as the production of repellent, antinu-
tritive, or toxic compounds, which help the
plant to protect itself against future invasion
by insect herbivores (Howe & Jander 2008).
Cross Talk Between the Salicylic Acid
and Jasmonic Acid Pathways
Transcriptome analyses of wild-type and mu-
tant Arabidopsis plants challenged by different
attackers revealed complex regulatory relation-
ships between hormone signaling sectors of
the plant immune signaling network (De Vos
et al. 2005, Glazebrook et al. 2003, Sato et al.
2010, Tsuda et al. 2009, Van Verk et al. 2011).
This hormonal cross talk is thought to equip
the plant with a powerful regulatory capacity
to ﬁnely tune its immune response to the at-
tacker encountered (Reymond & Farmer 1998).
The ﬁrst indications for SA-JA cross talk came
from studies in tomato, which revealed that SA
and its acetylated form aspirin are potent sup-
pressors of the JA-dependent wound response
(Doherty et al. 1988, Pe˜na-Cort´es et al. 1993).
Since its discovery in tomato, antagonism be-
tween the SA and JA pathways was demon-
strated in many plant species, including Ara-
bidopsis (Spoel et al. 2003, Van Wees et al. 1999).
The phenomenon of SA-JA cross talk shows
striking similarities with the inhibitory effect
of aspirin on prostaglandins in animal cells that
are produced via the same biosynthetic pathway
as JAs. However, the molecular bases of these
negative signal interactions seem to differ (see
sidebar, Aspirin-Prostaglandin Antagonism).
Interplay between SA and JA optimizes the
immune response against single attackers, such
as virulent Pseudomonas syringae, that initially
stimulate both the SA and JA pathways (Spoel
496
Pieterse et al.
Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2012.28:489-521. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Utrecht University on 04/12/13. For personal use only.

----- Page 9 (native) -----
COR: coronatine
et al. 2003). However, in nature, plants are si-
multaneously or sequentially attacked by mul-
tiple enemies with often different strategies and
lifestyles. Hence, SA-JA cross talk can also be
a powerful mechanism to prioritize one path-
way over the other, depending on the sequence
and type of attackers encountered. Indeed,
trade-offs between SA-dependent resistance to
biotrophs and JA-dependent defense against in-
sect herbivores or necrotrophs have been re-
ported repeatedly (Bostock 2005, Kunkel &
Brooks 2002, Verhage et al. 2010). For exam-
ple, induction of the SA pathway by avirulent P.
syringae suppressed JA signaling and rendered
infected Arabidopsis leaves more susceptible to
the necrotrophic fungus Alternaria brassicicola
(Spoel et al. 2007). Similarly, prior inocula-
tion with the SA-inducing biotrophic pathogen
Hyaloperonospora arabidopsidis suppressed JA-
mediated defenses that were activated upon
feeding by caterpillars of imported cabbage-
worm, Pieris rapae (Koornneef et al. 2008a).
In nature, plants often deal with simul-
taneous or subsequent invasion by multiple
pathogens and insects. In a ﬁeld study with
Brassica oleracea plants, early season herbivory
was shown to signiﬁcantly affect plant defense
responses to secondary herbivores and the de-
velopment of their populations (Poelman et al.
2008a). Gene expression analyses implicated
a dominant role for plant hormones in the
regulation of this process. In lima bean, SA-
inducing, phloem-feeding sweetpotato whiteﬂy
(Bemisia tabaci ) negatively affected JA biosyn-
thesis and JA-dependent indirect plant defenses
that were triggered by the twospotted spider
mite (Tetranychus urticae) on the same plant
(Zhang et al. 2009). In the absence of whiteﬂy,
spider mite–infested plants produce a volatile
blend that attracts predatory mites that will kill
the spider mites. However, in whiteﬂy-infested
plants this induced indirect defense was sup-
pressed, which resulted in reduced attractive-
ness to predatory mites. This antagonistic effect
could be mimicked by SA, which indicates that
the effect of SA-JA cross talk extends to plant
immune responses against organisms from dif-
ferent trophic levels.
SA-JA cross talk has also been implicated
in adaptive responses to abiotic stresses, such
as thermotolerance (Clarke et al. 2009) and
shade avoidance (Ballar´e 2011, Cerrudo et al.
2012, Ritsema et al. 2010). Hence, in addition
to its regulatory role in prioritizing one induced
pathway over the other upon perceiving speciﬁc
stresses, SA-JA cross talk may help integrate
the ecological context and stress-related life his-
tory to prepare a plant for future environmental
conditions.
MOLECULAR BASIS OF
SALICYLIC ACID–JASMONIC
ACID CROSS TALK
In Arabidopsis, the JA-responsive genes PDF1.2
(marker of the ERF branch of the JA path-
way) and VSP2 (marker of the MYC branch
of the JA pathway) are highly sensitive to sup-
pression by SA. This suppression by SA oc-
curs irrespective of whether these JA responsive
genes are activated by necrotrophic pathogens,
by insect herbivores, or by JA, JA-Ile, or its
precursors α-LA and 12-oxo-phytodienoic acid
(OPDA) (Koornneef et al. 2008a, Leon-Reyes
et al. 2010b). Antagonism between the SA
and JA response pathways was observed in a
large number of Arabidopsis accessions collected
from different geographic origins (Koornneef
et al. 2008a) and was even reported to re-
main active in a next generation (Luna et al.
2012), highlighting the potential signiﬁcance of
SA-JA cross talk in nature.
Reciprocally, JA signaling can suppress the
SA pathway as well. The antagonistic effect
of JA signaling on SA-dependent defenses has
been studied predominantly in the context
of the interaction between plants and the
pathogen P. syringae (Brooks et al. 2005,
Nomura et al. 2005). P. syringae produces
the virulence factor coronatine (COR), which
is a phytotoxin that functions as a mimic of
JA-Ile and suppresses SA-dependent defenses
to promote susceptibility of the host (see
also Rewiring of the Hormone Signaling
Network by Plant Enemies, below). However,
relatively little is known about the molecular
www.annualreviews.org • Hormonal Modulation of Plant Immunity
497
Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2012.28:489-521. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Utrecht University on 04/12/13. For personal use only.

----- Page 10 (native) -----
details involved in the antagonistic effect of JA
signaling on the SA pathway.
Although many reports describe an an-
tagonistic interaction between the SA and
JA pathways with corresponding trade-offs
in disease and pest resistance, neutral and
synergistic interactions have been described
as well (Mur et al. 2006, Schenk et al. 2000,
Van Wees et al. 2000). For example, treatment
of Arabidopsis with low concentrations of JA
and SA resulted in a synergistic effect on the
JA- and SA-responsive genes PDF1.2 and
PR-1, respectively. At higher concentrations
the effects were antagonistic, demonstrating
that the outcome of the SA-JA interaction is
dependent upon the relative concentration of
each hormone (Mur et al. 2006). Timing and
sequence of initiation of SA and JA signaling
are also important (Koornneef et al. 2008a,
Leon-Reyes et al. 2010a), indicating that the
kinetics of hormone biosynthesis and signaling
during the interaction between a plant and
its attacker(s) is crucial for the ﬁnal defense
output of the immune signaling network.
Molecular Players in Salicylic
Acid–Jasmonic Acid Cross Talk
Although interactions between the SA and
JA response pathways can be either antag-
onistic, synergistic, or neutral, antagonistic
interactions seem to prevail (Pieterse et al.
2009, Tsuda et al. 2009). Here we describe our
current understanding of proteins that play a
role in regulating SA-mediated suppression of
the JA pathway (Figure 2). The effects of other
hormones on the balance between the SA and
JA response pathways are discussed below.
Mitogen-activated protein kinases. Mito-
gen-activated protein (MAP) kinases transfer
information from sensors to cellular responses
in all eukaryotes and thus play a central role
in plant immune signaling (Rodriguez et al.
2010). In Arabidopsis, MAP KINASE4 (MPK4)
was identiﬁed as a negative regulator of SA sig-
naling and a positive regulator of JA signal-
ing, as mutant mpk4 plants displayed elevated
SA levels and constitutive expression of SA-
responsive PR genes but failed to induce JA
defense marker genes (Petersen et al. 2000).
EDS1 and PAD4, which act early in the SA
pathway and stimulate SA biosynthesis, were
identiﬁed as downstream components of MPK4
function (Brodersen et al. 2006). Another tar-
get of MPK4 is its substrate MPK4 SUB-
STRATE1 (MKS1). RNAi-mediated knock-
down of MKS1 partially rescued the PR-1-
overexpressing phenotype of mpk4, suggesting
that phosphorylation of MKS1 leads to repres-
sion of SA signaling (Andreasson et al. 2005).
However, JA signaling was not affected by
MKS1 overexpression or silencing, suggesting
that alternative substrates of MPK4 target JA
signaling.
Redox regulators. Changes in the cellular re-
ductive and oxidative states play an important
role in regulating many plant processes, includ-
ing plant immunity (Foyer & Noctor 2011,
Spoel & Loake 2011). Glutaredoxins (GRXs)
and thioredoxins (TRXs) are central players in
mediating redox regulation of protein activity
because of their capacity to catalyze disulﬁde
transitions. Both SA and JA affect the cellular
redox buffer glutathione. SA increases both the
cellular amount and the ratio between reduced
and oxidized glutathione, whereas JA decreases
the glutathione pool (Spoel & Loake 2011). In
Arabidopsis, the speciﬁc time frame in which SA
suppresses JA-responsive gene expression co-
incides with a transient increase in the level of
glutathione (Koornneef et al. 2008a). The glu-
tathione biosynthesis inhibitor L-buthionine-
sulfoximine (BSO) impacts this suppressive
effect of SA, suggesting that SA-mediated mod-
ulationofthecellularredoxstateisanimportant
trigger for the attenuation of the JA pathway
(Koornneef et al. 2008a).
The implication of GRX480 in SA-JA
cross talk conﬁrmed the role for redox reg-
ulation in SA-JA cross talk (Ndamukong
et al. 2007). GRX480 was identiﬁed in a
two-hybrid screen for interactors with TGAs.
Overexpression
of
GRX480
in
Arabidopsis
498
Pieterse et al.
Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2012.28:489-521. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Utrecht University on 04/12/13. For personal use only.

----- Page 11 (native) -----
Cytosol
Nucleus
NPR1
NPR1
NPR1
SA-responsive genes
JA-responsive genes
Defense against
biotrophic pathogens
Defense against
necrotrophic pathogens/
herbivorous insects
TGAs
TGAs
GRX480
WRKY70
TF
WRKYs
WRKY50/51
NPR1
NPR1
NPR1
NPR1
NPR1
Biotrophic pathogen
Redox change
mpk4
ssi2/low 18:1
TRX-H3/H5
SA
JA
Necrotrophic pathogen/
herbivorous insect
Nuclear
pore (MOS)
Figure 2
Schematic representation of molecular components involved in salicylic acid (SA)–mediated suppression of
jasmonic acid ( JA)–regulated gene expression (see text for details). Components that have been shown by
mutational analysis to be essential for SA-JA cross talk are underlined. The green frame highlights
components for which the expression was shown to be SA-responsive. Solid lines indicate established
interactions; dashed lines indicate hypothesized interactions.
did not affect SA-dependent responses, but
it strongly antagonized the transcription of
PDF1.2. A grx480 knockout mutant, however,
showed
wild-type
levels
of
SA-mediated
suppression of the JA pathway, indicating that
GRX480 is not required for SA-JA cross talk.
Recently, Zander et al. (2012) demonstrated
that in addition to GRX480, several other
TGA-interacting members of the ROXY class
of GRXs are able to suppress transcription
www.annualreviews.org • Hormonal Modulation of Plant Immunity
499
Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2012.28:489-521. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Utrecht University on 04/12/13. For personal use only.

----- Page 12 (native) -----
of the ERF-branch transcription factor gene
ORA59. Hence, it is plausible that SA-activated
ROXY class GRXs act redundantly in SA-JA
cross talk.
NPR1. The regulatory protein NPR1 is an
important transducer of SA-induced redox
changes and a crucial transcriptional coactiva-
tor of many SA-responsive genes (Wang et al.
2006). Arabidopsis npr1 mutants are not only
impaired in SA signaling, they are also blocked
in SA-mediated suppression of JA-regulated
genes (Leon-Reyes et al. 2009, Spoel et al.
2003). Nuclear localization of NPR1 is essen-
tial for SA-responsive defense gene expression,
but not for SA-mediated suppression of the JA
pathway (Spoel et al. 2003). Stimulation of the
SA pathway in Arabidopsis plants overexpressing
a fusion protein of NPR1 that was retained
in the cytosol resulted in wild-type levels of
suppression of JA responses, indicating that
SA-JA cross talk is mediated by cytosolic NPR1
(Spoel et al. 2003). The role of cytosolic NPR1
in SA-JA cross talk was conﬁrmed in rice
(Oryza sativa), where overexpression of cytoso-
lic OsNPR1 suppressed JA-responsive gene
transcription, whereas no antagonistic effect on
the JA response was recorded when OsNPR1
was constitutively targeted to the nucleus (Yuan
et al. 2007). Additional evidence is accumulat-
ing for a differential role of nuclear and cyto-
plasmic NPR1 in the regulation of SA- and JA-
dependent signaling (Glazebrook et al. 2003,
Johansson et al. 2006, Leon-Reyes et al. 2009,
Mao et al. 2007, Ramirez et al. 2010, Stein et al.
2008). However, the molecular details involved
in the differential regulation of nuclear versus
cytosolic NPR1-mediated responses need to be
elucidated.
Although cytosolic NPR1 seems to be
sufﬁcient for SA-mediated suppression of the
JA pathway, nuclear NPR1 regulates several
SA-responsive transcriptional (co)factors with
a direct or indirect role in suppressing JA-
responsive gene expression. These (co)factors
include GRX480, TGAs, and WRKYs. Their
role in SA-JA cross talk is discussed elsewhere
in this section.
TGA transcription factors. TGAs are im-
portant regulators of SA-induced expression of
PR genes (Zhang et al. 2003). In Arabidopsis,
seven TGAs interact with NPR1 (Kesarwani
et al. 2007), while TGA2 and TGA6 inter-
act with GRX480 (Ndamukong et al. 2007).
Because both NPR1 and GRX480 have been
implicated in SA-mediated suppression of the
JA pathway, the role of TGAs in SA-JA cross
talk has been tested. Interestingly, the tga256
triple and tga2356 quadruple mutants, which
are impaired in SA-responsive gene expression,
are also blocked in SA-mediated suppression
of the JA pathway (Leon-Reyes et al. 2010a,
Ndamukong et al. 2007, Zander et al. 2009),
indicating that TGAs are essential for SA-JA
cross talk.
TGAs bind to the core motif TGACG in
SA-responsive promoters (Lebel et al. 1998).
The JA- and ET-responsive promoter of
PDF1.2 contains a TGACG motif to which
TGA2 can bind, which suggests that TGAs
may directly inhibit promoter activity of
JA-responsive genes (Spoel et al. 2003). How-
ever, deletion of the TGACG motif from
the PDF1.2 promoter affected neither JA in-
ducibility nor SA-mediated suppression of the
promoter (Spoel et al. 2003, Zander et al. 2009).
Hence, it is likely that TGAs play an indirect
role in SA-JA cross talk, e.g., in the activation
of a negative regulator or in the suppression of
a positive regulator of the JA response pathway.
In addition to their role in SA signaling,
TGAs are important for the activation of JA-
and ET-dependent defense genes in the ab-
sence of an SA stimulus (Zander et al. 2009).
Because of their regulatory role in transcrip-
tion, it is plausible that in the absence of an SA
stimulus certain TGAs may function as posi-
tive regulators of JA- and ET-responsive gene
expression. However, upon induction of the SA
pathway their negative regulatory role in the JA
pathway dominates (Zander et al. 2009).
SSI2. SUPPRESSOR OF SA INSENSITIV-
ITY2 (SSI2) was identiﬁed in a screen for
SA signaling components that are associated
with
NPR1-independent
defense
signaling
500
Pieterse et al.
Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2012.28:489-521. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Utrecht University on 04/12/13. For personal use only.

----- Page 13 (native) -----
(Kachroo et al. 2001). SSI2 encodes a protein
that desaturates stearic acid to oleic acid (18:1)
in plant cells. Mutant ssi2 plants have a reduced
18:1 level, which simultaneously signals upreg-
ulation of the SA pathway and downregulation
of the JA pathway (Kachroo et al. 2003). This
phenotype was independent of whether NPR1
was active. Moreover, lowering the SA levels in
ssi2 by ectopic expression of the SA hydroxylase
gene nahG did not relieve the suppressive effect
on the JA pathway, suggesting that ssi2/low
18:1–mediated suppression of JA signaling
is regulated by a component downstream
of SA in the SA pathway (Kachroo et al.
2001). Genome-wide transcriptional proﬁling
of ssi2 plants revealed that several WRKY
transcription factor genes potentially have a
role in ssi2/low 18:1–induced SA-JA cross talk.
Mutations in WRKY50 and WRKY51 reduced
the ssi2/18:1-mediated enhanced SA levels and
restored JA-responsive gene expression in the
ssi2 background, indicating that WRKY50 and
WRKY51 function together as both positive
regulators of the SA pathway and negative
regulators of the JA pathway (Gao et al. 2011).
WRKY transcription factors. WRKY tran-
scription factors are important regulators of
SA-dependent defense responses, and many
of them are upregulated themselves by SA
(Rushton et al. 2010). Several WRKY tran-
scription factors have been implicated in SA-JA
cross talk. In addition to their role in ssi2/low
18:1-mediated suppression of JA signaling,
WRKY50 and WRKY51 were implicated in
SA-induced suppression of the JA pathway in
wild-type plants. Exogenous application of SA
suppressed JA-inducible gene expression in
wild type but not in wrky50 or wrky51 mutant
plants (Gao et al. 2011). Hence, WRKY50 and
WRKY51 seem to be essential for SA-mediated
suppression of JA signaling.
Arabidopsis WRKY70 is an important node
of convergence between SA and JA signaling
(Li et al. 2004, Li et al. 2006). Overexpres-
sion of WRKY70 in Arabidopsis enhanced the
expression of SA-responsive PR genes, whereas
it suppressed JA-responsive gene expression (Li
et al. 2004, Ren et al. 2008). However, mu-
tant wrky70 was not affected in the respon-
siveness to SA and JA, or in the antagonistic
effect of SA on the JA pathway (Leon-Reyes
et al. 2010a, Ren et al. 2008). Hence, similar
to GRX480, WRKY70 is sufﬁcient but not es-
sential for SA-mediated suppression of the JA
pathway. Because WRKY70 is induced in an
SA- and partly NPR1-dependent manner (Li
et al. 2004), it is conceivable that SA-induced
WRKY70 negatively affects transcription of
JA-responsive genes, which is supported by
microarray data (Li et al. 2004).
Another WRKY factor associated with
SA-JA cross talk is WRKY62 (Mao et al.
2007). WRKY62 is synergistically induced by
SA and JA in wild-type Arabidopsis but not
in mutant npr1 plants. Mutant wrky62 plants
have enhanced JA-responsive gene expres-
sion, whereas overexpression of WRKY62 sup-
presses the JA pathway. Hence, analogous to
WRKY70, these ﬁndings point to a SA- and
NPR1-inducible negative regulatory role for
WRKY62 in the JA response pathway. On the
basis of results with overexpression or knockout
lines, WRKY8 (Chen et al. 2010); WRKY11
and WRKY17 ( Journot-Catalino et al. 2006);
WRKY18, WRKY40, and WRKY60 (Xu et al.
2006); and WRKY41 (Higashi et al. 2008) also
have been connected to SA-JA cross talk, but
whether or not they play a redundant role in
this process is unknown.
Targets of Salicylic Acid Antagonism
in the Jasmonic Acid Signaling
Pathway
The list of molecular players in SA-JA cross
talk grows steadily, but relatively little is
known about their target(s) in the JA signaling
pathway. JA signaling is under the control of
a positive-feedback regulatory system, as many
JA biosynthesis genes are themselves induced
by JA (Wasternack 2007).
In Arabidopsis,
several genes encoding key enzymes in the
JA biosynthesis pathway can be repressed by
SA, suggesting that SA-mediated antagonism
depends possibly on repression of de novo JA
www.annualreviews.org • Hormonal Modulation of Plant Immunity
501
Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2012.28:489-521. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Utrecht University on 04/12/13. For personal use only.

----- Page 14 (native) -----
biosynthesis (Leon-Reyes et al. 2010b). How-
ever, in mutant aos/dde2, which is completely
blocked in JA synthesis because of a mutation in
the ALLENE OXIDE SYNTHASE (AOS) gene,
SA suppresses MeJA-induced gene expression
to the same level as in wild-type plants (Leon-
Reyes et al. 2010b). Thus, the antagonistic
effect of SA on JA signaling must act at a target
in the JA signaling pathway downstream of
JA biosynthesis. Nevertheless, it is likely that
suppression of JA biosynthesis genes by SA
may contribute to the attenuation of the JA
response during plant-attacker interactions.
Downstream of JA biosynthesis, SCFCOI1
complex
and
JAZ
repressor
proteins
are
central components in signal transduction.
Interference of SA by either one of these
components could result in suppression of JA
responses, but this needs to be investigated.
Because the antagonistic effect of SA on the JA
pathway is often clearly expressed at the level
of gene transcription, it is plausible that the
JA transcription machinery is targeted by SA.
Indeed, several transcriptional (co)activators,
such as NPR1, TGA, and WRKY, play a role
in SA-mediated suppression of JA-responsive
genes (Figure 2). Upon induction of the SA
pathway, they may act as negative regulators.
However, the exact mechanism by which these
transcriptional (co)activators target the JA
response pathway needs to be resolved.
Both SA- and JA-responsive gene expres-
sion involve alterations in the chromatin
conﬁguration by covalent modiﬁcations of the
histone tails in the nucleosome to allow or
prevent access of the transcription machinery
(Moore et al. 2011). Hence, SA-mediated
chromatin remodeling may also play a role
in SA-JA cross talk. Histone deacetylation,
mediated by histone deacetylases, is generally
correlated
with
transcriptional
repression
(Pﬂuger & Wagner 2007). However, chro-
matin immunoprecipitation analysis using an
antibody directed against acetylated histone
H3 revealed that SA does not affect this histone
modiﬁcation at the JA-responsive promoter of
PDF1.2 (Koornneef et al. 2008b). This ﬁnding
suggests that chromatin remodeling does not
play a major role in SA-JA cross talk, but this
also needs further investigation.
HORMONAL MODULATORS OF
THE SALICYLIC ACID–JASMONIC
ACID BACKBONE
Several other plant hormones antagonistically
or synergistically interact with the SA-JA
backbone
of
the plant
immune signaling
network. In addition, plant hormones can
have SA- and JA-independent effects on plant
immunity, but this is outside the scope of this
review and is described elsewhere (Bari & Jones
2009, Robert-Seilaniantz et al. 2011a). Here
we focus on recent developments that have
elaborated our understanding of how other
plant hormones modulate the SA-JA backbone
of the plant immune signaling network.
Ethylene
The gaseous hormone ET is a major con-
stituent of the blend of defense signals that is
produced during many plant-attacker interac-
tions and functions as an important modulator
of plant immunity (Broekaert et al. 2006,
Van Loon et al. 2006a, Von Dahl & Baldwin
2007). Analyses of global gene expression
proﬁles of pathogen-infected wild-type and
hormone-signaling-defective
mutant
plants
revealed extensive cross talk between ET and
the SA and JA signaling sectors of the immune
signaling network (Glazebrook et al. 2003,
Sato et al. 2010). ET can act both positively and
negatively on plant immunity. For instance,
in Arabidopsis, ET potentiates SA-responsive
PR-1 expression (De Vos et al. 2006, Lawton
et al. 1994), and in tobacco it is essential
for the onset of SAR (Verberne et al. 2003).
Conversely, the ET-responsive transcription
factors EIN3 and EIL1 were implicated in
global repression of PAMP-responsive genes in
Arabidopsis, including the SA biosynthesis gene
ICS/SID2, resulting in reduced accumulation
of SA (Chen et al. 2009).
ET also greatly affects the outcome of the
JA response. When produced in combination
502
Pieterse et al.
Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2012.28:489-521. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Utrecht University on 04/12/13. For personal use only.

----- Page 15 (native) -----
with JA, such as upon infection by necrotrophic
pathogens, ET acts synergistically on the ex-
pression of the ERF branch of the JA pathway,
whereas it antagonizes the MYC branch,
resulting in prioritization of the immune sig-
naling network toward JA- and ET-dependent
defense signaling associated with resistance to
necrotrophs (Figure 3) (Anderson et al. 2004,
Lorenzo et al. 2003, Lorenzo et al. 2004, Pr´e
et al. 2008). Moreover, when the ERF branch
was activated and the MYC branch suppressed
by ORA59 overexpression, plants became more
attractive to P. rapae larvae (Verhage et al.
2011). Hence, modulation of the JA response
by ET signaling can negatively affect the
plant’s chance to survive insect attack.
Also during SA-JA signal interaction, ET
can play a critical role. ET applied exogenously
or produced during pathogen infection by-
passed the need for NPR1 in the suppression
of the JA response by SA (Leon-Reyes et al.
2009). Consequently, SA-mediated suppres-
sion of resistance to the JA- and ET-inducing
necrotrophic
fungus
Alternaria
brassicicola
became uncoupled from NPR1, but not the
antagonistic effect of SA on JA-dependent
resistance against the ET-noninducing insect
herbivore
Frankliniella
occidentalis
(western
ﬂower thrips). Hence, the ﬁnal outcome of the
SA-JA signal interaction during the complex
interactions between plants and their attackers
can be shaped by ET present in the signal sig-
nature produced upon attack. The molecular
events through which ET modulates the role
of NPR1 in SA-JA cross talk are unknown.
Additionally, ET signaling makes plant tis-
sues immune to future SA-mediated suppres-
sion of the JA pathway (Leon-Reyes et al.
2010a). When the JA and ET signaling path-
ways are activated during or after the onset
of the SA response, SA is capable of exert-
ing a strong suppressive effect on JA-responsive
gene expression. However, when the JA and
ET pathways are fully induced prior to SA in-
duction, the antagonistic effect of SA on the
JA pathway is completely abolished. This ef-
fect could be attributed to ET because it was
not apparent when the ET signaling inhibitor
Necrotrophic pathogen
Defense against
necrotrophic pathogens,
preferred by insects
ERF1/ORA59
DELLAs
JAZs
PYL4
SCFCOI1
PDF1.2
Defense against
insects
MYCs
VSP2
Herbivorous insect
GA
JA
ET
ABA
Figure 3
Modulation of the JA signaling pathway by ET, ABA, and GA (see text for
details). Necrotrophic pathogens induce JA- and ET-dependent signaling
pathways; herbivorous insects induce JA- and ABA-dependent signaling
pathways. The ET- and ABA-regulated branches of the JA pathway are
mutually antagonistic. Solid lines indicate established interactions, dashed lines
represent hypothesized interactions, arrows indicate positive effects, and red
inhibition lines represent negative effects. Abbreviations: ABA, abscisic acid;
ET, ethylene; GA, gibberellin; JA, jasmonic acid.
1-methylcyclopropene (1-MCP) was included.
Simultaneous induction of the JA and ET
pathways through infection by a necrotrophic
pathogen, or constitutively in mutant cev1 (con-
stitutive expression of VSP1) and transgenic
www.annualreviews.org • Hormonal Modulation of Plant Immunity
503
Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2012.28:489-521. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Utrecht University on 04/12/13. For personal use only.

----- Page 16 (native) -----
35S:ORA59 plants, similarly rendered leaf tis-
sues unresponsive to SA-mediated suppression
of the JA pathway. This acquired insensitivity
to SA antagonism may reﬂect a mechanism by
which plants prioritize the JA and ET path-
ways over the SA pathway, which may be im-
portant for plant survival during multi-attacker
interactions.
Abscisic Acid
Recent
discoveries
have
greatly
expanded
our understanding of ABA perception and
signaling (Cutler et al. 2010). In addition to its
role in development and adaptation to abiotic
stress, in particular drought and salinity stress,
ABA emerged as an important modulator of the
plant immune signaling network (Asselbergh
et al. 2008, Cao et al. 2011, Ton et al. 2009).
ABA signaling antagonizes plant immunity by
suppressing SA-dependent defenses (Cao et al.
2011, De Torres-Zabala et al. 2009, Jiang et al.
2010, Yasuda et al. 2008). In Arabidopsis, ABA
and SA response mechanisms affect each other
at multiple steps, from the level of biosynthesis
to intermediate components of the signal
transduction pathways (Yasuda et al. 2008).
Hence, plants seem to balance ABA-mediated
abiotic stress tolerance and SA-mediated biotic
stress resistance through ABA-SA cross talk.
When produced in combination with JA,
such as upon wounding or herbivory, ABA acts
synergistically on the expression of the MYC
branch of the JA response pathway, while it
antagonizes the ERF branch (Abe et al. 2003,
Anderson et al. 2004) (Figure 3). This results in
prioritization of the immune signaling network
toward the MYC branch of the JA pathway,
which is associated with resistance to herbivory
(Anderson et al. 2004, Dombrecht et al. 2007,
Fernandez-Calvo et al. 2011), while resistance
to necrotrophs is compromised (Anderson et al.
2004). Conversely, JA signaling can function
positively on ABA signaling by inducing genes,
such as PYL4 (Lackman et al. 2011), that encode
proteins of the ABA receptor family. This way
certain JA-inducible responses depend on ABA
and vice versa. Transcription factors from the
R2R3-MYB and NAC families are implicated in
ABA-JA interactions as well and as such func-
tion as important modulators of plant responses
to abiotic and biotic stress (AbuQamar et al.
2009, Nakashima et al. 2007, Wu et al. 2009).
Because ABA negatively affects SA signal-
ing and promotes the MYC branch of the JA
response pathway, it is likely to affect SA-JA
cross talk. Indeed, interactions between ABA,
SA, and JA play a role in the regulation of basal
and β-aminobutyric acid (BABA)-induced de-
fenses (Flors et al. 2008), but the general bio-
logical signiﬁcance and molecular details of this
tripartite hormone interaction are still poorly
understood.
Auxin
Auxins play a role in virtually every stage
of plant development (Benjamins & Scheres
2008). Many microbes can produce auxins
themselves or manipulate auxin signaling in the
host to interfere with normal developmental
processes (Kazan & Manners 2009, Robert-
Seilaniantz et al. 2011a). Auxin signaling
can repress SA levels and signaling (Robert-
Seilaniantz et al. 2011b), so it is not surprising
that certain biotrophic pathogens evolved
ways to exploit auxin-mediated suppression
of SA to enhance susceptibility of the host
(Chen et al. 2007). On the contrary, transcript
proﬁling showed that SA signaling impedes
auxin responses through global repression of
auxin-related genes (Wang et al. 2007). During
PTI, induction of the microRNA miR393
by the bacterial PAMP ﬂagellin targets auxin
receptors
and
suppresses
auxin
signaling,
thereby preventing auxin from antagonizing
SA signaling (Navarro et al. 2006, Robert-
Seilaniantz et al. 2011b). This suppression of
auxin responses resulted in enhanced resistance
to P. syringae and H. arabidopsidis, suggesting
that antagonism of auxin signaling is an
intrinsic part of SA-dependent defenses against
biotrophs. Although overexpression of miR393
rendered plants more resistant to biotrophs, it
caused enhanced susceptibility to necrotrophs,
suggesting that suppression of auxin signaling
504
Pieterse et al.
Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2012.28:489-521. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Utrecht University on 04/12/13. For personal use only.

----- Page 17 (native) -----
DELLA: growth-
repressing GA signal
mediator that acts
positively on JA
signaling by
sequestering JAZ
repressor proteins
also affects SA-JA cross talk. In addition,
suppression of auxin signaling by miR393
redirects the metabolic ﬂow of the tryptophan
metabolic pathway by which auxins and antimi-
crobial indole glucosinolates and camalexin
are synthesized. As a result, auxin-suppressed
plants produce more indole glucosinolates,
which are implicated in biotroph resistance,
whereas production of camalexin, which is
more effective against necrotrophic fungi, is
reduced (Robert-Seilaniantz et al. 2011b).
In Arabidopsis, the JA signaling suppres-
sor JAZ1 was expressed in early phases of
the auxin response, suggesting that JAZ1 acts
as an integrator of auxin and JA responses
(Grunewald et al. 2009). However, the role of
the JA-auxin interaction in the regulation of the
plant immune signaling network remains to be
elucidated.
Gibberellins
GAs are hormones that control plant growth
by regulating the degradation of growth-
repressing DELLA proteins (Sun 2011). GAs
were ﬁrmly implicated in plant immune signal-
ing when degradation of DELLA proteins was
shown to promote susceptibility to necrotrophs
and resistance to biotrophs through modula-
tion of JA and SA signaling (Navarro et al.
2008). DELLA mutant plants showed reduced
sensitivity to JA, whereas constitutive DELLA
activation in a GA-insensitive mutant resulted
in enhanced sensitivity to JA, indicating that
DELLA proteins positively interact with the
JA pathway (Figure 3). Interestingly, DELLA
proteins sequester the JA signaling repres-
sor JAZ1 by binding to it, thereby reducing
JAZ/MYC2 interactions and allowing MYC2 to
activate JA-responsive target genes (Hou et al.
2010). GA-mediated degradation of DELLA
proteins accordingly enhanced JAZ-mediated
suppression of JA-responsive gene expression.
Thus, GAs suppress the cellular competence
to respond to JAs and consequently shift the
balance between JA and SA signaling, resulting
in enhanced SA signaling and biotroph resis-
tance. Because DELLA proteins integrate plant
responses to various hormonal signals and envi-
ronmental conditions, they are central players
in the plant’s capacity to maximize growth and
protection.
Cytokinins
CKs are classic growth hormones that also
emerged as modulators of plant immunity
(Choi et al. 2011, Robert-Seilaniantz et al.
2011a). CKs are often linked to a plant’s
response to biotrophic pathogens that alter
the host’s physiology (Walters & McRoberts
2006). Choi et al. (2010) showed that CKs
modulate SA signaling. The CK-activated
transcription factor ARR2, which regulates
CK-responsive genes, can bind to the SA
response
transcription
factor
TGA3
and
positively regulates PR-1 gene expression and
resistance against P. syringae. Thus, CKs can
act synergistically on the SA signaling sector
of the plant immune signaling network.
REWIRING OF THE HORMONE
SIGNALING NETWORK BY
PLANT ENEMIES
Although hormone cross talk may provide the
plant with a powerful regulatory potential to
ﬁnely tune its defenses, it is also a possible
target, such that plant attackers can manipulate
the plant immune signaling network for their
own beneﬁt. For instance, the necrotrophic
fungus Botrytis cinerea produces an exopolysac-
charide that acts as an elicitor of the SA/NPR1
pathway
and
consequently
suppresses
ef-
fective JA-dependent defenses in its host,
the tomato plant (Solanum lycopersicum) (El
Oirdi et al. 2011). In recent years, numerous
examples of plant pathogens that hijack speciﬁc
hormone-regulated signaling pathways, e.g., by
producing plant hormones, hormone mimics,
or effectors that target hormone signaling
components (Robert-Seilaniantz et al. 2011a),
have been described. Here we focus on the
bacterial model pathogen P. syringae, which is
exceptionally well-equipped to hijack the im-
mune signaling network of its host to promote
www.annualreviews.org • Hormonal Modulation of Plant Immunity
505
Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2012.28:489-521. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Utrecht University on 04/12/13. For personal use only.

----- Page 18 (native) -----
virulence. In addition, we provide an overview
of recent developments of hormonal modula-
tion of host immunity by insect herbivores.
Hormonal Modulation of Host
Immunity by the Model Pathogen
Pseudomonas syringae
Infection of Arabidopsis by virulent P. syringae
results in PAMP-triggered stomatal closure and
the activation of SA-dependent basal defenses
that limit pathogen entry and growth (Melotto
et al. 2008, Nomura et al. 2005). Basal SA-
dependent defenses can be promoted by bacte-
rial ﬂagellin, e.g., via CK-activated ARR2 tran-
scription factors, which through interaction
with TGA3 promote SA-responsive gene ex-
pression (Choi et al. 2010), or by the induction
of miR393, which suppresses auxin signaling
and concomitantly relieves the inhibitory effect
of auxin on the SA response pathway. As a coun-
termeasure, virulent P. syringae suppresses SA-
dependent immune responses by bacterial ef-
fector proteins, which are injected into the plant
cell through the type III secretion system, and
by the bacterial toxin COR, which functions as a
molecular mimic of JA-Ile (Nomura et al. 2005).
In many cases, P. syringae utilizes the hormone-
regulated defense signaling network of the host
to suppress host immunity (Figure 4).
COR binds directly to the JA receptor
COI1 and is much more active in stimulating
the JA pathway than JA-Ile is (Katsir et al. 2008,
Yang et al. 2009). COR-mediated activation
of the JA pathway antagonizes SA-dependent
defenses (Brooks et al. 2005, Ishiga et al. 2010)
and inhibits PAMP-triggered stomatal closure
(Melotto et al. 2008), resulting in enhanced
susceptibility of the host. Several type III
effectors of virulent P. syringae target the SA
pathway as well to promote pathogenesis. The
effector HopI1 localizes to the chloroplasts
where it suppresses SA accumulation ( Jelenska
et al. 2007). The defense-suppressive activity of
HopI1 depends on its interaction with the plant
stress chaperone HEAT SHOCK PROTEIN
70 (HSP70), which is thought to possess a
defense-promoting function ( Jelenska et al.
2010). In addition, AvrPtoB stimulates ABA
biosynthesis and ABA responses that antago-
nize SA biosynthesis and SA-mediated defenses
(De Torres-Zabala et al. 2007, 2009). Similarly,
AvrRpt2 alters the auxin physiology, which
antagonizes the SA pathway and consequently
promotes host susceptibility (Chen et al.
2007). Hence, manipulation of plant hormone
homeostasis, which leads to suppression of
host immunity, is a major virulence strategy of
P. syringae.
The stabilization of DELLA proteins and
the ET-mediated activation of EIN3 and EIL1
also suppress the SA response pathway and pro-
mote susceptibility to P. syringae (Chen et al.
2009, Navarro et al. 2008). However, there is
no evidence that P. syringae recruits these mech-
anisms to promote virulence.
Hijacking Host Hormone Integration
by Insect Herbivores
Similar to virulent pathogens, insect her-
bivores have also leveraged the molecular
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−→
Figure 4
Rewiring of the hormone-regulated immune signaling network. Pseudomonas syringae–derived PAMPs are recognized by the host’s
PRRs, leading to activation of SA-dependent defenses. P. syringae delivers the phytotoxin COR and effectors such as AvrRpt2, AvrPtoB,
and HopI1 (indicated in the blue frame) into the host cell, which suppress the SA pathway via activation of JA, auxin, or ABA signaling
pathways, or via a direct suppressive effect on SA biosynthesis. Cross talk between SA signaling and the other hormone signaling
pathways is commonly mutually antagonistic, which could help the plant to counteract the effector-triggered susceptibility.
ET-stabilized EIN3/EIL1 transcription factors suppress SA-regulated genes such as the SA biosynthesis gene SID2. The plant
hormones GA and CK can contribute positively to SA-dependent defenses. Arrows indicate positive effects; red inhibition lines
represent negative effects. See text for details. Abbreviations: ABA, abscisic acid; CK, cytokinin; COR, coronatine; ET, ethylene;
GA, gibberellin; JA, jasmonic acid; PAMP, pathogen-associated molecular pattern; PM, plasma membrane; PRR, pattern-recognition
receptor; SA, salicylic acid; TTSS, type III secretion system.
506
Pieterse et al.
Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2012.28:489-521. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Utrecht University on 04/12/13. For personal use only.

----- Page 19 (native) -----
communication
within
the
host
immune
signaling network to enhance their success on
host plants (Hogenhout & Bos 2011, Walling
2008). For instance, the invasive spider mite
Tetranychus evansi suppresses SA- and JA-
dependent defenses in tomato to levels even
lower than those in herbivore-free plants,
resulting in a much better performance on
previously attacked plants than on non-attacked
plants (Sarmento et al. 2011). Also, nymphs of
PRRs
PM
PM
TGA3
ARR2
SID2
EIN3/
EIL1
SCFTIR1/AFB
AvrRpt2
AvrRpt2
miR393
AvrPtoB
HopI1
HopI1
HSP70
SCFCOI1
DELLAs
AvrPtoB
PAMP
TTSS
PAMP
COR
COR
COR
GA
CK
ET
Auxin
Auxin response
ABA
JA response
ABA response
?
Pseudomonas
syringae
SA-dependent
defenses
www.annualreviews.org • Hormonal Modulation of Plant Immunity
507
Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2012.28:489-521. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Utrecht University on 04/12/13. For personal use only.

----- Page 20 (native) -----
the phloem-feeding silverleaf whiteﬂy (Bemisia
tabaci )
are
able
to
manipulate
hormone-
regulated host defenses to their own beneﬁt.
On Arabidopsis, they activate the SA signaling
pathway,
which
concomitantly
suppresses
effective JA-dependent defenses, resulting in
increased plant susceptibility and enhanced
insect performance (Zarate et al. 2007). Some
tissue-chewing insects appear to have adopted
this strategy as well. Elicitors from salivary
excretions of the beet armyworm (Spodoptera
exigua) suppressed effective JA-regulated de-
fenses through the activation of the SA pathway
(Diezel et al. 2009, Weech et al. 2008). Interest-
ingly, elicitors from insect eggs activated the SA
pathway (Bruessow et al. 2010). Consequently,
JA-dependent defenses were suppressed at
the site of oviposition, resulting in enhanced
growth of freshly hatched larvae of the gen-
eralist herbivore Spodoptera littoralis (cotton
leafworm) that fed from the undefended tissue.
Hence, recruiting the SA pathway to suppress
effective JA-dependent defenses seems to be an
effective strategy employed by different insect
herbivores to counteract host defense.
Alternative strategies have been described as
well. For instance, caterpillars of the herbivore
P. rapae attempt to rewire different branches of
the JA response pathway for their own beneﬁt.
Elicitors in their oral secretions activate the
insect-preferred ERF branch of the JA pathway
in Arabidopsis (Verhage et al. 2011), possibly
to guide the JA pathway away from the MYC
branch, which regulates herbivore resistance
(Fernandez-Calvo et al. 2011) (Figure 3).
However, despite the initial attempt of P. rapae
to stimulate the ERF branch of the JA pathway,
the MYC/ERF balance shifts toward the MYC
branch, suggesting that the arms race between
plant and attacker during this interaction is
decidedly in favor of the plant.
HORMONAL MODULATION
OF HOST IMMUNITY BY
BENEFICIAL MICROBES
Like leaf tissues, roots are capable of respond-
ing to a variety of defense elicitors, such as
MAMPs produced by soil-borne microbes
( Jacobs et al. 2011, Millet et al. 2010). Be-
cause of the plethora of soil microbes that
reside in the rhizosphere (each gram of soil
typically contains over a billion microbes),
immune signaling in plant roots must be under
tight control (Zamioudis & Pieterse 2012).
Hormone-regulated defenses can inﬂuence
the composition of the indigenous microﬂora
in the rhizosphere (Doornbos et al. 2011;
Berendsen et al. 2012). Evidence is emerging
that beneﬁcial soil microbes have evolved
decoy strategies to short-circuit hormone-
regulated immune responses that are triggered
in the roots upon initial recognition, which
paves the way for a prolonged mutualistic
association with their host. For instance, the
beneﬁcial PGPF Piriformospora indica recruits
the JA pathway to suppress both early and
late defenses, including SA-mediated defenses
( Jacobs et al. 2011) (Figure 5a). Moreover, in
both mycorrhizal and root-nodule symbioses,
JA transiently accumulates in the roots of host
plants at the early stages of infection, which
suggests a role for JA signaling in counter-
balancing SA-triggered responses (Gutjahr &
Paszkowski 2009). In addition, many free-living
PGPR and PGPF produce substantial amounts
of plant hormones, such as auxins and GAs
(Lugtenberg & Kamilova 2009, Sirrenberg
et al. 2007), that potentially attenuate SA
signaling via hormonal cross talk mechanisms.
The recently discovered MiSSP7 effector of
the ectomycorrhizal fungus Laccaria bicolor and
the SP7 effector of the arbuscular mycorrhizal
fungus Glomus intraradices are two examples of
symbiotic effectors that promote a biotrophic
interaction by affecting hormonal signaling
pathways (Kloppholz et al. 2011, Plett et al.
2011). MiSSP7 is imported into the plant cell
through lipid raft–mediated endocytosis, after
which it is translocated into the nucleus of
host cells, where it promotes the expression
of auxin-responsive genes (Plett et al. 2011)
(Figure 5b). SP7 is the ﬁrst symbiotic effector
described so far to possess immune-suppressive
function by targeting the ET signaling path-
way, which is an important component of PTI
508
Pieterse et al.
Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2012.28:489-521. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Utrecht University on 04/12/13. For personal use only.

----- Page 21 (native) -----
Nucleus
JA
response
a  PGPF Piriformospora indica
e  Primed cell
d  PGPR Pseudomonas fluorescens
b  Ectomycorrhizal fungus
b  Laccaria bicolor
c  Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungus
c  Glomus intraradices
?
SA
response
Auxin-
responsive genes
ET-responsive
genes
ET
signaling
JA/ET-responsive
genes
Callose
deposition
NPR1/MYC2
ABA
MYB72
Systemic signal(s)
?
Nucleus
MAMP
MiSSP7
MiSSP7
PRR
MAMP
SP7
SP7
ERF19
PRR
MAMP
PRR
Figure 5
Soil-borne mutualists utilize effector molecules that interfere with hormone-regulated signaling pathways to facilitate root colonization.
(a) The beneﬁcial fungus Piriformospora indica recruits the JA signaling pathway to suppress MAMP-triggered SA-dependent defenses.
(b) The symbiotic effector MiSSP7 of the ectomycorrhizal fungus Laccaria bicolor is targeted to the nucleus to promote the expression of
auxin-responsive genes. (c) The symbiotic effector SP7 of the arbuscular mycorrhizal fungus Glomus intraradices interacts with the
ET-responsive transcription factor ERF19 to suppress ET-mediated defenses. Root colonization by beneﬁcial microbes commonly
results in the onset of a systemic immune response. (d ) Colonization of roots by selected strains of the PGPR Pseudomonas ﬂuorescens is
associated with an enhanced defensive capacity in the aerial parts of the plant. Initiation of ISR is regulated by the root-speciﬁc
transcription factor MYB72 and components of the ET signaling pathway that locally act to generate a so far unknown systemic
signal(s). (e) In systemic tissues, the onset of ISR depends on functional JA/ET and ABA signaling pathways and further requires the
transcriptional regulators NPR1 and MYC2. ISR-expressing plants are primed for accelerated JA- and ET-responsive gene expression
and increased callose deposition at the sites of pathogen or insect attack. Dashed arrows represent hypothesized interactions, solid
arrows indicate positive effects, and red inhibition lines represent negative effects or repression of transcription. Abbreviations:
ABA, abscisic acid; ET, ethylene; ISR, induced systemic resistance; JA, jasmonic acid; MAMP, microbe-associated molecular pattern;
PGPF, plant-growth-promoting fungi; PGPR, plant-growth-promoting rhizobacteria; PRR, pattern-recognition receptor; SA, salicylic
acid.
www.annualreviews.org • Hormonal Modulation of Plant Immunity
509
Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2012.28:489-521. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Utrecht University on 04/12/13. For personal use only.

----- Page 22 (native) -----
Induced systemic
resistance (ISR):
JA-/ET-dependent
enhanced defensive
capacity of the entire
plant, acquired upon
colonization of the
roots by speciﬁc
mutualistic microbes
in the roots (Boutrot et al. 2010, Mersmann
et al. 2010, Millet et al. 2010). SP7 is translo-
cated into the nucleus of host cells, where it
interacts with the defense-related transcription
factor ERF19 and blocks its transcriptional
program (Kloppholz et al. 2011) (Figure 5c).
Considering the delicate symbiotic interactions
between plant roots and soil mutualists, many
more symbiotic effectors that manipulate the
hormone-regulated defense signaling network
of the host are likely to be discovered.
Once
established,
interactions
between
plant roots and mutualistic microbes are often
associated with an enhanced defensive capac-
ity in above-ground plant parts, a phenomenon
known as induced systemic resistance (ISR)
(Van Wees et al. 2008). Induction of ISR in Ara-
bidopsis by the rhizosphere-colonizing PGPR
Pseudomonas ﬂuorescens WCS417 is well studied.
WCS417 beneﬁts from the plant by utilizing
nutrients that are exuded by the roots. WCS417
suppresses local ﬂagellin-triggered PTI re-
sponses in the roots via apoplastic secretion of
one or more low-molecular-weight molecule(s)
(Millet et al. 2010). Whereas PTI is suppressed
locally, an immune signaling cascade is initi-
ated systemically that confers resistance against
a broad spectrum of pathogens and even insects
(Pineda et al. 2010, Van der Ent et al. 2009b,
Van Oosten et al. 2008). Initiation of ISR in the
roots is regulated by the root-speciﬁc transcrip-
tion factor MYB72 and components of the ET
pathway that act locally to generate or translo-
cate one or more unknown systemic signal(s)
(Knoester et al. 1999, Van der Ent et al. 2008).
The ISR response is associated not with direct
defense activation, but with priming for accel-
erated JA- and ET-dependent gene expression
and increased deposition of callose at the site
of pathogen entry (Van der Ent et al. 2009b,
Van Wees et al. 2008) (Figure 5d,e). Systemic
establishment of WCS417-ISR in leaf tissues
depends on the JA/ET and ABA signaling path-
ways and requires NPR1 and MYC2 (Pozo et al.
2008, Van der Ent et al. 2009a). Priming of sys-
temic hormone-regulated immune responses
by beneﬁcial microbes is suggested to be part
of an autoregulatory mechanism that keeps
colonization by mutualists in check. One of
its outcomes is the ISR phenomenon, which
provides broad-spectrum systemic protection
of roots and shoots (Zamioudis & Pieterse
2012).
CONCLUDING REMARKS
We now have a wealth of information on the
molecular details of hormone perception, dere-
pression of hormone signaling pathways, and
activation/degradation
of
hormone-speciﬁc
transcription factors (Santner & Estelle 2009).
Also, the central role of plant hormones in the
regulation of immune signaling is ﬁrmly estab-
lished. Not only SA and JA, but also nearly all
other hormones, which were discovered origi-
nally because of their effects on growth or de-
velopment, have been implicated in defense or
pathogenesis. Manipulation of hormone home-
ostasis and signal cross talk appear to be dom-
inant features in the regulation of the defense
signaling network, initiated either by the plant
to ﬁne-tune or prioritize its defenses to maxi-
mize growth and protection, or by pathogens,
insects, or beneﬁcial microbes to rewire the im-
mune signaling circuitry for their own bene-
ﬁt. However, an integrated view on the spatial
and temporal dynamics of hormone production
and signaling during the interaction of plants
with other organisms is still lacking, especially
in relation to how hormone interplay steers the
ﬁnal outcome of the plant immune response.
Also, our understanding of the molecular events
that foster hormonal cross talk is still in its
infancy.
That several important mediators of hor-
mone cross talk are transcriptional (co)factors
suggests that cross talk predominantly takes
place downstream of signal transduction, at
the level of gene transcription. Hence, future
research on hormone interactions will beneﬁt
greatly from next-generation deep sequencing
technologies, such as RNA-seq and ChIP-seq.
These technologies will allow high-resolution,
whole-genome expression proﬁling to infer
510
Pieterse et al.
Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2012.28:489-521. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Utrecht University on 04/12/13. For personal use only.

----- Page 23 (native) -----
core gene regulatory networks and to iden-
tify the transcriptional regulators involved.
Computational modeling approaches will sub-
sequently be essential to identify key regulatory
nodes in the cross talk gene regulatory network
model. To this end, experimental biologists
should join forces with bioinformaticians and
mathematicians and engage in the systems biol-
ogy cycle of predictive, quantitative modeling
and biological experimentation.
Repressors of transcriptional activators of
hormone responses, such as JAZ and DELLA,
emerged as important nodes of convergence in
the hormone signaling network. As they are
crucial for suppression of their core signaling
pathway and function in complex signalosomes,
they are theoretically ideal targets for hormone
cross talk. Novel tandem afﬁnity puriﬁcation
and proteomics approaches allow the isolation
and identiﬁcation of core signaling modules and
interactors of key nodal proteins (Pauwels et al.
2010). Hence, this technology will be highly in-
strumental in identifying and functionally char-
acterizing important molecular players in hor-
mone cross talk.
At the other end of the spectrum, challenges
for future research lie in understanding how
complex signal interactions are functional in
an ecological context. In nature, plants inter-
act simultaneously or sequentially with multiple
beneﬁcial and harmful organisms. Community
ecology studies show that the invasion history
of a plant inﬂuences the response to secondary
attackers and that plant hormones can play a
decisive role in this process (Kessler et al. 2004,
Poelman et al. 2008b). By placing research on
molecular mechanisms of hormone cross talk
in an ecological perspective, we will be able to
achieve a more complete understanding of the
role of this process in plant survival.
SUMMARY POINTS
1. Plants utilize hormone cross talk to optimize defenses, whereas pathogens, insects, and
mutualists can rewire the hormone-regulated signaling circuitry to evade or suppress
host immunity.
2. Transcriptional (co)regulators, such as NPR1, TGAs, and WRKYs, emerged as molec-
ular players in SA-JA antagonism.
3. ET is an important modulator of SA-JA cross talk, as it bypasses the NPR1 dependency
of SA-JA cross talk, and can render plant tissues unresponsive to subsequent SA-mediated
suppression of the JA pathway.
4. ABA, auxins, GA, and CK affect the SA-JA backbone of the plant immune signaling
network, resulting in positive or negative effects on biotroph and necrotroph resistance.
5. In general, opposing effects of other hormones on SA and JA signaling are found: ET,
auxin, and ABA antagonize SA signaling but synergize JA signaling, whereas GA antag-
onizes JA signaling but synergizes SA signaling.
6. P. syringae exploits the JA mimic COR and several type III secreted effectors to activate
the JA, ABA, and auxin signaling pathways and consequently suppress SA responses and
promote pathogen virulence.
7. Plant hormone signaling pathways are rewired by symbiotic effectors of bene-
ﬁcial microbes to suppress host immunity and enable a prolonged mutualistic
interaction.
www.annualreviews.org • Hormonal Modulation of Plant Immunity
511
Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2012.28:489-521. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Utrecht University on 04/12/13. For personal use only.

----- Page 24 (native) -----
FUTURE ISSUES
1. Components of core hormone signaling pathways that are targeted by other hormone
signaling pathways need to be identiﬁed to fully understand the molecular basis of hor-
mone cross talk.
2. Large-scale transcript proﬁling and subsequent computational modeling approaches are
required to identify novel key regulatory nodes of pathway cross talk.
3. Analysis of hormone cross talk during multiorganism and multistress interactions would
provide new insights into how the hormone-regulated plant defense signaling network
functions.
4. The identiﬁcation of effectors of mutualistic microbes that relay the plant’s hormone-
regulated signaling network to suppress host immunity is a challenging new ﬁeld of
research.
5. How conserved are the molecular mechanisms of hormone cross talk as identiﬁed in
Arabidopsis, and what is their signiﬁcance in an ecological and evolutionary context?
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The authors are not aware of any afﬁliations, memberships, funding, or ﬁnancial holdings that
might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors of this review are supported by ERC Advanced grant no. 269072 of the European
Research Council, VICI grant no. 865.04.002 and VIDI grant no. 11281 of the Netherlands
Organization of Scientiﬁc Research, and a fellowship of the Greek State Scholarship Foundation.
LITERATURE CITED
Abe H, Urao T, Ito T, Seki M, Shinozaki K, Yamaguchi-Shinozaki K. 2003. Arabidopsis AtMYC2 (bHLH)
and AtMYB2 (MYB) function as transcriptional activators in abscisic acid signaling. Plant Cell 15:63–78
AbuQamar S, Luo H, Laluk K, Mickelbart MV, Mengiste T. 2009. Crosstalk between biotic and abiotic stress
responses in tomato is mediated by the AIM1 transcription factor. Plant J. 58:347–60
Anderson JP, Badruzsaufari E, Schenk PM, Manners JM, Desmond OJ, et al. 2004. Antagonistic interaction
between abscisic acid and jasmonate-ethylene signaling pathways modulates defense gene expression and
disease resistance in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 16:3460–79
Andreasson E, Jenkins T, Brodersen P, Thorgrimsen S, Petersen NHT, et al. 2005. The MAP kinase substrate
MKS1 is a regulator of plant defense responses. EMBO J. 24:2579–89
Asselbergh B, De Vleesschauwer D, H¨ofte M. 2008. Global switches and ﬁne-tuning—ABA modulates plant
pathogen defense. Mol. Plant Microbe Interact. 21:709–19
Ballar´e CL. 2011. Jasmonate-induced defenses: a tale of intelligence, collaborators and rascals. Trends Plant
Sci. 16:249–57
Bardoel BW, Van der Ent S, Pel MJC, Tommassen J, Pieterse CMJ, et al. 2011. Pseudomonas evades immune
recognition of ﬂagellin in both mammals and plants. PLoS Pathog. 7:e1002206
Bari R, Jones JDG. 2009. Role of plant hormones in plant defence responses. Plant Mol. Biol. 69:473–88
Benjamins R, Scheres B. 2008. Auxin: the looping star in plant development. Annu. Rev. Plant Biol. 59:443–65
Berendsen RL, Pieterse CMJ, Bakker PAHM. 2012. The rhizosphere microbiome and plant health. Trends
Plant Sci. 17:478–86
512
Pieterse et al.
Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2012.28:489-521. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Utrecht University on 04/12/13. For personal use only.

----- Page 25 (native) -----
Bernoux M, Ellis JG, Dodds PN. 2011. New insights in plant immunity signaling activation. Curr. Opin. Plant
Biol. 14:512–18
Berrocal-Lobo M, Molina A, Solano R. 2002. Constitutive expression of ETHYLENE-RESPONSE-FACTOR1
in Arabidopsis confers resistance to several necrotrophic fungi. Plant J. 29:23–32
Boller T, Felix G. 2009. A renaissance of elicitors: perception of microbe-associated molecular patterns and
danger signals by pattern-recognition receptors. Annu. Rev. Plant Biol. 60:379–406
Bostock RM. 2005. Signal crosstalk and induced resistance: straddling the line between cost and beneﬁt. Annu.
Rev. Phytopathol. 43:545–80
Boutrot F, Segonzac C, Chang KN, Qiao H, Ecker JR, et al. 2010. Direct transcriptional control of the
Arabidopsis immune receptor FLS2 by the ethylene-dependent transcription factors EIN3 and EIL1.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 107:14502–7
Brodersen P, Petersen M, Bjorn Nielsen H, Zhu S, Newman M-A, et al. 2006. Arabidopsis MAP kinase 4
regulates salicylic acid- and jasmonic acid/ethylene-dependent responses via EDS1 and PAD4. Plant J.
47:532–46
Broekaert WF, Delaure SL, De Bolle MFC, Cammuel BPA. 2006. The role of ethylene in host-pathogen
interactions. Annu. Rev. Phytopathol. 44:393–416
Brooks DM, Bender CL, Kunkel BN. 2005. The Pseudomonas syringae phytotoxin coronatine promotes viru-
lence by overcoming salicylic acid-dependent defences in Arabidopsis thaliana. Mol. Plant Pathol. 6:629–39
Browse J. 2009. Jasmonate passes muster: a receptor and targets for the defense hormone. Annu. Rev. Plant
Biol. 60:183–205
Bruessow F, Gouhier-Darimont C, Buchala A, M´etraux J-P, Reymond P. 2010. Insect eggs suppress plant
defence against chewing herbivores. Plant J. 62:876–85
Cao FY, Yoshioka K, Desveaux D. 2011. The roles of ABA in plant-pathogen interactions. J. Plant Res.
124:489–99
Cerrudo I, Keller MM, Cargnel MD, Demkura PV, de Wit M, et al. 2012. Low red/far-red ratios reduce
Arabidopsis resistance to Botrytis cinerea and jasmonate responses via a COI1-JAZ10-dependent, salicylic
acid-independent mechanism. Plant Physiol. 158:2042–52
Chen H, Xue L, Chintamanani S, Germain H, Lin H, et al. 2009. ETHYLENE INSENSITIVE3 and ETHY-
LENE INSENSITIVE3-LIKE1 repress SALICYLIC ACID INDUCTION DEFICIENT2 expression to
negatively regulate plant innate immunity in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 21:2527–40
Chen L, Zhang L, Yu D. 2010. Wounding-induced WRKY8 is involved in basal defense in Arabidopsis.
Mol. Plant Microbe Interact. 23:558–65
Chen ZY, Agnew JL, Cohen JD, He P, Shan LB, et al. 2007. Pseudomonas syringae type III effector AvrRpt2
alters Arabidopsis thaliana auxin physiology. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 104:20131–36
Cheng YT, Germain H, Wiermer M, Bi D, Xu F, et al. 2009. Nuclear pore complex component MOS7/Nup88
is required for innate immunity and nuclear accumulation of defense regulators in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell
21:2503–16
Choi J, Choi D, Lee S, Ryu CM, Hwang I. 2011. Cytokinins and plant immunity: old foes or new friends?
Trends Plant Sci. 16:388–94
Choi J, Huh SU, Kojima M, Sakakibara H, Paek KH, Hwang I. 2010. The cytokinin-activated transcription
factor ARR2 promotes plant immunity via TGA3/NPR1-dependent salicylic acid signaling in Arabidopsis.
Dev. Cell 19:284–95
Clarke SM, Cristescu SM, Miersch O, Harren FJM, Wasternack C, Mur LAJ. 2009. Jasmonates act with
salicylic acid to confer basal thermotolerance in Arabidopsis thaliana. New Phytol. 182:175–87
Cutler SR, Rodriguez PL, Finkelstein RR, Abrams SR. 2010. Abscisic acid: emergence of a core signaling
network. Annu. Rev. Plant Biol. 61:651–79
De Jonge R, Van Esse HP, Kombrink A, Shinya T, Desaki Y, et al. 2010. Conserved fungal LysM effector
Ecp6 prevents chitin-triggered immunity in plants. Science 329:953–55
De Torres-Zabala M, Bennett MH, Truman WH, Grant MR. 2009. Antagonism between salicylic and abscisic
acid reﬂects early host-pathogen conﬂict and moulds plant defence responses. Plant J. 59:375–86
De Torres-Zabala M, Truman W, Bennett MH, Lafforgue G, Mansﬁeld JW, et al. 2007. Pseudomonas syringae
pv. tomato hijacks the Arabidopsis abscisic acid signalling pathway to cause disease. EMBO J. 26:1434–43
www.annualreviews.org • Hormonal Modulation of Plant Immunity
513
Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2012.28:489-521. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Utrecht University on 04/12/13. For personal use only.

----- Page 26 (native) -----
De Vos M, Van Oosten VR, Van Poecke RMP, Van Pelt JA, Pozo MJ, et al. 2005. Signal signature and tran-
scriptome changes of Arabidopsis during pathogen and insect attack. Mol. Plant-Microbe Interact. 18:923–37
De Vos M, Van Zaanen W, Koornneef A, Korzelius JP, Dicke M, et al. 2006. Herbivore-induced resistance
against microbial pathogens in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol. 142:352–63
Despr´es C, DeLong C, Glaze S, Liu E, Fobert PR. 2000. The Arabidopsis NPR1/NIM1 protein enhances the
DNA binding activity of a subgroup of the TGA family of bZIP transcription factors. Plant Cell 12:279–90
Dicke M, Baldwin IT. 2010. The evolutionary context for herbivore-induced plant volatiles: beyond the ‘cry
for help’. Trends Plant Sci. 15:167–75
Diezel C, Von Dahl CC, Gaquerel E, Baldwin IT. 2009. Different lepidopteran elicitors account for cross-talk
in herbivory-induced phytohormone signaling. Plant Physiol. 150:1576–86
Doherty HM, Selvendran RR, Bowles DJ. 1988. The wound response of tomato plants can be inhibited by
aspirin and related hydroxy-benzoic acids. Physiol. Mol. Plant Pathol. 33:377–84
Dombrecht B, Xue GP, Sprague SJ, Kirkegaard JA, Ross JJ, et al. 2007. MYC2 differentially modulates diverse
jasmonate-dependent functions in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 19:2225–45
Dong X. 2004. NPR1, all things considered. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 7:547–52
Doornbos RF, Geraats BPJ, Kuramae EE, Van Loon LC, Bakker PAHM. 2011. Effects of jasmonic acid,
ethylene, and salicylic acid signaling on the rhizosphere bacterial community of Arabidopsis thaliana. Mol.
Plant-Microbe Interact. 24:395–407
Du L, Ali GS, Simons KA, Hou J, Yang T, et al. 2009. Ca2+/calmodulin regulates salicylic-acid-mediated
plant immunity. Nature 457:1154–58
Durrant WE, Wang S, Dong X. 2007. Arabidopsis SNI1 and RAD51D regulate both gene transcription and
DNA recombination during the defense response. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 104:4223–27
Shows the SA-JA
crosstalk in action:
necrotroph produces
elicitor that triggers
SA/NPR1 signaling,
which subsequently
downregulates effective
JA-dependent defenses
in the host.
El Oirdi M, Abd El Rahman T, Rigano L, El Hadrami A, Rodriguez MC, et al. 2011. Botrytis cinerea
manipulates the antagonistic effects between immune pathways to promote disease development
in tomato. Plant Cell 23:2405–21
Fan W, Dong X. 2002. In vivo interaction between NPR1 and transcription factor TGA2 leads to salicylic
acid-mediated gene activation in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 14:1377–89
Fernandez-Calvo P, Chini A, Fernandez-Barbero G, Chico JM, Gimenez-Ibanez S, et al. 2011. The Arabidopsis
bHLH transcription factors MYC3 and MYC4 are targets of JAZ repressors and act additively with MYC2
in the activation of jasmonate responses. Plant Cell 23:701–15
Flors V, Ton J, van Doorn R, Jakab G, Garcia-Agustin P, Mauch-Mani B. 2008. Interplay between JA, SA and
ABA signalling during basal and induced resistance against Pseudomonas syringae and Alternaria brassicicola.
Plant J. 54:81–92
Fonseca S, Chini A, Hamberg M, Adie B, Porzel A, et al. 2009. (+)-7-iso-Jasmonoyl-L-isoleucine is the
endogenous bioactive jasmonate. Nat. Chem. Biol. 5:344–50
Foyer CH, Noctor G. 2011. Ascorbate and glutathione: the heart of the redox hub. Plant Physiol. 155:2–18
Funk CD. 2001. Prostaglandins and leukotrienes: advances in eicosanoid biology. Science 294:1871–75
Demonstrates the
essential role of
WRKY50/51 in both
SA- and low
18:1-mediated
suppression of the JA
pathway.
Gao Q-M, Venugopal S, Navarre D, Kachroo A. 2011. Low oleic acid-derived repression of jasmonic
acid-inducible defense responses requires the WRKY50 and WRKY51 proteins. Plant Physiol.
155:464–76
Garcion C, M´etraux J-P. 2006. Salicylic acid. In Plant Hormone Signaling: Annual Plant Reviews, ed. P Hedden,
SG Thomas, 24:229–55. Oxford: Blackwell
Gfeller A, Dubugnon L, Liechti R, Farmer EE. 2010. Jasmonate biochemical pathway. Sci. Signal. 3:cm3
Glazebrook J. 2005. Contrasting mechanisms of defense against biotrophic and necrotrophic pathogens. Annu.
Rev. Phytopathol. 43:205–27
Glazebrook J, Chen W, Estes B, Chang H-S, Nawrath C, et al. 2003. Topology of the network integrating
salicylate and jasmonate signal transduction derived from global expression phenotyping. Plant J. 34:217–
28
Grunewald W, Vanholme B, Pauwels L, Plovie E, Inze D, et al. 2009. Expression of the Arabidopsis jasmonate
signalling repressor JAZ1/A01IT is stimulated by auxin. EMBO Rep. 10:923–28
Gutjahr C, Paszkowski U. 2009. Weights in the balance: jasmonic acid and salicylic acid signaling in root-
biotroph interactions. Mol. Plant-Microbe Interact. 22:763–72
514
Pieterse et al.
Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2012.28:489-521. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Utrecht University on 04/12/13. For personal use only.

----- Page 27 (native) -----
Harrison MJ. 2005. Signaling in the arbuscular mycorrhizal symbiosis. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 59:19–42
Higashi K, Ishiga Y, Inagaki Y, Toyoda K, Shiraishi T, Ichinose Y. 2008. Modulation of defense signal trans-
duction by ﬂagellin-induced WRKY41 transcription factor in Arabidopsis thaliana. Mol. Genet. Genomics
279:303–12
Hogenhout SA, Bos JIB. 2011. Effector proteins that modulate plant–insect interactions. Curr. Opin. Plant
Biol. 14:422–28
Establishes a molecular
link between the
GA-regulated DELLA
proteins and the JA
signaling pathway.
Hou X, Lee LYC, Xia K, Yen Y, Yu H. 2010. DELLAs modulate jasmonate signaling via competitive
binding to JAZs. Dev. Cell 19:884–94
Howe GA, Jander G. 2008. Plant immunity to insect herbivores. Annu. Rev. Plant Biol. 59:41–66
Ishiga Y, Uppalapati SR, Ishiga T, Bender CL. 2010. Exogenous coronatine, but not coronafacic acid or methyl
jasmonate, restores the disease phenotype of a coronatine-defective mutant of Pseudomonas syringae pv.
tomato on tomato seedlings. J. Gen. Plant Pathol. 76:188–95
Jacobs S, Zechmann B, Molitor A, Trujillo M, Petutschnig E, et al. 2011. Broad-spectrum suppression of
innate immunity is required for colonization of Arabidopsis roots by the fungus Piriformospora indica. Plant
Physiol. 156:726–40
Jaillais Y, Chory J. 2010. Unraveling the paradoxes of plant hormone signaling integration. Nat. Struct. Mol.
Biol. 17:642–45
Jelenska J, Van Hal JA, Greenberg JT. 2010. Pseudomonas syringae hijacks plant stress chaperone machinery
for virulence. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 107:13177–82
Jelenska J, Yao N, Vinatzer BA, Wright CM, Brodsky JL, Greenberg JT. 2007. A J domain virulence effector
of Pseudomonas syringae remodels host chloroplasts and suppresses defenses. Curr. Biol. 17:499–508
Jiang C-J, Shimono M, Sugano S, Kojima M, Yazawa K, et al. 2010. Abscisic acid interacts antagonistically
with salicylic acid signaling pathway in rice-Magnaporthe grisea interaction. Mol. Plant-Microbe Interact.
23:791–98
Johansson A, Staal J, Dixelius C. 2006. Early responses in the Arabidopsis-Verticillium longisporum pathosystem
are dependent on NDR1, JA- and ET-associated signals via cytosolic NPR1 and RFO1. Mol. Plant-Microbe
Interact. 19:958–69
Jones JDG, Dangl JL. 2006. The plant immune system. Nature 444:323–29
Journot-Catalino N, Somssich IE, Roby D, Kroj T. 2006. The transcription factors WRKY11 and WRKY17
act as negative regulators of basal resistance in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Cell 18:3289–302
Kachroo A, Lapchyk L, Fukushige H, Hildebrand D, Klessig D, Kachroo P. 2003. Plastidial fatty acid signaling
modulates salicylic acid- and jasmonic acid-mediated defense pathways in the Arabidopsis ssi2 mutant. Plant
Cell 15:2952–65
Kachroo P, Shanklin J, Shah J, Whittle EJ, Klessig DF. 2001. A fatty acid desaturase modulates the activation
of defense signaling pathways in plants. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98:9448–53
Katagiri F, Tsuda K. 2010. Understanding the plant immune system. Mol. Plant-Microbe Intact. 12:1531–36
Katsir L, Schilmiller AL, Staswick PE, He SY, Howe GA. 2008. COI1 is a critical component of a receptor
for jasmonate and the bacterial virulence factor coronatine. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 105:7100–5
Kazan K. 2006. Negative regulation of defence and stress genes by EAR-motif-containing repressors. Trends
Plant Sci. 11:109–12
Kazan K, Manners JM. 2009. Linking development to defense: auxin in plant-pathogen interactions. Trends
Plant Sci. 14:373–82
Kazan K, Manners JM. 2012. JAZ repressors and the orchestration of phytohormone crosstalk. Trends Plant
Sci. 17:22–31
Kesarwani M, Yoo J, Dong X. 2007. Genetic interactions of TGA transcription factors in the regulation of
pathogenesis-related genes and disease resistance in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol. 144:336–46
Kessler A, Halitschke R, Baldwin IT. 2004. Silencing the jasmonate cascade: induced plant defenses and insect
populations. Science 305:665–68
Provides ﬁrst evidence
(with Plett et al. 2011)
of symbiotic effector
that suppresses host
immunity.
Kloppholz S, Kuhn H, Requena N. 2011. A secreted fungal effector of Glomus intraradices promotes
symbiotic biotrophy. Curr. Biol. 21:1204–9
Knoester M, Pieterse CMJ, Bol JF, Van Loon LC. 1999. Systemic resistance in Arabidopsis induced by rhi-
zobacteria requires ethylene-dependent signaling at the site of application. Mol. Plant-Microbe Interact.
12:720–27
www.annualreviews.org • Hormonal Modulation of Plant Immunity
515
Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2012.28:489-521. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Utrecht University on 04/12/13. For personal use only.

----- Page 28 (native) -----
Koornneef A, Leon-Reyes A, Ritsema T, Verhage A, Den Otter FC, et al. 2008a. Kinetics of salicylate-mediated
suppression of jasmonate signaling reveal a role for redox modulation. Plant Physiol. 147:1358–68
Koornneef A, Rindermann K, Gatz C, Pieterse CMJ. 2008b. Histone modiﬁcations do not play a major role
in salicylate-mediated suppression of jasmonate-induced PDF1.2 gene expression. Commun. Integr. Biol.
1:143–45
Kunkel BN, Brooks DM. 2002. Cross talk between signaling pathways in pathogen defense. Curr. Opin. Plant
Biol. 5:325–31
Lackman P, Gonzalez-Guzman M, Tilleman S, Carqueijeiro I, Perez AC, et al. 2011. Jasmonate signaling
involves the abscisic acid receptor PYL4 to regulate metabolic reprogramming in Arabidopsis and tobacco.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 108:5891–96
Laudert D, Weiler EW. 1998. Allene oxide synthase: a major control point in Arabidopsis thaliana octadecanoid
signalling. Plant J. 15:675–84
Lawton KA, Potter SL, Uknes S, Ryals J. 1994. Acquired resistance signal transduction in Arabidopsis is ethylene
independent. Plant Cell 6:581–88
Lebel E, Heifetz P, Thorne L, Uknes S, Ryals J, Ward E. 1998. Functional analysis of regulatory sequences
controlling PR-1 gene expression in Arabidopsis. Plant J. 16:223–33
Leon-Reyes A, Du Y, Koornneef A, Proietti S, K¨orbes AP, et al. 2010a. Ethylene signaling renders the
jasmonate response of Arabidopsis insensitive to future suppression by salicylic acid. Mol. Plant-Microbe
Interact. 23:187–97
Demonstrates that ET
modulates the
NPR1-dependency of
SA-JA antagonism.
Leon-Reyes A, Spoel SH, De Lange ES, Abe H, Kobayashi M, et al. 2009. Ethylene modulates the
role of NONEXPRESSOR OF PATHOGENESIS-RELATED GENES1 in cross talk between
salicylate and jasmonate signaling. Plant Physiol. 149:1797–809
Leon-Reyes A, Van der Does D, De Lange ES, Delker C, Wasternack C, et al. 2010b. Salicylate-mediated sup-
pression of jasmonate-responsive gene expression in Arabidopsis is targeted downstream of the jasmonate
biosynthesis pathway. Planta 232:1423–32
Li J, Brader G, Kariola T, Palva ET. 2006. WRKY70 modulates the selection of signaling pathways in plant
defense. Plant J. 46:477–91
Li J, Brader G, Palva ET. 2004. The WRKY70 transcription factor: a node of convergence for jasmonate-
mediated and salicylate-mediated signals in plant defense. Plant Cell 16:319–31
Li X, Zhang Y, Clarke JD, Li Y, Dong X. 1999. Identiﬁcation and cloning of a negative regulator of systemic
acquired resistance, SNI1, through a screen for suppressors of npr1-1. Cell 98:329–39
Lindermayr C, Saalbach G, Durner J. 2005. Proteomic identiﬁcation of S-nitrosylated proteins in Arabidopsis.
Plant Physiol. 137:921–30
Lorenzo O, Chico JM, Sanchez-Serrano JJ, Solano R. 2004. JASMONATE-INSENSITIVE1 encodes a MYC
transcription factor essential to discriminate between different jasmonate-regulated defense responses in
Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 16:1938–50
Lorenzo O, Piqueras R, S´anchez-Serrano JJ, Solano R. 2003. ETHYLENE RESPONSE FACTOR1 inte-
grates signals from ethylene and jasmonate pathways in plant defense. Plant Cell 15:165–78
Lugtenberg B, Kamilova F. 2009. Plant-growth-promoting rhizobacteria. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 63:541–56
Luna E, Bruce TJA, Roberts MR, Flors V, Ton J. 2012. Next-generation systemic acquired resistance. Plant
Physiol. 158:844–53
Mao P, Duan M, Wei C, Li Y. 2007. WRKY62 transcription factor acts downstream of cytosolic NPR1 and
negatively regulates jasmonate-responsive gene expression. Plant Cell Physiol. 48:833–42
McGrath KC, Dombrecht B, Manners JM, Schenk PM, Edgar CI, et al. 2005. Repressor- and activator-
type ethylene response factors functioning in jasmonate signaling and disease resistance identiﬁed via a
genome-wide screen of Arabidopsis transcription factor gene expression. Plant Physiol. 139:949–59
Melotto M, Underwood W, He S-Y. 2008. Role of stomata in plant innate immunity and foliar bacterial
diseases. Annu. Rev. Phytopathol. 46:101–22
Memelink J. 2009. Regulation of gene expression by jasmonate hormones. Phytochemistry 70:1560–70
Mersmann S, Bourdais G, Rietz S, Robatzek S. 2010. Ethylene signaling regulates accumulation of the FLS2
receptor and is required for the oxidative burst contributing to plant immunity. Plant Physiol. 154:391–400
Millet YA, Danna CH, Clay NK, Songnuan W, Simon MD, et al. 2010. Innate immune responses activated
in Arabidopsis roots by microbe-associated molecular patterns. Plant Cell 22:973–90
516
Pieterse et al.
Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2012.28:489-521. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Utrecht University on 04/12/13. For personal use only.

----- Page 29 (native) -----
Mishina TE, Zeier J. 2007. Pathogen-associated molecular pattern recognition rather than development of
tissue necrosis contributes to bacterial induction of systemic acquired resistance in Arabidopsis. Plant J.
50:500–13
Monaghan J, Germain H, Weihmann T, Li X. 2010. Dissecting plant defence signal transduction: modiﬁers
of snc1 in Arabidopsis. Can. J. Plant Pathol. 32:35–42
Moore JW, Loake GJ, Spoel SH. 2011. Transcription dynamics in plant immunity. Plant Cell 23:2809–20
Moreau M, Lindermayr C, Durner J, Klessig DF. 2010. NO synthesis and signaling in plants—Where do we
stand? Physiol. Plant. 138:372–83
Mundy J, Nielsen HB, Brodersen P. 2006. Crosstalk. Trends Plant Sci. 11:63–64
Mur LAJ, Kenton P, Atzorn R, Miersch O, Wasternack C. 2006. The outcomes of concentration-speciﬁc
interactions between salicylate and jasmonate signaling include synergy, antagonism, and oxidative stress
leading to cell death. Plant Physiol. 140:249–62
Nakashima K, Tran L-SP, Van Nguyen D, Fujita M, Maruyama K, et al. 2007. Functional analysis of a NAC-
type transcription factor OsNAC6 involved in abiotic and biotic stress-responsive gene expression in rice.
Plant J. 51:617–30
Nakashita H, Yasuda M, Nitta T, Asami T, Fujioka S, et al. 2003. Brassinosteroid functions in a broad range
of disease resistance in tobacco and rice. Plant J. 33:887–98
Navarro L, Bari R, Achard P, Lison P, Nemri A, et al. 2008. DELLAs control plant immune responses by
modulating the balance of jasmonic acid and salicylic acid signaling. Curr. Biol. 18:650–55
Navarro L, Dunoyer P, Jay F, Arnold B, Dharmasiri N, et al. 2006. A plant miRNA contributes to antibacterial
resistance by repressing auxin signaling. Science 312:436–39
Ndamukong I, Abdallat AA, Thurow C, Fode B, Zander M, et al. 2007. SA-inducible Arabidopsis glutaredoxin
interacts with TGA factors and suppresses JA-responsive PDF1.2 transcription. Plant J. 50:128–39
Niu Y, Figueroa P, Browse J. 2011. Characterization of JAZ-interacting bHLH transcription factors that
regulate jasmonate responses in Arabidopsis. J. Exp. Bot. 62:2143–54
Nomura K, Melotto M, He S-Y. 2005. Suppression of host defense in compatible plant-Pseudomonas syringae
interactions. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 8:361–68
Pan Z, Camara B, Gardner HW, Backhaus RA. 1998. Aspirin inhibition and acetylation of the plant cytochrome
P450, allene oxide synthase, resembles that of animal prostaglandin endoperoxide H synthase. J. Biol.
Chem. 273:18139–45
Pape S, Thurow C, Gatz C. 2010. The Arabidopsis PR-1 promoter contains multiple integration sites for the
coactivator NPR1 and the repressor SNI. Plant Physiol. 154:1805–18
Describes novel
components of the
SCFCOI1/JAZ repressor
complex that can be
targeted by multiple
hormone pathways.
Pauwels L, Barbero GF, Geerinck J, Tilleman S, Grunewald W, et al. 2010. NINJA connects the
co-repressor TOPLESS to jasmonate signalling. Nature 464:788–91
Pauwels L, Goossens A. 2011. The JAZ proteins: a crucial interface in the jasmonate signaling cascade. Plant
Cell 23:3089–100
Pe˜na-Cort´es H, Albrecht T, Prat S, Weiler EW, Willmitzer L. 1993. Aspirin prevents wound-induced gene
expression in tomato leaves by blocking jasmonic acid biosynthesis. Planta 191:123–28
PetersenM,BrodersenP,Naested H,AndreassonE,Lindhart U,et al.2000.Arabidopsis map kinase 4 negatively
regulates systemic acquired resistance. Cell 103:1111–20
Pﬂuger J, Wagner D. 2007. Histone modiﬁcations and dynamic regulation of genome accessibility in plants.
Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 10:645–52
Pieterse CMJ, Leon-Reyes A, Van der Ent S, Van Wees SCM. 2009. Networking by small-molecule hormones
in plant immunity. Nat. Chem. Biol. 5:308–16
Pineda A, Zheng S-J, Van Loon JJA, Pieterse CMJ, Dicke M. 2010. Helping plants to deal with insects: the
role of beneﬁcial soil-borne microbes. Trends Plant Sci. 15:507–14
Plett JM, Kemppainen M, Kale SD, Kohler A, Legue V, et al. 2011. A secreted effector protein of Laccaria
bicolor is required for symbiosis development. Curr. Biol. 21:1197–203
Poelman EH, Broekgaarden C, Van Loon JJ, Dicke M. 2008a. Early season herbivore differentially affects
plant defence responses to subsequently colonizing herbivores and their abundance in the ﬁeld. Mol. Ecol.
17:3352–65
Poelman EH, van Loon JJA, Dicke M. 2008b. Consequences of variation in plant defense for biodiversity at
higher trophic levels. Trends Plant Sci. 13:534–41
www.annualreviews.org • Hormonal Modulation of Plant Immunity
517
Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2012.28:489-521. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Utrecht University on 04/12/13. For personal use only.

----- Page 30 (native) -----
Pozo MJ, Van der Ent S, Van Loon LC, Pieterse CMJ. 2008. Transcription factor MYC2 is involved in
priming for enhanced defense during rhizobacteria-induced systemic resistance in Arabidopsis thaliana.
New Phytol. 180:511–23
Pr´e M, Atallah M, Champion A, De Vos M, Pieterse CMJ, Memelink J. 2008. The AP2/ERF domain tran-
scription factor ORA59 integrates jasmonic acid and ethylene signals in plant defense. Plant Physiol.
147:1347–57
Ramirez V, Van der Ent S, Garcia-Andrade J, Coego A, Pieterse CMJ, Vera P. 2010. OCP3 is an important
modulator of NPR1-mediated jasmonic acid-dependent induced defenses in Arabidopsis. BMC Plant Biol.
10:199
Ren C-M, Zhu Q, Gao B-D, Ke S-Y, Yu W-C, et al. 2008. Transcription factor WRKY70 displays important
but no indispensable roles in jasmonate and salicylic acid signaling. J. Integr. Plant Biol. 50:630–37
Reymond P, Farmer EE. 1998. Jasmonate and salicylate as global signals for defense gene expression. Curr.
Opin. Plant Biol. 1:404–11
Ritsema T, Van Zanten M, Leon-Reyes A, Voesenek LACJ, Millenaar FF, et al. 2010. Kinome proﬁling
reveals an interaction between jasmonate, salicylate and light control of hyponastic petiole growth in
Arabidopsis thaliana. PLoS ONE 5:e14255
Robert-Seilaniantz A, Grant M, Jones JDG. 2011a. Hormone crosstalk in plant disease and defense: more
than just jasmonate-salicylate antagonism. Annu. Rev. Phytopathol. 49:317–43
Robert-Seilaniantz A, MacLean D, Jikumaru Y, Hill L, Yamaguchi S, et al. 2011b. The microRNA miR393
re-directs secondary metabolite biosynthesis away from camalexin and towards glucosinolates. Plant J.
67:218–31
Rodriguez MCS, Petersen M, Mundy J. 2010. Mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling in plants. Annu.
Rev. Plant Biol. 61:621–49
Rushton PJ, Somssich IE, Ringler P, Shen QJ. 2010. WRKY transcription factors. Trends Plant Sci. 15:247–
58
Santner A, Estelle M. 2009. Recent advances and emerging trends in plant hormone signalling. Nature
459:1071–78
Sarmento RA, Lemos F, Bleeker PM, Schuurink RC, Pallini A, et al. 2011. A herbivore that manipulates plant
defence. Ecol. Lett. 14:229–36
Sato M, Tsuda K, Wang L, Coller J, Watanabe Y, et al. 2010. Network modeling reveals prevalent neg-
ative regulatory relationships between signaling sectors in Arabidopsis immune signaling. PLoS Pathog.
6:e1001011
Schenk PM, Kazan K, Wilson I, Anderson JP, Richmond T, et al. 2000. Coordinated plant defense responses
in Arabidopsis revealed by microarray analysis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97:11655–60
Schoonhoven LM, Van Loon JJA, Dicke M. 2005. Insect-Plant Biology. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press
Seo HS, Song JT, Cheong J-J, Lee Y-H, Lee Y-W, et al. 2001. Jasmonic acid carboxyl methyltransferase: a
key enzyme for jasmonate-regulated plant responses. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98:4788–93
Sheard LB, Tan X, Mao HB, Withers J, Ben-Nissan G, et al. 2010. Jasmonate perception by inositol-
phosphate-potentiated COI1-JAZ co-receptor. Nature 468:400–5
Shoresh M, Harman GE, Mastouri F. 2010. Induced systemic resistance and plant responses to fungal bio-
control agents. Annu. Rev. Phytopathol. 48:21–43
Sirrenberg A, Goebel C, Grond S, Czempinski N, Ratzinger A, et al. 2007. Piriformospora indica affects plant
growth by auxin production. Physiol. Plant. 131:581–89
Song J, Durrant WE, Wang S, Yan S, Tan EH, Dong X. 2011. DNA repair proteins are directly involved in
regulation of gene expression during plant immune response. Cell Host Microbe 9:115–24
Spaink HP. 2000. Root nodulation and infection factors produced by rhizobial bacteria. Annu. Rev. Microbiol.
54:257–88
Spoel SH, Dong X. 2008. Making sense of hormone crosstalk during plant immune responses. Cell Host Microbe
3:348–51
Spoel SH, Johnson JS, Dong X. 2007. Regulation of tradeoffs between plant defenses against pathogens with
different lifestyles. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 104:18842–47
518
Pieterse et al.
Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2012.28:489-521. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Utrecht University on 04/12/13. For personal use only.

----- Page 31 (native) -----
Spoel SH, Koornneef A, Claessens SMC, Korzelius JP, Van Pelt JA, et al. 2003. NPR1 modulates cross-talk
between salicylate- and jasmonate-dependent defense pathways through a novel function in the cytosol.
Plant Cell 15:760–70
Spoel SH, Loake GJ. 2011. Redox-based protein modiﬁcations: the missing link in plant immune signalling.
Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 14:358–64
Spoel SH, Mou ZL, Tada Y, Spivey NW, Genschik P, Dong X. 2009. Proteasome-mediated turnover of the
transcription coactivator NPR1 plays dual roles in regulating plant immunity. Cell 137:860–72
Staswick PE, Tiryaki I. 2004. The oxylipin signal jasmonic acid is activated by an enzyme that conjugates it
to isoleucine in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 16:2117–27
Stein E, Molitor A, Kogel KH, Waller F. 2008. Systemic resistance in Arabidopsis conferred by the mycorrhizal
fungus Piriformospora indica requires jasmonic acid signaling and the cytoplasmic function of NPR1. Plant
Cell Physiol. 49:1747–51
Sun T-P. 2011. The molecular mechanism and evolution of the GA-GID1-DELLA signaling module in
plants. Curr. Biol. 21:R338–R45
Describes the role of
thioredoxins and
S-nitrosylation in the
NPR1 monomer-
oligomer homeostasis.
Tada Y, Spoel SH, Pajerowska-Mukhtar K, Mou Z, Song J, et al. 2008. Plant immunity requires
conformational changes of NPR1 via S-nitrosylation and thioredoxins. Science 321:952–56
Thomma BPHJ, Nurnberger T, Joosten MHAJ. 2011. Of PAMPs and effectors: the blurred PTI-ETI di-
chotomy. Plant Cell 23:4–15
Ton J, Flors V, Mauch-Mani B. 2009. The multifaceted role of ABA in disease resistance. Trends Plant Sci.
14:310–17
Tsuda K, Sato M, Stoddard T, Glazebrook J, Katagiri F. 2009. Network properties of robust immunity in
plants. PLoS Genet. 5:e1000772
Van der Ent S, Van Hulten MHA, Pozo MJ, Czechowski T, Udvardi MK, et al. 2009a. Priming of plant
innate immunity by rhizobacteria and β-aminobutyric acid: differences and similarities in regulation.
New Phytol. 183:419–31
Van der Ent S, Van Wees SCM, Pieterse CMJ. 2009b. Jasmonate signaling in plant interactions with resistance-
inducing beneﬁcial microbes. Phytochemistry 70:1581–88
Van der Ent S, Verhagen BWM, Van Doorn R, Bakker D, Verlaan MG, et al. 2008. MYB72 is required in early
signaling steps of rhizobacteria-induced systemic resistance in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol. 146:1293–304
Van Loon LC, Geraats BPJ, Linthorst HJM. 2006a. Ethylene as a modulator of disease resistance in plants.
Trends Plant Sci. 11:184–91
Van Loon LC, Rep M, Pieterse CMJ. 2006b. Signiﬁcance of inducible defense-related proteins in infected
plants. Annu. Rev. Phytopathol. 44:135–62
Van Oosten VR, Bodenhausen N, Reymond P, Van Pelt JA, Van Loon LC, et al. 2008. Differential effectiveness
of microbially induced resistance against herbivorous insects in Arabidopsis. Mol. Plant-Microbe Interact.
21:919–30
Van Verk MC, Bol JF, Linthorst HJM. 2011. Prospecting for genes involved in transcriptional regulation of
plant defenses, a bioinformatics approach. BMC Plant Biol. 11:88
Van Wees SCM, De Swart EAM, Van Pelt JA, Van Loon LC, Pieterse CMJ. 2000. Enhancement of induced
disease resistance by simultaneous activation of salicylate- and jasmonate-dependent defense pathways in
Arabidopsis thaliana. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97:8711–16
Van Wees SCM, Luijendijk M, Smoorenburg I, Van Loon LC, Pieterse CMJ. 1999. Rhizobacteria-mediated
induced systemic resistance (ISR) in Arabidopsis is not associated with a direct effect on expression of
known defense-related genes but stimulates the expression of the jasmonate-inducible gene Atvsp upon
challenge. Plant Mol. Biol. 41:537–49
Van Wees SCM, Van der Ent S, Pieterse CMJ. 2008. Plant immune responses triggered by beneﬁcial microbes.
Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 11:443–48
Verberne MC, Hoekstra J, Bol JF, Linthorst HJM. 2003. Signaling of systemic acquired resistance in tobacco
depends on ethylene perception. Plant J. 35:27–32
Verhage A, van Wees SCM, Pieterse CMJ. 2010. Plant immunity: It’s the hormones talking, but what do they
say? Plant Physiol. 154:536–40
Describes modulation
of the ERF and MYC
branches of the JA
pathway during a
plant-insect warfare.
Verhage A, Vlaardingerbroek I, Raaymakers C, Van Dam N, Dicke M, et al. 2011. Rewiring of the
jasmonate signaling pathway in Arabidopsis during insect herbivory. Front. Plant Sci. 2:47
www.annualreviews.org • Hormonal Modulation of Plant Immunity
519
Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2012.28:489-521. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Utrecht University on 04/12/13. For personal use only.

----- Page 32 (native) -----
Vlot AC, Dempsey DA, Klessig DF. 2009. Salicylic acid, a multifaceted hormone to combat disease. Annu.
Rev. Phytopathol. 47:177–206
Von Dahl CC, Baldwin IT. 2007. Deciphering the role of ethylene in plant-herbivore interactions. J. Plant
Growth Regul. 26:201–9
Walling LL. 2008. Avoiding effective defenses: strategies employed by phloem-feeding insects. Plant Physiol.
146:859–66
Walters D, Heil M. 2007. Costs and trade-offs associated with induced resistance. Physiol. Mol. Plant Pathol.
71:3–17
Walters DR, McRoberts N. 2006. Plants and biotrophs: a pivotal role for cytokinins? Trends Plant Sci. 11:581–
86
Wang D, Amornsiripanitch N, Dong X. 2006. A genomic approach to identify regulatory nodes in the tran-
scriptional network of systemic acquired resistance in plants. PLoS Pathog. 2:1042–50
Wang D, Pajerowska-Mukhtar K, Hendrickson Culler A, Dong X. 2007. Salicylic acid inhibits pathogen
growth in plants through repression of the auxin signaling pathway. Curr. Biol. 17:1784–90
Wang S, Durrant WE, Song J, Spivey NW, Dong X. 2010. Arabidopsis BRCA2 and RAD51 proteins are
speciﬁcally involved in defense gene transcription during plant immune responses. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 107:22716–21
Wasternack C. 2007. Jasmonates: an update on biosynthesis, signal transduction and action in plant stress
response, growth and development. Ann. Bot. 100:681–97
Weech MH, Chapleau M, Pan L, Ide C, Bede JC. 2008. Caterpillar saliva interferes with induced Arabidopsis
thaliana defence responses via the systemic acquired resistance pathway. J. Exp. Bot. 59:2437–48
Weigel RR, Pﬁtzner UM, Gatz C. 2005. Interaction of NIMIN1 with NPR1 modulates PR gene expression
in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 17:1279–91
Wiermer M, Feys BJ, Parker JE. 2005. Plant immunity: the EDS1 regulatory node. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol.
8:383–89
Wu J, Baldwin IT. 2010. New insights into plant responses to the attack from insect herbivores. Annu. Rev.
Genet. 44:1–24
Wu Y, Deng Z, Lai J, Zhang Y, Yang C, et al. 2009. Dual function of Arabidopsis ATAF1 in abiotic and biotic
stress responses. Cell Res. 19:1279–90
Xu X, Chen C, Fan B, Chen Z. 2006. Physical and functional interactions between pathogen-induced Ara-
bidopsis WRKY18, WRKY40, and WRKY60 transcription factors. Plant Cell 18:1310–26
Yang J, Kloepper JW, Ryu CM. 2009. Rhizosphere bacteria help plants tolerate abiotic stress. Trends Plant
Sci. 14:1–4
Yasuda M, Ishikawa A, Jikumaru Y, Seki M, Umezawa T, et al. 2008. Antagonistic interaction between
systemic acquired resistance and the abscisic acid-mediated abiotic stress response in Arabidopsis. Plant
Cell 20:1678–92
Yuan Y, Zhong S, Li Q, Zhu Z, Lou Y, et al. 2007. Functional analysis of rice NPR1-like genes reveals that
OsNPR1/NH1 is the rice orthologue conferring disease resistance with enhanced herbivore susceptibility.
Plant Biotechnol. J. 5:313–24
Zamioudis C, Pieterse CMJ. 2012. Modulation of host immunity by beneﬁcial microbes. Mol. Plant-Microbe
Interact. 25:139–50
Zander M, Chen S, Imkampe J, Thurow C, Gatz C. 2012. Repression of the Arabidopsis thaliana jasmonic
acid/ethylene-induced defense pathway by TGA-interacting glutaredoxins depends on their C-terminal
ALWL motif. Mol. Plant 5:831–40
Describes the essential
role of TGAs in the
antagonistic effect of SA
on JA/ET-induced
defense responses.
Zander M, La Camera S, Lamotte O, M´etraux J-P, Gatz C. 2009. Arabidopsis thaliana class-II TGA
transcription factors are essential activators of jasmonic acid/ethylene-induced defense responses.
Plant J. 61:200–10
Zarate SI, Kempema LA, Walling LL. 2007. Silverleaf whiteﬂy induces salicylic acid defenses and suppresses
effectual jasmonic acid defenses. Plant Physiol. 143:866–75
Zhang PJ, Zheng SJ, Van Loon JJA, Boland W, David A, et al. 2009. Whiteﬂies interfere with indirect plant
defense against spider mites in lima bean. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 106:21202–7
520
Pieterse et al.
Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2012.28:489-521. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Utrecht University on 04/12/13. For personal use only.

----- Page 33 (native) -----
Zhang YL, Tessaro MJ, Lassner M, Li X. 2003. Knockout analysis of Arabidopsis transcription factors TGA2,
TGA5, and TGA6 reveals their redundant and essential roles in systemic acquired resistance. Plant Cell
15:2647–53
Establishes a molecular
link between JAZ
proteins and the ERF
branch of the JA
signaling pathway.
Zhu Z, An F, Feng Y, Li P, Xue L, et al. 2011. Derepression of ethylene-stabilized transcription factors
(EIN3/EIL1) mediates jasmonate and ethylene signaling synergy in Arabidopsis. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 108:12539–44
Zipfel C. 2009. Early molecular events in PAMP-triggered immunity. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 12:414–20
www.annualreviews.org • Hormonal Modulation of Plant Immunity
521
Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2012.28:489-521. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Utrecht University on 04/12/13. For personal use only.

----- Page 34 (native) -----
Annual Review
of Cell and
Developmental
Biology
Volume 28, 2012 Contents
A Man for All Seasons: Reﬂections on the Life and Legacy
of George Palade
Marilyn G. Farquhar p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 1
Cytokinesis in Animal Cells
Rebecca A. Green, Ewa Paluch, and Karen Oegema p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p29
Driving the Cell Cycle Through Metabolism
Ling Cai and Benjamin P. Tu p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p59
Dynamic Reorganization of Metabolic Enzymes
into Intracellular Bodies
Jeremy D. O’Connell, Alice Zhao, Andrew D. Ellington,
and Edward M. Marcotte p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p89
Mechanisms of Intracellular Scaling
Daniel L. Levy and Rebecca Heald p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 113
Inﬂammasomes and Their Roles in Health and Disease
Mohamed Lamkanﬁand Vishva M. Dixit p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 137
Nuclear Organization and Genome Function
Kevin Van Bortle and Victor G. Corces p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 163
New Insights into the Troubles of Aneuploidy
Jake J. Siegel and Angelika Amon
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 189
Dynamic Organizing Principles of the Plasma Membrane that
Regulate Signal Transduction: Commemorating the Fortieth
Anniversary of Singer and Nicolson’s Fluid-Mosaic Model
Akihiro Kusumi, Takahiro K. Fujiwara, Rahul Chadda, Min Xie,
Taka A. Tsunoyama, Ziya Kalay, Rinshi S. Kasai, and Kenichi G.N. Suzuki p p p p p p p p 215
Structural Basis of the Unfolded Protein Response
Alexei Korennykh and Peter Walter p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 251
viii
Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2012.28:489-521. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Utrecht University on 04/12/13. For personal use only.

----- Page 35 (native) -----
The Membrane Fusion Enigma: SNAREs, Sec1/Munc18 Proteins,
and Their Accomplices—Guilty as Charged?
Josep Rizo and Thomas C. S¨udhof p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 279
Diversity of Clathrin Function: New Tricks for an Old Protein
Frances M. Brodsky p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 309
Multivesicular Body Morphogenesis
Phyllis I. Hanson and Anil Cashikar
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 337
Beyond Homeostasis: A Predictive-Dynamic Framework
for Understanding Cellular Behavior
Peter L. Freddolino and Saeed Tavazoie
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 363
Bioengineering Methods for Analysis of Cells In Vitro
Gregory H. Underhill, Peter Galie, Christopher S. Chen,
and Sangeeta N. Bhatia p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 385
Emerging Roles for Lipid Droplets in Immunity
and Host-Pathogen Interactions
Hector Alex Saka and Raphael Valdivia p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 411
Second Messenger Regulation of Bioﬁlm Formation:
Breakthroughs in Understanding c-di-GMP Effector Systems
Chelsea D. Boyd and George A. O’Toole
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 439
Hormonal Interactions in the Regulation of Plant Development
Marleen Vanstraelen and Eva Benkov´a p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 463
Hormonal Modulation of Plant Immunity
Corn´e M.J. Pieterse, Dieuwertje Van der Does, Christos Zamioudis,
Antonio Leon-Reyes, and Saskia C.M. Van Wees p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 489
Functional Diversity of Laminins
Anna Domogatskaya, Sergey Rodin, and Karl Tryggvason
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 523
LINE-1 Retrotransposition in the Nervous System
Charles A. Thomas, Apu˜a C.M. Paquola, and Alysson R. Muotri p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 555
Axon Degeneration and Regeneration: Insights from Drosophila Models
of Nerve Injury
Yanshan Fang and Nancy M. Bonini p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 575
Cell Polarity as a Regulator of Cancer Cell Behavior Plasticity
Senthil K. Muthuswamy and Bin Xue
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 599
Planar Cell Polarity and the Developmental Control of Cell Behavior
in Vertebrate Embryos
John B. Wallingford p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 627
Contents
ix
Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2012.28:489-521. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Utrecht University on 04/12/13. For personal use only.

----- Page 36 (native) -----
The Apical Polarity Protein Network in Drosophila Epithelial Cells:
Regulation of Polarity, Junctions, Morphogenesis, Cell Growth,
and Survival
Ulrich Tepass p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 655
Gastrulation: Making and Shaping Germ Layers
Lila Solnica-Krezel and Diane S. Sepich p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 687
Cardiac Regenerative Capacity and Mechanisms
Kazu Kikuchi and Kenneth D. Poss p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 719
Paths Less Traveled: Evo-Devo Approaches to Investigating Animal
Morphological Evolution
Ricardo Mallarino and Arhat Abzhanov p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 743
Indexes
Cumulative Index of Contributing Authors, Volumes 24–28 p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 765
Cumulative Index of Chapter Titles, Volumes 24–28 p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p 768
Errata
An online log of corrections to Annual Review of Cell and Developmental Biology articles
may be found at http://cellbio.annualreviews.org/errata.shtml
x
Contents
Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2012.28:489-521. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
by Utrecht University on 04/12/13. For personal use only.