

----- Page 1 (native) -----
12 PERVASIVE computing
Published by the IEEE CS   n   1536-1268/08/$25.00 © 2008 IEEE
U s e r - G e n e r a t e d  C o n t e n t
OpenStreetMap:  
User-Generated Street Maps
Mordechai (Muki) Haklay  
and Patrick Weber
University College London
The OpenStreetMap project is a knowledge collective that provides  
user-generated street maps.
T
he process of mapping the Earth 
accurately was, until recently, the 
preserve of highly skilled, well-
equipped, and organized individ-
uals and groups. For many years, 
it was usually the role of surveyors, cartogra-
phers, and geographers to map the world and 
transcribe it on paper or, since the 1960s, into 
the computer. Lewis and Clark’s expedition to 
map North America’s West, and Lambton and 
Everest’s Great Arc expedition to measure India, 
are just two famous episodes in the history of 
maps and map making. Each country has an 
established national mapping agency charged 
with keeping the national maps accurate and 
current (for example, the US Geological Survey 
and the UK Ordnance Survey). 
Less than a decade ago, it was common to as-
sume that a person needed a university-level de-
gree to be able to measure the 
Earth and transcribe the in-
formation on paper or into the 
computer as well as expensive 
equipment and infrastructure 
to support his or her work.
This, however, has changed 
dramatically over the past de-
cade. On 1 May 2000, US President Bill Clinton 
announced the removal of selective availability 
of the GPS signal1 and, by so doing, provided 
much improved accuracy for simple, low-cost 
GPS receivers. In practical terms, this made it 
possible to acquire the receiver’s position with 
an accuracy of 6 to 10 meters in normal condi-
tions, in contrast to roughly 100 meters before 
the “switch off.” Attempts to develop location-
based services predated this announcement2 
and were based on information from mobile 
phone masts or other beacons. However, these 
methods hadn’t gained much market share ow-
ing to their technical complexity and inability 
to provide a universal coverage. In contrast, 
GPS enabled the development of cheap receiv-
ers with good positional accuracy, and, by mid-
2001, it was possible to purchase a receiver unit 
for roughly US$100.3 These receivers helped 
more people than ever before collect informa-
tion about different locations and upload it to 
their computers. However, until 2002, when an 
interchange standard (GPS eXchange format or 
GPX) was published, manipulating and sharing 
this information was a complicated task that 
required computing and data manipulation 
knowledge. Fortunately, most GPS receiver 
developers rapidly adopted the GPX standard, 
and, by 2004, it had become commonplace 
(www.topografix.com/gpx.asp).
The wide availability of high-quality location 
information has enabled mass-market mapping 
based on affordable GPS receivers, home com-
puters, and the Internet. Although a range of 
projects based on user-generated mapping has 
emerged, OpenStreetMap (OSM) is probably 
the most extensive and effective project cur-
rently under development. In this article, we re-
view the project and provide an overview for the 
techniques and methodologies used within it. 
OpenStreetMap Background 
Technological changes over the past 10 years, 
in combination with increased bandwidth and 
the ability to provide better tools for collabo-
ration, have led to “crowdsourcing”4—a term 
developed from the concept of outsourcing in 
which business operations are transferred to re-
mote, many times cheaper locations.5 Similarly,

----- Page 2 (native) -----
October–december 2008 
PERVASIVE computing 13
crowdsourcing is how large groups of 
users can perform functions that are ei-
ther difficult to automate or expensive 
to implement. 
OSM follows the peer production 
model that created Wikipedia; its aim 
is to create a set of map data that’s free 
to use, editable, and licensed under new 
copyright schemes. The project, born 
at University College London (UCL) in 
July 2004, was founded by Steve Coast; 
although Coast moved on to start his 
own company, UCL still supports and 
hosts the main server infrastructure. 
As of May 2008, OSM had more than 
33,000 registered users (with approxi-
mately 3,500 currently active contrib-
utors), and data contribution growth 
continues to rise quickly (see Figure 1). 
A considerable number of contributors 
edit the world map collaboratively us-
ing the OSM technical infrastructure, 
and a core group, estimated at approx-
imately 40 volunteers, dedicate their 
time to creating and improving OSM’s 
infrastructure, including maintaining 
the server, writing the core software 
that handles the transactions with the 
server, and creating cartographical 
outputs. There’s also a growing com-
munity of software developers who de-
velop software tools to make OSM data 
available for further use across differ-
ent application domains, software plat-
forms, and hardware devices.
A key motivation for this project is to 
enable free access to current geograph-
ical information where, in European 
countries, accurate digital geographical 
information is considered to be expen-
sive and out of the reach of individu-
als, small businesses, and community 
organizations. In the US, where basic 
road information is available through 
the US Census Bureau’s Tiger (Topolog-
ically Integrated Geographic Encoding 
and Referencing)/Line program, the 
details provided are limited to streets 
and roads only; it doesn’t include green 
space, landmarks, and the like. In ad-
dition, owing to the high cost of map-
ping, the Tiger system’s update cycles 
are infrequent and don’t take into ac-
count rapid changes. Commercial geo-
graphical information products from 
providers such as NAVTEQ are also 
expensive and aren’t available for indi-
vidual users in an accessible format.
The OSM project’s hub is the main 
OSM Web site (www.openstreetmap.
org), which contains four parts. Visitors 
are first greeted with a Google Maps-
style online mapping interface, which 
lets visitors pan, zoom, and search the 
OSM world map and discover which 
geographical areas are completed. An 
500
450
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
50,000
45,000
40,000
35,000
30,000
25,000
20,000
15,000
10,000
5,000
0
Date
Track point (millions)
Users
08/08/05
05/09/05
03/10/05
31/10/05
28/12/05
26/12/05
23/01/06
20/02/06
20/03/06
17/04/06
15/05/06
12/06/06
10/07/06
07/08/06
04/09/06
02/10/06
30/11/06
27/11/06
25/12/06
22/01/07
19/02/07
19/03/07
16/04/07
14/05/07
11/06/07
09/07/07
06/08/07
03/09/07
01/10/07
29/10/07
26/11/07
24/12/07
21/01/08
18/02/08
17/03/08
14/04/08
12/05/08
09/06/08
07/07/08
Track points
OpenStreetMap (OSM) registered users
Figure 1. Graph of user and contributions growth to OSM on a monthly basis. The graph shows the accelerating growth in 
number of users and the rapid increase in data entry measured in track points (source: http://wiki.openstreetmap.org).

----- Page 3 (native) -----
14 
PERVASIVE computing
www.computer.org/pervasive
User-Generated Content
export function allows users to down-
load portions of the OSM information 
in different raster and vector formats 
for further use or processing. The edit-
ing tab allows anyone to contribute to 
the project by digitizing geographical 
features, uploading GPX traces from 
hand-held GPS units, or correcting er-
rors they might have discovered in their 
local areas. The OSM community wiki, 
open for all registered users, contains 
information about the project and of-
fers guidance on best practices to ca-
sual and advanced mapping contribu-
tors and an extensive documentation of 
the project’s technical infrastructure. 
Noticeably, OSM decided to follow 
the route of allowing only registered 
users to edit the map, not following 
Wikipedia’s open-for-all approach. 
OSM project leads wanted the ability 
to trace the information source in case 
of copyright disputes and ensure the in-
formation was maintained.  
In the following sections, we describe 
the OSM GeoStack — the set of tools 
that lets users capture, produce, com-
municate, aggregate, and consume the 
geographical information produced in 
the project (see other work6 for further 
discussion of the GeoStack). As already 
noted, the Web site provides a mecha-
nism to consume OSM data — but in 
the next section we move to the starting 
point of the stack, where data is cap-
tured and produced. 
Editing Tools
User-contributed geographical informa-
tion is obviously a core part of OSM, 
and the OSM developer community has 
made a considerable effort to implement 
tools to facilitate user contributions to 
the database. For most casual contribu-
tors, the OSM Web site offers a light-
weight online Flash-based editor, Pot-
latch, which lets users add, update, or 
delete geographical features through a 
relatively easy-to-use interface. The in-
terface is kept deliberately simple, with 
more advanced functionality provided 
through keyboard shortcuts; Potlatch 
gives extensive guidance to users by 
providing predefined tagging schemas 
for frequently occurring features (such 
as motorways or primary roads). 
Potlatch also lets users upload and 
integrate GPX tracks recorded from 
handheld GPS units. Other important 
data sources from which users trace 
road networks and other features is 
satellite imagery and out-of-copyright 
maps, which are integrated into the 
mapping interface. Notably, at the end 
of 2006, Yahoo granted OSM the right 
to use its satellite imagery Web service 
to trace roads and other features. For 
example, Yahoo hosts detailed aerial 
imagery of Baghdad, Iraq, which let 
OSM contributors remotely map the 
city in great detail, resulting in the most 
detailed online map of Baghdad to date. 
However, this map is based solely on 
amateur image interpretation, and, de-
spite the original effort, very little fur-
ther information (such as street names) 
has been added to the map. 
More experienced OSM contributors 
also use the Java OpenStreetMap Editor 
(JOSM), an editing suite with an inter-
face more akin to traditional geographi-
cal information systems (GIS) packages. 
The application lets users import, edit, 
and tag OSM data offline and allows 
bulk uploads of OSM updates through 
the OSM application programming in-
terface (API). JOSM offers advanced 
functionalities such as linking OSM 
features to photos and audio notes, 
supports data conflict resolutions, and 
can be extended using several indepen-
dently developed plug-ins. Examples 
of user-contributed plug-ins include 
custom Web mapping service (WMS) 
background imagery and Yahoo aerial 
imagery, live recording of external GPS 
data, and a data and tagging scheme 
validation tool, to name just a few.
Apart from individual user contribu-
tions from GPS tracks and the digitizing 
of aerial imagery, OSM has also taken 
advantage of the availability of free geo-
graphical information in certain parts 
of the world. For example, over the past 
year, US contributors have imported the 
public-domain Tiger information, add-
ing to OSM’s comprehensive street and 
highway coverage for the entire US. 
In July 2007, commercial navigation 
information provider AND (Automo-
tive Navigation Data) donated the en-
tire street map of the Netherlands to 
the project, thus completing street-level 
mapping of the first country in OSM. 
Local and national authorities have 
contributed information to the project 
as well—for example, the Isle of Man’s 
Department for Local Government and 
the Environment donated geographical 
information to OSM, enabling the cre-
ation of an excellent map of the island.
Technical Infrastructure
The next element of the GeoStack fo-
cuses on the way in which geographi-
cal information is stored and orga-
nized. Here, at the core of OSM data 
management, it’s easy to see how open 
source philosophy permeates the proj-
ect’s technical infrastructure. OSM is 
built iteratively using the principle that 
the simplest approach to any problem 
is the best way to ensure the success of 
the project as a whole. OSM’s develop-
ers deliberately steered away from us-
ing existing standards for geographical 
information from standard bodies such 
as the Open Geospatial Consortium 
(OGC)—for example, its WMS stan-
dard. They felt that most such tools and 
standards are hard to use and maintain, 
citing performance issues with, for in-
stance, MapServer (a popular open 
OpenStreetMap’s aim is to create a set of map 
data that’s free to use, editable, and licensed 
under new copyright schemes.

----- Page 4 (native) -----
October–december 2008 
PERVASIVE computing 15
source WMS) and a lack of adaptability 
of OGC-compliant software packages 
to support wiki-style behavior. 
At the heart of OSM’s technical infra-
structure lies the central database hold-
ing the live data, which is implemented 
in MySQL. The database schema is de-
signed to support wiki behaviors, such as 
versioning and rollbacks, and keeps cop-
ies of modified or deleted features indefi-
nitely. All geographical entities are re-
corded as points (nodes), which contain 
the latitude and longitude coordinates 
along with user name and timestamp 
information. Linear and area features 
are defined by reference to a list of or-
dered nodes, called ways. Area features 
aren’t explicitly defined in the database 
schema—rather, they’re defined im-
plicitly by the condition of a way that’s 
closed (the first node of a way is the same 
as the last one) and explicit tagging con-
ventions (using the tag area=yes). 
Along with the geographical coor-
dinates of features in the OSM data-
base, attributes of features are recorded 
for each node and way as semicolon-
separated key=value pairs (for exam-
ple, type=pub;name=The Bull). This tagging 
schema, which is increasingly being 
developed into a complex taxonomy of 
real-world feature classes and objects, 
is a core part of the OSM initiative and 
is community-driven. Any member of 
the community can contribute to and 
update the schema by proposing new 
key=value pairs. Discussion on the OSM 
wiki leads the community to vote on 
tag propositions and reach a consensus 
on the definition of and best practices 
for feature tagging. Interestingly, and 
sometimes controversially, the OSM 
database doesn’t pose any limitations 
on the tags users can attach to features, 
and thus adhering to the core tagging 
schema the community agreed upon 
is voluntary. Guidance on best prac-
tices for tagging is given at the editing 
software level for casual contributors. 
The lack of restrictions also benefits us-
ers because they can freely implement 
custom tagging schemas for specific 
applications.
Access to the core OSM database is 
provided by a dedicated RESTful API, 
which is implemented in Ruby on Rails 
and supports authentication, enabling 
users to add, update, and delete geo-
graphical features. The API accepts 
and outputs data in OSM XML, a dedi-
cated data transport format developed 
for the project that replicates the data-
bases’ specific entity model. All editing 
tools use this API for accessing and up-
dating the main database. As a result, 
editing and presentation tools can be 
developed independently from the data-
base, with the lightweight communica-
tion protocol acting as a glue between 
the elements of OSM’s GeoStack. 
Mapping Outputs
Given the database, which contains all 
the geographical information and attri-
butes OSM contributors have collected, 
the main cartographic output from the 
OSM information is presented on the 
OSM Web site as a Google Maps-like 
interface, coined “Slippy Map,” which 
uses the open source AJAX library 
OpenLayers to dynamically update the 
map display and allow interaction with 
users. As users drag the map, the vis-
ible extent is updated and new map tiles 
are requested in the background with-
out reloading the entire HTML page. 
A search function (implemented as an 
external Web service) lets users quickly 
find cities, villages, or other points of in-
terest (POIs) in the database. Recently, 
OSM developers added an export tab, 
which lets users quickly generate map 
images, PDF files, and raw data down-
loads of custom bounding boxes.
The default set of tiles on the main 
OSM Web site (see Figure 2) is rendered 
using Mapnik, an open source library 
for generating high-quality map images. 
It uses a weekly database dump as the 
source for the rendering of map tiles, 
given that live rendering of tiles on client 
request would be too computationally 
Figure 2. Main OpenStreetMap Web  
site Slippy Map with detailed coverage 
of central London. Notice the ability 
to edit, export, and upload data  
by using the top tabs (source: www.
openstreetmap.org).

----- Page 5 (native) -----
16 
PERVASIVE computing
www.computer.org/pervasive
User-Generated Content
expensive to be practical; map tiles are 
therefore rendered for all zoom levels 
and saved on the server so that they can 
be served rapidly as static images. 
Owing to the open source nature of 
all the tools needed for map render-
ing, several OSM contributors have 
developed custom map tile sets that 
cater to specific needs and target au-
diences. One example is a tile set that 
highlights cycle-path networks and 
other features relevant to cyclists.
Because of the high demands on com-
puting during rendering, a community 
grid element of OSM has developed. 
Tiles@Home (T@H) is a distributed 
map-tile-rendering system that com-
prises a central coordinating server and 
approximately 100 active software cli-
ents (as of May 2008), which members of 
the OSM community contributed. The 
main server distributes rendering jobs 
between clients, which collect the rele-
vant data from the OSM API and render 
a set of map tiles that are then uploaded 
back to the server for distribution. The 
main benefit of T@H is that it distributes 
the computational load between multi-
tudes of clients, enabling the system to 
quickly render large numbers of up-to-
date map tiles. T@H is especially use-
ful for OSM mapping contributors that 
want to quickly see the results of data 
changes, as they can request specific ar-
eas to be added to the T@H rendering 
queue. Typically, such requests for up-
dated map tiles are fulfilled in a matter 
of hours, in contrast to up to seven days 
for a Mapnik tile set update.  
Users interested in only a small area 
and who don’t need a Web-mapping 
server set-up can use local software 
rendering packages such as Kosmos 
or Gosmore to generate maps quickly. 
Other members of the OSM community 
are also developing import and conver-
sion tools to support OSM data in GIS 
packages such as Manifold GIS (www.
manifold.net) and ArcGIS (www.esri.
com/software/arcgis/). Significantly, 
vendors of commercial GIS packages, 
such as CadCorp SIS and Global Map-
per, have recently included OSM XML 
data support out of the box. 
Users have converted OSM informa-
tion for use on a multitude of devices, 
including mobile phones, PDAs, and 
GPS units. A community-maintained 
software package lets users trans-
late OSM data into the Garmin IMG 
GPS map format, despite this for-
mat’s proprietary nature and lack of 
documentation. 
Social Collaboration
Unlike Wikipedia, on which individu-
als create the majority of content at dis-
parate locations, the OSM community 
organizes a series of local workshops 
(called “mapping parties”), which aim 
to create and annotate content for local-
ized geographical areas. These events 
are designed to introduce new users and 
contributors to the community with the 
hands-on experience of collecting, pro-
cessing, and uploading data to the OSM 
project. The meetings might take the 
shape of informal and small gatherings 
for a few hours to complete missing fea-
tures of a small defined neighborhood, 
up to more ambitious efforts that take 
several days and involve several dozens 
of participants. One of the first mapping 
parties took place on the Isle of Wight, 
off the south coast of England, in May 
2006. More than 30 participants from 
Europe spent two days driving, cycling, 
and wandering around the island with 
GPS receivers to collect a complete cov-
erage of roads and footpaths. After col-
lecting the individual contributions, 
processing them, and uploading the 
data, a practically complete map of the 
island emerged. 
Although these community events 
positively contribute to the overall proj-
ect by generating new data and street 
labeling, they aren’t only meant as data 
collection exercises. Mapping parties 
play an essential part in creating and fos-
tering local OSM user groups and creat-
ing a vibrant social community around 
the project (see Figure 3). User groups 
have now formed all over the UK, as 
well as in continental Europe and the 
rest of the world. A detailed discussion 
of a mapping party appears elsewhere.7
Motivations and Challenges 
OSM’s success should be attributed to 
its founder’s vision of the project as a 
combined social and technical chal-
lenge. In many interviews and presen-
tations, Coast emphasizes the social 
side’s importance: “A big aspect of 
getting OSM off the ground was the 
mapping parties: getting drunk and 
arguing with people.”8 Nick Black, 
another OSM core contributor, noted 
that people have a range of reasons for 
getting involved in the project—from 
certain ideological views such as a be-
lief in the provision of free information 
to improve the world, to anti-national 
mapping agency views, to those who 
enjoy going out and mapping or sitting 
at home and writing computer code, 
to those who enjoy feeling like part of 
a community.9 Coast also adds that 
there’s an “addictive” aspect of getting 
involved in the project, which adds to 
the participants’ commitment. 
Indeed, OSM can boast significant 
achievement and is currently going 
through a period of rapid growth in 
terms of the number of users who con-
tribute to the map, its visibility as the 
leading Open Geodata project, and of 
the number of map edits. Its infrastruc-
OpenStreetMap is built iteratively using  
the principle that the simplest approach  
to any problem is the best way to ensure  
the success of the project as a whole.

----- Page 6 (native) -----
October–december 2008 
PERVASIVE computing 17
ture is demonstrating how a modern, 
open source, and light structure can 
provide a reliable and scalable GIS; the 
innovation that OSM offers can also 
teach many established GIS providers 
valuable lessons. The mainstream GIS 
literature has already noted and dis-
cussed OSM and similar activities.10
Along with these achievements, some 
open issues still must be taken into ac-
count, such as the fitness for purpose of 
OSM data, the influence of geography 
and participation on the project, the 
ability to continue to update the infor-
mation, and licensing. 
Since early 2007, with the completion 
of the mapping of Cambridge, OSM in-
formation and the cartographic ability 
of Mapnik demonstrated the useful-
ness of the information for several car-
tographic products and presentation 
of paper maps. However, this cover-
age isn’t universal. Although, as Coast 
notes, “it’s important to let go of the 
concept of completeness,”8 some idea 
about information quality is crucial 
for evaluating how fit OSM data is for 
various applications. Considerations 
that should be included are how well 
an area is covered by data, the data’s 
accuracy in terms of positional accu-
racy and attributes, the consistency 
in terms of classification or data-cap-
ture procedures, and quality control. 
Currently, OSM doesn’t provide any 
of these measures and doesn’t have in-
ternal quality assurance procedures. 
Preliminary results from an evaluation 
of completeness at UCL suggest that 
OSM has covered about 29 percent 
of roads in England. Even in London, 
where the project started, large areas 
are undermapped. 
In many applications, attribute infor-
mation, such as traffic directions and 
restrictions or street names, can be cru-
cial. Although data capture based on 
aerial imagery sped up road mapping, 
the road name can’t be captured with-
out a survey at the ground level unless 
the surveyor breaks copyright laws and 
uses an existing map to copy the name. 
Furthermore, mistakes from misinter-
preting aerial imagery also must be 
rectified through ground survey. Here, 
there’s no escape from the world’s 
physical geography, and OSM is de-
pendent on willing contributors on the 
ground in the area under survey. The 
same is true for updates and changes 
to the data—for example, when a road 
changes from two-way to one-way ow-
ing to local traffic regulations. 
Although the common argument 
from OSM advocates is that because of 
the data’s free nature, people who spot a 
mistake are likely to be more motivated 
to rectify it, in practice, OSM is exhib-
iting the same participation inequality 
as many other user-generated content 
projects.11 A few users are responsible 
for contributing a significant amount 
of the information—this phenomena 
is also visible in terms of places, where 
many areas are mapped by a single 
user. It’s reasonable to assume that, 
as on Wikipedia, the number of users 
who don’t contribute any improvement 
to the map can reach 99.8 percent, to 
which the complexities of adding or 
updating data to OSM due to the us-
ability of the data entry application and 
the need to understand the ontological 
schema need to be added. In short, this 
is a challenging aspect that the OSM 
community must solve.
Finally, the issue of licensing has be-
deviled OSM from the start. The proj-
ect started with the Creative Commons 
framework (CC-By-SA), which has 
proved to be unsuitable for geographical 
information. For example, the “share 
alike” principle means that by mixing 
OSM information with other sources 
of information, the resulting map must 
be shared under the same terms. How-
ever, OSM creates the base map, which 
in most geographical analysis projects 
is the starting point. The map is aug-
mented either through cartographic 
processing to produce products such as 
tourist maps or combined with other 
sources of information, such as the cen-
sus, to create thematic maps. It can also 
be combined with sensitive commercial 
information for analyzing store loca-
tions, among other things. In all these 
cases, the CC-By-SA prevents the use 
of the data or might complicate matters 
significantly. The OSM community has 
been discussing a new license for more 
than two years and hopes to publish 
one soon, although it’s clear that some 
use issues will remain unresolved.
Figure 3. A mapping party. In February 
2008, Schuyler Erle and Mikel Maron, 
contributors to OSM, held a series of 
multiday mapping parties in several 
universities to create local contributor 
groups (source: www.flickr.com/photos/
tags/freemapindia2008/).

----- Page 7 (native) -----
18 
PERVASIVE computing
www.computer.org/pervasive
User-Generated Content
O
SM provides a good ex-
ample of the social and 
technical aspects of user-
generated content com-
munities. Using terminology found 
in other work,12 OSM is a knowledge 
collective that creates Open Geodata 
as its main objective. Simultaneously, 
it includes a peer production network, 
as different groups within the organi-
zation are developing different aspects 
of the project—digitizing tools, map-
rendering software, server software, 
and running activities such as mapping 
parties. It’s utilizing community com-
puting grids in the process of render-
ing map tiles through T@H. OSM uses 
social mobile computing, especially 
during mapping parties when partici-
pants coordinate their work via mobile 
GPS receivers and mobile phones. The 
group-forming network appears on the 
main wiki, which contains information 
about the project, and also through an 
array of active mailing lists, Web fo-
rums, Internet Relay Chats (IRCs), and 
other modes of computer-mediated 
communication (CMC). Finally, social 
accounting is evident in OSM—for ex-
ample, in the contributions of various 
members of the OSM community high-
lighted on a Web site about the amount 
of computing they’ve contributed or 
how many edits they’ve performed dur-
ing the last week, month, and year. 
OSM also demonstrates some impor-
tant aspects in terms of geographical 
information delivery. The data format 
and structures demonstrate a simple 
approach for developing and delivering 
geographical information, in contrast 
to current practice within the GIS in-
dustry. On the other hand, OSM data 
isn’t complete or consistent across the 
world, or even across London, where 
the project started. The data’s accu-
racy is unknown, given that there are 
no systemic and comprehensive qual-
ity assurance processes integral to the 
data collection. Furthermore, there’s 
no intention of universal coverage; as 
Coast remarks: “Nobody wants to do 
council estates. But apart from those 
socioeconomic barriers—for places 
people aren’t that interested in visiting 
anyway—nowhere else gets missed.”9
Although the OSM project started 
in 2004, it’s still in its early stages—the 
area of user-generated geographical in-
formation will surely grow in the future 
with applications in the private, public, 
and voluntary sectors. It has already 
shaken the world of geographical infor-
mation, and the wider industry is paying 
attention to the emerging business mod-
els that OSM volunteers have created.
Acknowledgments 
We thank the anonymous reviewers who pro-
vided useful suggestions on an earlier version 
of this article. T hanks to the R oyal Geographical 
Society’s Small R esearch Grants program, which 
provided early support for the engagement of 
OpenStreetMap in 2006. 
References
	 1.	B. Clinton, Improving the Civilian Global 
Positioning System (GPS), Office of Sci-
ence and Technology Policy, Executive 
Office of the President, 1 May 2000; 
http://clinton4.nara.gov/WH/EOP/
OSTP/html/0053_4.html.
	 2.	A. Giordano, M. Chan, and H. Habal, “A 
Novel Location-Based Service and Archi-
tecture,” 6th IEEE Int’l Symp. Personal, 
Indoor, and Mobile Radio Communica-
tions, Wireless: Merging onto the Infor-
mation Superhighway (PIMRC 95), IEEE 
Press, 1995, pp. 853–857.
	 3.	J. Hightower  and G.A. Borriello, Sur-
vey and Taxonomy of Location-Sensing 
Systems for Ubiquitous Computing, UW 
CSE 01-08-03, Dept. of Computer Science 
and Eng., Univ. of Washington, 2001.
	 4.	J. Howe, “The Rise of Crowdsourcing,” 
Wired, June 2006; www.wired.com/
wired/archive/14.06/crowds.html. 
	 5.	T.L. Friedman, The World Is Flat: A Brief 
History of the Twenty-First Century, 
Updated And Expanded Edition,  Farrar, 
Straus, and Giroux, 2006.
	 6.	A.J. Turner, Introduction to Neogeogra-
phy, O’Reilly Media, 2006.
	 7.	 C. Perkins and M. Dodge, “The Potential 
of User-Generated Cartography: A Case 
Study of the OpenStreetMap Project and 
Mapchester Mapping Party,” North West 
Geography, vol. 8, no. 1, 2008, pp. 19–32.
	 8.	GISPro, “The GISPro Interview with 
OSM Founder Steve Coast,” GIS Profes-
sional, no. 18, Oct. 2007, pp. 20–23.
	 9.	N. Black, “OpenStreetMap—Geo-
data Collection for the 21st Century,” 
presented at the AGI annual confer-
ence, 2007; www.slideshare.net/nickb/ 
nick-black-openstreetmap-geodata- 
collection-for-the-21st-century.
	10.	M.F. Goodchild, “Citizens as Voluntary 
Sensors: Spatial Data Infrastructure in the 
World of Web 2.0,” Int’l J. Spatial Data 
Infrastructures Research, vol. 2, 2007, 
pp. 24–32.
	11.	J. Nielsen, “Participation Inequality: 
Encouraging More Users to Contribute,” 
Alertbox, 9 Oct. 2006; www.useit.com/
alertbox/participation_inequality.html.
	12.	A. Saveri, H. Rheingold, and K. Vian, 
Technologies of Cooperation, Inst. for 
the Future, 2005.
the Authors
Mordechai (Muki) Haklay is a senior lecturer in geographical information 
science in the D epartment of C ivil, Environmental and Geomatic Engineer-
ing at University C ollege London. His research interests are in public access to 
environmental information, human-computer interaction, usability engineer-
ing for GIS, and the societal aspects of GIS use. Haklay has a PhD in geogra-
phy from UCL. He’s a member of the ACM, a fellow of the R oyal Geographic 
Society, and a member of the Association for Geographical Information (AGI). 
Contact him at m.haklay@ucl.ac.uk.
Patrick Weber is a third-year engineering doctorate student in University 
College London’s D epartment of C omputer Science. His research interests lie 
in the application of GI science and spatial decision support systems to gain 
a better understanding of foreign direct investment in London as well as the 
wider accessibility and public awareness issues for geographical information 
science. Weber has an M
Sc in GIS from UCL and an M
S in physical geography 
from the Université Louis Pasteur, Strasbourg. C ontact him at p.weber@ucl.
ac.uk.