

----- Page 1 (native) -----
Since January 2020 Elsevier has created a COVID-19 resource centre with free
information in English and Mandarin on the novel coronavirus COVID-19. The
COVID-19 resource centre is hosted on Elsevier Connect, the company's public
news and information website.
Elsevier hereby grants permission to make all its COVID-19-related research
that is available on the COVID-19 resource centre - including this research
content - immediately available in PubMed Central and other publicly funded
repositories, such as the WHO COVID database with rights for unrestricted
research re-use and analyses in any form or by any means with acknowledgement
of the original source. These permissions are granted for free by Elsevier
for as long as the COVID-19 resource centre remains active.

----- Page 2 (native) -----
2007 guideline for isolation precautions:
preventing transmission of infectious
agents in health care settings
Jane D. Siegel, MD, Emily Rhinehart, RN, MPH, CIC, Marguerite Jackson, PhD, Linda Chiarello, RN, MS, for the Health
Care Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee
Health Care Infection Control Practices Advisory
Committee (HICPAC)
Chair
Patrick J. Brennan, MD, Professor of Medicine, Divi-
sion of Infectious Diseases, University of Pennsylvania
Medical School
Executive Secretary
Michael Bell, MD, Division of Health Care Quality
Promotion, National Center for Infectious Diseases,
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Members
Vicki L. Brinsko, RN, BA, Infection Control Coordina-
tor, Vanderbilt University Medical Center
E. Patchen Dellinger, MD, Professor of Surgery, Uni-
versity of Washington School of Medicine
Jeffrey Engel, MD, Head, General Communicable
Disease
Control
Branch,
North
Carolina
State
Epidemiologist
Steven M. Gordon, MD, Chairman, Department of
Infections Diseases, Hospital Epidemiologist, Cleveland
Clinic Foundation
Lizzie J. Harrell, PhD, D(ABMM), Research Professor
of Molecular Genetics, Microbiology and Pathology,
Associate Director, Clinical Microbiology, Duke Univer-
sity Medical Center
Carol O’Boyle, PhD, RN, Assistant Professor, School
of Nursing, University of Minnesota
David Alexander Pegues, MD, Division of Infec-
tious Diseases, David Geffen School of Medicine at
UCLA
Dennis M. Perrotta, PhD, CIC, Adjunct Associate Pro-
fessor of Epidemiology, University of Texas School of
Public Health, Texas A&M University School of Rural
Public Health
Harriett M. Pitt, MS, CIC, RN, Director, Epidemiology,
Long Beach Memorial Medical Center
Keith M. Ramsey, MD, Professor of Medicine, Medical
Director of Infection Control, Brody School of Medicine,
East Carolina University
Nalini Singh, MD, MPH, Professor of Pediatrics, Epi-
demiology and International Health, George Washing-
ton University Children’s National Medical Center
Kurt Brown Stevenson, MD, MPH Division of Infec-
tious Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, Ohio
State University Medical Center
Philip W. Smith, MD, Chief, Section of Infectious Dis-
eases, Department of Internal Medicine, University of
Nebraska Medical Center
HICPAC membership (past)
Robert A. Weinstein, MD (Chair), Cook County Hos-
pital, Chicago, IL
Jane D. Siegel, MD (Co-Chair), University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX
Michele
L.
Pearson,
MD
(Executive
Secretary),
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta,
GA
Raymond Y.W. Chinn, MD, Sharp Memorial Hospital,
San Diego, CA
Alfred DeMaria, Jr, MD, Massachusetts Department
of Public Health, Jamaica Plain, MA
James T. Lee, MD, PhD, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, MN
William A. Rutala, PhD, MPH, University of North
Carolina Health Care System, Chapel Hill, NC
William E. Scheckler, MD, University of Wisconsin,
Madison, WI
Beth H. Stover, RN, Kosair Children’s Hospital, Louis-
ville, KY
Marjorie A. Underwood, RN, BSN CIC, Mt Diablo
Medical Center, Concord, CA
(Am J Infect Control 2007;35:S65-164.)
0196-6553/$32.00
This is a U.S. Government work. There are no restrictions on its use.
doi:10.1016/j.ajic.2007.10.007
S65

----- Page 3 (native) -----
HICPAC Liaisons
William B. Baine, MD, Liaison to the Agency for
Health Care Quality Research
Joan Blanchard, RN, MSN, CNOR, Liaison to the
Association of Perioperative Registered Nurses
Patrick J. Brennan, MD, Liaison to the Board of Scien-
tiﬁc Counselors
Nancy Bjerke, RN, MPH, CIC, Liaison to the Associa-
tion of Professionals in Infection Prevention and
Control
Jeffrey P. Engel, MD, Liaison to the Advisory Commit-
tee on Elimination of Tuberculosis
David Henderson, MD, Liaison to the National Insti-
tutes of Health
Lorine J. Jay, MPH, RN, CPHQ, Liaison to the Health
Care Resources Services Administration
Stephen F. Jencks, MD, MPH, Liaison to the Center
for Medicare and Medicaid Services
Sheila A. Murphey, MD, Liaison to the Food and Drug
Administration
Mark Russi, MD, MPH, Liaison to the American
College
of
Occupational
and
Environmental
Medicine
Rachel L. Stricof, MPH, Liaison to the Advisory Com-
mittee on Elimination of Tuberculosis
Michael L. Tapper, MD, Liaison to the Society for
Health Care Epidemiology of America
Robert A. Wise, MD, Liaison to the Joint Commission
on the Accreditation of Health Care Organizations
Authors’ Associations
Jane D. Siegel, MD, Professor of Pediatrics, Depart-
ment of Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center
Emily Rhinehart, RN, MPH, CIC, CPHQ, Vice Presi-
dent, AIG Consultants, Inc
Marguerite Jackson, RN, PhD, CIC, Director, Admin-
istrative
Unit,
National
Tuberculosis
Curriculum
Consortium, Department of Medicine, University of
California San Diego
Linda Chiarello, RN, MS, Division of Health Care
Quality Promotion, National Center for Infectious
Diseases,
Centers
for
Disease
Control
and
Pre-
vention
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Executive Summary
Abbreviations
Part I: Review of the Scientiﬁc Data Regarding
Transmission of Infectious Agents in Health Care
Settings
I.A. Evolution of the 2007 Document
I.B. Rationale for Standard and Transmission-Based
Precautions in Health Care Settings
I.B.1. Source of Infectious Agents
I.B.2. Susceptible Hosts
I.B.3. Modes of Transmission
I.B.3.a. Contact Transmission
I.B.3.a.i. Direct Contact Transmission
I.B.3.a.ii. Indirect Contact Transmission
I.B.3.b. Droplet Transmission
I.B.3.c. Airborne Transmission
I.B.3.d. Emerging Issues and Controversies
Concerning
Bioaerosols
and
Air-
borne Transmission of Infectious
Agents
I.B.3.d.i. Transmission From Patients
I.B.3.d.ii. Transmission From the Envi-
ronment
I.B.3.e. Other Sources of Infection
I.C. Infectious Agents of Special Infection Control
Interest for Health Care Settings
I.C.1. Epidemiologically Important Organisms
I.C.1.a. Clostridium difﬁcile
I.C.1.b. Multidrug-Resistant Organisms
I.C.2. Agents of Bioterrorism
I.C.3. Prions
I.C.4. Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS)
I.C.5. Monkeypox
I.C.6. Noroviruses
I.C.7. Hemorrhagic Fever Viruses
I.D. Transmission Risks Associated With Speciﬁc Types
of Health Care Settings
I.D.1. Hospitals
I.D.1.a. Intensive Care Units
I.D.1.b. Burn Units
I.D.1.c. Pediatrics
I.D.2. Nonacute Care Settings
I.D.2.a. Long-Term Care
I.D.2.b. Ambulatory Care
I.D.2.c. Home Care
I.D.2.d. Other Sites of Health Care Delivery
I.E. Transmission Risks Associated With Special Patient
Populations
I.E.1. Immunocompromised Patients
I.E.2. Cystic Fibrosis Patients
I.F. New Therapies With Potential Transmissible Infec-
tious Agents
I.F.1. Gene Therapy
I.F.2. Infections
Transmitted
Through
Blood,
Organs and Tissues
I.F.3. Xenotransplantation and Tissue Allografts
Part
II.
Fundamental
Elements
to
Prevent
Transmission of Infectious Agents in Health Care
Settings
II.A. Health Care System Components That Inﬂuence
the
Effectiveness
of
Precautions
to
Prevent
Transmission
S66
Vol. 35 No. 10 Supplement 2
Siegel et al

----- Page 4 (native) -----
II.A.1. Administrative Measures
II.A.1.a. Scope
of
Work
and
Stafﬁng
Needs for Infection Control Pro-
fessionals
II.A.1.a.i. Infection Control Liaison Nurse
II.A.1.b. Bedside Nurse Stafﬁng
II.A.1.c. Clinical
Microbiology
Laboratory
Support
II.A.2. Institutional Safety Culture and Organiza-
tional Characteristics
II.A.3. Adherence of Health Care Workers to Rec-
ommended Guidelines
II.B. Surveillance
for
Health
Care–Associated
In-
fections
II.C. Education of Health Care Workers, Patients, and
Families
II.D. Hand Hygiene
II.E. Personal Protective Equipment for Health Care
Workers
II.E.1. Gloves
II.E.2. Isolation Gowns
II.E.3. Face
Protection:
Masks,
Goggles,
Face
Shields
II.E.3.a. Masks
II.E.3.b. Goggles and Face Shields
II.E.4. Respiratory Protection
II.F. Safe Work Practices to Prevent Health Care Worker
Exposure to Bloodborne Pathogens
II.F.1. Prevention
of
Needlesticks
and
Other
Sharps-Related Injuries
II.F.2. Prevention of Mucous Membrane Contact
II.F.2.a. Precautions During Aerosol-Gener-
ating Procedures
II.G. Patient Placement
II.G.1. Hospitals and Long-Term Care Settings
II.G.2. Ambulatory Care Settings
II.G.3. Home Care
II.H. Transport of Patients
II.I. Environmental Measures
II.J. Patient Care Equipment, Instruments/Devices
II.K. Textiles and Laundry
II.L. Solid Waste
II.M. Dishware and Eating Utensils
II.N. Adjunctive Measures
II.N.1. Chemoprophylaxis
II.N.2. Immunoprophylaxis
II.N.3. Management of Visitors
II.N.3.a. Visitors as Sources of Infection
II.N.3.b. Use
of
Barrier
Precautions
by
Visitors
Part III. HICPAC Precautions to Prevent Transmis-
sion of Infectious Agents
III.A. Standard Precautions
III.A.1. New Standard Precautions for Patients
III.A.1.a. Respiratory
Hygiene/Cough
Eti-
quette
III.A.1.b. Safe Injection Practices
III.A.1.c. Infection
Control
Practices
for
Special
Lumbar
Puncture
Pro-
cedures
III.B. Transmission-Based Precautions
III.B.1. Contact Precautions
III.B.2. Droplet Precautions
III.B.3. Airborne Infection Isolation Precautions
III.C. Syndromic or Empiric Application of Transmis-
sion-Based Precautions
III.D. Discontinuation of Precautions
III.E. Application of Transmission-Based Precautions in
Ambulatory and Home Care Settings
III.F. Protective Environment
Part IV: Recommendations
Appendix A: Type and Duration of Precautions
Needed for Selected Infections and Conditions
Glossary
References
Table 1. Recent history of guidelines for prevention
of health care–associated infections
Table 2. Clinical syndromes or conditions warrant-
ing additional empiric transmission-based precautions
pending conﬁrmation of diagnosis
Table 3. Infection control considerations for high-
priority (CDC category A) diseases that may result
from bioterrorist attacks or are considered bioterrorist
threats
Table 4. Recommendations for application of Stan-
dard Precautions for the care of all patients in all health
care settings
Table 5. Components of a protective environment
Fig 1. Sequence for donning and removing personal
protective equipment
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The Guideline for Isolation Precautions: Preventing
Transmission of Infectious Agents in Health Care Set-
tings 2007 updates and expands the 1996 Guideline
for Isolation Precautions in Hospitals. The following
developments led to these revisions of the 1996
guideline:
1. The transition of health care delivery from primar-
ily acute
care hospitals
to other
health
care
settings (eg, home care, ambulatory care, free-
standing specialty care sites, long-term care) cre-
ated a need for recommendations that can be
applied in all health care settings using common
principles of infection control practice, yet can
be
modiﬁed
to
reﬂect
setting-speciﬁc
needs.
Siegel et al
December 2007
S67

----- Page 5 (native) -----
Accordingly, the revised guideline addresses the
spectrum of health care delivery settings. Further-
more, the term ‘‘nosocomial infections‘‘ is re-
placed
by
‘‘health
care–associated
infections’’
(HAIs), to reﬂect the changing patterns in health
care delivery and difﬁculty in determining the geo-
graphic site of exposure to an infectious agent and/
or acquisition of infection.
2. The emergence of new pathogens (eg, severe acute
respiratory
syndrome
coronavirus
[SARS-CoV]
associated with SARS avian inﬂuenza in humans),
renewed concern for evolving known pathogens
(eg, Clostridium difﬁcile, noroviruses, community-
associated methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus au-
reus [CA-MRSA]), development of new therapies
(eg, gene therapy), and increasing concern for the
threat of bioweapons attacks, necessitates address-
ing a broader scope of issues than in previous isola-
tion guidelines.
3. The successful experience with Standard Precau-
tions, ﬁrst recommended in the 1996 guideline,
has led to a reafﬁrmation of this approach as
the foundation for preventing transmission of in-
fectious agents in all health care settings. New ad-
ditions
to
the
recommendations
for
Standard
Precautions
are
respiratory
hygiene/cough
eti-
quette and safe injection practices, including the
use of a mask when performing certain high-
risk, prolonged procedures involving spinal canal
punctures (eg, myelography, epidural anesthesia).
The need for a recommendation for respiratory
hygiene/cough etiquette grew out of observations
during the SARS outbreaks, when failure to imple-
ment simple source control measures with pa-
tients, visitors, and health care workers (HCWs)
with respiratory symptoms may have contributed
to
SARS-CoV
transmission.
The
recommended
practices have a strong evidence base. The contin-
ued occurrence of outbreaks of hepatitis B and
hepatitis C viruses in ambulatory settings indi-
cated a need to reiterate safe injection practice
recommendations as part of Standard Precautions.
The addition of a mask for certain spinal injec-
tions grew from recent evidence of an associated
risk for developing meningitis caused by respira-
tory ﬂora.
4. The
accumulated
evidence
that
environmental
controls decrease the risk of life-threatening fungal
infections in the most severely immunocompro-
mised patients (ie, those undergoing allogeneic
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation [HSCT]) led
to the update on the components of the protective
environment (PE).
5. Evidence that organizational characteristics (eg,
nurse stafﬁng levels and composition, establishment
of a safety culture) inﬂuence HCWs’ adherence to
recommended infection control practices, and thus
are important factors in preventing transmission of
infectious agents, led to a new emphasis and recom-
mendations for administrative involvement in the
development and
support of
infection
control
programs.
6. Continued
increase
in the
incidence of HAIs
caused by multidrug-resistant organisms (MDROs)
in all health care settings and the expanded
body
of
knowledge
concerning
prevention
of
transmission
of
MDROs
created
a
need
for
more speciﬁc recommendations for surveillance
and control of these pathogens that would be
practical and effective in various types of health
care settings.
This document is intended for use by infection
control staff, health care epidemiologists, health care
administrators, nurses, other health care providers,
and persons responsible for developing, implement-
ing, and evaluating infection control programs for
health care settings across the continuum of care.
The reader is referred to other guidelines and web-
sites for more detailed information and for recom-
mendations concerning specialized infection control
problems.
PARTS I, II, AND III: REVIEW OF THE SCIENTIFIC
DATA REGARDING TRANSMISSION OF
INFECTIOUS AGENTS IN HEALTH CARE
SETTINGS
Part I reviews the relevant scientiﬁc literature
that
supports
the
recommended
prevention
and
control practices. As in the 1996 guideline, the
modes and factors that inﬂuence transmission risks
are described in detail. New to the section on trans-
mission are discussions of bioaerosols and of how
droplet and airborne transmission may contribute
to infection transmission. This became a concern
during the SARS outbreaks of 2003, when transmis-
sion associated with aerosol-generating procedures
was observed. Also new is a deﬁnition of ‘‘epidemi-
ologically important organisms’’ that was developed
to assist in the identiﬁcation of clusters of infec-
tions that require investigation (ie multidrug-resis-
tant organisms, C difﬁcile). Several other pathogens
of special infection control interest (ie, norovirus,
SARS, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
[CDC] category A bioterrorist agents, prions, mon-
keypox, and the hemorrhagic fever viruses) also
are discussed, to present new information and in-
fection
control
lessons
learned
from
experience
with these agents. This section of the guideline
S68
Vol. 35 No. 10 Supplement 2
Siegel et al

----- Page 6 (native) -----
also presents information on infection risks associ-
ated with speciﬁc health care settings and patient
populations.
Part II updates information on the basic principles of
hand hygiene, barrier precautions, safe work practices,
and isolation practices that were included in previous
guidelines. However, new to this guideline is important
information on health care system components that
inﬂuence transmission risks, including those compo-
nents under the inﬂuence of health care administrators.
An important administrative priority that is described is
the need for appropriate infection control stafﬁng to
meet the ever-expanding role of infection control pro-
fessionals in the complex modern health care system.
Evidence
presented
also
demonstrates
another
administrative concern: the importance of nurse staff-
ing levels, including ensuring numbers of appropriately
trained nurses in intensive care units (ICUs) for prevent-
ing HAIs. The role of the clinical microbiology labora-
tory in supporting infection control is described, to
emphasize the need for this service in health care facil-
ities. Other factors that inﬂuence transmission risks are
discussed, including the adherence of HCWs to recom-
mended infection control practices, organizational
safety culture or climate, and education and training.
Discussed for the ﬁrst time in an isolation guideline
is surveillance of health care–associated infections.
The information presented will be useful to new infec-
tion control professionals as well as persons involved
in designing or responding to state programs for public
reporting of HAI rates.
Part III describes each of the categories of precau-
tions developed by the Health Care Infection Control
Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC) and the CDC
and provides guidance for their application in various
health care settings. The categories of Transmission-
Based Precautions are unchanged from those in the
1996 guideline: Contact, Droplet, and Airborne. One
important change is the recommendation to don the
indicated personal protective equipment (PPE—gowns,
gloves, mask) on entry into the patient’s room for pa-
tients who are on Contact and/or Droplet Precautions,
because the nature of the interaction with the patient
cannot be predicted with certainty, and contaminated
environmental surfaces are important sources for
transmission of pathogens. In addition, the PE for pa-
tients undergoing allogeneic HSCT, described in previ-
ous guidelines, has been updated.
TABLES, APPENDICES, AND OTHER
INFORMATION
Five
tables
summarize
important
information.
Table 1 provides a summary of the evolution of this
document. Table 2 gives guidance on using empiric
isolation precautions according to a clinical syndrome.
Table 3 summarizes infection control recommenda-
tions for CDC category A agents of bioterrorism. Table 4
lists the components of Standard Precautions and rec-
ommendations for their application, and Table 5 lists
components of the PE.
A glossary of deﬁnitions used in this guideline also is
provided. New to this edition of the guideline is a ﬁgure
showing the recommended sequence for donning and
removing PPE used for isolation precautions to opti-
mize safety and prevent self-contamination during
removal.
APPENDIX A: TYPE AND DURATION OF
PRECAUTIONS RECOMMENDED FOR SELECTED
INFECTIONS AND CONDITIONS
Appendix A provides an updated alphabetical list of
most infectious agents and clinical conditions for
which isolation precautions are recommended. A pre-
amble to the appendix provides a rationale for recom-
mending the use of 1 or more Transmission-Based
Precautions in addition to Standard Precautions, based
on a review of the literature and evidence demonstrat-
ing a real or potential risk for person-to-person trans-
mission in health care settings. The type and duration
of recommended precautions are presented, with addi-
tional comments concerning the use of adjunctive
measures or other relevant considerations to prevent
transmission of the speciﬁc agent. Relevant citations
are included.
PREPUBLICATION OF THE GUIDELINE ON
PREVENTING TRANSMISSION OF MDROS
New to this guideline is a comprehensive review and
detailed recommendations for prevention of trans-
mission of MDROs. This portion of the guideline
was published electronically in October 2006 and
updated in November 2006 (Siegel JD, Rhinehart E,
Jackson M, Chiarello L and HICPAC. Management
of multidrug-resistant organisms in health care set-
tings,
2006;
available
from
http://www.cdc.gov/
ncidod/dhqp/pdf/ar/mdroGuideline2006.pdf),
and
is
considered a part of the Guideline for Isolation Pre-
cautions. This section provides a detailed review of
the complex topic of MDRO control in health care
settings and is intended to provide a context for
evaluation of MDRO at individual health care set-
tings. A rationale and institutional requirements for
developing an effective MDRO control program are
summarized.
Siegel et al
December 2007
S69

----- Page 7 (native) -----
Although the focus of this guideline is on measures
to prevent transmission of MDROs in health care set-
tings, information concerning the judicious use of anti-
microbial agents also is presented, because such
practices are intricately related to the size of the reser-
voir of MDROs, which in turn inﬂuences transmission
(eg, colonization pressure). Two tables summarize
recommended prevention and control practices using
7 categories of interventions to control MDROs: admin-
istrative measures, education of HCWs, judicious
antimicrobial use, surveillance, infection control pre-
cautions, environmental measures, and decoloniza-
tion. Recommendations for each category apply to
and are adapted for the various health care settings.
Table 1. History of guidelines for isolation precautions in hospitals*
Year (reference)
Document issued
Comments
19701095
Isolation Techniques for Use in Hospitals, 1st ed
d Introduced 7 isolation precaution categories with color-coded cards:
strict, respiratory, protective, enteric, wound and skin, discharge, and
blood.
d No user decision making required.
d Simplicity a strength; overisolation prescribed for some infections.
19751100
Isolation Techniques for Use in Hospitals, 2nd ed
d Same conceptual framework as ﬁrst edition.
19831097
Guideline for Isolation Precautions in Hospitals
d Provided 2 systems for isolation: category-speciﬁc and disease-
speciﬁc.
d Protective isolation eliminated; blood precautions expanded to
include body ﬂuids.
d Categories included strict, contact, respiratory, acid-fast bacteria,
enteric, drainage/secretion, blood and body ﬂuids.
d Emphasized decision making by users.
1985-88778, 894
Universal Precautions
d Developed in response to the HIV/AIDS epidemic.
d Dictated application of blood and body ﬂuid precautions to all
patients, regardless of infection status.
d Did not apply to feces, nasal secretions, sputum, sweat, tears, urine,
or vomitus unless contaminated by visible blood.
d Added personal protective equipment to protect health care
workers from mucous membrane exposures.
d Handwashing recommended immediately after glove removal.
d Added speciﬁc recommendations for handling needles and other
sharp devices; concept became integral to the OSHA’s 1991 rule on
occupational exposure to blood-borne pathogens in health care
settings.
19871098
Body Substance Isolation
d Emphasized avoiding contact with all moist and potentially infectious
body substances except sweat even if blood not present.
d Shared some features with Universal Precautions.
d Weak on infections transmitted by large droplets or by contact with
dry surfaces.
d Did not emphasize need for special ventilation to contain airborne
infections.
d Handwashing after glove removal not speciﬁed in the absence of
visible soiling.
19961
Guideline for Isolation Precautions in Hospitals
d Prepared by the Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory
Committee.
d Melded major features of Universal Precautions and body substance
isolation into Standard Precautions to be used with all patients at all
times.
d Included 3 transmission-based precaution categories: Airborne,
Droplet, and Contact.
d Listed clinical syndromes that should dictate use of empiric isolation
until an etiologic diagnosis is established.
*Derived from Garner and Simmons.1099
S70
Vol. 35 No. 10 Supplement 2
Siegel et al

----- Page 8 (native) -----
Table 2. Clinical syndromes or conditions warranting empiric transmission-based precautions in addition to Standard
Precautions pending conﬁrmation of diagnosis*
Clinical syndrome or conditiony
Potential pathogensz
Empiric precautions (always includes
Standard Precautions)
Diarrhea
Acute diarrhea with a likely infectious cause in
an incontinent or diapered patient
Enteric pathogens§
Contact Precautions (pediatrics and adult)
Meningitis
Neisseria meningitidis
Droplet Precautions for ﬁrst 24 hours of
antimicrobial therapy; mask and face
protection for intubation
Enteroviruses
Contact Precautions for infants and children
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Airborne Precautions if pulmonary inﬁltrate
present
Airborne Precautions plus Contact Precautions if
potentially infectious draining body ﬂuid
present
Rash or exanthems, generalized, etiology
unknown
Petechial/ecchymotic with fever (general)
Neisseria meningitides
Droplet Precautions for the ﬁrst 24 hours of
antimicrobial therapy
Positive history of travel to an area with an
ongoing outbreak of VHF in the 10 days
before onset of fever
Ebola, Lassa, Marburg viruses
Droplet Precautions plus Contact Precautions,
with face/eye protection, emphasizing safety
sharps and Barrier Precautions when blood
exposure likely. N95 or higher-level
respiratory protection when aerosol-
generating procedure performed
Vesicular
Varicella-zoster, herpes simplex, variola
(smallpox), vaccinia viruses
Airborne plus Contact Precautions
Vaccinia virus
Contact Precautions only if herpes simplex,
localized zoster in an immunocompetent host,
or vaccinia virus likely
Maculopapular with cough, coryza, and fever
Rubeola (measles) virus
Airborne Precautions
Respiratory infections
Cough/fever/upper lobe pulmonary inﬁltrate
in an HIV-negative patient or a patient at
low risk for HIV infection
M. tuberculosis, respiratory viruses, Streptococcus
pneumoniae, Staphylococcus aureus (MSSA or
MRSA)
Airborne Precautions plus Contact Precautions
Cough/fever/pulmonary inﬁltrate in any lung
location in an HIV-infected patient or a
patient at high risk for HIV infection
M tuberculosis, respiratory viruses, S pneumoniae,
S aureus (MSSA or MRSA)
Airborne Precautions plus Contact Precautions;
eye/face protection if aerosol-generating
procedure performed or contact with
respiratory secretions anticipated; Droplet
Precautions instead of Airborne Precautions if
tuberculosis unlikely and airborne infection
isolation room and/or respirator unavailable
(tuberculosis more likely in HIV-infected than
in HIV-negative individuals)
Cough/fever/pulmonary inﬁltrate in any lung
location in a patient with a history of recent
travel (10 to 21 days) to countries with
active outbreaks of SARS, avian inﬂuenza
M tuberculosis, severe acute respiratory
syndrome virus (SARS-CoV), avian inﬂuenza
Airborne plus Contact Precautions plus eye
protection; Droplet Precautions instead of
Airborne Precautions if SARS and tuberculosis
unlikely
Respiratory infections, particularly
bronchiolitis and pneumonia, in infants and
young children
Respiratory syncytial virus, parainﬂuenza virus,
adenovirus, inﬂuenza virus, human
metapneumovirus
Contact plus Droplet Precautions; discontinue
Droplet Precautions if adenovirus and
inﬂuenza ruled out
Skin or wound infection
Abscess or draining wound that cannot be
covered
S aureus (MSSA or MRSA), group A
streptococcus
Contact Precautions, plus Droplet Precautions
for the ﬁrst 24 hours of appropriate
antimicrobial therapy if invasive group A
streptococcal disease suspected
*Infection control professionals should modify or adapt this table according to local conditions. To ensure that appropriate empiric precautions are implemented always, hospitals
must have systems in place to evaluate patients routinely according to these criteria as part of their preadmission and admission care.
yPatients with the syndromes or conditions listed below may present with atypical signs or symptoms (eg, neonates and adults with pertussis may not have paroxysmal or severe
cough). The clinician’s index of suspicion should be guided by the prevalence of speciﬁc conditions in the community, as well as clinical judgment.
zThe organisms listed under the column ‘‘Potential Pathogens’’ are not intended to represent the complete, or even most likely, diagnoses, but rather possible etiologic agents that
require additional precautions beyond Standard Precautions until they can be ruled out.
§These pathogens include enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli O157:H7, Shigella spp, hepatitis A virus, noroviruses, rotavirus, and Clostridium difﬁcile.
Siegel et al
December 2007
S71

----- Page 9 (native) -----
Table 3. Infection control considerations for high-priority (CDC category A) diseases that may result from bioterrorist
attacks or are considered bioterrorist threats (see http://www.bt.cdc.gov)
Disease
Anthrax
Site(s) of infection; transmission mode
Cutaneous (contact with spores); RT (inhalation of spores); GIT (ingestion of spores [rare])
Cutaneous and inhalation disease
have occurred in past bioterrorist
incidents
Comment: Spores can be inhaled into the lower respiratory tract. The infectious dose of Bacillus anthracis in humans by any
route is not precisely known. In primates, the LD50 for an aerosol challenge with B anthracis is estimated to be 8,000 to 50,000
spores; the infectious dose may be as low as 1 to 3 spores.
Incubation period
Cutaneous: 1 to 12 days; RT: Usually 1 to 7 days, but up to 43 days reported; GIT: 15 to 72 hours
Clinical features
Cutaneous: Painless, reddish papule that develops a central vesicle or bulla in 1 to 2 days; over the next 3 to 7 days, the lesion
becomes pustular and then necrotic, with black eschar and extensive surrounding edema
RT: Initial ﬂu-like illness for 1 to 3 days with headache, fever, malaise, cough; by day 4, severe dyspnea and shock. Usually fatal (85%
to 90%) if untreated; meningitis develops in 50% of RT cases.
GIT: In intestinal form, necrotic, ulcerated edematous lesions develop in intestines with fever, nausea, and vomiting and
progression to hematemesis and bloody diarrhea; 25% to 60% mortality
Diagnosis
Cutaneous: Swabs of lesion (under eschar) for IHC, PCR, and culture; punch biopsy for IHC, PCR, and culture; vesicular ﬂuid
aspirate for Gram’s stain and culture; blood culture if systemic symptoms present; acute and convalescent sera for ELISA
serology
RT: CXR or CT demonstrating wide mediastinal widening and/or pleural effusion and hilar abnormalities; blood for culture and
PCR; pleural effusion for culture, PCR, and IHC; CSF (if meningeal signs present) for IHC, PCR, and culture; acute and
convalescent sera for ELISA serology; pleural and/or bronchial biopsy specimens for IHC
GIT: Blood and ascites ﬂuid, stool samples, rectal swabs, and swabs of oropharyngeal lesions, if present, for culture, PCR, and
IHC
Infectivity
Cutaneous: Person-to-person transmission from contact with lesion of untreated patient is possible but rare
RT and GIT: Person-to-person transmission does not occur
Aerosolized powder, environmental exposures: Highly infectious if aerosolized
Recommended precautions
Cutaneous: Standard Precautions; Contact Precautions if uncontained copious drainage present
RT and GIT: Standard Precautions.
Aerosolized powder, environmental exposures: Respirator (N95 mask or powered air-purifying respirator), protective
clothing; decontamination of persons with powder on them (see http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/
mm5135a3.htm)
Hand hygiene: Handwashing for 30 to 60 seconds with soap and water or 2% chlorhexidene gluconate after spore contact;
alcohol hand rubs are inactive against spores.981
Postexposure prophylaxis after environmental exposure: A 60-day course of antimicrobials (doxycycline, ciproﬂoxacin,
or levoﬂoxacin) and postexposure vaccine under IND.
Disease
Botulism
Site(s) of infection; transmission mode
GIT: Ingestion of toxin-containing food; RT: Inhalation of toxin containing aerosol. Comment: Toxin ingested or potentially
delivered by aerosol in bioterrorist incidents. LD50 for type A is 0.001 mg/mL/kg.
Incubation period
1 to 5 days.
Clinical features
Ptosis, generalized weakness, dizziness, dry mouth and throat, blurred vision, diplopia, dysarthria, dysphonia, and dysphagia,
followed by symmetrical descending paralysis and respiratory failure.
Diagnosis
Clinical diagnosis: identiﬁcation .of toxin in stool, serology, unless toxin-containing material available for toxin neutralization
bioassays.
Infectivity
Not transmitted from person to person; exposure to toxin necessary for disease.
Recommended precautions
Standard Precautions.
Disease
Ebola Hemorrhagic Fever
Site(s) of infection; transmission mode
As a rule, infection develops after exposure of mucous membranes or RT, or through broken skin or percutaneous injury.
Incubation period
2 to 19 days, usually 5 to 10 days
Clinical features
Febrile illnesses with malaise, myalgias, headache, vomiting, and diarrhea that are rapidly complicated by hypotension, shock, and
hemorrhagic features. Massive hemorrhage in , 50% of patients.
Diagnosis
Etiologic diagnosis can be made using reverse-transcription-PCR, serologic detection of antibody and antigen, pathologic
assessment with immunohistochemistry, and viral culture with electromicroscopic conﬁrmation of morphology,
Infectivity
Person-to-person transmission occurs primarily through unprotected contact with blood and body ﬂuids; percutaneous injuries
(eg, needlestick) are associated with a high rate of transmission. Transmission in health care settings has been reported but can
be prevented by use of Barrier Precautions.
Recommended precautions
Hemorrhagic fever–speciﬁc Barrier Precautions: If disease is believed to be related to intentional release of a bioweapon,
then the epidemiology of transmission is unpredictable pending observation of disease transmission. Until the nature of the
pathogen is understood and its transmission pattern conﬁrmed, Standard, Contact, and Airborne Precautions should be used.
Once the pathogen is characterized, if the epidemiology of transmission is consistent with natural disease, then Droplet
Precautions can be substituted for Airborne Precautions. Emphasize the following: (1) use of sharps safety devices and safe
work practices, (2) proper hand hygiene, (3) barrier protection against blood and body ﬂuids on entry into room (single gloves
and ﬂuid-resistant or impermeable gown, face/eye protection with masks, goggles or face shields), and (4) appropriate waste
handling. Use N95 or higher respirators when performing aerosol-generating procedures. In settings where AIIRs are
unavailable or the large numbers of patients cannot be accommodated by existing AIIRs, observe Droplet Precautions (plus
Standard and Contact Precautions) and segregate patients from those not suspected as having VHF infection. Limit blood draws
to those essential to care. See the text for discussion and Appendix A for recommendations for naturally occurring VHFs.
Continued
S72
Vol. 35 No. 10 Supplement 2
Siegel et al

----- Page 10 (native) -----
Table 3. Continued
Disease
Plague*
Site(s) of infection; transmission mode
RT: Inhalation of respiratory droplets. Comment: Pneumonic plague is most likely when used as a biological weapon, but some
cases of bubonic and primary septicemia also may occur. Infective dose, 100 to 500 bacteria.
Incubation period
1 to 6 days, usually 2 to 3 days.
Clinical features
Pneumonic: Fever, chills, headache, cough, dyspnea, rapid progression of weakness, and, in later stages, hemoptysis, circulatory
collapse, and bleeding diathesis.
Diagnosis
Presumptive is diagnosis from Gram’s stain or Wayson’s stain of sputum, blood, or lymph node aspirate; deﬁnitive diagnosis is
from cultures of same material or paired acute/convalescent serology.
Infectivity
Person-to-person transmission occurs through respiratory droplets. Risk of transmission is low during the ﬁrst 20 to 24 hours of
illness and requires close contact. Respiratory secretions probably are not infectious within a few hours after initiation of
appropriate therapy.
Recommended precautions
Standard and Droplet Precautions until patients have received 48 hours of appropriate therapy. Chemoprophylaxis: Consider
antibiotic prophylaxis for HCWs with close contact exposure.
Disease
Smallpox
Site(s) of infection; transmission mode
RT Inhalation of droplet or, rarely, aerosols; and skin lesions (contact with virus).
Comment: If used as a biological weapon, natural disease (which has not occurred since 1977) likely will result.
Incubation period
7 to 19 days (mean, 12 days).
Clinical features
Fever, malaise, backache, headache, and often vomiting for 2 to 3 days, followed by generalized papular or maculopapular
rash (more on face and extremities), which becomes vesicular (on day 4 or 5) and then pustular; lesions all in same
stage.
Diagnosis
Electron microscopy of vesicular ﬂuid or culture of vesicular ﬂuid by a World Health Organization–approved laboratory (CDC);
detection by PCR available only at select LRN laboratories, the CDC, and US Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious
Diseases.
Infectivity
Secondary attack rates up to 50% in unvaccinated persons. Infected persons may transmit disease from the time that rash appears
until all lesions have crusted over (about 3 weeks). Infectivity is greatest during the ﬁrst 10 days of rash.
Recommended precautions
Combined use of Standard, Contact, and Airborne Precautions should be maintained until all scabs have separated (3 to 4
weeks).y Only immune HCWs should care for patients. Postexposure vaccine should be provided within 4 days.
Vacciniaz: HCWs to cover vaccination site with gauze and semipermeable dressing until scab separates ($ 21 days). Hand
hygiene should be observed.
Adverse events with virus-containing lesions: Standard Precautions plus Contact Precautions until all lesions are
crusted.
Disease
Tularemia
Site(s) of infection; transmission mode
RT: Inhalation of aerosolized bacteria; GIT: Ingestion of food or drink contaminated with aerosolized bacteria.
Comment: Pneumonic or typhoidal disease likely to occur after bioterrorist event using aerosol delivery. Infective dose, 10 to
50 bacteria.
Incubation period
2 to 10 days; usually 3 to 5 days.
Clinical features
Pneumonic: malaise, cough, sputum production, dyspnea. Typhoidal: fever, prostration, weight loss and frequently an associated
pneumonia.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis usually made with serology on acute and convalescent serum specimens; bacterium can be detected by PCR (LRN) or
isolated from blood and other body ﬂuids on cysteine-enriched media or mouse inoculation.
Infectivity
Person-to-person spread is rare. Laboratory workers who encounter/handle cultures of this organism are at high risk for disease
if exposed.
Recommended precautions
Standard Precautions
AIIR, airborne infection isolation room; BSL, biosafety level; CSF, cerebrospinal ﬂuid; CT, computed tomography; CXR, chest x-ray; ELISA, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay; GIT,
gastrointestinal tract; HCW, health care worker; IHC, immunohistochemistry; LD50, lethal dose for 50% of experimental animals; LRN, Laboratory Response Network; PAPR, pow-
ered air-purifying respirator; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; RT, respiratory tract; VHF, viral hemorrhagic fever.
*Pneumonic plague is not as contagious as is often thought. Historical accounts and contemporary evidence indicate that persons with plague usually transmit the in-
fection only when the disease is in the end stage. These persons cough copious amounts of bloody sputum that contains many plague bacteria. Patients in the early
stage of primary pneumonic plague (approximately the ﬁrst 20 to 24 hours) apparently pose little risk (Wu L-T. A treatise on pneumonic plague. Geneva, Switzerland:
League of Nations; 1926; Kool JL. Risk of person-to-person transmission of pneumonic plague. Clin Infect Dis 2005;40:1166-72). Antibiotic medication rapidly clears the
sputum of plague bacilli, so that a patient generally is not infective within hours after initiation of effective antibiotic treatment (Butler TC. Plague and other Yersinia
infections. In: Greenough WB, editor. Current topics in infectious disease. New York: Plenum; 1983). This means that in modern times, many patients will never reach
a stage where they pose a signiﬁcant risk to others. Even in the end stage of disease, transmission occurs only after close contact. Simple protective measures, such as
wearing masks, maintaining good hygiene, and avoiding close contact, have been effective in interrupting transmission during many pneumonic plague outbreaks; in the
United States, the last known case of person-to-person transmission of pneumonic plague occurred in 1925 (Kool JL. Risk of person-to-person transmission of pneumonic
plague. Clin Infect Dis 2005;40:1166-72).
yTransmission by the airborne route is a rare event. Airborne Precautions are recommended when possible, but in the event of mass exposures, Barrier Precautions and con-
tainment within a designated area are most important.204,212
zVaccinia adverse events with lesions containing infectious virus include inadvertent autoinoculation, ocular lesions (blepharitis, conjunctivitis), generalized vaccinia, progressive
vaccinia, and eczema vaccinatum. Bacterial superinfection also requires addition of Contact Precautions if exudates cannot be contained.216, 217
Siegel et al
December 2007
S73

----- Page 11 (native) -----
With the increasing incidence and prevalence of
MDROs, all health care facilities must prioritize effec-
tive control of MDRO transmission. Facilities should
identify prevalent MDROs at the facility, implement
control measures, assess the effectiveness of control
programs, and demonstrate decreasing MDRO rates.
A set of intensiﬁed MDRO prevention interventions
is to be added if the incidence of transmission of
a target MDRO is not decreasing despite implemen-
tation of basic MDRO infection control measures,
and when the ﬁrst case of an epidemiologically
important MDRO is identiﬁed within a health care
facility.
SUMMARY
This updated guideline responds to changes in health
caredeliveryandaddressesnewconcernsabouttransmis-
sion of infectious agents to patients and HCWs in the
United States and infection control. The primary objective
of the guideline is to improve the safety of the nation’s
health care delivery system by reducing the rates of HAIs.
Table 4. Recommendations for application of Standard Precautions for the care of all patients in all healthcare settings (see
Sections II.D to II.J and III.A.1)
Component
Recommendations
Hand hygiene
After touching blood, body ﬂuids, secretions, excretions, contaminated
items; immediately after removing gloves; between patient contacts
Personal protective equipment (PPE)
Gloves
For touching blood, body ﬂuids, secretions, excretions, contaminated
items, mucous membranes, and nonintact skin
Gown
During procedures and patient care activities when contact of clothing/
exposed skin with blood/body ﬂuids, secretions, and excretions is
anticipated
Mask, eye protection (goggles), face shield*
During procedures and patient care activities likely to generate splashes or
sprays of blood, body ﬂuids, secretions, especially suctioning,
endotracheal intubation
Soiled patient care equipment
Handle in a manner that prevents transfer of microorganisms to others and
to the environment; wear gloves if visibly contaminated; perform hand
hygiene
Environmental control
Develop procedures for routine care, cleaning, and disinfection of
environmental surfaces, especially frequently touched surfaces in patient
care areas
Textiles and laundry
Handle in a manner that prevents transfer of microorganisms to others and
to the environment
Needles and other sharps
Do not recap, bend, break, or hand-manipulate used needles; if recapping is
required, use a one-handed scoop technique only; use safety features
when available; place used sharps in puncture-resistant container
Patient resuscitation
Use mouthpiece, resuscitation bag, other ventilation devices to prevent
contact with mouth and oral secretions
Patient placement
Prioritize for single-patient room if patient is at increased risk of
transmission, is likely to contaminate the environment, does not maintain
appropriate hygiene, or is at increased risk of acquiring infection or
developing adverse outcome after infection
Respiratory hygiene/cough etiquette (source containment of infectious
respiratory secretions in symptomatic patients, beginning at initial point
of encounter, eg, triage and reception areas in emergency departments
and physician ofﬁces)
Instruct symptomatic persons to cover mouth/nose when sneezing/
coughing; use tissues and dispose in no-touch receptacle; observe
hand hygiene after soiling of hands with respiratory secretions; wear
surgical mask if tolerated or maintain spatial separation, .3 feet if
possible.
*During aerosol-generating procedures on patients with suspected or proven infections transmitted by respiratory aerosols (eg, severe acute respiratory syndrome), wear a ﬁt-
tested N95 or higher respirator in addition to gloves, gown, and face/eye protection.
S74
Vol. 35 No. 10 Supplement 2
Siegel et al

----- Page 12 (native) -----
ABBREVIATIONS USED IN THE GUIDELINE
AIA
American Institute of Architects
AIIR
Airborne infection isolation room
CDC
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
CF
Cystic ﬁbrosis
CJD
Creutzfeld-Jakob Disease
ESBL
Extended-spectrum beta-lactamase
FDA
Food and Drug Administration
HAI
Health care–associated infection
HBV
Hepatitis B virus
HCV
Hepatitis C virus
HEPA
High-efﬁciency particulate air
HICPAC
Health Care Infection Control Practices Advi-
sory Committee
HIV
Human immunodeﬁciency virus
HCW
Health care worker
HFV
Hemorrhagic fever virus
HSCT
Hematopoetic stem cell transplantation
ICP
Infection prevention and control
professional
ICU
Intensive care unit
LTCF
Long-term care facility
MDR-GNB
Multidrug-resistant gram-negative bacilli
MDRO
Multidrug-resistant organism
MRSA
Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
MSSA
Methicillin-susceptible Staphylococcus
aureus
NICU
Neonatal intensive care unit
NIOSH
National Institute for Occupational Safety
and Health
NNIS
National Nosocomial Infection Surveillance
NSSP
Nonsusceptible Streptococcus pneumoniae
OSHA
Occupational Safety and Health
Administration
PCR
Polymerase chain reaction
PE
Protective environment
PFGE
Pulsed-ﬁeld gel electrophoresis
PICU
Pediatric intensive care unit
Table 5. Components of a protective environment
I. Patients: allogeneic hematopoeitic stem cell transplantation only
d Maintain in protective environment (PE) room except for required diagnostic or therapeutic procedures that cannot be performed in the room (eg,
radiology, surgery)
d Respiratory protection (eg, N95 respirator) for the patient when leaving PE during periods of construction
II. Standard and Expanded Precautions
d Hand hygiene observed before and after patient contact
d Gown, gloves, mask not required for health care workers (HCWs) or visitors for routine entry into the room
d Use of gown, gloves, and mask by HCWs and visitors according to Standard Precautions and as indicated for suspected or proven infections for which
transmission-based precautions are recommended
III. Engineering
d Central or point-of-use high-efﬁciency particulate air (HEPA) ﬁlters (99.97% efﬁciency) ﬁlters capable of removing particles 0.3 mm in diameter in supply
(incoming) air
d Well-sealed rooms:
- Proper construction of windows, doors, and intake and exhaust ports
- Ceilings: smooth, free of ﬁssures, open joints, crevices
- Walls sealed above and below the ceiling
- If leakage detected, locate source and make necessary repairs
d Ventilation to maintain $12 air changes/hour
d Directed air ﬂow; air supply and exhaust grills located so that clean, ﬁltered air enters from one side of the room, ﬂows across the patient’s bed, and exits
on opposite side of the room
d Positive room air pressure in relation to the corridor; pressure differential of .2.5 Pa (0.01-inch water gauge)
d Air ﬂow patterns monitored and recorded daily using visual methods (eg, ﬂutter strips, smoke tubes) or a hand-held pressure gauge
d Self-closing door on all room exits
d Back-up ventilation equipment (eg, portable units for fans or ﬁlters) maintained for emergency provision of ventilation requirements for PE areas, with
immediate steps taken to restore the ﬁxed ventilation system
d For patients who require both a PE and an airborne infection isolation room (AIIR), use an anteroom to ensure proper air balance relationships and
provide independent exhaust of contaminated air to the outside, or place a HEPA ﬁlter in the exhaust duct. If an anteroom is not available, place patient in
an AIIR and use portable ventilation units, industrial-grade HEPA ﬁlters to enhance ﬁltration of spores.
IV. Surfaces
d Daily wet-dusting of horizontal surfaces using cloths moistened with EPA-registered hospital disinfectant/detergent
d Avoid dusting methods that disperse dust
d No carpeting in patient rooms or hallways
d No upholstered furniture and furnishings
V. Other
d No ﬂowers (fresh or dried) or potted plants in PE rooms or areas
d Vacuum cleaner equipped with HEPA ﬁlters when vacuum cleaning is necessary
Adapted from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.11
Siegel et al
December 2007
S75

----- Page 13 (native) -----
PPE
Personal protective equipment
RSV
Respiratory syncytial virus
SARS
Severe acute respiratory syndrome
vCJD
variant Creutzfeld-Jakob disease
VISA
Vancomycin-intermediate/resistannt Staphy-
lococcus aureus
VRE
Vancomycin-resistant enterococci
VRSA
Vancomycin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
WHO
World Health Organization
PART I: REVIEW OF SCIENTIFIC DATA
REGARDING TRANSMISSION OF INFECTIOUS
AGENTS IN HEALTH CARE SETTINGS
I.A. Evolution of the 2007 Document
The Guideline for Isolation Precautions: Preventing
Transmission of Infectious Agents in Health care Set-
tings 2007 builds on a series of isolation and infection
prevention documents promulgated since 1970. These
previous documents are summarized and referenced in
Table 1 and in Part I of the 1996 Guideline for Isolation
Precautions in Hospitals.1
I.A.1. Objectives and Methods. The objectives of
this guideline are to (1) provide infection control recom-
mendations for all components of the health care
delivery system, including hospitals, long-term care
facilities, ambulatory care, home care, and hospice; (2)
reafﬁrm Standard Precautions as the foundation for pre-
venting transmission during patient care in all health
care settings; (3) reafﬁrm the importance of implement-
ing Transmission-Based Precautions based on the clini-
cal presentation or syndrome and likely pathogens until
the infectious etiology has been determined (Table 2);
and (4) provide epidemiologically sound and, whenever
possible, evidence-based recommendations.
This guideline is designed for use by individuals
who are charged with administering infection control
programs in hospitals and other health care settings.
The information also will be useful for other HCWs,
health care administrators, and anyone needing infor-
mation about infection control measures to prevent
transmission of infectious agents. Commonly used ab-
breviations are provided, and terms used in the guide-
line are deﬁned in the Glossary.
Medline and PubMed were used to search for rele-
vant studies published in English, focusing on those
published since 1996. Much of the evidence cited for
preventing transmission of infectious agents in health
care settings is derived from studies that used ‘‘quasi-
experimental designs,’’ also referred to as nonrandom-
ized
preintervention
and
postintervention
study
designs.2 Although these types of studies can provide
valuable information regarding the effectiveness of
various interventions, several factors decrease the cer-
tainty of attributing improved outcome to a speciﬁc
intervention. These include: difﬁculties in controlling
for important confounding variables, the use of multi-
ple interventions during an outbreak, and results that
are explained by the statistical principle of regression
to the mean (eg, improvement over time without any
intervention).3 Observational studies remain relevant
and have been used to evaluate infection control inter-
ventions.4,5 The quality of studies, consistency of re-
sults, and correlation with results from randomized
controlled trials, when available, were considered dur-
ing the literature review and assignment of evidence-
based categories (see Part IV: Recommendations) to
the recommendations in this guideline. Several authors
have summarized properties to consider when evaluat-
ing studies for the purpose of determining whether the
results should change practice or in designing new
studies.2,6,7
I.A.2. Changes or Clariﬁcations in Terminology.
This guideline contains 4 changes in terminology
from the 1996 guideline:
1. The term ‘‘nosocomial infection’’ is retained to refer
only to infections acquired in hospitals. The term
‘‘health care–associated infection’’ (HAI) is used to
refer to infections associated with health care deliv-
ery in any setting (eg, hospitals, long-term care facil-
ities, ambulatory settings, home care). This term
reﬂects the inability to determine with certainty
where the pathogen was acquired, because patients
may be colonized with or exposed to potential path-
ogens outside of the health care setting before re-
ceiving health care, or may develop infections
caused by those pathogens when exposed to the
conditions associated with delivery of health care.
In addition, patients frequently move among the
various settings within the health care system.8
2. A new addition to the practice recommendations for
Standard Precautions is respiratory hygiene/cough
etiquette. Whereas Standard Precautions generally
apply to the recommended practices of HCWs dur-
ing patient care, respiratory hygiene/cough etiquette
applies broadly to all persons who enter a health
care setting, including HCWs, patients, and visitors.
These recommendations evolved from observations
during the SARS epidemic that failure to implement
basic source control measures with patients, visitors,
and HCWs with signs and symptoms of respiratory
tract infection may have contributed to SARS-CoV
transmission. This concept has been incorporated
into CDC planning documents for SARS and pan-
demic inﬂuenza.9,10
3. The term ‘‘Airborne Precautions’’ has been supple-
mented by the term ‘‘Airborne Infection Isolation
Room’’ (AIIR), to achieve consistency with the
Guidelines for Environmental Infection Control in
S76
Vol. 35 No. 10 Supplement 2
Siegel et al

----- Page 14 (native) -----
Health Care Facilities,11 the Guidelines for Preventing
the Transmission of Mycobacterium tuberculosis in
Health Care Settings 2005,12 and the American Insti-
tute of Architects (AIA) 2006 guidelines for design
and construction of hospitals.13
4. A set of prevention measures known as the protec-
tive environment (PE) has been added to the precau-
tions for preventing HAIs. These measures, which
have been deﬁned in previous guidelines, consist
of engineering and design interventions aimed at
decreasing the risk of exposure to environmental
fungi for severely immunocompromised patients
undergoing allogeneic HSCT during the times of
highest risk, usually the ﬁrst 100 days posttrans-
plantation or longer in the presence of graft-ver-
sus-host disease.11,13-15 Recommendations for a PE
apply only to acute care hospitals that provide
care to patients undergoing HSCT.
I.A.3. Scope. This guideline, like its predecessors, fo-
cuses primarily on interactions between patients and
health care providers. The Guidelines for the Prevention
of MDRO Infection were published separately in Novem-
ber 2006 and are available online at http://www.cdc.
gov/ncidod/dhqp/index.html.
Several
other
HICPAC
guidelines to prevent transmission of infectious agents
associated with health care delivery are cited, including
Guideline for Hand Hygiene, Guideline for Environmental
Infection Control, Guideline for Prevention of Health
Care–Associated Pneumonia, and Guideline for Infection
Control in Health Care Personnel.11,14,16,17 In combina-
tion, these provide comprehensive guidance on the pri-
mary infection control measures for ensuring a safe
environment for patients and HCWs.
This guideline does not discuss in detail specialized
infection control issues in deﬁned populations that are
addressed elsewhere (eg, Recommendations for Pre-
venting Transmission of Infections Among Chronic He-
modialysis
Patients, Guidelines
for
Preventing
the
Transmission of Mycobacterium tuberculosis in Health
Care Facilities 2005, Guidelines for Infection Control in
Dental Health Care Settings, and Infection Control Rec-
ommendations for Patients With Cystic Fibrosis.12,18-20
An exception has been made by including abbreviated
guidance for a PE used for allogeneic HSCT recipients,
because components of the PE have been deﬁned
more completely since publication of the Guidelines
for Preventing Opportunistic Infections Among HSCT
Recipients in 2000 and the Guideline for Environmental
Infection Control in Health Care Facilities.11,15
I.B. Rationale for Standard and Transmission-
Based Precautions in Health Care Settings
Transmission of infectious agents within a health
care setting requires 3 elements: a source (or reservoir)
of infectious agents, a susceptible host with a portal of
entry receptive to the agent, and a mode of transmis-
sion for the agent. This section describes the interrela-
tionship of these elements in the epidemiology of HAIs.
I.B.1.
Sources of Infectious Agents. Infectious
agents transmitted during health care derive primarily
from human sources but inanimate environmental
sources also are implicated in transmission. Human res-
ervoirs include patients,20-28 HCWs,17,29-39 and house-
hold members and other visitors.40-45 Such source
individuals may have active infections, may be in the
asymptomatic and/or incubation period of an infectious
disease, or may be transiently or chronically colonized
with pathogenic microorganisms, particularly in the
respiratory and gastrointestinal tracts. Other sources
of HAIs are the endogenous ﬂora of patients (eg, bacteria
residing in the respiratory or gastrointestinal tract).46-54
I.B.2. Susceptible Hosts. Infection is the result of a
complex interrelationship between a potential host
and an infectious agent. Most of the factors that inﬂu-
ence infection and the occurrence and severity of dis-
ease are related to the host. However, characteristics
of the host–agent interaction as it relates to pathoge-
nicity, virulence, and antigenicity also are important,
as are the infectious dose, mechanisms of disease pro-
duction, and route of exposure.55 There is a spectrum
of possible outcomes after exposure to an infectious
agent. Some persons exposed to pathogenic microor-
ganisms never develop symptomatic disease, whereas
others become severely ill and even die. Some individ-
uals are prone to becoming transiently or permanently
colonized but remain asymptomatic. Still others pro-
gress from colonization to symptomatic disease either
immediately after exposure or after a period of asymp-
tomatic colonization. The immune state at the time of
exposure to an infectious agent, interaction between
pathogens, and virulence factors intrinsic to the agent
are important predictors of an individual’s outcome.
Host factors such as extremes of age and underlying
disease (eg, diabetes56,57, human immunodeﬁciency
virus/acquired immune deﬁciency syndrome [HIV/
AIDS],58,59
malignancy,
and
transplantation18,60,61)
can increase susceptibility to infection, as can various
medications that alter the normal ﬂora (eg, antimicro-
bial agents, gastric acid suppressors, corticosteroids,
antirejection drugs, antineoplastic agents, immunosup-
pressive drugs). Surgical procedures and radiation ther-
apy impair defenses of the skin and other involved
organ systems. Indwelling devices, such as urinary
catheters, endotracheal tubes, central venous and arte-
rial catheters,62-64 and synthetic implants, facilitate de-
velopment of HAIs by allowing potential pathogens
to bypass local defenses that ordinarily would impede
their invasion and by providing surfaces for develop-
ment of bioﬁlms that may facilitate adherence of
Siegel et al
December 2007
S77

----- Page 15 (native) -----
microorganisms and protect from antimicrobial activ-
ity.65 Some infections associated with invasive proce-
dures result from transmission within the health care
facility; others arise from the patient’s endogenous
ﬂora.46-50 High-risk patient populations with notewor-
thy risk factors for infection are discussed further in
Sections I.D, I.E, and I.F.
I.B.3. Modes of Transmission. Several classes of
pathogens can cause infection, including bacteria, vi-
ruses, fungi, parasites, and prions. The modes of trans-
mission vary by type of organism, and some infectious
agents may be transmitted by more than 1 route. Some
are transmitted primarily by direct or indirect contact,
(eg, herpes simplex virus [HSV], respiratory syncytial
virus, S aureus), others by the droplet, (eg, inﬂuenza
virus, Bordetella pertussis) or airborne routes (eg, Myco-
bacterium tuberculosis). Other infectious agents, such
as bloodborne viruses (eg, hepatitis B virus [HBV], hep-
atitis C virus [HCV], HIV), are rarely transmitted in
health care settings through percutaneous or mucous
membrane exposure. Importantly, not all infectious
agents are transmitted from person to person; these
are listed in Appendix A. The 3 principal routes of
transmission—contact,
droplet,
and
airborne—are
summarized below.
I.B.3.a. Contact Transmission. The most common
mode of transmission, contact transmission is divided
into 2 subgroups: direct contact and indirect contact.
I.B.3.a.i. Direct
Contact
Transmission.
Direct
transmission occurs when microorganisms are trans-
ferred from an infected person to another person with-
out a contaminated intermediate object or person.
Opportunities for direct contact transmission between
patients and HCWs have been summarized in HICPAC’s
Guideline for Infection Control in Health Care Personnel,
199817 and include the following:
d Blood or other blood-containing body ﬂuids from a
patient directly enters a HCW’s body through contact
with a mucous membrane66 or breaks (ie, cuts, abra-
sions) in the skin.67
d Mites from a scabies-infested patient are transferred
to a HCW’s skin while he or she is in direct ungloved
contact with the patient’s skin.68,69
d A HCW develops herpetic whitlow on a ﬁnger after
contact with HSV when providing oral care to a pa-
tient without using gloves, or HSV is transmitted to
a patient from a herpetic whitlow on an ungloved
hand of a HCW.70,71
I.B.3.a.ii. Indirect Contact Transmission.
Indirect
transmission involves the transfer of an infectious
agent through a contaminated intermediate object or
person. In the absence of a point-source outbreak, it
is difﬁcult to determine how indirect transmission oc-
curs. However, extensive evidence cited in the Guideline
for Hand Hygiene in Health Care Settings suggests that
the contaminated hands of HCWs are important con-
tributors to indirect contact transmission.16 Examples
of opportunities for indirect contact transmission in-
clude the following:
d A HCWs’ hands may transmit pathogens after touch-
ing an infected or colonized body site on 1 patient or
a contaminated inanimate object, if hand hygiene is
not performed before touching another patient.72,73
d Patient-care devices (eg, electronic thermometers,
glucose monitoring devices) may transmit pathogens
if devices contaminated with blood or body ﬂuids are
shared between patients without cleaning and disin-
fecting between patients.74-77
d Shared toys may become a vehicle for transmitting
respiratory viruses (eg, respiratory syncytial virus
[RSV]24,78,79 or pathogenic bacteria (eg, Pseudomonas
aeruginosa80) among pediatric patients.
d Instruments that are inadequately cleaned between
patients before disinfection or sterilization (eg, endo-
scopes or surgical instruments)81-85 or that have
manufacturing defects that interfere with the effec-
tiveness of reprocessing86,87 may transmit bacterial
and viral pathogens.
Clothing, uniforms, laboratory coats, or isolation
gowns used as PPE may become contaminated with
potential pathogens after care of a patient colonized
or infected with an infectious agent, (eg, MRSA,88 van-
comycin-resistant enterococci [VRE],89 and C difﬁ-
cile90). Although contaminated clothing has not been
implicated directly in transmission, the potential exists
for soiled garments to transfer infectious agents to suc-
cessive patients.
I.B.3.b. Droplet Transmission. Droplet transmis-
sion is technically a form of contact transmission;
some infectious agents transmitted by the droplet route
also may be transmitted by direct and indirect contact
routes. However, in contrast to contact transmission,
respiratory droplets carrying infectious pathogens
transmit infection when they travel directly from the
respiratory tract of the infectious individual to suscep-
tible mucosal surfaces of the recipient, generally over
short distances, necessitating facial protection. Respi-
ratory droplets are generated when an infected person
coughs, sneezes, or talks91,92 or during such proce-
dures
as
suctioning,
endotracheal
intubation,93-96
cough induction by chest physiotherapy,97 and cardio-
pulmonary resuscitation.98,99 Evidence for droplet
transmission comes from epidemiologic studies of dis-
ease outbreaks,100-103 from experimental studies,104
and from information on aerosol dynamics.91,105 Stud-
ies have shown that the nasal mucosa, conjunctivae,
and, less frequently, the mouth are susceptible portals
of entry for respiratory viruses.106 The maximum
S78
Vol. 35 No. 10 Supplement 2
Siegel et al

----- Page 16 (native) -----
distance for droplet transmission is currently unre-
solved; pathogens transmitted by the droplet route
have not been transmitted through the air over long
distances, in contrast to the airborne pathogens dis-
cussed below. Historically, the area of deﬁned risk has
been a distance of , 3 feet around the patient, based
on epidemiologic and simulated studies of selected in-
fections.103,104 Using this distance for donning masks
has been effective in preventing transmission of infec-
tious agents through the droplet route. However, exper-
imental studies with smallpox107,108 and investigations
during the global SARS outbreaks of 2003101 suggest
that droplets from patients with these 2 infections
could reach persons located 6 feet or more from their
source. It is likely that the distance that droplets travel
depends on the velocity and mechanism by which res-
piratory droplets are propelled from the source, the
density of respiratory secretions, environmental fac-
tors (eg, temperature, humidity), and the pathogen’s
ability to maintain infectivity over that distance.105
Thus, a distance of , 3 feet around the patient is best
considered an example of what is meant by ‘‘a short
distance from a patient’’ and should not be used as
the sole criterion for determining when a mask should
be donned to protect from droplet exposure. Based on
these considerations, it may be prudent to don a mask
when within 6 to 10 feet of the patient or on entry into
the patient’s room, especially when exposure to
emerging or highly virulent pathogens is likely. More
studies are needed to gain more insight into droplet
transmission under various circumstances.
Droplet size is another variable under investigation.
Droplets traditionally have been deﬁned as being . 5
mm in size. Droplet nuclei (ie, particles arising from des-
iccation of suspended droplets) have been associated
with airborne transmission and deﬁned as , 5 mm in
size,105 areﬂectionof thepathogenesis of pulmonary tu-
berculosis that is not generalizeable to other organisms.
Observations of particle dynamics have demonstrated
that a range of droplet sizes, including those of diameter
$ 30 mm, can remain suspended in the air.109 The be-
havior of droplets and droplet nuclei affect recommen-
dations for preventing transmission. Whereas ﬁne
airborne particles containing pathogens that are able
to remain infective may transmit infections over long
distances, requiring AIIR to prevent its dissemination
within a facility; organisms transmitted by the droplet
route do not remain infective over long distances and
thus do not require special air handling and ventilation.
Examples of infectious agents transmitted through the
droplet route include B pertussis,110 inﬂuenza virus,23
adenovirus,111
rhinovirus,104
Mycoplasma
pneumo-
niae,112 SARS-CoV,21,96,113 group A streptococcus,114
and Neisseria meningitides.95,103,115 Although RSV may
be transmitted by the droplet route, direct contact with
infected respiratorysecretions is the most important de-
terminant of transmission and consistent adherence to
Standard Precautions plus Contact Precautions prevents
transmission in health care settings.24,116,117
Rarely, pathogens that are not transmitted routinely
by the droplet route are dispersed into the air over
short distances. For example, although S aureus is
transmitted most frequently by the contact route, viral
upper respiratory tract infection has been associated
with increased dispersal of S aureus from the nose
into the air for a distance of 4 feet under both outbreak
and experimental conditions; this is known as the
‘‘cloud baby’’ and ‘‘cloud adult’’ phenomenon.118-120
I.B.3.c. Airborne Transmission. Airborne transmis-
sion occurs by dissemination of either airborne droplet
nuclei or small particles in the respirable size range
containing infectious agents that remain infective
over time and distance (eg, spores of Aspergillus spp
and M tuberculosis). Microorganisms carried in this
manner may be dispersed over long distances by air
currents and may be inhaled by susceptible individuals
who have not had face-to-face contact with (or even
been in the same room with) the infectious individ-
ual.121-124 Preventing the spread of pathogens that
are transmitted by the airborne route requires the use
of special air handling and ventilation systems (eg,
AIIRs) to contain and then safely remove the infectious
agent.11,12 Infectious agents to which this applies in-
clude M tuberculosis,124-127 rubeola virus (measles),122
and varicella-zoster virus (chickenpox).123 In addition,
published data suggest the possibility that variola virus
(smallpox) may be transmitted over long distances
through the air under unusual circumstances, and
AIIRs are recommended for this agent as well; however,
droplet and contact routes are the more frequent routes
of transmission for smallpox.108,128,129 In addition to
AIIRs, respiratory protection with a National Institute
for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH)-certiﬁed
N95 or higher-level respirator is recommended for
HCWs entering the AIIR, to prevent acquisition of
airborne infectious agents such as M tuberculosis.12
For certain other respiratory infectious agents, such
as inﬂuenza130,131 and rhinovirus,104 and even some
gastrointestinal viruses (eg, norovirus132 and rotavi-
rus133), there is some evidence that the pathogen
may be transmitted through small-particle aerosols un-
der natural and experimental conditions. Such trans-
mission has occurred over distances . 3 feet but
within a deﬁned air space (eg, patient room), suggest-
ing that it is unlikely that these agents remain viable
on air currents that travel long distances. AIIRs are
not routinely required to prevent transmission of these
agents. Additional issues concerning small-particle aer-
osol transmission of agents that are most frequently
transmitted by the droplet route are discussed below.
Siegel et al
December 2007
S79

----- Page 17 (native) -----
I.B.3.d. Emerging
Issues
Concerning
Airborne
Transmission of Infectious Agents.
I.B.3.d.i. Transmission From Patients. The emer-
gence of SARS in 2002, the importation of monkeypox
into the United States in 2003, and the emergence of
avian inﬂuenza present challenges to the assignment
of isolation categories due to conﬂicting information
and uncertainty about possible routes of transmission.
Although SARS-CoV is transmitted primarily by contact
and/or droplet routes, airborne transmission over a lim-
ited distance (eg, within a room) has been suggested, al-
though not proven.134-141 This is true of other infectious
agents as well, such as inﬂuenza virus130 and norovi-
ruses.132,142,143 Inﬂuenza viruses are transmitted pri-
marily by close contact with respiratory droplets,23,102
and acquisition by HCWs has been prevented by Drop-
let Precautions, even when positive-pressure rooms
were used in one center.144 However, inhalational trans-
mission could not be excluded in an outbreak of inﬂu-
enza in the passengers and crew of an aircraft.130
Observations of a protective effect of ultraviolet light
in preventing inﬂuenza among patients with tuberculo-
sis during the inﬂuenza pandemic of 1957–1958 have
been used to suggest airborne transmission.145,146
In contrast to the strict interpretation of an airborne
route for transmission (ie, long distances beyond the pa-
tient room environment), short-distance transmission
by small-particle aerosols generated under speciﬁc cir-
cumstances (eg, during endotracheal intubation) to per-
sonsintheimmediateareanearthepatientalsohasbeen
demonstrated. Aerosolized particles , 100 mm in diam-
eter can remain suspended in air when room air current
velocities exceed the terminal settling velocities of the
particles.109 SARS-CoV transmission has been associated
with endotracheal intubation, noninvasive positive
pressure ventilation, and cardiopulmonary resuscita-
tion.93,94,96,98,141 Although the most frequent routes of
transmission of noroviruses are contact and foodborne
and waterborne routes, several reports suggest that nor-
oviruses also may be transmitted through aerosolization
of infectious particles from vomitus or fecal mate-
rial.142,143,147,148 It is hypothesized that the aerosolized
particles are inhaled and subsequently swallowed.
Roy and Milton have proposed a new classiﬁcation
for aerosol transmission when evaluating routes of
SARS transmission:
d Obligate. Under natural conditions, disease occurs af-
ter transmission of the agent only through inhalation
of small-particle aerosols (eg, tuberculosis).
d Preferential. Natural infection results from transmis-
sion through multiple routes, but small-particle aero-
sols are the predominant route (eg, measles, varicella).
d Opportunistic. Under special circumstances, agents
that naturally cause disease through other routes
may
be
transmitted
through
small-particle
aerosols.149
This conceptual framework can explain rare occur-
rences of airborne transmission of agents that are
transmitted most frequently by other routes (eg, small-
pox, SARS, inﬂuenza, noroviruses). Concerns about un-
known or possible routes of transmission of agents
associated with severe disease and no known treat-
ment often result in the adoption of overextreme pre-
vention strategies, and recommended precautions
may change as the epidemiology of an emerging infec-
tion becomes more well deﬁned and controversial is-
sues are resolved.
I.B.3.d.ii. Transmission
From
the
Environment.
Some airborne infectious agents are derived from the
environment and do not usually involve person-to-per-
son transmission; for example, anthrax spores present
in a ﬁnely milled powdered preparation can be aerosol-
ized from contaminated environmental surfaces and
inhaled into the respiratory tract.150,151 Spores of envi-
ronmental fungi (eg, Aspergillus spp) are ubiquitous in
the environment and may cause disease in immuno-
compromised patients who inhale aerosolized spores
(through, eg, construction dust).152,153 As a rule, nei-
ther of these organisms is subsequently transmitted
from infected patients; however, there is 1 well-docu-
mented report of person-to-person transmission of
Aspergillus sp in the ICU setting that was most likely
due to the aerosolization of spores during wound
debridement.154 The PE involves isolation practices de-
signed to decrease the risk of exposure to environmental
fungal agents in allogeneic HSCT patients.11,14,15,155-158
Environmental sources of respiratory pathogens (eg,
Legionella) transmitted to humans through a common
aerosol source is distinct from direct patient-to-patient
transmission.
I.B.3.e. Other Sources of Infection. Sources of in-
fection transmission other than infectious individuals
include those associated with common environmental
sources or vehicles (eg, contaminated food, water, or
medications, such as intravenous ﬂuids). Although As-
pergillus spp have been recovered from hospital water
systems,159 the role of water as a reservoir for immuno-
suppressed patients remains unclear. Vectorborne
transmission of infectious agents from mosquitoes,
ﬂies, rats, and other vermin also can occur in health
care settings. Prevention of vectorborne transmission
is not addressed in this document.
I.C. Infectious Agents of Special Infection
Control Interest for Health Care Settings
This section discusses several infectious agents with
important infection control implications that either
were not discussed extensively in previous isolation
S80
Vol. 35 No. 10 Supplement 2
Siegel et al

----- Page 18 (native) -----
guidelines or have emerged only recently. Included are
epidemiologically important organisms (eg, C difﬁcile),
agents of bioterrorism, prions, SARS-CoV, monkeypox,
noroviruses, and the hemorrhagic fever viruses (HFVs).
Experience with these agents has broadened the un-
derstanding of modes of transmission and effective
preventive measures. These agents are included for in-
formation purposes and, for some (ie, SARS-CoV, mon-
keypox), to highlight the lessons that have been
learned about preparedness planning and responding
effectively to new infectious agents.
I.C.1. Epidemiologically Important Organisms. Un-
der deﬁned conditions, any infectious agent transmit-
ted in a health care setting may become targeted for
control because it is epidemiologically important. C dif-
ﬁcile is speciﬁcally discussed below because of its cur-
rent prevalence and seriousness in US health care
facilities. In determining what constitutes an ‘‘epidemi-
ologically important organism,’’ the following criteria
apply:
d A propensity for transmission within health care fa-
cilities based on published reports and the occur-
rence of temporal or geographic clusters of more
than 2 patients, (eg, C difﬁcile, norovirus, RSV, inﬂu-
enza, rotavirus, Enterobacter spp, Serratia spp, group
A streptococcus). A single case of health care–associ-
ated invasive disease caused by certain pathogens
(eg, group A streptococcus postoperatively,160 in a
burn unit,161 or in a LTCF;162 Legionella spp,14,163 As-
pergillus spp164) is generally considered a trigger for
investigation and enhanced control measures be-
cause of the risk of additional cases and the severity
of illness associated with these infections. Antimicro-
bial resistance can have the following characteristics:
d Resistance
to
ﬁrst-line
therapies
(eg,
MRSA,
vancomycin-intermediate/resistannt S aureus [VISA],
vancomycin-resistant S aureus [VRSA], VRE, ex-
tended-spectrum beta-lactamase [ESBL]-producing
organisms)
d Common and uncommon microorganisms with un-
usual patterns of resistance within a facility (eg, the
ﬁrst isolate of Burkholderia cepacia complex or Ral-
stonia spp in non-CF patients or a quinolone-resis-
tant strain of P aeruginosa in a facility)
d Difﬁcult to treat because of innate or acquired resis-
tance to multiple classes of antimicrobial agents (eg,
Stenotrophomonas maltophilia, Acinetobacter spp)
d Association with serious clinical disease, and in-
creased morbidity and mortality (eg, MRSA and
methicillin-susceptible S aureus [MSSA], group A
streptococcus)
d A newly discovered or reemerging pathogen.
I.C.1.a. Clostridium difﬁcile. C difﬁcile is a spore-
forming gram-positive anaerobic bacillus that was ﬁrst
isolated from stools of neonates in 1935165 and identi-
ﬁed as the most frequent causative agent of antibiotic-
associated diarrhea and pseudomembranous colitis in
1977.166 This pathogen is a major cause of health
care–associated diarrhea and has been responsible
for many large outbreaks in health care settings that
have proven extremely difﬁcult to control. Important
factors contributing to health care–associated out-
breaks include environmental contamination, persis-
tence of spores for prolonged periods, resistance of
spores to routinely used disinfectants and antiseptics,
hand carriage by HCWs to other patients, and exposure
of
patients
to
frequent
courses
of
antimicrobial
agents.167 Antimicrobials most frequently associated
with increased risk of C difﬁcile include third-genera-
tion cephalosporins, clindamycin, vancomycin, and
ﬂuoroquinolones.
Since 2001, outbreaks and sporadic cases of C dif-
ﬁcile with increased morbidity and mortality have
occurred in several US states, Canada, England, and
the Netherlands.168-172 The same strain of C difﬁcile
has been implicated in all of these outbreaks;173
this strain, toxinotype III, North American pulsed-
ﬁeld gel electrophoresis (PFGE) type 1, and polymer-
ase chain reaction (PCR)-ribotype 027 (NAP1/027),
has been found to hyperproduce toxin A (a 16-fold
increase) and toxin B (a 23-fold increase) compared
with isolates from 12 other PFGE types. A recent sur-
vey of US infectious disease physicians found that
40% of the respondents perceived recent increases
in the incidence and severity of C difﬁcile disease.174
Standardization of testing methodology and surveil-
lance deﬁnitions is needed for accurate comparisons
of trends in rates among hospitals.175 It is hypothe-
sized that the incidence of disease and apparent
heightened transmissibility of this new strain may
be due, at least in part, to the greater production
of toxins A and B, increasing the severity of diarrhea
and producing more environmental contamination.
Considering the greater morbidity, mortality, length
of stay, and costs associated with C difﬁcile disease
in both acute care and long-term care facilities,
control of this pathogen is becoming increasingly
important.
Prevention of transmission focuses on syndromic
application of Contact Precautions for patients with di-
arrhea, accurate identiﬁcation of affected patients, en-
vironmental measures (eg, rigorous cleaning of patient
rooms), and consistent hand hygiene. Using soap and
water rather than alcohol-based handrubs for mechan-
ical removal of spores from hands and using a bleach-
containing disinfectant (5000 ppm) for environmental
disinfection may be valuable in cases of transmission
in health care facilities. Appendix A provides for
recommendations.
Siegel et al
December 2007
S81

----- Page 19 (native) -----
I.C.1.b. Multidrug-Resistant Organisms. In gen-
eral, MDROs are deﬁned as microorganisms—predomi-
nantly bacteria—that are resistant to 1 or more classes
of antimicrobial agents.176 Although the names of cer-
tain MDROs suggest resistance to only a single agent
(eg, MRSA, VRE), these pathogens are usually resistant
to all but a few commercially available antimicrobial
agents. This latter feature deﬁnes MDROs that are con-
sidered to be epidemiologically important and deserve
special attention in health care facilities.177 Other
MDROs of current concern include multidrug-resistant
Streptococcus pneumoniae, which is resistant to penicil-
lin and other broad-spectrum agents such as macrolides
and ﬂuroquinolones, multidrug-resistant gram-nega-
tive bacilli (MDR-GNB), especially those producing
ESBLs; and strains of S aureus that are intermediate or
resistant to vancomycin (ie, VISA and VRSA).178-198
MDROs are transmitted by the same routes as anti-
microbial susceptible infectious agents. Patient-to-pa-
tient transmission in health care settings, usually via
hands of HCWs, has been a major factor accounting
for the increase in MDRO incidence and prevalence, es-
pecially for MRSA and VRE in acute care facilities.199-
201 Preventing the emergence and transmission of
these pathogens requires a comprehensive approach
that includes administrative involvement and mea-
sures (eg, nurse stafﬁng, communication systems, per-
formance improvement processes to ensure adherence
to recommended infection control measures), educa-
tion and training of medical and other HCWs, judicious
antibiotic use, comprehensive surveillance for targeted
MDROs, application of infection control precautions
during patient care, environmental measures (eg,
cleaning and disinfection of the patient care environ-
ment and equipment, dedicated single-patient use of
noncritical equipment), and decolonization therapy
when appropriate.
The prevention and control of MDROs is a national
priority, one that requires that all health care facilities
and agencies assume responsibility and participate in
community-wide control programs.176,177 A detailed
discussion of this topic and recommendations for pre-
vention published in 2006 is available at http://
www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dhqp/pdf/ar/mdroGuideline2006.
pdf.
I.C.2. Agents of Bioterrorism. The CDC has desig-
nated the agents that cause anthrax, smallpox, plague,
tularemia, viral hemorrhagic fevers, and botulism as
category A (high priority), because these agents can
be easily disseminated environmentally and/or trans-
mitted from person to person, can cause high mortality
and have the potential for major public health impact,
might cause public panic and social disruption, and
necessitate special action for public health prepared-
ness.202 General information relevant to infection
control in health care settings for Category A agents
of bioterrorism is summarized in Table 3. (See http://
www.bt.cdc.gov for additional, updated Category A
agent information as well as information concerning
Category B and C agents of bioterrorism and updates.)
Category B and C agents are important but are not as
readily disseminated and cause less morbidity and
mortality than Category A agents.
Health care facilities confront a different set of is-
sues when dealing with a suspected bioterrorism event
compared with other communicable diseases. An un-
derstanding of the epidemiology, modes of transmis-
sion, and clinical course of each disease, as well as
carefully drafted plans that specify an approach and
relevant websites and other resources for disease-spe-
ciﬁc guidance to health care, administrative, and sup-
port personnel, are essential for responding to and
managing a bioterrorism event. Infection control issues
to be addressed include (1) identifying persons who
may be exposed or infected; (2) preventing transmis-
sion among patients, HCWs, and visitors; (3) providing
treatment, chemoprophylaxis, or vaccine to potentially
large numbers of people; (4) protecting the environ-
ment, including the logistical aspects of securing sufﬁ-
cient numbers of AIIRs or designating areas for patient
cohorts when an insufﬁcient number of AIIRs is avail-
able; (5) providing adequate quantities of appropriate
PPE; and (6) identifying appropriate staff to care for
potentially infectious patients (eg, vaccinated HCWs for
care of patients with smallpox). The response is likely
to differ for exposures resulting from an intentional
release compared with a naturally occurring disease
because of the large number of persons that can be
exposed at the same time and possible differences in
pathogenicity.
Various sources offer guidance for the management
of persons exposed to the most likely agents of bio-
terrorism. Federal agency websites (eg, http://www.
usamriid.army.mil/publications/index.html and http://
www.bt.cdc.gov) and state and county health depart-
ment websites should be consulted for the most up-
to-date information. Sources of information on speciﬁc
agents include anthrax,203 smallpox,204-206 plague,207,208
botulinum toxin,209 tularemia,210 and hemorrhagic
fever viruses.211,212
I.C.2.a. Pre-Event
Administration
of
Smallpox
(Vaccinia) Vaccine to Health Care Workers. Vaccina-
tion of HCWsl in preparation for a possible smallpox
exposure has important infection control implica-
tions.213-215 These include the need for meticulous
screening for vaccine contraindications in persons at
increased risk for adverse vaccinia events; contain-
ment and monitoring of the vaccination site to prevent
transmission in the health care setting and at home;
and management of patients with vaccinia-related
S82
Vol. 35 No. 10 Supplement 2
Siegel et al

----- Page 20 (native) -----
adverse events.216,217 The pre-event US smallpox
vaccination program of 2003 is an example of the
effectiveness of carefully developed recommendations
for both screening potential vaccinees for contraindi-
cations and vaccination site care and monitoring.
Between December 2002 and February 2005, approx-
imately 760,000 individuals were vaccinated in the
Department of Defense and 40,000 in the civilian or
public health populations, including approximately
70,000 who worked in health care settings. No cases
of eczema vaccinatum, progressive vaccinia, fetal vac-
cinia, or contact transfer of vaccinia were reported in
health care settings or in military workplaces.218,219
Outside the health care setting, there were 53 cases of
contact transfer from military vaccinees to close per-
sonal contacts (eg, bed partners or contacts during par-
ticipation in sports such as wrestling220). All contact
transfers were from individuals who were not following
recommendations to cover their vaccination sites.
Vaccinia virus was conﬁrmed by culture or PCR in 30
cases, 2 of which resulted from tertiary transfer. All
recipients, including 1 breast-fed infant, recovered
without complications. Subsequent studies using viral
culture and PCR techniques have conﬁrmed the effec-
tiveness
of
semipermeable
dressings
to
contain
vaccinia.221-224 This experience emphasizes the impor-
tance of ensuring that newly vaccinated HCWs adhere
to recommended vaccination site care, especially those
caring for high-risk patients. Recommendations for
pre-event smallpox vaccination of HCWs and vaccinia-
related
infection
control
recommendations
are
published in the Morbidity and Mortality Weekly
Report,216,225 with updates posted on the CDC’s bioter-
rorism website.205
I.C.3. Prions. Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) is a rap-
idly progressive, degenerative neurologic disorder of
humans, with an incidence in the United States of ap-
proximately 1 person/million population/year.226,227
CJD is believed to be caused by a transmissible protein-
aceous infectious agent known as a prion. Infectious
prions are isoforms of a host-encoded glycoprotein
known as the prion protein. The incubation period (ie,
time between exposure and and onset of symptoms)
varies from 2 years to many decades. However, death
typically occurs within 1 year of the onset of symptoms.
Approximately 85% of CJD cases occur sporadically
with no known environmental source of infection,
and 10% of cases are familial. Iatrogenic transmission
has occurred, with most cases resulting from treatment
with human cadaver pituitary-derived growth hormone
or gonadotropin,228,229 from implantation of contami-
nated human dura mater grafts,230 or from corneal
transplants.231 Transmission has been linked to the
use of contaminated neurosurgical instruments or
stereotactic electroencephalogram electrodes.232-235
Prion diseases in animals include scrapie in sheep
and goats, bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE,
or ‘‘mad cow disease’’) in cattle, and chronic wasting
disease in deer and elk.236 BSE, ﬁrst recognized in the
United Kingdom in 1986, was associated with a major
epidemic among cattle that had consumed contami-
nated meat and bone meal. The possible transmission
of BSE to humans causing variant CJD (vCJD) was ﬁrst
described in 1996 and was subsequently found to be
associated with consumption of BSE-contaminated cat-
tle products primarily in the United Kingdom. There is
strong epidemiologic and laboratory evidence for a
causal association between the causative agent of BSE
and vCJD.237 Although most cases of vCJD have been
reported from the United Kingdom, a few cases also
have been reported from Europe, Japan, Canada, and
the United States. Most persons affected with vCJD
worldwide lived in or visited the United Kingdom dur-
ing the years of a large outbreak of BSE (1980–1996)
and may have consumed contaminated cattle products
during
that
time
(see
http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/
diseases/cjd/cjd.htm). Although there has been no in-
digenously acquired vCJD in the United States, the
sporadic occurrence of BSE in cattle in North America
has heightened awareness of the possibility that such
infections could occur and have led to increased sur-
veillance activities. Updated information may be found
at http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/diseases/cjd/cjd.htm. The
public health impact of prion diseases has been
reviewed previously.238
vCJD in humans has different clinical and pathologic
characteristics than sporadic or classic CJD,239 includ-
ing (1) younger median age at death (28 [range, 16 to
48] vs 68 years), (2) longer median duration of illness
(14 months vs 4 to 6 months), (3) increased frequency
of sensory symptoms and early psychiatric symptoms
with delayed onset of frank neurologic signs; and (4) de-
tection of prions in tonsillar and other lymphoid tissues,
not present in sporadic CJD.240 Similar to sporadic CJD,
there have been no reported cases of direct human-to-
human transmission of vCJD by casual or environmen-
tal contact, droplet, or airborne routes. Ongoing blood
safety surveillance in the United States has not detected
sporadic CJD transmission through blood transfu-
sion;241-243 however, bloodborne transmission of vCJD
is believed to have occurred in 2 patients in the Uited
Kingdom.244,245 The following FDAwebsites provide in-
formation on steps currently being taken in the United
States to protect the blood supply from CJD and vCJD:
http://www.fda.gov/cber/gdlns/cjdvcjd.htm and http://
www.fda.gov/cber/gdlns/cjdvcjdq&a.htm.
Standard Precautions are used when caring for pa-
tients with suspected or conﬁrmed CJD or vCJD. How-
ever, special precautions are recommended for tissue
handling in the histology laboratory and for conducting
Siegel et al
December 2007
S83

----- Page 21 (native) -----
an autopsy, embalming, and coming into contact with a
body that has undergone autopsy.246 Recommenda-
tions for reprocessing surgical instruments to prevent
transmission of CJD in health care settings have been
published by the World Health Organization (WHO)
and are currently under review at the CDC.
Questions may arise concerning notiﬁcation of pa-
tients potentially exposed to CJD or vCJD through con-
taminated
instruments
and
blood
products
from
patients with CJD or vCJD or at risk of having vCJD.
The risk of transmission associated with such expo-
sures is believed to be extremely low but may vary
based on the speciﬁc circumstance. Therefore, consul-
tation on appropriate options is advised. The United
Kingdom has developed several documents that clini-
cians and patients in the United States may ﬁnd use-
ful (see http://www.hpa.org.uk/infections/topics_az/cjd/
information_documents.htm).
I.C.4. Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome. SARS is a
newly discovered respiratory disease that emerged in
China late in 2002 and spread to several coun-
tries.135,140 In particular, mainland China, Hong Kong,
Hanoi, Singapore, and Toronto have been signiﬁcantly
affected. SARS is caused by SARS-CoV, a previously un-
recognized member of the coronavirus family.247,248
The incubation period from exposure to the onset of
symptoms is typically 2 to 7 days, but can be as long
as 10 days and in rare cases even longer.249 The illness
is initially difﬁcult to distinguish from other common
respiratory infections. Signs and symptoms usually in-
clude fever above 38.08C and chills and rigors, some-
times accompanied by headache, myalgia, and mild to
severe respiratory symptoms. A radiographic proﬁle of
atypical pneumonia is an important clinical indicator
of possible SARS. Compared with adults, children are af-
fected less frequently, have milder disease, and are less
likely to transmit SARS-CoV.135,249-251 The overall case
fatality rate is approximately 6%; underlying disease
and advanced age increase the risk of mortality (see
http://www.who.int/csr/sarsarchive/2003_05_07a/en/).
Outbreaks in health care settings, with transmission
to large numbers of HCWs and patients, haa been a
striking feature of SARS; undiagnosed infectious pa-
tients and visitors have been important initiators of
these outbreaks.21,252-254 The relative contribution of
potential modes of transmission is not known pre-
cisely. There is ample evidence for droplet and contact
transmission;96,101,113 however, opportunistic airborne
transmission cannot be excluded.101,135-139,149, 254 For
example, exposure to aerosol-generating procedures
(eg, endotracheal intubation, suctioning) has been
associated with transmission of infection to large num-
bers of HCWs outside of the United States.93,94,96,98,253
Therefore, aerosolization of small infectious particles
generated during these and other similar procedures
could be a risk factor for transmission to others within
a multibed room or shared airspace. A review of the in-
fection control literature generated from the SARS out-
breaks of 2003 concluded that the greatest risk of
transmission is to those who have close contact, are
not properly trained in use of protective infection con-
trol procedures, and do not consistently use PPE, and
that N95 or higher-level respirators may offer addi-
tional protection to those exposed to aerosol-generat-
ing
procedures
and
high-risk
activities.255,256
Organizational and individual factors that affect adher-
ence to infection control practices for SARS also were
identiﬁed.256
Control of SARS requires a coordinated, dynamic re-
sponse by multiple disciplines in a health care setting.9
Early detection of cases is accomplished by screening
persons with symptoms of a respiratory infection for
history of travel to areas experiencing community
transmission or contact with SARS patients, followed
by implementation of respiratory hygiene/cough eti-
quette (ie, placing a mask over the patient’s nose and
mouth) and physical separation from other patients
in common waiting areas. The precise combination
of precautions to protect HCWs has not yet been deter-
mined. At the time of this publication, the CDC recom-
mends Standard Precautions, with emphasis on the use
of hand hygiene; Contact Precautions, with emphasis
on environmental cleaning due to the detection of
SARS-CoV RNA by PCR on surfaces in rooms occupied
by SARS patients;138,254,257 and Airborne Precautions,
including use of ﬁt-tested NIOSH-approved N95 or
higher-level respirators and eye protection.258 In
Hong Kong, the use of Droplet and Contact Precautions,
including the use of a mask but not a respirator, was ef-
fective in protecting HCWs.113 However, in Toronto,
consistent use of an N95 respirator was found to be
slightly more protective than a mask.93 It is noteworthy
that no transmission of SARS-CoV to public hospital
workers occurred in Vietnam despite inconsistent use
of infection control measures, including use of PPE,
which suggests other factors (eg, severity of disease,
frequency of high-risk procedures or events, environ-
mental features) may inﬂuence opportunities for
transmission.259
SARS-CoV also has been transmitted in the labora-
tory setting through breaches in recommended labo-
ratory
practices.
Research
laboratories
in
which
SARS-CoV was under investigation were the source
of most cases reported after the ﬁrst series of out-
breaks in the winter and spring of 2003.260,261 Studies
of the SARS outbreaks of 2003 and transmissions oc-
curring in the laboratory reafﬁrm the effectiveness
of recommended infection control precautions and
highlight the importance of consistent adherence to
these measures.
S84
Vol. 35 No. 10 Supplement 2
Siegel et al

----- Page 22 (native) -----
Lessons learned from the SARS outbreaks are useful
in devising plans to respond to future public health cri-
ses, such as pandemic inﬂuenza and bioterrorism
events. Surveillance for cases among patients and
HCWs, ensuring availability of adequate supplies and
stafﬁng, and limiting access to health care facilities
were important factors in the response to SARS.9 Guid-
ance for infection control precautions in various set-
tings is available at http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/sars.
I.C.5. Monkeypox. Monkeypox is a rare viral disease
found mostly in the rain forest countries of Central
and West Africa. The disease is caused by an orthopox-
virus that is similar in appearance to smallpox but
causes a milder disease. The only recognized outbreak
of human monkeypox in the United States was de-
tected in June 2003, after several people became ill af-
ter contact with sick pet prairie dogs. Infection in the
prairie dogs was subsequently traced to their contact
with a shipment of animals from Africa, including giant
Gambian rats.262 This outbreak demonstrates the im-
portance of recognition and prompt reporting of un-
usual disease presentations by clinicians to enable
prompt identiﬁcation of the etiology, as well as the po-
tential of epizootic diseases to spread from animal res-
ervoirs to humans through personal and occupational
exposure.263
Only limited data on transmission of monkeypox
are available. Transmission from infected animals and
humans is believed to occur primarily through direct
contact with lesions and respiratory secretions; air-
borne transmission from animals to humans is un-
likely
but
cannot
be
excluded,
and
may
have
occurred in veterinary practices (eg, during administra-
tion of nebulized medications to ill prairie dogs264). In
humans, 4 instances of monkeypox transmission in
hospitals have been reported in Africa among children,
usually related to sharing the same ward or bed.265,266
Additional recent literature documents transmission of
Congo Basin monkeypox in a hospital compound for
an extended number of generations.267
There has been no evidence of airborne or any other
person-to-person transmission of monkeypox in the
United States, and no new cases of monkeypox have
been identiﬁed since the outbreak in June 2003.268
The outbreak strain is a clade of monkeypox distinct
from the Congo Basin clade and may have different ep-
idemiologic properties (including human-to-human
transmission potential) from monkeypox strains of
the Congo Basin;269 this awaits further study. Smallpox
vaccine is 85% protective against Congo Basin mon-
keypox.270 Because there is an associated case fatality
rate of , 10%, administration of smallpox vaccine
within 4 days to individuals who have had direct expo-
sure to patients or animals with monkeypox is a rea-
sonable policy.271 For the most current information
on monkeypox, see http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/mon
keypox/clinicians.htm.
I.C.6. Noroviruses. Noroviruses, formerly referred to
as Norwalk-like viruses, are members of the Caliciviri-
dae family. These agents are transmitted via contami-
nated food or water and from person to person,
causing explosive outbreaks of gastrointestinal dis-
ease.272 Environmental contamination also has been
documented as a contributing factor in ongoing trans-
mission during outbreaks.273,274 Although noroviruses
cannot be propagated in cell culture, DNA detection by
molecular diagnostic techniques has brought a greater
appreciation of their role in outbreaks of gastrointesti-
nal disease.275Reportedoutbreaks in hospitals,132,142,276
nursing
homes,274,277-282
cruise
ships,283,284,
hotels,143,147 schools,148 and large crowded shelters es-
tablished for hurricane evacuees285 has demonstrated
their highly contagious nature, their potentially disrup-
tive impact in health care facilities and the community,
and the difﬁculty of controlling outbreaks in settings in
which people share common facilites and space. Of
note, there is nearly a 5-fold increase in the risk to
patients in outbreaks when a patient is the index case
compared with exposure of patients during outbreaks
when a staff member is the index case.286
The average incubation period for gastroenteritis
caused by noroviruses is 12 to 48 hours, and the clini-
cal course lasts 12 to 60 hours.272 Illness is character-
ized by acute onset of nausea, vomiting, abdominal
cramps, and/or diarrhea. The disease is largely self-lim-
ited; rarely, death due to severe dehydration can occur,
particularly in elderly persons with debilitating health
conditions.
The epidemiology of norovirus outbreaks shows that
even though primary cases may result from exposure to
a fecallycontaminated food or water, secondary and ter-
tiary cases often result from person-to-person transmis-
sion facilitated by contamination of fomites272,287 and
dissemination of infectious particles, especially during
the process of vomiting.132,142,143,147,148,272,
278,279
Widespread, persistent, and inapparent contamination
of the environment and fomites can make outbreaks ex-
tremely difﬁcult to control.147,274,283 These clinical ob-
servations and the detection of norovirus DNA on
horizontal surfaces 5 feet above the level that might be
touched normally suggest that under certain circum-
stances, aerosolized particles may travel distances be-
yond 3 feet.147 It is hypothesized that infectious
particles may be aerosolized from vomitus, inhaled,
and swallowed. In addition, individuals who are respon-
sible for cleaning the environment may be at increased
risk of infection. Development of disease and transmis-
sion may be facilitated by the low infectious dose (ie,
, 100 viral particles)288 and the resistance of these
viruses to the usual cleaning and disinfection agents
Siegel et al
December 2007
S85

----- Page 23 (native) -----
(ie, they may survive , 10 ppm chlorine).289-291 An al-
ternate phenolic agent that was shown to be effective
against feline calicivirus was used for environmental
cleaning in one outbreak.275,292 There are insufﬁcient
data to determine the efﬁcacy of alcohol-based hand
rubs against noroviruses when the hands are not visibly
soiled.293 Absence of disease in certain individuals dur-
ing an outbreak may be explained by protection from
infection conferred by the B histo-blood group anti-
gen.294 Consultation on outbreaks of gastroenteritis is
available through the CDC’s Division of Viral and Rick-
ettsial Diseases.295
I.C.7. Hemorrhagic Fever Viruses. HFV is a mixed
group of viruses that cause serious disease with high
fever, skin rash, bleeding diathesis, and, in some cases,
high mortality; the resulting disease is referred to as
viral hemorrhagic fever (VHF). Among the more com-
monly known HFVs are Ebola and Marburg viruses
(Filoviridae),
Lassa
virus
(Arenaviridae),
Crimean-
Congo hemorrhagic fever and Rift Valley Fever virus
(Bunyaviridae), and Dengue and Yellow fever viruses
(Flaviviridae).212,296 These viruses are transmitted to
humans through contact with infected animals or via
arthropod vectors. Although none of these viruses is
endemic in the United States, outbreaks in affected
countries provide potential opportunities for importa-
tion by infected humans and animals. Furthermore,
there is a concern that some of these agents could be
used as bioweapons.212 Person-to-person transmission
has been documented for Ebola, Marburg, Lassa, and
Crimean-Congo HFVs. In resource-limited health care
settings, transmission of these agents to HCWs, pa-
tients, and visitors has been described and in some out-
breaks has accounted for a large proportion of
cases.297-299 Transmission within households also has
been documented in individuals who had direct con-
tact with ill persons or their body ﬂuids, but not in
those who did not have such contact.300
Evidence concerning the transmission of HFVs has
been summarized previously.212,301 Person-to-person
transmission is associated primarily with direct blood
and body ﬂuid contact. Percutaneous exposure to con-
taminated blood carries a particularly high risk for
transmission and increased mortality.302,303 The ﬁnd-
ing of large numbers of Ebola viral particles in the skin
and the lumina of sweat glands has raised concerns
that transmission could occur from direct contact with
intact skin, although epidemiologic evidence to sup-
port this is lacking.304 Postmortem handling of infected
bodies is an important risk for transmission.300,305,306
In rare situations, cases in which the mode of trans-
mission was unexplained among individuals with no
known direct contact have led to speculation that
airborne transmission could have occurred.297 How-
ever, airborne transmission of naturally occurring
HFVs in humans has not been documented. A study
of airplane passengers exposed to an in-ﬂight index
case of Lassa fever found no transmission to any
passengers.307
In the laboratory setting, animals have been infected
experimentally with Marburg or Ebola virus through di-
rect inoculation of the nose, mouth, and/or conjunc-
tiva308,309 and by using mechanically generated virus-
containing aerosols.310, 311 Transmission of Ebola virus
among laboratory primates in an animal facility has
been described.312 The secondarily infected animals
were in individual cages separated by approximately
3 meters. Although the possibility of airborne transmis-
sion was suggested, the investigators were not able to
exclude droplet or indirect contact transmission in
this incidental observation.
Guidance on infection control precautions for HVFs
transmitted person-to-person have been published by
the CDC1,211 and by the Johns Hopkins Center for Civil-
ian Biodefense Strategies.212 The most recent recom-
mendations
at
the
time
of
publication
of
this
document were posted on the CDC website on May
19, 2005.313 Inconsistencies among the various recom-
mendations have raised questions about the appropri-
ate precautions to use in US hospitals. In less developed
countries, outbreaks of HFVs have been controlled with
basic hygiene, barrier precautions, safe injection prac-
tices, and safe burial practices.298,305 The preponder-
ance of evidence on HFV transmission indicates that
Standard, Contact, and Droplet Precautions with eye
protection are effective in protecting HCWs and visitors
coming in contact with an infected patient. Single
gloves are adequate for routine patient care; double-
gloving is advised during invasive procedures (eg, sur-
gery) that pose an increased risk of blood exposure.
Routine eye protection (ie goggles or face shield) is par-
ticularly important. Fluid-resistant gowns should be
worn for all patient contact. Airborne Precautions are
not required for routine patient care; however, use of
AIIRs is prudent when procedures that could generate
infectious aerosols are performed (eg, endotracheal in-
tubation, bronchoscopy, suctioning, autopsy proce-
dures involving oscillating saws). N95 or higher-level
respirators may provide added protection for individ-
uals in a room during aerosol-generating procedures
(Table 3, Appendix A). When a patient with a syndrome
consistent with hemorrhagic fever also has a history of
travel to an endemic area, precautions are initiated on
presentation and then modiﬁed as more information is
obtained (Table 2). Patients with hemorrhagic fever
syndrome in the setting of a suspected bioweapons
attack should be managed using Airborne Precau-
tions, including AIIRs, because the epidemiology of
a potentially weaponized hemorrhagic fever virus is
unpredictable.
S86
Vol. 35 No. 10 Supplement 2
Siegel et al

----- Page 24 (native) -----
I.D. Transmission Risks Associated With
Speciﬁc Types of Health Care Settings
Numerous factors inﬂuence differences in transmis-
sion risks among the various health care settings.
These factors include the population characteristics
(eg, increased susceptibility to infections, type and
prevalence of indwelling devices), intensity of care, ex-
posure to environmental sources, length of stay, and
frequency of interaction between patients/residents
with each other and with HCWs. These factors, as
well as organizational priorities, goals, and resources,
inﬂuence how different health care settings adapt
transmission prevention guidelines to meet their spe-
ciﬁc needs.314,315 Infection control management deci-
sions are informed by data regarding institutional
experience/Epidemiology; trends in community and
institutional HAIs; local, regional, and national Epide-
miology; and emerging infectious disease threats.
I.D.1. Hospitals. Infection transmission risks are
present in all hospital settings. However, certain hospi-
tal settings and patient populations have unique condi-
tions that predispose patients to infection and merit
special mention. These are often sentinel sites for the
emergence of new transmission risks that may be
unique to that setting or present opportunities for
transmission to other settings in the hospital.
I.D.1.a. Intensive Care Units. Intensive care units
(ICUs) serve patients who are immunocompromised
by disease state and/or by treatment modalities, as
well as patients with major trauma, respiratory failure,
and other life-threatening conditions (eg, myocardial
infarction, congestive heart failure, overdose, stroke,
gastrointestinal bleeding, renal failure, hepatic failure,
multiorgan system failure, and extremes of age). Al-
though ICUs account for a relatively small proportion
of hospitalized patients, infections acquired in these
units account for . 20% of all HAIs.316 In the National
Nosocomial
Infection
Surveillance
(NNIS)
system,
26.6% of HAIs were reported from ICU and high-risk
nursery (neonatal ICU [NICU]) patients in 2002 (NNIS,
unpublished data). This patient population has in-
creased susceptibility to colonization and infection, es-
pecially with MDROs and Candida spp,317,318 because
of underlying diseases and conditions, the invasive
medical devices and technology used in their care
(eg central venous catheters and other intravascular
devices, mechanical ventilators, extracorporeal mem-
braneoxygenation,hemodialysis/ﬁltration,pacemakers,
implantable left-ventricular assist devices), the fre-
quencyof contact with HCWs, prolonged lengths of stay,
and prolonged exposure to antimicrobial agents.319-330
Furthermore, adverse patient outcomes in this setting
aremoresevereand areassociated with a highermortal-
ity.331 Outbreaks associated with various bacterial,
fungal, and viral pathogens due to common-source
and person-to-person transmissions are frequent in
adult ICUs and pediatric ICUs (PICUs).31,332-337
I.D.1.b. Burn Units. Burn wounds can provide opti-
mal conditions for colonization, infection, and trans-
mission of pathogens; infection acquired by burn
patients is a frequent cause of morbidity and mortal-
ity.319,338,339 The risk of invasive burn wound infection
is particularly high in patients with a burn injury in-
volving .
30%
of
the
total
body surface area
(TBSA).340,341 Infections occurring in patients with
burn injuries involving , 30% of the TBSA are usually
associated with the use of invasive devices. MSSA,
MRSA, enterococci (including VRE), gram-negative bac-
teria, and Candida spp are prevalent pathogens in burn
infections,53,339,342-349 and outbreaks of these orga-
nisms have been reported.350-353 Shifts over time in
the predominance of pathogens causing infections in
burn patients often lead to changes in burn care prac-
tices.342,354-357 Burn wound infections caused by
Aspergillus spp or other environmental molds may
result from exposure to supplies contaminated during
construction358 or to dust generated during construc-
tion or other environmental disruption.359
Hydrotherapy equipment is an important environ-
mental reservoir of gram-negative organisms. Its use
in burn care is discouraged based on demonstrated as-
sociations between the use of contaminated hydrother-
apy equipment and infections. Burn wound infections
and colonization, as well as bloodstream infections,
caused by multidrug-resistant P aeruginosa,360 Acineto-
bacter baumannii,361 and MRSA351 have been associ-
ated
with
hydrotherapy;
thus,
excision
of
burn
wounds in operating rooms is the preferred approach.
Advances in burn care (speciﬁcally, early excision
and grafting of the burn wound, use of topical antimi-
crobial agents, and institution of early enteral feeding)
have led to decreased infectious complications. Other
advances have included prophylactic antimicrobial
use, selective digestive decontamination, and use of an-
timicrobial-coated catheters; however, few epidemio-
logic studies and no efﬁcacy studies have been
performed to investigate the relative beneﬁt of these
measures.356
There is no consensus on the most effective infec-
tion control practices to prevent transmission of infec-
tions to and from patients with serious burns (eg,
single-bed rooms,357 laminar ﬂow,362 and high-efﬁ-
ciency particulate air [HEPA] ﬁltration,359 or maintain-
ing burn patients in a separate unit with no exposure
to patients or equipment from other units363). There
also is controversy regarding the need for and type
of barrier precautions in the routine care of burn pa-
tients. One retrospective study demonstrated the efﬁ-
cacy and cost-effectiveness of a simpliﬁed barrier
Siegel et al
December 2007
S87

----- Page 25 (native) -----
isolation protocol for wound colonization, emphasiz-
ing handwashing and use of gloves, caps, masks, and
impermeable plastic aprons (rather than isolation
gowns) for direct patient contact.364 However, to
date no studies have determined the most effective
combination of infection control precautions for use
in burn settings. Prospective studies in this area are
needed.
I.D.1.c. Pediatrics. Studies of the epidemiology of
HAIs in children have identiﬁed unique infection con-
trol issues in this population.63,64,365-369 Pediatric ICU
patients and the lowest birth weight babies in the
NICU monitored in the NNIS system have had high
rates of central venous catheter–associated blood-
stream infections.64,319,368-371 In addition, there is a
high prevalence of community-acquired infections
among hospitalized infants and young children who
have not yet become immune either by vaccination
or by natural infection. This results in more patients
and their sibling visitors with transmissible infections
in pediatric health care settings, especially during sea-
sonal epidemics (eg, pertussis;36,40,41 respiratory viral
infections. including those caused by RSV,24 inﬂuenza
viruses,372 parainﬂuenza virus,373 human metapneu-
movirus,374 and adenoviruses;375 rubeola [measles];34
varicella [chickenpox];376 and rotavirus38,377).
Close physical contact between HCWs and infants
and young children (eg. cuddling, feeding, playing,
changing soiled diapers, and cleaning copious uncon-
trolled respiratory secretions) provides abundant op-
portunities for transmission of infectious material.
Such practices and behaviors as congregation of chil-
dren in play areas where toys and bodily secretions
are easily shared and rooming-in of family members
with pediatric patients can further increase the risk
of transmission. Pathogenic bacteria have been recov-
ered from toys used by hospitalized patients;378 con-
taminated bath toys were implicated in an outbreak
of multidrug-resistant P. aeruginosa on a pediatric on-
cology unit.80 In addition, several patient factors in-
crease the likelihood that infection will result from
exposure to pathogens in health care settings (eg, im-
maturity of the neonatal immune system, lack of previ-
ous
natural
infection
and
resulting
immunity,
prevalence of patients with congenital or acquired im-
mune deﬁciencies, congenital anatomic anomalies,
and use of life-saving invasive devices in NICUs and
PICUs).63 There are theoretical concerns that infection
risk will increase in association with innovative prac-
tices used in the NICU for the purpose of improving
developmental outcomes, Such factors include co-
bedding379 and kangaroo care,380 which may increase
opportunity for skin-to-skin exposure of multiple ges-
tation infants to each other and to their mothers, re-
spectively; although the risk of infection actually may
be reduced among infants receiving kangaroo care.381
Children who attend child care centers382,383 and pedi-
atric rehabilitation units384 may increase the overall
burden of antimicrobial resistance by contributing to
the reservoir of CA-MRSA.385-390 Patients in chronic
care facilities may have increased rates of colonization
with resistant garm-negative bacilli and may be sour-
ces of introduction of resistant organisms to acute
care settings.50
I.D.2. Nonacute Health Care Settings. Health care is
provided in various settings outside of hospitals, in-
cluding long-term care facilities (LTCFs) (eg nursing
homes), homes for the developmentally disabled, be-
havioral health service settings, rehabilitation centers,
and hospices.391 In addition, health care may be pro-
vided in non–health care settings, such as workplaces
with occupational health clinics, adult day care centers,
assisted-living facilities, homeless shelters, jails and
prisons, school clinics, and inﬁrmaries. Each of these
settings has unique circumstances and population risks
that must be considered when designing and imple-
menting an infection control program. Several of the
most common settings and their particular challenges
are discussed below. Although this guideline does not
address each setting, the principles and strategies pro-
vided
herein
may
be
adapted
and
applied
as
appropriate.
I.D.2.a. Long-Term Care. The designation LTCF ap-
plies to a diverse group of residential settings, ranging
from institutions for the developmentally disabled to
nursing homes for the elderly and pediatric chronic
care facilities.392-394 Nursing homes for the elderly pre-
dominate numerically and frequently represent long-
term care as a group of facilities. Approximately 1.8
million Americans reside in the nation’s 16,500 nurs-
ing homes.395 Estimates of HAI rates of 1.8 to 13.5
per 1000 resident-care days have been reported, with
a range of 3 to 7 per 1000 resident-care days in the
more rigorous studies.396-400 The infrastructure de-
scribed in the Department of Veterans Affairs’ nursing
home care units is a promising example for the devel-
opment of a nationwide HAI surveillance system for
LTCFs.401
LCTFs are different from other health care settings
in that elderly patients at increased risk for infection
are brought together in one setting and remain in the
facility for extended periods; for most residents, it is
their home. An atmosphere of community is fostered,
and residents share common eating and living areas
and participate in various facility-sponsored activi-
ties.402,403 Because able residents interact freely with
each other, controlling infection transmission in this
setting can be challenging.404 A residents who is colo-
nized or infected with certain microorganisms are in
some cases restricted to his or her room. However,
S88
Vol. 35 No. 10 Supplement 2
Siegel et al

----- Page 26 (native) -----
because of the psychosocial risks associated with such
restriction, balancing psychosocial needs with infec-
tion control needs is important in the LTCF set-
ting.405-408 Documented LTCF outbreaks have been
caused by various viruses (eg, inﬂuenza virus,35,409-411
rhinovirus,412 adenovirus [conjunctivitis],413 norovi-
rus274,277,278,280) and bacteria, including group A strep-
tococcus,162,
B
pertussis,414
nonsusceptible
S
pneumoniae,197,198 other MDROs, and C difﬁcile415).
These pathogens can lead to substantial morbidity
and mortality, as well as increased medical costs;
prompt detection and implementation of effective con-
trol measures are needed.
Risk factors for infection are prevalent among LTCF
residents.394,416,417 Age-related declines in immunity
may affect the response to immunizations for inﬂuenza
and other infectious agents and increase the suscepti-
bility to tuberculosis. Immobility, incontinence, dys-
phagia, underlying chronic diseases, poor functional
status, and age-related skin changes increase suscepti-
bility to urinary, respiratory, and cutaneous and soft tis-
sue
infections,
whereas
malnutrition
can
impair
wound healing.418-422 Medications (eg, drugs that affect
level of consciousness, immune function, gastric acid
secretions, and normal ﬂora, including antimicrobial
therapy) and invasive devices (eg, urinary catheters
and feeding tubes) heighten the susceptibility to infec-
tion and colonization in LTCF residents.423-425 Finally,
limited functional status and total dependence on
HCWs for activities of daily living have been identiﬁed
as independent risk factors for infection400,416,426 and
for colonization with MRSA427,428 and ESBL-producing
Klebsiella pneumoniae.429 Several position papers and
review articles provide guidance on various aspects of
infection
control
and
antimicrobial
resistance
in
LTCFs.405-407,430-435 The Centers for Medicare and Med-
icaid Services has established regulations for the pre-
vention of infection in LTCFs.436
Because residents of LTCFs are hospitalized fre-
quently, they can transfer pathogens between LTCFs
and health care facilities in which they receive
care.8,437-440 This also is true for pediatric long-term
care populations. Pediatric chronic care facilities have
been associated with the importation of extended-
spectrum
cephalosporin-resistant,
gram-negative
bacilli into a PICU.50 Children from pediatric rehabilita-
tion units may contribute to the reservoir of commu-
nity-associated MRSA.384,388-390
I.D.2.b. Ambulatory Care. Over the past decade,
health care delivery in the United States has shifted
from the acute, inpatient hospital to various ambula-
tory and community-based settings, including the
home. Ambulatory care is provided in hospital-based
outpatient clinics, nonhospital-based clinics and physi-
cians’ ofﬁces, public health clinics, free-standing
dialysis centers, ambulatory surgical centers, urgent
care centers, and other setting. In 2000, there were
83 million visits to hospital outpatient clinics and
more than 823 million visits to physicians’ ofﬁces;441
ambulatory care now accounts for most patient en-
counters with the health care system.442 Adapting
transmission prevention guidelines to these settings is
challenging, because patients remain in common areas
for prolonged periods waiting to be seen by a health
care provider or awaiting admission to the hospital, ex-
amination or treatment rooms are turned around
quickly with limited cleaning, and infectious patients
may not be recognized immediately. Furthermore, im-
munocompromised patients often receive chemother-
apy in infusion rooms, where they stay for extended
periods along with other types of patients.
Little data exist on the risk of HAIs in ambulatory
care settings, with the exception of hemodialysis cen-
ters.18,443,444 Transmission of infections in outpatient
settings has been reviewed in 3 studies.445-447 Good-
man and Solomon445 summarized 53 clusters of infec-
tions associated with the outpatient setting between
1961 and 1990. Overall, 29 clusters were associated
with common source transmission from contaminated
solutions or equipment, 14 were associated with per-
son-to-person transmission from or involving HCWs,
and 10 were associated with airborne or droplet trans-
mission among patients and health care workers.
Transmission of bloodborne pathogens (ie, HBV, HCV,
and, rarely, HIV) in outbreaks, sometimes involving
hundreds of patients, continues to occur in ambulatory
settings. These outbreaks often are related to common
source exposures, usually a contaminated medical de-
vice, multidose vial, or intravenous solution.82,448-452 In
all cases, transmission has been attributed to failure to
adhere to fundamental infection control principles, in-
cluding safe injection practices and aseptic technique.
This subject has been reviewed, and recommended in-
fection control and safe injection practices have been
summarized.453
Airborne transmission of M tuberculosis and mea-
sles in ambulatory settings, most often emergency de-
partments,
has
been
reported.34,127,445,447,454-456
Measles virus was transmitted in physicians’ ofﬁces
and other outpatient settings during an era when im-
munization rates were low and measles outbreaks in
the community were occurring regularly.34,122,457 Ru-
bella has been transmitted in the outpatient obstetric
setting;33 there are no published reports of varicella
transmission in the outpatient setting. In the ophthal-
mology setting, adenovirus type 8 epidemic keratocon-
junctivitis has been transmitted through incompletely
disinfected ophthalmology equipment and/or from
HCWs
to
patients,
presumably
by
contaminated
hands.17,445,447,458-461
Siegel et al
December 2007
S89

----- Page 27 (native) -----
Preventing transmission in outpatient settings ne-
cessitates screening for potentially infectious sympto-
matic and asymptomatic individuals, especially those
at possible risk for transmitting airborne infectious
agents (eg, M tuberculosis, varicella-zoster virus, rube-
ola [measles]), at the start of the initial patient encoun-
ter. On identiﬁcation of a potentially infectious patient,
implementation of prevention measures, including
prompt separation of potentially infectious patients
and implementation of appropriate control measures
(eg, respiratory hygiene/cough etiquette and Transmis-
sion-Based Precautions) can decrease transmission
risks.9,12 Transmission of MRSA and VRE in outpatient
settings has not been reported, but the association of
CA-MRSA in HCWs working in an outpatient HIV clinic
with environmental CA-MRSA contamination in that
clinic suggests the possibility of transmission in that
setting.462 Patient-to-patient transmission of Burkhol-
deria spp and P aeruginosa in outpatient clinics for
adults and children with cystic ﬁbrosis has been
conﬁrmed.463,464
I.D.2.c. Home Care. Home care in the United States
is delivered by more than 20,000 provider agencies, in-
cluding home health agencies, hospices, durable med-
ical equipment providers, home infusion therapy
services, and personal care and support services pro-
viders. Home care is provided to patients of all ages
with both acute and chronic conditions. The scope of
services ranges from assistance with activities of daily
living and physical and occupational therapy to the
care of wounds, infusion therapy, and chronic ambula-
tory peritoneal dialysis.
The incidence of infection in home care patients,
other than that associated with infusion therapy, has
not been well studied.465-470 However, data collection
and calculation of infection rates have been done for
central venous catheter–associated bloodstream infec-
tions in patients receiving home infusion therapy469-
473 and for the risk of blood contact through percutane-
ous or mucosal exposures, demonstrating that surveil-
lance can be performed in this setting.474 Draft
deﬁnitions for home care–associated infections have
been developed.475
Transmission risks during home care are presumed
to be minimal. The main transmission risks to home
care patients are from an infectious home care pro-
vider or contaminated equipment; a provider also can
be exposed to an infectious patient during home visits.
Because home care involves patient care by a limited
number of personnel in settings without multiple pa-
tients or shared equipment, the potential reservoir of
pathogens is reduced. Infections of home care pro-
viders that could pose a risk to home care patients
include infections transmitted by the airborne or drop-
let routes (eg, chickenpox, tuberculosis, inﬂuenza),
skin infestations (eg, scabies69 and lice), and infections
transmitted by direct or indirect contact (eg, impetigo).
There are no published data on indirect transmission
of MDROs from one home care patient to another,
although this is theoretically possible if contaminated
equipment is transported from an infected or colonized
patient and used on another patient. Of note, investiga-
tions of the ﬁrst case of VISA in home care186 and the
ﬁrst 2 reported cases of VRSA178,180,181,183 found no
evidence of transmission of VISA or VRSA to other
home care recipients. Home health care also may con-
tribute to antimicrobial resistance; a review of outpa-
tient vancomycin use found that 39% of recipients
did not receive prescribed antibiotics according to rec-
ommended guidelines.476
Although most home care agencies implement poli-
cies and procedures aimed at preventing transmission
of organisms, the current approach is based on the ad-
aptation of the 1996 Guideline for Isolation Precautions
in Hospitals,1 as well as other professional guid-
ance.477,478 This issue has proven very challenging to
the home care industry, and practice has been incon-
sistent and frequently not evidence-based. For exam-
ple, many home health agencies continue to observe
‘‘nursing bag technique,’’ a practice that prescribes
the use of barriers between the nursing bag and envi-
ronmental surfaces in the home.479 Although the
home environment may not always appear clean, the
use of barriers between 2 noncritical surfaces has
been questioned.480,481 Opportunites exist to conduct
research in home care related to infection transmission
risks.482
I.D.2.d. Other Sites of Health Care Delivery. Facil-
ities that are not primarily health care settings but
in which health care is delivered include clinics in
correctional facilities and shelters. Both of these set-
tings can have suboptimal features, such as crowded
conditions and poor ventilation. Economically disad-
vantaged individuals who may have chronic illnesses
and health care problems related to alcoholism, in-
jected drug use, poor nutrition, and/or inadequate
shelter often receive their primary health care at
such sites.483 Infectious diseases of special concern
for transmission include tuberculosis, scabies, respira-
tory infections (eg, N meningitides, S pneumoniae), sex-
ually transmitted and bloodborne diseases (eg, HIV,
HBV, HCV, syphilis, gonorrhea), hepatitis A virus, diar-
rheal
agents
such
as
norovirus,
and
foodborne
diseases.285,484-487 A high index of suspicion for tuber-
culosis and CA-MRSA in these populations is needed;
outbreaks in these settings or among the populations
they serve have been reported.488-496
Patient encounters in these types of facilities pro-
vide an opportunity to deliver recommended immuni-
zations and screen for M tuberculosis infection, along
S90
Vol. 35 No. 10 Supplement 2
Siegel et al

----- Page 28 (native) -----
with diagnosing and treating acute illnesses.497 Recom-
mended infection control measures in these nontradi-
tional areas designated for health care delivery are
the same as for other ambulatory care settings. There-
fore, these settings must be equipped to observe
Standard Precautions and, when indicated, Transmis-
sion-Based Precautions.
I.E. Transmission Risks Associated With Special
Patient Populations
As new treatments emerge for complex diseases,
unique infection control challenges associated with
special patient populations must be addressed.
I.E.1. Immunocompromised Patients. Patients who
have congenital primary immune deﬁciencies or ac-
quired disease (eg. treatment-induced immune deﬁ-
ciencies) are at increased risk for numerous types of
infections while receiving health care; these patients
may be located throughout the health care facility.
The speciﬁc immune system defects determine the
types of infections most likely to be acquired (eg, viral
infections are associated with Tcell defects, and fungal
and bacterial infections occur in patients who are neu-
tropenic). As a general group, immunocompromised
patients can be cared for in the same environment as
other patients; however, it is always advisable to mini-
mize exposure to other patients with transmissible in-
fections, such as inﬂuenza and other respiratory
viruses.498,499 The use of more intense chemotherapy
regimens for treatment of childhood leukemia may
be associated with prolonged periods of neutropenia
and suppression of other components of the immune
system, extending the period of infection risk and rais-
ing the concern that additional precautions may be in-
dicated for select groups.500,501 With the application of
newer and more intense immunosuppressive therapies
for various medical conditions (eg, rheumatologic dis-
ease,502, 503 inﬂammatory bowel disease504), immuno-
suppressed patients are likely to be more widely
distributed throughout a health care facility rather
than localized to single patient units (eg, hematology-
oncology). Guidelines for preventing infections in cer-
tain groups of immunocompromised patients have
been published previously.15,505,506
Published data provide evidence to support placing
patients undergoing allogeneic HSCT in a PE.15,157,158
In addition, guidelines have been developed that ad-
dress the special requirements of these immunocom-
promised patients, including use of antimicrobial
prophylaxis and engineering controls to create a PE
for the prevention of infections caused by Aspergillus
spp and other environmental fungi.11,14,15 As more in-
tense chemotherapy regimens associated with pro-
longed periods of neutropenia or graft-versus-host
disease are implemented, the period of risk and dura-
tion of environmental protection may need to be pro-
longed beyond the traditional 100 days.507
I.E.2. Cystic Fibrosis Patients. Patients with cystic
ﬁbrosis (CF) require special consideration when devel-
oping infection control guidelines. Compared with
other patients, CF patients require additional protec-
tion to prevent transmission from contaminated respi-
ratory therapy equipment.508-512 Such infectious agents
as B cepacia complex and P aeruginosa.463,464,513,514
have unique clinical and prognostic signiﬁcance. In
CF patients, B cepacia infection has been associated
with increased morbidity and mortality,515-517 whereas
delayed acquisition of chronic P aeruginosa infection
may be associated with an improved long-term clinical
outcome.518,519
Person-to-person transmission of B cepacia complex
has
been
demonstrated
among
children516
and
adults520 with CF in health care settings463,521 and
from various social contacts,522 most notably atten-
dance at camps for patients with CF523 and among sib-
lings with CF.524 Successful infection control measures
used to prevent transmission of respiratory secretions
include segregation of CF patients from each other in
ambulatory and hospital settings (including use of pri-
vate rooms with separate showers), environmental de-
contamination
of
surfaces
and
equipment
contaminated with respiratory secretions, elimination
of group chest physiotherapy sessions, and disbanding
of CF camps.97,525 The Cystic Fibrosis Foundation has
published a consensus document with evidence-based
recommendations for infection control practices in CF
patients.20
I.F. New Therapies Associated With Potentially
Transmissible Infectious Agents
I.F.1. Gene Therapy. Gene therapy has has been at-
tempted using various viral vectors, including nonrep-
licating retroviruses, adenoviruses, adeno-associated
viruses, and replication-competent strains of poxvi-
ruses. Unexpected adverse events have restricted the
prevalence of gene therapy protocols.
The infectious hazards of gene therapy are theoreti-
cal at this time but require meticulous surveillance due
to the possible occurrence of in vivo recombination
and the subsequent emergence of a transmissible
genetically altered pathogen. The greatest concern
attends the use of replication-competent viruses,
especially vaccinia. To date, no reports have described
transmission of a vector virus from a gene therapy
recipient to another individual, but surveillance is
ongoing. Recommendations for monitoring infection
control issues throughout the course of gene therapy
trials have been published.526-528
Siegel et al
December 2007
S91

----- Page 29 (native) -----
I.F.2.
Infections
Transmitted
Through
Blood,
Organs, and Other Tissues. The potential hazard of
transmitting infectious pathogens through biologic
products is a small but ever-present risk, despite donor
screening. Reported infections transmitted by transfu-
sion or transplantation include West Nile virus infec-
tion,529
cytomegalovirus
infection,530
CJD,230
hepatitis C,531 infections with Clostridium spp532 and
group A streptococcus,533 malaria,534 babesiosis,535
Chagas disease,536 lymphocytic choriomeningitis,537
and rabies.538,539 Therefore, it is important to consider
receipt of biologic products when evaluating patients
for potential sources of infection.
I.F.3. Xenotransplantation. Transplantation of non-
human cells, tissues, and organs into humans poten-
tially
exposes
patients
to
zoonotic
pathogens.
Transmission of known zoonotic infections (eg, trichi-
nosis from porcine tissue) is of concern. Also of
concern is the possibility that transplantation of non-
human cells, tissues, or organs may transmit previ-
ously unknown zoonotic infections (xenozoonoses) to
immunosuppressed human recipients. Potential infec-
tions that potentially could accompany transplantation
of porcine organs have been described previously.540
Guidelines from the US Public Health Service address
many infectious diseases and infection control issues
that surround the developing ﬁeld of xenotransplanta-
tion;541 work in this area is ongoing.
PART II: FUNDAMENTAL ELEMENTS NEEDED TO
PREVENT TRANSMISSION OF INFECTIOUS
AGENTS IN HEALTH CARE SETTINGS
II.A. Health Care System Components That
Inﬂuence the Effectiveness of Precautions to
Prevent Transmission
II.A.1. Administrative Measures. Health care organi-
zations can demonstrate a commitment to preventing
transmission of infectious agents by incorporating in-
fection control into the objectives of the organization’s
patient and occupational safety programs.542-546 An in-
frastructure designed to guide, support, and monitor
adherence to Standard Precautions and Transmission-
Based Precautions434,547,548 will facilitate fulﬁllment
of the organization’s mission and achievement of the
Joint Commission on Accreditation of Health Care
Organizations’ patient safety goal to decrease HAIs.549
Policies and procedures that explain how Standard
Precautions and Transmission-Based Precautions are
applied, including systems used to identify and com-
municate information on patients with potentially
transmissible infectious agents, are essential to ensure
the success of these measures. These policies and pro-
cedures may vary according to the characteristics of
the organization.
A key administrative measure is the provision of ﬁs-
cal and human resources for maintaining infection
control and occupational health programs that are re-
sponsive to emerging needs. Speciﬁc components in-
clude bedside nurse550 and infection prevention and
control professional (ICP) stafﬁng levels,551 inclusion
of ICPs in facility construction and design decisions,11
clinical
microbiology
laboratory
support,552,553
adequate supplies and equipment including facility
ventilation systems,11 adherence monitoring,554 assess-
ment and correction of system failures that contribute
to transmission,555,556 and provision of feedback to
HCWs and senior administrators.433,547,548,557 The
positive inﬂuence of institutional leadership has been
demonstrated repeatedly in studies of HCWs’ adher-
ence to recommended hand hygiene practices.176,177,
433,547,548,558-563 Health care administrators’ involve-
ment in the infection control processes can improve
their awareness of the rationale and resource require-
ments for following recommended infection control
practices.
Several administrative factors may affect the trans-
mission of infectious agents in health care settings, in-
cluding
the
institutional
culture,
individual
HCW
behavior, and the work environment. Each of these
areas is suitable for performance improvement moni-
toring and incorporation into the organization’s patient
safety goals.542,543,545,564
II.A.1.a. Scope of Work and Stafﬁng Needs for
Infection Control Professionals. The effectiveness of
infection surveillance and control programs in prevent-
ing nosocomial infections in USt hospitals was as-
sessed by the CDC through the Study on the Efﬁcacy
of Nosocomial Infection Control (SENIC Project) con-
ducted between 1970 and 1976.565 In a representative
sample of US general hospitals, those with a trained in-
fection control physician or microbiologist involved in
an infection control program and at least 1 infection
control nurse per 250 beds were associated with a
32% lower rate of the 4 infections studied (CVC-associ-
ated
bloodstream
infections,
ventilator-associated
pneumonias, catheter-related urinary tract infections,
and surgical site infections).
Since the publication of that landmark study, respon-
sibilities of ICPs have expanded commensurate with the
growing complexity of the health care system, the pa-
tient populations served, and the increasing numbers
of medical procedures and devices used in all types of
health care settings. The scope of work of ICPs was ﬁrst
assessed in 1982566-568 by the Certiﬁcation Board of In-
fection Control, and has been reassessed every 5 years
since that time.557,569-571 The ﬁndings of these analyses
have been used to develop and update the Infection
Control Certiﬁcation Examination, which was ﬁrst of-
fered in 1983. With each new survey, it becomes
S92
Vol. 35 No. 10 Supplement 2
Siegel et al

----- Page 30 (native) -----
increasingly apparent that the role of the ICP is growing
in complexity and scope beyond traditional infection
control activities in acute care hospitals. Activities
currently assigned to ICPs in response to emerging chal-
lenges include (1) surveillance and infection prevention
at facilities other than acute care hospitals (eg, ambula-
tory clinics, day surgery centers, LTCFs, rehabilitation
centers, home care); (2) oversight of employee health
services related to infection prevention (eg, assessment
of risk and administration of recommended treatment
after exposure to infectious agents, tuberculosis screen-
ing, inﬂuenza vaccination, respiratory protection ﬁt
testing, and administration of other vaccines as indi-
cated, such as smallpox vaccine in 2003); (3) prepared-
ness
planning
for
annual
inﬂuenza
outbreaks,
pandemic inﬂuenza, SARS, and bioweapons attacks;
(4) adherence monitoring for selected infection control
practices; (5) oversight of risk assessment and imple-
mentation of prevention measures associated with
construction and renovation; (6) prevention of trans-
mission of MDROs; (7) evaluation of new medical pro-
ducts
that
could
be
associated
with
increased
infection risk (eg, intravenous infusion materials); (8)
communication with the public, facility staff, and state
and local health departments concerning infection con-
trol–related issues; and (9) participation in local and
multicenter research projects.433,548,551,557,572,573
None of the Certiﬁcation Board of Infection Control
job analyses addressed speciﬁc stafﬁng requirements
for the identiﬁed tasks, although the surveys did in-
clude information about hours worked; the 2001 sur-
vey included the number of ICPs assigned to the
responding facilities.557 There is agreement in the liter-
ature that a ratio of 1 ICP per 250 acute care beds is no
longer adequate to meet current infection control
needs; a Delphi project that assessed stafﬁng needs of
infection control programs in the 21st century con-
cluded that a ratio of 0.8 to 1.0 ICP per 100 occupied
acute care beds is an appropriate stafﬁng level.551 A
survey of participants in the NNIS system found an av-
erage daily patient census of 115 per ICP.315 Results of
other studies have been similar: 3 per 500 beds for
large acute care hospitals, 1 per 150 to 250 beds in
LTCFs, and 1.56 per 250 in small rural hospitals.572,574
The foregoing demonstrates that infection control
stafﬁng no longer can be based on patient census
alone, but rather must be determined by the scope of
the program, characteristics of the patient population,
complexity of the health care system, tools available
to assist personnel to perform essential tasks (eg,
electronic tracking and laboratory support for sur-
veillance), and unique or urgent needs of the institu-
tion and community.551 Furthermore, appropriate
training is required to optimize the quality of work
performed.557,571,575
II.A.1.a.i. Infection Control Nurse Liaison.
Desig-
nating a bedside nurse on a patient care unit as an infec-
tion control liaison or ‘‘link nurse’’ is reported to be an
effective adjunct to enhance infection control at the
unit level.576-581 Such individuals receive training in ba-
sic infection control and have frequent communication
with ICPs, but maintain their primary role as bedside
caregiver on their units. The infection control nurse liai-
son increases the awareness of infection control at the
unit level. He or she is especially effective in implemen-
tating new policies or control interventions because of
the rapport with individuals on the unit, an understand-
ing of unit-speciﬁc challenges, and ability to promote
strategies that are most likely to be successful in that
unit. This position is an adjunct to, not a replacement
for, fully trained ICPs. Furthermore, the infection control
liaison nurses should not be counted when considering
ICP stafﬁng.
II.A.1.b. Bedside Nurse Stafﬁng. There is increasing
evidence that the level of bedside nurse stafﬁng inﬂu-
ences the quality of patient care.582,583 Adequate nurs-
ing staff makes it more likely that infection control
practices, including hand hygiene, Standard Precau-
tions, and Transmission-Based Precautions, will be
given appropriate attention and applied correctly and
consistently.551 A national multicenter study reported
strong and consistent inverse relationships between
nurse stafﬁng and 5 adverse outcomes in medical pa-
tients, 2 of which were HAIs (urinary tract infections
and pneumonia).582 The association of nursing staff
shortages with increased rates of HAI has been demon-
strated in several outbreaks in hospitals and LTCFs, and
with increased transmission of hepatitis C virus in dial-
ysis units.22,417,550,584-596 In most cases, when stafﬁng
was improved as part of a comprehensive control inter-
vention, the outbreak ended or the HAI rate declined. In
2 studies,589,595 the composition of the nursing staff
(‘‘pool’’ or ‘‘ﬂoat’’ vs regular staff nurses) inﬂuenced the
rateofprimarybloodstreaminfections,withanincreased
infection rate occurring when the proportion of regular
nurses decreased and that of pool nurses increased.
II.A.1.c. Clinical
Microbiology
Laboratory
Support. The critical role of the clinical microbiology
laboratory in infection control and health care epidemi-
ology has been well described552,553,597-599 and is sup-
ported by the Infectious Disease Society of America’s
policy statement on the consolidation of clinical micro-
biology laboratories published in 2001.552 The clinical
microbiology laboratory contributes to preventing trans-
mission of infectious diseases in health care settings by
promptly detecting and reporting epidemiologically
important organisms, identifying emerging patterns of
antimicrobial resistance, and assessing the effectiveness
of recommended precautions to limit transmission
during outbreaks.597 Outbreaks of infections may be
Siegel et al
December 2007
S93

----- Page 31 (native) -----
recognized ﬁrst by laboratorians.161 Health care organi-
zations need to ensure the availability of the recommen-
ded scope and quality of laboratory services, a sufﬁcient
number of appropriately trained laboratory staff mem-
bers, and systems to promptly communicate epidemio-
logically important results to those who will take action
(eg, providers of clinical care, infection control staff,
health care epidemiologists, and infectious disease con-
sultants).600 As concerns about emerging pathogens
and bioterrorism grow, the role of the clinical microbi-
ology laboratory assumes ever-greater importance. For
health care organizations that outsource microbiology
laboratory services (eg, ambulatory care, home care,
LTCFs, smaller acute care hospitals), it is important to
specify by contract the types of services (eg, periodic in-
stitution-speciﬁc aggregate susceptibility reports) re-
quired to support infection control.
Several key functions of the clinical microbiology
laboratory are relevant to this guideline:
d Antimicrobial susceptibility by testing and interpreta-
tion in accordance with current guidelines developed
by the National Committee for Clinical Laboratory
Standards, known as the Clinical and Laboratory Stan-
dards Institute since 2005,601 for the detection of
emerging resistance patterns602,603 and for the prepa-
ration, analysis, and distribution of periodic cumula-
tive antimicrobial susceptibility summary reports.604-
606 Although not required, clinical laboratories ideally
should have access to rapid genotypic identiﬁcation of
bacteria and their antibiotic resistance genes.607
d Performance of surveillance cultures when appro-
priate (including retention of isolates for analysis),
to assess patterns of infection transmission and
effectiveness of infection control interventions at
the facility or organization. Microbiologists assist in
decision making regarding the indications for initiat-
ing and discontinuing active surveillance programs
and optimizing the use of laboratory resources.
d Molecular typing, onsite or outsourced, to investigate
and control health care–associated outbreaks.608
d Application of rapid diagnostic tests to support clini-
cal decisions involving patient treatment, room se-
lection, and implementation of control measures,
including barrier precautions and use of vaccine or
chemoprophylaxis agents (eg, inﬂuenza,609-611 B per-
tussis,612, RSV,613, 614 and enteroviruses615). The mi-
crobiologist provides guidance to limit rapid testing
to clinical situations in which rapid results inﬂuence
patient management decisions, and also provides
oversight of point-of-care testing performed by non-
laboratory HCWs.616
d Detection and rapid reporting of epidemiologically
important organisms, including those that are report-
able to public health agencies.
d Implementation of a quality control program to en-
sure that testing services are appropriate for the pop-
ulation being served and are stringently evaluated for
sensitivity, speciﬁcity, applicability, and feasibility.
d Participation in a multidisciplinary team to develop
and maintain an effective institutional program for
the judicious use of antimicrobial agents.617,618
II.A.2. Institutional Safety Culture and Organiza-
tional Characteristics. Safety culture (or safety climate)
refers to a work environment in which a shared com-
mitment to safety on the part of management and the
workforce is understood and maintained.558,619,620
The authors of the Institute of Medicine’s report titled
To Err is Human542 acknowledged that causes of med-
ical error are multifaceted but emphasized the pivotal
role of system failures and the beneﬁts of a safety cul-
ture. A safety culture is created through (1) the actions
that management takes to improve patient and worker
safety, (2) worker participation in safety planning, (3)
the availability of appropriate PPE, (4) the inﬂuence
of group norms regarding acceptable safety practices,
and (5) the organization’s socialization process for
new personnel. Safety and patient outcomes can be en-
hanced by improving or creating organizational char-
acteristics within patient care units, as demonstrated
by studies of surgical ICUs.621,622 Each of these factors
has a direct bearing on adherence to transmission pre-
vention recommendations.256 Measurement of an in-
stitution’s culture of safety is useful in designing
improvements in health care.623,624 Several hospital-
based studies have linked measures of safety culture
with both employee adherence to safe practices and
reduced exposures to blood and body ﬂuids.625-631
One study of hand hygiene practices concluded that
improved adherence requires integration of infection
control into the organization’s safety culture.560 Several
hospitals that are part of the Veterans Administration
health care system have taken speciﬁc steps toward im-
proving the safety culture, including error-reporting
mechanisms, root cause analyses of identiﬁed prob-
lems, safety incentives, and employee education.632-634
II.A.3. Adherence of Health Care Workers to Rec-
ommended Guidelines. HCWs’ adherence to recom-
mended infection control practices decreases the
transmission of infectious agents in health care set-
tings.116,561,635-639 Several observational studies have
shown limited adherence to recommended practices by
HCWs.558,639-656 Observed adherence to universal pre-
cautions ranged from 43% to 89%.640,641,648,650,651 The
degree of adherence often depended on the speciﬁc
practice that was assessed and, for glove use, the
circumstance in which the practice was applied. Ob-
served rates of appropriate glove use has ranged from
a low of 15%644 to a high of 82%.649 However, 92%
S94
Vol. 35 No. 10 Supplement 2
Siegel et al

----- Page 32 (native) -----
and 98% adherence with glove use have been reported
during arterial blood gas collection and resuscitation,
respectively, procedures in which considerable blood
contact may occur.642,655 Differences in observed ad-
herence have been reported among occupational
groups in the same health care facility640 and between
experienced and nonexperienced professionals.644 In
surveys of HCWs, self-reported adherence was gener-
ally higher than actual adherence found in observa-
tional studies. Furthermore, where an observational
component was included with a self-reported survey,
self-perceived adherence was often greater than ob-
served adherence.656 Among nurses and physicians,
increasing years of experience is a negative predictor
of adherence.644,650 Education to improve adherence
is the primary intervention that has been studied.
Whereas positive changes in knowledge and attitude
have been demonstrated,639,657 no or only limited ac-
companying changes in behavior often have been
found.641,643 Self-reported adherence is higher in
groups that received an educational intervention.629,658
In one study, educational interventions that incorpo-
rated videotaping and performance feedback were suc-
cessful in improving adherence during the study
period, but the long-term effect of such interventions
is not known.653 The use of videotaping also served
to identify system problems (eg, communication and
access to PPE) that otherwise may not have been
recognized.
Interest is growing in the use of engineering controls
and facility design concepts for improving adherence.
Whereas the introduction of automated sinks was
found to have a negative impact on consistent adher-
ence to handwashing in one study,659 the use of elec-
tronic monitoring
and voice prompts to remind
HCWs to perform hand hygiene and improving acces-
sibility to hand hygiene products increased adherence
and contributed to a decrease in HAIs in another
study.660 More information is needed regarding ways
in which technology might improve adherence.
Improving adherence to infection control practices
requires a multifaceted approach that incorporates
continuous assessment of both the individual and the
work environment.558,560 Using several behavioral the-
ories, Kretzer and Larson concluded that a single inter-
vention (eg, a handwashing campaign or putting up
new posters about transmission precautions) likely
would be ineffective in improving HCWs adherence.661
Improvement requires the organizational leadership to
make prevention an institutional priority and integrate
infection control practices into the organization’s safety
culture.560 A recent review of the literature concluded
that variations in organizational factors (eg, safety cli-
mate, policies and procedures, education and training)
and individual factors (eg, knowledge, perceptions of
risk, past experience) were determinants of adherence
to infection control guidelines for protection against
SARS and other respiratory pathogens.256
II.B. Surveillance for Health Care-Associated
Infections
Surveillance is an essential tool for case ﬁnding of
single patients orclusters of patients who areinfected or
colonized with epidemiologically important organisms
(eg, susceptible bacteria such as S aureus, S pyogenes
[group A streptococcus] or Enterobacter-Klebsiella
spp; MRSA, VRE, and other MDROs; C difﬁcile; RSV;
inﬂuenza virus) for which transmission-based precau-
tions may be required. Surveillance is deﬁned as the
ongoing systematic collection, analysis, interpretation,
and dissemination of data regarding a health-related
event for use in public health action to reduce morbidity
and mortality and to improve health.662 The work of
Ignaz Semmelweis delineating the role of person-to-
person transmission in puerperal sepsis is the earliest
example of the use of surveillance data to reduce trans-
mission of infectious agents.663 Surveillance of both
process measures and the infection rates to which
they are linked is important in evaluating the effective-
ness of infection prevention efforts and identifying
indications for change.554,664-667
The Study on the Efﬁcacy of Nosocomial Infection
Control (SENIC) found that different combinations of
infection control practices resulted in reduced rates of
nosocomial
surgical
site
infections,
pneumonia,
urinary tract infections, and bacteremia in acute care
hospitals;565 however, surveillance was the only com-
ponent essential for reducing all 4 types of HAIs. Al-
though a similar study has not been conducted in
other health care settings, a role for surveillance and
the need for novel strategies in LTCFs397,433,668,669 and
in home care469-472 have been described. The essential
elements of a surveillance system are (1) standardized
deﬁnitions, (2) identiﬁcation of patient populations at
risk for infection, (3) statistical analysis (eg, risk adjust-
ment, calculation of rates using appropriate denomin-
ators, trend analysis using such methods as statistical
process control charts), and (4) feedback of results to
the primary caregivers.670-675 Data gathered through
surveillance of high-risk populations, device use, pro-
cedures, and facility locations (eg, ICUs) are useful in
detecting transmission trends.670-672 Identiﬁcation of
clusters of infections should be followed by a system-
atic epidemiologic investigation to determine com-
monalities in persons, places, and time and to guide
implementation of interventions and evaluation of
the effectiveness of those interventions.
Targeted surveillance based on the highest-risk areas
or patients has been preferred over facility-wide
Siegel et al
December 2007
S95

----- Page 33 (native) -----
surveillance
for
the
most
effective
use
of
re-
sources.672,675 However, for certain epidemiologically
important organisms, surveillance may need to be fa-
cility-wide. Surveillance methods will continue to
evolve as health care delivery systems change391,676
and user-friendly electronic tools for electronic track-
ing and trend analysis become more widely avail-
able.673,677,678 Individuals with experience in health
care epidemiology and infection control should be in-
volved in selecting software packages for data aggrega-
tion and analysis, to ensure that the need for efﬁcient
and accurate HAI surveillance will be met. Effective
surveillance is increasingly important as legislation re-
quiring public reporting of HAI rates is passed and
states work to develop effective systems to support
such legislation.679
II.C. Education of Health Care Workers,
Patients, and Families
The education and training of HCWs is a prere-
quisite for ensuring that policies and procedures for
Standard and Transmission-Based Precautions are
understood and practiced. Understanding the scientiﬁc
rationale for the precautions will allow HCWs to apply
procedures correctly, as well as to safely modify pre-
cautions based on changing requirements, resources,
or health care settings.14,654,680-687 One study found
that the likelihood of HCWs developing SARS was
strongly associated with less than 2 hours of infection
control training and poor understanding of infection
control procedures.688 Education regarding the impor-
tant role of vaccines (eg, inﬂuenza, measles, varicella,
pertussis, pneumococcal) in protecting HCWs, their pa-
tients, and family members can help improve vaccina-
tion rates.689-692
Education on the principles and practices for pre-
venting transmission of infectious agents should begin
during training in the health professions and be pro-
vided to anyone who has an opportunity for contact
with patients or medical equipment (eg, nursing and
medical staff; therapists and technicians, including res-
piratory, physical, occupational, radiology, and cardiol-
ogy
personnel;
phlebotomists;
housekeeping
and
maintenance staff; and students). In health care facili-
ties, education and training on Standard and Transmis-
sion-Based Precautions are typically provided at the
time of orientation and should be repeated as neces-
sary to maintain competency; updated education and
training are necessary when policies and procedures
are revised or when a special circumstance occurs,
such as an outbreak that requires modiﬁcation of
current practice or adoption of new recommendations.
Education and training materials and methods appro-
priate to the HCW’s level of responsibility, individual
learning habits, and language needs can improve the
learning experience.657,693-701
Education programs for HCWs have been associated
with sustained improvement in adherence to best prac-
tices and a related decrease in device-associated HAIs
in teaching and nonteaching settings638,702 and in
medical and surgical ICUs (Coopersmith, 2002 #2149;
Babcock, 2004 #2126; Berenholtz, 2004 #2289; http://
www.ihi.org/IHI/Programs/Campaign, #2563). Several
studies have shown that in addition to targeted educa-
tion to improve speciﬁc practices, periodic assessment
and feedback of the HCW’s knowledge and adherence
to recommended practices are necessary to achieve
the desired changes and identify continuing education
needs.561,703-707 The effectiveness of this approach for
isolation practices has been demonstrated in the con-
trol of RSV.116,683
Patients, family members, and visitors can be part-
ners in preventing transmission of infections in health
care settings.9,42,708-710 Information on Standard Pre-
cautions, especially hand hygiene, respiratory hy-
giene/cough etiquette, vaccination (especially against
inﬂuenza), and other routine infection prevention strat-
egies, may be incorporated into patient information
materials provided on admission to the health care fa-
cility. Additional information on Transmission-Based
Precautions is best provided when these precautions
are initiated. Fact sheets, pamphlets, and other printed
material may include information on the rationale for
the additional precautions, risks to household mem-
bers, room assignment for Transmission-Based Precau-
tions purposes, explanation of the use of PPE by HCWs,
and directions for use of such equipment by family
members and visitors. Such information may be partic-
ularly helpful in the home environment, where house-
hold members often have the primary responsibility
for adherence to recommended infection control prac-
tices. HCWs must be available and prepared to explain
this material and answer questions as needed.
II.D. Hand Hygiene
Hand hygiene has been frequently cited as the single
most important practice to reduce the transmission of
infectious agents in health care settings558,711,712 and
is an essential element of Standard Precautions. The
term ‘‘hand hygiene’’ includes both handwashing
with either plain or antiseptic-containing soap and wa-
ter and the use of alcohol-based products (gels, rinses,
foams) that do not require water. In the absence of vis-
ible soiling of hands, approved alcohol-based products
for hand disinfection are preferred over antimicrobial
or plain soap and water because of their superior mi-
crobiocidal activity, reduced drying of the skin, and
convenience.558 Improved hand hygiene practices
S96
Vol. 35 No. 10 Supplement 2
Siegel et al

----- Page 34 (native) -----
have been associated with a sustained decrease in the
incidence of MRSA and VRE infections primarily in
ICUs.560,561,713-716 The scientiﬁc rationale, indications,
methods, and products for hand hygiene have been
summarized in previous publications.558,716
The effectiveness of hand hygiene can be reduced
by the type and length of ﬁngernails.558,717,718 Individ-
uals wearing artiﬁcial nails have been shown to harbor
more pathogenic organisms, especially gram-negative
bacilli and yeasts, on the nails and in the subungual
area compared with individuals with native nails.719,720
In 2002, the CDC/HICPAC recommended (Category IA)
that artiﬁcial ﬁngernails and extenders not be worn
by HCWs who have contact with high-risk patients
(eg, those in ICUs and operating rooms), due to the as-
sociation with outbreaks of gram-negative bacillus and
candidal infections as conﬁrmed by molecular typing
of isolates.30,31,558,721-724 The need to restrict the wear-
ing of artiﬁcial ﬁngernails by all HCWs who provide di-
rect patient care and those who have contact with other
high-risk groups (eg, oncology and cystic ﬁbrosis pa-
tients) has not been studied but has been recommended
by some experts.20 Currently, such decisions are at the
discretion of an individual facility’s infection control
program. There is less evidence indicating that jewelry
affects the quality of hand hygiene. Although hand
contamination with potential pathogens is increased
with ring-wearing,558,725 no studies have related this
practice to HCW-to-patient transmission of pathogens.
II.E. Personal Protective Equipment for Health
Care Workers
PPE refers to various barriers and respirators used
alone or in combination to protect mucous mem-
branes, airways, skin, and clothing from contact with
infectious agents. The choice of PPE is based on the na-
ture of the patient interaction and/or the likely mode(s)
of transmission. Speciﬁc guidance on the use of PPE is
provided in Part III of this guideline. A suggested proce-
dure for donning and removing PPE aimed at prevent-
ing skin or clothing contamination is presented in
Figure 1. Designated containers for used disposable
or reusable PPE should be placed in a location conve-
nient to the site of removal, to facilitate disposal and
containment of contaminated materials. Hand hygiene
is always the ﬁnal step after removing and disposing of
PPE. The following sections highlight the primary uses
of and criteria for selecting this equipment.
II.E.1. Gloves. Gloves are used to prevent contami-
nation of HCW hands when (1) anticipating direct con-
tact with blood or body ﬂuids, mucous membranes,
nonintact skin and other potentially infectious mate-
rial; (2) having direct contact with patients who are col-
onized or infected with pathogens transmitted by the
contact route (eg, VRE, MRSA, RSV558,726,727); or (3)
handling or touching visibly or potentially contami-
nated patient care equipment and environmental sur-
faces.72,73,558 Gloves can protect both patients and
HCWs from exposure to infectious material that may
be carried on hands.73 The extent to which gloves
will protect HCWs from transmission of bloodborne
pathogens (eg, HIV, HBV, HCV) after a needlestick or
other puncture that penetrates the glove barrier has
not yet been determined. Although gloves may reduce
the volume of blood on the external surface of a sharp
by 46% to 86%,728 the residual blood in the lumen of a
hollow-bore needle would not be affected; therefore,
the effect on transmission risk is unknown.
Gloves manufactured for health care purposes are
subject to FDA evaluation and clearance.729 Nonsterile
disposable medical gloves made of various materials
(eg, latex, vinyl, nitrile) are available for routine patient
care.730 The selection of glove type for nonsurgical use
is based on various factors, including the task to be per-
formed, anticipated contact with chemicals and che-
motherapeutic agents, latex sensitivity, sizing, and
facility policies for creating a latex-free environ-
ment.17,731-733 For contact with blood and body ﬂuids
during nonsurgical patient care, a single pair of gloves
generally provides adequate barrier protection.733
However, there is considerable variability among
gloves; both the quality of the manufacturing process
and type of material inﬂuence their barrier effective-
ness.734 Whereas there is little difference in the barrier
properties of unused intact gloves,735 studies have
shown repeatedly that vinyl gloves have higher failure
rates than latex or nitrile gloves when tested under sim-
ulated and actual clinical conditions.730,734-737 For this
reason, either latex or nitrile gloves are preferable for
clinical procedures that require manual dexterity or
will involve more than brief patient contact. A facility
may need to stock gloves in several sizes. Heavier, reus-
able utility gloves are indicated for non–patient care
activities, such as handling or cleaning contaminated
equipment or surfaces.11,14,738
During patient care, transmission of infectious orga-
nisms can be reduced by adhering to the principles of
working from ‘‘clean’’ to ‘‘dirty’’ and conﬁning or limit-
ing contamination to those surfaces directly needed for
patient care. It may be necessary to change gloves dur-
ing the care of a single patient to prevent cross-contam-
ination of body sites.558,739 It also may be necessary to
change gloves if the patient interaction also involves
touching portable computer keyboards or other mobile
equipment transported from room to room. Discarding
gloves between patients is necessary to prevent trans-
mission of infectious material. Gloves must not be
washed for subsequent reuse, because microorganisms
cannot be removed reliably from glove surfaces, and
Siegel et al
December 2007
S97

----- Page 35 (native) -----
continued glove integrity cannot be ensured. Further-
more, glove reuse has been associated with transmis-
sion of MRSA and gram-negative bacilli.740-742
When gloves are worn in combination with other
PPE, they are put on last. Gloves that ﬁt snugly around
the wrist are preferred for use with an isolation gown,
because they will cover the gown cuff and provide a
more reliable continuous barrier for the arms, wrists,
and hands. Proper glove removal will prevent hand
contamination (Fig 1). Hand hygiene after glove re-
moval further ensures that the hands will not carry po-
tentially infectious material that might have penetrated
through unrecognized tears or that could have contam-
inated the hands during glove removal.558,727,740
II.E.2. Isolation Gowns. Isolation gowns are used as
speciﬁed by Standard and Transmission-Based Precau-
tions to protect the HCW’s arms and exposed body
areas and prevent contamination of clothing with
blood, body ﬂuids, and other potentially infectious ma-
terial.24,88,261,743-745 The need for and the type of isola-
tion gown selected is based on the nature of the patient
interaction, including the anticipated degree of contact
with infectious material and potential for blood and
body ﬂuid penetration of the barrier. The wearing of
isolation gowns and other protective apparel is man-
dated by the Occupational Safety and Health Adminis-
tration’s (OSHA) Bloodborne Pathogens Standard.738
Clinical and laboratory coats or jackets worn over per-
sonal clothing for comfort and/or purposes of identity
are not considered PPE.
When applying Standard Precautions, an isolation
gown is worn only if contact with blood or body ﬂuid
is anticipated. However, when Contact Precautions
are used (ie, to prevent transmission of an infectious
agent that is not interrupted by Standard Precautions
alone
and
is
associated
with
environmental
Fig 1. Example of safe donning and removal of PPE.
S98
Vol. 35 No. 10 Supplement 2
Siegel et al

----- Page 36 (native) -----
contamination), donning of both gown and gloves on
room entry is indicated, to prevent unintentional con-
tact with contaminated environmental surfaces.54,72,
73,88 The routine donning of isolation gowns on entry
into an ICU or other high-risk area does not prevent
or inﬂuence potential colonization or infection of
patients in those areas, however.364,746-749
Isolation gowns are always worn in combination
with gloves, and with other PPE when indicated.
Gowns are usually the ﬁrst piece of PPE to be donned.
Full coverage of the arms and body front, from neck to
the mid-thigh or below, will ensure protection of cloth-
ing and exposed upper body areas. Several gown sizes
should be available in a health care facility to ensure
appropriate coverage for staff members. Isolation
gowns should be removed before leaving the patient
care area to prevent possible contamination of the en-
vironment outside the patient’s room. Isolation gowns
should be removed in a manner that prevents contam-
ination of clothing or skin (Fig 1); the outer, ‘‘contami-
nated’’ side of the gown is turned inward and rolled
into a bundle, and then discarded into a designated
container for waste or linen to contain contamination.
II.E.3. Face Protection: Masks, Goggles, and Face
Shields.
II.E.3.a. Masks. Masks are used for 3 primary pur-
poses in health care settings: (1) placed on HCWs to
protect them from contact with infectious material
from patients (eg, respiratory secretions and sprays of
blood or body ﬂuids), consistent with Standard Precau-
tions and Droplet Precautions; (2) placed on HCWs en-
gaged in procedures requiring sterile technique, to
protect patients from exposure to infectious agents car-
ried in the HCW’s mouth or nose; and (3) placed on
coughing patients to limit potential dissemination of
infectious respiratory secretions from the patient to
others (ie, respiratory hygiene/cough etiquette). Masks
may be used in combination with goggles to protect
the mouth, nose, and eyes, or, alternatively, a face
shield may be used instead of a mask and goggles to
provide more complete protection for the face, as dis-
cussed below. Masks should not be confused with par-
ticulate respirators used to prevent inhalation of small
particles that may contain infectious agents transmit-
ted through the airborne route, as described below.
The mucous membranes of the mouth, nose, and
eyes are susceptible portals of entry for infectious
agents; other skin surfaces also may be portals if skin
integrity is compromised (by, eg, acne, dermatitis).66,
750-753 Therefore, use of PPE to protect these body sites
is an important component of Standard Precautions.
The protective effect of masks for exposed HCWs has
been demonstrated previously.93,113,754,755 Procedures
that generate splashes or sprays of blood, body ﬂuids,
secretions, or excretions (eg, endotracheal suctioning,
bronchoscopy, invasive vascular procedures) require
either a face shield (disposable or reusable) or a mask
and
goggles.93-96,113,115,261,738,756
The
wearing
of
masks, eye protection, and face shields in speciﬁed cir-
cumstances when blood or body ﬂuid exposure is
likely is mandated by OSHA’s Bloodborne Pathogens
Standard.738 Appropriate PPE should be selected based
on the anticipated level of exposure.
Two mask types are available for use in health care
settings: surgical masks that are cleared by the FDA
and required to have ﬂuid-resistant properties, and pro-
cedure or isolation masks.757,#2688 To date, no studies
comparing mask types to determine whether one
mask type provides better protection than another
have been published. Because procedure/isolation
masks are not regulated by the FDA, they may be
more variable in terms of quality and performance
than surgical masks. Masks come in various shapes
(eg, molded and nonmolded), sizes, ﬁltration efﬁciency,
and method of attachment (eg, ties, elastic, ear loops).
Health care facilities may ﬁnd that different types of
masks are needed to meet individual HCW needs.
II.E.3.b. Goggles and Face Shields. Guidance on eye
protection for infection control has been published.758
The eye protection chosen for speciﬁc work situations
(eg,gogglesorfaceshield)dependsonthecircumstances
of exposure, other PPE used, and personal vision needs.
Personal eyeglasses and contact lenses are not consid-
ered adequate eye protection (see http://www.cdc.gov/
niosh/topics/eye/eye-infectious.html). NIOSH guidelines
specify that eye protection must be comfortable, allow
for sufﬁcient peripheral vision, and adjustable to ensure
a secure ﬁt. A health care facility may need to provide
several different types, styles, and sizes of eye protection
equipment. Indirectly vented goggles with a manufac-
turer’s antifog coating may provide the most reliable
practical eye protection from splashes, sprays, and respi-
ratory droplets from multiple angles. Newer styles of
goggles may provide better indirect airﬂow properties
to reduce fogging, as well as better peripheral vision
and more size options for ﬁtting goggles to different
workers. Many styles of goggles ﬁt adequately over pre-
scription glasses with minimal gaps. Although effective
as eye protection, goggles do not provide splash or spray
protection to other parts of the face.
The role of goggles in addition to a mask in pre-
venting exposure to infectious agents transmitted
through respiratory droplets has been studied only
for RSV. Reports published in the mid-1980s demon-
strated that
eye
protection
reduced occupational
transmission of RSV.759,760 Whether this was due to
the prevention hand–eye contact or the prevention
of respiratory droplet–eye contact has not been deter-
mined. However, subsequent studies demonstrated
that RSV transmission is effectively prevented by
Siegel et al
December 2007
S99

----- Page 37 (native) -----
adherence to Standard Precautions plus Contact Pre-
cautions and that routine use of goggles is not neces-
sary for this virus.24,116,117,683,761 It is important to
remind HCWs that even if Droplet Precautions are
not recommended for a speciﬁc respiratory tract path-
ogen, protection for the eyes, nose, and mouth using a
mask and goggles or a face shield alone is necessary
when a splash or spray of any respiratory secretions
or other body ﬂuids is likely to occur, as deﬁned in
Standard Precautions.
Disposable or nondisposable face shields may be
used as an alternative to goggles.758 Compared with
goggles, a face shield can provide protection to other
facial areas besides the eyes. Face shields extending
from the chin to crown provide better face and eye pro-
tection from splashes and sprays; face shields that
wrap around the sides may reduce splashes around
the edge of the shield.
Removal of a face shield, goggles, and mask can be
performed safely after gloves have been removed and
hand hygiene performed. The ties, earpieces, and/or
headband used to secure the equipment to the head
are considered ‘‘clean’’ and thus safe to touch with
bare hands. The front of a mask, goggles, and face
shield are considered contaminated (Fig 1).
II.E.4. Respiratory Protection. The subject of respi-
ratory protection as it applies to preventing transmis-
sion of airborne infectious agents, including the need
for and frequency of ﬁt testing is under scientiﬁc re-
view and was the subject of a 2004 CDC workshop.762
Respiratory protection currently requires the use of a
respirator with N95 or higher-level ﬁltration to prevent
inhalation of infectious particles. Information about
respirators and respiratory protection programs is
summarized in the Guideline for Preventing Transmis-
sion of Mycobacterium tuberculosis in Health Care
Settings.12
Respiratory protection is broadly regulated by OSHA
under the general industry standard for respiratory
protection (29 CFR 1910.134),763 which requires that
US employers in all employment settings implement
a program to protect employees from inhalation of
toxic materials. OSHA program components include
medical clearance to wear a respirator; provision and
use of appropriate respirators, including ﬁt-tested
NIOSH-certiﬁed N95 and higher-level particulate ﬁlter-
ing respirators; education on respirator use, and peri-
odic
reevaluation
of
the
respiratory
protection
program.
When
selecting
particulate
respirators,
models with inherently good ﬁt characteristics (ie,
those expected to provide protection factors of $
10% to 95% of wearers) are preferred and theoretically
could preclude the need for ﬁt testing.764,765 Issues per-
taining to respiratory protection remain the subject of
ongoing debate. Information on various types of
respirators is available at http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/
npptl/respirators/respsars.html and in several previ-
ously published studies.764,766,767 A user-seal check
(formerly called a ‘‘ﬁt check’’) should be performed
by the wearer of a respirator each time that the respira-
tor is donned, to minimize air leakage around the face
piece.768 The optimal frequency of ﬁt testing has not
been determined; retesting may be indicated if there
is a change in wearer’s facial features, onset of a med-
ical condition that would affect respiratory function in
the wearer, or a change in the model or size of the res-
pirator that was initially assigned.12
Respiratory protection was ﬁrst recommended for
protection of US HCWs from exposure to M tuberculo-
sis in 1989. That recommendation has been main-
tained in 2 successive revisions of the Guidelines for
Prevention of Transmission of Tuberculosis in Hospitals
and Other Health Care Settings.12,126 The incremental
beneﬁt from respirator use, in addition to administra-
tive and engineering controls (ie, AIIRs, early recogni-
tion of patients likely to have tuberculosis and
prompt placement in an AIIR, and maintenance of a pa-
tient with suspected tuberculosis in an AIIR until no
longer infectious), for preventing transmission of air-
borne infectious agents (eg, M tuberculosis) remains
undetermined. Although some studies have demon-
strated effective prevention of M tuberculosis transmis-
sion in hospitals in which surgical masks instead of
respirators were used in conjunction with other admin-
istrative and engineering controls.636,769,770 the CDC
currently recommends N95 or higher-level respirators
for personnel exposed to patients with suspected or
conﬁrmed tuberculosis. Currently, this recommenda-
tion also holds for other diseases that could be trans-
mitted through the airborne route, including SARS261
and smallpox,108,129,771 until inhalational transmission
is better deﬁned or health care-speciﬁc PPE more suit-
able for preventing infection is developed. Wearing of
respirators is also currently recommended during the
performance of aerosol-generating procedures (eg, in-
tubation, bronchoscopy, suctioning) in patients with
SARS-CoV infection, avian inﬂuenza, and pandemic in-
ﬂuenza (see Appendix A).
Although Airborne Precautions are recommended
for preventing airborne transmission of measles and
varicella-zoster viruses, no data are available on which
to base a recommendation for respiratory protection to
protect susceptible personnel against these 2 infec-
tions. Transmission of varicella-zoster virus has been
prevented among pediatric patients using negative-
pressure isolation alone.772 Whether respiratory pro-
tection (ie, wearing a particulate respirator) will
enhance protection from these viruses has not yet been
studied. Because most HCWs have natural or acquired
immunity to these viruses, only immune personnel
S100
Vol. 35 No. 10 Supplement 2
Siegel et al

----- Page 38 (native) -----
generally care for patients with these infections.773-776
Although there is no evidence suggesting that masks
are not adequate to protect HCWs in these settings,
for purposes of consistency and simplicity, or because
of difﬁculties in ascertaining immunity, some facilities
may require the use of respirators for entry into all
AIIRs, regardless of the speciﬁc infectious agent present.
Procedures for safe removal of respirators are pro-
vided in Figure 1. In some health care settings, particu-
late respirators used to provide care for patients with M
tuberculosis are reused by the same HCW. This is an ac-
ceptable practice providing that the respirator is not
damaged or soiled, the ﬁt is not compromised by a
change in shape, and the respirator has not been con-
taminated with blood or body ﬂuids. No data are avail-
able on which to base a recommendation regarding
the length of time that a respirator may be safely reused.
II.F. Safe Work Practices to Prevent Health Care
Worker Exposure to Bloodborne Pathogens
II.F.1.
Prevention
of
Needlesticks
and
Other
Sharps-Related Injuries. Injuries due to needles and
other sharps have been associated with transmission
of HBV, HCV, and HIV to HCWs.777,778 The prevention
of sharps injuries has always been an essential element
of Universal Precautions and is now an aspect of Stan-
dard Precautions.1,779 These include measures to han-
dle needles and other sharp devices in a manner that
will prevent injury to the user and to others who may
encounter the device during or after a procedure. These
measures apply to routine patient care and do not ad-
dress the prevention of sharps injuries and other blood
exposures during surgical and other invasive proce-
dures addressed elsewhere.780-784
Since 1991, when OSHA ﬁrst issued its Bloodborne
Pathogens Standard to protect HCWs from blood expo-
sure, the focus of regulatory and legislative activity has
been on implementing a hierarchy of control mea-
sures. This has included focusing attention on remov-
ing sharps hazards through the development and use
of engineering controls. The federal Needlestick Safety
and Prevention Act, signed into law in November 2000,
authorized OSHA’s revision of its Bloodborne Patho-
gens Standard to more explicitly require the use of
safety-engineered sharps devices.785 The CDC has pro-
vided guidance on sharps injury prevention,786,787 in-
cluding guidelines for the design, implementation
and evaluation of a comprehensive sharps injury pre-
vention program.788
II.F.2. Prevention of Mucous Membrane Contact.
Exposure of mucous membranes of the eyes, nose,
and mouth to blood and body ﬂuids has been associ-
ated with the transmission of bloodborne viruses and
other infectious agents to HCWs.66,751,753,778 The
prevention of mucous membrane exposures has al-
ways been an element of Universal Precautions and
is now an element of Standard Precautions for routine
patient care1,752 and is subject to OSHA bloodborne
pathogen regulations. Safe work practices, in addition
to wearing PPE, are designed to protect mucous mem-
branes and nonintact skin from contact with poten-
tially
infectious
material.
These
include
keeping
contaminated gloved and ungloved hands from touch-
ing the mouth, nose, eyes, or face and positioning pa-
tients to direct sprays and splatter away from the
caregiver’s face. Careful placement of PPE before pa-
tient contact will help avoid the need to make adjust-
ments to PPE and prevent possible face or mucous
membrane contamination during use.
In areas where the need for resuscitation is unpre-
dictable, mouthpieces, pocket resuscitation masks
with 1-way valves, and other ventilation devices pro-
vide an alternative to mouth-to-mouth resuscitation,
preventing exposure of the caregiver’s nose and mouth
to oral and respiratory ﬂuids during the procedure.
II.F.2.a. Precautions During Aerosol-Generating
Procedures. The performance of procedures that can
generate small-particle aerosols (aerosol-generating
procedures), such as bronchoscopy, endotracheal intu-
bation, and open suctioning of the respiratory tract,
have been associated with transmission of infectious
agents to HCWs, including M tuberculosis,789 SARS-
CoV,93,94,98 and N meningitidis.95 Protection of the
eyes, nose, and mouth, in addition to gown and gloves,
is recommended during performance of these proce-
dures in accordance with Standard Precautions. The
use of a particulate respirator is recommended during
aerosol-generating procedures when the aerosol is
likely to contain M tuberculosis, SARS-CoV, or avian
or pandemic inﬂuenza viruses.
II.G. Patient Placement
II.G.1. Hospitals and Long-Term Care Facilities. Op-
tions for patient placement include single-patient
rooms, 2-patient rooms, and multibed wards. Of these,
single-patient rooms are preferred when transmission
of an infectious agent is of concern. Although some
studies have failed to demonstrate the efﬁcacy of
single-patient rooms in preventing HAIs,790 other pub-
lished studies, including one commissioned by the AIA
and the Facility Guidelines Institute, have documented
a beneﬁcial relationship between private rooms and
reduced infectious and noninfectious adverse patient
outcomes.791,792 The AIA notes that private rooms are
the trend in hospital planning and design. However,
most hospitals and LTCFs have multibed rooms and
must consider many competing priorities when deter-
mining the appropriate room placement for patients
Siegel et al
December 2007
S101

----- Page 39 (native) -----
(eg, reason for admission; patient characteristics, such
as age, gender, and mental status; stafﬁng needs; family
requests; psychosocial factors; reimbursement con-
cerns). In the absence of obvious infectious diseases
that require speciﬁed airborne infection isolation
rooms (eg, tuberculosis, SARS, chickenpox), the risk
of transmission of infectious agents is not always con-
sidered when making placement decisions.
When only a limited number of single-patient rooms
is available, it is prudent to prioritize room assignments
for those patients with conditions that facilitate trans-
mission of infectious material to other patients (eg,
draining wounds, stool incontinence, uncontained se-
cretions) and those at increased risk of acquisition
and adverse outcomes resulting from HAIs (due to,
eg, immunosuppression, open wounds, indwelling
catheters, anticipated prolonged length of stay, total
dependence
on
HCWs
for
activities
of
daily
living).15,24,43,429,793,794
Single-patient rooms are always indicated for pa-
tients placed on Airborne Precautions in a PE and are
preferred for patients requiring Contact or Droplet Pre-
cautions.23,24,409,434,795,796
During
a
suspected
or
proven outbreak caused by a pathogen whose reservoir
is the gastrointestinal tract, the use of single-patient
rooms with private bathrooms limits opportunities
for transmission, especially when the colonized or in-
fected patient has poor personal hygiene habits or fecal
incontinence, or cannot be expected to assist in main-
taining procedures that prevent transmission of micro-
organisms (eg, infants, children, and patients with
altered mental status or developmental delay). In the
absence of continued transmission, it is not necessary
to provide a private bathroom for patients colonized or
infected with enteric pathogens as long as personal hy-
giene practices and Standard Precautions (especially
hand hygiene and appropriate environmental clean-
ing) are maintained. Assignment of a dedicated com-
mode to a patient, and cleaning and disinfecting
ﬁxtures and equipment that may have fecal contami-
nation (eg, bathrooms, commodes,797 scales used for
weighing diapers) and the adjacent surfaces with ap-
propriate agents may be especially important when a
single-patient room cannot be assigned, because envi-
ronmental contamination with intestinal tract patho-
gens is likely from both continent and incontinent
patients.54,798 The results of several studies that inves-
tigated the beneﬁt of a single-patient room in prevent-
ing transmission of C difﬁcile were inconclusive.167,799-
801 Some studies have shown that being in the same
room with a colonized or infected patient is not neces-
sarily a risk factor for transmission;790,802-804 however,
for children, the risk of health care–associated diarrhea
is increased with the increased number of patients
per room.805 These ﬁndings demonstrate that patient
factors are important determinants of infection trans-
mission risks. The need for a single-patient room
and/or private bathroom for any patient is best deter-
mined on a case-by-case basis.
Cohorting is the practice of grouping together pa-
tients who are colonized or infected with the same or-
ganism to conﬁne their care to a single area and
prevent contact with other patients. Cohorts are created
based on clinical diagnosis, microbiologic conﬁrmation
(when available), epidemiology, and mode of transmis-
sion of the infectious agent. Avoiding placing severely
immunosuppressed patients in rooms with other pa-
tients is generally preferred. Cohorting has been exten-
sively
used
for
managing
outbreaks
of
MDROs,
including MRSA,22,
806 VRE,637,807,808 MDR-ESBL,809
P aeruginosa,29 MSSA,810 RSV,811,812 adenovirus kerato-
conjunctivitis,813 rotavirus,814 and SARS.815 Modeling
studies provide additional support for cohorting pa-
tients to control outbreaks;816-818 however, cohorting
often is implemented only after routine infection con-
trol measures have failed to control an outbreak.
Assigning or cohorting HCWs to care only for pa-
tients infected or colonized with a single target patho-
gen limits further transmission of the target pathogen
to uninfected patients,739,818 but is difﬁcult to achieve
in the face of current stafﬁng shortages in hospitals582
and residential health care sites.819-821 However, co-
horting of HCWs may be beneﬁcial when transmission
continues after implementing routine infection control
measures and creating patient cohorts.
During periods when RSV, human metapneumovi-
rus,822 parainﬂuenza, inﬂuenza, other respiratory vi-
ruses,823
and
rotavirus
are
circulating
in
the
community, cohorting based on the presenting clinical
syndrome is often a priority in facilities that care for in-
fants and young children.824 For example, during the
respiratory virus season, infants may be cohorted
based solely on the clinical diagnosis of bronchiolitis,
due to the logistical difﬁculties and costs associated
with
requiring
microbiologic
conﬁrmation
before
room placement and the predominance of RSV during
most of the season. However, when available, single-pa-
tient rooms are always preferred, because a common
clinical presentation (eg, bronchiolitis), can be caused
by more than 1 infectious agent.822,823,825 Furthermore,
the inability of infants and children to contain body
ﬂuids, and the close physical contact associated with
their care, increases the risk of infection transmission
for patients and personnel in this setting.24,794
II.G.2. Ambulatory Care Settings. Patients actively
infected with or incubating transmissible infectious
diseases are frequently seen in ambulatory settings (eg,
outpatient clinics, physicians’ ofﬁces, emergency de-
partments) and potentially expose HCWs and other pa-
tients, family members, and visitors.21,34,127,135,142,826
S102
Vol. 35 No. 10 Supplement 2
Siegel et al

----- Page 40 (native) -----
In response to the global outbreak of SARS in 2003 and
in preparation for pandemic inﬂuenza, HCWs working in
outpatient settings are urged to implement source con-
tainment measures (eg, asking coughing patients to
wear a surgical mask or cover coughing with tissues)
to prevent transmission of respiratory infections, be-
ginning at the initial patient encounter,9,261,827 as de-
scribed in Section III.A.1.a. Signs can be posted at the
facility’s entrance or at the reception or registration
desk requesting that the patient or individuals accom-
panying the patient promptly inform the receptionist
of anysymptomsof respiratory infection (eg, cough, ﬂu-
like illness, increased production of respiratory secre-
tions). The presence of diarrhea, skin rash, or known
or suspected exposure to a transmissible disease (eg,
measles, pertussis, chickenpox, tuberculosis) also could
be added. Prompt placement of a potentially infectious
patient in an examination room limits the numberof ex-
posed individuals in the common waiting area.
In waiting areas, maintaining a distance between
symptomatic and nonsymptomatic patients (eg, . 3
feet), in addition to source control measures, may limit
exposures. However, infections transmitted through
the airborne route (eg, M tuberculosis, measles, chicken-
pox) require additional precautions.12,125,828 Patients
suspected of having such an infection can wear a surgi-
cal mask for source containment, if tolerated, and
should be placed in an examination room (preferably
an AIIR) as soon as possible. If this is not possible, then
having the patient wear a mask and segregating the pa-
tient from other patients in the waiting area will reduce
the risk of exposing others. Because the person(s) ac-
companying the patient also may be infectious, applica-
tion of the same infection control precautions may
be extended to these persons if they are sympto-
matic.21,251,829 Family members accompanying chil-
dren admitted with suspected M tuberculosis have
been found to have unsuspected pulmonary tuberculo-
sis with cavitary lesions, even when asymptomatic.42,830
Patients with underlying conditions that increase
their susceptibility to infection (eg, immunocompro-
mised status43,44 or cystic ﬁbrosis20) require special ef-
forts to protect them from exposure to infected patients
in common waiting areas. Informing the receptionist of
their infection risk on arrival allows appropriate steps
to further protect these patients from infection. In
some cystic ﬁbrosis clinics, to avoid exposure to other
patients who could be colonized with B cepacia, pa-
tients have been given beepers on registration so that
they may leave the area and receive notiﬁcation to re-
turn when an examination room becomes available.831
II.G.3. Home Care. In home care, patient placement
concerns focus on protecting others in the home from
exposure to an infectious household member. For
individuals who are especially vulnerable to adverse
outcomes associated with certain infections, it may
be beneﬁcial to either remove them from the home
or segregate them within the home. Persons who are
not part of the household may need to be prohibited
from visiting during the period of infectivity. For exam-
ple, in a situation where a patient with pulmonary tu-
berculosis is contagious and being cared for at home,
very young children (age under 4 years)832 and immu-
nocompromised persons who have not yet been in-
fected should be removed or excluded from the
household. During the SARS outbreak of 2003, segrega-
tion of infected persons during the communicable
phase of the illness was found to be beneﬁcial in pre-
venting household transmission.249,833
II.H. Transport of Patients
Several principles guide the transport of patients re-
quiring Transmission-Based Precautions. In the inpatient
and residential settings, these include the following:
1. Limiting transport of such patients to essential
purposes, such as diagnostic and therapeutic proce-
dures that cannot be performed in the patient’s room.
2. When transport is necessary, applying appropri-
ate barriers on the patient (eg, mask, gown, wrapping
in sheets or use of impervious dressings to cover the af-
fected areas) when infectious skin lesions or drainage
are present, consistent with the route and risk of
transmission.
3. Notifying HCWs in the receiving area of the pa-
tient’s impending arrival and of the necessary precau-
tions to prevent transmission.
4. For patients being transported outside the facility,
informing the receiving facility and the medi-van or
emergency vehicle personnel in advance about the
type of Transmission-Based Precautions being used.
For tuberculosis, additional precautions may be
needed in a small shared air space, such as in an
ambulance.12
II.I. Environmental Measures
Cleaning and disinfecting noncritical surfaces in pa-
tient care areas is an aspect of Standard Precautions. In
general, these procedures do not need to be changed
for patients on Transmission-Based Precautions. The
cleaning and disinfection of all patient care areas is im-
portant for frequently touched surfaces, especially
those closest to the patient, which are most likely to
be contaminated (eg, bedrails, bedside tables, com-
modes, doorknobs, sinks, surfaces and equipment in
close proximity to the patient).11,72,73,834 The fre-
quency or intensity of cleaning may need to be
changed, based on the patient’s level of hygiene and
the degree of environmental contamination and for
certain
infectious
agents
with
reservoirs
in
the
Siegel et al
December 2007
S103

----- Page 41 (native) -----
intestinal tract.54 This may be particularly important in
LTCFs and pediatric facilities, where patients with stool
and urine incontinence are encountered more fre-
quently. In addition, increased frequency of cleaning
may be needed in a PE to minimize dust accumula-
tion.11 Special recommendations for cleaning and dis-
infecting environmental surfaces in dialysis centers
have been published previously.18 In all health care set-
tings, administrative, stafﬁng, and scheduling activities
should prioritize the proper cleaning and disinfection
of surfaces that could be implicated in transmission.
During a suspected or proven outbreak in which an en-
vironmental reservoir is suspected, routine cleaning
procedures should be reviewed, and the need for addi-
tional trained cleaning staff should be assessed. Adher-
ence should be monitored and reinforced to promote
consistent and correct cleaning.
US Environmental Protection Agency–registered dis-
infectants or detergents/disinfectants that best meet
the overall needs of the health care facility for routine
cleaning and disinfection should be selected.11,835 In
general, use of the existing facility detergent/disinfec-
tant according to the manufacturer’s recommendations
for amount, dilution, and contact time is sufﬁcient to
remove pathogens from surfaces of rooms where colo-
nized or infected individuals were housed. This in-
cludes those pathogens that are resistant to multiple
classes of antimicrobial agents (eg, C difﬁcile, VRE,
MRSA, MDR-GNB11,24,88,434,745,795,836). Most often, en-
vironmental reservoirs of pathogens during outbreaks
are related to a failure to follow recommended proce-
dures for cleaning and disinfection, rather than to the
speciﬁc cleaning and disinfectant agents used.837-840
Certain pathogens (eg, rotavirus, noroviruses, C difﬁ-
cile) may be resistant to some routinely used hospital
disinfectants.274,291,841-846 The role of speciﬁc disinfec-
tants in limiting transmission of rotavirus has been
demonstrated experimentally.841 Also, because C difﬁ-
cile may display increased levels of spore production
when exposed to non–chlorine-based cleaning agents,
and because these spores are more resistant than veg-
etative cells to commonly used surface disinfectants,
some investigators have recommended the use of a
1:10 dilution of 5.25% sodium hypochlorite (house-
hold bleach) and water for routine environmental dis-
infection of rooms of patients with C difﬁcile when
there is continued transmission.843,847 One study
found an association between the use of a hypochlorite
solution and decreased rates of C difﬁcile infections.846
The need to change disinfectants based on the pres-
ence of these organisms can be determined in consul-
tation with the infection control committee.11,846,847
Detailed recommendations for disinfection and ster-
ilization of surfaces and medical equipment that have
been in contact with prion-containing tissue or high
risk body ﬂuids, and for cleaning of blood and body
substance spills, are available in the Guidelines for En-
vironmental Infection Control in Health Care Facilities11
and in the Guideline for Disinfection and Sterilization.847
II.J. Patient Care Equipment and Instruments/
Devices
Medical equipment and instruments/devices must
be cleaned and maintained according to the manufac-
turers’ instructions to prevent patient-to-patient trans-
mission of infectious agents.86,87,324,848 Cleaning to
remove organic material always must precede high-
level disinfection and sterilization of critical and semi-
critical instruments and devices, because residual pro-
teinacous material reduces the effectiveness of the
disinfection and sterilization processes.835,847 Noncrit-
ical
equipment,
such
as
commodes,
intravenous
pumps, and ventilators, must be thoroughly cleaned
and disinfected before being used on another patient.
All such equipment and devices should be handled in
a manner that will prevent HCW and environmental
contact with potentially infectious material. It is impor-
tant to include computers and personal digital assis-
tants used in patient care in policies for cleaning and
disinfection of noncritical items. The literature on con-
tamination of computers with pathogens has been
summarized,849 and 2 reports have linked computer
contamination to colonization and infections in pa-
tients.850,851 Although keyboard covers and washable
keyboards that can be easily disinfected are available,
the infection control beneﬁt of these items and their
optimal management have not yet been determined.
In all health care settings, providing patients who are
on Transmission-Based Precautions with dedicated
noncritical medical equipment (eg, stethoscope, blood
pressure cuff, electronic thermometer) has proven ben-
eﬁcial for preventing transmission.74,89,739,852,853 When
this is not possible, disinfection of this equipment after
each use is recommended. Other previously published
guidelines should be consulted for detailed guidance
in developing speciﬁc protocols forcleaning and reproc-
essing medicalequipmentandpatientcare items in both
routine and special circumstances.11,14,18,20,739,835,847
In home care, it is preferable to remove visible blood
or body ﬂuids from durable medical equipment before
it leaves the home. Equipment can be cleaned onsite
using a detergent/disinfectant and, when possible,
should be placed in a plastic bag for transport to the re-
processing location.20,738
II.K. Textiles and Laundry
Although soiled textiles, including bedding, towels,
and patient or resident clothing, may be contaminated
S104
Vol. 35 No. 10 Supplement 2
Siegel et al

----- Page 42 (native) -----
with pathogenic microorganisms, the risk of disease
transmission is negligible if these textiles are handled,
transported, and laundered in a safe manner.11,854,855
Key principles for handling soiled laundry are (1)
avoiding shaking the items or handling them in any
way that may aerosolize infectious agents, (2) avoiding
contact of one’s body and personal clothing with the
soiled items being handled, and (3) containing soiled
items in a laundry bag or designated bin. If a laundry
chute is used, it must be maintained to minimize dis-
persion
of
aerosols
from
contaminated
items.11
Methods of handling, transporting, and laundering
soiled textiles are determined by organizational policy
and any applicable regulations;738 guidance is provided
in the Guidelines for Environmental Infection Control in
Health Care Facilities.11 Rather than rigid rules and reg-
ulations, hygienic and common sense storage and pro-
cessing of clean textiles is recommended.11,856 When
laundering is done outside of a health care facility,
the clean items must be packaged or completely cov-
ered and placed in an enclosed space during transport
to prevent contamination with outside air or construc-
tion dust that could contain infectious fungal spores
that pose a risk for immunocompromised patients.11
Institutions are required to launder garments used as
PPE and uniforms visibly soiled with blood or infective
material.738 Little data exist on the safety of home laun-
dering of HCW uniforms, but no increase in infection
rates was observed in the one published study,857 and
no pathogens were recovered from home- or hospi-
tal-laundered scrubs in another study.858 In the home,
textiles and laundry from patients with potentially
transmissible infectious pathogens do not require spe-
cial handling or separate laundering and may be
washed with warm water and detergent.11,857,858
II.L. Solid Waste
The management of solid waste emanating from the
health care environment is subject to federal and state
regulations for medical and nonmedical waste.859,860
No additional precautions are needed for nonmedical
solid waste removed from rooms of patients on Trans-
mission-Based Precautions. Solid waste may be con-
tained in a single bag of sufﬁcient strength.861
II.M. Dishware and Eating Utensils
The combination of hot water and detergents used in
dishwashers is sufﬁcient to decontaminate dishware
and eating utensils. Therefore, no special precautions
areneeded fordishware(eg, dishes, glasses, cups) oreat-
ing utensils. Reusable dishware and utensils may be
used for patients requiring Transmission-Based Precau-
tions. In the home and other communal settings, eating
utensils and drinking vessels should not be shared,
consistent with principles of good personal hygiene
and to help prevent transmission of respiratory viruses,
herpes simplex virus, and infectious agents that infect
the gastrointestinal tract and are transmitted by the fe-
cal/oral route (eg, hepatitis A virus, noroviruses). If ade-
quate resources for cleaning utensils and dishes are not
available, then disposable products may be used.
II.N. Adjunctive Measures
Important adjunctive measures that are not consid-
ered primary components of programs to prevent
transmission of infectious agents but nonetheless im-
prove the effectiveness of such programs include (1)
antimicrobial management programs, (2) postexposure
chemoprophylaxis
with
antiviral
or
antibacterial
agents, (3) vaccines used both for pre-exposure and
postexposure prevention, and (4) screening and re-
stricting visitors with signs of transmissible infections.
Detailed discussion of judicious use of antimicrobial
agents is beyond the scope of this document; however,
this topic has been addressed in a previous CDC
guideline
(http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dhqp/pdf/ar/
mdroGuideline2006.pdf).
II.N.1.
Chemoprophylaxis.
Antimicrobial
agents
and topical antiseptics may be used to prevent infec-
tion and potential outbreaks of selected agents. Infec-
tions for which postexposure chemoprophylaxis is
recommended under deﬁned conditions include B per-
tussis,17,862 N meningitides,863 B anthracis after envi-
ronmental
exposure
to
aeosolizable
material,864
inﬂuenza virus,610 HIV,865 and group A streptococ-
cus.160 Orally administered antimicrobials also may
be used under deﬁned circumstances for MRSA decol-
onization of patients or HCWs.866
Another form of chemoprophylaxis involves the use
of topical antiseptic agents. For example, triple dye is
routinely used on the umbilical cords of term new-
borns to reduce the risk of colonization, skin infec-
tions, and omphalitis caused by S aureus, including
MRSA, and group A streptococcus.867,868 Extension of
the use of triple dye to low birth weight infants in a
NICU was one component of a program that controlled
a long-standing MRSA outbreak.22 Topical antiseptics
(eg, mupirocin) also are used for decolonization of
HCWs or selected patients colonized with MRSA, as dis-
cussed in the MDRO guideline866,869-872
II.N.2. Immunoprophylaxis. Certain immunizations
recommended for susceptible HCWs have decreased
the risk of infection and the potential for transmission
in health care facilities.17,873 The OSHA mandate requir-
ing employers to offer HBV vaccination to HCWs has
played a substantial role in the sharp decline in inci-
dence of occupational HBV infection.777,874 The routine
administration of varicella vaccine to HCWs has
Siegel et al
December 2007
S105

----- Page 43 (native) -----
decreased the need to place susceptible HCWs on
administrative leave after exposure to patients with
varicella.774 In addition, reports of health care–associ-
ated transmission of rubella in obstetric clinics33,875
and measles in acute care settings34 demonstrate the
importance of immunization of susceptible HCWs
against childhood diseases. Many states have require-
ments for vaccination of HCWs for measles and rubella
in the absence of evidence of immunity. Annual inﬂu-
enza vaccine campaigns targeted at patients and
HCWs in LTCFs and acute care settings have been instru-
mental in preventing or limiting institutional outbreaks;
consequently, increasing attention is being directed
toward
improving
inﬂuenza
vaccination
rates
in
HCWs.35,610,689,876-878
Transmission of B pertussis in health care facilities
has been associated with large and costly outbreaks
that include both HCWs and patients.17,36,41,100,682,826,
879,880 HCWs in close contact with infants with pertus-
sis are at particularly high risk because of waning
immunity and, until 2005, the absence of a vaccine ap-
propriate for adults. But 2 acellular pertussis vaccines
were licensed in the United States in 2005, 1 for use
in individuals age 11 to 18 years and the other for use
in those age 10 to 64 years.881 Current Advisory
Committee on Immunization Practices provisional rec-
ommendations include immunization of adolescents
and adults, especially those in contact with infants
under age 12 months and HCWs with direct patient
contact.882,883
Immunization of children and adults will help pre-
vent the introduction of vaccine-preventable diseases
into health care settings. The recommended immuni-
zation schedule for children is published annually in
the January issues of the Morbidity and Mortality
Weekly Report, with interim updates as needed.884,885
An adult immunization schedule also is available for
healthy adults and those with special immunization
needs due to high-risk medical conditions.886
Some vaccines are also used for postexposure pro-
phylaxis of susceptible individuals, including vari-
cella,887 inﬂuenza,610 hepatitis B,777 and smallpox225
vaccines.17,873 In the future, administration of a newly
developed S aureus conjugate vaccine (still under in-
vestigation) to selected patients may provide a novel
method of preventing health care–associated S aureus
(including MRSA) infections in high-risk groups (eg, he-
modialysis patients and candidates for selected surgi-
cal procedures).888, 889
Immune globulin preparations also are used for
postexposure prophylaxis of certain infectious agents
under speciﬁed circumstances (eg, varicella-zoster vi-
rus, HBV, rabies, measles and hepatitis A virus17,832,873).
The RSV monoclonal antibody preparation palivizu-
mab may have contributed to controlling a nosocomial
outbreak of RSV in one NICU, but there is insufﬁcient
evidence to support a routine recommendation for its
use in this setting.890
II.N.3. Management of Visitors.
II.N.3.a. Visitors as Sources of Infection. Visitors
have been identiﬁed as the source of several types of
HAIs (eg, pertussis,40,41M tuberculosis,42,891 inﬂuenza and
other respiratory viruses24,43,44,372 and SARS21,252-254).
Effective methods for visitor screening in health care
settings have not yet been studied, however. Visitor
screening is especially important during community
outbreaks of infectious diseases and for high-risk pa-
tient units. Sibling visits are often encouraged in birth-
ing centers, postpartum rooms, pediatric inpatient
units, PICUs, and residential settings for children; in
hospital settings, a child visitor should visit only his or
her own sibling. Screening of visiting siblings and other
children before they are allowed into clinical areas is
necessary to prevent the introduction of childhood ill-
nesses and common respiratory infections. Screening
may be passive, through the use of signs to alert family
members and visitors with signs and symptoms of com-
municable diseases not to enter clinical areas. More
active screening may include the completion of a
screening tool or questionnaire to elicit information
related to recent exposures or current symptoms. This
information is reviewed by the facility staff, after which
the visitor is either permitted to visit or is excluded.832
Family and household members visiting pediatric
patients with pertussis and tuberculosis may need to
be screened for a history of exposure, as well as signs
and symptoms of current infection. Potentially infec-
tious visitors are excluded until they receive appropri-
ate medical screening, diagnosis, or treatment. If
exclusion is not considered to be in the best interest
of the patient or family (ie, primary family members
of critically or terminally ill patients), then the sympto-
matic visitor must wear a mask while in the health care
facility and remain in the patient’s room, avoiding ex-
posure to others, especially in public waiting areas
and the cafeteria.
Visitor screening is used consistently on HSCT
units.15,43 However, considering the experience during
the 2003 SARS outbreaks and the potential for pan-
demic inﬂuenza, developing effective visitor screening
systems will be beneﬁcial.9 Education concerning res-
piratory hygiene/cough etiquette is a useful adjunct to
visitor screening.
II.N.3.b. Use of Barrier Precautions by Visitors.
The use of gowns, gloves, and masks by visitors in
health care settings has not been addressed speciﬁcally
in the scientiﬁc literature. Some studies included the
use of gowns and gloves by visitors in the control of
MDROs but did not perform a separate analysis to de-
termine whether their use by visitors had a measurable
S106
Vol. 35 No. 10 Supplement 2
Siegel et al

----- Page 44 (native) -----
impact.892-894 Family members or visitors who are pro-
viding care to or otherwise are in very close contact
with the patient (eg, feeding, holding) may also have
contact with other patients and could contribute to
transmission in the absence of effective barrier precau-
tions. Speciﬁc recommendations may vary by facility
or by unit and should be determined by the speciﬁc
level of interaction.
PART III: PRECAUTIONS TO PREVENT
TRANSMISSION OF INFECTIOUS AGENTS
There are 2 tiers of HICPAC/CDC precautions to pre-
vent transmission of infectious agents, Standard Pre-
cautions
and
Transmission-Based
Precautions.
Standard Precautions are intended to be applied to
the care of all patients in all health care settings, re-
gardless of the suspected or conﬁrmed presence of
an infectious agent. Implementation of Standard Pre-
cautions constitutes the primary strategy for the pre-
vention of health care–associated transmission of
infectious agents among patients and HCWs. Transmis-
sion-Based Precautions are for patients who are known
or suspected to be infected or colonized with infectious
agents, including certain epidemiologically important
pathogens, which require additional control measures
to effectively prevent transmission. Because the infect-
ing agent often is not known at the time of admission to
a health care facility, Transmission-Based Precautions
are used empirically, according to the clinical syn-
drome and the likely etiologic agents at the time, and
then modiﬁed when the pathogen is identiﬁed or a
transmissible infectious etiology is ruled out. Examples
of this syndromic approach are presented in Table 2.
The HICPAC/CDC Guidelines also include recommen-
dations for creating a Protective Environment for allo-
geneic HSCT patients.
The speciﬁc elements of Standard and Transmis-
sion-Based Precautions are discussed in Part II of this
guideline. In Part III, the circumstances in which Stan-
dard Precautions,
Transmission-Based
Precautions,
and a Protective Environment are applied are dis-
cussed. Tables 4 and 5 summarize the key elements
of these sets of precautions
III.A. Standard Precautions
Standard Precautions combine the major features of
Universal Precautions779, 895 and Body Substance Isola-
tion639 and are based on the principle that all blood,
body ﬂuids, secretions, excretions except sweat, nonin-
tact skin, and mucous membranes may contain trans-
missible
infectious
agents.
Standard
Precautions
include a group of infection prevention practices that
apply to all patients, regardless of suspected or con-
ﬁrmed infection status, in any setting in which health
care is delivered (Table 4). These include hand hygiene;
use of gloves, gown, mask, eye protection, or face
shield, depending on the anticipated exposure; and
safe injection practices. Also, equipment or items in
the patient environment likely to have been contami-
nated with infectious body ﬂuids must be handled in a
manner to prevent transmission of infectious agents
(eg, wear gloves for direct contact, contain heavily
soiled equipment, properly clean and disinfect or steril-
ize reusable equipment before use on another patient).
The application of Standard Precautions during pa-
tient care is determined by the nature of the HCW–pa-
tient interaction and the extent of anticipated blood,
body ﬂuid, or pathogen exposure. For some interac-
tions (eg, performing venipuncture), only gloves may
be needed; during other interactions (eg, intubation),
use of gloves, gown, and face shield or mask and gog-
gles is necessary. Education and training on the princi-
ples and rationale for recommended practices are
critical elements of Standard Precautions because
they facilitate appropriate decision-making and pro-
mote adherence when HCWs are faced with new cir-
cumstances.654,680-685 An example of the importance
of the use of Standard Precautions is intubation, espe-
cially under emergency circumstances when infectious
agents may not be suspected, but later are identiﬁed
(eg, SARS-CoV, N meningitides). The application of Stan-
dard Precautions is described below and summarized
in Table 4. Guidance on donning and removing gloves,
gowns and other PPE is presented in Figure 1.
Standard Precautions are also intended to protect
patients by ensuring that HCWs do not carry infectious
agents to patients on their hands or via equipment used
during patient care.
III.A.1. New Elements of Standard Precautions. In-
fection control problems that are identiﬁed in the
course of outbreak investigations often indicate the
need for new recommendations or reinforcement of
existing infection control recommendations to protect
patients. Because such recommendations are consid-
ered a standard of care and may not be included in
other guidelines, they are added here to Standard Pre-
cautions. Three such areas of practice that have been
added are respiratory hygiene/cough etiquette, safe in-
jection practices, and use of masks for insertion of
catheters or injection of material into spinal or epidural
spaces through lumbar puncture procedures (eg, mye-
logram, spinal or epidural anesthesia). Although most
elements of Standard Precautions evolved from Univer-
sal Precautions that were developed for protection of
HCWs, these new elements of Standard Precautions
focus on protection of patients.
III.A.1.a. Respiratory
Hygiene/Cough
Etiquette.
The transmission of SARS-CoV in emergency depart-
ments by patients and their family members during
Siegel et al
December 2007
S107

----- Page 45 (native) -----
the widespread SARS outbreaks in 2003 highlighted the
need for vigilance and prompt implementation of in-
fection control measures at the ﬁrst point of encounter
within a health care setting (eg, reception and triage
areas in emergency departments, outpatient clinics,
and physician ofﬁces).21,254,896 The strategy proposed
has
been
termed
respiratory
hygiene/cough
eti-
quette9,827 and is intended to be incorporated into in-
fection control practices as a new component of
Standard Precautions. The strategy is targeted at pa-
tients and accompanying family members and friends
with undiagnosed transmissible respiratory infections,
and applies to any person with signs of illness includ-
ing cough, congestion, rhinorrhea, or increased pro-
duction of respiratory secretions when entering a
health care facility.40,41,43 The term cough etiquette is
derived from recommended source control measures
for M tuberculosis.12,126
The elements of respiratory hygiene/cough etiquette
include (1) education of health care facility staff, pa-
tients, and visitors; (2) posted signs, in language(s) ap-
propriate to the population served, with instructions
to patients and accompanying family members or
friends; (3) source control measures (eg, covering the
mouth/nose with a tissue when coughing and prompt
disposal of used tissues, using surgical masks on the
coughing person when tolerated and appropriate); (4)
hand hygiene after contact with respiratory secretions;
and (5) spatial separation, ideally .3 feet, of persons
with respiratory infections in common waiting areas
when possible. Covering sneezes and coughs and plac-
ing masks on coughing patients are proven means of
source containment that prevent infected persons
from
dispersing
respiratory
secretions
into
the
air.107,145,897,898 Masking may be difﬁcult in some set-
tings, (eg, pediatrics), in which case the emphasis by
necessity may be on cough etiquette.899 Physical prox-
imity of , 3 feet has been associated with an increased
risk for transmission of infections through the droplet
route (eg, N meningitidis103 and group A streptococ-
cus114) and thus supports the practice of distancing in-
fected persons from others who are not infected. The
effectiveness of good hygiene practices, especially
hand hygiene, in preventing transmission of viruses
and reducing the incidence of respiratory infections
both within and outside900-902 health care settings is
summarized in several reviews.558,716,903
These measures should be effective in decreasing the
risk of transmission of pathogens contained in large
respiratory droplets (eg, inﬂuenza virus,23 adenovi-
rus,111 B pertussis,826 and M pneumoniae112). Although
fever will be present in many respiratory infections,
patients with pertussis and mild upper respiratory tract
infections are often afebrile. Therefore, the absence of
fever does not always exclude a respiratory infection.
Patients who have asthma, allergic rhinitis, or chronic
obstructive lung disease also may be coughing and
sneezing. Although these patients often are not infec-
tious, cough etiquette measures are prudent.
HCWs are advised to observe Droplet Precautions (ie,
wear a mask) and hand hygiene when examining and
caring for patients with signs and symptoms of a respi-
ratory infection. HCWs who have a respiratory infection
are advised to avoid direct patient contact, especially
with high-risk patients. If this is not possible, then a
mask should be worn while providing patient care.
III.A.1.b. Safe Injection Practices. The investiga-
tion of 4 large outbreaks of HBV and HCV among pa-
tients in ambulatory care facilities in the United
States identiﬁed a need to deﬁne and reinforce safe in-
jection practices.452 The 4 outbreaks occurred in a pri-
vate medical practice, a pain clinic, an endoscopy
clinic, and a hematology/oncology clinic. The primary
breaches in infection control practice that contributed
to these outbreaks were reinsertion of used needles
into a multiple-dose vial or solution container (eg, sa-
line bag) and use of a single needle/syringe to adminis-
ter intravenous medication to multiple patients. In 1 of
these outbreaks, preparation of medications in the
same workspace where used needle/syringes were dis-
mantled also may have been a contributing factor.
These and other outbreaks of viral hepatitis could
have been prevented by adherence to basic principles
of aseptic technique for the preparation and adminis-
tration of parenteral medications.452,453 These include
the use of a sterile, single-use, disposable needle and
syringe for each injection given and prevention of con-
tamination of injection equipment and medication.
Whenever possible, use of single-dose vials is preferred
over multiple-dose vials, especially when medications
will be administered to multiple patients.
Outbreaks related to unsafe injection practices indi-
cate that some HCWs are unaware of, do not under-
stand,
or do
not
adhere
to
basic
principles
of
infection control and aseptic technique. A survey of
US health care workers who provide medication
through injection found that 1% to 3% reused the
same needle and/or syringe on multiple patients.904
Among the deﬁciencies identiﬁed in recent outbreaks
were a lack of oversight of personnel and failure to fol-
low up on reported breaches in infection control prac-
tices in ambulatory settings. Therefore, to ensure that
all HCWs understand and adhere to recommended
practices, principles of infection control and aseptic
technique need to be reinforced in training programs
and incorporated into institutional polices that are
monitored for adherence.453
III.A.1.c. Infection Control Practices for Special
Lumbar Puncture Procedures. In 2004, the CDC inves-
tigated 8 cases of postmyelography meningitis that
S108
Vol. 35 No. 10 Supplement 2
Siegel et al

----- Page 46 (native) -----
either were reported to the CDC or identiﬁed through a
survey of the Emerging Infections Network of the Infec-
tious Disease Society of America. Blood and/or cerebro-
spinal ﬂuid of all 8 cases yielded streptococcal species
consistent with oropharyngeal ﬂora and there were
changes in the CSF indices and clinical status indicative
of bacterial meningitis. Equipment and products used
during these procedures (eg, contrast media) were ex-
cluded as probable sources of contamination. Proce-
dural details available for 7 cases determined that
antiseptic skin preparations and sterile gloves had
been used. However, none of the clinicians wore a
face mask, giving rise to the speculation that droplet
transmission of oralpharyngeal ﬂora was the most
likely explanation for these infections. Bacterial men-
ingitis after myelography and other spinal procedures
(eg, lumbar puncture, spinal and epidural anesthesia,
intrathecal chemotherapy) has been reported previ-
ously.905-914 As a result, the question of whether face
masks should be worn to prevent droplet spread of
oral ﬂora during spinal procedures (eg, myelography,
lumbar
puncture,
spinal
anesthesia)
has
been
debated.915, 916 Face masks are effective in limiting
the dispersal of oropharyngeal droplets917 and are rec-
ommended for the placement of central venous cathe-
ters.918 In October 2005, HICPAC reviewed the evidence
and concluded that there is sufﬁcient experience to
warrant the additional protection of a face mask for
the individual placing a catheter or injecting material
into the spinal or epidural space.
III.B. Transmission-Based Precautions
There are 3 categories of Transmission-Based Pre-
cautions: Contact Precautions, Droplet Precautions,
and Airborne Precautions. Transmission-Based Precau-
tions are used when the route(s) of transmission is (are)
not completely interrupted using Standard Precautions
alone. For some diseases that have multiple routes of
transmission (eg, SARS), more than 1 Transmission-
Based Precautions category may be used. When used
either singly or in combination, they are always used
in addition to Standard Precautions. See Appendix A
for recommended precautions for speciﬁc infections.
When Transmission-Based Precautions are indicated,
efforts must be made to counteract possible adverse ef-
fects on patients (ie, anxiety, depression and other
mood disturbances,919-921 perceptions of stigma,922 re-
duced contact with clinical staff,923-925 and increases in
preventable adverse events564) to improve acceptance
by the patients and adherence by HCWs.
III.B.1. Contact Precautions. Contact Precautions
are intended to prevent transmission of infectious
agents, including epidemiologically important micro-
organisms, which are spread by direct or indirect
contact with the patient or the patient’s environment
as described in Section I.B.3.a. The speciﬁc agents
and circumstance for which Contact Precautions are
indicated are found in Appendix A. The application of
Contact Precautions for patients infected or colonized
with MDROs is described in the 2006 HICPAC/CDC
MDRO guideline.926 Contact Precautions also apply
where the presence of excessive wound drainage, fecal
incontinence, or other discharges from the body
suggest an increased potential for extensive environ-
mental contamination and risk of transmission. A sin-
gle-patient room is preferred for patients who require
Contact Precautions. When a single-patient room is
not available, consultation with infection control per-
sonnel is recommended to assess the various risks
associated with other patient placement options (eg,
cohorting, keeping the patient with an existing room-
mate). In multipatient rooms, $ 3 feet spatial separa-
tion
between
beds
is
advised
to
reduce
the
opportunities for inadvertent sharing of items between
the infected/colonized patient and other patients. HCWs
caring for patients on Contact Precautions wear a gown
and gloves for all interactions that may involve contact
with the patient or potentially contaminated areas in
the patient’s environment. Donning PPE on room entry
and discardingbeforeexiting the patient roomis done to
contain pathogens, especially those that have been im-
plicated in transmission through environmental con-
tamination (eg, VRE, C difﬁcile, noroviruses and other
intestinal tract pathogens, RSV).54,72,73,78,273,274,739
III.B.2. Droplet Precautions. Droplet Precautions are
intended to prevent transmission of pathogens spread
through close respiratory or mucous membrane con-
tact with respiratory secretions as described in Section
I.B.3.b. Because these pathogens do not remain infec-
tious over long distances in a health care facility, spe-
cial air handling and ventilation are not required to
prevent droplet transmission. Infectious agents for
which Droplet Precautions are indicated are listed in
Appendix A and include B pertussis, inﬂuenza virus, ad-
enovirus, rhinovirus, N meningitides, and group A
streptococcus (for the ﬁrst 24 hours of antimicrobial
therapy). A single-patient room is preferred for patients
who require Droplet Precautions. When a single-pa-
tient room is not available, consultation with infection
control personnel is recommended to assess the vari-
ous risks associated with other patient placement op-
tions (eg, cohorting, keeping the patient with an
existing roommate). Spatial separation of $ 3 feet
and drawing the curtain between patient beds is espe-
cially important for patients in multibed rooms with in-
fections transmitted by the droplet route. HCWs wear a
mask (a respirator is not necessary) for close contact
with infectious patient; the mask is generally donned
on room entry. Patients on Droplet Precautions who
Siegel et al
December 2007
S109

----- Page 47 (native) -----
must be transported outside of the room should wear a
mask if tolerated and follow respiratory hygiene/cough
etiquette.
III.B.3. Airborne Precautions. Airborne Precautions
prevent transmission of infectious agents that remain
infectious over long distances when suspended in the
air (eg, rubeola virus [measles], varicella virus [chick-
enpox], M tuberculosis, and possibly SARS-CoV), as
described in Section I.B.3.c and Appendix A. The pre-
ferred placement for patients who require Airborne
Precautions is in an AIIR, a single-patient room equip-
ped with special air handling and ventilation capacity
that meet the AIA/Facility Guidelines Institute stan-
dards for AIIRs (ie, monitored negative pressure relative
to the surrounding area; 12 air exchanges per hour for
new construction and renovation and 6 air exchanges
per hour for existing facilities; air exhausted directly
to the outside or recirculated through HEPA ﬁltration
before return).12,13 Some states require the availability
of such rooms in hospitals, emergency departments,
and nursing homes that care for patients with M tuber-
culosis. A respiratory protection program that includes
education about use of respirators, ﬁt testing, and user
seal checks is required in any facility with AIIRs. In set-
tings where Airborne Precautions cannot be imple-
mented due to limited engineering resources (eg,
physician ofﬁces), masking the patient, placing the pa-
tient in a private room (eg, ofﬁce examination room)
with the door closed, and providing N95 or higher-level
respirators or masks if respirators are not available for
HCWs will reduce the likelihood of airborne transmis-
sion until the patient is either transferred to a facility
with an AIIR or returned to the home environment,
as deemed medically appropriate. HCWs caring for
patients on Airborne Precautions wear a mask or respi-
rator, depending on the disease-speciﬁc recommenda-
tions (see Section II.E.4, Table 2, and Appendix A), that
is donned before room entry. Whenever possible, non-
immune HCWs should not care for patients with
vaccine-preventable airborne diseases (eg, measles,
chickenpox, smallpox).
III.C. Syndromic and Empiric Applications of
Transmission-Based Precautions
Diagnosis of many infections requires laboratory
conﬁrmation.
Because
laboratory
tests,
especially
those that depend on culture techniques, often require
2 or more days for completion, Transmission-Based
Precautions must be implemented while test results
are pending, based on the clinical presentation and
likely pathogens. Use of appropriate Transmission-
Based Precautions at the time a patient develops symp-
toms or signs of transmissible infection, or arrives at a
health care facility for care, reduces transmission
opportunities. Although it is not possible to identify
prospectively all patients needing Transmission-Based
Precautions, certain clinical syndromes and conditions
carry a sufﬁciently high risk to warrant their use empir-
ically while conﬁrmatory tests are pending (see Table
2). ICPs are encouraged to modify or adapt this table ac-
cording to local conditions.
III.D. Discontinuation of Transmission-Based
Precautions
Transmission-Based Precautions remain in effect for
limited periods (ie, while the risk for transmission of
the infectious agent persists or for the duration of the
illness (see Appendix A). For most infectious diseases,
this duration reﬂects known patterns of persistence
and shedding of infectious agents associated with the
natural history of the infectious process and its treat-
ment. For some diseases (eg, pharyngeal or cutaneous
diphtheria, RSV), Transmission-Based Precautions re-
main in effect until culture or antigen-detection test re-
sults document eradication of the pathogen and, for
RSV, symptomatic disease is resolved. For other dis-
eases (eg, M tuberculosis), state laws and regulations
and health care facility policies may dictate the dura-
tion of precautions.12 In immunocompromised pa-
tients,
viral
shedding
can
persist
for
prolonged
periods of time (many weeks to months) and transmis-
sion to others may occur during that time; therefore,
the duration of contact and/or droplet precautions
may be prolonged for many weeks.499,927-932
The duration of Contact Precautions for patients
who are colonized or infected with MDROs remains
undeﬁned. MRSA is the only MDRO for which effective
decolonization regimens are available.866 However,
carriers of MRSAwho have negative nasal cultures after
a course of systemic or topical therapy may resume
shedding MRSA in the weeks after therapy.933,934 Al-
though early guidelines for VRE suggested discontinu-
ation of Contact Precautions after 3 stool cultures
obtained at weekly intervals proved negative,739 subse-
quent experiences have indicated that such screening
may fail to detect colonization that can persist for .
1 year.27,935-937 Likewise, available data indicate that
colonization with VRE, MRSA,938 and possibly MDR-
GNB can persist for many months, especially in the
presence of severe underlying disease, invasive de-
vices, and recurrent courses of antimicrobial agents.
It may be prudent to assume that MDRO carriers are
colonized permanently and manage them accordingly.
Alternatively, an interval free of hospitalizations, anti-
microbial therapy, and invasive devices (eg, 6 or 12
months) before reculturing patients to document clear-
ance of carriage may be used. Determination of the best
strategy awaits the results of additional studies. See the
S110
Vol. 35 No. 10 Supplement 2
Siegel et al

----- Page 48 (native) -----
2006 HICPAC/CDC MDRO guideline926 for a discussion
of possible criteria to discontinue Contact Precautions
for patients colonized or infected with MDROs.
III.E. Application of Transmission-Based
Precautions in Ambulatory and Home Care
Settings
Although Transmission-Based Precautions generally
apply in all health care settings, exceptions exist. For
example, in home care, AIIRs are not available. Further-
more, family members already exposed to diseases
such as varicella and tuberculosis would not use masks
or respiratory protection, but visiting HCWs would
need to use such protection. Similarly, management
of patients colonized or infected with MDROs may ne-
cessitate Contact Precautions in acute care hospitals
and in some LTCFs when there is continued transmis-
sion, but the risk of transmission in ambulatory care
and home care has not been deﬁned. Consistent use
of Standard Precautions may sufﬁce in these settings,
but more information is needed.
III.F. Protective Environment
A PE is designed for allogeneic HSCT patients to min-
imize fungal spore counts in the air and reduce the risk
of invasive environmental fungal infections (see Table
5 for speciﬁcations).11,13-15 The need for such controls
has been demonstrated in studies of aspergillosis out-
breaks associated with construction.11,14,15,157,158 As
deﬁned by the AIA13 and presented in detail in the
CDC’s 2003 Guideline for Environmental Infection Con-
trol in Health Care Facilities,11,860 air quality for HSCT
patients is improved through a combination of environ-
mental controls that include (1) HEPA ﬁltration of in-
coming air, (2) directed room air ﬂow, (3) positive
room air pressure relative to the corridor, (4) well-sealed
rooms (including sealed walls, ﬂoors, ceilings, windows,
electrical outlets) to prevent ﬂow of air from the outside,
(5) ventilation to provide $ 12 air changes per hour, (6)
strategies to minimize dust (eg, scrubbable surfaces
rather than upholstery939 and carpet,940 and routinely
cleaning crevices and sprinkler heads), and (7) prohibit-
ing dried and fresh ﬂowers and potted plants in the
rooms of HSCT patients. The latter is based on molecu-
lar typing studies that have found indistinguishable
strains of Aspergillus terreus in patients with hemato-
logic malignancies and in potted plants in the vicinity
of the patients.941-943 The desired quality of air may be
achieved without incurring the inconvenience or ex-
pense of laminar airﬂow.15,157 To prevent inhalation of
fungalsporesduringperiodswhenconstruction,renova-
tion, or other dust-generating activities that may be on-
going in and around the health care facility, it has been
recommended
that
severely
immunocompromised
patients wear a high-efﬁciency respiratory protection
device (eg, an N95 respirator) when they leave the
PE.11,14,944 The use of masks or respirators by HSCT pa-
tients when they are outside of the PE for prevention of
environmental fungal infections in the absence of con-
struction has not been evaluated. A PE does not include
the use of barrier precautions beyond those indicated
for Standard Precuations and Transmission-Based Pre-
cautions. No published reports support the beneﬁt of
placing patients undergoing solid organ transplantation
or other immunocompromised patients in a PE.
PART IV: RECOMMENDATIONS
These recommendations are designed to prevent
transmission of infectious agents among patients and
HCWs in all settings where health care is delivered.
As in other CDC/HICPAC guidelines, each recommenda-
tion is categorized on the basis of existing scientiﬁc
data, theoretical rationale, applicability, and, when
possible, economic impact. The CDC/HICPAC system
for categorizing recommendations is as follows:
Category IA. Strongly recommended for implemen-
tation and strongly supported by well-designed exper-
imental, clinical, or epidemiologic studies.
Category IB. Strongly recommended for implemen-
tation and supported by some experimental, clinical, or
epidemiologic
studies
and
a
strong
theoretical
rationale.
Category IC. Required for implementation, as man-
dated by federal and/or state regulation or standard.
Category II. Suggested for implementation and sup-
ported by suggestive clinical or epidemiologic studies
or a theoretical rationale.
No recommendation; unresolved issue. Practices for
which insufﬁcient evidence or no consensus regarding
efﬁcacy exists.
I. Administrative Responsibilities
Health care organization administrators should en-
sure the implementation of recommendations speci-
ﬁed in this section.
I.A. Incorporate preventing transmission of infectious
agents into the objectives of the organization’s pa-
tient and occupational safety programs.542-545,560,
629,625,945 Category IB/IC
I.B. Make preventing transmission of infectious agents
a priority for the health care organization. Provide
administrative support, including ﬁscal and hu-
man resources for maintaining infection control
programs.433,547,548,551,558,560-563,565,661,945
Cate-
gory IB/IC
I.B.1. Ensure that individuals with training in in-
fection control are employed by or are
Siegel et al
December 2007
S111

----- Page 49 (native) -----
available by contract to all health care facili-
ties, so that the infection control program
is managed by 1 or more qualiﬁed indi-
viduals.315,551,565,572,575,574,945,946
Category
IB/IC
I.B.1.a. Determinethespeciﬁcinfectioncontrol
full-time equivalents according to the
scope of the infection control program,
the complexity of the health care facil-
ity or system, the characteristics of the
patient population, the unique or ur-
gent needs of the facility and commu-
nity,
and
proposed
stafﬁng
levels
basedonsurveyresultsandrecommen-
dations from professional organiza-
tions.315,433,548,551,565,568,572,574,947,948
Category IB
I.B.2. Include prevention of HAIs as a deter-
minant of bedside nurse stafﬁng levels
and composition, especially in high-risk
units.417,550,582,584-589,591-596 Category IB
I.B.3. Delegate authority to infection control per-
sonnel or their designees (eg, patient care
unit charge nurses) for making infection
control decisions concerning patient place-
ment and assignment of Transmission-Based
Precautions.433,548,856,945 Category IC
I.B.4. Involve infection control personnel in deci-
sions on facility construction and design, de-
termination of AIIR and PE capacity needs,
and environmental assessments.11-13, 949,950
Category IB/IC
I.B.4.a. Provide ventilation systems required
for a sufﬁcient number of AIIRs (as
determined by a risk assessment)
and PEs in health care facilities that
provide care to patients for whom
such rooms are indicated, according
to
published
recommendations.11-
13,15 Category IB/IC
I.B.5. Involve infection control personnel in the se-
lection and postimplementation evaluation
of medical equipment and supplies and
changes in practice that could affect the
risk of HAI.951,952 Category IC
I.B.6. Ensure availability of human and ﬁscal re-
sources to provide clinical microbiology labo-
ratory support, including a sufﬁcient number
of medical technologists trained in microbiol-
ogy, appropriate to the health care setting, for
monitoring transmission of microorganisms,
planning and conducting epidemiologic in-
vestigations, and detecting emerging patho-
gens.
Identify
resources
for
performing
surveillance cultures, rapid diagnostic testing
for viral and other selected pathogens, prepa-
ration of antimicrobial susceptibility sum-
mary reports, trend analysis, and molecular
typing of clustered isolates (performed either
onsite or in a reference laboratory) and use
these resources according to facility-speciﬁc
epidemiologic needs, in consultation with
clinical
microbiologists.552,553,597,598,602,604-
606,608,609,611,613-616,953 Category IB
I.B.7. Provide human and ﬁscal resources to meet
occupational health needs related to infec-
tion control (eg, HCWs immunization, post-
exposure evaluation and care, evaluation
and management of HCWs with communi-
cable infections.12,17,134,689,738,878-880 Cate-
gory IB/IC
I.B.8. In all areas where health care is delivered,
provide supplies and equipment necessary
for the consistent observance of Standard
Precautions, including hand hygiene pro-
ducts and PPE (eg, gloves, gowns, face and
eye protection).558,738,945 Category IB/IC
I.B.9. Develop and implement policies and proce-
dures to ensure that reusable patient care
equipment is cleaned and reprocessed ap-
propriately
before
use
on
another
pa-
tient.11,87,836,954-959 Category IA/IC
I.C. Develop and implement processes to ensure over-
sight of infection control activities appropriate to
the health care setting and assign responsibility
for oversight of infection control activities to an in-
dividual or group within the health care organiza-
tion
that
is
knowledgeable
about
infection
control.433,548,565 Category II
I.D. Develop and implement systems for early detec-
tion and management (eg, use of appropriate in-
fection
control
measures,
including
isolation
precautions, PPE) of potentially infectious persons
at initial points of patient encounter in outpatient
settings (eg, triage areas, emergency departments,
outpatient clinics, physician ofﬁces) and at the
time
of
admission
to
hospitals
and
LTCFs.9,122,134,253,826 Category IB
I.E. Develop and implement policies and procedures to
limit patient visitation by persons with signs or
symptoms of a communicable infection. Screen
visitors to high-risk patient care areas (eg, oncology
units, HSCT units, intensive care units, other se-
verely immunocompromised patients) for possible
infection.24,41,43,960,961Category IB
I.F. Identify performance indicators of the effective-
ness of organization-speciﬁc measures to prevent
transmission of infectious agents (Standard Precau-
tions and Transmission-Based Precautions), estab-
lish processes to monitor adherence to those
S112
Vol. 35 No. 10 Supplement 2
Siegel et al

----- Page 50 (native) -----
performance measures, and provide feedback to
staff members.554,665-667,703,704,739,962 Category IB
II. Education and Training
II.A. Provide job- or task-speciﬁc education and train-
ing on preventing transmission of infectious
agents associated with health care during orienta-
tion to the health care facility; update information
periodically during ongoing education programs.
Target all HCWs for education and training, in-
cluding but not limited to medical, nursing, clini-
cal technicians, and laboratory staff; property
service
(housekeeping),
laundry,
maintenance
and dietary workers; students; contract staff; and
volunteers. Document competency initially and
repeatedly, as appropriate, for the speciﬁc staff
positions. Develop a system to ensure that HCWs
employed by outside agencies meet these educa-
tion and training requirements through programs
offered by the agencies or by participation in the
health care facility’s program designed for full-
time personnel.126,558,560,561,654,680-683,685,687,688,
701,892,918,963 Category IB
II.A.1. Include in education and training programs,
information concerning use of vaccines as
an
adjunctive
infection
control
mea-
sure.17,610,689,873 Category IB
II.A.2. Enhance education and training by apply-
ing principles of adult learning, using read-
ing level and language appropriate material
for the target audience, and using online ed-
ucational tools available to the institu-
tion.657,693,694,696,697,699,964 Category IB
II.B. Provide instructional materials for patients and
visitors on recommended hand hygiene and
respiratory
hygiene/cough
etiquette
practices
and the application of Transmission-Based Pre-
cautions.9,708,709,961 Category II
III. Surveillance
III.A. Monitor the incidence of epidemiologically im-
portant organisms and targeted HAIs that have a
substantial impact on outcome and for which ef-
fective preventive interventions are available. Use
information collected through surveillance of
high-risk populations, procedures, devices, and
highly transmissible infectious agents to detect
transmission of infectious agents in the health
care facility.565,670,671,672,674,686,918,965-968
Cate-
gory IA
III.B. Apply the following epidemiologic principles of
infection surveillance:662,663,670,672,965,967 Cate-
gory IB
d Use standardized deﬁnitions of infection.
d Use laboratory-based data (when available).
d Collect epidemiologically important variables
(eg, patient locations and/or clinical service in
hospitals and other large multiunit facilities,
population-speciﬁc risk factors [eg, low birth
weight neonates], underlying conditions that
predispose to serious adverse outcomes).
d Analyze data to identify trends that may indi-
cated increased rates of transmission.
d Feedback information on trends in the incidence
and prevalence of HAIs, probable risk factors,
and prevention strategies and their impact to
the appropriate health care providers, organiza-
tion administrators, and as required by local
and state health authorities.
III.C. Develop and implement strategies to reduce risks
for
transmission
and
evaluate
effective-
ness565,672, 683,961,968,969 Category IB
III.D. When transmission of epidemiologically impor-
tant organisms continues despite implementa-
tion and documented adherence to infection
prevention and control strategies, obtain consul-
tation from persons knowledgeable in infection
control and health care epidemiology to review
the situation and recommend additional mea-
sures for control.247,566,686 Category IB
III.E. Periodically review information on community or
regional trends regarding the incidence and prev-
alence of epidemiologically important organisms
(eg, inﬂuenza, RSV, pertussis, invasive group A
streptococcal disease, MRSA, VRE) (including in
other health care facilities) that may affect trans-
mission
of
organisms
within
the
facil-
ity.397,686,970-972 Category II
IV. Standard Precautions
Assume that every person is potentially infected or
colonized with an organism that could be transmitted
in the health care setting and apply the following infec-
tion control practices during the delivery of health care.
IV.A. Hand Hygiene
IV.A.1. During the delivery of health care, avoid un-
necessary touching of surfaces in close
proximity to the patient to prevent both con-
taminationofcleanhandsfromenvironmen-
tal surfaces and transmission of pathogens
from contaminated hands to surfaces.72,73,
738,799,973 {CDC, 2001 #970. Category IB/IC
IV.A.2. When hands are visibly dirty, contaminated
with proteinaceous material, or visibly
soiled with blood or body ﬂuids, wash
hands with either a nonantimicrobial soap
Siegel et al
December 2007
S113

----- Page 51 (native) -----
and water or an antimicrobial soap and
water.558 Category IA
IV.A.3. If hands are not visibly soiled, or after re-
moving visible material with nonantimicro-
bial soap and water, decontaminate hands
in
the
clinical
situations
described
in
IV.A.2.a–f. The preferred method of hand
decontamination is with an alcohol-based
hand rub.561,974 Alternatively, hands may
be washed with an antimicrobial soap and
water. Frequent use of an alcohol-based
hand rub immediately after handwashing
with nonantimicrobial soap may increase
the frequency of dermatitis.558 Category IB
Perform hand hygiene:
IV.A.3.a. Before having direct contact with
patients.663,975 Category IB
IV.A.3.b. After
contact
with
blood,
body
ﬂuids or excretions, mucous mem-
branes, nonintact skin, or wound
dressings.663 Category IA
IV.A.3.c. After contact with a patient’s intact
skin (eg, when measuring pulse
or
blood
pressure
or
lifting
a
patient).167,976-978 Category IB
IV.A.3.d. If hands will be moving from a con-
taminated body site to a clean body
site during patient care. Category II
IV.A.3.e. After contact with inanimate ob-
jects (including medical equipment)
in the immediate vicinity of the pa-
tient.72,73,88,799,979,980 Category II
IV.A.3.f. After
removing
gloves.727,740,741
Category IB
IV.A.4. Wash hands with nonantimicrobial soap
and water or with antimicrobial soap and
water if contact with spores (eg, C difﬁcile
or B anthracis) is likely to have occurred.
The physical action of washing and rinsing
hands under such circumstances is recom-
mended because alcohols, chlorhexidine,
iodophors, and other antiseptic agents
have poor activity against spores.558,954,981
Category II
IV.A.5. Do not wear artiﬁcial ﬁngernails or ex-
tenders if duties include direct contact
with patients at high risk for infection and
associated adverse outcomes (eg, those in
ICUs or operating rooms).30,31,558,721-723
Category IA
IV.A.5.a. Develop an organizational policy
on the wearing of nonnatural nails
by HCWs who have direct contact
with patients outside of the groups
speciﬁed above.982 Category II
IV.B. Personal protective equipment (see Fig 1)
IV.B.1. Observe the following principles of use:
IV.B.1.a. Wear PPE, as described in IV.B.2–
4, when the nature of the antici-
pated patient interaction indicates
that contact with blood or body
ﬂuids may occur.738,779,895 Cate-
gory IB/IC
IV.B.1.b. Prevent contamination of clothing
and skin during the process of re-
moving PPE (see Fig 1). Category II
IV.B.1.c. Before leaving the patient’s room or
cubicle,
remove
and
discard
PPE.18,738 Category IB/IC
IV.B.2. Gloves
IV.B.2.a. Wear gloves when it can be reason-
ably anticipated that contact with
blood or other potentially infectious
materials,
mucous
membranes,
nonintact skin, or potentially con-
taminated intact skin (eg, of a pa-
tient incontinent of stool or urine)
could occur.18,727,738,740,779,983 Cate-
gory IB/IC
IV.B.2.b. Wear gloves with ﬁt and durability
appropriate to the task.558,730,731,
738,984,985 Category IB
IV.B.2.b.i. Wear disposable medical ex-
amination gloves for providing
direct patient care.
IV.B.2.b.ii. Wear disposable medical ex-
amination gloves or reusable
utility
gloves
for
cleaning
the environment or medical
equipment.
IV.B.2.c. Remove gloves after contact with a
patient
and/or
the
surrounding
environment
(including
medical
equipment) using proper technique
to prevent hand contamination (see
Fig 1). Do not wear the same pair of
gloves for the care of more than
1 patient. Do not wash gloves for
the purpose of reuse, because this
practice has been associated with
transmission of pathogens.558,727,
740-742,986 Category IB
IV.B.2.d. Change gloves during patient care if
the hands will move from a con-
taminated body site (eg, perineal
area) to a clean body site (eg,
face). Category II
IV.B.3. Gowns
IV.B.3.a. Wear a gown appropriate to the task
to protect skin and prevent soiling
S114
Vol. 35 No. 10 Supplement 2
Siegel et al

----- Page 52 (native) -----
or contamination of clothing during
procedures and patient care activi-
ties
when
contact
with
blood,
body ﬂuids, secretions, or excre-
tions is anticipated.738,779,894 Cate-
gory IB/IC
IV.B.3.a.i. Wear a gown for direct patient
contact if the patient has un-
contained secretions or excre-
tions.24,88,89,738,743
Category
IB/IC
IV.B.3.a.ii. Remove gown and perform
hand hygiene before leaving
the patient’s environment.24,
88,89,738,743 Category IB/IC
IV.B.3.b. Do not reuse gowns, even for re-
peated contacts with the same pa-
tient. Category II
IV.B.3.c. Routine donning of gowns on en-
trance into a high-risk unit (eg,
ICU, NICU, HSCT unit) is not indi-
cated.364,746-749 Category IB
IV.B.4. Mouth, nose, and eye protection
IV.B.4.a. Use PPE to protect the mucous
membranes of the eyes, nose, and
mouth during procedures and pa-
tient care activities that are likely
to generate splashes or sprays of
blood, body ﬂuids, secretions, and
excretions. Select masks, goggles,
face
shields,
and
combinations
of these according to the need
anticipated
by
the
task
to
be
performed.113,738,779,895
Category
IB/IC
IV.B.5. During aerosol-generating procedures (eg,
bronchoscopy, suctioning of the respiratory
tract [if not using in-line suction catheters],
endotracheal intubation) in patients who
are not suspected of being infected with
an agent for which respiratory protection
is otherwise recommended (eg, M tubercu-
losis, SARS, or hemorrhagic fever viruses),
wear one of the following: a face shield
that fully covers the front and sides of the
face, a mask with attached shield, or a
mask and goggles (in addition to gloves
and gown).93-96,113,126,134 Category IB
IV.C. Respiratory hygiene/cough etiquette
IV.C.1. Educate HCWs on the importance of source
control measures to contain respiratory se-
cretions, to prevent droplet and fomite
transmission of respiratory pathogens, es-
pecially during seasonal outbreaks of viral
respiratory tract infections (eg, inﬂuenza,
RSV, adenovirus, parainﬂuenza virus) in
communities.10,14,24,261,683 Category IB
IV.C.2. Implement the following measures to con-
tain respiratory secretions in patients and
accompanying individuals who have signs
and symptoms of a respiratory infection,
beginning at the point of initial encounter
in a health care setting (eg, triage, reception
and waiting areas in emergency depart-
ments, outpatient clinics, and physicians’
ofﬁces).20,24,145,901,987
IV.C.2.a. Post signs at entrances and in stra-
tegic places (eg, elevators, cafete-
rias)
within
ambulatory
and
inpatient settings with instructions
to patients and other persons with
symptoms of respiratory infection
to cover their mouths and noses
when coughing or sneezing, use
and dispose of tissues, and perform
hand hygiene after hands have
been in contact with respiratory se-
cretions. Category II
IV.C.2.b. Provide tissues and no-touch recep-
tacles (eg, foot pedal–operated lid
or open, plastic-lined wastebasket)
for disposal of tissues.20 Category II
IV.C.2.c. Provide resources and instructions
for performing hand hygiene in or
near waiting areas in ambulatory
and inpatient settings; provide con-
veniently located dispensers of al-
cohol-based hand rubs and, where
sinks are available, supplies for
handwashing.558,901 Category IB
IV.C.2.d. During periods of increased preva-
lence of respiratory infections in
the community (as indicated by,
eg, increased school absenteeism,
increased number of patients seek-
ing care for respiratory infection),
offer masks to coughing patients
and other symptomatic persons
(eg, persons who accompany ill pa-
tients) on entry into the facility or
medical ofﬁce126,898,899 and en-
courage them to maintain special
separation (ideally, at least 3 feet)
from others in common waiting
areas.20,23,103,111,114,134 Category IB
IV.C.2.d.i. Some facilities may ﬁnd it lo-
gistically
easier
to
institute
this
recommendation
year-
round as a standard of prac-
tice. Category II
Siegel et al
December 2007
S115

----- Page 53 (native) -----
IV.D. Patient placement
IV.D.1. Include the potential for transmission of in-
fectious agents in patient placement deci-
sions. Place patients who pose a risk for
transmission to others (eg, those with uncon-
tained secretions, excretions, or wound
drainage;infantswithsuspectedviralrespira-
tory or gastrointestinal infections) in a
single-patient room when available.24,409,429,
434,792,795,796,805,988 Category IB
IV.D.2. Determine patient placement based on the
following factors:
d Route(s) of transmission of the known or
suspected infectious agent
d Risk factors for transmission in the in-
fected patient
d Risk factors for adverse outcomes resulting
from an HAI in other patients in the area or
room
being
considered
for
patient
placement
d Availability of single-patient rooms
d Patient options for room sharing (eg, co-
horting patients with the same infection)
Category II
IV.E. Patient
care
equipment
and
instruments/
devices954
IV.E.1. Establish policies and procedures for con-
taining, transporting, and handling patient
care equipment and instruments/devices
that may be contaminated with blood or
body ﬂuids18,738,973 Category IB/IC
IV.E.2. Remove organic material from critical and
semicritical instrument/devices, using rec-
ommended cleaning agents before high-
level disinfection and sterilization to enable
effective disinfection and sterilization pro-
cesses.835,989,990 Category IA
IV.E.3. Wear PPE (eg, gloves, gown), according to
the level of anticipated contamination,
when handling patient care equipment
and
instruments/devices
that
is
visibly
soiled or may have been in contact with
blood or body ﬂuids.18,738,973 Category IB/IC
IV.F. Care of the environment11
IV.F.1. Establish policies and procedures for rou-
tine and targeted cleaning of environmental
surfaces as indicated by the level of patient
contact and degree of soiling.11 Category II
IV.F.2. Clean and disinfect surfaces likely to be
contaminated with pathogens, including
those in close proximity to the patient (eg,
bed rails, over bed tables) and frequently
touched surfaces in the patient care envi-
ronment (eg, door knobs, surfaces in and
surrounding toilets in patient rooms) on a
more frequent schedule compared with
that for other surfaces (eg, horizontal sur-
faces
in
waiting
rooms).11,72,73,739,745,
799,833,991-993 Category IB
IV.F.3. Use EPA-registered disinfectants that have
microbiocidal (ie, killing) activity against
the pathogens most likely to contaminate
the patient care environment. Use in accor-
dance with manufacturer’s instructions.841-
843,954,994 Category IB/IC
IV.F.3.a. Review the efﬁcacy of disinfectants
in use when evidence of continuing
transmission of an infectious agent
(eg, rotavirus, C difﬁcile, norovirus)
may
indicate
resistance
to
the
product and a change to a more
effective
disinfectant
as
indi-
cated.274,841,846 Category II
IV.F.4. In facilities that provide health care to pedi-
atric patients or that have waiting areas with
children’s toys (eg, obstetric/gynecology of-
ﬁces and clinics), establish policies and pro-
cedures for cleaning and disinfecting toys at
regular intervals.80,378 Category IB
Consider the following principles when developing
this policy and procedures: Category II
d Select play toys that can be easily cleaned
and disinfected.
d Do not permit use of stuffed furry toys if
they will be shared.
d Clean and disinfect large stationary toys
(eg, climbing equipment) at least weekly
and whenever visibly soiled.
d If toys are likely to be mouthed, rinse with
water
after
disinfection;
alternatively,
wash in a dishwasher.
d When a toy requires cleaning and disinfec-
tion, do so immediately or store in a desig-
nated labeled container separate from toys
that are clean and ready for use.
IV.F.5. Include multiuse electronic equipment in
policies
and
procedures
for
preventing
contamination and for cleaning and disin-
fection, especially those items that are
used by patients, those used during deliv-
ery of patient care, and mobile devices
that are moved in and out of patient rooms
frequently (eg, daily).849,850,851,995 Category
IB
IV.F.5.a. No recommendation for use of re-
movable protective covers or wash-
able keyboards. Unresolved issue
IV.G. Textiles and laundry
IV.G.1. Handle used textiles and fabrics with mini-
mum agitation to avoid contamination of
S116
Vol. 35 No. 10 Supplement 2
Siegel et al

----- Page 54 (native) -----
air, surfaces, and persons.738,996,997 Cate-
gory IB/IC
IV.G.2. If laundry chutes are used, ensure that they
are properly designed, maintained, and
used in a manner to minimize dispersion
of
aerosols
from
contaminated
laun-
dry.11,13,998,999 Category IB/IC
IV.H. Safe injection practices
The following recommendations apply to the use of
needles, cannulas that replace needles, and, where ap-
plicable, intravenous delivery systems:453
IV.H.1. Use aseptic technique to avoid contamina-
tion of sterile injection equipment1000,1001
Category IA
IV.H.2. Do not administer medications from a sy-
ringe to multiple patients, even if the nee-
dle or cannula on the syringe is changed.
Needles, cannulae, and syringes are sterile,
single-use items; they should not be reused
for another patient or to access a medica-
tion or solution that might be used for a
subsequent
patient.452,918,1002,1003
Cate-
gory IA
IV.H.3. Use ﬂuid infusion and administration sets
(ie, intravenous bags, tubing and connec-
tors) for one patient only and dispose of
appropriately after use. Consider a syringe
or
needle/cannula
to
be
contaminated
once it has been used to enter or connect
to a patient’s intravenous infusion bag or
administration set.452 Category IB
IV.H.4. Use single-dose vials for parenteral medica-
tions whenever possible.452 Category IA
IV.H.5. Do not administer medications from single-
dose vials or ampules to multiple patients
or combine leftover contents for later
use.368,452,1003 Category IA
IV.H.6. If multidose vials must be used, both the
needle or cannula and syringe used to ac-
cess the multidose vial must be ster-
ile.452,1000 Category IA
IV.H.7. Donotkeep multidosevialsintheimmediate
patient treatment area. Store in accordance
with the manufacturer’s recommendations;
discard if sterility is compromised or ques-
tionable.452,1001 Category IA
IV.H.8. Do not use bags or bottles of intravenous
solution as a common source of supply
for multiple patients.452,1004 Category IB
IV.I. Infection control practices for special lumbar
puncture procedures
Wear a surgical mask when placing a catheter or inject-
ing material into the spinal canal or subdural space (ie,
during myelograms, lumbar puncture and spinal or ep-
idural anesthesia).904-912,916,1005 Category IB
IV.J. Worker safety
Adhere to federal and state requirements for protection
of HCWs from exposure to bloodborne pathogens.738
Category IC
V. Transmission-Based Precautions
V.A. General principles
V.A.1. In addition to Standard Precautions, use
Transmission-Based
Precautions
for
patients with documented or suspected in-
fection or colonization with highly trans-
missible
or
epidemiologically
important
pathogens for which additional precautions
are needed to prevent transmission (see
Appendix A).24,93,126,141,305,805,1006 Category
IA
V.A.2. Extend the duration of Transmission-Based
Precautions, (eg, Droplet, Contact) for im-
munosuppressed patients with viral infec-
tions due to prolonged shedding of viral
agents
that
may
be
transmitted
to
others.927,930-932,1007-1009 Category IA
V.B. Contact Precautions
V.B.1. Use Contact Precautions as recommended
in Appendix A for patients with known or
suspected infections or evidence of syn-
dromes that represent an increased risk for
contact transmission. For speciﬁc recom-
mendations for use of Contact Precautions
for colonization or infection with MDROs,
consult the MDRO guideline, available at
http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dhqp/pdf/ar/
mdroGuideline2006.pdf.869
V.B.2. Patient placement
V.B.2.a. In acute care hospitals, place patients
who require Contact Precautions in a
single-patient
room
when
avail-
able.24,686,792,795,796,805,836,892,1010,1011
Category IB
V.B.2.b. When single-patient rooms are in
short supply, apply the following
principles for making decisions on
patient placement:
d Prioritize patients with conditions that
may facilitate transmission (eg, uncon-
tained drainage, stool incontinence) for
single-patient room placement. Cate-
gory II
d Place patients who are infected or col-
onized with the same pathogen and
are suitable roommates together in
the same room (cohort).29,637,807,810-
812,814,817,818 Category IB
Siegel et al
December 2007
S117

----- Page 55 (native) -----
d If it becomes necessary to place a pa-
tient requiring Contact Precautions in
a room with a patient who is not in-
fected or colonized with the same in-
fectious agent:
- Avoid placing patients on Contact Pre-
cautions in the same room with pa-
tients who have conditions that may
increase the risk of adverse outcome
from infection or that may facilitate
transmission (eg, those who are im-
munocompromised,
have
open
wounds, or have anticipated pro-
longed lengths of stay). Category II
- Ensure that patients are physically
separated (ie, .3 feet apart) from
each other. Draw the privacy curtain
between beds to minimize opportu-
nities for direct contact. Category II
- Change protective attire and per-
form hand hygiene between contact
with patients in the same room, re-
gardless of whether or not either of
the patients is on Contact Precau-
tions.727,740,741,986,1012,1013 Category IB
V.B.2.c. In long-term care and other residen-
tial settings, make decisions regard-
ing patient placement on a case-by-
case basis, balancing infection risks
to other patients in the room, the
presence of risk factors that increase
the likelihood of transmission, and
the potential adverse psychological
impact on the infected or colonized
patient.919,920 Category II
V.B.2.d. In ambulatory settings, place pa-
tients who require Contact Precau-
tions in an examination room or
cubicle as soon as possible.20 Cate-
gory II
V.B.3. Use of PPE
V.B.3.a. Gloves
Wear gloves whenever touching the patient’s
intact skin24,89,134,558,745,836 or surfaces and
articles in close proximity to the patient
(eg, medical equipment, bed rails).72,73,88,836
Don gloves on entry into the room or cubicle.
Category IB
V.B.3.b. Gowns
V.B.3.b.i. Wear a gown whenever it is an-
ticipated that clothing will come
in direct contact with the pa-
tient or potentially contami-
nated environmental surfaces
or equipment in close proxim-
ity to the patient. Don a gown on
entry into the room or cubicle.
Remove the gown and observe
hand hygiene before leaving
the
patient
care
environ-
ment.24,88,134,744,836 Category IB
V.B.3.b.ii. After gown removal, ensure
that clothing and skin do not
contact
potentially
contami-
nated environmental surfaces
that could result in possible
transfer of microorganism to
other patients or environmen-
tal surfaces.72,73 Category II
V.B.4. Patient transport
V.B.4.a. In acute care hospitals and long-
term care and other residential set-
tings, limit transport and movement
of patients outside of the room to
medically necessary purposes. Cate-
gory II
V.B.4.b. When transport or movement in any
health care setting is necessary, en-
sure that infected or colonized areas
of the patient’s body are contained
and covered. Category II
V.B.4.c. Remove and dispose of contami-
nated PPE and perform hand hy-
giene before transporting patients
on Contact Precautions. Category II
V.B.4.d. Don clean PPE to handle the patient
at the transport destination. Cate-
gory II
V.B.5. Patient care equipment and instruments/
devices
V.B.5.a. Handle patient care equipment and
instruments/devices
according
to
Standard
Precautions.738,835
Cate-
gory IB/IC
V.B.5.b. In acute care hospitals and long-
term care and other residential set-
tings,
use
disposable
noncritical
patient care equipment (eg, blood
pressure cuffs) or implement pa-
tient-dedicated use of such equip-
ment. If common use of equipment
for multiple patients is unavoidable,
clean and disinfect such equipment
before
use
on
another
pa-
tient.24,88,795,835,836,853,1014 Category
IB
V.B.5.c. In-home care settings
V.B.5.c.i. Limit the amount of nondispos-
able patient care equipment
S118
Vol. 35 No. 10 Supplement 2
Siegel et al

----- Page 56 (native) -----
brought into the home of a pa-
tient on Contact Precautions.
Whenever possible, leave pa-
tient care equipment in the
home
until
discharge
from
home care services. Category II
V.B.5.c.ii. If
noncritical
patient
care
equipment
(eg,
stethoscope)
cannot remain in the home,
clean and disinfect items be-
fore
taking
them
from
the
home using a low- to interme-
diate-level disinfectant. Alter-
natively, place contaminated
reusable items in a plastic bag
for transport and subsequent
cleaning and disinfection. Cat-
egory II
V.B.5.d. In ambulatory settings, place con-
taminated reusable noncritical pa-
tient care equipment in a plastic
bag for transport to a soiled utility
area for reprocessing. Category II
V.B.6. Environmental measures
Ensure that rooms of patients on Contact Precau-
tions are prioritized for frequent cleaning and dis-
infection (eg, at least daily) with a focus on
frequently touched surfaces (eg, bed rails, overbed
table, bedside commode, lavatory surfaces in pa-
tient bathrooms, doorknobs) and equipment in
the immediate vicinity of the patient.11,24,88,745,836
Category IB
V.B.7. Discontinue Contact Precautions after signs
and symptoms of the infection have re-
solved or according to pathogen-speciﬁc
recommendations in Appendix A. Category
IB
V.C. Droplet Precautions
V.C.1. Use Droplet Precautions as recommended
in Appendix A for patients known or sus-
pected infection with pathogens transmitted
by respiratory droplets (ie, droplets . 5 m)
generated by a patient who is coughing,
sneezing, or talking,14,23, Steinberg, 1969
#1708,41,95,103,111,112,754,755,987,1015 Category
IB
V.C.2. Patient placement
V.C.2.a. In acute care hospitals, place pa-
tients who require Droplet Precau-
tions
in
a
single-patient
room
when available Category II
When single-patient rooms are in short sup-
ply, apply the following principles when
making decisions on patient placement:
d Prioritize patients who have excessive
cough and sputum production for sin-
gle-patient room placement. Category
II
d Place patients who are infected the
same pathogen and are suitable room-
mates together in the same room (co-
hort).813,815 Category IB
d If it becomes necessary to place pa-
tients who require Droplet Precautions
in a room with a patient who does not
have the same infection:
- Avoid placing patients on Droplet
Precautions in the same room with
patients who have conditions that
may increase the risk of adverse out-
come from infection or that may fa-
cilitate transmission (eg, those who
are immunocompromised or have
anticipated
prolonged
lengths
of
stay). Category II
- Ensure that patients are physically
separated (ie, .3 feet apart) from
each other. Draw the privacy curtain
between beds to minimize opportu-
nities for close contact.103,104,409 Cat-
egory IB
- Change protective attire and per-
form hand hygiene between contact
with patients in the same room,
regardless of whether or not either
patient is on Droplet Precautions.740-
741,986,1012,1013 Category IB
V.C.2.b. In long-term care and other residen-
tial settings, make decisions reg-
arding
patient
placement
on
a
case-by-case basis after considering
infection risks to other patients in
the room and available alterna-
tives.409 Category II
V.C.2.c. In ambulatory settings, place pa-
tients who require Droplet Precau-
tions in an examination room or
cubicle as soon as possible. Instruct
patients to follow recommendations
for respiratory hygiene/cough eti-
quette.9,446,447,827 Category II
V.C.3. Use of PPE
V.C.3.a. Don amaskonentryintothepatient’s
room or cubicle.14,23,41,103,111,113,115,
826 Category IB
V.C.3.b. No recommendation for routinely
wearing eye protection (eg, goggle
or face shield) in addition to a
mask, for close contact with patients
Siegel et al
December 2007
S119

----- Page 57 (native) -----
who require Droplet Precautions.
Unresolved issue
V.C.3.c. For
patients
with
suspected
or
proven SARS, avian inﬂuenza or
pandemic inﬂuenza, refer to the fol-
lowing websites for the most current
recommendations: http://www.cdc.
gov/ncidod/sars/;
http://www.cdc.
gov/ﬂu/avian/;
and
http://www.
pandemicﬂu.gov/.134,1016,1017
V.C.4. Patient transport
V.C.4.a. In acute care hospitals and long-
term care and other residential set-
tings, limit transport and movement
of patients outside of the room to
medically necessary purposes. Cate-
gory II
V.C.4.b. If transport or movement in any
health care setting is necessary, in-
struct the patient to wear a mask
and
follow
respiratory
hygiene/
cough etiquette (see http://www.cdc.
gov/ﬂu/professionals/infectioncontrol/
resphygiene.htm). Category IB
V.C.4.c. No mask is required for persons
transporting
patients
on
Droplet
Precautions. Category II
V.C.4.d. Discontinue
Droplet
Precautions
after signs
and
symptoms have
resolved or according to pathogen-
speciﬁc recommendations in Ap-
pendix A. Category IB
V.D. Airborne Precautions
V.D.1. Use Airborne Precautions as recommended
in Appendix A for patients known or sus-
pected to be infected with infectious agents
transmitted person to person by the air-
borne route (eg, M tuberculosis,12 mea-
sles,34,122,1018
chickenpox,123,772,1019
disseminated herpes zoster1020). Category
IA/IC
V.D.2. Patient placement
V.D.2.a. In acute care hospitals and long-
term care settings, place patients
who require Airborne Precautions
in an AIIR that has been constructed
in accordance with current guide-
lines.11-13 Category IA/IC
V.D.2.a.i. Provide at least 6 (in an existing
facility) or 12 (in new construc-
tion/renovation)
air
changes
per hour.
V.D.2.a.ii. Direct exhaust of air to the out-
side. If it is not possible to
exhaust air from an AIIR di-
rectly to the outside, the air
may be returned to the air-
handling system or adjacent
spaces if all air is directed
through HEPA ﬁlters.
V.D.2.a.iii. Whenever an AIIR is in use for
a patient on Airborne Precau-
tions, monitor air pressure
daily with visual indicators
(eg,
smoke
tubes,
ﬂutter
strips), regardless of the pres-
ence or absence of differential
pressure-sensing devices (eg,
manometers).11,12,1021,1022
V.D.2.a.iv. Keep the AIIR door closed
when not required for entry
and exit.
V.D.2.b. When an AIIR is not available, trans-
fer the patient to a facility that has
an available AIIR.12 Category II
V.D.2.c. In the event of an outbreak or expo-
sure involving large numbers of pa-
tients
who
require
Airborne
Precautions:
d Consult an ICP before patient place-
ment to determine the safety of an al-
ternative room that does not meet
engineering requirements for an AIIR.
d Place patients who are presumed to
have the same infection (based on clin-
ical presentation and diagnosis when
known) together (cohort) in areas of
the facility away from other patients,
especially patients at increased risk
for
infection
(eg,
immunocompro-
mised patients).
d Use temporary portable solutions (eg,
exhaust fan) to create a negative-pres-
sure environment in the converted
area of the facility. Discharge air di-
rectly to the outside, away from people
and air intakes, or direct all of the air
through HEPA ﬁlters before it is intro-
duced to other air spaces.12 Category II
V.D.2.d. In ambulatory settings:
V.D.2.d.i. Develop systems (eg, triage,
signage) to identify patients
with known or suspected infec-
tions
who
require
Airborne
Precautions on entry into am-
bulatory
settings.9,12,34,127,134
Category IA
V.D.2.d.ii. Place the patient in an AIIR as
soon as possible. If an AIIR is
S120
Vol. 35 No. 10 Supplement 2
Siegel et al

----- Page 58 (native) -----
not available, place a surgical
mask on the patient and place
the patient in an examination
room. Once the patient leaves,
the room should remain va-
cant for the appropriate time
(generally 1 hour) to allow for
a full exchange of air.11,12,122
Category IB/IC
V.D.2.d.iii. Instruct a patient with a known
or suspected airborne infec-
tion to wear a surgical mask
and observe respiratory hy-
giene/cough etiquette. Once in
an AIIR, the mask may be re-
moved; the mask should re-
main on if the patient is not in
an AIIR.12,107,145,898 Category
IB/IC
V.D.3. Personnel restrictions
Restrict susceptible HCWs from entering the
rooms of patients known or suspected to have
measles (rubeola), varicella (chickenpox), dissemi-
nated zoster, or smallpox if other immune HCWs
are available.17,774 Category IB
V.D.4. Use of PPE
V.D.4.a. Wear a ﬁt-tested NIOSH-approved
N95 or higher-level respirator for
respiratory protection when enter-
ing the room or home of a patient
when the following diseases are
suspected or conﬁrmed:
d Infectious pulmonary or laryngeal tu-
berculosis, or when infectious tubercu-
losis skin lesions are present and
procedures that would aerosolize via-
ble organisms (eg, irrigation, incision
and drainage, whirlpool treatments)
are performed.12,1023,1024 Category IB
d Smallpox
(vaccinated
and
unvacci-
nated). Respiratory protection is rec-
ommended for all HCWs, including
those with a documented ‘‘take’’ after
smallpox vaccination due to the risk
of
a
genetically
engineered
virus
against which the vaccine may not pro-
vide protection, or of exposure to a
very large viral load (from, eg, high-
risk
aerosol-generating
procedures,
immunocompromised patients, hem-
orrhagic
or
ﬂat
smallpox).108,129
Category II
V.D.4.b. No recommendation is made re-
garding the use of PPE by HCWs
who are presumed to be immune
to measles (rubeola) or varicella-
zoster based on history of disease,
vaccine, or serologic testing when
caring for an individual with known
or suspected measles, chickenpox,
or disseminated zoster due to difﬁ-
culties in establishing deﬁnite im-
munity.1025,1026 Unresolved issue
V.D.4.c. No recommendation is made re-
garding the type of PPE (ie, surgical
mask or respiratory protection with
a N95 or higher-level respirator) to
be worn by susceptible HCWs who
must have contact with patients
with known or suspected measles,
chickenpox, or disseminated herpes
zoster. Unresolved issue
V.D.5. Patient transport
V.D.5.a. In acute care hospitals and long-
term care and other residential set-
tings, limit transport and movement
of patients outside of the room to
medically necessary purposes. Cate-
gory II
V.D.5.b. If transport or movement outside an
AIIR is necessary, instruct the patient
to wear a surgical mask, if possible,
and to observe respiratory hygiene/
cough etiquette.12 Category II
V.D.5.c. For a patient with skin lesions asso-
ciated with varicella or smallpox or
draining skin lesions caused by M
tuberculosis,
cover
the
affected
areas to prevent aerosolization or
contact with the infectious agent
in skin lesions.108,1023,1024,1027-1029
Category IB
V.D.5.d. An HCW transporting a patient on
Airborne
Precautions
does
not
need to wear a mask or respirator
during transport if the patient is
wearing a mask and infectious skin
lesions are covered. Category II
V.D.6. Exposure management
Immunize or provide the appropriate immune
globulin to susceptible persons as soon as possible
after unprotected contact (ie, exposure) to a pa-
tient with measles, varicella, or smallpox: Category
IA
d Administer measles vaccine to exposed
susceptible persons within 72 hours after
the exposure or administer immune globu-
lin within 6 days of the exposure event for
high-risk persons in whom vaccine is con-
traindicated.17,1030-1033
Siegel et al
December 2007
S121

----- Page 59 (native) -----
d Administer varicella vaccine to exposed
susceptible persons within 120 hours after
the exposure or administer varicella im-
mune globulin (VZIG or an alternative pro-
duct), when available, within 96 hours for
high-risk persons in whom vaccine is con-
traindicated
(eg,
immunocompromised
patients,
pregnant
women,
newborns
whose mother’s varicella onset was , 5
days before or within 48 hours after deliv-
ery).887,1033-1035
d Administer smallpox vaccine to exposed
susceptible persons within 4 days after ex-
posure.108,1036-1038
V.D.7. Discontinue Airborne Precautions accord-
ing to pathogen-speciﬁc recommendations
in Appendix A. Category IB
V.D.8. Consult the Guidelines for Preventing the
Transmission of Mycobacterium tuberculosis
in Health Care Settings, 200512 and the
Guideline for Environmental Infection Con-
trol in Health Care Facilities11 for additional
guidance on environment strategies for pre-
venting transmission of tuberculosis in
health care settings. The environmental rec-
ommendations in these guidelines may be
applied to patients with other infections
that necessitate Airborne Precautions.
VI. Protective Environment (see Table 4)
VI.A. Place allogeneic HSCT patients in a PE as de-
scribed in the Guideline to Prevent Opportunistic
Infections in HSCT Patients,15 Guideline for Envi-
ronmental Infection Control in Health Care Facili-
ties,11
and
Guidelines
for
Preventing
Health
Care–Associated Pneumonia, 200314 to reduce ex-
posure to environmental fungi (eg, Aspergillus
spp).157,158 Category IB
VI.B. No recommendation for placing patients with
other medical conditions associated with in-
creased risk for environmental fungal infections
(eg, aspergillosis) in a PE.11 Unresolved issue
VI.C. For patients who require a PE, implement the fol-
lowing (see Table 5):11,15
VI.C.1. Environmental controls
VI.C.1.a. Filtered incoming air using central
or point-of-use HEPA ﬁlters capable
of removing 99.97% of particles $
0.3 mm in diameter.13 Category IB
VI.C.1.b. Directed room airﬂow with the air
supply on one side of the room that
moves airacrossthe patient bed and
outthroughanexhaustontheoppo-
site side of the room.13 Category IB
VI.C.1.c. Positive air pressure in room rela-
tive to the corridor (pressure differ-
ential
of
$
12.5
Pa0.01-in
water
gauge).13 Category IB
VI.C.1.c.i. Monitor air pressure daily with
visual indicators (eg, smoke
tubes, ﬂutter strips).11,1022 Cat-
egory IA
VI.C.1.d. Well-sealed rooms that prevent in-
ﬁltration of outside air.13 Category
IB
VI.C.1.e. At least 12 air changes per hour.13
Category IB
VI.C.2. Lower dust levels by using smooth, nonpo-
rous surfaces and ﬁnishes that can be
scrubbed, rather than textured material
(eg, upholstery). Wet dust horizontal sur-
faces whenever dust detected and routinely
clean crevices and sprinkler heads where
dust may accumulate.939,940 Category II
VI.C.3. Avoid carpeting in hallways and patient
rooms in areas.940 Category IB
VI.C.4. Prohibit dried and fresh ﬂowers and potted
plants.940-942 Category II
VI.D. Minimize the time that patients who require a PE
are outside their rooms for diagnostic procedures
and other activities.11,158,944 Category IB
VI.E. During periods of construction, to prevent inhala-
tion of respirable particles that could contain in-
fectious spores, provide respiratory protection
(eg, N95 respirator) to patients who are medically
ﬁt to tolerate a respirator when they are required
to leave the PE.158,944 Category II
VI.E.1.a. No recommendation for ﬁt testing of pa-
tients who are using respirators. Unre-
solved issue
VI.E.1.b. No recommendation for use of particu-
late respirators when leaving the PE in
the absence of construction. Unresolved
issue
VI.F. Use of Standard and Transmission-Based Precau-
tions in a PE
VI.F.1. Use Standard Precautions as recommended
for all patient interactions. Category IA
VI.F.2. Implement Droplet and Contact Precau-
tions as recommended for diseases listed
in Appendix A. Transmission-Based precau-
tions for viral infections may need to be
prolonged because of the patient’s immu-
nocompromised state and prolonged shed-
ding of viruses.927,929,931,1008,1009 Category
IB
VI.F.3. Barrier precautions, (eg, masks, gowns,
gloves) are not required for HCWs in the ab-
sence of suspected or conﬁrmed infection
S122
Vol. 35 No. 10 Supplement 2
Siegel et al

----- Page 60 (native) -----
in the patient or if they are not indicated ac-
cording to Standard Precautions.15 Category
II
VI.F.4. Implement Airborne Precautions for pa-
tients who require a PE and who also have
an airborne infectious disease (eg, pulmo-
nary or laryngeal tuberculosis, acute vari-
cella-zoster). Category IA
VI.F.4.a. Ensure that the PE is designed to
maintain positive pressure.13 Cate-
gory IB
VI.F.4.b. Use an anteroom to further support
the appropriate air balance relative
to the corridor and the PE; provide
independent exhaust of contami-
nated air to the outside or place a
HEPA ﬁlter in the exhaust duct if
the return air must be recircu-
lated.13,1039 Category IB
VI.F.4.c. If an anteroom is not available,
place the patient in an AIIR and
use portable, industrial-grade HEPA
ﬁlters in the room to enhance ﬁltra-
tion of spores.1040 Category II
GLOSSARY
Airborne infection isolation room (AIIR). Formerly
known as a negative-pressure isolation room, an AIIR
is a single-occupancy patient care room used to isolate
persons with a suspected or conﬁrmed airborne infec-
tious disease. Environmental factors are controlled in
AIIRs to minimize the transmission of infectious agents
that are usually transmitted from person to person by
droplet nuclei associated with coughing or aerosoliza-
tion of contaminated ﬂuids. AIIRs should provide neg-
ative pressure in the room (so that air ﬂows under the
door gap into the room), an air ﬂow rate of 6 to 12
air changes per hour (ACH) (6 ACH for existing struc-
tures, 12 ACH for new construction or renovation),
and direct exhaust of air from the room to the outside
of the building or recirculation of air through a high-
efﬁciency particulate air ﬁlter before returning to
circulation. (MMWR 2003; 52 [RR-10]; MMWR 1994;
43 [RR-13).]
American Institute of Architects (AIA). A profes-
sional organization that has developed standards for
building ventilation, the 2001Guidelines for Design and
Construction of Hospital and Health Care Facilities, the
development of which was supported by the AIA, Acad-
emy of Architecture for Health, and Facilities Guideline
Institute, with assistance from the US Department of
Health and Human Services and the National Institutes
of Health, is the primary source of guidance for
creating airborne infection isolation rooms and protec-
tive environments (http://www.aia.org/aah).
Ambulatory care setting. A facility that provides
health care to patients who do not remain overnight;
examples include hospital-based outpatient clinics,
non–hospital-based clinics and physician ofﬁces, ur-
gent care centers, surgicenters, free-standing dialysis
centers, public health clinics, imaging centers, ambula-
tory behavioral health and substance abuse clinics,
physical therapy and rehabilitation centers, and dental
practices.
Bioaerosol. An airborne dispersion of particles con-
taining whole or parts of biological entities, including
bacteria, viruses, dust mites, fungal hyphae, and fungal
spores. Such aerosols usually consist of a mixture of
monodispersed and aggregate cells, spores, or viruses
carried by other materials, such as respiratory secre-
tions and/or inert particles. Infectious bioaerosols (ie,
those containing biological agents capable of causing
an infectious disease) can be generated from human
sources (eg, expulsion from the respiratory tract during
coughing, sneezing, talking, singing, suctioning, or
wound irrigation), wet environmental sources (eg,
high-volume air consitioning and cooling tower water
with Legionella) or dry sources (eg, construction dust
with spores produced by Aspergillus spp). Bioaerosols
include large respiratory droplets and small droplet nu-
clei (Cole EC. AJIC 1998;26: 453-64).
Caregiver.. Any person who is not an employee of an
organization, is not paid, and provides or assists in pro-
viding health care to a patient (eg, family member,
friend) and acquire technical training as needed based
on the tasks that must be performed.
Cohorting. In the context of this guideline, this term
applies to the practice of grouping patients infected or
colonized with the same infectious agent together to
conﬁne their care to one area and prevent contact
with susceptible patients (cohorting patients). During
outbreaks, health care personnel may be assigned to
a cohort of patients to further limit opportunities for
transmission (cohorting staff).
Colonization. Proliferation of microorganisms on or
within body sites without detectable host immune re-
sponse, cellular damage, or clinical expression. The
presence of a microorganism within a host may occur
with varying durations but may become a source of po-
tential transmission. In many instances, colonization
and carriage are synonymous.
Droplet nuclei. Microscopic particles , 5 mm in size
that are the residue of evaporated droplets and are pro-
duced when a person coughs, sneezes, shouts, or sings.
These particles can remain suspended in the air for
prolonged periods and can be carried on normal air
currents in a room or beyond, to adjacent spaces or
areas receiving exhaust air.
Siegel et al
December 2007
S123

----- Page 61 (native) -----
Engineering controls. Removal or isolation of a
workplace hazard through technology. An airborne in-
fection isolation room, a protective environment, engi-
neered sharps injury prevention device, and a sharps
container are examples of engineering controls.
Epidemiologically important pathogen. An infec-
tious agent that has one or more of the following char-
acteristics: (1) readily transmissible, (2) a proclivity
toward causing outbreaks, (3) possible association
with a severe outcome, and (4) difﬁcult to treat. Exam-
ples include Acinetobacter spp, Aspergillus spp, Burk-
holderia cepacia, Clostridium difﬁcile, Klebsiella or
Enterobacter spp, extended-spectrum beta-lactamase–
producing gram-negative bacilli, methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, van-
comycin-resistant enterococci, vancomycin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus, inﬂuenza virus, respiratory syn-
cytial virus, rotavirus, severe acute respiratory syn-
drome coronavirus, noroviruses, and the hemorrhagic
fever viruses.
Hand hygiene. A general term that applies to any
one of the following: (1) handwashing with plain (non-
antimicrobial) soap and water, (2) antiseptic handwash-
ing (soap containing antiseptic agents and water), (3)
antiseptic
handrub
(waterless
antiseptic
product,
most often alcohol-based, rubbed on all surfaces of
hands), or (4) surgical hand antisepsis (antiseptic hand-
wash or antiseptic handrub performed preoperatively
by surgical personnel to eliminate transient hand ﬂora
and reduce resident hand ﬂora).558
Health care–associated infection (HAI). An infec-
tion that develops in a patient who is cared for in any
setting where health care is delivered (eg, acute care
hospital, chronic care facility, ambulatory clinic, dialy-
sis center, surgicenter, home) and is related to receiving
health care (ie, was not incubating or present at the
time health care was provided). In ambulatory and
home settings, HAI refers to any infection that is asso-
ciated with a medical or surgical intervention. Because
the geographic location of infection acquisition is often
uncertain, the preferred term is considered to be health
care-associated rather than health care-acquired.
Healthcare epidemiologist. A person whose pri-
mary training is medical (MD, DO) and/or masters- or
doctorate-level epidemiology who has received ad-
vanced training in health care epidemiology. Typically
these professionals direct or provide consultation to an
infection control program in a hospital, long-term care
facility, or health care delivery system (also see Infec-
tion control professional).
Health care personnel, health care worker (HCW).
Any paid or unpaid person who works in a health
care setting (eg, any person who has professional or
technical training in a health care–related ﬁeld and
provides patient care in a health care setting or any
person who provides services that support the delivery
of health care such as dietary, housekeeping, engineer-
ing, maintenance personnel).
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT).
Any transplantation of blood- or bone marrow–derived
hematopoietic stem cells, regardless of donor type (eg,
allogeneic or autologous) or cell source (eg, bone mar-
row, peripheral blood, or placental/umbilical cord
blood), associated with periods of severe immunosup-
pression that vary with the source of the cells, the in-
tensity of chemotherapy required, and the presence
of graft versus host disease (MMWR 2000; 49: RR-10).
High-efﬁciency particulate air (HEPA) ﬁlter. An air
ﬁlter that removes .99.97% of particles . 0.3 mm
(the most penetrating particle size) at a speciﬁed ﬂow
rate of air. HEPA ﬁlters may be integrated into the cen-
tral air handling systems, installed at the point of use
above the ceiling of a room, or used as portable units
(MMWR 2003; 52: RR-10).
Home care. A wide range of medical, nursing, reha-
bilitation, hospice, and social services delivered to pa-
tients
in
their
place
of
residence
(eg,
private
residence, senior living center, assisted living facility).
Home health care services include care provided by
home health aides and skilled nurses, respiratory ther-
apists, dieticians, physicians, chaplains, and volun-
teers; provision of durable medical equipment; home
infusion therapy; and physical, speech, and occupa-
tional therapy.
Immunocompromised patient. A patient whose im-
mune mechanisms are deﬁcient because of a congeni-
tal or acquired immunologic disorder (eg, human
immunodeﬁciency virus infection, congenital immune
deﬁciency syndromes), chronic diseases such as diabe-
tes mellitus, cancer, emphysema, or cardiac failure, in-
tensive
care
unit
care,
malnutrition,
and
immunosuppressive therapy of another disease pro-
cess [eg, radiation, cytotoxic chemotherapy, anti–graft
rejection medication, corticosteroids, monoclonal anti-
bodies directed against a speciﬁc component of the im-
mune system]). The type of infections for which an
immunocompromised patient has increased suscepti-
bility is determined by the severity of immunosuppres-
sion and the speciﬁc component(s) of the immune
system that is affected. Patients undergoing allogeneic
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation and those with
chronic graft versus host disease are considered the
most vulnerable to health care–associated infections.
Immunocompromised states also make it more difﬁ-
cult to diagnose certain infections (eg, tuberculosis)
and are associated with more severe clinical disease
states than persons with the same infection and a nor-
mal immune system.
Infection. The transmission of microorganisms into
a
host
after
evading
or
overcoming
defense
S124
Vol. 35 No. 10 Supplement 2
Siegel et al

----- Page 62 (native) -----
mechanisms, resulting in the organism’s proliferation
and invasion within host tissue(s). Host responses to in-
fection may include clinical symptoms or may be sub-
clinical, with manifestations of disease mediated by
direct organisms pathogenesis and/or a function of
cell-mediated or antibody responses that result in the
destruction of host tissues.
Infection
control
and
prevention
professional
(ICP). A person whose primary training is in either
nursing, medical technology, microbiology, or epide-
miology and who has acquired specialized training in
infection control. Responsibilities may include collec-
tion, analysis, and feedback of infection data and
trends to health care providers; consultation on infec-
tion risk assessment, prevention, and control strate-
gies; performance of education and training activities;
implementation of evidence-based infection control
practices or those mandated by regulatory and licens-
ing agencies; application of epidemiologic principles
to improve patient outcomes; participation in planning
renovation and construction projects (eg, to ensure
appropriate containment of construction dust); evalua-
tion of new products or procedures on patient out-
comes; oversight of employee health services related
to infection prevention; implementation of prepared-
ness plans; communication within the health care set-
ting, with local and state health departments, and with
the community at large concerning infection control is-
sues; and participation in research. Certiﬁcation in in-
fection control is available through the Certiﬁcation
Board of Infection Control and Epidemiology.
Infection control and prevention program. A multi-
disciplinary program that includes a group of activities
to ensure that recommended practices for the preven-
tion of health care–associated infections are imple-
mented and followed by health care workers, making
the health care setting safe from infection for patients
and health care personnel. The Joint Commission on
Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations requires
the following 5 components of an infection control
program for accreditation: (1) surveillance: monitoring
patients and health care personnel for acquisition of in-
fection and/or colonization; (2) investigation: identiﬁca-
tion and analysis of infection problems or undesirable
trends; (3) prevention: implementation of measures to
prevent transmission of infectious agents and to reduce
risks for device- and procedure-related infections; (4)
control: evaluation and management of outbreaks;
and (5) reporting: provision of information to external
agencies as required by state and federal laws and reg-
ulations (see http://www.jcaho.org). The infection con-
trol program staff has the ultimate authority to
determine infection control policies for a health care
organization with the approval of the organization’s
governing body.
Long-term care facility (LTCF). A residential or outpa-
tient facility designed to meet the biopsychosocial
needs of persons with sustained self-care deﬁcits.
These include skilled nursing facilities, chronic disease
hospitals, nursing homes, foster and group homes, in-
stitutions for the developmentally disabled, residential
care facilities, assisted living facilities, retirement
homes, adult day health care facilities, rehabilitation
centers, and long-term psychiatric hospitals.
Mask. A term that applies collectively to items used
to cover the nose and mouth and includes both proce-
dure masks and surgical masks (see http://www.fda.
gov/cdrh/ode/guidance/094.html#4).
Multidrug-resistant organism (MDRO). In general, a
bacterium (excluding Mycobacterium tuberculosis) that
is resistant to 1 or more classes of antimicrobial agents
and usually is resistant to all but 1 or 2 commercially
available antimicrobial agents (eg, methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus, vancomycin-resistant entero-
cocci, extended-spectrum beta-lactamase–producing
or intrinsically resistant gram-negative bacilli).176
Nosocomial infection. Derived from 2 Greek words,
‘‘nosos’’ (disease) and ‘‘komeion’’ (to take care of), re-
fers to any infection that develops during or as a result
of an admission to an acute care facility (hospital) and
was not incubating at the time of admission.
Personal protective equipment (PPE). A variety of
barriers used alone or in combination to protect mu-
cous membranes, skin, and clothing from contact
with infectious agents. PPE includes gloves, masks, res-
pirators, goggles, face shields, and gowns.
Procedure mask. A covering for the nose and mouth
that is intended for use in general patient care situa-
tions. These masks generally attach to the face with
ear loops rather than ties or elastic. Unlike surgical
masks, procedure masks are not regulated by the
Food and Drug Administration.
Protective environment. A specialized patient care
area, usually in a hospital, with a positive air ﬂow rel-
ative to the corridor (ie, air ﬂows from the room to the
outside adjacent space). The combination of high-efﬁ-
ciency particulate air ﬁltration, high numbers (.12)
of air changes per hour, and minimal leakage of air
into the room creates an environment that can safely
accommodate patients with a severely compromised
immune system (eg, those who have received alloge-
neic hemopoietic stem cell transplantation) and de-
crease the risk of exposure to spores produced by
environmental fungi. Other components include use
of scrubbable surfaces instead of materials such as
upholstery or carpeting, cleaning to prevent dust ac-
cumulation, and prohibition of fresh ﬂowers or potted
plants.
Quasi-experimental study. A study undertaken to
evaluate interventions but do not use randomization
Siegel et al
December 2007
S125

----- Page 63 (native) -----
as part of the study design. These studies are also re-
ferred to as nonrandomized, pre-/postintervention
study designs. These studies aim to demonstrate cau-
sality between an intervention and an outcome but
cannot achieve the level of conﬁdence concerning an
attributable beneﬁt obtained through a randomized
controlled trial. In hospitals and public health settings,
randomized control trials often cannot be imple-
mented due to ethical, practical, and urgency reasons;
therefore, quasi-experimental design studies are com-
monly used. However, even if an intervention appears
to be effective statistically, the question can be raised
as to the possibility of alternative explanations for the
result. Such a study design is used when it is not logis-
tically feasible or ethically possible to conduct a ran-
domized
controlled
trial,
(eg,
during
outbreaks).
Within the classiﬁcation of quasi-experimental study
designs, there is a hierarchy of design features that
may contribute to validity of results (Harris et al. CID
2004:38: 1586).
Residential care setting. A facility in which people
live, minimal medical care is delivered, and the psycho-
social needs of the residents are provided for.
Respirator. A personal protective device worn by
health care personnel over the nose and mouth to pro-
tect them from acquiring airborne infectious diseases
due to inhalation of infectious airborne particles , 5
mm in size. These include infectious droplet nuclei
from patients with Mycobacterium tuberculosis, variola
virus [smallpox], or severe acute respiratory syndrome
and dust particles that contain infectious particles,
such as spores of environmental fungi (eg, Aspergillus
spp). The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health
(NIOSH) certiﬁes respirators used in health care set-
tings (see http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/topics/respirators/).
The N95 disposable particulate, air-purifying respira-
tor is the type used most commonly by health care per-
sonnel. Other respirators used include N-99 and N-100
particulate respirators, powered air-purifying respira-
tors with high-efﬁciency ﬁlters, and nonpowered full-
facepiece elastomeric negative pressure respirators.
A listing of NIOSH-approved respirators can be found
at http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/npptl/respirators/disp_part/
particlist.html. Respirators must be used in conjunc-
tion with a complete respiratory protection program,
as required by the Occupational Safety and Health
Administration, which includes ﬁt testing, training,
proper selection of respirators, medical clearance,
and respirator maintenance.
Respiratory hygiene/cough etiquette. A combina-
tion of measures designed to minimize the transmis-
sion of respiratory pathogens through droplet or
airborne routes in health care settings. The compo-
nents of respiratory hygiene/cough etiquette are (1)
covering the mouth and nose during coughing and
sneezing, (2) using tissues to contain respiratory secre-
tions with prompt disposal into a no-touch receptacle,
(3) offering a surgical mask to persons who are cough-
ing to decrease contamination of the surrounding envi-
ronment, and (4) turning the head away from others
and maintaining spatial separation (ideally .3 feet)
when coughing. These measures are targeted to all pa-
tients with symptoms of respiratory infection and their
accompanying family members or friends beginning at
the point of initial encounter with a health care setting
(eg, reception/triage in emergency departments, ambu-
latory clinics, health care provider ofﬁces).126 (Sriniva-
sin A ICHE 2004; 25: 1020; http://www.cdc.gov/ﬂu/
professionals/infectioncontrol/resphygiene.htm).
Safety culture. Shared perceptions of workers and
management regarding the level of safety in the work
environment. A hospital safety climate includes the fol-
lowing organizational components: (1) senior manage-
ment support for safety programs, (2) absence of
workplace barriers to safe work practices, (3) cleanli-
ness and orderliness of the worksite, (4) minimal con-
ﬂict and good communication among staff members,
(5) frequent safety-related feedback/training by super-
visors, and (6) availability of PPE and engineering
controls.618
Source control. The process of containing an infec-
tious agent either at the portal of exit from the body or
within a conﬁned space. The term is applied most fre-
quently to containment of infectious agents transmit-
ted by the respiratory route but could apply to other
routes of transmission, (eg, a draining wound, vesicular
or bullous skin lesions). Respiratory hygiene/cough et-
iquette that encourages individuals to ‘‘cover your
cough’’ and/or wear a mask is a source control mea-
sure. The use of enclosing devices for local exhaust
ventilation (eg, booths for sputum induction or admin-
istration of aerosolized medication) is another example
of source control.
Standard precautions. A group of infection preven-
tion practices that apply to all patients, regardless of
suspected or conﬁrmed diagnosis or presumed infec-
tion status. Standard precautions represents a combi-
nation and expansion of universal precautions778 and
body substance isolation.1109 Standard precautions
are based on the principle that all blood, body ﬂuids,
secretions, excretions except sweat, nonintact skin,
and mucous membranes may contain transmissible in-
fectious agents. Standard precautions include hand hy-
giene and, depending on the anticipated exposure, use
of gloves, gown, mask, eye protection, or face shield. In
addition, equipment or items in the patient environ-
ment likely to have been contaminated with infectious
ﬂuids must be handled in a manner to prevent trans-
mission of infectious agents (eg, wear gloves for
S126
Vol. 35 No. 10 Supplement 2
Siegel et al

----- Page 64 (native) -----
handling, contain heavily soiled equipment, properly
clean and disinfect or sterilize reusable equipment be-
fore use on another patient).
Surgical mask. A device worn over the mouth and
nose by operating room personnel during surgical pro-
cedures to protect both surgical patients and operating
room personnel from transfer of microorganisms and
body ﬂuids. Surgical masks also are used to protect
health care personnel from contact with large infec-
tious droplets (. 5 mm in size). According to draft guid-
ance issued by the Food and Drug Administration on
May 15, 2003, surgical masks are evaluated using stan-
dardized testing procedures for ﬂuid resistance, bacte-
rial
ﬁltration
efﬁciency,
differential
pressure
(air
exchange), and ﬂammability to mitigate the risks to
health associated with the use of surgical masks. These
speciﬁcations apply to any masks that are labeled
surgical, laser, isolation, or dental or medical procedure
(http://www.fda.gov/cdrh/ode/guidance/094.html#4).
Surgical masks do not protect against inhalation of
small particles or droplet nuclei and should not be con-
fused with particulate respirators that are recommen-
ded for protection against selected airborne infectious
agents (eg, Mycobacterium tuberculosis).
The authors and HICPAC gratefully acknowledge Dr Larry Strausbaugh for his many
contributions and valued guidance in the preparation of this guideline.
References
1. Garner JS. Guideline for isolation precautions in hospitals. The Hos-
pital Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee. Infect Con-
trol Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:53-80.
2. Harris AD, Bradham DD, Baumgarten M, Zuckerman IH, Fink JC,
Perencevich EN. The use and interpretation of quasi-experimental
studies in infectious diseases. Clin Infect Dis 2004;38:1586-91.
3. Morton V, Torgerson DJ. Effect of regression to the mean on deci-
sion making in health care. BMJ 2003;326:1083-4.
4. Pocock SJ, Elbourne DR. Randomized trials or observational tribu-
lations? N Engl J Med 2000;342:1907-9.
5. Ioannidis JP, Haidich AB, Pappa M, et al. Comparison of evidence of
treatment effects in randomized and nonrandomized studies. JAMA
2001;286:821-30.
6. Bent S, Shojania KG, Saint S. The use of systematic reviews and
meta-analyses in infection control and hospital epidemiology. Am J
Infect Control 2004;32:246-54.
7. Harris AD, Lautenbach E, Perencevich E. A systematic review of
quasi-experimental study designs in the ﬁelds of infection control
and antibiotic resistance. Clin Infect Dis 2005;41:77-82.
8. Evans R, Lloyd JF, Abouzelof RH, Taylor CW, Anderson VR, Samore
MH. System-wide surveillance for clinical encounters by patients
previously identiﬁed with MRSA and VRE. Medinfo 2004;2004:
212-6.
9. Srinivasan A, McDonald LC, Jernigan D, et al. Foundations of the se-
vere acute respiratory syndrome preparedness and response plan
for healthcare facilities. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2004;25:
1020-5.
10. www.cdc.gov/ﬂu/avian/professional/infect-control.htm.
11. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Guidelines for envi-
ronmental infection control in health-care facilities. Recommenda-
tions of CDC and the Healthcare Infection Control Practices
Advisory Committee (HICPAC). MMWR Recomm Rep 2003;52:
1-42.
12. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Guidelines for pre-
venting the transmission of Mycobacterium tuberculosis in health-
care settings, 2005. MMWR Recomm Rep 2005;54:1-141.
13. American Institute of Architects. Guidelines for design and con-
struction of hospital and health care facilities. Washington, DC:
American Institute of Architects Press; 2006.
14. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Guidelines for pre-
venting health care–associated pneumonia, 2003. Recommenda-
tions of CDC and the Healthcare Infection Control Practices
Advisory Committee. MMWR Recomm Rep 2004;53:1-40.
15. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Guidelines for pre-
venting opportunistic infections among hematopoietic stem cell
transplant recipients. Recommendations of CDC, the Infectious
Disease Society of America, and the American Society of Blood
and Marrow Transplantation. MMWR Recomm Rep 2000;49:1-125.
16. Boyce JM, Pittet D. Guideline for hand hygiene in health-care set-
tings. Recommendations of the Healthcare Infection Control Prac-
tices Advisory Committee and the HICPAC/SHEA/APIC/IDSA
Hand Hygiene Task Force, Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of
America/Association for Professionals in Infection Control/Infec-
tious Diseases Society of America. MMWR Recomm Rep 2002;
51:1-45.
17. Bolyard EA, Tablan OC, Williams WW, Pearson ML, Shapiro CN,
Deitchmann SD. Guideline for infection control in healthcare per-
sonnel, 1998. Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory Com-
mittee. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:407-63.
18. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Recommendations
for preventing transmission of infections among chronic hemodial-
ysis patients. MMWR Recomm Rep 2001;50:1-43.
19. Kohn WG, Collins AS, Cleveland JL, Harte JA, Eklund KJ, Malvitz
DM. Guidelines for infection control in dental health-care settings,
2003. MMWR Recomm Rep 2003;52:1-61.
20. Saiman L, Siegel J. Infection control recommendations for patients
with cystic ﬁbrosis: microbiology, important pathogens, and infec-
tion control practices to prevent patient-to-patient transmission.
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2003;24(5 Suppl):S6-S52.
21. Varia M, Wilson S, Sarwal S, et al. Investigation of a nosocomial out-
break of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) in Toronto,
Canada. CMAJ 2003;169:285-92.
22. Haley RW, Cushion NB, Tenover FC, et al. Eradication of endemic
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus infections from a neonatal
intensive care unit. J Infect Dis 1995;171:614-24.
23. Bridges CB, Kuehnert MJ, Hall CB. Transmission of inﬂuenza: impli-
cations for control in health care settings. Clin Infect Dis 2003;37:
1094-101.
24. Hall CB. Nosocomial respiratory syncytial virus infections: the
‘‘cold war’’ has not ended. Clin Infect Dis 2000;31:590-6.
25. Campbell JR, Zaccaria E, Mason EO Jr, Baker CJ. Epidemiological
analysis deﬁning concurrent outbreaks of Serratia marcescens and
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus in a neonatal intensive-
care unit. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:924-8.
26. Pena C, Pujol M, Ardanuy C, et al. Epidemiology and successful con-
trol of a large outbreak due to Klebsiella pneumoniae producing ex-
tended-spectrum beta-lactamases. Antimicrob Agents Chemother
1998;42:53-8.
27. Bonten MJ, Slaughter S, Ambergen AW, et al. The role of ‘‘coloniza-
tion pressure’’ in the spread of vancomycin-resistant enterococci:
an important infection control variable. Arch Intern Med 1998;
158:1127-32.
28. Jensenius M, Ringertz SH, Berild D, Bell H, Espinoza R, Grinde B.
Prolonged nosocomial outbreak of hepatitis A arising from an alco-
holic with pneumonia. Scand J Infect Dis 1998;30:119-23.
29. Zawacki A, O’Rourke E, Potter-Bynoe G, Macone A, Harbarth S,
Goldmann D. An outbreak of Pseudomonas aeruginosa pneumonia
Siegel et al
December 2007
S127

----- Page 65 (native) -----
and bloodstream infection associated with intermittent otitis ex-
terna in a healthcare worker. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol
2004;25:1083-9.
30. Foca M, Jakob K, Whittier S, et al. Endemic Pseudomonas aeruginosa
infection in a neonatal intensive care unit. N Engl J Med 2000;343:
695-700.
31. Gupta A, Della-Latta P, Todd B, et al. Outbreak of extended-spec-
trum beta-lactamase–producing Klebsiella pneumoniae in a neonatal
intensive care unit linked to artiﬁcial nails. Infect Control Hosp Epi-
demiol 2004;25:210-5.
32. Boyce JM, Opal SM, Potter-Bynoe G, Medeiros AA. Spread of meth-
icillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus in a hospital after exposure to
a health care worker with chronic sinusitis. Clin Infect Dis 1993;17:
496-504.
33. Fliegel PE, Weinstein WM. Rubella outbreak in a prenatal clinic:
management and prevention. Am J Infect Control 1982;10:29-33.
34. Atkinson WL, Markowitz LE, Adams NC, Seastrom GR. Transmis-
sion of measles in medical settings, United States, 1985–1989. Am J
Med 1991;91:320S-4S.
35. Carman WF, Elder AG, Wallace LA, et al. Effects of inﬂuenza vacci-
nation of health-care workers on mortality of elderly people in long-
term care: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2000;355:93-7.
36. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Outbreaks of pertus-
sis associated with hospitals: Kentucky, Pennsylvania, and Oregon,
2003. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2005;54:67-71.
37. Mermel LA, McKay M, Dempsey J, Parenteau S. Pseudomonas surgi-
cal-site infections linked to a healthcare worker with onychomyco-
sis. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2003;24:749-52.
38. Barnes GL, Callaghan SL, Kirkwood CD, Bogdanovic-Sakran N,
Johnston LJ, Bishop RF. Excretion of serotype G1 rotavirus strains
by asymptomatic staff: a possible source of nosocomial infection. J
Pediatr 2003;142:722-5.
39. Wang JT, Chang SC, Ko WJ, et al. A hospital-acquired outbreak of
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus infection initiated by a
surgeon carrier. J Hosp Infect 2001;47:104-9.
40. Valenti WM, Pincus PH, Messner MK. Nosocomial pertussis: possi-
ble spread by a hospital visitor. Am J Dis Child 1980;134:520-1.
41. Christie CD, Glover AM, Willke MJ, Marx ML, Reising SF, Hutchin-
son NM. Containment of pertussis in the regional pediatric hospital
during the greater Cincinnati epidemic of 1993. Infect Control
Hosp Epidemiol 1995;16:556-63.
42. Munoz FM, Ong LT, Seavy D, Medina D, Correa A, Starke JR. Tuber-
culosis among adult visitors of children with suspected tuberculosis
and employees at a children’s hospital. Infect Control Hosp Epide-
miol 2002;23:568-72.
43. Garcia R, Raad I, Abi-Said D, et al. Nosocomial respiratory syncytial
virus infections: prevention and control in bone marrow transplant
patients. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1997;18:412-6.
44. Whimbey E, Champlin RE, Couch RB, et al. Community respiratory
virus infections among hospitalized adult bone marrow transplant
recipients. Clin Infect Dis 1996;22:778-82.
45. Saiman L, O’Keefe M, Graham PL, et al. Hospital transmission of
community-acquired
methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus
aureus
among postpartum women. Clin Infect Dis 2003;37:1313-9.
46. Bonten MJ, Slaughter S, Hayden MK, Nathan C, van Voorhis J, Wein-
stein RA. External sources of vancomycin-resistant enterococci for
intensive care units. Crit Care Med 1998;26:2001-4.
47. Flynn DM, Weinstein RA, Nathan C, Gaston MA, Kabins SA. Pa-
tients’ endogenous ﬂora as the source of ‘‘nosocomial’’ Enterobacter
in cardiac surgery. J Infect Dis 1987;156:363-8.
48. Olson B, Weinstein RA, Nathan C, Chamberlin W, Kabins SA. Ep-
idemiology of endemic Pseudomonas aeruginosa: why infection con-
trol efforts have failed. J Infect Dis 1984;150:808-16.
49. Perl TM, Cullen JJ, Wenzel RP, et al. Intranasal mupirocin to prevent
postoperative Staphylococcus aureus infections. N Engl J Med 2002;
346:1871-7.
50. Toltzis P, Hoyen C, et al. Factors that predict preexisting coloniza-
tion with antibiotic-resistant Gram-negative bacilli in patients admit-
ted to a pediatric intensive care unit. Pediatrics 1999;103(4 Pt 1):
719-23.
51. Sarginson RE, Taylor N, Reilly N, Baines PB, Van Saene HK. Infec-
tion in prolonged pediatric critical illness: a prospective four-year
study based on knowledge of the carrier state. Crit Care Med
2004;32:839-47.
52. Silvestri L, Monti Bragadin C, Milanese M, et al. Are most ICU infec-
tions really nosocomial? A prospective observational cohort study
in mechanically ventilated patients. J Hosp Infect 1999;42:125-33.
53. Heggers JP, Phillips LG, Boertman JA, et al. The epidemiology of
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus in a burn center. J Burn
Care Rehabil 1988;9:610-2.
54. Donskey CJ. The role of the intestinal tract as a reservoir and
source for transmission of nosocomial pathogens. Clin Infect Dis
2004;39:219-26.
55. Osterholm MT, Hedberg CW, Moore KA. The epidemiology of in-
fectious diseases. In: G.L. M, Jr DRG, J.E. B, editors. Principles and
practice of infectious diseases. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Churchill Living-
stone; 2000. p 161–3.
56. Thomsen RW, Hundborg HH, Lervang HH, Johnsen SP, Schon-
heyder HC, Sorensen HT. Risk of community-acquired pneumococ-
cal bacteremia in patients with diabetes: a population-based case-
control study. Diabetes Care 2004;27:1143-7.
57. Carton JA, Maradona JA, Nuno FJ, Fernandez-Alvarez R, Perez-
Gonzalez F, Asensi V. Diabetes mellitus and bacteraemia: a compar-
ative study between diabetic and non-diabetic patients. Eur J Med
1992;1:281-7.
58. Hirschtick RE, Glassroth J, Jordan MC, et al. Bacterial pneumonia in
persons infected with the human immunodeﬁciency virus. Pulmo-
nary Complications of HIV Infection Study Group. N Engl J Med
1995;333:845-51.
59. Rosenberg AL, Seneff MG, Atiyeh L, Wagner R, Bojanowski L, Zim-
merman JE. The importance of bacterial sepsis in intensive care unit
patients with acquired immunodeﬁciency syndrome: implications
for future care in the age of increasing antiretroviral resistance.
Crit Care Med 2001;29:548-56.
60. Malone JL, Ijaz K, Lambert L, et al. Investigation of healthcare-asso-
ciated transmission of Mycobacterium tuberculosis among patients
with malignancies at three hospitals and at a residential facility. Can-
cer 2004;101:2713-21.
61. Fishman JA, Rubin RH. Infection in organ transplant recipients. N
Engl J Med 1998;338:1741-51.
62. Safdar N, Kluger DM, Maki DG. A review of risk factors for cathe-
ter-related bloodstream infection caused by percutaneously in-
serted,
noncuffed central venous catheters: implications
for
preventive strategies. Medicine (Baltimore) 2002;81:466-79.
63. Jarvis WR, Robles B. Nosocomial infections in pediatric patients.
Adv Pediatr Infect Dis 1996;12:243-59.
64. Yogaraj JS, Elward AM, Fraser VJ. Rate, risk factors, and outcomes
of nosocomial primary bloodstream infection in pediatric intensive
care unit patients. Pediatrics 2002;110:481-5.
65. Donlan RM. Bioﬁlms: microbial life on surfaces. Emerg Infect Dis
2002;8:881-90.
66. Rosen HR. Acquisition of hepatitis C by a conjunctival splash. Am J
Infect Control 1997;25:242-7.
67. Beltrami EM, Kozak A, Williams IT, et al. Transmission of HIV and
hepatitis C virus from a nursing home patient to a health care
worker. Am J Infect Control 2003;31:168-75.
68. Obasanjo OO, Wu P, Conlon M, et al. An outbreak of scabies in a
teaching hospital: lessons learned. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol
2001;22:13-8.
69. Andersen BM, Haugen H, Rasch M, Heldal Haugen A, Tageson A.
Outbreak of scabies in Norwegian nursing homes and home care
patients: control and prevention. J Hosp Infect 2000;45:160-4.
S128
Vol. 35 No. 10 Supplement 2
Siegel et al

----- Page 66 (native) -----
70. Avitzur Y, Amir J. Herpetic whitlow infection in a general pediatric-
ian: an occupational hazard. Infection 2002;30:234-6.
71. Adams G, Stover BH, Keenlyside RA, et al. Nosocomial herpetic in-
fections in a pediatric intensive care unit. Am J Epidemiol 1981;113:
126-32.
72. Bhalla A, Pultz NJ, Gries DM, et al. Acquisition of nosocomial path-
ogens on hands after contact with environmental surfaces near hos-
pitalized patients. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2004;25:164-7.
73. Duckro AN, Blom DW, Lyle EA, Weinstein RA, Hayden MK. Trans-
fer of vancomycin-resistant enterococci via health care worker
hands. Arch Intern Med 2005;165:302-7.
74. Brooks SE, Veal RO, Kramer M, Dore L, Schupf N, Adachi M. Re-
duction in the incidence of Clostridium difﬁcile–associated diarrhea
in an acute care hospital and a skilled nursing facility following re-
placement of electronic thermometers with single-use disposables.
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1992;13:98-103.
75. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Nosocomial hepatitis
B virus infection associated with reusable ﬁngerstick blood sampling
devices, Ohio and New York City, 1996. MMWR Morb Mortal
Wkly Rep 1997;46:217-21.
76. Desenclos JC, Bourdiol-Razes M, Rolin B, et al. Hepatitis C in a
ward for cystic ﬁbrosis and diabetic patients: possible transmission
by spring-loaded ﬁnger-stick devices for self-monitoring of capillary
blood glucose. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2001;22:701-7.
77. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Transmission of hep-
atitis B virus among persons undergoing blood glucose monitoring
in long-term care facilities, Mississippi, North Carolina, and Los An-
geles County, California, 2003–2004. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly
Rep 2005;54:220-3.
78. Hall CB, Douglas RG Jr. Modes of transmission of respiratory syn-
cytial virus. J Pediatr 1981;99:100-3.
79. Hall CB, Douglas RG Jr, Geiman JM. Possible transmission by fom-
ites of respiratory syncytial virus. J Infect Dis 1980;141:98-102.
80. Buttery JP, Alabaster SJ, Heine RG, et al. Multiresistant Pseudomonas
aeruginosa outbreak in a pediatric oncology ward related to bath
toys. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1998;17:509-13.
81. Agerton T, Valway S, Gore B, et al. Transmission of a highly drug-re-
sistant strain (strain W1) of Mycobacterium tuberculosis: community
outbreak and nosocomial transmission via a contaminated broncho-
scope. JAMA 1997;278:1073-7.
82. Bronowicki JP, Venard V, Botte C, et al. Patient-to-patient transmis-
sion of hepatitis C virus during colonoscopy. N Engl J Med 1997;
337:237-40.
83. Michele TM, Cronin WA, Graham NM, et al. Transmission of Myco-
bacterium tuberculosis by a ﬁberoptic bronchoscope: identiﬁcation by
DNA ﬁngerprinting. JAMA 1997;278:1093-5.
84. Schelenz S, French G. An outbreak of multidrug-resistant Pseudomo-
nas aeruginosa infection associated with contamination of broncho-
scopes and an endoscope washer-disinfector. J Hosp Infect 2000;46:
23-30.
85. Weber DJ, Rutala WA. Lessons from outbreaks associated with
bronchoscopy. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2001;22:403-8.
86. Kirschke DL, Jones TF, Craig AS, et al. Pseudomonas aeruginosa and
Serratia marcescens contamination associated with a manufacturing
defect in bronchoscopes. N Engl J Med 2003;348:214-20.
87. Srinivasan A, Wolfenden LL, Song X, et al. An outbreak of Pseudo-
monas aeruginosa infections associated with ﬂexible bronchoscopes.
N Engl J Med 2003;348:221-7.
88. Boyce JM, Potter-Bynoe G, Chenevert C, King T. Environmental
contamination due to methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus:
possible infection control implications. Infect Control Hosp Epide-
miol 1997;18:622-7.
89. Zachary KC, Bayne PS, Morrison VJ, Ford DS, Silver LC, Hooper
DC. Contamination of gowns, gloves, and stethoscopes with vanco-
mycin-resistant enterococci. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2001;
22:560-4.
90. Perry C, Marshall R, Jones E. Bacterial contamination of uniforms. J
Hosp Infect 2001;48:238-41.
91. Papineni RS, Rosenthal FS. The size distribution of droplets in the
exhaled breath of healthy human subjects. J Aerosol Med 1997;
10:105-16.
92. Wells WF. On airborne infection. Study II: droplets and droplet nu-
clei. Am J Hygiene 1934;20:611-8.
93. Loeb M, McGeer A, Henry B, et al. SARS among critical care nurses,
Toronto. Emerg Infect Dis 2004;10:251-5.
94. Fowler RA, Guest CB, Lapinsky SE, et al. Transmission of severe
acute respiratory syndrome during intubation and mechanical ven-
tilation. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2004;169:1198-202.
95. Gehanno JF, Kohen-Couderc L, Lemeland JF, Leroy J. Nosocomial
meningococcemia in a physician. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol
1999;20:564-5.
96. Scales D, et al. Illness in intensive-care staff after brief exposure to
severe acute respiratory syndrome. Emerg Infect Dis 2003;9:
1205-10.
97. Ensor E, Humphreys H, Peckham D, Webster C, Knox AJ. Is Burk-
holderia (Pseudomonas) cepacia disseminated from cystic ﬁbrosis pa-
tients during physiotherapy? J Hosp Infect 1996;32:9-15.
98. Christian MD, Loutfy M, McDonald LC, et al. Possible SARS coro-
navirus transmission during cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Emerg
Infect Dis 2004;10:287-93.
99. Valenzuela TD, Hooton TM, Kaplan EL, Schlievert P. Transmission of
‘‘toxic strep’’ syndrome from an infected child to a ﬁreﬁghter during
CPR. Ann Emerg Med 1991;20:90-2.
100. Bassinet L, Matrat M, Njamkepo E, Aberrane S, Housset B, Guiso
N. Nosocomial pertussis outbreak among adult patients and health-
care workers. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2004;25:995-7.
101. Wong TW, Lee CK, Tam W, et al. Cluster of SARS among medical
students exposed to single patient, Hong Kong. Emerg Infect Dis
2004;10:269-76.
102. Pachucki CT, Pappas SA, Fuller GF, Krause SL, Lentino JR, Schaaff
DM. Inﬂuenza A among hospital personnel and patients: implica-
tions for recognition, prevention, and control. Arch Intern Med
1989;149:77-80.
103. Feigin RD, Baker CJ, Herwaldt LA, Lampe RM, Mason EO, Whitney
SE. Epidemic meningococcal disease in an elementary school class-
room. N Engl J Med 1982;307:1255-7.
104. Dick EC, Jennings LC, Mink KA, Wartgow CD, Inhorn SL. Aerosol
transmission of rhinovirus colds. J Infect Dis 1987;156:442-8.
105. Duguid JP. The size and duration of air-carriage of respiratory drop-
lets and droplet nucleii. J Hyg (Lond) 1946;44:471-9.
106. Hall CB, Douglas RG Jr, Schnabel KC, Geiman JM. Infectivity of res-
piratory syncytial virus by various routes of inoculation. Infect Im-
mun 1981;33:779-83.
107. Downie AW, Meiklejohn M, St Vincent L, Rao AR, Sundara Babu BV,
Kempe CH. The recovery of smallpox virus from patients and their
environment in a smallpox hospital. Bull World Health Organ 1965;
33:615-22.
108. Fenner F, Henderson DA, Arita I, Jezek Z, Ladnyi ID. The epidemi-
ology of smallpox. In: Smallpox and its eradication. Geneva, Switzer-
land:: World Health Organization; 1988.
109. Cole EC, Cook CE. Characterization of infectious aerosols in
health care facilities: an aid to effective engineering controls and
preventive strategies. Am J Infect Control 1998;26:453-64.
110. Christie C, Mazon D, Hierholzer W Jr, Patterson JE. Molecular het-
erogeneity of Acinetobacter baumanii isolates during seasonal in-
crease in prevalence. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1995;16:590-4.
111. Musher DM. How contagious are common respiratory tract infec-
tions? N Engl J Med 2003;348:1256-66.
112. Steinberg P, White RJ, Fuld SL, Gutekunst RR, Chanock RM, Senter-
ﬁt LB. Ecology of Mycoplasma pneumoniae infections in marine re-
cruits at Parris Island, South Carolina. Am J Epidemiol 1969;89:
62-73.
Siegel et al
December 2007
S129

----- Page 67 (native) -----
113. Seto WH, Tsang D, Yung RW, et al. Effectiveness of precautions
against droplets and contact in prevention of nosocomial transmis-
sion of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS). Lancet 2003;
361:1519-20.
114. Hamburger M, Robertson OH. Expulsion of group A haemolytic
streptocicci in droplets and droplet nuclei by sneezing, coughing
and talking. Am J Med 1948;4:690.
115. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Nosocomial meningo-
coccemia. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 1978;27:358.
116. LeClair JM, Freeman J, Sullivan BF, Crowley CM, Goldmann DA.
Prevention of nosocomial respiratory syncytial virus infections
through compliance with glove and gown isolation precautions. N
Engl J Med 1987;317:329-34.
117. Madge P, Paton JY, McColl JH, Mackie PL. Prospective controlled
study of four infection-control procedures to prevent nosocomial
infection with respiratory syncytial virus. Lancet 1992;340:1079-83.
118. Bassetti S, Bischoff WE, Walter M, et al. Dispersal of Staphylococcus
aureus into the air associated with a rhinovirus infection. Infect
Control Hosp Epidemiol 2005;26:196-203.
119. Eichenwald HF, Kotsevalov O, Fasso LA. The ‘‘cloud baby’’: an ex-
ample of bacterial–viral interaction. Am J Dis Child 1960;100:
161-73.
120. Sheretz RJ, Reagan DR, Hampton KD, et al. A cloud adult: the
Staphylococcus aureus–virus interaction revisited. Ann Intern Med
1996;124:539-47.
121. Coronado VG, Beck-Sague CM, Hutton MD, et al. Transmission of
multidrug-resistant Mycobacterium tuberculosis among persons with
human immunodeﬁciency virus infection in an urban hospital: epide-
miologic and restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis. J
Infect Dis 1993;168:1052-5.
122. Bloch AB, Orenstein WA, Ewing WM, et al. Measles outbreak in a
pediatric practice: airborne transmission in an ofﬁce setting. Pediat-
rics 1985;75:676-83.
123. LeClair JM, Zaia JA, Levin MJ, Congdon RG, Goldmann DA. Air-
borne transmission of chickenpox in a hospital. N Engl J Med
1980;302:450-3.
124. Riley RL, Mills CC, Nyka W, et al. Aerial dissemination of pulmo-
nary tuberculosis: a two-year study of contagion in a tuberculosis
ward. Am J Hygiene 1959;70:185-96.
125. Beck-Sague C, Dooley SW, Hutton MD, et al. Hospital outbreak of
multidrug-resistant Mycobacterium tuberculosis infections: factors in
transmission to staff and HIV-infected patients. JAMA 1992;268:
1280-6.
126. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Guidelines for pre-
venting the transmission of Mycobacterium tuberculosis in health-
care facilities, 1994. MMWR Recomm Rep 1994;43:1-132.
127. Haley CE, McDonald RC, Rossi L, Jones WD Jr, Haley RW, Luby JP.
Tuberculosis epidemic among hospital personnel. Infect Control
Hosp Epidemiol 1989;10:204-10.
128. Wehrle PF, Posch J, Richter KH, Henderson DA. An airborne out-
break of smallpox in a German hospital and its signiﬁcance with re-
spect to other recent outbreaks in Europe. Bull World Health
Organ 1970;43:669-79.
129. Gelfand HM, Posch J. The recent outbreak of smallpox in Meschede,
West Germany. Am J Epidemiol 1971;93:234-7.
130. Moser MR, Bender TR, Margolis HS, Noble GR, Kendal AP, Ritter
DG. An outbreak of inﬂuenza aboard a commercial airliner. Am J
Epidemiol 1979;110:1-6.
131. Alford RH, Kasel JA, Gerone PJ, Knight V. Human inﬂuenza resulting
from aerosol inhalation. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 1966;122:800-4.
132. Chadwick PR, McCann R. Transmission of a small round structured
virus by vomiting during a hospital outbreak of gastroenteritis. J
Hosp Infect 1994;26:251-9.
133. Prince DS, Astry C, Vonderfecht S, Jakab G, Shen FM, Yolken RH.
Aerosol transmission of experimental rotavirus infection. Pediatr
Infect Dis 1986;5:218-22.
134. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Available from
www.cdc.gov/ncidod/sars. Accessed.
135. Peiris JS, Yuen KY, Osterhaus AD, Stohr K. The severe acute respi-
ratory syndrome. N Engl J Med 2003;349:2431-41.
136. Olsen SJ, Chang HL, Cheung TY, et al. Transmission of the severe
acute respiratory syndrome on aircraft. N Engl J Med 2003;349:
2416-22.
137. Wilder-Smith A, Leong HN, Villacian JS. In-ﬂight transmission of se-
vere acute respiratory syndrome (SARS): a case report. J Travel
Med 2003;10:299-300.
138. Booth TF, Kournikakis B, Bastien N, et al. Detection of airborne se-
vere acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) coronavirus and environ-
mental contamination in SARS outbreak units. J Infect Dis 2005;
191:1472-7.
139. Yu IT, Li Y, Wong TW, et al. Evidence of airborne transmission of
the severe acute respiratory syndrome virus. N Engl J Med 2004;
350:1731-9.
140. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Update: outbreak of
severe acute respiratory syndrome worldwide. MMWR Morb Mor-
tal Wkly Rep 2003;52:241-8.
141. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Cluster of severe
acute respiratory syndrome cases among protected health-care
workers, Toronto, Canada, April 2003. MMWR Morb Mortal
Wkly Rep 2003;52:433-6.
142. Sawyer LA, Murphy JJ, Kaplan JE, et al. 25- to 30-nm virus particles
associated with a hospital outbreak of acute gastroenteritis with ev-
idence for airborne transmission. Am J Epidimiol 1988;127:1261-71.
143. Marks PJ, Vipond IB, Carlisle D, Deakin D, Fey RE, Caul EO. Evi-
dence for airborne transmission of Norwalk-like virus (NLV) in a
hotel restaurant. Epidemiol Infect 2000;124:481-7.
144. Salgado CD, Farr BM, Hall KK, Hayden FG. Inﬂuenza in the acute
hospital setting. Lancet Infect Dis 2002;2:145-55.
145. Riley RL. Airborne infection. Am J Med 1974;57:466-75.
146. McLean R. General discussion. Am Rev Respir Dis 1961;83:36-8.
147. Cheesbrough JS, Green J, Gallimore CI, Wright PA, Brown DW.
Widespread environmental contamination with Norwalk-like vi-
ruses (NLV) detected in a prolonged hotel outbreak of gastroenter-
itis. Epidemiol Infect 2000;125:93-8.
148. Marks PJ, Vipond IB, Regan FM, Wedgwood K, Fey RE, Caul EO. A
school outbreak of Norwalk-like virus: evidence for airborne trans-
mission. Epidemiol Infect 2003;131:727-36.
149. Roy CJ, Milton DK. Airborne transmission of communicable infec-
tion: the elusive pathway. N Engl J Med 2004;350:1710-2.
150. Dull PM, Wilson KE, Kournikakis B, et al. Bacillus anthracis aerosol-
ization associated with a contaminated mail-sorting machine. Emerg
Infect Dis 2002;8:1044-7.
151. Weis CP, Intrepido AJ, Miller AK, et al. Secondary aerosolization of
viable Bacillus anthracis spores in a contaminated US Senate Ofﬁce.
JAMA 2002;288:2853-8.
152. Patterson JE, Zidouh A, Miniter P, Andriole VT, Patterson TF. Hos-
pital epidemiologic surveillance for invasive aspergillosis: patient de-
mographics and the utility of antigen detection. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol 1997;18:104-8.
153. Arnow PM, Andersen RL, Mainous PD, Smith EJ. Pumonary aspergil-
losis during hospital renovation. Am Rev Respir Dis 1978;118:49-53.
154. Pegues DA, Lasker BA, McNeil MM, Hamm PM, Lundal JL, Kubak
BM. Cluster of cases of invasive aspergillosis in a transplant intensive
care unit: evidence of person-to-person airborne transmission. Clin
Infect Dis 2002;34:412-6.
155. Bufﬁngton J, Reporter R, Lasker BA, et al. Investigation of an epi-
demic of invasive aspergillosis: utility of molecular typing with the
use of random ampliﬁed polymorphic DNA probes. Pediatr Infect
Dis J 1994;13:386-93.
156. Krasinski K, Holzman RS, Hanna B, Greco MA, Graff M, Bhogal M.
Nosocomial fungal infection during hospital renovation. Infect Con-
trol 1985;6:278-82.
S130
Vol. 35 No. 10 Supplement 2
Siegel et al

----- Page 68 (native) -----
157. Humphreys H. Positive-pressure isolation and the prevention of
invasive aspergillosis: what is the evidence? J Hosp Infect 2004;56:
93-100.
158. Thio CL, Smith D, Merz WG, et al. Reﬁnements of environmental
assessment during an outbreak investigation of invasive aspergillosis
in a leukemia and bone marrow transplant unit. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol 2000;21:18-23.
159. Anaissie EJ, Stratton SL, Dignani MC, et al. Pathogenic Aspergillus
species recovered from a hospital water system: a 3-year prospec-
tive study. Clin Infect Dis 2002;34:780-9.
160. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Prevention of invasive
group A streptococcal disease among household contacts of case
patients and among postpartum and postsurgical patients: recom-
mendations from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Clin Infect Dis 2002;35:950-9.
161. Gruteke P, van Belkum A, Schouls LM, et al. Outbreak of group A
streptococci in a burn center: use of pheno- and genotypic proce-
dures for strain tracking. J Clin Microbiol 1996;34:114-8.
162. Greene CM, Van Beneden CA, Javadi M, et al. Cluster of deaths
from group A streptococcus in a long-term care facility, Georgia,
2001. Am J Infect Control 2005;33:108-13.
163. Sabria M, Campins M. Legionnaires’ disease: update on epidemiol-
ogy and management options. Am J Respir Med 2003;2:235-43.
164. Bille J, Marchetti O, Calandra T. Changing face of health care–asso-
ciated fungal infections. Curr Opin Infect Dis 2005;18:314-9.
165. Hall IC, O’Toole E. Intestinal ﬂora in newborn infants with a de-
scription of a new pathogenic anaerobe, Bacillus difﬁcilis. Am J
Dis Child 1935;49:390-402.
166. George WL, Sutter VL, Finegold SM. Antimicrobial agent–induced
diarrhea: a bacterial disease. J Infect Dis 1977;136:822-8.
167. McFarland LV, Mulligan ME, Kwok RY, Stamm WE. Nosocomial acqui-
sition of Clostridium difﬁcile infection. N Engl J Med 1989;320:204-10.
168. Pepin J, Valiquette L, Alary ME, et al. Clostridium difﬁcile–associated
diarrhea in a region of Quebec from 1991 to 2003: a changing pat-
tern of disease severity. CMAJ 2004;171:466-72.
169. Agency HP. Outbreak of Clostridium difﬁcile infection in a hospital in
southeast England. Commun Dis Rep CDR Wkly 2005;31:.
170. Koopmans M, Wilbrink B, Conyn M, et al. Transmission of H7N7
avian inﬂuenza A virus to human beings during a large outbreak in
commercial poultry farms in the Netherlands. Lancet 2004;363:
587-93.
171. McDonald LC, Killgore GE, Thompson A, et al. An epidemic, toxin
gene-variant strain of Clostridium difﬁcile. N Engl J Med 2005;353:
2433-41.
172. Loo VG, Poirier L, Miller MA, et al. A predominantly clonal multi-
institutional outbreak of Clostridium difﬁcile–associated diarrhea
with high morbidity and mortality. N Engl J Med 2005;353:2442-9.
173. Warny M, Pepin J, Fang A, et al. Toxin production by an emerging
strain of Clostridium difﬁcile associated with outbreaks of severe dis-
ease in North America and Europe. Lancet 2005;366:1079-84.
174. Layton BAML, Gerding DN, Liedtke LA, Strausbaugh LJ. Perceived
increases in the incidence and severity of Clostridium difﬁcile disease:
an emerging threat that continues to unfold. Presented at the 15th
Annual Scientiﬁc Meeting of the Society for Healthcare Epidemiol-
ogy of America, Los Angeles, CA, 2005.
175. Sohn S, Climo M, Diekema D, et al. Varying rates of Clostridium dif-
ﬁcile–associated diarrhea at prevention epicenter hospitals. Infect
Control Hosp Epidemiol 2005;26:676-9.
176. Harrison PF, Lederberg J, editors. Institute of Medicine. Antimicro-
bial resistance: issues and options. Washington, DC: National Acad-
emy Press; 1998. p. 8-74.
177. Shlaes DM, Gerding DN, John JF Jr, et al. Society for Healthcare Ep-
idemiology of America and Infectious Diseases Society of America
Joint Committee on the Prevention of Antimicrobial Resistance
guidelines for the prevention of antimicrobial resistance in hospitals.
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1997;18:275-91.
178. Whitener CJ, Park SY, Browne FA, et al. Vancomycin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus in the absence of vancomycin exposure. Clin
Infect Dis 2004;38:1049-55.
179. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Staphylococcus aureus
with reduced susceptibility to vancomycin, United States. MMWR
Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 1997;46:765-6.
180. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Staphylococcus aureus
resistant to vancomycin, United States, 2002. MMWR Morb Mortal
Wkly Rep 2002;51:565-7.
181. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Public health dispatch:
vancomycin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, Pennsylvania, 2002.
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2002;51:902.
182. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Vancomycin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus, New York, 2004. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly
Rep 2004;53:322-3.
183. Chang S, Sievert DM, Hageman JC, et al. Infection with vancomycin-
resistant Staphylococcus aureus containing the vanA resistance gene.
N Engl J Med 2003;348:1342-7.
184. Fridkin SK, Hageman J, McDougal LK, et al. Epidemiological and mi-
crobiological characterization of infections caused by Staphylococcus
aureus with reduced susceptibility to vancomycin, United States,
1997–2001. Clin Infect Dis 2003;36:429-39.
185. Gold HS, Moellering RC Jr. Antimicrobial drug resistance. N Engl J
Med 1996;335:1445-53.
186. Hageman JC, Pegues DA, Jepson C, et al. Vancomycin-intermediate
Staphylococcus aureus in a home health care patient. Emerg Infect
Dis 2001;7:1023-5.
187. Harwell JI, Brown RB. The drug-resistant pneumococcus: clinical
relevance, therapy, and prevention. Chest 2000;117:530-41.
188. Jones RN. Resistance patterns among nosocomial pathogens: trends
over the past few years. Chest 2001;119(2 Suppl):397S-404S.
189. Murray BE. Vancomycin-resistant enterococcal infections. N Engl J
Med 2000;342:710-21.
190. Neuhauser MM, Weinstein RA, Rydman R, Danziger LH, Karam G,
Quinn JP. Antibiotic resistance among Gram-negative bacilli in US
intensive care units: implications for ﬂuoroquinolone use. JAMA
2003;289:885-8.
191. Pitout JD, Sanders CC, Sanders WE Jr. Antimicrobial resistance with
focus on beta-lactam resistance in Gram-negative bacilli. Am J Med
1997;103:51-9.
192. Rotun SS, McMath V, Schoonmaker DJ, et al. Staphylococcus aureus
with reduced susceptibility to vancomycin isolated from a patient
with fatal bacteremia. Emerg Infect Dis 1999;5:147-9.
193. Smith TL, Pearson ML, Wilcox KR, et al. Emergence of vancomycin
resistance in Staphylococcus aureus. Glycopeptide-Intermediate Staph-
ylococcus aureus Working Group. N Engl J Med 1999;340:493-501.
194. Srinivasan A, Dick JD, Perl TM. Vancomycin resistance in staphylo-
cocci. Clin Microbiol Rev 2002;15:430-8.
195. Hyle EP, Lipworth AD, Zaoutis TE, et al. Risk factors for increasing
multidrug resistance among extended-spectrum ß-lactamase–pro-
ducing Escheria coli and Klebsiella species. Clin Infect Dis 2005;40:
1317-24.
196. Gleich S, Morad Y, Echague R, et al. Streptococcus pneumoniae sero-
type 4 outbreak in a home for the aged: report and review of recent
outbreaks. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2000;21:711.
197. Fry AM, Udeagu CC, Soriano-Gabarro M, et al. Persistence of ﬂuo-
roquinolone-resistant, multidrug-resistant Streptococcus pneumoniae
in a long-term-care facility: efforts to reduce intrafacility transmis-
sion. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2005;26:239-47.
198. Carter RJ, Sorenson G, Heffernan R, et al. Failure to control an out-
break of multidrug-resistant Streptococcus pneumoniae in a long-
term-care facility: emergence and ongoing transmission of a ﬂuoro-
quinolone-resistant strain. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2005;26:
248-55.
199. Blok HE, Troelstra A, Kamp-Hopmans TE, et al. Role of healthcare
workers in outbreaks of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus: a
Siegel et al
December 2007
S131

----- Page 69 (native) -----
10-year evaluation from a Dutch university hospital. Infect Control
Hosp Epidemiol 2003;24:679-85.
200. Muto CA, Jernigan JA, Ostrowsky BE, et al. SHEA guideline for pre-
venting nosocomial transmission of multidrug-resistant strains of
Staphylococcus aureus and enterococcus. Infect Control Hosp Epide-
miol 2003;24:362-86.
201. Tammelin A, Klotz F, Hambraeus A, Stahle E, Ransjo U. Nasal and
hand carriage of Staphylococcus aureus in staff at a Department for
Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery: endogenous or exogenous
source? Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2003;24:686-9.
202. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Biological and chem-
ical terrorism: strategic plan for preparedness and response. Rec-
ommendations
of
the
CDC
Strategic
Planning
Workgroup.
MMWR Recomm Rep 2000;49:1-14.
203. Inglesby TV, O’Toole T, Henderson DA, et al. Anthrax as a biological
weapon, 2002: updated recommendations for management. JAMA
2002;287:2236-52.
204. Henderson DA, Inglesby TV, Bartlett JG, et al. Smallpox as a biolog-
ical weapon: medical and public health management. Working
Group on Civilian Biodefense. JAMA 1999;281:2127-37.
205. www.bt.cdc.gov/agent/smallpox/.
206. www.who.int/csr/disease/smallpox/en/.
207. Kool JL. Risk of person-to-person transmission of pneumonic
plague. Clin Infect Dis 2005;40:1166-72.
208. Inglesby TV, Dennis DT, Henderson DA, et al. Plague as a biological
weapon: medical and public health management. Working Group on
Civilian Biodefense. JAMA 2000;283:2281-90.
209. Arnon SS, Schechter R, Inglesby TV, et al. Botulinum toxin as a bi-
ological weapon: medical and public health management. JAMA
2001;285:1059-70.
210. Dennis DT, Inglesby TV, Henderson DA, et al. Tularemia as a biolog-
ical weapon: medical and public health management. JAMA 2001;
285:2763-73.
211. Centers
for
Disease
Control
and
Prevention.
Notice
to
readers update: management of patients with suspected viral
hemorrhagic fever, United States. MMWR Recomm Rep 1995;44:
475-9.
212. Borio L, Inglesby T, Peters CJ, et al. Hemorrhagic fever viruses as
biological weapons: medical and public health management. JAMA
2002;287:2391-405.
213. Neff JM, Lane JM, Fulginiti VA, Henderson DA. Contact vaccinia:
transmission of vaccinia from smallpox vaccination. JAMA 2002;
288:1901-5.
214. Sepkowitz KA. How contagious is vaccinia? N Engl J Med 2003;348:
439-46.
215. Lane JM, Fulginiti VA. Transmission of vaccinia virus and rationale for
measures for prevention. Clin Infect Dis 2003;37:281-4.
216. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Smallpox vaccination
and adverse reactions: guidance for clinicians. MMWR Morb Mortal
Wkly Rep 2003;52:1-28.
217. Fulginiti VA, Papier A, Lane JM, Neff JM, Henderson DA. Smallpox
vaccination: a review. Part II: adverse events. Clin Infect Dis 2003;
37:251-71.
218. www.smallpox.mil./event/SPSafetySum.asp.
219. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Update: adverse
events following civilian smallpox vaccination, United States, 2003.
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2003;52:419-20.
220. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Secondary and ter-
tiary transfer of vaccinia virus among US military personnel, United
States and worldwide, 2002–2004. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep
2004;53:103-5.
221. Talbot TR, Ziel E, Doersam JK, LaFleur B, Tollefson S, Edwards KM.
Risk of vaccinia transfer to the hands of vaccinated persons after
smallpox immunization. Clin Infect Dis 2004;38:536-41.
222. Hepburn MJ, Dooley DP, Murray CK, et al. Frequency of vaccinia
virus isolation on semipermeable versus nonocclusive dressings
covering smallpox vaccination sites in hospital personnel. Am J In-
fect Control 2004;32:126-30.
223. Waibel KH, Ager EP, Topolski RL, Walsh DS. Randomized trial com-
paring vaccinia on the external surfaces of 3 conventional bandages
applied to smallpox vaccination sites in primary vaccinees. Clin In-
fect Dis 2004;39:1004-7.
224. Tenorio AR, Peeples M, Patri M, et al. Quantitative vaccinia cultures
and evolution of vaccinia-speciﬁc CD81 cytotoxic T-lymphocyte
(CTL) responses in revaccinees [abstract 823]. Presented at the In-
fectious Diseases Society of America 41st annual meeting, San
Diego, CA, October 2003.
225. Wharton M, Strikas RA, Harpaz R, et al. Recommendations for us-
ing smallpox vaccine in a pre-event vaccination program: supple-
mental
recommendations
of
the
Advisory
Committee
on
Immunization Practices (ACIP) and the Healthcare Infection Con-
trol Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC). MMWR Recomm
Rep 2003;52:1-16.
226. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Surveillance for
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, United States. MMWR Morb Mortal
Wkly Rep 1996;45:665-8.
227. Johnson RT, Gibbs CJ Jr. Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease and related
transmissible spongiform encephalopathies. N Engl J Med 1998;
339:1994-2004.
228. Brown P, Gajdusek DC, Gibbs CJ Jr, Asher DM. Potential epidemic
of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease from human growth hormone therapy.
N Engl J Med 1985;313:728-31.
229. Frasier SD, Foley TP Jr. Clinical review 58: Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
in recipients of pituitary hormones. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1994;
78:1277-9.
230. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Update: Creutzfeldt-
Jakob disease associated with cadaveric dura mater grafts, Japan,
1979–2003. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2003;52(48):1179-81.
231. Lang CJ, Heckmann JG, Neundorfer B. Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease via
dural and corneal transplants. J Neurol Sci 1998;160:128-39.
232. el Hachimi KH, Chaunu MP, Cervenakova L, Brown P, Foncin JF. Pu-
tative neurosurgical transmission of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease with
analysis of donor and recipient: agent strains. C R Acad Sci Ser III
1997;320:319-28.
233. Will RG, Matthews WB. Evidence for case-to-case transmission of
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1982;45:
235-8.
234. Bernoulli C, Siegfried J, Baumgartner G, et al. Danger of accidental
person-to-person transmission of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease by sur-
gery. Lancet 1977;1:478-9.
235. Rutala WA, Weber DJ. Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease: recommenda-
tions for disinfection and sterilization. Clin Infect Dis 2001;32:
1348-56.
236. Belay ED, Maddox RA, Williams ES, Miller MW, Gambetti P, Schon-
berger LB. Chronic wasting disease and potential transmission to
humans. Emerg Infect Dis 2004;10:977-84.
237. Collinge J, Sidle KC, Meads J, Ironside J, Hill AF. Molecular analysis
of prion strain variation and the aetiology of ‘‘new variant’’ CJD. Na-
ture 1996;383:685-90.
238. Belay ED, Schonberger LB. The public health impact of prion dis-
eases. Annu Rev Public Health 2005;26:191-212.
239. Belay ED, Schonberger LB. Variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease and
bovine spongiform encephalopathy. Clin Lab Med 2002;22:849-62.
240. Hill AF, Butterworth RJ, Joiner S, et al. Investigation of variant
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease and other human prion diseases with ton-
sil biopsy samples. Lancet 1999;353:183-9.
241. Evatt B. Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease and haemophilia: assessment of
risk. Haemophilia 2000;6(Suppl 1):94-9.
242. Chamberland ME. Emerging infectious agents: do they pose a risk to
the safety of transfused blood and blood products? Clin Infect Dis
2002;34:797-805.
243. Available from. Accessed.
S132
Vol. 35 No. 10 Supplement 2
Siegel et al

----- Page 70 (native) -----
244. Llewelyn CA, Hewitt PE, Knight RS, et al. Possible transmission of
variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease by blood transfusion. Lancet
2004;363:417-21.
245. Peden AH, Head MW, Ritchie DL, Bell JE, Ironside JW. Preclinical
vCJD after blood transfusion in a PRNP codon 129 heterozygous
patient. Lancet 2004;364:527-9.
246. Brown P. Guidelines for high-risk autopsy cases: special precautions
for Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. In: Hutchins G, editor. Autopsy per-
formance and reporting. Northﬁeld (IL): College of American Pa-
thologists; 1990. p. 68-74.
247. Drosten C, Gunther S, Preiser W, et al. Identiﬁcation of a novel co-
ronavirus in patients with severe acute respiratory syndrome. N
Engl J Med 2003;348:1967-76.
248. Ksiazek TG, Erdman D, Goldsmith CS, et al. A novel coronavirus
associated with severe acute respiratory syndrome. N Engl J Med
2003;348:1953-66.
249. Chan WM, Kwan YW, Wan HS, Leung CW, Chiu MC. Epidemio-
logic linkage and public health implication of a cluster of severe
acute respiratory syndrome in an extended family. Pediatr Infect
Dis J 2004;23:1156-9.
250. Leung CW, Kwan YW, Ko PW, et al. Severe acute respiratory syn-
drome among children. Pediatrics 2004;113:e535-43.
251. Bitnun A, Allen U, Heurter H, et al. Children hospitalized with se-
vere acute respiratory syndrome–related illness in Toronto. Pediat-
rics 2003;112:e261.
252. Chow KY, Lee CE, Ling ML, Heng DM, Yap SG. Outbreak of severe
acute respiratory syndrome in a tertiary hospital in Singapore,
linked to an index patient with atypical presentation: epidemiolog-
ical study. BMJ 2004;328:195.
253. Shen Z, Ning F, Zhou W, et al. Super-spreading SARS events, Beijing,
2003. Emerg Infect Dis 2004;10:256-60.
254. Chen Y-C, Huang L-M, Chan C-C, Su C-P, Chang S-C, Chang Y-Y,
et al. SARS in hospital emergency room. Emerg Infect Dis 2004;
10:782-8.
255. Gamage B, Moore D, Copes R, Yassi A, Bryce E. Protecting health
care workers from SARS and other respiratory pathogens: a review
of the infection control literature. Am J Infect Control 2005;33:
114-21.
256. Moore D, Gamage B, Bryce E, Copes R, Yassi A. Protecting health
care workers from SARS and other respiratory pathogens: organi-
zational and individual factors that affect adherence to infection
control guidelines. Am J Infect Control 2005;33:88-96.
257. Dowell SF, Simmerman JM, Erdman DD, et al. Severe acute respira-
tory syndrome coronavirus on hospital surfaces. Clin Infect Dis
2004;39:652-7.
258. Public Health Guidance for Community-Level Preparedness and Re-
sponse to Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS). 2004. Avail-
able from http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/sars/guidance/I/occupational.
htm.
259. Le DH, Bloom SA, Nguyen QH, et al. Lack of SARS transmission
among public hospital workers. Vietnam. Emerg Infect Dis 2004;
10:265-8.
260. Lim PL, Kurup A, Gopalakrishna G, et al. Laboratory-acquired se-
vere acute respiratory syndrome. N Engl J Med 2004;350:1740-5.
261. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2003. Available from
www.cdc.gov/ncidod/sars.
262. Reed KD, Melski JW, Graham MB, et al. The detection of monkey-
pox in humans in the Western Hemisphere. N Engl J Med 2004;350:
342-50.
263. Anderson MG, Frenkel LD, Homann S, Guffey J. A case of severe
monkeypox virus disease in an American child: emerging infections
and changing professional values. Pediatr Infect Dis J 2003;22:
1093-6.
264. Jezek Z, Fenner F. Human monkey pox. In: Melnick JL, editor. , Vol.
17. Monographs in virology. . Basel, Switzerland: S Karger; 1988.
p. 81-102.
265. Marennikova SS, Jezek Z, Szczeniowski M, Mbudi PM, Vernette M.
Contagiousness of monkey pox for humans: results of an investiga-
tion of 2 outbreaks of the infection in Zaire. Zh Mikrobiol Epide-
miol Immunobiol 1985;38-43.
266. Jezek Z, Arita I, Mutombo M, Dunn C, Nakano JH, Szczeniowski M.
Four generations of probable person-to-person transmission of hu-
man monkeypox. Am J Epidemiol 1986;123:1004-12.
267. Learned LA, Reynolds MG, Wassa DW, et al. Extended interhuman
transmission of monkeypox in a hospital community in the Republic
of the Congo, 2003. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2005;73:428-34.
268. Fleischauer AT, Kile JC, Davidson M, et al. Evaluation of human-to-
human transmission of monkeypox from infected patients to health
care workers. Clin Infect Dis 2005;40:689-94.
269. Likos AM, Sammons SA, Olson VA, et al. A tale of two clades: mon-
keypox viruses. J Gen Virol 2005;86(Pt 10):2661-72.
270. Fine PE, Jezek Z, Grab B, Dixon H. The transmission potential of
monkeypox virus in human populations. Int J Epidemiol 1988;17:
643-50.
271. Jezek Z, Grab B, Paluku KM, Szczeniowski MV. Human monkeypox:
disease pattern, incidence and attack rates in a rural area of north-
ern Zaire. Trop Geogr Med 1988;40:73-83.
272. Centers for Disease Control. Norwalk-like viruses: public health
consequences and outbreak management. MMWR Recomm Rep
2001;50:1-18.
273. Evans MR, Meldrum R, Lane W, et al. An outbreak of viral gastro-
enteritis following environmental contamination at a concert hall.
Epidemiol Infect 2002;129:355-60.
274. Wu HM, Fornek M, Kellogg JS, et al. A norovirus outbreak at a long-
term-care facility: the role of environmental surface contamination.
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2005;26:802-10.
275. Duizer E, Schwab KJ, Neill FH, Atmar RL, Koopmans MP, Estes MK.
Laboratory efforts to cultivate noroviruses. J Gen Virol 2004;85(Pt
1):79-87.
276. Zingg W, Colombo C, Jucker T, Bossart W, Ruef C. Impact of an
outbreak of norovirus infection on hospital resources. Infect Con-
trol Hosp Epidemiol 2005;26:263-7.
277. Calderon-Margalit R, Sheffer R, Halperin T, Orr N, Cohen D, Sho-
hat T. A large-scale gastroenteritis outbreak associated with noro-
virus in nursing homes. Epidemiol Infect 2005;133:35-40.
278. Marx A, Shay DK, Noel JS, et al. An outbreak of acute gastroenter-
itis in a geriatric long-term-care facility: combined application of ep-
idemiological and molecular diagnostic methods. Infect Control
Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:306-11.
279. Gellert GA, Waterman SH, Ewert D, et al. An outbreak of acute
gastroenteritis caused by a small round structured virus in a geriat-
ric convalescent facility. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1990;11:
459-64.
280. Cooper E, Blamey S. A norovirus gastroenteritis epidemic in a
long-term-care facility. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2005;
26:256.
281. Navarro G, Sala RM, Segura F, et al. An outbreak of norovirus infec-
tion in a long-term-care facility. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol
2005;26:259.
282. Green KY, Belliot G, Taylor JL, et al. A predominant role for Nor-
walk-like viruses as agents of epidemic gastroenteritis in Maryland
nursing homes for the elderly. J Infect Dis 2002;185:133-46.
283. Widdowson MA, Cramer EH, Hadley L, et al. Outbreaks of acute
gastroenteritis on cruise ships and on land: identiﬁcation of a pre-
dominant circulating strain of norovirus, United States, 2002. J In-
fect Dis 2004;190:27-36.
284. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Outbreaks of gastro-
enteritis associated with noroviruses on cruise ships, United States,
2002. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2002;51:1112-5.
285. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Norovirus outbreak
among evacuees from hurricane Katrina, Houston, Texas, Septem-
ber 2005. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2005;54:1016-8.
Siegel et al
December 2007
S133

----- Page 71 (native) -----
286. Mattner F, Mattner L, Borck HU, Gastmeier P. Evaluation of the im-
pact of the source (patient versus staff) on nosocomial norovirus
outbreak severity. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2005;26:268-72.
287. Isakbaeva ET, Bulens SN, Beard RS, et al. Norovirus and child care:
challenges in outbreak control. Pediatr Infect Dis J 2005;24:561-3.
288. Kapikian AZ, Estes MK, Chanock RM. Norwalk group of viruses. In:
Fields BN, Knipe DM, Howley PM, editors. Fields virology. 3rd ed.
Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven; 1996. p. 783-810.
289. Duizer E, Bijkerk P, Rockx B, De Groot A, Twisk F, Koopmans M.
Inactivation of caliciviruses. Appl Environ Microbiol 2004;70:
4538-43.
290. Doultree JC, Druce JD, Birch CJ, Bowden DS, Marshall JA. Inactiva-
tion of feline calicivirus, a Norwalk virus surrogate. J Hosp Infect
1999;41:51-7.
291. Barker J, Vipond IB, Bloomﬁeld SF. Effects of cleaning and disinfec-
tion in reducing the spread of norovirus contamination via environ-
mental surfaces. J Hosp Infect 2004;58:42-9.
292. Gulati BR, Allwood PB, Hedberg CW, Goyal SM. Efﬁcacy of commonly
used disinfectants for the inactivation of calicivirus on strawberry, let-
tuce, and a food-contact surface. J Food Prot 2001;64:1430-4.
293. Gehrke C, Steinmann J, Goroncy-Bermes P. Inactivation of feline ca-
licivirus, a surrogate of norovirus (formerly Norwalk-like viruses),
by different types of alcohol in vitro and in vivo. J Hosp Infect
2004;56:49-55.
294. Hutson AM, Atmar RL, Graham DY, Estes MK. Norwalk virus infec-
tion and disease is associated with ABO histo-blood group type. J
Infect Dis 2002;185:1335-7.
295. National Center for Infectious Diseases, Division of Viral and Rick-
ettsial Diseases. Available from. Accessed.
296. LeDuc JW. Epidemiology of hemorrhagic fever viruses. Rev Infect
Dis 1989;11(Suppl 4):S730-5.
297. Roels TH, Bloom AS, Bufﬁngton J, et al. . Ebola hemorrhagic fever,
Kikwit, Democratic Republic of the Congo, 1995: risk factors for
patients without a reported exposure. J Infect Dis 1999;179(Suppl
1):S92-7.
298. Suleiman MN, Muscat-Baron JM, Harries JR, et al. Congo/Crimean
haemorrhagic fever in Dubai: an outbreak at the Rashid Hospital.
Lancet 1980;21:939-41.
299. Monath TP, Mertens PE, Patton R, et al. A hospital epidemic of Lassa
fever in Zorzor, Liberia, March–April 1972. Am J Trop Med Hyg
1973;22:773-9.
300. Dowell SF, Mukunu R, Ksiazek TG, Khan AS, Rollin PE, Peters CJ.
Transmission of Ebola hemorrhagic fever: a study of risk factors
in family members, Kikwit, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
1995. J Infect Dis 1999;179(Suppl 1):S87-91.
301. Peters CJ. Marburg and Ebola: arming ourselves against the deadly
ﬁloviruses. N Engl J Med 2005;352:2571-3.
302. Ebola haemorrhagic fever in Zaire, 1976. Bull World Health Organ
1978;56:271-93.
303. Emond RT, Evans B, Bowen ET, Lloyd G. A case of Ebola virus infec-
tion. Br Med J 1977;2:541-4.
304. Zaki SR, Shieh WJ, Greer PW, et al. A novel immunohistochemical
assay for the detection of Ebola virus in skin: implications for diag-
nosis, spread, and surveillance of Ebola hemorrhagic fever. Commis-
sion de Lutte contre les Epidemies a Kikwit. J Infect Dis 1999;
179(Suppl 1):S36-47.
305. Khan AS, Tshioko FK, Heymann DL, et al. The reemergence of
Ebola hemorrhagic fever, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
1995. Commission de Lutte contre les Epidemies a Kikwit. J Infect
Dis 1999;179(Suppl 1):S76-86.
306. Muyembe-Tamfum JJ, Kipasa M, Kiyungu C, Colebunders R. Ebola
outbreak in Kikwit, Democratic Republic of the Congo: discovery
and control measures. J Infect Dis 1999;179(Suppl 1):S259-62.
307. Haas WH, Breuer T, Pfaff G, et al. Imported Lassa fever in Germany:
surveillance and management of contact persons. Clin Infect Dis
2003;36:1254-8.
308. Simpson DI. Marburg agent disease in monkeys. Trans R Soc Trop
Med Hyg 1969;63:303-9.
309. Jaax NK, Davis KJ, Geisbert TJ, et al. Lethal experimental infection
of rhesus monkeys with Ebola-Zaire (Mayinga) virus by the oral and
conjunctival route of exposure. Arch Pathol Lab Med 1996;120:
140-55.
310. Stephenson EH, Larson EW, Dominik JW. Effect of environmental
factors on aerosol-induced Lassa virus infection. J Med Virol
1984;14:295-303.
311. Johnson E, Jaax N, White J, Jahrling P. Lethal experimental infections
of rhesus monkeys by aerosolized Ebola virus. Int J Exp Pathol 1995;
76:227-36.
312. Jaax N, Jahrling P, Geisbert T, et al. Transmission of Ebola virus
(Zaire strain) to uninfected control monkeys in a biocontainment
laboratory. Lancet 1995;346:1669-71.
313. www.bt.cdc.gov/agent/vhf/.
314. Nguyen GT, Proctor SE, Sinkowitz-Cochran RL, Garrett DO,
Jarvis WR. Status of infection surveillance and control programs
in the United States, 1992–1996. Association for Professionals in
Infection Control and Epidemiology. Am J Infect Control 2000;28:
392-400.
315. Richards C, Emori TG, Edwards J, Fridkin S, Tolson J, Gaynes R.
Characteristics of hospitals and infection control professionals par-
ticipating in the National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance System
1999. Am J Infect Control 2001;29:400-3.
316. Wenzel RP, Thompson RL, Landry SM, et al. Hospital-acquired in-
fections in intensive care unit patients: an overview with emphasis
on epidemics. Infect Control 1983;4:371-5.
317. Wenzel RP, Gennings C. Bloodstream infections due to Candida
species in the intensive care unit: identifying especially high-risk pa-
tients to determine prevention strategies. Clin Infect Dis 2005;
41(Suppl 6):S389-93.
318. San Miguel LG, Cobo J, Otheo E, Sanchez-Sousa A, Abraira V, Mor-
eno S. Secular trends of candidemia in a large tertiary-care hospital
from 1988 to 2000: emergence of Candida parapsilosis. Infect Con-
trol Hosp Epidemiol 2005;26:548-52.
319. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System Re-
port, data summary from January 1992 through June 2004, issued
October 2004. Am J Infect Control 2004;32:470-85.
320. Richards MJ, Edwards JR, Culver DH, Gaynes RP. Nosocomial infec-
tions in medical intensive care units in the United States. National
Nosocomial Infections Surveillance System. Crit Care Med 1999;
27:887-92.
321. Richards MJ, Edwards JR, Culver DH, Gaynes RP. Nosocomial infec-
tions in combined medical-surgical intensive care units in the United
States. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2000;21:510-5.
322. Hugonnet S, Eggimann P, Borst F, Maricot P, Chevrolet JC, Pittet D.
Impact of ventilator-associated pneumonia on resource utilization
and patient outcome. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2004;25:
1090-6.
323. O’Neill JM, Schutze GE, Heulitt MJ, Simpson PM, Taylor BJ. Noso-
comial infections during extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. In-
tensive Care Med 2001;27:1247-53.
324. Villegas MV, Hartstein AI. Acinetobacter outbreaks, 1977–2000. In-
fect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2003;24:284-95.
325. Gordon SM, Schmitt SK, Jacobs M, et al. Nosocomial bloodstream
infections in patients with implantable left ventricular assist devices.
Ann Thorac Surg 2001;72:725-30.
326. Giamarellou H. Nosocomial cardiac infections. J Hosp Infect 2002;
50:91-105.
327. Fridkin SK. Increasing prevalence of antimicrobial resistance in in-
tensive care units. Crit Care Med 2001;29(4 Suppl):N64-8.
328. Kollef MH, Fraser VJ. Antibiotic resistance in the intensive care unit.
Ann Intern Med 2001;134:298-314.
329. Fridkin SK, Edwards JR, Courval JM, et al. The effect of vancomycin
and third-generation cephalosporins on prevalence of vancomycin-
S134
Vol. 35 No. 10 Supplement 2
Siegel et al

----- Page 72 (native) -----
resistant enterococci in 126 US adult intensive care units. Ann In-
tern Med 2001;135:175-83.
330. Crnich CJ, Safdar N, Maki DG. The role of the intensive care unit
environment in the pathogenesis and prevention of ventilator-asso-
ciated pneumonia. Respir Care 2005;50:813-38.
331. Knaus WA, Wagner DP, Zimmerman JE, Draper EA. Variations in
mortality and length of stay in intensive care units. Ann Intern
Med 1993;118:753-61.
332. Villarino ME, Stevens LE, Schable B, et al. Risk factors for epidemic
Xanthomonas maltophilia infection/colonization in intensive care unit
patients. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1992;13:201-6.
333. Sanchez V, Vazquez JA, Barth-Jones D, Dembry L, Sobel JD, Zervos
MJ. Nosocomial acquisition of Candida parapsilosis: an epidemiologic
study. Am J Med 1993;94:577-82.
334. Husni RN, Goldstein LS, Arroliga AC, et al. Risk factors for an out-
break of multidrug-resistant Acinetobacter nosocomial pneumonia
among intubated patients. Chest 1999;115:1378-82.
335. McDonald LC, Walker M, Carson L, et al. Outbreak of Acinetobacter
spp bloodstream infections in a nursery associated with contami-
nated aerosols and air conditioners. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1998;17:
716-22.
336. Trick WE, Kioski CM, Howard KM, et al. Outbreak of Pseudomonas
aeruginosa ventriculitis among patients in a neurosurgical intensive
care unit. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2000;21:204-8.
337. Guidry GG, Black-Payne CA, Payne DK, Jamison RM, George RB,
Bocchini JA Jr. Respiratory syncytial virus infection among intubated
adults in a university medical intensive care unit. Chest 1991;100:
1377-84.
338. Wurtz R, Karajovic M, Dacumos E, Jovanovic B, Hanumadass M.
Nosocomial infections in a burn intensive care unit. Burns 1995;
21:181-4.
339. Rodgers GL, Mortensen J, Fisher MC, Lo A, Cresswell A, Long SS.
Predictors of infectious complications after burn injuries in children.
Pediatr Infect Dis J 2000;19:990-5.
340. Pruitt BA Jr, McManus AT, Kim SH, Goodwin CW. Burn wound in-
fections: current status. World J Surg 1998;22:135-45.
341. Weber J, editor. Epidemiology of infections and strategies for con-
trol in burn care and therapy. St. Louis: Mosby; 1998.
342. Heggers JP, McCoy L, Reisner B, Smith M, Edgar P, Ramirez RJ.
Alternate antimicrobial therapy for vancomycin-resistant entero-
cocci burn wound infections. J Burn Care Rehabil 1998;19:
399-403.
343. Sheridan RL, Weber J, Benjamin J, Pasternack MS, Tompkins RG.
Control of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus in a pediatric
burn unit. Am J Infect Control 1994;22:340-5.
344. Matsumura H, Yoshizawa N, Narumi A, Harunari N, Sugamata A,
Watanabe K. Effective control of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus
aureus in a burn unit. Burns 1996;22:283-6.
345. McGregor JC. Proﬁle of the ﬁrst four years of the Regional Burn
Unit based at St. John’s Hospital, West Lothian (1992–1996). J R
Coll Surg Edinb 1998;43:45-8.
346. Desai MH, Rutan RL, Heggers JP, Herndon DN. Candida infection
with and without nystatin prophylaxis: an 11-year experience with
patients with burn injury. Arch Surg 1992;127:159-62.
347. Ekenna O, Sherertz RJ, Bingham H. Natural history of bloodstream
infections in a burn patient population: the importance of candide-
mia. Am J Infect Control 1993;21:189-95.
348. Bowser-Wallace BH, Graves DB, Caldwell FT. An epidemiological
proﬁle and trend analysis of wound ﬂora in burned children: 7 years’
experience. Burns Incl Therm Inj 1984;11:16-25.
349. Tredget EE, Shankowsky HA, Rennie R, Burrell RE, Logsetty S. Pseu-
domonas infections in the thermally injured patient. Burns 2004;30:
3-26.
350. Edgar P, Mlcak R, Desai M, Linares HA, Phillips LG, Heggers JP. Con-
tainment of a multiresistant Serratia marcescens outbreak. Burns
1997;23:15-8.
351. Embil JM, McLeod JA, Al-Barrak AM, et al. An outbreak of
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus on a burn unit: potential
role of contaminated hydrotherapy equipment. Burns 2001;27:
681-8.
352. Meier PA, Carter CD, Wallace SE, Hollis RJ, Pfaller MA, Herwaldt
LA. A prolonged outbreak of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus au-
reus in the burn unit of a tertiary medical center. Infect Control
Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:798-802.
353. Snyder LL, Wiebelhaus P, Boon SE, Morin RA, Goering R. Methicil-
lin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus eradication in a burn center. J
Burn Care Rehabil 1993;14(2 Pt 1):164-8.
354. May AK, Melton SM, McGwin G, Cross JM, Moser SA, Rue LW. Re-
duction of vancomycin-resistant enterococcal infections by limita-
tion of broad-spectrum cephalosporin use in a trauma and burn
intensive care unit. Shock 2000;14:259-64.
355. Sheridan RL, Weber JM, Budkevich LG, Tompkins RG. Candidemia
in the pediatric patient with burns. J Burn Care Rehabil 1995;16:
440-3.
356. Mayhall CG. The epidemiology of burn wound infections: then and
now. Clin Infect Dis 2003;37:543-50.
357. McManus AT, Mason AD Jr, McManus WF, Pruitt BA Jr. A decade of
reduced Gram-negative infections and mortality associated with im-
proved isolation of burned patients. Arch Surg 1994;129:1306-9.
358. Bryce EA, Walker M, Scharf S, et al. An outbreak of cutaneous as-
pergillosis in a tertiary care hospital. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol
1996;17:170-2.
359. Levenson C, Wohlford P, Djou J, Evans S, Zawacki B. Preventing
postoperative burn wound aspergillosis. J Burn Care Rehabil
1991;12:132-5.
360. Tredget EE, Shankowsky HA, Joffe AM, et al. Epidemiology of infec-
tions with Pseudomonas aeruginosa in burn patients: the role of hy-
drotherapy. Clin Infect Dis 1992;15:941-9.
361. Wisplinghoff H, Perbix W, Seifert H. Risk factors for nosocomial
bloodstream infections due to Acinetobacter baumannii: a case-
control study of adult burn patients. Clin Infect Dis 1999;28:
59-66.
362. Weber JM, Sheridan RL, Schulz JT, Tompkins RG, Ryan CM. Effec-
tiveness of bacteria-controlled nursing units in preventing cross-col-
onization with resistant bacteria in severely burned children. Infect
Control Hosp Epidemiol 2002;23:549-51.
363. Bayat A, Shaaban H, Dodgson A, Dunn KW. Implications for burn
unit design following outbreak of multi-resistant Acinetobacter infec-
tion in an ICU and burn unit. Burns 2003;29:303-6.
364. Lee JJ, Marvin JA, Heimbach DM, Grube BJ, Engrav LH. Infection
control in a burn center. J Burn Care Rehabil 1990;11:575-80.
365. Raymond J, Aujard Y. Nosocomial infections in pediatric patients: a
European, multicenter prospective study. European Study Group.
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2000;21:260-3.
366. Campins M, Vaque J, Rossello J, et al. Nosocomial infections in pe-
diatric patients: a prevalence study in Spanish hospitals. EPINE
Working Group. Am J Infect Control 1993;21:58-63.
367. Allen U, Ford-Jones EL. Nosocomial infections in the pediatric pa-
tient: an update. Am J Infect Control 1990;18:176-93.
368. Grohskopf LA, Sinkowitz-Cochran RL, Garrett DO, et al. A national
point-prevalence survey of pediatric intensive care unit–acquired in-
fections in the United States. J Pediatr 2002;140:432-8.
369. Sohn AH, Garrett DO, Sinkowitz-Cochran RL, et al. Prevalence of
nosocomial infections in neonatal intensive care unit patients: re-
sults from the ﬁrst national point-prevalence survey. J Pediatr
2001;139:821-7.
370. Gaynes RP, Edwards JR, Jarvis WR, Culver DH, Tolson JS, Martone
WJ. Nosocomial infections among neonates in high-risk nurseries in
the United States. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance Sys-
tem. Pediatrics 1996;98(3 Pt 1):357-61.
371. Richards MJ, Edwards JR, Culver DH, Gaynes RP. Nosocomial infec-
tions in pediatric intensive care units in the United States. National
Siegel et al
December 2007
S135

----- Page 73 (native) -----
Nosocomial Infections Surveillance System. Pediatrics 1999;103:
e39.
372. Maltezou HC, Drancourt M. Nosocomial inﬂuenza in children. J
Hosp Infect 2003;55:83-91.
373. Moisiuk SE, Robson D, Klass L, et al. Outbreak of parainﬂuenza vi-
rus type 3 in an intermediate care neonatal nursery. Pediatr Infect
Dis J 1998;17:49-53.
374. Mullins JA, Erdman DD, Weinberg GA, et al. Human metapneumo-
virus infection among children hospitalized with acute respiratory
illness. Emerg Infect Dis 2004;10:700-5.
375. Hatherill M, Levin M, Lawrenson J, Hsiao NY, Reynolds L, Argent A.
Evolution of an adenovirus outbreak in a multidisciplinary children’s
hospital. J Paediatr Child Health 2004;40:449-54.
376. Langley JM, Hanakowski M. Variation in risk for nosocomial
chickenpox after inadvertent exposure. J Hosp Infect 2000;44:
224-6.
377. Ratner AJ, Neu N, Jakob K, et al. Nosocomial rotavirus in a pediat-
ric hospital. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2001;22:299-301.
378. Avila-Aguero ML, German G, Paris MM, Herrera JF. Toys in a pedi-
atric hospital: are they a bacterial source? Am J Infect Control 2004;
32:287-90.
379. Nyqvist KH, Lutes LM. Co-bedding twins: a developmentally sup-
portive care strategy. J Obstet Gynecol Neonatal Nurs 1998;27:
450-6.
380. Feldman R, Eidelman AI, Sirota L, Weller A. Comparison of skin-to-
skin (kangaroo) and traditional care: parenting outcomes and pre-
term infant development. Pediatrics 2002;110(1 Pt 1):16-26.
381. Conde-Agudelo A, Diaz-Rossello JL, Belizan JM. Kangaroo mother
care to reduce morbidity and mortality in low birthweight infants.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2003; CD002771.
382. Adcock PM, Pastor P, Medley F, Patterson JE, Murphy TV. Methicil-
lin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus in two child care centers. J Infect
Dis 1998;178:577-80.
383. Shahin R, Johnson IL, Jamieson F, McGeer A, Tolkin J, Ford-Jones EL.
Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus carriage in a child care
center following a case of disease. Toronto Child Care Center
Study Group. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 1999;153:864-8.
384. Stover BH, Duff A, Adams G, Buck G, Hancock G, Rabalais G.
Emergence and control of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
in a children’s hospital and pediatric long-term care facility. Am J In-
fect Control 1992;20:248-55.
385. Herold BC, Immergluck LC, Maranan MC, et al. Community-ac-
quired methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus in children with
no identiﬁed predisposing risk. JAMA 1998;279:593-8.
386. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Four pediatric deaths
from community-acquired methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus au-
reus, Minnesota and North Dakota, 1997–1999. MMWR Morb Mor-
tal Wkly Rep 1999;48:707-10.
387. Abi-Hanna P, Frank AL, Quinn JP, et al. Clonal features of commu-
nity-acquired methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus in children.
Clin Infect Dis 2000;30:630-1.
388. Fergie JE, Purcell K. Community-acquired methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus infections in south Texas children. Pediatr In-
fect Dis J 2001;20:860-3.
389. Sattler CA, Mason EO Jr, Kaplan SL. Prospective comparison of risk
factors and demographic and clinical characteristics of community-
acquired, methicillin-resistant versus methicillin-susceptible Staphy-
lococcus aureus infection in children. Pediatr Infect Dis J 2002;21:
910-7.
390. Kaplan SL, Hulten KG, Gonzalez BE, et al. Three-year surveillance
of community-acquired Staphylococcus aureus infections in children.
Clin Infect Dis 2005;40:1785-91.
391. Jarvis WR. Infection control and changing health-care delivery sys-
tems. Emerg Infect Dis 2001;7:170-3.
392. Garibaldi RA. Residential care and the elderly: the burden of infec-
tion. J Hosp Infect 1999;43(Suppl):S9-S18.
393. Hsu K, Harris JA. Control of infections in nonacute care pediatric
settings. Semin Pediatr Infect Dis 2001;12:92-9.
394. Strausbaugh LJ, Joseph CL. The burden of infection in long-term
care. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2000;21:674-9.
395. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. Healthcare industry
market update. Available from http://wwwcmshhsgov/reports/hci-
mu/hcimu_05202003pdf, May 2003.
396. Lee YL, Thrupp LD, Friis RH, Fine M, Maleki P, Cesario TC. Noso-
comial infection and antibiotic utilization in geriatric patients: a pilot
prospective surveillance program in skilled nursing facilities. Geron-
tology 1992;38:223-32.
397. Stevenson KB. Regional data set of infection rates for long-term
care facilities: description of a valuable benchmarking tool. Am J In-
fect Control 1999;27:20-6.
398. Jackson MM, Fierer J, Barrett-Connor E, et al. Intensive surveillance
for infections in a three-year study of nursing home patients. Am J
Epidemiol 1992;135:685-96.
399. Darnowski SB, Gordon M, Simor AE. Two years of infection surveil-
lance in a geriatric long-term care facility. Am J Infect Control 1991;
19:185-90.
400. Hoffman N, Jenkins R, Putney K. Nosocomial infection rates during
a one-year period in a nursing home care unit of a Veterans Admin-
istration hospital. Am J Infect Control 1990;18:55-63.
401. Tsan L, Hojlo C, Kearns MA, et al. Infection surveillance and control
programs in the Department of Veterans Affairs nursing home
care units: a preliminary assessment. Am J Infect Control 2006;
34:80-3.
402. Kane RA, Caplan AL, Urv-Wong EK, Freeman IC, Aroskar MA,
Finch M. Everyday matters in the lives of nursing home residents:
wish for and perception of choice and control. J Am Geriatr Soc
1997;45:1086-93.
403. Libow LS, Starer P. Care of the nursing home patient. N Engl J Med
1989;321:93-6.
404. Perls TT, Herget M. Higher respiratory infection rates on an Alz-
heimer’s special care unit and successful intervention. J Am Geriatr
Soc 1995;43:1341-4.
405. Bradley SF. Issues in the management of resistant bacteria in long-
term-care facilities. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:362-6.
406. Crossley K. Vancomycin-resistant enterococci in long-term-care fa-
cilities. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:521-5.
407. Strausbaugh LJ, Crossley KB, Nurse BA, Thrupp LD. Antimicrobial
resistance in long-term-care facilities. Infect Control Hosp Epide-
miol 1996;17:129-40.
408. Richards CL. Infections in Long-Term-Care Facilities: Screen or
Clean? Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2005;26:800-1.
409. Drinka PJ, Krause P, Nest L, Goodman BM, Gravenstein S. Risk of
acquiring inﬂuenza A in a nursing home from a culture-positive
roommate. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2003;24:872-4.
410. Falsey AR, Treanor JJ, Betts RF, Walsh EE. Viral respiratory infec-
tions in the institutionalized elderly: clinical and epidemiologic ﬁnd-
ings. J Am Geriatr Soc 1992;40:115-9.
411. Ellis SE, Coffey CS, Mitchel EF Jr, Dittus RS, Grifﬁn MR. Inﬂuenza-
and respiratory syncytial virus–associated morbidity and mortality
in the nursing home population. J Am Geriatr Soc 2003;51:761-7.
412. Louie JK, Yagi S, Nelson FA, et al. Rhinovirus outbreak in a long-
term care facility for elderly persons associated with unusually
high mortality. Clin Infect Dis 2005;41:262-5.
413. Piednoir E, Bureau-Chalot F, Merle C, Gotzamanis A, Wuibout J, Ba-
jolet O. Direct costs associated with a nosocomial outbreak of ad-
enoviral conjunctivitis infection in a long-term care institution. Am J
Infect Control 2002;30:407-10.
414. Addiss DG, Davis JP, Meade BD, et al. A pertussis outbreak in a
Wisconsin nursing home. J Infect Dis 1991;164:704-10.
415. Gaynes R, Rimland D, Killum E, et al. Outbreak of Clostridium difﬁcile
infection in a long-term care facility: association with gatiﬂoxacin
use. Clin Infect Dis 2004;38:640-5.
S136
Vol. 35 No. 10 Supplement 2
Siegel et al

----- Page 74 (native) -----
416. High KP, Bradley S, Loeb M, Palmer R, Quagliarello V, Yoshikawa T.
A new paradigm for clinical investigation of infectious syndromes in
older adults: assessment of functional status as a risk factor and out-
come measure. Clin Infect Dis 2005;40:114-22.
417. Loeb MB, Craven S, McGeer AJ, et al. Risk factors for resistance to
antimicrobial agents among nursing home residents. Am J Epidemiol
2003;157:40-7.
418. Vergis EN, Brennen C, Wagener M, Muder RR. Pneumonia in long-
term care: a prospective case-control study of risk factors and im-
pact on survival. Arch Intern Med 2001;161:2378-81.
419. Loeb M, McGeer A, McArthur M, Walter S, Simor AE. Risk factors
for pneumonia and other lower respiratory tract infections in el-
derly residents of long-term care facilities. Arch Intern Med 1999;
159:2058-64.
420. Brandeis GH, Ooi WL, Hossain M, Morris JN, Lipsitz LA. A longi-
tudinal study of risk factors associated with the formation of pres-
sure ulcers in nursing homes. J Am Geriatr Soc 1994;42:388-93.
421. Allard JP, Aghdassi E, McArthur M, et al. Nutrition risk factors for
survival in the elderly living in Canadian long-term care facilities. J
Am Geriatr Soc 2004;52:59-65.
422. Pick N, McDonald A, Bennett N, et al. Pulmonary aspiration in a
long-term care setting: clinical and laboratory observations and an
analysis of risk factors. J Am Geriatr Soc 1996;44:763-8.
423. Nicolle LE. The chronic indwelling catheter and urinary infection in
long-term care facility residents. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol
2001;22:316-21.
424. Pien EC, Hume KE, Pien FD. Gastrostomy tube infections in a com-
munity hospital. Am J Infect Control 1996;24:353-8.
425. Gomes GF, Pisani JC, Macedo ED, Campos AC. The nasogastric
feeding tube as a risk factor for aspiration and aspiration pneumo-
nia. Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care 2003;6:327-33.
426. Bula CJ, Ghilardi G, Wietlisbach V, Petignat C, Francioli P. Infections
and functional impairment in nursing home residents: a reciprocal
relationship. J Am Geriatr Soc 2004;52:700-6.
427. Bradley SF, Terpenning MS, Ramsey MA, et al. Methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus: colonization and infection in a long-term
care facility. Ann Intern Med 1991;115:417-22.
428. Washio M, Nishisaka S, Kishikawa K, et al. Incidence of methicillin-
resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) isolation in a skilled nursing
home: a third report on the risk factors for the occurrence of
MRSA infection in the elderly. J Epidemiol 1996;6:69-73.
429. Trick WE, Weinstein RA, DeMarais PL, et al. Colonization of
skilled-care facility residents with antimicrobial-resistant pathogens.
J Am Geriatr Soc 2001;49:270-6.
430. Nicolle LE, Garibaldi RA. Infection control in long-term care facili-
ties. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1995;16:348-53.
431. Crossley K. Long-term care facilities as sources of antibiotic-
resistant nosocomial pathogens. Curr Opin Infect Dis 2001;14:
455-9.
432. Smith PW, Rusnak PG. Infection prevention and control in the long-
term-care facility. SHEA Long-Term-Care Committee and APIC
Guidelines Committee. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1997;18:
831-49.
433. Friedman C, Barnette M, Buck AS, et al. Requirements for infra-
structure and essential activities of infection control and epidemiol-
ogy
in
out-of-hospital
settings:
a
consensus
panel
report.
Association for Professionals in Infection Control and Epidemiology
and Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America. Infect Control
Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:695-705.
434. Nicolle LE. Infection control in long-term care facilities. Clin Infect
Dis 2000;31:752-6.
435. Bradley SF. Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus: long-term
care concerns. Am J Med 1999;106:2S-10S.
436. www.cms.hhs.gov/manuals/Downloads/som107ap_pp_guidelines_ltcf.
437. Mylotte JM, Goodnough S, Tayara A. Antibiotic-resistant organisms
among long-term care facility residents on admission to an inpatient
geriatrics unit: retrospective and prospective surveillance. Am J In-
fect Control 2001;29:139-44.
438. Strausbaugh LJ, Jacobson C, Yost T. Methicillin-resistant Staphylococ-
cus aureus in a nursing home and afﬁliated hospital: a four-year per-
spective. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1993;14:331-6.
439. Wiener J, Quinn JP, Bradford PA, et al. Multiple antibiotic-resistant
Klebsiella and Escherichia coli in nursing homes. JAMA 1999;281:
517-23.
440. Pop-Vicas AE, D’Agata EM. The rising inﬂux of multidrug-resistant
Gram-negative bacilli in tertiary care hospitals. Clin Infect Dis
2005;40:1792-8.
441. Ly N, McCaig LF. National Hospital Ambulatory Medical Care Sur-
vey: 2000 outpatient department summary. Adv Data 2002;1-27.
442. Cherry DK, Woodwell DA. National Ambulatory Medical Care Sur-
vey: 2000 summary. Adv Data 2002;1-32.
443. Finelli L, Miller JT, Tokars JI, Alter MJ, Arduino MJ. National surveil-
lance of dialysis-associated diseases in the United States. Semin Dial
2002;2005(18):52-61.
444. D’Agata EM. Antimicrobial-resistant, Gram-positive bacteria among
patients undergoing chronic hemodialysis. Clin Infect Dis 2002;35:
1212-8.
445. Goodman RA, Solomon SL. Transmission of infectious diseases in
outpatient health care settings. JAMA 1991;265:2377-81.
446. Nafziger DA, Lundstrom T, Chandra S, Massanari RM. Infection
control in ambulatory care. Infect Dis Clin North Am 1997;11:
279-96.
447. Herwaldt LA, Smith SD, Carter CD. Infection control in the outpa-
tient setting. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:41-74.
448. Hlady WG, Hopkins RS, Ogilby TE, Allen ST. Patient-to-patient
transmission of hepatitis B in a dermatology practice. Am J Public
Health 1993;83:1689-93.
449. Birnie GG, Quigley EM, Clements GB, Follet EA, Watkinson G. En-
doscopic transmission of hepatitis B virus. Gut 1983;24:171-4.
450. Chant K, Lowe D, Rubin G, et al. Patient-to-patient transmission
of HIV in private surgical consulting rooms. Lancet 1993;342:
1548-9.
451. Chant K, Kociuba K, Munro R, et al. Investigation of possible pa-
tient-to-patient transmission of hepatitis C in a hospital. NSW Pub-
lic Health Bull 1994;5:47-51.
452. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Transmission of hep-
atitis B and C viruses in outpatient settings, New York, Oklahoma,
and Nebraska, 2000–2002. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2003;
52:901-6.
453. Williams IT, Perz JF, Bell BP. Viral hepatitis transmission in ambula-
tory health care settings. Clin Infect Dis 2004;38:1592-8.
454. Couldwell DL, Dore GJ, Harkness JL, et al. Nosocomial outbreak of
tuberculosis in an outpatient HIV treatment room. AIDS 1996;10:
521-5.
455. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Mycobacterium tuber-
culosis transmission in a health clinic, Florida. MMWR Morb Mortal
Wkly Rep 1989;38:256-8.
456. Calder RA, Duclos P, Wilder MH, Pryor VL, Scheel WJ. Mycobacte-
rium tuberculosis transmission in a health clinic. Bull Int Union Tuberc
Lung Dis 1991;66:103-6.
457. Istre GR, McKee PA, West GR, et al. Measles spread in medical set-
tings: an important focus of disease transmission? Pediatrics 1987;
79:356-8.
458. Dawson C, Darrell R. Infections due to adenovirus type 8 in the
United States. I: an outbreak of epidemic keratoconjunctivitis orig-
inating in a physician’s ofﬁce. N Engl J Med 1963;268:1031-4.
459. Montessori V, Scharf S, Holland S, Werker DH, Roberts FJ, Bryce E.
Epidemic keratoconjunctivitis outbreak at a tertiary referral eye
care clinic. Am J Infect Control 1998;26:399-405.
460. Jernigan JA, Lowry BS, Hayden FG, et al. Adenovirus type 8 epi-
demic keratoconjunctivitis in an eye clinic: risk factors and control.
J Infect Dis 1993;167:1307-13.
Siegel et al
December 2007
S137

----- Page 75 (native) -----
461. Buehler JW, Finton RJ, Goodman RA, et al. Epidemic keratocon-
junctivitis: report of an outbreak in an ophthalmology practice
and recommendations for prevention. Infect Control 1984;5:390-4.
462. Johnston CP, Cooper L, Ruby W, Teeter T, et al. Community-asso-
ciated methicillin resistant Staphyloccoccus aureus skin infections
among outpatient healthcare workers and its isolation in the clinic
environment [abstract 132]. Presented at the 15th Annual Scientiﬁc
Meeting of the Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America
(SHEA), Los Angeles, CA, April 10, 2005.
463. Biddick R, Spilker T, Martin A, LiPuma JJ. Evidence of transmission of
Burkholderia cepacia, Burkholderia multivorans, and Burkholderia dolosa
among persons with cystic ﬁbrosis. FEMS Microbiol Lett 2003;228:
57-62.
464. Grifﬁths AL, Jamsen K, Carlin JB, et al. Effects of segregation on an
epidemic Pseudomonas aeruginosa strain in a cystic ﬁbrosis clinic. Am
J Respir Crit Care Med 2005;171:1020-5.
465. Danzig LE, Short LJ, Collins K, et al. Bloodstream infections associ-
ated with a needleless intravenous infusion system in patients re-
ceiving home infusion therapy. JAMA 1995;273:1862-4.
466. Kellerman S, Shay DK, Howard J, et al. Bloodstream infections in
home infusion patients: the inﬂuence of race and needleless intra-
vascular access devices. J Pediatr 1996;129:711-7.
467. Do AN, Ray BJ, Banerjee SN, et al. Bloodstream infection associ-
ated with needleless device use and the importance of infection-
control practices in the home health care setting. J Infect Dis
1999;179:442-8.
468. Tokars JI, Cookson ST, McArthur MA, Boyer CL, McGeer AJ, Jarvis
WR. Prospective evaluation of risk factors for bloodstream infec-
tion in patients receiving home infusion therapy. Ann Intern Med
1999;131:340-7.
469. Manangan LP, Pearson ML, Tokars JI, Miller E, Jarvis WR. Feasibility
of national surveillance of health care–associated infections in
home-care settings. Emerg Infect Dis 2002;8:233-6.
470. Shah SS, Manning ML, Leahy E, Magnusson M, Rheingold SR, Bell LM.
Central venous catheter–associated bloodstream infections in pedi-
atric oncology home care. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2002;23:
99-101.
471. Gorski LA. Central venous access device outcomes in a homecare
agency: a 7-year study. J Infus Nurs 2004;27:104-11.
472. Rosenheimer L, Embry FC, Sanford J, Silver SR. Infection surveil-
lance in home care: device-related incidence rates. Am J Infect Con-
trol 1998;26:359-63.
473. White MC, Ragland KE. Surveillance of intravenous catheter–re-
lated infections among home care clients. Am J Infect Control
1994;22:231-5.
474. Beltrami EM, McArthur MA, McGeer A, et al. The nature and fre-
quency of blood contacts among home healthcare workers. Infect
Control Hosp Epidemiol 2000;21:765-70.
475. Embry FC, Chinnes LF. Draft deﬁnitions for surveillance of infec-
tions in home health care. Am J Infect Control 2000;28:449-53.
476. Fraser TG, Stosor V, Wang Q, Allen A, Zembower TR. Vancomycin
and home health care. Emerg Infect Dis 2005;11:1558-64.
477. Carrico RM, Niner S. Multidrug-resistant organisms—VRE and MRSA:
practical home care tips. Home Healthcare Nurse 2002;20:23-8.
478. Friedman MM, Rhinehart E. Improving infection control in home
care: from ritual to science-based practice. Home Healthcare
Nurse 2000;18:99-105.
479. Friedman MM, Rhinehart E. Putting infection control principles into
practice in home care. Nurs Clin North Am 1999;34:463-82.
480. Davis PL, Madigan EA. Evidence-based practice and the home care
nurse’s bag. Home Healthcare Nurse 1999;17:295-9.
481. Sitzman KL, Pett MA, Bloswick DS. An exploratory study of nurse
bag use by home visiting nurses. Home Healthcare Nurse 2002;20:
237-43.
482. Anderson MA, Madigan EA, Helms LB. Nursing research in home
health care: endangered species? Home Care Provid 2001;6:200-4.
483. White MC. Identifying infectious diseases in prisons: surveillance,
protection, and intervention. West J Med 1999;170:177.
484. Puisis M. Update on public health in correctional facilities. West J
Med 1998;169:374.
485. Levy MH, Lerwitworapong J. Issues facing TB control (3.1). Tuber-
culosis in prisons. Scott Med J 2000;45(5 Suppl):30-3.
486. Parece MS, Herrera GA, Voigt RF, Middlekauff SL, Irwin KL. STD
testing policies and practices in US city and county jails. Sex Transm
Dis 1999;26:431-7.
487. Cieslak PR, Curtis MB, Coulombier DM, Hathcock AL, Bean NH,
Tauxe RV. Preventable disease in correctional facilities: desmoteric
foodborne outbreaks in the United States, 1974–1991. Arch Intern
Med 1996;156:1883-8.
488. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Public health dispatch:
tuberculosis outbreak in a homeless population, Portland, Maine,
2002–2003. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2003;52:1184.
489. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Public health dispatch:
tuberculosis outbreak among homeless persons, King County,
Washington, 2002–2003. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2003;
52:1209-10.
490. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Tuberculosis trans-
mission in a homeless shelter population, New York, 2000–2003.
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2005;54:149-52.
491. Baillargeon J, Kelley MF, Leach CT, Baillargeon G, Pollock BH. Meth-
icillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus infection in the Texas prison
system. Clin Infect Dis 2004;38:e92-5.
492. Young DM, Harris HW, Charlebois ED, et al. An epidemic of meth-
icillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus soft tissue infections among
medically underserved patients. Arch Surg 2004;139:947-53.
493. Pan ES, Diep BA, Carleton HA, et al. Increasing prevalence of meth-
icillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus infection in California jails. Clin
Infect Dis 2003;37:1384-8.
494. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Drug-susceptible tu-
berculosis outbreak in a state correctional facility housing HIV-in-
fected inmates, South Carolina, 1999–2000. MMWR Morb Mortal
Wkly Rep 2000;49:1041-4.
495. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus skin or soft tissue infections in a state prison,
Mississippi, 2000. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2001;50:919-22.
496. Mohle-Boetani JC, Miguelino V, Dewsnup DH, et al. Tuberculosis
outbreak in a housing unit for human immunodeﬁciency virus–in-
fected patients in a correctional facility: transmission risk factors
and effective outbreak control. Clin Infect Dis 2002;34:668-76.
497. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Prevention and con-
trol of tuberculosis in correctional racilities: recommendations of
the Advisory Council for the Elimination of Tuberculosis. MMWR
Recomm Rep 1996;45:1-37.
498. Whimbey E, Englund JA, Couch RB. Community respiratory virus
infections in immunocompromised patients with cancer. Am J
Med 1997;102:10-8.
499. Zambon M, Bull T, Sadler CJ, Goldman JM, Ward KN. Molecular ep-
idemiology of two consecutive outbreaks of parainﬂuenza 3 in a
bone marrow transplant unit. J Clin Microbiol 1998;36:2289-93.
500. Gamis AS, Howells WB, DeSwarte-Wallace J, Feusner JH, Buckley
JD, Woods WG. Alpha-hemolytic streptococcal infection during in-
tensive treatment for acute myeloid leukemia: a report from the
Children’s Cancer Group Study CCG-2891. J Clin Oncol 2000;18:
1845-55.
501. Ek T, Mellander L, Andersson B, Abrahamsson J. Immune reconsti-
tution after childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia is most se-
verely affected in the high-risk group. Pediatr Blood Cancer 2005;
44:461-8.
502. Pascual V, Allantaz F, Arce E, Punaro M, Banchereau J. Role of inter-
leukin-1 (IL-1) in the pathogenesis of systemic onset juvenile idio-
pathic arthritis and clinical response to IL-1 blockade. J Exp Med
2005;201:1479-86.
S138
Vol. 35 No. 10 Supplement 2
Siegel et al

----- Page 76 (native) -----
503. Marchesoni A, Puttini PS, Gorla R, et al. Cyclosporine in addition to
inﬂiximab and methotrexate in refractory rheumatoid arthritis. Clin
Exp Rheumatol 2005;23:916-7.
504. Isaacs KL, Lewis JD, Sandborn WJ, Sands BE, Targan SR. State of the
art: IBD therapy and clinical trials in IBD. Inﬂamm Bowel Dis 2005;
11(Suppl 1):S3-S12.
505. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Guidelines for pre-
venting
opportunitic
infections
among
HIV-infected
persons.
MMWR Recomm Rep 2002;51:1-52.
506. Kusne S, Krystofak S. Infection control issues after solid organ
transplantation. In: Bowden RA, Ljungman P, Paya CV, editors.
Transplant infections. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins; 2003.
507. Anderson D, DeFor T, Burns L, et al. A comparison of related do-
nor peripheral blood and bone marrow transplants: importance of
late-onset chronic graft-versus-host disease and infections. Biol
Blood Marrow Transplant 2003;9:52-9.
508. Pitchford KC, Corey M, Highsmith AK, et al. Pseudomonas species
contamination of cystic ﬁbrosis patients’ home inhalation equip-
ment. J Pediatr 1987;111:212-6.
509. Hamill RJ, Houston ED, Georghiou PR, et al. An outbreak of Burk-
holderia (formerly Pseudomonas) cepacia respiratory tract coloniza-
tion and infection associated with nebulized albuterol therapy.
Ann Intern Med 1995;122:762-6.
510. Hutchinson GR, Parker S, Pryor JA, et al. Home-use nebulizers: a
potential primary source of Burkholderia cepacia and other colis-
tin-resistant, Gram-negative bacteria in patients with cystic ﬁbrosis.
J Clin Microbiol 1996;34:584-7.
511. Jakobsson BM, Onnered AB, Hjelte L, Nystrom B. Low bacterial
contamination of nebulizers in home treatment of cystic ﬁbrosis pa-
tients. J Hosp Infect 1997;36:201-7.
512. Rosenfeld M, Joy P, Nguyen CD, Krzewinski J, Burns JL. Cleaning
home nebulizers used by patients with cystic ﬁbrosis: is rinsing
with tap water enough? J Hosp Infect 2001;49:229-30.
513. Govan JR. Infection control in cystic ﬁbrosis: methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus, Pseudomonas aeruginosa and the Burkholderia
cepacia complex. J R Soc Med 2000;93(Suppl 38):40-5.
514. Frederiksen B, Koch C, Hoiby N. Changing epidemiology of Pseudo-
monas aeruginosa infection in Danish cystic ﬁbrosis patients (1974–
1995). Pediatr Pulmonol 1999;28:159-66.
515. Isles A, Maclusky I, Corey M, et al. Pseudomonas cepacia infection in
cystic ﬁbrosis: an emerging problem. J Pediatr 1984;104:206-10.
516. LiPuma JJ. Burkholderia cepacia: Management issues and new insights.
Clin Chest Med 1998;19:473-86.
517. Tablan OC, Chorba TL, Schidlow DV, et al. Pseudomonas cepacia col-
onization in patients with cystic ﬁbrosis: risk factors and clinical out-
come. J Pediatr 1985;107:382-7.
518. Hudson VL, Wielinski CL, Regelmann WE. Prognostic implications
of initial oropharyngeal bacterial ﬂora in patients with cystic ﬁbrosis
diagnosed before the age of two years. J Pediatr 1993;122:854-60.
519. Farrell PM, Li Z, Kosorok MR, et al. Bronchopulmonary disease in
children with cystic ﬁbrosis after early or delayed diagnosis. Am J
Respir Crit Care Med 2003;168:1100-8.
520. Smith DL, Gumery LB, Smith EG, Stableforth DE, Kaufmann ME,
Pitt TL. Epidemic of Pseudomonas cepacia in an adult cystic ﬁbrosis
unit: evidence of person-to-person transmission. J Clin Microbiol
1993;31:3017-22.
521. Pegues DA,SchidlowDV, TablanOC, CarsonLA, ClarkNC,JarvisWR.
Possible nosocomial transmission of Pseudomonas cepacia in patients
with cystic ﬁbrosis. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 1994;148:805-12.
522. Govan JR, Brown PH, Maddison J, et al. Evidence for transmission of
Pseudomonas cepacia by social contact in cystic ﬁbrosis. Lancet 1993;
342:15-9.
523. Pegues DA, Carson LA, Tablan OC, et al. Acquisition of Pseudomo-
nas cepacia at summer camps for patients with cystic ﬁbrosis. Sum-
mer Camp Study Group. J Pediatr 1994;124(5 Pt 1):694-702.
524. Tablan OC, Martone WJ, Doershuk CF, et al. Colonization of the
respiratory tract with Pseudomonas cepacia in cystic ﬁbrosis. risk
factors and outcomes. Chest 1987;91:527-32.
525. Thomassen MJ, Demko CA, Doershuk CF, Stern RC, Klinger JD.
Pseudomonas cepacia: decrease in colonization in patients with cystic
ﬁbrosis. Am Rev Respir Dis 1986;134:669-71.
526. Weber DJ, Rutala WA. Gene therapy: a new challenge for infection
control. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:530-2.
527. Evans ME, Lesnaw JA. Infection control for gene therapy: a busy
physician’s primer. Clin Infect Dis 2002;35:597-605.
528. Strausbaugh LJ. Gene therapy and infection control: more light on
the way. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2000;21:630-2.
529. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. West Nile virus infec-
tions in organ transplant recipients, New York and Pennsylvania,
August–September, 2005. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2005;
54:1021-3.
530. Lawson CA. Cytomegalovirus after kidney transplantation: a case
review. Prog Transplant 2005;15:157-60.
531. Tugwell BD, Patel PR, Williams IT, et al. Transmission of hepatitis C
virus to several organ and tissue recipients from an antibody-nega-
tive donor. Ann Intern Med 2005;143:648-54.
532. Kainer MA, Linden JV, Whaley DN, et al. Clostridium infections asso-
ciated with musculoskeletal tissue allografts. N Engl J Med 2004;350:
2564-71.
533. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Invasive Streptococcus
pyogenes after allograft implantation, Colorado, 2003. MMWR Morb
Mortal Wkly Rep 2003;52:1174-6.
534. Mungai M, Tegtmeier G, Chamberland M, Parise M. Transfusion-
transmitted malaria in the United States from 1963 through 1999.
N Engl J Med 2001;344:1973-8.
535. Lux JZ, Weiss D, Linden JV, et al. Transfusion-associated babesiosis
after heart transplant. Emerg Infect Dis 2003;9:116-9.
536. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Chagas disease after
organ transplantation, United States, 2001. MMWR Morb Mortal
Wkly Rep 2002;51:210-2.
537. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Lymphocytic chorio-
meningitis virus infection in organ transplant recipients, Massachu-
setts and Rhode Island, 2005. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep
2005;54:537-9.
538. Srinivasan A, Burton EC, Kuehnert MJ, et al. Transmission of rabies
virus from an organ donor to four transplant recipients. N Engl J
Med 2005;352:1103-11.
539. Gottesdiener KM. Transplanted infections: donor-to-host transmis-
sion with the allograft. Ann Intern Med 1989;110:1001-16.
540. Borie DC, Cramer DV, Phan-Thanh L, et al. Microbiological hazards
related to xenotransplantation of porcine organs into man. Infect
Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:355-65.
541. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. US Public Health Ser-
vice guideline on infectious disease issues in xenotransplantation.
MMWR Recomm Rep 2001;50:1-46.
542. Institute of Medicine. To err is human: building a safer health sys-
tem. Washington DC: National Academy Press; 1999.
543. Gerberding JL. Hospital-onset infections: a patient safety issue. Ann
Intern Med 2002;137:665-70.
544. Leape LL, Berwick DM, Bates DW. What practices will most im-
prove safety? Evidence-based medicine meets patient safety. JAMA
2002;288:501-7.
545. Burke JP. Patient safety. Infection control: a problem for patient
safety. N Engl J Med 2003;348:651-6.
546. Shulman L, Ost D. Managing infection in the critical care unit: how
can infection control make the ICU safe? Crit Care Clin 2005;21:
111-28.
547. Goldmann DA, Weinstein RA, Wenzel RP, et al. Strategies to pre-
vent and control the emergence and spread of antimicrobial-resis-
tant
microorganisms
in
hospitals:
a
challenge
to
hospital
leadership. JAMA 1996;275:234-40.
Siegel et al
December 2007
S139

----- Page 77 (native) -----
548. Scheckler WE, Brimhall D, Buck AS, et al. Requirements for infra-
structure and essential activities of infection control and epidemiol-
ogy in hospitals: a consensus panel report. Society for Healthcare
Epidemiology of America. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:
114-24.
549. www.jointcommission.org/PatientSafety/NationalPatientSafetyGoals/.
550. Jackson M, Chiarello LA, Gaynes RP, Gerberding JL. Nurse stafﬁng
and health care–associated infections: proceedings from a working
group meeting. Am J Infect Control 2002;30:199-206.
551. O’Boyle C, Jackson M, Henly SJ. Stafﬁng requirements for infection
control programs in US health care facilities: Delphi project. Am J
Infect Control 2002;30:321-33.
552. Peterson LR, Hamilton JD, Baron EJ, et al. Role of clinical microbiol-
ogy laboratories in the management and control of infectious dis-
eases and the delivery of health care. Clin Infect Dis 2001;32:605-11.
553. McGowan JE Jr, Tenover FC. Confronting bacterial resistance in
healthcare settings: a crucial role for microbiologists. Nat Rev Mi-
crobiol 2004;2:251-8.
554. Available from. Accessed.
555. Curtis JR, Cook DJ, Wall RJ, et al. Intensive care unit quality im-
provement: a ‘‘how-to’’ guide for the interdisciplinary team. Crit
Care Med 2006;34:211-8.
556. Pronovost PJ, Nolan T, Zeger S, Miller M, Rubin H. How can clini-
cians measure safety and quality in acute care? Lancet 2004;363:
1061-7.
557. Goldrick BA, Dingle DA, Gilmore GK, Curchoe RM, Plackner CL,
Fabrey LJ. Practice analysis for infection control and epidemiology
in the new millennium. Am J Infect Control 2002;30:437-48.
558. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Guideline for hand hy-
giene in health-care settings: recommendations of the Healthcare
Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee and the HICPAC/-
SHEA/APIC/IDSA Hand Hygiene Task Force. MMWR Recomm Rep
2002;51:1-44.
559. Bonomo RA, Rice LB. Emerging issues in antibiotic resistant infec-
tions in long-term care facilities. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci
1999;54:B260-7.
560. Larson EL, Early E, Cloonan P, Sugrue S, Parides M. An organiza-
tional climate intervention associated with increased handwashing
and decreased nosocomial infections. Behav Med 2000;26:14-22.
561. Pittet D, Hugonnet S, Harbarth S, et al. Effectiveness of a hospital-
wide programme to improve compliance with hand hygiene. Infec-
tion Control Programme. Lancet 2000;356:1307-12.
562. Murthy R. Implementation of strategies to control antimicrobial re-
sistance. Chest 2001;119(2 Suppl):405S-11S.
563. Rondeau KV, Wagar TH. Organizational learning and continuous
quality improvement: examining the impact on nursing home per-
formance. Health Care Manage Forum 2002;15:17-23.
564. Stelfox HT, Bates DW, Redelmeier DA. Safety of patients isolated
for infection control. JAMA 2003;290:1899-905.
565. Haley RW, Culver DH, White JW, et al. The efﬁcacy of infection sur-
veillance and control programs in preventing nosocomial infections
in US hospitals. Am J Epidemiol 1985;121:182-205.
566. McArthur BJ, Pugliese G, Weinstein S, et al. A national task analysis
of infection control practitioners, 1982. Part One: methodology and
demography. Am J Infect Control 1984;12:88-95.
567. Shannon R, McArthur BJ, Weinstein S, et al. A national task analysis
of infection control practitioners, 1982. Part Two: tasks, knowledge,
and abilities for practice. Am J Infect Control 1984;12:187-96.
568. Pugliese G, McArthur BJ, Weinstein S, et al. A national task analysis
of infection control practitioners, 1982. Part Three: the relationship
between hospital size and tasks performed. Am J Infect Control
1984;12:221-7.
569. Larson E, Eisenberg R, Soule BM. Validating the certiﬁcation process
for infection control practice. Am J Infect Control 1988;16:198-205.
570. Bjerke NB, Fabrey LJ, Johnson CB, et al. Job analysis 1992: infection
control practitioner. Am J Infect Control 1993;21:51-7.
571. Turner JG, Kolenc KM, Docken L. Job analysis 1996: infection con-
trol professional. Certiﬁcation Board in Infection Control and Epi-
demiology Inc, 1996 Job Analysis Committee. Am J Infect Control
1999;27:145-57.
572. Health Canada, Nosocomial and Occupational Infections Section.
Development of a resource model for infection prevention and
control programs in acute, long-term, and home care settings: con-
ference proceedings of the Infection Prevention and Control Alli-
ance. Am J Infect Cont 2004;32:2-6.
573. Lee TH, Meyer GS, Brennan TA. A middle ground on public ac-
countability. N Engl J Med 2004;350:2409-12.
574. Stevenson KB, Murphy CL, Samore MH, et al. Assessing the status
of infection control programs in small rural hospitals in the western
United States. Am J Infect Control 2004;32:255-61.
575. Simonds DN, Horan TC, Kelley R, Jarvis WR. Detecting pediatric
nosocomial infections: how do infection control and quality assur-
ance personnel compare? Am J Infect Control 1997;25:202-8.
576. Dawson SJ. The role of the infection control link nurse. J Hosp In-
fect 2003;54:251-7.
577. Wright J, Stover BH, Wilkerson S, Bratcher D. Expanding the infec-
tion control team: development of the infection control liaison po-
sition for the neonatal intensive care unit. Am J Infect Control 2002;
30:174-8.
578. Teare EL, Peacock A. The development of an infection control link-
nurse programme in a district general hospital. J Hosp Infect 1996;
34:267-78.
579. Ching TY, Seto WH. Evaluating the efﬁcacy of the infection control
liaison nurse in the hospital. J Adv Nurs 1990;15:1128-31.
580. Amundsen J, Drennan DP. An infection control nurse-advisor pro-
gram. Am J Infect Control 1983;11:20-3.
581. Ross KA. A program for infection surveillance utilizing an infection
control liaison nurse. Am J Infect Control 1982;10:24-8.
582. Needleman J, Buerhaus P, Mattke S, Stewart M, Zelevinsky K.
Nurse-stafﬁng levels and the quality of care in hospitals. N Engl J
Med 2002;346:1715-22.
583. Dimick JB, Swoboda SM, Pronovost PJ, Lipsett PA. Effect of nurse-
to-patient ratio in the intensive care unit on pulmonary complica-
tions and resource use after hepatectomy. Am J Crit Care 2001;
10:376-82.
584. Mayhall CG, Lamb VA, Gayle WE Jr, Haynes BW Jr. Enterobacter clo-
acae septicemia in a burn center: epidemiology and control of an
outbreak. J Infect Dis 1979;139:166-71.
585. Goldmann DA, Durbin WA Jr, Freeman J. Nosocomial infections in
a neonatal intensive care unit. J Infect Dis 1981;144:449-59.
586. Arnow P, Allyn PA, Nichols EM, Hill DL, Pezzlo M, Bartlett RH.
Control of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus in a burn
unit: role of nurse stafﬁng. J Trauma 1982;22:954-9.
587. Haley RW, Bregman DA. The role of understafﬁng and overcrowd-
ing in recurrent outbreaks of staphylococcal infection in a neonatal
special-care unit. J Infect Dis 1982;145:875-85.
588. Fridkin SK, Pear SM, Williamson TH, Galgiani JN, Jarvis WR.
The role of understafﬁng in central venous catheter–associated
bloodstream infections. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:
150-8.
589. Robert J, Fridkin SK, Blumberg HM, et al. The inﬂuence of the com-
position of the nursing staff on primary bloodstream infection rates
in a surgical intensive care unit. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol
2000;21:12-7.
590. Li J, Birkhead GS, Strogatz DS, Coles FB. Impact of institution size,
stafﬁng patterns, and infection control practices on communicable
disease outbreaks in New York State nursing homes. Am J Epide-
miol 1996;143:1042-9.
591. Archibald LK, Manning ML, Bell LM, Banerjee S, Jarvis WR. Patient
density, nurse-to-patient ratio and nosocomial infection risk in a pe-
diatric cardiac intensive care unit. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1997;16:
1045-8.
S140
Vol. 35 No. 10 Supplement 2
Siegel et al

----- Page 78 (native) -----
592. Harbarth S, Sudre P, Dharan S, Cadenas M, Pittet D. Outbreak of
Enterobacter cloacae related to understafﬁng, overcrowding, and poor
hygiene practices. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:598-603.
593. Vicca AF. Nursing staff workload as a determinant of methicillin-re-
sistant Staphylococcus aureus spread in an adult intensive therapy
unit. J Hosp Infect 1999;43:109-13.
594. Stegenga J, Bell E, Matlow A. The role of nurse understafﬁng in nos-
ocomial viral gastrointestinal infections on a general pediatrics
ward. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2002;23:133-6.
595. Alonso-Echanove J, Edwards JR, Richards MJ, et al. Effect of nurse
stafﬁng and antimicrobial-impregnated central venous catheters
on the risk for bloodstream infections in intensive care units. Infect
Control Hosp Epidemiol 2003;24:916-25.
596. Petrosillo N, Gilli P, Serraino D, et al. Prevalence of infected patients
and understafﬁng have a role in hepatitis C virus transmission in di-
alysis. Am J Kidney Dis 2001;37:1004-10.
597. Pfaller MA, Herwaldt LA. The clinical microbiology laboratory and
infection control: emerging pathogens, antimicrobial resistance, and
new technology. Clin Infect Dis 1997;25:858-70.
598. Simor AE. The role of the laboratory in infection prevention and
control programs in long-term-care facilities for the elderly. Infect
Control Hosp Epidemiol 2001;22:459-63.
599. Weinstein RA, Mallison GF. The role of the microbiology laboratory
in surveillance and control of nosocomial infections. Am J Clin
Pathol 1978;69:130-6.
600. Kolmos HJ. Interaction between the microbiology laboratory and
clinician: what the microbiologist can provide. J Hosp Infect 1999;
43(Suppl):S285-91.
601. Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute. www.clsi.org/.
602. Ginocchio CC. Role of NCCLS in antimicrobial susceptibility test-
ing and monitoring. Am J Health Syst Pharm 2002;59(8 Suppl. 3):
S7-S11.
603. National Committee for Clinical Laboratory Standards. Perfor-
mance standards for antimicrobial susceptibility testing: twelfth in-
formational
supplement.
Document
M100–S12.
Wayne
(PA):
National Committee for Clinical Laboratory Standards; 2002.
604. National Committee for Clinical Laboratory Standards. Analysis
and presentation of cumulative antimicrobial susceptibility test
data: approved guideline. Document M39-A. Wayne (PA): National
Committee for Clinical Laboratory Standards; 2002.
605. Halstead DC, Gomez N, McCarter YS. Reality of developing a com-
munity-wide antibiogram. J Clin Microbiol 2004;42:1-6.
606. Ernst EJ, Diekema DJ, BootsMiller BJ, et al. Are United States hos-
pitals following national guidelines for the analysis and presentation
of cumulative antimicrobial susceptibility data? Diagn Microbiol In-
fect Dis 2004;49:141-5.
607. Bergeron MG, Ouellette M. Preventing antibiotic resistance through
rapid genotypic identiﬁcation of bacteria and of their antibiotic re-
sistance genes in the clinical microbiology laboratory. J Clin Micro-
biol 1998;36:2169-72.
608. Hacek DM, Suriano T, Noskin GA, Kruszynski J, Reisberg B, Peter-
son LR. Medical and economic beneﬁt of a comprehensive infection
control program that includes routine determination of microbial
clonality. Am J Clin Pathol 1999;111:647-54.
609. Rodriguez WJ, Schwartz RH, Thorne MM. Evaluation of diagnostic
tests for inﬂuenza in a pediatric practice. Pediatr Infect Dis J 2002;
21:193-6.
610. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Prevention and control
of inﬂuenza: recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Im-
munization Practices (ACIP). MMWR Recomm Rep 2005;54:1-40.
611. Uyeki TM. Inﬂuenza diagnosis and treatment in children: a review of
studies on clinically useful tests and antiviral treatment for inﬂuenza.
Pediatr Infect Dis J 2003;22:164-77.
612. Chan EL, Antonishyn N, McDonald R, et al. The use of TaqMan PCR
assay for detection of Bordetella pertussis infection from clinical spec-
imens. Arch Pathol Lab Med 2002;126:173-6.
613. Barenfanger J, Drake C, Kacich G. Clinical and ﬁnancial beneﬁts of
rapid bacterial identiﬁcation and antimicrobial susceptibility testing.
J Clin Microbiol 1999;37:1415-8.
614. Barenfanger J, Drake C, Leon N, Mueller T, Troutt T. Clinical and
ﬁnancial beneﬁts of rapid detection of respiratory viruses: an out-
comes study. J Clin Microbiol 2000;38:2824-8.
615. Ramers C, Billman G, Hartin M, Ho S, Sawyer MH. Impact of a di-
agnostic cerebrospinal ﬂuid enterovirus polymerase chain reaction
test on patient management. JAMA 2000;283:2680-5.
616. Mackie PL, Joannidis PA, Beattie J. Evaluation of an acute point-of-
care system screening for respiratory syncytial virus infection. J
Hosp Infect 2001;48:66-71.
617. Guillemot D, Courvalin P. Better control of antibiotic resistance.
Clin Infect Dis 2001;33:542-7.
618. Paterson DL. The role of antimicrobial management programs in
optimizing antibiotic prescribing within hospitals. Clin Infect Dis
2006;42(Suppl 2):S90-5.
619. Lundstrom T, Pugliese G, Bartley J, Cox J, Guither C. Organizational
and environmental factors that affect worker health and safety and
patient outcomes. Am J Infect Control 2002;30:93-106.
620. www.patientsafety.com/vision.html.
621. Pronovost PJ, Jenckes MW, Dorman T, et al. Organizational charac-
teristics of intensive care units related to outcomes of abdominal
aortic surgery. JAMA 1999;281:1310-7.
622. Pronovost PJ, Angus DC, Dorman T, Robinson KA, Dremsizov TT,
Young TL. Physician stafﬁng patterns and clinical outcomes in criti-
cally ill patients: a systematic review. JAMA 2002;288:2151-62.
623. Pronovost PJ, Weast B, Holzmueller CG, et al. Evaluation of the cul-
ture of safety: survey of clinicians and managers in an academic
medical center. Qual Saf Health Care 2003;12:405-10.
624. Nieva VF, Sorra J. Safety culture assessment: a tool for improving
patient safety in healthcare organizations. Qual Saf Health Care
2003;12(Suppl 2):ii17-23.
625. Clarke SP, Rockett JL, Sloane DM, Aiken LH. Organizational climate,
stafﬁng, and safety equipment as predictors of needlestick injuries
and near-misses in hospital nurses. Am J Infect Control 2002;30:
207-16.
626. Rivers DL, Aday LA, Frankowski RF, Felknor S, White D, Nichols B.
Predictors of nurses’ acceptance of an intravenous catheter safety
device. Nurs Res 2003;52:249-55.
627. Gershon RR, Karkashian CD, Grosch JW, et al. Hospital safety cli-
mate and its relationship with safe work practices and workplace
exposure incidents. Am J Infect Control 2000;28:211-21.
628. Gershon RR, Vlahov D, Felknor SA, et al. Compliance with universal
precautions among health care workers at three regional hospitals.
Am J Infect Control 1995;23:225-36.
629. Michalsen A, Delclos GL, Felknor SA, et al. Compliance with universal
precautions among physicians. J Occup Environ Med 1997;39:130-7.
630. Vaughn TE, McCoy KD, Beekmann SE, Woolson RE, Torner JC,
Doebbeling BN. Factors promoting consistent adherence to safe
needle precautions among hospital workers. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol 2004;25:548-55.
631. Grosch JW, Gershon RR, Murphy LR, DeJoy DM. Safety climate di-
mensions associated with occupational exposure to blood-borne
pathogens in nurses. Am J Ind Med (Suppl 1):122-4.
632. Piotrowski MM, Hinshaw DB. The safety checklist program: creat-
ing a culture of safety in intensive care units. Jt Comm J Qual Improv
2002;28:306-15.
633. Weeks WB, Bagian JP. Developing a culture of safety in the Veterans
Health Administration. Eff Clin Pract 2000;3:270-6.
634. Bagian JP, Gosbee JW. Developing a culture of patient safety at the
VA. Ambul Outreach 2000;25-9.
635. Tokars JI, McKinley GF, Otten J, et al. Use and efﬁcacy of tubercu-
losis infection control practices at hospitals with previous out-
breaks of multidrug-resistant tuberculosis. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol 2001;22:449-55.
Siegel et al
December 2007
S141

----- Page 79 (native) -----
636. Maloney SA, Pearson ML, Gordon MT, Del Castillo R, Boyle JF, Jar-
vis WR. Efﬁcacy of control measures in preventing nosocomial
transmission of multidrug-resistant tuberculosis to patients and
health care workers. Ann Intern Med 1995;122:90-5.
637. Montecalvo MA, Jarvis WR, Uman J, et al. Infection-control mea-
sures reduce transmission of vancomycin-resistant enterococci in
an endemic setting. Ann Intern Med 1999;131:269-72.
638. Sherertz RJ, Ely EW, Westbrook DM, et al. Education of physicians-
in-training can decrease the risk for vascular catheter infection. Ann
Intern Med 2000;132:641-8.
639. Lynch P, Cummings MJ, Roberts PL, Herriott MJ, Yates B, Stamm WE.
Implementing and evaluating a system of generic infection precau-
tions: body substance isolation. Am J Infect Control 1990;18:1-12.
640. Kelen GD, DiGiovanna TA, Celentano DD, et al. Adherence to uni-
versal (barrier) precautions during interventions on critically ill and
injured emergency department patients. J Acquir Immune Deﬁc
Syndr 1990;3:987-94.
641. Courington KR, Patterson SL, Howard RJ. Universal precautions
are not universally followed. Arch Surg 1991;126:93-6.
642. Kaczmarek RG, Moore RM Jr, McCrohan J, et al. Glove use by
health care workers: results of a tristate investigation. Am J Infect
Control 1991;19:228-32.
643. Freeman SW, Chambers CV. Compliance with universal precautions
in a medical practice with a high rate of HIV infection. J Am Board
Fam Pract 1992;5:313-8.
644. Friedland LR, Joffe M, Wiley JF 2nd, Schapire A, Moore DF. Effect of
educational program on compliance with glove use in a pediatric
emergency department. Am J Dis Child 1992;146:1355-8.
645. Henry K, Campbell S, Maki M. A comparison of observed and self-
reported compliance with universal precautions among emergency
department personnel at a Minnesota public teaching hospital: im-
plications for assessing infection control programs. Ann Emerg
Med 1992;21:940-6.
646. Henry K, Campbell S, Collier P, Williams CO. Compliance with uni-
versal precautions and needle handling and disposal practices
among emergency department staff at two community hospitals.
Am J Infect Control 1994;22:129-37.
647. Eustis TC, Wright SW, Wrenn KD, Fowlie EJ, Slovis CM. Compli-
ance with recommendations for universal precautions among pre-
hospital providers. Ann Emerg Med 1995;25:512-5.
648. DiGiacomo JC, Hoff WS, Rotondo MF, et al. Barrier precautions in
trauma resuscitation: real-time analysis utilizing videotape review.
Am J Emerg Med 1997;15:34-9.
649. Thompson BL, Dwyer DM, Ussery XT, Denman S, Vacek P,
Schwartz B. Handwashing and glove use in a long-term-care facility.
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1997;18:97-103.
650. Helfgott AW, Taylor-Burton J, Garcini FJ, Eriksen NL, Grimes R.
Compliance with universal precautions: knowledge and behavior
of residents and students in a department of obstetrics and gynecol-
ogy. Infect Dis Obstet Gynecol 1998;6:123-8.
651. Moore S, Goodwin H, Grossberg R, Toltzis P. Compliance with uni-
versal precautions among pediatric residents. Arch Pediatr Adolesc
Med 1998;152:554-7.
652. Akduman D, Kim LE, Parks RL, et al. Use of personal protective
equipment and operating room behaviors in four surgical subspe-
cialties: personal protective equipment and behaviors in surgery. In-
fect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:110-4.
653. Brooks AJ, Phipson M, Potgieter A, Koertzen H, Boffard KD. Education
of the trauma team: video evaluation of the compliance with universal
barrier precautions in resuscitation. Eur J Surg 1999;165:1125-8.
654. Kidd F, Heitkemper P, Kressel AB. A comprehensive educational ap-
proach to improving patient isolation practice. Clin Perform Qual
Health Care 1999;7:74-6.
655. Madan AK, Rentz DE, Wahle MJ, Flint LM. Noncompliance of health
care workers with universal precautions during trauma resuscita-
tions. South Med J 2001;94:277-80.
656. Madan AK, Raafat A, Hunt JP, Rentz D, Wahle MJ, Flint LM. Barrier
precautions in trauma: is knowledge enough? J Trauma 2002;52:
540-3.
657. Jeffe DB, Mutha S, Kim LE, Evanoff BA, Fraser VJ. Evaluation of a
preclinical, educational and skills-training program to improve stu-
dents’ use of blood and body ﬂuid precautions: one-year follow-
up. Prev Med 1999;29:365-73.
658. Williams CO, Campbell S, Henry K, Collier P. Variables inﬂuencing
worker compliance with universal precautions in the emergency de-
partment. Am J Infect Control 1994;22:138-48.
659. Larson E, McGeer A, Quraishi ZA, et al. Effect of an automated sink
on handwashing practices and attitudes in high-risk units. Infect
Control Hosp Epidemiol 1991;12:422-8.
660. Swoboda SM, Earsing K, Strauss K, Lane S, Lipsett PA. Electronic
monitoring and voice prompts improve hand hygiene and decrease
nosocomial infections in an intermediate care unit. Crit Care Med
2004;32:358-63.
661. Kretzer EK, Larson EL. Behavioral interventions to improve infec-
tion control practices. Am J Infect Control 1998;26:245-53.
662. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Updated guidelines
for evaluating public health surveillance systems: recommendations
from the Guidelines Working Group. MMWR Recomm Rep 2001;
50:1-35.
663. Semmelweiss IP. Die aetiologie, der begriff und die prophylaxis des
kindbettﬁebers. Pest, Wein, und Leipzig: CA Harleben’s Verlags-Ex-
pedition; 1861.
664. Bratzler DW, Houck PM. Antimicrobial prophylaxis for surgery: an
advisory statement from the National Surgical Infection Prevention
Project. Clin Infect Dis 2004;38:1706-15.
665. Bloom BT, Craddock A, Delmore PM, et al. Reducing acquired in-
fections in the NICU: observing and implementing meaningful differ-
ences in process between high and low acquired infection rate
centers. J Perinatol 2003;23:489-92.
666. Braun BI, Kritchevsky SB, Wong ES, et al. Preventing central venous
catheter–associated primary bloodstream infections: characteristics
of practices among hospitals participating in the Evaluation of Pro-
cesses and Indicators in Infection Control (EPIC) study. Infect Con-
trol Hosp Epidemiol 2003;24:926-35.
667. Baker OG. Process surveillance: an epidemiologic challenge for all
health care organizations. Am J Infect Cont 1997;25:96-101.
668. Loeb M, McGeer A, McArthur M, Peeling RW, Petric M, Simor AE.
Surveillance for outbreaks of respiratory tract infections in nursing
homes. CMAJ 2000;162:1133-7.
669. Nicolle LE. Preventing infections in non-hospital settings: long-term
care. Emerg Infect Dis 2001;7:205-7.
670. Pottinger JM, Herwaldt LA, Perl TM. Basics of surveillance: an over-
view. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1997;18:513-27.
671. Lee TB, Baker OG, Lee JT, Scheckler WE, Steele L, Laxton CE. Rec-
ommended practices for surveillance. Association for Professionals
in Infection Control and Epidemiology Inc, Surveillance Initiative
Working Group. Am J Infect Control 1998;26:277-88.
672. Haley RW. The scientiﬁc basis for using surveillance and risk factor
data to reduce nosocomial infection rates. J Hosp Infect 1995;
30(Suppl):3-14.
673. Benneyan JC, Lloyd RC, Plsek PE. Statistical process control as a
tool for research and healthcare improvement. Qual Saf Health
Care 2003;12:458-64.
674. LemmenSW, ZolldannD, GastmeierP, Lutticken R. Implementing and
evaluating a rotating surveillance system and infection control guide-
lines in 4 intensive care units. Am J Infect Control 2001;29:89-93.
675. Gaynes R, Richards C, Edwards J, et al. Feeding back surveillance
data to prevent hospital-acquired infections. Emerg Infect Dis
2001;7:295-8.
676. Tokars JI, Richards C, Andrus M, et al. The changing face of surveil-
lance for health care–associated infections. Clin Infect Dis 2004;39:
1347-52.
S142
Vol. 35 No. 10 Supplement 2
Siegel et al

----- Page 80 (native) -----
677. Sands KE, Yokoe DS, Hooper DC, et al. Detection of postoperative
surgical-site infections: comparison of health plan–based surveil-
lance with hospital-based programs. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol
2003;24:741-3.
678. Jodra VM, Rodela AR, Martinez EM, Fresnena NL. Standardized in-
fection ratios for three general surgery procedures: a comparison
between Spanish hospitals and US centers participating in the Na-
tional Nosocomial Infections Surveillance System. Infect Control
Hosp Epidemiol 2003;24:744-8.
679. McKibben L, Horan T, Tokars JI, et al. Guidance on public reporting
of
healthcare–associated
infections:
recommendations
of
the
Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee. Am
J Infect Control 2005;33:217-26.
680. Gould D, Chamberlain A. The use of a ward-based educational
teaching package to enhance nurses’ compliance with infection con-
trol procedures. J Clin Nurs 1997;6:55-67.
681. Calabro K, Weltge A, Parnell S, Kouzekanani K, Ramirez E. Inter-
vention for medical students: effective infection control. Am J Infect
Control 1998;26:431-6.
682. Haiduven DJ, Hench CP, Simpkins SM, Stevens DA. Standardized
management of patients and employees exposed to pertussis. Infect
Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:861-4.
683. Macartney KK, Gorelick MH, Manning ML, Hodinka RL, Bell LM.
Nosocomial respiratory syncytial virus infections: the cost-effec-
tiveness and cost beneﬁt of infection control. Pediatrics 2000;106:
520-6.
684. Beekmann SE, Vaughn TE, McCoy KD, et al. Hospital bloodborne
pathogens programs: program characteristics and blood and body
ﬂuid exposure rates. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2001;22:73-82.
685. Sokas RK, Simmens S, Scott J. A training program in universal pre-
cautions for second-year medical students. Acad Med 1993;68:
374-6.
686. Ostrowsky BE, Trick WE, Sohn AH, et al. Control of vancomycin-
resistant enterococcus in health care facilities in a region. N Engl J
Med 2001;344:1427-33.
687. Bonten MJ, Kollef MH, Hall JB. Risk factors for ventilator-associated
pneumonia: from epidemiology to patient management. Clin Infect
Dis 2004;38:1141-9.
688. Lau JT, Fung KS, Wong TW, et al. SARS transmission among hospital
workers in Hong Kong. Emerg Infect Dis 2004;10:280-6.
689. Talbot TR, Bradley SE, Cosgrove SE, Ruef C, Siegel JD, Weber DJ.
Inﬂuenza vaccination of healthcare workers and vaccine allocation
for healthcare workers during vaccine shortages. Infect Control
Hosp Epidemiol 2005;26:882-90.
690. Harbarth S, Siegrist CA, Schira JC, Wunderli W, Pittet D. Inﬂuenza
immunization: improving compliance of healthcare workers. Infect
Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:337-42.
691. Bryant KA, Stover B, Cain L, Levine GL, Siegel J, Jarvis WR. Improv-
ing inﬂuenza immunization rates among healthcare workers caring
for high-risk pediatric patients. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol
2004;25:912-7.
692. Martinello RA, Jones L, Topal JE. Correlation between healthcare
workers’ knowledge of inﬂuenza vaccine and vaccine receipt. Infect
Control Hosp Epidemiol 2003;24:845-7.
693. Goldrick B, Gruendemann B, Larson E. Learning styles and teachin-
g/learning strategy preferences: implications for educating nurses in
critical care, the operating room, and infection control. Heart Lung
1993;22:176-82.
694. Davis D, O’Brien MA, Freemantle N, Wolf FM, Mazmanian P, Taylor-
Vaisey A. Impact of formal continuing medical education: do confer-
ences, workshops, rounds, and other traditional continuing educa-
tion activities change physician behavior or health care outcomes?
JAMA 1999;282:867-74.
695. Carr H, Hinson P. Education and training. In APIC Infection Control
and Epidemiology. 2nd edition Washington, DC: Association for
Professionals in Infection Control and Epidemiology; 2005. p 11-1.
696. Caffarella RS. Planning programs for adult learners: a practical guide
for educators, trainers, and staff developers. 2nd ed. San Francisco:
Jossey-Bass; 2001.
697. Sargeant J, Curran V, Jarvis-Selinger S, et al. Interactive on-line con-
tinuing medical education: physicians’ perceptions and experiences.
J Contin Educ Health Prof 2004;24:227-36.
698. Van Harrison R. Systems-based framework for continuing medical
education and improvements in translating new knowledge into
physicians’ practices. J Contin Educ Health Prof 2004;24(Suppl 1):
S50-62.
699. Cole TB, Glass RM. Learning associated with participation in jour-
nal-based continuing medical education. J Contin Educ Health
Prof 2004;24:205-12.
700. Diekema DJ, Albanese MA, Schuldt SS, Doebbeling BN. Blood and
body ﬂuid exposures during clinical training: relation to knowledge
of universal precautions. J Gen Intern Med 1996;11:109-11.
701. Diekema DJ, Schuldt SS, Albanese MA, Doebbeling BN. Universal
precautions training of preclinical students: impact on knowledge,
attitudes, and compliance. Prev Med 1995;24:580-5.
702. Warren DK, Zack JE, Cox MJ, Cohen MM, Fraser VJ. An educa-
tional intervention to prevent catheter-associated bloodstream in-
fections in a nonteaching, community medical center. Crit Care
Med 2003;31:1959-63.
703. Dubbert PM, Dolce J, Richter W, Miller M, Chapman SW. Increasing
ICU staff handwashing: effects of education and group feedback. In-
fect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1990;11:191-3.
704. Avila-Aguero ML, Umana MA, Jimenez AL, Faingezicht I, Paris MM.
Handwashing practices in a tertiary-care, pediatric hospital and the
effect on an educational program. Clin Perform Qual Health Care
1998;6:70-2.
705. Lai KK, Fontecchio SA, Kelley AL, Melvin ZS. Knowledge of the
transmission of tuberculosis and infection control measures for tu-
berculosis among healthcare workers. Infect Control Hosp Epide-
miol 1996;17:168-70.
706. Koenig S, Chu J. Senior medical students’ knowledge of universal
precautions. Acad Med 1993;68:372-4.
707. Babcock HM, Zack JE, Garrison T, et al. An educational inter-
vention to reduce ventilator-associated pneumonia in an inte-
grated health system: a comparison of effects. Chest 2004;125:
2224-31.
708. McGuckin M, Taylor A, Martin V, Porten L, Salcido R. Evaluation of
a patient education model for increasing hand hygiene compliance
in an inpatient rehabilitation unit. Am J Infect Control 2004;32:
235-8.
709. Cirone N. Patient-education handbook. Nursing 1997;27:44-5.
710. Chase TM. Learning styles and teaching strategies: enhancing the
patient education experience. SCI Nursing 2001;18:138-41.
711. Jarvis WR. Handwashing: the Semmelweis lesson forgotten? Lancet
1994;344:1311-2.
712. Daniels IR, Rees BI. Handwashing: simple, but effective. Ann R Coll
Surg Engl 1999;81:117-8.
713. Webster J, Faoagali JL, Cartwright D. Elimination of methicillin-re-
sistant Staphylococcus aureus from a neonatal intensive care unit af-
ter hand washing with triclosan. J Paediatr Child Health 1994;30:
59-64.
714. Zafar AB, Butler RC, Reese DJ, Gaydos LA, Mennonna PA. Use of
0.3% triclosan (Bacti-Stat) to eradicate an outbreak of methicillin-
resistant Staphylococcus aureus in a neonatal nursery. Am J Infect
Control 1995;23:200-8.
715. Malik RK, Montecalvo MA, Reale MR, et al. Epidemiology and con-
trol of vancomycin-resistant enterococci in a regional neonatal in-
tensive care unit. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1999;18:352-6.
716. Pittet D, Boyce JM. Hand hygiene and patient care: pursuing the
Semmelweis legacy. Lancet Infect Dis 2001;9-20.
717. Lin CM, Wu FM, Kim HK, Doyle MP, Michael BS, Williams LK. A
comparison of hand-washing techniques to remove Escherichia coli
Siegel et al
December 2007
S143

----- Page 81 (native) -----
and caliciviruses under natural or artiﬁcial ﬁngernails. J Food Prot
2003;66:2296-301.
718. Edel E, Houston S, Kennedy V, LaRocco M. Impact of a 5-minute
scrub on the microbial ﬂora found on artiﬁcial, polished, or natural
ﬁngernails of operating room personnel. Nurs Res 1998;47:54-9.
719. Pottinger J, Burns S, Manske C. Bacterial carriage by artiﬁcial versus
natural nails. Am J Infect Control 1989;17:340-4.
720. Hedderwick SA, McNeil SA, Lyons MJ, Kauffman CA. Pathogenic
organisms associated with artiﬁcial ﬁngernails worn by healthcare
workers. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2000;21:505-9.
721. Passaro DJ, Waring L, Armstrong R, et al. Postoperative Serratia
marcescens wound infections traced to an out-of- hospital source.
J Infect Dis 1997;175:992-5.
722. Moolenaar RL, Crutcher JM, San Joaquin VH, et al. A prolonged
outbreak of Pseudomonas aeruginosa in a neonatal intensive care
unit: did staff ﬁngernails play a role in disease transmission? Infect
Control Hosp Epidemiol 2000;21:80-5.
723. Parry MF, Grant B, Yukna M, et al. Candida osteomyelitis and diskitis
after spinal surgery: an outbreak that implicates artiﬁcial nail use.
Clin Infect Dis 2001;32:352-7.
724. Boszczowski I, Nicoletti C, Puccini DM, et al. Outbreak of extended
spectrum beta-lactamase–producing Klebsiella pneumoniae infection
in a neonatal intensive care unit related to onychomycosis in a
health care worker. Pediatr Infect Dis J 2005;24:648-50.
725. Trick WE, Vernon MO, Hayes RA, et al. Impact of ring wearing on
hand contamination and comparison of hand hygiene agents in a
hospital. Clin Infect Dis 2003;36:1383-90.
726. Pittet D, Dharan S, Touveneau S, Sauvan V, Perneger TV. Bacterial
contamination of the hands of hospital staff during routine patient
care. Arch Intern Med 1999;159:821-6.
727. Tenorio AR, Badri SM, Sahgal NB, et al. Effectiveness of gloves in the
prevention of hand carriage of vancomycin-resistant enterococcus
species by health care workers after patient care. Clin Infect Dis
2001;32:826-9.
728. Mast ST, Woolwine JD, Gerberding JL. Efﬁcacy of gloves in reducing
blood volumes transferred during simulated needlestick injury. J In-
fect Dis 1993;168:1589-92.
729. Medical Glove Guidance Manual. Available from. Accessed.
730. Korniewicz DM, El-Masri M, Broyles JM, Martin CD, O’Connell KP.
Performance of latex and nonlatex medical examination gloves dur-
ing simulated use. Am J Infect Control 2002;30:133-8.
731. Korniewicz DM, McLeskey SW. Latex allergy and gloving standards.
Semin Perioper Nurs 1998;7:216-21.
732. Ranta PM, Ownby DR. A review of natural-rubber latex allergy in
health care workers. Clin Infect Dis 2004;38:252-6.
733. Korniewicz DM, Kirwin M, Cresci K, et al. Barrier protection with
examination gloves: double versus single. Am J Infect Control 1994;
22:12-5.
734. Korniewicz DM, Kirwin M, Cresci K, Larson E. Leakage of latex and
vinyl exam gloves in high- and low-risk clinical settings. Am Ind Hyg
Assoc J 1993;54:22-6.
735. Rego A, Roley L. In-use barrier integrity of gloves: latex and nitrile
superior to vinyl. Am J Infect Control 1999;27:405-10.
736. Kotilainen HR, Brinker JP, Avato JL, Gantz NM. Latex and vinyl ex-
amination gloves. Quality control procedures and implications for
health care workers. Arch Intern Med 1989;149:2749-53.
737. Korniewicz DM, Laughon BE, Butz A, Larson E. Integrity of vinyl and
latex procedure gloves. Nurs Res 1989;38:144-6.
738. Occupational Safety and Health Administration. Occupational ex-
posure to bloodborne pathogens: ﬁnal rule. 29 CFR Part 1910:
1030. Federal Register 1991;56:64003-182 Revised 2001 CFR 66
2001:5317-25.
739. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Recommendations
for preventing the spread of vancomycin resistance: recommenda-
tions of the Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory Commit-
tee (HICPAC). MMWR Recomm Rep 1995;44:1-13.
740. Olsen RJ, Lynch P, Coyle MB, Cummings J, Bokete T, Stamm WE.
Examination gloves as barriers to hand contamination in clinical
practice. JAMA 1993;270:350-3.
741. Doebbeling BN, Pfaller MA, Houston AK, Wenzel RP. Removal of
nosocomial pathogens from the contaminated glove: implications
for glove reuse and handwashing. Ann Intern Med 1988;109:394-8.
742. Maki DG, McCormick RD, Zilz MA, et al. A MRSA outbreak in an
SICU during universal precautions: new epidemiology for nosoco-
mial MRSA [abstract 473]. Presented at the 30th Annual Meeting
of the Interscience Conference on Antimicrobial Agents and Che-
motherapy (ICAAC), Chicago, IL, October 21–24, 1990.
743. Boyce JM, Jackson MM, Pugliese G, et al. Methicillin-resistant Staph-
ylococcus aureus (MRSA): a brieﬁng for acute care hospitals and
nursing facilities. The AHA Technical Panel on Infections Within
Hospitals. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1994;15(2):105-15.
744. Boyce JM, Mermel LA, Zervos MJ, et al. Controlling vancomycin-re-
sistant enterococci. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1995;16:634-7.
745. Gerding DN, Johnson S, Peterson LR, Mulligan ME, Silva J Jr. Clostrid-
ium difﬁcile–associated diarrhea and colitis. Infect Control Hosp Ep-
idemiol 1995;16:459-77.
746. Cloney DL, Donowitz LG. Overgrown use for infection control in
nurseries and neonatal intensive care units. Am J Dis Child 1986;
140:680-3.
747. Pelke S, Ching D, Easa D, Melish ME. Gowning does not affect col-
onization or infection rates in a neonatal intensive care unit. Arch
Pediatr Adolesc Med 1994;148:1016-20.
748. Slaughter S, Hayden MK, Nathan C, et al. A comparison of the ef-
fect of universal use of gloves and gowns with that of glove use
alone on acquisition of vancomycin-resistant enterococci in a med-
ical intensive care unit. Ann Intern Med 1996;125:448-56.
749. Duquette-Petersen L, Francis ME, Dohnalek L, Skinner R, Dudas P.
The role of protective clothing in infection prevention in patients
undergoing autologous bone marrow transplantation. Oncol Nurs
Forum 1999;26:1319-24.
750. Sartori M, La Terra G, Aglietta M, Manzin A, Navino C, Verzetti G.
Transmission of hepatitis C via blood splash into conjunctiva. Scand
J Infect Dis 1993;25:270-1.
751. Hosoglu S, Celen MK, Akalin S, Geyik MF, Soyoral Y, Kara IH. Trans-
mission of hepatitis C by blood splash into conjunctiva in a nurse.
Am J Infect Control 2003;31:502-4.
752. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Update: human immu-
nodeﬁciency virus infections in health careworkers exposed to blood
of infected patients. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 1987;36:285-9.
753. Keijman J, Tjhie J, Olde Damink S, Alink M. Unusual nosocomial
transmission of Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Eur J Clin Microbiol In-
fect Dis 2001;20:808-9.
754. Weaver GH. Value of the face mask and other measures. JAMA
1918;70:76.
755. Weaver GH. Droplet infection and its prevention by the face mask. J
Infect Dis 1919;24:218-30.
756. Davidson IR, Crisp AJ, Hinwood DC, Whitaker SC, Gregson RH.
Eye splashes during invasive vascular procedures. Br J Radiol
1995;68:39-41.
757. Guidance for industry and FDA staff: surgical masks. Premarket noti-
ﬁcation [510(k)] submissions; guidance for industry and FDA. http:
//www.fda.gov/cdrh/ode/guidance/094.html.
758. National Institute for Occupational Health and Safety. Eye protec-
tion for infection control. http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/topics/eye/
eye-infectious.html.
759. Gala CL, Hall CB, Schnabel KC, et al. The use of eye-nose goggles
to control nosocomial respiratory syncytial virus infection. JAMA
1986;256:2706-8.
760. Agah R, Cherry JD, Garakian AJ, Chapin M. Respiratory syncytial virus
(RSV) infection rate in personnel caring for children with RSV infec-
tions: routine isolation procedure versus routine procedure supple-
mented by use of masks and goggles. Am J Dis Child 1987;141:695-7.
S144
Vol. 35 No. 10 Supplement 2
Siegel et al

----- Page 82 (native) -----
761. Thorburn K, Kerr S, Taylor N, van Saene HK. RSV outbreak in a
paediatric intensive care unit. J Hosp Infect 2004;57:194-201.
762. http://a257.g.akamaitech.net/7/257/2422/06jun20041800/edocket.
access.gpo.gov/2004/04-25183.htm.
763. Occupational Safety and Health Administration. Respiratory protection.
www.osha.gov/dcsp/ote/trng-materials/respirators/respirators.html.
764. Campbell DL, Coffey CC, Lenhart SW. Respiratory protection as a
function of respirator ﬁtting characteristics and ﬁt-test accuracy.
Am Ind Hyg Assoc J 2001;62:36-44.
765. Lee K, Slavcev A, Nicas M. Respiratory protection against Myco-
bacterium tuberculosis: quantitative ﬁt test outcomes for ﬁve type
N95 ﬁltering-facepiece respirators. J Occup Environ Hyg 2004;1:
22-8.
766. Coffey CC, Campbell DL, Zhuang Z. Simulated workplace perfor-
mance of N95 respirators. Am Ind Hyg Assoc J 1999;60:618-24.
767. Coffey CC, Lawrence RB, Zhuang Z, Campbell DL, Jensen PA,
Myers WR. Comparison of ﬁve methods for ﬁt-testing N95 ﬁlter-
ing-facepiece respirators. Appl Occup Environ Hyg 2002;17:723-30.
768. National Personal Protective Technology Laboratory. Available from
www.cdc.gov/niosh/npptl/. Accessed.
769. McGowan JE Jr. Nosocomial tuberculosis: new progress in control
and prevention. Clin Infect Dis 1995;21:489-505.
770. Jarvis WR. Nosocomial transmission of multidrug-resistant Myco-
bacterium tuberculosis. Am J Infect Control 1995;23:146-51.
771. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Emergency prepared-
ness and response. Available from wwwbtcdcgov 2003. Accessed.
772. Anderson JD, Bonner M, Scheifele DW, Schneider BC. Lack of nos-
ocomial spread of varicella in a pediatric hospital with negative-
pressure ventilated patient rooms. Infect Control 1985;6:120-1.
773. Brunell PA, Wood D. Varicella serological status of healthcare
workers as a guide to whom to test or immunize. Infect Control
Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:355-7.
774. Saiman L, LaRussa P, Steinberg SP, et al. Persistence of immunity to
varicella-zoster virus after vaccination of healthcare workers. Infect
Control Hosp Epidemiol 2001;22:279-83.
775. Willy ME, Koziol DE, Fleisher T, et al. Measles immunity in a popu-
lation of healthcare workers. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1994;
15:12-7.
776. Wright LJ, Carlquist JF. Measles immunity in employees of a multi-
hospital healthcare provider. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1994;
15:8-11.
777. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Updated US Public
Health Service Guidelines for the management of occupational expo-
sures to HBV, HCV, and HIV. MMWR Recomm Rep 2001;50:1-52.
778. Do AN, Ciesielski CA, Metler RP, Hammett TA, Li J, Fleming PL.
Occupationally acquired human immunodeﬁciency virus (HIV) in-
fection: national case surveillance data during 20 years of the HIV
epidemic in the United States. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol
2003;24:86-96.
779. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Update: universal pre-
cautions for prevention of transmission of human immunodeﬁciency
virus, hepatitis B virus, and other bloodborne pathogens in health-
care settings. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 1988;37:377-88.
780. Davis MS. Occupational hazards of operating: opportunities for im-
provement. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:691-3.
781. Gerberding JL. Procedure-speciﬁc infection control for preventing
intraoperative blood exposures. Am J Infect Control 1993;21:364-7.
782. Fry DE, Telford GL, Fecteau DL, Sperling RS, Meyer AA. Prevention
of blood exposure: body and facial protection. Surg Clin North Am
1995;75:1141-57.
783. Hansen ME. Bloodborne pathogens and procedure safety in inter-
ventional radiology. Semin Ultrasound CT MR 1998;19:209-14.
784. Holodnick CL, Barkauskas V. Reducing percutaneous injuries in the
OR by educational methods. AORN J 2000;72:461-76.
785. www.osha.gov/SLTC/bloodbornepathogens/index.html.
786. www.cdc.gov/niosh/2000-108.html.
787. National Insititute for Occupational Health and Safety. Safer medical
device implementation in health care facilities. http://www.cdc.gov/
niosh/topics/bbp/safer/.
788. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Available from
www.cdc.gov/sharpssafety/resources.html.
789. Catanzaro A. Nosocomial tuberculosis. Am Rev Respir Dis 1982;
125:559-62.
790. Cepeda JA, Whitehouse T, Cooper B, et al. Isolation of patients in
single rooms or cohorts to reduce spread of MRSA in intensive-
care units: prospective two-centre study. Lancet 2005;365:295-304.
791. Mulin B, Rouget C, Clement C, et al. Association of private isolation
rooms with ventilator-associated Acinetobacter baumanii pneumonia
in a surgical intensive-care unit. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol
1997;18:499-503.
792. www.aia.org/aah_gd_hospcons.
793. Raad I, Abbas J, Whimbey E. Infection control of nosocomial respi-
ratory viral disease in the immunocompromised host. Am J Med
1997;102:48-52.
794. Isaacs D, Dickson H, O’Callaghan C, Sheaves R, Winter A, Moxon
ER. Handwashing and cohorting in prevention of hospital acquired
infections with respiratory syncytial virus. Arch Dis Child 1991;
66:227-31.
795. Chang VT, Nelson K. The role of physical proximity in nosocomial
diarrhea. Clin Infect Dis 2000;31:717-22.
796. Byers KE, Anglim AM, Anneski CJ, et al. A hospital epidemic of van-
comycin-resistant Enterococcus: risk factors and control. Infect Con-
trol Hosp Epidemiol 2001;22:140-7.
797. Dassut B. The implementation of a commode cleaning and identiﬁ-
cation system. Nurs Times 2004;100:47.
798. Mayer RA, Geha RC, Helfand MS, Hoyen CK, Salata RA, Donskey CJ.
Role of fecal incontinence in contamination of the environment with
vancomycin-resistant enterococci. Am J Infect Control 2003;31:221-5.
799. Samore
MH,
Venkataraman
L,
DeGirolami
PC,
Arbeit
RD,
Karchmer AW. Clinical and molecular epidemiology of sporadic
and clustered cases of nosocomial Clostridium difﬁcile diarrhea. Am
J Med 1996;100:32-40.
800. Clabots CR, Johnson S, Olson MM, Peterson LR, Gerding DN. Ac-
quisition of Clostridium difﬁcile by hospitalized patients: evidence for
colonized new admissions as a source of infection. J Infect Dis 1992;
166:561-7.
801. Samore MH. Epidemiology of nosocomial Clostridium difﬁcile diar-
rhoea. J Hosp Infect 1999;43(Suppl):S183-90.
802. Tokars JI, Satake S, Rimland D, et al. The prevalence of colonization
with vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus at a Veterans’ Affairs institu-
tion. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:171-5.
803. Cone R, Mohan K, Thouless M, Corey L. Nosocomial transmission
of rotavirus infection. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1988;7:103-9.
804. Bruce BB, Blass MA, Blumberg HM, Lennox JL, del Rio C, Hors-
burgh CR Jr. Risk of Cryptosporidium parvum transmission between
hospital roommates. Clin Infect Dis 2000;31:947-50.
805. Ford-Jones EL, Mindorff CM, Gold R, Petric M. The incidence of vi-
ral-associated diarrhea after admission to a pediatric hospital. Am J
Epidemiol 1990;131:711-8.
806. Murray-Leisure KA, Geib S, Graceley D, et al. Control of epidemic
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. Infect Control Hosp Epi-
demiol 1990;11:343-50.
807. Jochimsen EM, Fish L, Manning K, et al. Control of vancomycin-re-
sistant enterococci at a community hospital: efﬁcacy of patient and
staff cohorting. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:106-9.
808. Sample ML, Gravel D, Oxley C, Toye B, Garber G, Ramotar K. An
outbreak of vancomycin-resistant enterococci in a hematology-on-
cology unit: control by patient cohorting and terminal cleaning of
the environment. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2002;23:468-70.
809. Podnos YD, Cinat ME, Wilson SE, Cooke J, Gornick W, Thrupp LD.
Eradication of multidrug-resistant Acinetobacter from an intensive
care unit. Surg Infect (Larchmt) 2001;2:297-301.
Siegel et al
December 2007
S145

----- Page 83 (native) -----
810. Graham PL 3rd, Morel AS, Zhou J, et al. Epidemiology of methicillin-
susceptible Staphylococcus aureus in the neonatal intensive care unit.
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2002;23:677-82.
811. Doherty JA, Brookﬁeld DS, Gray J, McEwan RA. Cohorting of
infants with respiratory syncytial virus. J Hosp Infect 1998;38:
203-6.
812. Hall CB, Geiman JM, Douglas RG Jr, Meagher MP. Control of nos-
ocomial respiratory syncytial viral infections. Pediatrics 1978;62:
728-32.
813. Bufﬁngton J, Chapman LE, Stobierski MG, et al. Epidemic kerato-
conjunctivitis in a chronic care facility: risk factors and measures
for control. J Am Geriatr Soc 1993;41:1177-81.
814. Grehn M, Kunz J, Sigg P, Slongo R, Zbinden R. Nosocomial rotavirus
infections in neonates: means of prevention and control. J Perinat
Med 1990;18:369-74.
815. Tan YM, Chow PK, Tan BH, et al. Management of inpatients ex-
posed to an outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome
(SARS). J Hosp Infect 2004;58:210-5.
816. Talon D, Vichard P, Muller A, Bertin M, Jeunet L, Bertrand X. Mod-
elling the usefulness of a dedicated cohort facility to prevent the dis-
semination of MRSA. J Hosp Infect 2003;54:57-62.
817. Hotchkiss JR, Strike DG, Simonson DA, Broccard AF, Crooke PS.
An agent-based and spatially explicit model of pathogen dissemina-
tion in the intensive care unit. Crit Care Med 2005;33:168-76.
818. Austin DJ, Bonten MJ, Weinstein RA, Slaughter S, Anderson RM.
Vancomycin-resistant enterococci in intensive-care hospital set-
tings: transmission dynamics, persistence, and the impact of infec-
tion control programs. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1999;96:6908-13.
819. Kovner CT, Harrington C. Counting nurses: data show many nurs-
ing homes to be short-staffed. Am J Nurs 2000;100:53-4.
820. Mueller C. Stafﬁng problems in long-term care: let’s do something
about it!. J Gerontol Nurs 2003;29:3-4.
821. Stats & facts: nursing staff shortages in long-term care facilities.
Manag Care Interface 2000;13:46-7.
822. Mejias A, Chavez-Bueno S, Ramilo O. Human metapneumovirus: a
not-so-new virus. Pediatr Infect Dis J 2004;23:1-7.
823. Iwane MK, Edwards KM, Szilagyi PG, et al. Population-based surveil-
lance for hospitalizations associated with respiratory syncytial virus,
inﬂuenza virus, and parainﬂuenza viruses among young children. Pe-
diatrics 2004;113:1758-64.
824. Ong GM, Wyatt DE, O’Neill HJ, McCaughey C, Coyle PV. A com-
parison of nested polymerase chain reaction and immunoﬂuores-
cence for the diagnosis of respiratory infections in children with
bronchiolitis, and the implications for a cohorting strategy. J Hosp
Infect 2001;49:122-8.
825. von Linstow ML, Larsen HH, Eugen-Olsen J, et al. Human meta-
pneumovirus and respiratory syncytial virus in hospitalized Danish
children with acute respiratory tract infection. Scand J Infect Dis
2004;36:578-84.
826. Gehanno JF, Pestel-Caron M, Nouvellon M, Caillard JF. Nosocomial
pertussis in healthcare workers from a pediatric emergency unit in
France. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:549-52.
827. www.cdc.gov/ﬂu/professionals/infectioncontrol/resphygiene.htm.
828. Edlin BR, Tokars JI, Grieco MH, et al. An outbreak of multidrug-
resistant tuberculosis among hospitalized patients with the acquired
immunodeﬁciency syndrome. N Engl J Med 1992;326:1514-21.
829. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Update: severe acute
respiratory syndrome, Toronto, Canada, 2003. MMWR Morb Mor-
tal Wkly Rep 2003;52:547-50.
830. Starke JR. Transmission of Mycobacterium tuberculosis to and
from children and adolescents. Semin Pediatr Infect Dis 2001;12:
115-23.
831. Saiman L, Macdonald N, Burns JL, Hoiby N, Speert DP, Weber D.
Infection control in cystic ﬁbrosis: practical recommendations for
the hospital, clinic, and social settings. Am J Infect Control 2000;
28:381-5.
832. American Academy of Pediatrics. Red Book 2003 Report of the
Committee on Infectious Diseases. 24th ed. Elk Grove Village (IL):
American Academy of Pediatrics; 2003.
833. Lau JT, Lau M, Kim JH, Tsui HY, Tsang T, Wong TW. Probable sec-
ondary infections in households of SARS patients in Hong Kong.
Emerg Infect Dis 2004;10:235-43.
834. Hota B. Contamination, disinfection, and cross-colonization: are
hospital surfaces reservoirs for nosocomial infection? Clin Infect
Dis 2004;39:1182-9.
835. Rutala WA, Weber DJ. Disinfection and sterilization in health care
facilities: what clinicians need to know. Clin Infect Dis 2004;39:
702-9.
836. Boyce JM, Opal SM, Chow JW, et al. Outbreak of multidrug-resis-
tant Enterococcus faecium with transferable vanB class vancomycin
resistance. J Clin Microbiol 1994;32:1148-53.
837. Engelhart S, Krizek L, Glasmacher A, Fischnaller E, Marklein G, Ex-
ner M. Pseudomonas aeruginosa outbreak in a haematology-oncology
unit associated with contaminated surface cleaning equipment. J
Hosp Infect 2002;52:93-8.
838. Denton M, Wilcox MH, Parnell P, et al. Role of environmental clean-
ing in controlling an outbreak of Acinetobacter baumannii on a neu-
rosurgical intensive care unit. J Hosp Infect 2004;56:106-10.
839. Hollyoak V, Allison D, Summers J. Pseudomonas aeruginosa wound in-
fection associated with a nursing home’s whirlpool bath. Commun
Dis Rep CDR Rev 1995;5:R100-2.
840. Malik RE, Cooper RA, Grifﬁth CJ. Use of audit tools to evaluate the
efﬁcacy of cleaning systems in hospitals. Am J Infect Control 2003;
31:181-7.
841. Ansari SA, Springthorpe VS, Sattar SA. Survival and vehicular spread
of human rotaviruses: possible relation to seasonality of outbreaks.
Rev Infect Dis 1991;13:448-61.
842. Kaatz GW, Gitlin SD, Schaberg DR, et al. Acquisition of Clostridium
difﬁcile from the hospital environment. Am J Epidemiol 1988;127:
1289-94.
843. Mayﬁeld JL, Leet T, Miller J, Mundy LM. Environmental control to
reduce transmission of Clostridium difﬁcile. Clin Infect Dis 2000;31:
995-1000.
844. Dennehy PH. Transmission of rotavirus and other enteric pathogens
in the home. Pediatr Infect Dis J 2000;19(10 Suppl):S103-5.
845. Dennehy P. Rotavirus infections in infection control reference ser-
vice. In: Abrutyn E, Goldmann D, Scheckler W, editors. . Philadel-
phia: Saunders; 2001. p. 821-3.
846. Wilcox MH, Fawley WN, Wigglesworth N, Parnell P, Verity P, Free-
man J. Comparison of the effect of detergent versus hypochlorite
cleaning on environmental contamination and incidence of Clostrid-
ium difﬁcile infection. J Hosp Infect 2003;54:109-14.
847. Rutala WA, Weber DJ, Healthcare Infection Control Practices Ad-
visory Committee Committee (HICPAC). Guideline for disinfection
and sterilization in health care facilities. 2007. in press.
848. Bernards AT, Harinck HI, Dijkshoorn L, van der Reijden TJ, van den
Broek PJ. Persistent Acinetobacter baumannii? Look inside your med-
ical equipment. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2004;25:1002-4.
849. Neely AN, Weber JM, Daviau P, et al. Computer equipment used in
patient care within a multihospital system: recommendations for
cleaning and disinfection. Am J Infect Control 2005;33:233-7.
850. Neely AN, Maley MP, Warden GD. Computer keyboards as reser-
voirs for Acinetobacter baumannii in a burn hospital. Clin Infect Dis
1999;29:1358-60.
851. Bures S, Fishbain JT, Uyehara CF, Parker JM, Berg BW. Computer
keyboards
and
faucet
handles
as
reservoirs
of
nosocomial
pathogens in the intensive care unit. Am J Infect Control 2000;28:
465-71.
852. Brooks S, Khan A, Stoica D, et al. Reduction in vancomycin-resistant
Enterococcus and Clostridium difﬁcile infections following change to
tympanic thermometers. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:
333-6.
S146
Vol. 35 No. 10 Supplement 2
Siegel et al

----- Page 84 (native) -----
853. Jernigan JA, Siegman-Igra Y, Guerrant RC, Farr BM. A randomized
crossover study of disposable thermometers for prevention of Clos-
tridium difﬁcile and other nosocomial infections. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol 1998;19:494-9.
854. Weinstein SA, Gantz NM, Pelletier C, Hibert D. Bacterial surface
contamination of patients’ linen: isolation precautions versus stan-
dard care. Am J Infect Control 1989;17:264-7.
855. Pugliese G. Isolating and double-bagging laundry: is it really neces-
sary? Health Facil Manag 1989;2:16-21.
856. Available from. Accessed .
857. Kiehl E, Wallace R, Warren C. Tracking perinatal infection: is it safe
to launder your scrubs at home? MCN Am J Matern Child Nurs
1997;22:195-7.
858. Jurkovich P. Home- versus hospital-laundered scrubs: a pilot study.
MCN Am J Matern Child Nurs 2004;29:106-10.
859. US Environmental Protection Agency. Medical waste. Available from
www.epa.gov/epaoswer/other/medical/.
860. www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dhqp/gl_environinfection.html.
861. Maki DG, Alvarado C, Hassemer C. Double-bagging of items from
isolation rooms is unnecessary as an infection control measure: a
comparative study of surface contamination with single- and dou-
ble-bagging. Infect Control 1986;7:535-7.
862. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Recommended
antimicrobial agents for the treatment and postexposure prophylaxis
of pertussis: 2005 CDC guidelines. MMWR Recomm Rep 2005;54:
1-16.
863. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Prevention and con-
trol of meningococcal disease: recommendations of the Advisory
Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR Recomm
Rep 2000;49:1-10.
864. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Notice to readers: ad-
ditional options for preventive treatment for persons exposed to
inhalational anthrax. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2001;50:
1142-51.
865. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Updated US Public
Health Service guidelines for the management of occupational ex-
posures to HIV and recommendations for postexposure prophy-
laxis. MMWR Recomm Rep 2005;54:1-17.
866. Boyce JM. MRSA patients: proven methods to treat colonization
and infection. J Hosp Infect 2001;48(Suppl A):S9-S14.
867. Barrett FF, Mason EO Jr, Fleming D. Brief clinical and laboratory ob-
servations. J Pediatr 1979;94:796-800.
868. American Academy of Pediatrics and American Academy of Obste-
tricians and Gynecologists. Guidelines for perinatal care. 4th ed. Elk
Grove Village (IL): American Academy of Pediatrics; 2002.
869. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Management of mul-
tidrug-resistant organisms in health care settings, 2006. Available
from. Accessed.
870. Kallen AJ, Wilson CT, Larson RJ. Perioperative intranasal mupirocin
for the prevention of surgical-site infections: systematic review of
the literature and meta-analysis. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol
2005;26:916-22.
871. Carrier M, Marchand R, Auger P, et al. Methicillin-resistant Staphy-
lococcus aureus infection in a cardiac surgical unit. J Thorac Cardio-
vasc Surg 2002;123:40-4.
872. Tacconelli E, Carmeli Y, Aizer A, Ferreira G, Foreman MG, D’Agata
EM. Mupirocin prophylaxis to prevent Staphylococcus aureus infec-
tion in patients undergoing dialysis: a meta-analysis. Clin Infect
Dis 2003;37:1629-38.
873. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Immunization of
health-care workers: recommendations of the Advisory Committee
on Immunization Practices (ACIP) and the Hospital Infection Con-
trol Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC). MMWR Recomm
Rep 1997;46:1-42.
874. Mahoney FJ, Stewart K, Hu H, Coleman P, Alter MJ. Progress to-
ward the elimination of hepatitis B virus transmission among health
care workers in the United States. Arch Intern Med 1997;157:
2601-5.
875. Gladstone JL, Millian SJ. Rubella exposure in an obstetric clinic. Ob-
stet Gynecol 1981;57:182-6.
876. Wilde JA, McMillan JA, Serwint J, Butta J, O’Riordan MA, Steinhoff
MC. Effectiveness of inﬂuenza vaccine in health care professionals: a
randomized trial. JAMA 1999;281:908-13.
877. Potter J, Stott DJ, Roberts MA, et al. Inﬂuenza vaccination of health
care workers in long-term care hospitals reduces the mortality of
elderly patients. J Infect Dis 1997;175:1-6.
878. Pearson ML, Bridges CB, Harper SA. Inﬂuenza vaccination of health-
care personnel: recommendations of the Healthcare Infection Con-
trol Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC) and the Advisory
Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR Recomm
Rep 2006;55:1-16.
879. Wright SW, Decker MD, Edwards KM. Incidence of pertussis infec-
tion in healthcare workers. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:
120-3.
880. Calugar A, Ortega-Sanchez IR, Tiwari T, Oakes L, Jahre JA, Murphy
TV. Nosocomial pertussis: costs of an outbreak and beneﬁts of vac-
cinating health care workers. Clin Infect Dis 2006;42:981-8.
881. www.fda.gov.
882. Campins-Marti M, Cheng HK, Forsyth K, et al. Recommendations
are needed for adolescent and adult pertussis immunisation: ratio-
nale and strategies for consideration. Vaccine 2001;20:641-6.
883. www.cdc.gov/nip/recs/provisional_recs/default.htm.
884. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Recommended child-
hood and adolescent immunization schedule, United States, 2006.
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2006;54:Q1-4.
885. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Recommended child-
hood and adolescent immunization schedule, United States, 2006.
Pediatrics 2006;117:239-40.
886. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Recommended adult
immunization schedule, United States, October 2005–September
2006. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2005;54:Q1-4.
887. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Prevention of vari-
cella: updated recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Im-
munization Practices (ACIP). MMWR Recomm Rep 1999;48:1-5.
888. McKenney D, Pouliot KL, Wang Y, et al. Broadly protective vaccine
for Staphylococcus aureus based on an in vivo-expressed antigen. Sci-
ence 1999;284:1523-7.
889. Shineﬁeld H, Black S, Fattom A, et al. Use of a Staphylococcus aureus
conjugate vaccine in patients receiving hemodialysis. N Engl J Med
2002;346:491-6.
890. Abadesso C, Almeida HI, Virella D, Carreiro MH, Machado MC.
Use of palivizumab to control an outbreak of syncytial respiratory
virus in a neonatal intensive care unit. J Hosp Infect 2004;58:
38-41.
891. George RH, Gully PR, Gill ON, Innes JA, Bakhshi SS, Connolly M.
An outbreak of tuberculosis in a children’s hospital. J Hosp Infect
1986;8:129-42.
892. Simor AE, Lee M, Vearncombe M, et al. An outbreak due to multi-
resistant Acinetobacter baumannii in a burn unit: risk factors for ac-
quisition and management. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2002;23:
261-7.
893. Puzniak LA, Leet T, Mayﬁeld J, Kollef M, Mundy LM. To gown or not
to gown: the effect on acquisition of vancomycin-resistant entero-
cocci. Clin Infect Dis 2002;35:18-25.
894. Hanna H, Umphrey J, Tarrand J, Mendoza M, Raad I. Management of
an outbreak of vancomycin-resistant enterococci in the medical in-
tensive care unit of a cancer center. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol
2001;22:217-9.
895. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Recommendations
for preventing transmission of infection with human T-lymphotropic
virus type III/lymphadenopathy-associated virus in the workplace.
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 1985;34:681-95.
Siegel et al
December 2007
S147

----- Page 85 (native) -----
896. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Severe acute respira-
tory syndrome, Taiwan, 2003. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep
2003;52:461-6.
897. Capps JA. Measures for the prevention and control of respiratory
infections in military camps. JAMA 1918;71:448-51.
898. Thomas C. Efﬁciency of surgical masks in use in hospital wards: re-
port to the Control of Infection Subcommittee. Guys Hosp Rep
1961;110:157-67.
899. Beck M, Antle BJ, Berlin D, et al. Wearing masks in a pediatric hospital:
developing practical guidelines. Can J Public Health 2004;95:256-7.
900. Ryan MA, Christian RS, Wohlrabe J. Handwashing and respiratory
illness among young adults in military training. Am J Prev Med
2001;21:79-83.
901. Roberts L, Smith W, Jorm L, Patel M, Douglas RM, McGilchrist C.
Effect of infection control measures on the frequency of upper res-
piratory infection in child care: a randomized, controlled trial. Pedi-
atrics 2000;105(4 Pt 1):738-42.
902. White C, Kolble R, Carlson R, et al. The effect of hand hygiene on
illness rate among students in university residence halls. Am J Infect
Control 2003;31:364-70.
903. Aiello AE, Larson EL. What is the evidence for a causal link between
hygiene and infections? Lancet Infect Dis 2002;2:103-10.
904. American Association of Nurse Anesthesists. Reuse of needles and
syringes by healthcare providers put patients at risk. Available from
www.aana.com/news.aspx?ucNavMenu_TSMenuTargetID5171&
ucNavMenu_TSMenuTargetType54&ucNavMenu_TSMenuID56&
id51613. Accessed November 10, 2007.
905. Watanakunakorn C, Stahl C. Streptococcus salivarius meningitis fol-
lowing myelography. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1992;13:454.
906. GelfandMS, Abolnik IZ.Streptococcal meningitis complicating diagnos-
tic myelography: three cases and review. Clin Infect Dis 1995;20:582-7.
907. Schlesinger JJ, Salit IE, McCormack G. Streptococcal meningitis after
myelography. Arch Neurol 1982;39:576-7.
908. Yaniv LG, Potasman I. Iatrogenic meningitis: an increasing role for
resistant viridans streptococci? Case report and review of the last
20 years. Scand J Infect Dis 2000;32:693-6.
909. Schlegel L, Merlet C, Laroche JM, Fremaux A, Geslin P. Iatrogenic
meningitis due to Abiotrophia defectiva after myelography. Clin Infect
Dis 1999;28:155-6.
910. Schneeberger PM, Janssen M, Voss A. Alpha-hemolytic streptococci:
a major pathogen of iatrogenic meningitis following lumbar punc-
ture. Case reports and a review of the literature. Infection 1996;
24:29-33.
911. Veringa E, van Belkum A, Schellekens H. Iatrogenic meningitis by
Streptococcus salivarius following lumbar puncture. J Hosp Infect
1995;29:316-8.
912. Couzigou C, Vuong TK, Botherel AH, Aggoune M, Astagneau P. Iat-
rogenic Streptococcus salivarius meningitis after spinal anaesthesia:
need for strict application of standard precautions. J Hosp Infect
2003;53:313-4.
913. Torres E, Alba D, Frank A, Diez-Tejedor E. Iatrogenic meningitis due
to Streptococcus salivarius following a spinal tap. Clin Infect Dis 1993;
17:525-6.
914. Trautmann M, Lepper PM, Schmitz FJ. Three cases of bacterial men-
ingitis after spinal and epidural anesthesia. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect
Dis 2002;21:43-5.
915. Baer ET. Iatrogenic meningitis: the case for face masks. Clin Infect
Dis 2000;31:519-21.
916. Black SR, Weinstein RA. The case for face masks: zorro or zero?
Clin Infect Dis 2000;31:522-3.
917. Philips BJ, Fergusson S, Armstrong P, Anderson FM, Wildsmith JA. Sur-
gical face masks are effective in reducing bacterial contamination
caused by dispersal from the upper airway. Br J Anaesth 1992;69:407-8.
918. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Guidelines for the
prevention of intravascular catheter–related infections. MMWR Re-
comm Rep 2002;51:1-26.
919. Catalano G, Houston SH, Catalano MC, et al. Anxiety and depres-
sion in hospitalized patients in resistant organism isolation. South
Med J 2003;96:141-5.
920. Tarzi S, Kennedy P, Stone S, Evans M. Methicillin-resistant Staphylo-
coccus aureus: psychological impact of hospitalization and isolation in
an older adult population. J Hosp Infect 2001;49:250-4.
921. Kelly-Rossini L, Perlman DC, Mason DJ. The experience of respira-
tory isolation for HIV-infected persons with tuberculosis. J Assoc
Nurses AIDS Care 1996;7:29-36.
922. Knowles HE. The experience of infectious patients in isolation.
Nurs Times 1993;89:53-6.
923. Evans HL, Shaffer MM, Hughes MG, et al. Contact isolation in sur-
gical patients: a barrier to care? Surgery 2003;134:180-8.
924. Kirkland KB, Weinstein JM. Adverse effects of contact isolation.
Lancet 1999;354:1177-8.
925. Saint S, Higgins LA, Nallamothu BK, Chenoweth C. Do physicians
examine patients in contact isolation less frequently? A brief report.
Am J Infect Control 2003;31:354-6.
926. Management of multidrug-resistant organisms in healthcare settings,
2006. Available from www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dhqp/pdf/ar/mdroGuideline
2006.pdf.
927. Hall CB, Powell KR, MacDonald NE, et al. Respiratory syncytial viral
infection in children with compromised immune function. N Engl J
Med 1986;315:77-81.
928. Lui SL, Luk WK, Cheung CY, Chan TM, Lai KN, Peiris JS. Nosoco-
mial outbreak of parvovirus B19 infection in a renal transplant unit.
Transplantation 2001;71:59-64.
929. Weinstock DM, Gubareva LV, Zuccotti G. Prolonged shedding of
multidrug-resistant inﬂuenza A virus in an immunocompromised pa-
tient. N Engl J Med 2003;348:867-8.
930. van Tol MJ, Claas EC, Heemskerk B, et al. Adenovirus infection in chil-
dren after allogeneic stem cell transplantation: diagnosis, treatment
and immunity. Bone Marrow Transplant 2005;35(Suppl 1):S73-6.
931. Wood DJ, David TJ, Chrystie IL, Totterdell B. Chronic enteric virus
infection in two T-cell–immunodeﬁcient children. J Med Virol 1988;
24:435-44.
932. Mori I, Matsumoto K, Sugimoto K, et al. Prolonged shedding of ro-
tavirus in a geriatric inpatient. J Med Virol 2002;67:613-5.
933. Cederna JE, Terpenning MS, Ensberg M, Bradley SF, Kauffman CA.
Staphylococcus aureus nasal colonization in a nursing home: eradica-
tion with mupirocin. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1990;11:13-6.
934. Kauffman CA, Terpenning MS, He X, et al. Attempts to eradicate
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus from a long-term-care fa-
cility with the use of mupirocin ointment. Am J Med 1993;94:371-8.
935. Montecalvo MA, de Lencastre H, Carraher M, et al. Natural history
of colonization with vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus faecium. In-
fect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1995;16:680-5.
936. D’Agata EM, et al. High rate of false-negative results of the rectal swab
culture method in detection of gastrointestinal colonization with van-
comycin-resistant enterococci. Clin Infect Dis 2002;34:167-72.
937. Donskey CJ, Hoyen CK, Das SM, Helfand MS, Hecker MT. Recur-
rence of vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus stool colonization during
antibiotic therapy. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2002;23:436-40.
938. Scanvic A, Denic L, Gaillon S, Giry P, Andremont A, Lucet JC. Du-
ration of colonization by methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
after hospital discharge and risk factors for prolonged carriage.
Clin Infect Dis 2001;32:1393-8.
939. Noskin GA, Bednarz P, Suriano T, Reiner S, Peterson LR. Persistent
contamination of fabric-covered furniture by vancomycin-resistant
enterococci: implications for upholstery selection in hospitals. Am
J Infect Control 2000;28:311-3.
940. Gerson SL, Parker P, Jacobs MR, Creger R, Lazarus HM. Aspergillo-
sis due to carpet contamination. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol
1994;15(4 Pt 1):221-3.
941. Taplin D, Mertz PM. Flower vases in hospitals as reservoirs of path-
ogens. Lancet 1973;2:1279-81.
S148
Vol. 35 No. 10 Supplement 2
Siegel et al

----- Page 86 (native) -----
942. Walsh TJ, Dixon DM. Nosocomial aspergillosis: environmental mi-
crobiology, hospital epidemiology, diagnosis and treatment. Eur J
Epidemiol 1989;5:131-42.
943. Lass-Florl C, Rath P, Niederwieser D, et al. Aspergillus terreus infec-
tions in haematological malignancies: molecular epidemiology sug-
gests association with in-hospital plants. J Hosp Infect 2000;46:31-5.
944. Raad I, Hanna H, Osting C, et al. Masking of neutropenic patients on
transport from hospital rooms is associated with a decrease in nos-
ocomial aspergillosis during construction. Infect Control Hosp Epi-
demiol 2002;23:41-3.
945. www.cms.hhs.gov/CLIA.
946. Emori TG, Haley RW, Stanley RC. The infection control nurse in US
hospitals, 1976–1977: characteristics of the position and its occu-
pant. Am J Epidemiol 1980;111:592-607.
947. Richet HM, Benbachir M, Brown DE, et al. Are there regional varia-
tions in the diagnosis, surveillance, and control of methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus? Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2003;24:334-41.
948. Anderson DJ, Kirkland KB, McDonald JR, et al. Results of a survey
of work duties of 56 infection control professionals (ICPs): are new
guidelines needed for the stafﬁng of infection control (IC) pro-
grams? [abstract 146]. Presented at the 16th annual meeting of
the Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America, Chicago, IL,
2006.
949. Harvey MA. Critical care unit bedside design and furnishing: impact
on nosocomial infections. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:
597-601.
950. Srinivasan A, Beck C, Buckley T, et al. The ability of hospital venti-
lation systems to ﬁlter Aspergillus and other fungi following a build-
ing implosion. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2002;23:520-4.
951. Maragakis LL, Bradley KL, Song X, et al. Increased catheter-related
bloodstream infection rates after the introduction of a new me-
chanical valve intravenous access port. Infect Control Hosp Epide-
miol 2006;27:67-70.
952. Joint Commision on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations.
Comprehensive accredication manual for hospitals: the ofﬁcial
handbook. Oakbrook Terrace (IL): Joint Commision on Accredita-
tion of Healthcare Organizations; 2007.
953. Peterson LR, Noskin GA. New technology for detecting multidrug-
resistant pathogens in the clinical microbiology laboratory. Emerg
Infect Dis 2001;7:306-11.
954. Diekema DJ, Doebbeling BN. Employee health and infection con-
trol. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1995;16:292-301.
955. Weems JJ Jr. Nosocomial outbreak of Pseudomonas cepacia associ-
ated with contamination of reusable electronic ventilator tempera-
ture probes. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1993;14:583-6.
956. Berthelot P, Grattard F, Mahul P, et al. Ventilator temperature sen-
sors: an unusual source of Pseudomonas cepacia in nosocomial in-
fection. J Hosp Infect 1993;25:33-43.
957. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Bronchoscopy-related
infections and pseudoinfections, New York, 1996 and 1998. MMWR
Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 1999;48:557-60.
958. Heeg P, Roth K, Reichl R, Cogdill CP, Bond WW. Decontaminated sin-
gle-use devices: an oxymoron that may be placing patients at risk for
cross-contamination. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2001;22:542-9.
959. www.fda.gov/cdrh/reprocessing/.
960. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Prevention and control
of inﬂuenza: recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immu-
nization Practices (ACIP). MMWR Recomm Rep 2003;52:1-36.
961. WeinstockDM, EaganJ, Malak SA, et al. Control ofinﬂuenzaA on abone
marrow transplant unit. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2000;21:730-2.
962. Cromer AL, Hutsell SO, Latham SC, et al. Impact of implementing a
method of feedback and accountability related to contact precau-
tions compliance. Am J Infect Control 2004;32:451-5.
963. Eveillard M, Eb F, Tramier B, et al. Evaluation of the contribution of
isolation precautions in prevention and control of multi-resistant
bacteria in a teaching hospital. J Hosp Infect 2001;47:116-24.
964. Pfeiffer J, Gilmore G. The text as an orientation tool. In: Pfeiffer J,
editor. APIC Text of Infection Control and Epidemiology. Washing-
ton, DC: Association for Professionals in Infection Control and Ep-
idemiology; 2000 7/1–8.
965. Gaynes RP, Emori TG. Surveillance for nosocomial infections. In:
Abrutyn E, Goldmann DA, Scheckler WE, editors. Saunders Infec-
tion Control Reference. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2001. p. 40-4.
966. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Monitoring hospital-
acquired infections to promote patient safety, United States,
1990-1999. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2000;49:149-53.
967. Curran ET, Benneyan JC, Hood J. Controlling methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus: a feedback approach using annotated statistical
process control charts. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2002;23:13-8.
968. Lanotte P, Cantagrel S, Mereghetti L, et al. Spread of Stenotrophomo-
nas maltophilia colonization in a pediatric intensive care unit de-
tected by monitoring tracheal bacterial carriage and molecular
typing. Clin Microbiol Infect 2003;9:1142-7.
969. Coopersmith CM, Zack JE, Ward MR, et al. The impact of bedside
behavior on catheter-related bacteremia in the intensive care unit.
Arch Surg 2004;139:131-6.
970. O’Brien KL, Beall B, Barrett NL, et al. Epidemiology of invasive
group a streptococcus disease in the United States, 1995–1999.
Clin Infect Dis 2002;35:268-76.
971. Nicolle LE, Dyck B, Thompson G, et al. Regional dissemination and
control of epidemic methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus.
Manitoba Chapter of CHICA-Canada. Infect Control Hosp Epide-
miol 1999;20(3):202-5.
972. Seybold U, Kourbatova EV, Johnson JG, et al. Emergence of commu-
nity-associated methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus USA300
genotype as a major cause of health care–associated blood stream
infections. Clin Infect Dis 2006;42:647-56.
973. Bond WW, Favero MS, Petersen NJ, Gravelle CR, Ebert JW, May-
nard JE. Survival of hepatitis B virus after drying and storage for
one week. Lancet 1981;1:550-1.
974. Ehrenkranz NJ, Alfonso BC. Failure of bland soap handwash to pre-
vent hand transfer of patient bacteria to urethral catheters. Infect
Control Hosp Epidemiol 1991;12:654-62.
975. Winnefeld M, Richard MA, Drancourt M, Grob JJ. Skin tolerance
and effectiveness of two hand decontamination procedures in ev-
eryday hospital use. Br J Dermatol 2000;143:546-50.
976. Widmer AF. Replace hand washing with use of a waterless alcohol
hand rub? Clin Infect Dis 2000;31:136-43.
977. Mortimer EA Jr, Lipsitz PJ, Wolinsky E, Gonzaga AJ, Rammelkamp CH
Jr. Transmission of staphylococci between newborns: importance of
the hands to personnel. Am J Dis Child 1962;104:289-95.
978. Casewell M, Phillips I. Hands as route of transmission for Klebsiella
species. Br Med J 1977;2:1315-7.
979. Ojajarvi J. Effectiveness of hand washing and disinfection methods in
removing transient bacteria after patient nursing. J Hyg (Lond)
1980;85:193-203.
980. Otter J, Havill N, Adams N, Joyce J. Extensive environmental con-
tamination associated with patients with loose stools and MRSA
colonization of the gastrointestinal tract [abstract 159]. Presented
at the 16th annual scientiﬁc meeting of the Society for Healthcare
Epidemiology of America, Chicago, IL, 2006.
981. WeberDJ,Sickbert-BennettE,GergenMF,RutalaWA.Efﬁcacyofselected
hand hygiene agents used to remove Bacillus atrophaeus (asurrogate of Ba-
cillus anthracis) from contaminated hands. JAMA 2003;289:1274-7.
982. Saiman L, Lerner A, Saal L, et al. Banning artiﬁcial nails from health
care settings. Am J Infect Control 2002;30:252-4.
983. Johnson S, Gerding DN, Olson MM, et al. Prospective, controlled
study of vinyl glove use to interrupt Clostridium difﬁcile nosocomial
transmission. Am J Med 1990;88:137-40.
984. Neal JG, Jackson EM, Suber F, Edlich RF. Latex glove penetration by
pathogens: a review of the literature. J Long Term Eff Med Implants
1998;8:233-40.
Siegel et al
December 2007
S149

----- Page 87 (native) -----
985. Broyles JM, O’Connell KP, Korniewicz DM. PCR-based method for
detecting viral penetration of medical exam gloves. J Clin Microbiol
2002;40:2725-8.
986. Patterson JE, Vecchio J, Pantelick EL, et al. Association of contami-
nated gloves with transmission of Acinetobacter calcoaceticus var. ani-
tratus in an intensive care unit. Am J Med 1991;91:479-83.
987. Goldmann DA. Epidemiology and prevention of pediatric viral res-
piratory infections in health-care institutions. Emerg Infect Dis
2001;7:249-53.
988. Gaggero A, Avendano LF, Fernandez J, Spencer E. Nosocomial
transmission of rotavirus from patients admitted with diarrhea. J
Clin Microbiol 1992;30:3294-7.
989. Merritt K, Hitchins VM, Brown SA. Safety and cleaning of medical
materials and devices. J Biomed Mater Res 2000;53:131-6.
990. Kampf G, Bloss R, Martiny H. Surface ﬁxation of dried blood by glu-
taraldehyde and peracetic acid. J Hosp Infect 2004;57:139-43.
991. Weber DJ, Rutala WA. Role of environmental contamination in the
transmission of vancomycin-resistant enterococci. Infect Control
Hosp Epidemiol 1997;18:306-9.
992. Byers KE, Durbin LJ, Simonton BM, Anglim AM, Adal KA, Farr BM. Dis-
infection of hospital rooms contaminated with vancomycin-resistant En-
terococcus faecium. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998;19:261-4.
993. Martinez JA, Ruthazer R, Hansjosten K, Barefoot L, Snydman DR.
Role of environmental contamination as a risk factor for acquisition
of vancomycin-resistant enterococci in patients treated in a medical
intensive care unit. Arch Intern Med 2003;163:1905-12.
994. US Environmental Protection Agency. Federal Insecticide, Fungicide,
and Rodenticidal Act 7 USC 136 et seq.
995. Devine J, Cooke RP, Wright EP. Is methicillin-resistant Staphylococ-
cus aureus (MRSA) contamination of ward-based computer termi-
nals a surrogate marker for nosocomial MRSA transmission and
handwashing compliance? J Hosp Infect 2001;48:72-5.
996. Sattar SA, Springthorpe S, Mani S, et al. Transfer of bacteria from
fabrics to hands and other fabrics: development and application of
a quantitative method using Staphylococcus aureus as a model. J
Appl Microbiol 2001;90:962-70.
997. Shiomori T, Miyamoto H, Makishima K, et al. Evaluation of bedmak-
ing-related airborne and surface methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus
aureus contamination. J Hosp Infect 2002;50:30-5.
998. Whyte W, Baird G, Annand R. Bacterial contamination on the sur-
face of hospital linen chutes. J Hyg (Lond) 1969;67:427-35.
999. Michaelsen GS. Designing linen chutes to reduce spread of infec-
tious organisms. Hospitals 1965;39:116-9.
1000. Plott RT, Wagner RF Jr, Tyring SK. Iatrogenic contamination of mul-
tidose vials in simulated use: a reassessment of current patient in-
jection technique. Arch Dermatol 1990;126:1441-4.
1001. Samandari T, Malakmadze N, Balter S, et al. A large outbreak of hep-
atitis B virus infections associated with frequent injections at a phy-
sician’s ofﬁce. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2005;26:745-50.
1002. Comstock RD, Mallonee S, Fox JL, et al. A large nosocomial outbreak
of hepatitis C and hepatitis B among patients receiving pain remedia-
tion treatments. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2004;25:576-83.
1003. Germain JM, Carbonne A, Thiers V, et al. Patient-to-patient transmis-
sion of hepatitis C virus through the use of multidose vials during gen-
eral anesthesia. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2005;26:789-92.
1004. Macedo de Oliveira A, White KL, Leschinsky DP, et al. An outbreak
of hepatitis C virus infections among outpatients at a hematolo-
gy/oncology clinic. Ann Intern Med 2005;142:898-902.
1005. Hsu J, Jensen B, Arduino M, et al. Streptococcal meningitis following
myelogram procedures. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2007;28:
614-7.
1006. Srinivasan A, Song X, Ross T, Merz W, Brower R, Perl TM. A pro-
spective study to determine whether cover gowns in addition to
gloves decrease nosocomial transmission of vancomycin-resistant
enterococci in an intensive care unit. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol
2002;23:424-8.
1007. Nichols WG, Corey L, Gooley T, Davis C, Boeckh M. Parainﬂuenza
virus infections after hematopoietic stem cell transplantation: risk
factors, response to antiviral therapy, and effect on transplant out-
come. Blood 2001;98:573-8.
1008. Elizaga J, Olavarria E, Apperley J, Goldman J, Ward K. Parainﬂuenza
virus 3 infection after stem cell transplant: relevance to outcome of
rapid diagnosis and ribavirin treatment. Clin Infect Dis 2001;32:413-8.
1009. Oishi I, Kimura T, Murakami T, et al. Serial observations of chronic
rotavirus infection in an immunodeﬁcient child. Microbiol Immunol
1991;35:953-61.
1010. Fierobe L, Lucet JC, Decre D, et al. An outbreak of imipenem-resis-
tant Acinetobacter baumannii in critically ill surgical patients. Infect
Control Hosp Epidemiol 2001;22:35-40.
1011. Montesinos I, Salido E, Delgado T, Lecuona M, Sierra A. Epidemiology
of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus at a university hospital in
the Canary Islands. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2003;24:667-72.
1012. Poutanen SM, Vearncombe M, McGeer AJ, Gardam M, Large G,
Simor AE. Nosocomial acquisition of methicillin-resistant Staphylo-
coccus aureus during an outbreak of severe acute respiratory syn-
drome. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2005;26:134-7.
1013. Yap FH, Gomersall CD, Fung KS, et al. Increase in methicillin-resis-
tant Staphylococcus aureus acquisition rate and change in pathogen
pattern associated with an outbreak of severe acute respiratory
syndrome. Clin Infect Dis 2004;39:511-6.
1014. Layton MC, Perez M, Heald P, Patterson JE. An outbreak of mupir-
ocin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus on a dermatology ward associ-
ated with an environmental reservoir. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol 1993;14:369-75.
1015. Gilmore A, Stuart J, Andrews N. Risk of secondary meningococcal
disease in health-care workers. Lancet 2000;356:1654-5.
1016. www.cdc.gov/ﬂu/avian/index.htm.
1017. www.hhs.gov/pandemicﬂu/plan/pdf/S04.pdf.
1018. Ehresmann KR, Hedberg CW, Grimm MB, Norton CA, MacDonald
KL, Osterholm MT. An outbreak of measles at an international
sporting event with airborne transmission in a domed stadium. J In-
fect Dis 1995;171:679-83.
1019. Gustafson TL, Lavely GB, Brawner ER Jr, Hutcheson RH Jr, Wright
PF, Schaffner W. An outbreak of airborne nosocomial varicella. Pe-
diatrics 1982;70:550-6.
1020. Hyams PJ, Stuewe MC, Heitzer V. Herpes zoster causing varicella
(chickenpox) in hospital employees: cost of a casual attitude. Am
J Infect Control 1984;12:2-5.
1021. Pavelchak N, DePersis RP, London M, et al. Identiﬁcation of factors
that disrupt negative air pressurization of respiratory isolation
rooms. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2000;21:191-5.
1022. Rice N, Streifel A, Vesley D. An evaluation of hospital special ventila-
tion room pressures. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2001;22:19-23.
1023. Hutton MD, Stead WW, Cauthen GM, Bloch AB, Ewing WM. Nos-
ocomial transmission of tuberculosis associated with a draining ab-
scess. J Infect Dis 1990;161:286-95.
1024. Frampton MW. An outbreak of tuberculosis among hospital personnel
caring for a patient with a skin ulcer. Ann Intern Med 1992;117:312-3.
1025. Ammari LK, Bell LM, Hodinka RL. Secondary measles vaccine failure
in healthcare workers exposed to infected patients. Infect Control
Hosp Epidemiol 1993;14:81-6.
1026. Behrman A, Schmid DS, Crivaro A, Watson B. A cluster of primary
varicella cases among healthcare workers with false-positive vari-
cella zoster virus titers. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2003;24:
202-6.
1027. Josephson A, Gombert ME. Airborne transmission of nosocomial
varicella from localized zoster. J Infect Dis 1988;158:238-41.
1028. Brodkin RH. Zoster-causing varicella: current dangers of contagion
without isolation. Arch Dermatol 1963;88:322-4.
1029. Suzuki K, Yoshikawa T, Tomitaka A, Matsunaga K, Asano Y. Detec-
tion of aerosolized varicella-zoster virus DNA in patients with lo-
calized herpes zoster. J Infect Dis 2004;189:1009-12.
S150
Vol. 35 No. 10 Supplement 2
Siegel et al

----- Page 88 (native) -----
1030. Ruuskanen O, Salmi TT, Halonen P. Measles vaccination after expo-
sure to natural measles. J Pediatr 1978;93:43-6.
1031. Berkovich S, Starr S. Use of live measles virus vaccine to abort an
expected outbreak of measles within a closed population. N Engl
J Med 1963;269:75-7.
1032. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Measles, mumps, and
rubella vaccine use and strategies for elimination of measles, rubella,
and congenital rubella syndrome and control of mumps: recommen-
dations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices
(ACIP). MMWR Recomm Rep 1998;47:1-57.
1033. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. General recommen-
dations on immunization: recommendations of the Advisory Com-
mittee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR Recomm Rep
2006;55:1-48.
1034. Watson B, Seward J, Yang A, et al. Postexposure effectiveness of
varicella vaccine. Pediatrics 2000;105(1 Pt 1):84-8.
1035. Salzman MB, Garcia C. Postexposure varicella vaccination in
siblings of children with active varicella. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1998;
17:256-7.
1036. Centers for Disease Control and Preverntion. Vaccinia (smallpox)
vaccine: recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immuni-
zation Practices (ACIP), 2001. MMWR Recomm Rep 2001;50:1-25.
1037. Fulginiti VA, Papier A, Lane JM, Neff JM, Henderson DA. Smallpox
vaccination: a review. Part I: background, vaccination technique,
normal vaccination and revaccination, and expected normal reac-
tions. Clin Infect Dis 2003;37:241-50.
1038. Dixon CW. Smallpox in Tripolitania, 1946: an epidemiological and
clinical study of 500 cases, including trials of penicillin treatment. J
Hyg (Lond) 1948;46:351-77.
1039. Murray WA, Streifel AJ, O’Dea TJ, Rhame FS. Ventilation for pro-
tection of immune-compromised patients. ASHRAE Trans 1988;
94:1185.
1040. Rutala WA, Jones SM, Worthington JM, Reist PC, Weber DJ. Efﬁ-
cacy of portable ﬁltration units in reducing aerosolized particles
in the size range of Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Infect Control
Hosp Epidemiol 1995;16:391-8.
1041. Mandell GL, Bennett JE, Dolin R, editors. Mandell, Douglas and Ben-
nett’s principles and practice of infectious diseases. 5th ed. Philadel-
phia: Churchill Livingstone; 2000.
1042. Heymann DL, editor. Control of communicable diseases manual. 18th
ed. Washington, DC: American Public Health Association; 2005.
1043. Vreden SG, Visser LG, Verweij JJ, et al. Outbreak of amebiasis in a
family in the Netherlands. Clin Infect Dis 2000;31:1101-4.
1044. Thacker SB, Kimball AM, Wolfe M, Choi K, Gilmore L. Parasitic disease
control in a residential facility for the mentally retarded: failure of se-
lected isolation procedures. Am J Public Health 1981;71:303-5.
1045. Sampathkumar P. West Nile virus: epidemiology, clinical presenta-
tion, diagnosis, and prevention. Mayo Clin Proc 2003;78:1137-43.
1046. Ruben B, Band JD, Wong P, Colville J. Person-to-person transmis-
sion of Brucella melitensis. Lancet 1991;337:14-5.
1047. Vandercam B, Zech F, de Cooman S, Bughin C, Gigi J, Wauters G.
Isolation of Brucella melitensis from human sperm. Eur J Clin Micro-
biol Infect Dis 1990;9:303-4.
1048. Robichaud S, Libman M, Behr M, Rubin E. Prevention of laboratory-
acquired brucellosis. Clin Infect Dis 2004;38:e119-22.
1049. Troy CJ, Peeling RW, Ellis AG, et al. Chlamydia pneumoniae as a new
source of infectious outbreaks in nursing homes. JAMA 1997;277:
1214-8.
1050. Ekman MR, Grayston JT, Visakorpi R, Kleemola M, Kuo CC, Saikku
P. An epidemic of infections due to Chlamydia pneumoniae in military
conscripts. Clin Infect Dis 1993;17:420-5.
1051. Eickhoff TC. An outbreak of surgical wound infections due to Clos-
tridium perfringens. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1962;114:102-8.
1052. Kohn GJ, Linne SR, Smith CM, Hoeprich PD. Acquisition of coccid-
ioidomycosis at necropsy by inhalation of coccidioidal endospores.
Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 1992;15:527-30.
1053. Wright PW, Pappagianis D, Wilson M, et al. Donor-related coccid-
ioidomycosis in organ transplant recipients. Clin Infect Dis 2003;37:
1265-9.
1054. Maitreyi RS, Dar L, Muthukumar A, et al. Acute hemorrhagic conjunc-
tivitis due to enterovirus 70 in India. Emerg Infect Dis 1999;5:267-9.
1055. Centers
for
Disease
Control
and
Prevention.
Acute
hemorrhagic conjunctivitis outbreak caused by Coxsackievirus
A24, Puerto Rico, 2003. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2004;
53:632-4.
1056. Faden H, Wynn RJ, Campagna L, Ryan RM. Outbreak of adenovirus
type 30 in a neonatal intensive care unit. J Pediatr 2005;146:523-7.
1057. Chaberny IE, Schnitzler P, Geiss HK, Wendt C. An outbreak of ep-
idemic keratoconjunctivtis in a pediatric unit due to adenovirus type
8. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2003;24:514-9.
1058. Warren D, Nelson KE, Farrar JA, et al. A large outbreak of epidemic
keratoconjunctivitis: problems in controlling nosocomial spread. J
Infect Dis 1989;160:938-43.
1059. www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dvrd/cjd/qa_cjd_infection_control.htm.
1060. Wang CY, Wu HD, Hsueh PR. Nosocomial transmission of crypto-
coccosis. N Engl J Med 2005;352:1271-2.
1061. Beyt BE Jr, Waltman SR. Cryptococcal endophthalmitis after cor-
neal transplantation. N Engl J Med 1978;298:825-6.
1062. Widdowson MA, Glass R, Monroe S, et al. Probable transmission of
norovirus on an airplane. JAMA 2005;293:1859-60.
1063. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Prevention of hepati-
tis A through active or passive immunization: recommendations of
the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP).
MMWR Recomm Rep 1999;48:1-37.
1064. Rosenblum LS, Villarino ME, Nainan OV, et al. Hepatitis A outbreak
in a neonatal intensive care unit: risk factors for transmission and
evidence of prolonged viral excretion among preterm infants. J In-
fect Dis 1991;164:476-82.
1065. Carl M, Kantor RJ, Webster HM, Fields HA, Maynard JE. Excretion
of hepatitis A virus in the stools of hospitalized hepatitis patients.
J Med Virol 1982;9:125-9.
1066. Robson SC, Adams S, Brink N, Woodruff B, Bradley D. Hospital
outbreak of hepatitis E. Lancet 1992;339:1424-5.
1067. Arvin A, Whitley R. Herpes simplex virus infections. In: Remington
JS, Klein JO, editors. Infectious diseases of the fetus and newborn
infant. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2001.
1068. Enright AM, Prober CG. Neonatal herpes infection: diagnosis, treat-
ment and prevention. Semin Neonatol 2002;7:283-91.
1069. Esper F, Boucher D, Weibel C, Martinello RA, Kahn JS. Human
metapneumovirus infection in the United States: clinical manifesta-
tions associated with a newly emerging respiratory infection in chil-
dren. Pediatrics 2003;111(6 Pt 1):1407-10.
1070. Colodner R, Sakran W, Miron D, Teitler N, Khavalevsky E, Kopelo-
witz J. Listeria moncytogenes cross-contamination in a nursery. Am J
Infect Control 2003;31:322-4.
1071. Farber JM, Peterkin PI, Carter AO, Varughese PV, Ashton FE,
Ewan EP. Neonatal listeriosis due to cross-infection conﬁrmed
by isoenzyme typing and DNA ﬁngerprinting. J Infect Dis 1991;
163:927-8.
1072. Schuchat A, Lizano C, Broome CV, Swaminathan B, Kim C, Winn K.
Outbreak of neonatal listeriosis associated with mineral oil. Pediatr
Infect Dis J 1991;10:183-9.
1073. Pejaver RK, Watson AH, Mucklow ES. Neonatal cross-infection
with Listeria monocytogenes. J Infect 1993;26:301-3.
1074. Jain SK, Persaud D, Perl TM, et al. Nosocomial malaria and saline
ﬂush. Emerg Infect Dis 2005;11:1097-9.
1075. Abulrahi HA, Bohlega EA, Fontaine RE, al-Seghayer SM, al-Ruwais
AA. Plasmodium falciparum malaria transmitted in hospital through
heparin locks. Lancet 1997;349:23-5.
1076. Al-Saigul AM, Fontaine RE, Haddad Q. Nosocomial malaria from
contamination of a multidose heparin container with blood. Infect
Control Hosp Epidemiol 2000;21:329-30.
Siegel et al
December 2007
S151

----- Page 89 (native) -----
1077. Piro
S,
Sammud
M,
Badi
S,
Al
Ssabi
L.
Hospital-acquired
malaria transmitted by contaminated gloves. J Hosp Infect 2001;47:156-8.
1078. Book LS, Overall JC Jr, Herbst JJ, Britt MR, Epstein B, Jung AL. Clus-
tering of necrotizing enterocolitis: interruption by infection-control
measures. N Engl J Med 1977;297:984-6.
1079. Rotbart HA, Levin MJ. How contagious is necrotizing enterocolitis?
Pediatr Infect Dis 1983;2:406-13.
1080. Rotbart HA, Levin MJ, Yolken RH, Manchester DK, Jantzen J. An
outbreak of rotavirus-associated neonatal necrotizing enterocolitis.
J Pediatr 1983;103:454-9.
1081. Gerber AR, Hopkins RS, Lauer BA, Curry-Kane AG, Rotbart HA.
Increased risk of illness among nursery staff caring for neonates
with necrotizing enterocolitis. Pediatr Infect Dis 1985;4:246-9.
1082. Sanchez MP, Erdman DD, Torok TJ, Freeman CJ, Matyas BT. Out-
break of adenovirus 35 pneumonia among adult residents and staff
of a chronic care psychiatric facility. J Infect Dis 1997;176:760-3.
1083. Singh-Naz N, Brown M, Ganeshananthan M. Nosocomial adenovi-
rus infection: molecular epidemiology of an outbreak. Pediatr Infect
Dis J 1993;12:922-5.
1084. Uemura T, Kawashitam T, Ostuka Y, Tanaka Y, Kusubae R, Yoshinaga
M. A recent outbreak of adenovirus type 7 infection in a chronic in-
patient facility for the severely handicapped. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol 2000;21:559-60.
1085. Nuorti JP, Butler JC, Crutcher JM, et al. An outbreak of multidrug-
resistant pneumococcal pneumonia and bacteremia among unvacci-
nated nursing home residents. N Engl J Med 1998;338:1861-8.
1086. Houff SA, Burton RC, Wilson RW, et al. Human-to-human trans-
mission of rabies virus by corneal transplant. N Engl J Med 1979;
300:603-4.
1087. CentersforDiseaseControlandPrevention.Humanrabiesprevention,
United States, 1999: recommendations of the Advisory Committee on
Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR Recomm Rep 1999;48:1-21.
1088. Hayden FG. Rhinovirus and the lower respiratory tract. Rev Med
Virol 2004;14:17-31.
1089. Valenti WM, Clarke TA, Hall CB, Menegus MA, Shapiro DL. Con-
current outbreaks of rhinovirus and respiratory syncytial virus in
an intensive care nursery: epidemiology and associated risk factors.
J Pediatr 1982;100:722-6.
1090. Chidekel AS, Rosen CL, Bazzy AR. Rhinovirus infection associated
with serious lower respiratory illness in patients with bronchopul-
monary dysplasia. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1997;16:43-7.
1091. Drusin LM, Ross BG, Rhodes KH, Krauss AN, Scott RA. Nosoco-
mial ringworm in a neonatal intensive care unit: a nurse and her cat.
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2000;21:605-7.
1092. Lewis SM, Lewis BG. Nosocomial transmission of Trichophyton ton-
surans tinea corporis in a rehabilitation hospital. Infect Control
Hosp Epidemiol 1997;18:322-5.
1093. Saiman L, Jakob K, Holmes KW, et al. Molecular epidemiology of
staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome in premature infants. Pediatr
Infect Dis J 1998;17:329-34.
1094. Ramage L, Green K, Pyskir D, Simor AE. An outbreak of fatal nos-
ocomial infections due to group A streptococcus on a medical
ward. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:429-31.
1095. Kakis A, Gibbs L, Eguia J, et al. An outbreak of group A streptococcal
infection among health care workers. Clin Infect Dis 2002;35:1353-9.
1096. Schwartz B, Elliott JA, Butler JC, et al. Clusters of invasive group A
streptococcal infections in family, hospital, and nursing home set-
tings. Clin Infect Dis 1992;15:277-84.
1097. National Communicable Disease Center. Isolation techniques for use
in hospitals. Washington, DC: US Government Printing Ofﬁce; 1970.
1098. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Isolation techniques
for use in hospitals. 2nd ed. Washington, DC: US Government
Printing Ofﬁce; 1975.
1099. Garner JS, Simmons BP. CDC guideline for isolation precautions in
hospitals. Atlanta (GA): US Department of Health and Human Ser-
vices, Public Health Service, Centers for Disease Control; 1983.
1100. Lynch P, Jackson MM, Cummings MJ, Stamm WE. Rethinking the
role of isolation practices in the prevention of nosocomial infec-
tions. Ann Intern Med 1987;107:243-6.
APPENDIX A: TYPE AND DURATION OF
PRECAUTIONS RECOMMENDED FOR SELECTED
INFECTIONS AND CONDITIONS
Preamble
The mode(s) and risk of transmission for each spe-
ciﬁc disease agent listed in this appendix were re-
viewed.
Principle
sources
consulted
for
the
development of disease-speciﬁc recommendations for
the appendix included infectious disease manuals and
textbooks.831,1039,1040 The published literature was
searched forevidence of person-to-person transmission
in health care and non–health care settings with a focus
on reported outbreaks that would assist in developing
recommendations for all settings where health care is
delivered. The following criteria were used to assign
transmission-based precautions categories:
d A transmission-based precautions category was as-
signed if there was strong evidence for person-to-per-
son transmission via droplet, contact, or airborne
routes in health care or non–health care settings
and/or if patient factors (eg, diapered infants, diar-
rhea,
draining
wounds)
increased
the
risk
of
transmission.
d Transmission-basedprecautionscategoryassignments
reﬂect the predominant mode(s) of transmission.
d If there was no evidence for person-to-person trans-
mission by droplet, contact or airborne routes, then
Standard Precautions were assigned.
d If there was a low risk for person-to-person transmis-
sion and no evidence of health care-associated trans-
mission, then Standard Precautions were assigned.
d Standard precautions were assigned for bloodborne
pathogens (eg, HBV, HCV, HIV) in accordance with
CDC recommendations for universal precautions is-
suedin1988.778Subsequentexperiencehasconﬁrmed
the efﬁcacy of Standard Precautions to prevent expo-
sure to infected blood and body ﬂuid.776,777,863
Additional information relevant to use of precau-
tions was added in the comments column to assist
the caregiver in decision-making. Citations were added
as needed to support a change in or provide additional
evidence for recommendations for a speciﬁc disease
and for new infectious agents (eg, SARS-CoV, avian in-
ﬂuenza) that have been added to Appendix A. The
reader may refer to more detailed discussion concern-
ing modes of transmission and emerging pathogens in
the background text and for MDRO control in the
MDRO Guideline.
S152
Vol. 35 No. 10 Supplement 2
Siegel et al

----- Page 90 (native) -----
Appendix A. Continued.
Precaution
Infection/Condition
Type*
Durationy
Comments
Abscess
Draining, major
C
DI
No dressing or containment of drainage; until drainage stops or can be contained by
dressing.
Draining, minor or limited
S
Dressing to cover and contain drainage.
AIDS/HIV
S
Postexposure chemoprophylaxis for some blood exposures.865
Actinomycosis
S
Not transmitted from person to person.
Adenovirus infection (see
agent-speciﬁc guidance under
gastroenteritis, conjuctivitis,
pneumonia)
Amebiasis
S
Person-to-person transmission is rare. Transmission in settings for the mentally challenged
and in a family group has been reported.1041 Use care when handling diapered infants and
mentally challenged persons.1042
Anthrax
S
Infected patients do not generally pose a transmission risk.
Cutaneous
S
Transmission through nonintact skin contact with draining lesions possible; thus, use
Contact Precautions if a large amount of uncontained drainage is present. Handwashing
with soap and water is preferable to the use of waterless alcohol-based antiseptics,
because alcohol does not have sporicidal activity.979
Pulmonary
S
Not transmitted from person to person.
Environmental: aerosolizable
spore-containing powder or
other substance
DE
Until decontamination of environment complete.203 Wear respirator (N95 mask or PAPR),
protective clothing; decontaminate persons with powder on them (http://www.cdc.gov/
mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm5135a3.htm).
Hand hygiene: Handwashing for 30 to 60 seconds with soap and water or 2%
chlorhexidene gluconate after spore contact. (Alcohol handrubs are inactive against
spores.)979
Postexposure prophylaxis after environmental exposure: 60 days of antimicrobials (either
doxycycline, ciproﬂoxacin, or levoﬂoxacin) and postexposure vaccine under IND.
Antibiotic-associated colitis
(see Clostridium difﬁcile)
Arthropod-borne viral
encephalitides (eastern, west-
ern, Venezuelan equine enceph-
alomyelitis; St Louis, California
encephalitis; west Nile virus)
and viral fevers (dengue, yellow
fever, Colorado tick fever)
S
Not transmitted from person to person except rarely by transfusion, and for West Nile
virus by organ transplant, breastmilk or transplacentally.528,1043 Install screens in
windows and doors in endemic areas.
Use DEET-containing mosquito repellants and clothing to cover extremities.
Ascariasis
S
Not transmitted from person to person.
Aspergillosis
S
Institute Contact Precautions and Airborne Precautions if massive soft tissue infection with
copious drainage and repeated irrigations required.154
Avian inﬂuenza (see inﬂuenza,
avian below)
Babesiosis
S
Not transmitted from person to person except rarely by transfusion.
Blastomycosis, North
American, cutaneous or
pulmonary
S
Not transmitted from person to person.
Botulism
S
Not transmitted from person to person.
Bronchiolitis (see respiratory
infections in infants and
young children)
C
DI
Use mask according to Standard Precautions.
Brucellosis (undulant, Malta,
Mediterranean fever)
S
Not transmitted from person to person except rarely through banked spermatozoa and
sexual contact.1044,1045 Provide antimicrobial prophylaxis following laboratory
exposure.1046
Campylobacter gastroenteritis
(see gastroenteritis)
Candidiasis, all forms, including
mucocutaneous
S
Cat-scratch fever (benign
inoculation
lymphoreticulosis)
S
Not transmitted from person to person.
Continued
Siegel et al
December 2007
S153

----- Page 91 (native) -----
Appendix A. Continued
Precaution
Infection/Condition
Type*
Durationy
Comments
Cellulitis
S
Chancroid (soft chancre)
(Haemophilus ducreyi)
S
Transmitted sexually from person to person.
Chickenpox (see varicella)
Chlamydia trachomatis
Conjunctivitis
S
Genital (lymphogranuloma
venereum)
S
Pneumonia (infants # 3 mos.
of age))
S
Chlamydia pneumoniae
S
Outbreaks in institutionalized populations are rarely reported.1047,1048
Cholera (see gastroenteritis)
Closed-cavity infection
Open drain in place; limited
or minor drainage
S
Contact Precautions if copious uncontained drainage is present.
No drain or closed drainage
system in place
S
Clostridium spp
C botulinum
S
Not transmitted from person to person.
C difﬁcile (see gastroenteritis,
C difﬁcile)
C
DI
C perfringens
Food poisoning
S
Not transmitted from person to person.
Gas gangrene
S
Transmission from person to person is rare; 1 outbreak in a surgical setting has been
reported.1053 Use Contact Precautions if wound drainage is extensive.
Coccidioidomycosis (valley
fever)
Draining lesions
S
Not transmitted from person to person except under extraordinary circumstances,
because the infectious arthroconidial form of Coccidioides immitis is not produced in
humans.1050
Pneumonia
S
Not transmitted from person to person except under extraordinary circumstances (eg,
inhalation of aerosolized tissue phase endospores during necropsy, transplantation of
infected lung), because the infectious arthroconidial form of C immitis is not produced in
humans.1050, 1051
Colorado tick fever
S
Not transmitted from person to person.
Congenital rubella
C
Until age 1 year
Standard Precautions if nasopharyngeal and urine cultures are repeatedly negative after age
3 months.
Conjunctivitis
Acute bacterial
S
Chlamydial
S
Gonococcal
S
Acute viral (acute
hemorrhagic)
C
DI
Adenovirus most common; enterovirus 70,1052 Coxsackie virus A241054 also associated
with community outbreaks. Highly contagious; outbreaks in eye clinics, pediatric and
neonatal settings, institutional settings reported. Eye clinics should follow Standard
Precautions when handling patients with conjunctivitis. Routine use of infection control
measures in the handling of instruments and equipment will prevent the occurrence of
outbreaks in this and other settings.458,459,812,1054-1056
Corona virus associated with
SARS (SARS-CoV) (see
severe acute respiratory
syndrome)
Coxsackie virus disease (see
enteroviral infection)
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD,
vCJD)
S
Use disposable instruments or special sterilization/disinfection for surfaces and objects
contaminated with neural tissue if CJD or vCJD has not been ruled out; no special burial
procedures.1057
Croup (see respiratory
infections in infants and
young children)
Continued
S154
Vol. 35 No. 10 Supplement 2
Siegel et al

----- Page 92 (native) -----
Appendix A. Continued
Precaution
Infection/Condition
Type*
Durationy
Comments
Crimean-Congo Fever (see viral
hemorrhagic fever)
S
Cryptococcosis
S
Not transmitted from person to person, except rarely through tissue and corneal
transplantation.1058,1059
Cryptosporidiosis (see
gastroenteritis)
Cysticercosis
S
Not transmitted from person to person.
Cytomegalovirus infection,
including in neonates and
immunosuppressed patients
S
No additional precautions for pregnant HCWs.
Decubitus ulcer (see Pressure
ulcer)
Dengue fever
S
Not transmitted from person to person.
Diarrhea, acute-infective
etiology suspected (see
gastroenteritis)
Diphtheria
Cutaneous
C
CN
Until 2 cultures obtained 24 hours apart are negative.
Pharyngeal
D
CN
Until 2 cultures obtained 24 hours apart are negative.
Ebola virus (see viral
hemorrhagic fevers)
Echinococcosis (hydatidosis)
S
Not transmitted from person to person.
Echovirus (see enteroviral
infection)
Encephalitis or
encephalomyelitis (see
speciﬁc etiologic agents)
Endometritis
(endomyometritis)
S
Enterobiasis (pinworm disease,
oxyuriasis)
S
Enterococcus spp (see multidrug-
resistant organisms if
epidemiologically signiﬁcant
or vancomycin-resistant)
Enterocolitis, Clostridium difﬁcile
(see C difﬁcile,
gastroenteritis)
Enteroviral infections (ie, group
A and B Coxsackie viruses
and Echo viruses) (excludes
polio virus)
S
Use Contact Precautions for diapered or incontinent children for duration of illness and to
control institutional outbreaks.
Epiglottitis, due to Haemophilus
inﬂuenzae type b
D
U 24 hours
(See speciﬁc disease agents for epiglottitis due to other etiologies.)
Epstein-Barr virus infection,
including infectious
mononucleosis
S
Erythema infectiosum (also see
parvovirus B19)
Escherichia coli gastroenteritis
(see gastroenteritis)
Food poisoning
Botulism
S
Not transmitted from person to person.
Clostridium perfringens or C
welchii
S
Not transmitted from person to person.
Staphylococcal
S
Not transmitted from person to person.
Furunculosis, staphylococcal
S
Contact if drainage not controlled. Follow institutional policies if MRSA.
Infants and young children
C
DI
Gangrene (gas gangrene)
S
Not transmitted from person to person.
Continued
Siegel et al
December 2007
S155

----- Page 93 (native) -----
Appendix A. Continued
Precaution
Infection/Condition
Type*
Durationy
Comments
Gastroenteritis
S
Use Contact Precautions for diapered or incontinent persons for the duration of illness or
to control institutional outbreaks for gastroenteritis caused by all of the agents listed
below.
Adenovirus
S
Use Contact Precautions for diapered or incontinent persons for the duration of illness or
to control institutional outbreaks.
Campylobacter spp
S
Use Contact Precautions for diapered or incontinent persons for the duration of illness or
to control institutional outbreaks.
Cholera (Vibrio cholerae)
S
Use Contact Precautions for diapered or incontinent persons for the duration of illness or
to control institutional outbreaks.
Clostridium difﬁcile
C
DI
Discontinue antibiotics if appropriate. Do not share electronic thermometers;851,852
ensure consistent environmental cleaning and disinfection. Hypochlorite solutions
may be required for cleaning if transmission continues.845 Handwashing with soap and
water is preferred because of the absence of sporicidal activity of alcohol in waterless
antiseptic handrubs.979
Cryptosporidium spp
S
Use Contact Precautions for diapered or incontinent persons for the duration of illness or
to control institutional outbreaks.
Escherichia coli
Enteropathogenic O157:H7
and other shiga toxin–
producing strains
S
Use Contact Precautions for diapered or incontinent persons for the duration of illness or
to control institutional outbreaks.
Other species
S
Use Contact Precautions for diapered or incontinent persons for the duration of illness or
to control institutional outbreaks.
Giardia lamblia
S
Use Contact Precautions for diapered or incontinent persons for the duration of illness or
to control institutional outbreaks.
Noroviruses
S
Use Contact Precautions for diapered or incontinent persons for the duration of illness
or to control institutional outbreaks. Persons who clean areas heavily contaminated
with feces or vomitus may beneﬁt from wearing masks, because virus can be aerosolized
from these body substances;142,147,148 ensure consistent environmental cleaning and
disinfection with focus on restrooms even when apparently unsoiled.272,1060
Hypochlorite solutions may be required when there is continued transmission.289-291
Alcohol is less active, but there is no evidence that alcohol antiseptic handrubs are
not effective for hand decontamination.293 Cohorting of affected patients to separate
airs paces and toilet facilities may help interrupt transmission during
outbreaks.
Rotavirus
C
DI
Ensure consistent environmental cleaning and disinfection and frequent removal of soiled
diapers. Prolonged shedding may occur in both immunocompetent and
immunocompromised children and the elderly.930, 931
Salmonella species (including
S typhi)
S
Use Contact Precautions for diapered or incontinent persons for the duration of illness or
to control institutional outbreaks.
Shigella species (bacillary
dysentery)
S
Use Contact Precautions for diapered or incontinent persons for the duration of illness or
to control institutional outbreaks.
Vibrio parahaemolyticus
S
Use Contact Precautions for diapered or incontinent persons for the duration of illness or
to control institutional outbreaks.
Viral (if not covered
elsewhere)
S
Use Contact Precautions for diapered or incontinent persons for the duration of illness or
to control institutional outbreaks.
Yersinia enterocolitica
S
Use Contact Precautions for diapered or incontinent persons for the duration of illness or
to control institutional outbreaks.
German measles (see rubella;
see congenital rubella)
Giardiasis (see gastroenteritis)
Gonococcal ophthalmia
neonatorum (gonorrheal
ophthalmia, acute
conjunctivitis of newborn)
S
Gonorrhea
S
Granuloma inguinale
(donovanosis, granuloma
venereum)
S
Guillain-Barre´ syndrome
S
Not an infectious condition.
Continued
S156
Vol. 35 No. 10 Supplement 2
Siegel et al

----- Page 94 (native) -----
Appendix A. Continued
Precaution
Infection/Condition
Type*
Durationy
Comments
Haemophilus inﬂuenzae (see
disease-speciﬁc
recommendations)
Hand, foot, and mouth disease
(see enteroviral infection)
Hansen’s disease (see leprosy)
Hantavirus pulmonary
syndrome
S
Not transmitted from person to person.
Helicobacter pylori
S
Hepatitis, viral
Type A
S
Provide hepatitis A vaccine postexposure as recommended.1061
Diapered or incontinent
patients
C
Maintain Contact Precautions for the duration of hospitalization in infants and children
under age 3 years, for 2 weeks after onset of symptoms in children age 3 to 14 years, and
for 1 week after onset of symptoms in those over age 14 year.831,1062,1063
Type B-HBsAg positive; acute
or chronic
S
See speciﬁc recommendations for care of patients in hemodialysis centers.776
Type C and other unspeciﬁed
non-A, non-B
S
See speciﬁc recommendations for care of patients in hemodialysis centers.776
Type D (seen only with
hepatitis B)
S
Type E
S
Use Contact Precautions for diapered or incontinent individuals for the duration of
illness.1064
Type G
S
Herpangina (see enteroviral
infection)
Hookworm
S
Herpes simplex (Herpesvirus
hominis)
Encephalitis
S
Mucocutaneous,
disseminated or primary,
severe
C
Until lesions dry
and crusted
Mucocutaneous, recurrent
(skin, oral, genital)
S
Neonatal
C
Until lesions dry
and crusted
Also for asymptomatic, exposed infants delivered vaginally or by C-section and if mother
has active infection and membranes have been ruptured for more than 4 to 6 hours until
infant surface cultures obtained at 24 to 36 hours of age negative after 48 hours of
incubation.1065, 1066
Herpes zoster (varicella-zoster)
(shingles)
Disseminated disease in any
patient
A,C
DI
Susceptible HCWs should not enter room if immune caregivers are available; no recom-
mendation for protection of immune HCWs; no recommendation for type of protection
(ie surgical mask or respirator) for susceptible HCWs.
Localized disease in
immunocompromised
patient until disseminated
infection ruled out
Localized in patient with
intact immune system with
lesions that can be contained/
covered
S
DI
Susceptible HCWs should not provide direct patient care when other immune caregivers
are available.
Histoplasmosis
S
Not transmitted from person to person.
Human immunodeﬁciency virus
(HIV)
S
Postexposure chemoprophylaxis for some blood exposures.864
Human metapneumovirus
C
DI
HAI reported,1067 but the route of transmission is not established.821 Assumed to be
contact transmission as for RSV since the viruses are closely related and have similar
clinical manifestations and epidemiology. Wear masks according to Standard
Precautions.
Impetigo
C
U 24 hours
Infectious mononucleosis
S
Continued
Siegel et al
December 2007
S157

----- Page 95 (native) -----
Appendix A. Continued
Precaution
Infection/Condition
Type*
Durationy
Comments
Inﬂuenza
Human (seasonal inﬂuenza)
D
5 days except
DI in
immuno-
compromised
persons
Single patient room when available or cohort; avoid placement with high-risk
patients; mask patient when transported out of room; chemoprophylaxis/vaccine
to control/prevent outbreaks.609 Use of gown and gloves according to Standard
Precautions may be especially important in pediatric settings. Duration of precautions
for immunocompromised patients cannot be deﬁned; prolonged duration of viral
shedding (ie for several weeks) has been observed; implications for transmission
are unknown.928
Avian (eg, H5N1, H7, H9
strains)
See http://www.cdc.gov/ﬂu/avian/professional/infect-control.htm for current avian
inﬂuenza guidance.
Pandemic inﬂuenza (also a
human inﬂuenza virus)
D
5 days from onset
of symptoms
See http://www.pandemicﬂu.gov for current pandemic inﬂuenza guidance.
Kawasaki syndrome
S
Not an infectious condition.
Lassa fever (see viral
hemorrhagic fevers)
Legionnaires’ disease
S
Not transmitted from person to person.
Leprosy
S
Leptospirosis
S
Not transmitted from person to person; see
Lice
http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dpd/parasites/lice/default.htm.
Head (pediculosis)
C
U 4 hours
Body
S
Transmitted person to person through infested clothing. Wear gown and gloves when
removing clothing; bag and wash clothes according to CDC guidance.
Pubic
S
Transmitted person to person through sexual contact.
Listeriosis (Listeria
monocytogenes)
S
Person-to-person transmission rare; cross-transmission in neonatal settings
reported.1068,1069,1070, 1071
Lyme disease
S
Not transmitted from person to person.
Lymphocytic choriomeningitis
S
Not transmitted from person to person.
Lymphogranuloma venereum
S
Malaria
S
Not transmitted from person to person except rarely through transfusion and due
to failure to follow Standard Precautions during patient care.1072-1075 Install screens in
windows and doors in endemic areas. Use DEET-containing mosquito repellants and
clothing to cover extremities.
Marburg virus disease (see viral
hemorrhagic fevers)
Measles (rubeola)
A
4 days after onset
of rash; DI in
immune
compromised
Susceptible HCWs should not enter room if immune care providers are available; no
recommendation for face protection for immune HCW; no recommendation for type
of face protection for susceptible HCWs (ie, mask or respirator).1023,1025 For exposed
susceptible HCWs, postexposure vaccine within 72 hours or immune globulin within
6 days when available.17,1028,1030 Place exposed susceptible patients on Airborne
Precautions and exclude susceptible HCWs from duty from day 5 after ﬁrst exposure
to day 21 after last exposure, regardless of postexposure vaccine.17
Melioidosis, all forms
S
Not transmitted from person to person.
Meningitis
Aseptic (nonbacterial or
viral; also see enteroviral
infections)
S
Contact for infants and young children.
Bacterial, gram-negative
enteric, in neonates
S
Fungal
S
Haemophilus inﬂuenzae, type
b known or suspected
D
U 24 hours
Listeria monocytogenes (See
listeriosis)
S
Neisseria meningitidis
(meningococcal) known or
suspected
D
U 24 hours
See meningococcal disease below.
Streptococcus pneumoniae
S
Continued
S158
Vol. 35 No. 10 Supplement 2
Siegel et al

----- Page 96 (native) -----
Appendix A. Continued
Precaution
Infection/Condition
Type*
Durationy
Comments
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
S
Concurrent, active pulmonary disease or draining cutaneous lesions may necessitate
addition of Contact and/or Airborne Precautions.
For children, airborne precautions until active tuberculosis ruled out in visiting family
members (see tuberculosis below).42
Other diagnosed bacterial
S
Meningococcal disease: sepsis,
pneumonia, meningitis
D
U 24 hours
Postexposure chemoprophylaxis for household contacts, HCWs exposed to respiratory
secretions; postexposure vaccine only to control outbreaks.15,17
Molluscum contagiosum
S
Monkeypox
A,C
A-Until
monkeypox
conﬁrmed and
smallpox
excluded
See http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/monkeypox for most current recommendations. Trans-
mission in hospital settings unlikely.267 Preexposure and postexposure smallpox vaccine
recommended for exposed HCWs.
C-Until lesions
crusted
Mucormycosis
S
Multidrug-resistant organisms
(MDROs), infection or
colonization (eg, MRSA, VRE,
VISA/VRSA, ESBLs, resistant
S. pneumoniae)
S/C
MDROs judged by the infection control program, based on local, state, regional, or national
recommendations, to be of clinical and epidemiologic signiﬁcance. Contact Precautions
recommended in settings with evidence of ongoing transmission, acute care settings
with increased risk for transmission or wounds that cannot be contained by dressings.
See recommendations for management options in Management of Multidrug-Resistant
Organisms In Health care Settings, 2006.868 Contact state health department for guidance
regarding new or emerging MDROs.
Mumps (infectious parotitis)
D
U 9 days
After onset of swelling; susceptible HCWs should not provide care if immune caregivers
are available. (Note: Recent assessment of outbreaks in healthy 18- to 24-year-olds has
indicated that salivary viral shedding occurred early in the course of illness and that 5
days of isolation after onset of parotitis may be appropriate in community settings;
however, the implications for health care personnel and high-risk patient populations
remain to be clariﬁed.)
Mycobacteria, nontuberculosis
(atypical)
Not transmitted person-to-person.
Pulmonary
S
Wound
S
Mycoplasma pneumonia
D
DI
Necrotizing enterocolitis
S
Contact Precautions when cases clustered temporally.1076-1079
Nocardiosis, draining lesions, or
other presentations
S
Not transmitted person-to-person.
Norovirus (see gastroenteritis)
Norwalk agent gastroenteritis
(see gastroenteritis)
Orf
S
Parainﬂuenza virus infection,
respiratory in infants and
young children
C
DI
Viral shedding may be prolonged in immunosuppressed patients.1005,1006 Reliability of
antigen testing to determine when to remove patients with prolonged hospitalizations
from Contact Precautions uncertain.
Parvovirus B19 (Erythema
infectiosum)
D
Maintain precautions for duration of hospitalization when chronic disease occurs in
immunocompromised patients. For patients with transient aplastic crisis or red cell
crisis, maintain precautions for 7 days. Duration of precautions for immunosuppressed
patients with persistently positive PCR not deﬁned, but transmission has occurred.927
Pediculosis (lice)
C
U 24 hours after
treatment
Pertussis (whooping cough)
D
U 5 days
Single patient room preferred. Cohorting an option. Postexposure chemoprophylaxis for
household contacts and HCWs with prolonged exposure to respiratory secretions.861
Recommendations for Tdap vaccine in adults under development.
Pinworm infection
(Enterobiasis)
S
Plague (Yersinia pestis)
Bubonic
S
Pneumonic
D
U 48 hours
Antimicrobial prophylaxis for exposed HCW.207
Pneumonia
Continued
Siegel et al
December 2007
S159

----- Page 97 (native) -----
Appendix A. Continued
Precaution
Infection/Condition
Type*
Durationy
Comments
Adenovirus
D, C
DI
Outbreaks in pediatric and institutional settings reported.375,1080-1082 In
immunocompromised hosts, extend duration of Droplet and Contact Precautions due
to prolonged shedding of virus.929
Bacterial not listed elsewhere
(including gram-negative
bacterial)
S
B cepacia in patients with CF,
including respiratory tract
colonization
C
Unknown
Avoid exposure to other persons with CF; private room preferred. Criteria for D/C
precautions not established. See the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation guidelines.20
B cepacia in patients without
CF (see multidrug-resistant
organisms)
Chlamydia
S
Fungal
S
Haemophilus inﬂuenzae, type
b
Adults
S
Infants and children
D
U 24 hours
Legionella spp
S
Meningococcal
D
U 24 hours
See meningococcal disease above.
Multidrug-resistant bacterial
(see multidrug-resistant
organisms)
Mycoplasma (primary
atypical pneumonia)
D
DI
Pneumococcal pneumonia
S
Use Droplet Precautions if evidence of transmission within a patient care unit
or facility.196-198,1083
Pneumocystis jiroveci
(Pneumocystis carinii)
S
Avoid placement in the same room with an immunocompromised patient.
Staphylococcus aureus
S
For MRSA, see MDROs.
Streptococcus, group A
Adults
D
U 24 hours
See streptococcal disease (group A streptococcus) below.
Contact precautions if skin lesions present.
Infants and young children
D
U 24 hours
Contact Precautions if skin lesions present.
Varicella-zoster (see
varicella-zoster)
Viral
Adults
S
Infants and young children
(see respiratory infectious
disease, acute, or speciﬁc
viral agent)
Poliomyelitis
C
DI
Pressure ulcer (decubitus ulcer,
pressure sore) infected
Major
C
DI
If no dressing or containment of drainage; until drainage stops or can be contained by
dressing.
Minor or limited
S
If dressing covers and contains drainage.
Prion disease (See Creutzfeld-
Jacob Disease)
Psittacosis (ornithosis)
(Chlamydia psittaci)
S
Not transmitted from person to person.
Q fever
S
Rabies
S
Person-to-person transmission is rare; transmission via corneal, tissue and organ
transplants has been reported.537,1084 If patient has bitten another individual or saliva has
contaminated an open wound or mucous membrane, wash exposed area thoroughly and
administer postexposure prophylaxis.1085
Continued
S160
Vol. 35 No. 10 Supplement 2
Siegel et al

----- Page 98 (native) -----
Appendix A. Continued
Precaution
Infection/Condition
Type*
Durationy
Comments
Rat-bite fever (Streptobacillus
moniliformis disease, Spirillum
minus disease)
S
Not transmitted from person to person.
Relapsing fever
S
Not transmitted from person to person.
Resistant bacterial infection or
colonization (see multidrug-
resistant organisms)
Respiratory infectious disease,
acute (if not covered
elsewhere)
Adults
S
Infants and young children
C
DI
Also see syndromes or conditions listed in Table 2.
Respiratory syncytial virus
infection, in infants, young
children and
immunocompromised adults
C
DI
Wear mask according to Standard Precautions24,116,117 In immunocompromised patients,
extend the duration of Contact Precautions due to prolonged shedding.926 Reliability of
antigen testing to determine when to remove patients with prolonged hospitalizations
from Contact Precautions uncertain.
Reye’s syndrome
S
Not an infectious condition.
Rheumatic fever
S
Not an infectious condition.
Rhinovirus
D
DI
Droplet most important route of transmission.104,1086 Outbreaks have occurred in NICUs
and LTCFs.411,1087,1088 Add Contact Precautions if copious moist secretions and close
contact likely to occur (eg, young infants).111,831
Rickettsial fevers, tickborne
(Rocky Mountain spotted
fever, tickborne typhus fever)
S
Not transmitted from person to person except rarely through transfusion.
Rickettsialpox (vesicular
rickettsiosis)
S
Not transmitted from person to person.
Ringworm (dermatophytosis,
dermatomycosis, tinea)
S
Rarely, outbreaks have occurred in health care settings, (eg, NICU,1089 rehabilitation
hospital1090). Use Contact Precautions for outbreak.
Ritter’s disease (staphylococcal
scalded skin syndrome)
C
DI
See staphylococcal disease and scalded skin syndrome below.
Rocky Mountain spotted fever
S
Not transmitted from person to person except rarely through transfusion.
Roseola infantum (exanthem
subitum; caused by HHV-6)
S
Rotavirus infection (see
gastroenteritis)
Rubella (German measles) (also
see congenital rubella)
D
U 7 days after
onset of rash
Susceptible HCWs should not enter room if immune caregivers are available. No
recommendation for wearing face protection (eg, a surgical mask) if immune. Pregnant
women who are not immune should not care for these patients.17,33 Administer vaccine
within 3 days of exposure to nonpregnant susceptible individuals. Place exposed
susceptible patients on Droplet Precautions; exclude susceptible health care personnel
from duty from day 5 after ﬁrst exposure to day 21 after last exposure, regardless of
postexposure vaccine.
Rubeola (see measles)
Salmonellosis (see
gastroenteritis)
Scabies
C
U 24
Scalded skin syndrome,
staphylococcal
C
DI
See staphylococcal disease and scalded skin syndrome below.
Schistosomiasis (bilharziasis)
S
Severe acute respiratory
syndrome (SARS)
A, D,C
DI plus 10 days
after resolution
of fever,
provided
respiratory
symptoms are
absent or
improving
Airborne Precautions preferred; D if AIIR unavailable. N95 or higher-level respiratory
protection; surgical mask if N95 is unavailable; eye protection (goggles, face shield);
aerosol-generating procedures and ‘‘supershedders’’ are at highest risk for transmission
through small droplet nuclei and large droplets.93,94,96Vigilant environmental disinfection
necessary (see http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/sars).
Shigellosis (see gastroenteritis)
Continued
Siegel et al
December 2007
S161

----- Page 99 (native) -----
Appendix A. Continued
Precaution
Infection/Condition
Type*
Durationy
Comments
Smallpox (variola; see vaccinia
for management of
vaccinated persons)
A,C
DI
Until all scabs have crusted and separated (3 to 4 weeks). Nonvaccinated HCWs should
not provide care when immune HCWs are available; N95 or higher-level respiratory
protection for susceptible and successfully vaccinated individuals; postexposure vaccine
within 4 days of exposure protective.108,129,1034-1036
Sporotrichosis
S
Spirillum minor disease (rat-bite
fever)
S
Not transmitted from person to person.
Staphylococcal disease (S.
aureus)
Skin, wound, or burn
Major
C
DI
No dressing, or dressing does not adequately contain drainage.
Minor or limited
S
Dressing adequatelys cover and contain drainage.
Enterocolitis
S
Use Contact Precautions for diapered or incontinent children for duration of illness.
Multidrug-resistant (see
multidrug-resistant
organisms)
Pneumonia
S
Scalded skin syndrome
C
DI
Consider health care personnel as potential source of nursery, NICU outbreak.1091
Toxic shock syndrome
S
Streptobacillus moniliformis
disease (rat-bite fever)
S
Not transmitted from person to person.
Streptococcal disease (group A
streptococcus)
Skin, wound, or burn
Major
C,D
U 24 hours
No dressing, or dressing does not adequately contain drainage.
Minor or limited
S
Dressing covers and adequately contains drainage.
Endometritis (puerperal
sepsis)
S
Pharyngitis in infants and
young children
D
U 24 hours
Pneumonia
D
U 24 hours
Scarlet fever in infants and
young children
D
U 24 hours
Serious invasive disease
D
U24 hours
Outbreaks of serious invasive disease have occurred secondary to transmission among
patients and HCWs.162,968,1092-1094
Contact Precautions for draining wound as above; follow recommendations for
antimicrobial prophylaxis in selected conditions.160
Streptococcal disease (group B
streptococcus), neonatal
S
Streptococcal disease (not
group A or B) unless covered
elsewhere
S
Multidrug-resistant (see
multidrug-resistant
organisms)
Strongyloidiasis
S
Syphilis
Latent (tertiary) and
seropositivity without lesions
S
Skin and mucous membrane,
including congenital, primary,
secondary
S
Tapeworm disease
Hymenolepis nana
S
Not transmitted from person to person.
Taenia solium (pork)
S
Other
S
Tetanus
S
Not transmitted from person to person.
Tinea (eg, dermatophytosis,
dermatomycosis, ringworm)
S
Rare episodes of person-to-person transmission.
Continued
S162
Vol. 35 No. 10 Supplement 2
Siegel et al

----- Page 100 (native) -----
Appendix A. Continued
Precaution
Infection/Condition
Type*
Durationy
Comments
Toxoplasmosis
S
Transmission from person to person is rare; vertical transmission from mother to child,
transmission through organs and blood transfusion rare.
Toxic shock syndrome
(staphylococcal disease,
streptococcal disease)
S
Droplet Precautions for the ﬁrst 24 hours after implementation of antibiotic therapy if
group A streptococcus is a likely etiology.
Trachoma, acute
S
Transmissible spongiform
encephalopathy (see
Creutzfeld-Jacob disease,
CJD, vCJD)
Trench mouth (Vincent’s
angina)
S
Trichinosis
S
Trichomoniasis
S
Trichuriasis (whipworm
disease)
S
Tuberculosis (M. tuberculosis)
Extrapulmonary, draining
lesion)
A,C
Discontinue precautions only when patient is improving clinically and drainage has ceased
or there are 3 consecutive negative cultures of continued drainage.1021,1022 Examine for
evidence of active pulmonary tuberculosis.
Extrapulmonary, no draining
lesion, meningitis
S
Examine for evidence of pulmonary tuberculosis. For infants and children, use Airborne
Precautions until active pulmonary tuberculosis in visiting family members ruled out.42
Pulmonary or laryngeal
disease, conﬁrmed
A
Discontinue precautions only when patient on effective therapy is improving clinically and
has three consecutive sputum smears negative for acid-fast bacilli collected on separate
days (see http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/
rr5417a1.htm?s_cid5rr5417a1_e).12
Pulmonary or laryngeal
disease, suspected
A
Discontinue precautions only when the likelihood of infectious TB disease is deemed
negligible, and either there is another diagnosis that explains the clinical syndrome or the
results of three sputum smears for AFB are negative. The 3 sputum specimens should be
collected 8 to 24 hours apart, and at least 1 specimen should be an early-morning
specimen
Skin-test positive with no
evidence of current active
disease
S
Tularemia
Draining lesion
S
Not transmitted from person to person.
Pulmonary
S
Not transmitted from person to person.
Typhoid (Salmonella typhi) fever
(see gastroenteritis)
Typhus
Rickettsia prowazekii
(Epidemic or Louse-borne
typhus)
S
Transmitted from person to person through close personal or clothing contact.
Rickettsia typhi
S
Not transmitted from person to person.
Urinary tract infection
(including pyelonephritis),
with or without urinary
catheter
S
Vaccinia (vaccination site,
adverse events after
vaccination)*
Only vaccinated HCWs have contact with active vaccination sites and care for persons
with adverse vaccinia events; if unvaccinated, only HCWs without contraindications to
vaccine may provide care.
Vaccination site care
(including autoinoculated
areas)
S
Vaccination recommended for vaccinators; for newly vaccinated HCWs: semipermeable
dressing over gauze until scab separates, with dressing change as ﬂuid accumulates, ;3
to 5 days; gloves, hand hygiene for dressing change; vaccinated HCW or HCW without
contraindication to vaccine for dressing changes.205,221,225
Eczema vaccinatum
C
Until lesions dry
and crusted, scabs
separated
For contact with virus-containing lesions and exudative material.
Fetal vaccinia
C
Generalized vaccinia
C
Progressive vaccinia
C
Continued
Siegel et al
December 2007
S163

----- Page 101 (native) -----
Appendix A. Continued
Precaution
Infection/Condition
Type*
Durationy
Comments
Postvaccinia encephalitis
S
Blepharitis or conjunctivitis
S/C
Use Contact Precautions if copious drainage is present.
Iritis or keratitis
S
Vaccinia-associated erythema
multiforme (Stevens-Johnson
syndrome)
S
Not an infectious condition.
Secondary bacterial infection
(eg, S. aureus, group A beta
hemolytic streptococcus
S/C
Follow organism-speciﬁc (streptococcal and staphylococcal most frequent)
recommendations and consider magnitude of drainage.
Varicella zoster
A,C
Until lesions dry
and crusted
Susceptible HCWs should not enter room if immune caregivers are available; no
recommendation for face protection of immune HCWs; no recommendation for type of
protection (ie, surgical mask or respirator) for susceptible HCWs. In an
immunocompromised host with varicella pneumonia, prolong the duration of
precautions for duration of illness. Postexposure prophylaxis: Provide postexposure
vaccine as soon as possible but within 120 hours; for susceptible exposed persons for
whom vaccine is contraindicated (immunocompromised persons, pregnant women,
newborns whose mother’s varicella onset is # 5 days before delivery or within 48 hours
after delivery) provide VZIG, when available, within 96 hours; if unavailable, use IVIG.
Provide Airborne Precautions for exposed susceptible persons and exclude exposed
susceptible health care workers beginning 8 days after ﬁrst exposure until 21 days after
last exposure or 28 if received VZIG, regardless of postexposure vaccination.1032
Variola (see smallpox)
Vibrio parahaemolyticus (see
gastroenteritis)
Vincent’s angina (trench mouth)
S
Viral hemorrhagic fevers due to
Lassa, Ebola, Marburg,
Crimean-Congo fever
viruses
S, D, C
DI
Single-patient room preferred. Emphasize: use of sharps safety devices and safe work
practices, hand hygiene; barrier protection against blood and body ﬂuids on entry into
room (single gloves and ﬂuid-resistant or impermeable gown, face/eye protection with
masks, goggles or face shields), and appropriate waste handling. Use N95 or higher-level
respirator when performing aerosol-generating procedures. Largest viral load in ﬁnal
stages of illness when hemorrhage may occur; additional PPE, including double gloves,
leg and shoe coverings may be used, especially in resource-limited settings where
options for cleaning and laundry are limited. Notify public health ofﬁcials immediately if
Ebola is suspected.212,313,738,770 Also see Table 3 for Ebola as a bioterrorism agent.
Viral respiratory diseases (not
covered elsewhere)
Adults
S
Infants and young children
(see respiratory infectious
disease, acute)
Whooping cough (see
pertussis)
Wound infections
Major
C
DI
No dressing or dressing does not contain drainage adequately.
Minor or limited
S
Dressing covers and contains drainage adequately.
Yersinia enterocolitica
gastroenteritis (see
gastroenteritis)
Zoster (varicella-zoster) (see
herpes zoster)
Zygomycosis (phycomycosis,
mucormycosis)
S
Not transmitted person to person.
*Type of precautions: A, airborne precautions; C, contact; D, droplet; S, standard; when A, C, and D are speciﬁed, also use S.
yDuration of precautions: CN, until off antimicrobial treatment and culture-negative; DI, duration of illness (with wound lesions, DI means until wounds stop draining); DE, until
environment completely decontaminated; U, until time speciﬁed in hours (hrs) after initiation of effective therapy; Unknown: criteria for establishing eradication of pathogen has
not been determined
S164
Vol. 35 No. 10 Supplement 2
Siegel et al