

----- Page 1 (native) -----
ORIGINAL PAPER
Advancing a Conceptual Model of Evidence-Based Practice
Implementation in Public Service Sectors
Gregory A. Aarons • Michael Hurlburt •
Sarah McCue Horwitz
Published online: 14 December 2010
 The Author(s) 2010. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
Abstract
Implementation science is a quickly growing
discipline. Lessons learned from business and medical
settings are being applied but it is unclear how well they
translate to settings with different historical origins and
customs (e.g., public mental health, social service, alcohol/
drug sectors). The purpose of this paper is to propose a
multi-level, four phase model of the implementation pro-
cess (i.e., Exploration, Adoption/Preparation, Implemen-
tation, Sustainment), derived from extant literature, and
apply it to public sector services. We highlight features of
the model likely to be particularly important in each phase,
while considering the outer and inner contexts (i.e., levels)
of public sector service systems.
Keywords
Dissemination  Implementation  Adoption 
Sustainment  Sustainability  Organization  Public sector 
Mental health  Social service  Alcohol/drug 
Child welfare
Introduction
It is increasingly recognized that improving services
designed to support the mental health and well-being of
children and families involved in public sector services is
inﬂuenced as much by the process of implementing inno-
vative practices as by the practices selected for imple-
mentation (Aarons and Palinkas 2007; Crea et al. 2008;
Fixsen et al. 2009; Greenhalgh et al. 2004; Palinkas and
Aarons 2009; Palinkas et al. 2008). While concern exists
about the lag between development of innovative, empiri-
cally tested practices and their ultimate implementation,
the policy and practice landscape is often fragmented and
changing rapidly (Shonkoff and Phillips 2000). The last
decade has seen expansion in a range of promising and
proven practices (Center for the Study and Prevention of
Violence 2010; Substance Abuse and Mental Health Ser-
vices Administration [SAMHSA] 2010) and in demands
for practice focused organizations to consider, implement,
and utilize interventions identiﬁed as having the potential
to improve children’s and families’ mental health. Expec-
tations that research and service communities will work
together effectively to address the challenges of translating
scientiﬁc potential into public health impact are high
(New Freedom Commission on Mental Health 2003; U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services [DHHS] 2000).
Unfortunately, the process of implementing evidence-
based practices is often complex and fraught with challenges
(Backer 2000; Bond et al. 2009; Institute of Medicine [IOM]
2007). Many efforts to implement programs designed to
improve the quality and outcomes of human services have
not reached their full potential due to a variety of challenges
inherent in the implementation process. Implementation of
innovative human service technologies is generally con-
sidered to be more complex than implementation of other
G. A. Aarons (&)
University of California, 9500 Gilman Dr. (0812), La Jolla,
CA 92093-0812, USA
e-mail: gaarons@ucsd.edu
S. M. Horwitz
Department of Pediatrics and the Centers for Health Policy
and Primary Care and Outcomes Research, Stanford University,
Stanford, CA, USA
e-mail: Sarah.Horwitz@stanford.edu
M. Hurlburt
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA
e-mail: hurlburt@usc.edu
G. A. Aarons  M. Hurlburt  S. M. Horwitz
Child and Adolescent Services Research Center at Rady
Children’s Hospital, San Diego, CA, USA
123
Adm Policy Ment Health (2011) 38:4–23
DOI 10.1007/s10488-010-0327-7

----- Page 2 (native) -----
types of technology, due to the fact that human service
technologies are delivered through the actions of individ-
uals and organizations, which exist within complex, multi-
layered social contexts (Fixsen et al. 2009; Glisson and
Schoenwald 2005).
One important link in the connection between research
and practice is the translation of evidence-based practices
into broader application and impact. The challenges of
effective implementation of evidence-based practices are
recognized by the National Institutes of Health (National
Institute of Mental Health [NIMH] 2001; National Insti-
tutes of Health [NIH] 2006). A growing, but still young,
body of research and discussion has developed around the
science of Dissemination and Implementation. Drawing
upon research in the areas of health care (Wagner et al.
2001), public health (Glasgow et al. 1999), organizational
development (Glisson and Schoenwald 2005), business
(Frambach and Schillewaert 2002), and mental health
(Mendel et al. 2008), a variety of different models have
been proposed to summarize factors at multiple levels of
the social and organizational context that potentially
inﬂuence the process of translating research into effective
improvements in practice. For example, some models
emphasize the importance of developing alignments among
stakeholders in the community around approaches to
solving a targeted societal issue (e.g., delinquency) as well
as improving the interorganizational environments of
agencies preparing to implement related evidence-based
practices (Glisson and Schoenwald 2005). Others empha-
size the signiﬁcance of ongoing and extensive partnerships
with agencies, consumers, and other stakeholders in the
community to shape the design and implementation of
quality improvement initiatives (Mendel et al. 2008). Still
others describe processes for embedding research and
quality improvement initiatives deeply within the structure
of large-scale service systems (Stetler et al. 2008).
In looking across multiple models, several researchers
have developed relatively comprehensive catalogs of the
factors that may affect the success of research to practice
translation efforts (Damschroder et al. 2009; Feldstein and
Glasgow 2008; Greenhalgh et al. 2004). More globally,
however, a review of implementation models reveals several
core themes that are relevant to the current state of imple-
mentation science. First, many models divide the process
of implementation into several phases (e.g., pre-implemen-
tation, implementation, and maintenance/enhancement).
There is general recognition that implementation may not
always move linearly through such phases (California
Institute for Mental Health [CIMH] 2006; Fixsen et al. 2009;
Mendel et al. 2008). Second, there are many common com-
ponents across implementation models, but different models
clearly emphasize speciﬁc factors above others as signature
characteristics. The focus on community-based Participatory
Action Research (PAR) in the model articulated by Mendel
et al. (2008) is an excellent example of such an emphasis.
Variables at many contextual levels are identiﬁed in the
model, but a guiding force through which quality improve-
ment efforts are directed is the PAR framework. From one
perspective, some of the implementation models can be
viewed as constructivist in nature (Guba and Lincoln 1994),
seeking to describe how use of speciﬁc organizing forces can
create a conducive community context for implementation.
The implementation model or approach becomes a part of
the way the community in which implementation occurs
understands the problem. A ﬁnal emergent theme from
across proposed implementation models is the relative lack
of evidence yet available to clearly prioritize which variables
are likely to play key roles in any given implementation
effort or context. Consensus opinion exists around important
key features, such as leadership in implementation efforts,
the need for ongoing consultation and training, especially in
early implementation phases, the need to address the impact
of staff turnover, and other core implementation drivers, but
the body of concrete research evidence for each core driver in
many cases remains to be developed (Fixsen et al. 2009).
Consensus also exists that multi-component implementation
strategies are needed in order to address the challenges of
effective implementation, as many different factors need to
be addressed in sequence or in tandem for effective imple-
mentation that retains impact in community settings (Ferlie
and Shortell 2001; Fixsen et al. 2009; Glisson and Schoen-
wald 2005; Grimshaw et al. 2001; Grol and Grimshaw 1999).
Like other models before it, this paper offers a frame-
work that articulates variables
hypothesized to play
important roles in achieving effective implementation of
EBPs. However, rather than attempt to replicate existing
comprehensive literature reviews on the topic, this paper
recognizes that implementation models arise through a lens
that is shaped by the service contexts chosen for emphasis
and by the contextual levels that serve as primary orga-
nizing arenas.
As shown in Fig. 1, this paper advances a conceptual
model of factors that, in our opinion, are some of the most
likely to have a strong inﬂuence on the implementation of
EBPs in publicly funded settings serving children and
families. While most of our focus is on implementation in
child welfare settings, which has received sparse attention
in the ﬁeld of implementation science, we also include
examples from specialty mental health service contexts.
However, we also propose that many of the factors
addressed in these two sectors are common to public sector
services in general. In addition to adopting a focus that
primarily emphasizes the role of service delivery organi-
zations and the service systems within which they operate,
we also divide our discussion into factors likely to have the
greatest potential impact on implementation at each of four
Adm Policy Ment Health (2011) 38:4–23
5
123

----- Page 3 (native) -----
different implementation phases, including Exploration,
Adoption/Preparation, Implementation, and Sustainment.
As shown in Fig. 2, different aspects of the outer and inner
context may be more prominent or manifest differently
during different
phases. Few implementation models
explicitly recognize that different variables may play cru-
cial roles at different points in the implementation process.
In addition, once the sustainment phase is reached, the
experiences and lessons learned may impact future imple-
mentation efforts (as indicated by the recursive arrows at
the top of the Fig. 2). Our overall objective in this paper is
to provide examples that illustrate why speciﬁc factors are
likely to be important at each implementation phase, with
sufﬁcient speciﬁcity that the model could inform the fur-
ther development of multi-component implementation
strategies.
Exploration Phase1
The Exploration Phase involves awareness of either an
issue that needs attention or of an improved approach to an
organizational challenge (Grol et al. 2007). Because the
implementation literature has been developed in areas
where the adoption of innovation is driven by proﬁt or
science, there is little attention to this ﬁrst phase in the
extant literature (Damanpour 1991). Further, adoption of
innovation in human services organizations is fundamen-
tally different than adoption of innovation in business or
agriculture due to the nature of the innovations and the
variability of the clients (Damanpour 1991). Across public
sector human service organizations, those with a strong
focus on development of new knowledge and understanding
of best practices (i.e., ‘‘learning organizations,’’ (Senge
2006), as well as incentives to adopt best practices are likely
well poised to explore appropriate practices and imple-
mentation strategies (Chadwick Center 2004; Hemsley-
Brown and Sharp 2003; National Association of Public
Child Welfare Administrators [NAPCWA] 2005).
The Outer Context
Sociopolitical/Funding
Beginning at the broadest level, the state and federal
sociopolitical and funding contexts inﬂuence the explora-
tion of innovative interventions or practices (Davies and
Nutley 2008; Ganju 2003; Hoagwood 2003). Child Wel-
fare, as a publically-funded sector charged with the
protection of children, is especially sensitive to social and
political forces. Child and Family Service Reviews man-
dated as part of the (1997) Adoption and Safe Families Act
(PL 105-89) require child welfare agencies to monitor
outcome indicators in the three key areas of safety, per-
manence, and child wellbeing. Although all states have
participated in at least one review, no state has achieved
excellence in all areas, prompting the development of
Performance Improvement Plans (U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services [DHHS] 2009), which may
provide an impetus for state child welfare agencies to begin
Fig. 1 Conceptual model
of global factors affecting
implementation in public
service sectors
1 Portions of the Exploration section appeared in an earlier publica-
tion in this journal. Horwitz SM, Chamberlain P, Landsverk J,
Mullican C. Improving the Mental Health of Children in Child
Welfare Through the Use of Evidence-Based Parenting Interventions.
Administration and Policy Mental Health. 2010. Feb 9 [Epub ahead of
print].
6
Adm Policy Ment Health (2011) 38:4–23
123

----- Page 4 (native) -----
the exploration phase to identify EBPs that address areas
requiring improvement. Federal initiatives can also take the
form of special reports (e.g., From Neurons to Neighbor-
hoods: The Science of Early Childhood Development,
(2000) or speciﬁc funding for the implementation of
EBPs, such as NIMH’s Dissemination and Implementation
Research in Health program announcements (i.e., National
Institutes of Health [NIH] 2006, 2009a, b).
State legislatures often demand practice change in
response to both public concerns over issues in child
welfare services, such as abuse while in state-mandated
out-of-home care and consent decrees and settlements
arising from class action suits. Similarly, legislators may
use funding in the form of special allocations to encourage
the use of innovations. Conversely, severe budget restric-
tions discourage the exploration of innovations since
exploration demands staff time, which may be limited
when work forces are cut due to funding restrictions
(Greenhalgh et al. 2004).
States may employ a number of other strategies to
encourage exploration of EBPs. In mental health, numer-
ous states have set up ofﬁces for EBPs to serve as resources
to agencies interested in practice change. In California, the
California Institute for Mental Health was established in
1993 as a private, nonproﬁt public interest organization to
promote excellence in mental health services through
training, technical assistance, research and policy devel-
opment (California Institute of Mental Health [CIMH]
2010). For Child Welfare, the California Evidence-Based
Clearinghouse for Child-Welfare (CEBC), funded by the
California Department of Social Services, identiﬁes and
disseminates information on EBPs relevant to child welfare
(CEBC 2010).
Private foundations, professional organizations and
educational reforms can also shape the context for explo-
ration of EBPs. Two excellent examples are the Annie
E. Casey Foundation Family to Family initiative started in
1992 (The Annie E. Casey Foundation [AECF] 1992) and
the educational changes proposed by the April, 2008
meeting on Partnerships to Integrate Evidence-Based
Mental Health Research into Social Work Education and
Research sponsored by the National Institute of Mental
Health (National Institute of Mental Health [NIMH] 2010).
The Family to Family initiative operates in 17 states and
advocates for children remaining with their own families
through the development of neighborhood-based foster care
and family supports (AECF 2008). The NIMH initiative
was a joint effort with the Institute for the Advancement
Fig. 2 Conceptual model of implementation phases and factors affecting implementation in public service sectors
Adm Policy Ment Health (2011) 38:4–23
7
123

----- Page 5 (native) -----
of Social Work Research (2007) and explored necessary
changes in education to incorporate EBPs. Similarly,
the 2006 University of Texas at Austin Symposium,
‘‘Improving the Teaching of Evidence-Based Practice’’ was
also an early effort to explore EBPs as part of reforms in
social work teaching and curricula (Jenson 2007).
Client Advocacy
As noted by Hoagwood (2003), clients
can be powerful advocates for system change through both
their demands on individual providers and through their
advocacy efforts with legislators. Although consumer
based organizations are not common in child welfare, cli-
ent advocacy has taken the form of organizations started by
concerned individuals who, most often, were not child
welfare clients. The most famous of these organizations,
the Children’s Defense Fund (CDF), was started to pro-
mote policies that protect children from abuse and neglect,
ensure access to health care, access to quality education
and move them out of poverty (CDF 2008). The CDF has
inspired the development of individual state advocacy
organizations such as Connecticut Voices for Children, an
organization heavily involved in encouraging the State of
Connecticut to adopt better practices in child welfare
(Connecticut Voices for Children 2010). Other smaller
local organizations such as the Family and Youth Round-
table in San Diego County, California provide education
and training for families with children involved in the
mental health, child welfare, and alcohol/drug sectors.
Interorganizational Networks
Much of what has been written on the implementation of
EBPs focuses on the level of organizations or agencies
because the bulk of health and welfare services are deliv-
ered by employees organized in groups or teams (Ferlie
and Shortell 2001). A key extra-organizational feature that
may encourage the implementation of EBPs is the network
of organizations with which agencies are involved (Fram-
bach and Schillewaert 2002). When agencies or organiza-
tions interact with other organizations that employ EBPs,
this has the potential to increase their own likelihood of
exploring or adopting EBPs. In child welfare, contracting
with mental health or juvenile justice agencies that employ
EBPs will both familiarize the child welfare agency with
EBPs and set the example that practice change is achiev-
able. The Community Development Team (CDT) model,
an implementation strategy adopted by the California
Institute for Mental Health that organizes agencies and
speciﬁc EBP implementations, is a good example of the
power of interorganizational networks (California Institute
for Mental Health [CIMH] 2006; Chamberlain et al. 2008).
The Inner Context
Organizational Characteristics
Considerable information is available on the organizational
characteristics that promote the exploration and eventual
adoption of innovation (Greenhalgh et al. 2004; Rogers
2003) and EBPs in mental health and social service orga-
nizations (Glisson et al. 2010). Three broad areas appear to
be especially important in the early stage of implementa-
tion: an organization’s absorptive capacity, readiness for
change and receptive context. Absorptive capacity refers
to an organization’s preexisting knowledge/skills, ability
to use new knowledge, specialization and mechanisms to
support knowledge sharing. Organizations that start with
good knowledge/skills, can incorporate new knowledge,
are highly specialized, and have mechanisms in place to
spread knowledge throughout the organization, are much
more likely to explore EBPs and eventually initiate them
(Damanpour 1991; Ferlie and Shortell 2001; Greenhalgh
et al. 2004; Grol et al. 2007). Public sector agencies
including child welfare agencies may suffer from a number
of deﬁcits in this area. They often have a workforce with
varied levels of education and considerable workloads,
have multiple responsibilities ranging from investiga-
tions to direct delivery of services, and have few readily
available venues for knowledge sharing (Yoo et al. 2007).
Organizational context has received the most attention in
public sector services, due largely to the work of Glisson and
colleagues in children’s services (Glisson and Hemmelgarn
1998; Glisson and James 2002; Glisson and Schoenwald
2005) and in substance abuse treatment settings as described
by Simpson and Flynn (2007). As noted by Glisson and
James (2002) both culture (the normative beliefs and shared
expectations of the organization) and organizational climate
(shared perceptions of the psychological impact of the work
environment on the provider) can impact the quality of
service delivery and the adoption of EBPs. Thus, individuals
who do not view the climate of their organization as wel-
coming innovation and organizations whose cultures do not
promote exploration of practices in response to challenges
are highly unlikely to explore the use of EBPs (Damanpour
1991; Klein and Sorra 1996; Simpson 2002). In fact, to
assist public sector agencies in changing the climate for
innovation, Glisson and colleagues have developed an
organizational and community intervention model (Glisson
et al. 2006; Glisson and Schoenwald 2005). Additionally,
leadership, clear goal setting and prior success in under-
taking practice change all have been linked to the likelihood
that an agency will explore the use of EBPs (Aarons 2006;
Damanpour 1991; Greenhalgh et al. 2004).
8
Adm Policy Ment Health (2011) 38:4–23
123

----- Page 6 (native) -----
Individual Adopter Characteristics
At the more micro level, characteristics of individual
adopters are important determinants of which agencies will
and will not explore or initiate the use of EBPs. Individual
adopters can be at the system, organization, or provider
level. In reviewing the literature, three features of indi-
vidual adopters appear to be important: (1) values and
goals, (2) social networks and (3) the perceived need for
change. First, values and goals have received considerable
attention in the research literature. Those who value
innovation are often labeled as innovators and early
adopters (Rogers 2003). These individuals are seen as trend
setters—comfortable with novelty but also being highly
professional. They engage in ongoing education, usually
follow the professional literature in their ﬁelds and are
well-networked (Berwick 2003; Grol 2001). Unfortunately,
child welfare, unlike medicine, is only recently developing
a strong research base for innovators to follow (National
Association
of
Public
Child
Welfare
Administrators
[NAPCWA] 2005). Second, the discussion of the use of
EBPs in child welfare is reasonably recent (Barth et al.
2005; Chadwick Center 2004; NAPCWA 2005) and tra-
ditional social work education has not focused on dis-
semination of knowledge about EBPs (Weissman et al.
2006), although there is a growing recognition of the
importance to do so (Jenson 2007). As the knowledge base
develops, state and county child welfare directors will
increasingly have the opportunity interact and learn about
EBPs from one another. However, there are some structural
issues that do not support the spread of knowledge about
EBPs through provider social or professional networks.
For example, although psychologists and physicians are
licensed in all states, licensure for social workers is less
consistent especially for those workers often employed by
child welfare agencies. According to data from the Asso-
ciation of Social Work Boards, nine states and Puerto Rico
only license MSW or DSW level social workers leaving
the bulk of the child welfare workforce unlicensed and
imposing no continuing educational requirements on that
workforce (Data Path Design 2010). This lack of contin-
uing education requirement coupled with very minimal
standards in some states (range = 0–48 h over 2 years)
and lack of EBP training in most social work curricula
means that child welfare workers are highly unlikely to be
exposed to and communicate with each other about EBPs.
Finally, attitudes and perceptions of the need to change are
critical if EBPs are to be explored (Aarons 2005). Such
perceptions on the part of the individual worker come from
the ability to identify a problem and feeling empowered
that change can occur.
As shown in Fig. 2, both outer and inner contextual
factors potentially inﬂuence whether or not EBPs are
explored by public sector agencies and organizations.
Although a strong research agenda on the impact of orga-
nizational culture and climate exists in child welfare, there
are few data supporting the importance of the other drivers
of EBP exploration suggested by the literature. This is
unfortunate since, as suggested by Chafﬁn and Friedrich
(2004), two of the biggest obstacles in implementing EBPs
in the public sector may be the ability of agencies and
organizations to access easily understood research-based
information on the appropriateness/effectiveness of EBPs
and the level of involvement/comfort with the implemen-
tation process. However, even with this dearth of infor-
mation, policy, funding, and competitive forces are moving
public sector systems and organizations to sometimes
move hastily into the Adoption/Preparation phase.
Adoption Decision/Preparation Phase
The adoption decision is often conceptualized as a one-
time event while, in practice, organizations may experi-
ment with an innovation, sometimes intermittently, prior to
broader implementation. As noted above, public service
sector organizations generally do not have strong expertise
in gathering and weighing research evidence. Thus, the
adoption of EBPs cannot easily be separated from the
process of adopting new service models, whether or not
they have a strong base of research evidence (Schoenwald
et al. 2008). Therefore, we consider factors that affect the
adoption decision more broadly. A number of approaches
to addressing the exploration and adoption decision phases
include academic-public partnerships, community-based
participatory research, and action research (Leykum et al.
2009; Wallerstein and Duran 2010). In addition, some tools
to facilitate the adoption decision are now in place. For
example, for child welfare, the CEBC provides a search-
able web resource with information on EBPs and imple-
mentation approaches. For mental health and alcohol/
drug services, the Substance Abuse and Mental Health
Services Administration’s National Registry of Effective
and Promising Practices (NREPP) (Substance Abuse and
Mental Health Services Administration [SAMHSA] 2010)
is a resource to help in evaluating the evidence for mental
health, substance abuse, and child-welfare practices. In
regard to children’s mental health, the PracticeWise.com
website (Practice Wise 2010) provides services to support
better understanding and accessibility of the research lit-
erature regarding EPBs. While some of these tools are
available no cost to the user (i.e., CEBC, NREPP), other
resources come at a price or subscription fee (i.e., Practice
Wise 2010). While forces that have the greatest inﬂuence
on the adoption decision may vary, the decision is likely to
be a conﬂuence of factors at multiple levels.
Adm Policy Ment Health (2011) 38:4–23
9
123

----- Page 7 (native) -----
Outer Context
Sociopolitical/Funding
Some impetus for the adoption decision is captured in
major legislative landmarks. The Adoption Assistance and
Child Welfare Act of 1980 (1980) and the Family Preser-
vation and Support Services Program amendment of 1993
(1993) emerged at a time when there was signiﬁcant con-
cern about too many children being placed in foster care or
other residential care settings (Behar 1985; Knitzer 1982)
rather than about providing sufﬁcient services to families to
aid in prevention of out-of-home placement. These laws
reﬂected a heightened awareness of the large and growing
numbers of children in foster care (Wulczyn and Goerge
1992) and the lack of services to prevent out-of-home
placements. Over the subsequent decade, decisions to
adopt Family Preservation models occurred in child wel-
fare systems around the country. Many such programs
relied on only a small amount of research evidence and
were largely inﬂuenced by the sociopolitical and funding
contexts, both of which supported exploration of family
preservation models and decisions to adopt intensive
family preservation service approaches. While some family
preservation models that were adopted have a strong evi-
dence base (Aos 2006; Aos et al. 2004), many others that
operated under the concept of family preservation had a
weak base of evidence (Chafﬁn and Friedrich 2004;
Heneghan et al. 1996; Littell and Schuerman 1995).
Client Advocacy
Client advocacy, and advocacy on behalf of clients, also
plays a role in the ultimate decision to adopt innovative
service models. At the national level, advocacy organiza-
tions, such as the Children’s Defense Fund, were highly
inﬂuential in shaping the sociopolitical context (concep-
tualization and legislation) that led to an environment in
which speciﬁc service models were widely adopted.
Foundations, such as American Humane and the Annie
E. Casey Foundation, which also assume client advocacy
roles through efforts to shape policy, have had a strong
inﬂuence on the adoption of service models such as Team
Decision Making (Crampton 2007), which has become
increasingly widespread in its application in child welfare
settings (Crampton 2007). Team Decision Making is an
example of a practice that ﬁts with the values of the
sociopolitical context—having a focus on making services
for families in child welfare more family-centered, cul-
turally sensitive, and individualized—as described in
the previous section. This service also received strong
and coordinated technical support from these national
foundations, which supported adoption decisions by child
welfare organizations around the country.
Client advocacy at the local level has traditionally been
less organized and had less inﬂuence. However, many child
welfare
jurisdictions
have
had
class
action
lawsuits
resulting from advocacy groups taking action to ameliorate
concerns with safety, service equity, or service availability.
These types of lawsuits often lead to changes in local
policy and practice.
Interorganizational Networks
Interorganizational forces, which focus on how individual
organizations relate to, partner with, and compete with one
another also play a potentially powerful role in adoption
decisions. A number of these forces have received attention
in process models that describe pathways for encouraging
adoption, implementation, and effective delivery of EBPs
(e.g., (Chamberlain et al. 2008; Glisson and Schoenwald
2005; Institute for Healthcare Improvement [IHI] 2003;
Stetler et al. 2008). One aspect of interorganizational
structure pertains to how individual organizations, and their
leaders, are linked to one another. Information about
innovations can be transmitted from one organization to
another through interorganizational communication path-
ways (Rogers 2003). The direct inﬂuence of such pathways
on an adoption decision may take the form of educating a
potential decision maker about the costs and beneﬁts of
using an innovation, which may have the effect of lowering
(or raising) perceptions of risk regarding costs and beneﬁts
of initiating an innovation. However, innovative tools for
cost estimation are being developed (Chamberlain et al.
2010) and hold promise for reducing perceived risk
because more accurate cost estimates could be obtained
prior to the Active Implementation phase. Perceptions of
risk, not surprisingly, play an important role in whether
organizations choose to adopt innovative practices (Panzano
and Roth 2006).
In some cases, interorganizational networks represent
informal communication and referral patterns that arise in a
dynamic agency environment (Palinkas et al. 2010). In
other situations, organizations may join together to for-
malize interorganizational ties through interest or umbrella
groups
or
through
technical
assistance
organizations
designed to serve members of the interorganizational net-
work (e.g., (Chamberlain et al. 2008). Several states have
formed such organizations to support provision of technical
assistance around assessing and supporting the adoption of
new practices, such as the California Institute for Mental
Health and the Ohio Center for Innovative Practice. Such
formal actions may increase the potential inﬂuence of
interorganizational ties, especially when the role of the
10
Adm Policy Ment Health (2011) 38:4–23
123

----- Page 8 (native) -----
technical assistance organization is to advocate and support
introduction of innovative and EBPs.
Similar concepts for formalizing interorganizational
ties to foster experimentation with and adoption of best
practices have been developed in process models of prac-
tice improvement. The Veterans Affairs (VA) Quality
Enhancement Research Initiative (QUERI) describes a
process for utilizing individual medical centers as drivers
of change around speciﬁc service approaches in other VA
centers (Bowman et al. 2008). The CDT model, articulated
by the California Institute of Mental Health, describes how
a technical assistance entity can use the shared interests of
multiple organizations to overcome barriers to adoption,
particularly by assisting in reducing perceptions of risk of
adoption and by developing an approach whereby multiple
organizations can support one another during implemen-
tation. The Institute for Healthcare Improvement (IHI)
learning collaborative model links organizations with
shared goals for quality improvement and implementation
of innovations (IHI 2010). Glisson and Schoenwald (2005)
describe how the development of interorganizational part-
nerships sharing common outcome goals can create an
environment in which shared commitment to a service
approach can increase the likelihood of adoption by cre-
ating an environment in which organizations perceive that
adoption of a service approach will have positive impacts
for clients and the organizations involved.
In addition to partnerships, funding opportunities that
encourage competition also have the potential to inﬂuence
adoption decisions. In circumstances where contracts can
be speciﬁed to require use of a particular type of service
approach, such as occurred with the adoption of the Safe-
Care EBP (Lutzker et al. 1982) statewide in Oklahoma
and countywide in San Diego County, California, this is a
powerful incentive for agencies to position themselves to
compete for and receive such contracts.
Inner Context
Organizational Characteristics
Many intra-organizational characteristics have the poten-
tial to increase the likelihood of adopting service inno-
vations. Several variables can serve to illustrate the role of
organizational characteristics. For example, organizational
size may increase the likelihood of innovation adoption.
Larger organizations may have greater resources to com-
mit to evaluating and exploring the potential utility of
different innovative practices. Organizational size was an
important contributing factor in a meta-analysis of inno-
vation adoption conducted by Damanpour (1991). Orga-
nizational size is likely a proxy for structural variables,
such as role specialization and the existence of knowledge
and skills within an organization to support adoption of
innovations.
Organizational structure can also inﬂuence the ﬁt
between speciﬁc practices and the organization. Fit of a
practice with the roles, structure, values, and authority of
an organization may contribute to the likelihood that a
particular practice is adopted or not. A review of evidence-
based parenting programs used within child welfare set-
tings revealed that, despite their relevance to changes in
key parenting practices of interest to child welfare, few
EBPs were being utilized with families involved with child
welfare services (Hurlburt et al. 2007). In part, this may
have to do with the fact that many child welfare organi-
zations, despite referring many families to parent training
services, do not have extensive inﬂuence over the speciﬁc
services provided because they often rely on service pro-
viders in other sectors that also serve clients with other
reasons for attending parenting programs. On the other
hand, the SafeCare home visiting model, which includes a
parent training component, ﬁts better structurally with
existing home visitation services over which child welfare
organizations often exercise signiﬁcant control (Edwards
and Lutzker 2008). Differences in the ﬁt of some innova-
tions with the existing structure and responsibilities of
service organizations may contribute directly to the like-
lihood of their adoption and implementation, with SafeCare
an example of a model with good ﬁt with child welfare
organization services.
Leadership
Leadership is a crucial variable in both creating the orga-
nizational culture and climate conducive to adoption of
service innovations and in taking ownership of the process
of advancing a speciﬁc innovative practice. Leadership is
associated with effective implementation of evidence-
based medicine (Edmondson 2004) and with improving the
organizational context for EBP implementation (Aarons
2006). Without an internal organizational champion, the
probability that a practice will move past the Exploration
and Adoption phases and into the Implementation Phase
will likely be lower (Forgatch et al. 2005; Price et al. 1998;
Rogers 2003).
Like the processes in the Exploration Phase, ultimate
decisions to adopt innovations and prepare for active
implementation can be inﬂuenced by factors at multiple
levels. In any particular implementation, the forces that
have the greatest inﬂuence on an adoption decision may
vary. At the point of adoption great attention and resources
must be given to preparing for active implementation
through planning and development activities.
Adm Policy Ment Health (2011) 38:4–23
11
123

----- Page 9 (native) -----
Active Implementation Phase
Although general principles apply to large and small
implementation efforts, the scale of the implementation has
implications for speciﬁc issues in both outer and inner
contexts. Implementation factors range from large system
issues, such as political and funding concerns (availability
of startup funding, sustained funding in place), through
clinician issues (ﬁt with productivity and work demands),
to consumer concerns (potential for stigma, applicability of
practices for client needs and culture) (Aarons et al. 2009;
Hurlburt and Knapp 2003).
Outer Context
Sociopolitical/Funding
Whether an EBP is part of new services, being integrated
into existing services, or replacing existing funded ser-
vices, ﬁscal resource availability is critical (Aarons et al.
2009). The costs of policy and contracting changes involve
resources to support staff in leading or attending internal
and external meetings, developing requests for proposals,
and facilitating proposal review. Funding is necessary for
staff training, computer systems, and other materials (e.g.,
binders, notebooks, manuals, DVDs, training tapes, etc.)
(Simpson 2002).
Funds for targeted services may face competing priori-
ties of legislatures that may favor funding to cover other
increasing costs such as Medicaid and prisons (Domino
et al. 2004). In one study, public sector agency executive
directors and administrators cited uncertainty about future
funding allocations as a reason not to invest in EBPs
(Buchanan et al. 2005). Creative outer context solutions
can be developed. For example, the Mental Health Services
Act in California provides for a 1% tax on personal income
over $1 million annually to be allocated for mental health
care. Previous research in other organizational settings
suggests that payers can improve EBP implementation by
supporting initial costs such as time spent on training
(Frambach and Schillewaert 2002). However, a one-time
funding allocation, even if generous, is likely insufﬁcient to
support a sustainable EBP implementation.
Contracting
Contracting can be a powerful tool for
driving implementation and public sector service systems
commonly use contracts with community based organiza-
tions (CBOs) to support services that go beyond the pur-
view of the work activities of system employees. In child
welfare responsibility for child protective services (e.g.,
investigations, disposition) generally rests with state or
county authorities while family preservation/family support
services such as home visitation are generally provided
through contracts with CBOs. In child welfare, mental
health and alcohol/drug sector contracts are generally
awarded through a competitive bidding process and pro-
vide the opportunity for speciﬁcation regarding the activi-
ties to be carried out by CBO staff.
Interorganizational Networks
Networks can operate at the level of states, counties,
organizations, and individuals. Professional organizations
for service providers can serve as informal networks
through which knowledge and information about EBPs, as
well as the speciﬁc steps required for full implementation,
are shared. The National Association of Public Child
Welfare Administrators also supports networking, collab-
oration, and support for implementing effective programs
as well as policies (NAPCWA 2010). The National Asso-
ciation of State Mental Health Directors (NASMHPD)
represents and advocates for state mental health agencies
and directors, provides information exchange through
technical assistance, data analysis, and sponsors confer-
ences and meetings with a focus on research ﬁndings and
best practice (NASMHPD 2010). The National Association
of State Alcohol/Drug Abuse Directors (NASADAD)
provides similar services on a national level (NASADAD
2010). Similar organizations provide support for child
welfare, mental health, and alcohol/drug programs at the
state level and provide structure and process to support
information sharing, interaction, and working toward
common goals (e.g., supporting legislation to provide more
effective services).
Interorganizational networks within a given service
system can be critical when moving from policy decisions
to policy implementation (Hanf and O’Toole 1992). For
example, in child welfare systems, effective interorga-
nizational networks can facilitate appropriate referrals,
subcontracting arrangements, training opportunities, and
knowledge about EBPs. The interorganizational networks
of contractors and their subcontractors may also come into
play such as when a particular lead agency may not have
the workforce or geographic reach to effectively and efﬁ-
ciently implement and deliver services in particular
catchment areas. Thus, interorganizational networks can
facilitate information sharing, provision of implementation
support, and can be used to drive the implementation
process forward.
Information-related challenges to implementation include
disconnection, missing and/or misinterpreted information,
and varying interpretations based on differing world views
(Sobo et al. 2008). Guidelines to improve cross-organiza-
tional communications suggested by these authors include:
mapping the territory to ensure that all relevant stake-
holders are included; charting differences in stakeholder
12
Adm Policy Ment Health (2011) 38:4–23
123

----- Page 10 (native) -----
positions; ensuring buy-in at multiple levels; establishing
policies and procedures to address organizational facts-of-
life (e.g., staff turnover), practicing (active) collaboration
to support co-ownership; establishing clear roles and
responsibilities; and engaging an objective outsider to
assess progress and help problem solve (Sobo et al. 2008).
Intervention Developers
Intervention developers and their organizations and staff
play a crucial role in the Active Implementation Phase.
There is a great deal of variability in the degree to which
intervention developers understand
the challenges of
implementation across service systems, organizations, and
providers. Interventions that have been developed with a
focus on one sector may be implemented in a completely
different sector. For example, The Incredible Years (IY)
(Webster-Stratton et al. 2005) was developed for group
settings in small clinics. However, there have been recent
efforts to implement IY in child welfare (Hurlburt et al.
2007) and residential substance abuse treatment settings
(Aarons et al., in press). In addition, some intervention
developers are willing and able to support developing local
expertise in their model, while others prefer to retain the
training and ﬁdelity support processes (Henggeler et al.
1992; Henggeler et al. 1999; Szapocznik and Williams
2000).
Leadership
Leadership across levels of the outer context is necessary
but not sufﬁcient to facilitate effective implementation.
Leadership is critical in the effective and sustainable
implementation of innovation (Edmondson et al. 2001;
Rogers 2003). Improving leadership, developing readiness
for innovation, and developing systems and organizations
with a learning orientation will likely facilitate EBP
implementation (Aarons and Palinkas 2007; Evans et al.
2003; Iles 2003). Leadership at all pertinent levels (e.g.,
executive director, middle manager, clinical supervisor)
combined with organizational support promotes a positive
implementation
climate,
attitudes,
and
readiness
for
implementation (Aarons 2006; Aarons and Palinkas 2007;
Klein et al. 2001).
Inner Context
Organizational Characteristics
Organizational characteristics refer to structures and pro-
cesses that exist and/or take place in organizations. It is
important to consider how characteristics of organizations
inﬂuence the process of implementation (Rosenheck 2001).
Structure
More centralized organizations may have an
easier time implementing innovations relative to less cen-
tralized or more dispersed organizations (Zmud 1982). This
can occur, in part, because of potential barriers to imple-
menting change across dispersed organizational units (e.g.,
clinics in rural areas or teams with different leaders).
However, dispersing expertise across organizational units
may, in some cases, facilitate EBP uptake and sustainment
(Bertram 2008; Hollenbeck et al. 1995). In addition, for-
malized policies supporting the use of EBP that are part of
the core values, mission, and supports of an organization
can lead to better adoption and implementation of EBPs
(Aarons et al. 2009). Such policies are usually more easily
communicated in more centralized organizations.
Priorities and goals
Setting clear priorities and goals is
critical to an organization’s sense of mission and purpose.
Communicating organizational priorities supportive of
EBPs can guide employees toward a common purpose.
However, speciﬁc actions can be taken to instantiate the
mission and vision of organizations. For example, formal
communications and policies can be set to support the
organizational mission and the importance of particular
practices (Schein 2004). Formalization of policies sup-
porting the use of particular interventions for particular
mental health problems is associated with greater openness
to EBP (Aarons 2004). In addition to communicating
organizational priorities, the presence of such policies is
congruent with procedural speciﬁcations that are often
required by EBPs.
Readiness for change
Conceptualizations, deﬁnitions,
and measures of organizational readiness to change vary
widely and range from organizations that are poised to
change and innovate (Marsick and Watkins 2003) to
organizations with high levels of inertia that may stiﬂe
innovation. Organization type is related to openness to
innovation and private sector organizations tend to have
more organizational supports for use of EBP (Aarons et al.
2009). A number of conceptual models and measures of
organizational readiness exist. Studies of organizational
readiness to change identify both structural (e.g., avail-
ability of computer resources) and process (e.g., cohesion,
pressure for change) variables that may be related to
adoption of EBPs (Lehman et al. 2002). In addition,
readiness is also related to process factors such as organi-
zational culture and climate and individual attitudes toward
innovation (Aarons and Sawitzky 2006; Armenakis et al.
2007; Glisson and Schoenwald 2005).
Receptive Context
Receptive contexts are those with
organizational cultures, climates, and communications
that provide openness to change and minimize competing
Adm Policy Ment Health (2011) 38:4–23
13
123

----- Page 11 (native) -----
demands. Such contexts can be found in organizations
characterized by support for creative innovation and new
ideas, tolerance of differences, personal commitment, and
psychological safety (Ash 1997; Siegel and Kaemmerer
1978). In addition, positive social
inﬂuences within
organizations can be facilitated through events, commu-
nications, ideas, objects, and behaviors that support
positive attitudes, beliefs and behaviors relevant to EBP
(Lewis and Seibold 1993). Four social norms in the
workplace are positively associated with a receptive or
open context: (1) support for creativity and risk taking (2)
teamwork, (3) speed of action, and (4) tolerance of mis-
takes (O’Reilly and Caldwell 1985). Fostering receptive
system and organizational norms can be inﬂuential in
shaping desired attitudes and behaviors in which adher-
ence to structure and procedure (e.g., EBP) provides
social approval and rejection avoidance (Cialdini et al.
1999). It follows that agencies with social processes
supporting openness and innovation would be more likely
to have employees likely to accept variation in work
routines tied to EBP.
Culture and Climate
Organizational culture and climate
can have a profound inﬂuence on organizational function-
ing and effectiveness in public sector services (Glisson
et al. 2006; Glisson and Green 2006). Organizational cul-
ture can be deﬁned as the implicit norms and assumptions
of a work unit that guide behaviors (Cooke and Rousseau
1988) and can impact how readily new technologies will be
considered and adopted in practice (Caccia-Bava et al.
2006; Hemmelgarn et al. 2001). There is concern that
public sector service organizations have cultures that are
resistant to innovation and may provide lower support for
EBP (Aarons et al. 2009). Lower levels of bureaucracy and
being a private (vs. public) sector organization are asso-
ciated with more positive staff attitudes toward adopting
EBPs and private provider organizations are more likely to
provide organizational support for EBP (Aarons 2004;
Aarons et al. 2009; Backer et al. 1995). However, tech-
nology transfer may be facilitated by adjusting imple-
mentation plans to the culture of a human service agency
(Keller and Galanter 1999) and, although a difﬁcult task,
some aspects of organizational culture can be changed
(Schraeder et al. 2005).
Organizational climate refers to employees’ perceptions
and affective responses to their work environment (Joyce
and Slocum 1982; Srivastava and Bathla 1996). More
general organizational climate includes perceptions of job
characteristics and the work group (Glisson 1989). How-
ever, ‘‘strategic’’ climates for particular purposes can be
developed. For example, climate for innovation is a factor
in human service organizational openness to change
(Anderson and West 1998; Klein and Sorra 1996) and
implementation climate is a measureable factor that can be
targeted in organizational change efforts (Klein et al.
2001).
Culture and climate are interrelated but should be con-
sidered both in their own right, and in interaction with each
other (Aarons and Sawitzky 2006). While culture and cli-
mate are important considerations in regard to quality of
services, they should also be a key consideration during the
Active Implementation Phase (Hemmelgarn et al. 2006).
Innovation-Values Fit
Innovation-values ﬁt posits that implementation of an
innovation will be successful to the degree that the inno-
vation matches the mission, values and service provider
tasks and duties of the organization and individuals within
that organization (Klein and Sorra 1996). For example,
case management services for families involved with child
welfare systems have common goals of child safety,
avoiding removal from the home, minimizing placement
changes, and reuniﬁcation and permanence. There are a
number of ways in which these goals can be accomplished.
Interventions that are most effective in meeting goals and
also ﬁt with other administrative and practice needs such as
record-keeping, and productivity requirements are most
likely to facilitate effective implementation. When con-
sidering which practice to implement, innovation-values ﬁt
should be considered at the organizational, managerial,
provider and consumer levels. The degree to which an EBP
is congruent with system, organization, and provider goals
and processes is likely to impact the ease with which
implementation proceeds. However, the characteristics of
the EBP may allow for more or less ﬂexibility in inter-
vention delivery while adhering to EBP core elements
demonstrated to be responsible for treatment outcome
effects (Chorpita and Daleiden 2009; Chorpita and Regan
2009).
Individual Adopter Characteristics
There can be a great deal of variability in service provider
characteristics and readiness to implement EBP and atti-
tudes toward organizational change are important in the
dynamics of innovation (Dunham et al. 1989). Personal
characteristics of service staff include demographic factors
such as age, race/ethnicity, level of education, training,
primary discipline, and amount of professional experience,
adaptability, personal values and goals, personal disposi-
tional innovativeness, and attitudes toward innovation and
EBP. Level of education, level of professional experience,
primary discipline, and race/ethnicity are associated with
openness toward adopting EBPs (Aarons 2004, 2005;
Aarons et al. 2010). Locus of control and self-esteem are,
14
Adm Policy Ment Health (2011) 38:4–23
123

----- Page 12 (native) -----
likewise, related to acceptance of innovation (Korunka and
Vitouch 1999). Individual provider attitudes toward adop-
tion of EBPs vary with organizational characteristics as
well as demographic predictors such as education level,
professional status (Aarons 2004), and organizational cul-
ture and climate (Aarons and Sawitzky 2006). In addition,
deﬁnitions of EBP may vary and one study found more
favorable attitudes after training in modularized treatment
where attitudes were measured relative to perceived evi-
dence rather than manualization (Borntrager et al. 2009).
We have identiﬁed a number of factors important in the
Active Implementation phase of EBP in public sectors. A
broad consideration of system, organizational, and indi-
vidual factors is warranted and will likely lead to more
effective planning for EBP implementation. While there
may be readiness to change at a given level in the system or
organization, readiness to change may be more variable in
other parts of the system (e.g., CBOs, providers, etc.) so
ongoing attention to problem solving is a critical driver of
the implementation process.
Sustainment Phase
While there is movement in EBP implementation, we have
little systemic knowledge about what factors facilitate or
limit sustainment of an EBP in a service setting. Federal
and state agencies may fund implementation demonstration
projects and research studies to facilitate the implementa-
tion of EBPs, however, there has been little empirical work
examining factors that either facilitate or limit sustain-
ability of EBPs in public sector social services (Greenhalgh
et al. 2004). We use the term sustainment to denote the
continued use of an innovation in practice. We currently
lack comprehensive models of factors that support main-
tenance or sustainment of EBPs in public service sectors.
Models of Sustainment
Most of the commonly cited models of implementation
invoke sustainability as a key component. Greenhalgh et al.
(2004) note that sustainability is a key element of models of
implementation and diffusion of health innovations. The
RE-AIM model (Glasgow et al. 1999; Glasgow et al. 2006)
explicitly identiﬁes the ‘‘maintenance’’ phase of imple-
mentation as critical in sustaining effective health interven-
tions. A model developed for substance abuse services is the
Organizational Readiness for Change (ORC) model that
focuses not only system and organizational issues in imple-
mentation but also what factors may facilitate the chances of
sustained innovation implementation (Simpson and Flynn
2007). The ARC model developed by Charles Glisson
invokes the concept of sustainment in the ‘‘self-regulation’’
phase of the implementation process (Glisson and Schoen-
wald 2005). While sustainment is a desired outcome of
effective implementation (Damschroder et al. 2009) there
has been little empirical work completed in this area—nor is
there a comprehensive guiding conceptual model of sus-
tainability. This phase can also include models for expansion
and scaling-up within a service system beyond an initial
implementation trial (Brown et al. 2009).
Outer Context
Sociopolitical
Leadership
In order for practices to be sustained across
service systems, leadership at multiple levels must be
supportive in word and deed. The policies and funding
needed for sustained use of practices typically follow from
leaders who develop initiatives or set visions that can be
maintained over time (Hoagwood et al. 2006). However,
strong charismatic leadership may be required to create the
conditions for sustained use of EBP once the active
implementation phase is complete (Edmondson 2003a).
Policy
Policies to support sustainment of practices can
arise at the legislative, system, or organizational levels. At
the legislative level, funds can be allocated for particular
initiatives. For example, the Mental Health Services Act
(Proposition 63) in California (State of California, 2004),
provides funds not only for new services but also for sus-
taining evidence-based services (Cashin et al. 2008). New
York State has established an Evidence-based Treatment
Dissemination Center (EBTDC) to support training and
year-long consultation to front-line clinicians (Bruns et al.
2008) and the State of Ohio has developed ‘‘Coordinating
Centers of Excellence’’ to promote use of best-practices
and EBPs (Ohio Department of Mental Health [ODMH]
2009). Finally, some federal grant mechanisms now require
planning for sustainability after research funds are with-
drawn. SAMHSA’s children’s mental health system of care
request for proposals has such a requirement.
Service systems may adopt a policy of supporting evi-
dence-based programs as they provide a higher likelihood
of positive impacts for individuals served directly by the
system. For example, after reviewing promising initial
outcome and workforce results of a statewide randomized
effectiveness study, the Oklahoma Ofﬁce of Children’s
Services (OCS) implemented and is sustaining an evi-
dence-based home visitation program across the entire
state. The OCS revised the bidding and contracting process
to support services and additional staff to provide ongoing
ﬁdelity monitoring, coaching and support. In another
example, the San Diego County Child Welfare system, in
collaboration with the United Way, is implementing
Adm Policy Ment Health (2011) 38:4–23
15
123

----- Page 13 (native) -----
evidence-based home visitation and made recent changes
to the competitive bid process, contracting language, and
statements of work in order to support the implementation
and sustainability of the practice.
Another important impetus in policy and practice
change that can support sustainability in social service
systems is the class action lawsuit and related consent
decrees. Such lawsuits focus on a variety of system factors
relevant to sustainability of EBPs including caseloads,
sufﬁcient training, and effective supervision for case-
workers (Korunka and Vitouch 1999). Policies stemming
from legal actions can result in mandates for the use of
particular service models and practices. This type of law-
suit often results in ‘‘consent decrees’’ that specify man-
dated changes to be undertaken by the service system under
the decree such as increased caseworker training, foster
parent training, and use of assessments (Korunka and
Vitouch 1999; Robinson et al. 2002) that may be addres-
sed, in part, through the use of EBPs.
Funding
Just as usual care services must be funded, sustaining EBP
after initial implementation requires a commitment to
ongoing funding. Funding can be dedicated to the support
of the particular practice or can be allocated more generally
for supporting the services—and associated organizations
and staff—in the implementation setting. However, some
additional costs are generally associated with EBP that go
beyond usual services such as costs associated with mon-
itoring the ﬁdelity with which an intervention is delivered
and then providing relevant feedback, coaching, or support
to service providers. Additional costs are also associated
with training new staff in the EBP and, in many cases,
supporting staff until they are certiﬁed in the practice. This
can be a particularly critical issue in public sector service
organizations where turnover rates can range from 20% to
50% annually. A concern for many service systems is
supporting EBPs—that are generally more costly to deliver
than usual care services—while reaching clients in need.
This translates into a challenge for service organizations
that have to balance providing high quality care while
meeting productivity requirements.
Public-Academic Collaboration
Many implementation efforts involve public academic
collaborations. Such collaborations can be critical in the
successful translation of research ﬁndings into clinical
practice (Biegel et al. 2001; Quill and Aday 2000). Suc-
cessful partnerships can take different forms but some key
elements have been identiﬁed including empowering
community participants, frank discussion of issues and
concerns of all stakeholders, building trust, and identiﬁ-
cation and valuing of needs of all stakeholders (Maurana
and Goldenberg 1996). Such partnerships can improve
chances of sustainability by providing a mechanism for
continued involvement of multiple stakeholders, trouble-
shooting, problem-solving, procurement of funds for sus-
tainability, and ongoing technical support.
Inner Context
Organizational Characteristics
Leadership and Organizational Culture
Sustainment may
be supported by a leader’s strategic decisions and plans for
how service providers work in organizations. Strong leader
support of EBPs can create a climate conducive to con-
tinued buy-in and use of speciﬁc practices. Sustainability is
likely to be more successful when placed in an organiza-
tional culture that values EBP and has leadership that
facilitates team participation and psychological safety
(Edmondson 2003a; b). Schein (2004) identiﬁed a number
of primary and secondary ‘‘culture embedding mecha-
nisms’’ by which leaders and organizations can set the
stage for instantiating organizational values and actions
supportive
of
EBP.
Primary
embedding
mechanisms
include what leaders pay attention to, what they measure
and control, resource allocation, rewards and status in the
organization, and how employees are recruited, selected,
and promoted. Secondary embedding mechanisms include
organization systems and procedures, design of physical
space (e.g. rooms with one-way mirrors for in vivo
coaching), and formal statements of organizational phi-
losophy. Use of these types of strategies can promote
organizational ideologies that support continued use of
EBPs with a high level of excellence.
Critical Mass of EBP Use
An organization in which all
targeted employees use a given innovation consistently and
well is likely to be effective in its implementation and
sustainment relative to organizations in which only some of
the targeted employees use the innovation consistently and
well (Klein and Sorra 1996). This may be, in part, because
during
implementation
providers
may
become
more
‘‘skillful, consistent, and committed in their use of an
innovation.’’ (p. 1057), and sustainability is enhanced when
there is a critical mass and social network support for the
EBP. However, building expertise across an entire service
system may require collaboration and building expertise
across and between organizations to instantiate and sustain
an EBP (Bertram 2008; Edmondson and Roloff 2009).
16
Adm Policy Ment Health (2011) 38:4–23
123

----- Page 14 (native) -----
Fidelity Monitoring and Support
In the sustainment phase continued ﬁdelity monitoring
and support are critical for continued EBP effectiveness
(Schoenwald et al. in press). While this is positioned in this
paper as an ‘‘inner context’’ issue, it really spans the outer
and inner contexts. For example, training and ﬁdelity
support that is reliant on external expertise and processes
can be considered outer context. However, where training
and ﬁdelity support are garnered locally through develop-
ing localized EBPs, it becomes an inner context issue. In
both cases, having requirements and mechanisms for
ongoing ﬁdelity support communicates the need for tar-
geted continuous quality improvement. This is congruent
with having a high degree of procedural speciﬁcity in work
activities. That is, once an EBP is implemented, system
and/or organizational cultural norms and processes support
providers’ understanding that they now have new set of
skills to learn and are expected to work toward perfecting
those skills. In addition, this approach supports greater role
clarity where service providers know what is expected of
them and how their job performance will be evaluated.
Such role clarity is associated with better job performance
and role efﬁcacy (Bray and Brawley 2002). However,
appropriate tools such as ﬁdelity checklists and use of
technology such as web-based remote observation, or
remote coding of session audiotapes are necessary (Baer
et al. 2007). In addition, pairing EBP with ongoing ﬁdelity
support in the form of supportive coaching is associated
with lower staff turnover in child welfare (Aarons et al.
2009). This is likely related to the reduced staff emotional
exhaustion found with some EBPs (Aarons et al. 2009).
Supportive coaching and supervision should also take into
account the professional development level of child-wel-
fare service providers (Stoltenberg et al. 1998). Approaches
such as these along with appropriate technological supports
such as web-based or automated phone technology for
ﬁdelity monitoring and reporting may help to improve EBP
adherence.
Stafﬁng
Stafﬁng for EBP has probably received less empirical
attention than other sustainability concerns. Agencies and
organizations have standard hiring procedures but these are
frequently not geared to the needs of EBPs (Fixsen et al.
2005). Usually largely unstructured interviews are used in
the selection process. However, the literature on personnel
selection in organizations suggests that such interviews
have very low validity in predicting job performance. This
can be improved by adopting practices of personnel psy-
chologists. For example, a thorough job analysis should be
conducted in order to determine criteria for selecting the
best candidates (Patterson et al. 2008). From the job
analysis selection criteria can be developed. Selection cri-
teria should include knowledge, skills, abilities, attitudes,
and other characteristics important for employees in gen-
eral, and for effective learning and delivery of EBP in
particular. Staff retention and replacement must be con-
sidered and planned for in all phases of implementation;
however, this concern becomes critical when considering
sustainability since a well trained staff is critical to the
continued delivery of EBPs.
We have identiﬁed a number of factors in the outer and
inner contexts that warrant particular consideration during
the sustainment phase in public sector services. Consider-
ation of these factors as well as proactive problem solving
should lead to more effective maintenance of EBPs within
public sector systems.
Discussion and Conclusions
Taken together, the four phases provide a conceptual
framework for considering challenges and opportunities in
EBP implementation in public service sectors. The nature
of the outer and inner contexts, in practice, varies
depending on one’s perspective and implementation phase.
Similarly, many of the factors discussed above are likely to
have relatively more or less importance depending on the
implementation phase and the dynamics of the particular
service system, organizations, providers, and consumers
involved (Aarons et al. 2009; Green and Aarons 2010).
While the model and stages that we have proposed
provide heuristic value in understanding and navigating the
implementation process, there are few, if any, good mea-
sures of the process or progression through the phases. For
example, if a county is just beginning to consider whether
or not to use or adopt an EBP it would be in the Explo-
ration phase. However, there may be a continuum on which
to measure how far the county is into a phase. Some
existing measures while developed through work in a
particular sector may have relevance to other sectors
(Saldana et al. 2007). In addition, the heuristic of clinical
readiness to change has also been applied to organizational
change in health and public sector services (Cinite et al.
2009; Weiner 2009) although the utility of this approach
has not been proven. However, process-based measures of
implementation phase would be useful to implementation
researchers in order to assess and compare implementation
efforts in terms of current status, progression, attaining
milestones within each phase, the speed with which each
phase is traversed. Such measures could then be examined
in relation to implementation effectiveness (Klein et al.
2001) and implementation outcomes (Proctor et al. 2009;
Proctor et al. 2010).
Adm Policy Ment Health (2011) 38:4–23
17
123

----- Page 15 (native) -----
Embedding a culture (Schein 2004) of EBP can begin
early in the overall implementation process. For example,
once the Adoption/Preparation phase is entered, plans and
processes should be developed to support embedding the
particular EBP in the system both ideologically and prac-
tically. Positive organizational culture is associated with
EBP sustainment (Glisson et al. 2008). However, the value
of EBP in general should be part of the ongoing system
and/or organizational culture. Embedding strategies could
include improving implementation climate that supports
the EBP, carving out time for training and coaching that
also support ﬁdelity, and tailoring information systems to
support EBP record keeping and reporting.
Consistent with the current NIMH Strategic Plan
(National Institutes of Mental Health 2007), dissemination
and implementation of effective health, mental health, and
social service strategies should be a priority for service
systems and organizations providing mental health and
social services. While there are a number of effective EBPs
tailored to the needs of various service systems and their
clients and patients, the movement of such interventions
has been slow and relatively ineffective (Balas and Boren
2000). Having a better understanding of the challenges
likely to be present during implementation phases should
help multiple stakeholders more effectively navigate the
complex process of EBP implementation.
Acknowledgments
Development of this paper was supported by
National Institute of Mental Health Grants P30MH074678 and
R01MH072961. The authors thank C. Hendricks Brown, Ph.D., John
Landsverk, Ph.D., Lawrence Palinkas, Ph.D., and Sonja Schoenwald,
Ph.D. for their comments and feedback on earlier versions of this
manuscript.
Open Access
This article is distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which per-
mits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
References
Aarons, G. A. (2004). Mental health provider attitudes toward
adoption
of
evidence-based
practice:
The
Evidence-Based
Practice Attitude Scale (EBPAS). Mental Health Services
Research, 6(2), 61–74.
Aarons, G. A. (2005). Measuring provider attitudes toward evidence-
based practice: Consideration of organizational context and
individual differences. Child and Adolescent Psychiatric Clinics
of North America, 14(2), 255–271.
Aarons, G. A. (2006). Transformational and transactional leadership:
Association with attitudes toward evidence-based practice.
Psychiatric Services, 57(8), 1162–1169.
Aarons, G. A., Cafri, G., Lugo, L., & Sawitzky, A. (in press). Expand-
ing the domains of attitudes towards evidence-based practice:
The evidence based practice attitude scale-50 (EBPAS-50).
Administration and Policy in Mental Health and Mental Health
Services Research.
Aarons, G. A., Fettes, D. L., Flores, L. E., & Sommerfeld, D. H.
(2009a). Evidence-based practice implementation and staff
emotional exhaustion in children’s services. Behaviour Research
and Therapy, 47(11), 954–960.
Aarons, G. A., Glisson, C., Hoagwood, K., Landsverk, J., & Cafri, G.
(2010). Psychometric properties and United States national
norms of the Evidence-Based Practice Attitude Scale (EBPAS).
Psychological Assessment, 22(2), 356–365.
Aarons, G. A., & Palinkas, L. A. (2007). Implementation of evidence-
based practice in child welfare: Service provider perspectives.
Administration and Policy in Mental Health & Mental Health
Services Research, 34, 411–419.
Aarons, G. A., & Sawitzky, A. C. (2006). Organizational culture and
climate and mental health provider attitudes toward evidence-
based practice. Psychological Services, 3(1), 61–72.
Aarons, G. A., Sommerfeld, D. H., Hecht, D. B., Silovsky, J. F., &
Chafﬁn, M. J. (2009b). The impact of evidence-based practice
implementation and ﬁdelity monitoring on staff turnover:
Evidence for a protective effect. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 77(2), 270–280.
Aarons, G. A., Sommerfeld, D. H., & Walrath-Greene, C. M. (2009c).
Evidence-based practice implementation: The impact of public
vs. private sector organization type on organizational support,
provider attitudes, and adoption of evidence-based practice.
Implementation Science, 4(83), 1–13.
Aarons, G. A., Wells, R. S., Zagursky, K., Fettes, D. L., & Palinkas,
L. A. (2009d). Implementing evidence-based practice in com-
munity mental health agencies: A multiple stakeholder analysis.
American Journal of Public Health, 99(11), 2087–2095.
Adoption and Safe Families Act. (1997). PL105-89 C.F.R.
Adoption Assistance and Child Welfare Act. (1980). Public law
96-272.
Anderson, N. R., & West, M. A. (1998). Measuring climate for work
group innovation: Development and validation of the Team
Climate Inventory. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 19(3),
235–258.
Annie E. Casey Foundation [AECF]. (2008). The story of family to
family: The early years (1992–2006) of an initiative to improve
child welfare systems. Retrieved April 10, 2009, from www.
aecf.org.
Aos, S. (2006). Intensive family preservation programs: Program
ﬁdelity inﬂuences effectiveness revised (No. 06-02-3901). Olym-
pia: Washington State Institute for Public Policy.
Aos, S., Lieb, R., Mayﬁeld, J., Miller, M., & Pennucci, A. (2004).
Beneﬁts and costs of prevention and early intervention programs
for youth (No. 04-07-3901). Olympia: Washington State Institute
for Public Policy.
Armenakis, A. A., Bernerth, J. B., Pitts, J. P., & Walker, H. J. (2007).
Organizational change recipients’ beliefs scale. Journal of
Applied Behavioral Science, 43(4), 481–505.
Ash, J. (1997). Organizational factors that inﬂuence information
technology diffusion in academic health sciences centers.
Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 4(2),
102–111.
Backer, T. (2000). The failure of success: Challenges of disseminat-
ing effective substance abuse prevention programs. Journal of
Community Psychology, 28(3), 363–373.
Backer, T. E., David, S. L., & Soucy, G. E. (1995). Reviewing the
behavioral science knowledge base on technology transfer
(NIDA research monograph 155, NIH publication no. 95-4035).
Rockville, MD: National Institute on Drug Abuse.
Baer, J. S., Ball, S. A., Campbell, B. K., Miele, G. M., Schoener,
E. P., & Tracy, K. (2007). Training and ﬁdelity monitoring of
18
Adm Policy Ment Health (2011) 38:4–23
123

----- Page 16 (native) -----
behavioral interventions in multi-site addictions research. Drug
Alcohol Dependence, 87(2–3), 107–118.
Balas, E. A., & Boren, S. A. (2000). Managing clinical knowledge for
health care improvement. Yearbook of medical informatics 2000:
Patient-centered systems, pp. 65–70.
Barth, R. P., Landsverk, J., Chamberlain, P., Reid, J. B., Rolls, J. A.,
Hurlburt, M. S., et al. (2005). Parent-training programs in child
welfare services: Planning for a more evidence-based approach
to serving biological parents. Research on Social Work Practice,
15(5), 353–371.
Behar, L. (1985). Changing patterns of state responsibility: A case
study of North Carolina. Journal of Clinical Child Psychology,
14, 188–195.
Bertram, R. M. (2008). Establishing a basis for multi-system
collaboration: Systemic team development. Journal of Sociology
and Social Welfare, 35(4), 9–27.
Berwick, D. M. (2003). Disseminating innovations in health care.
JAMA, 289(15), 1969–1975.
Biegel, D. E., Shafran, R. D., Johnsen, J. A., & Friedman, S. (2001).
Facilitators and barriers to support group participation. ﬁnal
report to the ofﬁce of program evaluation and research, Ohio
Department of Mental Health. Cleveland: Cuyahoga County
Community Mental Health Research Institute, Mandel School of
Applied Social Sciences, Case Western Reserve University.
Bond, G., Drake, R., McHugo, G., Rapp, C., & Whitley, R. (2009).
Strategies for improving ﬁdelity in the national evidence-based
practices project. Research on Social Work Practice, 19(5), 569.
Borntrager, C. F., Chorpita, B. F., Higa-McMillan, C., & Weisz, J. R.
(2009). Provider attitudes toward evidence-based practices: Are
the concerns with the evidence or with the manuals? Psychiatric
Services, 60, 677–681.
Bowman, C., Sobo, E., Asch, S., & Gifford, A. (2008). Measuring
persistence of implementation: QUERI Series. Implementation
Science, 3(1), 21.
Bray, S. R., & Brawley, L. R. (2002). Role efﬁcacy, role clarity, and
role performance effectiveness. Small Group Research, 33(2),
233–253.
Brown, C. H., Ten Have, T. R., Jo, B., Dagne, G., Wyman, P. A.,
Muthen, B., et al. (2009). Adaptive designs for randomized trials
in public health. Annual Review of Public Health, 30, 1–25.
Bruns, E. J., Hoagwood, K. E., Rivard, J. C., Wotring, J., Marsenich,
L., & Carter, B. (2008). State implementation of evidence-based
practice for youths, part II: Recommendations for research and
policy. Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent
Psychiatry, 47(5), 499–504.
Buchanan, D., Fitzgerald, L., Ketley, D., Gollop, R., Jones, J. L., Saint
Lamont, S., et al. (2005). No going back: A review of the
literature on sustaining organizational change. International
Journal of Management Reviews, 7(3), 189–205.
Caccia-Bava, M. D. C., Guimaraes, T., & Harrington, S. J. (2006).
Hospital organization culture, capacity to innovate and success
in technology adoption. Journal of Health Organization and
Management, 20, 194–217.
California Evidence Based Clearinghouse [CEBC]. (2010). The
California evidence-based clearinghouse for child welfare.
Retrieved May 4, 2010, from http://www.cebc4cw.org/.
California Institute for Mental Health [CIMH]. (2006). Community
Development Team model: Supporting the model adherent imple-
mentation of programs and practices. Sacramento: California
Institute for Mental Health.
California Institute of Mental Health [CIMH]. (2010). http://www.
cimh.org/.
Cashin, C., Schefﬂer, R., Felton, M., Neal, A., & Miller, L. (2008).
Transformation of the California mental health system: Stake-
holder-driven planning as a transformational activity. Psychiat-
ric Services, 59(10), 1107–1114.
Center for the Study and Prevention of Violence. (2010). Blueprints
for violence prevention. Retrieved May 4, 2010, from http://
www.colorado.edu/cspv/blueprints/.
Chadwick Center. (2004). Closing the quality chasm in child abuse
treatment: Identifying and disseminating best practices. San
Diego, CA: Children’s Hospital-San Diego, Chadwich Center for
Children and Families.
Chafﬁn, M., & Friedrich, B. (2004). Evidence-based treatments in
child abuse and neglect. Children and Youth Services Review,
26, 1097–1113.
Chamberlain, P., Brown, C. H., Saldana, L., Reid, J., Wang, W.,
Marsenich, L., et al. (2008). Engaging and recruiting counties in
an experiment on implementing evidence-based practice in
California. Administration and Policy in Mental Health and
Mental Health Services Research, 35(4), 250–260.
Chamberlain, P., Padgett, C., Rolls-Reutz, J., Holmes, L., Ward, H.,
Soper, J. et al. (2010). A Strategy for assessing costs of
implementing new practices in the child welfare system: Adapting
the English cost calculator in the U.S. Unpublished manuscript.
Children’s Defense Fund [CDF]. (2008). Annual report. Washington,
DC: Children’s Defense Fund.
Chorpita, B. F., & Daleiden, E. L. (2009). Mapping evidence-based
treatments for children and adolescents: Application of the
distillation and matching model to 615 treatments from 322
randomized trials. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychol-
ogy, 77(3), 566–579.
Chorpita, B. F., & Regan, J. (2009). Dissemination of effective mental
health treatment procedures: Maximizing the return on a
signiﬁcant
investment.
Behaviour
Research
and
Therapy,
47(11), 990–993.
Cialdini, R. B., Bator, R. J., & Guadagno, R. E. (1999). Normative
inﬂuences in organizations. In D. Messick, J. Levine, &
L. Thompson (Eds.), Shared cognition in organizations.
:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Cinite, I., Duxbury, L., & Higgins, C. (2009). Measurement of
perceived organizational readiness for change in the public
sector. British Journal of Management, 20(2), 265–277.
Connecticut Voices for Children. (2010). http://www.ctkidslink.org/.
Cooke, R. A., & Rousseau, D. M. (1988). Behavioral norms and
expectations. Group and Organizational Studies, 13, 245–273.
Crampton, D. (2007). Research review: Family group decision-
making: A promising practice in need of more programme theory
and research. Child and Family Social Work, 12, 202–209.
Crea, T. M., Crampton, D. S., Abramson-Madden, A., & Usher, C. L.
(2008). Variability in the implementation of Team Decision-
making (TDM): Scope and compliance with the family to family
practice model. Children and Youth Services Review, 30(11),
1221–1232.
Damanpour, F. (1991). Organizational innovation: A meta-analysis of
effects of determinants and moderators. Academy of Manage-
ment Journal, 34(3), 555–590.
Damschroder,L., Aron, D., Keith, R., Kirsh,S., Alexander,J., & Lowery,
J. (2009). Fostering implementation of health services research
ﬁndings into practice: A consolidated framework for advancing
implementation science. Implementation Science, 4, 50.
Data Path Design. (2010). ASWB projects. Retrieved June 10, 2009,
from https://www.datapathdesign.com/ASWB/ASWB.html.
Davies, H. T. O., & Nutley, S. M. (2008). Learning more about how
research-based knowledge gets used: Guidance in the develop-
ment of new empirical research. New York, NY: William T.
Grant Foundation.
Domino, M. E., Norton, E. C., Morrissey, J. P., & Thakur, N. (2004).
Cost shifting to jails after a change to managed mental health
care. Health Services Research, 39, 1379–1400.
Dunham, R. B., Grube, J. A., Gardner, D. G., Cummings, L., &
Pierce, J. L. (1989). The development of an attitude toward
Adm Policy Ment Health (2011) 38:4–23
19
123

----- Page 17 (native) -----
change instrument. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the
Academy of Management.
Edmondson, A. C. (2003a). Framing for learning: Lessons in
successful technology implementation. California Management
Review, 45(2), 35–54.
Edmondson, A. C. (2003b). Speaking up in the operating room: How
team leaders promote learning in interdisciplinary action teams.
Journal of Management Studies, 40(6), 1419–1452.
Edmondson, A. C. (2004). Learning from failure in health care:
Frequent opportunities, pervasive barriers. Quality and Safety in
Health Care, 13(suppl 2), ii3–ii9.
Edmondson, A. C., Bohmer, R., & Pisano, G. P. (2001). Disrupted
routines: Team learning and new technology adaptation. Admin-
istrative Science Quarterly, 46, 685–716.
Edmondson, A. C., & Roloff, K. S. (2009). Overcoming barriers to
collaboration: Psychological safety and learning in diverse
teams. In E. Salas, G. F. Goodwin, & C. S. Burke (Eds.), Team
effectiveness in complex organizations: Cross-disciplinary per-
spectives and approaches (Vol. 34). New York: Routledge/
Taylor & Francis Group.
Edwards, A., & Lutzker, J. (2008). Iterations of the SafeCare model.
Behavior Modiﬁcation, 32(5), 736–756.
Evans, C., Connell, J., Barkham, M., Marshall, C., & Mellor-Clark, J.
(2003). Practice-based evidence: Benchmarking NHS primary
care counseling services at national and local levels. Clinical
Psychology & Psychotherapy, 10(6), 374–388.
Family Preservation and Support Services Program Amendment.
(1993). Public law 103-66.
Feldstein, A., & Glasgow, R. (2008). A practical, robust implemen-
tation and sustainability model (PRISM). Joint Commission
Journal on Quality and Patient Safety, 34(4), 228–243.
Ferlie, E. B., & Shortell, S. M. (2001). Improving the quality of health
care in the United Kingdom and the United States: A framework
for change. Milbank Quarterly, 79(2), 281–315.
Fixsen, D., Blase, K., Naoom, S., & Wallace, F. (2009). Core
implementation components. Research on Social Work Practice,
19(5), 531.
Fixsen, D. L., Naoon, S. F., Blase, K. A., Friedman, R. M., &
Wallace, F. (2005). Implementation research: A synthesis of the
literature. Tampa: University of South Florida, Louis de la Parte
Florida Mental Health Institute, the National Implementation
Research Network.
Forgatch, M. S., Patterson, G. R., & DeGarmo, D. S. (2005).
Evaluating ﬁdelity: Predictive validity for a measure of compe-
tent adherence to the Oregon model of parent management
training (PMTO). Behavior Therapy, 36, 3–13.
Frambach, R. T., & Schillewaert, N. (2002). Organizational innova-
tion adoption: A multi-level framework of determinants and
opportunities for future research. Journal of Business Research.
Special Issue: Marketing theory in the next millennium, 55(2),
163–176.
Ganju, V. (2003). Implementation of evidence-based practices in state
mental health systems: Implications for research and effective-
ness studies. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 29(1), 125–131.
Glasgow, R. E., Klesges, L. M., Dzewaltowski, D. A., Estabrooks, P.
A., & Vogt, T. M. (2006). Evaluating the impact of health
promotion programs: Using the RE-AIM framework to form
summary measures for decision making involving complex
issues. Health Education Research, 21(5), 688.
Glasgow, R., Vogt, T., & Boles, S. (1999). Evaluating the public
health impact of health promotion interventions: The RE-AIM
framework. American Journal of Public Health, 89(9), 1322.
Glisson, C. (1989). The effect of leadership on workers in human
service organizations. Administration in Social Work, 13, 99–116.
Glisson, C., Dukes, D., & Green, P. (2006). The effects of the ARC
organizational intervention on caseworker turnover, climate, and
culture in children’s service systems. Child Abuse and Neglect,
30(8), 849–854.
Glisson, C., & Green, P. (2006). The effects of organizational culture
and climate on the access to mental health care in child welfare
and juvenile justice systems. Administration and Policy in
Mental Health and Mental Health Services Research, 33(4),
433–448.
Glisson, C., & Hemmelgarn, A. (1998). The effects of organizational
climate and interorganizational coordination on the quality and
outcomes of children’s service systems. Child Abuse and
Neglect, 22(5), 401–421.
Glisson, C., & James, L. R. (2002). The cross-level effects of culture
and climate in human service teams. Journal of Organizational
Behavior, 23, 767–794.
Glisson, C., & Schoenwald, S. (2005). The ARC organizational and
community intervention strategy for implementing evidence-
based children’s mental health treatments. Mental Health
Services Research, 7(4), 243–259.
Glisson, C., Schoenwald, S. K., Hemmelgarn, A., Green, P., Dukes,
D., Armstrong, K. S. et al. (2010). Randomized trial of MST and
ARC in an two-level evidence-based treatment implementation
strategy. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 78(4),
537–550.
Glisson, C., Schoenwald, S., Kelleher, K., Landsverk, J., Hoagwood,
K., Mayberg, S., et al. (2008). Assessing the organizational
social context (OSC) of mental health services: Implications for
research and practice. Administration and Policy in Mental
Health and Mental Health Services Research. Special Issue:
Improving mental health services, 35(1–2), 98–113.
Green, A. E., & Aarons, G. A. (2010). Stakeholder perceptions of
factors affecting evidence-based practice implementation. Paper
presented at the The Quality of Behavioral Healthcare: A Drive
for Change through Research, Clearwater Beach, FL.
Greenhalgh, T., Robert, G., Macfarlane, F., Bate, P., & Kyriakidou,
O. (2004). Diffusion of innovations in service organizations:
Systematic review and recommendations. Milbank Quarterly,
82(4), 581–629.
Grimshaw, J., Shirran, L., Thomas, R., Mowatt, G., Fraser, C., Bero,
L., et al. (2001). Changing provider behavior: An overview of
systematic reviews of interventions. Medical Care, 39(8), II2–
II45.
Grol, R. (2001). Successes and failures in the implementation of
evidence-based guidelines for clinical practice. Medical Care,
39(8 Suppl 2), 46–54.
Grol, R., Bosch, M. C., Hulscher, M. E. J. L., Eccles, M. P., &
Wensing, M. (2007). Planning and studying improvement in
patient care: The use of theoretical perspectives. The Milbank
Quarterly, 85(1), 93–138.
Grol, R., & Grimshaw, J. (1999). Evidence-based implementation of
evidence-based medicine. The Joint Commission journal on
quality improvement, 25(10), 503.
Guba, E., & Lincoln, Y. (1994). Competing paradigms in qualitative
research. In N. K. Denzin & Y. S. Lincoln (Eds.), The Handbook
of Qualatative Research (pp. 163–194). Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage.
Hanf, K. I., & O’Toole, L. J., Jr. (1992). Revisiting old friends:
Networks, implementation structures, and the management of
inter-organizational relations. European Journal of Political
Research, 21, 163–180.
Hemmelgarn, A. L., Glisson, C., & Dukes, D. (2001). Emergency
room culture and the emotional support component of Family-
Centered Care. Children’s Health Care, 30(2), 93–110.
Hemmelgarn, A. L., Glisson, C., & James, L. R. (2006). Organiza-
tional culture and climate: Implications for services and
interventions research. Clinical Psychology: Science and Prac-
tice, 13, 73–89.
20
Adm Policy Ment Health (2011) 38:4–23
123

----- Page 18 (native) -----
Hemsley-Brown, J., & Sharp, C. (2003). The use of research to
improve professional practice: A systematic review of the
literature. Oxford Review of Education, 29(4), 449–470.
Heneghan, A. M., Horwitz, S. M., & Leventhal, J. M. (1996).
Evaluating intensive family preservation programs: A method-
ologic review. Pediatrics, 97(4), 535–542.
Henggeler, S. W., Melton, G. B., & Smith, L. A. (1992). Family
preservation using multisystemic therapy: An effective alterna-
tive to incarcerating serious juvenile offenders. Journal of
Consulting & Clinical Psychology, 60(6), 953–961.
Henggeler, S. W., Pickrel, S. G., & Brondino, M. J. (1999).
Multisystemic treatment of substance-abusing and -dependent
delinquents: Outcomes, treatment ﬁdelity, and transportability.
Mental Health Services Research, 1(3), 171–184.
Hoagwood, K. (2003). The policy context for child and adolescent
mental health services: Implications for systems reform and
basic science development. Annals of the New York Academy of
Science, 1008, 140–148.
Hoagwood, K. E., Kelleher, K., Murray, L. K., Jensen, P. S., &
Integrated Services Program Task Force (2006). Implementation
of evidence-based practice for children in four countries: A
project of the World Psychiatric Association. Revista Brasileira
de Psiquiatria, 28, 59–66.
Hollenbeck, J. R., Ilgen, D. R., Sego, D. J., Hedlund, J., Major, D. A.,
& Phillips, J. (1995). Multilevel theory of team decision making:
Decision performance in teams incorporating distributed exper-
tise. Journal of Applied Psychology, 80(2), 292–316.
Hurlburt, M., Barth, R. P., Leslie, L. K., Landsverk, J. A., & McCrae,
J. S. (2007). Building on strengths: Current status and oppor-
tunities for improvement of parent training for families in child
welfare services. In R. Haskins, F. H. Wulczyn, & M. B. Webb
(Eds.), Child protection: Using research to improve policy and
practice (pp. 81–106). Washington, DC: Brookings.
Hurlburt, M., & Knapp, P. (2003). The new consumers of evidence-
based practices: Reﬂections of providers and families. Data
Matters, Spring/Summer, 21–23.
Iles, I. K. (2003). Becoming a learning organization: A precondition
for person centered services to people with learning difﬁculties.
Journal of Learning Disabilities, 7(1), 65–77.
Institute for Healthcare Improvement [IHI]. (2003). The breakthrough
series: IHI’s collaborative model for achieving breakthrough
improvement. Boston: Institute for Healthcare Improvement.
Institute for Healthcare Improvement [IHI]. (2010). Accessed Nov 2,
2010, from http://www.ihi.org/ihi.
Institute of Medicine [IOM]. (2007). The state of quality improvement
and implementation research: Expert views. Workshop summary.
Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
Jenson, J. M. (2007). Evidence-based practice and the reform of
social work education: A response to Gambrill and Howard and
Allen-Meares.
Research
on
Social
Work
Practice,
17(5),
569–573.
Joyce, W. F., & Slocum, J. W. (1982). Climate discrepancy: Reﬁning
the concepts of psychological and organizational climate.
Human Relations, 35(11), 951–971.
Keller, D. S., & Galanter, M. (1999). Technology transfer of network
therapy to community-based addictions counselors. Journal of
Substance Abuse Treatment, 16(2), 183–189.
Klein, K. J., Conn, A. B., & Sorra, J. S. (2001). Implementing
computerized technology: An organizational analysis. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 86(5), 811–824.
Klein, K. J., & Sorra, J. S. (1996). The challenge of innovation imple-
mentation. Academy of Management Review, 21(4), 1055–1080.
Knitzer, J. (1982). Unclaimed children: The failure of public
responsibility to children and adolescents in needs of mental
health services. Washington, DC: Children’s Defense Fund.
Korunka, C., & Vitouch, O. (1999). Effects of the implementation of
information technology on employees’ strain and job satisfaction:
A context-dependent approach. Work & Stress, 13(4), 341–363.
Lehman, W. E., Greener, J. M., & Simpson, D. D. (2002). Assessing
organizational readiness for change. Journal of Substance Abuse
Treatment, 22(4), 197–209.
Lewis, L. K., & Seibold, D. R. (1993). Innovation modiﬁcation during
intraorganizational adoption. Academy of Management Review,
18(2), 322–354.
Leykum, L. K., Pugh, J. A., Lanham, H. J., Harmon, J., & McDaniel,
R. R., Jr. (2009). Implementation research design: Integrating
participatory action research into randomized controlled trials.
Implementation Science, 4(69), 1–8.
Littell, J. H., & Schuerman, J. R. (1995). A synthesis of research on
family preservation and family reuniﬁcation programs. Ofﬁce of
the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation, Department
of Health and Human Services.
Lutzker, J. R., Frame, R. E., & Rice, J. M. (1982). Project 12-Ways:
An ecobehavioral approach to the treatment and prevention of
child abuse and neglect. Education and Treatment of Children,
5(2), 141–155.
Marsick, V. J., & Watkins, K. E. (2003). Demonstrating the value of
an organization’s learning culture: The dimensions of the
Learning Organization Questionnaire. Advances in Developing
Human Resources, 5(2), 132–151.
Maurana, C. A., & Goldenberg, K. (1996). A successful academic-
community partnership to improve the public’s health. Academic
Medicine, 71(5), 425–431.
Mendel, P., Meredith, L., Schoenbaum, M., Sherbourne, C., & Wells,
K. (2008). Interventions in organizational and community
context: A framework for building evidence on dissemination
and implementation in health services research. Administration
and Policy in Mental Health and Mental Health Services
Research, 35(1), 21–37.
Mental Health Services Act. (2004). Proposition 63 C.F.R.
National Association of Public Child Welfare Administrators [NAP-
CWA]. (2005). Guide for child welfare administrators on
evidence based practice. Washington DC: APHSA.
National Association of Public Child Welfare Administrators [NAP-
CWA]. (2010). http://www.napcwa.org/Home/home_news.asp.
National Association of State Alcohol/Drug Abuse Directors [NASA-
DAD]. (2010). http://www.nasadad.org/.
National Association of State Mental Health Program Directors
(NASMHPD). (2010). http://www.nasmhpd.org/.
National Institute of Mental Health [NIMH]. (2001). Blueprint for
change: Research on child and adolescent mental health.
Bethesda, MD: National Institutes of Health.
National Institutes of Health. [NIH]. (2006). Dissemination and
implementation research in health (R01 program announce-
ment). Retrieved October 25, 2006, from http://grants.nih.gov/
grants/guide/pa-ﬁles/PAR-06-039.html.
National Institues of Mental Health. [NIMH]. (2007, March 30).
National Institute of mental health professional coalition for
research progress, Washington, DC.
National Institutes of Health [NIH]. (2009a). Dissemination and
implementation research in health (R21). http://grants.nih.gov/
grants/guide/pa-ﬁles/par-10-040.html.
National Institutes of Health [NIH]. (2009b). Dissemination and
implementation research in health (R03). http://grants.nih.gov/
grants/guide/pa-ﬁles/PAR-10-039.html.
National Institute of Mental Health [NIMH]. (2010). http://www.
nimh.nih.gov/index.shtml.
New Freedom Commission on Mental Health. (2003). Achieving the
promise: Transforming mental health care in America. Final
report (No. SMA 03-3832). Rockville, MD.
Adm Policy Ment Health (2011) 38:4–23
21
123

----- Page 19 (native) -----
O’Reilly, C. A., & Caldwell, D. F. (1985). The impact of normative
social inﬂuence and cohesiveness on task perceptions and
attitudes: A social information processing approach. Journal of
Occupational Psychology, 58(3), 193–206.
Ohio Department of Mental Health [ODMH]. (2009). Ohio’s
coordinating centers of excellence. Retrieved Sept 9, 2009, from
http://mentalhealth.ohio.gov/what-we-do/promote/coordinating-
centers-of-excellence.shtml.
Palinkas, L. A., & Aarons, G. A. (2009). A view from the top:
Executive and management challenges in a statewide imple-
mentation of an evidence-based practice to reduce child neglect.
International Journal of Child Health and Human Development,
2(1), 47–55.
Palinkas, L. A., Fuentes, D., Holloway, I., Wu, Q., & Chamberlain, P.
(2010, July 3). Advice networks and implementation of advice
networks and implementation of evidence-based practices in
public youth-serving systems. Paper presented at the Sunbelt
XXX, International Network for Social Network Analysis
Conference, Riva del Garda, Italy.
Palinkas, L. A., Schoenwald, S. K., Hoagwood, K., Landsverk, J.,
Chorpita, B. F., & Weisz, J. R. (2008). An ethnographic study of
implementation of evidence-based treatments in child mental
health: First steps. Psychiatric Services, 59(7), 738–746.
Panzano, P. C., & Roth, D. (2006). The Decision to adopt evidence-
based and other innovative mental health practices: Risky
business? Psychiatric Services, 57(8), 1153.
Patterson, F., Ferguson, E., & Thomas, S. (2008). Using job analyses
to identify core and speciﬁc competencies for three secondary
care specialties: Implications for selection and recruitment.
Medical Education, 42, 1195–1204.
Practice Wise. (2010). What works in children’s mental health, from
http://www.practicewise.com/web/.
Price, R. H., Friedland, D. S., Choi, J., & Caplan, R. D. (1998). Job-
loss and work transitions in a time of global economic change. In
X. Arriaga & S. Oskamp (Eds.), Addressing community prob-
lems: Psychological research and interventions (pp. 195–222).
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Proctor, E., Landsverk, J., Aarons, G. A., Chambers, D., Glisson, C.
A., & Mittman, B. (2009). Implementation research in mental
health services: An emerging science with conceptual, method-
ological, and training challenges. Administration and Policy in
Mental Health and Mental Health Services Research, 46, 24–34.
Proctor, E., Silmere, H., Raghavan, R., Hovmand, P., Aarons, G. A.,
Bunger, A. et al. (2010). Outcomes for implementation research:
Conceptual distinctions, measurement challenges, and research
questions. Unpublished manuscript.
Quill, B. E., & Aday, L. A. (2000). Toward a new paradigm for public
health practice and academic partnerships. Journal of Public
Health Practice and Management, 6(1), 1–3.
Robinson, M., Freundlich, M., & Gerstenzang, S. (2002). Class
action litigation judicial reform of child welfare systems in the
United States. Adoption & Fostering Journal, 26(3), 50–57.
Rogers, E. M. (2003). Diffusion of innovations (5th ed.). New York,
NY: Free Press.
Rosenheck, R. A. (2001). Organizational process: A missing link
between research and practice. American Psychiatric Associa-
tion, 52, 1607–1612.
Saldana, L., Chapman, J., Henggeler, S., & Rowland, M. (2007). The
organizational readiness for change scale in adolescent pro-
grams: Criterion validity. Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment,
33(2), 159–169.
Schein, E. (2004). Organizational culture and leadership (3rd ed.).
San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Schoenwald, S. K., Chapman, J. E., Kelleher, K., Hoagwood, K. E.,
Landsverk, J., Stevens, J. et al. (2008). A survey of the
infrastructure for children’s mental health services: Implications
for the implementation of empirically supported treatments
(EBTs). Administration and Policy in Mental Health and Mental
Health Services Research, 35(1), 84–97.
Schoenwald, S. K., Garland, A. F., Chapman, J. E., Frazier, S. L.,
Sheidow, A. J., & Southam-Gerow, M. A. (in press). Toward the
effective and efﬁcient measurement of implementation ﬁdelity.
Administration and Policy in Mental Health and Mental Health
Services Research. doi:10.1007/s10488-010-0321-0.
Schraeder, M., Tears, R. S., & Jordan, M. H. (2005). Organizational
culture in public sector organizations: Promoting change through
training and leading by example. Leadership & Organization
Development Journal, 26(6), 492–502.
Senge, P. M. (2006). The ﬁfth discipline, the art and practice of the
learning organization: Doubleday.
Shonkoff, J. P., & Phillips, D. (2000). From neurons to neighbor-
hoods: The science of early child development. Washington:
National Academies Press.
Siegel, S. M., & Kaemmerer, W. F. (1978). Measuring the perceived
support for innovation in organizations. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 63(5), 553–562.
Simpson, D. D. (2002). A conceptual framework for transferring
research to practice. Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment, 22(4),
171–182.
Simpson, D. D., & Flynn, P. (2007). Moving innovations into
treatment: A stage-based approach to program change. Journal
of Substance Abuse Treatment, 33, 111–120.
Sobo, E. J., Bowman, C., Aarons, G. A., Asch, S., & Gifford, A. L.
(2008). Enhancing organizational change and improvement
prospects: Lessons from an HIV testing intervention for
veterans. Human Organization, 67, 443–453.
Srivastava, S. K., & Bathla, A. (1996). Correlational study of
organizational climate and work adjustment among industrial
workers. Social Science International, 12(1), 52–60.
Stetler, C., Mittman, B., & Francis, J. (2008). Overview of the VA
Quality Enhancement Research Initiative(QUERI) and QUERI
theme articles: QUERI series. Implementation Science, 3(1), 8.
Stoltenberg, C. D., McNeill, B., & Delworth, U. (1998). IDM
supervision: An integrated developmental model for supervising
counselors and therapists. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration [SAM-
HSA]. (2010). SAMHSA’s national registry of evidence-based
programs and practices. Retrieved May 4, 2010, from http://
www.nrepp.samhsa.gov/.
Szapocznik, J., & Williams, R. A. (2000). Brief strategic family
therapy: Twenty-ﬁve years of interplay among theory, research
and
practice
in
adolescent
behavior
problems
and
drug
abuse. Clinical Child & Family Psychology Review, 3(2),
117–134.
The Annie E. Casey Foundation [AECF]. (1992). Family to family
initiative. Retrieved May 12, 2010, from http://www.aecf.org/
MajorInitiatives/Family%20to%20Family.aspx.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services [DHHS]. (2000).
Surgeon general’s report: A national action agenda. Rockville,
MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services [DHHS]. (2009).
Children’s bureau child and family services reviews fact sheet.
Retrieved June 5, 2009, from http://www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/
cb/cwmonitoring/recruit/cfsrfactsheet.htm.
Wagner, E., Glasgow, R., Davis, C., Bonomi, A., Provost, L.,
McCulloch, D., et al. (2001). Quality improvement in chronic
illness care: A collaborative approach. Joint Commission Jour-
nal on Quality and Patient Safety, 27(2), 63–80.
Wallerstein, N., & Duran, B. (2010). Community-based participatory
research contributions to intervention research: The intersection
of science and practice to improve health equity. American
Journal of Public Health, 100, S40–S46.
22
Adm Policy Ment Health (2011) 38:4–23
123

----- Page 20 (native) -----
Webster-Stratton, C., Hibbs, E. D., & Jensen, P. S. (2005). The
incredible years: A training series for the prevention and
treatment of conduct problems in young children (Vol. Vol.
2nd, pp. 507–555). Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association.
Weiner, B. J. (2009). A theory of organizational readiness for change.
Implementation Science, 19(4), 67.
Weissman, M. M., Verdeli, H., Gameroff, M. J., Bledsoe, S. E., Betts,
K., Mufson, L., et al. (2006). National survey of psychotherapy
training in psychiatry, psychology, and social work. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 63(8), 925–934.
Wulczyn, F. H., & Goerge, R. M. (1992). Foster care in New York
and Illinois: The challenge of rapid change. Social Service
Review, 66(2), 278–294.
Yoo, J., Brooks, D., & Patti, R. (2007). Organizational constructs as
predictors of effectiveness in child welfare interventions. Child
Welfare, 86(1), 53–78.
Zmud, R. W. (1982). Diffusion of modern software practices:
Inﬂuence of centralization and formalization. Management
Science, 28(12), 1421–1431.
Adm Policy Ment Health (2011) 38:4–23
23
123