

----- Page 1 (native) -----
Tourism Management Reviews 
 
Progress in tourism management 
 
Twenty years on and 10 years after the Internet: The state of eTourism research 
 
 
Dimitrios Buhalis 
Bournemouth University  
 
International Centre for Tourism & Hospitality Research 
Bournemouth University, Talbot Campus 
Fern Barrow, Poole, Dorset, BH12 5BB, UK 
Tel: +44 1202 961517    Fax: +44 1202 515707 
Email: dbuhalis@bournemouth.ac.uk 
http://www.bournemouth.ac.uk/services-management/ 
 
 
Rob Law  
Hong Kong Polytechnic University  
 
School of Hotel & Tourism Management 
Hong Kong Polytechnic University 
Hung Hom, Kowloon 
Hong Kong SAR, China 
Email: hmroblaw@polyu.edu.hk 
Tel: +(852) 2766-6349 
  
Acknowledgment  
 
The authors would like to thank the three anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments on an 
earlier version of this paper. This project is partly supported by a grant funded by the Hong 
Kong Polytechnic University (G-U436). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This is the Pre-Published Version of the article published in the journal:

----- Page 2 (native) -----
Tourism Management Reviews 
 
ABSTRACT 
This paper reviews the published articles on eTourism in the past 20 years. Using a wide 
variety of sources, mainly in the tourism literature, this paper comprehensively reviews and 
analyzes prior studies in the context of Internet applications to Tourism. The paper also 
projects future developments in eTourism and demonstrates critical changes that will 
influence the tourism industry structure. A major contribution of this paper is its overview of 
the research and development efforts that have been endeavoured in the field, and the 
challenges that tourism researchers are, and will be, facing. 
 
Keywords: Internet, eTourism, eBusiness, tourism management and marketing  
 
 
INTRODUCTION  
 
Technological progress and tourism have been going hand in hand for years (Sheldon, 1997; 
Poon, 1993). Since the 1980s, Information Communication Technologies (ICTs) have been 
transforming tourism globally. Developments in ICTs have undoubtedly changed both business 
practices and strategies as well as industry structures (Porter, 2001). The establishment of the 
Computer Reservations Systems (CRSs) in the 1970s and Global Distribution Systems (GDSs) 
in the late 1980s, followed by the development of the Internet in the late 1990s, have 
transformed the best operational and strategic practices in the industry dramatically (Buhalis, 
2003; O’Connor, 1999; Emmer et al,, 1993; eBusiness Watch, 2006). If the past 20 years 
have seen an emphasis on technology per se, then since the Year 2000 we have been 
witnessing the truly transformational effect of the communications technologies. This has 
given scope for the development of a wide range of new tools and services that facilitate 
global interaction between players around the world.  
 
Tourism as an international industry and as the biggest provider of jobs on the planet boasts 
a greater array of heterogeneous stakeholders than many other industries. The energetic 
growth and development of the industry is perhaps only mirrored by the growth of ICTs. The 
accelerating and synergistic interaction between technology and tourism in recent times has 
brought fundamental changes on the industry and on our perceptions of its nature. The 
significance of crossing the new information threshold of universal, ubiquitous 
communications access have brought the entire tourism industry to the new levels of 
interactivity, propelling management by wire. Increasingly, ICTs play a critical role for the 
competitiveness of tourism organisations and destinations as well as for the entire industry as 
a whole (UNWTO, 2001). Developments in search engines, carrying capacity and speed of 
networks have influenced the number of travellers around the world that use technologies for 
This is the Pre-Published Version of the article published in the journal:

----- Page 3 (native) -----
planning and experiencing their travels. ICTs have also changed radically the efficiency and 
effectiveness of tourism organisations, the way that businesses are conducted in the 
marketplace, as well as how consumers interact with organisations (Buhalis, 2003). There 
have been many new entrants among the players on the tourism stage, shifts in market 
share and balance of power, changes in political perceptions of tourism, and a growing 
recognition of the importance of tourism to an ever-increasing number of national and 
regional economies.  
 
The ICT driven business processes re-engineering observed in the industry gradually generates 
a new paradigm-shift. This alters the structure of the entire industry and develops a whole range 
of opportunities and threats for all stakeholders. Not only ICTs empower consumers to identify, 
customise and purchase tourism products but they also support the globalisation of the 
industry by providing effective tools for suppliers to develop, manage and distribute their 
offerings worldwide (Buhalis, 1998). As a result, a major research field is emerging from this 
interface, as increasingly researchers seek to understand and communicate the significance 
of the new technologies, investigate and interpret contemporary activity, and attempt to 
forecast the way ahead for both industry and technological developments. 
 
To a certain degree this has been reflected in the literature. Very few publications on tourism 
and technology appeared up to 1990. The research community came together initially at a 
conference at the University of Perugia in Assisi, in 1991. Perhaps what really built the 
research community and made eTourism a key area of research was the annual ENTER 
conference that emerged in 1994 in Innsbruck Austria. A few years later the Journal of 
Information Technology & Tourism followed in 1998 establishing a multidisciplinary interest 
group of researchers that published regularly on tourism and technology. Most participants of 
this group constituted the core membership of the International Federation of Information 
Technology for Travel & Tourism (IFITT) which was developed under the leadership of 
Professor Hannes Werthner.   
 
As a result of this activity research in the area flourished. Frew (2000) estimated that 665 
refereed articles were published in the 20 years period 1980 through 1999. The rapid 
development in telecommunication technologies, collaborations at the national and 
international levels had substantially increased publications 154% and 275% respectively 
between the first and second decades during the study period. Leung and Law (2007) report 
on that out of 4140 papers published in the six leading research journals in hospitality and 
tourism in the period of 1986 to 2005 (Annals of Tourism Research [ATR], Journal of Travel 
Research [JTR], Tourism Management [TM], International Journal of Hospitality Management 
[IJHM], Cornell Hotel and Restaurant Administration Quarterly [CQ], and Journal of 
Hospitality & Tourism Research [JHTR]) 195 papers focused on ICTs, 66 of which appeared in 
the CQ and only 5 in the ATR. Among the 195 papers analyzed in that study, 137 papers

----- Page 4 (native) -----
(70.26%) had at least one author who was affiliated with North American institutes. O’Connor 
and Murphy (2004) reviewed recent research on information technology in the hospitality 
industry and revealed three broad research areas: the Internet's effects on distribution; on 
pricing; and on consumer interactions. These are consistently examined in most of the 
publications on the subject. 
 
This paper provides a comprehensive review to the key ICTs in Tourism (or eTourism in 
short) themes and aims to illustrate the principle dimensions of the research enquiry. The 
paper provides the historical evolution of the theme in the literature, particularly in leading 
publication channels in tourism, and to bring together the most influential publications in the 
last five years. Three main themes are identified as the main axes of eTourism research, 
namely: Consumers and demand dimensions, Technological Innovation and Industry 
functions. These three themes represent the stakeholders in the demand, supply, and 
technologies. The paper demonstrates the contribution to knowledge, theory and professional 
practice resulting from these publications as well as exploring future prospects for the 
research area and the interdisciplinary contributions. It also provides managerial implications 
and dimensions whilst suggesting strategic and operational solutions for the industry. In April 
2007 to January 2008, online databases of ScienceDirect and EBSCOHost’s tourism and 
hospitality index, as well as the Google Scholar search engine were used to search for related 
articles, mainly in the tourism literature, using different combinations of keywords that are 
related to eTourism. Key references from mainstream journals were also included in the 
analysis. Besides, published articles in ENTER proceedings and the Journal of Information 
Technology & Tourism were thoroughly read through by the authors to identify the relevant 
articles. At the end of the database search, more than 149 published articles were 
determined to be relevant to this study as they had made a critical contribution to this area 
and they are analyzed in this paper.  
 
 
CONSUMERS AND DEMAND DIMENSIONS  
 
Increasingly, ICTs enable travellers to access reliable and accurate information as well as to 
undertake reservations in a fraction of time, cost and inconvenience required by conventional 
methods (O’Connor, 1999). ICTs can assist the improvement of the service quality and 
contribute to higher guest/traveller satisfaction. ICTs place users in the middle of its functionality 
and product delivery. Every tourist is different, carrying a unique blend of experiences, 
motivations and desires. To an extent the new sophisticated traveller has emerged as a result of 
experience. Tourists from the major generating regions of the world have become frequent 
travellers, are linguistically and technologically skilled and can function in multicultural and 
demanding environments overseas. The development of ICTs and particularly the Internet 
empowered the "new" tourist who is becoming knowledgeable and is seeking exceptional value

----- Page 5 (native) -----
for money and time. They are less interested in following the crowds in packaged tours and 
much more keen to pursue their own preferences and schedules. Increasingly, package tours are 
loosing market share in favour of independently organised tourism facilitated by dynamic 
packaging. The contemporary/connected consumer is far less willing to wait or put up with 
delays, to the point where patience is a disappearing virtue. The key to success lies in the quick 
identification of consumer needs and in reaching potential clients with comprehensive, 
personalised and up-to-date products and services that satisfy those needs. Gradually new, 
experienced, sophisticated, and demanding travellers require interacting with suppliers to satisfy 
their own specific needs and wishes. Living in a hectic life, consumers in the developed world 
often have short periods of time to relax their batteries and also to engage in their favourite 
activities. Leisure time will increasingly be used for “edutainment”, i.e. the exploration of 
personal interests for both their personal and professional development. 
 
Travel and holidays are one of the most expensive items purchased regularly by households 
around the world and it represents a significant proportion of individual’s annual budget. The 
Internet has changed tourism consumer behaviour dramatically (Mills & Law, 2004). 
Prospective travellers have direct access to a much greater wealth of information provided by 
tourism organisations, private enterprises and increasingly by other users/consumers. From 
information search, to destination/product consumption and post experience engagement, 
ICTs offer a range of tools to facilitate and improve the process. Customers search for travel 
related information, make online air ticket bookings, online room reservations, and other 
online purchases themselves instead of relying on travel agencies to undertake this process 
for them (Morrison et al., 2001). Due to the popularity of Internet applications, most tourism 
organizations such as hotels, airlines, and travel agencies have embraced Internet 
technologies as part of their marketing and communication strategies.  
 
Information Search is a significant part of the purchase decision process and was 
revolutionised as a result of the Internet. ICTs not only reduce uncertainty and perceived 
risks but also enhance the quality of trips (Fodness & Murray, 1997). The more research 
undertaken on a trip and the more information found, the better customer needs can be met 
and served. A well informed consumer is able to interact better with local resources and 
cultures, to find products and services that meet his/her requirements and to take advantage 
of special offers and reduced prices. According to Snepenger, Meged, Snelling and Worrall 
(1990), the four major factors that influence information search in the tourism context are i) 
the composition of vacation groups, ii) the presence of families and friends at the destination, 
iii) prior visits to the destination, and iv) the degree of novelty associated with the 
destination. Gursoy and McCleary (2004) developed a comprehensive theoretical model that 
integrated all psychological/motivational, economics, and processing approaches into a 
cohesive whole for understanding tourists’ information seeking behaviour.

----- Page 6 (native) -----
Moreover, Jang (2004) proposed that future research should explore potential travellers’ 
concerns and difficulties when planning and purchasing trips online, which can be achieved 
through in-depth analysis of relationships regarding information search and cross-cultural 
impacts on tourists’ online information search behaviours. Buhalis (1998) stated that potential 
tourists have become more independent and sophisticated on using a wide range of tools to 
arrange for their trips. These include reservation systems and online travel agencies (such as 
Expedia), search engines and meta-search engines (such as Google and Kayak respectively), 
destination management systems (such as visitbritain.com), social networking and web 2.0 
portals (such as wayn and tripadvisor), price comparison sites (such as kelkoo) as well as 
individual suppliers and intermediaries sites. Pricing is also a major issue in eTourism as many 
organizations use ICTs to communicate directly to consumers on web-only fares and rates, 
passing on discounts that are generated from saved commissions and distribution charges 
made in a short value chain. Research found substantial price dispersion for domestic airline 
tickets offered by online travel agents in the US where the average price was lower than 
traditional travel agents (Brynjolfsson & Smith, 2000; Clemons et al., 2002). Also, customers 
have spent increasingly more time on price comparisons on different travel websites such as 
Kayak and Kelkoo searching for alternative products that can reduce the cost of their travels. 
Prior research shows that search costs decrease in electronic markets due to diminishing cost 
of data exchange. This, in turn, enables consumers to find offers that meet their needs and 
tastes (Bakos, 1997, 1998). 
 
The Internet is one of the most influential technologies that have changed travellers’ 
behaviour. Previous research showed that tourists who searched on the Internet tended to 
spend more at their destinations as compared to those who consult other information sources 
(Bonn, Furr, & Susskind, 1998; Luo, Feng, & Cai, 2004). The Internet enabled consumers to 
engage directly with suppliers and challenging the role of intermediaries. It also allowed 
consumers to interact dynamically with suppliers and destinations and often make requests 
that will enable them to customize their products. At present, there is a large increase in the 
number of customers who make reservations directly from hotel websites (Jeong et al., 
2003). With rapid data transmission on the Internet, the expected response time from 
organizations to customers has been greatly reduced. The reaction to online inquiries can 
thus influence customer satisfactions and booking behaviour. As a result, response behaviour 
becomes an essential factor for the success of small and medium-sized tourism enterprises 
(Pechlaner et al., 2002, Main, 2002). In addition, satisfaction online has a positive impact on 
loyalty both to the organisational programmes and their website (Anderson & Srinivansan, 
2003). According to Wolfe, Hsu, and Kang’s (2004) research, the reasons of consumers not 
purchasing travel products online are the lack of personal service, security issues, lack of 
experience, and time consuming. Weber and Roehl (1999) found that people purchasing 
travel products online are more likely to have been online for four years or more and trust 
can be built between customers and online businesses through positive experience of past

----- Page 7 (native) -----
transactions (Bai et al., 2004, Bieger et al., 2005). The Internet is already influencing the 
consumer behaviour in developing countries such as China enabling consumers to have much 
more choice (Li & Buhalis, 2006). 
 
Although plenty of choices are available on the Internet for customers to choose from, 
psychological barriers often prevent consumers from completing transactions online, resulting 
to “lookers” purchasing products off-line. With less time spent on waiting and planning, and 
more time on enjoyment, consumers would surely like to make reservations and received 
tickets at home via travel websites (O’Connor & Frew, 2001). Moreover, e-shopping provides 
a large geographic coverage which consumers can choose from a great product assortment 
when they shop at home (Peterson et al., 1997). Werthner and Ricci (2004) have thus found 
that the tourism industry is leading eCommerce applications. However, since payment is the 
most important item in eCommerce, consumers are always concerned on payment security. 
Such concerns are a possible outcome of computer crimes, which are one of the primary 
factors that prevent consumers from providing credit card information. Mills et al. (2002) 
listed several cyber-crimes such as auction fraud, vacation fraud, gaming fraud, spamming, 
and identity theft. Business organizations must therefore pay more attention to protect 
themselves and their customers from losses due to cyber-crimes. These crimes, however, are 
not likely to be completely prevented or easily detected by law enforcement alone (Mills et 
al., 2002). Additionally, privacy issues are found to be of major concern to many consumers. 
This leads to the situation that many travellers use the Internet to search for information but 
still purchase offline. Research findings have shown privacy issues also play a significant role 
in inhibiting purchase of travel-related products online (Kolsaker, Lee-Kelley, & Choy, 2004). 
Website owners should, therefore, pay more attention on making customers feel comfortable 
and secure to complete their reservations and to increase trust in the online environment 
(Chen, 2006, Bauernfeind & Zins, 2006). 
 
Virtual communities are gradually becoming incredibly influential in tourism as consumers 
increasingly trust better their peers, rather than marketing messages. The most cited 
definition of a virtual community was firstly given by Rheingold (1993:58) as “a virtual 
community is a group of people who may or may not meet one another face-to-face, and 
who exchange words and ideas through the mediation of computer bulletin boards and 
networks”. A Virtual Travel Community (VTC) makes it easier for people to obtain 
information, maintain connections, develop relationships, and eventually make travel-related 
decisions (Stepchenkova, Mills, & Jiang, 2007). Vogt and Fensenmaier (1998) stated that 
participation and attitude are the primary dimensions of consumer behaviour in the virtual 
communities. Since many travellers like to share their travel experiences and 
recommendations with others, VTCs have become one of their favourite areas to post their 
travel dairy. Additionally, online travellers are enthusiastic to meet other travellers who have 
similar attitudes, interests and way of life (Wang, Yu & Fesenmaier, 2002). As such, better

----- Page 8 (native) -----
understanding VTC users’ behaviour and motivation can assist tourism practitioners and 
policy makers to establish, operate, and maintain VTCs in a more efficient way. This, in turn, 
facilitates consumer centric marketing or relationship marketing (Niininen, March & Buhalis, 
2006). VTCs, however, may be at risk of losing members if their members are not satisfied 
with the content, design, security policies, and repercussions for non-compliance with 
community rules (Allison et al., 2005; Wang et al., 2002). The emergence of Web 2.0 or 
Travel 2.0 brings together the concept of Social networking/virtual communities and applies 
it to the tourism industry. TripAdvisor (www.tripadvisor.com) is amongst the most successful 
social networking/virtual community in tourism that facilitates the reviewing of all hotels 
around the world and brings together individuals in discussion forums. The system provides 
users with independent travel reviews and comments written from TripAdvisor members and 
expert advisors and provides a powerful platform for interaction between peers (Wang & 
Fesenmaier, 2004b). User satisfaction is a major factor for evaluating a travel organization. 
By analyzing VTCs’ content, travel organizations can understand their customers’ satisfactions 
and behaviour, and undertake corrective actions to improve their offering. They can also 
increase brand awareness and strengthen brand association through the assistance of VTCs. 
Despite VTCs’ large potential impact on the tourism industry, Preece (2000) stated that 
research on the topic is still at an infancy stage when comparing to other geographical and 
physical communities. 
 
ICTs and the Internet have dramatically increased the number of choices for consumers. 
Until the emergence of the Internet consumers could only access major brand names and 
also those organizations in their immediate vicinity. Consumers can now have much more 
choice for searching and subsequently purchasing on the Internet. The choice is availed from 
single products to dynamically packaging holidays. For example with the fast expansion of 
no-frills airlines such as easyJet and Ryanair, as well as with holiday packages and hotel 
rooms discounted at the last-minute, travellers can enjoy low cost travel. Oorni and Klein 
(2003), however, found that low cost airlines have high online booking ratios because they 
offer simple products and are pursuing a direct sales strategy. Other airlines with complicated 
yield management strategies simply obstruct consumers to search for flights efficiently 
without expert assistance. Leading global online travel agents, such as Expedia, Orbitz, 
Lastminute.com, Opodo and Travelocity, are mainly successful for their provision of a 
platform for one-stop shopping with significant improvement in usability and interaction 
design (Klein, 2002). Comparing with traditional travel organizations, making websites more 
user-friendly and with simple pricing could help attract customers to complete the online 
transactions.  
 
One of the problems that the Internet has a brought around was that of too many choices. 
When novice web users search for travel information, they tend to browse through multiple 
websites. This is often the result of starting seeking information in a generic search engine

----- Page 9 (native) -----
such as Google. A recommender system is to provide assistance in the social process of 
indicating or receiving indications about what options are better suited in a specific case for 
specific individuals (Resnick & Varian, 1997, Gretzel et al,, 2004). Ricci (2002) further stated 
that a recommender system can provide valuable information to assist consumers’ decision 
making process. A recommender system can support travellers in a complex decision-making 
process by identifying better customer requirements and by correlating those to other 
consumers and their preferences (Fesenmaier, Werthner, & Wöber, 2003, Ricci & Werthner, 
2002, 2006). Personality has been related to the selection of vacation destinations, the choice 
of leisure activities throughout the vacation, and other travel-related decisions (Mardrigal, 
1995). When implementing tourism recommender systems, textual summary is used to 
classify the database item (tourism options) in themes or categories of the ontology (Loh et 
al., 2004). Although different recommendation technologies have been applied to eTourism, 
Rabanser and Ricci (2005) argued that the existence of different business models present 
application challenges. 
 
ICTs also provide a very effective mechanism for consumers to air complaints. In the past, 
less than 5 percent of customers who were dissatisfied had actually voiced out their 
complaints (Albrecht & Zemke, 1985). In order to provide a channel for customers to have 
feedback and complaints, tourism organizations should have an e-complaint handling section 
on their websites so that there is a proper channel of communication between management 
and unsatisfied customers. However, with the rapid development of the Internet, users at 
present can easily spread their complaints which, in turn, can significantly affect a company’s 
image. Electronic Word-Of-Mouth (WOM) is a useful tool to disseminate complaints about 
brands via websites, chat rooms and consumer forums (Gelb & Sundaram, 2002). Untied.com 
is probably one of the most famous examples of an individual who not only used his website 
to complain against United Airlines himself but also to accumulate thousands of complaints 
from fellow travellers. In the Internet era even individuals have sufficient power to take on 
powerful organizations such as airlines (Buhalis, 2004). Many consumers rely on WOM to 
reduce the perceived risks and uncertainty before they make any purchases (Walker, 2001). 
Shea, Enghagen, and Khullar (2004) have illustrated a real case “Yours is a very bad Hotel” 
that made at least seven newspapers and magazines report the unpleasant experience. The 
influential power of the Internet, “complaint forum” and chat room were clearly shown in this 
study. At present, many tourism practitioners do not know which VTCs exist and how to 
handle e-complaints in virtual communities, resulting in losing customers and negative WOM 
(Mattila & Mount, 2003). To prevent the wide spread of e-complaints, tourism managers 
should locate these complaint forums and try to handle them professionally.  
 
It is interesting to observe the many different ways that the web is used by different market 
segments. Cotte, Chowdhury, Ratneshwar and Ricci’s (2006) study finds that utilitarian-
consumption highly correlates with information search and online shopping behaviour.

----- Page 10 (native) -----
Utilitarian consumer behaviour is rationally task-directed rather than directed by the nature of 
the experience itself. Instead, pleasure–oriented consumers typically enjoy interacting with 
the Web to play Web-based games, e-mail or chat. That is, interactive communication 
behaviour can be viewed as a sort of entertainment. Increasingly profiling will lead to better 
personalization, customization and interaction between consumers and tourism organizations. 
Pouloudi, Vassilopoulou, and Ziouvelou (2002) summarized the Internet users’ profile into 
seven e-social factors, namely: region/geography, culture, legal/regulation/policy, economic, 
ethical/professional, social capital/social networks, and social structure. In particular, 
information search behaviour has a significant relationship with demographic and lifestyle 
characteristics. Enabling consumers to develop their online profile and to include personal 
data that indicate their preference can support tourism organizations to provide better 
service. Also, understanding how different market segments appreciate different tourism 
products and services also enhance the possibilities to put suitable products forward. For 
instance, Lastminute.com collects suitable information to personalize the weekly newsletter 
sent to consumers and also identifies what parts of the newsletter are accessed by 
consumers in order to personalize their offerings even further. Demographics and life cycle 
information is critical for profiling. For example, where to go for holidays has long been 
considered as a joint decision-making process between husbands and wives. In recent years, 
children, however, also play a key role in the decision making process (Wang et al., 2004). 
Children often seek fun, games and chat-rooms on the Internet. As such, for the children-
target tourism attractions, managers should provide more children-friendly content, such as 
interactive games in order to attract children to visit and engage with their websites (Tufte & 
Rasmusse, 2003). With the growing popularity of the Internet, not only teenagers browse 
information online, but also senior members of the society (e.g. age 50 and above) are also 
becoming active Internet users. According to Graeupl (2006), flight information and 
accommodation are the most searched topics for the consumers aged between 50 to 60 
years olds, and most of them were not interested in package holidays. As a result, consumers 
have expressed their increasing interests for more convenience, choice and in online travel 
shopping.  
 
Increasingly consumers are willing to provide significant personal information in exchange for 
recognition and better services. Tourism organisations should also collect customer information 
at each stage of service, before, during and after a visit in order to understand behaviour 
choices, concerns and determinants. Customer satisfaction depends highly on the accuracy and 
comprehensiveness of specific tourism information and the ability of organisations to react 
instantly to consumer requests. Consumers not only require value for money, but also value for 
time for the entire range of their dealings with organisations. This reflects people’s shortage of 
time, which is already evident in Western societies. Therefore the value proposition offered to 
consumers needs to be revised accordingly (Minghetti, 2003). Personalised services driven by 
advanced Customer Relationship Management systems should record customer preferences and

----- Page 11 (native) -----
requirements for present and future usage (Picolli & O’Connor,2003). Systems need to be 
location, context and mood aware in order to provide sensible advice.  
 
Implications 
 
Tourism organisations therefore need to recognise these changes and to develop personalised 
services to address individual needs. Proactive services may be offered based on the anticipated 
needs resulted from known/declared or previously experienced customer profiles. Reactive 
services should be designed to meet the needs of customers following incidents or external 
environment factors. In order to achieve customer centricity, organisations need to integrate all 
their systems and develop mechanisms for both recording customer reaction to stimulus and 
also for providing suggestions to both employees and the customers themselves. An off the cuff 
complain at the pool bar of a hotel, for example, can be channelled through the system and 
resolved on the spot. Equally requests and concerns during the reservation process should be 
passed on to the personnel that are developed for product delivery.  
 
 
TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION 
 
Constant innovation in applications of hardware, software and network developments means 
that only dynamic organisations, which can assess the requirements of their stakeholders and 
respond efficiently and effectively, will be able to outperform their competitors and maintain 
their long term prosperity. Rapid technological development paradoxically means that the 
more powerful and complex ICTs become, the more affordable, user friendly they become, 
enabling more people and organisations to take advantage. Technological innovations in 
hardware, software and netware have been propelling a wide range of changes in 
Information Systems (IS). ICTs convergence effectively integrates the entire range of 
hardware, software, groupware, netware and humanware and blurs the boundaries between 
equipment and software (Werthner & Klein,1999). Wireless and mobile networks are 
extensively used for communications, networking of equipment and interoperability between 
both organisations and functions. As a result, IS have evolved from simply interrelated 
components working together to collect, process, store and disseminate information to 
support decision making, coordination, control, analysis and visualisation in an organisation, 
to dynamic, interoperable mechanisms of collecting, processing and disseminating intelligence 
within organisations and in their extensive environment (Laudon & Laudon, 2007; Turban & 
Aronson, 2001). Technology therefore emerges as an “info-structure” of an organisation that 
supports the entire range of internal and external communications and processes (Buhalis, 
2003). ICTs are becoming a holistic integrated system of networked equipment and software, 
which enables effective data processing and communication for organisational benefit. In the 
last few years a number of technologies have been identified as critical for further innovation

----- Page 12 (native) -----
in the tourism industry. These technologies primarily provide innovative software and network 
that support organisations to improve their communications with partners and consumers.  
 
 
Interoperability and Ontology building is one of these technologies. Werthner and Klein 
(1999) defined interoperability as the provision of a well defined and end-to-end service 
which is in a consistent and predictable way. This generally covers not merely technical 
features but also in the case of electronic market environments, contractual features and a 
set of institutional rules. Staab and Werthner (2002) stated that interoperability is a major 
technical issue  Interoperability offers a realistic alternative to standardisation, as many of the 
initiatives to establish global standards in tourism have failed to be widely accepted. This is 
due to the lack of flexibility of the standardisation process which requires every detail of the 
exchanged messages, include all the technical details depending on the communication 
mechanism being committed among all the communication partners, resulting to a high effort 
for defining and maintaining such standards (Fodor & Werthner, 2005). Interoperability 
enables partners to interact electronically with each other by the most convenient method 
and to deliver the right information at the right time to the right user at the right cost. Using 
an ontology that represents a set of concepts within a domain and the relationships between 
those concepts a mediator software system (such as Harmonise) effectively “translates” 
partners’ data and allows them to communicate electronically. Jakkilinki, Georgievski, and 
Sharda (2007) proposed an ontology-based eTourism Planner - AuSTO that enables users to 
create itinerary in one single application by this intelligent tool that builds on semantic web 
technologies. Similarly, Maedche and Staab (2002; 2003) showed that semantic web 
technologies can be used for tourism information systems to provide useful information on 
text and graphics, as well as generating a semantic description that is interpretable by 
machines. The OntoMat-Service, introduced by Agarwal, Handschuh and Staab (2003), can 
embed the process of web service discovery. Travellers thus no longer need to search 
information among millions of websites to grab the desire information. To the degree that 
tourism organizations need to interact dynamically with partners to develop and deliver 
tourism products, interoperability will be critical for their ability to work efficiently with others.  
 
 
Multimedia is also becoming one of key areas of development that influences tourism. 
Tourism information needs an extensive representation of photos and graphics in order to 
provide a tangible image or experience to travel planners. Using animations or video clips can 
enhance information richness and interaction. Unlike offline information, which is unilaterally 
exposed to travellers, the Web allows people from around the world to virtually interact with 
a destination through three-dimensional (3D) virtual tours (Cho & Fesenmaier, 2001). The 
experience within a computer-mediated environment can simulate real visits and virtual 
experience can provide almost real-life experiences. This can lead to the creation and

----- Page 13 (native) -----
communication of destination image (Cho, Wang & Fesenmaier, 2002). Three-dimensional 
(3D) interactive websites have been adopted by online marketers to attract online consumers, 
encourage online purchases, and to create loyalty (Fiore, Kim & Lee, 2005). Tourists can get 
visualized tourism information from digital maps with aerial and satellite images in both two 
dimensions and even three dimensions (Raggam & Almer, 2005). Interactivity can be further 
enhanced using multimedia. Abad, Sorzabal, and Linaza (2005) demonstrate how tourist 
attractions can be presented dynamically by virtual characters in real time, which is enhanced 
by the multimedia information about the items stored in a database. Using the system, 
visitors can ask for available attractions that correspond to the selection criteria with ranking 
based on travellers’’ preferences. Interacting with multimedia-enhanced websites can produce 
telepresence and allow people to “experience” products and destinations without actually 
visiting a place. Telepresence uses a range of technologies to make users feel as if they were 
present at a location or situation which in reality they are not (Steuer, 1992). Telepresence 
relies on how closely the computer-mediated experience simulates real-world interaction with 
a product and is determined by the extent to which interactivity is achieved (Fiore et al., 
2005; Shih, 1998).  
 
 
Perhaps one of the most interesting areas is mobile and wireless technologies. Wireless 
is a term used widely to describe telecommunications in which electromagnetic waves (as 
opposed to wire) carry a signal. ICT developments have proliferated the use of wireless 
applications and devices, including: Cellular phones and pagers; Global Positioning System; 
Cordless computer peripherals and telephones; home-remote control and monitor systems. The 
development of mobile telephony over the Global System for Mobile Communication (GSM) and 
the Wireless Application Protocol (WAP) allowed the communication of voice and data over 
mobile phones. General Packet Radio Service (GPRS) and Universal Mobile Telecommunications 
System (UMTS) as well as I-Mode in Japan gradually introduce third generation (3G) mobile 
phones and services, empowering the communication of multimedia information on interactive 
mobile devices. Mobile phones now have a greater penetration even to digitally excluded 
communities. The proliferation of different mobile devices, such as Personal Digital Assistants 
(PDAs) and 3G mobile phones with Global Position Systems (GPSs) enable travellers to 
retrieve travel related information without any time and geographic constraints. In addition, 
mobile services now enable travellers to book hotel rooms and air-tickets, car rentals, retrieve 
information about transportation schedules, travel guides for destinations, and dining guides 
(Berger et al., 2003). Flouri and Buhalis (2004) stated several potential mobile applications 
such as SMS and MMS. Solon, McKevitt, and Curran (2004) developed TeleMorph that can 
determine the mobile network bandwidth to output presentations, and receive and interpret 
voice questions from tourists to show destination information. This technology can prevent 
information delay when travellers retrieve information from low bandwidth networks. Alfaro 
et al. (2005) implemented a multimedia guide on PDA with each destination installed infra-

----- Page 14 (native) -----
red emitters. When tourists approach, their PDAs will automatically display a multimedia 
presentation of the destination. A major challenge for their wide adoption, however, is the 
language barriers (Chen & Hsu, 2000) that make the mobile information not providing the 
latest information due to delay in translation.  
 
In addition to mobile networks, Wireless Local Area Networks (WLANs) allow users to connect 
devices to the Internet through a wireless-radio connection (WiFi), whilst Bluetooth connects 
PDAs, cell phones, computer mice, and other peripherals over short distances. WLANs have 
limited area coverage and they are offered at a range of about 100 meters away from stationary 
hot-spots. WiFi is now extensively used in hotels, airports and cafes allowing people to connect 
to the Internet. It is not expected to offer wide and omnipresent coverage like mobile networks 
do. The next technological evolution emerging is WiMAX, defined as Worldwide 
Interoperability for Microwave Access. WiMAX promotes conformance and interoperability of 
the IEEE 802.16 standard and provides wireless data over a long distance (Patton, Aukerman 
& Shorter, 2005). This enables users to browse the Internet without physically connecting the 
computer to a wall jack. WiMAX supports the delivery of last mile wireless broadband access 
as an alternative to cable and DSL. WiMAX is expected to offer the highest possible coverage, 
up to 30 miles (Odinma, Oborkale, & Kah, 2007) providing Internet broadband wireless 
access to entire destinations. This will support users to have Internet access whilst at the 
destination without having to pay expensive data-roaming charges. WiMAX is also predicted 
to have its largest impact in developed countries or rural, remote locations characterized by 
low population density in which an adequate wired infrastructure was never developed, or 
cannot be developed for economical reasons (WiMAX Forum, 2004). This narrows the digital 
divide, favouring the transition to a new stage of information and service providers (Ohrtman, 
2005). Always-on (when users are connected to the Internet constantly) connectivity creates 
great opportunities for interactivity at the destination and the provision of personalized, 
contextualized, and location based services (LBS). The four primary functions of LBS for the 
traveller are: (1) localization of persons, objects, and places, (2) routing between them, (3) 
search for objects in proximity such as restaurants, shops, hotels, or sights, and (4) 
information about travelling conditions, such as traffic-related data (Berger et al., 2003). 
 
 
Web design in both functionality and usability senses is also becoming of critical 
importance. Travellers expect websites to be informative, interactive, and attractive (Chu, 
2001). Kim and Lee (2004) classified web service quality into six dimensions, namely: ease of 
use, usefulness, information content, security, responsiveness, and personalization. In Law 
and Cheung’s (2005) study on customers’ weighting factors on hotel website contents, they 
found that reservation information was the most important dimension. A successful website 
should therefore take customers’ interest and participation into consideration, to capture 
information about their preference, and to subsequently use the information to provide

----- Page 15 (native) -----
personalized communications and services (Doolin, Burgess & Cooper, 2002, Chung & Law, 
2003). Hashim, Murphy and Law (2007) consolidated 25 tourism and hospitality website 
studies from 1996 to 2006 on website quality and features analysis and generated 74 website 
features. Hoteliers must therefore routinely evaluate their websites in order to ensure that 
the sites are efficient, appropriate, and useful to customers (Baloglu & Pekcan, 2006). Lastly, 
Cunliffe (2000) emphasized a poor web design resulted in a loss of 50 percent of potential 
sales and the negative experience lead to a loss of 40 percent of potential repeated visits. 
 
 
Related to usability is accessibility which addresses the fact that web surfing is still a barrier 
for people with disabilities (Michopoulou et al., 2007). Examples of the physical barriers 
include low vision users will need large text or spatial adjustment, blind people will require 
screen readers, colour-blindness users will need adequate contrast of text and background 
colours, and deaf people should have visual displays rather than pure audio presentations. 
Han and Mills (2006) stated that the current website design have nine themes that will affect 
the screen readers for the visual-impaired users. In response, the World Wide Web 
Consortium has illustrated requirements for using websites and Web-based applications, and 
has provided supporting information for guidelines and technical work (W3C, 2005). Hence, 
by exploiting this knowledge and following the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 
(Chrisholm et al., 1999) from the W3C Web Accessibility Initiative (WAI), content can be 
presented in an accessible and customisable way, accommodating users’ needs and 
preferences. The hospitality and tourism industries should be aware of the fact that people 
with disabilities and the elderly represent a growing market segment. Assistive technologies 
such as voice browsers can provide certain assistance for these customers to access web 
information (Pühretmair, 2004). Waldor et al. (2007) for example implemented an automated 
call centre agent (RESA) for a low-budget hotel, which enables customers to use their phones 
and voice to reserve hotel rooms via RESA without the need to go through any human 
agents. RESA can automatically select a desired room on the basis of customer’s voiced 
criteria. Rumetshofer and Wöß (2004) introduced intelligent accessibility add-on that allows 
users to create their personal profiles with their special needs, and the update depends on 
the user’s input and action over time. System environments and navigation styles can also be 
automatically managed. Nevertheless, these technologies need further customization before 
they can totally match with users’ needs. To attract business and provide convenience to the 
physically challenged customers, tourism web designer should consider the needs from every 
group of users and to design websites to address inclusion.   
 
Perhaps the next major revolution will emerge in the form of Ambient Intelligence (AI) 
defined by ISTAG (2003) as a set of properties of an environment which people are in the 
process of creating. AI represents a new paradigm for how people can work and live 
together. According to the ISTAG vision statement, in an Ambient Intelligent Environment

----- Page 16 (native) -----
humans will be surrounded by intelligent interfaces supported by computing and networking 
technology that is embedded in everyday objects, such as furniture, clothes, vehicles, roads 
and smart materials - even particles of decorative substances like paint (Manes, 2003). 
Humans will live in an AI Space in which there will be seamless interoperation between 
different environments – home, vehicle, public space, work, leisure space, tourism destination 
etc. This implies a seamless environment of computing, advanced networking technology and 
specific interfaces which should be aware of the specific characteristics of human presence 
and personalities; adapt to the needs of users; be capable of responding intelligently to 
spoken or gestured indications of desire; and even result in systems that are capable of 
engaging in intelligent dialogue. Pursuit of the AI vision will require contributions from many 
streams of research to realise both ‘ambience’ and ‘intelligence’. The development of the AI 
space will depend not simply on finding solutions to the research challenges for ambience 
and intelligence, but on the extent to which mechanisms can be found to ensure the 
successful, seamless, integration of components and their convergence into AI systems. 
There are a number of research domains or components in which significant progress must 
be made in order to further develop and realise the AI vision (Buhalis & O’Connor, 2005).  
 
Implications 
 
The technical complexity of modern systems based on ICTs demands that all aspects of the 
innovation chain integrate their efforts. The concentration and coherence required to achieve 
both significant technological development and market impact necessitate engagement of 
both the research and business communities to integrate the rapid co-evolution of 
technology, the market, social and administrative requirements. 
 
INDUSTRY AND BUSINESS FUNCTIONS 
Although the literature has been dominated by applications which explain how to automate 
rather than how to assist organisation to evolve to the new era, gradually the importance and 
necessity of ICTs usage for both the strategic and operational tourism management is 
emerging in the literature (O’Connor, 1999; Inkpen, 1998; Marcussen, 1999a & 1999b). 
Increasingly ICTs are used to reengineer all business functions and processes towards 
supporting the organisation on its entirety rather than automating.  
 
The strategic and operational dimensions of ICTs for tourism strategy are emerging in the 
literature. Law and Jogaratnam (2005) advocated that technologies can become part of the 
strategic planning process of a business only when managers make full use of it. 
Furthermore, effective ICT applications require the knowledge of managers and operating 
staff. ICTs should be used for both operational and strategic management. ICT developments 
have direct impacts on the competitiveness of enterprises they determine the two 
fundamental roots to competitive advantage, i.e. differentiation and cost advantage (Porter,

----- Page 17 (native) -----
2001). Moreover, it is crucial for tourism practitioners to proactively incorporate ICTs into 
their efforts to improve service quality as ICTs enable organisations to dynamically 
differentiate and specialise their products and services. This almost leads to the market 
segment of one, where consumers can build their tourism experience by bundling their 
products dynamically (Buhalis & O’Connor, 2005). Recently, Mazanec, Wöber, and Zins 
(2007) argued that it is necessary to develop an Internet web site when the competitiveness 
of a tourism destination is evaluated. ICTs also become instrumental to cost management in 
the industry and particularly for the distribution and promotion costs (Connolly et al., 1998). 
Redesigning processes and eliminating repetitive tasks reduced labour costs and increased 
efficiency (Buhalis, 1998). This has empowered the development of no-frills organisations 
that use technology heavily for operations and distribution and at the same time it has put 
incredible pressure on traditional organisations to reengineer their operations. In several 
occasions this has led to outsourcing functions and process to external organisations 
(Paraskevas & Buhalis, 2002). 
 
The emergence of the Internet affected all Five Forces in Porter’s (1979, 1980) model, as it 
changed the conditions of competition in the marketplace. The Internet is changing the 
industry structure by altering barriers to entry, minimising switching costs, revolutionising 
distribution channels, facilitating price transparency and competition, whilst enhancing 
production efficiency (Kim, Nam, & Stimpert, 2004). Rivalry among existing competitors was 
also revolutionised, as technology and the Internet affected differentiation and cost structures 
as well as switching costs. The Internet had a major effect on entry barriers as it altered 
market scope, economies of scale and the amount of capital required for competing. Porter 
(2001) demonstrates how the Internet has changed industry forces. The Internet has also 
enhanced the bargaining power of suppliers as it enabled them to monitor competitors and 
offer tailored and differentiated products. By being able to adjust to changes in demand and 
by being efficient, suppliers gain important cost savings. Overall, suppliers of travel products 
enhanced their position within the industry due to the increased possibility of 
interconnectivity and interactivity with consumers and partners. From a customer perspective, 
the Internet affected the bargaining power of buyers. Buyers gained bargaining power as 
they now have instant access to information, understand market offers and conditions better 
and are constantly exposed to special offers. They have more choice and are able to make 
direct comparisons that are rising from their expectations and demands. As Porter (2001: 70) 
states “buyers back away from open marketplaces. They may once again focus on building 
close, proprietary relationships with fewer suppliers, using Internet technologies to gain 
efficiency improvements in various aspects of those relationships”. The increase in buyers’ 
bargaining power is also related to the increased convenience, transparency, flexibility, direct 
communication with suppliers and depth of the available information. The Internet also 
enabled them to dynamically package their individualised products by combining different 
travel products (i.e. accommodation, transportation etc.) (Daniele & Frew, 2005). Access to a

----- Page 18 (native) -----
greater range of available suppliers also increased their power. The threat of substitution may 
also be affected by technological advancements (Porter, 1980). The intensified rivalry led to 
increased difficulty to create and sustain competitive advantages through differentiation 
strategies (Go et al., 1999). Wöber (2001) suggested that the identification of tourism 
destinations competing for the same market can be assisted by a Group Decision Support 
System (GDSS). In this way, decision makers can include their subjective and objective views 
for analysis like the traditional forms of competitive analysis. Similarly, there was a shift in the 
bargaining power of suppliers, as the Internet provided alternative procurement 
opportunities. The bargaining power of suppliers was also enhanced by allowing direct 
contact with consumers and decreasing distribution costs whilst creating the opportunity for 
partnerships with countless affiliates and other distributors. Consequently, tourism enterprises 
for the first time ever did not have to rely exclusively on powerful intermediaries, such as 
Tour Operators or Global Distribution Systems. As a result, the Internet forces tourism 
organisations around the world to change their strategies dramatically (Buhalis & Zoge, 
2007). Constant innovations of both product and process supported by proactive and reactive 
strategies are some of the few sources of competitive advantage in the Internet era (Buhalis, 
2003). 
 
 
Perhaps marketing and distribution are the most affected business functions from the 
technological revolution (Go & Willams,1993; O’Connor and Frew, 2002; O’Connor,2000, Yu & 
Law, 2000). Technology supported organisations to develop their knowledge base to improve 
their management and marketing functions (Fesenmaier, Leppers, & O’Leary, 1999; Schertler 
& Berger-Koch, 1999). By using the Web and the Internet as marketing tools, tourism 
organizations also gained some distinct advantages in cost reduction, revenue growth, 
marketing research and database development, and customer retention (Morrison, Taylor, 
Morrison, & Morrison, 1999). Reaching worldwide customers in a cost effective way allows 
organisations to engage in a direct dialogue with consumers (Buhalis, 1998, 2003). The 
Internet has assisted tourism organizations to use a wide range of promotional activities to 
supplement, if not replace, offline promotions. This change is important as the Internet is 
generally considered as a multi-promotion tool and distribution channel (Gretzel, Yuan & 
Fesenmaier, 2000; O’Connor & Frew, 2004). Web marketing is therefore gradually becoming 
mainstream (Buhalis, 2003, Fesenmaier et al., 2003). The flexibility of the Internet and the 
ability to address different target markets support tourism organisations to develop a 
marketing proposition for each target market and to create themes or routes through the 
destination to address the needs of each market. Thus, customers are dynamic targets at 
which marketers can aim promotional messages. 
 
ICTs also transformed the distribution function to an electronic marketplace, where access to 
information and ubiquity is achieved, while interactivity between principals and consumers

----- Page 19 (native) -----
provides major opportunities. The Internet promotes the mass-customisation of tourism products 
as it supports the industry to target niche markets of significant size in different geographical 
locations. Hence, the Internet propels the re-engineering of the entire process of producing and 
delivering tourism products, as well as it boosts interactivity between partners that can design 
specialised products and promotion in order to maximise the value-added provided to individual 
consumers. Ultimately, ICT tools reinvent the packaging of tourism to a much more individual-
focused activity, offering great opportunities for principals and intermediaries and enhancing the 
total quality of the final product (fitness to purpose). Electronic tourism distribution channels 
dictate the choice of product as the difference between products becomes secondary to the 
easiness of getting an entire transaction completed (Buhalis, 1998). Therefore ICTs gradually 
change the function of distribution from facilitation of information exchange and reservations to 
a much more sophisticated mechanism of adding value and providing service. In addition, to 
the degree that a great number of new players provide tourism and regional information, there 
is a rapid expansion of intermediaries in the marketplace. 
 
In the pre-Internet era tourism suppliers had no other choice but to use intermediaries, such 
as travel agents and tour operators, for their distribution functions. Central Reservations 
Systems (CRS) and Global Distribution Systems (GDS) facilitated the intermediation process 
(Sheldon,1997; O’Connor, 2003; Karcher,1997). Both intermediaries and end-consumers are 
dependant on comprehensive, accurate and timely information to aid in their travel choice as 
a result of the intangible nature of the tourism products (Poon, 1993). The Web enabled 
organizations to be able to distribute their products not only through direct distribution but 
also through a very wide range of channels (O’Connor & Frew, 2002). Third party 
intermediaries included online travel agencies as well as meta search engines, all of which 
could distribute both static and dynamic information such as availability and pricing. 
Electronic intermediaries are also emerging dynamically and increasingly challenge traditional 
distributors. For example Expedia and Lastminute.com are now challenging the business 
models of Thomson and Thomas Cook, forcing them to rethink their operations and 
strategies. Auctions sites such as eBay.com, price comparison sites such as Kelkoo and 
Kayak.com; price reversing sites such as Priceline.com and price prediction sites such as 
farecast.com also provide a great challenge for pricing of both suppliers and intermediaries. 
In a addition, Web 2.0 or Travel 2.0 providers such as Tripadvisor.com, IGOUGO.com and 
Wayn.com also enable consumers to interact and to offer peer to peer advice. These changes 
force all tourism players to rethink their business models and to take drastic actions in re-
developing their value chains. Tourism organisations aim to disintermediate all intermediaries 
that add cost to their production and distribution. For example tour operators aim to sell their 
packages direct, bypassing travel agencies. They also dis-bundle their packages and sell 
individual components. On the other hand, travel agencies dynamically package tour products 
and support the development of customised packages, disintermediating tour operators. The 
web therefore introduced utter transparency in the marketplace (Buhalis, 2003). This trend

----- Page 20 (native) -----
commoditized the tourism product and challenged differentiation strategies and branding. 
Consumers who search the Internet for accommodation or airlines for example would be 
offered listing of products based on price or commercial arrangements with intermediaries, 
rather than product attributes or brands. This had great implications, especially for branded 
products and services that could observe their customers switching products or channel if 
another product was cheaper by few dollars. Pricing became utterly transparent and hence 
the price that appeared in different distribution channels had to be coordinated to ensure 
price parity (O’Connor, 2003). Therefore organizations had to reinforce their brands online 
and offline and to justify their positioning and pricing strategies. At the time of a very volatile 
environment in the marketplace, tourism intermediaries are forced to readdress both their 
revenue and costs bases as well as to re-evaluate all partnerships and value chains. 
 
eLearning includes all technology-enabled learning. The Internet provided innovative tools 
and techniques to facilitate eLearning for both students and professionals (Piccoli et al., 
2001; Cheng & Piccoli, 2002; Baum & Sigala, 2001). eLearning is used by the entire range of 
the educational experience from distant leaning to mixed delivery and a wide range of 
research has been undertaken on the benefits and the challenges emerging. Tourism 
educators around the world use Virtual Learning Environments (VLEs) to support their class 
teaching, distribute notes and link to resources, stimulate discussion and facilitating marking 
and course administration. The Internet and computer simulations have also been used to 
simulate classroom discussions in order to enhance students’ understanding and retention of 
taught theories (Fawcett & Lockwood, 2000). However, Sigala and Christou (2002) found that 
most educators mainly exploit the Internet in order to automate rather than to transform 
their instructions and foster pedagogical innovation. Naturally the educators’ perceptions and 
abilities towards technology were found to significantly affect the type and degree of Internet 
use. Sigala (2002) explores Internet learning environments by reviewing and evaluating the 
evolution of practices in Internet pedagogy in order to identify effective e-learning models for 
tourism and hospitality education. Her three-era model of eLearning includes: Automational 
era models that use the Internet for publishing and disseminating learning materials as a 
depository centre. The mass learning era employs networking and interactive capabilities of 
the Internet for developing virtual eLearning applications based on collaborative and 
constructivist instructions.  Finally the mass customisation era empowers customised learning 
to the needs of individual learners. She concludes that that e-learning models should aim at 
the personalisation of online instructions that simultaneously aim at exploiting the benefits of 
collaborative and constructivism practices. 
 
eLearning is also widely utilised as an essential feature of training delivery, but the levels of 
its adoption in companies differ. eLearning has been accepted as a means of increasing skills 
and knowledge, and is being integrated into their training strategy along with other methods 
of delivering training. eLearning is particularly important for smaller companies that do not

----- Page 21 (native) -----
have sufficient resources to send their employees to expensive courses and those that require 
flexibility in working arrangements (Collins, Buhalis & Peters, 2003). The time constraints and 
workload of managers of SMTEs frequently prevents them from attending training sessions 
during their working hours. Therefore the prospect of flexible-location, cost-effective and 
time-independent learning environments may encourage them to participate more in training 
sessions via online learning systems. However, Braun (2002) suggests that SMTEs are still 
not committed to online training because they do not consider it a priority at present.  
 
Implications 
 
Despite the aforementioned benefits, hitherto the eTourism virtuality is still primitive. This 
jeopardises the opportunities for tourism corporations to develop credible interfaces with other 
members of the value-chain, and thus, it prevents them from developing their virtuality further. 
A number of organisations fail to appreciate the benefits of co-opetition and co-destiny, when 
organisations collaborate with players that they would normally regard as competitors. A wide 
range of issues must be therefore resolved before the tourism industry can take full advantage 
of the ICTs and maximise its virtuality.  
 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE RESEARCH 
 
The technological revolution experienced through the development of the Internet has 
changed dramatically the market conditions for tourism organisations. ICTs evolve rapidly 
providing new tools for tourism marketing and management. They support the interactivity 
between tourism enterprises and consumers and as a result they reengineer the entire 
process of developing, managing and marketing tourism products and destinations. 
Increasingly the impacts of ICTs are becoming clearer, as networking, dynamic interfaces 
with consumers and partners and the ability to redevelop the tourism product proactively and 
reactively are critical for the competitiveness of tourism organisations. The literature review 
undertaken demonstrates that eTourism research is in its infancy and that a number of issues 
are only now start being addressed in the literature.  
 
Increasingly ICTs will provide the “info-structure” for the entire industry and will overtake all 
mechanistic aspects of tourism transactions. It is evident, however, that the future of 
eTourism will be focused on Consumer Centric technologies that will support organisations to 
interact with their customers dynamically. Consumers are becoming incredibly powerful and 
are increasingly able to determine elements of their tourism products. They are also much 
more sophisticated and experienced and therefore are much more difficult to please. 
Innovative tourism enterprises will have the ability to divert resources and expertise to 
servicing consumers and provide a higher value added transactions. The development of new 
and more powerful ICT applications empowers both suppliers and destinations to enhance

----- Page 22 (native) -----
their efficiency and re-engineer their communication strategies. Innovative technologies will 
support interoperability, personalisation and constant networking. Agile strategies are 
therefore required at both strategic and tactical management levels to ensure that the ICT 
driven opportunities and challenges are turned to the advantage of tourism organisations 
towards enhancing their innovation and competitiveness. 
 
Like all studies, this paper is not without limitations. A major limitation of this 
study is the predominant inclusion of publications from publication channels in 
tourism. A natural extension of this study is, therefore, to include more 
publications from mainstream journals. It would be interesting to compare and 
contrast prior research endeavours between tourism researchers and other 
researchers in the context of eTourism. Other limitations of this study are the 
adoption of an unsophisticated method for grouping the published articles, and 
the absence of empirical data from industrial practitioners and academic 
researchers to comment on the applicability and implications of the published 
articles. Thus, we advocate the importance of performing future studies to 
address these issues. In spite of these limitations, this paper should be of value to 
readers to better understand the research that has recently been conducted by 
tourism researchers. Lastly, the paper presents the included publications in a 
comprehensive approach. A future attempt can extend the time period of 
publications, and critically analyzes the findings in a progressive way.

----- Page 23 (native) -----
References  
 
Abad, M., Sorzabal, A.A., & Linaza, M.T. (2005). NOMENCLATOR-Innovative Multilingual 
Environment for Collaborative Applications for Tourists and Cultural Organizations. In 
A.J. Frew ed). Information and Communication Technologies in Tourism 2005 (pp. 
79-89). New York: Springer-Verlag Wien. 
Agarwal, S, Handschuh, S., & Staab, S. (2003). Surfing the Service Web. Lecture Notes in 
Computer Science, 2870, 211-226.  
Albrecht, K., & Zemke, R. (1985). Service America! Doing business in the new economy. 
Homewood, IL: Dow Jones-Irwin. 
Alfaro, I., Nardon, M., Pianesi, F., Stock, O., & Zancanaro, M. (2005). Using cinematic 
techniques on mobile devices for cultural tourism, Information technology & Tourism, 
7(2), 61-71.  
Allison, A., Currall, J., Moss, M., & Stuart, S. (2005). Digital Identity Matters. Journal of the 
American Society for Information Science and Technology, 56(4), 364-372.  
Anderson, R.E. & Srinivansan, S.S. (2003). E-satisfaction and e-loyalty: A contingency 
framework. Psychology and Marketing, 20(2), 123-138. 
Bai, B., Hu, C., Elsworth, J., & Countryman, C. (2004). Online Travel Planning and College 
Students: The Spring Break Experience. Journal of Travel & Tourism Marketing, 
17(2/3), 79-91. 
Bakos, J.Y. (1997). Reducing buyer search costs: Implications for electronic marketplaces. 
Management Science, 43(12), 1676-1692. 
Bakos, J.Y. (1998). The emerging role of electronic marketplaces on the Internet. 
Communications of the ACM, 41(8), 35-42. 
Baloglu, S., & Pekcan, Y.A. (2006). The Website Design and Internet Site Marketing Practices 
of Upscale and Luxury Hotels in Turkey. Tourism Management, 27(1), 171-176. 
Bauernfeind, U., & Zins, A., (2006). The perception of exploratory browsing and trust with 
recommender websites. Information Technology & Tourism, 8(2), 121-136. 
Baum, T. & Sigala, M. (2001). E-learning in hospitality and tourism. Education, Singapore’s 
Knowledge Industry Journal, December, 32-34. 
Berger, S.,  Lehmann, H., & Lehner, F. (2003). Location-Based Services In The Tourist 
Industry. Information Technology & Tourism, 5(4),  243–256. 
Bieger, T., Beritelli, P., Weinert, R., & Wittmer, A. (2005). Building Trust and Identity on the 
Web — New IT Transaction Platforms to Overcome Psychological Barrier to Rent. In 
A. Frew (Eds.). Information and Communication Technologies in Tourism 2005 — 
Proceedings of the International Conference in Innsbruck. (pp. 296-305). New York: 
Springer-Verlag Wien.   
Bonn, M.A., Furr, H.L., & Susskind, A.M. (1998). Using the Internet as a pleasure travel 
planning tool: An examination of the sociodemographic and behavioral characteristics

----- Page 24 (native) -----
among Internet users and non-users. Journal of Hospitality & Tourism Research, 
22(3), 303-317. 
Braun, P. (2002). Networking Tourism SMEs: E-Commerce and E-Marketing Issues in 
Regional Australia. Information Technology and Tourism, 5(1), 13-23. 
Brynjolfsson, E., & Smith, M.D. (2000). Frictionless Commerce? A comparison of Internet and 
conventional retailers. Management Science, 46(4), 563-586. 
Buhalis D., & O’Connor, P., (2005), Information Communication Technology - Revolutionising 
Tourism. Tourism Recreation Research, 30(3), 7-16. 
Buhalis, D. & Licata, M. C. (2002). The Future eTourism Intermediaries. Tourism 
Management, 23(3), 207-220. 
Buhalis, D. (1998). Strategic use of information technologies in the tourism industry. Tourism 
Management, 19(5), 409-421. 
Buhalis, D. (2003). eTourism: information technology for strategic tourism management, 
Pearson (Financial Times/Prentice Hall), 
Buhalis, D. (2004). eAirlines: Strategic and tactical use of ICTS in the Airline Industry. 
Information & Management, 41(7), 805-825. 
Buhalis, D., & Zoge, M. (2007). The Strategic Impact of the Internet on the Tourism Industry, 
in Sigala, M., Mich, L., Murphy, J. (Eds.), Information and Communication 
Technologies in Tourism 2007, (pp. 481-492). Springer-Verlag, Wien,  
Chen, C. (2006). Identifying significant factors influencing consumer trust in an online travel 
site. Information Technology & Tourism, 8(2), 197-214. 
Chen, J.S., & Hsu, C.H.C. (2000). Measurement of Korean Tourists’ perceived images of 
overseas destinations. Journal of Travel Research, 38(4). 411-416. 
Cheng, C., & Piccoli, G. (2002). Web-Based Training in the Hospitality Industry: A Conceptual 
Definition, Taxonomy and Preliminary Investigation, International Journal of 
Hospitality Information Technology, 2(2),  19-33.  
Cho, Y., & Fesenmaier, D.R. (2001). A new paradigm for tourism and electronic commerce: 
Experience marketing using the virtual tour, in Laws, E., and Buhalis, D., (Eds), 
tourism distribution channels: practices, issues and transformation, pp. 351-370, 
Thomson,. 
Cho, Y., Wang, Y., & Fesenmaier, D.R. (2002). Searching for experiences: The web-based 
virtual tour in tourism marketing. Journal of Travel & Tourism Marketing, 12(4), 1-17 
Chrisholm, W., Vanderheiden, G., & Jacobs, I. (1999). Web Content Accessibility Guidelines. 
Retrieved 30/08/05 from http:// www.w3c.org/TR/WCAG10/ 
Chu, R. (2001). What online Hong Kong travelers look for on airline/travel Websites? 
International Journal of Hospitality Management, 20(1), 95-100. 
Chung, T., Law, R. (2003). Developing a performance indicator for hotel websites. 
International Journal of Hospitality Management, 22 (1), 119–125. 
Clemons, E.K., Hann, I.-H., & Hitt, L.M. (2002). Price dispersion and differentiation in online 
travel: An empirical investigation. Management Science, 48(4), 534-549

----- Page 25 (native) -----
Collins, C., Buhalis, D., & Peters, M. (2003), Enhancing Small Medium Tourism Enterprises' 
business performance through the Internet and e-learning platforms. Education & 
Training, 45(8/9), 483-494. 
Connolly, D., Olsen, M., & Moore, R. (1998). The Internet as a Distribution Channel, Cornell 
Hotel and Restaurant Administration Quarterly, 39(4) 42-54 
Cotte, J., Chowdhury, T.G., Ratneshwar, S. & Ricci, L.M. (2006). Pleasure or utility? Time 
planning style and Web usage behaviors. Journal of Interactive Marketing. 20 (1), 45-
57 
Cunliffe, D. (2000). Developing usable websites – a review and model. Internet Research: 
Electronic networking Application and Policy, 10(2), 295-397. 
Daniele, R. & Frew, A. (2005). Using Concept Maps to Examine Business Models and Drivers 
of Competitive Advantage for Travel eMediaries, In Frew, A. (ed), Information and 
Communication Technologies in Tourism 2005, (pp. 497-507). Springer, Vienna,  
Doolin, B., Burgess, L., & Cooper, J. (2002). Evaluating the use of the web for tourism 
marketing: A case study from New Zealand. Tourism Management, 23(5), 557-561. 
eBusiness W@tch, (2006), ICT and e-Business in the Tourism Industry, Sector Impact Study 
No. 
08 
/ 
2006, 
European 
Commission, 
http://www.ebusiness-
watch.org/resources/tourism/SR08-2006_Tourism.pdf 
Emmer, R.M., Tauck, C., Wilkinson, S., & Moore, R.G. (1993). Marketing hotels using global 
distribution systems. Cornell Hotel and Restaurant Administration Quarterly, 34(6), 
80–89. 
Fawcett, S. L. & Lockwood, A. (2000), Improving the learning environment for the 
development of hospitality accountancy skills using computer simulation gaming. 
Tourism and Hospitality Research, 2(3), 262-276   
Fesenmaier, D., Leppers, A. W. & O’Leary, J.T. (1999). Developing a Knowledge-Based 
Tourism Marketing Information System. Information Technology and Tourism, 2(1), 
31-44. 
Fesenmaier, D. R., Werthner, H. & K. W. Wöber (2003).  Travel Destination Recommendation 
Systems:  Behavioral Foundations and Applications, CAB International, London 
Fesenmaier, D., Gretzel, U., Hwang, Y.H. & Wang, Y. (2003). The Future of Destination 
Marketing: e-Commerce in Travel and Tourism. International Journal of Tourism 
Science, 3(2), 191-200 
Fiore, A.M., Kim, J., & Lee, H. (2005). Effect of image interactivity technology on consumer 
responses toward the online retailer. Journal of Interactive Marketing, 19(3), 38-53.  
Flouri, E., & Buhalis, D. (2004). Wireless Technologies for tourism Destinations. In A.J. Frew 
(ed). Information and Communication Technologies in Tourism 2004 (pp. 27-38). 
New York: Springer-Verlag Wien. 
Fodness, D., & Murray, B. (1997). Tourist information search. Annals of Tourism Research, 
24(3), 503-523.

----- Page 26 (native) -----
Fodor, O., & Werthner, H., (2005), Harmonise: A step toward an interoperable eTourism 
Marketplace. International Journal of Electronic Commerce, 9(2), 11-39. 
Frew, A J.  (2000). A Critical Analysis of Tourism Information Technology Research. In D. 
Fesenmaier (ed), Information and Communications Technologies in Tourism, (pp. 39-
52), Vienna, Austria: Springer-Verlag,. 
Gelb, B.D., & Sundaram, S. (2002). Adapting to “word of mouse.” Business Horizons, 45(4), 
15-20. 
Go, F.M., Govers, P., & van den Heuvel, M. (1999). Towards interactive tourism: capitalizing 
on virtual and physical value chains. In Buhalis, D. & Schertler, W. (eds), Information 
and Communication Technologies in Tourism 1999. (pp. 12-24), Springer, Vienna,. 
Go, F. M., & Williams, A.P. (1993). Competing and Co-operating in the Changing Tourism 
Channel System. Journal of Travel and Tourism Marketing, 2 (2/3), 229-48. 
Graeupl, A. (2006). ‘Silver Surfers’ and their Online Information Search Behaviour. In M. Hitz, 
M. Sigala, & J. Murphy (Eds). Information and Communication Technologies in 
Tourism 2006  (pp. 236-247). New York: Springer-Verlag Wien.  
Gretzel, U., Mitsche, N., Hwang, Y.-H., & Fesenmaier, D. (2004). Tell me who you are and I 
will tell you where to go — Use of Travel Personalities in Destination 
Recommendation Systems. Information Technology & Tourism, 7(1), 3–12.   
Gretzel, U., Yuan, Y.L., & Fesenmaier, D.R. (2000). Preparing for the New Economy: 
Advertising Strategies and Changes in Destination Marketing Organizations. Journal 
of Travel Research, 39(2), 146-156. 
Gursoy, D. & McCleary, K. (2004). An Integrative Model of Tourists’ Information Search 
Behaviour. Annals of Tourism Research, 31(2), 353–373. 
Han, J-H., & Mills, J. (2006). The Mutual Designing of Travel Websites: Perceptions of the 
Visually Impaired. In M. Hitz, M. Sigala, & J. Murphy (Eds). Information and 
Communication Technologies in Tourism 2006. (pp. 47-157). New York: Springer-
Verlag Wien. 
Hashim, N.H., Murphy, J., & Law, R. (2007). A Review of Hospitality Website Design 
Frameworks. In M. Sigala, L. Mich, & J. Murphy (Eds). Information and 
Communication Technologies in Tourism 2007 , (pp. 219-230). New York: Springer-
Verlag Wien.  
Inkpen, G. (1998). Information technology for travel and tourism, 2nd ed, Addison Wesley 
Longman, London. 
ISTAG, 2003, Ambient Intelligence: from Vision to reality. Information Society Technologies, 
European Commission. 
Jakkilinki, R., Georgievski, M., & Sharda, N. (2007). Connecting Destinations with an 
Ontology-Based e-Tourism Planner. In M. Sigala, L. Mich, & J. Murphy (Eds). 
Information and Communication Technologies in Tourism 2007, (pp. 21-32), 
Springer-Verlag Wien.

----- Page 27 (native) -----
Jang, S.C. (2004). The Past, Present, and Future Research of Online Information Search. 
Journal of Travel & Tourism Marketing, 17(2/3), 41-47. 
Jeong, M., Oh, H., & Gregoire, M. (2003). Conceptualizing Web site quality and its 
consequences in the lodging industry. International Journal of Hospitality 
Management, 22(2), 161-175. 
Kärcher, K. (1997). Reinventing Package Holiday Business, DeutscherUniversitätsVerlag, 
Berlin. 
Kim, E., Nam, D., & Stimpert, J.L. (2004). The Applicability of Porter’s Generic Strategies in 
the Digital Age: Assumptions, Conjectures and Suggestions, Journal of Management, 
30(5), 569-589 
Kim, W.G., & Lee, H.Y. (2004). Comparison of Web Service Quality between Online Travel 
Agencies and Online Travel Suppliers. Journal of Travel & Tourism Marketing, 
17(2/3), 105-116. 
Klein, S. (2002). Web impact on the distribution structure for flight tickets. In K.W. Wöber, 
A.J. Frew, & M. Hitz (Eds). Information and Communication Technologies in Tourism 
2002  (pp. 219-228). New York: Springer-Verlag Wien. 
Kolsaker, A., Lee-Kelley, L., & Choy, P.C. (2004). The reluctant Hong Kong consumer: 
Purchasing travel online. International Journal of Consumer Studies, 28(3). 295-304. 
Laudon, K., & Laudon, J., (2007). Management Information Systems, 10th ed, Prentice Hall, 
New Jersey 
Law, R., & Jogaratnam, G. (2005). A study if hotel information technology applications. 
International Journal of Contemporary Hospitality Management, 17(2), 170-180. 
Law, R., & Cheung, C. (2005). Weighing of hotel website dimensions and attributes. In A.J. 
Frew (Ed). Information and Communication Technologies in Tourism 2005, (pp. 327-
334). New York: Springer-Verlag Wien. 
Leung, R. & Law, R. (2007), Analyzing Research Collaborations of Information Technology 
Publications in Leading Hospitality and Tourism Journals: 1986–2005, in Sigala, M., 
Mich, L., & Murphy, J., (Eds.), Information and Communication Technologies in 
Tourism, pp. 547-557. 
Li, L. & Buhalis, D. (2005). Predicting Internet Usage for Travel Bookings in China. 
Information and Communication Technologies in Tourism 2005. (pp. 429–439). Wien.   
Loh, S., Lorenzi, F., Saldana, R., & Licthnow, D. (2004). A Tourism Recommender System 
Based on Collaboration and Text Analysis. Information Technology & Tourism, 6(3), 
157-165. 
Luo, M., Feng, R, & Cai, L.A. (2004). Information Search Behavior and Tourist Characteristics: 
The Internet vis-à-vis Other Information Sources. Journal of Travel & Tourism 
Marketing, 17(2/3), 15-25. 
Maedche, A., & Staab, S. (2002). Applying Semantic Web Technologies for Tourism 
Information Systems. pp.311-319. In Wöber, K.W., Frew, A.J & Hitz, M. (Eds)

----- Page 28 (native) -----
Information and Communication Technologies in Tourism 2002. ENTER 2002 
Proceedings. New York: Springer-Verlag, Wien 
Maedche, A., & Staab, S. (2003). Services on the Move: Towards P2P-Enabled Semantic Web 
Services. pp. 124-133. In Frew, A., O’Connor & Hitz, M. (Eds) Information and 
Communication Technologies in Tourism 2003. ENTER 2003 Proceedings. New York: 
Springer-Verlag, Wien. 
Main, H. (2001). The expansion of technology in small and medium hospitality enterprises 
with a focus on net technology. Information Technology & Tourism, 4(3-4), 167-174 
Manes, G. (2003). The Tetherless Tourist: Ambient Intelligence in Travel and Tourism, 
Information Technology and Tourism, 5(4),  211–220. 
Marcussen, C. (1999a). Internet Distribution of European Travel and Tourism Services. 
Research Centre of Bornholm, Denmark.  
Marcussen, C. (1999b). The effects of Internet distribution of travel and tourism services on 
the marketing mix: No-frills, fair fares and fare wars in the air. Information 
Technology & Tourism, 2(3/4), 197-212.  
Mattila, A.S., & Mount, D.J. (2003). The impact of selected customer characteristics and 
response time on e-complaint satisfaction and return intent. International Journal of 
Hospitality Management, 22(2), 135-145. 
Mazanec, J.A., Wöber, K.W., & Zins, A.H. (2007). Tourism Destination Competitiveness: From 
Definition to Explanation? Journal of Travel Research, 46, 86-95. 
Michopoulou, E., Buhalis, D., Michailidis, S., & Ambrose, I., (2007), Destination Management 
Systems: Technical Challenges in Developing an eTourism Platform for Accessible 
Tourism in Europe. In M. Sigala, L. Mich, & J. Murphy  (Eds.). Information and 
Communication Technologies in Tourism 2007, (pp. 301-310). Springer-Verlag Wien. 
Mills, J. & Law, R.  (2004). Handbook of Consumer Behaviour, Tourism and the Internet. New 
York:Harworth Hospitality Press.   
Mills, J.E., Ismail, J.A., Werner, W.B., & Hackshaw, K. (2002). Cyber Crimes and the Travel 
and Tourism Consumer. In K.W. Wöber, A.J. Frew, & M. Hitz (Eeds). Information and 
Communication Technologies in Tourism 2002,  (pp. 197-206). Springer-Verlag Wien. 
Minghetti, V., (2003). Building customer value in the hospitality industry: towards the 
definition of a customer-centric information system. Information Technology and 
Tourism, 6 (2), 141–153. 
Morrison, A. M., Jing, S., O’Leary, J. T., & Lipping, A. C. (2001). Predicting Usage of the 
Internet for travel bookings: an exploratory study. Information Technology & 
Tourism, 4(1), 15–30.   
Morrison, A. M., Taylor, J. S., Morrison A. J., & Morrison, A. D. (1999). Marketing small hotels 
on the World Wide Web. Information Technology & Tourism, 2(2), 97–113. 
Niininen, O., March, R., & Buhalis, D. (2006). Consumer Centric Tourism Marketing. In D. 
Buhalis & C. Costa (Eds.), Tourism management dynamics : trends, management and 
tools (pp. xxiii, 279 p.). Amsterdam ; London: Buttterworth Heinemann.

----- Page 29 (native) -----
O’ Connor, P., (2003), Room rates on the Internet – is the web really cheaper? Journal of 
Services Research. 1(1), 57-72.  
O’Connor, P. & Frew, A. (2002). The future of hotel electronic distribution: Expert and 
industry perspectives. Cornell Hotel and Restaurant Administration Quarterly. 43(3), 
33-45. 
O’Connor, P., & Frew, A. (2001). Expert perceptions on the Future on Hotel Electronic 
Distribution Channels. In P.J. Sheldon, K.W. Wöber, & D.R. Fesenmaier (Eds). 
Information and Communication Technologies in Tourism 2001, (pp. 346-357). New 
York: Springer-Verlag Wien.  
O’Connor, P. (1999). Electronic Information Distribution in Tourism & Hospitality, 
Wallingford:CAB.  
O’Connor, P. (2000). Electronic Information Distribution in Tourism and Hospitality, CABI.  
O’Connor, P., & Murphy. J. (2004). Research on information technology in the hospitality 
industry. International Journal of Hospitality Management, 23(5), 473-484.  
O’Connor, P., & Frew, A.J. (2004). An evaluation methodology for hotel electronic channels of 
distribution. International Journal of Hospitality Management, 23(2), 179–199. 
Odinma, A.C., Oborkhale, L.I,, & Kah, M.M.O. (2007). The trends in broadband wireless 
network technologies. The Pacific Journal of Science and Technology, 8(1), 118-125. 
Ohrtman, F. (2005). WiMAX handbook: building 802.16 wireless networks. New York: 
McGraw-Hill. 
Oorni, A., & Klein, S. (2003). Electronic Travel Markets: Elusive Effects on consumer Behavior. 
In A.J. Frew, M. Hitz, & P. O’Connor (Eds). Information and Communication 
Technologies in Tourism 2003.  (pp. 29-38). New York: Springer-Verlag Wien.  
Paraskevas, A., & Buhalis, D., (2002), Web-enabled ICT Outsourcing for Small Hotels: 
Opportunities and Challenges, Cornell Hotel and Restaurant Administration Quarterly, 
43(2), 27-39. 
Patton, B.K., Aukerman, R., & Shorter, J.D. (2005). Wireless technologies, wireless fidelity 
(WI-FI) & worldwide interoperability for microwave access (WiMax). Issues in 
Information Systems, 6(2), 364-370. 
Pechlaner, H., Rienzner, H., Matzler, K., & Osti, L. (2002). Response Attitudes and Behavior 
of Hotel Industry to Electronic info Requests. In K.W. Wöber, A.J. Frew, & M. Hitz 
(Eds). Information and Communication Technologies in Tourism 2002 (pp. 177-196), 
Springer-Verlag Wien. 
Peterson, R.A., Balasubramanian, S., & Bronnenberg, B. (1997). Exploring the Implications of 
the Internet for Consumer Marketing. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 
25(3), 329-346. 
Piccoli, G., Ahmad, R. & Ives, B. (2001). Web Based Virtual Learning Environments: A 
research framework and a preliminary assessment of effectiveness in basic IT skills 
and training, MIS Quarterly; 25(4),  401-427.

----- Page 30 (native) -----
Picolli, G., O’Connor, P., Capaccioli, C., & Alvarez, R., (2003). Customer relationship 
management—a driver for change in the structure of the US lodging industry. Cornell 
Hotel and Restaurant Administration Quarterly, 44(4), 61-73  
Poon, A., (1993), Tourism, technology and competitive strategies, CAB International, Oxford. 
Porter, M. (1979). How Competitive Forces Shape Strategy, Harvard Business Review, 57(2), 
137-145. 
Porter, M. (1980). Competitive Strategy: Techniques for Analysing Industries and 
Competitors, Free Press, New York. 
Porter, M., (2001). Strategy and the Internet, Harvard Business Review, 79(3), 63-78.  
Pouloudi, A., Vassilopoulou, K., & Ziouvelou, X. (2002). Considering the societal implications 
in the adoption of e-business models. In Proceedings of 6th International conference 
on The transformation of organizations in the information age: social and ethical 
implications (ETHICOMP’ 2002) - Lisbon, Portugal, 13-15 November, (pp. 237-246).  
Preece, J. (2000). Online communities : designing usability, supporting sociability. New York: 
John Wiley. 
Pühretmair, F. (2004). It’s time to make eTourism accessible. In Miesenberger, K., Klaus, J., 
Zagler, W. & Burger, D. (Eds.) Computers helping people with special needs. In 
Proceedings 9th International Conference, ICCHP 2004, Paris, France, July 2004, 
Proceedings, Berlin, (pp. 272-279), Springer Verlag.  
Rabanser, U., & Ricci, F. (2005). Recommendation Systems: Do They Have a Viable Business 
Model in e-Tourism. pp. 160-171. In Frew, A. (Ed). Information and Communication 
Technologies in Tourism 2005. ENTER 2005 Proceedings. New York: Springer-Verlag, 
Wien. 
Raggam, K., & Almer, A. (2005). Acceptance of Geo-multimedia Applications in Austrian 
Tourism Organizations. In M. Sigala, L. Mich, & J. Murphy (Eds). Information and 
Communication Technologies in Tourism 2007, (pp. 163-174). New York: Springer-
Verlag Wien.  
Resnick, P., & Varian, H. (1997). Four text classification algorithms compared on a Dutch 
corpus. In International ACM-SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in 
Information retrieval (SIGIR’98) Melbourne, (pp. 369-370) 
.Rheingold, H. (1993). The Virtual Community: Homesteading on the Electronic Frontier. 
Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley. 
Ricci, 
F. 
(2002). 
Travel 
Recommender 
Systems. 
IEEE 
Intelligent 
Systems, 
November/December, 55-57Öööö. 
Ricci, F., & Werthner, H., (2002), Case base querying for travel planning recommendation. 
Information Technology & Tourism, 3(3/4), 215-226. 
Ricci, F., & Werthner, H., (2006), Recommender Systems, International Journal of Electronic 
Commerce, 11(2), 5-9. 
Rumetshofer, H., & Wöß, W. (2004). Tourism information systems promoting Barrier-Free 
tourism for people with disabilities. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 3118, 280-
286.

----- Page 31 (native) -----
Schertler, W & Berger-Koch, C. (1999), Tourism as an information business: The strategic 
Consequences of e-Commerce for Business Travel, Buhalis, D. & Schertler, W. (eds), 
Information & Communication Technologies in Tourism 1999. (pp. 25-35). Springer,.  
Shea, L., Enghagen, L., & Khullar, A. (2004). Internet Diffusion of an E-Complaint: A Content 
Analysis of Unsolicited Responses. Journal of Travel & Tourism Marketing, 17(2/3), 
105-116. 
Sheldon, P. (1997), Tourism Information Technologies, CAB, Oxford. 
Shih, C.F. (1998). Conceptualizing consumer experiences in cyberspace. European Journal of 
Marketing, 32(7/8), 655-663. 
Sigala, M. & Christou, E. (2002). Using the Internet for complementing and enhancing the 
teaching of tourism and hospitality education: evidence from Europe. In K.W. Wöber, 
A.F. Frew and M. Hitz (Eds.). Information and Communication Technologies in 
Tourism 2002. (pp. 229-238), Springer-Verlag, Wien.  
Sigala, M., (2002), The Evolution of Internet Pedagogy: Benefits for Tourism and Hospitality 
Education. Journal of Hospitality, Leisure, Sport and Tourism Education, 1(2), 29-45. 
Snepenger, D., Meged, K., Snelling, M. & Worrall, K. (1990). Information Search Strategies by 
Information-Naive Tourists. Journal of Travel Research , 29(1),13-16. 
Solon, A., McKevitt, P., & Curran, K. (2004). TeleMorph: Bandwidth-determined Mobile 
Multimodal Presentation. Information Technology & Tourism, 7(1), 33-47. 
Stabb, S., & Werthner, H. (2002). Intelligent Systems for Tourism. IEEE Intelligent Systems, 
November/December, 53-55. 
Stepchenkova, S., Mills, J.E., & Jiang, H. (2007). Virtual Travel Communities: Self-Reported 
Experiences and Satisfaction. In M. Sigala, L. Mich, & J. Murphy (Eds). Information 
and communication technologies in tourism 2007,  (pp. 163-174). New York: 
Springer-Verlag Wien. 
Steuer, J. (1992). Defining virtual reality: Dimensions determining telepresence. Journal of 
Communication, 42(4), 73-93.  
Tufte, B., & Rasmussen, J. (2003). Children on the Net – State of the Art and Future 
Perspectives Regarding Danish Children’s Use of the Internet. European Advances in 
Consumer Research, 6, 142-146.  
Turban, E., & Aronson, J.E., (2001), Decision Support Systems and Intelligent Systems, 6th 
ed, New Jersey, Prentice Hall. 
Vogt, C. A., & Fesenmaier, D. R. (1998). Expanding the functional information search model. 
Annals of Tourism Research, 25(3), 551-578. 
W3C-The World Wide Web Consortium. (2005). How People with Disabilities Use the Web, 
W3C Working Draft. Available online at http://www.w3.org/WAI/EO/Drafts/PWD-Use-
Web. [Accessed on June 15, 2007]. 
Waldhor, K., Freidl, C., Fessler, F., & Starha, G. (2007). RESA-An Automated Speech Based 
Hotel Room Booking Call Center Agent. In M. Sigala, L. Mich, & J. Murphy (Eds). 
Information and Communication Technologies in Tourism 2007, (pp. 1-10). New 
York: Springer-Verlag Wien.

----- Page 32 (native) -----
Walker, L.J. (2001). The measurement of word-of-mouth communication and an investigation 
of service quality and customer commitment as potential antecedents. Journal of 
Service Research, 4(1), 60-75. 
Wang, K-C., Hsieh, A-T., Yeh, Y-C, & Tsai, C-W. (2004). Who is the Decision-maker: the 
Parents or the Child in Group Package Tours? Tourism Management, 25(2), 183-194. 
Wang, Y., & Fesenmaier, D. R. (2004). Towards understanding members' general 
participation in and active contribution to an online travel community. Tourism 
Management, 25(6), 709-722. 
Wang, Y., Yu, Q., & Fesenmaier, R.D. (2002). Defining the Virtual Tourist Community: 
Implications for Tourism Marketing. Tourism Management, 23(4), 407-417. 
Weber, K., & Roehl, W.S. (1999). Profiling people searching for and purchasing travel 
products on the World Wide Web. Journal of Travel Research, 37(3), 291-298. 
Werthner, H. & Klein, S., (1999). Information Technology and Tourism-A challenging 
relationship, Springer, New York. 
Werthner, H., & Ricci, F. (2004). E-Commerce and Tourism. Communications of the ACM, 
47(12), 101-105. 
WiMAX Forum (2004). Regulatory Position and Goals of the WiMAX Forum . White paper, 
available 
online 
at 
http://www.wimaxforum.org/technology/downloads/ 
M_Taiwan_Program.pdf [accessed 10/06/2007]  
Wöber, K.W. (2001). Identifying Competing Tourism Destinations Using a Group Decision 
Support System. pp. 1-12. In Sheldon, P., Wober, K.W. & Fesenmaier, D.R. (Eds) 
Information and Communication Technologies 2001. ENTER 2001 Proceedings. New 
York: Springer-Verlag, Wien. 
Wolfe, K., Hsu, C.H.C., & Kang, S.K. (2004). Buyer Characteristics Among Users of Various 
Travel Intermediaries. Journal of Travel & Tourism Marketing, 17(2/3), 51-62. 
UNWTO, (2001), eBusiness for Tourism: Practical; guidelines for destinations and businesses, 
Madrid: World Tourism Organisation 
Yu, A.K.L. & Law, R. (2000). The Application of E-Commerce to Enhance the Competitive 
Advantages of Hotels in Hong Kong, In Fesenmaier, D., Klein, S., Buhalis, D. (eds) 
Information & Communication Technologies in Tourism 2000., (pp. 343-35). 
Springer, Vienna,  .