

----- Page 1 (native) -----
HAL Id: hal-00266983
https://hal.science/hal-00266983v1
Submitted on 19 Feb 2020
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not.
The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.
L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.
Assessing the realism of ocean simulations against
hydrography and altimetry
Thierry Penduff, Mélanie Juza, Bernard Barnier
To cite this version:
Thierry Penduff, Mélanie Juza, Bernard Barnier. Assessing the realism of ocean simulations against
hydrography and altimetry.
Newsletter of the Climate Variability and Predictability Programme
(CLIVAR), 2007, 12 (3), pp.11-12. ￿10.1029/2004JC002378￿. ￿hal-00266983￿

----- Page 2 (native) -----
ASSESSING THE REALISM OF OCEAN SIMULATIONS AGAINST HYDROGRAPHY AND ALTIMETRY 
Thierry Penduff1, Mélanie Juza1, and Bernard Barnier1 
LEGI-CNRS, BP53, 38041 Grenoble Cedex 9, France. 
Corresponding author: Thierry.Penduff@hmg.inpg.fr 
Introduction 
Future climate prediction systems will include ocean 
models at eddy-admitting to eddy-resolving resolu-
tion, i.e. ¼° on the horizontal or finer. The develop-
ment and calibration of such models requires the use 
of more accurate numerical schemes, and the im-
provement of physical subgrid-scale parameteriza-
tions for the ocean interior and its boundaries, includ-
ing air-sea interactions that drive the global ocean cir-
culation and its feedbacks to the atmosphere. The 
DRAKKAR consortium is developing a hierarchy of 
basin-scale to global ocean models (Barnier et al, this 
issue) to simulate and study the ocean variability 
driven by realistic atmospheric conditions over the 
last 50 years without data assimilation. These oceanic 
hindcasts should help understand the nonlinear inter-
actions between fine scale processes and large-scale 
ocean dynamics, better interpret and take advantage 
of satellite and in situ observations (see Penduff et al, 
2006, for an overview). However, numerical simula-
tions require quantitative model-observation mis-
match evaluations to guide dynamical studies and 
further model improvements, and careful dynamical 
assessments 
This paper presents an assessment method of model 
solutions against two complementary datasets: the 
ENACT-ENSEMBLES hydrographic profile database1 
which covers the period 1956-present and includes 7.4 
million temperature/salinity (T/S) reports from hy-
drographic sections, moored arrays, floats, ARGO and 
XBT observations; and the Ssalto/Duacs multimission 
Sea Level Anomaly (SLA) weekly maps from altime-
ter measurements2 available since 1993. DRAKKAR 
models simulate the evolution since the late 1950’s of 
T, S, velocity, sea-surface height (SSH), sea-ice charac-
teristics, and oceanic concentrations of two tracers 
(CFC11, 14C) released in the atmosphere over that pe-
riod. These variables are stored as successive 5-day 
averages during the integrations. Dynamical outputs 
are then collocated with real observations for com-
parison purposes. This paper focuses on the 1958-2004 
global ¼° ORCA025-G70 simulation (Barnier et al, this 
issue), and its 2°-resolution counterpart driven by the 
same surface forcing. 
Data preprocessing  
The collocation procedure linearly interpolates model 
T/S fields at the geographical locations, depths, and 
instants when real T/S profiles where collected. Only 
1
http://www.mersea.eu.org/Insitu-Obs/1-Insitu-Data-
ENACT.html 
2http://www.aviso.oceanobs.com/html/donnees/welcome
_uk.html 
quality-checked (unflagged) observations are consid-
ered. Model profiles are stored in the same format as 
observed ones to facilitate their dissemination. Collo-
cated profiles are then processed jointly to character-
ize the structure of T/S model biases in space and 
time. Model SSH fields are interpolated as observed 
SLA maps, i.e. weekly and on a 1/3x1/3° Mercator 
grid, from 1993 to 2004. Collocated SLA databases are 
obtained by masking them where and when (either 
real or simulated) sea-ice is present, by removing at 
each grid point their respective 1993-1999 mean, and 
by removing their global spatial average every week. 
Lanczos filters may then be applied to split collocated 
SLA fields (and thus evaluate the model skill) into 
distinct wavenumber-frequency ranges. We focus 
here on the interannual SLA variability, i.e. with 
timescales longer than 18 months. 
Upper ocean heat and salt contents 
The upper ocean, which varies and interacts with the 
atmosphere on a wide range of time and space scales, 
requires a dedicated assessment in terms of heat and 
salt content (HC and SC). Each color dot in Figure A 
shows, for the 50-450m layer and the period 1998-
2004, a collocated bias (¼° global simulation minus 
ARGO) of HC and SC. A cold fresh bias, whose me-
dian reaches -3°C at 250m and -0.5 psu at the surface, 
can be seen north of the simulated North Atlantic 
Current. Indeed, this current progressively tends to 
block over the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, like in many mod-
els at this resolution, and lets cold and fresh subpolar 
waters invade the region off the Grand Banks. Two 
other shifts are revealed in the Antarctic Circumpolar 
Current (ACC), which locally departs from its ob-
served route near 45° and near 90°E. Another signifi-
cant T/S bias (reaching +2°C and +0.2 psu at 200m), 
not fully understood yet and subject to present inves-
tigations, is revealed in the Kuroshio region. The 
warm and salty bias visible in the northwestern In-
dian Ocean is due to a spurious mixing of the Red Sea 
overflow; our present work on bottom boundary layer 
parameterizations will hopefully reduce it. The 
DRAKKAR group is also working on improving the 
surface forcing function to limit the warm and salty 
equatorial bias seen in the tropical Indian and Atlantic 
basins. Over the rest of the global ocean, collocated 
model and ARGO profiles show smaller biases after 
several decades of integration.  
The black and green lines in Figure B illustrate in the 
Sargasso Sea how ARGO is being used to assess the 
mixed layer annual cycle simulated at ¼° resolution, 
in terms of monthly heat content (MLHC), depth 
(MLD), and temperature (MLT). The median MLHC 
simulated there over 1998-2004 appears overestimated 
1

----- Page 3 (native) -----
between November and April, by up to a factor of 2 in 
winter. The lower panels show that this substantial 
bias is due to a winter MLD that is twice as deep as 
observed, and not to a warm bias (ARGO and simu-
lated MLTs are almost identical). This approach also 
helps evaluate hydrographic sampling errors: our re-
sults shows that, in this region, ARGO accurately 
samples the distributions (median, percentiles) of 
monthly MLHC, MLD and MLT: blue lines (full 
model) and black lines (subsampled model) are re-
markably similar. Hydrographic sampling error 
evaluation and model-observation intercomparisons 
are presently being extended at global scale. 
Sea level interannual variability 
The 2° and ¼° DRAKKAR simulations are assessed in 
terms of interannual SLA variability (ISV) after collo-
cation onto altimetric maps. Because the 2° grid is re-
fined meridionally to 1/3° at low latitudes, both mod-
els simulate the ISV observed there with realistic and 
comparable amplitudes (Figure C). At higher lati-
tudes, the ISV magnitude gets more realistic at ¼° 
resolution, especially in the eddy-active Gulf Stream 
(GS), North Atlantic Current and ACC (both shifted 
as mentioned), Kuroshio, and Agulhas region. A 
space-time analysis of the ISV is shown for the GS 
region in Figure D. SLA fields from both simulations 
are projected on the 1st EOF of the observed ISV in this 
area. Its spatial structure Eo and associated principal 
component Po show that the GS latitude follows the 
NAO index in the real ocean with a 9-month lag (right 
panel). The ¼° model represents 19% of this mode’s 
variance, which is modest but much greater than in 
the 2° model (2%). Moreover, the ¼° model captures 
much better the delay between the NAO forcing and 
the GS’s response (7.8 months instead of 3.2 months at 
2° resolution), yielding a better correlation with the 
observed ISV (0.59 instead of 0.49). Investigations of 
this kind are being extended to other key areas and 
basins of the World Ocean. 
Conclusion 
This quick overview of our “collocated” assessment 
approach has highlighted certain strengths and weak-
nesses of 50-year DRAKKAR simulations with respect 
to complementary (and recent) observations. More 
complete assessments are underway in other regions, 
depths and time ranges, and should contribute to 
guide model improvements. Our next multi-decadal 
climate-oriented simulations will be compared against 
the same observational databases, to precisely 
quantify the model sensitivities (e.g. time-mean state, 
various modes of variability, drifts) to thermal and 
mechanical surface fluxes, to resolved physical 
processes (e.g. mesoscale turbulence, nonlinearities, 
scale interactions, etc.), and to numerical choices (e.g. 
resolution, 
schemes, 
parameterization 
of 
non-
hydrostatic, mixing or diffusive processes). These 
tools can also help evaluate existing or future ocean 
observing systems in terms of sampling errors, and 
strengthen the link between the observational and 
numerical oceanographic communities.  
Ocean observations, especially prior to the recent 
ARGO-plus-altimeter “golden age”, are both rare 
with respect to typical scales of motion (the Rossby 
radius) and dispersed in time and space. On the statis-
tical side, model-observation mismatches can always 
be computed, but estimating the robustness or signifi-
cance of these skills may be difficult. Besides the ex-
tension of our evaluations to various regions, times-
cales, periods and depth ranges, advantage should 
thus progressively be also taken of complementary 
observational datasets (e.g. satellite SSTs, current me-
ters, tide gauges, lagrangian trajectories, etc). 
Acknowledgments 
DRAKKAR-France acknowledges the computational 
support from IDRIS, and the support from CNES for 
the development of model-observation comparison 
methods and tools. 
References 
Montegut, C.D., G. Madec, A. Fischer, A. Lazar and D. 
Iudicone, 2004: Mixed layer depth over the 
Global Ocean: an examination of profile data and 
a profile-based climatology. J. Geophys. Res. 109, 
DOI: 10.1029/2004JC002378. 
Penduff, T., B. Barnier, A.M. Treguier, P.Y. Le Traon, 
2006 : Synergy between ocean observations and 
numerical simulations: CLIPPER heritage and 
DRAKKAR perspectives. Proceedings of the 
Symposium 15 Years of Progress in Radar Altime-
try, Venice. 
Figure A. Mixed layer heat and salt content biases from the 
¼° simulation collocated with ARGO profiles over 1998-
2004. Each color dot quantifies a synoptic model bias.  
Figure B. Top left: Local mixed layer depth (MLD) esti-
mates from ARGO in February (1998-2004). The MLD 
corresponds to a 0.2°C temperature change (Montegut et 
al, 2004). Other panels: Monthly mixed layer statistics 
(heat content in 109 J/m2, depth in m, temperature in °C) 
over 1998-2004 in the Sargasso Sea from the full ¼° simu-
lation (blue), ARGO (green), and the model collocated with 
ARGO (black). Medians (thick lines) and 17%/83% per-
centiles (dashed) characterize monthly distributions. 
Figure C. 1993-2004 standard deviations (cm) of observed 
and simulated low-frequency (LF) SLAs.  
Figure D. Left: normalized 1st EOF Eo(x,y) of the observed 
LF SLA in the Gulf Stream region. Center: Principal com-
ponent Po(t) in cm associated with Eo (green), low-passed 
filtered NAO index N(t) (blue), projection of simulated 
SLAs on Eo (P¼(t) in black for the ¼° model, P2(t) in ma-
genta for the 2° model). Right panel: variances of Po, P¼, 
and P2 scaled by the variance of Po (line 1). Correlation of 
Po, P¼, and P2 with Po (line 2). Lag between N and Po, P¼, 
P2 in months (line 3). 
2

----- Page 4 (native) -----
1/4° Simulation
Observations
2° Simulation
Salt Content
103 kg.m-2
1/4° model
bias
Heat Content
109 J.m-2
1/4° model
bias
Mixed
Layer
Heat content
(109 J.m-2)
Mixed
Layer
Temperature
(°C)
Mixed
Layer
Depth
(m)
A
B
C
D
Observed SLA: 1st EOF
at interannual frequency
1/4° run: full output
1/4° run: coloc. on ARGO
ARGO observations
Obs.
1
1
9.0
1/4°
0.19
0.59
7.8
2°
0.02
0.49
3.2
Var
Corr
Lag
NAO
index
Obs.
2°
1/4°
3