

----- Page 1 (native) -----
Review
Plastics, the environment and human health:
current consensus and future trends
Richard C. Thompson1,*, Charles J. Moore2, Frederick S. vom Saal3
and Shanna H. Swan4
1Marine Biology and Ecology Research Centre, Marine Institute, University of Plymouth,
Drake Circus, Plymouth PL4 8AA, UK
2Algalita Marine Research Foundation, Long Beach, CA 90803, USA
3Division of Biological Sciences, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65201, USA
4Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY 14642, USA
Plastics have transformed everyday life; usage is increasing and annual production is likely to exceed
300 million tonnes by 2010. In this concluding paper to the Theme Issue on Plastics, the Environ-
ment and Human Health, we synthesize current understanding of the beneﬁts and concerns sur-
rounding the use of plastics and look to future priorities, challenges and opportunities. It is
evident that plastics bring many societal beneﬁts and offer future technological and medical
advances. However, concerns about usage and disposal are diverse and include accumulation of
waste in landﬁlls and in natural habitats, physical problems for wildlife resulting from ingestion
or entanglement in plastic, the leaching of chemicals from plastic products and the potential for
plastics to transfer chemicals to wildlife and humans. However, perhaps the most important over-
riding concern, which is implicit throughout this volume, is that our current usage is not sustainable.
Around 4 per cent of world oil production is used as a feedstock to make plastics and a similar
amount is used as energy in the process. Yet over a third of current production is used to make
items of packaging, which are then rapidly discarded. Given our declining reserves of fossil fuels,
and ﬁnite capacity for disposal of waste to landﬁll, this linear use of hydrocarbons, via packaging
and other short-lived applications of plastic, is simply not sustainable. There are solutions, including
material reduction, design for end-of-life recyclability, increased recycling capacity, development of
bio-based feedstocks, strategies to reduce littering, the application of green chemistry life-cycle
analyses and revised risk assessment approaches. Such measures will be most effective through
the combined actions of the public, industry, scientists and policymakers. There is some urgency,
as the quantity of plastics produced in the ﬁrst 10 years of the current century is likely to approach
the quantity produced in the entire century that preceded.
Keywords: plastic; polymer; debris; endocrine disruption; phthalates; waste management
1. INTRODUCTION
Many of the current applications and the predicted
beneﬁts of plastic follow those outlined by Yarsley
and Couzens in the 1940s. Their account of the
beneﬁts that plastics would bring to a person born
nearly 70 years ago, at the beginning of this ‘plastic
age’, was told with much optimism:
It is a world free from moth and rust and full of colour,
a world largely built up of synthetic materials made
from the most universally distributed substances, a
world in which nations are more and more indepen-
dent of localised naturalised resources, a world in
which man, like a magician, makes what he wants for
almost every need out of what is beneath and around
him (Yarsley & Couzens 1945, p. 152).
The durability of plastics and their potential for diverse
applications, including widespread use as disposable
items, were anticipated, but the problems associated
with waste management and plastic debris were not.
In fact the predictions were ‘how much brighter and
cleaner a world [it would be] than that which preceded
this plastic age’ (Yarsley & Couzens 1945, p. 152).
This paper synthesizes current understanding of the
beneﬁts and concerns surrounding the use of plastics
and looks to challenges, opportunities and priorities
for the future. The content draws upon papers
submitted to this Theme Issue on Plastics, the
Environment and Human Health together with other
sources. While selected citations are given to original
sources of information, we primarily refer the reader
to the discussion of a particular topic, and the associ-
ated references, in the Theme Issue papers. Here, we
consider the subject from seven perspectives: plastics
as materials; accumulation of plastic waste in the natu-
ral environment; effects of plastic debris in the
* Author for correspondence (R.C.Thompson@plymouth.ac.uk).
One contribution of 15 to a Theme Issue ‘Plastics, the environment
and human health’.
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B (2009) 364, 2153–2166
doi:10.1098/rstb.2009.0053
2153
This journal is # 2009 The Royal Society

----- Page 2 (native) -----
environment and on wildlife; effects on humans;
production, usage, disposal and waste management
solutions; biopolymers, degradable and biodegradable
polymer solutions; and policy measures.
2. PLASTICS AS MATERIALS: AN OVERVIEW
Plastics are inexpensive, lightweight, strong, durable,
corrosion-resistant materials, with high thermal and
electrical insulation properties. The diversity of poly-
mers and the versatility of their properties are used
to make a vast array of products that bring medical
and
technological
advances,
energy
savings
and
numerous other societal beneﬁts (Andrady & Neal
2009). As a consequence, the production of plastics
has increased substantially over the last 60 years from
around 0.5 million tonnes in 1950 to over 260 million
tonnes today. In Europe alone the plastics industry has
a turnover in excess of 300 million euros and employs
1.6 million people (Plastics Europe 2008). Almost all
aspects of daily life involve plastics, in transport, tele-
communications, clothing, footwear and as packaging
materials that facilitate the transport of a wide range of
food, drink and other goods. There is considerable
potential for new applications of plastics that will
bring beneﬁts in the future, for example as novel medi-
cal applications, in the generation of renewable energy
and by reducing energy used in transport (Andrady &
Neal 2009).
Virgin plastic polymers are rarely used by them-
selves and typically the polymer resins are mixed
with various additives to improve performance. These
additives include inorganic ﬁllers such as carbon
and silica that reinforce the material, plasticizers
to render the material pliable, thermal and ultraviolet
stabilizers, ﬂame retardants and colourings. Many
such additives are used in substantial quantities and
in a wide range of products (Meeker et al. 2009).
Some additive chemicals are potentially toxic (for
example lead and tributyl tin in polyvinyl chloride,
PVC), but there is considerable controversy about
the extent to which additives released from plastic
products (such as phthalates and bisphenol A, BPA)
have adverse effects in animal or human populations.
The central issue here is relating the types and quantities
of additives present in plastics to uptake and accumula-
tion by living organisms (Andrady & Neal 2009; Koch &
Calafat 2009; Meeker et al. 2009; Oehlmann et al.
2009; Talsness et al. 2009; Wagner & Oehlmann 2009).
Additives of particular concern are phthalate plasticizers,
BPA, brominated ﬂame retardants and anti-microbial
agents. BPA and phthalates are found in many mass
produced products including medical devices, food
packaging, perfumes, cosmetics, toys, ﬂooring materials,
computers and CDs and can represent a signiﬁcant con-
tent of the plastic. For instance, phthalates can constitute
a substantial proportion, by weight, of PVC (Oehlmann
et al. 2009), while BPA is the monomer used for
production of polycarbonate plastics aswell as an additive
used for production of PVC. Phthalates can leach out of
products because they are not chemically bound to the
plasticmatrix,andtheyhaveattractedparticularattention
because of their high production volumes and wide usage
(Wagner & Oehlmann 2009; Talsness et al. 2009).
Phthalates and BPA are detectable in aquatic environ-
ments, in dust and, because of their volatility, in air
(Rudel et al. 2001, 2003). There is considerable
concern about the adverse effects of these chemicals on
wildlife and humans (Meeker et al. 2009; Oehlmann
et al. 2009). In addition to the reliance on ﬁnite resources
for plastic production, and concerns about additive
effects of different chemicals, current patterns of usage
are generating global waste management problems.
Barnes et al. (2009) show that plastic wastes, including
packaging, electrical equipment and plastics from end-
of-life vehicles, are major components of both household
and industrialwastes; our capacity for disposal of waste to
landﬁllisﬁniteandinsomelocationslandﬁllsareat,orare
rapidlyapproaching, capacity (Defra et al. 2006). Sofrom
several perspectives it would seem that our current use
and disposal of plastics is the cause for concern (Barnes
et al. 2009; Hopewell et al. 2009).
3. ACCUMULATION OF PLASTIC WASTE
IN THE NATURAL ENVIRONMENT
Substantial quantities of plastic have accumulated in
the natural environment and in landﬁlls. Around
10 per cent by weight of the municipal waste stream
is plastic (Barnes et al. 2009) and this will be con-
sidered later in §6. Discarded plastic also contaminates
a wide range of natural terrestrial, freshwater and
marine habitats, with newspaper accounts of plastic
debris on even some of the highest mountains. There
are also some data on littering in the urban environ-
ment (for example compiled by EnCams in the UK;
http://www.encams.org/home); however, by compari-
son with the marine environment, there is a distinct
lack of data on the accumulation of plastic debris in
natural terrestrial and freshwater habitats. There are
accounts of inadvertent contamination of soils with
small plastic fragments as a consequence of spreading
sewage sludge (Zubris & Richards 2005), of fragments
of plastic and glass contaminating compost prepared
from municipal solid waste (Brinton 2005) and of
plastic being carried into streams, rivers and ultimately
the sea with rain water and ﬂood events (Thompson
et al. 2005). However, there is a clear need for more
research on the quantities and effects of plastic
debris in natural terrestrial habitats, on agricultural
land and in freshwaters. Inevitably, therefore, much
of the evidence presented here is from the marine
environment. From the ﬁrst accounts of plastic in
the environment, which were reported from the car-
casses of seabirds collected from shorelines in the
early 1960s (Harper & Fowler 1987), the extent of
the problem soon became unmistakable with plastic
debris contaminating oceans from the poles to the
Equator and from shorelines to the deep sea. Most
polymers are buoyant in water, and since items of plas-
tic debris such as cartons and bottles often trap air,
substantial quantities of plastic debris accumulate on
the sea surface and may also be washed ashore. As a
consequence, plastics represent a considerable pro-
portion (50–80%) of shoreline debris (Barnes et al.
2009). Quantities are highly variable in time and
space, but there are reports of more than 100 000
items m–2 on some shorelines
(Gregory 1978) and
2154
R. C. Thompson et al.
Review. Plastics, the environment and human health
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B (2009)

----- Page 3 (native) -----
up to 3 520 000 items km–2 at the ocean surface
(Yamashita & Tanimura 2007). Gyres and oceanic
convergences appear to be particularly contaminated,
as do enclosed seas such as the Mediterranean
(Barnes et al. 2009; Ryan et al. 2009). Despite their
buoyant nature, plastics can become fouled with
marine life and sediment causing items to sink to the
seabed. For example, shallow seabeds in Brazil were
more heavily contaminated than the neighbouring
shorelines (Oigman-Pszczol & Creed 2007), indicating
that the seabed may be an ultimate sink even for
initially buoyant marine debris (Barnes et al. 2009).
In
some
locations
around
Europe,
it
has
been
suggested that quantities on the seabed may exceed
10 000 items ha–1, and debris has even been reported
more
than
a
1000 m
below
the
ocean
surface,
including accounts of inverted plastic bags passing a
deep-sea submersible like an assembly of ghosts
(Gregory 2009). Quantitative data on the abundance
of debris on the seabed are still very limited, but
there are concerns that degradation rates in the deep
sea will be especially slow because of darkness and
cold (Barnes et al. 2009; Ryan et al. 2009).
Monitoring the abundance of debris is important to
establish rates of accumulation and the effectiveness of
any remediation measures. Most studies assess the
abundance of all types of anthropogenic debris includ-
ing data on plastics and/or plastic items as a category.
In general, the abundance of debris on shorelines has
been extensively monitored, in comparison to surveys
from the open oceans or the seabed. In addition to
recording debris, there is a need to collect data on
sources; for plastic debris this should include dis-
charges from rivers and sewers together with littering
behaviour. Here, the limited data we have suggest
that storm water pulses provide a major pathway for
debris from the land to the sea, with 81 g m–3 of plas-
tic debris during high-ﬂow events in the USA (Ryan
et al. 2009). Methods to monitor the abundance of
anthropogenic debris (including plastics) often vary
considerably between countries and organizations,
adding to difﬁculties in interpreting trends. As a
consequence, the United Nations Environment Pro-
gramme and the OSPAR Commission are currently
taking
steps
to
introduce
standardized
protocols
(OSPAR 2007; Cheshire et al. 2009). Some trends
are evident, however, typically with an increase in
the abundance of debris and fragments between the
1960s and the 1990s (Barnes et al. 2009). More
recently, abundance at the sea surface in some regions
and on some shorelines appears to be stabilizing, while
in other areas such as the Paciﬁc Gyre there are reports
of considerable increases. On shorelines the quantities
of debris, predominantly plastic, are greater in the
Northern than in the Southern Hemisphere (Barnes
2005). The abundance of debris is greater adjacent
to urban centres and on more frequented beaches
and there is evidence that plastics are accumulating
and becoming buried in sediments (Barnes et al.
2009; Ryan et al. 2009). Barnes et al. (2009) consider
that contamination of remote habitats, such as the
deep sea and the polar regions, is likely to increase as
debris is carried there from more densely populated
areas. Allowing for variability between habitats and
locations, it seems inevitable, however, that the quan-
tity of debris in the environment as a whole will
continue to increase—unless we all change our prac-
tices. Even with such changes, plastic debris that is
already in the environment will persist for a consider-
able time to come. The persistence of plastic debris
and the associated environmental hazards are illus-
trated poignantly by Barnes et al. (2009) who describe
debris that had originated from an aeroplane being
ingested by an albatross some 60 years after the
plane had crashed.
4. EFFECTS OF PLASTIC DEBRIS IN THE
ENVIRONMENT AND ON WILDLIFE
There are some accounts of effects of debris from
terrestrial habitats, for example ingestion by the endan-
gered California condor, Gymnogyps californianus (Mee
et al. 2007). However, the vast majority of work describ-
ing environmental consequences of plastic debris is
from marine settings and more work on terrestrial and
freshwater habitats is needed. Plastic debris causes aes-
thetic problems, and it also presents a hazard to mari-
time activities including ﬁshing and tourism (Moore
2008; Gregory 2009). Discarded ﬁshing nets result in
ghost ﬁshing that may result in losses to commercial
ﬁsheries (Moore 2008; Brown & Macfadyen 2007).
Floating plastic debris can rapidly become colonized
by marine organisms and since it can persist at the sea
surface for substantial periods, it may subsequently
facilitate the transport of non-native or ‘alien’ species
(Barnes 2002; Barnes et al. 2009; Gregory 2009). How-
ever, the problems attracting most public and media
attention are those resulting in ingestion and entangle-
ment by wildlife. Over 260 species, including invert-
ebrates, turtles, ﬁsh, seabirds and mammals, have
been reported to ingest or become entangled in plastic
debris, resulting in impaired movement and feeding,
reduced reproductive output, lacerations, ulcers and
death (Laist 1997; Derraik 2002; Gregory 2009). The
limited monitoring data we have suggest rates of entan-
glement have increased over time (Ryan et al. 2009). A
wide range of species with different modes of feeding
including ﬁlter feeders, deposit feeders and detritivores
are known to ingest plastics. However, ingestion is likely
to be particularly problematic for species that speciﬁ-
cally select plastic items because they mistake them
for their food. As a consequence, the incidence of inges-
tion can be extremely high in some populations. For
example, 95 per cent of fulmars washed ashore dead
in the North Sea have plastic in their guts, with substan-
tial quantities of plastic being reported in the guts of
other birds, including albatross and prions (Gregory
2009). There are some very good data on the quantity
of debris ingested by seabirds recorded from the car-
casses of dead birds. This approach has been used to
monitor temporal and spatial patterns in the abundance
of sea-surface plastic debris on regional scales around
Europe (Van Franeker et al. 2005; Ryan et al. 2009).
An area of particular concern is the abundance of
small plastic fragments or microplastics. Fragments
as small as 1.6 mm have been identiﬁed in some
marine habitats, and it seems likely there will be even
smaller pieces below current levels of detection. A
Review. Plastics, the environment and human health
R. C. Thompson et al.
2155
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B (2009)

----- Page 4 (native) -----
recent workshop convened in the USA by the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration concluded
that microplastics be deﬁned as pieces ,5 mm with
a suggested lower size boundary of 333 mm so as to
focus on microplastics that will be captured using con-
ventional sampling approaches (Arthur et al. 2009).
However, we consider it important that the abundance
of even smaller fragments is not neglected. Plastic frag-
ments appear to form by the mechanical and chemical
deterioration of larger items. Alternative routes for
microplastics to enter the environment include the
direct release of small pieces of plastics that are used
as abrasives in industrial and domestic cleaning appli-
cations (e.g. shot blasting or scrubbers used in proprie-
tary hand cleansers) and spillage of plastic pellets and
powders that are used as a feedstock for the manufac-
ture of most plastic products. Data from shorelines,
from the open ocean and from debris ingested by sea-
birds, all indicate that quantities of plastic fragments
are increasing in the environment, and quantities on
some shores are substantial (.10% by weight of
strandline material; Barnes et al. 2009). Laboratory
experiments have shown that small pieces such as
these can be ingested by small marine invertebrates
including ﬁlter feeders, deposit feeders and detritivores
(Thompson et al. 2004), while mussels were shown to
retain plastic for over 48 days (Browne et al. 2008).
However, the extent and consequences of ingestion
of microplastics by natural populations are not known.
In addition to the physical problems associated with
plastic debris, there has been much speculation that, if
ingested, plastic has the potential to transfer toxic sub-
stances to the food chain (see Teuten et al. 2009). In
the marine environment, plastic debris such as pellets,
fragments and microplastics have been shown to con-
tain organic contaminants including polychlorinated
biphenyls (PCBs), polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons,
petroleum hydrocarbons, organochlorine pesticides
(2,20-bis(p-chlorophenyl)-1,1,1 trichloroethane (DDT)
and its metabolites; together with hexachlorinated
hexane
(HCH)),
polybrominated
diphenylethers
(PBDEs), alkylphenols and BPA at concentrations
ranging from ng g–1 to mg g–1. Some of these com-
pounds are added to plastics during manufacture
while
others
adsorb
to
plastic
debris
from
the
environment. Work in Japan has shown that plastics
can accumulate and concentrate persistent organic pol-
lutants that have arisen in the environment from other
sources. These contaminants can become orders of
magnitude more concentrated on the surface of plastic
debris than in the surrounding sea water (Mato et al.
2001). Teuten et al. (2009) describe experiments to
examine the transfer of these contaminants from plastics
to seabirds and other animals. The potential for trans-
port varies among contaminants, polymers and possibly
also according to the state of environmental weathering
of the debris. Recent mathematical modelling studies
have shown that even very small quantities of plastics
could facilitate transport of contaminants from plastic
to organisms upon ingestion. This could present a
direct and important route for the transport of chemi-
cals to higher animals such as seabirds (Teuten et al.
2007, 2009), but will depend upon the nature of the
habitat and the amount and type of plastics present.
For instance, the extent to which the presence of plastic
particles might contribute to the total burden of con-
taminants transferred from the environment to organ-
isms will depend
upon
competitive sorption and
transport by other particulates (Arthur et al. 2009).
The abundance of fragments of plastic is increasing in
the environment; these particles, especially truly micro-
scopic fragments less than the 333 mm proposed by
NOAA (see earlier), have a relatively large surface area
to volume ratio that is likely to facilitate the transport
of contaminants, and because of their size such frag-
ments can be ingested by a wide range of organisms.
Hence, the potential for plastics to transport and release
chemicals to wildlife is an emerging area of concern.
More work will be needed to establish the full environ-
mental relevance of plastics in the transport of contami-
nants to organisms living in the natural environment,
and the extent to which these chemicals could then be
transported along food chains. However, there is already
clear evidence that chemicals associated with plastic are
potentially harmful to wildlife. Data that have principally
been collected using laboratory exposures are summar-
ized by Oehlmann et al. (2009). These show that phtha-
lates and BPA affect reproduction in all studied animal
groups and impair development in crustaceans and
amphibians. Molluscs and amphibians appear to be par-
ticularly sensitive to these compounds and biological
effects have been observed in the low ng l–1 to mg l–1
range. In contrast, most effects in ﬁsh tend to occur at
higher concentrations. Most plasticizers appear to act by
interfering with hormone function, although they can
do this by several mechanisms (Hu et al. 2009). Effects
observed in the laboratory coincide with measured
environmental concentrations, thus there is a very real
probability that these chemicals are affecting natural
populations (Oehlmann et al. 2009). BPA concentrations
in aquatic environments vary considerably, but can reach
21 mg l–1 in freshwater systems and concentrations in
sediments are generally several orders of magnitude
higher than in the water column. For example, in the
River Elbe, Germany, BPA was measured at 0.77 mg l–1
in water compared with 343 mg kg–1 in sediment (dry
weight). These ﬁndings are in stark contrast with the
European Union environmental risk assessment pre-
dicted environmental concentrations of 0.12 mg l–1 for
water and 1.6 mg kg–1 (dry weight) for sediments.
Phthalates and BPA can bioaccumulate in organ-
isms, but there is much variability between species
and individuals according to the type of plasticizer
and experimental protocol. However, concentration
factors are generally higher for invertebrates than ver-
tebrates, and can be especially high in some species of
molluscs and crustaceans. While there is clear evidence
that these chemicals have adverse effects at environ-
mentally relevant concentrations in laboratory studies,
there is a need for further research to establish popu-
lation-level effects in the natural environment (see
discussion in Oehlmann et al. 2009), to establish the
long-term effects of exposures (particularly due to
exposure of embryos), to determine effects of exposure
to contaminant mixtures and to establish the role of
plastics as sources (albeit not exclusive sources) of
these contaminants (see Meeker et al. (2009) for
discussion of sources and routes of exposure).
2156
R. C. Thompson et al.
Review. Plastics, the environment and human health
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B (2009)

----- Page 5 (native) -----
5. EFFECTS ON HUMANS: EPIDEMIOLOGICAL
AND EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE
Turning to adverse effects of plastic on the human
population, there is a growing body of literature on
potential health risks. A range of chemicals that are
used in the manufacture of plastics are known to be
toxic. Biomonitoring (e.g. measuring concentration of
environmental contaminants in human tissue) provides
an integrated measure of an organism’s exposure to
contaminants from multiple sources. This approach
has shown that chemicals used in the manufacture of
plastics are present in the human population, and
studies using laboratory animals as model organisms
indicate potential adverse health effects of these chemi-
cals (Talsness et al. 2009). Body burdens of chemicals
that are used in plastic manufacture have also been
correlated with adverse effects in the human population,
including reproductive abnormalities (e.g. Swan et al.
2005; Swan 2008; Lang et al. 2008).
Interpreting biomonitoring data is complex, and a key
task is to set information into perspective with dose levels
that are considered toxic on the basis of experimental
studies in laboratory animals. The concept of ‘toxicity’
and thus the experimental methods for studying the
health impacts of the chemicals in plastic, and other
chemicals classiﬁed as endocrine disruptors, is currently
undergoing a transformation (a paradigm inversion)
since the disruption of endocrine regulatory systems
requires approaches very different from the study of
acute toxicants or poisons. There is thus extensive evi-
dence that traditional toxicological approaches are
inadequate for revealing outcomes such as ‘reprogram-
ming’ of the molecular systems in cells as a result of
exposure tovery low doses during critical periods in devel-
opment (e.g. Myers et al. 2009). Research on experimen-
tal animals informs epidemiologists about the potential
for adverse effects in humans and thus plays a critical
role in chemical risk assessments. A key conclusion from
the paper by Talsness et al. (2009) is the need to
modify our approach to chemical testing for risk assess-
ment. As noted by these authors and others, there is a
need to integrate concepts of endocrinology in the
assumptions underlying chemical risk assessment. In
particular, the assumptions that dose–response curves
are monotonic and that there are threshold doses (safe
levels) are not true for either endogenous hormones or
for chemicals with hormonal activity (which includes
many chemicals used in plastics) (Talsness et al. 2009).
The biomonitoring approach has demonstrated
phthalates and BPA, as well as other additives in plas-
tics and their metabolites, are present in the human
population. It has also demonstrated that the most
common human exposure scenario is to a large
number of these chemicals simultaneously. These
data indicate differences according to geographical
location and age, with greater concentrations of some
of these chemicals in young children. While exposure
via house dust is extensive (Rudel et al. 2008), it
would appear that at least for some phthalates (e.g.
diethylhexyl phthalate, DEHP), foodstuffs and to a
lesser extent use of oral drugs probably present
major
uptake
pathways
(Wormuth
et
al.
2006).
Exposure data for BPA are similar but less extensive.
While average concentrations of phthalates in selected
populations worldwide appear quite similar, there is
evidence of considerable variability in daily intake
rates among individuals, and even within individuals
(Peck et al. 2009). Exposures through ingestion, inha-
lation and dermal contact are all considered important
routes of exposure for the general population (Adibi
et al. 2003; Rudel et al. 2003). Koch & Calafat
(2009) show that while mean/median exposures for
the general population were below levels determined
to be safe for daily exposure (USA, EPA reference
dose, RfD; and European Union tolerable daily
intake, TDI), the upper percentiles of di-butyl phtha-
late and DEHP urinary metabolite concentrations
show that for some people daily intake might be sub-
stantially higher than previously assumed and could
exceed estimated safe daily exposure levels. Current
‘safe’ exposure levels are typically based on the appli-
cation of traditional toxicological assumptions regard-
ing acute toxicants to calculate daily exposures for
chemicals in a range of widely used plastic items.
The toxicological consequences of such exposures,
especially for susceptible subpopulations such as chil-
dren and pregnant women, remain unclear and war-
rant further investigation. However, there is evidence
of associations between urinary concentrations of
some phthalate metabolites and biological outcomes
(Swan et al. 2005; Swan 2008). For example, an
inverse relationship has been reported between the
concentrations of DEHP metabolites in the mother’s
urine and anogenital distance, penile width and testi-
cular decent in male offspring (Swan et al. 2005;
Swan 2008). In adults, there is some evidence of a
negative association between phthalate metabolites
and semen quality (Meeker & Sathyanarayana) and
between high exposures to phthalates (workers produ-
cing
PVC
ﬂooring)
and
free
testosterone
levels.
Moreover, recent work (Lang et al. 2008) has shown
a signiﬁcant relationship between urine levels of BPA
and
cardiovascular
disease,
type
2
diabetes
and
abnormalities in liver enzymes, and Stahlhut et al.
(2009) have reported that exposure of adults in the
USA to BPA is likely to occur from multiple sources
and that the half-life of BPA is longer than previously
estimated, and the very high exposure of premature
infants in neonatal intensive-care units to both BPA
and phthalates is of great concern (Calafat et al.
2009). These data indicate detrimental effects in the
general population may be caused by chronic low-
dose exposures (separately or in combination) and
acute exposure to higher doses, but the full extent to
which chemicals are transported to the human popu-
lation by plastics is yet to be conﬁrmed.
Much has been learned about toxicological effects
on humans from experiments using laboratory ani-
mals. This approach has been used to examine
component chemicals used in plastic production.
A summary of work on phthalates, BPA and tetra-
bromobisphenol A (TBBPA) is presented by Talsness
et al. (2009). The male reproductive tract is particu-
larly sensitive to phthalate exposure. However, most
reproductive effects are not exerted by phthalate di-
esters themselves, but by their monoester metabolites,
which are formed in the liver. The majority of these
studies have been done using rats as a model organism,
Review. Plastics, the environment and human health
R. C. Thompson et al.
2157
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B (2009)

----- Page 6 (native) -----
with doses at least an order of magnitude higher than
those to which humans are commonly exposed, but
they have resulted in rapid, severe changes in the rat
testis. Reproductive effects have also been described
in mice and guinea pigs. Effects on pre- and early
post-natal development are of particular concern,
and recent animal studies have shown exposures to
certain phthalates can result in severe disorders of
the developing male reproductive system. It should
be noted that most work on animals has used phthalate
exposures much higher than estimated daily human
exposures (see above), and researchers have only
recently
started
to
investigate
possible
biological
effects within the range of median human phthalate
exposure (Talsness et al. 2009). This is of critical
importance
because
epidemiological
studies
have
reported associations between phthalate levels and a
number of adverse health effects in humans (Swan
et al. 2005), suggesting that either humans are more
sensitive to phthalates than experimental animals or
that the testing paradigm used in traditional toxico-
logical studies, which examines one phthalate at a
time, has not served to accurately predict adverse
effects from the mixture of phthalates to which
humans are exposed (Andrade et al. 2006; NAS 2008).
For BPA, there is an extensive published literature
showing adverse effects of exposure at very low
doses, based on administration during development
and to adult experimental animals. In particular,
unlike the case for experimental animal research on
phthalates, there are now hundreds of experiments
on laboratory animals using doses within the range of
human exposures (Vandenberg et al. 2007). The rate
and extent to which BPA is metabolized affect the
interpretation of these ﬁndings, but even very low
doses of BPA have been shown to cause signiﬁcant
stimulation of insulin secretion followed by insulin
resistance in mice, a signiﬁcant decrease in sperm
production by rats, a decrease in maternal behaviour
in mice and disruption of hippocampal synapses,
leading to the appearance of a brain typical of that
seen in senility in both rats and monkeys. The greatest
concerns with exposure to BPA are during develop-
ment; BPA appears to affect brain development
leading to loss of sex differentiation in brain struc-
tures and behaviour (Talsness et al. 2009). A further
important observation regarding adverse responses to
developmental exposures of animals to very low
doses of BPA is that many relate to disease trends in
humans. Less has been published on effects of the
ﬂame retardant TBBPA, but there is evidence of
effects
on
thyroid
hormones,
pituitary
function
and reproductive success in animals (Talsness et al.
2009).
Despite the environmental concerns about some of
the chemicals used in plastic manufacture, it is impor-
tant to emphasize that evidence for effects in humans
is still limited and there is a need for further research
and in particular, for longitudinal studies to examine
temporal relationships with chemicals that leach out
of plastics (Adibi et al. 2008). In addition, the tra-
ditional approach to studying the toxicity of chemicals
has been to focus only on exposure to individual
chemicals in relation to disease or abnormalities.
However, because of the complex integrated nature
of the endocrine system, it is critical that future studies
involving endocrine-disrupting chemicals that leach
from plastic products focus on mixtures of chemicals
to which people are exposed when they use common
household products. For example, in a study con-
ducted in the USA, 80 per cent of babies were exposed
to measurable levels of at least nine different phthalate
metabolites (Sathyanarayana et al. 2008), and the
health impacts of the cumulative exposure to these
chemicals need to be determined. An initial attempt
at examining more than one phthalate as a contributor
to abnormal genital development in babies has shown
the importance of this approach (Swan 2008). Studies
of mixtures of chemicals therefore also need to extend
beyond mixtures of the same class of chemical, such as
mixtures of different phthalates or of different PCBs.
For example, PVC (used in a wide range of products
in the home including water pipes) may contain phtha-
lates, BPA, ﬂame retardants such as PBDEs or
TBBPA, cadmium, lead and organotins, all of which
have been shown in animal studies to result in obesity
(Heindel & vom Saal 2009). In addition, the monomer
used to manufacture PVC plastic, vinyl chloride, is a
known carcinogen and exposure can cause angiosar-
coma of the liver among factory workers (Bolt 2005;
Gennaro et al. 2008). PVC in medical tubing has
also been shown to be a source of high DEHP
exposure among infants in neonatal intensive-care
nurseries (Green et al. 2005) and probably contributes
to the high levels of BPA found in these babies
since BPA is an additive in PVC plastic (Calafat
et al. 2009).
Examining the relationship between plastic addi-
tives and adverse human effects presents a number of
challenges. In particular, the changing patterns of pro-
duction and use of both plastics, and the additives they
contain, as well as the conﬁdential nature of industrial
speciﬁcations makes exposure assessment particularly
difﬁcult.
Evolving
technology,
methodology
and
statistical
approaches
should
help
disentangle
the
relationships between these chemicals and health effects.
However, with most of the statistically signiﬁcant
hormone alternations that have been attributed to envir-
onmental and occupational exposures, the actual degree
of hormone alteration has been considered subclinical.
Hence, more information is required on the biological
mechanisms that may be affected by plastic additives
and in particular, low-dose chronic exposures. Mean-
while we should consider strategies to reduce the use
of these chemicals in plastic manufacture and/or
develop and test alternatives (for example citrates are
being developed as substitute plasticizers). This is the
goal of the new ﬁeld of green chemistry, which is
based on the premise that development of chemicals
for use in commerce should involve an interaction
between biologists and chemists. Had this approach
been in place 50 years ago it would probably have
prevented the development of chemicals that are recog-
nized as likely endocrine disruptors (Anastas & Beach
2007). There is also a need for industry and indepen-
dent scientists to work more closely with, rather than
against, each other in order to focus effectively on the
best ways forward. For example, contrast comments
2158
R. C. Thompson et al.
Review. Plastics, the environment and human health
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B (2009)

----- Page 7 (native) -----
on BPA by Bird (2005) with those of vom Saal (2005),
and contrast comments in this volume on the safety of
plastic additives by Andrady & Neal (2009) with
those by Koch & Calafat (2009), Meeker et al.
(2009), Oehlmann et al. (2009) and Talsness et al.
(2009).
6. PRODUCTION, USAGE, DISPOSAL AND
WASTE MANAGEMENT SOLUTIONS
Accumulation of plastic debris in the environment and
the associated consequences are largely avoidable.
Considerable immediate reductions in the quantity of
waste entering natural environments, as opposed to
landﬁll, could be achieved by better waste disposal
and material handling. Littering is a behavioural
issue and some have suggested that it has increased
in parallel with our use of disposable products and
packaging. Perhaps increasing the capacity to recycle
will help to reverse this trend such that we start to
regard end-of-life materials as valuable feedstocks for
new production rather than waste. To achieve this
will require better education, engagement, enforce-
ment and recycling capacity (ﬁgure 1a–f ). Unfortu-
nately, we were unable to source a contribution on
education and public engagement, but it is evident
that social research on littering behaviour could be
very informative. A recent report by EnCams in the
UK examined attitudes towards littering in 2001 and
then again in 2006. This indicated that despite greater
awareness among the general public about the pro-
blems of littering, the propensity to litter had actually
increased; ﬁve key attitudes and behaviours were noted
and these offer valuable insight for future research
(EnCams 2006). There is evidence that appropriate
education can inﬂuence behaviour. For example, pre-
production plastic pellets (a feedstock for production
of plastic products, also described as nurdles or mer-
maids tears) account for around 10 per cent, by
number, of the plastic debris recorded on shorelines
in Hawaii (McDermid & McMullen 2004) and sub-
stantial quantities have been recorded on shorelines
in New Zealand (Gregory 1978). These pellets have
entered the environment through spillage during trans-
portation, handling and as cargo lost from ships. In the
USA guidelines (Operation Clean-Sweep, ﬁgure 1e)
on handling of resin pellets are reported to have
reduced spillage during trials (Moore et al. 2005).
Conservation organizations such as the UK Marine
Conservation Society play an important role in edu-
cation, and the annual beach cleans they organize
can be a good way to raise public awareness and to
collect data on trends in the abundance of debris on
shorelines (see www.mcsuk.org and Ocean Conser-
vancy, International Coastal Cleanup www.oceancon-
servancy.org). However, there is a pressing need for
education to reduce littering at source (ﬁgure 1d and
e). This is especially important in urban settings
where increased consumption of on-the-go/fast food
coupled, in some locations, with a reduction in the
availability of bins as a consequence of concerns
about terrorism is likely to result in increased littering.
Where plastic debris enters watercourses as a conse-
quence of dumping or littering a range of strategies
including catch basin inserts, booms and separators
can be used to facilitate removal (ﬁgure 1f ).
Substantial quantities of end-of-life plastics are dis-
posed of to landﬁll. Waste generation statistics vary
among countries and according to the rationale for
data collection. For instance, plastics are a small com-
ponent of waste by weight but a large component by
volume. Temporal and spatial comparisons can thus
be confounded, and data on quantities of waste
recycled can be skewed according to categorization
of various wastes. However, in many locations space
in landﬁll is running out (e.g. Defra et al. 2006). It
has also been suggested that because of the longevity
of plastics, disposal to landﬁll may simply be storing
problems for the future (Barnes et al. 2009; Hopewell
et al. 2009). For example, plasticizers and other
additive chemicals have been shown to leach from
landﬁlls (Teuten et al. (2009) and references therein).
The extent of this varies according to conditions,
particularly
pH
and
organic
content.
There
is
evidence,
however,
that
landﬁlls
can
present
a
signiﬁcant source of contaminants, such as BPA, to
aquatic environments. Efﬁcient treatment approaches
are available and are in use in some countries
(Teuten et al. 2009).
From a waste management perspective, the three
R’s—reduce, reuse and recycle are widely advocated
to reduce the quantities of plastic and especially plas-
tics packaging the waste we generate (ﬁgure 1a–c).
Hopewell et al. (2009) outline the beneﬁts and limit-
ations of these strategies. They show that to be effec-
tive
we
need
to
consider
the
three
R’s
in
combination with each other and together with a
fourth ‘R’, energy recovery. Indeed we also need to con-
sider a 5th ‘R’, molecular redesign, as an emerging and
potentially very important strategy. Hence, the three
R’s become ﬁve: ‘reduce, reuse, recycle, recover and
redesign’. There are opportunities to ‘reduce’ usage
of raw material by down gauging (ﬁgure 1a) and
there are also some opportunities to ‘reuse’ plastics,
for example, in the transport of goods on an industrial
(pallets, crates; ﬁgure 1b) and a domestic (carrier
bags) scale. However, there is limited potential for
wide-scale reuse of retail packaging because of the sub-
stantial back-haul distances and logistics involved in
returning empty cartons to suppliers. Some of the
energy content of plastics can be ‘recovered’ by incin-
eration, and through approaches such as co-fuelling of
kilns, reasonable energy efﬁciency can be achieved.
These
approaches
have
beneﬁts
compared
with
disposal to landﬁll since some of the energy content
of plastics is recovered. However, energy recovery
does not reduce the demand for raw material used in
plastic production, hence it is considered less energy
efﬁcient than product recovery via recycling (WRAP
2006; Defra 2007). In addition, concerns about emis-
sions from incinerators (Katami et al. 2002) can
reduce the appeal of this waste disposal option.
There is now strong evidence to indicate signiﬁcant
potential lies in increasing our ability to effectively
recycle end-of-life plastic products (WRAP 2006,
2008; Defra 2007; ﬁg 1c). Although thermoplastics
have been recycled since the 1970s, the proportion of
material recycled has increased substantially in recent
Review. Plastics, the environment and human health
R. C. Thompson et al.
2159
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B (2009)

----- Page 8 (native) -----
years and represents one of the most dynamic areas of
the plastic industry today (WRAP 2006, 2008).
The recycling message is simple; both industry and
society need to regard end-of-life items, including
plastics, as raw materials rather than waste. At present
our consumption of fossil fuels for plastic production is
linear, from oil to waste via plastics. It is essential to take
a more cyclical approach to material usage, but achiev-
ing this goal is complex (Hopewell et al. 2009). Greatest
energy efﬁciency is achieved where recycling diverts the
need for use of fossil fuels as raw materials (ﬁgure 1c);
good examples being the recycling of old polyethylene
terephthalate (PET) bottles into new ones (closed-
loop recycling) or where low-density polyethylene
bottles are converted into waste bins (semi-closed
loop). In addition to beneﬁts as a consequence of
more sustainable material usage, a recent life cycle
analysis calculated that use of 100 per cent recycled
PET rather than virgin PET to produce plastic bottles
could give a 27 per cent reduction on CO2 emissions
(WRAP 2008; Hopewell et al. 2009).
There are some very encouraging trends, with
growth in mechanical recycling increasing at 7 per
cent per annum in western Europe. However, there
is considerable regional variation in recycling rates
and globally only a small proportion of plastic waste
is recycled (see Barnes et al. (2009) for US data; see
Hopewell et al. (2009) for European data). Items
made of a single polymer are easier and more efﬁcient
to recycle than composite items, ﬁlms and mixed
wastes. As a consequence, it is currently not possible
to recycle a substantial proportion of the packaging
in a typical shopping basket (Hopewell et al. 2009).
On reading the account by Hopewell et al. (2009), the
ingenuity of the separation procedures for recycling
is
evident
(Fourier-transform
near-infrared
spec-
troscopy, optical colour separation, X-ray detection),
but one cannot help but wonder why similar ingenuity
has not been focused on designing products for better
end-of-life recyclability. Historically, the main con-
siderations for the design of plastic packaging have
been getting goods safely to market and product mar-
keting. There is an increasing urgency to also design
products, especially packaging, in order to achieve
material reduction and greater end-of-life recyclability.
Public support for recycling is high in some countries
(57% in the UK and 80% in Australia; Hopewell et al.
2009), and consumers are keen to recycle, but the
small size and the diversity of different symbols to
describe a product’s potential recyclability, together
with uncertainties as to whether a product will actually
be recycled if it is offered for collection, can hinder
engagement. In our opinion, what is needed is a sim-
pliﬁcation and streamlining of everyday packaging, to
facilitate recyclability, together with clearer labelling
to inform users. One option could be a trafﬁc light
system so that consumers can easily distinguish from
printed product labelling between packages that use
recycled content and have high end-of-life recyclability
(marked with a green spot), those that have low end-
of-life recyclability and are predominantly made of
virgin polymer (red spot), and those which lie between
these extremes (amber spot). With combined actions
including waste reduction, design for end-of-life,
(a)
before
after
(d)
(e)
( f )
(b)
(c)
Figure 1. Solutions include: (a) measures to reduce the production of new plastics from oil, here an example showing how
small changes in product packing reduced the weight of packaging required by 70%, while (b) re-useable plastic packing
crates have reduced the packaging consumption of the same retailer by an estimated 30,000 tonnes per annum; and (c) recy-
cling; here, bales of used plastic bottles have been sorted prior to recycling into new items, such as plastic packaging or textiles.
Measures to reduce the quantity of plastic debris in the natural environment include: (d) educational signage to reduce
contamination via storm drains and (e) via industrial spillage, together with (f ) booms to intercept and facilitate the removal
of riverine debris. (Photographs (a) and (b), and associated usage statistics, courtesy of Marks and Spencer PLC; (c) courtesy
of P. Davidson, WRAP; (d,e,f ) courtesy of C. Moore, Algalita Marine Research Foundation.)
2160
R. C. Thompson et al.
Review. Plastics, the environment and human health
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B (2009)

----- Page 9 (native) -----
better labelling for consumers, increased options for on-
the-go disposal to recycling and improved recycling
capability, Hopewell et al. (2009) consider it could be
possible to divert the majority of plastic from landﬁll
over the next few decades (ﬁgure 1a–c). This will
require consistency of policy measures and facilities
among regions and will also require the cooperation of
industry since ultimately there needs to be an acceptance
of reduced usage and hence reduced income associated
with the production of plastics from virgin polymer.
Molecular redesign of plastics (the 5th R) has become
an emerging issue in green chemistry (Anastas &
Warner 1998; Anastas et al. 2000; Anastas & Crabtree
2009) that should be incorporated within the design
and life cycle analysis of plastics. In this context,
green chemists aspire to design chemical products that
are fully effective, yet have little or no toxicity or
endocrine-disrupting activity; that break down into
innocuous substances if released into the environment
after use; and/or that are based upon renewable
feedstocks, such as agricultural wastes. One of the fun-
damental factors limiting progress on all other R’s is
that the design criteria used to develop new monomers
have rarely included speciﬁcations to enhance reusabil-
ity, recyclability or recovery of plastic once it has been
used. Typically, such assessments have only been
made after a product entered the marketplace and pro-
blems involving waste and/or adverse health effects have
begun to appear. Had the guiding principles of Green
Chemistry (Anastas & Warner 1998) been available to
inform the syntheses of polymers over the past century,
perhaps some of the environmental and health concerns
described in this Theme Issue would be more manage-
able. To date, the application of these design criteria to
polymers has remained largely in the laboratory.
Polylactic acid (PLA) (Drumright et al. 2000), a biode-
gradable polymer sourced from corn and potatoes, has
entered the marketplace and has the potential to make a
valuable contribution among other strategies for waste
management. However, life cycle analyses are required
to help establish the most appropriate usage, disposal
(e.g. Song et al. 2009 illustrate relatively slow degrad-
ability of PLA in home composting) and hence
labelling, of biopolymers such as this (WRAP 2009).
7. BIOPOLYMERS, DEGRADABLE AND
BIODEGRADABLE POLYMER SOLUTIONS
Degradable polymers have been advocated as an alter-
native to conventional oil-based plastics and their
production has increased considerably in recent dec-
ades. Materials with functionality comparable to con-
ventional
plastics
can
now
be
produced
on
an
industrial scale; they are more expensive than conven-
tional polymers and account for less than 1 per cent of
plastics production (Song et al. 2009). Biopolymers
differ from conventional polymers in that their feed-
stock is from renewable biomass rather than being
oil-based. They may be natural polymers (e.g. cellu-
lose), or synthetic polymers made from biomass
monomers (e.g. PLA) or synthetic polymers made
from synthetic monomers derived from biomass (e.g.
polythene derived from bioethanol) (WRAP 2009).
They are often described as renewable polymers
since the original biomass, for example corn grown in
agriculture, can be reproduced. The net carbon dioxide
emission may be less than that with conventional
polymers, but it is not zero since farming and pesticide
production have carbon dioxide outputs (WRAP 2009).
In addition, as a consequence of our rapidly increasing
human population, it seems unlikely that there will be
sufﬁcient land to grow crops for food, let alone for sub-
stantial quantities of packaging in which to wrap it. One
solution is to recycle waste food into biopolymers; this
has merit, but will ultimately be limited by the
amount of waste food available.
Biopolymers that are designed to breakdown in an
industrial composter are described as ‘biodegradables’
while those that are intended to degrade in a domestic
composter are known as ‘compostable’. There are
beneﬁts of these biodegradable materials in speciﬁc
applications, for example, with packaging of highly
perishable goods where, regrettably, it can be necess-
ary to dispose of perished unopened and unused
product together with its wrapper. Song et al. (2009)
show experimentally that degradation of biodegrad-
able, as opposed to compostable, polymers can be
very slow in home composters (typically less than 5%
loss of biomass in 90 days). Degradation of these poly-
mers in landﬁlls is also likely to be slow and may create
unwanted methane emissions. Hence, the beneﬁts of
biopolymers are only realized if they are disposed of
to an appropriate waste management system that uses
their biodegradable features. Typically, this is achieved
via industrial composting at 508C for around 12
weeks to produce compost as a useful product.
Some biopolymers, such as PLA, are biodegradable,
but others such as polythene derived from bioethanol
are not. A further complication is that degradable, as
opposed to biodegradable, polymers (also called ‘oxo-
biodegradable’, ‘oxy-degradable’ or ‘UV-degradable’)
can also be made from oil-based sources but as a con-
sequence
are
not
biopolymers.
These
degradable
materials are typically polyethylene together with addi-
tives to accelerate the degradation. They are used in a
range of applications and are designed to break down
under UV exposure and/or dry heat and mechanical
stress, leaving small particles of plastic. They do not
degrade effectively in landﬁlls and little is known
about the timescale, extent or consequences of their
degradation in natural environments (Barnes et al.
2009; Teuten et al. 2009). Degradable polymers could
also compromise the quality of recycled plastics if they
enter the recycling stream. As a consequence, use of
degradable polymers is not advocated for primary
retail packaging (WRAP 2009).
There is a popular misconception that degradable
and biodegradable polymers offer solutions to the
problems of plastic debris and the associated environ-
mental hazards that result from littering. However,
most of these materials are unlikely to degrade quickly
in natural habitats, and there is concern that degrad-
able, oil-based polymers could merely disintegrate
into small pieces that are not in themselves any more
degradable than conventional plastic (Barnes et al.
2009). So while biodegradable polymers offer some
waste management solutions, there are limitations
and considerable misunderstanding among the general
Review. Plastics, the environment and human health
R. C. Thompson et al.
2161
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B (2009)

----- Page 10 (native) -----
Table 1. Synthesis of current knowledge, uncertainty and recommended actions relevant to environmental and human health
concerns arising from current production, use and disposal of plastics.
established knowledge
concerns and uncertainty
recommendations for industry,
research and policy
production and
use
plastics are inexpensive,
lightweight, versatile, water
resistant and durable
annual growth in plastic
production is approximately
9% (currently .260 Mt yr21)
around 8% of world oil
production is used to make
plastics
plastics bring extensive societal,
human health and
environmental beneﬁts
.33% of production is used for
disposable items of packaging
is our usage of hydrocarbons for
plastics sustainable?
to what extent could
biopolymers replace oil-based
plastics?
is there sufﬁcient arable land for
production of biomass (crops)
required for biopolymers?
to what extent does use of plastic
powders as cleaning abrasives,
and scrubbers results in direct
release of particles to
environment?
increase/incentivize material
reduction and reuse
construct life cycle analysis of
production, disposal/recycling of
major polymers (including
biopolymers, degradable and
biodegradable polymers) and
plastic products
develop alternative monomers,
polymers and additives using
green chemistry approaches
revise international standards for
and introduce accurate/
informative labelling of
recyclable, ‘degradable’,
‘biodegradable’ and
compostable polymers
disposal: waste
management
plastics are a substantial part of
domestic and industrial wastes
in landﬁll
recycling of some polymers (e.g.
PET) has increased
considerably in recent years,
but substantial quantities of
plastic waste not compatible
with recycling
biodegradable polymers typically
require industrial composting
and will not readily degrade
in landﬁll
biodegradable plastics can
compromise recycling
are current disposal strategies
sustainable—lack of space in
landﬁll?
to what extent do chemicals
leach from plastic in landﬁll?
little is known about the
degradability or environmental
fate of additives used in
biodegradable polymers
increase/incentivize product design
towards use of recycled
feedstock and increased end-of-
life recyclability
improve methods to collect and
separate plastic waste for
recycling
investment in/incentivize recycling
operations
standardize labelling so consumers
can identify products with high
end-of-life recyclability (trafﬁc
light system)
research and monitoring of
leachates from landﬁlls
disposal:
littering and
dumping
plastic debris is common in
marine habitats worldwide,
including poles and deep sea
the abundance of plastic debris is
increasing/stabilizing (not
declining)
plastic debris is fragmenting, with
pieces ,20 mm on shorelines
and in water column
to what extent will breakdown of
plastic debris increase the
abundance of small fragments
in the environment?
rates of accumulation of debris
on land, in freshwaters and in
the deep sea are not certain
do biodegradable or compostable
plastics degrade in natural
habitats?
education/incentives to promote
the value of end-of-life plastics
as a feedstock for recycling
education and associated
enforcement on the wasteful and
adverse ecological effects of
plastic spillage, dumping and
littering
develop standard protocols and
monitoring to evaluate trends in
the abundance of plastic debris
across in natural habitats
cleaning programmes in natural,
urban and industrial locations
research on breakdown of
degradable and biodegradables
issues relating
to wildlife
.260 species are known to ingest
or become entangled in plastic
debris
ingestion is widespread in some
populations (.95% of
individuals) and can
compromise feeding
entanglement in plastic debris
can lead to severe injury and
death
does ingestion of, or
entanglement in, plastic debris
have effects at the population
level or can such effects
combine with other stressors
to do so?
to what extent do plastics
transport/release chemicals to
wildlife?
what are the consequences of the
accumulation of small plastic
particles (e.g. abrasives from
cleaning applications) in the
environment?
research to establish the
distribution, abundance and
environmental consequences of
micro- and nano-plastic
fragments
research to establish potential for
plastics to transport chemicals
to food chain
research to establish population-
level consequences of ingestion
and entanglement
education, monitoring and
cleaning (see above)
(Continued)
2162
R. C. Thompson et al.
Review. Plastics, the environment and human health
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B (2009)

----- Page 11 (native) -----
public about their application (WRAP 2007). To gain
the maximum beneﬁt from degradable, biodegradable
and compostable materials, it is, therefore, essential to
identify speciﬁc uses that offer clear advantages and to
reﬁne national and international standards (e.g. EN
13432, ASTM D6400-99) and associated product lab-
elling to indicate appropriate usage and appropriate
disposal.
8. POLICY MEASURES
Our intention when preparing this Theme Issue was to
focus on the science surrounding all aspects pertinent
to plastics, the environment and human health. There
are some omissions from the volume, such as input
from social scientists on how best to convey relevant
information to inﬂuence littering behaviour, consumer
choice and engagement with recycling. These omis-
sions aside, to be of greatest value the science herein
needs to be communicated beyond a purely scientiﬁc
audience (see recommendations in table 1). This is
in part the role of a Theme Issue such as this, and
the ﬁnal invited contribution to the volume examines
the science–policy interface with particular reference
to policy relating to plastics. Shaxson (2009) con-
siders this interface from the perspectives of industry,
the scientist and the policymaker. She emphasizes
the need for policy relating to plastic to weigh societal
and economic beneﬁts against environmental and
health concerns. This is a diverse subject area that
will require a range of policies to focus at speciﬁc
issues, including polymer safety, material reduction,
reuse, recycling, biopolymers, biodegradable and com-
postable polymers, littering, dumping and industrial
spillage. There are a range of appropriate measures
(National Research Council 2008) including infor-
mation and recommendations (e.g. WRAP 2009),
regulations (such as the Canadian Government restric-
tions on BPA in baby bottles), taxes (such as land ﬁll
tax, which incentivizes the diversion of waste from
landﬁll to recycling), standards (such as EN 13432
covering
compostable
plastics)
and
allocation
of
funds for research, innovation and capacity building.
However, the diversity of issues leads to an equally
complex policy environment. In the UK, for example,
there is not one, but many relevant policy interfaces
and numerous policies. These activities are shared
among several government departments, driven by
national pressures, international obligations and Euro-
pean directives. In such a complex environment, even
robust and clearly delivered information from the
scientiﬁc community does not always have the most
appropriate effects on the policy process.
Shaxson presents evidence from case studies on pol-
icies relating to plastic litter in the marine environment
and land-based plastic waste. She indicates that many
plastic-related policy issues fall into what are deﬁned as
unstructured or badly structured problems—in essence,
problems that lack consensus and clarity in the relevant
policy question and in some cases lack clarity in the rel-
evant knowledge base to inform any decision. Shaxson
suggests such circumstances will require a reﬂexive
approach to brokering knowledge between industry,
scientists and policymakers, and that scientists will need
to be prepared to make and facilitate value judgements
on the basis of best evidence. From a UK perspective,
she advocates using the science within this volume to
help develop a ‘Plastics Road Map’, similar to the recently
completed Milk and Dairy Road Map (Defra 2008) to
structure policy around plastics, the environment and
human health and suggests that this be facilitated by
appropriate and broad debate among relevant parties.
9. PLASTICS AND THE FUTURE
Looking ahead, we do not appear to be approaching
the end of the ‘plastic age’ described by Yarsley and
Couzens in the 1940s, and there is much that plastics
can contribute to society. Andrady & Neal (2009)
consider
that the speed of technological change
is increasing exponentially such that life in 2030 will
be unrecognizable compared with life today; plastics
will play a signiﬁcant role in this change. Plastic materials
have the potential to bring scientiﬁc and medical
Table 1. (Continued)
established knowledge
concerns and uncertainty
recommendations for industry,
research and policy
issues relating
to human
health
some plastics contain potentially
harmful monomers and
additive chemicals, including
ﬂame retardants and
plasticizers
adverse effects of additives
evident in laboratory animals
measurable levels of chemicals
used as additives/monomers are
present in the human
population
Canadian government declared
BPA a toxic substance. USA
National Toxicology Program
expressed concern for adverse
health effects
what are the effects of low-dose
chronic exposure to chemicals
or mixtures of chemicals used
as plastic monomers or
additives?
dose–response curves may not
be monotonic and so should
not be extrapolated in risk
assessment
conduct cumulative risk
assessment/management of
plastic additives and monomers
biomonitoring of body burdens of
additives/monomers
effects on susceptible
subpopulations (babies,
children) and on those with
high-exposure risks
evaluate effects of exposure to
mixtures of additives/monomers
design/validate appropriate
species/protocols to assess
chronic low dose exposures to
additives/monomers by humans
Review. Plastics, the environment and human health
R. C. Thompson et al.
2163
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B (2009)

----- Page 12 (native) -----
advances, to alleviate suffering and help reduce man-
kind’s environmental footprint on the planet (Andrady
& Neal 2009). For instance, plastics are likely to play
an increasing role in medical applications, including
tissue and organ transplants; lightweight components,
such as those in the new Boeing 787, will reduce fuel
usage in transportation; components for generation of
renewable
energy and
insulation
will
help
reduce
carbon emissions and smart plastic packaging will no
doubt be able to monitor and indicate the quality of per-
ishable goods.
In conclusion, plastics offer considerable beneﬁts
for the future, but it is evident that our current
approaches to production, use and disposal are not
sustainable and present concerns for wildlife and
human
health.
We
have
considerable
knowledge
about many of the environmental hazards, and infor-
mation on human health effects is growing, but
many concerns and uncertainties remain. There are
solutions, but these can only be achieved by combined
actions (see summary table 1). There is a role for indi-
viduals, via appropriate use and disposal, particularly
recycling; for industry by adopting green chemistry,
material reduction and by designing products for
reuse and/or end-of-life recyclability and for govern-
ments and policymakers by setting standards and
targets, by deﬁning appropriate product labelling to
inform and incentivize change and by funding relevant
academic research and technological developments.
These measures must be considered within a frame-
work of lifecycle analysis and this should incorporate
all of the key stages in plastic production, including
synthesis of the chemicals that are used in production,
together with usage and disposal. Relevant examples of
lifecycle analysis are provided by Thornton (2002) and
WRAP (2006) and this topic is discussed, and advo-
cated, in more detail in Shaxson (2009). In our
opinion, these actions are overdue and are now
required with urgent effect; there are diverse environ-
mental hazards associated with the accumulation of
plastic waste and there are growing concerns about
effects
on
human
health,
yet
plastic
production
continues to grow at approximately 9 per cent per
annum (PlasticsEurope 2008). As a consequence, the
quantity of plastics produced in the ﬁrst 10 years of
the current century will approach the total that was
produced in the entire century that preceded.
We are indebted to James Joseph and Claire Rawlinson in the
editorial ofﬁce and Jessica Mnatzaganian in the journals
production ofﬁce at the Royal Society. Without their
guidance and patience this volume would not have been
possible. We also thank Dr J. P. Myers, Environmental
Health Sciences, for his help in preparing text for the
section on Green Chemistry.
REFERENCES
Adibi, J. J., Perera, F. P., Jedrychowski, W., Camann, D. E.,
Barr, D., Jacek, R. & Whyatt, R. M. 2003 Prenatal
exposures to phthalates among women in New York
City and Krakow, Poland. Environ. Health Perspect. 111,
1719–1722.
Adibi, J. J. et al. 2008 Characterization of phthalate exposure
among pregnant women assessed by repeat air and urine
samples. Environ. Health Perspect. 116, 467–473.
Anastas, P. T. & Beach, E. S. 2007 Green chemistry: the
emergence of a transformative framework. Green Chem.
Lett. Rev. 1, 9–24. (doi:10.1080/17518250701882441)
Anastas, P. T. & Crabtree, R. H. (ed.) 2009 Handbook
of green chemistry—green catalysis. Vol I Homogenous
catalysis. Handbook of Green Chemistry. New York, NY:
John Wiley & Sons.
Anastas, P. T. & Warner, J. C. 1998 Green chemistry: theory
and practice. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Anastas, P. T., Bickart, P. H. & Kirchhoff, M. M. 2000
Designing safer polymers. New York, NY: John Wiley and
Sons, Wiley-Interscience.
Andrade, A. J. M., Grande, S. W., Talsness, C. E., Grote, K.
& Chahoud, I. 2006 A dose–response study following in
utero and lactational exposure to di-(2-ethylhexyl)-phtha-
late (DEHP): non-monotonic dose–response and low
dose effects on rat brain aromatase activity. Toxicology
227, 185–192. (doi:10.1016/j.tox.2006.07.022)
Andrady, A. L. & Neal, M. A. 2009 Applications and societal
beneﬁts of plastics. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 364, 1977–
1984. (doi:10.1098/rstb.2008.0304)
Arthur, C., Baker, J. & Bamford, H. 2009. Proc. International
Research Workshop on the occurrence, effects and fate of micro-
plastic marine debris, 9–11 September 2008. NOAA Techni-
cal Memorandum NOS-OR&R30.
Barnes, D. K. A. 2002 Biodiversity—invasions by marine life
on plastic debris. Nature 416, 808–809. (doi:10.1038/
416808a)
Barnes, D. K. A. 2005 Remote islands reveal rapid rise of
southern hemisphere sea debris. Sci. World J. 5, 915–921.
Barnes, D. K. A., Galgani, F., Thompson, R. C. & Barlaz,
M. 2009 Accumulation and fragmentation of plastic
debris in global environments. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B
364, 1985–1998. (doi:10.1098/rstb.2008.0205)
Bird, J. 2005 Hyperbole or common sense. Chem. Ind. 5,
14–15.
Bolt, H. M. 2005 Vinyl chloride—a classical industrial toxi-
cant of new interest. Crit. Rev. Toxicol. 35, 307–323.
(doi:10.1080/10408440490915975)
Brinton, W. F. 2005 Characterization of man-made foreign
matter and its presence in multiple size fractions from
mixed waste composting. Compost Sci. Utilizat. 13,
274–280.
Brown, J. & Macfadyen, G. 2007 Ghost ﬁshing in European
waters: impacts and management responses. Mar. Policy
31, 488–504. (doi:10.1016/j.marpol.2006.10.007)
Browne, M. A., Dissanayake, A., Galloway, T. S., Lowe,
D. M. & Thompson, R. C. 2008 Ingested microscopic
plastic translocates to the circulatory system of the
mussel, Mytilus edulis (L.). Environ. Sci. Technol. 42,
5026–5031. (doi:10.1021/es800249a)
Calafat, A. M., Weuve, J., Ye, X. Y., Jia, L. T., Hu, H.,
Ringer, S., Huttner, K. & Hauser, R. 2009 Exposure to
bisphenol A and other phenols in neonatal intensive
care unit premature infants. Environ. Health Perspec.
117, 639–644. (doi:10.1289/ehp.0800265)
Cheshire, A. C. et al. 2009 UNEP/IOC Guidelines on Survey
and Monitoring of Marine Litter. UNEP Regional Seas
Reports and Studies, No. 186; IOC Technical Series
No. 83: xiiþ120 pp.
Defra 2007 Waste strategy for England, p. 127. Norwich, UK:
Department of Environment food and Rural Affairs,
HMSO.
Defra 2008 The milk roadmap. London, UK: Department of
Environment, Food and Rural Affairs. See http://www.
defra.gov.uk/environment/consumerprod/products/milk.
htm#roadmap (accessed 10 July 2008).
Defra, Enviros, Wilson, S. & Hannan, M. 2006 Review of
England’s waste strategy. Environmental report under the
‘SEA’ directive, p. 96. London, UK: DEFRA.
2164
R. C. Thompson et al.
Review. Plastics, the environment and human health
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B (2009)

----- Page 13 (native) -----
Derraik, J. G. B. 2002 The pollution of the marine environ-
ment by plastic debris: a review. Mar. Pollut. Bull. 44,
842–852. (doi:10.1016/S0025-326X(02)00220-5)
Drumright, R. E., Gruber, P. R. & Henton, D. E. 2000 Poly-
lactic acid technology. Adv. Mater. 12, 1841–1846.
(doi:10.1002/1521-4095(200012)12:23,1841::AID-
ADMA1841.3.0.CO;2-E)
EnCams
2006
Litter
segmentation
2006.
Wigan,
UK:
Environmental Campaigns Limited (ENCAMS).
Gennaro, V., Ceppi, M., Crosignani, P. & Montanaro, F.
2008 Reanalysis of updated mortality among vinyl and
polyvinyl chloride workers: conﬁrmation of historical evi-
dence and new ﬁndings. BMC Public Health 8, article 21.
(doi:10.1186/1471-2458-8-21)
Green, R., Hauser, R., Calafat, A. M., Weuve, J., Schettler,
T., Ringer, S., Huttner, K. & Hu, H. 2005 Use of
di(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate-containing medical products
and urinary levels of mono(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate in
neonatal intensive care unit infants. Environ. Health
Perspect. 113, 1222–1225.
Gregory, M. R. 1978 Accumulation and distribution of
virgin
plastic
granules
on
New
Zealand
beaches.
N. Z. J. Mar. Freshwater Res. 12, 339–414.
Gregory, M. R. 2009 Environmental implications of plastic
debris
in
marine
settings—entanglement,
ingestion,
smothering, hangers-on, hitch-hiking and alien invasions.
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 364, 2013–2025. (doi:10.1098/
rstb.2008.0265)
Harper, P. C. & Fowler, J. A. 1987 Plastic pellets in New
Zealand storm-killed prions (Pachyptila spp.), 1958–
1998. Notornis 34, 65–70.
Heindel, J. J. & vom Saal, F. S. 2009 Overview of obesity and
the role of developmental nutrition and environmental
chemical exposures. Mol. Cell. Endocrinol. (doi:10.1016/
j.mce.2009.02.025)
Hopewell, J., Dvorak, R. & Kosior, E. 2009 Plastics recy-
cling: challenges and opportunities. Phil. Trans. R. Soc.
B 364, 2115–2126. (doi:10.1098/rstb.2008.0311)
Hu, G. X., Lian, Q. Q., Ge, R. S., Hardy, D. O. & Li, X. K.
2009 Phthalate-induced testicular dysgenesis syndrome:
Leydig cell inﬂuence. Trends Endocrinol. Metab. 20,
139–145. (doi:10.1016/j.tem.2008.12.001)
Katami, T., Yasuhara, A., Okuda, T. & Shibamoto, T. 2002
Formation of PCDDs, PCDFs, and coplanar PCBs from
polyvinyl chloride during combustion in an incinerator.
Environ. Sci. Technol. 36, 1320–1324. (doi:10.1021/
es0109904)
Koch, H. M. & Calafat, A. M. 2009 Human body burdens
of
chemicals
used
in
plastic
manufacture.
Phil.
Trans.
R.
Soc.
B
364,
2063–2078.
(doi:10.1098/
rstb.2008.0208)
Laist, D. W. 1997 Impacts of marine debris: entanglement of
marine life in marine debris including a comprehensive
list of species with entanglement and ingestion records.
In Marine debris: sources, impacts and solutions (eds J. M.
Coe & B. D. Rogers), pp. 99–141. Berlin, Germany:
Springer.
Lang, I. A., Galloway, T. S., Scarlett, A., Henley, W. E.,
Depledge, M., Wallace, R. B. & Melzer, D. 2008 Associ-
ation of urinary bisphenol A concentration with medical
disorders and laboratory abnormalities in adults. J. Am.
Med. Assoc. 300, 1303–1310. (doi:10.1001/jama.300.
11.1303)
Mato, Y., Isobe, T., Takada, H., Kanehiro, H., Ohtake, C. &
Kaminuma, T. 2001 Plastic resin pellets as a transport
medium for toxic chemicals in the marine environment.
Environ.
Sci.
Technol.
35,
318–324.
(doi:10.1021/
es0010498)
McDermid, K. J. & McMullen, T. L. 2004 Quantitative
analysis
of
small-plastic
debris
on
beaches
in
the
Hawaiian archipelago. Mar. Pollut. Bull. 48, 790–794.
(doi:10.1016/j.marpolbul.2003.10.017)
Mee, A., Rideout, B. A., Hamber, J. A., Todd, J. N., Austin,
G., Clark, M. & Wallace, M. P. 2007 Junk ingestion
and nestling mortality in a reintroduced population of Cali-
fornia Condors Gymnogyps californianus. Bird Conserv.
Int. 17, 119–130. (doi:10.1017/S095927090700069X)
Meeker, J. D., Sathyanarayana, S. & Swan, S. H. 2009
Phthalates
and
other
additives
in
plastics:
human
exposure and associated health outcomes. Phil. Trans.
R. Soc. B 364, 2097–2113. (doi:10.1098/rstb.2008.0268)
Moore, C. J. 2008 Synthetic polymers in the marine environ-
ment: a rapidly increasing, long-term threat. Environ. Res.
108, 131–139. (doi:10.1016/j.envres.2008.07.025)
Moore, C. J., Lattin, G. L. & Zellers, A. F. 2005 Working our
way upstream: a snapshot of land based contributions of
plastic and other trash to coastal waters and beaches of
Southern California. In Proceedings of the Plastic Debris
Rivers to Sea Conference, Algalita Marine Research Foun-
dation, Long Beach, California.
Myers, J. P. et al. 2009 Why public health agencies cannot
depend on good laboratory practices as a criterion for
selecting data: the case of bisphenol A. Environ. Health
Perspect. 117, 309–315.
NAS 2008 Phthalates and cumulative risk assessment: the tasks
ahead. Washington, DC: National Academy of Sciences.
National Research Council. 2008 Tackling Marine Debris in
the 21st century. Committee on the effectiveness of inter-
national and national measures to prevent and reduce
marine debris and its impacts. Washington, DC: The
National Academies Press.
Oehlmann, J. et al. 2009 A critical analysis of the biological
impacts of plasticizers on wildlife. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B
364, 2047–2062. (doi:10.1098/rstb.2008.0242)
Oigman-Pszczol, S. S. & Creed, J. C. 2007 Quantiﬁca-
tion and classiﬁcation of marine litter on beaches along
Armacao dos Buzios, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. J. Coastal
Res. 23, 421–428. (doi:10.2112/1551-5036(2007)23[421:
QACOML]2.0.CO;2)
OSPAR 2007 OSPAR pilot project on monitoring marine beach
litter: monitoring of marine litter on beaches in the OSPAR
region. London, UK: OSPAR Commission.
Peck, J. D., Sweeney, A. M., Symanski, E., Gardiner, J.,
Silva, M. J., Calafat, A. M. & Schantz, S. L. 2009
Intra- and inter-individual variability of urinary phthalate
metabolite concentrations in Hmong women of reproduc-
tive age. J. Expo. Sci. Environ. Epidemiol. (doi:10.1038/
jes.2009.4)
PlasticsEurope 2008 The compelling facts about plastics 2007:
an analysis of plastics production, demanda and recovery in
Europe, p. 24. Brussels, Australia: PlasticsEurope.
Rudel, R. A., Brody, J. G., Spengler, J. C., Vallarino, J.,
Geno, P. W., Sun, G. & Yau, A. 2001 Identiﬁcation of
selected hormonally active agents and animal mammary
carcinogens in commercial and residential air and dust
samples. J. Air Waste Manag. Assoc. 51, 499–513.
Rudel, R. A., Camann, D. E., Spengler, J. D., Korn, L. R. &
Brody, J. G. 2003 Phthalates, alkylphenols, pesticides,
polybrominated diphenyl ethers, and other endocrine-
disrupting
compounds
in
indoor
air
and
dust.
Environ. Sci. Technol. 37, 4543–4553. (doi:10.1021/
es0264596)
Rudel, R. A., Dodson, R. E., Newton, E., Zota, A. R. &
Brody, J. G. 2008 Correlations between urinary phthalate
metabolites
and
phthalates,
estrogenic
compounds
4-butyl phenol and o-phenyl phenol, and some pesticides
in home indoor air and house dust. Epidemiology 19,
S332.
Ryan, P. G., Moore, C. J., van Franeker, J. A. & Moloney, C. L.
2009 Monitoring the abundance of plastic debris in the
Review. Plastics, the environment and human health
R. C. Thompson et al.
2165
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B (2009)

----- Page 14 (native) -----
marine environment. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 364, 1999–
2012. (doi:10.1098/rstb.2008.0207)
Sathyanarayana, S., Karr, C. J., Lozano, P., Brown, E.,
Calafat, A. M., Liu, F. & Swan, S. H. 2008 Baby care
products: possible sources of infant phthalate exposure.
Pediatrics
121,
E260–E268.
(doi:10.1542/peds.2006-
3766)
Shaxson, L. 2009 Structuring policy problems for plastics,
the environment and human health: reﬂections from
the UK. Phil. Trans. R. Soc.
B 364, 2141–2151.
(doi:10.1098/rstb.2008.0283)
Song, J. H., Murphy, R. J., Narayan, R. & Davies, G. B. H.
2009 Biodegradable and compostable alternatives to con-
ventional plastics. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 364, 2127–2139.
(doi:10.1098/rstb.2008.0289)
Stahlhut, R. W., Welshons, W. V. & Swan, S. H. 2009
Bisphenol A data in NHANES suggest longer than
expected half-life, substantial non-food exposure, or
both. Environ. Health Perspect. 117, 784–789. (doi:10.
1289/ehp.0800376)
Swan, S. H. 2008 Environmental phthalate exposure in
relation to reproductive outcomes and other health end-
points in humans. Environ. Res. 108, 177–184. (doi:10.
1016/j.envres.2008.08.007)
Swan, S. H. et al. 2005 Decrease in anogenital distance
among male infants with prenatal phthalate exposure.
Environ. Health Perspect. 113, 1056–1061.
Talsness, C. E., Andrade, A. J. M., Kuriyama, S. N., Taylor,
J. A. & vom Saal, F. S. 2009 Components of plastic:
experimental
studies
in
animals
and
relevance
for
human health. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 364, 2079–2096.
(doi:10.1098/rstb.2008.0281)
Teuten, E. L., Rowland, S. J., Galloway, T. S. & Thompson,
R. C. 2007 Potential for plastics to transport hydrophobic
contaminants. Environ. Sci. Technol. 41, 7759–7764.
(doi:10.1021/es071737s)
Teuten,
E.
L.
et
al.
2009
Transport
and
release
of
chemicals from plastics to the environment and to wild-
life. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 364, 2027–2045. (doi:10.
1098/rstb.2008.0284)
Thompson, R. C., Olsen, Y., Mitchell, R. P., Davis, A.,
Rowland, S. J., John, A. W. G., McGonigle, D. & Russell,
A. E. 2004 Lost at sea: where is all the plastic? Science 304,
838–838. (doi:10.1126/science.1094559)
Thompson, R., Moore, C., Andrady, A., Gregory, M.,
Takada, H. & Weisberg, S. 2005 New directions in plastic
debris. Science 310, 1117.
Thornton, J. 2002 Environmental Impacts of Polyvinyl Chloride
Building Materials, A Healthy Building Network Report.
Washington, DC: Healthy Building Network.
Van Franeker, J. A. et al. 2005 Save the North Sea’
Fulmar Study 2002–2004: a regional pilot project for
the
Fulmar-Litter-EcoQO
in
the
OSPAR
area.
In
Alterra-rapport 1162. Wageningen: Alterra. See www.
zeevogelgroep.nl.
Vandenberg, L. N., Hauser, R., Marcus, M., Olea, N. &
Welshons, W. V. 2007 Human exposure to bisphenol A
(BPA).
Reprod.
Toxicol.
24,
139–177.
(doi:10.1016/
j.reprotox.2007.07.010)
vom Saal, F. S. 2005 Low-dose BPA: conﬁrmed by extensive
literature. Chem. Ind. 7, 14–15.
Wagner, M. & Oehlmann, J. 2009 Endocrine disruptors in
bottled
mineral water: total estrogenic burden
and
migration from plastic bottles. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res
16, 278–286.
Wormuth,
M.,
Scheringer,
M.,
Vollenweider,
M.
&
Hungerbuhler, K. 2006 What are the sources of exposure
to eight frequently used phthalic acid esters in Europeans?
Risk Anal. 26, 803–824. (doi:10.1111/j.1539-6924.2006.
00770.x)
WRAP 2006 Environmental beneﬁts of recycling: an inter-
national review of life cycle comparisons for key materials in
the UK recycling sector. Banbury, UK: WRAP.
WRAP 2007 Consumer attitudes to biopolymers. Banbury, UK:
WRAP.
WRAP 2008 The carbon impact of bottling Australian wine in
the UK: PETand glass bottles, p. 34. Banbury, UK: WRAP.
WRAP 2009 Biopolymer packaging in UK grocery market, p. 4.
Banbury, UK: WRAP.
Yamashita, R. & Tanimura, A. 2007 Floating plastic in the
Kuroshio Current area, western North Paciﬁc Ocean.
Mar.
Pollut.
Bull.
54,
485–488.
(doi:10.1016/
j.marpolbul.2006.11.012)
Yarsley, V. E. & Couzens, E. G. 1945 Plastics. Middlesex:
Penguin Books Limited.
Zubris, K. A. V. & Richards, B. K. 2005 Synthetic ﬁbers as
an indicator of land application of sludge. Environ. Pollut.
138, 201–211. (doi:10.1016/j.envpol.2005.04.013)
2166
R. C. Thompson et al.
Review. Plastics, the environment and human health
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B (2009)