

----- Page 1 (native) -----
Microalgae for biodiesel production and other applications: A review
Teresa M. Mata, Anto´ nio A. Martins, Nidia. S. Caetano 
Keywords:
Microalgae
Biodiesel
Photo-bioreactors
Open ponds
Environmental applications
High-value chemical compounds
A B S T R A C T
Sustainable production of renewable energy is being hotly debated globally since it is increasingly understood that ﬁrst generation 
biofuels, primarily produced from food crops and mostly oil seeds are limited in their ability to achieve targets for biofuel production, 
climate change mitigation and economic growth. These concerns have increased the interest in developing second generation biofuels 
produced from non-food feedstocks such as microalgae, which potentially offer greatest opportunities in the longer term. This paper 
reviews the current status of microalgae use for biodiesel production, including their cultivation, harvesting, and processing. The 
microalgae species most used for biodiesel production are presented and their main advantages described in comparison with other 
available biodiesel feedstocks. The various aspects associated with the design of microalgae production units are described, giving an 
overview of the current state of development of algae cultivation systems (photo-bioreactors and open ponds). Other potential 
applications and products from microalgae are also presented such as for biological sequestration of CO2, wastewater treatment, in 
human health, as food additive, and for aquaculture.

----- Page 2 (native) -----
1. Introduction
The transportation and energy sectors are the major anthro-
pogenic sources, responsible in European Union (EU) for more than
20% and 60% of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, respectively [1].
Agriculture is the third largest anthropogenic source, representing
about 9% of GHG emissions, where the most important gases are
nitrous oxide (N2O) and methane (CH4) [2]. It is expected that with
the development of new growing economies, such as India and
China, the global consumption of energy will raise and lead to more
environmental damage [3].
GHG contributes not only to global warming (GW) but also to
other impacts on the environment and human life. Oceans absorb
approximately one-third of the CO2 emitted each year by human
activities and as its levels increase in the atmosphere, the amount
dissolved in oceans will also increase turning the water pH
gradually to more acidic. This pH decrease may cause the quick loss
of coral reefs and of marine ecosystem biodiversity with huge
implications in ocean life and consequently in earth life [4].
As GW is a problem affecting different aspects of human life and
the global environment, not only a single but a host of solutions is
needed to address it. One side of the problem concerns the
reduction of crude oil reserves and difﬁculties in their extraction
and processing, leading to an increase of its cost [5]. This situation
is particularly acute in the transportation sector, where currently
there are no relevant alternatives to fossil fuels.
To ﬁnd clean and renewable energy sources ranks as one of the
most challenging problems facing mankind in the medium to long
term.
The
associated
issues
are intimately
connected with
economic development and prosperity, quality of life, global
stability, and require from all stakeholders tough decisions and
long term strategies. For example, many countries and regions
around the world established targets for CO2 reduction in order to
meet the sustainability goals agreed under the Kyoto Protocol.
Presently many options are being studied and implemented
in practice, with different degrees of success, and in different
phases of study and implementation. Examples include solar
energy, either thermal or photovoltaic, hydroelectric, geother-
mal, wind, biofuels, and carbon sequestration, among others
[6,7]. Each one has its own advantages and problems and,
depending on the area of application, different options will be
better suited. One important goal is to take measures for
transportation emissions reduction, such as the gradual replace-
ment of fossil fuels by renewable energy sources, where biofuels
are seen as real contributors to reach those goals, particularly in
the short term.
Biofuels production is expected to offer new opportunities to
diversify income and fuel supply sources, to promote employment
in rural areas, to develop long term replacement of fossil fuels, and
to
reduce
GHG
emissions,
boosting
the
decarbonisation
of
transportation fuels and increasing the security of energy supply.
The most common biofuels are biodiesel and bio-ethanol,
which can replace diesel and gasoline, respectively, in today cars
with little or none modiﬁcations of vehicle engines. They are
mainly produced from biomass or renewable energy sources and
contribute to lower combustion emissions than fossil fuels per
equivalent power output. They can be produced using existing
technologies and be distributed through the available distribution
system. For this reason biofuels are currently pursued as a fuel
alternative that can be easily applied until other options harder to
implement, such as hydrogen, are available.
Although biofuels are still more expensive than fossil fuels their
production is increasing in countries around the world. Encour-
aged by policy measures and biofuels targets for transport, its
global production is estimated to be over 35 billion liters [8].
The
main
alternative
to
diesel
fuel
in
EU
is
biodiesel,
representing 82% of total biofuels production [9] and is still
growing in Europe, Brazil, and United States, based on political and
economic objectives.
Biodiesel is produced from vegetable oils (edible or non-edible)
or animal fats. Since vegetable oils may also be used for human
consumption, it can lead to an increase in price of food-grade oils,
causing the cost of biodiesel to increase and preventing its usage,
even if it has advantages comparing with diesel fuel.
The potential market for biodiesel far surpasses the availability
of plant oils not designated for other markets. For example, to fulﬁll
a 10% target in EU from domestic production, the actual feedstocks
supply is not enough to meet the current demand and the land
requirements for biofuels production, would be more than the
potential available arable land for bio-energy crops [10]. The
extensive plantation and pressure for land use change and increase
of cultivated ﬁelds may lead to land competition and biodiversity
loss, due to the cutting of existing forests and the utilization of
ecological importance areas [11]. Biodiesel may also be dis-
advantageous when replacing crops used for human consumption
or if its feedstocks are cultivated in forests and other critical
habitats with associated biological diversity.
Current policies at regional and national levels and the expected
cost and difﬁculties in obtaining fossil fuels will necessarily lead to
an increase in biodiesel production and of other types of renewable
energy. To become a more viable alternative fuel and to survive in
the market, biodiesel must compete economically with diesel. The
end cost of biodiesel mainly depends on the price of the feedstocks
that accounts for 60–75% of the total cost of biodiesel fuel [12].
In order to not compete with edible vegetable oils, the low-cost
and proﬁtable biodiesel should be produced from low-cost
feedstocks such as non-edible oils, used frying oils, animal fats,
soap-stocks, and greases. However the available quantities of
waste oils and animal fats are not enough to match the today
demands for biodiesel. Thus transition to second generation
biofuels, such as microalgae, can also contribute to a reduction in
land requirements due to their presumed higher energy yields per
hectare as well as to their non-requirement of agricultural land.
Additionally, biodiesel needs to have lower environmental impacts
and ensure the same level of performance of existing fuels [13].
Albeit the growing interest and fast growth of this area, it is still
on its infancy. A large investment in research and development
(R&D) and correct policies and strategies are still needed, for all
stages of the biofuels value chain, from raw materials production to
delivery and ﬁnal consumption. Among the various possibilities
currently being investigated and implemented at pilot scale or
even at industrial scale concerning potential feedstocks, the more
interesting ones are microalgae. Besides their cultivation is not
directly linked to human consumption, they have low space
requirements for its production.
This review focuses its attention on microalgae and how they can
be used for biodiesel production. Questions associated with
production and processing of microalgae are considered in detail,

----- Page 3 (native) -----
not only those directly related with biofuels production but also the
possibilitiesofcombining itwithpollution control,inparticularwith
biological sequestration of CO2 emissions and other greenhouse
gases, or wastewater treatment. This work starts by describing
which microalgae are normally used for the production of biofuels
and their main advantages when compared with other available
feedstocks. Then, the current status of biodiesel production from
microalgae, concerning their growth, harvest, and processing is
reviewed. Other potential applications and how to combine them
with biodiesel production are also described.
2. Microalgae for biodiesel production
2.1. Viability of microalgae for biodiesel
2.1.1. What are microalgae?
Microalgae
are
prokaryotic
or
eukaryotic
photosynthetic
microorganisms that can grow rapidly and live in harsh conditions
due to their unicellular or simple multicellular structure. Examples
of prokaryotic microorganisms are Cyanobacteria (Cyanophyceae)
and eukaryotic microalgae are for example green algae (Chlor-
ophyta) and diatoms (Bacillariophyta) [14,15]. A more in depth
description of microalgae is presented by Richmond [16].
Microalgae are present in all existing earth ecosystems, not just
aquatic but also terrestrial, representing a big variety of species
living in a wide range of environmental conditions. It is estimated
that more than 50,000 species exist, but only a limited number, of
around 30,000, have been studied and analyzed [16].
During the past decades extensive collections of microalgae
have been created by researchers in different countries. An
example is the freshwater microalgae collection of University of
Coimbra (Portugal) considered one of the world’s largest, having
more than 4000 strains and 1000 species. This collection attests to
the large variety of different microalgae available to be selected for
use in a broad diversity of applications, such as value added
products for pharmaceutical purposes, food crops for human
consumption and as energy source.
A bit all over the world, other algae collections attest for the
interest that algae have risen, for many different production
purposes. For example, the collection of the Goettingen University,
Germany (SAG), that started in the early 1920s and has about 2213
strains and 1273 species. About 77% of all the strains in the SAG
collection are green algae and about 8% cyanobacteria (61 genera
and 230 strains). Some of them are freshwater red algae and others
from saline environments.
The University of Texas Algal Culture Collection is another very
well known collection of algae cultures that was founded in 1953.
It includes 2300 different strains of freshwater algae (edaphic
green algae and cyanobacteria), but includes representatives of
most major algal taxa, including many marine macrophytic green
and red algae species.
In the Asian continent, the National Institute for Environmental
Studies Collection (NIES), in Ibaraki, Japan, holds a collection of
about 2150 strains, with around 700 species of different algae. The
CSIRO Collection of Living Microalgae (CCLM), in Australia, holds
about 800 strains of different algae, including representatives from
the majority of classes of marine and some freshwater microalgae,
being the majority of the strains isolated from Australian waters.
2.1.2. Advantages of using microalgae for biodiesel production
Many research reports and articles described many advantages
of using microalgae for biodiesel production in comparison with
other available feedstocks [14,15,17,21–27]. From a practical point
of view, they are easy to cultivate, can grow with little or even no
attention, using water unsuitable for human consumption and
easy to obtain nutrients.
Microalgae reproduce themselves using photosynthesis to
convert sun energy into chemical energy, completing an entire
growth cycle every few days [17]. Moreover they can grow almost
anywhere, requiring sunlight and some simple nutrients, although
the growth rates can be accelerated by the addition of speciﬁc
nutrients and sufﬁcient aeration [18–20].
Different microalgae species can be adapted to live in a variety
of environmental conditions. Thus, it is possible to ﬁnd species best
suited to local environments or speciﬁc growth characteristics,
which is not possible to do with other current biodiesel feedstocks
(e.g. soybean, rapeseed, sunﬂower and palm oil).
They have much higher growth rates and productivity when
compared to conventional forestry, agricultural crops, and other
aquatic plants, requiring much less land area than other biodiesel
feedstocks of agricultural origin, up to 49 or 132 times less when
compared to rapeseed or soybean crops, for a 30% (w/w) of oil
content in algae biomass [21]. Therefore, the competition for
arable soil with other crops, in particular for human consumption,
is greatly reduced.
Microalgae can provide feedstock for several different types of
renewable fuels such as biodiesel, methane, hydrogen, ethanol,
among others. Algae biodiesel contains no sulfur and performs as
well as petroleum diesel, while reducing emissions of particulate
matter, CO, hydrocarbons, and SOx. However emissions of NOx may
be higher in some engine types [28].
The utilization of microalgae for biofuels production can also
serve other purposes. Some possibilities currently being consid-
ered are listed below.
 Removal of CO2 from industrial ﬂue gases by algae bio-ﬁxation
[29], reducing the GHG emissions of a company or process while
producing biodiesel [30].
 Wastewater treatment by removal of NH4
+, NO3
, PO4
3, making
algae to grow using these water contaminants as nutrients [29].
 After oil extraction the resulting algae biomass can be processed
into ethanol, methane, livestock feed, used as organic fertilizer
due to its high N:P ratio, or simply burned for energy co-
generation (electricity and heat) [29];
 Combined with their ability to grow under harsher conditions,
and their reduced needs for nutrients, they can be grown in areas
unsuitable for agricultural purposes independently of the
seasonal weather changes, thus not competing for arable land
use, and can use wastewaters as the culture medium, not
requiring the use of freshwater.
 Depending on the microalgae species other compounds may
also be extracted, with valuable applications in different
industrial sectors, including a large range of ﬁne chemicals
and bulk products, such as fats, polyunsaturated fatty acids, oil,
natural dyes, sugars, pigments, antioxidants, high-value bioac-
tive
compounds,
and
other
ﬁne
chemicals
and
biomass
[14,15,31].
 Because of this variety of high-value biological derivatives,
with many possible commercial applications, microalgae can
potentially revolutionize a large number of biotechnology
areas including biofuels, cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, nutrition
and food additives, aquaculture, and pollution prevention
[25,31].
2.1.3. Historic evolution of microalgae production systems
For the past 50 years, extensive research has been performed
on microalgae and how they can be used in a wide variety of
processes or to manufacture many practical and economic
important products. The ﬁrst large-scale culture of microalgae
started in the early 1960s in Japan by Nihon Chlorella with the
culture of Chlorella [32]. The interest in using microalgae for
renewable energy increased in 1970s during the ﬁrst oil crisis [32].

----- Page 4 (native) -----
The U.S. National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) through
the Aquatic Species Program (ASP), launched a speciﬁc R&D
Program dedicated to alternative renewable fuels, including
biodiesel from microalgae that lasted from 1978 to 1996 [17].
One of its main objectives was to study the biochemistry and
physiology of lipid production in oleaginous microalgae. From
1987 to 1990, an ‘‘Outdoor Test Facility’’ of two 1000 m2 high-rate
ponds was operated in Roswell, New Mexico. It was concluded that
the use of microalgae for the low-cost production of biodiesel was
technically feasible, but still needs considerable long term R&D to
achieve the high productivities required. Other objective of this
NREL R&D program was to produce improved algae strains by
looking for genetic variability between algal isolates, attempting to
use ﬂow cytometry to screen for naturally occurring high lipid
individuals, and exploring algal viruses as potential genetic
vectors. However in 1995 the Department of Energy reduced
the budget allocated to funding this program and it was
discontinued before these experiments could be carried out
beyond the preliminary stages [17].
The recent price volatility of crude oil and the expected future
price increase, tied with the urge to reduce pollutant emissions and
greenhouse gases, have created a new interest in the production of
biodiesel using microalgae. For example, several companies were
created or have entered this market niche, selling either entire
processes or key process units, such as photo-bioreactors with
optimized designs to cultivate microalgae for biodiesel production
and other applications [33–35]. Torrey [37] presents links to 37
companies that are currently exploring algae as a fuel source.
Nowadays, microalgae are seen as an alternative feedstock for
biodiesel production, being the target of a large number of
consortiums, private and public organizations’ investments in
R&D, aiming to use the most effective and cheap technology to
produce large amounts of oil. They are considered to be a second
generation feedstock together with other biomass sources, such as
Jatropha, lignocellulosic materials, agricultural residues, and
systematically grown energy crops, with high potential yields of
biofuels and that are not used as food source for human
consumption [36].
Though it is not cost effective yet to compete with fossil diesel
without additional support (for example government subsidies)
research is being done to turn it economically viable, both in
academia and in industry [35,38,39]. In a long term, as crude oil
reserves diminish and price per barrel increases in a daily basis,
other alternatives must become available, and thus, it is now the
time to search, develop and implement them.
Recent research efforts have concentrated on applying meta-
bolic engineering and genetic methods to microalgae in order to
develop organisms optimized for high productivity and energy
Table 1
Lipid content and productivities of different microalgae species.
Marine and freshwater
microalgae species
Lipid content
(% dry weight biomass)
Lipid
productivity (mg/L/day)
Volumetric productivity
of biomass (g/L/day)
Areal productivity
of biomass (g/m2/day)
Ankistrodesmus sp.
24.0–31.0
–
–
11.5–17.4
Botryococcus braunii
25.0–75.0
–
0.02
3.0
Chaetoceros muelleri
33.6
21.8
0.07
–
Chaetoceros calcitrans
14.6–16.4/39.8
17.6
0.04
–
Chlorella emersonii
25.0–63.0
10.3–50.0
0.036–0.041
0.91–0.97
Chlorella protothecoides
14.6–57.8
1214
2.00–7.70
–
Chlorella sorokiniana
19.0–22.0
44.7
0.23–1.47
–
Chlorella vulgaris
5.0–58.0
11.2–40.0
0.02–0.20
0.57–0.95
Chlorella sp.
10.0–48.0
42.1
0.02–2.5
1.61–16.47/25
Chlorella pyrenoidosa
2.0
–
2.90–3.64
72.5/130
Chlorella
18.0–57.0
18.7
–
3.50–13.90
Chlorococcum sp.
19.3
53.7
0.28
–
Crypthecodinium cohnii
20.0–51.1
–
10
–
Dunaliella salina
6.0–25.0
116.0
0.22–0.34
1.6–3.5/20–38
Dunaliella primolecta
23.1
–
0.09
14
Dunaliella tertiolecta
16.7–71.0
–
0.12
–
Dunaliella sp.
17.5–67.0
33.5
–
–
Ellipsoidion sp.
27.4
47.3
0.17
–
Euglena gracilis
14.0–20.0
–
7.70
–
Haematococcus pluvialis
25.0
–
0.05–0.06
10.2–36.4
Isochrysis galbana
7.0–40.0
–
0.32–1.60
–
Isochrysis sp.
7.1–33
37.8
0.08–0.17
–
Monodus subterraneus
16.0
30.4
0.19
–
Monallanthus salina
20.0–22.0
–
0.08
12
Nannochloris sp.
20.0–56.0
60.9–76.5
0.17–0.51
–
Nannochloropsis oculata.
22.7–29.7
84.0–142.0
0.37–0.48
–
Nannochloropsis sp.
12.0–53.0
37.6–90.0
0.17–1.43
1.9–5.3
Neochloris oleoabundans
29.0–65.0
90.0–134.0
–
–
Nitzschia sp.
16.0–47.0
8.8–21.6
Oocystis pusilla
10.5
–
–
40.6–45.8
Pavlova salina
30.9
49.4
0.16
–
Pavlova lutheri
35.5
40.2
0.14
–
Phaeodactylum tricornutum
18.0–57.0
44.8
0.003–1.9
2.4–21
Porphyridium cruentum
9.0–18.8/60.7
34.8
0.36–1.50
25
Scenedesmus obliquus
11.0–55.0
–
0.004–0.74
–
Scenedesmus quadricauda
1.9–18.4
35.1
0.19
–
Scenedesmus sp.
19.6–21.1
40.8–53.9
0.03–0.26
2.43–13.52
Skeletonema sp.
13.3–31.8
27.3
0.09
–
Skeletonema costatum
13.5–51.3
17.4
0.08
–
Spirulina platensis
4.0–16.6
–
0.06–4.3
1.5–14.5/24–51
Spirulina maxima
4.0–9.0
–
0.21–0.25
25
Thalassiosira pseudonana
20.6
17.4
0.08
–
Tetraselmis suecica
8.5–23.0
27.0–36.4
0.12–0.32
19
Tetraselmis sp.
12.6–14.7
43.4
0.30
–

----- Page 5 (native) -----
value, in order to achieve their full processing capabilities [25,31].
Since microalgae represent a much simpler system than plants,
usually with no cell differentiation, genetic manipulations to
increase its content of higher value compounds is very tempting.
Nevertheless, progress in the genetic engineering of algae was
extremely slow until recently. Also, these promising advances
should be viewed with caution because transgenic algae poten-
tially pose a considerable threat to the ecosystem and thus will
most likely be banned from outdoor cultivation systems [40].
2.1.4. Microalgae lipid content and productivities
Many microalgae species can be induced to accumulate
substantial quantities of lipids [17] thus contributing to a high
oil yield. The average lipid content varies between 1 and 70% but
under certain conditions some species can reach 90% of dry weight
[14,15,21,32].
Table 1 presents both lipid content and lipid and biomass
productivities of different marine and freshwater microalgae
species, showing signiﬁcant differences between the various
species [15,16,20,21,24,32,41–68].
As shown in Table 1, oil content in microalgae can reach 75% by
weight of dry biomass but associated with low productivities (e.g.
for Botryococcus braunii). Most common algae (Chlorella, Crypthe-
codinium, Cylindrotheca, Dunaliella, Isochrysis, Nannochloris, Nanno-
chloropsis,
Neochloris,
Nitzschia,
Phaeodactylum,
Porphyridium,
Schizochytrium, Tetraselmis) have oil levels between 20 and 50%
but higher productivities can be reached.
Chlorella seems to be a good option for biodiesel production.
Yet, as other species are so efﬁcient and productive as this one, the
selection of the most adequate species needs to take into account
other factors, such as for example the ability of microalgae to
develop using the nutrients available or under speciﬁc environ-
mental conditions. All these parameters should be considered
simultaneously in the selection of the most adequate species or
strains for biodiesel production.
Also signiﬁcant is the composition of fatty acids of the different
microalgae species, as they can have a signiﬁcant effect on the
characteristics of biodiesel produced. These are composed of
saturated and unsaturated fatty acids with 12–22 carbon atoms,
some of them of v3 and v6 families. Thomas et al. [66] analyzed
the fatty acid compositions of seven fresh water microalgae species
showing that all of them synthesized C14:0, C16:0, C18:1, C18:2,
and C18:3 fatty acids. This author reported that the relative
intensity of other individual fatty acids chains is species speciﬁc,
e.g. C16:4 and C18:4 in Ankistrodesmus sp., C18:4 and C22:6 in
Isochrysis sp., C16:2, C16:3 and C20:5 in Nannochloris sp., C16:2,
C16:3, and C20:5 in Nitzschia sp.
Different nutritional and environmental factors, cultivation
conditions and growth phases may affect the fatty acid composi-
tion. For example, nitrogen deﬁciency and salt stress induced the
accumulation of C18:1 in all treated species and to some extent
C20:5 in B. braunii [66]. Other authors also reported a differentia-
tion between fatty acid composition of various algae species
[19,23,47,59,62,69].
Although the microalgae oil yield is strain-dependent it is
generally much greater than other vegetable oil crops, as shown in
Table 2 that compares the biodiesel production efﬁciencies and
land use of microalgae and other vegetable oil crops, including the
amount of oil content in a dry weight basis and the oil yield per
hectare, per year [21,65,70–80].
Table 2 shows that although the oil contents are similar
between seed plants and microalgae there are signiﬁcant varia-
tions in the overall biomass productivity and resulting oil yield and
biodiesel productivity with a clear advantage for microalgae. In
terms of land use, microalgae followed by palm oil biodiesel are
clearly advantageous because of their higher biomass productivity
and oil yield.
2.2. Microalgae biodiesel value chain stages
Although in a simplistic view microalgae may seem to not
signiﬁcantly differ from other biodiesel feedstocks, they are
microorganisms living essentially in liquid environments, and
thus
with
particular cultivation,
harvesting, and
processing
techniques that ought to be considered in order to efﬁciently
produce biodiesel.
All existing processes for biodiesel production from microalgae
include a production unit where cells are grown, followed by the
separation of the cells from the growing media and subsequent
lipids extraction. Then, biodiesel or other biofuels are produced in a
form akin to existing processes and technologies used for other
biofuels
feedstocks.
Recently
other
possibilities
for
biofuel
production are being pursued instead of the transesteriﬁcation
reaction, such as the thermal cracking (or pyrolysis) involving the
thermal decomposition or cleavage of the triglycerides and other
organic
compounds
presented in
the
feedstock,
in
simpler
molecules, namely alkans, alkenes, aromatics, carboxylic acids,
among others [81–83].
Fig. 1 shows a schematic representation of the algal biodiesel
value chain stages, starting with the selection of microalgae
species depending on local speciﬁc conditions and the design and
implementation of cultivation system for microalgae growth.
Then, it follows the biomass harvesting, processing and oil
extraction to supply the biodiesel production unit.
In the next subsections issues related to each algal biodiesel
value chain stage are presented and discussed.
2.2.1. Algae and site selection
Currently a lot of research effort is being focused on the algal
cultivation unit, as in most cases it represents the key step that
Table 2
Comparison of microalgae with other biodiesel feedstocks.
Plant source
Seed oil content
(% oil by wt in biomass)
Oil yield
(L oil/ha year)
Land use
(m2 year/kg biodiesel)
Biodiesel productivity
(kg biodiesel/ha year)
Corn/Maize (Zea mays L.)
44
172
66
152
Hemp (Cannabis sativa L.)
33
363
31
321
Soybean (Glycine max L.)
18
636
18
562
Jatropha (Jatropha curcas L.)
28
741
15
656
Camelina (Camelina sativa L.)
42
915
12
809
Canola/Rapeseed (Brassica napus L.)
41
974
12
862
Sunﬂower (Helianthus annuus L.)
40
1070
11
946
Castor (Ricinus communis)
48
1307
9
1156
Palm oil (Elaeis guineensis)
36
5366
2
4747
Microalgae (low oil content)
30
58,700
0.2
51,927
Microalgae (medium oil content)
50
97,800
0.1
86,515
Microalgae (high oil content)
70
136,900
0.1
121,104

----- Page 6 (native) -----
ultimately determines the economic viability of the process.
According to Maxwell et al. [84] for the implementation of an algae
cultivation unit a site selection and resource evaluation have to be
performed considering several criteria: (i) the water supply/
demand, its salinity and chemistry; (ii) the land topography,
geology, and ownership; (iii) the climatic conditions, temperature,
insulation, evaporation, precipitation; (iv) the easy access to
nutrients and carbon supply sources.
One needs also to decide if the algal cultivation unit will be
operating in batch or continuous mode and if the production units
will be open or close systems. This depends on the microalgae
species selected, the expected environmental conditions, avail-
ability of nutrients and even the possibility to combine the
microalgae growth with a pollution control strategy of other
industry, for example for the removal of CO2 from ﬂue gas
emissions or the removal of nitrogen and phosphorus from a
wastewater efﬂuent.
Besides the equipment needed for microalgae growth, it is
essential to pay close attention to the selection of the most
adequate species and strains, their cultivation conditions and
nutrients available for their growth. In most cases the production
of biodiesel will rely on already available species and strains that
have shown to be adequate due to either their lipid content or
productivity. Literature information (as the one summarized in
Table 1) and obtained from companies supplying production units
can also be used. However, in some cases this approach may not
yield an adequate solution and thus a search for more convenient
microalgae species has to be done. Typically sources of microalgae
include existing collections of microalgae, commercially available
either from Universities or other national and international
foundations (such as the ones previously mentioned) or from
companies speciﬁcally devoted to algae growth [37], or water and
soil samples obtained from diverse environments.
As microalgae will have to live and thrive in a wide range of
environmental conditions, especially of nutrients scarcity and
other adverse conditions, algae samples obtained in harsh
environments such as thermal springs or industrial wastewaters
can be used. This way it is ensured that if any viable option is
found it will be robust and possibly better adapted to speciﬁc
conditions.
The sampling and
selection process
is well established,
although it requires specialized equipment and may be time
consuming [16]. A multicriteria strategy has to be considered in
this process, considering factors such as follows:
 Growing rate, normally measured by total amount of biomass
accumulated per unit time and unit volume;
 Lipid content, not total amount but the distribution of free fatty
acids and triglycerides, a factor that may be relevant in biodiesel
production;
 Resistance to environmental conditions changes, in particular of
temperature, nutrients input, light, competition from other
microalgae species and/or bacterial;
 Nutrients availability, in particular of carbon dioxide sources
when the goal of carbon sequestration is also deemed relevant;
 Ease of biomass separation and processing;
 Possibility of obtaining other valuable chemicals.
The listed criteria consider not only the microalgae themselves
but also their cultivation units. Thus, all experiments should mimic
as much as possible the real conditions where the microorganisms
will be used and include the biomass processing stages before the
production of biodiesel itself.
Even when the species listed in literature or obtained from the
environment are not adequate, the utilization of genetic engineer-
ing may be a solution [85]. This way it is possible to adjust the
characteristics of microalgae to the process and desired product(s)
and to improve the productivity and lipid yield and composition.
However,
the
fears
of
biological
contamination,
restrictive
legislation and viable natural options still hinder the broader
utilization of genetically engineered organisms.
Although probably lengthy in time and cost intensive, obtaining
an organism that better suits the speciﬁc operating conditions has
some advantages. Firstly, it frees the company that produces
biodiesel from microalgae to be dependent from suppliers, and
generates in house expertise that can be advantageous in future.
Secondly, the identiﬁcation of new species or the development of
new strains represents a business opportunity and source of
income from the possible royalties resulting from its intellectual
property.
Therefore, it is crucial to understand how to select the right
algae species, create an optimal photo-biological formula for each
species, and build a cost-effective cultivation unit that can
precisely deliver the formula to each individual algae cell, no
matter the size of the facility, or its geographical location.
2.2.2. Algae cultivation
Microalgae are adapted to scavenge their environments for
resources, to storage them, or increase their efﬁciency in resource
utilization. In general for biomass growth (consisting of 40–50%
carbon) microalgae depend on a sufﬁcient supply of a carbon
source and light to carry out photosynthesis [57,86]. Yet they can
adjust or change their internal structure (e.g. biochemical and
physiological acclimation), whilst externally they can excrete a
variety
of compounds to amongst others, render nutrients
available or limit the growth of competitors [16].
Microalgae may assume many types of metabolisms (e.g.
autotrophic, heterotrophic, mixotrophic, photoheterotrophic)
and are capable of a metabolic shift as a response to changes in
Fig. 1. Microalgae biodiesel value chain stages.

----- Page 7 (native) -----
the environmental conditions. For example some organisms can
grow [87]:
 Photoautotrophically, i.e. using light as a sole energy source that
is converted to chemical energy through photosynthetic reac-
tions.
 Heterotrophically, i.e. utilizing only organic compounds as
carbon and energy source.
 Mixotrophically, i.e. performing photosynthesis as the main
energy source, though both organic compounds and CO2 are
essential. Amphitrophy, subtype of mixotrophy, means that
organisms are able to live either autotrophically or hetero-
trophically, depending on the concentration of organic com-
pounds and light intensity available.
 Photoheterotrophycally,
also
known
as
photoorganitrophy,
photoassimilation, photometabolism, describes the metabolism
in which light is required to use organic compounds as carbon
source. The photoheterotrophic and mixotrophic metabolisms
are not well distinguished, in particular they can be deﬁned
according to a difference of the energy source required to
perform growth and speciﬁc metabolite production.
The metabolism involved can also be distinguished according to
pH changes that depend on the microalgae growth stoichiometry.
Chlorella vulgaris, Haematococcus pluvialis, Arthrospira (Spirulina)
platensis are examples of strains found to grow under photoauto-
trophic, heterotrophic, as well as under mixotrophic conditions.
Other strains such as Selenastrum capricornutum and Scenedesmus
acutus can grow either photoautotrophically, heterotrophically, or
photoheterotrophically [87].
Not only organic carbon or substract (a carbon source such as
sugars, proteins and fats), vitamins, salts and other nutrients
(nitrogen and phosphorous) are vital for algal growth, but also
equilibrium between operational parameters (oxygen, carbon
dioxide, pH, temperature, light intensity, and product and by-
product removal) [88].
When considering algal use for biodiesel production, it is yet
important to quantitatively deﬁne the inﬂuence of these opera-
tional parameters and their interrelation to be able to manipulate
them. This way one may succeed in obtaining a certain control over
the composition of microalgae populations, even on a large scale.
As stated by De Pauw et al. [89], experience has repeatedly shown
that properly managed algal cultures are quite resistant and that
infections are often an indication of poor culture conditions.
Under suitable climatic conditions and sufﬁcient nutrients,
microalgae can grow profusely. Commonly they double their
biomass within 24 h or within 3.5 h during the exponential growth
phase [21].
Fig. 2 represents the algae growth curve in a batch culture
(solid line) and nutrients concentration (dashed line), where ﬁve
reasonably well deﬁned growth phases can be recognized: (1) lag
phase; (2) exponential growth phase, representing the maximum
growth rate under the speciﬁc conditions; (3) linear growth
phase; (4) stationary growth phase; (5) decline or death phase.
The opposite pattern of the dashed curve (in Fig. 2) indicates the
nutrients depletion during the stationary phase and onwards.
Generally algal cultures in the exponential growth phase contain
more protein, while cultures in the stationary phase have more
carbohydrates and glycogen. For example, according to De Pauw
et al. [89] oysters fed by algae of the former type usually grow less.
A major handicap in the large-scale cultivation of algae is our
inability to grow selected species in substantial volumes of
hundreds of cubic meters. Exceptions are for example Chlorella and
Spirulina used in aquaculture [89]. A premature collapse may occur
when up-scaling cultures of algae strains to larger volumes, in an
artiﬁcially protected environment of semi-sterility, or other
species better adapted to outdoor conditions can take-over. This
means that they were developed under unbalanced growth
conditions and should be better deﬁned, in the exponential
growth phase, for high-density cultures.
There are several factors inﬂuencing algal growth: abiotic
factors such as light (quality, quantity), temperature, nutrient
concentration, O2, CO2, pH, salinity, and toxic chemicals; biotic
factors such as pathogens (bacteria, fungi, viruses) and competi-
tion by other algae; operational factors such as shear produced by
mixing, dilution rate, depth, harvest frequency, and addition of
bicarbonate.
Temperature is the most important limiting factor, after light,
for culturing algae in both closed and open outdoor systems. The
temperature effects for many microalgae species in the laboratory
are well documented, but the magnitude of temperature effects in
the annual biomass production outdoors is not yet sufﬁciently
acknowledged. Many microalgae can easily tolerate temperatures
up to 15 8C lower than their optimal, but exceeding the optimum
temperature by only 2–4 8C may result in the total culture loss.
Also, overheating problems may occur in closed culture systems
during some hot days, where the temperature inside the reactor
may reach 55 8C. In this case evaporative water cooling systems
may be economically used to decrease the temperature to around
20–26 8C [57].
Salinity, in both open and closed systems, can affect the growth
and cell composition of microalgae. Every alga has a different
optimum salinity range that can increase during hot weather
conditions due to high evaporation. Salinity changes normally
affect phytoplankton in three ways [57]: (1) osmotic stress (2) ion
(salt) stress; and (3) changes of the cellular ionic ratios due to the
membrane selective ion permeability. The easiest way for salinity
control is by adding fresh water or salt as required.
Mixing is another important growth parameter since it
homogenizes the cells distribution, heat, metabolites, and facil-
itates transfer of gases. Also, a certain degree of turbulence,
especially in large-scale production, is desirable in order to
promote the fast circulation of microalgae cells from the dark to
the light zone of the reactor [90]. In other hand high liquid
velocities and degrees of turbulence (due to mechanical mixing or
air bubbles mixing) can damage microalgae due to shear stress
[45]. The optimum level of turbulence (above which cell death
occurs) is strain dependent and should be investigated in order to
avoid decline in productivity [90].
Common biological contaminants observed include unwanted
algae, mould, yeast, fungi, and bacteria. Attempts made to cultivate
some microalgae species in raceway ponds failed, since cultures
collapse due to predation by protozoa and contamination by other
algal species.
As referred by Moheimani [57] a way to decrease contaminants
and improve yield is after removing the unwanted organism to
Fig. 2. Schematic representation of algae growth rate in batch culture (solid line)
and nutrients concentration (dashed line).

----- Page 8 (native) -----
subject the culture to a temporarily extreme change of the
environmental factors such as temperature, pH, or light. The closed
environment, the higher degree of control over culture parameters,
and the higher cell concentration attainable in closed cultivation
reactors effectively protect the culture from contamination and
make cultivation of some important microalgae feasible.
The effects of different cultivation factors on algal growth have
been examined by various authors:
 Moheimani [57] analyzed the effects of a reduction in the
medium pH, resulting from CO2, which may inhibit the algal
growth. This author determined that for Pleurochrysis carterae
the pH range for maximum productivities in a plate photo-
bioreactor is pH 7.7–8.0 and in an outdoor raceway pond is pH
9.1–9.6. This author also determined a best operational depth for
the outdoor raceway pond between 16 and 21 cm.
 Richmond [16] reported that supplying CO2 in shallow suspen-
sions at near neutral pH is difﬁcult to control, since the bubbles
residence time is insufﬁcient to complete the absorption,
resulting in great CO2 losses to the atmosphere.
 Weissman and Goebel [91] explain that the absorption of CO2
into alkaline waters may be accelerated by one of two major
uncatalyzed reaction paths, the hydration of CO2 and subsequent
acid-base reaction to form bicarbonate ion and the direct
reaction of CO2 with the hydroxyl ion to form bicarbonate. This
author refers that the rate of the former reaction is faster at pH
values below 8, while the second dominates above pH 10.
Between 8 and 10 both can be important.
 Chiu et al. [42] results show an increase in the biomass
production and lipid accumulation with a CO2 concentration
increase in the aeration of Nannochloropsis oculata cultures.
 Similar results were obtained by De Morais and Costa [43] for
Scenedesmus obliquus and Chlorella kessleri cultures, isolated from
a treatment pond of a coal ﬁred thermoelectric power plant in
Brazil, concluding that these microalgae have the potential for
bio-ﬁxation of CO2 in thermoelectric power plants.
 Other
important
factors
are
aeration
and
light
intensity.
Kaewpintong [86] reported a better growth for an airlift
bioreactor than for an unaerated column. This is explained
because aeration lead to a better mixing of the microalgal
culture, which prevents sedimentation, maintains homogeneous
conditions, and helps for a better contact between cells and
nutrients. This author also reports an increase in cell density and
speciﬁc growth rate with an increase in the light intensity up to a
certain limit, above which the growth was inhibited.
 Thomas et al. [66] investigated photosynthetic algae species that
grow autotrophically on a mineral medium containing carbon
dioxide (and bicarbonate) as a carbon source and nitrate as a
nitrogen source. The main purpose of this study is to determine
the effect of nitrogen as well as the salt stress on the proximate
chemical compositions of the algae. The general conclusion is
that the species tested differ in their basic cellular composition
when they are exposed to environmental stress. On growth
under non-stressed conditions, Botryococcus contained the
highest concentration of lipids the greatest proportion of which
is hydrocarbon in nature. All other algae contained lower levels
of lipids with an average of 23% per organic weight for the green
algae, 12% for Nitzschia sp. and 7% for Isochrysis.
 Liu et al. [92] showed that high iron concentration could also
induce considerable lipid accumulation in marine strain C.
vulgaris. This suggests that some metabolic pathways related to
the lipid accumulation in C. vulgaris are probably modiﬁed by
high level of iron concentration in the initial medium.
 Illman et al. [50] found that the reduction in nitrogen in the
medium increases the lipid content in all ﬁve investigated
Chlorella strains, among which C. emersonii, C. minutissima and C.
vulgaris gained an increase in lipid contend of 63%, 56% and 40%
biomass by dry weight respectively.
 Thomas et al. [66] also studied the effect of nitrogen stress on
algae lipid fraction, concluding that cultivation under nitrogen
deﬁcient conditions did indeed increase the neutral lipid
contents, but it cannot be summarized as a single trend. This
is observed for Botryococcus, Isochrysis and Dunaliella species
grown under nitrogen stress. In Botryococcus the neutral lipids
comprised a major proportion of the total lipids. However, the
greatest neutral lipid production occurred in the resting stage
and the greatest amount is formed in the conversion of the algae
from the green to the brown growth phase. In contrast to the 10%
increase in the Botryococcus lipids, there was a drop in the lipid
fraction in Dunaliella bardawil and Dunaliella salina to about 10%
of the organic weight. These halotolerant green algae shifted
towards carbohydrate storage under nitrogen stress. On the
other hand, Isochrysis accumulated higher fractions of lipids and
carbohydrates under nitrogen deﬁciency, with lipids comprising
about one-fourth of the algal organic cell weight following 10
days of nitrogen starvation. In general, the effects of nitrate
deﬁciency were that the protein content and the chlorophyll
level decreased while carbohydrate and lipids exhibited a
species-speciﬁc change. The neutral lipid content is expressed
in the algae that shift to lipid storage when under environmental
stress. These neutral lipids are not predominantly straight chain
saturated hydrocarbons but multibranched and/or polyunsatu-
rated components.
 Macedo and Alegre [93] demonstrated that the Spirulina lipids
content increase approximately 3 times with the decrease of
nitrogen content and temperature decrease, being the nitrogen
concentration decrease more effective.
2.2.3. Harvesting and biomass concentration
Algal harvesting consists of biomass recovery from the culture
medium that may contribute to 20–30% of the total biomass
production cost [94]. In order to remove large quantities of water
and process large algal biomass volumes, a suitable harvesting
method may involve one or more steps and be achieved in several
physical, chemical, or biological ways, in order to perform the
desired solid–liquid separation. Experience has demonstrated that
albeit a universal harvesting method does not exist, this is still an
active area for research, being possible to develop an appropriate
and economical harvesting system for any algal species.
Most common harvesting methods include sedimentation,
centrifugation,
ﬁltration,
ultra-ﬁltration,
sometimes
with
an
additional ﬂocculation step or with a combination of ﬂoccula-
tion–ﬂotation. Flocculation is used to aggregate the microalgal
cells to increase the effective particle size and hence ease
sedimentation, centrifugal recovery, and ﬁltration [94]. Weissman
and Goebel [91] studied four primary harvesting methods for the
purpose of biofuels production: microstraining, belt ﬁltering,
ﬂotation with ﬂoat collection, and sedimentation. These methods
discriminate on a size and density basis in performing the biomass
separation. Microstrainers are an attractive harvesting method
because of their mechanical simplicity and availability in large unit
sizes. The recent availability of very ﬁne mesh polyester screens
has revived interest in their use for microalgae harvesting.
Subsequent studies concluded that it would be necessary to
ﬂocculate the cells prior to microstraining.
Filter presses operating under pressure or vacuum can be used
to recover large quantities of biomass, but for some applications
ﬁltration can be relatively slow which may be unsatisfactory. Also
ﬁltration is better suited for large microalgae such as Coelastrum
proboscideum and S. platensis but cannot recover organisms with
smaller dimensions such Scenedesmus, Dunaliella, or Chlorella [94].
Alternatively, membrane microﬁltration and ultra-ﬁltration are

----- Page 9 (native) -----
other possible alternatives to conventional ﬁltration for recovering
algal biomass, which are more suitable for fragile cells and small-
scale production processes. Furthermore these ﬁltration processes
are more expensive especially because of the need for membrane
replacement and pumping.
Richmond [16] suggested one main criterion for selecting a
proper harvesting procedure, which is the desired product quality.
In one hand for low value products, gravity sedimentation may be
used, possibly enhanced by ﬂocculation. Sedimentation tanks or
settling ponds are also possible, e.g. to recover biomass from
sewage-based processes. In other hand for high-value products, to
recover high quality algae such as for food or aquaculture
applications,
it is
often recommended to
use continuously
operating centrifuges that can process large volumes of biomass.
Albeit at considerable cost, centrifuges are suitable to rapidly
concentrate any type of microorganisms, which remain fully
contained during recovery. Additionally, these devices can be
easily cleaned or sterilized to effectively avoid bacterial contam-
ination or fouling of raw product.
Another basic criterion for selecting the harvesting procedure is
its potential to adjust the density or the acceptable level of
moisture in the resulting concentrate right to the optimum
subsequent process [16,94]. Gravity sedimented sludge is gen-
erally more diluted than centrifugally recovered biomass, which
substantially inﬂuence the economics of product recovery further
downstream. Since costs of thermal drying are much higher than
those of mechanical dewatering, in order to reduce the overall
production cost, a concentrate with higher solids content is
required after harvest to easy biomass dehydration (e.g. in a drum-
drying). In this case a combination of methods can also be used, e.g.
a pre-concentration with a mechanical dewatering step such as
microstrainer, ﬁltration, or centrifugation and then, a post-
concentration by means of a screw centrifuge or a thermal drying.
After separation from the culture medium algal biomass (5–15%
dry weight) must be quickly processed lest it should get spoiled in
only a few hours in a hot climate.
2.2.4. Processing and components extraction
Processing represents a major economic limitation to the
production of low cost commodities (fuels, feeds and foods) and
also to higher value products (b-carotene, polysaccharides). It is
difﬁcult to discuss processing, since it is highly speciﬁc and
strongly depends on the desired products.
It is common to apply dehydration of biomass that also increases
its shelf-life and of the ﬁnal product. Several methods have been
employed to dry microalgae such as Chlorella, Scenedesmus and
Spirulina, where the most common include spray-drying, drum-
drying, freeze-drying and sun-drying [16]. Because of the high water
content of algal biomass sun-drying is not a very effective method
for algal powder production and spray-drying is not economically
feasible for low value products, such as biofuel or protein.
After drying it follows the cell disruption of the microalgae cells
for release of the metabolites of interest. Several methods can be
used depending on the microalgae wall and on the product nature
to be obtained either based on mechanical action (e.g. cell
homogenizers, bead mills, ultrasounds, autoclave, and spray
drying) or non-mechanical action (e.g. freezing, organic solvents
and osmotic shock and acid, base and enzyme reactions).
Taking the example of the astaxanthin recovery, although
different methods have been studied the best results were
obtained from autoclaved and mechanically disrupted biomass,
with yield 3 times higher than with other methods [16].
Lyophilization breaks up the cells and turns the algal material
into a loose and ﬁne powder, making other treatment unnecessary.
For biodiesel production, lipids and fatty acids have to be
extracted from the microalgal biomass. For lipids a solvent
extraction is normally done directly from the lyophilized biomass,
being a quick and efﬁcient extraction method that slightly reduces
the degradation. Several solvents can be used such as hexane,
ethanol (96%), or a hexane–ethanol (96%) mixture, being possible
to obtain up to 98% quantitative extraction of puriﬁed fatty acids
[16]. Although ethanol is a very good solvent it can also extract
some cellular contaminants such as sugars, amino acids, salts,
hydrophobic proteins and pigments, which is not desirable if the
purpose of the extraction is just the lipids.
Extraction methods
such
as
ultrasound and
microwave-
assisted were also studied for oil extraction from vegetable
sources. Cravotto et al. [95] compared oil extraction times and
yields using these methods with those resulting from conventional
procedures.
For
that
purpose
these
authors
research
team
developed ultrasound devices working at frequencies of 19, 25,
40 and 300 kHz and multimode microwave oven operating with
both open and closed vessels, as well as combined extraction with
simultaneous double sonication at 19 and 25 kHz and simulta-
neous ultrasound/multimode microwave irradiation achieved.
These results indicate that compared with conventional methods
these new methods can greatly improve oil extraction with higher
efﬁciency. Extraction times were reduced and yields increased by
50–500% with low or moderate costs and minimal added toxicity.
In the case of marine microalgae Crypthecodinium cohnii, ultra-
sound worked best as the disruption of the tough algal cell wall
considerably improved the extraction yield from 4.8% (in soxhlet)
to 25.9%.
2.2.5. Biodiesel production
Biodiesel is a mixture of fatty acid alkyl esters obtained by
transesteriﬁcation (ester exchange reaction) of vegetable oils or
animal fats. These lipid feedstocks are composed by 90–98%
(weight) of triglycerides and small amounts of mono and
diglycerides, free fatty acids (1–5%), and residual amounts of
phospholipids,
phosphatides,
carotenes,
tocopherols,
sulphur
compounds, and traces of water [9].
Transesteriﬁcation is a multiple step reaction, including three
reversible steps in series, where triglycerides are converted to
diglycerides, then diglycerides are converted to monoglycerides,
and monoglycerides are then converted to esters (biodiesel) and
glycerol (by-product). The overall transesteriﬁcation reaction is
described in Fig. 3 where the radicals R1, R2, R3 represent long
chain hydrocarbons, known as fatty acids.
For the transesteriﬁcation reaction oil or fat and a short chain
alcohol (usually methanol) are used as reagents in the presence of a
catalyst (usually NaOH). Although the alcohol:oil theoretical molar
ratio is 3:1, the molar ratio of 6:1 is generally used to complete the
reaction accurately. The relationship between the feedstock mass
input and biodiesel mass output is about 1:1, which means that
theoretically, 1 kg of oil results in about 1 kg of biodiesel.
A homogeneous or heterogeneous, acid or basic catalyst can be
used to enhance the transesteriﬁcation reaction rate, although for
some processes using supercritical ﬂuids (methanol or ethanol) it
may not be necessary to use a catalyst [96]. Most common
Fig. 3. Transesteriﬁcation of triglycerides (overall reaction).

----- Page 10 (native) -----
industrial processes use homogeneous alkali catalysts (e.g. NaOH
or KOH) in a stirred reactor operating in batch mode.
Recently some improvements were proposed for this process, in
particular to be able to operate in continuous mode with reduced
reaction time, such as reactors with improved mixing, microwave
assisted reaction [95,97], cavitation reactors [98,99] and ultrasonic
reactors [100,101].
2.3. Microalgae culture systems
2.3.1. Open versus closed-culture systems
Microalgae cultivation can be done in open-culture systems
such as lakes or ponds and in highly controlled closed-culture
systems called photo-bioreactors (PBRs). A bioreactor is deﬁned as
a system in which a biological conversion is achieved. Thus, a
photo-bioreactor is a reactor in which phototrophs (microbial,
algal or plant cells) are grown or used to carry out a photo-
biological reaction. Although this deﬁnition may apply to both
closed and open-culture systems, for the purpose of this article we
limit the deﬁnition to the former ones.
Open-culture systems are normally less expensive to build and
operate, more durable than large closed reactors and with a large
production capacity when compared with closed systems. How-
ever According to Richmond [16] ponds use more energy to
homogenize nutrients and the water level cannot be kept much
lower than 15 cm (or 150 L/m2) for the microalgae to receive
enough solar energy to grow. Generally ponds are more susceptive
to weather conditions, not allowing control of water temperature,
evaporation and lighting. Also, they may produce large quantities
of microalgae, but occupy more extensive land area and are more
susceptible to contaminations from other microalgae or bacteria.
Moreover, since atmosphere only contains 0.03–0.06% CO2 it is
expected that mass transfer limitation could slow down the cell
growth of microalgae.
PBRs are ﬂexible systems that can be optimized according to the
biological and physiological characteristics of the algal species
being cultivated, allowing one to cultivate algal species that cannot
be grown in open ponds. On a PBR, direct exchange of gases and
contaminants (e.g. microorganisms, dust) between the cultivated
cells and atmosphere are limited or not allowed by the reactor’s
walls. Also, a great proportion of light does not impinge directly on
the culture surface but has to cross the transparent reactor walls.
Depending on their shape or design, PBRs are considered to
have several advantages over open ponds: offer better control over
culture conditions and growth parameters (pH, temperature,
mixing, CO2 and O2), prevent evaporation, reduce CO2 losses, allow
to attain higher microalgae densities or cell concentrations,
higher volumetric productivities, offer a more safe and protected
environment, preventing contamination or minimizing invasion
by competing microorganisms.
Despite their advantages it is not expected that PBR have a
signiﬁcant impact in the near future on any product or process that
can be attained in large outdoor raceway ponds. PBRs suffer from
several drawbacks that need to be considered and solved. Their
main limitations include: overheating, bio-fouling, oxygen accu-
mulation, difﬁculty in scaling up, the high cost of building,
operating and of algal biomass cultivation, and cell damage by
shear stress and deterioration of material used for the photo-stage.
The cost of biomass production in PBRs may be one order of
magnitude higher than in ponds. While in some cases, for some
microalgae species and applications it may be low enough to be
attractive for aquaculture use, in other cases, the higher cell
concentration and the higher productivity achieved in PBR may not
compensate for its higher capital and operating costs.
Table 3 makes a comparison between PBR and ponds for several
culture conditions and growth parameters [102–106].
Comparison of performances achieved by PBRs and open ponds
may not be easy, as the evaluation depends on several factors,
among which the algal species cultivated and the method adopted
to compute productivity. There are three parameters commonly
used to evaluate productivity in algae production units [16]:
 Volumetric productivity (VP): productivity per unit reactor
volume (expressed as g/L d).
 Areal productivity (AP): productivity per unit of ground area
occupied by the reactor (expressed as g/m2 d).
 Illuminated surface productivity (ISP): productivity per unit of
reactor illuminated surface area (expressed as g/m2 d).
As stated by Richmond [16] despite closed systems offer no
advantage in terms of areal productivity, they largely surpass
ponds in terms of volumetric productivity (8 times higher) and cell
concentration (about 16 times higher).
In conclusion, PBR and open ponds should not be viewed as
competing technologies, but the real competing technology will be
genetic engineering [16,85].
2.3.2. Batch versus continuous operation
PBR can be operated in batch or continuous mode. There are
several advantages of using continuous bioreactors as opposed to
the batch mode [88]:
 Continuous bioreactors provide a higher degree of control than
do batch;
 Growth rates can be regulated and maintained for extended time
periods and biomass concentration can be controlled by varying
the dilution rate;
 Because of the steady-state of continuous bioreactors, results are
more reliable and easily reproducible and the desired product
quality may be more easily obtained;
Table 3
A comparison of open and closed large-scale culture systems for microalgae.
Culture systems
for microalgae
Closed systems (PBRs)
Open systems
(Ponds)
Contamination control
Easy
Difﬁcult
Contamination risk
Reduced
High
Sterility
Achievable
None
Process control
Easy
Difﬁcult
Species control
Easy
Difﬁcult
Mixing
Uniform
Very poor
Operation regime
Batch or semi-continuous
Batch or
semi-continuous
Space required
A matter of productivity
PBRs  Ponds
Area/volume ratio
High (20–200 m1)
Low (5–10 m1)
Population (algal cell)
density
High
Low
Investment
High
Low
Operation costs
High
Low
Capital/operating
costs ponds
Ponds 3–10 times lower cost
PBRs > Ponds
Light utilization
efﬁciency
High
Poor
Temperature control
More uniform temperature
Difﬁcult
Productivity
3–5 times more productive
Low
Water losses
Depends upon cooling design
PBRs  Ponds
Hydrodynamic stress
on algae
Low–high
Very low
Evaporation of growth
medium
Low
High
Gas transfer control
High
Low
CO2 losses
Depends on pH, alkalinity, etc.
PBRs  Ponds
O2 inhibition
Greater problem in PBRs
PBRs > Ponds
Biomass concentration
3–5 times in PBRs
PBRs > Ponds
Scale-up
Difﬁcult
Difﬁcult

----- Page 11 (native) -----
 Continuous reactions offer increased opportunities for system
investigation and analysis.
There are yet inherent disadvantages that may make this
process unsuitable for some types of bio-reaction. For example, one
challenge lies in controlling the production of some non-growth-
related products. For this reason, the continuous process often
requires feed-batch culturing, and a continuous nutrient supply.
Wall growth and cell aggregation can also cause wash-out or
prevent optimum steady-state growth.
Another problem is that the original product strain can be lost
over time, if it is overtaken by a faster-growing one. The mixture
viscosity and its heterogeneous nature can make it difﬁcult to
maintain ﬁlamentous organisms. Long growth periods not only
increase the contamination risk, but also dictate that the bioreactor
must be extremely reliable and consistent, incurring a potentially
larger initial expenditure in higher-quality equipment.
2.3.3. Designs and construction materials of culture systems
Depending on the local conditions and available materials it is
possible to design different culture systems with variations in size,
shape, construction materials, inclination and agitation type,
which inﬂuence their performance, cost and durability (resistance
to weathering).
Among the various sizes and shapes of ponds operated at a
relatively large scale the three major designs include [16,26]: (1)
raceway ponds constructed as an endless loop, in which the culture
is circulated by paddle wheels; (2) circular ponds with agitation
provided by a rotating arm; (3) inclined systems where mixing is
achieved through pumping and gravity ﬂow.
Raceway ponds and also natural ponds may be the most
commonly
used
for
commercial
production
of
microalgae.
Normally open ponds are relatively economical, easy to clean up
after cultivation and good for mass cultivation of algae. However
they allow little control of culture conditions, their productivity is
poor, occupy large land area, cultures are easily contaminated, are
limited to few strains of algae, and have difﬁculty in growing algal
cultures for long periods [67].
PBRs can be classiﬁed on the basis of both design and mode of
operation. Many different designs have been developed (serpen-
tine, manifold, helical, and ﬂat), where the main categories include
[16]: (1) ﬂat or tubular; (2) horizontal, inclined, vertical or spiral;
and (3) manifold or serpentine. From these, elevated reactors can
be oriented and tilted at different angles and can use diffuse and
reﬂected light, which plays an important role in productivity.
Generally tubular reactors are suitable for outdoor cultures, are
relatively cheap, have a large illumination surface area and have
fairly good biomass productivities. Disadvantages include fouling,
some degree of wall growth, dissolved oxygen and CO2 along the
tubes, and the pH gradients [67].
Vertical bubble columns and airlift cylinders can attain
substantially increased radial movement of ﬂuid that is necessary
for improved light–dark cycling. These reactor designs have a low
surface/volume, but substantially greater gas hold-ups than
horizontal reactors and a much more chaotic gas–liquid ﬂow
[16,67]. Other prospects include high mass transfer, good mixing
with low shear stress, low energy consumption, high potential for
scalability, easy to sterilize, readily tempered, good for immobi-
lization of algae. Consequently, cultures suffer less from photo-
inhibition and photo-oxidation, and experience a more adequate
light–dark cycle. Limitations include their cost, small illumination
surface area, their construction requires sophisticated materials,
shear stress to algal cultures, and the fact that, since diameter and
height cannot be much increased, a large number of units are
needed to build a commercial plant.
Vertical plate photo-bioreactors mixed by air bubbling seem
even better than bubble columns in terms of productivity and ease
of operation. Flat-plates allow large illumination surface area, are
suitable for outdoor cultures, are good for algae immobilization,
relatively cheap, easy to clean up and readily tempered [67]. It has
been shown that vertical ﬂat plates of 1000–2000 L in volume can
be successfully operated for long periods, hence having potential
for scale up [16]. Packed ﬂat panels mixed by air bubbling can
potentially achieve very high overall ground-areal productivities
through lamination of solar light. Limitations include difﬁculty in
controlling culture temperature, some degree of wall growth,
scale-up require many compartments and support materials, and
possibility of hydrodynamic stress to some algal strains [67].
PBR can be built with various light paths and can be mixed by
different types of pumps or by air bubbling, key issues to reach very
high productivities and efﬁciencies of solar energy utilization. The
type of material used for the photo-stage is of fundamental
importance for a suitable PBR construction. Materials such as
plastic or glass sheets, collapsible or rigid tubes, must lack toxicity,
have high transparency, high mechanical strength, high durability,
chemical stability and low cost [16]. The ease of cleaning and loss
of the plastics transparency exposed outdoors are operational
issues to consider.
According to Richmond [16] the construction materials to build
the side walls and bottom of a pond can vary from simple sand or
clay, to brick or cement, and to expensive plastics like PVC, glass
ﬁber or polyurethane. For the lining most commercial plants use
long-life plastic membranes (e.g. 1–2 mm thick, UV-resistant, PVC
or polyethylene sheets). Sometimes unlined ponds are used to
reduce costs, but they suffer from silt suspension, percolation,
heavy contamination, and their use is limited to a few algal species
and to particular soil and environmental conditions.
3. Other applications and products from microalgae
3.1. Environmental applications
Production of biodiesel and other bio-products from microalgae
can be more environmentally sustainable, cost-effective and
proﬁtable, if combined with processes such as wastewater and
ﬂue gas treatments. In fact various studies demonstrated the use of
microalgae for production of valuable products combined with
environmental applications [107–111].
3.1.1. Flue gas CO2 emissions as microalgae nutrient
Two main CO2 mitigation strategies are normally used [29]: the
chemical reaction-based approaches and the biological mitigation.
In
one
hand,
the
chemical
reaction-based
CO2
mitigation
approaches are energy-consuming, use costly processes, and have
disposal problems because both the captured carbon dioxide and
the wasted absorbents need to be disposed of. In other hand, the
biological CO2 mitigation has attracted much attention in the last
years since it leads to the production of biomass energy in the
process of CO2 ﬁxation through photosynthesis [40].
Flue gases from power plants are responsible for more than 7%
of the total world CO2 emissions from energy use [112]. Also,
industrial exhaust gases contains up to 15% CO2 [113,114],
providing a CO2-rich source for microalgae cultivation and a
potentially more efﬁcient route for CO2 bio-ﬁxation. Therefore, to
use a ﬂue gas emission from an industrial process unit (e.g. from
fuel-ﬁred power plants) as a source of CO2 for the microalgae
growth is envisioned to have a great potential to diminish CO2 and
to provide a very promising alternative to current GHG emissions
mitigation strategies.
The laboratory studies carried out by Zeiler et al. [115] using a
green algaMonoruphidium minutum, demonstratedthatthisalgacan
efﬁciently utilize simulated ﬂue gas containing high levels of carbon
dioxide, as well as sulfur and nitrogen oxides, as a feedstock to

----- Page 12 (native) -----
produce substantial biomass. In this study several important
parameters for productivity have been identiﬁed including nutrient
levels and sparging regime. The green algae Chlorophyta showed the
ability to ﬁx CO2 while capturing solar energy with an efﬁciency of
10–50 times greater than that of terrestrial plants [29].
For that reason, it is beneﬁcial if microalgae are tolerant to high
carbon dioxide levels in order to be used for its ﬁxation from ﬂue
gases. Chlorococcum littorale a marine alga, showed exceptional
tolerance to high CO2 concentration of up to 40% [116]. Chlorella
Strains from hot springs, also showed to be tolerant to high
temperatures up to 42 8C, for CO2 ﬁxation from industrial ﬂue gases
containing up to 40% CO2 [117]. Microalgae S. obliquus and C.
kessleri, separated from the waste treatment ponds of the
Presidente Me´dici coal-ﬁred thermoelectric power plant, also
exhibited good tolerance to high CO2 contents [43,118].
In terms of carbon savings, the use o microalgae for biodiesel
can lower considerably the CO2 emissions because the CO2
released on combustion should equal the CO2 ﬁxed during plant
or algal photosynthesis and growth. This will also depend upon
the process to convert biomass to biodiesel. Generally, the more
energy intensive the process, the greater the CO2 emitted over
the fuel life cycle, assuming that this energy will be derived from
fossil fuel.
3.1.2. Wastewater nitrogen and phosphorous as microalgae nutrients
Aquaculture systems involving microalgae production and
wastewater treatment (e.g. of amino acids, enzyme, or food
industries wastewaters) seems to be quite promising for micro-
algae growth combined with biological cleaning. This allows
nutrition of microalgae by using organic compounds (nitrogen and
phosphorous) available in some manufactures wastewater, not
containing heavy metals and radioisotopes. Additionally, micro-
algae can mitigate the effects of sewage efﬂuent and industrial
sources of nitrogenous waste such as those originating from water
treatment or ﬁsh aquaculture and at the same time contributing to
biodiversity. Moreover, removing nitrogen and carbon from water,
microalgae can help reduce the eutrophication in the aquatic
environment.
Aslan and Kapdan [18] used C. vulgaris for nitrogen and
phosphorus removal from wastewater with an average removal
efﬁciency of 72% for nitrogen and 28% for phosphorus (from 3 to
8 mg/LNH4+and1.5–3.5 mg/LPO4
3).Otherwidelyusedmicroalgae
cultures for nutrient removal are Chlorella [119,120], Scenedesmus
[121], and Spirulina species [122]. Nutrient removal capacities of
Nannochloris [123], Botryococcus brauinii [124], and cyanobacterium
Phormidium bohneri [125,126] have also been investigated.
3.2. Microalgae ﬁne chemicals and bioactive compounds
Depending on the microalgae species various high-value
chemical
compounds
may
be
extracted
such
as
pigments,
antioxidants, b-carotenes, polysaccharides, triglycerides, fatty
acids, vitamins, and biomass, which are largely used as bulk
commodities in different industrial sectors (e.g. pharmaceuticals,
cosmetics, nutraceuticals, functional foods, biofuels). Also, algal
hydrocolloids alginate, agar, and carrageenan are produced from
seaweeds (especially macroalgae) and largely used as viscosity-
modifying agents in foods and pharmaceuticals [127]. Because the
production of these ﬁne chemicals and bioactive compounds
normally demands the use of monocultures and controlled
cultivation systems for a highest productivity and production
efﬁciency, this has led to the development of large-scale PBRs.
3.2.1. Microalgae applications in human health
Consumers are progressively more concerned about debilitat-
ing illnesses (e.g. cholesterol, heart disease, osteoporosis, and
cancer) and are not just relying on prescription medications to
treat or prevent these illnesses, but increasingly examining the link
between their diet and health.
Traditionally nutritional supplements derived from plants have
been used and predominated in the market. Nevertheless, the
health beneﬁts of aquatic microorganisms such as algae are being
investigated and more recognized and appreciated, within the last
three to four decades, especially since the introduction of probiotic
supplements [127]. Microalgae are viewed as having a protein
quality value greater than other vegetable sources, for example,
wheat, rice, and legumes, but poorer than animal sources, for
example, milk and meat.
Microalgae have been found to contain several different types of
sterols, including clionasterol isolated from Spirulina sp. that has
been shown to increase the production of plaminogen-activating
factor in vascular endothelial cells and thus facilitate cardiovas-
cular disease prevention [127]. Additionally, several antioxidant
compounds (e.g. dimethylsulfoniopropionate, mycosporines or
mycosporinelike amino acids, b-carotene, astaxanthin and other
carotenoids) have been isolated from microalgal sources, having
the potential to protect against oxidative stress, cause of a wide
spectrum of diseases and ageing.
Muriellopsis sp. among other microalgae is able to accumulate
high levels of carotenoids such as lutein (normally presented in
dark, leafy green vegetables, such as spinach and kale, as well as in
corn, egg yolk, and some other foods with yellow color) that is used
for the prevention and treatment of degenerative diseases [104].
Spirulina (Arthrospira) and Chlorella (a unicellular green micro-
alga) are both considered edible algae that have been widely
studied both in terms of their component molecules and their
biological activities [40].
S. platensis and Spirulina maxima are the most popular, in terms
of
human
consumption.
Spirulina
sp.
is
currently
largely
cultivated for use as a healthy food, since it boosts the immune
system, helping to prevent both viral infection and cancer. It has
also been reported to increase the number of lactic acid bacteria
in the gastrointestinal tract as a result of a dietary supplement
for promoting healthy hormonal balance in adult human.
Additionally, it has a high nutritional value due to its protein
content of 55–70% of total dry weight. For this reason Spirulina
have been used as a food source in Asia for more than 1000 years
and in Lake Texcoco (Mexico), during the Aztec civilization,
some 700 years ago (e.g. dried and sold as small cakes to
incorporate in bread) [127].
As stated by Barrow and Shahidi [127] Chlorella sp. presents
several health beneﬁts, when their extracts are ingested. For
example, it can increase hemoglobin concentrations, lower blood
sugar levels and act as hypocholesterolemic and hepatoprotective
agents during malnutrition and ethionine intoxication.
Polysaccharide
complexes from
Chlorella
pyrenoidosa
and
possibly Chlorella ellipsoidea contain glucose and any combination
of galactose, rhamnose, mannose, arabinose, N-acetyl glucosamide
and N-acetyl galactosamine [127]. These complexes are believed to
have immunomodulating properties, speciﬁcally immune stimu-
latory
activity
and
can
inhibit
the
proliferation
of
Listeria
monocytogenes and Candida albicans. Also, chlorella extracts may
be administered to mammals, to increase the proliferation of
splenocytes and production of cytokines, and can be used as a
supplement to further stimulate their immune response [127].
Barrow and Shahidi [127] also refer that around years 1942 and
1946, a plankton soup primarily consisting of Chlorella sp. cells was
used as a dietary aid for leprosy patients, showing increases in their
energy, weight and health. Based on C. ellipsoidea, Japanese
researchers have developed several trial food products (e.g.
powdered green tea, soups, noodles, bread and rolls, cookies, ice
cream, and soy sauce).

----- Page 13 (native) -----
Scenedesmus sp. was also previously investigated as a nutritional
food source. Yet, their production at a commercial scale remains
limited or underdeveloped. In general, their extracts are considered
to be an acceptable candidate for incorporation into commonly used
foods such as desserts, fruit puddings, ravioli, noodles, and soups. In
1961, human feeding studies showed similar acceptable levels of
Scenedesmussp. andChlorella extractsfor human consumption[127].
Dunaliella sp. (especially D. salina) has become popular as food-
grade green microalgae. In particular, due to their lipids and
protein contents, glycerol concentration, b-carotene content (up to
4% of dry weight) and their exceptional ability to grow under
brackish conditions [127]. These microalgae are currently being
cultivated by several companies, in both Israel and Australia, as
sources of these compounds and as dietary supplements and
powders, containing vitamins A and C [128]. Furthermore, it has
been postulated that the carotenoids found in Spirulina sp. and
Dunaliella sp. may be more potent anticancer agents than b-
carotene [104,105].
Long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs), especially of
v3 and v6 series such as eicosapentaenoic (EPA), docosahexaenoic
(DHA), and arachidonic (AA) are considered pharmacologically
important for dietetics and therapeutics [40]. They have been used
for prophylactic and therapeutic treatment of chronic inﬂamma-
tions (e.g. rheumatism, skin diseases, and inﬂammation of the
mucosa of the gastrointestinal tract). Also, they are believed to
have a positive effect on cardio-circulatory diseases, coronary
heart diseases, atherosclerosis, hypertension, cholesterol, and
cancer treatment [127].
Microalgae such as N. oculata, Phaeodactylum tricornutum,
and Thalassiosira pseudonana are able to produce PUFA with
amounts varying, not only between species, but also during the
various growth phases. A much higher percentage of the total
cellular
EPA
was
partitioned
to
triacylglycerols
(TAGs)
in
stationary phase cells of N. oculata compared to P. tricornutum,
while T. pseudonana produce EPA and DHA and partitioned these
to TAGs during the stationary growth phase [127]. Besides, CO2
increase within photoautotrophic culture and induction of
heterotrophic growth in these organisms, allow the increase
and variation in PUFA composition of respectively Nannochlor-
opsis sp. and C. cohnii [127].
Astaxanthin produced from H. pluvialis (1.5–3% of dry weight)
is a high-value carotenoid, being very good at protecting
membranous phospholipids and other lipids against peroxida-
tion. The U.S. FDA for marketing has cleared H. pluvialis as a dietary
supplement and it has been also approved in several European
countries for human consumption. Preclinical studies suggested
several health beneﬁts for consuming astaxanthin such as [127]:
immune-modulating functions (e.g. antibody production, anti-
tumor activity); anticancer activity (inhibit cancer formation and
growth in colon, bladder, liver, mammary, and oral cavity); photo-
protection (e.g. from ultraviolet light); anti-inﬂammatory (e.g. for
asthma, ulcers, anti muscle damage, providing increased muscle
endurance);
cardiovascular
health
(e.g.
lower
the
risk
for
atherosclerosis); reduce risk for neurodegenerative diseases
(e.g. Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s dementia); protect the eye
retina from oxidative damage and has an effect against age-
related macular disease.
3.2.2. Microalgae for aquaculture and animal feed
Considerable
efforts
have
been
made
to
promote
the
microalgae use in human food. However, high production costs
and fear of toxicological contamination have limited algae
application to expensive ‘‘healthy’’ foods. So far, microalgae
culture have been more successful for food source and feed
additive in the commercial rearing of many aquatic animals (e.g.
rearing larvae and juveniles of many commercially important
mollusks, penaeid prawn larvae, crustaceans and ﬁsh) both
freshwater and marine.
Microalgae can also be used for culturing several types of
zooplankton (rotifers, cladocerans, brine shrimp or copepods) used
as live food in crustacean and ﬁnﬁsh farming [89,128,129].
Isochrysis galbana and Tetraselmis suecica are considered the best
food for larval bivalves, growing much better in unﬁltered
seawater to which these algae have been added. Drum-fried
Scenedesmus can be used as Artemia food and Chlorella (marine,
freshwater, or dried) is well suited for the rotifer Brachionus
plicatilis cultivation but not for clams or oysters [89].
Although nutritional requirements for some consumer species
have been deﬁned, no set of nutritional criteria have yet been
advanced. Generally, the algae must be non-toxic, in an acceptable
size for ingestion, the cell wall should be digestible, and with
sufﬁcient biochemical constituents. Lipids quality rather than
quantity is of prime importance to the nutritional value of
microalgae. Depending on the amount of essential fatty acids
(especially of the v6 and v3 groups) the ﬁsh larvae are either
healthy or malformed [89].
Two distinct ways of growing microalgae for aquaculture
applications can be distinguished [89,129]:
(1) Natural populations of phytoplankton, either as they are found
in nature or from cultures enriched by adding nutrients. The
major drawbacks of using natural phytoplankton are the lack of
control over production, consumption by undesirable pre-
dators, and contaminations by other species better adapted to
existing environmental conditions, available nutrients, and
algal populations composition.
(2) Algal monocultures, for example when it is required a high
quality feed source with known nutritional properties or
bacteria free algal cultures with reduced risk of introducing
unwanted pathogens into animal cultures. The major difﬁculty,
especially with large-scale monocultures, is that microalgae
are susceptible to infection by viruses, bacteria, or fungi, and
are exposed to predators such as protozoan, rotifers, crusta-
ceans, and even microplantonic larvae of benthic organisms. As
collapse of microalgae cultures owing to predation is very
unpredictable in many aquaculture operations it is common
practice to maintain cultures in duplicate.
Most problems with marine microalgae cultures are related to
predation by various types of protozoans (e.g. zooﬂagellates,
ciliates, and rhizopods). Other problem is the blooming of
unwanted or toxic species such as the blue-green algae or
dinoﬂagellates (red tides) that can result in high toxicity for
consumers and even for humans. Examples are the massive
development of green chlorococcalean algae, such as Synechocystis
in freshwater, and also the development of Phaeodactylum in
seawater that is undesirable for bivalve molluscs. [89]. A more
controlled but more difﬁcult approach consists of inducing and
managing algal blooms completely separated from their con-
sumers, i.e. ﬁrst it is induced a bloom of natural phytoplankton and
then, the consumers are introduced [89]. Also cultured microalgae
can be used directly while alive or indirectly in a concentrated form
after harvesting and preserving (e.g. as additives in pelleted food).
The most promising source of natural astaxanthin is H. pluvialis
that synthesizes it from b-carotenes and accumulates it in oil
droplets. This involves the action of enzymes presented in these
lipid vesicles, supporting the suggestion that b-carotenes might be
transported from the chloroplast to the lipid vesicles where the
pigment is transformed into astaxanthin. Normally, astaxanthin is
found either esteriﬁed with fatty acids or conjugated to proteins
since its free form is very sensitive to oxidation. Currently, the
largest market for astaxanthin is probably salmon and trout that

----- Page 14 (native) -----
are farmed and fed artiﬁcial diets [104]. Other animals, such
shrimp, prawns, and chickens also beneﬁt from astaxanthin
supplementation in their diet (e.g. for exoskeleton and skin
coloration, muscle, and yolk).
Although open pond systems can be used for the commercial
production of H. pluvialis, it is normally done at large-scale PBR
where two production phases can be better induced and managed:
one ﬁrst phase of fast growth to produce large quantities of green
biomass under conditions of nutrient sufﬁciency, light, pH, and
temperature control, and a second phase where stresses are induced
(e.g. through nutrients decrease, acetate, Fe, salt, temperature, etc.)
to stimulate astaxanthin accumulation. In the second phase the
reddening
H.
pluvialis
cells
lose
their
ﬂagella
and
become
signiﬁcantly larger, heavier, and denser than average (up to
50 mm versus 10–15 mm for the green ﬂagellates), which facilitates
its harvesting by gravitational settling and centrifugation [126].
4. Conclusions
Current efforts and business investment are driving attention
and marketing efforts on the promises of producing algal biodiesel
and superior production systems.
A large number of companies are claiming that they are at the
forefront of the technology and will be producing algal biodiesel
economically within the next few years. However most of these
companies have limited technical expertise and few have actually
made biodiesel from algae.
Producing algal biodiesel requires large-scale cultivation and
harvesting systems, with the challenging of reducing the cost per
unit area. At a large scale, the algal growth conditions need to be
carefully controlled and optimum nurturing environment have to
be provided. Such processes are most economical when combined
with sequestration of CO2 from ﬂue gas emissions, with waste-
water remediation processes, and/or with the extraction of high
value compounds for application in other process industries.
Current limitations to a more widespread utilization of this
feedstock for biodiesel production concern the optimization of the
microalgae harvesting, oil extraction processes, and supply of CO2
for a high efﬁciency of microalgae production. Also, light, nutrients,
temperature, turbulence, CO2 and O2 levels need to be adjusted
carefully to provide optimum conditions for oil content and
biomass yield.
It
is
therefore
clear
that
a
considerable
investment
in
technological development and technical expertise is still needed
before algal biodiesel is economically viable and can become a
reality. This should be accomplished together with strategic
planning and political and economic support.
Further efforts on microalgae production should concentrate in
reducing costs in small-scale and large-scale systems. This can be
achieved for example by using cheap sources of CO2 for culture
enrichment (e.g. from a ﬂue gas), use of nutrient-rich wastewaters,
or inexpensive fertilizers, use of cheaper design culture systems
with automated process control and with fewer manual labor, use
of greenhouses and heated efﬂuents to increase algal yields.
Apart from saving costs of raw-materials (nutrients and fresh
water use), these measures will help to reduce GHG emissions,
waste amount, and the feed cost by using of nitrogen fertilizers.
Also, will raise the availability of microalgae biomass for different
applications (e.g. food, agriculture, medicine, and biofuels, among
others) and will contribute to the sustainability and market
competitiveness of the microalgae industry.
References
[1] European Environmental Agency (EEA). Greenhouse gas emission trends and
projections in Europe 2004: progress by the EU and its Member States
towards achieving their Kyoto Protocol targets. Report N85. Copenhagen,
Denmark; 2004.
[2] European Environmental Agency (EEA). Greenhouse gas emission trends
and projections in Europe 2007: tracking progress towards Kyoto targets.
European Environmental Agency (EEA) Report N85. Copenhagen, Denmark;
2007.
[3] International Energy Agency (IEA). World Energy Outlook 2007. China and
India Insights, Paris, France; 2007.
[4] Ormerod WG, Freund P, Smith A, Davison J. Ocean storage of CO2. IEA
greenhouse gas R&D programme. UK: International Energy Agency; 2002.
[5] Laherrere J. Forecasting production from discovery. In: ASPO; 2005.
[6] Dewulf J, Van Langenhove H. Renewables-based technology: sustainability
assessment. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd; 2006.
[7] Gilbert R, Perl A. Transport revolutions: moving people and freight without
oil. Earthscan; 2008.
[8] COM (2006) 34 ﬁnal. An EU strategy for biofuels. Commission of the European
Communities, Brussels, 8.2.2006.
[9] Bozbas K. Biodiesel as an alternative motor fuel: production and policies in
the European Union. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 2008;12:
542–52.
[10] Scarlat N, Dallemand JF, Pinilla FG. Impact on agricultural land resources of
biofuels production and use in the European Union. In: Bioenergy: challenges
and opportunities. International conference and exhibition on bioenergy;
2008.
[11] Renewable Fuel Agency (RFA). The Gallagher review of the indirect effects of
biofuels production; 2008.
[12] Canakci M, Sanli H. Biodiesel production from various feedstocks and their
effects on the fuel properties. Journal of Industrial Microbiology and Bio-
technology 2008;35:431–41.
[13] Reinhardt G, Rettenmaier N, Ko¨ppen S. How sustainable are biofuels for
transportation?In: Bioenergy: challenges and opportunities. International
conference and exhibition on bioenergy; 2008.
[14] Li Y, Wang B, Wu N, Lan CQ. Effects of nitrogen sources on cell growth and
lipid production of Neochloris oleoabundans. Applied Microbiology and Bio-
technology 2008;81(4):629–36.
[15] Li Y, Horsman M, Wu N, Lan CQ, Dubois-Calero N. Biofuels from microalgae.
Biotechnology Progress 2008;24(4):815–20.
[16] Richmond A. Handbook of microalgal culture: biotechnology and applied
phycology. Blackwell Science Ltd; 2004.
[17] Sheehan J, Dunahay T, Benemann J, Roessler P. A look back at the U.S.
Department of Energy’s aquatic species program: biodiesel from algae.
NREL/TP-580-24190, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, USA; 1998.
[18] Aslan S, Kapdan IK. Batch kinetics of nitrogen and phosphorus removal
from synthetic wastewater by algae. Ecological Engineering 2006;28(1):
64–70.
[19] Pratoomyot J, Srivilas P, Noiraksar T. Fatty acids composition of 10 microalgal
species. Songklanakarin Journal of Science and Technology 2005;27(6):
1179–87.
[20] Renaud SM, Thinh LV, Parry DL. The gross chemical composition and fatty
acid composition of 18 species of tropical Australian microalgae for possible
use in mariculture. Aquaculture 1999;170:147–59.
[21] Chisti Y. Biodiesel from microalgae. Biotechnology Advances 2007;25(3):
294–306.
[22] Hossain ABMS, Salleh A, Boyce AN, Chowdhury P, Naqiuddin M. Biodiesel fuel
production from algae as renewable energy. American Journal of Biochem-
istry and Biotechnology 2008;4(3):250–4.
[23] Hu Q, Sommerfeld M, Jarvis E, Ghirardi M, Posewitz M, Seibert M, et al.
Microalgal triacylglycerols as feedstocks for biofuels production: perspec-
tives and advances. The Plant Journal 2008;54:621–39.
[24] RodolﬁL, Zittelli GC, Bassi N, Padovani G, Biondi N, Bonini G, et al. Microalgae
for oil: strain selection, induction of lipid synthesis and outdoor mass
cultivation in a low-cost photobioreactor. Biotechnology and Bioengineering
2009;102(1):100–12.
[25] Rosenberg JN, Oyler GA, Wilkinson L, Betenbaugh MJ. A green light for
engineered algae: redirecting metabolism to fuel a biotechnology revolution.
Current Opinion in Biotechnology 2008;19(5):430–6.
[26] Schenk PM, Hall SRT, Stephens E, Marx UC, Mussgnug JH, Posten C, et al.
Second generation biofuels: high-efﬁciency microalgae for biodiesel produc-
tion. Bioenergy Research 2008;1:20–43.
[27] Tsukahara K, Sawayama S. Liquid fuel production using microalgae. Journal of
the Japan Petroleum Institute 2005;48(5):251–9.
[28] Delucchi MA. A Lifecycle Emissions Model (LEM): lifecycle emissions from
transportation fuels; motor vehicles, transportation modes, electricity use,
heating and cooking fuels. Main report UCD-ITS-RR-03-17; 2003.
[29] Wang B, Li Y, Wu N, Lan CQ. CO2 bio-mitigation using microalgae. Applied
Microbiology and Biotechnology 2008;79(5):707–18.
[30] Directive 2003/30/EC on the promotion of the use of biofuels or other
renewable fuels for transport; May 8, 2003.
[31] Raja R, Hemaiswarya S, Kumar NA, Sridhar S, Rengasamy R. A perspective on
the biotechnological potential of microalgae. Critical Reviews in Microbiol-
ogy 2008;34(2):77–88.
[32] Spolaore P, Joannis-Cassan C, Duran E, Isambert A. Commercial applications
of microalgae. Journal of Bioscience and Bioengineering 2006;101(2):
87–96.
[33] Barclay WR. Mixtures of omega-3 and omega-6 highly unsaturated fatty acids
from euryhaline microorganisms. US Patent 6977167; 2005.

----- Page 15 (native) -----
[34] Behrens PW, Thompson JM, Apt K, Pfeifer JW, Wynn JP, Lippmeier C, et al.
Production of high levels of DHA in microalgae using modiﬁed amounts of
chloride and potassium. US Patent 7163811; 2007.
[35] Kanel JS, Guelcher SA. Method for rupturing microalgae cells. US Patent
6000551; 1999.
[36] European Commission. The impact of a minimum 10% obligation for biofuel
use in the EU-27 in 2020 on agricultural markets, impact assessment renew-
able energy roadmap. European Commission (EC), Directorate-General For
Agriculture and Rural Development; March 2007.
[37] Torrey M. Algae in the tank. International News on Fats Oils and Related
Materials 2008;19(7):432–7.
[38] Bijl HL, Wolf JH, Schaap A, Visser JMJ. Preparation of microbial polyunsatu-
rated fatty acid containing oil from pasteurised biomass. US Patent 6727373;
2004.
[39] Yokochi T, Nakahara T, Higashihara T, Tanaka S, Yaguchi T. Microorganisms
capable of producing highly unsaturated fatty acids and process for produ-
cing highly unsaturated fatty acids by using the microorganisms. US Patent
6582941; 2003.
[40] Pulz O, Gross W. Valuable products from biotechnology of microalgae.
Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology 2004;65(6):635–48.
[41] Barclay B. Microalgae Culture Collection 1984–1985. Microalgal Technology
Research Group (MTRG). SERI/SP-231-2486; 1984.
[42] Chiu SY, Kao CY, Tsai MT, Ong SC, Chen CH, Lin CS. Lipid accumulation and CO2
utilization of Nannochloropsis oculata in response to CO2 aeration. Biore-
source Technology 2009;100:833–8.
[43] De Morais MG, Costa JAV. Carbon dioxide ﬁxation by Chlorella kessleri, C.
vulgaris, Scenedesmus obliquus and Spirulina sp. cultivated in ﬂasks and vertical
tubular photobioreactors. Biotechnology Letters 2007;29(9):1349–52.
[44] Demirbas A. Progress and recent trends in biodiesel fuels. Energy Conversion
and Management 2009;50:14–34.
[45] Eriksen NT. The technology of microalgal culturing. Biotechnology Letters
2008;30:1525–36.
[46] Feinberg DA. Fuel options from microalgae with representative chemical
compositions. SERI/TR-231-2427; 1984.
[47] Gouveia L, Oliveira AC. Microalgae as a raw material for biofuels production.
Journal of Industrial Microbiology and Biotechnology 2009;36:269–74.
[48] Grima EM, Ferna´ndez FGA, Camacho FG, Rubio FC, Chisti Y. Scale-up
of tubular photobioreactors. Journal of Applied Phycology 2000;12:
355–68.
[49] Huntley ME, Redalje DG. CO2 mitigation and renewable oil from photosyn-
thetic microbes: a new appraisal. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for
Global Change 2007;12(4):573–608.
[50] Illman AM, Scragg AH, Shales SW. Increase in Chlorella strains caloriﬁc values
when grown in low nitrogen medium. Enzyme and Microbial Technology
2000;27:631–5.
[51] Leathers J, Celina M, Chianelli R, Thoma S, Gupta V. Systems analysis and
futuristic designs of advanced biofuel factory, concepts. SANDIA Report,
SAND2007-6872; 2007.
[52] Lee YK. Microalgal mass culture systems and methods: their limitation and
potential. Journal of Applied Phycology 2001;13:307–15.
[53] Sancho MEM, Castillo JMJ, El YousﬁF. Photoautotrophic consumption of
phosphorus by Scenedesmus obliquus in a continuous culture. Inﬂuence of
light intensity. Process Biochemistry 1999;34(8):811–8.
[54] Miao X, Wu Q. Biodiesel production from heterotrophic microalgal oil.
Bioresource Technology 2006;97(6):841–6.
[55] Michiki H. Biological CO2 ﬁxation and utilization project. Energy Conversion
and Management 1995;36(6–9):701–5.
[56] Minowa R, Yokoyama S, Kishimoto M, Okakurat T. Oil production from algal
cells of Dunaliella tertiolecta by direct thermochemical liquefaction. Fuel
1995;74(12):1735–8.
[57] Moheimani NR. The culture of Coccolithophorid Algae for carbon dioxide
bioremediation. PhD thesis. Murdoch University; 2005.
[58] Moheimani NR, Borowitzka MA. The long-term culture of the coccolitho-
phore Pleurochrysis carterae (Haptophyta) in outdoor raceway ponds. Journal
of Applied Phycology 2006;18:703–12.
[59] Natrah F, Yoso VFM, Shari VM, Abas F, Mariana NS. Screening of Malaysian
indigenous microalgae for antioxidant properties and nutritional value.
Journal of Applied Phycology 2007;19:711–8.
[60] Negoro M, Shioji N, Miyamoto K, Miura Y. Growth of microalgae in high
CO2 gas and effects of SOX and NOX. Applied Biochemistry and Biotech-
nology – Part A Enzyme Engineering and Biotechnology 1991;28–29:877–
86.
[61] Peng W, Wu Q, Tu P, Zhao N. Pyrolitic characteristics of microalgae as
renewable energy source determined by thermogravimetric analysis. Bior-
esource Technology 2001;80:1–7.
[62] Poisson L, Devos M, Pencreac’h G, Ergan F. Beneﬁts and current developments
of polyunsaturated fatty acids from microalgae lipids. OCL – Oleagineux
Corps Gras Lipides 2002;9(2-3):92–5.
[63] Sawayama S, Minowa T, Yokoyama SY. Possibility of renewable energy
production and CO2 mitigation by thermochemical liquefaction of micro-
algae. Biomass and Bioenergy 1999;17(1):33–9.
[64] Scragg AH, Illman AM, Carden A, Shales SW. Growth of microalgae with
increased caloriﬁc values in a tubular bioreactor. Biomass and Bioenergy
2002;23(1):67–73.
[65] Teixeira CM, Morales ME. Microalga como mate´ria-prima para a produc¸a˜o de
biodiesel. Revista: Biodiesel o Novo combustı´vel do Brasil; 2007. pp. 91–6.
[66] Thomas WH, Tornabene TG, Weissman J. Screening for lipid yielding micro-
algae: activities for 1983. SERI/STR-231-2207; 1984.
[67] Ugwu CU, Aoyagi H, Uchiyama H. Photobioreactors for mass cultivation of
algae. Bioresource Technology 2008;99(10):4021–8.
[68] Zhu CJ, Lee YK. Determination of biomass dry weight of marine microalgae.
Journal of Applied Phycology 1997;9:189–94.
[69] O¨ tles S, Pire R. Fatty acid composition of Chlorella and Spirulina microalgae
species. Journal of AOAC International 2001;84(6):1708–14.
[70] Kheira AAA, Atta NMM. Response of Jatropha curcas L. to water deﬁcit: yield,
water use efﬁciency and oilseed characteristics. Biomass and Bioenergy; in
press. doi:10.1016/j.biombioe.2008.05.015.
[71] Callaway JC. Hempseed as a nutritional resource: an overview. Euphytica
2004;140:65–72.
[72] Hili AM, Feinberg DA. Fuel from microalgae: lipid products, energy from
biomass: building on a generic technology base. In: Second technical review
meeting; 1984.
[73] Kulay LA, Silva GA. Comparative screening LCA of agricultural stages of soy
and castor beans. In: 2nd international conference on life cycle management
– LCM2005; 2005. pp. 5–7.
[74] Mobius BioFuels. What is biodiesel? Mobius Biofuels, LLC; 2008. Accessed in
December at: http://www.mobiusbiofuels.com/biodiesel.htm.
[75] Nielsen DC. Oilseed productivity under varying water availability. In: Pro-
ceedings of 20th annual central plains irrigation conference and exposition;
2008. pp. 30–33.
[76] Peterson CL, Hustrulid T. Carbon cycle for rapeseed oil biodiesel fuels.
Biomass and Bioenergy 1998;14(2):91–101.
[77] Rathbauer J, Prankl H, Krammer K. Energetic use of natural vegetable oil in
Austria. Austria: BLT – Federal Institute of Agricultural Engineering; 2002.
[78] Reijnders L, Huijbregts MAJ. Biogenic greenhouse gas emissions linked to the
life cycles of biodiesel derived from European rapeseed and Brazilian soy-
beans. Journal of Cleaner Production 2008;16:1943–8.
[79] Vollmann J, Moritz T, Karg C, Baumgartner S, Wagentrist H. Agronomic
evaluation of camelina genotypes selected for seed quality characteristics.
Industrial Crops and Products 2007;26:270–7.
[80] Zappi M, Hernandez R, Sparks D, Horne J, Brough M, Swalm DC, et al. A review
of the engineering aspects of the biodiesel industry. MSU E-TECH Laboratory
Report ET-03-003; 2003.
[81] Bahadur NP, Boocock DGB, Konar SK. Liquid hydrocarbons from catalytic
pyrolysis of sewage sludge lipid and canola oil: evaluation of fuel properties.
Energy Fuels 1995;9:248–56.
[82] Babu BV. Biomass pyrolysis: a state-of-the-art review. Biofuels Bioproducts
Bioreﬁnin 2008;2(5):393–414.
[83] Boateng AA, Mullen CA, Goldberg N, Hicks KB, Jung HJG, Lamb JFS. Production
of bio-oil from alfalfa stems by ﬂuidized-bed fast pyrolysis. Industrial and
Engineering Chemistry Research 2008;47:4115–22.
[84] Maxwell EL, Folger AG, Hogg SE. Resource evaluation and site selection for
microalgae production systems. SERI/TR-215-2484; May 1985.
[85] Gressel J. Transgenics are imperative for biofuel crops. Plant Science
2008;174(3):246–63.
[86] Kaewpintong K. Cultivation of Haematococcus pluvialis in Airlift Bioreactor.
Master thesis in Chemical Engineering. Department of Chemical Engineering,
Faculty of Engineering, Chulalongkorn University; 2004.
[87] Chojnacka K, Marquez-Rocha FJ, Kinetic. Stoichiometric relationships of the
energy and carbon metabolism in the culture of microalgae. Biotechnology
2004;3(1):21–34.
[88] Williams JA. Keys to Bioreactor selection. CEP Magazine 2002;34–41.
[89] De Pauw N, Morales J, Persoone G. Mass culture of microalgae in aqua-
culture systems: progress and constraints. Hydrobiologia 1984;116/117:
121–34.
[90] Barbosa MJGV. Microalgal photobioreactors: scale-up and optimisation. PhD
thesis. Wageningen University, The Netherlands; 2003.
[91] Weissman JC, Goebel RP. Design and analysis of microalgal open pond
systems for the purpose of producing fuels: a subcontract report. US DOE-
SERI; 1987.
[92] Liu ZY, Wang GC, Zhou BC. Effect of iron on growth and lipid accumulation in
Chlorella vulgaris. Bioresource Technology 2008;99:4717–22.
[93] Macedo RVT, Alegre RM. Inﬂueˆncia do Teor de Nitrogeˆnio no Cultivo de
Spirulina Maxima em Dois Nı´veis de Temperatura – Parte II. Produc¸a˜o de
Lipı´dios Cieˆnc Tecnol Aliment Campinas 2001;21(2):183–6.
[94] Grima ME, Belarbi EH, Fernandez FGA, Medina AR, Chisti Y. Recovery of
microalgal biomass and metabolites: process options and economics. Bio-
technology Advances 2003;20(7-8):491–515.
[95] Cravotto G, Boffa L, Mantegna S, Perego P, Avogadro M, Cintas P. Improved
extraction of vegetable oils under high-intensity ultrasound and/or micro-
waves. Ultrasonics Sonochemistry 2008;15(5):898–902.
[96] Warabi Y, Kusdiana D, Saka S. Reactivity of triglycerides and fatty acids of
rapeseed oil in supercritical alcohols. Bioresource Technology 2004;91(3):
283–7.
[97] Azcan N, Danisman A. Microwave assisted transesteriﬁcation of rapeseed oil.
Fuel 2008;87:1781–8.
[98] Gogate PR. Cavitational reactors for process intensiﬁcation of chemical
processing applications: a critical review. Chemical Engineering and Proces-
sing 2008;47:515–27.
[99] Gogate PR, Kabadi AM. A review of applications of cavitation in biochemical
engineering/biotechnology.
Biochemical
Engineering
Journal
2009;44:
60–72.

----- Page 16 (native) -----
[100] Kalva A, Sivasankar T, Moholkar VS. Physical mechanism of ultrasound-
assisted synthesis of biodiesel. Industrial and Engineering Chemistry
Research 2008;48(1):534–44.
[101] Deshmane VG, Gogate PR, Pandit AB. Ultrasound-assisted synthesis of bio-
diesel from palm fatty acid distillate. Industrial and Engineering Chemistry
Research; in press.
[102] Borowitzka MA. Commercial production of microalgae: ponds, tanks, tubes
and fermenters. Journal of Biotechnology 1999;70(1–3):313–21.
[103] Chen F. High cell density culture of microalgae in heterotrophic growth.
Tibtech 1996;14:421–6.
[104] Del Campo JA, Garcı´a-Gonza´lez M, Guerrero MG. Outdoor cultivation of
microalgae for carotenoid production: current state and perspectives.
Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology 2007;74:1163–74.
[105] Canela APRF, Rosa PTV, Marques MOM, Meireles MAA. Supercritical ﬂuid
extraction of fatty acids and carotenoids from the microalgae Spirulina
maxima. Industrial and Engineering Chemistry Research 2002;41(12):
3012–8.
[106] Piccolo T. Aquatic biofuels. GlobeFish-FIIU; May 2008, Available at: http://
www.globeﬁsh.org/ﬁles/Aquaticbiofuels_638.pdf.
[107] Bilanovic D, Andargatchew A, Kroeger T, Shelef G. Freshwater and marine
microalgae sequestering of CO2 at different C and N concentrations—
response surface methodology analysis. Energy Conversion and Management
2009;50:262–7.
[108] Hodaifa G, Martı`nez ME, Sa`nchez S. Use of industrial wastewater from olive-
oil extraction for biomass production of Scenedesmus obliquus. Bioresource
Technology 2008;99(5):1111–7.
[109] Jacob-Lopes E, Lacerda LMCF, Franco TT. Biomass production and carbon
dioxide ﬁxation by Aphanothece microscopica Na¨geli in a bubble column
photobioreactor. Biochemical Engineering Journal 2008;40(1):27–34.
[110] Jacob-Lopes E, Scoparo CHG, Lacerda LMCF, Franco TT. Effect of light
cycles (night/day) on CO2 ﬁxation and biomass production by microalgae
in photobioreactors. Chemical Engineering and Processing 2009;48(1):
306–10.
[111] Murakami M, Yamada F, Nishide T, Muranaka T, Yamaguchi N, Takimoto Y.
The biological CO2 ﬁxation using Chlorella sp. with high capability in ﬁxing
CO2. Studies in Surface Science and Catalysis 1998;114:315–20.
[112] Kadam KL. Power plant ﬂue gas as a source of CO2 for Microalgae cultivation:
economic impact of different process options. Energy Conversion and Man-
agement 1997;38(Suppl.):505–10.
[113] Kadam KL. Microalgae production from power plant ﬂue gas: environmental
implications on a life cycle basis. NREL/TP-510-29417. Colorado, USA:
National Renewable Energy Laboratory; 2001.
[114] Maeda K, Owada M, Kimura N, Omata K, Karube I. CO2 ﬁxation from the ﬂue
gas on coal-ﬁred thermal power plant by microalgae. Energy Conversion and
Management 1995;36(6–9):717–20.
[115] Zeiler KG, Heacox DA, Toon ST, Kadam KL, Brown LM. Use of microalgae for
assimilation and utilization of carbon dioxide from fossil fuel-ﬁred power
plant ﬂue gas. Energy Conversion and Management 1995;36(6–9):707–12.
[116] Iwasaki I, Hu Q, Kurano N, Miyachi S. Effect of extremely high-CO2 stress on
energy distribution between photosystem I and photosystem II in a ‘high-
CO2’ tolerant green alga. Chlorococcum littorale and the intolerant green
alga Stichococcus bacillaris. Journal of Photochemistry and Photobiology
1998;B44:184–90.
[117] Sakai N, Sakamoto Y, Kishimoto N, Chihara M, Karube I. Chlorella strains from
hot springs tolerant to high temperature and high CO2. Energy Conversion
and Management 1995;36(6–9):693–6.
[118] De Morais MG, Costa JAV. Isolation and selection of microalgae from coal
ﬁred thermoelectric power plant for bioﬁxation of carbon dioxide. Energy
Conversion and Management 2007;48(7):2169–73.
[119] Gonzales LE, Canizares RO, Baena S. Efﬁciency of ammonia and phosphorus
removal from a Colombian agroindustrial wastewater by the microalgae
Chlorealla vulgaris and Scenedesmus dimorphus. Bioresource Technology
1997;60:259–62.
[120] Lee K, Lee CG. Effect of light/dark cycles on wastewater treatments by
microalgae. Biotechnology and Bioprocess Engineering 2001;6:194–9.
[121] Martı´nez ME, Sa´nchez S, Jime´nez JM, El YousﬁF, Mun˜oz L. Nitrogen and
phosphorus removal from urban wastewater by the microalga Scenedesmus
obliquus. Bioresource Technology 2000;73(3):263–72.
[122] Olguı´n EJ, Galicia S, Mercado G, Perez T. Annual productivity of Spirulina
(Arthrospira) and nutrient removal in a pig wastewater recycle process under
tropical conditions. Journal of Applied Phycology 2003;15:249–57.
[123] Jimenez-Perez MV, Sanches-Castillo P, Romera O, Fernandez-Moreno D,
Perez-Martinez C. Growth and nutrient removal in free and immobilized
planktonic green algae isolated from pig manure. Enzyme and Microbial
Technology 2004;34:392–8.
[124] An JY, Sim SJ, Lee JS, Kim BK. Hydrocarbon production from secondarily
treated piggery wastewater by the green algae, Botryococcus braunii. Journal
of Applied Phycology 2003;15:185–91.
[125] Dumas A, Laliberte G, Lessard P, Noue J. Biotreatment of ﬁsh farm efﬂuents
using the cyanobacterium Phormidium bohneri. Aquaculture Engineering
1998;17:57–68.
[126] Laliberte G, Lessard P, Noue J, Sylvestre S. Effect of phosphorus addition on
nutrient removal from wastewater with the cyanobacterium Phormidium
bohneri. Bioresource Technology 1997;59:227–33.
[127] Barrow C, Shahidi F. Marine nutraceuticals and functional foods. CRC Press,
Taylor & Francis Group; 2008.
[128] Brown MR, Jeffrey SW, Volkman JK, Dunstan GA. Nutritional properties of
microalgae for mariculture. Aquaculture 1997;151(1–4):315–31.
[129] Borowitzka MA. Microalgae for aquaculture: opportunities and constraints.
Journal of Applied Phycology 1997;9:393–401.