

----- Page 1 (native) -----
Inflammageing: chronic inflammation in ageing, cardiovascular 
disease, and frailty
Luigi Ferrucci1,* and Elisa Fabbri2
1Translational Gerontology Branch, National Institute on Aging, NIH, Baltimore, MD, USA.
2Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
Abstract
Most older individuals develop inflammageing, a condition characterized by elevated levels of 
blood inflammatory markers that carries high susceptibility to chronic morbidity, disability, frailty, 
and premature death. Potential mechanisms of inflammageing include genetic susceptibility, 
central obesity, increased gut permeability, changes to microbiota composition, cellular 
senescence, NLRP3 inflammasome activation, oxidative stress caused by dysfunctional 
mitochondria, immune cell dysregulation, and chronic infections. Inflammageing is a risk factor 
for cardiovascular diseases (CVDs), and clinical trials suggest that this association is causal. 
Inflammageing is also a risk factor for chronic kidney disease, diabetes mellitus, cancer, 
depression, dementia, and sarcopenia, but whether modulating inflammation beneficially affects 
the clinical course of non-CVD health problems is controversial. This uncertainty is an important 
issue to address because older patients with CVD are often affected by multimorbidity and frailty 
— which affect clinical manifestations, prognosis, and response to treatment — and are associated 
with inflammation by mechanisms similar to those in CVD. The hypothesis that inflammation 
affects CVD, multimorbidity, and frailty by inhibiting growth factors, increasing catabolism, and 
interfering with homeostatic signalling is supported by mechanistic studies but requires 
confirmation in humans. Whether early modulation of inflammageing prevents or delays the onset 
of cardiovascular frailty should be tested in clinical trials.
With the extension of life expectancy and the rising percentage of older individuals in the 
general population, understanding why ageing results in progressively higher susceptibility 
to chronic morbidity, disability, and frailty has become a public health priority1. An 
* ferruccilu@mail.nih.gov.
Author contributions
Both authors researched data for the article, discussed its content, wrote the manuscript, and reviewed and edited it before submission.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Publisher's Disclaimer: Publisher’s note
Publisher's Disclaimer: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional 
affiliations.
Review criteria
The information in this Review is based on a search of the scientific literature published since 2008 using the Medline database and 
the search terms: “inflammaging”, “inflammation and cardiovascular disease and aging”, “inflammation and frailty”, or 
“cardiovascular disease and frailty”. The authors reviewed all 3,377 relevant abstracts and selected the manu-scripts for which 
information is reported in this Review. Of note, some articles >10 years old were also cited because their content was considered 
critical for the topic addressed.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Rev Cardiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 20.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Rev Cardiol. 2018 September ; 15(9): 505–522. doi:10.1038/s41569-018-0064-2.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 2 (native) -----
interesting hypothesis stems from the observation that older organisms tend to develop a 
pro-inflammatory status that is characterized by high levels of pro-inflammatory markers in 
cells and tissues, a condition often named inflammageing, a term first coined in 2000 by 
Claudio Franceschi2. Strong evidence indicates that inflammageing is a risk factor for 
cardiovascular disease (CVD), in addition to many age-associated chronic diseases and other 
adverse health outcomes. Whether inflammageing contributes causally to CVD and other 
comorbid conditions or is instead a noncausal marker of some other underlying mechanisms 
is still debated. Other than calorie restriction and physical activity, treatment options for 
inflammageing rely on small molecules or antibodies that interfere with inflammatory 
mediators or their biological targets rather than targeting the underlying causes, resulting in 
highly heterogeneous efficacy.
In this Review, we summarize the current understanding of inflammageing. We explore risk 
factors and speculate on potential causes, and we look at possible roles of inflammageing in 
CVD and other conditions that are highly prevalent and often coexist with CVDs in older 
individuals. We report on findings from intervention studies aimed at modulating 
inflammation in different diseases, and in particular whether these interventions prevent or 
attenuate the clinical course of CVD. We continue by examining the role of inflammation in 
conditions that are typical of ageing and often comorbid with CVD, such as multimorbidity, 
sarcopenia, and frailty. Finally, we identify gaps in our knowledge and suggest priorities for 
future research.
Risk factors and causes of inflammageing
Ageing is associated with immune dysregulation, of which the most evident characteristics 
are high blood levels of pro-inflammatory immunogenic stimulations3,4. The pro-
inflammatory state is characterized by high circulating levels of pro-inflammatory markers, 
including IL-1, IL-1 receptor antagonist protein (IL-1RN), IL-6, IL-8, IL-13, IL-18, C-
reactive protein (CRP), IFNα and IFNβ, transforming growth factor-β (TGFβ), tumour 
necrosis factor (TNF) and its soluble receptors (TNF receptor superfamily members 1A and 
1B), and serum amyloid A. At this time, a comprehensive list of pro-inflammatory markers 
that are associated with ageing has not been compiled owing to the difficulty of applying 
high-sensitivity discovery proteomics in plasma and serum. High levels of age-associated 
pro-inflammatory markers are detected in the majority of older individuals, even in the 
absence of risk factors and clinically active diseases3,5–7. Despite its fundamental 
physiological role as a defence mechanism against infections or extraneous molecules, when 
inflammation becomes sustained and prolonged it becomes detrimental to health. According 
to the antagonistic pleiotropy theory of ageing, inflammation might have been evolutionarily 
selected because of beneficial effects early in life and in adulthood, although it becomes 
detrimental in old age when the effect of natural selection is no longer active8. 
Epidemiological studies have found that inflammageing is a risk factor for CVD, cancer, 
chronic kidney disease, dementia, and depression as well for global indicators of poor health 
status, such as multimorbidity, mobility disability and disability in activities of daily living, 
sarcopenia, frailty, and premature death9–19. On the basis of these findings, many 
researchers have proposed that inflammageing is a marker of accelerated ageing and should 
be considered to be one of the pillars of the biology of ageing20. The root causes of 
Ferrucci and Fabbri
Page 2
Nat Rev Cardiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 3 (native) -----
inflammageing are poorly understood, as are the mechanisms that connect inflammageing 
with CVD and with many other health outcomes. A critical question is whether 
inflammation directly causes the associated pathology or is instead a biomarker for the rate 
of biological ageing. The answer to this question might depend on the age of the patients and 
whether we consider CVD by itself or CVD in the context of associated multimorbidity, 
impairments, and disabilities.
Genetic susceptibility.
Studies in large populations have identified a multitude of genetic variants that affect blood 
levels of inflammatory mediators21. We focus on associations that have been confirmed by 
multiple studies and are functionally relevant21–25. Examining common variants of the 
IL1RN gene revealed that the rs4251961 minor allele is associated with a lowered serum 
level of IL-1RN and that the rs579543 single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) is also 
independently associated with IL-1RN levels, whereas the IL1RN 1018 haplotype correlates 
with higher concentrations of IL-1β and IFNγ22. These findings have been confirmed in 
three independent cohorts26, and further research has demonstrated that these factors affect 
the pathophysiology of human infections27 and the risk of developing insulin resistance28 
and knee osteoarthritis29.
A SNP in the promoter region of IL6 at position−174G > C magnifies IL-6 production in 
response to inflammatory stimuli, but this SNP has been associated inconsistently with 
baseline IL-6 levels. Carriers of the−174G > C mutation have an increased risk of 
developing various major diseases, including Alzheimer disease30, CVD31, non-insulin-
dependent diabetes mellitus32, bone fragility33, and systemic-onset juvenile chronic 
arthritis34. A genome-wide association study comparing >2,000 Chinese centenarians to 
middle-aged controls found that the SNP rs2069837 in IL6 was significantly associated with 
extreme longevity, confirming the role of IL-6 in conditioning morbidity and mortality, 
especially in old age35. Confirming the role of IL-6 in health, in a large Mendelian 
randomization analysis, the IL6R SNP rs7529229, marking a non-synonymous IL6R variant 
(rs8192284; p.Asp358Ala), was associated with increased circulating IL-6 levels24. Variants 
in the IL6R gene have been found to be associated with increased risk of coronary artery 
disease24, rheumatoid arthritis, atrial fibrillation, and abdominal aortic aneurysm, and with 
increased susceptibility to asthma, type 1 diabetes, and depression36,37. Multiple SNPs in the 
CRP gene are associated with higher CRP levels and increased risk of myocardial infarction 
and CVD-related death38.
These data indicate that genetic variability affects the plasma levels of several inflammatory 
markers and, through this mechanism, increases the risk of many apparently uncorrelated 
diseases. Therefore, the cumulative effect of these genetic polymorphisms might be a risk 
factor for multimorbidity and frailty, although this hypothesis has never been fully tested. A 
gene-expression study conducted on whole-blood RNA samples from a large population 
cohort in Europe and the USA revealed that immune response and inflammation were the 
most highly upregulated pathways in association with ageing39. A few gene transcripts 
mediate the age–IL-6 association, among which the largest affected transcript, SLC4A10 
mRNA (encoding the sodium-driven chloride bicarbonate exchanger), explains as much as 
Ferrucci and Fabbri
Page 3
Nat Rev Cardiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 4 (native) -----
19% of this association40. Interestingly, this study did not detect an age-related increase in 
IL6 mRNA transcript levels, suggesting that the overproduction of circulating proteins 
occurs in peripheral tissues rather than in blood cells.
Accumulating evidence shows that cellular changes that contribute to inflammageing are 
mediated by microRNAs (miRNAs), which are non-coding, single-stranded RNAs spanning 
17–25 nucleotides that generally modulate protein-expression programmes by interacting 
with mRNAs that share partial complementarity, thereby reducing mRNA stability and/or 
translation41. Studies have shown age-related differences in the abundance of specific 
miRNAs in circulating cells, plasma, and whole blood from older compared with younger 
individuals42–48. Findings from these studies are inconsistent, possibly owing to differences 
in sample size, age composition, and health status of the examined individuals, and because 
miRNA detection methods vary widely in specificity, accuracy, and sensitivity. In addition, 
given that miRNAs mostly function as intra-cellular modulators of mRNAs, their 
concentration in whole blood might be a poor indicator of their physiological effects. 
Nonetheless, miR-25–3p, miR-92a-3p, miR-93–5p, miR-101–3p, miR-106b-5p, miR-142–
5p, miR-151a-3p, and miR-181a-5p tend to be under-represented, whereas miR-21–5p and 
miR-126–3p are over-represented at older ages47,49,50. Age-related changes in miRNAs have 
been suggested to contribute to inflammageing. For example, miR-126–3p inhibits 
endothelial inflammation, and low levels of miR-126–3p were found in patients with CVD 
and diabetes50, whereas miR-21–5p levels are correlated negatively with CRP and 
fibrinogen levels, and miR-21–5p levels are higher in patients with CVD than in age-
matched controls44. Other miRNAs, such as miR-146 and miR-155, might also have a role 
in inflammageing by affecting cellular senescence or modulating immune responses, 
although these activities might not be reflected by changes in miRNA concentration or these 
miRNAs might be detected only in exosomes or other structures carrying miRNAs51. 
Overall, the contribution of miRNAs to inflammageing is an active area of investigation with 
high translational potential.
Visceral obesity.
Epidemiological studies provide some information about the origin of inflammageing. 
Obesity — particularly central obesity — is strongly associated with a pro-inflammatory 
state52–54. Adipocytes in abdominal, intramuscular, liver, and pericardial fat can produce 
pro-inflammatory and chemotactic compounds, such as IL-6, IL-1β, TNF, and C-C motif 
chemokine 2 (CCL2), as well as hormones that modulate inflammation, such as adiponectin 
and leptin54. The visceral fat tissue of obese individuals is infiltrated by T lymphocytes, 
macrophages, and monocytes. T lym-phocytes secrete IFNγ, which stimulates the 
production of several chemokines from adipocytes, including CCL2, CCL5, C-X-C motif 
chemokine 9 (CXCL9), and CXCL10, which further amplify tissue T cell migration. The 
number of B lymphocytes and macrophages in visceral adipose tissue from obese 
individuals is also increased and is correlated with BMI55. Studies with animal models 
suggest that a specific subset of B cells expressing the TNF ligand superfamily member 9 
and producing TNF, IFNγ, and granzyme B is increased in the peritoneal cavity during 
ageing56. Cytokines released by B cells contribute to the phenotypic switch of adipocytes in 
the visceral cavity, causing them to release adipokines, other pro-inflammatory markers, and 
Ferrucci and Fabbri
Page 4
Nat Rev Cardiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 5 (native) -----
cell debris52. Activated monocytes that give rise to M1 and M2 macrophages produce even 
more inflammatory compounds that probably appear in the circulation57. Weight loss 
through reduced dietary intake and possibly bariatric surgery is associated with reductions in 
primary pro-inflammatory markers, in part owing to normalized expression of inflammation-
related genes in white adipose tissue and to downregulation of the NLRP3 
inflammasome58–61. In addition, calorie restriction in humans is associated with a 
substantial reduction in pro-inflammatory markers in the blood62. Weight loss combined 
with exercise improves functional status and reduces some of the features of frailty in obese 
older individuals, improves the cardiovascular risk profile, and reduces the risk of CVD, 
although whether these beneficial effects are caused by reduced inflammation remains 
unclear63–65.
Microbiota and gut permeability.
A new hypothesis on the origin of inflammation highlights changes that occur in the gut 
microbiota with ageing as well as age- associated changes in gut permeability. Despite large 
variability in the gut microbiota found in different populations, geographic regions, and 
settings, evidence suggests that ageing is associated with a reduction in beneficial 
commensal microorganisms — such as Coprococcus, Faecalibacterium, and Lactobacillus 
— as well as a decrease in the Firmicutes: Bacteroidetes ratio66–68. The disappearance of 
these microorganisms is important because they normally counteract the expansion of 
pathogenic microbial communities, while also maintaining intestinal barrier integrity by 
fermenting starches and dietary fibres and producing mucus and lipid metabolites, such as 
short-chain fatty acids (primarily acetate, propionate, and butyrate)66–68. As beneficial 
intestinal bacteria decrease in abundance with ageing, other bacteria increase in relative 
abundance, including symbiotic bacteria that can become pathogenic under inflamed 
conditions, often termed pathobionts69. This category of microorganisms is enriched in the 
gut of older adults and is primarily dominated by facultative anaerobes — such as 
Fusobacterium and Staphylococcus — a state that has been associated with increased levels 
of inflammatory cytokines in plasma8,70.
Increased gut dysbiosis has been postulated to increase mucosal barrier permeability, 
thereby allowing bacteria and their products — including pathogen-associated molecular 
patterns (PAMPs), damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs), and microbial-
associated molecular patterns (MAMPs)— into the circulatory system. Together, these 
factors contribute to a chronic pro-inflammatory state71. This theory is supported by studies 
in animal models, but no definitive evidence exists of increased gut permeability and leakage 
of pro-inflammatory products in older individuals who are free from overt inflammatory 
disease72. Dysbiosis seems to be more severe in conditions in which prevalence increases 
with ageing, such as obesity and type 2 diabetes73. Of note, changes in gut microbiota 
composition have been shown to be associated with increased frailty74–76, which could be 
owing to gut dysbiosis-induced inflammation. Centenarians, who can be considered extreme 
examples of healthy ageing, have an enrichment of Akkermansia, Bifidobacterium, and 
Christensenellaceae in their intestinal flora67, which promote positive immune function, 
have anti-inflammatory activity, diminish the effects of obesity, and contribute to metabolic 
homeostasis77–79.
Ferrucci and Fabbri
Page 5
Nat Rev Cardiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 6 (native) -----
Consistent with the notion that changes in the gut microbiota composition can affect healthy 
ageing, calorie restriction — the most powerful strategy to increase longevity in animal 
models — causes changes in microbiota composition, decreases inflammation, and improves 
gut barrier integrity80. A healthy intestinal tract flora can theoretically be promoted by the 
administration of probiotics, prebiotics, or a combination of the two81–83. Some studies have 
shown that this strategy can reduce systemic inflammation and progression of central 
obesity, but more research in this area is needed to substantiate this initial evidence and to 
assess whether the reduction of inflammation owing to microbiota changes has beneficial 
effects on health84,85.
Cellular senescence.
A number of biological mechanisms that have been identified as hallmarks or pillars of 
biological ageing might account for inflammageing86,87. Paramount among them is the 
accumulation of senescent cells in multiple tissues. Cellular senescence is generally 
considered to be a pre-encoded cancer suppressor mechanism characterized by cell cycle 
arrest, loss of proliferation capacity, global cell enlargement, characteristic misshaped 
nuclei, presence of chromatin foci with persistent DNA damage response, increased nuclear 
factor-κB (NF-κB) signalling, and resistance to apoptosis88,89. Senescent cells are 
recognized by specific markers, including cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 2A (commonly 
known as p16INK4A) and increased lysosome β-galactosidase activity, although these 
markers are neither fully sensitive nor specific and, despite intense research, no gold-
standard biomarker of cellular senescence has been established90. Jeck and colleagues 
hypothesized that genetic variants associated with general susceptibility to multiple diseases 
are enriched in specific areas of the genome. Interestingly, SNPs located near regulators of 
senescence and inflammation are particularly associated with diseases of ageing, such as 
cancer, CVD, and type 2 diabetes, and the strongest association was found with a variant in 
the CDKN2A gene, which encodes the p16INK4A protein that is over-expressed in many 
forms of senescence. These findings were replicated in a meta-analysis that included 410 
genome-wide association studies91,92. In addition, the variant rs2811712 that is close to the 
CDKN2A gene was associated with poor physical function in two different cohorts93. 
Therefore, senescence seems to be associated with ageing, inflammation, CVD, and 
impaired physical function in older individuals, making cell senescence a strong candidate 
as a mechanism for inflammageing.
Cell senescence can be triggered by many stimuli, including critical telomere shortening, 
persistent DNA damage, oncogene activation or inactivation, epigenetic alterations, 
mitochondrial dysfunction, and exposure to DAMPs that are released by stressed cells, with 
some evidence that the phenotypic manifestations induced by different triggers are 
heterogeneous88,89. At the core of the replication arrest is increasing levels of cyclin-
dependent kinase inhibitors that block the phosphorylation of the retinoblastoma-associated 
protein and initiate cell cycle arrest. In adulthood, activation of retinoblastoma-associated 
protein can occur either through the cellular tumour antigen p53 that activates cyclin-
dependent kinase inhibitor 1 (commonly known as p21), or directly through the activation of 
p16INK4A. Theories suggest that senescence is not an acute switch but instead evolves in 
stages, from a temporary or reversible status to a chronic irreversible condition94.
Ferrucci and Fabbri
Page 6
Nat Rev Cardiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 7 (native) -----
Relevant to inflammageing, senescent cells acquire a senescence-associated secretory 
phenotype (SASP) that involves the secretion of a wide range of soluble molecules. The list 
of these molecules is not comprehensive, and the molecules can vary on the basis of cell 
type and triggering factors but usually include interleukins (IL-1α, IL-1β, and IL-6), 
chemokines (IL-8 and growth-regulated-α protein), growth factors (fibroblast growth factor 
2 and hepatocyte growth factor), metalloproteinases (interstitial collagenase (also known as 
MMP1), stromelysin 1 (also known as MMP3), and collagenase 3 (also known as MMP13)), 
and other insoluble proteins and extracellular matrix components95. These secretory 
molecules mainly function in a paracrine fashion and can facilitate the development of 
cellular senescence in neighbouring cells, but some of the soluble mediators are released into 
the circulation and are likely to contribute to inflammageing96.
Studies have shown that senescent cells accumulate exponentially with ageing in different 
organs and tissues, both in model organisms and in humans97–100. In humans, the 
accumulation of senescent markers has been demonstrated in the skin, T lymphocytes, 
atherosclerotic lesions, insulin-producing β cells, kidney, endothelium, visceral fat, joint 
cartilage, cardiac muscle, liver, and many others tissues98,101–107. Some tissues are likely to 
have a greater propensity to developing cellular senescence than others, but research in this 
area is scarce. Of note, senescent T cell accumulation has been demonstrated in patients with 
chronic infections such as Cytomegalovirus (CMV) or human immunodeficiency virus 
(HIV) infection, which might explain why patients with CMV or HIV infection have 
chronically elevated levels of pro-inflammatory markers and reduced vaccine 
efficacy108–110. In mice, the clearance of p16INK4A-positive cells extends lifespan and slows 
the emergence of ageing phenotypes and age-related functional deterioration of organs and 
tissues111,112. The extent to which the burden of senescent-cell accumulation in humans is 
associated with inflammageing and organ damage, and whether a plasma protein signature 
can be developed that correlates with cell senescence burden, are important areas of 
investigation.
Impaired recycling and elimination of degraded cellular material.
Despite the apparent stability of the human body, a massive turnover of molecules, 
microorganelles, cells, and cellular components occurs constantly throughout life. A 
complex and well-regulated molecular machinery constantly surveys cellular components 
and handles the repair or elimination of biological debris as well as broken or misplaced 
fragments. Within cells, worn-out macromolecules and organelles are physiologically 
recycled by proteasome degradation or autophagy. Extracellular debris is recognized by the 
immune system through different receptors, including pattern recognition receptors, and is 
then degraded by engulfment in phagocytic vesicles113. Under pathological conditions, 
molecules are released by stressed cells undergoing necrosis (such as during ischaemia– 
reperfusion or severe infection). These molecules, called DAMPs, include reactive oxygen 
species (ROS) from damaged and unrecycled mitochondria, extra-cellular nucleotides such 
as ATP, oxidized cardiolipin, free nuclear and mitochondrial DNA fragments or histones, 
high-mobility group protein B1, oxidized LDL, amyloid-β, islet amyloid polypeptide, and 
particulates such as monosodium urate and cholesterol crystals, in addition to many 
others114. If notpromptly removed, these molecules accumulate and possibly contribute to 
Ferrucci and Fabbri
Page 7
Nat Rev Cardiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 8 (native) -----
inflammageing115,116. Accordingly, inflammageing is proposed to originate from an 
imbalance between the production and disposal of cellular debris, misfolded proteins, and/or 
misplaced self-molecules that develops with age8. For example, accumulation of DAMPs is 
sensed by the NLRP3 inflammasome and causes NLRP3 oligomerization, resulting in 
caspase 1-dependent secretion of the inflammatory cytokines IL-1β and IL-18. In humans, 
IL-18 blood levels increase with ageing, and strong evidence from mouse studies indicates 
that blockade of the NLRP3 inflammasome extends healthspan, attenuating multiple age-
related degenerative changes that have been linked to inflammageing, including insulin 
resistance, thymic involution, T cell senescence, and bone loss as well as physical and 
cognitive function decline114,117,118. Of note, ROS produced by dysfunctional mitochondria 
can also trigger an inflammatory response by activating the NF-κB signalling pathway119.
Intrinsic defects in immune cells and chronic infections.
Studies conducted in isolated immune cells, mostly lymphocytes, suggest that an intrinsic 
defect in immune cells also contributes to inflammageing. For example, gene-expression 
studies show that CD4+ lymphocytes from older individuals have higher intrinsic activation 
of the NF-κB pathways than those from younger individuals120. After stimulation with anti-
CD3, the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines in vitro is lower in cells from older 
individuals than in cells from younger individuals120, a phenomenon that might be related to 
altered metabolic activity121. However, because these studies have been performed only in 
small populations, their relevance to inflammageing is unknown.
Subclinical and clinically evident chronic infections can chronically stimulate immune 
function and result in changes in levels of inflammatory markers that are indistinguishable 
from those of the inflammageing signature. Particularly relevant for inflammageing are 
human CMV and HIV infections. Human CMV infection is herpesvirus present in a latent 
state in more than half of the adult population122, where intermittent transcription episodes 
cause antigen reactivation throughout the life course. This situation might explain why the 
human CMV-specific memory T cells can comprise up to 50% of the total memory T cell 
compartment in older individuals123,124 and leads to the hypothesis that persistent human 
CMV infection has a role in immunosenescence and inflammageing. However, evidence to 
support this hypothesis remains controversial109. Some studies have found that human CMV 
infection in older individuals is associated with increased cardiovascular and all-cause 
mortality, negative immune risk profile, inflammageing, and lower antibody responses to 
influenza125–129. However, evidence that the association between CMV infection and CVD 
and mortality is mediated by inflammageing is scant at best109,130. The theoretical CMV-
associated impaired capacity to control heterologous infections in old age and the 
association with high circulating levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines have also been 
challenged109. Ultimately, whether human CMV infections cause accelerated immune 
senescence is controversial.
In the era of highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART), patients with HIV infection have 
a life expectancy that is, on average, only slightly lower than in the general population. 
However, this therapy does not protect patients from the persistent immune activation, 
chronic inflammation, and excess risk of developing CVD and frailty131–135. Chronic 
Ferrucci and Fabbri
Page 8
Nat Rev Cardiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 9 (native) -----
inflammation in HIV is mediated by depletion of memory CD41+ T cells, resulting in 
increased permeability in the gut epithelium and translocation of microbial products into the 
circulation, which causes inflammation136. Patients with HIV are also affected by 
antiretroviral-associated lipodystrophy and visceral obesity that can further contribute to 
inflammation and cause insulin resistance137.
Finally, chronic infections, such as oral infection, asymptomatic chronic infection in the 
urinary and biliary tracts, and hidden intestinal infections, are associated with the release of 
PAMPs into the circulation, which elicits a persistent inflammatory state. Treatment of these 
infections can reduce inflammageing and potentially has many long-term beneficial effects 
beyond immediate local resolution of symptoms.
As explained above, the possible causes of inflammageing are numerous and very 
heterogeneous (Fig. 1). These different mechanisms are likely to be additive and 
interconnected, acting in different combinations and with different relevance in selected 
individuals. Therefore, effectively reducing inflammation without weakening the 
surveillance and defensive functions of the immune system requires individualized 
approaches as well as an accurate diagnosis of the underlying causes of inflammation.
Consequences of inflammageing for CVD
Although strong epidemiological evidence indicates that inflammation is a powerful risk 
factor for CVD, non-cardiovascular comorbidities and conditions that are often associated 
with CVD, as well as with frailty, disability, and mortality in older individuals, and the 
mechanisms that underlie these associations have only just begun to be elucidated. 
Controversy exists on whether high levels of pro-inflammatory compounds in the circulation 
and tissues causally contribute to associated pathological conditions or whether 
inflammation is a reactive marker of underlying pathology. These two mechanisms are not 
mutually exclusive; for example, early damage that occurs during vascular endothelial cell 
inflammation participates in the pathogenesis of atherosclerotic plaques, whereas 
atherosclerosis itself produces antigens that trigger and sustain an inflammatory response, 
and senescent cells are found often in large quantities in atherosclerotic plaques. Therefore, 
multiple mechanisms amplify the role of inflammation in atherogenesis.
In this section of the Review, we summarize available evidence to suggest that chronic 
inflammation is both a risk factor and a pathogenic mechanism in CVD. Moreover, because 
inflammation also contributes to the pathogenesis of other chronic non-CVDs — such as 
anaemia, cancer, type 2 diabetes, dementia, osteoporosis, sarcopenia, chronic kidney disease, 
and depression — CVDs in old age often develop in the context of multimorbidity and 
frailty3,10,138–143 (Fig. 2). Epidemiological studies have produced insufficient evidence to 
demonstrate whether inflammation occurs in response to underlying disease pathologies or 
whether inflammation itself contributes to disease initiation and progression. To address this 
issue, we combine observational evidence with results from randomized, controlled trials 
(RCTs) that tested the efficacy of anti-inflammatory drugs in preventing or controlling CVD 
clinical manifestations (Table 1).
Ferrucci and Fabbri
Page 9
Nat Rev Cardiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 10 (native) -----
Atherosclerosis.
Atherosclerosis originates from damaged endothelium that allows the accumulation of 
cholesterol-containing LDL particles in the arterial wall that tend to be oxidized, which 
triggers an inflammatory response that fails to resolve144. Activation of both innate and 
adaptive immunity actively contributes to the initiation and progression of atherogenesis, 
from early endothelial dysfunction to the development of acute thrombotic complications 
triggered by plaque rupture or erosion 9,145–149. Monocytes that migrate into the intima of 
the arterial wall differentiate into macrophages and then transform into foam cells in the 
lipid necrotic core of the atheroma147,149. Cholesterol crystals and other DAMPs present in 
the atherosclerotic lesion activate the inflammasomes within macrophages, leading to the 
release of IL-1β, IL-18, and other pro-inflammatory cytokines150 that are chemotactic for 
other inflammatory cells, including T cells and B cells, which are major drivers 
ofatherosclerosis151. Late atherosclerosis is characterized by massive cell apoptosis and 
accumulation of cells with senescent features, which support a pro-inflammatory status and 
lead to the formation of a necrotic core that ultimately causes fragility and rupture of the 
plaque, formation of a thrombus, and acute vascular occlusion.
Cells in advanced atherosclerotic plaques often show markers of senescence, such as 
p16INK4A and tumour suppressor ARF (commonly known as p14ARF in humans and p19ARF 
in mice), and express a SASP that further fuels inflammation while producing 
metalloproteinases that degrade the extracellular matrix, further destabilizing the 
atherosclerotic plaque152. In turn, the degradation of the extracellular matrix induces the 
proliferation and phenotypic shift of vascular smooth muscle cells that migrate from the 
medial layer and, by synthesizing new extracellular matrix, build a fibrous cap that stabilizes 
atherosclerotic lesions. However, in an inflammatory environment, vascular smooth muscle 
cells undergo extensive DNA damage and excessive telomere shortening, develop markers of 
senescence, and might undergo loss of proliferative capacity or even apoptosis153. In 
addition, the production of metalloproteinases from senescent cells can further weaken the 
fibrous cap. Therefore, major mechanisms of plaque stabilization are impaired, and 
additional antigens might be uncovered that further amplify the inflammatory response154. 
Preclinical studies have shown that activated subtypes of T and B lymphocytes in plaques 
contribute to plaque instability, leading to an increase in the risk of cardiovascular 
disease155. miRNAs have emerged as important regulators of cellular adhesion, 
proliferation, lipid homeostasis, and inflammatory cytokine synthesis, potentially affecting 
the balance between atherosclerotic plaque progression and regression, although their 
mechanism of action and relationship with inflammageing is not fully clarified156.
Although the detailed mechanisms that affect the genesis and progression of atherosclerosis 
are far from being fully understood, evidence is accumulating that inflammation is a major 
contributor, acting through multiple mechanisms, including a vicious cycle that accelerates 
clinical progression. Consistent with this view, longitudinal studies demonstrate that high 
blood levels of pro-inflammatory markers, including high-sensitivity CRP assay and IL-6, 
predict the risk of cardiovascular disease in both middle-aged and older adults, independent 
of other CVD risk factors157–160. Moreover, statin therapy with rosuvastatin reduces the 
incidence of major cardiovascular events in healthy individuals who are free from 
Ferrucci and Fabbri
Page 10
Nat Rev Cardiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 11 (native) -----
hyperlipidaemia but who have elevated high-sensitivity CRP levels147,161. Although studies 
in endothelial cells suggest that CRP directly contributes to CVD by increasing oxidative 
stress162, other mechanistic studies and Mendelian randomization analyses in large 
populations suggest that CRP is a predictive biomarker that is not causally related to 
atherothrombosis163,164. By contrast, IL-6 and IL-1 contribute to atherosclerosis and should 
be considered to be therapeutic targets158,163. Mendelian randomization studies have shown 
that polymorphisms that affect IL-6 signalling are associated with lower life-time risk of 
cardiovascular disease23,24. In the MEASURE trial165, the IL-6 receptor blocker tocilizumab 
increased the concentration of HDL particles in patients with rheumatoid arthritis compared 
with placebo, despite an increase multicentre ENTRACTE trial166 compared the 
cardiovascular safety profile of tocilizumab to that of the TNF inhibitor etanercept in >3,000 
patients with moderate-to-severe rheumatoid arthritis, but the final results are not yet 
published.
In addition, because IL-1β production is a secondary effect of NLRP3 inflammasome 
activation, which is induced by cholesterol crystals and other DAMPs, the IL-1β signalling 
pathway has been suggested to be a promising target for atherothrombosis protection. New 
compounds that interfere with IL-1 and IL-6 signalling are under investigation163,167. The 
CANTOS trial168 has revealed that anti-inflammatory therapy with canakinumab, a human 
monoclonal anti-IL-1β antibody, significantly reduced recurrent cardiovascular events in 
>10,000 stable patients who had residual inflammation after myocardial infarction, 
independent of lowered lipid levels169. The ongoing CIRT trial170 is testing the hypothesis 
that low-dose methotrexate, a drug that suppresses IL-1β production by mononuclear cells in 
addition to other functions171, reduces major vascular events in patients with previous 
myocardial infarction and either type 2 diabetes or metabolic syndrome. In a small pilot 
study (the LoDoCo trial)172, anti-inflammatory treatment with colchicine seemed to be 
effective for secondary prevention of CVD. Larger RCTs, such as the ongoing LoDoCo2 
trial and COLCOT trials173, are needed to confirm these findings.
Type 2 diabetes.
The focus of this Review is on inflammageing conceptualized as a shared risk factor and 
pathophysiological mechanism between CVD and frailty. However, it is important to note 
that inflammation is associated with the risk and clinical evolution of non-CVD related 
disease and accelerated decline of physical function. This concept is clearly exemplified by 
the close connection between inflammation, CVD, and type 2 diabetes. Type 2 diabetes is a 
strong risk factor for CVD, and both CVD mortality and the effect of diabetes on the risk of 
CVD increase sharply with older age and frailty status174–176. Strong evidence indicates that 
insulin resistance and lipotoxicity cause the production of inflammatory mediators that cause 
neutrophil infiltration, macrophage proliferation, and smooth muscle and endothelial cell 
activation, which accelerate atherogenesis177. Excessive oxidative stress causes endothelial 
dysfunction that enables permeation, trapping, and physicochemical modification of 
circulating lipoprotein particles in the subendothelial space178. Telomeres are, on average, 
shorter and the number of cells positive for senescence biomarkers is higher in arteries from 
patients with diabetes than in individuals without diabetes, and this finding might be one of 
the mechanisms for the increased inflammation and accelerated atherosclerosis in 
Ferrucci and Fabbri
Page 11
Nat Rev Cardiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 12 (native) -----
diabetes179,180. Overproduction of angiotensin II amplifies chronic inflammation and can 
cause mitochondrial dysfunction181. At the same time, inflammation is a risk factor for the 
development of diabetes and its complications, and these associations are not accounted for 
by body composition parameters138.
Treating inflammation in non-CVDs.
Of note, a causal role of inflammation in CVD pathogenesis is also suggested by clinical 
trials that used an anti-inflammatory intervention as treatment for overt, noncardiovascular 
inflammatory diseases. For example, treatment with TNF inhibitors in rheumatoid arthritis, 
an overt inflammatory disease, is associated with a decreased risk of cardiovascular 
events182–187. Treatment with TNF inhibitors in psoriasis is also associated with decreased 
incidence of major adverse cardiac events186,188,189. However, anti-inflammatory treatment 
does not always yield beneficial effects. For example, in patients with congestive heart 
failure, the levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines, especially TNF, IL-6, and IL-1, are 
markedly elevated, and the TNF level is a negative prognostic factor190–192. However, 
clinical trials with the TNF inhibitor etanercept yielded no beneficial reductions in mortality 
or hospitalization due to congestive heart failure193, whereas high doses of infliximab, a 
TNF antagonist, did not improve and even worsened moderate-to-severe congestive heart 
failure194.
Multimorbidity and frailty.
The important role of inflammation in CVD, in particular in atherosclerosis, together with 
the observation that the pro-inflammatory state typical of ageing is a strong risk factor for 
many age-related chronic diseases, explains why CVD in older individuals often precedes, 
follows, or develops in the context of multimorbidity and frailty. Patients with CVD tend to 
have greater multimorbidity than individuals who are free from CVD195. Diseases most 
often associated with multimorbidity are diabetes, chronic kidney disease, anaemia, chronic 
pulmonary disease, depression, and dementia, which all involve inflammageing as an 
important risk factor3,138,139,142,143,196. The presence of comorbid diseases is well 
established to affect both the response to treatment and the prognosis for hard clinical 
outcomes, such as cardiovascular and all-cause mortality, as well as hospitalization and 
health-care utilization197. However, limited data are available on whether CVD 
comorbidities affect non-traditional outcomes that are still very important for geriatric 
patients, such as symptom burden, functional capacity, and self-rated health197. Whether 
these important, non-traditional out-comes respond to anti-inflammatory treatment is also 
unknown because this information is not commonly collected in most RCTs.
The resulting syndromes present clinical challenges whose complexity is often ignored in 
clinical practice guidelines for single diseases, which are based on randomized clinical trials 
in which patients with multimorbidity are under-represented, including most of the trials 
cited above that targeted inflammation195. The degree of clinical complexity is even higher 
when the comorbid medical condition is frailty. Age-associated frailty is a medical 
syndrome characterized by morphological and physiological changes across multiple 
systems and organs, resulting in a progressive loss of internal homeostasis, reduced 
physiological reserves, loss of function, reduced resilience, and increased vulnerability to 
Ferrucci and Fabbri
Page 12
Nat Rev Cardiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 13 (native) -----
internal and external stresses198,199. We address the general pathophysiology of frailty later 
in this Review. Here, we limit the discussion to the effect of frailty that emerges in patients 
with CVD. The prevalence of frailty in older individuals with CVD rises progressively from 
subclinical CVD, to heart failure, to overt acute syndromes, to cardiac surgery when, 
depending on the procedure, the rate of frailty can be >60%200. Strong evidence from 
multiple, large, observational studies indicates that the presence of CVD is a risk factor for 
frailty and that patients with frailty are more likely to develop CVD than those who are not 
frail201–203. This observation is not surprising because inflammation, insulin resistance, and 
coagulation problems have been identified as cardinal factors in the pathophysiology of 
frailty204–207. Therefore, CVD and frailty can be viewed as diseases arising from similar 
causal mechanisms, mutually accelerating their clinical course by vicious cycles that 
amplify inflammation, insulin resistance, and other still-unknown mechanisms, thereby 
synergistically contributing to adverse health outcomes. In accordance with this theory, 
independent of age and other risk factors, frailty in patients with CVD is associated with a 
twofold increase in the risk of death208.
We have previously proposed that a pro-inflammatory state might be caused by most of the 
described putative biological mechanisms of ageing, such as telomere shortening, cell 
senescence, mitochondrial dysfunction, altered nutrient sensing, and epigenetic alterations1. 
Therefore, the coexistence of CVD, diabetes, and frailty might be just one example of a 
general phenomenon that involves multiple diseases, as exemplified by the following 
observations. Low-grade chronic inflammation is a primary contributor to the onset and 
progression of chronic kidney disease11,142,209,210. Inflammation is a causal factor for 
cancer initiation, promotion, malignancy, and metastatic dissemination211,212. Depression is 
characterized by increased levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines and acute phase proteins in 
both peripheral blood and cerebrospinal fluid213,214. Inflammatory diseases and high levels 
of pro-inflammatory biomarkers in the blood increase the risk of depression143,215–217. 
Inflammation has a central role in age-related neuro-degeneration and in neurodegenerative 
diseases, such as Alzheimer disease218. These studies support the hypothesis that 
neuroinflammatory changes are important pathological components of Alzheimer disease 
and other neurodegenerative diseases, highlighting the potential clinical importance of 
cytokines in neurogenesis. Interestingly, most genetic variants associated with late-onset 
Alzheimer disease are within immunity-related genes219.
Inflammation and age-related frailty
The collective evidence suggests that chronic inflammation is a risk factor across multiple 
diseases, some of which are traditionally viewed as pathophysiologically unrelated, such as 
CVD157,159,160,220, diabetes138,180,221, chronic kidney disease11,142,209, cancer211,212,222, 
depression13,143,217, and dementia12,139,223. In addition, higher levels of inflammatory 
markers in blood are associated with a greater loss of muscle mass and strength, accelerated 
loss of mobility, lower-extremity performance and physical activity, and depression in older 
individuals224–228, all of which are essential elements for defining frailty on the basis of the 
criteria most often used in the literature229. From this perspective, inflammageing could act 
as a focal point for ageing mechanisms that are associated with increased susceptibility to 
stressors and impaired functional reserves. Consistent with this observation, both higher 
Ferrucci and Fabbri
Page 13
Nat Rev Cardiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 14 (native) -----
baseline levels and increasing accumulation rates of IL-6 predict accelerated longitudinal 
accumulation of multiple chronic diseases in older individuals14. In addition, inflammation 
contributes to accelerated ageing in individuals with multimorbidity230, and partially 
mediates the association between multimorbidity and functional limitations and 
disability231. Not surprisingly, most patients with frailty have chronic inflammation, 
especially those who are affected by sarcopenia, which is defined as a reduction in muscle 
strength and mass that is abnormally severe for an individual’s age207,232,233.
A variety of hypotheses have been proposed to explain the link between inflammation and 
sarcopenia and frailty; interestingly, some of these mechanisms are shared with the 
pathogenesis of CVD. Inflammation is associated with reduced synthesis and activity of 
insulin-like growth factor I (IGF1), a growth factor that is essential for muscle regeneration 
and maintenance of muscle integrity and that is protective against plaque instability in 
atherosclerosis158,234. In vitro studies have shown that IL-1α, IL-6, and TNF inhibit IGF1-
mediated anabolism and that IL-6 reduces the production of IGF1 and IGF-binding protein 3 
(reF.235). In observational studies, high levels of IL-6 and low levels of IGF1 synergistically 
correlate with lower muscle strength and power, effectively predicting progressive disability 
and death236,237. Inflammation impairs endothelial reactivity and muscle perfusion, 
interfering with the uptake of long branched-chain amino acids that are essential for muscle 
energetics and protein anabolism238–240. Dysfunctional mitochondria that are not recycled 
owing to defective mitophagy produce ROS that stimulate the production of pro-
inflammatory cytokines and catabolism via increased NF-κB-dependent protein 
ubiquitylation and proteasome degradation241. Senescent cells that produce inflammatory 
mediators might also have a role in the pathogenesis of sarcopenia. One study quantified 
senescent p16INK4A-expressing cells in thigh intramuscular adipose tissue from older 
women, revealing that senescent cell burden was associated with grip strength, walking 
speed, and self-perceived mobility242. Moreover, inflammation impairs satellite cell 
regenerative function243–245. Of note, the emergence of senescence traits in vascular smooth 
muscle cells has been implicated in the initiation and progression of CVD, specifically 
atherosclerosis246, again suggesting that atherosclerosis and the resulting CVD is a 
syndrome of accelerated ageing.
Both aerobic and resistance exercise — as well as dietary supplementation of amino acids or 
protein, vitamin D, and polyunsaturated fatty acids — have been associated with protection 
against age-associated sarcopenia, possibly because of their antiinflammatory and 
antioxidative properties141. In observational studies, adherence to the Mediterranean diet 
was the only behavioural factor consistently associated with a lower risk of frailty, which 
might be a result of the anti-inflammatory properties inherent to the diet247,248. Underlying 
the relationship between CVD and frailty, the Mediterranean diet is also one of the few 
behavioural interventions that, in both observational studies and clinical trials, was 
associated with lower cardiovascular morbidity and mortality249,250. Aspirin, a potent anti-
inflammatory molecule, is effective in the treatment of acute myocardial infarction and in 
secondary prevention of CVD, and some evidence indicates that aspirin might be effective in 
primary prevention of myocardial infarction, at least in high-risk groups251,252. Interestingly, 
chronic use of NSAIDs is associated with a lower risk of sarcopenia in community-dwelling 
individuals aged ≥80 years253.
Ferrucci and Fabbri
Page 14
Nat Rev Cardiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 15 (native) -----
Metformin, an antidiabetic drug that counteracts inflammation and insulin resistance, has 
been suggested to prevent frailty and attenuate its progression. In a large, observational 
study conducted in US veterans with type 2 diabetes and stratified according to baseline risk, 
treatment with metformin reduced the risk of multiple age-related diseases, including CVDs, 
cancer, depression, and frailty-related diseases254. An RCT conducted in Indonesia revealed 
that metformin improves gait speed, but not handgrip strength, in nondiabetic, pre-frail, 
older individuals255. A trial is currently ongoing at the University of Texas Health Science 
Center at San Antonio, TX, USA, aimed at examining whether metformin prevents frailty 
development in older individuals with impaired glucose tolerance256.
The evidence reported above suggests that CVD, multimorbidity, frailty, and perhaps other 
chronic diseases have inflammageing as a common root cause. Unfortunately, although 
strong evidence shows that targeting inflammation can reduce the risk of CVD, no definitive 
evidence exists that reducing inflammation can prevent or modify the progression of 
multimorbidity with frailty or sarcopenia. In part, this situation is because of the lack of 
adequately sized RCTs to test this hypothesis and because RCTs that have tested the 
effectiveness of anti-inflammatory treatments for cardiovascular prevention did not collect 
data on multimorbidity, frailty, or disability. These issues should be considered a priority in 
setting the future research agenda. The ENRGISE trial257 is an ongoing, multicentre, 
double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized pilot study, enrolling older men and women 
(aged ≥70 years) who have high levels of IL-6 and impaired physical function, to test 
whether losartan, omega-3 fish oil, or a combination of the two reduce plasma IL-6 levels 
compared with placebo. Interestingly, results from the CRATUS trial258,259 demonstrated 
that administration of allogeneic human mesenchymal stem cells improves measures of 
lower-extremity performance and reduces inflammatory biomarkers in age-related frailty. By 
contrast, despite their anti-inflammatory effects, statin use in the Women’s Health Initiative 
survey had no significant effect on the risk of frailty260.
Inflammageing is a pillar of geroscience
Many interventions that increase longevity in animal models cause a reduction in 
inflammatory markers. For example, calorie restriction is the most powerful life-extension 
intervention in most animal models and is associated with reduced inflammatory 
biomarkers261,262. Mechanisms by which calorie restriction reduces chronic inflammation 
include diminished ROS production and consequent downregulation of NF-κB-induced 
transcription of pro-inflammatory genes in multiple tissues263. Of note, dietary restriction 
significantly reduces the risk of CVD in humans, and in animal models, dietary restriction is 
associated with numerous beneficial changes in arterial walls264.
Rapamycin, a specific inhibitor of mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) signalling with 
many effects, including anti-inflammatory activity265, has an important role in longevity 
regulation266 in both animals and humans267, and improves survival and healthspan in 
animal models268–272. Aspirin improves lifespan in mice273, whereas metformin, which is 
known to have direct anti-inflammatory effects beyond its canonical glucose-lowering 
activity274, improves lifespan and healthspan in animal models275. A meta-analysis revealed 
that metformin reduces all-cause mortality and diseases associated with ageing independent 
Ferrucci and Fabbri
Page 15
Nat Rev Cardiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 16 (native) -----
of diabetic control in humans276. The TAME trial277 is designed to examine the effect of 
metformin on delaying the onset of age-related conditions and diseases and its potential use 
in expanding human health span. Finally, the clearance of senescent cells by either genetic 
engineering or the administration of senolytic drugs has been associated with reduced 
circulating levels of pro-inflammatory markers, increased lifespan, and delayed frailty-
related phenotypes in mice111,112. Clinical trials are needed to test the efficacy of these 
potential treatments in humans278. These examples suggest that interventions that target 
some of the fundamental mechanisms of ageing affect the general susceptibility to CVD, as 
well as other age-related diseases, and prevent frailty and disability in older individuals.
Over the past 3 decades, a wealth of evidence has been gathered that suggests that chronic 
inflammation is one of these mechanisms. Although this Review on the connection between 
inflammageing, CVD, and frailty is far from comprehensive, the role of chronic 
inflammation in health and functional deterioration with ageing is clearly emerging. Of 
course, conceptual problems remain. Throughout this Review, we have focused on 
inflammation as posing a threat to human health over the course of ageing. However, 
inflammation has been evolutionarily selected as a fundamental defensive mechanism that 
protects organisms from microbial invasion, ensures the integrity of a self-recognized 
inventory of proteins and other macromolecules, prevents cancer by recognizing and 
removing cells that present tumour antigens, and has an important role in tissue repair. The 
benefits of inflammation overcome the risks associated with autoimmune disease and 
inflammageing. As such, inflammation has a positive influence on health when activated 
transiently — that is, when inflammation deploys quickly and fully armed in response to an 
adequate stimulation, successfully eliminates the challenge, and recedes quickly to a 
baseline resting state. When inflammation becomes chronic, however, problems arise and 
deleterious effects emerge, as first described by Rudolph Virchow (1821–1902)279. Chronic 
inflammatory diseases, such as certain chronic infections, cancer, congestive heart failure, 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and HIV, cause syndromes that share many 
characteristics with accelerated ageing and frailty, including sarcopenia, weight loss, and 
loss of energy coupled with fatigability. Therefore, chronically elevated levels of circulating 
pro-inflammatory markers observed with ageing are unsurprisingly also associated with 
similar signs and symptoms to those of chronic disease, although the age-related symptoms 
develop progressively and over a longer time frame.
The mechanisms for these actions are not fully understood, but a comprehensive analysis of 
the literature reveals that inflammation is often associated with a catabolic state (Fig. 3). As 
described previously in this Review, inflammation is associated with anabolic resistance in 
muscle, which is caused partly by inhibition of the perfusion adjustment to anabolic stimuli 
and partly by inhibition of IGF1 production and signalling236–240. Chronic inflammation 
causes anaemia via direct inhibition of iron absorption and recycling as well as interference 
with erythropoietin production and signalling3,280. Evidence indicates that inflammation 
causes insulin resistance. In particular, TNF receptor superfamily member 1A and Toll-like 
receptor 4 block insulin signalling through Janus kinase activation, which causes serine 
phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrate 1 and 2, contributing to insulin 
resistance281–283. Conversely, evidence also indicates that insulin resistance promotes the 
accumulation of M1 macrophages and fosters inflammation in adipose tissue through the 
Ferrucci and Fabbri
Page 16
Nat Rev Cardiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 17 (native) -----
production of CCL2 (reF.284). Pro-inflammatory cytokines — including IL-1β, IL-6, IL-11, 
IL-15, IL-17, and TNF — stimulate bone resorption and almost certainly contribute to 
osteoporosis285. For example, bone resorption is increased in patients with inflammatory 
diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis286. Studies in cultured cells show that IL-1β, IL-6, and 
TNF induce mitochondrial dysfunction with reduced ATP synthesis-driven respiration, 
reduction of the NAD+:NADH ratio, and reduced mRNA levels of PPARGC1A (encoding 
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ co-activator 1α; PGC1α), suggesting that 
mitochondrial biogenesis is impaired287. Studies conducted both in vitro and in animal 
models suggest that inflammation in general, and IL-1β and IFNα in particular, inhibit 
neurogenesis and reduce the magnitude of neurogenesis that is normally induced by 
exercise288,289. These data delineate an overall mechanism by which inflammageing affects 
multiple physiological systems and phenotypes. During an infection that unleashes an 
inflammatory response, the physiological and metabolic state of the organism is focused on 
defence, and all other anabolic activities are paused, including nondefensive functions of the 
immune system, such as surveillance of damage and continuous repair in tissue, which 
mostly rely on growth factors. If this condition is temporary, turnover and repair of 
macromolecules, organelles, and cells can be delayed, avoiding irreversible damage. 
However, in older individuals, inflammation remains chronically activated, either because of 
continued stress from the inflammation source or because of a primary immune 
dysregulation. In the absence of macromolecular and organellar recycling, the accumulation 
of damage can reach a critical threshold, thereby causing severe functional consequences 
that become difficult or impossible to reverse, conferring the clinical syndrome of frailty.
Conclusions
On the basis of the data and the hypotheses presented in this Review, modulating 
inflammageing is a promising strategy not only to prevent CVD but also to slow the decline 
of health that occurs with ageing. Modulating inflammation is likely to be most effective at 
the early stage of health decline, at a time when the compensatory capacity of the organism 
is not completely exhausted and might still counteract physiological and functional declines. 
New pharmacological treatments that selectively affect some of the signalling pathways that 
regulate inflammation are needed to balance the relationship between risks and benefits. 
Early treatments will require early diagnosis and availability of a signature biomarker profile 
that allows for a differential diagnosis between true inflammageing and chronic 
inflammation sustained by the persistence of an infectious or toxic cause. Ultimately, RCTs 
are needed to test the hypothesis that modulating inflammation prevents the development of 
CVD as well as multimorbidity, disability, and frailty.
Acknowledgements
The authors received support from the Intramural Research Program of the National Institute on Aging, NIH, 
Baltimore, MD, USA. The authors thank A. Cornish (National Institute on Aging) for help in editing the manuscript 
and for the many suggestions that greatly improved the quality of this work, in particular the microbiota section.
Ferrucci and Fabbri
Page 17
Nat Rev Cardiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 18 (native) -----
References
1. Bektas A, Schurman SH, Sen R & Ferrucci L Aging, inflammation and the environment. Exp. 
Gerontol 10.1016/j.exger.2017.12.015 (2018).
2. Franceschi C et al. Inflamm-aging. An evolutionary perspective on immunosenescence. Ann. NY 
Acad. Sci 908, 244–254 (2000). [PubMed: 10911963] 
3. Ferrucci L et al. Proinflammatory state, hepcidin, and anemia in older persons. Blood 115, 3810–
3816 (2010). [PubMed: 20081092] 
4. Fulop T et al. Immunosenescence and inflamm-aging as two sides of the same coin: friends or foes? 
Frontiers Immunol 8, 1960 (2018).
5. Cohen HJ, Pieper CF, Harris T, Rao KM & Currie MS The association of plasma IL-6 levels with 
functional disability in community-dwelling elderly. J. Gerontol. A. Biol. Sci. Med. Sci 52, M201–
M208 (1997). [PubMed: 9224431] 
6. Newman AB et al. Trajectories of function and biomarkers with age: the CHS All Stars Study. Int. J. 
Epidemiol 45, 1135–1145 (2016). [PubMed: 27272182] 
7. Gerli R et al. Chemokines, sTNF-Rs and sCD30 serum levels in healthy aged people and 
centenarians. Mech. Ageing Dev 121, 37–46 (2000). [PubMed: 11164458] 
8. Franceschi C, Garagnani P, Vitale G, Capri M & Salvioli S Inflammaging and ‘garb-aging’. Trends 
Endocrinol. Metab 28, 199–212 (2017). [PubMed: 27789101] 
9. Ruparelia N, Chai JT, Fisher EA & Choudhury RP Inflammatory processes in cardiovascular 
disease: a route to targeted therapies. Nat. Rev. Cardiol 14, 133–144 (2017). [PubMed: 27905474] 
10. Leonardi GC, Accardi G, Monastero R, Nicoletti F & Libra M Ageing: from inflammation to 
cancer. Immun. Ageing 15, 1 (2018). [PubMed: 29387133] 
11. Salimi S et al. Inflammation and trajectory of renal function in community-dwelling older adults. J. 
Am. Geriatr. Soc 66, 804–811 (2018). [PubMed: 29360163] 
12. Gorelick PB Role of inflammation in cognitive impairment: results of observational 
epidemiological studies and clinical trials. Ann. NY Acad. Sci 1207, 155–162 (2010). [PubMed: 
20955439] 
13. Miller AH & Raison CL The role of inflammation in depression: From evolutionary imperative to 
modern treatment target. Nat. Rev. Immunol 16, 22–34 (2016). [PubMed: 26711676] 
14. Fabbri E et al. Aging and the burden of multimorbidity: associations with inflammatory and 
anabolic hormonal biomarkers. J. Gerontol. A. Biol. Sci. Med. Sci 70, 63–70 (2015). [PubMed: 
25104822] 
15. Ferrucci L et al. Serum IL-6 level and the development of disability in older persons. J. Am. 
Geriatr. Soc 47, 639–646 (1999). [PubMed: 10366160] 
16. Kuo H, Bean JF, Yen C & Leveille SG Linking C-reactive protein to late-life disability in the 
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) 1999–2002. J. Gerontol. A. Biol. 
Sci. Med. Sci 61, 380–387 (2006). [PubMed: 16611705] 
17. Schaap LA et al. Higher inflammatory marker levels in older persons: associations with 5-year 
change in muscle mass and muscle strength. J. Gerontol. A. Biol. Sci. Med. Sci 64, 1183–1189 
(2009). [PubMed: 19622801] 
18. Soysal P et al. Inflammation and frailty in the elderly: a systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Ageing Res. Rev 31, 1–8 (2016). [PubMed: 27592340] 
19. Volpato S et al. Cardiovascular disease, interleukin-6, and risk of mortality in older women: the 
women’s health and aging study. Circulation 103, 947–953 (2001). [PubMed: 11181468] 
20. Hodes RJ et al. Disease drivers of aging. Ann. NY Acad. Sci 1386, 45–68 (2016). [PubMed: 
27943360] 
21. Smith AJP & Humphries SE Cytokine and cytokine receptor gene polymorphisms and their 
functionality. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev 20, 43–59 (2009). [PubMed: 19038572] 
22. Rafiq S et al. Common genetic variation in the gene encoding interleukin-1-receptor antagonist 
(IL-1RA) is associated with altered circulating IL-1RA levels. Genes Immun 8, 344–351 (2007). 
[PubMed: 17443229] 
Ferrucci and Fabbri
Page 18
Nat Rev Cardiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 19 (native) -----
23. Sarwar N et al. Interleukin-6 receptor pathways in coronary heart disease: a collaborative meta-
analysis of 82 studies. Lancet 379, 1205–1213 (2012). [PubMed: 22421339] 
24. Swerdlow DI et al. The interleukin-6 receptor as a target for prevention of coronary heart disease: a 
mendelian randomisation analysis. Lancet 379, 1214–1224 (2012). [PubMed: 22421340] 
25. Dehghan A et al. Meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies in >80 000 subjects identifies 
multiple loci for C-reactive protein levels. Circulation 123, 731–738 (2011). [PubMed: 21300955] 
26. Reiner AP et al. Polymorphisms of the IL1-receptor antagonist gene (IL1RN) are associated with 
multiple markers of systemic inflammation. Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol 28, 1407–1412 
(2008). [PubMed: 18451331] 
27. Carrol ED et al. The IL1RN promoter rs4251961 correlates with IL-1 receptor antagonist 
concentrations in human infection and is differentially regulated by GATA-1. J. Immunol 186, 
2329–2335 (2011). [PubMed: 21248262] 
28. Herder C et al. Genetic determinants of circulating interleukin-1 receptor antagonist levels and 
their association with glycemic traits. Diabetes 63, 4343–4359 (2014). [PubMed: 24969107] 
29. Wu X et al. IL-1 receptor antagonist gene as a predictive biomarker of progression of knee 
osteoarthritis in a population cohort. Osteoarthr. Cartil 21, 930–938 (2013). [PubMed: 23602982] 
30. Dai L, Liu D, Guo H, Wang Y & Bai Y Association between polymorphism in the promoter region 
of interleukin 6 (−174 G/C) and risk of Alzheimer’s disease: a meta-analysis. Neurol. J 259, 414–
419 (2012).
31. Hou H et al. Association of interleukin-6 gene polymorphism with coronary artery disease: an 
updated systematic review and cumulative meta-analysis. Inflamm. Res 64, 707–720 (2015). 
[PubMed: 26174156] 
32. Testa R et al. Interleukin-6–174 G > C polymorphism affects the association between IL-6 plasma 
levels and insulin resistance in type 2 diabetic patients. Diabetes Res. Clin. Pract 71, 299–305 
(2006). [PubMed: 16140413] 
33. Moffett SP et al. Association of the G-174C variant in the interleukin-6 promoter region with bone 
loss and fracture risk in older women. J. Bone Miner. Res 19, 1612–1618 (2004). [PubMed: 
15355555] 
34. Fishman D et al. The effect of novel polymorphisms in the interleukin-6 (IL-6) gene on IL-6 
transcription and plasma IL-6 levels, and an association with systemic-onset juvenile chronic 
arthritis. J. Clin. Invest 102, 1369–1376 (1998). [PubMed: 9769329] 
35. Zeng Y et al. Novel loci and pathways significantly associated with longevity. Sci. Rep 6, 21243 
(2016). [PubMed: 26912274] 
36. Khandaker GM, Zammit S, Burgess S, Lewis G & Jones PB Association between a functional 
interleukin 6 receptor genetic variant and risk of depression and psychosis in a population-based 
birth cohort. Brain. Behav. Immun 69, 264–272 (2017). [PubMed: 29197507] 
37. Ferreira RC et al. Functional IL6R 358Ala allele impairs classical IL-6 receptor signaling and 
influences risk of diverse inflammatory diseases. PLoS Genet 9, e1003444 (2013). [PubMed: 
23593036] 
38. Lange LA et al. Association of polymorphisms in the CRP gene with circulating C-reactive protein 
levels and cardiovascular events. JAMA 296, 2703 (2006). [PubMed: 17164456] 
39. Peters MJ et al. The transcriptional landscape of age in human peripheral blood. Nat. Commun 6, 
8570 (2015). [PubMed: 26490707] 
40. Pilling LC et al. Gene expression markers of age-related inflammation in two human cohorts. Exp. 
Gerontol 70, 37–45 (2015). [PubMed: 26087330] 
41. Fabian MR, Sonenberg N & Filipowicz W Regulation of mRNA translation and stability by 
microRNAs. Annu. Rev. Biochem 79, 351–379 (2010). [PubMed: 20533884] 
42. Noren Hooten N et al. microRNA expression patterns reveal differential expression of target genes 
with age. PLoS ONE 5, e10724 (2010). [PubMed: 20505758] 
43. Lai C-Y et al. Modulated expression of human peripheral blood microRNAs from infancy to 
adulthood and its role in aging. Aging Cell 13, 679–689 (2014). [PubMed: 24803090] 
44. Olivieri F et al. Age-related differences in the expression of circulating microRNAs: miR-21 as a 
new circulating marker of inflammaging. Mech. Ageing Dev 133, 675–685 (2012). [PubMed: 
23041385] 
Ferrucci and Fabbri
Page 19
Nat Rev Cardiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 20 (native) -----
45. Freedman JE et al. Diverse human extracellular RNAs are widely detected in human plasma. Nat. 
Commun 7, 11106 (2016). [PubMed: 27112789] 
46. Noren Hooten N et al. Age-related changes in microRNA levels in serum. Aging 5, 725–740 
(2013). [PubMed: 24088671] 
47. Ameling S et al. Associations of circulating plasma microRNAs with age, body mass index and sex 
in a population-based study. BMC Med. Genomics 8, 61 (2015). [PubMed: 26462558] 
48. Zhang H et al. Investigation of microRNA expression in human serum during the aging process. J. 
Gerontol. A. Biol. Sci. Med. Sci 70, 102–109 (2015). [PubMed: 25165030] 
49. Dluzen DF, Noren Hooten N & Evans MK Extracellular. RNA in aging. WIREs RNA 10.1002/
wrna.1385 (2017).
50. Olivieri F et al. Age- and glycemia-related miR-126–3p levels in plasma and endothelial cells. 
Aging (Albany. NY) 6, 771–787 (2014). [PubMed: 25324472] 
51. Olivieri F et al. DNA damage response (DDR) and senescence: shuttled inflamma-miRNAs on the 
stage of inflamm-aging. Oncotarget 6, 35509–35521 (2015). [PubMed: 26431329] 
52. Frasca D, Blomberg BB & Paganelli R Aging, obesity, and inflammatory age-related diseases. 
Front. Immunol 8, 1–10 (2017). [PubMed: 28149297] 
53. Rocha VZ & Libby P Obesity, inflammation, and atherosclerosis. Nat. Rev. Cardiol 6, 399–409 
(2009). [PubMed: 19399028] 
54. Vandanmagsar B et al. The NLRP3 inflammasome instigates obesity-induced inflammation and 
insulin resistance. Nat. Med 17, 179–189 (2011). [PubMed: 21217695] 
55. Frasca D & Blomberg BB Adipose tissue inflammation induces B cell inflammation and decreases 
B cell function in aging. Front. Immunol 8, 1003 (2017). [PubMed: 28894445] 
56. Lee-Chang C et al. Accumulation of 4–1BBL+ B cells in the elderly induces the generation of 
granzyme-B+ CD8+ T cells with potential antitumor activity. Blood 124, 1450–1459 (2014). 
[PubMed: 25037628] 
57. Weisberg SP et al. Obesity is associated with macrophage accumulation in adipose tissue. J. Clin. 
Invest 112, 1796–1808 (2003). [PubMed: 14679176] 
58. Panagiotakos DB, Pitsavos C, Yannakoulia M, Chrysohoou C & Stefanadis C The implication of 
obesity and central fat on markers of chronic inflammation: The ATTICA study. Atherosclerosis 
183, 308–315 (2005). [PubMed: 16285994] 
59. Clément K et al. Weight loss regulates inflammation-related genes in white adipose tissue of obese 
subjects. FASEB J 18, 1657–1669 (2004). [PubMed: 15522911] 
60. Nicklas BJ, You T & Pahor M Behavioural treatments for chronic systemic inflammation: effects 
of dietary weight loss and exercise training. Can. Med. Assoc. J 172, 1199–1209 (2005). [PubMed: 
15851714] 
61. Illán-Gómez F et al. Obesity and inflammation: change in adiponectin, C-reactive protein, tumour 
necrosis factor-alpha and interleukin-6 after bariatric surgery. Obes. Surg 22, 950–955 (2012). 
[PubMed: 22527592] 
62. Meydani SN et al. Long-term moderate calorie restriction inhibits inflammation without impairing 
cell-mediated immunity: a randomized controlled trial in non-obese humans. Aging 8, 1416–1431 
(2016). [PubMed: 27410480] 
63. Zomer E et al. Interventions that cause weight loss and the impact on cardiovascular risk factors: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Obes. Rev 17, 1001–1011 (2016). [PubMed: 27324830] 
64. Ma C et al. Effects of weight loss interventions for adults who are obese on mortality, 
cardiovascular disease, and cancer: systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ 359, j4849 (2017). 
[PubMed: 29138133] 
65. Villareal DT et al. Aerobic or resistance exercise, or both, in dieting obese older adults. N. Engl. J. 
Med 376, 1943–1955 (2017). [PubMed: 28514618] 
66. Mariat D et al. The Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio of the human microbiota changes with age. 
BMC Microbiol 9, 123 (2009). [PubMed: 19508720] 
67. Biagi E et al. Gut microbiota and extreme longevity. Curr. Biol 26, 1480–1485 (2016). [PubMed: 
27185560] 
Ferrucci and Fabbri
Page 20
Nat Rev Cardiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 21 (native) -----
68. Shapiro H, Thaiss CA, Levy M & Elinav E The cross talk between microbiota and the immune 
system: metabolites take center stage. Curr. Opin. Immunol 30, 54–62 (2014). [PubMed: 
25064714] 
69. Rampelli S et al. Functional metagenomic profiling of intestinal microbiome in extreme ageing. 
Aging 5, 902–912 (2013). [PubMed: 24334635] 
70. Biagi E et al. Through ageing, and beyond: gut microbiota and inflammatory status in seniors and 
centenarians. PLoS ONE 5, e10667 (2010). [PubMed: 20498852] 
71. Zapata HJ & Quagliarello VJ The microbiota and microbiome in aging: potential implications in 
health and age-related diseases. Am. J. Geriatr. Soc 63, 776–781 (2015).
72. Thevaranjan N et al. Age-associated microbial dysbiosis promotes intestinal permeability, systemic 
inflammation, and macrophage dysfunction. Cell Host Microbe 21, 455–466.e4 (2017). [PubMed: 
28407483] 
73. Picca A et al. Gut dysbiosis and muscle aging: searching for novel targets against sarcopenia. 
Mediators Inflamm 2018, 7026198 (2018). [PubMed: 29686533] 
74. van Tongeren SP, Slaets JPJ, Harmsen HJM & Welling GW Fecal microbiota composition and 
frailty. Appl. Environ. Microbiol 71, 6438–6442 (2005). [PubMed: 16204576] 
75. O’Toole PW & Jeffery IB Gut microbiota and aging. Science 350, 1214–1215 (2015). [PubMed: 
26785481] 
76. Mello AM, Paroni G, Daragjati J & Pilotto A Gastrointestinal microbiota and their contribution to 
healthy aging. Dig. Dis 34, 194–201 (2016). [PubMed: 27028130] 
77. Barrios C et al. Gut-microbiota-metabolite axis in early renal function decline. PLoS ONE 10, 
e0134311 (2015). [PubMed: 26241311] 
78. Everard A et al. Cross-talk between Akkermansia muciniphila and intestinal epithelium controls 
diet-induced obesity. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 110, 9066–9071 (2013). [PubMed: 23671105] 
79. Turroni F et al. Molecular dialogue between the human gut microbiota and the host: a 
Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium perspective. Cell. Mol. Life Sci 71, 183–203 (2014). [PubMed: 
23516017] 
80. Ott B et al. Effect of caloric restriction on gut permeability, inflammation markers, and fecal 
microbiota in obese women. Sci. Rep 7, 11955 (2017). [PubMed: 28931850] 
81. Westfall S et al. Microbiome, probiotics and neurodegenerative diseases: deciphering the gut brain 
axis. Cell. Mol. Life Sci 74, 3769–3787 (2017). [PubMed: 28643167] 
82. Kim YA, Keogh JB & Clifton PM Probiotics, prebiotics, synbiotics and insulin sensitivity. Nutr. 
Res. Rev 31, 35–51 (2018). [PubMed: 29037268] 
83. Liu Y, Gibson GR & Walton GE An in vitro approach to study effects of prebiotics and probiotics 
on the faecal microbiota and selected immune parameters relevant to the elderly. PLoS ONE 11, 
e0162604 (2016). [PubMed: 27612304] 
84. Nagpal R et al. Gut microbiota in health and disease: an overview focused on metabolic 
inflammation. Benef. Microbes 7, 181–194 (2016). [PubMed: 26645350] 
85. Turchet P, Laurenzano M, Auboiron S & Antoine JM Effect of fermented milk containing the 
probiotic Lactobacillus casei DN-114001 on winter infections in free-living elderly subjects: a 
randomised, controlled pilot study. J. Nutr. Health Aging 7, 75–77 (2003). [PubMed: 12679825] 
86. López-Otín C, Blasco MA, Partridge L, Serrano M & Kroemer G The hallmarks of aging. Cell 
153, 1194–1217 (2013). [PubMed: 23746838] 
87. Kennedy BK et al. Geroscience: linking aging to chronic disease. Cell 159, 709–713 (2014). 
[PubMed: 25417146] 
88. Campisi J & D’Adda Di Fagagna F Cellular senescence: when bad things happen to good cells. 
Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell. Biol 8, 729–740 (2007). [PubMed: 17667954] 
89. Sharpless NE & Sherr CJ Forging a signature of in vivo senescence. Nat. Rev. Cancer 15, 397–408 
(2015). [PubMed: 26105537] 
90. Bernardes de Jesus B & Blasco MA Assessing cell and organ senescence biomarkers. Circ. Res 
111, 97–109 (2012). [PubMed: 22723221] 
91. Jeck WR, Siebold AP & Sharpless NE Review: a meta-analysis of GWAS and age-associated 
diseases. Aging Cell 11, 727–731 (2012). [PubMed: 22888763] 
Ferrucci and Fabbri
Page 21
Nat Rev Cardiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 22 (native) -----
92. Johnson SC, Dong X, Vijg J & Suh Y Genetic evidence for common pathways in human age-
related diseases. Aging Cell 14, 809–817 (2015). [PubMed: 26077337] 
93. Melzer D et al. A common variant of the p16INK4a genetic region is associated with physical 
function in older people. Mech. Ageing Dev 128, 370–377 (2007). [PubMed: 17459456] 
94. van Deursen JM The role of senescent cells in ageing. Nature 509, 439–446 (2014). [PubMed: 
24848057] 
95. Hernandez-Segura A et al. Unmasking transcriptional heterogeneity in senescent cells. Curr. Biol 
27, 2652–2660.e4 (2017). [PubMed: 28844647] 
96. Borodkina AV, Deryabin PI, Giukova AA & Nikolsky NN ‘Social life’ of senescent sells: what is 
SASP and why study it? Acta Naturae 10, 4–14 (2018).
97. Herbig U, Ferreira M, Condel L, Carey D & Sedivy JM Cellular senescence in aging primates. 
Science 311, 1257 (2006). [PubMed: 16456035] 
98. Waaijer MEC et al. The number of p16INK4a positive cells in human skin reflects biological age. 
Aging Cell 11, 722–725 (2012). [PubMed: 22612594] 
99. Liu Y et al. Expression of p16INK4a in peripheral blood T-cells is a biomarker of human aging. 
Aging Cell 8, 439–448 (2009). [PubMed: 19485966] 
100. Koppelstaetter C et al. Markers of cellular senescence in zero hour biopsies predict outcome in 
renal transplantation. Aging Cell 7, 491–497 (2008). [PubMed: 18462273] 
101. Helman A et al. p16Ink4a-induced senescence of pancreatic beta cells enhances insulin secretion. 
Nat. Med 22, 412–420 (2016). [PubMed: 26950362] 
102. Rossman MJ et al. Endothelial cell senescence with aging in healthy humans: prevention by 
habitual exercise and relation to vascular endothelial function. Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. 
Physiol 313, H890–H895 (2017). [PubMed: 28971843] 
103. Diekman BO et al. Expression of p16INK4a is a biomarker of chondrocyte aging but does not 
cause osteoarthritis. Aging Cell 10.1111/acel.12771 (2018).
104. Chimenti C et al. Senescence and death of primitive cells and myocytes lead to premature cardiac 
aging and heart failure. Circ. Res 93, 604–613 (2003). [PubMed: 12958145] 
105. Kajstura J et al. Myocyte turnover in the aging human heart. Circ. Res 107, 1374–1386 (2010). 
[PubMed: 21088285] 
106. Gregor MF & Hotamisligil GS Inflammatory mechanisms in obesity. Annu. Rev. Immunol 29, 
415–445 (2011). [PubMed: 21219177] 
107. Ogrodnik M et al. Cellular senescence drives age-dependent hepatic steatosis. Nat. Commun 8, 
15691 (2017). [PubMed: 28608850] 
108. Klenerman P & Oxenius A T cell responses to cytomegalovirus. Nat. Rev. Immunol 16, 367–377 
(2016). [PubMed: 27108521] 
109. Sansoni P et al. New advances in CMV and immunosenescence. Exp. Gerontol 55, 54–62 (2014). 
[PubMed: 24703889] 
110. Fulop T, Larbi A & Pawelec G Human T cell aging and the impact of persistent viral infections. 
Front. Immunol 4, 271 (2013). [PubMed: 24062739] 
111. Baker DJ et al. Clearance of p16 Ink4a-positive senescent cells delays ageing-associated disorders. 
Nature 479, 232–236 (2011). [PubMed: 22048312] 
112. Baker DJ et al. Naturally occurring p16 Ink4a-positive cells shorten healthy lifespan. Nature 530, 
184–189 (2016). [PubMed: 26840489] 
113. Medina CB & Ravichandran KS Do not let death do us part: ‘find-me’ signals in communication 
between dying cells and the phagocytes. Cell Death Differ 23, 979–989 (2016). [PubMed: 
26891690] 
114. Youm YH et al. Canonical Nlrp3 inflammasome links systemic low-grade inflammation to 
functional decline in aging. Cell Metab 18, 519–532 (2013). [PubMed: 24093676] 
115. Goldberg EL & Dixit VD Drivers of age-related inflammation and strategies for healthspan 
extension. Immunol. Rev 265, 63–74 (2015). [PubMed: 25879284] 
116. Medzhitov R & Janeway CAJ Decoding the patterns of self and nonself by the innate immune 
system. Science 296, 298–300 (2002). [PubMed: 11951031] 
Ferrucci and Fabbri
Page 22
Nat Rev Cardiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 23 (native) -----
117. Kepp O, Galluzzi L & Kroemer G Mitochondrial control of the NLRP3 inflammasome. Nat. 
Immunol 12, 199–200 (2011). [PubMed: 21321591] 
118. Ferrucci L et al. The origins of age-related proinflammatory state. Blood 105, 2294–2299 (2005). 
[PubMed: 15572589] 
119. Sies H, Berndt C & Jones DP Oxidative stress. Annu. Rev. Biochem 86, 715–748 (2017). 
[PubMed: 28441057] 
120. Bektas A et al. Age-associated alterations in inducible gene transcription in human CD4+ T 
lymphocytes. Aging 5, 18–36 (2013). [PubMed: 23385138] 
121. Bektas A et al. Age-associated changes in basal NF-κB function in human CD4+ T lymphocytes 
via dysregulation of PI3 kinase. Aging 6, 957–974 (2014). [PubMed: 25553802] 
122. Cannon MJ, Schmid DS & Hyde TB Review of cytomegalovirus seroprevalence and demographic 
characteristics associated with infection. Rev. Med. Virol 20, 202–213 (2010). [PubMed: 
20564615] 
123. Vescovini R et al. Massive load of functional effector CD4+ and CD8+ T cells against 
cytomegalovirus in very old subjects. J. Immunol 179, 4283–4291 (2007). [PubMed: 17785869] 
124. Simon CO et al. CD8 T cells control cytomegalovirus latency by epitope-specific sensing of 
transcriptional reactivation. J. Virol 80, 10436–10456 (2006). [PubMed: 16928768] 
125. Roberts ET, Haan MN, Dowd JB & Aiello AE Cytomegalovirus antibody levels, inflammation, 
and mortality among elderly Latinos over 9 years of follow-up. Am. J. Epidemiol 172, 363–371 
(2010). [PubMed: 20660122] 
126. Spyridopoulos I et al. CMV seropositivity and T-cell senescence predict increased cardiovascular 
mortality in octogenarians: results from the Newcastle 85+ study. Aging Cell 15, 389–392 
(2016). [PubMed: 26696322] 
127. Adriaensen W et al. CD4:8 ratio above 5 is associated with all-cause mortality in CMV-
seronegative very old women: results from the BELFRAIL study. J. Gerontol. A. Biol. Sci. Med. 
Sci 72, 1155–1162 (2017). [PubMed: 27927759] 
128. Brodin P et al. Variation in the human immune system is largely driven by non-heritable 
influences. Cell 160, 37–47 (2015). [PubMed: 25594173] 
129. Aiello AE, Chiu Y-L & Frasca D How does cytomegalovirus factor into diseases of aging and 
vaccine responses, and by what mechanisms? GeroScience 39, 261–271 (2017). [PubMed: 
28624868] 
130. Goldeck D et al. No strong correlations between serum cytokine levels, CMV serostatus and 
hand-grip strength in older subjects in the Berlin BASE-II cohort. Biogerontology 17, 189–198 
(2016). [PubMed: 25906063] 
131. Nasi M et al. Ageing and inflammation in patients with HIV infection. Clin. Exp. Immunol 187, 
44–52 (2017). [PubMed: 27198731] 
132. Neuhaus J et al. Markers of inflammation, coagulation, and renal function are elevated in adults 
with HIV infection. J. Infect. Dis 201, 1788–1795 (2010). [PubMed: 20446848] 
133. Losina E et al. Projecting 10-year, 20-year, and lifetime risks of cardiovascular disease in persons 
living with human immunodeficiency virus in the United States. Clin. Infect. Dis 65, 1266–1271 
(2017). [PubMed: 28605504] 
134. Brothers TD et al. Frailty in people aging with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection. J. 
Infect. Dis 210, 1170–1179 (2014). [PubMed: 24903667] 
135. Stein JH & Hsue PY Inflammation, immune activation, and CVD risk in individuals with HIV 
infection. JAMA 308, 405–406 (2012). [PubMed: 22820794] 
136. Brenchley JM et al. Microbial translocation is a cause of systemic immune activation in chronic 
HIV infection. Nat. Med 12, 1365–1371 (2006). [PubMed: 17115046] 
137. Grunfeld C et al. Association of upper trunk and visceral adipose tissue volume with insulin 
resistance in control and HIV-infected subjects in the FRAM study. J. Acquir. Immune Def. 
Syndr 46, 283–290 (2007).
138. Odegaard AO et al. Oxidative stress, inflammation, endothelial dysfunction and incidence of type 
2 diabetes. Cardiovasc. Diabetol 15, 51 (2016). [PubMed: 27013319] 
Ferrucci and Fabbri
Page 23
Nat Rev Cardiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 24 (native) -----
139. Lai KSP et al. Peripheral inflammatory markers in Alzheimer’s disease: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis of 175 studies. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 88, 876–882 (2017). [PubMed: 
28794151] 
140. Iseme RA et al. Is osteoporosis an autoimmune mediated disorder? Bone Rep 7, 121–131 (2017). 
[PubMed: 29124082] 
141. Dalle S, Rossmeislova L & Koppo K The role of inflammation in age-related sarcopenia. Front. 
Physiol 8, 1045 (2017). [PubMed: 29311975] 
142. Amdur RL et al. Inflammation and progression of CKD: the CRIC study. Clin. J. Am. Soc. 
Nephrol 11, 1546–1556 (2016). [PubMed: 27340285] 
143. Kohler O, Krogh J, Mors O & Eriksen Benros M Inflammation in depression and the potential for 
anti-inflammatory treatment. Curr. Neuropharmacol 14, 732–742 (2016). [PubMed: 27640518] 
144. Libby P, Ridker PM & Hansson GK Progress and challenges in translating the biology of 
atherosclerosis. Nature 473, 317–325 (2011). [PubMed: 21593864] 
145. Andreou DE & Andreadou I Atherosclerosis:an inflammatory disease. Pharmakeftiki 22, 83–96 
(2009).
146. Hansson GK Inflammation, atherosclerosis and coronary artery disease. N. Engl. J. Med 352, 
1685–1695 (2005). [PubMed: 15843671] 
147. Libby P, Ridker PM & Hansson GK Inflammation in atherosclerosis. from pathophysiology to 
practice. Am. J. Coll. Cardiol 54, 2129–2138 (2009).
148. De Caterina R, D’Ugo E & Libby P Inflammation and thrombosis – Testing the hypothesis with 
anti-inflammatory drug trials. Thromb. Haemost 116, 1012–1021 (2016). [PubMed: 27535617] 
149. Libby P, Okamoto Y, Rocha VZ & Folco E Inflammation in atherosclerosis. Circ. J 74, 213–220 
(2010). [PubMed: 20065609] 
150. Duewell P et al. NLRP3 inflammasomes are required for atherogenesis and activated by 
cholesterol crystals. Nature 464, 1357–1361 (2010). [PubMed: 20428172] 
151. Warnatsch A, Ioannou M, Wang Q & Papayannopoulos V Neutrophil extracellular traps license 
macrophages for cytokine production in atherosclerosis. Science 349, 316–320 (2015). [PubMed: 
26185250] 
152. Wang M, Kim SH, Monticone RE & Lakatta EG Matrix metalloproteinases promote arterial 
remodeling in aging, hypertension, and atherosclerosis. Hypertension 65, 698–703 (2015). 
[PubMed: 25667214] 
153. Matthews C et al. Vascular smooth muscle cells undergo telomere-based senescence in human 
atherosclerosis: effects of telomerase and oxidative stress. Circ. Res 99, 156–164 (2006). 
[PubMed: 16794190] 
154. Grootaert MOJ et al. Vascular smooth muscle cell death, autophagy and senescence in 
atherosclerosis. Cardiovasc. Res 114, 622–634 (2018). [PubMed: 29360955] 
155. Ketelhuth DFJ & Hansson GK Adaptive response of T and B cells in atherosclerosis. Circ. Res 
118, 668–678 (2016). [PubMed: 26892965] 
156. Feinberg MW & Moore KJ MicroRNA regulation of atherosclerosis. Circ. Res 118, 703–720 
(2016). [PubMed: 26892968] 
157. Ridker PM, Cushman M, Stampfer MJ, Tracy RP & Hennekens CH Inflammation, aspirin, and 
the risk of cardiovascular disease in apparently healthy men. N. Engl. J. Med 336, 973–979 
(1997). [PubMed: 9077376] 
158. Ridker PM, Hennekens CH, Buring JE & Rifai N C-reactive protein and other markers of 
inflammation in the prediction of cardiovascular disease in women. N. Engl. J. Med 342, 836–
843 (2000). [PubMed: 10733371] 
159. Cushman M et al. C-reactive protein and the 10-year incidence of coronary heart disease in older 
men and women: the cardiovascular health study. Circulation 112, 25–31 (2005). [PubMed: 
15983251] 
160. Cesari M et al. Inflammatory markers and onset of cardiovascular events: results from the Health 
ABC study. Circulation 108, 2317–2322 (2003). [PubMed: 14568895] 
161. Levinson SS Rosuvastatin to prevent vascular events in men and women with elevated C.-reactive 
protein – an analysis. Clin. J. Ligand Assay 31, 25–28 (2008).
Ferrucci and Fabbri
Page 24
Nat Rev Cardiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 25 (native) -----
162. Noren Hooten N, Ejiogu N, Zonderman AB & Evans MK Association of oxidative DNA damage 
and C-reactive protein in women at risk for cardiovascular disease. Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. 
Biol 32, 2776–2784 (2012). [PubMed: 22982460] 
163. Ridker PM From C-reactive protein to interleukin-6 to interleukin-1: moving upstream to identify 
novel targets for atheroprotection. Circ. Res 118, 145–156 (2016). [PubMed: 26837745] 
164. Elliott P et al. Genetic loci associated with C-reactive protein levels and risk of coronary heart 
disease. JAMA - J. Am. Med. Assoc 302, 37–48 (2009).
165. McInnes IB et al. Effect of interleukin-6 receptor blockade on surrogates of vascular risk in 
rheumatoid arthritis: MEASURE, a randomised, placebo-controlled study. Ann. Rheum. Dis 74, 
694–702 (2015). [PubMed: 24368514] 
166. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/
NCT01331837 (2011).
167. Libby P Interleukin-1 β as a target for atherosclerosis therapy: biological basis of CANTOS and 
beyond. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol 70, 2278–2289 (2017). [PubMed: 29073957] 
168. Ridker PM et al. Antiinflammatory therapy with canakinumab for atherosclerotic disease. N. 
Engl. J. Med 377, 1119–1131 (2017). [PubMed: 28845751] 
169. Ridker PM et al. Effects of interleukin-1β inhibition with canakinumab on hemoglobin A1c, 
lipids, C-reactive protein, interleukin-6, and fibrinogen. Circulation 126, 2739–2748 (2012). 
[PubMed: 23129601] 
170. Everett BM et al. Rationale and design of the cardiovascular inflammation reduction trial: a test of 
the inflammatory hypothesis of atherothrombosis. Am. Heart J 166, 199–207.e15 (2013). 
[PubMed: 23895801] 
171. Daniels LB Pretenders and contenders: inflammation, C-reactive protein and interleukin-6. Am. J. 
Heart Assoc 6, e007490 (2017).
172. Nidorf SM, Mbbs JWE, Hons CAB & Thompson PL Low-dose colchicine for secondary 
prevention of cardiovascular disease. Am. J. Coll. Cardiol 61, 404–410 (2013).
173. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/
NCT02551094 (2015).
174. Cigolle CT, Blaum CS & Halter JB Diabetes and cardiovascular disease prevention in older 
adults. Clin. Geriatr. Med 25, 607–641 (2009). [PubMed: 19944264] 
175. Stout MB, Justice JN, Nicklas BJ & Kirkland JL Physiological aging: Links among adipose tissue 
dysfunction, diabetes, and frailty. Physiology 32, 9–19 (2017). [PubMed: 27927801] 
176. Halter JB et al. Diabetes and cardiovascular disease in older adults: current status and future 
directions. Diabetes 63, 2578–2589 (2014). [PubMed: 25060886] 
177. Nahrendorf M & Swirski FK Immunology. Neutrophil-macrophage communication in 
inflammation and atherosclerosis. Science 349, 237–238 (2015). [PubMed: 26185231] 
178. Gimbrone MAJ & Garcia-Cardena G Endothelial cell dysfunction and the pathobiology of 
atherosclerosis. Circ. Res 118, 620–636 (2016). [PubMed: 26892962] 
179. Shakeri H, Lemmens K, Gevaert AB, De Meyer GRY & Segers V Cellular senescence links aging 
and diabetes in cardiovascular disease. Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol 10.1152/ajpheart.
00287.2018 (2018).
180. Aryan Z et al. Baseline high-sensitivity C-reactive protein predicts macrovascular and 
microvascular complications of type 2 diabetes: a population-pased study. Ann. Nutr. Metab 72, 
287–295 (2018). [PubMed: 29694948] 
181. Eguchi S, Kawai T, Scalia R & Rizzo V Understanding Angiotensin II type 1 receptor signaling 
in vascular pathophysiology. Hypertension 71, 804–810 (2018). [PubMed: 29581215] 
182. Jacobsson LT et al. Treatment with tumor necrosis factor blockers is associated with a lower 
incidence of first cardiovascular events in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. J. Rheumatol 32, 
1213–1218 (2005). [PubMed: 15996054] 
183. Greenberg JD et al. Tumour necrosis factor antagonist use and associated risk reduction of 
cardiovascular events among patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Ann. Rheum. Dis 70, 576–582 
(2011). [PubMed: 21109516] 
Ferrucci and Fabbri
Page 25
Nat Rev Cardiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 26 (native) -----
184. Solomon DH et al. Cardiovascular risk in rheumatoid arthritis: comparing TNF-α blockade with 
nonbiologic DMARDs. Am. J. Med 126, 730e9–730.e17 (2013).
185. Bili A et al. Tumor necrosis factor α inhibitor use and decreased risk for incident coronary events 
in rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Care Res 66, 355–363 (2014).
186. Roubille C et al. The effects of tumour necrosis factor inhibitors, methotrexate, non-steroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs and corticosteroids on cardiovascular events in rheumatoid arthritis, psoriasis 
and psoriatic arthritis: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Ann. Rheum. Dis 74, 480–489 
(2015). [PubMed: 25561362] 
187. Low ASL et al. Relationship between exposure to tumour necrosis factor inhibitor therapy and 
incidence and severity of myocardial infarction in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Ann. 
Rheum. Dis 76, 654–660 (2017). [PubMed: 28073800] 
188. Shaaban D & Al-Mutairi N The effect of tumor necrosis factor inhibitor therapy on the incidence 
of myocardial infarction in patients with psoriasis: a retrospective study. J. Dermatolog. Treat 29, 
3–7 (2018). [PubMed: 27881030] 
189. Yang Z, Lin N, Li L & Li Y The effect of TNF inhibitors on cardiovascular events in psoriasis and 
psoriatic arthritis: an updated meta-analysis. Clin. Rev. Allergy Immunol 51, 240–247 (2016). 
[PubMed: 27300248] 
190. Anker SD Inflammatory mediators in chronic heart failure: an overview. Heart 90, 464–470 
(2004). [PubMed: 15020532] 
191. Levine B, Kalman J, Mayer L, Fillit HM & Packer M Elevated circulating levels of tumor 
necrosis factor in severe chronic heart failure. N. Engl. J. Med 323, 236–241 (1990). [PubMed: 
2195340] 
192. Torre-Amione G et al. Proinflammatory cytokine levels in patients with depressed left ventricular 
ejection fraction: A report from the studies of left ventricular dysfunction (SOLVD). J. Am. Coll. 
Cardiol 27, 1201–1206 (1996). [PubMed: 8609343] 
193. Mann DL et al. Targeted anticytokine therapy in patients with chronic heart failure: results of the 
randomized etanercept worldwide evaluation (RENEWAL). Circulation 109, 1594–1602 (2004). 
[PubMed: 15023878] 
194. Chung ES Randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, pilot trial of infliximab, a chimeric 
monoclonal antibody to tumor necrosis factor-α, in patients with moderate-to-severe heart 
failure: results of the anti-TNF therapy against congestive heart failure. Circulation 107, 3133–
3140 (2003). [PubMed: 12796126] 
195. Forman DE et al. Multimorbidity in older adults with cardiovascular disease. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol 
71, 2149–2161 (2018). [PubMed: 29747836] 
196. Brandenberger C & Muhlfeld C Mechanisms of lung aging. Cell Tissue Res 367, 469–480 (2017). 
[PubMed: 27743206] 
197. Tisminetzky M, Goldberg R & Gurwitz JH Magnitude and impact of multimorbidity on clinical 
outcomes in older adults with cardiovascular aisease: a literature review. Clin. Geriatr. Med 32, 
227–246 (2016). [PubMed: 27113143] 
198. Fried LP et al. Frailty in older adults: evidence for a phenotype. J. Gerontol. A. Biol. Sci. Med. 
Sci 56, M146–M156 (2001). [PubMed: 11253156] 
199. Bergman H et al. Frailty: An emerging research and clinical paradigm — issues and 
controversies. J. Gerontol. A. Biol. Sci. Med. Sci 62, 731–737 (2007). [PubMed: 17634320] 
200. Afilalo J et al. Frailty assessment in the cardiovascular care of older adults. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol 
63, 747–762 (2014). [PubMed: 24291279] 
201. Woods NF et al. Frailty: emergence and consequences in women aged 65 and older in the 
Women’s Health Initiative Observational Study. J. Am. Geriatr. Soc 53, 1321–1330 (2005). 
[PubMed: 16078957] 
202. Corti MC, Salive ME & Guralnik JM Serum albumin and physical function as predictors of 
coronary heart disease mortality and incidence in older persons. Clin. J. Epidemiol 49, 519–526 
(1996).
203. McDermott MM et al. Decline in functional performance predicts later increased mobility loss 
and mortality in peripheral arterial disease. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol 57, 962–970 (2011). [PubMed: 
21329843] 
Ferrucci and Fabbri
Page 26
Nat Rev Cardiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 27 (native) -----
204. Walker KA et al. Midlife systemic inflammation is associated with frailty in later life: the ARIC 
Study. J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci 10.1093/gerona/gly045 (2018).
205. Abbatecola AM & Paolisso G Is there a relationship between insulin resistance and frailty 
syndrome? Curr. Pharm. Des 14, 405–410 (2008). [PubMed: 18289066] 
206. Barzilay JI et al. Insulin resistance and inflammation as precursors of frailty: the Cardiovascular 
Health Study. Arch. Intern. Med 167, 635–641 (2007). [PubMed: 17420420] 
207. Walston J et al. Frailty and activation of the inflammation and coagulation systems with and 
without clinical comorbidities: results from the Cardiovascular Health Study. Arch. Intern. Med 
162, 2333–2341 (2002). [PubMed: 12418947] 
208. Afilalo J, Karunananthan S, Eisenberg MJ, Alexander KP & Bergman H Role of frailty in patients 
with cardiovascular disease. Am. J. Cardiol 103, 1616–1621 (2009). [PubMed: 19463525] 
209. Gupta J et al. Association between albuminuria, kidney function, and inflammatory biomarker 
profile in CKD in CRIC. Clin. J. Am. Soc. Nephrol 7, 1938–1946 (2012). [PubMed: 23024164] 
210. Mc Causland FR et al. C-reactive protein and risk of ESRD: results from the trial to reduce 
cardiovascular events with aranesp therapy (TREAT). Am. J. Kidney Dis 68, 873–881 (2016). 
[PubMed: 27646425] 
211. Grivennikov SI, Greten FR & Karin M Immunity. inflammation, and cancer. Cell 140, 883–899 
(2010). [PubMed: 20303878] 
212. Todoric J, Antonucci L & Karin M Targeting inflammation in cancer prevention and therapy. 
Cancer Prev. Res 9, 895–905 (2016).
213. Howren MB, Lamkin DM & Suls J Associations of depression with C-reactive protein, IL-1, and 
IL-6: a meta-analysis. Psychosom. Med 71, 171–186 (2009). [PubMed: 19188531] 
214. Miller AH, Maletic V & Raison CL Inflammation and its discontents: the role of cytokines in the 
pathophysiology of major depression. Biol. Psychiatry 65, 732–741 (2009). [PubMed: 19150053] 
215. Matthews KA et al. Are there bi-directional associations between depressive symptoms and C-
reactive protein in mid-life women? Brain. Behav. Immun 24, 96–101 (2010). [PubMed: 
19683568] 
216. Zalli A, Jovanova O, Hoogendijk WJG, Tiemeier H & Carvalho LA Low-grade inflammation 
predicts persistence of depressive symptoms. Psychopharmacology 233, 1669–1678 (2016). 
[PubMed: 25877654] 
217. Lamers F, Milaneschi Y, de Jonge P, Giltay EJ & Penninx BWJH Metabolic and inflammatory 
markers: associations with individual depressive symptoms. Psychol. Med 48, 1102–1110 (2018). 
[PubMed: 28889804] 
218. Heneka MT et al. Neuroinflammation in Alzheimer’s disease. Lancet Neurol 14, 388–405 (2015). 
[PubMed: 25792098] 
219. Eikelenboom P et al. Innate immunity and the etiology of late-onset Alzheimer’s disease. 
Neurodegener. Dis 10, 271–273 (2012). [PubMed: 22261470] 
220. Hansen PR Chronic inflammatory diseases and atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease: Innocent 
bystanders or partners in crime? Curr. Pharm. Des 24, 281–290 (2018). [PubMed: 29318966] 
221. Goldfine AB & Shoelson SE Therapeutic approaches targeting inflammation for diabetes and 
associated cardiovascular risk. J. Clin. Invest 127, 83–93 (2017). [PubMed: 28045401] 
222. Zitvogel L, Pietrocola F & Kroemer G Nutrition, inflammation and cancer. Nat. Immunol 18, 
843–850 (2017). [PubMed: 28722707] 
223. Morgan AR et al. The correlation between inflammatory biomarkers and polygenic risk score in 
Alzheimer’s Disease. J. Alzheimers. Dis 56, 25–36 (2017). [PubMed: 27911318] 
224. Schlegel TF, Hawkins RJ, Lewis CW, Motta T & Turner AS The effects of augmentation with 
swine small intestine submucosa on tendon healing under tension: histologic and mechanical 
evaluations in sheep. Am. J. Sports Med 34, 275–280 (2006). [PubMed: 16210577] 
225. Ferrucci L et al. Change in muscle strength explains accelerated decline of physical function in 
older women with high interleukin-6 serum levels. J. Am. Geriatr. Soc 50, 1947–1954 (2002). 
[PubMed: 12473005] 
Ferrucci and Fabbri
Page 27
Nat Rev Cardiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 28 (native) -----
226. Visser M et al. Relationship of interleukin-6 and tumor necrosis factor-α with muscle nass and 
muscle strength in elderly men and women: the Health ABC Study. J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. 
Med. Sci 57, M326–M332 (2002). [PubMed: 11983728] 
227. Cesari M et al. Inflammatory markers and physical performance in older persons: the InCHIANTI 
Study. J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci 59, M242–M248 (2004).
228. Santos-Eggimann B, Cuénoud P, Spagnoli J & Junod J Prevalence of frailty in middle-aged and 
older community-dwelling Europeans living in 10 countries. J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci 
64, 675–681 (2009). [PubMed: 19276189] 
229. Walston J et al. Research agenda for frailty in older adults: toward a better understanding of 
physiology and etiology: summary from the American Geriatrics Society/National Institute on 
Aging research conference on frailty in older adults. J. Am. Geriatr. Soc 54, 991–1001 (2006). 
[PubMed: 16776798] 
230. Stepanova M, Rodriguez E, Birerdinc A & Baranova A Age-independent rise of inflammatory 
scores may contribute to accelerated aging in multi-morbidity. Oncotarget 6, 1414–1421 (2015). 
[PubMed: 25638154] 
231. Friedman EM, Montez JK, Sheehan CMD, Guenewald TL & Seeman TE Childhood adversities 
and adult cardiometabolic health: does the quantity, timing, and type of adversity matter? J. 
Aging Health 27, 1311–1338 (2015). [PubMed: 25903978] 
232. Hubbard RE, O’Mahony MS, Savva GM, Calver BL & Woodhouse KW Inflammation and frailty 
measures in older people. J. Cell Mol. Med 13, 3103–3109 (2009). [PubMed: 19438806] 
233. Newman AB et al. Weight change in old age and its association with mortality. J. Am. Geriatr. 
Soc 49, 1309–1318 (2001). [PubMed: 11890489] 
234. Higashi Y et al. Insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor deficiency in macrophages accelerates 
atherosclerosis and induces an unstable plaque phenotype in apolipoprotein E-deficient mice. 
Circulation 133, 2263–2278 (2016). [PubMed: 27154724] 
235. Lazarus DD, Moldawer LL & Lowry SF Insulin-like growth factor-1 activity is inhibited by 
interleukin-1α, tumor necrosis factor-α, and interleukin-6. Lymphokine Cytokine Res 12, 219–
223 (1993). [PubMed: 8218594] 
236. Barbieri M et al. Chronic inflammation and the effect of IGF-I on muscle strength and power in 
older persons. Am. J. Physiol. Metab 284, E481–E487 (2003).
237. Cappola AR et al. Insulin-like growth factor I and interleukin-6 contribute synergistically to 
disability and mortality in older women. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab 88, 2019–2025 (2003). 
[PubMed: 12727948] 
238. Timmerman KL et al. Pharmacological vasodilation improves insulin-stimulated muscle protein 
anabolism but not glucose utilization in older adults. Diabetes 59, 2764–2771 (2010). [PubMed: 
20724580] 
239. Moaddel R et al. Plasma biomarkers of poor muscle quality in older men and women from the 
Baltimore Longitudinal Study of Aging. J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci 71, 1266–1272 
(2016). [PubMed: 27029859] 
240. Fichtlscherer S et al. Elevated C-reactive protein levels and impaired endothelial vasoreactivity in 
patients with coronary artery disease. Circulation 102, 1000–1006 (2000). [PubMed: 10961964] 
241. Bar-Shai M, Carmeli E & Reznick AZ The role of NF-κB in protein breakdown in 
immobilization, aging, and exercise: From basic processes to promotion of health. Ann. NY 
Acad. Sci 1057, 431–447 (2005). [PubMed: 16399911] 
242. Justice JN et al. Cellular senescence biomarker p16INK4a+ cell burden in thigh adipose is 
associated with poor physical function in older women. J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci 73, 
939–945 (2017).
243. Roth SM, Metter EJ, Ling S & Ferrucci L Inflammatory factors in age-related muscle wasting. 
Curr. Opin. Rheumatol 18, 625–630 (2006). [PubMed: 17053510] 
244. Jo E, Lee S-R, Park B-S & Kim J-S Potential mechanisms underlying the role of chronic 
inflammation in age-related muscle wasting. Aging Clin. Exp. Res 24, 412–422 (2012). 
[PubMed: 22717404] 
245. Walston JD Connecting age-related biological decline to frailty and late-life vulnerability. Nestle 
Nutr. Inst. Workshop Ser 83, 1–10 (2015). [PubMed: 26485518] 
Ferrucci and Fabbri
Page 28
Nat Rev Cardiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 29 (native) -----
246. Wang J et al. Vascular smooth muscle cell senescence promotes atherosclerosis and features of 
plaque vulnerability. Circulation 132, 1909–1919 (2015). [PubMed: 26416809] 
247. Ntanasi E et al. Adherence to mediterranean diet and frailty. J. Am. Med. Dir. Assoc 19, 315–
322.e2 (2017). [PubMed: 29289542] 
248. Talegawkar SA et al. A higher adherence to a mediterranean-style diet is inversely associated with 
the development of frailty in community-dwelling elderly men and women. J. Nutr 142, 2161–
2166 (2012). [PubMed: 23096005] 
249. Rosato V et al. Mediterranean diet and cardiovascular disease: a systematic review and meta-
analysis of observational studies. Eur. J. Nutr 10.1007/s00394-017-1582-0 (2017).
250. Dinu M, Pagliai G, Casini A & Sofi F Mediterranean diet and multiple health outcomes: an 
umbrella review of meta-analyses of observational studies and randomized trials. Nutr. Metab. 
Cardiovasc. Dis 27, e21 (2017).
251. Antithrombotic Trialists’ Collaboration. Collaborative meta-analysis of randomised trials of 
antiplatelet therapy for prevention of death, myocardial infarction, and stroke in high risk 
patients. BMJ 324, 71–86 (2002). [PubMed: 11786451] 
252. De Caterina R [Aspirin for primary cardiovascular disease prevention - an update]. G. Ital. 
Cardiol 18, 1–6 (2017).
253. Landi F et al. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) use and sarcopenia in older people: 
results from the ilsirente study. J. Am. Med. Dir. Assoc 14, 626e9–626.e13 (2013).
254. Wang C-P, Lorenzo C, Habib SL, Jo B & Espinoza SE Differential effects of metformin on age 
related comorbidities in older men with type 2 diabetes. J. Diabetes Complications 31, 679–686 
(2017). [PubMed: 28190681] 
255. Laksmi PW, Setiati S, Tamin TZ & Soewondo P Effect of metformin on handgrip strength, gait 
speed, myostatin serum level, and health-related quality of life: a double blind randomized 
controlled trial among non-diabetic pre-frail elderly patients. Acta Med. Indones 49, 118–127 
(2017). [PubMed: 28790226] 
256. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT02570672 (2017).
257. Manini TM et al. ENabling reduction of low-grade inflammation in SEniors pilot study: concept, 
rationale, and design. J. Am. Geriatr. Soc 65, 1961–1968 (2017). [PubMed: 28734043] 
258. Golpanian S et al. Allogeneic human mesenchymal stem cell infusions for aging frailty. J. 
Gerontol. A. Biol. Sci. Med. Sci 72, 1505–1512 (2017). [PubMed: 28444181] 
259. Tompkins BA et al. Allogeneic mesenchymal stem cells ameliorate aging frailty: a phase II 
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial. J. Gerontol. A. Biol. Sci. Med. Sci 
72, 1513–1522 (2017). [PubMed: 28977399] 
260. LaCroix AZ et al. Statin use and incident frailty in women aged 65 years or older: prospective 
findings from the Women’s Health Initiative Observational Study. J. Gerontol. A. Biol. Sci. Med. 
Sci 63, 369–375 (2008). [PubMed: 18426960] 
261. Barzilai N, Huffman DM, Muzumdar RH & Bartke A The critical role of metabolic pathways in 
aging. Diabetes 61, 1315–1322 (2012). [PubMed: 22618766] 
262. Fontana L Neuroendocrine factors in the regulation of inflammation: excessive adiposity and 
calorie restriction. Exp. Gerontol 44, 41–45 (2009). [PubMed: 18502597] 
263. Kim HJ et al. Modulation of redox-sensitive transcription factors by calorie restriction during 
aging. Mech. Ageing Dev 123, 1589–1595 (2002). [PubMed: 12470896] 
264. LaRocca TJ, Martens CR & Seals DR Nutrition and other lifestyle influences on arterial aging. 
Ageing Res. Rev 39, 106–119 (2017). [PubMed: 27693830] 
265. Johnson SC, Rabinovitch PS & Kaeberlein M MTOR is a key modulator of ageing and age-
related disease. Nature 493, 338–345 (2013). [PubMed: 23325216] 
266. Li J, Kim SG & Blenis J Rapamycin: one drug, many effects. Cell Metab 19, 373–379 (2014). 
[PubMed: 24508508] 
267. Harries LW et al. Advancing age is associated with gene expression changes resembling mTOR 
inhibition: evidence from two human populations. Mech. Ageing Dev 133, 556–562 (2012). 
[PubMed: 22813852] 
Ferrucci and Fabbri
Page 29
Nat Rev Cardiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 30 (native) -----
268. Blagosklonny MV From rapalogs to anti-aging formula. Oncotarget 8, 35492–35507 (2017). 
[PubMed: 28548953] 
269. Halloran J et al. Chronic inhibition of mammalian target of rapamycin by rapamycin modulates 
cognitive and non-cognitive components of behavior throughout lifespan in mice. Neuroscience 
223, 102–113 (2012). [PubMed: 22750207] 
270. Zhang Y et al. Rapamycin extends life and health in C57BL/6 mice. J. Gerontol. A. Biol. Sci. 
Med. Sci 69A, 119–130 (2014).
271. Harrison DE et al. Rapamycin fed late in life extends lifespan in genetically heterogeneous mice. 
Nature 460, 392–395 (2009). [PubMed: 19587680] 
272. Liao CY et al. Rapamycin reverses metabolic deficits in lamin A/C-deficient mice. Cell Rep 17, 
2542–2552 (2016). [PubMed: 27926859] 
273. Strong R et al. Nordihydroguaiaretic acid and aspirin increase lifespan of genetically 
heterogeneous male mice. Aging Cell 7, 641–650 (2008). [PubMed: 18631321] 
274. Saisho Y Metformin and inflammation: Its potential beyond glucose-lowering effect. Endocr. 
Metab. Immune Disord. Drug Targets 15, 196–205 (2015). [PubMed: 25772174] 
275. Martin-Montalvo A et al. Metformin improves healthspan and lifespan in mice. Nat. Commun 4, 
2192 (2013). [PubMed: 23900241] 
276. Campbell JM, Bellman SM, Stephenson MD & Lisy K Metformin reduces all-cause mortality and 
diseases of ageing independent of its effect on diabetes control: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Ageing Res. Rev 40, 31–44 (2017). [PubMed: 28802803] 
277. Barzilai N, Crandall JP, Kritchevsky SB & Espeland MA Metformin as a tool to target aging. Cell 
Metab 23, 1060–1065 (2016). [PubMed: 27304507] 
278. Robbins PD & Niedernhofer LJ Advances in therapeutic approaches to extend healthspan: a 
perspective from the 2nd Scripps symposium on the biology of aging. Aging Cell 16, 610–614 
(2017). [PubMed: 28585366] 
279. Walter E & Scott M The life & work of Rudolf Virchow 1821–1902: ‘Cell theory, thrombosis and 
the sausage duel’. J. Intensive Care Soc 18, 234–235 (2017). [PubMed: 29118836] 
280. Ferrucci L et al. Proinflammatory state and circulating erythropoietin in persons with and without 
anemia. Am. J. Med 118, 1288e11–1288.e19 (2005).
281. de Luca C & Olefsky JM Inflammation and insulin resistance. FEBS Lett 582, 97–105 (2008). 
[PubMed: 18053812] 
282. Abbatecola AM et al. Diverse effect of inflammatory markers on insulin resistance and insulin-
resistance syndrome in the elderly. J. Am. Geriatr. Soc 52, 399–404 (2004). [PubMed: 14962155] 
283. Hotamisligil GS The role of TNFα and TNF receptors in obesity and insulin resistance. J. Intern. 
Med 245, 621–625 (1999). [PubMed: 10395191] 
284. Shimobayashi M et al. Insulin resistance causes inflammation in adipose tissue. J. Clin. Invest 
128, 1538–1550 (2018). [PubMed: 29528335] 
285. Abdelmagid SM, Barbe MF & Safadi FF Role of inflammation in the aging bones. Life Sci 123, 
25–34 (2015). [PubMed: 25510309] 
286. Goldring SR Pathogenesis of bone erosions in rheumatoid arthritis. Curr. Opin. Rheumatol 14, 
406–410 (2002). [PubMed: 12118176] 
287. Hahn WS et al. Proinflammatory cytokines differentially regulate adipocyte mitochondrial 
metabolism, oxidative stress, and dynamics. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab 306, E1033–
E1045 (2014). [PubMed: 24595304] 
288. Lezi E, Burns JM & Swerdlow RH Effect of high-intensity exercise on aged mouse brain 
mitochondria, neurogenesis, and inflammation. Neurobiol. Aging 35, 2574–2583 (2014). 
[PubMed: 25002036] 
289. Borsini A et al. Interferon-α reduces human hippocampal neurogenesis and increases apoptosis 
via activation of distinct STAT1-dependent mechanisms. Int. J. Neuropsychopharmacol 21, 187–
200 (2018). [PubMed: 29040650] 
290. Li YP & Stashenko P Proinflammatory cytokines tumor necrosis factor-α and IL-6, but not IL-1, 
down-regulate the osteocalcin gene promoter. J. Immunol 148, 788–794 (1992). [PubMed: 
1309841] 
Ferrucci and Fabbri
Page 30
Nat Rev Cardiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 31 (native) -----
291. Ginaldi L, Di Benedetto MC & De Martinis M Osteoporosis, inflammation and ageing. Immun. 
Ageing 2, 14 (2005). [PubMed: 16271143] 
292. Audet M-C & Anisman H Interplay between pro-inflammatory cytokines and growth factors in 
depressive illnesses. Front. Cell. Neurosci 7, 68 (2013). [PubMed: 23675319] 
293. Ridker PM et al. Relationship of C-reactive protein reduction to cardiovascular event reduction 
following treatment with canakinumab: a secondary analysis from the CANTOS randomised 
controlled trial. Lancet 391, 319–328 (2017). [PubMed: 29146124] 
294. EU Clinical Trial Register. ClinicalTrialsRegister.eu https://www.clinicaltrialsregister.eu/ctr-
search/search?query=LoDoCo2 (2016).
295. Navarro-Gonzalez JF et al. Effect of pentoxifylline on renal function and urinary albumin 
excretion in patients with diabetic kidney disease: the PREDIAN trial. J. Am. Soc. Nephrol 26, 
220–229 (2015). [PubMed: 24970885] 
296. Voelker J et al. Anti–TGF-β 1 antibody therapy in patients with diabetic nephropathy. J. Am. Soc. 
Nephrol 28, 953–962 (2017). [PubMed: 27647855] 
297. Flossmann E & Rothwell PM Effect of aspirin on long-term risk of colorectal cancer: consistent 
evidence from randomised and observational studies. Lancet 369, 1603–1613 (2007). [PubMed: 
17499602] 
298. Rothwell PM et al. Long-term effect of aspirin on colorectal cancer incidence and mortality: 20-
year follow-up of five randomised trials. Lancet 376, 1741–1750 (2010). [PubMed: 20970847] 
299. Iyengar RL et al. NSAIDs are associated with lower depression scores in patients with 
osteoarthritis. Am. J. Med 126, 1017e11–1017.e18 (2013).
300. Fields C, Drye L, Vaidya V & Lyketsos C Celecoxib or naproxen treatment does not benefit 
depressive symptoms in persons age 70 and older: findings from a randomized controlled trial. 
Am. J. Geriatr. Psychiatry 20, 505–513 (2012). [PubMed: 21775876] 
301. Raison CL et al. A randomized controlled trial of the tumor necrosis factor antagonist infliximab 
for treatment-resistant depression: the role of baseline inflammatory biomarkers. Arch. Gen. 
Psychiatry 70, 31–41 (2013).
302. Menter A et al. The effect of adalimumab on reducing depression symptoms in patients with 
moderate to severe psoriasis: a randomized clinical trial. J. Am. Acad. Dermatol 62, 812–818 
(2010). [PubMed: 20219265] 
303. Tyring S et al. Etanercept and clinical outcomes, fatigue, and depression in psoriasis: double-blind 
placebo-controlled randomised phase III trial. Lancet 367, 29–35 (2006). [PubMed: 16399150] 
304. Aisen PS, Schmeidler J & Pasinetti GM Randomized pilot study of nimesulide treatment in 
alzheimer’s disease. Neurology 58, 1050–1054 (2002). [PubMed: 11940691] 
305. Aisen PS et al. Effects of rofecoxib or naproxen vs placebo on Alzheimer disease progression. 
JAMA 289, 2819 (2003). [PubMed: 12783912] 
306. Reines SA et al. Rofecoxib: No effect on Alzheimer’s disease in a 1-year, randomized, blinded, 
controlled study. Neurology 62, 66–71 (2004). [PubMed: 14718699] 
307. Scharf S, Mander A, Ugoni A, Vajda F & Christophidis N A double-blind, placebo-controlled 
trial of diclofenac/misoprostol in Alzheimer’s disease. Neurology 53, 197–197 (1999). [PubMed: 
10408559] 
308. Martin BK et al. Cognitive function over time in the Alzheimer’s disease anti-inflammatory 
prevention trial (ADAPT): results of a randomized, controlled trial of naproxen and celecoxib. 
Arch. Neurol 65, 896–905 (2008). [PubMed: 18474729] 
309. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/
NCT02284906 (2014).
310. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/
NCT01931566 (2013).
Ferrucci and Fabbri
Page 31
Nat Rev Cardiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 32 (native) -----
Key points
•
High levels of pro-inflammatory markers in the blood and other tissues are 
often detected in older individuals and predict the risk of cardiovascular 
diseases, frailty, multimorbidity, and decline of physical and cognitive 
function.
•
In individuals with obesity, visceral fat produces pro-inflammatory and 
chemotactic compounds and is infiltrated by macrophages, lymphocytes, and 
senescent cells with a senescence-associated secretory phenotype that 
contributes to inflammageing.
•
Mechanisms potentially underlying inflammageing include genomic 
instability, cell senescence, mitochondria dysfunction, microbiota 
composition changes, NLRP3 inflammasome activation, primary 
dysregulation of immune cells, and chronic infections.
•
Clinical trials suggest that modulating inflammation prevents cardiovascular 
diseases, but studies to explore the effects on other chronic diseases, frailty, 
and disability are scarce and controversial.
•
Inflammageing can complicate the clinical features of cardiovascular disease 
in older individuals by causing an energetic imbalance towards catabolism 
and interfering with homeostatic signalling, leading to frailty.
Ferrucci and Fabbri
Page 32
Nat Rev Cardiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 33 (native) -----
Fig. 1 |. Potential causes of inflammageing.
Several genetic variants associated with high levels of inflammatory markers or increased 
response to inflammatory stimuli have been identified; the most relevant factors are 
indicated in parentheses. In central obesity, visceral fat tissue is infiltrated by T cells, 
macrophages, and monocytes. T cells secrete IFNγ, which stimulates the production of 
several chemokines by adipocytes, including C-C motif chemokine 2 (CCL2), CCL5, C-X-C 
motif chemokine 9 (CXCL9), and CXCL10, which further amplify tissue T cell infiltration. 
The number of B cells and macrophages in visceral adipose tissue from obese individuals is 
also increased and is correlated with BMI55. A specific subset of B cells expressing the 
tumour necrosis factor (TNF) superfamily ligand superfamily member 9 and producing TNF, 
IFNγ, and granzyme B accumulates in the abdominal cavity of older individuals56. 
Cytokines released by B cells contribute to the phenotypic change of adipocytes in the 
visceral cavity, causing them to release adipokines, other pro-inflammatory factors, and cell 
debris52. Activated monocytes that give rise to M1 and M2 macrophages produce even more 
inflammatory compounds57. Damaged mitochondria that cannot be repaired by repeated 
cycles of fission and fusion and are not recycled owing to defective autophagy release 
damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) that trigger the NLRP3 inflammasome and 
lead to caspase 1-dependent production of IL-1β and IL-18. Oxidative stress is one of the 
possible triggers of cell senescence, which can be induced by several other stressors, 
including epigenetic alterations. Senescent cells, through the senescence-associated 
secretory phenotype (SASP), secrete large quantities of cytokines, chemokines, and other 
molecules, locally triggering more cell senescence (paracrine senescence) and contributing 
to inflammageing. Studies have emphasized the role of age-related changes in the 
microbiome and increases in the gut mucosa permeability that lead to bacterial product 
release into the blood and stimulate an inflammatory response, in part through the NLRP3 
inflammasome. In addition, part of inflammageing is probably caused by chronic infections 
Ferrucci and Fabbri
Page 33
Nat Rev Cardiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 34 (native) -----
(for example, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or human Cytomegalovirus (CMV) 
infection) and intrinsic defective mechanisms in immune cells that might involve metabolic 
stress as well as age-related changes in microRNA transcription. Of note, other important 
triggers of cell senescence, such as genomic instability, the activation of oncogenes, and the 
inhibition of tumour-suppressor genes, are not shown in the figure but might be part of the 
same mechanism.
Ferrucci and Fabbri
Page 34
Nat Rev Cardiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 35 (native) -----
Fig. 2 |. Inflammageing is a risk factor for multiple chronic diseases.
Inflammageing, defined as an age-related increase in the levels of pro-inflammatory markers 
in blood and tissues, is a strong risk factor for multiple diseases that are highly prevalent and 
frequent causes of disability in elderly individuals but are pathophysiologically uncorrelated. 
Mild chronic inflammation is generally considered to be a biomarker of accelerated 
biological ageing or one of the mechanisms by which the ageing process is associated with 
increased global susceptibility to all diseases. Cardiovascular diseases, chronic kidney 
disease, cancer, depression, dementia, osteoporosis, sarcopenia, and anaemia are shown in 
the figure as examples because extensive evidence indicates that inflammation contributes to 
the development of these diseases in old age, but the list is far from 
exhaustive3,138,139,142,143,196. Concordant with this view, elevated blood levels of pro-
inflammatory markers (such as IL-6) are a powerful risk factor for multimorbidity (the 
number of coexisting diseases) and predict future rates of change in multimorbidity. 
Unsurprisingly, inflammageing is also a strong risk factor for typical geriatric conditions, 
such as physical and cognitive disability, frailty, and premature death. Although this effect is 
primarily mediated by multimorbidity, evidence also indicates that inflammation interferes 
with the maintenance and repair that constantly occur in all tissues, leading to accumulation 
of damage that contributes to frailty.
Ferrucci and Fabbri
Page 35
Nat Rev Cardiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 36 (native) -----
Fig. 3 |. Inflammageing induces a catabolic state.
Inflammation causes pathological states linked with frailty, cardiovascular disease, and 
ageing. Sarcopenia: the induction of anabolic resistance in muscle inhibits the perfusion 
adjustment to anabolic stimuli as well as insulin-like growth factor (IGF1) production and 
signalling235–240. Anaemia: chronic elevation of IL-6 levels causes anaemia through the 
production of hepcidin, reduction of the transmembrane iron transporter ferroportin, and 
inhibition of iron absorption and recycling as well as interference with erythropoietin (EPO) 
production and signalling3,280. Insulin resistance: tumour necrosis factor receptor 
superfamily member 1A (TNF-R1) and Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) block insulin signalling 
through Janus kinase (JAK) activation, which causes serine phosphorylation of insulin 
receptor substrate 1 (IRS1) and IRS2, contributing to insulin resistance283. Osteoporosis: 
TNF, IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF ligand superfamily member 11 (RANKL) contribute to 
osteoporosis by stimulating osteoclast growth and activity and inhibiting the production of 
osteocalcin290,291. Mitochondria biogenesis: studies in vitro show that TNF, IL-1β, and IL-6 
induce mitochondrial dysfunction with reduced ATP synthesis-driven respiration, a reduced 
NAD+:NADH ratio, and reduced mRNA levels of PPARGC1A (encoding peroxisome 
proliferator-activated receptor-γ co-activator 1α; PGC1α), suggesting impairment in 
mitochondrial biogenesis287. Neurogenesis: pro-inflammatory cytokines interfere with the 
biological activity of neuronal growth factors, such as brain-derived neurotrophic factor, 
thereby affecting neurogenesis and plasticity292. Accordingly, the addition of IFNα to 
human hippocampal progenitor cells reduces neurogenesis289. These are just few examples 
of how chronic inflammation promotes a catabolic state, suggesting a possible unifying 
hypothesis. During an acute bout of inflammation, induced for example by an infection, the 
surveillance of damage and continuous repair functions in multiple tissues are chronically 
inhibited, leading to accumulated damage in organelles and macromolecules. Over time, this 
damage accumulation across different tissues and organs could become so severe that it 
cannot be compensated for and causes irreversible frailty.
Ferrucci and Fabbri
Page 36
Nat Rev Cardiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 37 (native) -----
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Ferrucci and Fabbri
Page 37
Table 1 |
Clinical trials of anti-inflammatory drugs in chronic inflammatory diseases
Trial name
Participants
Design
n
Drug
Dosage
Type of
treatment
Outcome
Result
Refs
CANTOS
Patients with
previous MI and
hsCRP ≥2mg/l
Randomized
10,061
Canakinumab
150 mg every
3 months
Secondary
prevention
Cardiovascular
events
Beneficial
169,293
CIRT
Patients with
previous MI and
either T2DM
or metabolic
syndrome
Randomized
7,000
Methotrexate
15–20 mg
weekly
Secondary
prevention
Cardiovascular
events
Ongoing
170
LoDoCo
Patients with
clinically stable
CAD
Randomized
532
Colchicine
0.5 mg daily
Primary and
Secondary
prevention
Cardiovascular
events
Beneficial
172
LoDoCo2
Patients with
clinically stable
CAD
Randomized
3,000
Colchicine
0.5 mg daily
Primary and
Secondary
prevention
Cardiovascular
events
Ongoing
294
COLCOT
Patients with a
Documented
acute MI in the
past 30 days
Randomized
4,500
Colchicine
0.5 mg daily
Secondary
prevention
Cardiovascular
events
Ongoing
173
ENTRACTE
Patients with
moderate-
to-severe
rheumatoid
arthritis
Randomized
3,080
Tocilizumab
8mg/kg every
4 weeks
Prevention
Cardiovascular
events
Ongoing
166
PEDRIAN
Patients with
T2DM and stage
3–4 CKD
Randomized
169
Pentoxifylline
1,200 mg daily
Prevention
CKD
progression
Beneficial
295
NA
Patients aged
≥25 years with
T1DM or 
T2DMa
Randomized
416
Monoclonal
anti-TGFβ1
antibody
2, 10, or 50 mg
Monthly
(subcutaneous)
Prevention
CKD
progression
Not
beneficial
296
NA
Patients with a
recent TIA or
minor ischaemic
stroke and no
contraindication
to aspirin
Meta-
analysis
of two
randomized
trialsb
5,139+
2,449
Aspirin
300, 500, or
1,200 mg daily
Primary
prevention
Colorectal
cancer
Beneficial
297
NA
Patients with a
recent TIA or
minor ischaemic
stroke and no
contraindication
to aspirin
Meta-
analysis
of four
randomized
trialsc
14,033
Aspirin
30, 75, 283,
300, 500, or
1,200 mg daily
Primary
prevention
Colorectal
cancer
Beneficial
298
CANTOS
Patients with
previous MI and
hsCRP ≥2mg/l
Randomized
10,061
Canakinumab
150 or 300 mg
every 3 months
Primary
prevention
Lung cancer
Beneficial
168
NA
Patients with
osteoarthritis
Meta-
Analysis
of five
randomized
trialsd
1,497
Ibuprofen,
naproxen, or
celecoxib
800 mg three
times daily,
500 mg twice
daily, or 200 
mg
daily
Treatment
Depressive
symptoms
Beneficial
299
ADAPT
Individuals
aged ≥70 years,
cognitively
healthy , and 
with
a family history 
of
Randomized
2,528
Celecoxib or
naproxen
200 mg twice
daily or 220 
mg
twice daily
Treatment
Depressive
symptoms
Not
beneficial
300
Nat Rev Cardiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 20.

----- Page 38 (native) -----
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Ferrucci and Fabbri
Page 38
Trial name
Participants
Design
n
Drug
Dosage
Type of
treatment
Outcome
Result
Refs
AD-like 
dementia
NA
Outpatients with
major depression
Randomized
60
Infliximab
5mg/kg (three
infusions)
Treatment
Depressive
symptoms
Beneficial in
patients with
high baseline
inflammatory
blood
biomarkers
301
NA
Patients with
moderate-to-
severe psoriasis
Randomized
96
Adalimumab
40 mg every
other week
Treatment
Depressive
symptoms
Beneficial
302
NA
Patients with
moderate-
to-severe
psoriasis
Randomized
618
Etanercept
50 mg twice
weekly
Treatment
Depressive
symptoms
Beneficial
303
NA
Patients with
probable AD
Randomized
40
Nimesulide
100 mg twice
daily
Treatment
AD
Not
beneficial
304
NSAID study
Patients with
mild-to-moderate
AD
Randomized
351
Rofecoxib
or naproxen
sodium
25 mg once
daily or 220 
mg
twice daily
Treatment
AD
Not
beneficial
305
NA
Patients with 
mild
or moderate AD
aged ≥50 years
Randomized
692
Rofecoxib
25 mg daily
Treatment
AD
Not
beneficial
306
NA
Patients with
mild-to-moderate
AD
Randomized
41
Diclofenac
50 mg daily
Treatment
AD
Not
beneficial
307
ADAPT
Individuals
aged ≥70 years,
cognitively
healthy , and 
with
a family history
of AD
Randomized
2,117
Celecoxib or
naproxen
200 mg twice
daily or 220 
mg
twice daily
Primary
prevention
AD
Not
beneficial
308
TOMORROW
Cognitively
healthy
participants
at high risk of
developing MCI
Randomized
3,500
Pioglitazone
0.8 mg daily
Prevention
Onset of MI
or MCI owing
to AD
Ongoing
309,310
Metformin
for
Preventing
Frailty in
High-risk
Older Adults
Older adults with
impaired glucose
tolerance
Randomized
120
Metformin
1,000 mg twice
daily
Prevention
Frailty
Ongoing
256
TAME
Individuals aged
65–79 years
Randomized
3,000
Metformin
850 mg twice
daily
Prevention
Cardiovascular
events, cancer,
dementia, and
mortality
Ongoing
277
AD, Alzheimer disease; CAD coronary artery disease; CKD, chronic kidney disease; hsCRP, C-reactive protein measured by high-sensitivity assay; 
MCI, mild cognitive impairment; MI, myocardial infarction; NA, not applicable; T1DM, type 1 diabetes mellitus; T2DM, type 2 diabetes mellitus; 
TGFβ1, transforming growth factor-β1; TIA, transient ischaemic attack.
aPatients also had a serum creatinine level of 1.3–3.3 mg/dl for women or 1.5–3.5 mg/dl for men (or estimated glomerular filtration rate of 20–60 
ml/min/1.73 m2) and a 24-h urine protein: creatinine ratio ≥800 mg/g.
bBritish Doctors Aspirin Trial and UK-TIA Aspirin Trial.
cThrombosis Prevention Trial, British Doctors Aspirin Trial, Swedish Aspirin Low Dose Trial, and UK-TIA Aspirin Trial.
Nat Rev Cardiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 20.

----- Page 39 (native) -----
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Ferrucci and Fabbri
Page 39
dFive phase IV development trials conducted by Pfizer.
Nat Rev Cardiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 September 20.