

----- Page 1 (native) -----
Microenvironmental regulation of metastasis
Johanna A. Joyce* and Jeffrey W. Pollard‡
Johanna A. Joyce: joycej@mskcc.org; Jeffrey W. Pollard: pollard@aecom.yu.edu
*Cancer Biology and Genetics Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York,
USA
‡Department of Developmental and Molecular Biology, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology
and Women’s Health, Center for the Study of Reproductive Biology and Women’s Health, Albert
Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, USA
Abstract
Metastasis is a multistage process that requires cancer cells to escape from the primary tumour,
survive in the circulation, seed at distant sites and grow. Each of these processes involves rate-
limiting steps that are influenced by non-malignant cells of the tumour microenvironment. Many
of these cells are derived from the bone marrow, particularly the myeloid lineage, and are
recruited by cancer cells to enhance their survival, growth, invasion and dissemination. This
Review describes experimental data demonstrating the role of the microenvironment in metastasis,
identifies areas for future research and suggests possible new therapeutic avenues.
A variety of stromal cells in the surrounding environment are recruited to tumours, and these
not only enhance growth of the primary cancer but also facilitate its metastatic dissemination
to distant organs. Cancer cells in an aggressive primary mass are adept at exploiting that
particular tissue microenvironment; however, once they leave these favourable
surroundings, they must possess traits that will allow them to survive in new environments.
In order for a metastasis to occur, the intravasated cancer cell must survive in the circulation,
arrive at the target organ (seeding), extravasate into the parenchyma and show persistent
growth1. Each of these stages is inefficient and some are rate limiting1,2. For example,
senescence or apoptosis of cancer cells at the stage of entry into the metastatic site prevents
the spread of the majority of circulating cells2–4. Seeding can occur to multiple organs, but
metastatic tumours may grow in only one or a few5. There is also increasing evidence that in
some cases cancer cells can lie dormant for many years, and that seeding may occur several
years before diagnosis of the primary tumour6–10. In another phenomenon, termed
angiogenic dormancy, there is a balance of proliferation and apoptosis that results in
micrometastases that do not progress further11,12. The microenvironment clearly suppresses
© 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
DATABASES
Entrez Gene: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=gene
Tgfbr2
UniProtKB: http://www.uniprot.org
CCL21 | CCL5 | CCL9 | CCR1 | CCR10 | CCR5 | CCR7 | CSF1 | CSF1R | CX3CR1 | CXCL5 | CXCR4 | EGF | EGFR | EMR1 |
ERBB2 | fibronectin | GROA | ID1 | IL8RB | integrin αM | KIT ligand | MMP2 | MMP9 | osteopontin | osteoprotegerin | plasminogen |
PROK2 | PTHRP | RANKL | S100A8 | S100A9 | SDF1 | tissue factor | TLR2 | TLR6 | TNFα | uPA | VCAM1 | VEGFA | VEGFR1 |
versican
FURTHER INFORMATION
Johanna Joyce’s webpage: http://www.mskcc.org/mskcc/html/52336.cfm
Jeffrey Pollard’s webpage: http://www.aecom.yu.edu/home/faculty/profile.asp?id=3865
ALL LINKS ARE ACTIVE IN THE ONLINE PDF
NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 4.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Rev Cancer. 2009 April ; 9(4): 239–252. doi:10.1038/nrc2618.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 2 (native) -----
the malignancy of these potentially metastatic cells10, and their re-activation to form a
clinically relevant metastasis probably occurs through perturbations in the
microenvironment. Nevertheless, despite this evidence for early seeding and dormancy,
tumour size and grade are the main predictors of metastasis, and this has been reinforced in
recent studies in mouse models13 and by gene expression analysis that linked large tumour
size with metastasis-enhancing gene signatures14. It has been hypothesized that this may be
due to metastatic re- seeding to primary tumours15. If this is the case, nothing is currently
known about the underlying mechanisms. Successful metastatic outgrowth thus depends on
the cumulative ability of cancer cells to appropriate distinct microenvironments at each step
in the metastatic cascade: the primary tumour, systemic circulation and the final metastatic
site. In this Review we discuss instructive, and in some cases dominant, roles for the
microenvironment during the process of metastasis, with a particular focus on contributions
from bone marrow-derived cells (BMDCs).
Tumour–stroma interactions at the primary site
Tissues contain a plethora of cells that work in concert to effect normal physiology. These
cells have positional identity so that their location is defined and their number constrained.
Cancers have lost these constraints through mutations in oncogenes and tumour suppressor
genes. However, these tumour cells have not lost all their interactions with surrounding non-
malignant cells or with the extracellular architecture. Indeed, these interactions are not
static: they evolve along with the tumour, in particular through the recruitment of BMDCs.
In this section we discuss evidence that the microenvironment can exert inhibitory effects on
even aggressive malignant cells. However, during their progression, tumours circumvent
these inhibitory signals and instead exploit these surrounding cells to their own ends in
processes that result in inappropriate growth, invasion and ultimately metastasis.
Normal tissue homeostasis
Homeostasis in normal tissues requires a tightly controlled balance of cell proliferation and
death, which is achieved and maintained through intercellular communication. An important
regulator of normal cell behaviour and tissue homeostasis is the surrounding extracellular
matrix (ECM). The ECM has many functions, including acting as a physical scaffold,
facilitating interactions between different cell types, and providing survival and
differentiation signals. Maintaining organ homeostasis can prevent neoplastic transformation
in normal tissues by ensuring stable tissue structure, mediated by tight junction proteins and
cell adhesion molecules such as β1 integrins and epithelial (E)-cadherin16,17. Insight into the
dominance of the microenvironment over epithelial cell behaviour came from some of the
earliest pioneering studies in this field. Mintz and colleagues showed that the
microenvironment of a mouse blastocyst not only suppressed the tumorigenicity of
teratocarcinoma cells, but that those cells were stably reprogrammed, resulting in normal
chimeric mice18. Subsequent studies indicated that the embryonic microenvironment is
potent in its ability to reprogramme various cancer cells, including metastatic cells, to a less
aggressive phenotype19–23. Other groups have demonstrated a particularly important role for
stromal fibroblasts in modulating the malignant progression of transformed epithelial cells.
For example, co-culture experiments showed that normal fibroblasts prevented the growth of
initiated prostatic epithelial cells24, and could even reverse the malignant phenotype of
neoplastic epithelial cells25. During early tumour development, however, the protective
constraints of the microenvironment are overridden by conditions such as chronic
inflammation, and the local tissue microenvironment shifts to a growth-promoting state.
Joyce and Pollard
Page 2
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 4.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 3 (native) -----
Recruitment of stromal cells to developing tumours
It is now well established that primary tumours are composed of a multitude of stromal cell
types in addition to cancerous cells26. Among the stromal cell types that have been
implicated in tumour promotion are endothelial cells, which comprise the blood and
lymphatic circulatory systems, pericytes, fibroblasts and various BMDCs, including
macrophages, neutrophils, mast cells, myeloid cell-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) and
mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) (FIG. 1; TABLE 1). In recent years, the crucial
contribution of BMDCs to malignant progression has become increasingly evident, and will
be the central focus of this Review.
Chronic inflammation and BMDC recruitment
The presence of leukocytes in tumours in the past was generally thought to be a consequence
of a failed attempt at cancer cell destruction. However, tumours are not only effective in
escaping from immune-mediated rejection, they also modify certain inflammatory cell types
to render them tumour promoting rather than tumour suppressive. Furthermore, many of
these infiltrating immune cells may not be associated with the detection of cancer cell
antigens, but may alternatively be associated with the tissue disruption that is caused by
inflammatory agents or be a response to the growth of the tumour as it is established. This is
particularly evident in cancers associated with chronic inflammation, where the initial
inflammatory response is not resolved, and systemic conditions that promote continued
recruitment of bone marrow-derived inflammatory cells to the tumour mass are established
instead27. Thus a chronic inflammatory state can quickly set up a cascade of events in which
the tumour-promoting effects of immune cells are progressively amplified, often as a by-
product of their normal wound-repairing or developmental roles28. However, a complication
is that there is no clear association between the presence of any individual adaptive or innate
immune cell type and a defined outcome in terms of malignancy or prognosis across a range
of different tumour microenvironments. Even within individual cell types, there are
opposing functions; for example, CD4+ T cells, macrophages, and natural killer (NK) T cells
have either tumour-suppressive or tumour-promoting properties depending on the tissue
context and cellular stimuli29,30.
Classification of these immune cells into different cellular states or subtypes has helped
provide some insight into their disparate functions (TABLE 1). For example, type 1 CD4+ T
cells (TH1) aid CD8+ T cells in tumour rejection, whereas type 2 CD4+ T cells (TH2) and
CD4+ T regulatory cells block the activation of CD8+ T cells30. Like CD4+ T cells,
macrophages can either impede or promote tumour progression, depending on their
functional state (TABLE 1). Several recent studies have found correlations between
particular immune cell infiltrates in primary tumours and patient prognosis. For example,
infiltration of CD8+ T cells and mature dendritic cells is associated with a favourable
prognosis in colorectal cancer and head and neck cancer (reviewed in REF. 31). An
extensive macrophage infiltration, however, correlates with poor patient prognosis in >80%
of cancers analysed, including breast, thyroid and bladder cancer in which there is a positive
association with metastasis (reviewed in REFS 31,32).
The induction of angiogenesis is a crucial early stage in the development and growth of most
solid tumours, and is also necessary for haematogenous dissemination of cancer cells. Bone
marrow-derived myeloid cells, including macrophages33, TIE2-expressing monocytes
(TEMs)34, neutrophils35 and mast cells36,37 have all been shown to contribute to tumour
angiogenesis through their production of growth factors, cytokines and pro-teases such as
vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGFA), PROK2 (also known as BV8) and matrix
metalloproteinases (MMPs), respectively (reviewed in REF. 38) (BOX 1). Several of these
cell types have also been implicated in the later stages of tumour progression, namely
Joyce and Pollard
Page 3
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 4.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 4 (native) -----
invasion and metastasis, and the ability of these BMDCs to enhance tumour malignancy
directly and indirectly is discussed below.
Box 1
Proteases in invasion and metastasis
The importance of chemoattractant signalling in cancer cell intravasation has been
revealed by the studies that are discussed throughout this Review. However, to physically
invade into blood vessels, proteolytic degradation is required. Proteases are often
produced by invasive cancer cells, but in many cases bone marrow-derived cells,
including macrophages, have been shown to be the major cell type that supplies crucial
proteases to the tumour microenvironment. These stromal cell-derived proteases include
specific matrix metalloproteinases142,143, cysteine cathepsins144,145 and serine
proteases146. There are several possible mechanisms by which these proteases can
promote cancer cell invasion and intravasation, as indicated in the figure. Individual
proteases cleave cell-adhesion molecules, such as epithelial (E)-cadherin, leading to the
disruption of cell–cell junctions145,147. The loosening of cell contacts facilitates cancer
cell migration, either as individual cells or in groups, and protease degradation or
turnover of proteins in the extracellular matrix (ECM) and basement membrane enables
invasive cells to migrate into the surrounding tissue and vasculature. Not only are
proteases essential for the degradation of extracellular proteins, they also have more
specialized processing roles that are important for cell signalling, such as in the restricted
cleavage of pro-domains and subsequent activation of growth factors and cytokines148,
which may significantly increase chemoattraction, cell migration and metastasis. These
different modes of protease-enhanced invasion are not mutually exclusive; rather, it is
likely that they act in concert to promote cancer cell spread. All of these functions are
tightly regulated in a cascade of protease interactions, allowing for control and
amplification of proteolysis in invasion and metastasis149. Accordingly, when members
of some of these protease families are pharmacologically inhibited or genetically ablated,
there is a marked reduction in cancer cell invasion142,150,151.
Tumour-associated macrophages
Macrophages can be considered the prototypical BMDC type capable of modifying cancer
cell behaviour and have been shown to promote tumour angiogenesis, invasion,
intravasation and metastasis in animal models39,40. Macrophages are inherently plastic cells,
and this adaptability may be exploited by the tumour to elicit distinct functions at different
stages of tumour progression. Although macrophage classification schemes (TABLE 1) have
been useful in terms of assigning potential functions to tumour-associated macrophages
(TAMs), little is known about the complexity of individual macrophage activities and their
associated molecular profiles in cancer. In particular, the factors controlling the balance
between tumour-suppressing and tumour-promoting activities of macrophages, and how that
equilibrium changes over the course of tumour progression, are not known. We propose that
multiple subpopulations of TAMs exist within a tumour, which probably change temporally
Joyce and Pollard
Page 4
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 4.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 5 (native) -----
during tumour development and geographically on the basis of their location within the
tumour microenvironment. For example, TAMs recruited to hypoxic areas are likely to then
be usurped to promote tumour angiogenesis41, whereas TAMs at the tumour–stroma
interface play an active part in invasion and angiogenesis42. Transcriptome profiling of
freshly isolated TAMs also suggests that they are similar to those that are involved in
development43.
Most of the studies that have demonstrated a crucial role for macrophages in regulating
tumour progression have either used genetic manipulation, such as Csf1op/op mice, which are
deficient in the macrophage growth factor colony stimulating factor 1 (CSF1), or
pharmacological depletion, such as clodronate-liposome treatment, which causes selective
killing of macrophages. These approaches resulted in a substantial decrease in macrophage
infiltration into the tumour, which led to inhibition of tumour angiogenesis, tumour growth
and metastasis in different animal models33,44–47. Although these experiments have been
crucial in demonstrating pro-tumorigenic functions for macrophages in tumours, there are
undoubtedly heterogenous consequences from broadly depleting all macrophage
populations. An alternative is to ablate subpopulations or individual factors produced by
macrophages. This strategy was recently used for myeloid cell-specific deletion of vascular
endothelial growth factor A (VEGFA) in the MMTV–PyMT breast cancer model. This was
associated with decreased tumour angiogenesis, as might have been expected, but
surprisingly accelerated tumour progression48. Whether lung metastasis was also increased
in these mice was not reported; however, this study raises some concerns for the therapeutic
targeting of stromal factors, as discussed below.
One of the mechanisms involved in TAM-enhancement of cancer cell invasion involves a
paracrine loop in which epidermal growth factor (EGF) produced by TAMs increases the
invasiveness and migration of neighbouring breast cancer cells that express the EGF
receptor (EGFR). Cancer cells in turn express CSF1, which acts as a potent chemoattractant
and chemokinetic molecule for CSF1R-expressing TAMs (FIG. 2). This reciprocal cross-
talk can be blocked by either EGFR or CSF1R antagonists, resulting in a decrease in
migration and invasion of both cancer cells and macrophages49,50. Tumour cell invasion can
be initiated by other factors, such as neuregulin 1 (also known as heregulin) in a mouse
model of breast cancer caused by the mammary epithelium-restricted expression of the
oncoprotein ERBB2 or stromal cell-derived factor 1 (SDF1, also known as CXCL12) in the
MMTV–PyMT model. However, in each case the motor for tumour cell migration requires
macrophages and their reciprocal EGF and CSF1 signalling with tumour cells. As SDF1 can
be synthesized by pericytes, fibroblasts or tumour cells, these data suggest that particular
microenvironmental cues can determine the stimulation of tumour invasion and indicates the
potential for crosstalk between multiple stromal cells and the tumour51 (FIG. 2). Thus it is
possible that ‘invasive niches’ exist within the primary tumour, in which the proximity of
cancer cells, macrophages and the endothelium establishes paracrine signalling loops that
lead to enhanced intravasation and dissemination of cancer cells (FIG. 2). Indeed, clusters of
these three different cell types, termed the tumour microenvironment of metastasis (TMEM),
are found in human breast cancer, and their increased density is associated with the
development of distant organ metastasis52.
The identification of this paracrine loop in mammary cancers raises the question of whether
different sets or the same set of growth factors or chemokines and their cognate receptors
control the interplay between stromal and cancer cell invasion in other tumour
microenvironments. In a mouse model of colorectal cancer — in which, in a process termed
collective invasion, cancer cells invade as protruding sheets of cells rather than as single
cells — immature myeloid cells (iMCs) without definitive macrophage characteristics
(CD11b+ (also known as integrin αM)CD34+F4/80− (also known as EMR1)GR1−) are
Joyce and Pollard
Page 5
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 4.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 6 (native) -----
recruited by tumour-produced C–C chemokine 9 (CCL9) signalling through CCR1 on the
iMCs. In turn the iMCs promote collective tumour cell invasion, at least in part through
expression of MMP2 and MMP9 at the invasive front53.
TAMs also directly promote the process of cancer cell intravasation into the blood
circulation, as shown by multiphoton intravital imaging of the breast microenvironment54.
This major technological advance, which incorporated transgenic animals expressing
fluorescently tagged cancer cells, endothelial cells and macrophages, allowed the
visualization of dynamic interactions between these cell types at the point of intravasation.
Wyckoff and colleagues found that the association of cancer cells with TAMs throughout
the tumour significantly increased their motility, an effect that was further amplified when
cancer cells were found in close proximity to perivascular TAMs. Moreover, cancer cells
were observed to invade blood vessels only where perivascular TAMs were located. The
functional importance of this interaction for intravasation was demonstrated in Csf1op/op
PyMT mice, which have a reduction in macrophage infiltration, and a concomitant decrease
in circulating cancer cells. In addition, the EGF–CSF paracrine loop was also shown to be
important for intravasation, as blocking either signalling pathway led to a significant
reduction in the number of blood-borne cancer cells54. Cancer cells and macrophages also
use collagen fibres as tram lines to rapidly travel through the stroma. Many of these fibres
are tethered to blood vessels, resulting in cancer cells accumulating at these vessels55. The
density of these fibres is regulated by macrophages, at least during development56.
Myeloid-derived suppressor cells
Another BMDC type, which may share a common progenitor with TAMs, is the MDSC57.
MDSCs suppress the adaptive immune response by blocking the functions of CD4+ and
CD8+ T cells, in part through arginase and nitric oxide production, by expanding the
regulatory T cell pool, and by inhibiting NK cell activation58,59. MDSCs are a heterogenous
collection of immature myeloid cells at different stages of differentiation that are broadly
defined as CD11b+GR1+ cells in mice, with a wider range of markers in humans (TABLE
1). MDSC levels are increased in the bone marrow, blood and spleen of cancer patients and
tumour-bearing mice, and their accumulation is associated with tumour growth and
malignant progression30.
Although MDSC expansion is extensively described in cancer patients and mouse models,
the mechanisms leading to this increase are incompletely understood. Chronic inflammation
has been shown to induce MDSC accumulation in the 4T1 metastatic mammary cancer
model60,61, and the pro-inflammatory S100 proteins and prostaglandin E2 have recently
been identified as two principal effectors62,63. S100A9-deficient mice mount efficient anti-
tumour immune responses and reject implanted colorectal cancer cells. Crucially, this effect
was reversed by administration of wild-type MDSCs from tumour-bearing mice64.
Intriguingly, the S100A8 and S100A9 chemokines have also been implicated in preparing
the pre-metastatic niche65,66, as discussed later, suggesting a predominant role for this
family in directing systemic changes that promote metastasis. Disruption of transforming
growth factor-β (TGFβ) signalling, through Tgfbr2 deletion, was also shown to increase
MDSC homing to tumours in a spontaneous mammary cancer model, an effect that was
mediated through the SDF1–CXCR4 and CXCL5–CXCR2 (also known as IL8RB)
chemokine axes67.
An immunosuppressive state favours primary tumour development, but whether there is a
direct role for MDSCs in increasing tumour cell metastasis, rather than just an indirect
correlation, is only beginning to be elucidated. One example of a connection was suggested
in Tgfbr2-deficient mice, in which MDSCs (identified by GR1 expression) were
concentrated at the invasive tumour margin67. CXCR2 or CXCR4 antagonists reduced lung
Joyce and Pollard
Page 6
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 4.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 7 (native) -----
metastasis in this model, an effect that was attributed to MDSC depletion but that could also
result from the pleiotropic targets of these chemokine receptors. A general strategy that
many groups have used to suggest a functional role for MDSCs in tumour progression and
metastasis has involved GR1-specific antibodies, which not only target CD11b+GR1+ cells
but also GR1+ granulocytes and a significant proportion of monocytes68, thus complicating
the interpretation of these results. Although identification of specific MDSC markers, at
least in mouse models69 (TABLE 1), should facilitate their selective depletion in the future,
it is possible that broad targeting of MDSCs along with other myeloid cell types could still
be beneficial in eliciting potent anticancer effects.
Mesenchymal stem cells
Another cell type that resides predominantly in the bone marrow, although is not of
haematopoietic origin, is the MSC (TABLE 1). MSCs are multipotent cells that differentiate
into osteoblasts, chondrocytes, adipocytes and other cells of mesenchymal origin70. MSCs
can be found in large numbers in primary tumours and, based on this recruitment, MSCs
have been proposed as a cellular vehicle to deliver anticancer drugs into the tumour71.
Recently, however, Karnoub et al. investigated whether the presence of MSCs at the
primary site might actually modulate the behaviour of neighbouring cancer cells72. They
found that co-mingling of human MSCs with weakly metastatic breast cancer cells
significantly increased the dissemination of the cancer cells to the lung from a subcutaneous
xenograft, an effect that was not observed with other mesenchymal cells, such as normal
fibroblasts. Interestingly, the inductive effects of MSCs on cancer cells were mediated
exclusively at the primary site, apparently priming them for dissemination to the lung. This
was controlled, at least in part, through a paracrine loop involving MSC-supplied CCL5 and
its receptor, CCR5, on the breast cancer cells. However, the stimulatory effects of MSCs
were short lived so it is perhaps not surprising that, although exposure to MSCs increased
the number of metastases, there was no obvious increase in subsequent metastatic
outgrowth. These experiments point to yet another stromal cell that can communicate with
cancer cells to change their phenotype, albeit transiently in this study, but it will be
important to identify the signals released by the cancer cells that recruit MSCs to the
primary tumour as a potential step to targeting these cells therapeutically. It will also be
essential to demonstrate functionally that MSCs are bone fide stem cells, as this may have
implications for their potential to adopt distinct differentiation fates and roles in different
tumour microenvironments.
Breaking away: cancer cell dissemination
Once cancer cells intravasate into blood or lymphatic vessels, they must navigate an entirely
different microenvironment. As the haematogenous circulation is considered the major route
for metastatic dissemination and is the most studied, we focus on factors influencing cancer
cell survival in the blood. However the lymphatic system also seems to allow metastatic cell
spread, which is considered further in BOX 2.
Box 2
Lymph nodes and bone marrow in cancer cell dissemination
When cancer cells leave the primary tumour they may not immediately home to sites of
future metastasis, but rather disseminate to other microenvironments, namely the lymph
nodes and bone marrow. Although the presence of tumour cells in regional lymph nodes
has long been one of the criteria used in determining the stage and prognosis of many
common cancers, it remains controversial as to whether tumour cells actually metastasize
to other organs from the lymph nodes or whether the presence of tumour cells in draining
Joyce and Pollard
Page 7
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 4.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 8 (native) -----
lymphatics simply reflects their intrinsic invasiveness152. The process of cancer cell
invasion into lymphatic vessels is different from that required for entry into the blood
circulation, as there are no inter-endothelial cell tight junctions, pericytes, nor an intact
basement membrane to traverse153, and so it has been considered more of a passive
mechanism. Lymph nodes have been proposed to function as bridgeheads, or
intermediate way stations, in which cancer cells are filtered and concentrated in a
restricted space that causes them to aggregate, and consequently increases their
survival154. The lymph node may thus provide a supportive environment in which cancer
cells acquire additional mutations that increase their metastatic propensity. Similarly, it
has been suggested that the bone marrow microenvironment may serve a similar function
to select and enrich for cancer cells that subsequently develop the capacity to home to
other organs155,156. The bone marrow, in particular, may provide a uniquely supportive
stromal environment, given the crucial importance of bone marrow niches in
haematopoietic stem cell maintenance157. These are attractive hypotheses in that they
could provide an explanation for several genomic studies showing limited similarities
between primary tumours and disseminated cells158,159. However, to date there is little
experimental evidence supporting a requisite role for transitional stromal
microenvironments in the metastatic cascade.
Cancer cell survival in the systemic circulatory environment
Tens of thousands of cancer cells can be shed into the circulation every day, yet less than
0.01% of these will survive to produce metastases1,73. Numerous challenges, including
mechanical destruction caused by the shear force of the blood circulation and surveillance
by immune cells, particularly NK cells, contribute to making the blood a particularly hostile
environment for a potential metastatic cell. Cancer cells, however, are adept at enhancing
their chances of survival, in part by using platelets as a shield (FIG. 3). Tumour cells express
tissue factor, the receptor for coagulation factors VIIa and X, which serves as the main
initiator of coagulation, and has an important role in supporting thrombin-mediated
proteolysis and the formation of tumour cell-associated microthrombi74,75. The platelet
aggregate increases cancer cell survival through protection from NK cell-mediated
lysis76,77, but also through an independent signalling mechanism coupled to circulating
prothrombin77. The fibrin clots may also reduce shear forces that can destroy individual
circulating cancer cells, and facilitate the slowing, arrest and adhesion of cancer cells, thus
increasing their ability to extravasate at a secondary site. As might be expected, high platelet
count is associated with decreased survival in a wide range of cancers including breast,
colorectal and lung cancer78. Conversely, treatment with a variety of anti-coagulants has
been shown to decrease metastasis in experimental models and in patients79. Whether innate
immune cells such as macrophages have a similarly protective role in cancer cell survival
has not been extensively investigated, but could be important to address given the intimate
relationship that exists between macrophages and cancer cells at the site of intravasation
(FIG. 2). Another, albeit controversial, hypothesis is that cancer cells might actually fuse
with macrophages and thus acquire myeloid cell traits that could be beneficial for their
survival in the circulation and homing to target organs80.
The microenvironment at metastatic sites
The metastatic site offers new challenges for circulating tumour cells. In a hospitable tissue
they must lodge, survive, extravasate, become established and grow before they have
clinical relevance. Each stage is inefficient and often rate limiting. Indeed, even after
lodgement and escape into the parenchyma many metastatic cells become quiescent with
only a few reactivated later to develop into tumours (FIG. 3). The local microenvironment
Joyce and Pollard
Page 8
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 4.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 9 (native) -----
has a major role in every step in metastasis and, as in the primary tumour site, the
recruitment of bone marrow derived cells is crucial to the outcome of the final fate of the
metastatic cell.
Tissue tropism
The appreciation of interactions between metastatic tumour cells and the microenvironment
was evident from the earliest studies in this field, and most clearly enunciated by Paget in
his ‘seed and soil’ hypothesis81. In its modern context82,83 this would state that malignant
cancer cells (seed) gradually acquire mutations in oncogenes or tumour suppressor genes
that confer the ability to egress from the tissue of origin, survive in the haematogenous or
lymphatic circulation, and prosper in a distant site (soil). This soil would have characteristics
that allow the metastatic cell to adhere and proliferate, whereas other sites would be
hostile10. In humans, certain tumours metastasize to preferred organ sites. For example,
breast cancers metastasize to lung, liver, bone and brain; melanoma to liver, brain and skin;
prostate cancer to bone; and lung cancer to bone, liver and brain (BOX 3). By contrast, some
sites such as muscle are rarely if ever sites of metastasis. Conversely, other tumours such as
glioma do not metastasize but instead migrate along white matter tracks and invade in that
fashion, pancreatic tumours show perineural invasion, and others such as ovarian tumours
are restricted to the peritoneal cavity and it is unclear whether this is true metastasis or local
tissue invasion. Some others such as head and neck cancers only spread to regional lymph
nodes. The molecular bases of these differences are poorly if at all understood, but probably
have a microenvironmental component.
Box 3
Bone metastasis: a specialized microenvironment
Normal bone density is dynamically regulated by the coordinated actions of osteoblasts
that lay down bone, and osteoclasts that degrade bone160. Metastatic lesions in bone are
usually classified as osteolytic or osteoblastic160,161. However, this is probably too rigid
a classification, as approximately 25% of particular cancers cause the opposite type of
lesion162. The osteoclastic lineage is regulated by colony-stimulating factor 1 (CSF1)
acting on osteoclast–myeloid progenitors in the bone marrow that further differentiate
into mature osteoclasts under the influence of receptor activator of NF-κB ligand
(RANKL, also known as TNFSF11) expressed on osteoblasts,160,163,164. CSF1 is also
produced by osteoblasts and the action of RANKL is inhibited by the soluble RANKL
receptor osteoprotegerin (also known as TNFRSF11B), which is synthesized by the same
cell, thus ensuring tight regulation of the lineage164,165. Breast cancer metastases cause
osteolytic lesions by stimulating the formation and activity of osteoclasts166. They
produce CSF1 (REF. 167) as well as parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTHRP) and
tumour necrosis factor-α, which activate RANKL and inhibit osteoprotegerin synthesis,
thereby increasing the number and activity of osteoclasts160,162,167,168. Inhibition of
RANKL in a melanoma model of bone metastasis dramatically reduced metastatic
growth and bone disruption without affecting metastasis to other organs168. Bone matrix
is rich in sequestered growth factors and its degradation releases these factors, including
insulin-like growth factor 1, transforming growth factor-β (TGFβ) and bone
morphogenetic proteins that can act upon the metastatic cells, enhancing their survival
and growth while further stimulating PTHRP synthesis162,163. This creates a positive
feedback cycle of increased bone loss and increased growth of the metastatic cells162.
Selecting for breast cancer cells that home to bone revealed a gene expression signature
that defined this tropism, which included upregulation of C-X-C chemokine receptor 4
(CXCR4), osteopontin, matrix metalloproteinase 1 and interleukin 11 (IL-11)
transcripts169. Bone marrow stroma is a rich source of stromal cell-derived factor 1
Joyce and Pollard
Page 9
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 4.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 10 (native) -----
(SDF1, also known as CXCL12) that may contribute to this tropism by signalling through
CXCR4 (REF. 89) and, once the metastatic cells arrive, IL-11 synthesis would activate
osteoclasts162 and matrix metalloproteinase 1 activity would result in further release of
growth factors causing a similar positive feedback mechanism for the promotion of
metastatic growth.
A similar mechanism appears to operate in neuroblastoma, a cancer that also
preferentially metastasizes to the bone170. Although some neuroblastomas secrete
RANKL, many do not, and in this case IL-6 synthesized by MSCs, responding to
neuroblastoma-produced factors, appears to be the major culprit170. IL-6 is a potent
activator of osteoclastic activity and its inhibition limits neuroblastoma metastasis in
experimental models170. This bone marrow-derived stromal IL-6 also directly stimulates
the survival and proliferation of IL-6R+ neuroblastoma metastases, suggesting a
mechanism for the preferred growth of these tumours in the bone171.
In contrast to osteolytic lesions, prostate cancer predominantly results in osteoblastic
metastases in which there is a significant amount of disorganized bone deposition due to
local activation of osteoblastic activity160. Several osteoblastic factors are synthesized by
prostatic metastatic cells including endothelin 1, TGFβ2, fibroblast growth factors and
the bone morphogenetic proteins, all of which influence bone physiology162,172,173. In
addition, these cells produce proteases such as urokinase-type plasminogen activator or
prostate-specific antigen that might liberate growth factors bound to bone matrix to
increase the proliferation of metastatic cells162.
To address the mechanisms underlying tissue tropism associated with haematogenous
spread, several investigators took parental cancer cells and selected tissue-specific homing
variants through serial passage in mice83–85. More recent versions of these experiments have
used the power of transcriptome profiling to identify cohorts of genes of which expression
confers both enhanced metastatic potential and altered tissue tropism86,87. These data,
reviewed in another article in this Focus issue88, show that the ‘seed’ can have a preferred
site for growth that is encoded by genetic alterations in the tumour cell itself.
The tropism of metastatic cells for specific organs may be mediated by chemokines, the
local expression of these chemoattractants might guide cognate chemokine receptor-
expressing tumour cells to specific destinations, as a result of locally induced chemotaxis
and invasion of tumour cells89,90. For example, signalling through the chemokine receptors
CXCR4 and CCR7 expressed by breast cancer cells mediates actin polymerization and
pseudopod formation that contributes to a chemotactic and invasive response89. The
specificity of homing was achieved through expression of the cognate ligands, SDF1 and
CCL21, respectively, in the sites of metastasis, but not other organs. These chemokine
responses are important, as neutralizing antibodies to either SDF1 or CXCR4 impaired
breast cancer metastasis in an experimental metastasis model89. Of all the chemokine
receptors, the most prevalently overexpressed in human tumours is CXCR4, which
correlates with poor prognosis91. CXCR4 signalling is also essential for ERBB2-induced
breast cancer metastasis92. Additional chemokine receptors are important for tumour cell
homing to other organs; for instance, expression of CCR10 in melanoma cells, in addition to
CXCR4 and CCR7, confers a tropism to the skin89. Another interesting example is the
neural tropism and spread of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas, whereby the expression of
CX3CR1 by pancreatic tumour cells and its reciprocal ligand, CX3CL1, on peripheral
neurons promotes metastasis93.
The data discussed above have been interpreted as evidence for a positive selection of the
microenvironment causing metastatic homing. However, an alternative and persuasive view,
Joyce and Pollard
Page 10
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 4.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 11 (native) -----
based upon intravital imaging, is of a passive role of the microenvironment in homing, at
least for haematogenous metastases1. This suggests that the predominant sites of metastases
simply reflect the first pass of the cells in the circulation and their entrapment in local
capillaries. Thus, breast cancer cells spread predominantly to lung, lymph nodes and bone,
whereas colon cancer cells travel to the liver through the hepatic–portal circulation. Tissue
tropism in this view is not due to active homing, but instead to the ability of a small portion
of the many cells that become lodged in various tissues to survive, invade and grow in a
particular environment (soil) either by chance or because they have appropriate mutations.
Support for this comes from the studies by Massagué and colleagues in which gene
signatures have been identified whose expression confers the ability to grow in particular
tissues87. The local environment may therefore provide appropriate tropic factors that enable
a particular tumour cell, which expresses the relevant cohort of genes, to prosper. Indeed,
the effect of chemokines on tissue tropism described above can be interpreted as their ability
to induce migration and invasion of the tumour cells1 in particular sites, and also the
capacity of some chemokines, such as GROA (also known as CXCL1) to promote tumour
cell proliferation94.
Although still not definitive, the current data suggests that dissemination and homing
depends on prevailing circulatory patterns, whereas the initial survival of tumour cells and
their subsequent growth at the distant site is the rate-limiting step. Survival in the circulation
and at the landing site is essential in all models of dissemination (FIG. 3). Substantial
evidence implicates platelets in this process, as discussed above. Platelets are also a potent
source of SDF1 that may affect the migration of CXCR4-expressing tumour cells and the
recruitment of BMDCs to sites of metastasis95. Furthermore, platelets express many pro-
and anti-angiogenic factors96 that could influence the establishment and growth of
micrometastases.
Adhesion and invasion in the establishment of metastasis
Whereas passive entrapment may have part of the role in metastatic seeding, active adhesion
and invasion is essential for the subsequent establishment and persistent growth97. Little is
known of the early steps in this process. In some cases, proliferation occurs within the blood
vessels and these eventually rupture as the metastatic tumour grows bigger98. In others,
cancer cells extravasate first and then proliferate. Integrins expressed on the cancer cell
surface are important in this process. Integrins adhere to many extracellular matrix
molecules, including laminin and fibronectin, with specificity dictated by their α and β chain
combinations99. For example, α3β1 integrin is required for adhesion to laminin during
pulmonary metastasis100, whereas blocking αvβ1 integrin inhibited metastasis through
suppression of expression of the protease urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA)11. The data
for αvβ1 integrin are consistent with the inhibition of metastasis associated with uPA
deficiency in the MMTV–PyMT model of breast cancer101. Early experiments by Liotta and
colleagues showed that co-injection of tumour cells with fibronectin in experimental
metastasis models increased tumour cell adhesion and metastasis102. This potentiation is
consistent with the pre-metastatic niche concept discussed below, whereby BMDCs have
been suggested to increase fibronectin deposition at homing sites for metastatic cells103.
Interactions between the primary tumour and meta-static sites
Metastatic seeding of circulating tumour cells has been shown in some cases to be enhanced
by the primary tumour, whose secreted products create an environment that favours
establishment of metastases at unique distant sites, termed pre-metastatic niches103–105. For
example, melanoma cells induce these niches in multiple sites compared with Lewis lung
carcinoma (LLC), which only induces a niche in the lung and liver, following a pattern
consistent with the relative tropism of these two tumour types. Strikingly, LLC cells can be
Joyce and Pollard
Page 11
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 4.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 12 (native) -----
redirected to multiple and different metastatic sites by repeated intraperitoneal injection of
conditioned media from the melanoma cells103. These niches, covered in detail in an
Opinion piece in this Focus issue106, are populated by BMDCs of the myeloid lineage and
are abundant in fibronectin produced by activated fibroblasts. This fibronectin deposition,
together with other ECM molecules, may also be increased by the secretion of enzymes such
as lysyl oxidase from primary tumours acting on these distant fibroblasts107,108.
Several other molecules have been identified as important in the creation of the niche,
including the chemoattractants S100A8 and S100A9, and the metalloproteinase MMP9,
which liberates VEGFA locally and promotes myeloid cell recruitment through VEGFR1
signalling65,109. Inhibition of VEGFR1 signalling blocked the metastatic enhancement by
the primary tumour, suggesting the importance of myeloid cell recruitment103, although
VEGFR1 is also expressed on endothelial cells. Furthermore, Weinberg and colleagues110
have shown that certain tumours, termed instigators, can mobilize bone marrow precursors
through an osteopontin- mediated but unknown mechanism, to home to secondary metastatic
sites where they promote the growth of weakly malignant cells such that they form macro-
metastases. This mechanism requires seeded metastatic cells and long periods of incubation,
and so it is functionally distinct from the pre-metastatic niche concept. Nevertheless, both
processes highlight the importance of recruitment of BMDCs to metastatic sites.
Despite the persuasiveness of these experiments there have been other studies that appear to
contradict them. In these conflicting studies, the presence of a primary tumour inhibits
metastasis, and removal of the tumour promotes metastatic growth111. This is consistent
with clinical observations of a burst of metastasis following surgical removal of the primary
tumours in some patients111,112. These types of data led to the identification of anti-
angiogenic molecules, mostly fragments of the ECM such as angiostatin, a fragment of
plasminogen113, secreted from primary tumours114,115. The transition of these molecules
into clinical practice has been complicated, suggesting difficulties in quality control and
different mechanisms of action dependent on context113, but it seems important to reconcile
these disparate data in more complex models of metastatic disease and in clinical practice.
Cytokines, growth factors and metastases
The molecular mechanisms of these pro-metastatic functions of the microenvironment
remain poorly understood. Several growth factors and chemokines have been implicated in
increasing metastasis. Primary tumour-secreted VEGFA, TGFβ and tumour necrosis factor-
α (TNFα) induce expression of S100A8 and S100A9 by lung endothelium and myeloid
cells, which increased the invasion and adhesion of circulatory tumour cells, and also of
myeloid cells, into the metastatic niche65,66. TNFα has been shown in several studies to
increase metastasis. It can upregulate several adhesion molecules on endothelial cells that
promote tumour cell adhesion and migration116,117, including E-selectin, P-selectin and
VCAM1 (vascular cell adhesion protein 1). TNFα also protects against NK cell attack118.
These metastasis-promoting actions of TNFα appear to be mediated mostly through effects
on stromal and inflammatory cells. TNFα signals through the transcription factor nuclear
factor-κB (NF-κB), and signalling through this molecule in resident macrophages created an
inflammatory microenvironment that enhanced LLC cell metastasis119. Although the
sources of TNFα were not identified in the studies above, it is noteworthy that macrophages
are the most potent producers of this molecule. Indeed, Karin and colleagues recently
showed that conditioned media from LLC cells, of which the main active component was
the ECM protein versican, was a robust inducer of TNFα production in macrophages
through activation of Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2) and TLR6. Consequently, deletion of Tnf
or Tlr2 in the host significantly reduced experimental lung metastasis120.
Joyce and Pollard
Page 12
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 4.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 13 (native) -----
Persistent growth of metastases
After seeding, persistent growth of the metastatic tumour requires the establishment of a
vasculature that is achieved through the production of angiogenic growth factors such as
VEGFA, and the recruitment and proliferation of endothelial cells and their accompanying
support cells such as pericytes. Bone marrow-derived endothelial cell precursors are
recruited to metastases by VEGFA signalling through VEGFR2 (REF. 121). These
endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs) are recruited to macrometastases but not to
micrometastases and are incorporated into the endothelial wall122. Tumour-associated EPCs
express the inhibitor of differentiation 1 (ID1) transcription factor and suppression of ID1
blocks the angiogenic switch and formation of macrometastases, showing that the ID1+
EPCs were necessary for the initiation of angiogenesis122. EPCs themselves express a
variety of angiogenic molecules, suggesting that their recruitment further potentiates local
angiogenesis and subsequent metastatic tumour growth. However, other studies, albeit
disputed123, using parabiotic mice have called into question the recruitment of EPCs to
tumours, owing to the complete absence of EPCs in the parabiotic twin, which had no
adverse effect on tumour growth and metastasis124.
Folkman and colleagues suggested that dormant metastases fail to grow because of the lack
of vascularization; a phenomenon termed angiogenic dormancy12. Consequently, acquisition
of an angiogenic switch that produces a dense vasculature can initiate the onset of
growth125. In this scenario, additional oncogenic mutations or alterations in the
microenvironment enable the onset of angiogenesis. It seems unlikely that mutations occur
in the non-proliferating quiescent tumour cells125. However, changes in the
microenvironment due to inflammation or ageing could enable tumour cells to begin to
proliferate and initiate angiogenesis126. Senescent fibroblasts produce cytokines, particularly
inflammatory ones, and proteases that can promote epithelial cell proliferation and might
activate the dormant cells and trigger angiogenesis. Such factors are not produced by
‘young’ fibroblasts, providing a link between ageing, inflammation and cancer127,128.
Further, induction of an inflammatory response through activation of macrophages in the
lung increased metastases in an experimental metastasis model using LLC cells119.
Hyperoxic injury to the lung and allergen-induced pulmonary inflammation also increased
metastasis129,130. In primary tumours, macrophages regulate the angiogenic switch through
their production of a wide range of angiogenic factors including VEGFA33. However,
despite their abundance in metastases, whether they are actively involved in angiogenesis at
metastatic sites is unknown. In addition, the phenomenon of primary tumour instigation of
slow-growing metastases through the recruitment of BMDCs might also be a mechanism for
the induction of angiogenesis110. All these data suggest that alterations in the
microenvironment might reawaken dormant metastases or promote the growth of slow-
growing ones (FIG. 3).
Conclusions and perspectives
It is evident from the data presented in this Review that primary tumours and their metastatic
off-shoots are complex ecologies consisting of numerous cell types. Many of these are
derived from the bone marrow but there are also abundant resident cells. In analysing these
tumours, by necessity, experiments are usually focused upon a single cell type or a single
gene product within a cell. However, it is naive to think that individual cell types function in
isolation in a complex system. Thus, a major area for advances in understanding the role of
the microenvironment must incorporate a systems biology approach in order to model these
complex interactions and their evolution over time.
It is also apparent that cancer is a systemic disease with the tumour affecting multiple
systems in the host that can result in spread of cancer cells and enhancement of metastasis. It
Joyce and Pollard
Page 13
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 4.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 14 (native) -----
is important to realize that this usually involves mobilization of BMDCs, which home to the
tumour sites and dramatically alter their ecology, generally but not always in favour of the
tumour. In addition, these changes modify immune responses in the tumour-bearing animals,
often with a profound immunosuppression against new antigens expressed in the tumour
cells themselves. It remains obscure how the mobilization of BMDCs occurs, how they are
trafficked from bone marrow into the blood and back as well as to different tissues, and what
regulates the final differentiation and function of BMDCs at these sites. Several molecules
have been shown to be important, including SDF1, VEGFA, KIT ligand and osteopontin as
discussed above, but the major points of regulation still remain to be elucidated.
Nevertheless this is an area of research that needs to be expanded, along with detailed
phenotyping of the cells that BMDCs differentiate into, as this may be the key to controlling
metastatic spread. These approaches will be significantly enhanced by new imaging
techniques that can track cells and their interactions in vivo in both humans and mice. These
include intravital imaging using multi-photon microscopy of cells fluorescently labelled
either intrinsically or by barcodes of identifying antibodies55; nanoparticles that attach to the
cell surface through tags or other innovative means; enhanced magnetic resonance imaging
techniques using targeted nanoiron probes; positron emission tomography; and
spectroscopic methods coupled with magnetic resonance imaging or microscopy131 to
individually identify cell types based on intrinsic fluorescence in vivo — a technique that
might even be applicable to human tumours.
The goal of all these experiments is to create sufficient biological insight to reverse the
tumour-enhancing effects of the microenvironment with the ideal of recreating a suppressive
microenvironment that can fully revert the malignant phenotype to normal (or at least a
controlled phenotype), as was found in the pioneering experiments of reprogramming
malignant tumour cells in normal environments that are described above. This raises the
issue of whether stromal alterations are always reversible, or whether there is a point after
which these changes cannot be reversed. These questions apply both to modifications
conferred on the stroma by the cancer cells and to those conferred on cancer cells by the
stroma. Although it is probably optimistic to think that all changes can be fully reversed,
various strategies have been used to target stromal cells, particularly in the primary
tumour132,133, several of which have therapeutic efficacy. A wide range of agents are
already available, at least in animal models, to block the functions of stromal cells discussed
in this Review, including EGFR and CSF1R antagonists, VEGFA and Vegfr inhibitors,
TNFα inhibitors, S100 antibodies, protease inhibitors, anticoagulants and chemokine
inhibitors, including CXCR4 antagonists. It is likely that these will need to be used in
combination to attack the metastatic microenvironment in its diversity and to undermine its
robustness. Moreover, it is unlikely that any of these strategies will work alone without the
incorporation of a direct attack on the tumour cell itself.
An emerging concept in anticancer therapy involves the mobilization of several types of
BMDC following treatment with traditional chemotherapeutics or targeted therapies, which
may contribute either to a lack of response or acquired drug resistance. For example, EPCs
are rapidly mobilized through SDF1 and VEGFR2 signalling in response to certain
chemotherapies, including the taxanes and 5-fluorouracil. Resistance to these drugs can be
overcome in part through anti-VEGFR2 blocking antibodies, or by genetic ablation of EPCs
in ID1 and ID3-deficient mice134,135. BMDCs can also confer an inherent refractoriness to
therapy, as in the case of MDSCs, which are recruited to certain tumour models in response
to anti-VEGFA treatment136. However, when the anti-VEGFA antibody was combined with
an anti-GR1 antibody, tumour growth was effectively reduced. These examples indicate that
it will be important to inhibit mobilized BMDCs alongside drugs that target cancer cells, and
this synergy may in fact explain some of the therapeutic efficacy observed in certain
combination trials in mice and humans to date.
Joyce and Pollard
Page 14
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 4.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 15 (native) -----
Among the stromal cell types important for metastatic dissemination and outgrowth, drugs
that target endothelial cells are the most clinically advanced. Several Vegf antagonists have
been approved by the US Food and Drug Administration137 that increase survival in patients
with metastatic breast cancer138 and metastatic colorectal cancer139 when combined with
chemotherapy. The translational promise of this first targeted therapy against the tumour
microenvironment, however, is somewhat tempered by emerging instances of resistance to
anti-angiogenic therapy140, and examples of stromal cell targeting in animal models that
unexpectedly resulted in increased invasion48 or metastasis141. These data reinforce the
importance of fully understanding the intricacy of cellular interactions in the tumour
microenvironment, using approaches discussed in this Review, in order to isolate the cancer
cells from their multiple support networks and effectively destroy them.
Acknowledgments
We apologize to the many authors whose work we could not cite owing to space constraints. Research in the
authors’ laboratories is supported by the National Cancer Institute (J.A.J. and J.W.P.), the Emerald Foundation, the
Sidney Kimmel Foundation and the Rita Allen Foundation (J.A.J.). J.A.J. is a Geoffrey Beene Junior Faculty Chair
and J.W.P. is the Louis Goldstein Swan Chair in Women’s Cancer Research.
Glossary
Extracellular
matrix (ECM)
The matrix laid down by cells upon which they adhere and move. It
consists of many components including laminin and fibronectin,
which can influence tumour cell behaviour. ECM is also a rich
source of growth factors that can be released upon proteolytic
degradation and which in many cases increase metastasis
Myeloid cell-
derived
suppressor cell
(MDSC)
MDSCs are immature cells of the myeloid lineage that suppress T-
cell responses to tumours and also enhance metastasis in the
MMTV–PyMT model
Mesenchymal
stem cell (MSC)
MSCs are multipotent cells that differentiate into osteoblasts,
chondrocytes adipocytes, and other cells of mesenchymal origin that
can be recruited to tumours and increase metastasis
Tumour-
associated
macrophage
(TAM)
TAMs are cells recruited to the tumour microenvironment where
they are educated to perform tasks that enhance metastasis, such as
stimulating tumour cell migration, invasion and intravasation
MMTV–PyMT
breast cancer
model
Mammary cancers are induced in mice by the mammary-restricted
expression of the polyoma virus middle T oncoprotein from the
mouse mammary tumour virus (MMTV) long terminal repeat
promoter. This model progresses through stereotypical stages of
tumour progression and metastasizes to the lung, reminiscent of
those seen in human breast cancer
Immature
myeloid cells
(iMC)
Myeloid cells without definitive macrophage characteristics
(CD11b+CD34+F4/80−GR1−) that stimulate collective tumour cell
invasion in mouse models of colon cancer
Multiphoton
intravital
imaging
Visual imaging of tumours in live animals using infrared light and
the quantum phenomena of two low energy photons when focused
together having sufficient energy to elicit a fluorescent event. This
Joyce and Pollard
Page 15
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 4.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 16 (native) -----
enables imaging in real time of fluorescently tagged cells inside
tumours
Second harmonic
resonance
A quantum mechanical phenomena that enables the visualization by
multi-photon microscopy of repeating structures such as collagen I in
the blue channel. This enables visualization of the tumour
microenvironment in real time in live animals
Pre-metastatic
niche
A proposed environment induced by the primary tumour in
secondary organs that enhances metastatic cell seeding and that is
populated by bone marrow-derived cells
Experimental
metastasis model
This is a xenograft model of metastasis in which malignant cells are
introduced into experimental animals usually by intravenous
injection but also through the spleen or heart. It is usually used to
study lung metastases
Toll-like
receptors
A class of receptors expressed particularly by myeloid cells that
recognize foreign substances and have evolved to be a pattern
recognition system to detect invading pathogens. Their activation
triggers, among others, the NF-κB signalling pathway, which is
involved in metastasis in several tumour types
Endothelial
progenitor cell
(EPC)
EPCs are bone marrow-derived cells that are recruited to the nascent
tumour vasculature, and that have been shown to be important for
angiogenesis and metastasis in certain animal cancer models
References
1. Chambers AF, Groom AC, MacDonald IC. Dissemination and growth of cancer cells in metastatic
sites. Nature Rev Cancer. 2002; 2:563–572. A seminal review summarizing the authors’ research on
the various routes for metastasis. [PubMed: 12154349]
2. Mehlen P, Puisieux A. Metastasis: a question of life or death. Nature Rev Cancer. 2006; 6:449–458.
[PubMed: 16723991]
3. Kim JW, et al. Rapid apoptosis in the pulmonary vasculature distinguishes non-metastatic from
metastatic melanoma cells. Cancer Lett. 2004; 213:203–212. [PubMed: 15327836]
4. MacDonald IC, Groom AC, Chambers AF. Cancer spread and micrometastasis development:
quantitative approaches for in vivo models. Bioessays. 2002; 24:885–893. [PubMed: 12325121]
5. Husemann Y, et al. Systemic spread is an early step in breast cancer. Cancer Cell. 2008; 13:58–68.
[PubMed: 18167340]
6. Cameron MD, et al. Temporal progression of metastasis in lung: cell survival, dormancy, and
location dependence of metastatic inefficiency. Cancer Res. 2000; 60:2541–2546. [PubMed:
10811137]
7. Engel J, et al. The process of metastasisation for breast cancer. Eur J Cancer. 2003; 39:1794–1806.
[PubMed: 12888376]
8. Goodison S, et al. Prolonged dormancy and site-specific growth potential of cancer cells
spontaneously disseminated from nonmetastatic breast tumors as revealed by labeling with green
fluorescent protein. Clin Cancer Res. 2003; 9:3808–3814. [PubMed: 14506175]
9. Brackstone M, Townson JL, Chambers AF. Tumour dormancy in breast cancer: an update. Breast
Cancer Res. 2007; 9:208. [PubMed: 17561992]
10. Suzuki M, Mose ES, Montel V, Tarin D. Dormant cancer cells retrieved from metastasis-free
organs regain tumorigenic and metastatic potency. Am J Pathol. 2006; 169:673–681. [PubMed:
16877365]
11. Aguirre-Ghiso JA. Models, mechanisms and clinical evidence for cancer dormancy. Nature Rev
Cancer. 2007; 7:834–846. [PubMed: 17957189]
Joyce and Pollard
Page 16
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 4.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 17 (native) -----
12. Holmgren L, O’Reilly MS, Folkman J. Dormancy of micrometastases: balanced proliferation and
apoptosis in the presence of angiogenesis suppression. Nature Med. 1995; 1:149–153. Early
concepts of the presence of dormant metastatic cells and the requirement for an angiogenic switch
to re-awaken them. [PubMed: 7585012]
13. Kouros-Mehr H, et al. GATA-3 links tumor differentiation and dissemination in a luminal breast
cancer model. Cancer Cell. 2008; 13:141–152. [PubMed: 18242514]
14. Minn AJ, et al. Lung metastasis genes couple breast tumor size and metastatic spread. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA. 2007; 104:6740–6745. [PubMed: 17420468]
15. Norton L, Massague J. Is cancer a disease of self-seeding? Nature Med. 2006; 12:875–878.
[PubMed: 16892025]
16. Weaver VM, et al. Reversion of the malignant phenotype of human breast cells in three-
dimensional culture and in vivo by integrin blocking antibodies. J Cell Biol. 1997; 137:231–245.
[PubMed: 9105051]
17. Nelson CM, Bissell MJ. Of extracellular matrix, scaffolds, and signaling: tissue architecture
regulates development, homeostasis, and cancer. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol. 2006; 22:287–309.
[PubMed: 16824016]
18. Mintz B, Illmensee K. Normal genetically mosaic mice produced from malignant teratocarcinoma
cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1975; 72:3585–3589. This seminal paper showed that malignant
cancer cells could be reprogrammed by the embryonic blastocyst microenvironment, remarkably
resulting in normal mosaic mice. [PubMed: 1059147]
19. Pierce GB, Pantazis CG, Caldwell JE, Wells RS. Specificity of the control of tumor formation by
the blastocyst. Cancer Res. 1982; 42:1082–1087. [PubMed: 6277473]
20. Dolberg DS, Bissell MJ. Inability of Rous sarcoma virus to cause sarcomas in the avian embryo.
Nature. 1984; 309:552–556. [PubMed: 6203040]
21. Postovit LM, Seftor EA, Seftor RE, Hendrix MJ. A three-dimensional model to study the
epigenetic effects induced by the microenvironment of human embryonic stem cells. Stem Cells.
2006; 24:501–505. [PubMed: 16293574]
22. Gerschenson M, Graves K, Carson SD, Wells RS, Pierce GB. Regulation of melanoma by the
embryonic skin. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1986; 83:7307–7310. [PubMed: 3463969]
23. Hendrix MJ, et al. Reprogramming metastatic tumour cells with embryonic microenvironments.
Nature Rev Cancer. 2007; 7:246–255. [PubMed: 17384580]
24. Olumi AF, et al. Carcinoma-associated fibroblasts direct tumor progression of initiated human
prostatic epithelium. Cancer Res. 1999; 59:5002–5011. [PubMed: 10519415]
25. Hayashi N, Cunha GR. Mesenchyme-induced changes in the neoplastic characteristics of the
Dunning prostatic adenocarcinoma. Cancer Res. 1991; 51:4924–4930. [PubMed: 1893381]
26. Tlsty TD, Coussens LM. Tumor stroma and regulation of cancer development. Annu Rev Pathol.
2006; 1:119–150. [PubMed: 18039110]
27. Mantovani A, Allavena P, Sica A, Balkwill F. Cancer-related inflammation. Nature. 2008;
454:436–444. [PubMed: 18650914]
28. Medzhitov R. Origin and physiological roles of inflammation. Nature. 2008; 454:428–435.
[PubMed: 18650913]
29. de Visser KE, Eichten A, Coussens LM. Paradoxical roles of the immune system during cancer
development. Nature Rev Cancer. 2006; 6:24–37. [PubMed: 16397525]
30. Ostrand-Rosenberg S. Immune surveillance: a balance between protumor and antitumor immunity.
Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2008; 18:11–18. [PubMed: 18308558]
31. Talmadge JE, Donkor M, Scholar E. Inflammatory cell infiltration of tumors: Jekyll or Hyde.
Cancer Metastasis Rev. 2007; 26:373–400. [PubMed: 17717638]
32. Bingle L, Brown NJ, Lewis CE. The role of tumour-associated macrophages in tumour
progression: implications for new anticancer therapies. J Pathol. 2002; 196:254–265. [PubMed:
11857487]
33. Lin EY, et al. Macrophages regulate the angiogenic switch in a mouse model of breast cancer.
Cancer Res. 2006; 66:11238–11246. [PubMed: 17114237]
Joyce and Pollard
Page 17
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 4.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 18 (native) -----
34. De Palma M, et al. Tie2 identifies a hematopoietic lineage of proangiogenic monocytes required
for tumor vessel formation and a mesenchymal population of pericyte progenitors. Cancer Cell.
2005; 8:211–226. [PubMed: 16169466]
35. Nozawa H, Chiu C, Hanahan D. Infiltrating neutrophils mediate the initial angiogenic switch in a
mouse model of multistage carcinogenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2006; 103:12493–12498.
[PubMed: 16891410]
36. Coussens LM, et al. Inflammatory mast cells up-regulate angiogenesis during squamous epithelial
carcinogenesis. Genes Dev. 1999; 13:1382–1397. [PubMed: 10364156]
37. Soucek L, et al. Mast cells are required for angiogenesis and macroscopic expansion of Myc-
induced pancreatic islet tumors. Nature Med. 2007; 13:1211–1218. [PubMed: 17906636]
38. Murdoch C, Muthana M, Coffelt SB, Lewis CE. The role of myeloid cells in the promotion of
tumour angiogenesis. Nature Rev Cancer. 2008; 8:618–631. [PubMed: 18633355]
39. Pollard JW. Tumour-educated macrophages promote tumour progression and metastasis. Nature
Rev Cancer. 2004; 4:71–78. [PubMed: 14708027]
40. Condeelis J, Pollard JW. Macrophages: obligate partners for tumor cell migration, invasion, and
metastasis. Cell. 2006; 124:263–266. [PubMed: 16439202]
41. Lewis CE, Pollard JW. Distinct role of macrophages in different tumor microenvironments. Cancer
Res. 2006; 66:605–612. [PubMed: 16423985]
42. Pollard JW. Macrophages define the invasive microenvironment in breast cancer. J Leukoc Biol.
2008; 84:623–630. [PubMed: 18467655]
43. Ojalvo LS, King W, Cox D, Pollard JW. High density gene expression analysis of tumor-
associated macrophages from mouse mammary tumors. Am J Pathol. 2009; 174:1048–1064.
[PubMed: 19218341]
44. Lin EY, Nguyen AV, Russell RG, Pollard JW. Colony-stimulating factor 1 promotes progression
of mammary tumors to malignancy. J Exp Med. 2001; 193:727–740. References 33 and 44 used
the MMTV–PyMT mammary cancer model to show that macrophage depletion, in a CSF1-
deficient background, substantially decreased tumour angiogenesis, invasion and lung metastasis.
[PubMed: 11257139]
45. Hiraoka K, et al. Inhibition of bone and muscle metastases of lung cancer cells by a decrease in the
number of monocytes/macrophages. Cancer Sci. 2008; 99:1595–1602. [PubMed: 18754872]
46. Zeisberger SM, et al. Clodronate-liposome-mediated depletion of tumour-associated macrophages:
a new and highly effective antiangiogenic therapy approach. Br J Cancer. 2006; 95:272–281.
[PubMed: 16832418]
47. Miselis NR, Wu ZJ, Van Rooijen N, Kane AB. Targeting tumor-associated macrophages in an
orthotopic murine model of diffuse malignant mesothelioma. Mol Cancer Ther. 2008; 7:788–799.
[PubMed: 18375821]
48. Stockmann C, et al. Deletion of vascular endothelial growth factor in myeloid cells accelerates
tumorigenesis. Nature. 2008; 456:814–818. [PubMed: 18997773]
49. Wyckoff J, et al. A paracrine loop between tumor cells and macrophages is required for tumor cell
migration in mammary tumors. Cancer Res. 2004; 64:7022–7029. [PubMed: 15466195]
50. Goswami S, et al. Macrophages promote the invasion of breast carcinoma cells via a colony-
stimulating factor-1/epidermal growth factor paracrine loop. Cancer Res. 2005; 65:5278–5283.
[PubMed: 15958574]
51. Hernandez L, et al. The EGF/CSF-1 paracrine invasion loop can be triggered by heregulin beta 1
and CXCL12. Cancer Res. (in the press).
52. Robinson BD, et al. Tumor microenvironment of metastasis (TMEM) in human breast carcinoma:
a potential prognostic marker linked to hematogenous dissemination. Clin Cancer Res. (in the
press). This study found that analysis of invasive carcinoma cells, macrophages and endothelial
cells in combination (the TMEM) could be used as a prognostic marker for breast cancer
metastasis.
53. Kitamura T, et al. SMAD4-deficient intestinal tumors recruit CCR1+ myeloid cells that promote
invasion. Nature Genet. 2007; 39:467–475. [PubMed: 17369830]
54. Wyckoff JB, et al. Direct visualization of macrophage-assisted tumor cell intravasation in
mammary tumors. Cancer Res. 2007; 67:2649–2656. References 49 and 54 identified a paracrine
Joyce and Pollard
Page 18
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 4.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 19 (native) -----
loop involving the differential expression of EGF and CSF1, and their receptors, on macrophages
and cancer cells, which is an important mediator of cancer invasion and intravasation. [PubMed:
17363585]
55. Condeelis J, Segall JE. Intravital imaging of cell movement in tumours. Nature Rev Cancer. 2003;
3:921–930. [PubMed: 14737122]
56. Ingman WV, Wyckoff J, Gouon-Evans V, Condeelis J, Pollard JW. Macrophages promote
collagen fibrillogenesis around terminal end buds of the developing mammary gland. Dev Dyn.
2006; 235:3222–3229. [PubMed: 17029292]
57. Gabrilovich DI, et al. The terminology issue for myeloid-derived suppressor cells. Cancer Res.
2007; 67:425. author reply 426. [PubMed: 17210725]
58. Sica A, Bronte V. Altered macrophage differentiation and immune dysfunction in tumor
development. J Clin Invest. 2007; 117:1155–1166. [PubMed: 17476345]
59. Marigo I, Dolcetti L, Serafini P, Zanovello P, Bronte V. Tumor-induced tolerance and immune
suppression by myeloid derived suppressor cells. Immunol Rev. 2008; 222:162–179. [PubMed:
18364001]
60. Bunt SK, Sinha P, Clements VK, Leips J, Ostrand-Rosenberg S. Inflammation induces myeloid-
derived suppressor cells that facilitate tumor progression. J Immunol. 2006; 176:284–290.
[PubMed: 16365420]
61. Bunt SK, et al. Reduced inflammation in the tumor microenvironment delays the accumulation of
myeloid-derived suppressor cells and limits tumor progression. Cancer Res. 2007; 67:10019–
10026. [PubMed: 17942936]
62. Sinha P, Clements VK, Bunt SK, Albelda SM, Ostrand-Rosenberg S. Cross-talk between myeloid-
derived suppressor cells and macrophages subverts tumor immunity toward a type 2 response. J
Immunol. 2007; 179:977–983. [PubMed: 17617589]
63. Sinha P, et al. Proinflammatory S100 proteins regulate the accumulation of myeloid-derived
suppressor cells. J Immunol. 2008; 181:4666–4675. [PubMed: 18802069]
64. Cheng P, et al. Inhibition of dendritic cell differentiation and accumulation of myeloid-derived
suppressor cells in cancer is regulated by S100A9 protein. J Exp Med. 2008; 205:2235–2249.
[PubMed: 18809714]
65. Hiratsuka S, Watanabe A, Aburatani H, Maru Y. Tumour-mediated upregulation of
chemoattractants and recruitment of myeloid cells predetermines lung metastasis. Nature Cell
Biol. 2006; 8:1369–1375. [PubMed: 17128264]
66. Hiratsuka S, et al. The S100A8-serum amyloid A3-TLR4 paracrine cascade establishes a pre-
metastatic phase. Nature Cell Biol. 2008; 10:1349–1355. References 65 and 66 identify the
inflammatory chemoattractants S100A8 and S100A9 as mediators of myeloid cell recruitment to
the pre-metastatic niche in the lung through the serum amyloid A3–TLR4 signalling cascade.
[PubMed: 18820689]
67. Yang L, et al. Abrogation of TGF beta signaling in mammary carcinomas recruits Gr-1+CD11b+
myeloid cells that promote metastasis. Cancer Cell. 2008; 13:23–35. An important paper linking
myeloid cell-derived suppressor cells with metastasis. [PubMed: 18167337]
68. Gordon S. Alternative activation of macrophages. Nature Rev Immunol. 2003; 3:23–35. [PubMed:
12511873]
69. Youn JI, Nagaraj S, Collazo M, Gabrilovich DI. Subsets of myeloid-derived suppressor cells in
tumor-bearing mice. J Immunol. 2008; 181:5791–5802. [PubMed: 18832739]
70. Pittenger MF, et al. Multilineage potential of adult human mesenchymal stem cells. Science. 1999;
284:143–147. [PubMed: 10102814]
71. Spaeth E, Klopp A, Dembinski J, Andreeff M, Marini F. Inflammation and tumor
microenvironments: defining the migratory itinerary of mesenchymal stem cells. Gene Ther. 2008;
15:730–738. [PubMed: 18401438]
72. Karnoub AE, et al. Mesenchymal stem cells within tumour stroma promote breast cancer
metastasis. Nature. 2007; 449:557–563. This study showed that mesenchymal stem cells, when
mixed with weakly metastatic breast cancer cells, substantially enhance their metastatic capability,
in part through CCL5–CCR5 signalling. [PubMed: 17914389]
Joyce and Pollard
Page 19
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 4.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 20 (native) -----
73. Fidler IJ. Metastasis: quantitative analysis of distribution and fate of tumor emboli labeled with
125I-5-iodo-2′-deoxyuridine. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1970; 45:773–782. [PubMed: 5513503]
74. Im JH, et al. Coagulation facilitates tumor cell spreading in the pulmonary vasculature during early
metastatic colony formation. Cancer Res. 2004; 64:8613–8619. [PubMed: 15574768]
75. Palumbo JS. Mechanisms linking tumor cell-associated procoagulant function to tumor
dissemination. Semin Thromb Hemost. 2008; 34:154–160. [PubMed: 18645920]
76. Nieswandt B, Hafner M, Echtenacher B, Mannel DN. Lysis of tumor cells by natural killer cells in
mice is impeded by platelets. Cancer Res. 1999; 59:1295–1300. [PubMed: 10096562]
77. Palumbo JS, et al. Tumor cell-associated tissue factor and circulating hemostatic factors cooperate
to increase metastatic potential through natural killer cell-dependent and -independent
mechanisms. Blood. 2007; 110:133–141. [PubMed: 17371949]
78. Jurasz P, Alonso-Escolano D, Radomski MW. Platelet–cancer interactions: mechanisms and
pharmacology of tumour cell-induced platelet aggregation. Br J Pharmacol. 2004; 143:819–826.
[PubMed: 15492016]
79. Nash GF, Turner LF, Scully MF, Kakkar AK. Platelets and cancer. Lancet Oncol. 2002; 3:425–
430. [PubMed: 12142172]
80. Pawelek JM, Chakraborty AK. Fusion of tumour cells with bone marrow-derived cells: a unifying
explanation for metastasis. Nature Rev Cancer. 2008; 8:377–386. [PubMed: 18385683]
81. Paget S. The distribution of secondary growths in cancer of the breast. Lancet. 1889; 1:571–573.
82. Fokas E, Engenhart-Cabillic R, Daniilidis K, Rose F, An HX. Metastasis: the seed and soil theory
gains identity. Cancer Metastasis Rev. 2007; 26:705–715. [PubMed: 17786535]
83. Fidler IJ. The pathogenesis of cancer metastasis: the ‘seed and soil’ hypothesis revisited. Nature
Rev Cancer. 2003; 3:453–458. [PubMed: 12778135]
84. Fidler IJ, Kripke ML. Metastasis results from preexisting variant cells within a malignant tumor.
Science. 1977; 197:893–895. [PubMed: 887927]
85. Langley RR, Fidler IJ. Tumor cell–organ microenvironment interactions in the pathogenesis of
cancer metastasis. Endocr Rev. 2007; 28:297–321. [PubMed: 17409287]
86. Clark EA, Golub TR, Lander ES, Hynes RO. Genomic analysis of metastasis reveals an essential
role for RhoC. Nature. 2000; 406:532–535. [PubMed: 10952316]
87. Nguyen DX, Massague J. Genetic determinants of cancer metastasis. Nature Rev Genet. 2007;
8:341–352. [PubMed: 17440531]
88. Nguyen DX, Bos PD, Massagué J. Metastasis: from infiltration to colonization. Nature Rev
Cancer. (in the press).
89. Muller A, et al. Involvement of chemokine receptors in breast cancer metastasis. Nature. 2001;
410:50–56. This research revealed that chemokine signalling loops are important in directing
tissue-specific metastasis of breast cancer cells. [PubMed: 11242036]
90. Zlotnik A. Chemokines in neoplastic progression. Semin Cancer Biol. 2004; 14:181–185.
[PubMed: 15246053]
91. Zlotnik A. New insights on the role of CXCR4 in cancer metastasis. J Pathol. 2008; 215:211–213.
[PubMed: 18523970]
92. Li YM, et al. Upregulation of CXCR4 is essential for HER2-mediated tumor metastasis. Cancer
Cell. 2004; 6:459–469. [PubMed: 15542430]
93. Marchesi F, et al. The chemokine receptor CX3CR1 is involved in the neural tropism and
malignant behavior of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. Cancer Res. 2008; 68:9060–9069.
[PubMed: 18974152]
94. Balkwill F. Chemokine biology in cancer. Semin Immunol. 2003; 15:49–55. [PubMed: 12495640]
95. Jin DK, et al. Cytokine-mediated deployment of SDF-1 induces revascularization through
recruitment of CXCR4+ hemangiocytes. Nature Med. 2006; 12:557–567. [PubMed: 16648859]
96. Massberg S, et al. Platelets secrete stromal cell-derived factor 1alpha and recruit bone marrow-
derived progenitor cells to arterial thrombi in vivo. J Exp Med. 2006; 203:1221–1233. [PubMed:
16618794]
97. Miles FL, Pruitt FL, van Golen KL, Cooper CR. Stepping out of the flow: capillary extravasation
in cancer metastasis. Clin Exp Metastasis. 2008; 25:305–324. [PubMed: 17906932]
Joyce and Pollard
Page 20
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 4.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 21 (native) -----
98. Al-Mehdi AB, et al. Intravascular origin of metastasis from the proliferation of endothelium-
attached tumor cells: a new model for metastasis. Nature Med. 2000; 6:100–102. [PubMed:
10613833]
99. Hynes RO. Integrins: bidirectional, allosteric signaling machines. Cell. 2002; 110:673–687.
[PubMed: 12297042]
100. Wang H, et al. Tumor cell α3β1 integrin and vascular laminin-5 mediate pulmonary arrest and
metastasis. J Cell Biol. 2004; 164:935–941. [PubMed: 15024036]
101. Almholt K, et al. Reduced metastasis of transgenic mammary cancer in urokinase-deficient mice.
Int J Cancer. 2005; 113:525–532. [PubMed: 15472905]
102. Liotta LA, Rao CN, Wewer UM. Biochemical interactions of tumor cells with the basement
membrane. Annu Rev Biochem. 1986; 55:1037–1057. [PubMed: 3017189]
103. Kaplan RN, et al. VEGFR1-positive haematopoietic bone marrow progenitors initiate the pre-
metastatic niche. Nature. 2005; 438:820–827. This study first defined the concept of the pre-
metastatic niche and identified VEGFR1+ bone marrow-derived progenitors as key cells in
establishing the niche, a process mediated in part through integrin α4 and fibronectin. [PubMed:
16341007]
104. Rafii S, Lyden D. S100 chemokines mediate bookmarking of premetastatic niches. Nature Cell
Biol. 2006; 8:1321–1323. [PubMed: 17139281]
105. Wels J, Kaplan RN, Rafii S, Lyden D. Migratory neighbors and distant invaders: tumor-
associated niche cells. Genes Dev. 2008; 22:559–574. [PubMed: 18316475]
106. Psaila B, Lyden D. The metastatic niche: adapting the foreign soil. Nature Rev Cancer. (in the
press).
107. Erler JT, et al. Lysyl oxidase is essential for hypoxia-induced metastasis. Nature. 2006;
440:1222–1226. [PubMed: 16642001]
108. Erler JT, et al. Hypoxia-induced lysyl oxidase is a critical mediator of bone marrow cell
recruitment to form the premetastatic niche. Cancer Cell. 2009; 15:35–44. [PubMed: 19111879]
109. Hiratsuka S, et al. MMP9 induction by vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-1 is involved
in lung-specific metastasis. Cancer Cell. 2002; 2:289–300. [PubMed: 12398893]
110. McAllister SS, et al. Systemic endocrine instigation of indolent tumor growth requires
osteopontin. Cell. 2008; 133:994–1005. This paper showed that human breast carcinomas
instigate the growth of otherwise indolent cancer cells, through a phenomenon involving BMDC
recruitment and osteopontin signalling. [PubMed: 18555776]
111. Demicheli R, Retsky MW, Hrushesky WJ, Baum M. Tumor dormancy and surgery-driven
interruption of dormancy in breast cancer: learning from failures. Nature Clin Pract Oncol. 2007;
4:699–710. [PubMed: 18037874]
112. Demicheli R, Retsky MW, Swartzendruber DE, Bonadonna G. Proposal for a new model of
breast cancer metastatic development. Ann Oncol. 1997; 8:1075–1080. [PubMed: 9426326]
113. Cao Y, Xue L. Angiostatin. Semin Thromb Hemost. 2004; 30:83–93. [PubMed: 15034800]
114. O’Reilly MS, Holmgren L, Chen C, Folkman J. Angiostatin induces and sustains dormancy of
human primary tumors in mice. Nature Med. 1996; 2:689–692. [PubMed: 8640562]
115. O’Reilly MS, Pirie-Shepherd S, Lane WS, Folkman J. Antiangiogenic activity of the cleaved
conformation of the serpin antithrombin. Science. 1999; 285:1926–1928. [PubMed: 10489375]
116. Stoelcker B, Hafner M, Orosz P, Nieswandt B, Mannel DN. Role of adhesion molecules and
platelets in TNF-induced adhesion of tumor cells to endothelial cells: implications for
experimental metastasis. J Inflamm. 1995; 46:155–167. [PubMed: 8844496]
117. Mannel DN, Orosz P, Hafner M, Falk W. Mechanisms involved in metastasis enhanced by
inflammatory mediators. Circ Shock. 1994; 44:9–13. [PubMed: 7704939]
118. Hafner M, Orosz P, Kruger A, Mannel DN. TNF promotes metastasis by impairing natural killer
cell activity. Int J Cancer. 1996; 66:388–392. [PubMed: 8621262]
119. Stathopoulos GT, et al. Host nuclear factor-κB activation potentiates lung cancer metastasis. Mol
Cancer Res. 2008; 6:364–371. [PubMed: 18337446]
120. Kim S, et al. Carcinoma-produced factors activate myeloid cells through TLR2 to stimulate
metastasis. Nature. 2009; 457:102–107. [PubMed: 19122641]
Joyce and Pollard
Page 21
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 4.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 22 (native) -----
121. Rafii S, Lyden D, Benezra R, Hattori K, Heissig B. Vascular and haematopoietic stem cells: novel
targets for anti-angiogenesis therapy? Nature Rev Cancer. 2002; 2:826–835. [PubMed:
12415253]
122. Gao D, et al. Endothelial progenitor cells control the angiogenic switch in mouse lung metastasis.
Science. 2008; 319:195–198. [PubMed: 18187653]
123. Kerbel RS, et al. Endothelial progenitor cells are cellular hubs essential for neoangiogenesis of
certain aggressive adenocarcinomas and metastatic transition but not adenomas. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA. 2008; 105:E54. author reply E55. [PubMed: 18715995]
124. Purhonen S, et al. Bone marrow-derived circulating endothelial precursors do not contribute to
vascular endothelium and are not needed for tumor growth. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2008;
105:6620–6625. [PubMed: 18443294]
125. Naumov GN, Akslen LA, Folkman J. Role of angiogenesis in human tumor dormancy: animal
models of the angiogenic switch. Cell Cycle. 2006; 5:1779–1787. [PubMed: 16931911]
126. Schwartsburd PM. Age-promoted creation of a pro-cancer microenvironment by inflammation:
pathogenesis of dyscoordinated feedback control. Mech Ageing Dev. 2004; 125:581–590.
[PubMed: 15491675]
127. Krtolica A, Parrinello S, Lockett S, Desprez PY, Campisi J. Senescent fibroblasts promote
epithelial cell growth and tumorigenesis: a link between cancer and aging. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA. 2001; 98:12072–12077. [PubMed: 11593017]
128. Campisi J. Senescent cells, tumor suppression, and organismal aging: good citizens, bad
neighbors. Cell. 2005; 120:513–522. [PubMed: 15734683]
129. Adamson IY, Young L, Orr FW. Tumor metastasis after hyperoxic injury and repair of the
pulmonary endothelium. Lab Invest. 1987; 57:71–77. [PubMed: 3599913]
130. Taranova AG, et al. Allergic pulmonary inflammation promotes the recruitment of circulating
tumor cells to the lung. Cancer Res. 2008; 68:8582–8589. [PubMed: 18922934]
131. Willmann JK, van Bruggen N, Dinkelborg LM, Gambhir SS. Molecular imaging in drug
development. Nature Rev Drug Discov. 2008; 7:591–607. [PubMed: 18591980]
132. Joyce JA. Therapeutic targeting of the tumor microenvironment. Cancer Cell. 2005; 7:513–520.
[PubMed: 15950901]
133. Gadea BB, Joyce JA. Tumour-host interactions: implications for developing anti-cancer therapies.
Expert Rev Mol Med. 2006; 8:1–32. [PubMed: 17156575]
134. Shaked Y, et al. Therapy-induced acute recruitment of circulating endothelial progenitor cells to
tumors. Science. 2006; 313:1785–1787. [PubMed: 16990548]
135. Shaked Y, et al. Rapid chemotherapy-induced acute endothelial progenitor cell mobilization:
implications for antiangiogenic drugs as chemosensitizing agents. Cancer Cell. 2008; 14:263–
273. References 134 and 135 demonstrate that mobilization of endothelial progenitor cells
contributes to chemotherapy resistance. [PubMed: 18772115]
136. Shojaei F, et al. Tumor refractoriness to anti-VEGF treatment is mediated by CD11b+Gr1+
myeloid cells. Nature Biotechnol. 2007; 25:911–920. This study showed that another BMDC
type, CD11b+GR1+ cells, confer refractoriness to anti-VEGFA treatment in cancer models.
[PubMed: 17664940]
137. Ellis LM, Hicklin DJ. VEGF-targeted therapy: mechanisms of anti-tumour activity. Nature Rev
Cancer. 2008; 8:579–591. [PubMed: 18596824]
138. Miller K, et al. Paclitaxel plus bevacizumab versus paclitaxel alone for metastatic breast cancer.
N Engl J Med. 2007; 357:2666–2676. [PubMed: 18160686]
139. Hurwitz H, et al. Bevacizumab plus irinotecan, fluorouracil, and leucovorin for metastatic
colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med. 2004; 350:2335–2342. [PubMed: 15175435]
140. Bergers G, Hanahan D. Modes of resistance to anti-angiogenic therapy. Nature Rev Cancer. 2008;
8:592–603. [PubMed: 18650835]
141. Xian X, et al. Pericytes limit tumor cell metastasis. J Clin Invest. 2006; 116:642–651. [PubMed:
16470244]
142. Egeblad M, Werb Z. New functions for the matrix metalloproteinases in cancer progression.
Nature Rev Cancer. 2002; 2:161–174. [PubMed: 11990853]
Joyce and Pollard
Page 22
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 4.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 23 (native) -----
143. Lynch CC, Matrisian LM. Matrix metalloproteinases in tumor-host cell communication.
Differentiation. 2002; 70:561–573. [PubMed: 12492497]
144. Mohamed MM, Sloane BF. Cysteine cathepsins: multifunctional enzymes in cancer. Nature Rev
Cancer. 2006; 6:764–775. [PubMed: 16990854]
145. Gocheva V, Joyce JA. Cysteine cathepsins and the cutting edge of cancer invasion. Cell Cycle.
2007; 6:60–64. [PubMed: 17245112]
146. Laufs S, Schumacher J, Allgayer H. Urokinase-receptor (u-PAR): an essential player in multiple
games of cancer: a review on its role in tumor progression, invasion, metastasis, proliferation/
dormancy, clinical outcome and minimal residual disease. Cell Cycle. 2006; 5:1760–1771.
[PubMed: 16931909]
147. Masterson J, O’Dea S. Posttranslational truncation of E-cadherin and significance for tumour
progression. Cells Tissues Organs. 2007; 185:175–179. [PubMed: 17587823]
148. Van Damme J, Struyf S, Opdenakker G. Chemokine-protease interactions in cancer. Semin
Cancer Biol. 2004; 14:201–208. [PubMed: 15246056]
149. Mason, SD.; Joyce, JA. Cancer Metastasis: Biologic Basis and Therapeutics. Welsh, DR.; Lyden,
DC., editors. Cambridge Univ. Press; Cambridge, UK: 2009. (in the press)
150. Joyce JA, et al. Cathepsin cysteine proteases are effectors of invasive growth and angiogenesis
during multistage tumorigenesis. Cancer Cell. 2004; 5:443–453. [PubMed: 15144952]
151. Gocheva V, et al. Distinct roles for cysteine cathepsin genes in multistage tumorigenesis. Genes
Dev. 2006; 20:543–556. References 150 and 151 show that cysteine cathepsin proteases promote
cancer invasion, in part through cleavage of the cell adhesion molecule E-cadherin. [PubMed:
16481467]
152. Das S, Skobe M. Lymphatic vessel activation in cancer. Ann NY Acad Sci. 2008; 1131:235–241.
[PubMed: 18519976]
153. Saharinen P, Tammela T, Karkkainen MJ, Alitalo K. Lymphatic vasculature: development,
molecular regulation and role in tumor metastasis and inflammation. Trends Immunol. 2004;
25:387–395. [PubMed: 15207507]
154. Sleeman JP. The lymph node as a bridgehead in the metastatic dissemination of tumors. Recent
Results Cancer Res. 2000; 157:55–81. [PubMed: 10857162]
155. Pantel K, Brakenhoff RH. Dissecting the metastatic cascade. Nature Rev Cancer. 2004; 4:448–
456. [PubMed: 15170447]
156. Klein CA, Holzel D. Systemic cancer progression and tumor dormancy: mathematical models
meet single cell genomics. Cell Cycle. 2006; 5:1788–1798. [PubMed: 16929175]
157. Shiozawa Y, Havens AM, Pienta KJ, Taichman RS. The bone marrow niche: habitat to
hematopoietic and mesenchymal stem cells, and unwitting host to molecular parasites. Leukemia.
2008; 22:941–950. [PubMed: 18305549]
158. Klein CA, et al. Genetic heterogeneity of single disseminated tumour cells in minimal residual
cancer. Lancet. 2002; 360:683–689. [PubMed: 12241875]
159. Schmidt-Kittler O, et al. From latent disseminated cells to overt metastasis: genetic analysis of
systemic breast cancer progression. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2003; 100:7737–7742. [PubMed:
12808139]
160. Bussard KM, Gay CV, Mastro AM. The bone microenvironment in metastasis; what is special
about bone? Cancer Metastasis Rev. 2008; 27:41–55. [PubMed: 18071636]
161. Mundy GR, Edwards JR. The osteoclast — not always guilty. Cell Metab. 2007; 6:157–159.
[PubMed: 17767902]
162. Mundy GR. Metastasis to bone: causes, consequences and therapeutic opportunities. Nature Rev
Cancer. 2002; 2:584–593. [PubMed: 12154351]
163. Mundy GR. Osteoporosis and inflammation. Nutr Rev. 2007; 65:S147–151. [PubMed: 18240539]
164. Leibbrandt A, Penninger JM. RANK/RANKL: regulators of immune responses and bone
physiology. Ann NY Acad Sci. 2008; 1143:123–150. [PubMed: 19076348]
165. Felix R, Hofstetter W, Wetterwald A, Cecchini MG, Fleisch H. Role of colony-stimulating
factor-1 in bone metabolism. J Cell Biochem. 1994; 55:340–349. [PubMed: 7962166]
Joyce and Pollard
Page 23
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 4.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 24 (native) -----
166. Kakonen SM, Mundy GR. Mechanisms of osteolytic bone metastases in breast carcinoma.
Cancer. 2003; 97:834–839. [PubMed: 12548583]
167. Lin EY, Gouon-Evans V, Nguyen AV, Pollard JW. The macrophage growth factor CSF-1 in
mammary gland development and tumor progression. J Mammary Gland Biol Neoplasia. 2002;
7:147–162. [PubMed: 12465600]
168. Jones DH, et al. Regulation of cancer cell migration and bone metastasis by RANKL. Nature.
2006; 440:692–696. [PubMed: 16572175]
169. Kang Y, et al. A multigenic program mediating breast cancer metastasis to bone. Cancer Cell.
2003; 3:537–549. [PubMed: 12842083]
170. Sohara Y, Shimada H, DeClerck YA. Mechanisms of bone invasion and metastasis in human
neuroblastoma. Cancer Lett. 2005; 228:203–209. [PubMed: 15975706]
171. Ara T, et al. Interleukin-6 in the bone marrow microenvironment promotes the growth and
survival of neuroblastoma cells. Cancer Res. 2009; 69:329–337. [PubMed: 19118018]
172. Bagnato A, Rosano L. The endothelin axis in cancer. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2008; 40:1443–
1451. [PubMed: 18325824]
173. Valta MP, et al. FGF-8 is involved in bone metastasis of prostate cancer. Int J Cancer. 2008;
123:22–31. [PubMed: 18386787]
174. Mantovani A, et al. The chemokine system in diverse forms of macrophage activation and
polarization. Trends Immunol. 2004; 25:677–686. [PubMed: 15530839]
175. Mosser DM, Edwards JP. Exploring the full spectrum of macrophage activation. Nature Rev
Immunol. 2008; 8:958–969. [PubMed: 19029990]
176. Lodie TA, et al. Systematic analysis of reportedly distinct populations of multipotent bone
marrow-derived stem cells reveals a lack of distinction. Tissue Eng. 2002; 8:739–751. [PubMed:
12459053]
177. Uccelli A, Moretta L, Pistoia V. Mesenchymal stem cells in health and disease. Nature Rev
Immunol. 2008; 8:726–736. [PubMed: 19172693]
178. Venneri MA, et al. Identification of proangiogenic TIE2-expressing monocytes (TEMs) in human
peripheral blood and cancer. Blood. 2007; 109:5276–5285. [PubMed: 17327411]
179. Janeway, C.; Travers, P.; Walport, M.; Shlomchik, M. Immunobiology: the immune system in
health and disease. 6. Garland Science Publishing; New York: 2005.
180. Ribatti D, Crivellato E, Roccaro AM, Ria R, Vacca A. Mast cell contribution to angiogenesis
related to tumour progression. Clin Exp Allergy. 2004; 34:1660–1664. [PubMed: 15544587]
181. Folkman J. Role of angiogenesis in tumor growth and metastasis. Semin Oncol. 2002; 29:15–18.
[PubMed: 12516034]
182. Bertolini F, et al. Maximum tolerable dose and low-dose metronomic chemotherapy have
opposite effects on the mobilization and viability of circulating endothelial progenitor cells.
Cancer Res. 2003; 63:4342–4346. [PubMed: 12907602]
183. Bertolini F, Shaked Y, Mancuso P, Kerbel RS. The multifaceted circulating endothelial cell in
cancer: towards marker and target identification. Nature Rev Cancer. 2006; 6:835–845.
[PubMed: 17036040]
184. Nolan DJ, et al. Bone marrow-derived endothelial progenitor cells are a major determinant of
nascent tumor neovascularization. Genes Dev. 2007; 21:1546–1558. [PubMed: 17575055]
185. Song S, Ewald AJ, Stallcup W, Werb Z, Bergers G. PDGFRβ+ perivascular progenitor cells in
tumours regulate pericyte differentiation and vascular survival. Nature Cell Biol. 2005; 7:870–
879. [PubMed: 16113679]
186. Gerhardt H, Semb H. Pericytes: gatekeepers in tumour cell metastasis? J Mol Med. 2008; 86:135–
144. References 24 and 186, found that fibroblasts isolated from human prostate or breast cancer
dramatically increase tumour cell growth in tissue recombination experiments. [PubMed:
17891366]
187. Kalluri R, Zeisberg M. Fibroblasts in cancer. Nature Rev Cancer. 2006; 6:392–401. [PubMed:
16572188]
Joyce and Pollard
Page 24
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 4.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 25 (native) -----
188. Orimo A, et al. Stromal fibroblasts present in invasive human breast carcinomas promote tumor
growth and angiogenesis through elevated SDF-1/CXCL12 secretion. Cell. 2005; 121:335–348.
[PubMed: 15882617]
189. de Visser KE, Korets LV, Coussens LM. De novo carcinogenesis promoted by chronic
inflammation is B lymphocyte dependent. Cancer Cell. 2005; 7:411–423. [PubMed: 15894262]
190. Vivier E, Tomasello E, Baratin M, Walzer T, Ugolini S. Functions of natural killer cells. Nature
Immunol. 2008; 9:503–510. [PubMed: 18425107]
191. Waldhauer I, Steinle A. NK cells and cancer immunosurveillance. Oncogene. 2008; 27:5932–
5943. [PubMed: 18836474]
192. Walzer T, Jaeger S, Chaix J, Vivier E. Natural killer cells: from CD3−NKp46+ to post-genomics
meta-analyses. Curr Opin Immunol. 2007; 19:365–372. [PubMed: 17442558]
Joyce and Pollard
Page 25
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 4.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 26 (native) -----
At a glance
•
The tumour microenvironment has a major role in modulating the metastatic
capacity of most cancers. Seminal experiments indicated that certain
microenvironments can suppress malignancy. However, in most tumours these
restraints are overcome such that the tumour now exploits the supporting cells to
increase metastatic potential.
•
Primary and metastatic tumours cause systemic perturbations that often involve
mobilizing bone marrow-derived cells that home to the tumour and promote
tumour progression, malignant cell escape and survival, and growth at the
secondary site.
•
Primary tumours recruit macrophages to their microenvironment and these cells
increase metastatic potential by increasing tumour cell migration, invasion and
intravasation. They also increase angiogenesis and thereby increase the targets
for metastatic cell escape.
•
Myeloid cell-derived suppressor cells suppress immune responses to newly
displayed tumour antigens and promote the metastatic potential of the tumour.
•
Mesenchymal stem cells can differentiate into many different cell types and are
recruited to primary tumours where they enhance metastasis.
•
Tumour cells are protected in their travels through the circulation, particularly
by platelets. These platelets together with the tumour cells activate the clotting
system such that microthrombi form that help tumour cells lodge in target
tissues.
•
The formation of metastases has many rate-limiting steps including survival in
the distant organ, extravasation and the establishment of persistent growth.
Microenvironmental cues are important at all steps and the recruitment of a
variety of bone marrow-derived cells including endothelial progenitors and
myeloid cell-derived cells is crucial for these processes.
Joyce and Pollard
Page 26
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 4.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 27 (native) -----
Figure 1. The primary tumour microenvironment
a | Cancer cells in primary tumours are surrounded by a complex microenvironment
comprising numerous cells including endothelial cells of the blood and lymphatic
circulation, stromal fibroblasts and a variety of bone marrow-derived cells (BMDCs)
including macrophages, myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs), TIE2-expressing
monocytes (TEMs) and mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs). b | Invasive human breast cancer
stained with haematoxylin and eosin, in which a prominent infiltration of leukocytes
(indicated by white arrows) is evident at the invasive margin. c | Macrophages at the
invasive edge of pancreatic islet cancers express cathepsin B (green), which is associated
with loss of epithelial cadherin (red) on the neighbouring cancer cells. Cell nuclei are
visualized by DAPI (blue). Part c reproduced, with permission, from REF. 151 © (2006)
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.
Joyce and Pollard
Page 27
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 4.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 28 (native) -----
Figure 2. The invasive microenvironment
a | Cancer cell intravasation into the blood circulation preferentially occurs in close
proximity to perivascular macrophages. Disruption of endothelial cell contacts and
degradation of the vascular basement membrane is required for cancer cell intravasation,
which is mediated by proteases supplied from the cancer cells, macrophages or both. b |
Cancer cell migration is controlled through a paracrine loop involving colony-stimulating
factor 1 (CSF1), epidermal growth factor (EGF) and their receptors, which are differentially
expressed on carcinoma cells and macrophages, resulting in movement of cancer cells
towards macrophages (dashed arrow). Additional paracrine loops exist between cancer cells
expressing C-X-C chemokine receptor 4 (CXCR4) and stromal cells, such as fibroblasts and
pericytes, producing the cognate ligand stromal cell-derived factor 1 (SDF1, also known as
CXCL12), which contribute to directional cancer cell migration. c | Tumour-associated
macrophages (green) can be visualized in mammary tumours in living animals, in proximity
to blood vessels (red), as indicated by arrows, and migrating along collagen fibres (blue,
visualized by second harmonic resonance) as indicated by arrowheads. Part c reproduced,
with permission, from REF. 54 © (2007) American Association for Cancer Research.
Joyce and Pollard
Page 28
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 4.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 29 (native) -----
Figure 3. The fate of tumour cells in the metastatic microenvironment
Following cancer cell intravasation, a series of rate-limiting steps affect the ability of these
cells to establish secondary tumours in the metastatic site. At each step, the tumour cells can
meet several different fates (death, dormancy or survival), which can be modulated by
microenvironmental factors, including shielding by platelet aggregates in the circulation, the
activation of resident stromal cells, and the recruitment and differentiation of bone marrow-
derived cells (BMDCs).
Joyce and Pollard
Page 29
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 4.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

----- Page 30 (native) -----
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Joyce and Pollard
Page 30
Table 1
Markers and functions of stromal cells in the tumour microenvironment
Cell type
Cell surface markers*
Functions in the tumor microenvironment
refs
TAM
CD11b+CD14+CD31−CD34−
CD45+CD68+CD117−CD133−CD146−
CD204+CD206+CCR2+CSF1R+MHC II+
VEGFR1+VEGFR2− (m/h)
F4/80+ (m) CD23+CD163+CXCR4+ (h)
‘Classically activated’ M1 macrophages
contribute to tumour rejection through type 1
cytokine production and antigen presentation,
whereas ‘alternatively activated’ M2
macrophages enhance angiogenesis and
remodelling through type 2 cytokine
production
TAMs are proposed to share M2
characteristics; their presence in tumours is
thought to be tumour promoting, and is
associated with poor prognosis
31, 32, 38, 68, 174,
175
MDSC
CD11b+CD14+/−
MHC I+MHC IIlow (m/h)
GR1+ CD11b+ (m): can be further subdivided into
LY6G+ LY6Clow CD11b+
CD11c+/−CD33+CD34+CD86− (h)
MDSCs are increased in almost all patients and
animal models with cancer. Because of the
variation in MDSC gene expression between
different tumour microenvironments, it has
been challenging to identify a unique set of
markers. This has emphasized the importance
of showing their ability to suppress T cells as a
defining trait
30, 38, 69
MSC
CD14−CD29+CD31−CD34−CD44+CD45−
CD51+CD71+CD73+CD90+CD105+CD133−
CD166+CD271+ (m/h)
MSCs infiltrate various human cancers and
have been shown to increase cancer cell
dissemination in animal models. MSCs are also
immunosuppressive, in part through inhibition
of T-cell proliferation
71, 72, 176, 177
TEM
CD11b+CD14+CD31lowCD34−CD45+
CD117−CD133−TIE2+VEGFR2− (m/h)
F4/80+GR1lowSCA1− (m)
CD11c+CD13+CD16+CD33+CD62L−CD146−
CCR2−CCR5+CSF1R+ (h)
Monocytes that express the angiopoietin
receptor TIE2. TEMs have been implicated in
angiogenesis from studies in animal models
and have been detected in human tumours and
at low frequency in the peripheral blood of
cancer patients
34, 38, 178
Neutrophil
CD11b+CD14lowCD31+CD66B+CXCR2+ (m/h)
GR1+VEGFR1+CXCR1− (m)
CD15+CXCR1+ (h)
Levels of neutrophils are increased in patients
with colon, gastric and lung cancer. Neutrophil
infiltration is further enhanced in the invasive
areas of CRCs, and increased numbers are
associated with poor prognosis in
bronchioalveolar carcinoma. Neutrophils have
been implicated in enhancing angiogenesis and
metastasis in animal models
38, 179
Mast cell
CD43+CD117+CD123+CD153+(m/h)
CD11b+CD16+CD34+SCA1+ (m)
CCR1+CCR3+CCR4+CCR5+CXCR1+CXCR2+
CXCR4+ (h)
Mast cells are important in generating and
maintaining innate and adaptive immune
responses. Increased mast cell numbers have
been reported in a wide range of tumours and,
in some cases, this correlates with poor
prognosis. Mast cells have been implicated in
angiogenic switching in several animal models
38, 180
Endothelial cell
CD31+CD34+CD105+CD106+CD144+ (m/h)
Endothelial cells comprise the blood
vasculature of the tumour, and increased
microvessel density is frequently associated
with poor prognosis in a wide range of human
cancers
179, 181
EPC
CD13+CD31lowCD45−CD105+
CD133+CD117+CD146+CD144+ (VE-cadherin:
E4G10+ Ab)VEGFR2+ (m/h)
EPCs contribute to blood vessel formation in
various animal models and some patient
studies, although the functional importance of
EPCs in tumour angiogenesis remains
controversial
123, 124, 182–184
Pericyte
Desmin+/−NG2+/−αSMA+/−PDGFRβ+/−‡
Pericytes are mural cells that provide physical
support and stabilization, as well as pro-
survival factors, to blood vessels. Pericytes
may also be crucial in limiting metastasis by
maintaining vessel integrity
185, 186
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 4.

----- Page 31 (native) -----
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Joyce and Pollard
Page 31
Cell type
Cell surface markers*
Functions in the tumor microenvironment
refs
Fibroblast
Vimentin+desmin+αSMA+/−FSP1+FAP+ (m/h)
CAFs are a large component of the stroma, and
at later stages of tumour progression are
generally tumour promoting, as shown in
animal models and studies using patient
samples
24, 187, 188
Platelet
CD41+CD42a-dCD51+CD110+ (m/h)
Platelets are activated and circulate at higher
levels in cancer patients, particularly those with
advanced malignancy.
79, 179
CD4+ T cell
CD3+CD4+CD45+ (m/h)
T helper type 1 cells aid CD8+ T cells in
tumour rejection, whereas T helper type 2 cells
polarize immunity away from an anti-tumour
response, and regulatory T cells block CD8+
cell activation and NK cell killing
29, 30, 179
CD8+ T cells
CD3+CD8+CD45+ (m/h)
Also known as CTLs, these are the effector
cells of the adaptive immune system and
specifically recognize and destroy cancer cells
through perforin- and granzyme-mediated
apoptosis
29, 179
B cell
CD3−CD19+CD20+CD45+ (m/h)
CD45RA+ B220+ (m)
B lymphocytes are important mediators of
humoral immunity, but have been shown to
promote malignancy in an animal model of
squamous cell carcinogenesis
29, 179, 189
NK cell
CD11b+CD27+§
CD3−CD16+/−CD56+ ||
CD3−CD335+ NKp46+ (m/h)
NK cells are effector lymphocytes of the innate
immune system that are cytotoxic to cancer
cells through the perforin– granzyme pathway
NK cells contribute to immunosurveillance of
cancer, and low NK-like cytotoxicity in the
peripheral blood is associated with increased
risk of cancer
177, 190–192
Markers that are shared by mouse and human are indicated (m/h), as are those that are unique to mouse (m) or human (h).
*Stromal cells can be identified by the multiple cell surface markers listed, but not necessarily requiring all of the markers to be used
simultaneously, as this list compiles markers from multiple studies.
‡Three subsets in mouse tumours, based on relative levels of expression of these genes. Platelet-derived growth factor-β (PDGFRβ) is considered a
marker of pericyte progenitors, rather than mature pericytes.
§Three subsets in mouse, based on relative levels of CD11b and CD27 expression.
||Two subsets in human, based on relative levels of CD16 and CD56 expression. αSMA, α-smooth muscle actin; Ab, antibody; CAF, cancer-
associated fibroblast; CCR, C–C chemokine receptor; CRC, colorectal cancer; CSF1, colony-stimulating factor 1; CTL, CD8+ cytotoxic T cell;
CXCR, C-X-C chemokine receptor; EPC, endothelial progenitor cell; FAP, fibroblast-activated protein; FSP, fibroblast-specific protein; MDSC,
myeloid-derived suppressor cell; MHC, major histocompatibility complex; MSC, mesenchymal stem cell; NK, natural killer; SCA, stem cell
antigen; TAM, tumour-associated macrophage; TEM, TIE2-expressing monocyte; VE-cadherin, vascular endothelial cadherin ; VEGFR, vascular
endothelial growth factor receptor.
Nat Rev Cancer. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 January 4.