

----- Page 1 (native) -----
REVIEW
Astrocytes: biology and pathology
Michael V. Sofroniew • Harry V. Vinters
Received: 17 November 2009 / Revised: 23 November 2009 / Accepted: 24 November 2009 / Published online: 10 December 2009
 The Author(s) 2009. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
Abstract
Astrocytes are specialized glial cells that out-
number neurons by over ﬁvefold. They contiguously tile the
entire central nervous system (CNS) and exert many essen-
tial complex functions in the healthy CNS. Astrocytes
respond to all forms of CNS insults through a process
referred to as reactive astrogliosis, which has become a
pathological hallmark of CNS structural lesions. Substantial
progress has been made recently in determining functions
and mechanisms of reactive astrogliosis and in identifying
roles of astrocytes in CNS disorders and pathologies. A vast
molecular arsenal at the disposal of reactive astrocytes is
being deﬁned. Transgenic mouse models are dissecting
speciﬁc aspects of reactive astrocytosis and glial scar
formation in vivo. Astrocyte involvement in speciﬁc
clinicopathological entities is being deﬁned. It is now clear
that reactive astrogliosis is not a simple all-or-none phe-
nomenon but is a ﬁnely gradated continuum of changes that
occur in context-dependent manners regulated by speciﬁc
signaling events. These changes range from reversible
alterations in gene expression and cell hypertrophy with
preservation of cellular domains and tissue structure, to long-
lasting scar formation with rearrangement of tissue structure.
Increasing evidence points towards the potential of reactive
astrogliosis to play either primary or contributing roles in
CNS disorders via loss of normal astrocyte functions or gain
of abnormal effects. This article reviews (1) astrocyte
functions in healthy CNS, (2) mechanisms and functions of
reactive astrogliosis and glial scar formation, and (3) ways in
which reactive astrocytes may cause or contribute to speciﬁc
CNS disorders and lesions.
Keywords
Astrocyte  Reactive astrogliosis  Glial scar 
GFAP  Pathology  Central nervous system
Introduction
Until quite recently, the prevailing view regarding the biol-
ogy and pathology of astrocytes among those studying
clinical disorders and structural lesions of the central nervous
system (CNS) was most likely to be that (1) astrocytes are
supportive glial cell components in neural tissue and (2)
reactive astrogliosis is a reliable and sensitive marker of
diseased tissue. The notion that dysfunctions of astrocytes or
reactive astrocytes might contribute to the presentation of
clinical signs or to mechanisms leading to pathological
changes in CNS tissue was generally not considered. How-
ever, this viewpoint is gradually changing as a result of
steadily increasing interest in and study of the biology and
pathology of astrocytes. Over the past 25 years it has become
clear that astrocytes are responsible for a wide variety of
complex and essential functions in the healthy CNS,
including primary roles in synaptic transmission and infor-
mation processing by neural circuit functions. The functions
and mechanisms of reactive astrogliosis and glial scar for-
mation are gradually being elucidated. There is a growing
body of evidence that points towards the potential for loss of
M. V. Sofroniew (&)
Department of Neurobiology, David Geffen School of Medicine,
University of California, 10833 Le Conte Avenue,
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1763, USA
e-mail: sofroniew@mednet.ucla.edu
H. V. Vinters
Division of Neuropathology, Department of Pathology and
Laboratory Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine,
University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1763, USA
H. V. Vinters
Department of Neurology, David Geffen School of Medicine,
University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1732, USA
123
Acta Neuropathol (2010) 119:7–35
DOI 10.1007/s00401-009-0619-8

----- Page 2 (native) -----
normal astrocyte functions or gain of abnormal effects to
contribute to, or play primary roles in, disease processes, and
there are now numerous examples of astrocyte contributions
to clinical and pathological mechanisms [15, 52, 212, 224–
226, 237]. This article summarizes recent advances in (1)
astrocyte functions in healthy tissue, (2) the gradations,
mechanisms, functions, and effects of reactive astrogliosis,
and (3) the appearance and potential roles of reactive astro-
cytes in a variety of CNS disorders and pathologies.
Astrocyte biology in healthy CNS
Basic astrocyte morphology
Since the late nineteenth century, astrocytes have been
divided into two main subtypes, protoplasmic or ﬁbrous, on
the basis of differences in their cellular morphologies and
anatomical locations [191]. These two main categories
retain their validity and usefulness today. Protoplasmic
astrocytes are found throughout all gray matter and, as ﬁrst
demonstrated using classical silver impregnation tech-
niques, exhibit a morphology of several stem branches that
give rise to many ﬁnely branching processes in a uniform
globoid distribution (Fig. 1a). Fibrous astrocytes are found
throughout all white matter and exhibit a morphology of
many long ﬁber-like processes [191]. Classical and modern
neuroanatomical studies also indicate that both astrocyte
subtypes make extensive contacts with blood vessels
(Fig. 1a, b). Electron microscopic analyses of the mid-
twentieth century revealed that the processes of proto-
plasmic astrocytes envelop synapses and that the processes
of ﬁbrous astrocytes contact nodes of Ranvier, and that
both types of astrocytes form gap junctions between distal
processes of neighboring astrocytes [183]. These basic
attributes of astrocyte morphology and some of their
functional interactions are summarized schematically in
(Fig. 2a).
Molecular markers and proteomic characterization
Immunohistochemical techniques that enable the detection
of speciﬁc molecular markers at the single-cell level are
essential tools for identifying and characterizing cells in
healthy and pathological tissue. Expression of glial ﬁbrillary
acid protein (GFAP) has become a prototypical marker
for
immunohistochemical
identiﬁcation
of
astrocytes.
Fig. 1 Astrocyte morphology and interactions with blood vessels in
healthy and diseased tissue. a Protoplasmic astrocyte giving rise to a
dense network of ﬁnely branching processes throughout its local gray
matter neuropil, as well as to a large stem branch that extends foot
processes along a blood vessel (bv). b Two color ﬂuorescence
showing astrocytes in healthy mouse gray matter stained immuno-
histochemically for GFAP (red) as well as the transgene-derived
reporter molecule GFP (green). Note that in these transgenic mice
[95], GFP reporter is present in all of the ﬁne processes of the
protoplasmic astrocytes throughout the neuropil, whereas the GFAP is
present only in the large stem astrocyte processes and endfeet (which
appear yellow where green and red staining overlap). Note that
endfeet from many astrocytes contact and envelop bv. c Two color
ﬂuorescence showing dense accumulations of GFAP-positive (green)
endfeet and processes of reactive astrocytes lining up along perivas-
cular cuffs or clusters (pvc) of inﬂammatory cells stained with DAPI
(blue) in a mouse with experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis
(EAE). Transgenic disruption of this reactive astrocyte barrier leads to
widespread invasion of inﬂammatory cells away from perivascular
clusters into CNS parenchyma during EAE [251]. d Two color
brightﬁeld staining showing human autopsy specimen with reactive
astrocytes lining their processes along perivascular cuffs of inﬂam-
matory cells as if forming perivascular scar-like barriers similar to
those observed in experimental animal models [251]. Scale bars
a 3 lm, b 7.5 lm, c 15 lm, d 5 lm
b
8
Acta Neuropathol (2010) 119:7–35
123

----- Page 3 (native) -----
Nevertheless, it is important to recognize the appropriate
uses and limitations of GFAP as an astrocyte marker. GFAP
was ﬁrst isolated as a protein highly concentrated in old
demyelinated plaques from multiple sclerosis patients and
was then found to be associated immunohistochemically
with reactive astrocytes in such plaques and in other patho-
logical contexts [62, 63]. In line with this original mode of
identiﬁcation, GFAP expression can be regarded as a sensi-
tive and reliable marker that labels most, if not all, reactive
astrocytes that are responding to CNS injuries (Fig. 3).
However, GFAP is not an absolute marker of all non-reactive
astrocytes
and
is
often
not
immunohistochemically
detectable in astrocytes in healthy CNS tissue or remote
from CNS lesions (Figs. 3a, 4a). Although GFAP is
immunohistochemically detectable in many astrocytes
throughout the healthy CNS, it is clear from double staining
with multiple markers (including transgenic reporter pro-
teins) that many mature astrocytes in healthy CNS tissue do
not express detectable levels of GFAP and that GFAP
expression by astrocytes exhibits both regional and local
variability that is dynamically regulated by a large number of
inter- and intra-cellular signaling molecules [226].
GFAP has been studied extensively. GFAP is one of a
family
of
intermediate
ﬁlament
proteins,
including
vimentin, nestin, and others, that serve largely cyto-archi-
tectural
functions
[179].
Studies
in
transgenic
mice
indicated that the expression of GFAP is not essential for
the normal appearance and function of most astrocytes in
healthy CNS of transgenic mice, but is essential for the
process of reactive astrogliosis and glial scar formation [95,
179, 180]. There are different isoforms and splice variants
of GFAP including GFAP a, b, c, d, and j, and these may
be expressed in a heterogeneous manner in both healthy
CNS and in pathological specimens including glioma, but
the differential distribution and roles of GFAP isoforms are
only beginning to be studied [4, 20, 195].
At the single-cell level, in line with its structural role,
GFAP is not present throughout astrocyte cytoplasm, and
GFAP immunohistochemistry does not label all portions of
the astrocyte but only in the main stem branches (Fig. 1b).
GFAP is entirely absent from the ﬁnely branching astrocyte
processes and is often not detectably present in the cell
body (Figs. 1b, 3a). Consequently, GFAP immunohisto-
chemistry can markedly underestimate the extent of
astrocyte branching and territory in comparison with other
means of detection such as Golgi staining (Fig. 1a) or
expression of reporter proteins such as GFP or b-galacto-
sidase (Fig. 1b), or ﬁlling with ﬂuorescent dyes [34].
In addition, as regards the use of GFAP as an astrocyte
marker, it is important to note that GFAP expression is not
exclusive to protoplasmic and ﬁbrous astrocytes. Within
the CNS, GFAP is also expressed by a number of cells that
can be considered part of an extended astroglial family that
is described in more detail below. Outside of the CNS,
GFAP is expressed widely in many tissues by a variety of
cell types, also discussed below.
Other molecular markers that have been used for
immunohistochemical
identiﬁcation
of
astrocytes
and
reactive astrocytes include glutamine synthetase and S100b
[85, 165], but these molecules are not entirely exclusive to
astrocytes. Several recent studies have conducted large-
scale genetic analysis of the astrocyte transcriptome in
rodents and humans, and have identiﬁed large numbers of
molecules enriched in astrocytes as compared with other
neural cells such as neurons and oligodendrocytes [35,
129]. Such studies will provide a rich resource for identi-
fying molecules for mechanistic analyses of functions and
Fig. 2 Schematic representations that summarize, a astrocyte func-
tions in healthy CNS, and b triggers and molecular regulators of
reactive astrogliosis
Acta Neuropathol (2010) 119:7–35
9
123

----- Page 4 (native) -----
roles of astrocytes and reactive astrocytes. In addition, such
studies are identifying potential candidates for additional,
and better, molecular markers with which to identify
astrocytes. One such candidate appears to be the protein
Aldh1L1, whose promoter reliably targets the expression of
reporter molecules such as GFP (green ﬂuorescent protein)
to astrocytes and whose identiﬁcation by immunohisto-
chemistry may provide a sensitive chemical marker for
most if not all astrocytes in healthy tissue [15].
Anatomical organization
Astrocytes tile the entire CNS in a contiguous and essen-
tially non-overlapping manner that is orderly and well
organized (Fig. 3a). There are no CNS regions devoid of
astrocytes or closely related cells. Dye ﬁlling of individual
cells and other anatomical techniques have demonstrated
that in healthy CNS, individual protoplasmic astrocytes
have essentially non-overlapping domains in gray matter,
such that only the most distal tips of processes from indi-
vidual astrocytes interdigitate with one another and thereby
provide the substrate for formation of the gap junctions
detected at the ultrastructural level [34, 91, 162, 172].
Similar individual astrocyte domains appear likely to exist
in white matter, but this has not yet been as extensively
reported on. Individual protoplasmic astrocytes typically
extend from ﬁve to ten main stem branches, each of which
gives rise to many ﬁnely branching processes that are
evenly distributed throughout the astrocyte domain in the
gray matter. In hippocampus or cortex many ﬁnely
branching processes from a single astrocyte are estimated
to contact several hundred dendrites from multiple neurons
and to envelope 100,000 or more synapses [34, 91, 172].
It is also noteworthy that human astrocytes are larger,
structurally more complex, and more diverse than astro-
cytes in rodents [170].
Astrocyte physiology
Astrocytes express potassium and sodium channels and can
exhibit evoked inward currents, but unlike neurons, astro-
cytes do not ‘ﬁre’ or propagate action potentials along their
processes [162, 212]. However, this does not mean that
astrocytes are physiologically ‘silent’. Astrocytes exhibit
regulated increases in intracellular calcium concentration
[Ca??]i that represent a form of astrocyte excitability [39,
46]. A large body of evidence is now available that these
regulated increases in astrocyte [Ca??]i are of functional
signiﬁcance in astrocyte–astrocyte as well as in astrocyte–
neuron intercellular communication. Astrocyte [Ca??]i
elevations can (1) occur as intrinsic oscillations resulting
from Ca?? released from intracellular stores, (2) be trig-
gered by transmitters (including glutamate and purines)
released during neuronal activity, (3) elicit the release from
astrocytes of transmitters such as glutamate into the
extracellular space and thereby trigger receptor mediated
currents in neurons, and (4) be propagated to neighboring
astrocytes [89, 162, 182, 215, 249]. Evidence that calcium
Fig. 3 Astrocyte morphology remote from CNS lesions and with
different gradations of reactive astrogliosis. Brightﬁeld immunohis-
tochemistry for GFAP counterstained with haematoxylin (H) in
human autopsy specimens, surveys with details (boxed areas).
a Appearance of astrocytes in tissue remote from a lesion and
presumed healthy. Note that the territories of astrocyte processes do
not overlap and that many astrocytes do not express detectable levels
of GFAP. b Moderately reactive astrogliosis in which most (if not all)
astrocytes have up regulated expression of GFAP and exhibit cellular
hypertrophy, but with preservation of individual astrocyte domains
and without pronounced overlap of astrocyte processes. c Severe
diffuse reactive astrogliosis with pronounced up regulation of GFAP
expression, astrocyte hypertrophy, astrocyte proliferation and pro-
nounced overlap of astrocyte processes resulting in disruption of
individual
astrocyte
domains.
Scale
bars
surveys = 25 lm,
details = 10 lm
10
Acta Neuropathol (2010) 119:7–35
123

----- Page 5 (native) -----
signaling enables astrocytes to play a direct role in synaptic
transmission is discussed below. It is also noteworthy that
astrocytes can couple to neighboring astrocytes through
gap junctions (Fig. 2a) formed by connexins, and that the
gap junctional coupling of astrocytes into multicellular
networks may play a role in both normal function and CNS
disorders [162, 212].
Roles in development
The developmental generation of astrocytes tends to occur
after the initial production of neurons in many CNS
regions.
Nevertheless,
astrocytes
exert
a
number
of
important functions during development of both gray and
white matter. Molecular boundaries formed by astrocytes
take part in guiding the migration of developing axons and
certain neuroblasts [186]. In addition, substantive evidence
is accumulating that astrocytes are essential for the for-
mation and function of developing synapses by releasing
molecular signals such as thrombospondin [15, 43, 243].
Astrocytes appear also to inﬂuence developmental synaptic
pruning by releasing signals that induce expression of
complement C1q in synapses and thereby tag them for
elimination by microglia [15, 230]. As regards the devel-
opment of white matter, the loss or dysfunction of astrocyte
connexins and gap junctions leads to dysmelination [131].
Regulation of blood ﬂow
Astrocytes make extensive contacts with (Fig. 1a, b) and
have multiple bidirectional interactions with blood vessels,
including regulation of local CNS blood ﬂow. Recent
ﬁndings show that astrocytes produce and release various
molecular mediators, such prostaglandins (PGE), nitric
oxide (NO), and arachidonic acid (AA), that can increase
or decrease CNS blood vessel diameter and blood ﬂow in a
coordinated manner [86, 102]. Moreover, astrocytes may
be primary mediators of changes in local CNS blood ﬂow
in response to changes in neuronal activity [112]. Astro-
cytes have processes in contact with both blood vessels and
synapses (Fig. 2a). Via these contacts, astrocytes titrate
blood ﬂow in relation to levels of synaptic activity, as
demonstrated recently in the visual cortex where fMRI
detected changes in blood ﬂow in response to visual stimuli
were shown to be dependent on astrocyte function [211,
260].
Fluid, ion, pH, and transmitter homeostasis
Astrocyte processes envelop essentially all synapses [27,
183] and exert essential functions in maintaining the ﬂuid,
ion, pH, and transmitter homeostasis of the synaptic
interstitial ﬂuid in a manner that is critical for healthy
synaptic transmission (Fig. 2a). Astrocyte processes are
rich in the aquaporin 4 (AQP4) water channel and in
transporters for the uptake of K? [212, 220, 264]. Astrocyte
membranes have different means of proton shuttling,
including the Na?/H? exchanger, bicarbonate transporters,
monocarboxylic acid transporters, and the vacuolar-type
proton ATPase [168]. AQP4 water channels are densely
clustered along astrocyte processes that contact blood
vessels and play a critical role in regulating ﬂuid homeo-
stasis in healthy CNS and play roles in both vasogenic and
cytotoxic edema as discussed below. Astrocyte processes at
synapses also play essential roles in transmitter homeo-
stasis
by expressing high
levels
of transporters
for
neurotransmitters such as glutamate, GABA, and glycine
that serve to clear the neurotransmitters from the synaptic
space [205, 212]. After uptake into astrocytes, the trans-
mitters are converted by enzymes such as glutamine
synthetase into precursors such as glutamine and recycled
back to synapses for reconversion into active transmitters
(Fig. 2a). Networks of astrocytes linked together by gap
junctions are thought to be able to rapidly dissipate small
molecules such as potassium and glutamate and prevent
their potentially detrimental accumulation (Fig. 2a) [212].
Roles in synapse function
There is now steadily accumulating evidence that astro-
cytes play direct roles in synaptic transmission through the
regulated release of synaptically active molecules includ-
ing glutamate, purines (ATP and adenosine), GABA, and
D-serine [89, 162, 182, 215]. The release of such glio-
transmitters occurs in response to changes in neuronal
synaptic activity, involves astrocyte excitability as reﬂec-
ted by increases in astrocyte [Ca??]i, and can alter
neuronal excitability [89, 162, 182, 215]. Such evidence
has given rise to the ‘tripartite synapse’ hypothesis, which
posits that astrocytes play direct and interactive roles with
neurons during synaptic activity in a manner that is
essential for information processing by neural circuits [5,
89, 182].
In addition to having direct effects on synaptic activity
via the release of gliotransmitters, astrocytes have the
potential to exert powerful and long-term inﬂuences on
synaptic function through the release of growth factors and
related molecules. As discussed above, molecular mecha-
nisms have been identiﬁed through which astrocytes play a
role in the formation, maintenance, and pruning of syn-
apses during development [15, 43, 230]. Such mechanisms
may also provide astrocytes with the means of exerting
powerful inﬂuences on synaptic remodeling and pruning in
the healthy adult CNS or in response to CNS disorders
[15]. Cytokines such as tumor necrosis alpha (TNFa) have
been shown to inﬂuence homeostatic synaptic scaling by
Acta Neuropathol (2010) 119:7–35
11
123

----- Page 6 (native) -----
inducing the insertion of AMPA receptors at post-synaptic
membranes [229]. Although it is not certain whether
astrocytes or microglia are primary sources of TNFa in the
CNS in vivo, the effects on synaptic function of astrocyte-
derived growth factors and cytokines warrant further study.
Astrocytes are also sources of neuroactive steroids (neu-
rosteroids), including estradiol, progesterone and various
intermediaries and metabolites that can have synaptic
effects, particularly at GABAA receptors [80].
Energy and metabolism
A growing body of evidence also now indicates that
astrocytes make important contributions to CNS metabo-
lism. Astrocytes, which have processes that on the one
hand contact blood vessels and on the other hand contact
neuronal perikarya, axons (at nodes of Ranvier), and syn-
apses, are well positioned to take up glucose from blood
vessels and furnish energy metabolites to different neural
elements in gray and white matter (Fig. 2a). Although it
was known for many years that astrocytes are the principal
storage sites of glycogen granules in the CNS and that the
greatest accumulation of astrocytic glycogen occurs in
areas of high synaptic density [183, 184], the functional
contribution of these stores was originally discounted [27].
Compelling evidence now demonstrates that astrocytic
glycogen utilization can sustain neuronal activity during
hypoglycemia and during periods of high neuronal activity
[27, 231]. In this regard, it is noteworthy that astrocyte
glycogen content can be modulated by transmitters such as
glutamate [27] and that glucose metabolites can be passed
across gap junctions in a manner that is regulated by glu-
tamate and neuronal activity [200]. Other lines of evidence
indicate that during hypoglycemia, astrocyte glycogen
breaks down to lactate that is transferred to adjacent neural
elements (both synapses in gray matter and axons in white
matter) where it is used aerobically as fuel [27, 28, 181,
252]. In addition, computer-based modeling studies suggest
that during periods of high neuronal activity, inhibition of
phosphofructokinase leads to impairment of neuronal gly-
colysis, with the consequence that lactate efﬂuxed from
astrocytes becomes the preferred energy substrate for
neurons [171].
Blood brain barrier
The blood brain barrier (BBB) is a diffusion barrier that
impedes the inﬂux into brain parenchyma of certain mol-
ecules on the basis of polarity and size [1, 11]. The
principal cellular constituents of the BBB are cerebral
capillary endothelial cells that form tight junctions and are
surrounded by a basal lamina, perivascular pericytes, and
astrocyte endfeet. The role of pericytes in BBB function is
not well studied and the role of astrocytes is controversial.
The main functional components of the BBB are the
endothelial tight junctions [1, 11]. Numerous lines of in
vitro evidence indicate that astrocytes can induce barrier
properties in cerebral and other endothelial cells as well as
in related epithelial, arguing in favor of a role for astrocytes
in BBB induction [1, 11, 17, 208]. In contrast, certain
aspects of the BBB become functional in vivo before the
appearance of astrocytes during development [93, 206]. In
this regard, it is interesting to note that embryonic neural
progenitor cells are able to induce BBB properties in
cerebral endothelial cells [255]. Other studies suggest a
role for astrocytes in regulating BBB properties of cerebral
endothelial in vivo in adult mice through speciﬁc BMP
signaling mechanisms on astrocyte endfeet that when dis-
rupted cause BBB leaks [6]. In addition, both astrocytes
and related enteric glial cells are able to induce barrier
properties in gut epithelial cells and the molecule GSNO
has been identiﬁed as a molecular mediator of this effect
[208]. Additional studies will be needed to clarify the roles
of astrocytes and pericytes in BBB function and to identify
molecular mediators that may induce BBB properties in
cerebral endothelia. It is possible that different cell types
provide such factors at different times during development
and in healthy or injured CNS.
Astrocyte heterogeneity
The increasing awareness of the complexity, importance,
and diversity of astrocyte functions is giving rise to a
growing interest in the potential for specialization and
heterogeneity among astrocytes [96]. The notion of astro-
cyte heterogeneity is not new. Numerous anatomical
distinctions have long been recognized among gray (pro-
toplasmic) and white (ﬁbrous) matter astrocytes in different
CNS regions [191], but these have long been over looked
or discounted. In addition, there is a long-standing recog-
nition of an extended family of astroglial cells that share
similarities with, but also exhibit differences to, proto-
plasmic and ﬁbrous astrocytes, including Mu¨ller glia in the
retina, Bergmann glia of the cerebellum, tanycytes at the
base of the third ventricle, pituicytes in the neurohypoph-
ysis, cribrosocytes at the optic nerve head, and others.
These different cell types express various astrocyte-related
molecules such as GFAP, S100b, glutamine synthetase and
others, and exert functions similar to astrocytes in manners
specialized to their locations. In addition, these different
types of astroglial cells share with astrocytes the ability to
become reactive in response to CNS insults and these cells
have the potential to play important roles in pathological
changes in their speciﬁc locations as discussed below. As
regards protoplasmic and ﬁbrous astrocytes, various lines
of evidence suggest that there is considerable molecular,
12
Acta Neuropathol (2010) 119:7–35
123

----- Page 7 (native) -----
structural, and potentially functional diversity of astro-
cytes at both the regional and local levels, but such
investigations are at an early stage [10, 96]. In this con-
text it is interesting to note that the number, complexity,
and diversity of astroglial cells associated with neurons
has increased considerably with evolution, such that the
ratio of astrocytes to neurons is 1:6 in worms, 1:3 in
rodent cortex, and 1.4:1 in human cortex, implying that
astrocyte roles increase in importance with sophistication
of neural tissue [162]. The human cerebral neocortex
contains multiple subtypes of astrocytes, including types
that do not appear to exist in rodent cortex [170]. As
molecular markers become more sophisticated, it seems
likely that astrocytes will be revealed to be considerably
more heterogeneous than thus far imagined. Such infor-
mation is likely to impact on concepts about astrocyte
roles in both health and disease.
GFAP-expressing multipotent radial neural stem cells
in juvenile and adult brain
Recent studies have identiﬁed speciﬁc morphological and
chemical phenotypes of neural stem cells (NSC) in
embryonic, juvenile, and adult brain. In the embryonic
brain, it is now clear that radial cells are NSC that give
rise to cortical pyramidal neurons [116, 134, 164]. As
these radial cells mature, they adopt GFAP expression
and some give rise to GFAP-expressing radial NSC that
persist in juvenile and adult forebrain, while others
become
astrocytes
[116,
122,
142].
Some
GFAP-
expressing
radial
NSC
remain
constitutively
active
throughout life in the subependymal (or subventricular)
zone of the lateral ventricles and in the subgranular zone
of the hippocampal dentate gyrus, where they are the
predominant source of adult neurogenesis [56, 78, 103,
214]. Based almost entirely on the observation that these
adult NSC express GFAP, they have been referred to by
some authors as a ‘sub-type’ of astrocyte [56, 116], but
it is not clear that such a nomenclature is either war-
ranted or useful [14, 84, 153]. There is ample evidence
that GFAP is not an exclusive marker of astrocytes.
Moreover, as described above, protoplasmic and ﬁbrous
astrocytes are highly differentiated and specialized cells
that exert a wide variety of complex activities essential
for neural function in the healthy CNS, and at present
there is no evidence that GFAP-expressing adult radial
NSC exert any of the complex functions of mature dif-
ferentiated
protoplasmic
and
ﬁbrous
astrocytes.
In
addition,
there
is
clear
evidence
that
mature
adult
astrocytes are not neurogenic. Differentiated astrocytes in
uninjured mature cerebral cortex do not exhibit neuro-
genic potential either in vivo or in vitro [104]. Even
proliferating reactive astrocytes after CNS trauma give
rise only to other astrocytes and do not spontaneously
exhibit multipotent neurogenic potential unless they are
reprogrammed genetically or by exposure to high doses
of speciﬁc growth factors in vitro [29, 30]. In addition,
GFAP-expressing
NSC
differ
in
morphology
(radial
phenotype),
chemical
phenotype
(LeX
and
nestin
expression), and physiological characteristics from pro-
toplasmic and ﬁbrous astrocytes [78, 104, 126]. Thus, the
majority of currently available evidence argues that
juvenile and adult NSC share more similarities with
embryonic radial
NSC
than
with mature astrocytes.
There seems to be no reason to label the multipotent
neural progenitors that persist throughout life as a sub-
type of astrocyte, which risks the blurring of clear
functional distinctions among cell types. Instead, it seems
that clarity would best be served by referring to these
progenitors simply as either juvenile or adult radial NSC,
in keeping with their derivation and phenotype. It has
been argued that it may be useful to return to the
nomenclature of early neuroanatomists who referred to
such radial progenitor cells as ‘neuroepithelial cells’
rather than glia [14, 153]. Regardless of nomenclature,
the
presence
in
certain
forebrain
areas
of
GFAP-
expressing cells that have constitutive multipotent NSC
potential throughout life has important implications for
concepts regarding various CNS disorders, in particular
CNS neoplasms, as discussed below.
Astrocyte related cells outside of the CNS
There are many cells that have morphological and
functional similarities to astrocytes outside of the CNS in
both neural and non-neural tissues. Peripheral ganglia
contain satellite cells that express GFAP and envelope
neurons.
Peripheral
nerves
contain
non-myelinating
Schwann cells that express GFAP and surround non-
myelinated axons. The enteric nervous system contains a
vast population of GFAP-expressing enteric glia that
extends throughout the different neural plexuses. Enteric
glia surround neuronal cell bodies and axons, as well as
contact blood vessels and epithelial cells, and are likely
to take part in many gut functions in manners that are
similar to astrocytes [32, 202]. GFAP is expressed
widely in many tissues by a variety of cell types
including mesenchymal stellate cells that share structural
and
functional
similarities
with
astrocytes
in
many
organs, including liver, kidney, pancreas, lungs, and
testes [32, 124, 266]. The functional roles of these cells
and their potential similarities with astrocytes are only
beginning to be explored, but some appear to share with
astrocytes functions in tissue repair and scar formation,
as well as newly discovered roles as regulators of local
immune and inﬂammatory responses.
Acta Neuropathol (2010) 119:7–35
13
123

----- Page 8 (native) -----
Reactive astrogliosis and glial scar formation
Descriptive features of reactive astrogliosis and glial
scars
Although reactive astrogliosis is used widely as a patho-
logical hallmark of diseased CNS tissue, deﬁnitions of
reactive astrogliosis can vary considerably among authors
and there are no widely accepted categories of intensity or
severity. Based on a large body of observations in experi-
mental animals, a deﬁnition of reactive astrogliosis has
recently been proposed [226] that encompasses four key
features: (1) reactive astrogliosis is a spectrum of potential
molecular, cellular and functional changes in astrocytes
that occur in response to all forms and severities of CNS
injury and disease including subtle perturbations, (2) the
changes undergone by reactive astrocytes vary with
severity of the insult along a gradated continuum of pro-
gressive alterations in molecular expression, progressive
cellular hypertrophy, and in severe cases, proliferation and
scar formation, (3) the changes of reactive astrogliosis are
regulated in a context-speciﬁc manner by inter- and intra-
cellular signaling molecules, (4) the changes undergone
during reactive astrogliosis have the potential to alter
astrocyte activities both through gain and loss of functions
that can impact both beneﬁcially and detrimentally on
surrounding neural and non-neural cells [226]. Here, we
propose to apply and extend this deﬁnition to identifying
different gradations of reactive astrogliosis and glial scar
formation that may be encountered in histopathological
examinations of human disorders (Figs. 3, 4). According to
this deﬁnition, reactive astrogliosis is not an all-or-none
response, nor is it a single uniform process, nor is it
ubiquitously synonymous with scar formation. Instead,
reactive astrogliosis is a ﬁnely gradated continuum of
progressive changes in gene expression and cellular
changes. Although the increasing severities of reactive
astrogliosis transition seamlessly along a continuum, it is
convenient for purposes of description and classiﬁcation to
recognize three broad categories.
Mild to moderate reactive astrogliosis
In mild or moderate reactive astrogliosis there is variable
up regulation of expression of GFAP and other genes
[226], as well as hypertrophy of cell body and processes
that can vary in degree but that occurs within the domains
of individual astrocytes [257] without substantive inter-
mingling or overlap of processes of neighboring astrocytes
or loss of individual domains (Figs. 3b, 4b) [226]. There is
little or no astrocyte proliferation in mild or moderate
reactive astrogliosis; however, the up regulation of GFAP
expression in astrocytes that do not express detectable
levels of GFAP in healthy tissue (Figs. 3a, 4a) can lead to
the staining of more cells (Figs. 3b, 4b), sometimes giving
the false impression of proliferation. Mild or moderate
reactive astrogliosis is generally associated with mild non-
penetrating and non-contusive trauma, diffuse innate
immune activation (viral
infections, system
bacterial
infections), and in areas that are some distance to focal
CNS lesions. Because there is little or no reorganization of
tissue architecture, if the triggering mechanism is able to
resolve, then mild or moderate reactive astrogliosis exhibits
the potential for resolution in which the astrocytes return to
an appearance similar to that in healthy tissue [226]. The
physiological consequences of mild or moderate reactive
astrogliosis are not well understood.
Severe diffuse reactive astrogliosis
In severe diffuse reactive astrogliosis there is pronounced
up regulation of expression of GFAP and other genes,
together with pronounced hypertrophy of cell body and
processes, as well as astrocyte proliferation, resulting in
considerable extension of processes beyond the previous
domains of individual astrocytes. As a result, there is
substantive intermingling and overlapping of neighboring
astrocyte processes with blurring and disruption of indi-
vidual astrocyte domains (Figs. 3c, 4c). These changes can
result in long-lasting reorganization of tissue architecture
that can extend diffusely over substantive areas without the
formation of dense, compact barriers as found in glial scars
along borders to necrotic tissue (see below). Severe diffuse
reactive astrogliosis is generally found in areas surrounding
severe focal lesions, infections or areas responding to
chronic neurodegenerative triggers.
Severe reactive astrogliosis with compact glial scar
formation
Severe reactive astrogliosis with compact glial scar for-
mation includes changes associated with milder forms,
such as pronounced up regulation of GFAP and other
genes, and pronounced hypertrophy of cell bodies and
processes. In addition, glial scar formation progresses
beyond these changes with groups of reactive astrocytes
that exhibit pronounced overlapping of reactive astrocyte
processes, obliteration of individual astrocyte domains,
evidence of substantive astrocyte proliferation, and the
clear formation of dense, narrow, and compact glial scars
(Fig. 4d). Recent experimental evidence indicates that
these astrocyte scars act as neuroprotective barriers to
inﬂammatory cells and infectious agents, and that they
form in particular along borders to severe tissue damage,
14
Acta Neuropathol (2010) 119:7–35
123

----- Page 9 (native) -----
necrosis, infection or autoimmune-triggered inﬂammatory
inﬁltration (Fig. 4d) [33, 59, 68, 95, 226, 251]. An
important feature of these glial scars is the interaction of
reactive astrocytes with other cell types, in particular
ﬁbromeningeal and other glial cells (Fig. 4d) [31, 95], and
the deposition of a dense collagenous extracellular matrix
that contains many molecular cues that inhibit axonal and
cellular migration [219]. Triggering insults include pene-
trating trauma, severe contusive trauma, invasive infections
or abscess formation, neoplasm, chronic neurodegenera-
tion, systemically triggered inﬂammatory challenges. It is
noteworthy that the glial scar formation is associated with
substantive tissue reorganization and structural changes
that are long lasting and persist long after the triggering
insult may have resolved.
The ﬁndings summarized here show that there are pro-
nounced differences along the continuum of potential
responses of reactive astrocyte to insults of different kinds
and severities. These differences are likely to be of con-
sequence when considering the functions and impact of
reactive astrogliosis on CNS disorders and pathologies, as
discussed below.
The role of astrocyte proliferation in reactive
astrogliosis and glial scar formation
The contribution of astrocyte proliferation to reactive
astrogliosis warrants speciﬁc consideration. The wide-
spread and often exclusive use of GFAP as a marker for
astrocytes has led to a tendency to overestimate the con-
tribution of astrocyte proliferation to reactive astrogliosis.
As discussed above, many astrocytes in healthy CNS do
not express GFAP at immunohistochemically detectable
levels, or express only very low levels (Figs. 3a, 4a).
During mild or moderate astrogliosis, there is a marked up
regulation of GFAP expression as well as cellular hyper-
trophy in essentially all astrocytes, which can lead to the
false impression of an increase in astrocyte number
because
more
astrocytes
are
immunohistochemically
stained and the larger astrocytes seem more densely packed
(Figs. 3b, 4b). In healthy CNS tissue, astrocyte turnover is
Fig. 4 Schematic representations that summarize different gradations
of reactive astrogliosis. a Astrocytes in healthy CNS tissue. b Mild to
moderate reactive astrogliosis comprises variable changes in molec-
ular expression and functional activity together with variable degrees
of cellular hypertrophy. Such changes occur after mild trauma or at
sites distant from a more severe injury, or after moderate metabolic or
molecular insults or milder infections or inﬂammatory activation.
These changes vary with insult severity, involve little anatomical
overlap of the processes of neighboring astrocytes and exhibit the
potential for structural resolution if the triggering insult is removed or
resolves. c Severe diffuse reactive astrogliosis includes changes in
molecular expression, functional activity and cellular hypertrophy, as
well newly proliferated astrocytes (with red nuclei in ﬁgure),
disrupting astrocyte domains and causing long-lasting reorganization
of tissue architecture. Such changes are found in areas surrounding
severe focal lesions, infections or areas responding to chronic
neurodegenerative triggers. d Severe reactive astrogliosis with
compact glial scar formation occurs along borders to areas of overt
tissue damage and inﬂammation, and includes newly proliferated
astrocytes (with red nuclei in ﬁgure) and other cell types (gray in
ﬁgure) such as ﬁbromeningeal cells and other glia, as well as
deposition of dense collagenous extracellular matrix. In the compact
glial scar, astrocytes have densely overlapping processes. Mature glial
scars tend to persist for long periods and act as barriers not only to
axon regeneration but also to inﬂammatory cells, infectious agents,
and non-CNS cells in a manner that protects healthy tissue from
nearby areas of intense inﬂammation
b
Acta Neuropathol (2010) 119:7–35
15
123

----- Page 10 (native) -----
low and there are few proliferating or newly generated
astrocytes and it appears that the majority of astrocytes are
post-mitotic and long-lived [33, 45, 97, 167]. Experimental
analysis of cell proliferation indicates that GFAP up reg-
ulation and hypertrophy can occur in mild or moderate
astrogliosis in the absence of proliferation and increase in
cell number [226]. The appearance of newly proliferated
astrocytes occurs in severe diffuse reactive astrogliosis and
severe reactive astrogliosis with compact glial scar for-
mation as discussed above (Figs. 3c, 4c, d). In human
specimens, actively dividing reactive astrocytes have been
particularly reported in association with infection and acute
demyelinating lesions [45]. The source of newly divided
scar-forming astrocytes is not well established, and may
include mature astrocytes that re-enter the cell cycle as
well as progenitor cells in the local parenchyma or in the
periventricular regions [30, 33, 37, 77, 133, 141, 226].
Molecular triggers and regulators of reactive
astrogliosis and glial scar formation
Many different types of intercellular signaling molecules
are able to trigger reactive astrogliosis or to regulate spe-
ciﬁc aspects of reactive astrogliosis, including (1) large
polypeptide growth factors and cytokines such as IL6, LIF,
CNTF, TNFa, INFc, Il1, Il10, TGFb, FGF2, etc., (2)
mediators of innate immunity such as lipopolysaccharide
(LPS) and other Toll-like receptor ligands, (3) neuro-
transmitters such as glutamate and noradrenalin, (4)
purines such as ATP, (5) reactive oxygen species (ROS)
including nitric oxide (NO), (6) hypoxia and glucose
deprivation, (7) products associated with neurodegenera-
tion such as b-amyloid, (8) molecules associated with
systemic metabolic toxicity such as NH4
?, and (9) regu-
lators of cell proliferation such endothelin-1, as reviewed in
detail elsewhere [226]. Such molecular mediators of reac-
tive astrogliosis can be released by all cell types in CNS
tissue,
including
neurons,
microglia,
oligodendrocyte
lineage cells, pericytes, endothelia, and other astrocytes, in
response to all forms of CNS insults, ranging from subtle
cellular perturbations that release some of the speciﬁc
factors just listed, to cell stretching as might be encoun-
tered during acceleration/deceleration CNS injury and
which releases ATP, to intense tissue injury and cell death
that release various intracellular molecules that signal
intense tissue damage (Fig. 2b) [226]. It is also becoming
clear that different molecular, morphological, and func-
tional changes in reactive astrocytes are speciﬁcally
controlled by inter- and intra-cellular signaling mecha-
nisms that reﬂect the speciﬁc contexts of the stimuli and
produce speciﬁc
and gradated responses of reactive
astrogliosis [226]. For example, the different intracellular
signaling
pathways
associated
with
STAT3,
NFjB,
SOCS3, Nrf2, cAMP, Olig2 are implicated in mediating
different aspects or different degrees of reactive astrogli-
osis such as GFAP up regulation, cell hypertrophy,
proliferation, and pro- or anti-inﬂammatory effects [226].
Molecular triggers that lead to proliferation of reactive
astrocytes in vivo are incompletely characterized but
include EGF, FGF, endothelin 1, and ATP [77, 121, 161].
Functions of reactive astrogliosis and glial scar
formation
Concepts about reactive astrogliosis have long been dom-
inated by the recognition over 100 years ago that scars
formed by reactive astrocytes inhibit axon regeneration and
by the interpretation that this scar formation was the main
impediment to functional recovery after CNS injury or
disease [192]. The ensuing over 100-year-long emphasis on
glial scar formation as an inhibitor of axon regeneration has
often led to a generalized negative view of reactive
astrogliosis per se, and there has been a tendency among
certain authors to typecast the entire process of reactive
astrogliosis as a uniformly negative and maladaptive
phenomenon
that
unavoidably
causes
neurotoxicity,
inﬂammation, or chronic pain. This stereotyped viewpoint
has sometimes led to the simplistic notion that total
inhibition of reactive astrogliosis can be regarded as a
therapeutic strategy. This absolutely negative viewpoint of
reactive astrogliosis is no longer tenable and it is now clear
from many different lines of experimental evidence that
there is a normal process of reactive astrogliosis that exerts
essential beneﬁcial functions and does not do harm. As
reviewed in detail elsewhere [226], many studies using
transgenic and experimental animal models provide com-
pelling evidence that reactive astrocytes protect CNS cells
and tissue by (1) uptake of potentially excitotoxic gluta-
mate [33, 198, 234], (2) protection from oxidative stress via
glutathione production [42, 216, 234, 245], (3) neuropro-
tection via adenosine release [125], (4) protection from
NH4
? toxicity [193], (5) neuroprotection by degradation of
amyloid-beta peptides [113], (6) facilitating blood brain
barrier repair [33], (7) reducing vasogenic edema after
trauma, stroke or obstructive hydrocephalus [33, 264], (8)
stabilizing extracellular ﬂuid and ion balance and reducing
seizure threshold [264], and (9) limiting the spread of
inﬂammatory cells or infectious agents from areas of
damage or disease into healthy CNS parenchyma [33, 59,
68, 95, 123, 156, 175, 251].
Reactive astrogliosis, glial scar formation and CNS
inﬂammation
Of particular interest as regards functions of reactive
astrocytes, is recent evidence that reactive astrogliosis and
16
Acta Neuropathol (2010) 119:7–35
123

----- Page 11 (native) -----
glial scar formation play essential roles in regulating CNS
inﬂammation [226]. In response to different kinds of
stimulation, reactive astrocytes can make many different
kinds of molecules with either pro- or anti-inﬂammatory
potential [60, 108] and reactive astrocytes can exert both
pro- and anti-inﬂammatory effects on microglia [67, 148].
A large body of experimental studies indicates that reactive
astrocytes can exert both pro- and anti-inﬂammatory reg-
ulatory functions in vivo in a context dependent manner
that is regulated by speciﬁc molecular signaling pathways
[226]. A functional model, which may reconcile the
apparent paradox that reactive astrocytes have the potential
to exert both pro- and anti-inﬂammatory activities, is that
reactive astrocytes exert different activities at different
times after insults, or in different geographical locations in
relation to lesions, as determined by context-speciﬁc sig-
naling mechanisms. For example, reactive astrocytes may
exert pro-inﬂammatory roles at early times after insults and
in the center or immediate vicinity of lesions, but exert
anti-inﬂammatory roles at later times and at the borders
between lesions and healthy tissue. In cases of severe
lesions, reactive astrocytes may form scars that act as cell
migration barriers around the borders of areas where
intense inﬂammation is needed and thereby restrict the
spread of inﬂammatory cells and infectious agents into
adjacent healthy tissue (Fig. 4d) [225, 226]. Together,
these ﬁndings indicate that there is a normal process of
reactive astrogliosis and glial scar formation that exerts
various beneﬁcial functions including protecting neural
cells and function, restricting the spread of inﬂammation
and infection, and promoting tissue repair. It is important to
distinguish this normal process from the potential for
dysfunction of reactive astrocytes to contribute to CNS
disorders.
Mechanisms for contributions of reactive astrogliosis
to CNS disorders and pathologies
Astrocytes and reactive astrocytes have the potential to
impact on essentially all aspects of neural function through
regulation of blood ﬂow, provision of energy substrates, or
by inﬂuencing synaptic function and plasticity. Increasing
evidence indicates that dysfunctions of the process of
reactive astrogliosis and scar formation have the potential
to contribute to, or to be primary causes of, CNS disease
mechanisms either through loss of normal functions or
through gain of detrimental effects [226].
Potential for loss of essential functions by reactive
astrocytes
As discussed earlier, in healthy neural tissue, astrocytes
play critical roles in many functions, including regulation
of blood ﬂow, homeostasis of extracellular ﬂuid, ions and
transmitters, energy provision, and regulation of synapse
function, and synaptic remodeling (Fig. 2a). In addition,
different types of transgenic deletion studies show that
reactive astrocytes exert a number of essential beneﬁcial
functions in response to CNS insults, including BBB repair,
neural protection and restricting the spread of inﬂammatory
cells, and infection. The disturbance or loss of these
functions during the process of reactive astrogliosis has the
potential to underlie neural dysfunction and pathology in
various conditions including trauma, stroke, multiple
sclerosis, and others. Genetic animal models are providing
evidence for ways in which loss or attenuation of reactive
astrocyte functions might worsen outcome after various
kinds of CNS insults, for example, through excitotoxic
neurodegeneration due to failure or attenuation of gluta-
mate uptake [33, 198, 234] or increased inﬂammation or
infection due to loss or failure of astrocyte barrier functions
[33, 59, 68, 95, 251]. Clinical studies, discussed below, are
also identifying a rapidly growing number of conditions
that are precipitated by or exacerbated loss of functions by
astrocytes or reactive astrocytes.
Potential for gain of detrimental effects by reactive
astrocytes
In a manner analogous to inﬂammation, reactive astrogli-
osis also has the potential to exert detrimental effects. The
prototypical gain of a detrimental effect by reactive as-
trogliosis and glial scar formation is the inhibition of axon
regeneration, ﬁrst proposed over 100 years ago and now
supported by extensive molecular and cell-biological evi-
dence [219]. In addition, there is also evidence from both
clinical (discussed below) and experimental studies that,
under speciﬁc circumstances, astrocytes or reactive astro-
cytes have the potential to exert a variety of other
detrimental effects through gain of abnormal effects. For
example, reactive astrocytes can be stimulated by speciﬁc
signaling cascades (Fig. 2b) to gain of detrimental effects
such as (1) exacerbating inﬂammation via cytokine pro-
duction [22, 23], (2) producing neurotoxic levels of
reactive oxygen species [92, 234], (3) releasing potentially
excitotoxic glutamate [238], (4) potential contribution to
seizure genesis [106, 240], (5) compromising blood brain
barrier function due to VEGF-production [7], (6) causing
cytotoxic edema during trauma and stroke through AQP4
over activity [264], and (7) contributing to chronic pain
[147]. There also appears to be the potential for combi-
natorial signaling cascades resulting from exposure to
microbial antigens such as lipopolysaccharide (LPS), to
markedly increase the production of potentially toxic
molecules by astrocytes [67, 92]. Context-dependent acute
or
chronic
combinatorial
signaling
events
(Fig. 2b)
Acta Neuropathol (2010) 119:7–35
17
123

----- Page 12 (native) -----
involving different cell types might thus stimulate reactive
astrocytes to produce potentially cytotoxic levels of mole-
cules or might lead to chronic inﬂammation or neuropathic
pain. A greater understanding of such combinatorial
signaling could facilitate targeted therapeutic strategies that
preserve the beneﬁcial and attenuate the potentially detri-
mental aspects of reactive astrogliosis. In this regard, it will
also be interesting in future studies to look for genetic
polymorphisms that may alter reactive astrocyte functions
in certain individuals and thereby predispose them to certain
disease processes.
Molecular dissection of reactive astrogliosis
using transgenic technologies
Many experimental investigations of mechanisms and
functions of reactive astrogliosis and glial scar formation
make use of transgenic technologies combined with
experimental animal models, which has revolutionized the
study of neural injury and disease by allowing in vivo
dissection of molecular and cellular mechanisms [226].
Nevertheless, in interpreting results derived from studies
using transgenic mice it is important to understand asso-
ciated caveats [226]. For example, different promoters
(human or mouse GFAP, GLAST, etc.) may have different
targeting properties/efﬁciencies as regards astrocytes and
related cells. Although not all astrocytes express GFAP or
GFAP-regulated transgenes in healthy tissue, most if not all
appear to do so after CNS injury or other insults [33, 95,
251]. It is essential that authors deﬁne transgene expression
levels individually and speciﬁcally in every tissue region
and experimental model being studied, as well as control
for any possible confounding effects that may result from
transgene expression in other cells both within and outside
of the CNS [33, 95, 226, 251].
Astrocyte appearance and roles in CNS disorders
and pathology
CNS trauma
Traumatic brain and spinal cord injury are major causes of
premature death, permanent physical disability, or long-
lasting neuropsychiatric impairment [138]. Reactive as-
trogliosis and glial scar formation are prominent features of
CNS trauma and are increasingly implicated as playing
important roles in determining long-term clinical outcome
[41, 226]. The appearance of reactive astrogliosis after
CNS trauma (whether in the brain or spinal cord) varies
with the (1) type of the trauma, i.e., whether it is pene-
trating, contusional, or diffuse (as in the case of diffuse
axonal injury), (2) severity of the trauma, (3) length of time
that has elapsed between injury and biopsy or autopsy, and
(4) distance of the tissue examined from the site of injury/
trauma. The same specimen may exhibit different severi-
ties of reactive astrogliosis in different locations, such as a
distinct glial scar along areas of damaged tissue after
penetrating or severe contusive trauma (Fig. 4d), which
may be surrounded by areas of decreasing severity of
reactive astrogliosis (Fig. 4c) as distance away from the
lesion center increases (Fig. 4b). Tissue at a considerable
distance from the site of direct injury may show sequelae of
transient edema and/or downstream effects such as Wal-
lerian or trans-synaptic degeneration, or a combination of
the two, signiﬁcantly contributing to neurologic disability.
Severe reactive astrogliosis and glial scar formation at
sites of CNS trauma are well documented to inhibit axonal
regeneration [219] and are widely regarded as detrimental
to clinical outcome. Nevertheless, recent studies using
transgenic mouse models indicate that scar-forming reac-
tive astrocytes exert essential neuroprotective functions
after both brain and spinal cord trauma [33, 68, 95, 144,
175, 226] as discussed earlier.
Diffuse traumatic brain injury can lead to mild or
moderate diffuse astrogliosis without obvious scar forma-
tion, in which reactive astrocytes hypertrophy and up
regulate gene expression, including GFAP, but in which
there is little or no loss of individual astrocyte domains
(Figs. 3b, 4b). In animal experiments, mild to moderate
reactive astrogliosis of this type exhibits the potential for
resolution [226], but the functional consequences of these
changes are not well understood. A cerebral concussion
almost certainly impacts on astrocyte structure and func-
tion, but such injury is not life threatening, results in
minimal if any abnormalities on neuroimaging, and is thus
(by deﬁnition) not usually the subject of neuropathological
review or investigation.
Stroke and cerebrovascular disease
Brain parenchyma and the blood vessels that supply it are
not, as they once were, viewed as separate ‘compartments’
within the CNS. Rather, the concept of the ‘neurovascular
unit’ takes an integrated view of a given brain parenchymal
blood vessel and the glial elements that surround it [38,
139, 206]. Cellular elements in the vessel wall inﬂuence
surrounding CNS parenchyma, just as the surrounding
parenchymal elements affect vascular morphology and
function. The ‘neurovascular unit’ idea becomes especially
important when considering functional recovery after an
ischemic infarct or ‘stroke’.
From a practical diagnostic perspective, the appearance
of astrocytes around a region of cystic encephalomalacia
within brain that has resulted from an ischemic infarct or
hemorrhage can be used to ‘date’ such a lesion (i.e.,
18
Acta Neuropathol (2010) 119:7–35
123

----- Page 13 (native) -----
estimate how long it occurred prior to death), though not
very accurately. The sequence of cellular events in an
ischemic infarct progresses from intense neuronal eosino-
philia (hours to 1–2 days after the insult), to inﬂux of
polymorphonuclear leukocytes (variable intensity, but
usually within the same time frame), then ingress of
macrophages/histiocytes (from blood or activated resident
microglia) as liquefactive necrosis occurs (beginning 3–
5 days after the infarct), and ﬁnally proliferation of an
abundance of astrocytes that marginate and form a scar
(Fig. 4d) along the borders of an infarct from about 7–
10 days after ischemia and then persist for life of the
patient (Fig. 5). None of these time frames are precise,
particularly in aged individuals, where the process of
aging, as well as the exposure to other conditions, may
inﬂuence the level of reactive astrogliosis that is observed.
‘Chronic cystic infarcts’ are usually associated with
astrocytic gliosis [247], and a characteristic ﬁnding in a
cortical cystic infarct is the preservation of the relatively
paucicellular molecular layer overlying it and located
immediately beneath the meninges, which then develops a
dense collection of astrocytes, usually with gemistocytic
phenotype. Astrocytic processes usually traverse the cystic
cavity left by the death of brain tissue, in a delicate
meshwork, with persistence of foamy histiocytes among
the glial ﬁbers.
The role of reactive astrogliosis in the evolution of
ischemic brain lesions is at present uncertain, but recent
studies suggest that reactive astrocytes provide essential
metabolic support to neurons during transient ischemia and
that failure of astrocyte functions may contribute to neu-
ronal degeneration [196, 237]. In addition, experimental
disruption of astroglial scar formation in transgenic mice
after stroke is associated with loss of barrier functions
along the margins of infarcts, resulting in increased spread
of inﬂammation and increased lesion volume [123].
Stroke may also induce neurogenesis from periventric-
ular neural progenitor cells that express GFAP [173].
Newly ‘born’ neuroblasts and immature neurons migrate to
the infract region where they associate intimately with the
cerebral microvasculature in and around the infarct, which
itself is undergoing intense post-stroke remodeling. It
remains to be seen whether this interesting interplay of
neurogenic and vascular elements will become relevant in
the treatment of human strokes.
Infection
Reactive astrogliosis is prominent in most CNS infections.
Astrocytes can be both targets of, as well as responders to,
infectious agents, especially viruses. Subpial astrocytes are
especially prominent in individuals who have survived an
episode of purulent or granulomatous meningitis, and their
appearance of reactivity depends in large part on how
quickly antibiotic therapy was initiated. The roles of
reactive astrocytes during the response to infection are only
beginning to be elucidated. For example, reactive and scar-
forming astrocytes accumulate prominently around micro-
bial abscesses, and recent evidence indicates that reactive
astrocytes play essential roles in restricting the spread of
invading microbial agents such as Toxoplasma gondii into
CNS parenchyma [59]. These observations are consistent
with the putative protective barrier functions of reactive
astrocytes to infectious agents and inﬂammatory cells
(Fig. 4d) as discussed above and elsewhere [226]. Reactive
astrogliosis can also occur in response to peripheral
infections that result in circulating bacterial antigens or
endotoxins, such as LPS, due to peritonitis or sepsis
without direct CNS infection [105, 213].
Reactive astrocytes are prominent in different types of
viral encephalitis. Astrocytes are a main target and reser-
voir of human herpes virus 6 in the CNS, which can cause
encephalitis in both healthy and immunsuppressed patients
[57, 222]. Astrocytes are also a main target of human
T-lymphotropic virus type-1, leading to disturbances in
glutamate homeostasis and excitotoxicity [3, 235]. In
addition to being targets of certain viruses, reactive astro-
cytes may take part more generally in regulating CNS
inﬂammatory responses [226]. Perivascular cufﬁng, which
is a common and essentially deﬁning feature of different
types of viral encephalitis, may occur as a result of barrier
functions of reactive scar forming astrocytes that restrict
the spread of inﬂammatory cells into CNS parenchyma
Fig. 5 Reactive astrogliosis demarcates cerebral microinfarcts. Sur-
vey image of cerebral cortex of an elderly individual showing
microinfarcts (arrows) highlighted by dense clusters of prominently
reactive astrocytes that stain intensely for GFAP. Fibrous astrocytes
within subcortical white matter (wm) exhibit GFAP staining, whereas
GFAP is not detectable in most protoplasmic gray matter astrocytes
remote from the lesions in this specimen. H haematoxylin counter-
stain. Scale bar 180 lm
Acta Neuropathol (2010) 119:7–35
19
123

----- Page 14 (native) -----
(Fig. 1c, d) [226, 251]. Astrocyte endfeet prominently line
blood vessels in healthy tissue (Fig. 1b) and become
hypertrophic during encephalitis (Fig. 6a) and surround
perivascular clusters of inﬂammatory cells (Fig. 1c, d), and
experimental disruption of perivascular astrocytes leads to
widespread inﬁltration of lymphocytes and other inﬂam-
matory cells into CNS parenchyma [251].
Reactive astrocytes also play a role in the potential
neurological complications resulting from direct HIV-1
infection of the brain, which commonly results from
‘neurotropic’ strains of HIV-1 gaining entry to the CNS.
Such strains usually target microglia or macrophages (not
astrocytes), and may gain entry to the brain by entering it
within
infected
T-lymphocytes
(the
‘Trojan
horse’
hypothesis of CNS infection). This can eventually result in
cognitive impairment, initially mild, which can progress to
HIV-associated dementia (abbreviated as HAD, formerly
described as AIDS dementia complex/ADC). Despite the
relative efﬁcacy of highly active antiretroviral therapy in
controlling AIDS, no treatment has to date been found that
consistently moderates the pathogenic events important in
the evolution of HAD or that achieves neuronal protection
from the effects of the virus. The majority of viral repli-
cation in the brain occurs in microglia. Astrocytes can be
infected but do not appear to serve as sites of viral repli-
cation. Infected microglia and astrocytes are the main
cause of neurotoxicity, which appears to result indirectly
from signals exchanged between the two cell types,
resulting in the secretion of potentially toxic molecules
within the CNS parenchyma, both cerebral neocortex and
white matter. Astrocyte dysfunction with loss of neuro-
supportive and neuroprotective functions, in particular
disruption of glutamate homeostasis leading to synapse
dysfunction and excitotoxicity are regarded as the most
likely mechanisms in mediating HIV related cognitive
impairment and neurodegeneration [100, 253].
HIV-1 infection of the CNS is arguably at present the
most common form of brain viral infection. However,
numerous other viruses can cause neurological morbidity
and even mortality in individuals with a normal immune
system, or in those who are immunosuppressed, regardless
of whether said immunosuppression is the result of AIDS,
aggressive
therapy
for
solid
tumors
or
hematologic
malignancy, iatrogenic immunosuppression in a patient
with organ or bone stem cell transplantation, or other (e.g.,
congenital immunodeﬁciency) disease. Almost all viruses,
as with HIV-1 (see above), manifest tropism for various
cell types within the brain or spinal cord; that tropism may
include the astrocyte. Some of the herpes viruses, e.g.,
Herpes simplex and cytomegalovirus (the latter being a
Fig. 6 Reactive astrogliosis in two disorders with seizures. a High
magniﬁcation image of cerebral cortex from an individual with
Rasmussen encephalitis (RE). Immunohistochemical staining for
GFAP shows moderate reactive astrogliosis that is especially
prominent around small blood vessels. Note the intensely stained
and hypertrophic astrocytic foot processes extending to and lining the
adventitia of microvessels. b, c High magniﬁcation images of a
resection specimen from an individual with severe seizures associated
with severe focal cortical dysplasia stained for H&E (b) or GFAP (c).
b In this unique case, abundant Rosenthal ﬁbers were found
throughout the resection specimen, especially in the subpial regions
(arrows) and around blood vessels (arrowheads). The density of the
Rosenthal ﬁbers suggested the diagnosis of ‘focal’ Alexander’s
disease. However, testing of the GFAP gene revealed no mutations
(for details, see [111]). c Comparable section to b showing abundant
GFAP immunoreactive astrocytes and associated Rosenthal ﬁbers
(arrows). Scale bars a 10 lm, b 20 lm, c 15 lm
20
Acta Neuropathol (2010) 119:7–35
123

----- Page 15 (native) -----
major opportunistic pathogen in the CNS of AIDS patients
[248], infect a wide range of cell types within the CNS
including astrocytes, ependyma, and microvascular endo-
thelium. A mosquito-borne ﬂavivirus that has recently
appeared in North America, West Nile virus (WNV) infects
a variety of tissues throughout the body, but within the
CNS appears to favor neurons over astrocytes [8]. ‘Neu-
ronotropism’ of viruses is shared by other agents, e.g., the
rabies virus, which also appears to spare astrocytes, though
the proliferation of uninfected reactive astrocytes is an
inevitable result of rabies virus-associated encephalomyeli-
tis. JC virus, a human polyomavirus of the Polyomaviridae
family, shows selective infection and eventual destruction of
oligodendroglia in immunosuppressed individuals, leading
to neurologic deterioration caused by progressive multifocal
leukoencephalopathy (PML). JC virus may also infect
astrocytes, and in situ PCR techniques suggest an even
broader repertoire of cells that are vulnerable to JC virus
infection [132, 250]. In this context it is also interesting
to note that effector CD8? T cells form immunological
synapses with virally infected astrocytes, resulting in pro-
nounced changes in astrocyte morphology (and presumably
in function as well) as well as potential clearance of infected
cells [12, 13].
When bacterial (and some fungal) microorganisms
cause a leptomeningitis, a clinical imperative is to prevent
this meningitis from evolving into a meningo-encephalitis
or cerebritis that leads to signiﬁcant injury, necrosis, and
inﬂammation of the brain parenchyma with far more seri-
ous neurologic morbidity than an infection isolated to the
subarachnoid
space.
The
anatomic
structure
largely
responsible for preventing parenchymal injury in the
presence of meningitis is the glia limitans, formed at the
pial-subarachnoid interface by plump foot processes of
reactive astrocytes, ﬁbromeningeal cells, and an overlying
basement membrane, in a manner that shares similarities
with glia scar formation (Fig. 4d). A breach of the glia
limitans may occur because of toxins released by the
inﬂammatory inﬁltrate associated with a meningitis (espe-
cially the toxic molecules released by polymorphonuclear
leukocytes/PMN) or frank necrosis of brain parenchyma
underlying
an
inﬂammatory
inﬁltrate
resulting
from
occlusion/thrombosis of meningeal vessels.
Seizure disorders/epilepsy
Reactive astrogliosis is variable, but often prominent, in
almost all forms of seizures, and is perhaps most notable in
the setting of hippocampal sclerosis, the most common
neuropathological substrate of intractable temporal lobe
epilepsy [64]. Astrocytes proliferate in regions of pyrami-
dal neuron loss, usually the endfolium and CA1 segments.
In mouse models of severe epilepsy, reactive astrocytes
lose their non-overlapping domains and exhibit a tenfold
increase in overlapping processes, concurrent with an
increase in synaptic spine density [169]. The nature of
reactive astrogliotic changes varies with the intensity and
duration of the seizure disorder.
The morphologic substrates of epileptic disorders are
becoming understood as high-resolution neuroimaging
techniques guide neurosurgeons to likely ‘epileptogenic
foci’, thereby enabling surgical removal and providing novel
lesions for pathologic examination from patients who are
relatively ‘early’ in the course of their epileptic disorder [64,
150, 152]. The neuropathological ﬁndings within the foci of
cortical dysplasia found in severe intractable epilepsy
include pronounced dyslamination of the neocortex, neuro-
nal
dysmorphism
and
massive
enlargement
(‘giant’
neurons), gemistocyte-like ‘balloon cells’ [47]. Of interest is
that some of these cellular elements show immunohisto-
chemical evidence suggesting differentiation along both
neuronal and astrocytic lines [47]. The most severe examples
of focal cortical dysplasia (FCD) closely resemble the tubers
found within the neocortex of individuals with tuberous
sclerosis complex (TSC), and cells within severe FCD or
TSC tubers exhibit distinct mechanisms for activating
components of insulin-signaling pathways important in cell
growth and metabolism, probably reﬂecting a modulating
effect of TSC1 and TSC2 gene products on these pathways
[152, 246]. It is also interesting to note that pronounced
astrocytic abnormalities have been described in severe FCD
with intractable pediatric epilepsy, including astrocytes with
high densities of Rosenthal ﬁbers (Fig. 6b, c), comparable to
those seen in Alexander’s disease [111], a genetic disorder
with mutation of the GFAP gene that is also associated with
seizures and other symptoms (see below).
In addition to simply being passive responders to neu-
ronal changes caused by seizure activity, various lines of
recent evidence suggest that reactive astrocytes may play
functional roles in mechanisms causing seizures and epi-
lepsy, particularly in chronic relapsing forms. For example,
various antiepileptic therapeutic agents block calcium-
signaling in astrocytes [240]. In mesial temporal lobe
epilepsy with hippocampal sclerosis, neuropathological
ultrastructural evaluations suggest that reduced levels of
AQP4 and dystrophin in perivascular foot-processes of
astrocytes and reactive astrocytes may lead to perturbed
water ﬂux through astrocytes with impaired buffering of
K? and an increased propensity for seizures [61, 212]. In
Rasmussen’s encephalitis, seizures are associated with
perivascular reactive astrogliosis and pronounced hyper-
trophy of astrocyte endfeet (Fig. 6a), as well as with areas
of apparent astrocyte apoptosis and loss, and certain evi-
dence suggests that autoimmune induced (cytotoxic T
lymphocyte-mediated) perturbation of astrocyte function
and astrocyte degeneration may contribute to the seizure
Acta Neuropathol (2010) 119:7–35
21
123

----- Page 16 (native) -----
disorder [16, 256]. Reactive astrocytes may also play a role
in focal epilepsy following traumatic, ischemic, or infec-
tious brain injury. Experimental evidence and modeling
simulations suggest that during the BBB breakdown
incurred by such insults, exposure of reactive astrocytes to
albumin and other serum proteins leads to reduced clear-
ance by reactive astrocytes of synaptic glutamate and K?
that in turn facilitate seizure-like activity and epilepto-
genesis [51, 74].
Multiple sclerosis and autoimmune inﬂammatory
disorders
The CNS is affected by a number of different autoimmune
inﬂammatory conditions. Reactive astrogliosis is a not only
a prominent feature of these conditions, but various lines of
evidence point towards central roles for reactive astrocytes
in key pathogenic disease mechanisms discussed below. In
the most common (Charcot) type of multiple sclerosis,
plaques of demyelination are interspersed with and sur-
rounded by reactive astrocytes and there are widespread
regions of focal reactive astrogliosis of varying intensity
throughout white matter and in some regions of gray matter
[117, 130]. Astrocytes in demyelinating disease may
exhibit unusual nuclear and cytological features. They may
contain multiple distinct nuclei, especially in chronic dis-
ease. Such enlarged multinucleated astrocytes are often
referred to as ‘Creutzfeldt astrocytes’ or ‘Creutzfeldt–
Peters cells’ [65, 117, 163, 185]. The multiple nuclei within
these astrocytes may be fragmented, such that the appear-
ance of a given cell resembles an atypical or ‘granular
mitosis’ of the type often encountered in high grade glio-
mas. Demyelinating lesions may also exhibit astrocytes
that label with markers of cell division [45]. The obvious
diagnostic pitfall here is that a small biopsy from the edge
of a demyelinating plaque may suggest a malignancy rather
than multiple sclerosis (especially at the time of intraop-
erative consultation) [45, 65, 163]. Astrocytes in multiple
sclerosis
may
also
demonstrate
the
phenomenon
of
‘emperipolesis’, i.e., an astrocyte apparently engulﬁng one
or more other cells such as oligodendroglia [81] or lym-
phocytes [75]. The role of this process in the pathogenesis
or progression/chronicity of multiple sclerosis is not cer-
tain. It should be emphasized that both multinucleation of
astrocytes and astrocyte emperipolesis also occur in other
disorders, including
certain
tumors
and
longstanding
spongiform encephalopathy [45, 81, 155, 217].
The roles of astrocytes in multiple sclerosis and other
autoimmune inﬂammatory disorders are under intense
investigation and are likely to be complex. Astrocytes can
produce a wide variety of pro- or anti-inﬂammatory mol-
ecules [58, 226], and can exert potent suppressive effects
on inﬂammatory cells [114]. In the multiple sclerosis like
model condition, experimental autoimmune encephalomy-
elitis (EAE), reactive astrocytes form scar like barriers
around
perivascular
clusters
of
inﬂammatory
cells
(Fig. 1c), and transgenically targeted disruption of these
perivascular astrocyte scars in EAE exacerbates the spread
of
inﬂammation,
increases
axonal
degeneration,
and
worsens clinical signs [251]. Nevertheless, experimental
evidence suggests that reactive astrocytes can exert both
pro- and anti-inﬂammatory roles that are essential in EAE
[23, 251] and other conditions [226]. While such ﬁndings
may at ﬁrst seem at odds with each other, they may be
reconciled by evidence showing that reactive astrocytes
take part both in attracting inﬂammatory cells to speciﬁc
sites and in restricting inﬂammatory cells to those sites by
limiting their spread into adjacent healthy CNS paren-
chyma [226]. Such ﬁndings further suggest that the loss of
normal functions or the gain of abnormal effects by reac-
tive astrocytes may contribute to disease mechanisms in
multiple sclerosis and other autoimmune inﬂammatory
conditions. Consistent with this idea is the recent obser-
vation
that
the
majority
([90%)
of
patients
with
neuromyelitis optica, a CNS inﬂammatory/demyelinating
disease that was once considered a rare variant of multiple
sclerosis, have autoantibodies to aquaporin-4, which is
expressed in the CNS only on astrocyte foot processes and
that the severity of clinical signs and spinal cord lesions in
such patients correlate with aquaporin-4 speciﬁc antibody
titers [119, 236]. The potential involvement of astrocytes in
other autoimmune inﬂammatory conditions that sometimes
exhibit CNS involvement, such as systemic lupus erythe-
matosus, has been suggested but has not been extensively
investigated [242].
Edema
Astrocytes have several mechanisms through which they
can inﬂuence water balance and the potential for edema,
including ion channels and pumps, the water channel
AQP4 and the production of molecules such as vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) or NO that inﬂuence
endothelial cell permeability. The role of astrocytes in
edema is complex and likely to be context dependent.
Although excess uptake of water through AQP4 on astro-
cyte endfeet can lead to cytotoxic edema [135, 157, 264],
the loss of astrocytes or the failure of astrocyte AQP4
channels can also lead to vasogenic edema or accumulation
of extracellular ﬂuid [33, 157, 177, 264].
Blood brain barrier integrity
Integrity of the BBB is lost after many types of CNS insults
including trauma and stroke. The role of astrocytes in loss
or repair of BBB functions is not well understood. A role
22
Acta Neuropathol (2010) 119:7–35
123

----- Page 17 (native) -----
for astrocytes is suggested by studies in transgenic mice in
which ablation of reactive astrocytes after CNS trauma
prevented the normally occurring repair of the BBB and
grafts of normal astrocyte were able to restore BBB repair
[33]. It is not yet known whether a primary dysfunction of
astrocytes or reactive astrocytes could lead to loss of BBB
integrity. It is possible that loss of astrocyte production of a
potential BBB inductive molecule, such as GSNO [208], or
astrocyte over production of BBB disrupting molecules
might lead to loss of BBB integrity [69, 188].
Hepatic encephalopathy
Hepatic encephalopathy can lead to mild to severe neuro-
psychiatric
symptoms,
brain
edema
with
increased
intracranial pressure associated with cerebellar tonsillar,
uncal and/or central diencephalic herniation, and coma.
Astrocytes are now recognized as playing a central role in
the pathophysiology of hepatic encephalopathy [166]. The
brain edema is largely a result of astrocyte swelling, which
in turn is caused by astrocytic uptake of NH4
?. Although
astrocyte uptake of NH4
? is regarded initially as a neuro-
protective mechanism, it also drives the synthesis of
glutamine
from
glutamate
by
glutamine
synthetase,
resulting in changes in transmitter homeostasis that may
contribute to behavioral symptoms. The accumulation of
glutamine in astrocytes also leads to osmotic stress that
results in astrocyte swelling and progressive cytotoxic
edema [107, 166, 193].
Metabolic disorders
Niemann-Pick type C, is an inherited neurovisceral lipid
storage disorder caused by loss of function mutations of the
membrane-bound protein, NPC1, which is thought to play a
role in trafﬁcking of cholesterol and other lysosomal cargo.
In the CNS, NPC1 is expressed predominantly in perisy-
naptic astrocyte processes that are closely associated with
nerve terminals, the earliest site of degeneration in the
disease, suggesting that disruption of NPC1-mediated
vesicular trafﬁcking in astrocytes may be linked to neuro-
nal degeneration [178]. It is interesting that selective
restoration of expression of Npc1 in GFAP-positive astro-
cytes in Npc1-/- mice enhanced survival and decreased
neuronal storage of cholesterol in the CNS, while restora-
tion of expression of Npc1 in GFAP-positive in enteric
glial cells in Npc1-/- mice ameliorated enteric neuropa-
thology [110, 265].
Aceruloplasminemia is an inherited disorder of iron
metabolism caused by the lack of ceruloplasmin activity.
The neuropathological hallmarks are excessive iron depo-
sition, neuronal loss, bizarrely deformed astrocytes, and
numerous ‘grumose’ or foamy spheroid bodies. In the
CNS, ceruloplasmin is largely produced by perivascular
astrocytes and exhibits a ferroxidase activity that inhibits
iron-associated lipid peroxidation and hydroxyl radical
formation [174]. Astrocytes play key roles in iron traf-
ﬁcking
and
the
detoxiﬁcation
of
iron-mediated
free
radicals. Lack of ceruloplasmin causes direct oxidative
stress on astrocytes. In aceruloplasminemia, deformed
astrocytes accumulate ferric iron and the antioxidative
ability of astrocytes is compromised, leading to secondary
neuronal cell death [174].
Astrocyte abnormalities and CNS malformations or
lesions are also associated with the rare genetic disorders,
congenital glutamine synthetase
deﬁciency [88], and
pyruvate carboxylase deﬁciency [79].
Alexander disease and other leukodystrophies
Alexander disease is a genetic disorder of astrocytes caused
by a dominant, gain-of-function mutation of the gene
encoding GFAP [25]. Astrocytes are hypertrophied and
exhibit numerous, characteristic Rosenthal ﬁbers that are
aggregates of GFAP and are therefore prominently GFAP-
immunoreactive [25, 247]. There is particular involvement
of the white matter and patients exhibit macrocephaly,
seizures, psychomotor disturbances, spasticity, and pre-
mature death. Over expression of GFAP in transgenic mice
causes a fatal encephalopathy similar to the human con-
dition [143]. It is interesting to note that high densities of
Rosenthal ﬁbers, comparable to those seen in Alexander’s
disease, have been described in the context of pronounced
astrocytic abnormalities in severe FCD with intractable
pediatric epilepsy (Fig. 6b) [111] (see above).
Megaloencephalic leukoencephalopathy with subcorti-
cal cysts (MLC) is an autosomal recessive, progressive
white matter disease in children, characterized by myelin
splitting and intramyelinic vacuole formation and caused
by mutations in the MLC1 gene. In the CNS, the MLC1
protein is speciﬁcally expressed in distal astroglial pro-
cesses in perivascular, subependymal, and subpial regions.
This localization plus the transmembrane domains of the
protein, support the possible transport functions of MLC1,
possibly across the blood–brain and brain-cerebrospinal
ﬂuid barriers [21, 210].
Vanishing white matter disease (VWM) is a rare auto-
somal recessive leukoencephalopathy linked to mutations
in translation initiation factor 2B (eIF2B). VWM lesions in
vivo lack GFAP expressing astrocytes. Mutations in the
eIF2B genes are thought to impair the ability of cells to
regulate protein synthesis. RNAi targeting of EIF2B5
severely compromised the generation of GFAP expressing
astrocytes from normal human glial progenitors, raising the
possibility that a deﬁciency in astrocyte function may
contribute to the loss of white matter in VWM [55, 244].
Acta Neuropathol (2010) 119:7–35
23
123

----- Page 18 (native) -----
Glaucoma
Glaucoma is characterized by unexplained loss of retinal
ganglion neurons and by the reactive gliosis of astrocytes
and related Mu¨ller cells in the retina, and the reactivity of
astrocytes that surround ganglion cell axons in the optic
nerve head. It is not clear whether the reactive gliosis in the
retina is merely a response to a process afﬂicting the
ganglion neurons or whether the gliosis contributes to that
degeneration by loss of glial supportive functions, such as
glutamate uptake, or contribution of degenerative effects
such as production of reactive oxygen species [26, 109].
The optic nerve head, where the optic nerve emerges
from the eye, is an area where several tissues meet and the
area may be under particular stress and ﬂux during
increases in intraocular pressure as are often associated
with glaucoma. Astrocytes in the optic nerve head differ
from white and gray matter astrocytes and have a distinct
appearance and morphology. In rodents, optic nerve
astrocytes are spatially aligned to ensheathe axons in
bundles in a unique arrangement that provides essential
structural support for the axons [232]. In primates, optic
head astrocytes exhibit a similarly specialized morphology
and provide additional structural support by secreting an
extracellular matrix referred to as the lamina cribrosa [94,
262]. Various lines of evidence suggest that an early pre-
cipitating event in glaucoma may be disturbances of axon–
astrocyte interactions at the optic nerve head (perhaps as a
consequence of increased stresses caused by raised intra-
ocular pressure), which in turn lead to axonal damage and
subsequent retrograde degeneration of retinal ganglion
neurons [94, 98, 262].
Neuropathic pain
Compelling evidence now indicates that pain signaling in
the spinal cord dorsal horn involves interactions among
microglia, astrocytes and neurons [147]. As discussed
earlier, astrocytes can inﬂuence synaptic activity in a
variety of direct and indirect ways and astrocytes partici-
pate in regulation of CNS inﬂammation by responding to
and producing a wide variety of cytokines. These mecha-
nisms provide the basis for astrocyte involvement in both
normal and pathological pain signaling. There is a growing
body of evidence that astrocytes, which are chronically
reactive in the dorsal horn due to local cellular interactions,
have the potential to contribute to and exacerbate chronic
and neuropathological pain in various ways, including
release of neurotransmitters and neuromodulators such as
glutamate, NO and PGE or through release of cytokines
like TNFa that alter neuronal membrane receptor levels, all
of which can amplify neuronal excitability [147]. The
molecules
involved
in
these
emerging
multi-cellular
signaling interactions are providing novel targets for
analgesic therapeutic strategies.
Migraine
Prolonged cortical spreading depression is thought to play
a fundamental role in the pathophysiology of migraine and
can be caused by excessive synaptic glutamate release, or
by decreased removal of glutamate and potassium from the
synaptic cleft [204]. Familial hemiplegic migraine type 2,
an autosomal dominant form of migraine with aura, has
been associated with four distinct mutations in the alpha2-
subunit of the Na?,K?-ATPase that is expressed primarily
in astrocytes. The mutations all result in decreased activity
of the Na?,K?-pump in astrocytes [36], which in turn may
lower the threshold for cortical spreading depression and
migraine attacks.
Alzheimer’s disease
Reactive astrogliosis is a well-known feature of Alzhei-
mer’s disease (AD), but its roles in AD are not well
understood. Reactive astrogliosis tends to be focal in AD
such that reactive astrocytes are intimately associated with
amyloid plaques or diffuse deposits of amyloid and sur-
round them with dense layers of processes as if forming
miniature scars around them (Fig. 7a), perhaps to wall
them off and act as neuroprotective barriers. Reactive
astrocytes can contain substantial amounts of different
forms of amyloid beta, including amyloid beta 1–42
(Ab42) as well as truncated forms [159, 239]. Of consid-
erable interest are reports that reactive astrocytes can take
up and degrade extracellular deposits of Ab42 [261] and
that this function is attenuated in ApoE-/- astrocytes
[113], suggesting that reactive astrocytes functions or
dysfunctions could play a role in the progression and
severity of AD. The intensity of reactive astrogliosis, as
determined by GFAP levels, has been reported to increase
in parallel with increasing progression of Braak stages in
AD, while concomitantly the levels of astrocyte glutamate
transporters have been reported to decline, which may raise
the vulnerability of local neurons to excitotoxicity [221].
Reactive astrocytes also exhibit increased expression of
presenilin in sporadic AD [101, 254], but the consequences
of this expression are not known.
Transmissible spongiform encephalopathies
Astrogliosis is prominent, diffuse, and intense throughout
affected
CNS
regions
in
transmissible
spongiform
encephalopathies such as Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease (CJD)
(Fig. 7b) and related prion diseases, especially if clinical
symptoms have been of long duration. Although this
24
Acta Neuropathol (2010) 119:7–35
123

----- Page 19 (native) -----
astrogliosis exhibits some characteristics of severe diffuse
reactive astrogliosis (Figs. 3c, 4c), it is not clear whether
astrocytes play an active role in prion replication and dis-
ease pathogenesis or whether astrogliosis is largely reactive
to the disease process in other cell types [115]. It is
interesting that the hippocampal neuronal degeneration
associated with experimental ablation of reactive astrocytes
has a vacuolar appearance with similarities to spongiform
changes [33].
Parkinson’s disease
The role of astrocytes in Parkinson’s disease and related
syndromes is sparsely investigated and poorly understood
[140]. Reactive astrogliosis is generally mild or moderate
and rarely severe in autopsy specimens of substantia nigra
from Parkinson’s disease patients [72, 149]. Astrocytes
have been implicated as potentially exerting both neuro-
toxic and neuroprotective activities in Parkinson’s disease.
Experimental studies show that astrocytes take up the
Parkinson’s syndrome causing molecule, MPTP, from the
blood stream and convert it to neurotoxic MPP? and may
similarly convert other environmental molecules that have
been implicated in dopaminergic toxicity [54, 187]. On the
other hand, activation of the transcription factor Nrf2
selectively in astrocytes protects mice from MPTP-induced
Parkinsonism by activating anti-oxidative response path-
ways [40]. Rare mutations in Nurr1 lead to familial
Parkinson’s disease, and expression of Nurr1 in astrocytes
suppresses production of potentially toxic molecules and
protects against loss of dopaminergic neurons [203].
Recent ﬁndings also show that subpopulations of astrocytes
express
disease-related
proteins
such
as
a-synuclein,
parkin and phosho-tau to different levels and in different
combinations
in
Parkinson’s
disease,
multiple-system
atrophy, and progressive supranuclear palsy [227], but
the roles of astrocytes in these conditions are not yet
deﬁned.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)
Evidence is available suggesting two quite different
potential
roles
for
astrocytes
in
amyotrophic
lateral
sclerosis (ALS) or motor neuron disease, through either
the loss of a neuroprotective function or the gain of a
neurotoxic effect. Sporadic ALS is characterized by
selective
loss or
dysfunction
of
astrocyte
glutamate
transporters in spinal cord and cerebral cortical areas that
exhibit loss of lower and upper motor neurons [73, 136,
194, 197], suggesting that increased glutamate excito-
toxicity may contribute to motor neuron death and
raising the possibility of different types of potential
interventions. A high-throughput screen of small mole-
cules has identiﬁed that certain b-lactam antibiotics can
stimulate the expression of glutamate transporters by
astrocyte and thereby enhance glutamate uptake sufﬁciently
to reduce excitotoxicity, and provide neuroprotection in
animal models of stroke and ALS [199]. The b-lactam
antibiotic, Ceftriaxone, began stage 3 clinical trials in May
2009 to determine efﬁcacy in reducing excitotoxicity and
neurodegeneration in ALS. Focal grafts of healthy astro-
cytes are reported to be neuroprotective in an animal model
of ALS, suggesting that transplantation of astrocytes may
be a potential therapeutic strategy [120]. From a different
perspective, astrocytes may also exhibit neurotoxic dys-
function in ALS. Approximately 20% of familial ALS
cases, and about 5% of apparently sporadic cases, exhibit
missense mutations of the gene encoding superoxide
Fig. 7 Reactive astrogliosis in two degenerative diseases. a High
magniﬁcation image of autopsy specimen from a person with
longstanding Alzheimer’s disease immunohistochemically stained
for GFAP. Section of cerebral cortex shows an amyloid senile plaque
with a pale unstained center (Ab) ringed by dense layers of reactive
astrocytic processes (arrows) that circumferentially surround the
plaque as if forming a scar-like barrier around it. b High magniﬁ-
cation image of autopsy specimen from a person with Creutzfeldt–
Jakob disease (CJD) transmissible spongiform encephalopathy.
Section of cerebral cortex shows pronounced neuron loss and severe
diffuse reactive astrogliosis. Most of the cortex is packed with
gemistocytic astrocytes, while spongiform change is relatively
minimal in this area. Scale bars a, b 10 lm
Acta Neuropathol (2010) 119:7–35
25
123

----- Page 20 (native) -----
dismutase (SOD) that are dominantly inherited [201].
Recent ﬁndings show that expression of ALS mutant
SOD in astrocytes (but not other cell types) leads to pro-
duction by astrocytes of soluble molecules that are
selectively toxic to motor neurons but not to spinal cord
interneurons [53, 158], but the nature of the toxic mole-
cules and the mechanisms leading to their production are
not yet clear.
Tauopathies
Tauopathies are primarily associated with intracellular
ﬁlamentous deposits in neurons that lead to functional
disturbances [83]. Nevertheless, there is evidence to sug-
gest that astrocyte tau pathology may also contribute to
disease mechanisms. Filamentous tau aggregates can be
observed in astrocytes in human disease and in animal
models, and in animal models can disturb glutamate uptake
and other astrocyte functions leading to focal neuronal
degeneration [48, 71].
Huntington’s disease
In Huntington’s disease, excitotoxicity has long been
regarded as contributing to neuronal loss but the underlying
mechanisms have been difﬁcult to elucidate [82]. There is
increasing investigation of the potential for astrocytes
contributions to dysfunction and degeneration in Hunting-
ton’s disease through disturbances in glutamate uptake that
can alter synaptic function and lead to excitotoxicity, or
through abnormal production of neurotoxic molecules
[127, 136].
Psychiatric disorders
As it becomes increasingly clear that astrocytes play
essential roles in synaptic mechanisms (see above), there
is growing evidence that astrocyte functions and dys-
functions may contribute to behavioral mechanisms and
behavioral
disorders
[90].
For
example,
studies
in
experimental animals show that disruption of astrocyte-
speciﬁc Na?,K?-ATPase results in increased anxiety-
related behavior and impaired spatial learning in mice
[154], and that astrocyte inﬂuences on synaptic functions
are important in reward circuits, and may contribute to
drug addiction [145]. Clinicopathological studies show
that expression of astrocyte glutamate transporters has
been found in prefrontal cortex of schizophrenic patients
[137], and that the density of astrocytes is reduced in
prefrontal cortex of patients with major depressive dis-
orders [146, 189, 218]. Layer-speciﬁc
reductions in
GFAP-reactive have also been reported in astrocytes of
the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in schizophrenia [190]
and astrocyte roles in synaptic function are now central
to certain hypotheses regarding schizophrenic disease
mechanisms [19, 151].
The study of cellular neuropathology in psychiatric
disorders
is
fraught
with
roadblocks.
Morphologic
abnormalities associated with behavioral illness may be
extremely subtle and difﬁcult to detect. Individuals tend
to die with a psychiatric disorder rather than of it (the
exception to this being death by suicide), so that at the
time of necropsy a past history of psychiatric illness may
not be noted, or there may be changes in the brain
secondary to longstanding other medical problems that
‘mask’ any intrinsic structural changes underlying a
psychiatric illness. After many years of neuropsychiatric
problems in a given patient, it may be difﬁcult or
impossible to distinguish structural sequelae of pharma-
cotherapy from structural changes that caused the illness.
Astrocyte contributions to behavioral disorders are only
beginning to be explored. In this regard, it should be
considered that astrocytes may not show overt structural
changes or changes in commonly used astrocyte markers
in necropsy specimens. As histopathological molecular
identiﬁcation techniques expand in breadth and become
more sensitive, it may become possible (keeping in mind
the caveats just mentioned) to detect astrocyte speciﬁc
changes in molecular expression that are associated with
speciﬁc disorders and clinical conditions.
Brain tumors (primary or secondary)
Astrocytes play a major role in the evolution of many
common primary brain tumors, gliomas, and a less prom-
inent, though signiﬁcant, role in the progression of
metastases. From a practical diagnostic viewpoint, GFAP is
a reliable immunohistochemical marker for staining sur-
gically resected brain neoplasms to ascertain whether they
have a signiﬁcant component of cells differentiating along
astrocytic pathways [247]. The likelihood that a neoplasm
is an ‘astrocytoma’ increases if cells throughout the tumor
manifest atypical nuclear features (which can vary con-
siderably in their degree of atypia) and also show some
degree
of
cytoplasmic
immunoreactivity
with
GFAP
(Fig. 8a, b). Alternatively, abundant reactive astrocytes
may show GFAP immunoreactivity within or surrounding
non-glial tumors such as primary CNS lymphoma (Fig. 9a)
or medulloblastoma (Fig. 9b) [247]. When GFAP-positive
reactive astrocytes align themselves in a scar-like fashion
along a non-glial (usually metastatic) tumor, the impression
of a secondary neoplasm is strongly supported.
Malignant astrocytic glioma, such as glioblastoma
(astrocytoma WHO grade IV), are the most common and
among the most lethal intracranial tumors [76, 128]. The
cells of origin of astrocytic gliomas, whether potentially
26
Acta Neuropathol (2010) 119:7–35
123

----- Page 21 (native) -----
astrocytes, glial precursors, or stem cells, are the subject
of intense investigation [76]. In a manner consistent with
the cancer stem cell hypothesis, there is considerable
evidence that only minor populations of cells in primary
gliomas are capable of forming a tumor, [76, 223]. The
presence throughout adult brain of periventricular adult
NSC
that express the astrocyte marker
GFAP
(see
above), raises interesting questions regarding the possible
contribution of these cells to astrocytoma initiation.
Astrocytic gliomas contain small numbers of cells that
exhibit stem cell-like properties in that they self-renew,
are multipotent and form neurospheres in vitro and
constitutively produce the different types of cells found
within the parent tumors [160]. Growth properties of
glioma-derived neurospheres in vitro were found to be
signiﬁcant predictors of tumor progression in vivo and of
clinical outcome [118]. Nevertheless, the origins of gli-
oma are not yet understood and could be heterogeneous.
Astrocytic
gliomas
exhibit
molecular
heterogeneity,
particularly as regards expression patterns of transcriptional
regulators, tumor-suppressor proteins and kinase mutations,
and molecular phenotyping of glioma is opening up the
potential for molecularly targeted therapies [99]. Some
properties of astroglioma appear related to astrocyte func-
tions. For example, glutamate production by glioma may
increase invasive
growth
properties
[228].
Enhanced
STAT3 signaling activity by astroglioma reduces inﬂam-
mation and tumor-immune surveillance and increases cell
proliferation [24] in a manner consistent with functions of
STAT3 signaling in astrocytes [95].
Fig. 8 GFAP immunoreactive cells in primary CNS neoplasms.
a High magniﬁcation image of a subependymal giant cell astrocytoma
(SEGA) immunohistochemically stained for GFAP. Note variable
staining intensity within tumor cells, including some that show
uniform cytoplasmic staining. b High magniﬁcation image of a high-
grade glioma (glioblastoma, WHO grade IV) immunohistochemically
stained for GFAP. Note the variable staining of tumor cells as well as
the pronounced nuclear and cytological atypia. Scale bars a, b 10 lm
Fig. 9 Reactive astrogliosis in response to CNS tumors. a High
magniﬁcation image of autopsy specimen from a man with widely
inﬁltrating primary CNS lymphoma. Two color immunohistochem-
istry for GFAP and the cell cycle marker Ki67, shows the cytoplasm
of reactive astrocytes stained blue (arrows), with nuclei of inﬁltrating,
malignant and highly proliferative lymphoid elements stained brown
(arrowheads). Note that essentially none of the GFAP-immunoreac-
tive astrocytes show Ki-67-immunoreactive nuclei and are thus not
proliferative and exhibit only a moderate degree of reactive astrogl-
iosis with cell hypertrophy and up regulation of GFAP, in spite of the
presence of numerous inﬁltrating lymphoma cells. b High magniﬁ-
cation image of a medulloblastoma immunohistochemically stained
for GFAP and showing many processes of reactive astrocytes along
one edge of the tumor (at right of ﬁgure). Scale bars a 15 lm,
b 25 lm
Acta Neuropathol (2010) 119:7–35
27
123

----- Page 22 (native) -----
Neuroﬁbromatosis
Neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 (NF1) is an inherited neuro-
cutaneous disorder with neuropsychologic deﬁcits and
predisposition to Schwannomas and astrocytomas caused
by mutations in the NF1 gene [2, 9]. Reduced expression of
glutamate transporters have been reported in reactive
astrocyte clusters in NF1 [263]. Changes in mTOR and
PTEN-signaling pathways in Schwann cells and astrocytes
may contribute to tumorigenesis in NF1 [50, 87].
Enteric glia and inﬂammatory bowel disorders
The gastrointestinal tract is highly innervated and neuro-
pathology of the enteric nervous system is emerging as a
central feature of many gut diseases. Although most
considerations of the enteric nervous system have focused
on neuronal dysfunction, a large population of astrocyte-
like glia populates gut muscle layers and the intestinal
mucosa,
and
mounting new
evidence
points
toward
enteric glia, which express GFAP and share functional
similarities with astrocytes, as active participants in gut
pathology [207]. Various lines of experimental and neuro-
pathological evidence are consistent with the possibility
that enteric glia constitute a previously unrecognized
disease target in pathologies associated with intestinal
barrier dysfunction, notably inﬂammatory bowel disease,
necrotizing enterocolitis, irritable bowel syndrome, diabe-
tes, autoimmune disease, and neurotropic virus infection of
the gut pathology [44, 207]. Experimental ablation of
enteric glia leads to inﬂammatory bowel disease [32]. Both
astrocytes and related enteric glial cells are able to
induce barrier properties in gut epithelial cells, and
S-nitrosoglutathione (GSNO) has been identiﬁed as one
molecular mediator of this effect [208]. Thus, enteric
glia, like astrocytes, appear to play essential roles in
barrier functions during disease processes, particularly as
regards regulating the spread of inﬂammation [49, 207,
226, 251].
GFAP-expressing stellate cells within liver, pancreas,
and kidney
There is now growing evidence that stellate shaped,
GFAP-expressing
cells
in
various
tissues
may
have
functions that are similar to those of astrocytes. For
example,
there
is
increasing
evidence
that
GFAP-
expressing pancreatic stellate cells play important roles
in
tissue
repair,
ﬁbrosis,
and
scar
formation [176].
Hepatic stellate cells not only express GFAP and have
morphological appearance similar to astrocytes, but also
contact hepatic sinusoids and blood vessels and may take
part in hepatic immune processes [258, 259]. In this
regard, it is particularly interesting that the liver, like the
CNS, has a certain level of immune privilege [241], and
that both CNS and liver have resident populations of
macrophage-related cells (Kupfer cells in the liver and
microglia in the CNS) as well as of stellate cells that
participate in immune and inﬂammatory processes. In
addition,
there
is
evidence
that
GFAP-expressing
mesangial cells in the kidney function as local modula-
tors of innate and adaptive immune responses [209]. The
increasing
recognition
that
tissue-speciﬁc
cells
like
astrocytes and stellate cells play essential roles in regu-
lating local immune and inﬂammatory processes is likely
to impact considerably on concepts about organ-speciﬁc
vulnerability to autoimmunity and other inﬂammatory
conditions.
Therapeutic strategies involving astrocytes
The actively ongoing dissection of molecular mechanisms
of reactive astrogliosis is beginning to identify molecules
whose functions might be enhanced or blocked in speciﬁc
disease contexts as potential therapeutic strategies [66,
226]. For example, augmenting the function of the astro-
cyte glutamate transporter EAAT2 with parawexin 1, a
molecule isolated from spider venom, protects retinal
neurons from ischemic degeneration by enhancing gluta-
mate uptake and reducing excitotoxicity [70]. Certain
b-lactam
antibiotics,
identiﬁed
by
a
high-throughput
screen of small molecules, can stimulate the expression of
astrocyte glutamate transporters sufﬁciently to reduce
excitotoxicity and neuroprotection in models of stroke and
ALS [199].
Transplantation strategies involving astrocytes are also
under investigation. For example, grafts of stem or pro-
genitor cells that mature into healthy astrocytes cells are
reported to improve outcome in a mouse model of ALS in
which host astrocytes are abnormal and express a mutant
SOD [120]. A different strategy employs grafts of astro-
cytes that are genetically modiﬁed to produce speciﬁc
molecules, such as growth factors, as therapeutic pumps to
deliver those molecules in speciﬁc locations [18, 233]. In
due course, grafted astrocytes may be tested in clinical
contexts
and
become
subject
to
neuropathological
evaluations.
Acknowledgments
Work in the authors’ laboratories is supported
by grants from NIH, RO1 NS057624 (MVS), P50 AG16570 (HVV)
and P01 AG12435 (HVV), the Roman Reed Spinal Cord Injury
Research Fund (MVS) and Wings for Life (MVS) and the Daljit S.
and Elaine Sarkaria Chair in Diagnostic Medicine (HVV). Nicole Yin
and Spencer Tung assisted with preparation of illustrations.
Open Access
This article is distributed under the terms of the
Creative
Commons
Attribution
Noncommercial
License
which
28
Acta Neuropathol (2010) 119:7–35
123

----- Page 23 (native) -----
permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
References
1. Abbott NJ, Ronnback L, Hansson E (2006) Astrocyte-endothe-
lial interactions at the blood-brain barrier. Nat Rev Neurosci
7:41–53
2. Acosta MT, Gioia GA, Silva AJ (2006) Neuroﬁbromatosis type
1: new insights into neurocognitive issues. Curr Neurol Neurosci
Rep 6:136–143
3. Akaoka H, Szymocha R, Beurton-Marduel P, Bernard A, Belin
MF, Giraudon P (2001) Functional changes in astrocytes by
human T-lymphotropic virus type-1 T-lymphocytes. Virus Res
78:57–66
4. Andreiuolo F, Junier MP, Hol EM, Miquel C, Chimelli L,
Leonard N, Chneiweiss H, Daumas-Duport C, Varlet P (2009)
GFAPdelta immunostaining improves visualization of normal
and
pathologic
astrocytic
heterogeneity.
Neuropathology
29:31–39
5. Araque A, Parpura V, Sanzgiri RP, Haydon PG (1999) Tripartite
synapses: glia, the unacknowledged partner. Trends Neurosci
22:208–215
6. Araya R, Kudo M, Kawano M, Ishii K, Hashikawa T, Iwasato T,
Itohara S, Terasaki T, Oohira A, Mishina Y, Yamada M (2008)
BMP signaling through BMPRIA in astrocytes is essential for
proper cerebral angiogenesis and formation of the blood-brain-
barrier. Mol Cell Neurosci 38:417–430
7. Argaw AT, Gurfein BT, Zhang Y, Zameer A, John GR (2009)
VEGF-mediated disruption of endothelial CLN-5 promotes
blood-brain barrier breakdown. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
106:1977–1982
8. Armah HB, Wang G, Omalu BI, Tesh RB, Gyure KA, Chute DJ,
Smith RD, Dulai P, Vinters HV, Kleinschmidt-DeMasters BK,
Wiley CA (2007) Systemic distribution of West Nile virus
infection: postmortem immunohistochemical study of six cases.
Brain Pathol 17:354–362
9. Arun D, Gutmann DH (2004) Recent advances in neuroﬁbro-
matosis type 1. Curr Opin Neurol 17:101–105
10. Bachoo RM, Kim RS, Ligon KL, Maher EA, Brennan C, Bill-
ings N, Chan S, Li C, Rowitch DH, Wong WH, DePinho RA
(2004) Molecular diversity of astrocytes with implications for
neurological disorders. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 101:8384–8389
11. Ballabh P, Braun A, Nedergaard M (2004) The blood-brain
barrier: an overview: structure, regulation, and clinical impli-
cations. Neurobiol Dis 16:1–13
12. Barcia C, Sanderson NS, Barrett RJ, Wawrowsky K, Kroeger
KM, Puntel M, Liu C, Castro MG, Lowenstein PR (2008) T
cells’ immunological synapses induce polarization of brain
astrocytes in vivo and in vitro: a novel astrocyte response
mechanism to cellular injury. PLoS One 3:e2977
13. Barcia C, Thomas CE, Curtin JF, King GD, Wawrowsky K,
CandolﬁM, Xiong WD, Liu C, Kroeger K, Boyer O, Kupiec-
Weglinski J, Klatzmann D, Castro MG, Lowenstein PR (2006)
In vivo mature immunological synapses forming SMACs
mediate clearance of virally infected astrocytes from the brain.
J Exp Med 203:2095–2107
14. Barres BA (2003) What is a glial cell? Glia 43:4–5
15. Barres BA (2008) The mystery and magic of glia: a perspective
on their roles in health and disease. Neuron 60:430–440
16. Bauer J, Elger CE, Hans VH, Schramm J, Urbach H, Lassmann
H, Bien CG (2007) Astrocytes are a speciﬁc immunological
target in Rasmussen’s encephalitis. Ann Neurol 62:67–80
17. Beck DW, Vinters HV, Hart MN, Cancilla PA (1984) Glial cells
inﬂuence polarity of the blood-brain barrier. J Neuropathol Exp
Neurol 43:219–224
18. Behrstock S, Ebert AD, Klein S, Schmitt M, Moore JM,
Svendsen CN (2008) Lesion-induced increase in survival and
migration of human neural progenitor cells releasing GDNF.
Cell Transplant 17:753–762
19. Bernstein HG, Steiner J, Bogerts B (2009) Glial cells in
schizophrenia: pathophysiological signiﬁcance and possible
consequences for therapy. Expert Rev Neurother 9:1059–1071
20. Blechingberg J, Holm IE, Nielsen KB, Jensen TH, Jorgensen
AL, Nielsen AL (2007) Identiﬁcation and characterization of
GFAPkappa, a novel glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein isoform. Glia
55:497–507
21. Boor PK, de Groot K, Waisﬁsz Q, Kamphorst W, Oudejans CB,
Powers JM, Pronk JC, Scheper GC, van der Knaap MS (2005)
MLC1: a novel protein in distal astroglial processes. J Neuro-
pathol Exp Neurol 64:412–419
22. Brambilla R, Bracchi-Ricard V, Hu WH, Frydel B, Bramwell A,
Karmally S, Green EJ, Bethea JR (2005) Inhibition of astroglial
nuclear factor kappaB reduces inﬂammation and improves
functional recovery after spinal cord injury. J Exp Med
202:145–156
23. Brambilla R, Persaud T, Hu X, Karmally S, Shestopalov VI,
Dvoriantchikova G, Ivanov D, Nathanson L, Barnum SR,
Bethea JR (2009) Transgenic inhibition of astroglial NF-kappaB
improves functional outcome in experimental autoimmune
encephalomyelitis by suppressing chronic central nervous sys-
tem inﬂammation. J Immunol 182:2628–2640
24. Brantley EC, Nabors LB, Gillespie GY, Choi YH, Palmer CA,
Harrison K, Roarty K, Benveniste EN (2008) Loss of protein
inhibitors of activated STAT-3 expression in glioblastoma
multiforme tumors: implications for STAT-3 activation and
gene expression. Clin Cancer Res 14:4694–4704
25. Brenner M, Johnson AB, Boespﬂug-Tanguy O, Rodriguez D,
Goldman JE, Messing A (2001) Mutations in GFAP, encoding
glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein, are associated with Alexander
disease. Nat Genet 27:117–120
26. Bringmann A, Pannicke T, Grosche J, Francke M, Wiedemann
P, Skatchkov SN, Osborne NN, Reichenbach A (2006) Muller
cells in the healthy and diseased retina. Prog Retin Eye Res
25:397–424
27. Brown AM, Ransom BR (2007) Astrocyte glycogen and brain
energy metabolism. Glia 55:1263–1271
28. Brown AM, Baltan Tekkok S, Ransom BR (2004) Energy
transfer from astrocytes to axons: the role of CNS glycogen.
Neurochem Int 45:529–536
29. Buffo A, Vosko MR, Erturk D, Hamann GF, Jucker M, Rowitch
D, Gotz M (2005) Expression pattern of the transcription factor
Olig2 in response to brain injuries: implications for neuronal
repair. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102:18183–18188
30. Buffo A, Rite I, Tripathi P, Lepier A, Colak D, Horn AP, Mori
T, Gotz M (2008) Origin and progeny of reactive gliosis: A
source of multipotent cells in the injured brain. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 105:3581–3586
31. Bundesen LQ, Scheel TA, Bregman BS, Kromer LF (2003)
Ephrin-B2 and EphB2 regulation of astrocyte-meningeal ﬁbro-
blast interactions in response to spinal cord lesions in adult rats.
J Neurosci 23:7789–7800
32. Bush TG, Savidge TC, Freeman TC, Cox HJ, Campbell EA,
Mucke L, Johnson MH, Sofroniew MV (1998) Fulminant
jejuno-ileitis following ablation of enteric glia in adult trans-
genic mice. Cell 93:189–201
33. Bush TG NP, Horner CH, Polito A, Ostenfeld T, Svendsen CN,
Mucke L, Johnson MH, Sofroniew MV (1999) Leukocyte
inﬁltration, neuronal degeneration and neurite outgrowth after
Acta Neuropathol (2010) 119:7–35
29
123

----- Page 24 (native) -----
ablation of scar-forming, reactive astrocytes in adult transgenic
mice. Neuron 23:297–308
34. Bushong EA, Martone MA, Jones YZ, Ellisman MH (2002)
Protoplasmic astrocytes in CA1 atratum radiatum occupy sep-
arate anatomical domains. J Neurosci 22:183–192
35. Cahoy JD, Emery B, Kaushal A, Foo LC, Zamanian JL, Chr-
istopherson KS, Xing Y, Lubischer JL, Krieg PA, Krupenko SA,
Thompson WJ, Barres BA (2008) A transcriptome database for
astrocytes, neurons, and oligodendrocytes: a new resource for
understanding brain development and function. J Neurosci
28:264–278
36. Capendeguy O, Horisberger JD (2004) Functional effects of
Na ? , K ? -ATPase gene mutations linked to familial hemi-
plegic migraine. Neuromolecular Med 6:105–116
37. Carlen M, Meletis K, Goritz C, Darsalia V, Evergren E, Tani-
gaki K, Amendola M, Barnabe-Heider F, Yeung MS, Naldini L,
Honjo T, Kokaia Z, Shupliakov O, Cassidy RM, Lindvall O,
Frisen J (2009) Forebrain ependymal cells are Notch-dependent
and generate neuroblasts and astrocytes after stroke. Nat Neu-
rosci 12:259–267
38. Carmichael ST (2006) Cellular and molecular mechanisms of
neural repair after stroke: making waves. Ann Neurol 59:735–
742
39. Charles AC, Merrill JE, Dirksen ER, Sanderson MJ (1991)
Intercellular signaling in glial cells: calcium waves and oscil-
lations in response to mechanical stimulation and glutamate.
Neuron 6:983–992
40. Chen PC, Vargas MR, Pani AK, Smeyne RJ, Johnson DA, Kan
YW, Johnson JA (2009) Nrf2-mediated neuroprotection in the
MPTP mouse model of Parkinson’s disease: Critical role for the
astrocyte. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106:2933–2938
41. Chen Y, Swanson RA (2003) Astrocytes and brain injury.
J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 23:137–149
42. Chen Y, Vartiainen NE, Ying W, Chan PH, Koistinaho J,
Swanson RA (2001) Astrocytes protect neurons from nitric
oxide toxicity by a glutathione-dependent mechanism. J Neu-
rochem 77:1601–1610
43. Christopherson KS, Ullian EM, Stokes CC, Mullowney CE, Hell
JW, Agah A, Lawler J, Mosher DF, Bornstein P, Barres BA
(2005) Thrombospondins are astrocyte-secreted proteins that
promote CNS synaptogenesis. Cell 120:421–433
44. Cirillo C, Sarnelli G, Esposito G, Grosso M, Petruzzelli R, Izzo
P, Cali G, D’Armiento FP, Rocco A, Nardone G, Iuvone T,
Steardo L, Cuomo R (2009) Increased mucosal nitric oxide
production in ulcerative colitis is mediated in part by the
enteroglial-derived S100B protein. Neurogastroenterol Motil
21:1209–1212
45. Colodner KJ, Montana RA, Anthony DC, Folkerth RD, De
Girolami U, Feany MB (2005) Proliferative potential of human
astrocytes. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 64:163–169
46. Cornell-Bell AH, Finkbeiner SM, Cooper MS, Smith SJ (1990)
Glutamate induces calcium waves in cultured astrocytes: long-
range glial signaling. Science 247:470–473
47. Crino PB, Miyata H, Vinters HV (2002) Neurodevelopmental
disorders as a cause of seizures: neuropathologic, genetic, and
mechanistic considerations. Brain Pathol 12:212–233
48. Dabir DV, Robinson MB, Swanson E, Zhang B, Trojanowski
JQ, Lee VM, Forman MS (2006) Impaired glutamate transport
in a mouse model of tau pathology in astrocytes. J Neurosci
26:644–654
49. Daneman R, Rescigno M (2009) The gut immune barrier and the
blood-brain barrier: are they so different? Immunity (Epub 20
October 2009)
50. Dasgupta B, Yi Y, Chen DY, Weber JD, Gutmann DH (2005)
Proteomic analysis reveals hyperactivation of the mamma-
lian
target
of
rapamycin
pathway
in
neuroﬁbromatosis
1-associated human and mouse brain tumors. Cancer Res
65:2755–2760
51. David Y, Cacheaux LP, Ivens S, Lapilover E, Heinemann U,
Kaufer D, Friedman A (2009) Astrocytic dysfunction in epi-
leptogenesis: consequence of altered potassium and glutamate
homeostasis? J Neurosci 29:10588–10599
52. De Keyser J, Mostert JP, Koch MW (2008) Dysfunctional
astrocytes as key players in the pathogenesis of central nervous
system disorders. J Neurol Sci 267:3–16
53. Di Giorgio FP, Carrasco MA, Siao MC, Maniatis T, Eggan K
(2007) Non-cell autonomous effect of glia on motor neurons in
an embryonic stem cell-based ALS model. Nat Neurosci
10:608–614
54. Di Monte DA, Royland JE, Irwin I, Langston JW (1996)
Astrocytes as the site for bioactivation of neurotoxins. Neuro-
toxicology 17:697–703
55. Dietrich J, Lacagnina M, Gass D, Richﬁeld E, Mayer-Proschel
M, Noble M, Torres C, Proschel C (2005) EIF2B5 mutations
compromise GFAP ? astrocyte generation in vanishing white
matter leukodystrophy. Nat Med 11:277–283
56. Doetsch F, Caille I, Lim DA, Garcia-Verdugo JM, Alvarez-
Buylla A (1999) Subventricular zone astrocytes are neural stem
cells in the adult mammalian brain. Cell 97:703–716
57. Donati D, Martinelli E, Cassiani-Ingoni R, Ahlqvist J, Hou J,
Major EO, Jacobson S (2005) Variant-speciﬁc tropism of
human herpesvirus 6 in human astrocytes. J Virol 79:9439–
9448
58. Dong Y, Benveniste EN (2001) Immune function of astrocytes.
Glia 36:180–190
59. Drogemuller K, Helmuth U, Brunn A, Sakowicz-Burkiewicz M,
Gutmann DH, Mueller W, Deckert M, Schluter D (2008)
Astrocyte gp130 expression is critical for the control of Toxo-
plasma encephalitis. J Immunol 181:2683–2693
60. Eddleston M, Mucke L (1993) Molecular proﬁle of reactive
astrocytes—implications for their role in neurological disease.
Neuroscience 54:15–36
61. Eid T, Lee TS, Thomas MJ, Amiry-Moghaddam M, Bjornsen
LP, Spencer DD, Agre P, Ottersen OP, de Lanerolle NC (2005)
Loss of perivascular aquaporin 4 may underlie deﬁcient water
and K ? homeostasis in the human epileptogenic hippocampus.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102:1193–1198
62. Eng LF, Gerstl B, Vanderhaeghen JJ (1970) A study of proteins
in old multiple sclerosis plaques. Trans Am Soc Neurochem
1:42
63. Eng LF, Ghirnikar RS, Lee YL (2000) Glial ﬁbrillary acidic
protein: GFAP-thirty-one years (1969–2000). Neurochem Res
25:1439–1451
64. Engel J Jr (1996) Surgery for seizures. N Engl J Med 334:647–
652
65. Erana-Rojas IE, Barboza-Quintana A, Ayala AG, Fuller GN
(2002) Demyelinating pseudotumor. Ann Diagn Pathol 6:265–
271
66. Escartin C, Bonvento G (2008) Targeted activation of astro-
cytes: a potential neuroprotective strategy. Mol Neurobiol
38:231–241
67. Farina C, Aloisi F, Meinl E (2007) Astrocytes are active players
in cerebral innate immunity. Trends Immunol 28:138–145
68. Faulkner JR, Herrmann JE, Woo MJ, Tansey KE, Doan NB,
Sofroniew MV (2004) Reactive astrocytes protect tissue and
preserve function after spinal cord injury. J Neurosci 24:2143–
2155
69. Fisher M (2008) Injuries to the vascular endothelium: vascular
wall and endothelial dysfunction. Rev Neurol Dis 5(Suppl
1):S4–S11
70. Fontana AC, de Oliveira Beleboni R, Wojewodzic MW, Ferreira
Dos Santos W, Coutinho-Netto J, Grutle NJ, Watts SD, Danbolt
30
Acta Neuropathol (2010) 119:7–35
123

----- Page 25 (native) -----
NC, Amara SG (2007) Enhancing glutamate transport: mecha-
nism of action of Parawixin1, a neuroprotective compound from
Parawixia bistriata spider venom. Mol Pharmacol 72:1228–1237
71. Forman MS, Lal D, Zhang B, Dabir DV, Swanson E, Lee VM,
Trojanowski JQ (2005) Transgenic mouse model of tau
pathology in astrocytes leading to nervous system degeneration.
J Neurosci 25:3539–3550
72. Forno LS, DeLanney LE, Irwin I, Di Monte D, Langston JW
(1992) Astrocytes and Parkinson’s disease. Prog Brain Res
94:429–436
73. Fray AE, Ince PG, Banner SJ, Milton ID, Usher PA, Cookson
MR, Shaw PJ (1998) The expression of the glial glutamate
transporter protein EAAT2 in motor neuron disease: an immu-
nohistochemical study. Eur J Neurosci 10:2481–2489
74. Friedman A, Kaufer D, Heinemann U (2009) Blood-brain bar-
rier breakdown-inducing astrocytic transformation: novel targets
for the prevention of epilepsy. Epilepsy Res 85:142–149
75. Furer M, Hartloper V, Wilkins J, Nath A (1993) Lymphocyte
emperipolesis inhumanglialcells.CellAdhesCommun1:223–237
76. Furnari FB, Fenton T, Bachoo RM, Mukasa A, Stommel JM,
Stegh A, Hahn WC, Ligon KL, Louis DN, Brennan C, Chin L,
DePinho RA, Cavenee WK (2007) Malignant astrocytic glioma:
genetics, biology, and paths to treatment. Genes Dev 21:2683–
2710
77. Gadea A, Schinelli S, Gallo V (2008) Endothelin-1 regulates
astrocyte proliferation and reactive gliosis via a JNK/c-Jun
signaling pathway. J Neurosci 28:2394–2408
78. Garcia ADR, Doan NB, Imura T, Bush TG, Sofroniew MV
(2004) GFAP-expressing progenitors are the principle source of
constitutive neurogenesis in adult mouse forebrain. Nature
Neurosci 7:1233–1241
79. Garcia-Cazorla A, Rabier D, Touati G, Chadefaux-Vekemans B,
Marsac C, de Lonlay P, Saudubray JM (2006) Pyruvate carbox-
ylase deﬁciency: metabolic characteristics and new neurological
aspects. Ann Neurol 59:121–127
80. Garcia-Segura LM, Melcangi RC (2006) Steroids and glial cell
function. Glia 54:485–498
81. Ghatak NR (1992) Occurrence of oligodendrocytes within
astrocytes in demyelinating lesions. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol
51:40–46
82. Gil JM, Rego AC (2008) Mechanisms of neurodegeneration in
Huntington’s disease. Eur J Neurosci 27:2803–2820
83. Goedert M, Jakes R (2005) Mutations causing neurodegenera-
tive tauopathies. Biochim Biophys Acta 1739:240–250
84. Goldman S (2003) Glia as neural progenitor cells. Trends
Neurosci 26:590–596
85. Goncalves CA, Leite MC, Nardin P (2008) Biological and
methodological features of the measurement of S100B, a puta-
tive marker of brain injury. Clin Biochem 41:755–763
86. Gordon GR, Mulligan SJ, MacVicar BA (2007) Astrocyte
control of the cerebrovasculature. Glia 55:1214–1221
87. Gregorian C, Nakashima J, Dry SM, Nghiemphu PL, Smith KB,
Ao Y, Dang J, Lawson G, Mellinghoff IK, Mischel PS, Phelps M,
Parada LF, Liu X, Sofroniew MV, Eiber FC, Wu H (2009) PTEN
dosage is essential for neuroﬁbroma development and malignant
transformation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106:19479–19484
88. Haberle J, Gorg B, Rutsch F, Schmidt E, Toutain A, Benoist JF,
Gelot A, Suc AL, Hohne W, Schliess F, Haussinger D, Koch HG
(2005) Congenital glutamine deﬁciency with glutamine syn-
thetase mutations. N Engl J Med 353:1926–1933
89. Halassa MM, Fellin T, Haydon PG (2007) The tripartite syn-
apse: roles for gliotransmission in health and disease. Trends
Mol Med 13:54–63
90. Halassa MM, Fellin T, Haydon PG (2009) Tripartite synapses:
roles for astrocytic purines in the control of synaptic physiology
and behavior. Neuropharmacology 57:343–346
91. Halassa MM, Fellin T, Takano H, Dong JH, Haydon PG (2007)
Synaptic islands deﬁned by the territory of a single astrocyte.
J Neurosci 27:6473–6477
92. Hamby ME, Hewett JA, Hewett SJ (2006) TGF-beta1 potentiates
astrocytic nitric oxide production by expanding the population of
astrocytes that express NOS-2. Glia 54:566–577
93. Haseloff RF, Blasig IE, Bauer HC, Bauer H (2005) In search of
the astrocytic factor(s) modulating blood-brain barrier functions
in brain capillary endothelial cells in vitro. Cell Mol Neurobiol
25:25–39
94. Hernandez MR, Miao H, Lukas T (2008) Astrocytes in glau-
comatous optic neuropathy. Prog Brain Res 173:353–373
95. Herrmann JE, Imura T, Song B, Qi J, Ao Y, Nguyen TK, Korsak
RA, Takeda K, Akira S, Sofroniew MV (2008) STAT3 is a
critical regulator of astrogliosis and scar formation after spinal
cord injury. J Neurosci 28:7231–7243
96. Hewett JA (2009) Determinants of regional and local diversity
within the astroglial lineage of the normal central nervous sys-
tem. J Neurochem 110:1717–1736
97. Horner PJ, Power AE, Kempermann G, Kuhn HG, Palmer TD,
Winkler J, Thal LJ, Gage FH (2000) Proliferation and differ-
entiation of progenitor cells throughout the intact adult rat spinal
cord. J Neurosci 20:2218–2228
98. Howell GR, Libby RT, Jakobs TC, Smith RS, Phalan FC, Barter
JW, Barbay JM, Marchant JK, Mahesh N, Porciatti V, Whitmore
AV, Masland RH, John SW (2007) Axons of retinal ganglion
cells are insulted in the optic nerve early in DBA/2 J glaucoma.
J Cell Biol 179:1523–1537
99. Huang TT, Sarkaria SM, Cloughesy TF, Mischel PS (2009)
Targeted therapy for malignant glioma patients: lessons learned
and the road ahead. Neurotherapeutics 6:500–512
100. Hult B, Chana G, Masliah E, Everall I (2008) Neurobiology of
HIV. Int Rev Psychiatry 20:3–13
101. Huynh DP, Vinters HV, Ho DH, Ho VV, Pulst SM (1997)
Neuronal expression and intracellular localization of presenilins
in normal and Alzheimer disease brains. J Neuropathol Exp
Neurol 56:1009–1017
102. Iadecola C, Nedergaard M (2007) Glial regulation of the cere-
bral microvasculature. Nat Neurosci 10:1369–1376
103. Imura T, Kornblum HI, Sofroniew MV (2003) The predominant
neural stem cell isolated from postnatal and adult forebrain but
not from early embryonic forebrain expresses GFAP. J Neurosci
23:2824–2832
104. Imura T, Nakano I, Kornblum HI, Sofroniew MV (2006) Phe-
notypic and functional heterogeneity of GFAP-expressing cells
in vitro: Differential expression of LeX/CD15 by GFAP-
expressing multipotent neural stem cells and non-neurogenic
astrocytes. Glia 53:277–293
105. Jacob A, Hensley LK, Safratowich BD, Quigg RJ, Alexander JJ
(2007) The role of the complement cascade in endotoxin-
induced septic encephalopathy. Lab Invest 87:1186–1194
106. Jansen LA, Uhlmann EJ, Crino PB, Gutmann DH, Wong M
(2005) Epileptogenesis and reduced inward rectiﬁer potassium
current in tuberous sclerosis complex-1-deﬁcient astrocytes.
Epilepsia 46:1871–1880
107. Jayakumar AR, Rama Rao KV, Tong XY, Norenberg MD
(2009) Calcium in the mechanism of ammonia-induced astro-
cyte swelling. J Neurochem 109(Suppl 1):252–257
108. John GR, Lee SC, Brosnan CF (2003) Cytokines: Powerful
regulators of glial cell activation. Neuroscientist 9:10–22
109. Johnson EC, Morrison JC (2009) Friend or foe? Resolving the
impact of glial responses in glaucoma. J Glaucoma 18:341–353
110. Kapur R, Donohue C, Jelinek D, Erickson RP (2009) Amelio-
ration of enteric neuropathology in a mouse model of Niemann-
Pick C by Npc1 expression in enteric glia. J Neurosci Res
87:2994–3001
Acta Neuropathol (2010) 119:7–35
31
123

----- Page 26 (native) -----
111. Khanlou N, Mathern GW, Mitchell WG, Salamon N, Pope WB,
Yong WH, Vinters HV (2009) Cortical dysplasia with prominent
Rosenthal ﬁber formation in a case of intractable pediatric epi-
lepsy. Hum Pathol 40:1200–1204
112. Koehler RC, Roman RJ, Harder DR (2009) Astrocytes and
the regulation of cerebral blood ﬂow. Trends Neurosci 32:160–169
113. Koistinaho M, Lin S, Wu X, Esterman M, Koger D, Hanson J,
Higgs R, Liu F, Malkani S, Bales KR, Paul SM (2004) Apoli-
poprotein E promotes astrocyte colocalization and degradation
of deposited amyloid-beta peptides. Nat Med 10:719–726
114. Kostianovsky AM, Maier LM, Anderson RC, Bruce JN,
Anderson DE (2008) Astrocytic regulation of human monocytic/
microglial activation. J Immunol 181:5425–5432
115. Kovacs GG, Budka H (2008) Prion diseases: from protein to cell
pathology. Am J Pathol 172:555–565
116. Kriegstein A, Alvarez-Buylla A (2009) The glial nature of
embryonic and adult neural stem cells. Annu Rev Neurosci
32:149–184
117. Kuhlmann T, Lassmann H, Bruck W (2008) Diagnosis of
inﬂammatory demyelination in biopsy specimens: a practical
approach. Acta Neuropathol 115:275–287
118. Laks DR, Masterman-Smith M, Visnyei K, Angenieux B,
Orozco NM, Foran I, Yong WH, Vinters HV, Liau LM,
Lazareff JA, Mischel PS, Cloughesy TF, Horvath S, Kornb-
lum HI (2009) Neurosphere formation is an independent
predictor of clinical outcome in malignant glioma. Stem Cells
27:980–987
119. Lennon VA, Kryzer TJ, Pittock SJ, Verkman AS, Hinson SR
(2005) IgG marker of optic-spinal multiple sclerosis binds to the
aquaporin-4 water channel. J Exp Med 202:473–477
120. Lepore AC, Rauck B, Dejea C, Pardo AC, Rao MS, Rothstein
JD, Maragakis NJ (2008) Focal transplantation-based astrocyte
replacement is neuroprotective in a model of motor neuron
disease. Nat Neurosci 11:1294–1301
121. Levison SW, Jiang FJ, Stoltzfus OK, Ducceschi MH (2000) IL-
6-type cytokines enhance epidermal growth factor-stimulated
astrocyte proliferation. Glia 32:328–337
122. Levitt P, Rakic P (1980) Immunoperoxidase localization of glial
ﬁbrillary acidic protein in radial glial cells and astrocytes of the
developing rhesus monkey brain. J Comp Neurol 193:815–840
123. Li L, Lundkvist A, Andersson D, Wilhelmsson U, Nagai N,
Pardo AC, Nodin C, Stahlberg A, Aprico K, Larsson K, Yabe T,
Moons L, Fotheringham A, Davies I, Carmeliet P, Schwartz JP,
Pekna M, Kubista M, Blomstrand F, Maragakis N, Nilsson M,
Pekny M (2008) Protective role of reactive astrocytes in brain
ischemia. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 28:468–481
124. Lim MC, Maubach G, Zhuo L (2008) Glial ﬁbrillary acidic
protein splice variants in hepatic stellate cells–expression and
regulation. Mol Cells 25:376–384
125. Lin JH, Lou N, Kang N, Takano T, Hu F, Han X, Xu Q, Lovatt
D, Torres A, Willecke K, Yang J, Kang J, Nedergaard M (2008)
A central role of connexin 43 in hypoxic preconditioning.
J Neurosci 28:681–695
126. Liu X, Bolteus AJ, Balkin DM, Henschel O, Bordey A (2006)
GFAP-expressing cells in the postnatal subventricular zone
display a unique glial phenotype intermediate between radial
glia and astrocytes. Glia 54:394–410
127. Lobsiger CS, Cleveland DW (2007) Glial cells as intrinsic
components of non-cell-autonomous neurodegenerative disease.
Nat Neurosci 10:1355–1360
128. Louis DN, Ohgaki H, Wiestler OD, Cavenee WK, Burger PC,
Jouvet A, Scheithauer BW, Kleihues P (2007) The 2007 WHO
classiﬁcation of tumours of the central nervous system. Acta
Neuropathol 114:97–109
129. Lovatt D, Sonnewald U, Waagepetersen HS, Schousboe A, He
W, Lin JH, Han X, Takano T, Wang S, Sim FJ, Goldman SA,
Nedergaard M (2007) The transcriptome and metabolic gene
signature of protoplasmic astrocytes in the adult murine cortex.
J Neurosci 27:12255–12266
130. Love S (2006) Demyelinating diseases. J Clin Pathol 59:1151–
1159
131. Lutz SE, Zhao Y, Gulinello M, Lee SC, Raine CS, Brosnan CF
(2009) Deletion of astrocyte connexins 43 and 30 leads to a
dysmyelinating phenotype and hippocampal CA1 vacuolation. J
Neurosci 29:7743–7752
132. Maginnis MS, Atwood WJ (2009) JC virus: an oncogenic virus
in animals and humans? Semin Cancer Biol 19:261–269
133. Magnus T, Carmen J, Deleon J, Xue H, Pardo AC, Lepore AC,
Mattson MP, Rao MS, Maragakis NJ (2008) Adult glial precursor
proliferation in mutant SOD1G93A mice. Glia 56:200–208
134. Malatesta P, Hack MA, Hartfuss E, Kettenmann H, Klinkert W,
Kirchhoff F, Go¨tz M (2003) Neuronal or glial progeny: Regional
differences in radial glia fate. Neuron 37:751–764
135. Manley GT, Fujimura M, Ma T, Noshita N, Filiz F, Bollen AW,
Chan P, Verkman AS (2000) Aquaporin-4 deletion in mice
reduces brain edema after acute water intoxication and ischemic
stroke. Nat Med 6:159–163
136. Maragakis NJ, Rothstein JD (2006) Mechanisms of Disease:
astrocytes in neurodegenerative disease. Nat Clin Pract Neurol
2:679–689
137. Matute C, Melone M, Vallejo-Illarramendi A, Conti F (2005)
Increased expression of the astrocytic glutamate transporter
GLT-1 in the prefrontal cortex of schizophrenics. Glia 49:451–
455
138. McArthur DL, Chute DJ, Villablanca JP (2004) Moderate and
severe traumatic brain injury: epidemiologic, imaging and
neuropathologic perspectives. Brain Pathol 14:185–194
139. McCarty JH (2009) Cell adhesion and signaling networks in
brain neurovascular units. Curr Opin Hematol 16:209–214
140. McGeer PL, McGeer EG (2008) Glial reactions in Parkinson’s
disease. Mov Disord 23:474–483
141. Meletis K, Barnabe-Heider F, Carlen M, Evergren E, Tomilin
N, Shupliakov O, Frisen J (2008) Spinal cord injury reveals
multilineage differentiation of ependymal cells. PLoS Biol
6:e182
142. Merkle FT, Tramontin AD, Garcia-Verdugo JM, Alvarez-Buylla
A (2004) Radial glia give rise to adult neural stem cells in the
subventricular zone. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 101:17528–17532
143. Messing A, Head MW, Galles K, Galbreath EJ, Goldman JE,
Brenner M (1998) Fatal encephalopathy with astrocyte inclu-
sions in GFAP transgenic mice. Am J Pathol 152:391–398
144. Meyer EM, St.Onge E, Crews FT (1984) Effects of aging on rat
cortical presynaptic cholinergic processes. Neurobiol Aging
5:315–317
145. Miguel-Hidalgo JJ (2009) The role of glial cells in drug abuse.
Curr Drug Abuse Rev 2:72–82
146. Miguel-Hidalgo JJ, Baucom C, Dilley G, Overholser JC, Melt-
zer HY, Stockmeier CA, Rajkowska G (2000) Glial ﬁbrillary
acidic protein immunoreactivity in the prefrontal cortex distin-
guishes younger from older adults in major depressive disorder.
Biol Psychiatry 48:861–873
147. Milligan ED, Watkins LR (2009) Pathological and protective
roles of glia in chronic pain. Nat Rev Neurosci 10:23–36
148. Min KJ, Yang MS, Kim SU, Jou I, Joe EH (2006) Astrocytes
induce hemeoxygenase-1 expression in microglia: a feasible
mechanism
for
preventing
excessive
brain
inﬂammation.
J Neurosci 26:1880–1887
149. Mirza B, Hadberg H, Thomsen P, Moos T (2000) The absence
of reactive astrocytosis is indicative of a unique inﬂammatory
process in Parkinson’s disease. Neuroscience 95:425–432
150. Mischel PS, Nguyen LP, Vinters HV (1995) Cerebral cortical
dysplasia
associated
with
pediatric
epilepsy
Review
of
32
Acta Neuropathol (2010) 119:7–35
123

----- Page 27 (native) -----
neuropathologic features and proposal for a grading system.
J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 54:137–153
151. Mitterauer B (2005) Nonfunctional glial proteins in tripartite
synapses: a pathophysiological model of schizophrenia. Neuro-
scientist 11:192–198
152. Miyata H, Chiang AC, Vinters HV (2004) Insulin signaling
pathways in cortical dysplasia and TSC-tubers: tissue micro-
array analysis. Ann Neurol 56:510–519
153. Morest DK, Silver J (2003) Precursors of neurons, neuroglia,
and ependymal cells in the CNS: what are they? Where are they
from? How do they get where they are going? Glia 43:6–18
154. Moseley AE, Williams MT, Schaefer TL, Bohanan CS, Neu-
mann JC, Behbehani MM, Vorhees CV, Lingrel JB (2007)
Deﬁciency in Na, K-ATPase alpha isoform genes alters spatial
learning, motor activity, and anxiety in mice. J Neurosci
27:616–626
155. Muller W, Dahmen HG (1978) Lymphocytes within glial cells
(‘‘emperipolesis’’) in a case of a granular cell tumor. Acta
Neuropathol 44:163–165
156. Myer DJ, Gurkoff GG, Lee SM, Hovda DA, Sofroniew MV
(2006) Essential protective roles of reactive astrocytes in trau-
matic brain injury. Brain 129:2761–2772
157. Nag S, Manias JL, Stewart DJ (2009) Pathology and new players
in the pathogenesis of brain edema. Acta Neuropathol 118:197–
217
158. Nagai M, Re DB, Nagata T, Chalazonitis A, Jessell TM,
Wichterle H, Przedborski S (2007) Astrocytes expressing ALS-
linked mutated SOD1 release factors selectively toxic to motor
neurons. Nat Neurosci 10:615–622
159. Nagele RG, Wegiel J, Venkataraman V, Imaki H, Wang KC
(2004) Contribution of glial cells to the development of amyloid
plaques in Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol Aging 25:663–674
160. Nakano I, Kornblum HI (2009) Methods for analysis of brain
tumor stem cell and neural stem cell self-renewal. Methods Mol
Biol 568:37–56
161. Neary JT, Zimmermann H (2009) Trophic functions of nucleo-
tides in the central nervous system. Trends Neurosci 32:189–198
162. Nedergaard M, Ransom B, Goldman SA (2003) New roles for
astrocytes: redeﬁning the functional architecture of the brain.
Trends Neurosci 26:523–530
163. Nishie M, Mori F, Ogawa M, Sannohe S, Tanno K, Kurahashi
K, Kuroda N, Wakabayashi K (2004) Multinucleated astrocytes
in old demyelinated plaques in a patient with multiple sclerosis.
Neuropathology 24:248–253
164. Noctor SC, Flint AC, Weissman TA, Dammerman RS, Krieg-
stein AR (2001) Neurons derived from radial glial cells establish
radial units in neocortex. Nature 409:714–720
165. Norenberg MD (1979) Distribution of glutamine synthetase in the
rat central nervous system. J Histochem Cytochem 27:756–762
166. Norenberg MD, Rao KV, Jayakumar AR (2005) Mechanisms of
ammonia-induced astrocyte swelling. Metab Brain Dis 20:303–
318
167. Norton WT, Aquino DA, Hozumi I, Chiu FC, Brosnan CF
(1992) Quantitative aspects of reactive gliosis: a review. Neu-
rochem Res 17:877–885
168. Obara M, Szeliga M, Albrecht J (2008) Regulation of pH in
the mammalian central nervous system under normal and
pathological conditions: facts and hypotheses. Neurochem Int
52:905–919
169. Oberheim NA, Tian GF, Han X, Peng W, Takano T, Ransom B,
Nedergaard M (2008) Loss of astrocytic domain organization in
the epileptic brain. J Neurosci 28:3264–3276
170. Oberheim NA, Takano T, Han X, He W, Lin JH, Wang F, Xu Q,
Wyatt JD, Pilcher W, Ojemann JG, Ransom BR, Goldman SA,
Nedergaard M (2009) Uniquely hominid features of adult human
astrocytes. J Neurosci 29:3276–3287
171. Occhipinti R, Somersalo E, Calvetti D (2009) Astrocytes as the
glucose shunt for glutamatergic neurons at high activity: an in
silico study. J Neurophysiol 101:2528–2538
172. Ogata K, Kosaka T (2002) Structural and quantitative analysis
of astrocytes in the mouse hippocampus. Neuroscience 113:221–
233
173. Ohab JJ, Fleming S, Blesch A, Carmichael ST (2006) A neu-
rovascular niche for neurogenesis after stroke. J Neurosci
26:13007–13016
174. Oide T, Yoshida K, Kaneko K, Ohta M, Arima K (2006) Iron
overload and antioxidative role of perivascular astrocytes in
aceruloplasminemia. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 32:170–176
175. Okada S, Nakamura M, Katoh H, Miyao T, Shimazaki T, Ishii
K, Yamane J, Yoshimura A, Iwamoto Y, Toyama Y, Okano H
(2006) Conditional ablation of Stat3 or Socs3 discloses a dual
role for reactive astrocytes after spinal cord injury. Nature Med
12:829–834
176. Omary MB, Lugea A, Lowe AW, Pandol SJ (2007) The pan-
creatic stellate cell: a star on the rise in pancreatic diseases.
J Clin Invest 117:50–59
177. Papadopoulos MC, Manley GT, Krishna S, Verkman AS (2004)
Aquaporin-4 facilitates reabsorption of excess ﬂuid in vasogenic
brain edema. FASEB J 18:1291–1293
178. Patel SC, Suresh S, Kumar U, Hu CY, Cooney A, Blanchette-
Mackie EJ, Neufeld EB, Patel RC, Brady RO, Patel YC, Pent-
chev PG, Ong WY (1999) Localization of Niemann-Pick C1
protein in astrocytes: implications for neuronal degeneration in
Niemann- Pick type C disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
96:1657–1662
179. Pekny M, Pekna M (2004) Astrocyte intermediate ﬁlaments in
CNS pathologies and regeneration. J Pathol 204:428–437
180. Pekny M, Leveen P, Pekna M, Eliasson C, Berthold CH, Wes-
termark B, Betsholtz C (1995) Mice lacking glial ﬁbrillary acidic
protein display astrocytes devoid of intermediate ﬁlaments but
develop and reproduce normally. EMBO J 14:1590–1598
181. Pellerin L, Bouzier-Sore AK, Aubert A, Serres S, Merle M,
Costalat R, Magistretti PJ (2007) Activity-dependent regulation
of energy metabolism by astrocytes: an update. Glia 55:1251–
1262
182. Perea G, Navarrete M, Araque A (2009) Tripartite synapses:
astrocytes process and control synaptic information. Trends
Neurosci 32:t421–t431
183. Peters A, Palay SL, Webster HD (1991) The ﬁne structure of the
nervous system, Third edn. Oxford University Press, New York
184. Phelps CH (1972) Barbiturate-induced glycogen accumulation
in brain. An electron microscopic study. Brain Res 39:225–234
185. Pittock SJ, Lucchinetti CF (2007) The pathology of MS: new
insights and potential clinical applications. Neurologist 13:45–
56
186. Powell EM, Geller HM (1999) Dissection of astrocyte-mediated
cues in neuronal guidance and process extension. Glia 26:73–83
187. Przedborski S, Jackson-Lewis V, Djaldetti R, Liberatore G, Vila
M, Vukosavic S, Almer G (2000) The parkinsonian toxin
MPTP: action and mechanism. Restor Neurol Neurosci 16:135–
142
188. Pun PB, Lu J, Moochhala S (2009) Involvement of ROS in BBB
dysfunction. Free Radic Res 43:348–364
189. Rajkowska G, Miguel-Hidalgo JJ (2007) Gliogenesis and glial
pathology in depression. CNS Neurol Disord Drug Targets
6:219–233
190. Rajkowska G, Miguel-Hidalgo JJ, Makkos Z, Meltzer H,
Overholser J, Stockmeier C (2002) Layer-speciﬁc reductions in
GFAP-reactive astroglia in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in
schizophrenia. Schizophr Res 57:127–138
191. Ramon Y, Cajal S (1909) Histologie du systeme nerveux de
l’homme et des vertebres. Maloine, Paris
Acta Neuropathol (2010) 119:7–35
33
123

----- Page 28 (native) -----
192. Ramon y Cajal S (1928) Degeneration and regeneration of the
nervous system. Oxford University Press, London
193. Rao KV, Panickar KS, Jayakumar AR, Norenberg MD (2005)
Astrocytes protect neurons from ammonia toxicity. Neurochem
Res 30:1311–1318
194. Rattray M, Bendotti C (2006) Does excitotoxic cell death of
motor neurons in ALS arise from glutamate transporter and
glutamate receptor abnormalities? Exp Neurol 201:15–23
195. Roelofs RF, Fischer DF, Houtman SH, Sluijs JA, Van Haren W,
Van Leeuwen FW, Hol EM (2005) Adult human subventricular,
subgranular, and subpial zones contain astrocytes with a spe-
cialized intermediate ﬁlament cytoskeleton. Glia 52:289–300
196. Rossi DJ, Brady JD, Mohr C (2007) Astrocyte metabolism and
signaling during brain ischemia. Nat Neurosci 10:1377–1386
197. Rothstein JD, Martin LJ, Kuncl RW (1992) Decreased glutamate
transport by the brain and spinal cord in amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis. N Engl J Med 326:1464–1468
198. Rothstein JD, Dykes-Hoberg M, Pardo CA, Bristol LA, Jin L,
Kunci RW, Kanai Y, Hediger MA, Wang Y, Schielke JP, Welty
DF (1996) Knockout of glutamate transporters reveals a major
role for astroglial transport in excitotoxicity and clearance of
glutamate. Neuron 16:675–686
199. Rothstein JD, Patel S, Regan MR, Haenggeli C, Huang YH,
Bergles DE, Jin L, Dykes Hoberg M, Vidensky S, Chung DS,
Toan SV, Bruijn LI, Su ZZ, Gupta P, Fisher PB (2005) Beta-
lactam antibiotics offer neuroprotection by increasing glutamate
transporter expression. Nature 433:73–77
200. Rouach N, Koulakoff A, Abudara V, Willecke K, Giaume C
(2008) Astroglial metabolic networks sustain hippocampal
synaptic transmission. Science 322:1551–1555
201. Rowland LP, Shneider NA (2001) Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
N Engl J Med 344:1688–1700
202. Ruhl A (2005) Glial cells in the gut. Neurogastroenterol Motil
17:777–790
203. Saijo K, Winner B, Carson CT, Collier JG, Boyer L, Rosenfeld
MG, Gage FH, Glass CK (2009) A Nurr1/CoREST pathway in
microglia and astrocytes protects dopaminergic neurons from
inﬂammation-induced death. Cell 137:47–59
204. Sanchez-Del-Rio M, Reuter U, Moskowitz MA (2006) New
insights into migraine pathophysiology. Curr Opin Neurol
19:294–298
205. Sattler R, Rothstein JD (2006) Regulation and dysregulation of
glutamate transporters. Handb Exp Pharmacol 175:277–303
206. Saunders NR, Ek CJ, Habgood MD, Dziegielewska KM (2008)
Barriers in the brain: a renaissance? Trends Neurosci 31:279–
286
207. Savidge TC, Sofroniew MV, Neunlist M (2007) Starring roles
for astroglia in barrier pathologies of gut and brain. Lab Invest
87:731–736
208. Savidge TC, Newman P, Pothoulakis C, Ruhl A, Neunlist M,
Bourreille A, Hurst R, Sofroniew MV (2007) Enteric glia reg-
ulate intestinal barrier function and inﬂammation via release of
S-nitrosoglutathione. Gastroenterology 132:1344–1358
209. Schlondorff D, Banas B (2009) The mesangial cell revisited: no
cell is an island. J Am Soc Nephrol 20:1179–1187
210. Schmitt A, Gofferje V, Weber M, Meyer J, Mossner R, Lesch
KP (2003) The brain-speciﬁc protein MLC1 implicated in
megalencephalic leukoencephalopathy with subcortical cysts
is expressed in glial cells in the murine brain. Glia 44:283–295
211. Schummers J, Yu H, Sur M (2008) Tuned responses of astro-
cytes and their inﬂuence on hemodynamic signals in the visual
cortex. Science 320:1638–1643
212. Seifert G, Schilling K, Steinhauser C (2006) Astrocyte dys-
function in neurological disorders: a molecular perspective. Nat
Rev Neurosci 7:194–206
213. Semmler A, Okulla T, Sastre M, Dumitrescu-Ozimek L, Heneka
MT (2005) Systemic inﬂammation induces apoptosis with var-
iable vulnerability of different brain regions. J Chem Neuroanat
30:144–157
214. Seri B, Garcia-Verdugo JM, McEwen BS, Alvarez-Buylla A
(2001) Astrocytes give rise to new neurons in the adult mam-
malian hippocampus. J Neurosci 21:7153–7160
215. Shigetomi E, Bowser DN, Sofroniew MV, Khakh BS (2008)
Two forms of astrocyte calcium excitability have distinct effects
on NMDA receptor-mediated slow inward currents in pyramidal
neurons. J Neurosci 28:6659–6663
216. Shih AY, Johnson DA, Wong G, Kraft AD, Jiang L, Erb H,
Johnson JA, Murphy TH (2003) Coordinate regulation of glu-
tathione biosynthesis and release by Nrf2-expressing glia
potently protects neurons from oxidative stress. J Neurosci
23:3394–3406
217. Shintaku M, Yutani C (2004) Oligodendrocytes within astro-
cytes (‘‘emperipolesis’’) in the white matter in Creutzfeldt-Jakob
disease. Acta Neuropathol 108:201–206
218. Si
X,
Miguel-Hidalgo
JJ,
O’Dwyer
G,
Stockmeier
CA,
Rajkowska G (2004) Age-dependent reductions in the level of
glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein in the prefrontal cortex in major
depression. Neuropsychopharmacology 29:2088–2096
219. Silver J, Miller JH (2004) Regeneration beyond the glial scar.
Nature Rev Neurosci 5:146–156
220. Simard M, Nedergaard M (2004) The neurobiology of glia in the
context of water and ion homeostasis. Neuroscience 129:877–
896
221. Simpson JE, Ince PG, Lace G, Forster G, Shaw PJ, Matthews F,
Savva G, Brayne C, Wharton SB (2008) Astrocyte phenotype
in relation to Alzheimer-type pathology in the ageing brain.
Neurobiol Aging (Epub 1 July 2008)
222. Singh N, Paterson DL (2000) Encephalitis caused by human
herpesvirus-6 in transplant recipients: relevance of a novel
neurotropic virus. Transplantation 69:2474–2479
223. Singh SK, Hawkins C, Clarke ID, Squire JA, Bayani J, Hide T,
Henkelman RM, Cusimano MD, Dirks PB (2004) Identiﬁcation
of human brain tumour initiating cells. Nature 432:396–401
224. Sofroniew MV (2000) Astrocyte failure as a cause of CNS
dysfunction. Mol Psychiatry 5:230–232
225. Sofroniew MV (2005) Reactive astrocytes in neural repair and
protection. Neuroscientist 5:400–407
226. Sofroniew MV (2009) Molecular dissection of reactive as-
trogliosis and glial scar formation. Trends Neurosci 32:638–647
227. Song YJC, Halliday GM, Holton JL, Lashley T, O’Sullivan SS,
McCann H, Lees AJ, Ozawa T, Williams DR, Lockhart PJ,
Revesz TR (2009) Degeneration in different parkinsonian syn-
dromes
relates
to
astrocyte
type
and
astrocyte
protein
expression. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 68:1073–1083
228. Sontheimer H (2008) A role for glutamate in growth and inva-
sion of primary brain tumors. J Neurochem 105:287–295
229. Stellwagen D, Malenka RC (2006) Synaptic scaling mediated by
glial TNF-alpha. Nature 440:1054–1059
230. Stevens B, Allen NJ, Vazquez LE, Howell GR, Christopherson
KS, Nouri N, Micheva KD, Mehalow AK, Huberman AD,
Stafford B, Sher A, Litke AM, Lambris JD, Smith SJ, John SW,
Barres BA (2007) The classical complement cascade mediates
CNS synapse elimination. Cell 131:1164–1178
231. Suh SW, Bergher JP, Anderson CM, Treadway JL, Fosgerau K,
Swanson RA (2007) Astrocyte glycogen sustains neuronal
activity
during
hypoglycemia:
studies
with
the
glycogen
phosphorylase inhibitor CP-316, 819 ([R-R*, S*]-5-chloro-N-
[2-hydroxy-3-(methoxymethylamino)-3-oxo-1-(phenylmet hyl)
propyl]-1H-indole-2-carboxamide).
J
Pharmacol
Exp
Ther
321:45–50
34
Acta Neuropathol (2010) 119:7–35
123

----- Page 29 (native) -----
232. Sun D, Lye-Barthel M, Masland RH, Jakobs TC (2009) The
morphology and spatial arrangement of astrocytes in the optic
nerve head of the mouse. J Comp Neurol 516:1–19
233. Suzuki M, McHugh J, Tork C, Shelley B, Klein SM, Aebischer
P, Svendsen CN (2007) GDNF secreting human neural pro-
genitor cells protect dying motor neurons, but not their
projection to muscle, in a rat model of familial ALS. PLoS One
2:e689
234. Swanson RA, Ying W, Kauppinen TM (2004) Astrocyte inﬂu-
ences on ischemic neuronal death. Curr Mol Med 4:193–205
235. Szymocha R, Akaoka H, Dutuit M, Malcus C, Didier-Bazes M,
Belin MF, Giraudon P (2000) Human T-cell lymphotropic virus
type 1-infected T lymphocytes impair catabolism and uptake of
glutamate by astrocytes via Tax-1 and tumor necrosis factor
alpha. J Virol 74:6433–6441
236. Takahashi T, Fujihara K, Nakashima I, Misu T, Miyazawa I,
Nakamura M, Watanabe S, Shiga Y, Kanaoka C, Fujimori J,
Sato S, Itoyama Y (2007) Anti-aquaporin-4 antibody is involved
in the pathogenesis of NMO: a study on antibody titre. Brain
130:1235–1243
237. Takano T, Oberheim N, Cotrina ML, Nedergaard M (2009)
Astrocytes and ischemic injury. Stroke 40:S8–12
238. Takano T, Kang J, Jaiswal JK, Simon SM, Lin JH, Yu Y, Li Y,
Yang J, Dienel G, Zielke HR, Nedergaard M (2005) Receptor-
mediated glutamate release from volume sensitive channels in
astrocytes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102:16466–16471
239. Thal DR, Schultz C, Dehghani F, Yamaguchi H, Braak H, Braak
E (2000) Amyloid beta-protein (Abeta)-containing astrocytes
are located preferentially near N-terminal-truncated Abeta
deposits in the human entorhinal cortex. Acta Neuropathol
100:608–617
240. Tian GF, Azmi H, Takano T, Xu Q, Peng W, Lin J, Oberheim N,
Lou N, Wang X, Zielke HR, Kang J, Nedergaard M (2005) An
astrocytic basis of epilepsy. Nat Med 11:973–981
241. Tiegs G, Lohse AW (2009) Immune tolerance: what is unique
about the liver. J Autoimmun (Epub 1 September 2009)
242. Tomita M, Khan RL, Blehm BH, Santoro TJ (2004) The
potential pathogenetic link between peripheral immune activa-
tion and the central innate immune response in neuropsychiatric
systemic lupus erythematosus. Med Hypotheses 62:325–335
243. Ullian EK, Sapperstein SK, Christopherson KS, Barres BA
(2001) Control of synapse number by glia. Science 291:657–
661
244. van Kollenburg B, van Dijk J, Garbern J, Thomas AA, Scheper
GC, Powers JM, van der Knaap MS (2006) Glia-speciﬁc acti-
vation of all pathways of the unfolded protein response in
vanishing white matter disease. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol
65:707–715
245. Vargas MR, Johnson DA, Sirkis DW, Messing A, Johnson JA
(2008) Nrf2 activation in astrocytes protects against neurode-
generation in mouse models of familial amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis. J Neurosci 28:13574–13581
246. Vinters HV, Miyata H (2006) Neuropathologic features of
tuberous sclerosis. In: McLendon RE, Rosenblum MK, Bigner
DD (eds) Russel and Rubenstein’s Pathology of Tumors of the
Nervous System, 7th edn. Hodder Arnold, Oxford, pp 955–969
247. Vinters HV, Farrell MA, Mischel PS, Anders K (1998) Diag-
nostic Neuropathology. Marcel Dekker, Inc., New York
248. Vinters HV, Kwok MK, Ho HW, Anders KH, Tomiyasu U,
Wolfson WL, Robert F (1989) Cytomegalovirus in the nervous
system of patients with the acquired immune deﬁciency syn-
drome. Brain 112(Pt 1):245–268
249. Volterra A, Meldolesi J (2005) Astrocytes, from brain glue to
communication elements: the revolution continues. Nat Rev
Neurosci 6:626–640
250. von Einsiedel RW, Samorei IW, Pawlita M, Zwissler B, Deubel
M, Vinters HV (2004) New JC virus infection patterns by in situ
polymerase chain reaction in brains of acquired immunodeﬁ-
ciency
syndrome
patients
with
progressive
multifocal
leukoencephalopathy. J Neurovirol 10:1–11
251. Voskuhl RR, Peterson RS, Song B, Ao Y, Morales LB,
Tiwari-Woodruff S, Sofroniew MV (2009) Reactive astrocytes
form
scar-like
perivascular
barriers
to
leukocytes
during
adaptive
immune
inﬂammation
of
the
CNS.
J
Neurosci
29:11511–11522
252. Voutsinos-Porche B, Bonvento G, Tanaka K, Steiner P, Welker
E, Chatton JY, Magistretti PJ, Pellerin L (2003) Glial glutamate
transporters mediate a functional metabolic crosstalk between
neurons and astrocytes in the mouse developing cortex. Neuron
37:275–286
253. Wang Z, Trillo-Pazos G, Kim SY, Canki M, Morgello S, Sharer
LR, Gelbard HA, Su ZZ, Kang DC, Brooks AI, Fisher PB,
Volsky DJ (2004) Effects of human immunodeﬁciency virus
type 1 on astrocyte gene expression and function: potential role
in neuropathogenesis. J Neurovirol 10(Suppl 1):25–32
254. Weggen S, Diehlmann A, Buslei R, Beyreuther K, Bayer TA
(1998) Prominent expression of presenilin-1 in senile plaques
and reactive astrocytes in Alzheimer’s disease brain. Neurore-
port 9:3279–3283
255. Weidenfeller C, Svendsen CN, Shusta EV (2007) Differentiating
embryonic neural progenitor cells induce blood-brain barrier
properties. J Neurochem 101:555–565
256. Whitney KD, McNamara JO (2000) GluR3 autoantibodies
destroy neural cells in a complement-dependent manner modu-
lated by complement regulatory proteins. J Neurosci 20:7307–
7316
257. Wilhelmsson U, Bushong EA, Price DL, Smarr BL, Phung V,
Terada M, Ellisman MH, Pekny M (2006) Redeﬁning the con-
cept of reactive astrocytes as cells that remain within their
unique domains upon reaction to injury. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 103:17513–17518
258. Winau F, Quack C, Darmoise A, Kaufmann SH (2008) Starring
stellate cells in liver immunology. Curr Opin Immunol 20:68–74
259. Winau F, Hegasy G, Weiskirchen R, Weber S, Cassan C, Sieling
PA, Modlin RL, Liblau RS, Gressner AM, Kaufmann SH (2007)
Ito cells are liver-resident antigen-presenting cells for activating
T cell responses. Immunity 26:117–129
260. Wolf F, Kirchhoff F (2008) Neuroscience. Imaging astrocyte
activity. Science 320:1597–1599
261. Wyss-Coray T, Loike JD, Brionne TC, Lu E, Anankov R, Yan F,
Silverstein SC, Husemann J (2003) Adult mouse astrocytes
degrade amyloid-beta in vitro and in situ. Nat Med 9:453–457
262. Yang H, Downs JC, Sigal IA, Roberts MD, Thompson H,
Burgoyne CF (2009) Deformation of the normal monkey optic
nerve head connective tissue following acute iop elevation
within 3-D histomorphometric reconstructions. Invest Ophthal-
mol Vis Sci (Epub 2009/2007/2025)
263. Yeh TH, Lee da Y, Gianino SM, Gutmann DH (2009) Micro-
array analyses reveal regional astrocyte heterogeneity with
implications for neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 (NF1)-regulated glial
proliferation. Glia 57:1239–1249
264. Zador Z, Stiver S, Wang V, Manley GT (2009) Role of aqua-
porin-4 in cerebral edema and stroke. Handb Exp Pharmacol
190:159–170
265. Zhang M, Strnatka D, Donohue C, Hallows JL, Vincent I,
Erickson RP (2008) Astrocyte-only Npc1 reduces neuronal
cholesterol and triples life span of Npc1-/- mice. J Neurosci Res
86:2848–2856
266. Zhao L, Burt AD (2007) The diffuse stellate cell system. J Mol
Histol 38:53–64
Acta Neuropathol (2010) 119:7–35
35
123