

----- Page 1 (native) -----
Science faculty’s subtle gender biases favor
male students
Corinne A. Moss-Racusina,b, John F. Dovidiob, Victoria L. Brescollc, Mark J. Grahama,d, and Jo Handelsmana,1
aDepartment of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, bDepartment of Psychology, cSchool of Management, and dDepartment of Psychiatry,
Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520
Edited* by Shirley Tilghman, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, and approved August 21, 2012 (received for review July 2, 2012)
Despite efforts to recruit and retain more women, a stark gender
disparity persists within academic science. Abundant research has
demonstrated gender bias in many demographic groups, but has
yet to experimentally investigate whether science faculty exhibit
a bias against female students that could contribute to the gender
disparity in academic science. In a randomized double-blind study
(n = 127), science faculty from research-intensive universities
rated the application materials of a student—who was randomly
assigned either a male or female name—for a laboratory manager
position. Faculty participants rated the male applicant as signiﬁ-
cantly more competent and hireable than the (identical) female
applicant. These participants also selected a higher starting salary
and offered more career mentoring to the male applicant. The
gender of the faculty participants did not affect responses, such
that female and male faculty were equally likely to exhibit bias
against the female student. Mediation analyses indicated that the
female student was less likely to be hired because she was viewed
as less competent. We also assessed faculty participants’ preexist-
ing subtle bias against women using a standard instrument and
found that preexisting subtle bias against women played a moder-
ating role, such that subtle bias against women was associated
with less support for the female student, but was unrelated to
reactions to the male student. These results suggest that interven-
tions addressing faculty gender bias might advance the goal of
increasing the participation of women in science.
diversity | lifestyle choices | science education | science workforce
A
2012 report from the President’s Council of Advisors on
Science and Technology indicates that training scientists
and engineers at current rates will result in a deﬁcit of 1,000,000
workers to meet United States workforce demands over the next
decade (1). To help close this formidable gap, the report calls for
the increased training and retention of women, who are starkly
underrepresented within many ﬁelds of science, especially
among the professoriate (2–4). Although the proportion of sci-
ence degrees granted to women has increased (5), there is
a persistent disparity between the number of women receiving
PhDs and those hired as junior faculty (1–4). This gap suggests
that the problem will not resolve itself solely by more generations
of women moving through the academic pipeline but that in-
stead, women’s advancement within academic science may be
actively impeded.
With evidence suggesting that biological sex differences in
inherent aptitude for math and science are small or nonexistent
(6–8), the efforts of many researchers and academic leaders to
identify causes of the science gender disparity have focused in-
stead on the life choices that may compete with women’s pursuit
of the most demanding positions. Some research suggests that
these lifestyle choices (whether free or constrained) likely con-
tribute to the gender imbalance (9–11), but because the majority
of these studies are correlational, whether lifestyle factors are
solely or primarily responsible remains unclear. Still, some
researchers have argued that women’s preference for nonscience
disciplines and their tendency to take on a disproportionate
amount of child- and family-care are the primary causes of the
gender disparity in science (9–11), and that it “is not caused by
discrimination in these domains” (10). This assertion has re-
ceived substantial attention and generated signiﬁcant debate
among the scientiﬁc community, leading some to conclude that
gender discrimination indeed does not exist nor contribute to the
gender disparity within academic science (e.g., refs. 12 and 13).
Despite this controversy, experimental research testing for the
presence and magnitude of gender discrimination in the bi-
ological and physical sciences has yet to be conducted. Although
acknowledging that various lifestyle choices likely contribute to
the gender imbalance in science (9–11), the present research is
unique in investigating whether faculty gender bias exists within
academic biological and physical sciences, and whether it might
exert an independent effect on the gender disparity as students
progress through the pipeline to careers in science. Speciﬁcally,
the present experiment examined whether, given an equally
qualiﬁed male and female student, science faculty members
would show preferential evaluation and treatment of the male
student to work in their laboratory. Although the correlational
and related laboratory studies discussed below suggest that such
bias is likely (contrary to previous arguments) (9–11), we know of
no previous experiments that have tested for faculty bias against
female students within academic science.
If faculty express gender biases, we are not suggesting that
these biases are intentional or stem from a conscious desire to
impede the progress of women in science. Past studies indicate
that people’s behavior is shaped by implicit or unintended biases,
stemming from repeated exposure to pervasive cultural stereo-
types (14) that portray women as less competent but simulta-
neously emphasize their warmth and likeability compared with
men (15). Despite signiﬁcant decreases in overt sexism over the
last few decades (particularly among highly educated people)
(16), these subtle gender biases are often still held by even the
most egalitarian individuals (17), and are exhibited by both men
and women (18). Given this body of work, we expected that fe-
male faculty would be just as likely as male faculty to express an
unintended bias against female undergraduate science students.
The fact that these prevalent biases often remain undetected
highlights the need for an experimental investigation to de-
termine whether they may be present within academic science
and, if so, raise awareness of their potential impact.
Whether these gender biases operate in academic sciences
remains an open question. On the one hand, although consid-
erable research demonstrates gender bias in a variety of other
domains (19–23), science faculty members may not exhibit this
Author contributions: C.A.M.-R., J.F.D., V.L.B., M.J.G., and J.H. designed research; C.A.M.-R.
performed research; C.A.M.-R. analyzed data; and C.A.M.-R., J.F.D., V.L.B., M.J.G., and J.H.
wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
*This Direct Submission article had a prearranged editor.
Freely available online through the PNAS open access option.
1To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: jo.handelsman@yale.edu.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1211286109/-/DCSupplemental.
16474–16479
|
PNAS
|
October 9, 2012
|
vol. 109
|
no. 41
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1211286109

----- Page 2 (native) -----
bias because they have been rigorously trained to be objective.
On the other hand, research demonstrates that people who value
their objectivity and fairness are paradoxically particularly likely
to fall prey to biases, in part because they are not on guard
against subtle bias (24, 25). Thus, by investigating whether sci-
ence faculty exhibit a bias that could contribute to the gender
disparity within the ﬁelds of science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (in which objectivity is emphasized), the cur-
rent study addressed critical theoretical and practical gaps in that
it provided an experimental test of faculty discrimination against
female students within academic science.
A number of lines of research suggest that such discrimination
is likely. Science is robustly male gender-typed (26, 27), resour-
ces are inequitably distributed among men and women in many
academic science settings (28), some undergraduate women
perceive unequal treatment of the genders within science ﬁelds
(29), and nonexperimental evidence suggests that gender bias is
present in other ﬁelds (19). Some experimental evidence sug-
gests that even though evaluators report liking women more than
men (15), they judge women as less competent than men even
when they have identical backgrounds (20). However, these
studies used undergraduate students as participants (rather than
experienced faculty members), and focused on performance
domains outside of academic science, such as completing per-
ceptual tasks (21), writing nonscience articles (22), and being
evaluated for a corporate managerial position (23).
Thus, whether aspiring women scientists encounter discrimi-
nation from faculty members remains unknown. The formative
predoctoral years are a critical window, because students’ expe-
riences at this juncture shape both their beliefs about their own
abilities and subsequent persistence in science (30, 31). There-
fore, we selected this career stage as the focus of the present
study because it represents an opportunity to address issues that
manifest immediately and also resurface much later, potentially
contributing to the persistent faculty gender disparity (32, 33).
Current Study
In addition to determining whether faculty expressed a bias
against female students, we also sought to identify the processes
contributing to this bias. To do so, we investigated whether
faculty members’ perceptions of student competence would help
to explain why they would be less likely to hire a female (relative
to an identical male) student for a laboratory manager position.
Additionally, we examined the role of faculty members’ preex-
isting subtle bias against women. We reasoned that pervasive
cultural messages regarding women’s lack of competence in sci-
ence could lead faculty members to hold gender-biased attitudes
that might subtly affect their support for female (but not male)
science students. These generalized, subtly biased attitudes to-
ward women could impel faculty to judge equivalent students
differently as a function of their gender.
The present study sought to test for differences in faculty
perceptions and treatment of equally qualiﬁed men and women
pursuing careers in science and, if such a bias were discovered,
reveal its mechanisms and consequences within academic sci-
ence. We focused on hiring for a laboratory manager position as
the primary dependent variable of interest because it functions as
a professional launching pad for subsequent opportunities. As
secondary measures, which are related to hiring, we assessed: (i)
perceived student competence; (ii) salary offers, which reﬂect
the extent to which a student is valued for these competitive
positions; and (iii) the extent to which the student was viewed as
deserving of faculty mentoring.
Our hypotheses were that: Science faculty’s perceptions and
treatment of students would reveal a gender bias favoring male
students in perceptions of competence and hireability, salary
conferral, and willingness to mentor (hypothesis A); Faculty gen-
der would not inﬂuence this gender bias (hypothesis B); Hiring
discrimination against the female student would be mediated (i.e.,
explained) by faculty perceptions that a female student is less
competent than an identical male student (hypothesis C); and
Participants’ preexisting subtle bias against women would mod-
erate (i.e., impact) results, such that subtle bias against women
would be negatively related to evaluations of the female student,
but unrelated to evaluations of the male student (hypothesis D).
Results
A broad, nationwide sample of biology, chemistry, and physics
professors (n = 127) evaluated the application materials of an
undergraduate science student who had ostensibly applied for
a science laboratory manager position. All participants received
the same materials, which were randomly assigned either the
name of a male (n = 63) or a female (n = 64) student; student
gender was thus the only variable that differed between con-
ditions. Using previously validated scales, participants rated the
student’s competence and hireability, as well as the amount of
salary and amount of mentoring they would offer the student.
Faculty participants believed that their feedback would be
shared with the student they had rated (see Materials and
Methods for details).
Student Gender Differences. The competence, hireability, salary con-
ferral, and mentoring scales were each submitted to a two (student
gender; male, female) × two (faculty gender; male, female) be-
tween-subjects ANOVA. In each case, the effect of student gender
was signiﬁcant (all P < 0.01), whereas the effect of faculty partici-
pant gender and their interaction was not (all P > 0.19). Tests of
simple effects (all d > 0.60) indicated that faculty participants
viewed the female student as less competent [t(125) = 3.89, P <
0.001] and less hireable [t(125) = 4.22, P < 0.001] than the identical
male student (Fig. 1 and Table 1). Faculty participants also offered
less career mentoring to the female student than to the male student
[t(125) = 3.77, P < 0.001]. The mean starting salary offered the
female student, $26,507.94, was signiﬁcantly lower than that of
$30,238.10 to the male student [t(124) = 3.42, P < 0.01] (Fig. 2).
These results support hypothesis A.
In support of hypothesis B, faculty gender did not affect bias
(Table 1). Tests of simple effects (all d < 0.33) indicated that
female faculty participants did not rate the female student as
more competent [t(62) = 0.06, P = 0.95] or hireable [t(62) = 0.41,
P = 0.69] than did male faculty. Female faculty also did not
offer more mentoring [t(62) = 0.29, P = 0.77] or a higher salary
[t(61) = 1.14, P = 0.26] to the female student than did their male
Fig. 1.
Competence, hireability, and mentoring by student gender condition
(collapsed across faculty gender). All student gender differences are signiﬁcant
(P < 0.001). Scales range from 1 to 7, with higher numbers reﬂecting a greater
extent of each variable. Error bars represent SEs. nmale student condition = 63,
nfemale student condition = 64.
Moss-Racusin et al.
PNAS
|
October 9, 2012
|
vol. 109
|
no. 41
|
16475
PSYCHOLOGICAL AND
COGNITIVE SCIENCES

----- Page 3 (native) -----
colleagues. In addition, faculty participants’ scientiﬁc ﬁeld, age,
and tenure status had no effect (all P > 0.53). Thus, the bias
appears pervasive among faculty and is not limited to a certain
demographic subgroup.
Mediation and Moderation Analyses. Thus far, we have considered
the results for competence, hireability, salary conferral, and
mentoring separately to demonstrate the converging results
across these individual measures. However, composite indices of
measures that converge on an underlying construct are more
statistically reliable, stable, and resistant to error than are each of
the individual items (e.g., refs. 34 and 35). Consistent with this
logic, the established approach to measuring the broad concept
of target competence typically used in this type of gender bias
research is to standardize and average the competence scale
items and the salary conferral variable to create one composite
competence index, and to use this stable convergent measure for
all analyses (e.g., refs. 36 and 37). Because this approach
obscures mean salary differences between targets, we chose to
present salary as a distinct dependent variable up to this point, to
enable a direct test of the potential discrepancy in salary offered
to the male and female student targets. However, to rigorously
examine the processes underscoring faculty gender bias, we
reverted to standard practices at this point by averaging the
standardized salary variable with the competence scale items to
create a robust composite competence variable (α = 0.86). This
composite competence variable was used in all subsequent me-
diation and moderation analyses.
Evidence emerged for hypothesis C, the predicted mediation
(i.e., causal path; see SI Materials and Methods: Additional
Analyses for more information on mediation and the results of
additional mediation analyses). The initially signiﬁcant impact of
student gender on hireability (β = −0.35, P < 0.001) was reduced
in magnitude and dropped to nonsigniﬁcance (β = −0.10, P =
0.13) after accounting for the impact of student composite
competence (which was a strong predictor, β = 0.69, P < 0.001),
Sobel’s Z = 3.94, P < 0.001 (Fig. 3). This pattern of results
provides evidence for full mediation, indicating that the female
student was less likely to be hired than the identical male be-
cause she was viewed as less competent overall.
We also conducted moderation analysis (i.e., testing for fac-
tors that could amplify or attenuate the demonstrated effect) to
determine the impact of faculty participants’ preexisting subtle
bias against women on faculty participants’ perceptions and
treatment of male and female science students (see SI Materials
and Methods: Additional Analyses for more information on and
the results of additional moderation analyses). For this purpose,
we administered the Modern Sexism Scale (38), a well-validated
instrument frequently used for this purpose (SI Materials and
Methods). Consistent with our intentions, this scale measures
unintentional negativity toward women, as contrasted with
a more blatant form of conscious hostility toward women.
Results of multiple regression analyses indicated that partic-
ipants’ preexisting subtle bias against women signiﬁcantly inter-
acted with student gender to predict perceptions of student
composite competence (β = −0.39, P < 0.01), hireability (β =
−0.31, P < 0.05), and mentoring (β = −0.55, P < 0.001). To in-
terpret these signiﬁcant interactions, we examined the simple
effects separately by student gender. Results revealed that the
more preexisting subtle bias participants exhibited against
women, the less composite competence (β = −0.36, P < 0.01)
and hireability (β = −0.39, P < 0.01) they perceived in the fe-
male student, and the less mentoring (β = −0.53, P < 0.001) they
were willing to offer her. In contrast, faculty participants’ levels
of preexisting subtle bias against women were unrelated to the
perceptions of the male student’s composite competence (β =
0.16, P = 0.22) and hireability (β = 0.07, P = 0.59), and the
amount of mentoring (β = 0.22, P = 0.09) they were willing to
offer him. [Although this effect is marginally signiﬁcant, its di-
rection suggests that faculty participants’ preexisting subtle bias
against women may actually have made them more inclined to
mentor the male student relative to the female student (al-
though this effect should be interpreted with caution because of
its marginal signiﬁcance).] Thus, it appears that faculty partic-
ipants’ preexisting subtle gender bias undermined support for
the female student but was unrelated to perceptions and treat-
ment of the male student. These ﬁndings support hypothesis D.
Table 1.
Means for student competence, hireability, mentoring and salary conferral by student gender condition
and faculty gender
Male target student
Female target student
Male faculty
Female faculty
Male faculty
Female faculty
Variable
Mean
SD
Mean
SD
Mean
SD
Mean
SD
d
Competence
4.01a
(0.92)
4.1a
(1.19)
3.33b
(1.07)
3.32b
(1.10)
0.71
Hireability
3.74a
(1.24)
3.92a
(1.27)
2.96b
(1.13)
2.84b
(0.84)
0.75
Mentoring
4.74a
(1.11)
4.73a
(1.31)
4.00b
(1.21)
3.91b
(0.91)
0.67
Salary
30,520.83a
(5,764.86)
29,333.33a
(4,952.15)
27,111,11b
(6,948.58)
25,000.00b
(7,965.56)
0.60
Scales for competence, hireability, and mentoring range from 1 to 7, with higher numbers reﬂecting a greater extent of each
variable. The scale for salary conferral ranges from $15,000 to $50,000. Means with different subscripts within each row differ
signiﬁcantly (P < 0.05). Effect sizes (Cohen’s d) represent target student gender differences (no faculty gender differences were
signiﬁcant, all P > 0.14). Positive effect sizes favor male students. Conventional small, medium, and large effect sizes for d are 0.20,
0.50, and 0.80, respectively (51). nmale student condition = 63, nfemale student condition = 64. ***P < 0.001.
Fig. 2.
Salary conferral by student gender condition (collapsed across faculty
gender). The student gender difference is signiﬁcant (P < 0.01). The scale
ranges from $15,000 to $50,000. Error bars represent SEs. nmale student condition =
63, nfemale student condition = 64.
16476
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1211286109
Moss-Racusin et al.

----- Page 4 (native) -----
Finally, using a previously validated scale, we also measured
how much faculty participants liked the student (see SI Materials
and Methods). In keeping with a large body of literature (15),
faculty participants reported liking the female (mean = 4.35,
SD = 0.93) more than the male student [(mean = 3.91, SD =
0.1.08), t(125) = −2.44, P < 0.05]. However, consistent with this
previous literature, liking the female student more than the male
student did not translate into positive perceptions of her com-
posite competence or material outcomes in the form of a job
offer, an equitable salary, or valuable career mentoring. More-
over, only composite competence (and not likeability) helped to
explain why the female student was less likely to be hired; in
mediation analyses, student gender condition (β = −0.48, P <
0.001) remained a strong predictor of hireability along with
likeability (β = 0.60, P < 0.001). These ﬁndings underscore the
point that faculty participants did not exhibit outright hostility or
dislike toward female students, but were instead affected by
pervasive gender stereotypes, unintentionally downgrading the
competence, hireability, salary, and mentoring of a female stu-
dent compared with an identical male.
Discussion
The present study is unique in investigating subtle gender bias on
the part of faculty in the biological and physical sciences. It
therefore informs the debate on possible causes of the gender
disparity in academic science by providing unique experimental
evidence that science faculty of both genders exhibit bias against
female undergraduates. As a controlled experiment, it ﬁlls
a critical gap in the existing literature, which consisted only of
experiments in other domains (with undergraduate students as
participants) and correlational data that could not conclusively
rule out the inﬂuence of other variables.
Our results revealed that both male and female faculty judged
a female student to be less competent and less worthy of being
hired than an identical male student, and also offered her
a smaller starting salary and less career mentoring. Although the
differences in ratings may be perceived as modest, the effect
sizes were all moderate to large (d = 0.60–0.75). Thus, the
current results suggest that subtle gender bias is important to
address because it could translate into large real-world dis-
advantages in the judgment and treatment of female science
students (39). Moreover, our mediation ﬁndings shed light on
the processes responsible for this bias, suggesting that the female
student was less likely to be hired than the male student because
she was perceived as less competent. Additionally, moderation
results indicated that faculty participants’ preexisting subtle bias
against women undermined their perceptions and treatment of
the female (but not the male) student, further suggesting that
chronic subtle biases may harm women within academic science.
Use of a randomized controlled design and established practices
from audit study methodology support the ecological validity
and educational implications of our ﬁndings (SI Materials
and Methods).
It is noteworthy that female faculty members were just as likely
as their male colleagues to favor the male student. The fact that
faculty members’ bias was independent of their gender, scientiﬁc
discipline, age, and tenure status suggests that it is likely un-
intentional, generated from widespread cultural stereotypes
rather than a conscious intention to harm women (17). Addi-
tionally, the fact that faculty participants reported liking the fe-
male more than the male student further underscores the point
that our results likely do not reﬂect faculty members’ overt
hostility toward women. Instead, despite expressing warmth to-
ward emerging female scientists, faculty members of both gen-
ders appear to be affected by enduring cultural stereotypes about
women’s lack of science competence that translate into biases in
student evaluation and mentoring.
Our careful selection of expert participants revealed gender
discrimination among existing science faculty members who in-
teract with students on a regular basis (SI Materials and Methods:
Subjects and Recruitment Strategy). This method allowed for a high
degree of ecological validity and generalizability relative to an
approach using nonexpert participants, such as other under-
graduates or lay people unfamiliar with laboratory manager job
requirements and academic science mentoring (i.e., the partic-
ipants in much psychological research on gender discrimination).
The results presented here reinforce those of Stenpries, Anders,
and Ritzke (40), the only other experiment we know of that
recruited faculty participants. Because this previous experiment
also indicated bias within academic science, its results raised se-
rious concerns about the potential for faculty bias within the bi-
ological and physical sciences, casting further doubt on assertions
(based on correlational data) that such biases do not exist (9–11).
In the Steinpreis et al. experiment, psychologists were more likely
to hire a psychology faculty job applicant when the applicant’s
curriculum vitae was assigned a male (rather than female) name
(40). This previous work invited a study that would extend the
ﬁnding to faculty in the biological and physical sciences and to
reactions to undergraduates, whose competence was not already
fairly established by accomplishments associated with the ad-
vanced career status of the faculty target group of the previous
study. By providing this unique investigation of faculty bias against
female students in biological and physical sciences, the present
study extends past work to a critical early career stage, and to ﬁelds
where women’s underrepresentation remains stark (2–4).
Indeed, our ﬁndings raise concerns about the extent to which
negative predoctoral experiences may shape women’s sub-
sequent decisions about persistence and career specialization.
Following conventions established in classic experimental studies
to create enough ambiguity to leave room for potentially biased
responses (20, 23), the student applicants in the present research
were described as qualiﬁed to succeed in academic science (i.e.,
having coauthored a publication after obtaining 2 y of research
experience), but not irrefutably excellent. As such, they repre-
sented a majority of aspiring scientists, and were precisely the
type of students most affected by faculty judgments and men-
toring (see SI Materials and Methods for more discussion). Our
results raise the possibility that not only do such women en-
counter biased judgments of their competence and hireability,
but also receive less faculty encouragement and ﬁnancial rewards
than identical male counterparts. Because most students depend
on feedback from their environments to calibrate their own
worth (41), faculty’s assessments of students’ competence likely
contribute to students’ self-efﬁcacy and goal setting as scientists,
Student Gender
Student 
Competence 
(Composite)
Student 
Hireability
-0.37***
(0.73***)
0.69***
(-0.35***)
-0.10
Fig. 3.
Student gender difference hiring mediation. Values are standard-
ized regression coefﬁcients. The value in parentheses reﬂects a bivariate
analysis. The dashed line represents the mediated path. The composite stu-
dent competence variable consists of the averaged standardized salary
variable and the competence scale items. Student gender is coded such that
male = 0, female = 1. nmale student condition = 63, nfemale student condition = 64.
***P < 0.001.
Moss-Racusin et al.
PNAS
|
October 9, 2012
|
vol. 109
|
no. 41
|
16477
PSYCHOLOGICAL AND
COGNITIVE SCIENCES

----- Page 5 (native) -----
which may inﬂuence decisions much later in their careers.
Likewise, inasmuch as the advice and mentoring that students
receive affect their ambitions and choices, it is signiﬁcant that the
faculty in this study were less inclined to mentor women than
men. This ﬁnding raises the possibility that women may opt out
of academic science careers in part because of diminished
competence judgments, rewards, and mentoring received in the
early years of the careers. In sum, the predoctoral years repre-
sent a window during which students’ experiences of faculty bias
or encouragement are particularly likely to shape their persis-
tence in academic science (30–33). Thus, the present study not
only ﬁlls an important gap in the research literature, but also has
critical implications for pressing social and educational issues
associated with the gender disparity in science.
If women’s decisions to leave science ﬁelds when or before
they reach the faculty level are inﬂuenced by unequal treatment
by undergraduate advisors, then existing efforts to create more
ﬂexible work settings (42) or increase women’s identiﬁcation
with science (27) may not fully alleviate a critical underlying
problem. Our results suggest that academic policies and men-
toring interventions targeting undergraduate advisors could
contribute to reducing the gender disparity. Future research
should evaluate the efﬁcacy of educating faculty and students
about the existence and impact of bias within academia, an ap-
proach that has reduced racial bias among students (43). Edu-
cational efforts might address research on factors that attenuate
gender bias in real-world settings, such as increasing women’s
self-monitoring (44). Our results also point to the importance of
establishing
objective,
transparent
student
evaluation
and
admissions criteria to guard against observers’ tendency to un-
intentionally use different standards when assessing women rel-
ative to men (45, 46). Without such actions, faculty bias against
female undergraduates may continue to undermine meritocratic
advancement, to the detriment of research and education.
Conclusions
The dearth of women within academic science reﬂects a signiﬁ-
cant wasted opportunity to beneﬁt from the capabilities of our
best potential scientists, whether male or female. Although
women have begun to enter some science ﬁelds in greater
numbers (5), their mere increased presence is not evidence of
the absence of bias. Rather, some women may persist in aca-
demic science despite the damaging effects of unintended gender
bias on the part of faculty. Similarly, it is not yet possible to
conclude that the preferences for other ﬁelds and lifestyle
choices (9–11) that lead many women to leave academic science
(even after obtaining advanced degrees) are not themselves
inﬂuenced by experiences of bias, at least to some degree. To the
extent that faculty gender bias impedes women’s full participa-
tion in science, it may undercut not only academic meritocracy,
but also the expansion of the scientiﬁc workforce needed for the
next decade’s advancement of national competitiveness (1).
Materials and Methods
Participants. We recruited faculty participants from Biology, Chemistry, and
Physics departments at three public and three private large, geographically
diverse research-intensive universities in the United States, strategically
selected for their representative characteristics (see SI Materials and Methods
for more information on department selection). The demographics of the
127 respondents corresponded to both the averages for the selected
departments and faculty at all United States research-intensive institutions,
meeting the criteria for generalizability even from nonrandom samples (see
SI Materials and Methods for more information on recruitment strategy and
participant characteristics). Indeed, we were particularly careful to obtain
a sample representative of the underlying population, because many past
studies have demonstrated that when this is the case, respondents and
nonrespondents typically do not differ on demographic characteristics and
responses to focal variables (47).
Additionally, in keeping with recommended practices, we conducted an
a priori power analysis before beginning data collection to determine the
optimal sample size needed to detect effects without biasing results toward
obtaining signiﬁcance (SI Materials and Methods: Subjects and Recruitment
Strategy) (48). Thus, although our sample size may appear small to some
readers, it is important to note that we obtained the necessary power and
representativeness to generalize from our results while purposefully avoid-
ing an unnecessarily large sample that could have biased our results toward
a false-positive type I error (48).
Procedure. Participants were asked to provide feedback on the materials of
an undergraduate science student who stated their intention to go on to
graduate school, and who had recently applied for a science laboratory
manager position. Of importance, participants believed they were evalu-
ating a real student who would subsequently receive the faculty partic-
ipants’ ratings as feedback to help their career development (see SI
Materials and Methods for more information, and Fig. S1 for the full text of
the cover story). Thus, the faculty participants’ ratings were associated with
deﬁnite consequences.
Following established practices, the laboratory manager application was
designed to reﬂect high but slightly ambiguous competence, allowing for
variability in participant responses (20, 23). In addition, a promising but still-
nascent applicant is precisely the type of student whose persistence in aca-
demic science is most likely to be affected by faculty support or discour-
agement (30–33), rendering faculty reactions to such a student of particular
interest for the present purposes. The materials were developed in consul-
tation with a panel of academic science researchers (who had extensive
experience hiring and supervising student research assistants) to ensure that
they would be perceived as realistic (SI Materials and Methods). Results of
a funneled debrieﬁng (49) indicated that this was successful; no participant
reported suspicions that the target was not an actual student who would
receive their evaluation.
Participants were randomly assigned to one of two student gender con-
ditions: application materials were attributed to either a male student (John,
n = 63), or a female student (Jennifer, n = 64), two names that have been
pretested as equivalent in likability and recognizeability (50). Thus, each
participant saw only one set of materials, from either the male or female
applicant (see Fig. S2 for the full text of the laboratory manager application
and SI Method and Materials for more information on all materials). Because
all other information was held constant between conditions, any differences
in participants’ responses are attributable to the gender of the student.
Using validated scales, participants rated student competence, their own
likelihood of hiring the student, selected an annual starting salary for the
student, indicated how much career mentoring they would provide to such
a student, and completed the Modern Sexism Scale.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank faculty members from six anonymous
universities for their involvement as participants; and Jessamina Blum, John
Crosnick, Jennifer Frederick, Jaime Napier, Jojanneke van der Toorn, Tiffany
Tsang, Tessa West, James Young, and two anonymous reviewers for valuable
input. This research was supported by a grant from the Howard Hughes
Medical Institute Professors Program (to J.H.).
1. President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology (2012). Engage to excel:
Producing one million additional college graduates with degrees in science, tech-
nology, engineering, and mathematics. Available at http://www.whitehouse.gov/
sites/default/ﬁles/microsites/ostp/pcast-engage-to-excel-ﬁnal_feb.pdf. (Accessed Feb-
ruary 13, 2012).
2. Handelsman J, et al. (2005) Careers in science. More women in science. Science 309:
1190–1191.
3. United States National Academy of Sciences (2007) Beyond Bias and Barriers: Fulﬁlling
the Potential of Women in Academic Science and Engineering (National Academies,
Washington, DC).
4. National Science Foundation (2009) Women, Minorities, and Persons with Disabilities
in Science and Engineering (National Science Foundation, Arlington).
5. Bell N (2010) Graduate Enrollment and Degrees: 1999 to 2009 (Council of Graduate
Schools, Washington, DC).
6. Halpern DF, et al. (2007) The science of gender differences in science and mathe-
matics. Psychol Sci 8(1):1–51.
7. Hyde JS, Linn MC (2006) Diversity. Gender similarities in mathematics and science.
Science 314:599–600.
8. Spelke ES (2005) Sex differences in intrinsic aptitude for mathematics and science?:
A critical review. Am Psychol 60:950–958.
9. Ceci SJ, Williams WM (2010) Gender differences in math-intensive ﬁelds. Curr Dir
Psychol Sci 19:275–279.
10. Ceci SJ, Williams WM (2011) Understanding current causes of women’s un-
derrepresentation in science. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 108:3157–3162.
16478
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1211286109
Moss-Racusin et al.

----- Page 6 (native) -----
11. Ceci SJ, et al. (2011) Do subtle cues about belongingness constrain women’s career
choices? Psychol Inq 22:255–258.
12. Berezow AB (2011) Gender discrimination in science is a myth. Available at http://
www.nationalreview.com/articles/256816/gender-discrimination-science-myth-alex-b-
berezow?pg=2. (Accessed June 6, 2012).
13. Dickey Zakaib G (2011) Science gender gap probed. Nature 470:153.
14. Devine PG (1989) Stereotypes and prejudice: Their automatic and controlled com-
ponents. J Pers Soc Psychol 56(1):5–18.
15. Eagly AH, Mladinic A (1994) Are people prejudiced against women? Some answers
from research on attitudes, gender stereotypes, and judgments of competence. Eur
Rev Soc Psychol 5(1):1–35.
16. Spence JT, Hahn ED (1997) The attitudes toward women scale and attitude change in
college students. Psychol Women Q 21(1):17–34.
17. Dovidio JF, Gaertner SL (2004) Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, ed
Zanna MP (Elsevier, New York), pp 1–51.
18. Nosek BA, Banaji M, Greenwald AG (2002) Harvesting implicit group attitudes and
beliefs from a demonstration web site. Group Dyn 6(1):101–115.
19. Goldin C, Rouse C (2000) Orchestrating impartiality: The impact of “blind” auditions
on female musicians. Am Econ Rev 90:715–741.
20. Foschi M (2000) Double standards for competence: Theory and research. Annu Rev
Sociol 26(1):21–42.
21. Foschi M (1996) Double standards in the evaluation of men and women. Soc Psychol Q
59:237–254.
22. Goldberg P (1968) Are women prejudiced against women? Transaction 5(5):28–30.
23. Heilman ME, Wallen AS, Fuchs D, Tamkins MM (2004) Penalties for success: Reactions
to women who succeed at male gender-typed tasks. J Appl Psychol 89:416–427.
24. Monin B, Miller DT (2001) Moral credentials and the expression of prejudice. J Pers Soc
Psychol 81:33–43.
25. Uhlmann EL, Cohen GL (2007) “I think it, therefore it’s true”: Effects of self-perceived
objectivity on hiring discrimination. Organ Behav Hum Dec 104:207–223.
26. Nosek BA, Banaji MR, Greenwald AG (2002) Math = male, me = female, therefore
math not = me. J Pers Soc Psychol 83:44–59.
27. Dasgupta N (2011) Ingroup experts and peers as social vaccines who inoculate the
self-concept: The stereotype inoculation model. Psychol Inq 22:231–246.
28. The Massachusetts Institute of Technology (1999) A study on the status of women
faculty
in
science
at
MIT.
Available
at
http://web.mit.edu/fnl/women/women.
html#The%20Study (Accessed February 13, 2012).
29. Steele J, James JB, Barnett RC (2002) Learning in a man’s world: Examining the per-
ceptions of undergraduate women in male-dominated academic areas. Psychol
Women Q 26(1):46–50.
30. Lent RW, et al. (2001) The role of contextual supports and barriers in the choice of
math/science educational options: A test of social cognitive hypotheses. J Couns
Psychol 48:474–483.
31. Seymour E, Hewitt NM (1996) Talking about Leaving: Why Undergraduates Leave the
Sciences (Westview, Boulder).
32. Gasiewski JA, et al. (2012) From gatekeeping to engagement: A multicontextual,
mixed method study of student academic engagement in introductory STEM courses.
Res Higher Educ 53:229–261.
33. Byars-Winston A, Gutierrez B, Topp S, Carnes M (2011) Integrating theory and prac-
tice to increase scientiﬁc workforce diversity: A framework for career development in
graduate research training. CBE Life Sci Educ 10:357–367.
34. Campbell DT, Fiske DW (1959) Convergent and discriminant validation by the multi-
trait-multimethod matrix. Psychol Bull 56:81–105.
35. Robins RW, Hendin HM, Trzesniewski KH (2001) Measuring global self esteem: Con-
struct validation of a single-item measure and the Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale. Pers
Soc Psychol Bull 27(2):151–161.
36. Moss-Racusin CA, Rudman LA (2010) Disruptions in women’s self-promotion: The
backlash avoidance model. Psychol Women Q 34:186–202.
37. Rudman LA, Moss-Racusin CA, Glick P, Phelan JE (2012) Advances in Experimental
Social Psychology, eds Devine P, Plant A (Elsevier, New York), pp 167–227.
38. Swim JK, Aikin KJ, Hall WS, Hunter BA (1995) Sexism and racism: Old-fashioned and
modern prejudices. J Pers Soc Psychol 68:199–214.
39. Martell RF, Lane DM, Emrich C (1996) Male-female differences: A computer simula-
tion. Am Psychol 51(2):157–158.
40. Steinpreis RE, Anders KA, Ritzke D (1999) The impact of gender on the review of the
curricula vitae of job applicants and tenure candidates: A national empirical study.
Sex Roles 41:509–528.
41. Bandura A (1982) Self-efﬁcacy mechanism in human agency. Am Psychol 37:122–147.
42. Scandura TA, Lankau MJ (1997) Relationships of gender, family responsibility and
ﬂexible work hours to organizational commitment and job satisfaction. J Organ Be-
hav 18:377–391.
43. Rudman LA, Ashmore RD, Gary ML (2001) “Unlearning” automatic biases: The mal-
leability of implicit prejudice and stereotypes. J Pers Soc Psychol 81:856–868.
44. O’Neill OA, O’Reilly CA (2011) Reducing the backlash effect: Self-monitoring and
women’s promotions. J Occup Organ Psychol 84:825–832.
45. Uhlmann EL, Cohen GL (2005) Constructed criteria: Redeﬁning merit to justify dis-
crimination. Psychol Sci 16:474–480.
46. Phelan JE, Moss-Racusin CA, Rudman LA (2008) Competent yet out in the cold:
Shifting criteria for hiring reﬂects backlash toward agentic women. Psychol Women Q
32:406–413.
47. Holbrook AL, Krosnick JA, Pfent A (2007) Advances in Telephone Survey Methodol-
ogy, eds Lepkowski JM, et al. (John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken), pp 499–528.
48. Simmons JP, Nelson LD, Simonsohn U (2011) False-positive psychology: Undisclosed
ﬂexibility in data collection and analysis allows presenting anything as signiﬁcant.
Psychol Sci 22:1359–1366.
49. Bargh JA, Chartrand TL (2000) Handbook of Research Methods in Social and Per-
sonality Psychology, eds Reis HT, Judd CM (Cambridge Univ Press, New York), pp
253–285.
50. Brescoll VL, Uhlmann EL (2008) Can angry women get ahead? Status conferral, gen-
der, and workplace emotion expression. Psychol Sci 19:268–275.
51. Cohen J (1998) Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences (Erlbaum,
Hillsdale), 2nd Ed.
Moss-Racusin et al.
PNAS
|
October 9, 2012
|
vol. 109
|
no. 41
|
16479
PSYCHOLOGICAL AND
COGNITIVE SCIENCES