

----- Page 1 (native) -----
REVIEW
published: 20 February 2020
doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2020.00014
Frontiers in Public Health | www.frontiersin.org
1
February 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 14
Edited by:
Ethel Eljarrat,
Institute of Environmental Assessment
and Water Research (CSIC), Spain
Reviewed by:
Fei Li,
Zhongnan University of Economics
and Law, China
M. Jahangir Alam,
University of Houston, United States
*Correspondence:
Ioannis Manisalidis
giannismanisal@gmail.com
Elisavet Stavropoulou
elisabeth.stavropoulou@gmail.com
†These authors have contributed
equally to this work
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Environmental Health,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Public Health
Received: 17 October 2019
Accepted: 17 January 2020
Published: 20 February 2020
Citation:
Manisalidis I, Stavropoulou E,
Stavropoulos A and Bezirtzoglou E
(2020) Environmental and Health
Impacts of Air Pollution: A Review.
Front. Public Health 8:14.
doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2020.00014
Environmental and Health Impacts of
Air Pollution: A Review
Ioannis Manisalidis 1,2*†, Elisavet Stavropoulou 3*†, Agathangelos Stavropoulos 4† and
Eugenia Bezirtzoglou 2†
1 Delphis S.A., Kiﬁsia, Greece, 2 Laboratory of Hygiene and Environmental Protection, Faculty of Medicine, Democritus
University of Thrace, Alexandroupolis, Greece, 3 Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois (CHUV), Service de Médicine
Interne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 4 School of Social and Political Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom
One of our era’s greatest scourges is air pollution, on account not only of its
impact on climate change but also its impact on public and individual health due to
increasing morbidity and mortality. There are many pollutants that are major factors
in disease in humans. Among them, Particulate Matter (PM), particles of variable but
very small diameter, penetrate the respiratory system via inhalation, causing respiratory
and cardiovascular diseases, reproductive and central nervous system dysfunctions,
and cancer. Despite the fact that ozone in the stratosphere plays a protective role
against ultraviolet irradiation, it is harmful when in high concentration at ground level,
also affecting the respiratory and cardiovascular system. Furthermore, nitrogen oxide,
sulfur dioxide, Volatile Organic Compounds (VOCs), dioxins, and polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons (PAHs) are all considered air pollutants that are harmful to humans.
Carbon monoxide can even provoke direct poisoning when breathed in at high levels.
Heavy metals such as lead, when absorbed into the human body, can lead to direct
poisoning or chronic intoxication, depending on exposure. Diseases occurring from the
aforementioned substances include principally respiratory problems such as Chronic
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD), asthma, bronchiolitis, and also lung cancer,
cardiovascular events, central nervous system dysfunctions, and cutaneous diseases.
Last but not least, climate change resulting from environmental pollution affects the
geographical distribution of many infectious diseases, as do natural disasters. The only
way to tackle this problem is through public awareness coupled with a multidisciplinary
approach by scientiﬁc experts; national and international organizations must address the
emergence of this threat and propose sustainable solutions.
Keywords: air pollution, environment, health, public health, gas emission, policy
APPROACH TO THE PROBLEM
The interactions between humans and their physical surroundings have been extensively studied,
as multiple human activities inﬂuence the environment. The environment is a coupling of
the biotic (living organisms and microorganisms) and the abiotic (hydrosphere, lithosphere,
and atmosphere).
Pollution is deﬁned as the introduction into the environment of substances harmful to humans
and other living organisms. Pollutants are harmful solids, liquids, or gases produced in higher than
usual concentrations that reduce the quality of our environment.

----- Page 2 (native) -----
Manisalidis et al.
Air Pollution Environment and Health
Human activities have an adverse eﬀect on the environment
by polluting the water we drink, the air we breathe, and the soil
in which plants grow. Although the industrial revolution was a
great success in terms of technology, society, and the provision
of multiple services, it also introduced the production of huge
quantities of pollutants emitted into the air that are harmful
to human health. Without any doubt, the global environmental
pollution is considered an international public health issue
with multiple facets. Social, economic, and legislative concerns
and lifestyle habits are related to this major problem. Clearly,
urbanization and industrialization are reaching unprecedented
and upsetting proportions worldwide in our era. Anthropogenic
air pollution is one of the biggest public health hazards
worldwide, given that it accounts for about 9 million deaths per
year (1).
Without a doubt, all of the aforementioned are closely
associated with climate change, and in the event of danger, the
consequences can be severe for mankind (2). Climate changes
and the eﬀects of global planetary warming seriously aﬀect
multiple ecosystems, causing problems such as food safety issues,
ice and iceberg melting, animal extinction, and damage to
plants (3, 4).
Air pollution has various health eﬀects. The health of
susceptible and sensitive individuals can be impacted even on low
air pollution days. Short-term exposure to air pollutants is closely
related to COPD (Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease),
cough, shortness of breath, wheezing, asthma, respiratory disease,
and high rates of hospitalization (a measurement of morbidity).
The long-term eﬀects associated with air pollution are chronic
asthma, pulmonary insuﬃciency, cardiovascular diseases, and
cardiovascular mortality. According to a Swedish cohort study,
diabetes seems to be induced after long-term air pollution
exposure (5). Moreover, air pollution seems to have various
malign health eﬀects in early human life, such as respiratory,
cardiovascular, mental, and perinatal disorders (3), leading to
infant mortality or chronic disease in adult age (6).
National reports have mentioned the increased risk of
morbidity and mortality (1). These studies were conducted in
many places around the world and show a correlation between
daily ranges of particulate matter (PM) concentration and daily
mortality. Climate shifts and global planetary warming (3) could
aggravate the situation. Besides, increased hospitalization (an
index of morbidity) has been registered among the elderly and
susceptible individuals for speciﬁc reasons. Fine and ultraﬁne
particulate matter seems to be associated with more serious
illnesses (6), as it can invade the deepest parts of the airways and
more easily reach the bloodstream.
Air pollution mainly aﬀects those living in large urban areas,
where road emissions contribute the most to the degradation of
air quality. There is also a danger of industrial accidents, where
the spread of a toxic fog can be fatal to the populations of the
surrounding areas. The dispersion of pollutants is determined
by many parameters, most notably atmospheric stability and
wind (6).
In developing countries (7), the problem is more serious
due to overpopulation and uncontrolled urbanization along with
the development of industrialization. This leads to poor air
quality, especially in countries with social disparities and a lack
of information on sustainable management of the environment.
The use of fuels such as wood fuel or solid fuel for domestic needs
due to low incomes exposes people to bad-quality, polluted air
at home. It is of note that three billion people around the world
are using the above sources of energy for their daily heating and
cooking needs (8). In developing countries, the women of the
household seem to carry the highest risk for disease development
due to their longer duration exposure to the indoor air pollution
(8, 9). Due to its fast industrial development and overpopulation,
China is one of the Asian countries confronting serious air
pollution problems (10, 11). The lung cancer mortality observed
in China is associated with ﬁne particles (12). As stated already,
long-term exposure is associated with deleterious eﬀects on the
cardiovascular system (3, 5). However, it is interesting to note that
cardiovascular diseases have mostly been observed in developed
and high-income countries rather than in the developing low-
income countries exposed highly to air pollution (13). Extreme
air pollution is recorded in India, where the air quality reaches
hazardous levels. New Delhi is one of the more polluted cities
in India. Flights in and out of New Delhi International Airport
are often canceled due to the reduced visibility associated with
air pollution. Pollution is occurring both in urban and rural
areas in India due to the fast industrialization, urbanization, and
rise in use of motorcycle transportation. Nevertheless, biomass
combustion associated with heating and cooking needs and
practices is a major source of household air pollution in India
and in Nepal (14, 15). There is spatial heterogeneity in India,
as areas with diverse climatological conditions and population
and education levels generate diﬀerent indoor air qualities, with
higher PM2.5 observed in North Indian states (557–601 µg/m3)
compared to the Southern States (183–214 µg/m3) (16, 17). The
cold climate of the North Indian areas may be the main reason
for this, as longer periods at home and more heating are necessary
compared to in the tropical climate of Southern India. Household
air pollution in India is associated with major health eﬀects,
especially in women and young children, who stay indoors for
longer periods. Chronic obstructive respiratory disease (CORD)
and lung cancer are mostly observed in women, while acute lower
respiratory disease is seen in young children under 5 years of
age (18).
Accumulation of air pollution, especially sulfur dioxide and
smoke, reaching 1,500 mg/m3, resulted in an increase in the
number of deaths (4,000 deaths) in December 1952 in London
and in 1963 in New York City (400 deaths) (19). An association of
pollution with mortality was reported on the basis of monitoring
of outdoor pollution in six US metropolitan cities (20). In every
case, it seems that mortality was closely related to the levels of
ﬁne, inhalable, and sulfate particles more than with the levels
of total particulate pollution, aerosol acidity, sulfur dioxide, or
nitrogen dioxide (20).
Furthermore, extremely high levels of pollution are reported
in Mexico City and Rio de Janeiro, followed by Milan, Ankara,
Melbourne, Tokyo, and Moscow (19).
Based on the magnitude of the public health impact, it is
certain that diﬀerent kinds of interventions should be taken into
account. Success and eﬀectiveness in controlling air pollution,
Frontiers in Public Health | www.frontiersin.org
2
February 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 14

----- Page 3 (native) -----
Manisalidis et al.
Air Pollution Environment and Health
speciﬁcally at the local level, have been reported. Adequate
technological means are applied considering the source and the
nature of the emission as well as its impact on health and the
environment. The importance of point sources and non-point
sources of air pollution control is reported by Schwela and
Köth-Jahr (21). Without a doubt, a detailed emission inventory
must record all sources in a given area. Beyond considering the
above sources and their nature, topography and meteorology
should also be considered, as stated previously. Assessment of
the control policies and methods is often extrapolated from
the local to the regional and then to the global scale. Air
pollution may be dispersed and transported from one region
to another area located far away. Air pollution management
means the reduction to acceptable levels or possible elimination
of air pollutants whose presence in the air aﬀects our health
or the environmental ecosystem. Private and governmental
entities and authorities implement actions to ensure the air
quality (22). Air quality standards and guidelines were adopted
for the diﬀerent pollutants by the WHO and EPA as a tool
for the management of air quality (1, 23). These standards
have to be compared to the emissions inventory standards
by causal analysis and dispersion modeling in order to reveal
the problematic areas (24). Inventories are generally based
on a combination of direct measurements and emissions
modeling (24).
As an example, we state here the control measures at the
source through the use of catalytic converters in cars. These
are devices that turn the pollutants and toxic gases produced
from combustion engines into less-toxic pollutants by catalysis
through redox reactions (25). In Greece, the use of private cars
was restricted by tracking their license plates in order to reduce
traﬃc congestion during rush hour (25).
Concerning
industrial
emissions,
collectors
and
closed
systems can keep the air pollution to the minimal standards
imposed by legislation (26).
Current
strategies
to
improve
air
quality
require
an
estimation of the economic value of the beneﬁts gained
from
proposed
programs.
These
proposed
programs
by
public authorities, and directives are issued with guidelines to
be respected.
In Europe, air quality limit values AQLVs (Air Quality Limit
Values) are issued for setting oﬀplanning claims (27). In the
USA, the NAAQS (National Ambient Air Quality Standards)
establish the national air quality limit values (27). While both
standards and directives are based on diﬀerent mechanisms,
signiﬁcant success has been achieved in the reduction of overall
emissions and associated health and environmental eﬀects (27).
The European Directive identiﬁes geographical areas of risk
exposure as monitoring/assessment zones to record the emission
sources and levels of air pollution (27), whereas the USA
establishes global geographical air quality criteria according to
the severity of their air quality problem and records all sources
of the pollutants and their precursors (27).
In this vein, funds have been ﬁnancing, directly or indirectly,
projects
related
to
air
quality
along
with
the
technical
infrastructure to maintain good air quality. These plans focus
on an inventory of databases from air quality environmental
planning awareness campaigns. Moreover, pollution measures of
air emissions may be taken for vehicles, machines, and industries
in urban areas.
Technological innovation can only be successful if it is able
to meet the needs of society. In this sense, technology must
reﬂect the decision-making practices and procedures of those
involved in risk assessment and evaluation and act as a facilitator
in providing information and assessments to enable decision
makers to make the best decisions possible. Summarizing the
aforementioned in order to design an eﬀective air quality control
strategy, several aspects must be considered: environmental
factors and ambient air quality conditions, engineering factors
and air pollutant characteristics, and ﬁnally, economic operating
costs for technological improvement and administrative and legal
costs. Considering the economic factor, competitiveness through
neoliberal concepts is oﬀering a solution to environmental
problems (22).
The development of environmental governance, along with
technological progress, has initiated the deployment of a
dialogue. Environmental politics has created objections and
points of opposition between diﬀerent political parties, scientists,
media, and governmental and non-governmental organizations
(22). Radical environmental activism actions and movements
have been created (22). The rise of the new information and
communication technologies (ICTs) are many times examined
as to whether and in which way they have inﬂuenced means
of communication and social movements such as activism (28).
Since the 1990s, the term “digital activism” has been used
increasingly and in many diﬀerent disciplines (29). Nowadays,
multiple digital technologies can be used to produce a digital
activism outcome on environmental issues. More speciﬁcally,
devices with online capabilities such as computers or mobile
phones are being used as a way to pursue change in political and
social aﬀairs (30).
In the present paper, we focus on the sources of environmental
pollution in relation to public health and propose some solutions
and interventions that may be of interest to environmental
legislators and decision makers.
SOURCES OF EXPOSURE
It is known that the majority of environmental pollutants are
emitted through large-scale human activities such as the use
of industrial machinery, power-producing stations, combustion
engines, and cars. Because these activities are performed at such
a large scale, they are by far the major contributors to air
pollution, with cars estimated to be responsible for approximately
80% of today’s pollution (31). Some other human activities are
also inﬂuencing our environment to a lesser extent, such as
ﬁeld cultivation techniques, gas stations, fuel tanks heaters, and
cleaning procedures (32), as well as several natural sources, such
as volcanic and soil eruptions and forest ﬁres.
The classiﬁcation of air pollutants is based mainly on the
sources producing pollution. Therefore, it is worth mentioning
the four main sources, following the classiﬁcation system: Major
sources, Area sources, Mobile sources, and Natural sources.
Frontiers in Public Health | www.frontiersin.org
3
February 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 14

----- Page 4 (native) -----
Manisalidis et al.
Air Pollution Environment and Health
Major sources include the emission of pollutants from
power stations, reﬁneries, and petrochemicals, the chemical and
fertilizer industries, metallurgical and other industrial plants,
and, ﬁnally, municipal incineration.
Indoor area sources include domestic cleaning activities, dry
cleaners, printing shops, and petrol stations.
Mobile sources include automobiles, cars, railways, airways,
and other types of vehicles.
Finally, natural sources include, as stated previously, physical
disasters (33) such as forest ﬁre, volcanic erosion, dust storms,
and agricultural burning.
However, many classiﬁcation systems have been proposed.
Another type of classiﬁcation is a grouping according to the
recipient of the pollution, as follows:
Air pollution is determined as the presence of pollutants in
the air in large quantities for long periods. Air pollutants are
dispersed particles, hydrocarbons, CO, CO2, NO, NO2, SO3, etc.
Water pollution is organic and inorganic charge and biological
charge (10) at high levels that aﬀect the water quality (34, 35).
Soil pollution occurs through the release of chemicals or
the disposal of wastes, such as heavy metals, hydrocarbons,
and pesticides.
Air pollution can inﬂuence the quality of soil and water
bodies by polluting precipitation, falling into water and soil
environments (34, 36). Notably, the chemistry of the soil can be
amended due to acid precipitation by aﬀecting plants, cultures,
and water quality (37). Moreover, movement of heavy metals
is favored by soil acidity, and metals are so then moving into
the watery environment. It is known that heavy metals such
as aluminum are noxious to wildlife and ﬁshes. Soil quality
seems to be of importance, as soils with low calcium carbonate
levels are at increased jeopardy from acid rain. Over and
above rain, snow and particulate matter drip into watery ’
bodies (36, 38).
Lastly, pollution is classiﬁed following type of origin:
Radioactive and nuclear pollution, releasing radioactive and
nuclear pollutants into water, air, and soil during nuclear
explosions and accidents, from nuclear weapons, and through
handling or disposal of radioactive sewage.
Radioactive materials can contaminate surface water bodies
and, being noxious to the environment, plants, animals, and
humans. It is known that several radioactive substances such as
radium and uranium concentrate in the bones and can cause
cancers (38, 39).
Noise pollution is produced by machines, vehicles, traﬃc
noises, and musical installations that are harmful to our hearing.
The World Health Organization introduced the term DALYs.
The DALYs for a disease or health condition is deﬁned as the
sum of the Years of Life Lost (YLL) due to premature mortality
in the population and the Years Lost due to Disability (YLD)
for people living with the health condition or its consequences
(39). In Europe, air pollution is the main cause of disability-
adjusted life years lost (DALYs), followed by noise pollution. The
potential relationships of noise and air pollution with health have
been studied (40). The study found that DALYs related to noise
were more important than those related to air pollution, as the
eﬀects of environmental noise on cardiovascular disease were
independent of air pollution (40). Environmental noise should
be counted as an independent public health risk (40).
Environmental pollution occurs when changes in the physical,
chemical, or biological constituents of the environment (air
masses, temperature, climate, etc.) are produced.
Pollutants harm our environment either by increasing levels
above normal or by introducing harmful toxic substances.
Primary pollutants are directly produced from the above
sources, and secondary pollutants are emitted as by-products
of the primary ones. Pollutants can be biodegradable or non-
biodegradable and of natural origin or anthropogenic, as stated
previously. Moreover, their origin can be a unique source (point-
source) or dispersed sources.
Pollutants
have
diﬀerences
in
physical
and
chemical
properties, explaining the discrepancy in their capacity for
producing toxic eﬀects. As an example, we state here that
aerosol compounds (41–43) have a greater toxicity than gaseous
compounds due to their tiny size (solid or liquid) in the
atmosphere; they have a greater penetration capacity. Gaseous
compounds are eliminated more easily by our respiratory system
(41). These particles are able to damage lungs and can even enter
the bloodstream (41), leading to the premature deaths of millions
of people yearly. Moreover, the aerosol acidity ([H+]) seems
to considerably enhance the production of secondary organic
aerosols (SOA), but this last aspect is not supported by other
scientiﬁc teams (38).
CLIMATE AND POLLUTION
Air pollution and climate change are closely related. Climate
is the other side of the same coin that reduces the quality of
our Earth (44). Pollutants such as black carbon, methane,
tropospheric
ozone,
and
aerosols
aﬀect
the
amount
of
incoming sunlight. As a result, the temperature of the
Earth is increasing, resulting in the melting of ice, icebergs,
and glaciers.
In this vein, climatic changes will aﬀect the incidence and
prevalence of both residual and imported infections in Europe.
Climate and weather aﬀect the duration, timing, and intensity of
outbreaks strongly and change the map of infectious diseases in
the globe (45). Mosquito-transmitted parasitic or viral diseases
are extremely climate-sensitive, as warming ﬁrstly shortens the
pathogen incubation period and secondly shifts the geographic
map of the vector. Similarly, water-warming following climate
changes leads to a high incidence of waterborne infections.
Recently, in Europe, eradicated diseases seem to be emerging
due to the migration of population, for example, cholera,
poliomyelitis, tick-borne encephalitis, and malaria (46).
The spread of epidemics is associated with natural climate
disasters and storms, which seem to occur more frequently
nowadays (47). Malnutrition and disequilibration of the immune
system are also associated with the emerging infections aﬀecting
public health (48).
The Chikungunya virus “took the airplane” from the Indian
Ocean to Europe, as outbreaks of the disease were registered in
Italy (49) as well as autochthonous cases in France (50).
Frontiers in Public Health | www.frontiersin.org
4
February 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 14

----- Page 5 (native) -----
Manisalidis et al.
Air Pollution Environment and Health
An increase in cryptosporidiosis in the United Kingdom
and in the Czech Republic seems to have occurred following
ﬂooding (36, 51).
As stated previously, aerosols compounds are tiny in size and
considerably aﬀect the climate. They are able to dissipate sunlight
(the albedo phenomenon) by dispersing a quarter of the sun’s rays
back to space and have cooled the global temperature over the last
30 years (52).
AIR POLLUTANTS
The World Health Organization (WHO) reports on six major
air pollutants, namely particle pollution, ground-level ozone,
carbon monoxide, sulfur oxides, nitrogen oxides, and lead. Air
pollution can have a disastrous eﬀect on all components of the
environment, including groundwater, soil, and air. Additionally,
it poses a serious threat to living organisms. In this vein,
our interest is mainly to focus on these pollutants, as they
are related to more extensive and severe problems in human
health and environmental impact. Acid rain, global warming,
the greenhouse eﬀect, and climate changes have an important
ecological impact on air pollution (53).
Particulate Matter (PM) and Health
Studies have shown a relationship between particulate matter
(PM) and adverse health eﬀects, focusing on either short-term
(acute) or long-term (chronic) PM exposure.
Particulate matter (PM) is usually formed in the atmosphere
as a result of chemical reactions between the diﬀerent pollutants.
The penetration of particles is closely dependent on their
size (53). Particulate Matter (PM) was deﬁned as a term for
particles by the United States Environmental Protection Agency
(54). Particulate matter (PM) pollution includes particles with
diameters of 10 micrometers (µm) or smaller, called PM10, and
extremely ﬁne particles with diameters that are generally 2.5
micrometers (µm) and smaller.
Particulate matter contains tiny liquid or solid droplets that
can be inhaled and cause serious health eﬀects (55). Particles
<10 µm in diameter (PM10) after inhalation can invade the lungs
and even reach the bloodstream. Fine particles, PM2.5, pose a
greater risk to health (6, 56) (Table 1).
Multiple epidemiological studies have been performed on the
health eﬀects of PM. A positive relation was shown between
TABLE 1 | Penetrability according to particle size.
Particle size
Penetration degree in human respiratory system
>11 µm
Passage into nostrils and upper respiratory tract
7–11 µm
Passage into nasal cavity
4.7–7 µm
Passage into larynx
3.3–4.7 µm
Passage into trachea-bronchial area
2.1–3.3 µm
Secondary bronchial area passage
1.1–2.1 µm
Terminal bronchial area passage
0.65–1.1 µm
Bronchioles penetrability
0.43–0.65 µm
Alveolar penetrability
both short-term and long-term exposures of PM2.5 and acute
nasopharyngitis (56). In addition, long-term exposure to PM
for years was found to be related to cardiovascular diseases and
infant mortality.
Those studies depend on PM2.5 monitors and are restricted
in terms of study area or city area due to a lack of spatially
resolved daily PM2.5 concentration data and, in this way, are
not representative of the entire population. Following a recent
epidemiological study by the Department of Environmental
Health at Harvard School of Public Health (Boston, MA) (57),
it was reported that, as PM2.5 concentrations vary spatially, an
exposure error (Berkson error) seems to be produced, and the
relative magnitudes of the short- and long-term eﬀects are not
yet completely elucidated. The team developed a PM2.5 exposure
model based on remote sensing data for assessing short- and
long-term human exposures (57). This model permits spatial
resolution in short-term eﬀects plus the assessment of long-term
eﬀects in the whole population.
Moreover, respiratory diseases and aﬀection of the immune
system are registered as long-term chronic eﬀects (58). It is
worth noting that people with asthma, pneumonia, diabetes, and
respiratory and cardiovascular diseases are especially susceptible
and vulnerable to the eﬀects of PM. PM2.5, followed by PM10,
are strongly associated with diverse respiratory system diseases
(59), as their size permits them to pierce interior spaces (60).
The particles produce toxic eﬀects according to their chemical
and physical properties. The components of PM10 and PM2.5 can
be organic (polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, dioxins, benzene,
1-3 butadiene) or inorganic (carbon, chlorides, nitrates, sulfates,
metals) in nature (55).
Particulate Matter (PM) is divided into four main categories
according to type and size (61) (Table 2).
Gas contaminants include PM in aerial masses.
Particulate contaminants include contaminants such as smog,
soot, tobacco smoke, oil smoke, ﬂy ash, and cement dust.
TABLE 2 | Types and sizes of particulate Matter (PM).
Type
PM diameter
[µm]
Particulate contaminants
Smog
0.01–1
Soot
0.01–0.8
Tobacco smoke
0.01–1
Fly ash
1–100
Cement Dust
8–100
Biological Contaminants
Bacteria and
bacterial spores
0.7–10
Viruses
0.01–1
Fungi and molds
2–12
Allergens (dogs,
cats, pollen,
household dust)
0.1–100
Types of Dust
Atmospheric dust
0.01–1
Heavy dust
100–1000
Settling dust
1–100
Gases
Different gaseous
contaminants
0.0001–0.01
Frontiers in Public Health | www.frontiersin.org
5
February 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 14

----- Page 6 (native) -----
Manisalidis et al.
Air Pollution Environment and Health
Biological
Contaminants
are
microorganisms
(bacteria,
viruses, fungi, mold, and bacterial spores), cat allergens, house
dust and allergens, and pollen.
Types of Dust include suspended atmospheric dust, settling
dust, and heavy dust.
Finally, another fact is that the half-lives of PM10 and
PM2.5 particles in the atmosphere is extended due to their
tiny dimensions; this permits their long-lasting suspension in
the atmosphere and even their transfer and spread to distant
destinations where people and the environment may be exposed
to the same magnitude of pollution (53). They are able to change
the nutrient balance in watery ecosystems, damage forests and
crops, and acidify water bodies.
As stated, PM2.5, due to their tiny size, are causing more
serious health eﬀects. These aforementioned ﬁne particles are
the main cause of the “haze” formation in diﬀerent metropolitan
areas (12, 13, 61).
Ozone Impact in the Atmosphere
Ozone (O3) is a gas formed from oxygen under high voltage
electric discharge (62). It is a strong oxidant, 52% stronger
than chlorine. It arises in the stratosphere, but it could also
arise following chain reactions of photochemical smog in the
troposphere (63).
Ozone can travel to distant areas from its initial source,
moving with air masses (64). It is surprising that ozone levels
over cities are low in contrast to the increased amounts
occuring in urban areas, which could become harmful for
cultures, forests, and vegetation (65) as it is reducing carbon
assimilation (66). Ozone reduces growth and yield (47, 48)
and aﬀects the plant microﬂora due to its antimicrobial
capacity (67, 68). In this regard, ozone acts upon other natural
ecosystems, with microﬂora (69, 70) and animal species changing
their species composition (71). Ozone increases DNA damage
in epidermal keratinocytes and leads to impaired cellular
function (72).
Ground-level ozone (GLO) is generated through a chemical
reaction between oxides of nitrogen and VOCs emitted from
natural sources and/or following anthropogenic activities.
Ozone uptake usually occurs by inhalation. Ozone aﬀects the
upper layers of the skin and the tear ducts (73). A study of
short-term exposure of mice to high levels of ozone showed
malondialdehyde formation in the upper skin (epidermis) but
also depletion in vitamins C and E. It is likely that ozone levels
are not interfering with the skin barrier function and integrity to
predispose to skin disease (74).
Due to the low water-solubility of ozone, inhaled ozone has
the capacity to penetrate deeply into the lungs (75).
Toxic eﬀects induced by ozone are registered in urban areas
all over the world, causing biochemical, morphologic, functional,
and immunological disorders (76).
The European project (APHEA2) focuses on the acute
eﬀects of ambient ozone concentrations on mortality (77).
Daily ozone concentrations compared to the daily number
of deaths were reported from diﬀerent European cities for
a 3-year period. During the warm period of the year, an
observed increase in ozone concentration was associated with
an increase in the daily number of deaths (0.33%), in the
number of respiratory deaths (1.13%), and in the number
of cardiovascular deaths (0.45%). No eﬀect was observed
during wintertime.
Carbon Monoxide (CO)
Carbon monoxide is produced by fossil fuel when combustion
is incomplete. The symptoms of poisoning due to inhaling
carbon monoxide include headache, dizziness, weakness, nausea,
vomiting, and, ﬁnally, loss of consciousness.
The aﬃnity of carbon monoxide to hemoglobin is much
greater than that of oxygen. In this vein, serious poisoning may
occur in people exposed to high levels of carbon monoxide for a
long period of time. Due to the loss of oxygen as a result of the
competitive binding of carbon monoxide, hypoxia, ischemia, and
cardiovascular disease are observed.
Carbon monoxide aﬀects the greenhouses gases that are
tightly connected to global warming and climate. This should
lead to an increase in soil and water temperatures, and extreme
weather conditions or storms may occur (68).
However, in laboratory and ﬁeld experiments, it has been seen
to produce increased plant growth (78).
Nitrogen Oxide (NO2)
Nitrogen oxide is a traﬃc-related pollutant, as it is emitted
from automobile motor engines (79, 80). It is an irritant
of the respiratory system as it penetrates deep in the lung,
inducing respiratory diseases, coughing, wheezing, dyspnea,
bronchospasm, and even pulmonary edema when inhaled at high
levels. It seems that concentrations over 0.2 ppm produce these
adverse eﬀects in humans, while concentrations higher than 2.0
ppm aﬀect T-lymphocytes, particularly the CD8+ cells and NK
cells that produce our immune response (81).It is reported that
long-term exposure to high levels of nitrogen dioxide can be
responsible for chronic lung disease. Long-term exposure to NO2
can impair the sense of smell (81).
However, systems other than respiratory ones can be involved,
as symptoms such as eye, throat, and nose irritation have been
registered (81).
High levels of nitrogen dioxide are deleterious to crops and
vegetation, as they have been observed to reduce crop yield and
plant growth eﬃciency. Moreover, NO2 can reduce visibility and
discolor fabrics (81).
Sulfur Dioxide (SO2)
Sulfur dioxide is a harmful gas that is emitted mainly from fossil
fuel consumption or industrial activities. The annual standard
for SO2 is 0.03 ppm (82). It aﬀects human, animal, and plant
life. Susceptible people as those with lung disease, old people,
and children, who present a higher risk of damage. The major
health problems associated with sulfur dioxide emissions in
industrialized areas are respiratory irritation, bronchitis, mucus
production, and bronchospasm, as it is a sensory irritant and
penetrates deep into the lung converted into bisulﬁte and
interacting with sensory receptors, causing bronchoconstriction.
Moreover, skin redness, damage to the eyes (lacrimation and
Frontiers in Public Health | www.frontiersin.org
6
February 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 14

----- Page 7 (native) -----
Manisalidis et al.
Air Pollution Environment and Health
corneal opacity) and mucous membranes, and worsening of
pre-existing cardiovascular disease have been observed (81).
Environmental adverse eﬀects, such as acidiﬁcation of soil
and acid rain, seem to be associated with sulfur dioxide
emissions (83).
Lead
Lead is a heavy metal used in diﬀerent industrial plants and
emitted from some petrol motor engines, batteries, radiators,
waste incinerators, and waste waters (84).
Moreover, major sources of lead pollution in the air are metals,
ore, and piston-engine aircraft. Lead poisoning is a threat to
public health due to its deleterious eﬀects upon humans, animals,
and the environment, especially in the developing countries.
Exposure to lead can occur through inhalation, ingestion, and
dermal absorption. Trans- placental transport of lead was also
reported, as lead passes through the placenta unencumbered (85).
The younger the fetus is, the more harmful the toxic eﬀects. Lead
toxicity aﬀects the fetal nervous system; edema or swelling of the
brain is observed (86). Lead, when inhaled, accumulates in the
blood, soft tissue, liver, lung, bones, and cardiovascular, nervous,
and reproductive systems. Moreover, loss of concentration and
memory, as well as muscle and joint pain, were observed in
adults (85, 86).
Children and newborns (87) are extremely susceptible even
to minimal doses of lead, as it is a neurotoxicant and causes
learning disabilities, impairment of memory, hyperactivity, and
even mental retardation.
Elevated amounts of lead in the environment are harmful
to plants and crop growth. Neurological eﬀects are observed in
vertebrates and animals in association with high lead levels (88).
Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons(PAHs)
The distribution of PAHs is ubiquitous in the environment,
as the atmosphere is the most important means of their
dispersal. They are found in coal and in tar sediments. Moreover,
they are generated through incomplete combustion of organic
matter as in the cases of forest ﬁres, incineration, and engines
(89). PAH compounds, such as benzopyrene, acenaphthylene,
anthracene, and ﬂuoranthene are recognized as toxic, mutagenic,
and carcinogenic substances. They are an important risk factor
for lung cancer (89).
Volatile Organic Compounds(VOCs)
Volatile organic compounds (VOCs), such as toluene, benzene,
ethylbenzene, and xylene (90), have been found to be associated
with cancer in humans (91). The use of new products and
materials has actually resulted in increased concentrations of
VOCs. VOCs pollute indoor air (90) and may have adverse
eﬀects on human health (91). Short-term and long-term adverse
eﬀects on human health are observed. VOCs are responsible
for indoor air smells. Short-term exposure is found to cause
irritation of eyes, nose, throat, and mucosal membranes, while
those of long duration exposure include toxic reactions (92).
Predictable assessment of the toxic eﬀects of complex VOC
mixtures is diﬃcult to estimate, as these pollutants can have
synergic, antagonistic, or indiﬀerent eﬀects (91, 93).
Dioxins
Dioxins originate from industrial processes but also come from
natural processes, such as forest ﬁres and volcanic eruptions.
They accumulate in foods such as meat and dairy products, ﬁsh
and shellﬁsh, and especially in the fatty tissue of animals (94).
Short-period exhibition to high dioxin concentrations may
result in dark spots and lesions on the skin (94). Long-
term exposure to dioxins can cause developmental problems,
impairment of the immune, endocrine and nervous systems,
reproductive infertility, and cancer (94).
Without any doubt, fossil fuel consumption is responsible
for a sizeable part of air contamination. This contamination
may be anthropogenic, as in agricultural and industrial processes
or transportation, while contamination from natural sources
is also possible. Interestingly, it is of note that the air
quality standards established through the European Air Quality
Directive are somewhat looser than the WHO guidelines, which
are stricter (95).
EFFECT OF AIR POLLUTION ON HEALTH
The most common air pollutants are ground-level ozone and
Particulates Matter (PM). Air pollution is distinguished into two
main types:
Outdoor pollution is the ambient air pollution.
Indoor pollution is the pollution generated by household
combustion of fuels.
People exposed to high concentrations of air pollutants
experience disease symptoms and states of greater and lesser
seriousness. These eﬀects are grouped into short- and long-term
eﬀects aﬀecting health.
Susceptible populations that need to be aware of health
protection
measures
include
old
people,
children,
and
people with diabetes and predisposing heart or lung disease,
especially asthma.
As extensively stated previously, according to a recent
epidemiological study from Harvard School of Public Health,
the relative magnitudes of the short- and long-term eﬀects
have not been completely clariﬁed (57) due to the diﬀerent
epidemiological methodologies and to the exposure errors. New
models are proposed for assessing short- and long-term human
exposure data more successfully (57). Thus, in the present
section, we report the more common short- and long-term health
eﬀects but also general concerns for both types of eﬀects, as these
eﬀects are often dependent on environmental conditions, dose,
and individual susceptibility.
Short-term eﬀects are temporary and range from simple
discomfort, such as irritation of the eyes, nose, skin, throat,
wheezing,
coughing
and
chest
tightness,
and
breathing
diﬃculties, to more serious states, such as asthma, pneumonia,
bronchitis, and lung and heart problems. Short-term exposure to
air pollution can also cause headaches, nausea, and dizziness.
These problems can be aggravated by extended long-term
exposure to the pollutants, which is harmful to the neurological,
reproductive, and respiratory systems and causes cancer and
even, rarely, deaths.
Frontiers in Public Health | www.frontiersin.org
7
February 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 14

----- Page 8 (native) -----
Manisalidis et al.
Air Pollution Environment and Health
The long-term eﬀects are chronic, lasting for years or the
whole life and can even lead to death. Furthermore, the toxicity
of several air pollutants may also induce a variety of cancers in
the long term (96).
As stated already, respiratory disorders are closely associated
with the inhalation of air pollutants. These pollutants will invade
through the airways and will accumulate at the cells. Damage
to target cells should be related to the pollutant component
involved and its source and dose. Health eﬀects are also closely
dependent on country, area, season, and time. An extended
exposure duration to the pollutant should incline to long-term
health eﬀects in relation also to the above factors.
Particulate Matter (PMs), dust, benzene, and O3 cause serious
damage to the respiratory system (97). Moreover, there is a
supplementary risk in case of existing respiratory disease such as
asthma (98). Long-term eﬀects are more frequent in people with
a predisposing disease state. When the trachea is contaminated
by pollutants, voice alterations may be remarked after acute
exposure. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) may
be induced following air pollution, increasing morbidity and
mortality (99). Long-term eﬀects from traﬃc, industrial air
pollution, and combustion of fuels are the major factors for
COPD risk (99).
Multiple cardiovascular eﬀects have been observed after
exposure to air pollutants (100). Changes occurred in blood
cells after long-term exposure may aﬀect cardiac functionality.
Coronary arteriosclerosis was reported following long-term
exposure to traﬃc emissions (101), while short-term exposure
is related to hypertension, stroke, myocardial infracts, and
heart
insuﬃciency.
Ventricle
hypertrophy
is
reported
to
occur in humans after long-time exposure to nitrogen oxide
(NO2) (102, 103).
Neurological eﬀects have been observed in adults and children
after extended-term exposure to air pollutants.
Psychological
complications,
autism,
retinopathy,
fetal
growth, and low birth weight seem to be related to long-term
air pollution (83). The etiologic agent of the neurodegenerative
diseases (Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s) is not yet known, although
it is believed that extended exposure to air pollution seems to be
a factor. Speciﬁcally, pesticides and metals are cited as etiological
factors, together with diet. The mechanisms in the development
of neurodegenerative disease include oxidative stress, protein
aggregation, inﬂammation, and mitochondrial impairment in
neurons (104) (Figure 1).
Brain inﬂammation was observed in dogs living in a
highly polluted area in Mexico for a long period (105). In
human adults, markers of systemic inﬂammation (IL-6 and
ﬁbrinogen) were found to be increased as an immediate
response to PNC on the IL-6 level, possibly leading to the
production of acute-phase proteins (106). The progression of
atherosclerosis and oxidative stress seem to be the mechanisms
involved in the neurological disturbances caused by long-
term air pollution. Inﬂammation comes secondary to the
oxidative stress and seems to be involved in the impairment
of developmental maturation, aﬀecting multiple organs (105,
107). Similarly, other factors seem to be involved in the
developmental maturation, which deﬁne the vulnerability to
long-term air pollution. These include birthweight, maternal
smoking, genetic background and socioeconomic environment,
as well as education level.
However, diet, starting from breast-feeding, is another
determinant factor. Diet is the main source of antioxidants,
which play a key role in our protection against air pollutants
(108). Antioxidants are free radical scavengers and limit the
interaction of free radicals in the brain (108). Similarly, genetic
background may result in a diﬀerential susceptibility toward
the oxidative stress pathway (60). For example, antioxidant
supplementation with vitamins C and E appears to modulate
the eﬀect of ozone in asthmatic children homozygous for
the GSTM1 null allele (61). Inﬂammatory cytokines released
in the periphery (e.g., respiratory epithelia) upregulate the
innate immune Toll-like receptor 2. Such activation and
the subsequent events leading to neurodegeneration have
recently been observed in lung lavage in mice exposed to
ambient Los Angeles (CA, USA) particulate matter (61).
In children, neurodevelopmental morbidities were observed
after lead exposure. These children developed aggressive and
delinquent behavior, reduced intelligence, learning diﬃculties,
and hyperactivity (109). No level of lead exposure seems to be
“safe,” and the scientiﬁc community has asked the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) to reduce the current
screening guideline of 10 µg/dl (109).
It is important to state that impact on the immune
system, causing dysfunction and neuroinﬂammation (104), is
related to poor air quality. Yet, increases in serum levels of
immunoglobulins (IgA, IgM) and the complement component
C3 are observed (106). Another issue is that antigen presentation
is aﬀected by air pollutants, as there is an upregulation
of costimulatory molecules such as CD80 and CD86 on
macrophages (110).
As is known, skin is our shield against ultraviolet radiation
(UVR) and other pollutants, as it is the most exterior layer
of our body. Traﬃc-related pollutants, such as PAHs, VOCs,
oxides, and PM, may cause pigmented spots on our skin (111).
On the one hand, as already stated, when pollutants penetrate
through the skin or are inhaled, damage to the organs is observed,
as some of these pollutants are mutagenic and carcinogenic,
and, speciﬁcally, they aﬀect the liver and lung. On the other
hand, air pollutants (and those in the troposphere) reduce the
adverse eﬀects of ultraviolet radiation UVR in polluted urban
areas (111). Air pollutants absorbed by the human skin may
contribute to skin aging, psoriasis, acne, urticaria, eczema, and
atopic dermatitis (111), usually caused by exposure to oxides
and photochemical smoke (111). Exposure to PM and cigarette
smoking act as skin-aging agents, causing spots, dyschromia,
and wrinkles. Lastly, pollutants have been associated with skin
cancer (111).
Higher morbidity is reported to fetuses and children when
exposed to the above dangers. Impairment in fetal growth, low
birth weight, and autism have been reported (112).
Another exterior organ that may be aﬀected is the eye.
Contamination usually comes from suspended pollutants and
may result in asymptomatic eye outcomes, irritation (112),
retinopathy, or dry eye syndrome (113, 114).
Frontiers in Public Health | www.frontiersin.org
8
February 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 14

----- Page 9 (native) -----
Manisalidis et al.
Air Pollution Environment and Health
FIGURE 1 | Impact of air pollutants on the brain.
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT OF AIR
POLLUTION
Air pollution is harming not only human health but also
the environment (115) in which we live. The most important
environmental eﬀects are as follows.
Acid rain is wet (rain, fog, snow) or dry (particulates and
gas) precipitation containing toxic amounts of nitric and sulfuric
acids. They are able to acidify the water and soil environments,
damage trees and plantations, and even damage buildings and
outdoor sculptures, constructions, and statues.
Haze is produced when ﬁne particles are dispersed in the air
and reduce the transparency of the atmosphere. It is caused by
gas emissions in the air coming from industrial facilities, power
plants, automobiles, and trucks.
Ozone, as discussed previously, occurs both at ground level
and in the upper level (stratosphere) of the Earth’s atmosphere.
Stratospheric ozone is protecting us from the Sun’s harmful
ultraviolet (UV) rays. In contrast, ground-level ozone is harmful
to human health and is a pollutant. Unfortunately, stratospheric
ozone is gradually damaged by ozone-depleting substances
(i.e., chemicals, pesticides, and aerosols). If this protecting
stratospheric ozone layer is thinned, then UV radiation can reach
our Earth, with harmful eﬀects for human life (skin cancer) (116)
and crops (117). In plants, ozone penetrates through the stomata,
inducing them to close, which blocks CO2 transfer and induces a
reduction in photosynthesis (118).
Global climate change is an important issue that concerns
mankind. As is known, the “greenhouse eﬀect” keeps the
Earth’s temperature stable. Unhappily, anthropogenic activities
have destroyed this protecting temperature eﬀect by producing
large amounts of greenhouse gases, and global warming is
mounting, with harmful eﬀects on human health, animals,
forests, wildlife, agriculture, and the water environment. A report
states that global warming is adding to the health risks of poor
people (119).
Frontiers in Public Health | www.frontiersin.org
9
February 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 14

----- Page 10 (native) -----
Manisalidis et al.
Air Pollution Environment and Health
People living in poorly constructed buildings in warm-climate
countries are at high risk for heat-related health problems as
temperatures mount (119).
Wildlife is burdened by toxic pollutants coming from the air,
soil, or the water ecosystem and, in this way, animals can develop
health problems when exposed to high levels of pollutants.
Reproductive failure and birth eﬀects have been reported.
Eutrophication is occurring when elevated concentrations of
nutrients (especially nitrogen) stimulate the blooming of aquatic
algae, which can cause a disequilibration in the diversity of ﬁsh
and their deaths.
Without a doubt, there is a critical concentration of pollution
that an ecosystem can tolerate without being destroyed, which
is associated with the ecosystem’s capacity to neutralize acidity.
The Canada Acid Rain Program established this load at 20
kg/ha/yr (120).
Hence, air pollution has deleterious eﬀects on both soil and
water (121). Concerning PM as an air pollutant, its impact on
crop yield and food productivity has been reported. Its impact on
watery bodies is associated with the survival of living organisms
and ﬁshes and their productivity potential (121).
An impairment in photosynthetic rhythm and metabolism is
observed in plants exposed to the eﬀects of ozone (121).
Sulfur and nitrogen oxides are involved in the formation of
acid rain and are harmful to plants and marine organisms.
Last but not least, as mentioned above, the toxicity associated
with lead and other metals is the main threat to our ecosystems
(air, water, and soil) and living creatures (121).
DISCUSSION
In 2018, during the ﬁrst WHO Global Conference on Air
Pollution and Health, the WHO’s General Director, Dr. Tedros
Adhanom Ghebreyesus, called air pollution a “silent public health
emergency” and “the new tobacco” (122).
Undoubtedly, children are particularly vulnerable to air
pollution, especially during their development. Air pollution has
adverse eﬀects on our lives in many diﬀerent respects.
Diseases associated with air pollution have not only an
important economic impact but also a societal impact due to
absences from productive work and school.
Despite
the
diﬃculty
of
eradicating
the
problem
of
anthropogenic environmental pollution, a successful solution
could be envisaged as a tight collaboration of authorities,
bodies, and doctors to regularize the situation. Governments
should spread suﬃcient information and educate people and
should involve professionals in these issues so as to control the
emergence of the problem successfully.
Technologies to reduce air pollution at the source must be
established and should be used in all industries and power plants.
The Kyoto Protocol of 1997 set as a major target the reduction
of GHG emissions to below 5% by 2012 (123). This was followed
by the Copenhagen summit, 2009 (124), and then the Durban
summit of 2011 (125), where it was decided to keep to the same
line of action. The Kyoto protocol and the subsequent ones were
ratiﬁed by many countries. Among the pioneers who adopted this
important protocol for the world’s environmental and climate
“health” was China (3). As is known, China is a fast-developing
economy and its GDP (Gross Domestic Product) is expected to
be very high by 2050, which is deﬁned as the year of dissolution
of the protocol for the decrease in gas emissions.
A more recent international agreement of crucial importance
for climate change is the Paris Agreement of 2015, issued by
the UNFCCC (United Nations Climate Change Committee).
This latest agreement was ratiﬁed by a plethora of UN (United
Nations) countries as well as the countries of the European Union
(126). In this vein, parties should promote actions and measures
to enhance numerous aspects around the subject. Boosting
education, training, public awareness, and public participation
are some of the relevant actions for maximizing the opportunities
to achieve the targets and goals on the crucial matter of climate
change and environmental pollution (126). Without any doubt,
technological improvements makes our world easier and it seems
diﬃcult to reduce the harmful impact caused by gas emissions,
we could limit its use by seeking reliable approaches.
Synopsizing, a global prevention policy should be designed in
order to combat anthropogenic air pollution as a complement
to the correct handling of the adverse health eﬀects associated
with air pollution. Sustainable development practices should be
applied, together with information coming from research in
order to handle the problem eﬀectively.
At this point, international cooperation in terms of research,
development, administration policy, monitoring, and politics
is vital for eﬀective pollution control. Legislation concerning
air pollution must be aligned and updated, and policy makers
should propose the design of a powerful tool of environmental
and health protection. As a result, the main proposal of this
essay is that we should focus on fostering local structures
to promote experience and practice and extrapolate these to
the international level through developing eﬀective policies for
sustainable management of ecosystems.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
All authors listed have made a substantial, direct and intellectual
contribution to the work, and approved it for publication.
REFERENCES
1. WHO. Air Pollution. WHO. Available online at: http://www.who.int/
airpollution/en/ (accessed October 5, 2019).
2. Moores FC. Climate change and air pollution: exploring the synergies and
potential for mitigation in industrializing countries. Sustainability. (2009)
1:43–54. doi: 10.3390/su1010043
3. USGCRP (2009). Global Climate Change Impacts in the United States.
In: Karl TR, Melillo JM, Peterson TC, editors. Climate Change Impacts by
Sectors: Ecosystems. New York, NY: United States Global Change Research
Program. Cambridge University Press.
4. Marlon JR, Bloodhart B, Ballew MT, Rolfe-Redding J, Roser-Renouf C,
Leiserowitz A, et al. (2019). How hope and doubt aﬀect climate change
mobilization. Front. Commun. 4:20. doi: 10.3389/fcomm.2019.00020
Frontiers in Public Health | www.frontiersin.org
10
February 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 14

----- Page 11 (native) -----
Manisalidis et al.
Air Pollution Environment and Health
5. Eze IC, Schaﬀner E, Fischer E, Schikowski T, Adam M, Imboden M, et al.
Long- term air pollution exposure and diabetes in a population-based Swiss
cohort. Environ Int. (2014) 70:95–105. doi: 10.1016/j.envint.2014.05.014
6. Kelishadi R, Poursafa P. Air pollution and non-respiratory health hazards for
children. Arch Med Sci. (2010) 6:483–95. doi: 10.5114/aoms.2010.14458
7. Manucci PM, Franchini M. Health eﬀects of ambient air pollution in
developing countries. Int J Environ Res Public Health. (2017) 14:1048.
doi: 10.3390/ijerph14091048
8. Burden of Disease from Ambient and Household Air Pollution. Available
online: http://who.int/phe/health_topics/outdoorair/databases/en/ (accessed
August 15, 2017).
9. Hashim D, Boﬀetta P. Occupational and environmental exposures and
cancers in developing countries. Ann Glob Health. (2014) 80:393–411.
doi: 10.1016/j.aogh.2014.10.002
10. Guo Y, Zeng H, Zheng R, Li S, Pereira G, Liu Q, et al. The burden of lung
cancer mortality attributable to ﬁne particles in China. Total Environ Sci.
(2017) 579:1460–6. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.11.147
11. Hou Q, An XQ, Wang Y, Guo JP. An evaluation of resident exposure to
respirable particulate matter and health economic loss in Beijing during
Beijing 2008 Olympic Games. Sci Total Environ. (2010) 408:4026–32.
doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2009.12.030
12. Kan H, Chen R, Tong S. Ambient air pollution, climate change,
and
population
health
in
China.
Environ
Int.
(2012)
42:10–9.
doi: 10.1016/j.envint.2011.03.003
13. Burroughs Peña MS, Rollins A. Environmental exposures and cardiovascular
disease: a challenge for health and development in low- and middle-income
countries. Cardiol Clin. (2017) 35:71–86. doi: 10.1016/j.ccl.2016.09.001
14. Kankaria A, Nongkynrih B, Gupta S. Indoor air pollution in india:
implications on health and its control. Indian J Comm Med. 39:203–7.
doi: 10.4103/0970-0218.143019
15. Parajuli I, Lee H, Shrestha KR. Indoor air quality and ventilation assessment
of rural mountainous households of Nepal. Int J Sust Built Env. (2016)
5:301–11. doi: 10.1016/j.ijsbe.2016.08.003
16. Saud T, Gautam R, Mandal TK, Gadi R, Singh DP, Sharma SK. Emission
estimates of organic and elemental carbon from household biomass fuel used
over the Indo-Gangetic Plain (IGP), India. Atmos Environ. (2012) 61:212–20.
doi: 10.1016/j.atmosenv.2012.07.030
17. Singh DP, Gadi R, Mandal TK, Saud T, Saxena M, Sharma SK.
Emissions estimates of PAH from biomass fuels used in rural sector
of Indo-Gangetic Plains of India. Atmos Environ. (2013) 68:120–6.
doi: 10.1016/j.atmosenv.2012.11.042
18. Dherani M, Pope D, Mascarenhas M, Smith KR, Weber M BN. Indoor air
pollution from unprocessed solid fuel use and pneumonia risk in children
aged under ﬁve years: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Bull World
Health Organ. (2008) 86:390–4. doi: 10.2471/BLT.07.044529
19. Kassomenos P, Kelessis A, Petrakakis M, Zoumakis N, Christides T,
Paschalidou AK. Air Quality assessment in a heavily-polluted urban
Mediterranean environment through Air Quality indices. Ecol Indic. (2012)
18:259–68. doi: 10.1016/j.ecolind.2011.11.021
20. Dockery DW, Pope CA, Xu X, Spengler JD, Ware JH, Fay ME, et al. An
association between air pollution and mortality in six U.S. cities. N Engl J
Med. (1993) 329:1753–9. doi: 10.1056/NEJM199312093292401
21. Schwela,
DH
and
I
Köth-Jahr.
Leitfaden
für
die
Aufstellung
von
Luftreinhalteplänen [Guidelines for the Implementation of Clean Air
Implementation Plans]. Landesumweltamt des Landes Nordrhein Westfalen.
State Environmental Service of the State of North Rhine-Westphalia (1994).
22. Newlands
M.
Environmental
Activism,
Environmental
Politics,
and
Representation: The Framing of the British Environmental Activist Movement.
Ph.D. thesis. University of East London, United Kingdom (2015).
23. NEPIS (National Service Center for Environmental Publications), US EPA
(Environmental Protection Agency) (2017). Available online at: https://
www.epa.gov/clean-air-act-overview/air-pollution-current-and-future-
challenges (accessed August 15, 2017).
24. NRC (National Research Council). Available online at: https://www.nap.edu/
read/10728/chapter/1,2014 (accessed September 17, 2019).
25. Bull A. Traﬃc Congestion: The Problem and How to Deal With It. Santiago:
Nationes Unidas, Cepal (2003).
26. Spiegel J, Maystre LY. Environmental Pollution Control, Part VII - The
Environment, Chapter 55, Encyclopedia of Occupational Health and Safety.
Available online at: http://www.ilocis.org/documents/chpt55e.htm (accessed
September 17, 2019).
27. European Community Reports. Assessment of the Eﬀectiveness of European
Air
Quality
Policies
and
Measures:
Case
Study
2;
Comparison
of
the EU and US Air Quality Standards and Planning Requirements.
(2004). Available online at: https://ec.europa.eu/environment/archives/cafe/
activities/pdf/case_study2.pdf (accessed September 22, 2019).
28. Gibson R, Ward S. Parties in the digital age; a review. J Represent Democracy.
(2009) 45:87–100. doi: 10.1080/00344890802710888
29. Kaun A, Uldam J. Digital activism: after the hype. New Media Soc. (2017)
20:2099–106. doi: 10.1177/14614448177319
30. Sivitanides M, Shah V. The era of digital activism. In: 2011 Conference for
Information Systems Applied Research(CONISAR) Proceedings Wilmington
North Carolina, USA. Available online at: https://www.arifyildirim.com/
ilt510/marcos.sivitanides.vivek.shah.pdf (accessed September 22, 2019).
31. Möller L, Schuetzle D, Autrup H. Future research needs associated with
the assessment of potential human health risks from exposure to toxic
ambient air pollutants. Environ Health Perspect. (1994) 102(Suppl. 4):193–
210. doi: 10.1289/ehp.94102s4193
32. Jacobson
MZ,
Jacobson
PMZ.
Atmospheric
Pollution:
History,
Science, and Regulation. Cambridge University Press (2002). p. 206.
doi: 10.1256/wea.243.02
33. Stover RH. Flooding of soil for disease control. In: Mulder D, editor. Chapter
3. Developments in Agricultural and Managed Forest Ecology. Elsevier (1979).
p. 19–28. Available online at: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/B9780444416926500094
doi:
10.1016/B978-0-444-41692-6.50009-4
(accessed July 1, 2019).
34. Maipa V, Alamanos Y, Bezirtzoglou E. Seasonal ﬂuctuation of bacterial
indicators in coastal waters. Microb Ecol Health Dis. (2001) 13:143–6.
doi: 10.1080/089106001750462687
35. Bezirtzoglou E, Dimitriou D, Panagiou A. Occurrence of Clostridium
perfringens in river water by using a new procedure. Anaerobe. (1996)
2:169–73. doi: 10.1006/anae.1996.0022
36. Kjellstrom T, Lodh M, McMichael T, Ranmuthugala G, Shrestha R, Kingsland
S. Air and Water Pollution: Burden and Strategies for Control. DCP, Chapter
43. 817–32 p. Available online at: https://www.dcp-3.org/sites/default/ﬁles/
dcp2/DCP43.pdf (accessed September 17, 2017).
37. Pathak RK, Wang T, Ho KF, Lee SC. Characteristics of summertime PM2.5
organic and elemental carbon in four major Chinese cities: implications
of high acidity for water- soluble organic carbon (WSOC). Atmos Environ.
(2011) 45:318–25. doi: 10.1016/j.atmosenv.2010.10.021
38. Bonavigo L, Zucchetti M, Mankolli H. Water radioactive pollution and
related environmental aspects. J Int Env Appl Sci. (2009) 4:357–63
39. World Health Organization (WHO). Preventing Disease Through Healthy
Environments: Towards an Estimate of the Environmental Burden of Disease.
1106 p. Available online at: https://www.who.int/quantifying_ehimpacts/
publications/preventingdisease.pdf (accessed September 22, 2019).
40. Stansfeld SA. Noise eﬀects on health in the context of air pollution
exposure.
Int
J
Environ
Res
Public
Health.
(2015)
12:12735–60.
doi: 10.3390/ijerph121012735
41. Ethical Unicorn. Everything You Need To Know About Aerosols & Air
Pollution. (2019). Available online at: https://ethicalunicorn.com/2019/04/
29/everything-you-need-to-know-about-aerosols-air-pollution/ (accessed
October 4, 2019).
42. Colbeck I, Lazaridis M. Aerosols and environmental pollution. Sci Nat.
(2009) 97:117–31. doi: 10.1007/s00114-009-0594-x
43. Incecik S, Gertler A, Kassomenos P. Aerosols and air quality. Sci Total Env.
(2014) 355, 488–9. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2014.04.012
44. D’Amato G, Pawankar R, Vitale C, Maurizia L. Climate change and air
pollution: eﬀects on respiratory allergy. Allergy Asthma Immunol Res. (2016)
8:391–5. doi: 10.4168/aair.2016.8.5.391
45. Bezirtzoglou C, Dekas K, Charvalos E. Climate changes, environment
and
infection:
facts,
scenarios
and
growing
awareness
from
the
public health community within Europe. Anaerobe. (2011) 17:337–40.
doi: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2011.05.016
Frontiers in Public Health | www.frontiersin.org
11
February 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 14

----- Page 12 (native) -----
Manisalidis et al.
Air Pollution Environment and Health
46. Castelli F, Sulis G. Migration and infectious diseases. Clin Microbiol Infect.
(2017) 23:283–9. doi: 10.1016/j.cmi.2017.03.012
47. Watson JT, Gayer M, Connolly MA. Epidemics after natural disasters. Emerg
Infect Dis. (2007) 13:1–5. doi: 10.3201/eid1301.060779
48. Fenn B. Malnutrition in Humanitarian Emergencies. Available online at:
https://www.who.int/diseasecontrol_emergencies/publications/idhe_2009_
london_malnutrition_fenn.pdf. (accessed August 15, 2017).
49. Lindh E, Argentini C, Remoli ME, Fortuna C, Faggioni G, Benedetti E, et al.
The Italian 2017 outbreak Chikungunya virus belongs to an emerging Aedes
albopictus–adapted virus cluster introduced from the Indian subcontinent.
Open Forum Infect Dis. (2019) 6:ofy321. doi: 10.1093/oﬁd/ofy321
50. Calba C, Guerbois-Galla M, Franke F, Jeannin C, Auzet-Caillaud M, Grard
G, Pigaglio L, Decoppet A, et al. Preliminary report of an autochthonous
chikungunya outbreak in France, July to September 2017. Eur Surveill. (2017)
22:17-00647. doi: 10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2017.22.39.17-00647
51. Menne B, Murray V. Floods in the WHO European Region: Health Eﬀects
and Their Prevention. Copenhagen: WHO; Weltgesundheits organisation,
Regionalbüro für Europa (2013). Available online at: http://www.euro.who.
int/data/assets/pdf_ﬁle/0020/189020/e96853.pdf (accessed 15 August 2017).
52. Schneider SH. The greenhouse eﬀect: science and policy. Science. (1989)
243:771–81. doi: 10.1126/science.243.4892.771
53. Wilson WE, Suh HH. Fine particles and coarse particles: concentration
relationships relevant to epidemiologic studies. J Air Waste Manag Assoc.
(1997) 47:1238–49. doi: 10.1080/10473289.1997.10464074
54. US EPA (US Environmental Protection Agency) (2018). Available online at:
https://www.epa.gov/pm-pollution/particulate-matter-pm-basics (accessed
September 22, 2018).
55. Cheung K, Daher N, Kam W, Shafer MM, Ning Z, Schauer JJ, et al.
Spatial and temporal variation of chemical composition and mass closure of
ambient coarse particulate matter (PM10–2.5) in the Los Angeles area. Atmos
Environ. (2011) 45:2651–62. doi: 10.1016/j.atmosenv.2011.02.066
56. Zhang L, Yang Y, Li Y, Qian ZM, Xiao W, Wang X, et al. Short-
term and long-term eﬀects of PM2.5 on acute nasopharyngitis in 10
communities of Guangdong, China. Sci Total Env. (2019) 688:136–42.
doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.05.470.
57. Kloog I, Ridgway B, Koutrakis P, Coull BA, Schwartz JD. Long- and
short-term exposure to PM2.5 and mortality using novel exposure models,
Epidemiology. (2013) 24:555–61. doi: 10.1097/EDE.0b013e318294beaa
58. New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services. Current and
Forecasted Air Quality in New Hampshire. Environmental Fact Sheet (2019).
Available online at: https://www.des.nh.gov/organization/commissioner/
pip/factsheets/ard/documents/ard-16.pdf (accessed September 22, 2019).
59. Kappos AD, Bruckmann P, Eikmann T, Englert N, Heinrich U, Höppe P, et
al. Health eﬀects of particles in ambient air. Int J Hyg Environ Health. (2004)
207:399–407. doi: 10.1078/1438-4639-00306
60. Boschi N (Ed.). Deﬁning an educational framework for indoor air sciences
education. In: Education and Training in Indoor Air Sciences. Luxembourg:
Springer Science & Business Media (2012). 245 p.
61. Heal MR, Kumar P, Harrison RM. Particles, air quality, policy and health.
Chem Soc Rev. (2012) 41:6606–30. doi: 10.1039/c2cs35076a
62. Bezirtzoglou E, Alexopoulos A. Ozone history and ecosystems: a goliath from
impacts to advance industrial beneﬁts and interests, to environmental and
therapeutical strategies. In: Ozone Depletion, Chemistry and Impacts. (2009).
p. 135–45.
63. Villányi V, Turk B, Franc B, Csintalan Z. Ozone Pollution and its
Bioindication. In: Villányi V, editor. Air Pollution. London: Intech Open
(2010). doi: 10.5772/10047
64. Massachusetts Department of Public Health. Massachusetts State Health
Assessment.
Boston,
MA
(2017).
Available
online
at:
https://www.
mass.gov/ﬁles/documents/2017/11/03/2017%20MA%20SHA%20ﬁnal
%20compressed.pdf (accessed October 30, 2017).
65. Lorenzini G, Saitanis C. Ozone: A Novel Plant “Pathogen.” In: Sanitá di
Toppi L, Pawlik-Skowro´nska B, editors. Abiotic Stresses in Plant Springer
Link (2003). p. 205–29. doi: 10.1007/978-94-017-0255-3_8
66. Fares S, Vargas R, Detto M, Goldstein AH, Karlik J, Paoletti E, et
al. Tropospheric ozone reduces carbon assimilation in trees: estimates
from analysis of continuous ﬂux measurements. Glob Change Biol. (2013)
19:2427–43. doi: 10.1111/gcb.12222
67. Harmens H, Mills G, Hayes F, Jones L, Norris D, Fuhrer J. Air Pollution and
Vegetation. ICP Vegetation Annual Report 2006/2007. (2012)
68. Emberson LD, Pleijel H, Ainsworth EA, den Berg M, Ren W, Osborne S, et al.
Ozone eﬀects on crops and consideration in crop models. Eur J Agron. (2018)
100:19–34. doi: 10.1016/j.eja.2018.06.002
69. Alexopoulos A, Plessas S, Ceciu S, Lazar V, Mantzourani I, Voidarou C, et
al. Evaluation of ozone eﬃcacy on the reduction of microbial population
of fresh cut lettuce (Lactuca sativa) and green bell pepper (Capsicum
annuum). Food Control. (2013) 30:491–6. doi: 10.1016/j.foodcont.2012.
09.018
70. Alexopoulos A, Plessas S, Kourkoutas Y, Stefanis C, Vavias S, Voidarou C,
et al. Experimental eﬀect of ozone upon the microbial ﬂora of commercially
produced dairy fermented products. Int J Food Microbiol. (2017) 246:5–11.
doi: 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2017.01.018
71. Maggio
A,
Fagnano
M.
Ozone
damages
to
mediterranean
crops:
physiological responses. Ital J Agron. (2008) 13–20. doi: 10.4081/ija.2008.13
72. McCarthy JT, Pelle E, Dong K, Brahmbhatt K, Yarosh D, Pernodet N. Eﬀects
of ozone in normal human epidermal keratinocytes. Exp Dermatol. (2013)
22:360–1. doi: 10.1111/exd.12125
73. WHO. Health Risks of Ozone From Long-Range Transboundary Air
Pollution. Available online at: http://www.euro.who.int/data/assets/pdf_ﬁle/
0005/78647/E91843.pdf (accessed August 15, 2019).
74. Thiele JJ, Traber MG, Tsang K, Cross CE, Packer L. In vivo exposure
to ozone depletes vitamins C and E and induces lipid peroxidation in
epidermal layers of murine skin. Free Radic Biol Med. (1997) 23:365–91.
doi: 10.1016/S0891-5849(96)00617-X
75. Hatch GE, Slade R, Harris LP, McDonnell WF, Devlin RB, Koren HS, et al.
Ozone dose and eﬀect in humans and rats. A comparison using oxygen-
18 labeling and bronchoalveolar lavage. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. (1994)
150:676–83. doi: 10.1164/ajrccm.150.3.8087337
76. Lippmann M. Health eﬀects of ozone. A critical review. JAPCA. (1989)
39:672–95. doi: 10.1080/08940630.1989.10466554
77. Gryparis A, Forsberg B, Katsouyanni K, Analitis A, Touloumi G, Schwartz J,
et al. Acute eﬀects of ozone on mortality from the “air pollution and health: a
European approach” project. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. (2004) 170:1080–7.
doi: 10.1164/rccm.200403-333OC
78. Soon W, Baliunas SL, Robinson AB, Robinson ZW. Environmental eﬀects
of increased atmospheric carbon dioxide. Climate Res. (1999) 13:149–64
doi: 10.1260/0958305991499694
79. Richmont-Bryant J, Owen RC, Graham S, Snyder M, McDow S, Oakes M, et
al. Estimation of on-road NO2 concentrations, NO2/NOX ratios, and related
roadway gradients from near-road monitoring data. Air Qual Atm Health.
(2017) 10:611–25. doi: 10.1007/s11869-016-0455-7
80. Hesterberg TW, Bunn WB, McClellan RO, Hamade AK, Long CM, Valberg
PA. Critical review of the human data on short-term nitrogen dioxide
(NO2) exposures: evidence for NO2 no-eﬀect levels. Crit Rev Toxicol. (2009)
39:743–81. doi: 10.3109/10408440903294945
81. Chen T-M, Gokhale J, Shofer S, Kuschner WG. Outdoor air pollution:
nitrogen dioxide, sulfur dioxide, and carbon monoxide health eﬀects. Am
J Med Sci. (2007) 333:249–56. doi: 10.1097/MAJ.0b013e31803b900f
82. US EPA. Table of Historical SO2 NAAQS, Sulfur US EPA. Available online
at:
https://www3.epa.gov/ttn/naaqs/standards/so2/s_so2_history.html
(accessed October 5, 2019).
83. WHO Regional Oﬃce of Europe (2000). Available online at: https://euro.
who.int/_data/assets/pdf_ﬁle/0020/123086/AQG2ndEd_7_4Sulfuroxide.pdf
84. Pruss-Ustun A, Fewrell L, Landrigan PJ, Ayuso-Mateos JL. Lead exposure.
Comparative Quantiﬁcation of Health Risks. World Health Organization.
p. 1495–1542. Available online at: https://www.who.int/publications/cra/
chapters/volume2/1495-1542.pdf?ua=1
85. Goyer RA. Transplacental transport of lead. Environ Health Perspect. (1990)
89:101–5. doi: 10.1289/ehp.9089101
86. National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (NIH). Lead and Your
Health. (2013). 1–4 p. Available online at: https://www.niehs.nih.gov/health/
materials/lead_and_your_health_508.pdf (accessed September 17, 2019).
87. Farhat A, Mohammadzadeh A, Balali-Mood M, Aghajanpoor-Pasha M,
Ravanshad Y. Correlation of blood lead level in mothers and exclusively
breastfed infants: a study on infants aged less than six months. Asia Pac J
Med Toxicol. (2013) 2:150–2.
Frontiers in Public Health | www.frontiersin.org
12
February 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 14

----- Page 13 (native) -----
Manisalidis et al.
Air Pollution Environment and Health
88. Assi MA, Hezmee MNM, Haron AW, Sabri MYM, Rajion MA. The
detrimental eﬀects of lead on human and animal health. Vet World. (2016)
9:660–71. doi: 10.14202/vetworld.2016.660-671
89. Abdel-Shafy HI, Mansour MSM. A review on polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons: source, environmental impact, eﬀect on human health and
remediation. Egypt J Pet. (2016) 25:107–23. doi: 10.1016/j.ejpe.2015.03.011
90. Kumar A, Singh BP, Punia M, Singh D, Kumar K, Jain VK. Assessment
of indoor air concentrations of VOCs and their associated health
risks
in
the
library
of
Jawaharlal
Nehru
University,
New
Delhi.
Environ Sci Pollut Res Int. (2014) 21:2240–8. doi: 10.1007/s11356-013-
2150-7
91. Molhave L, Clausen G, Berglund B, Ceaurriz J, Kettrup A, Lindvall T,
et al. Total Volatile Organic Compounds (TVOC) in Indoor Air Quality
Investigations. Indoor Air. 7:225–240. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0668.1997.00002.x
92. Gibb T. Indoor Air Quality May be Hazardous to Your Health. MSU
Extension. Available online at: https://www.canr.msu.edu/news/indoor_air_
quality_may_be_hazardous_to_your_health (accessed October 5, 2019).
93. Ebersviller S, Lichtveld K, Sexton KG, Zavala J, Lin Y-H, Jaspers I, et al.
Gaseous VOCs rapidly modify particulate matter and its biological eﬀects
– Part 1: simple VOCs and model PM. Atmos Chem Phys Discuss. (2012)
12:5065–105. doi: 10.5194/acpd-12-5065-2012
94. WHO (World Health Organization). Dioxins and Their Eﬀects on Human
Health. Available online at: https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/
detail/dioxins-and-their-eﬀects-on-human-health
(accessed October 5,
2019).
95. EEA (European Environmental Agency). Air Quality Standards to the
European Union and WHO. Available online at: https://www.eea.europa.eu/
themes/data-and-maps/ﬁgures/air-quality-standards-under-the
96. Nakano T, Otsuki T. [Environmental air pollutants and the risk of cancer].
(Japanese). Gan To Kagaku Ryoho. (2013) 40:1441–5.
97. Kurt
OK,
Zhang
J,
Pinkerton
KE.
Pulmonary
health
eﬀects
of
air
pollution.
Curr
Opin
Pulm
Med.
(2016)
22:138–43.
doi: 10.1097/MCP.0000000000000248
98. Guarnieri M, Balmes JR. Outdoor air pollution and asthma. Lancet. (2014)
383:1581–92. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(14)60617-6
99. Jiang X-Q, Mei X-D, Feng D. Air pollution and chronic airway diseases: what
should people know and do? J Thorac Dis. (2016) 8:E31–40.
100. Bourdrel T, Bind M-A, Béjot Y, Morel O, Argacha J-F. Cardiovascular
eﬀects
of
air
pollution.
Arch
Cardiovasc
Dis.
(2017)
110:634–42.
doi: 10.1016/j.acvd.2017.05.003
101. Hoﬀmann
B,
Moebus
S,
Möhlenkamp
S,
Stang
A,
Lehmann
N,
Dragano
N,
et
al.
Residential
exposure
to
traﬃc
is
associated
with
coronary
atherosclerosis.
Circulation.
(2007)
116:489–496.
doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.107.693622
102. Katholi RE, Couri DM. Left ventricular hypertrophy: major risk factor in
patients with hypertension: update and practical clinical applications. Int J
Hypertens. (2011) 2011:495349. doi: 10.4061/2011/495349
103. Leary PJ, Kaufman JD, Barr RG, Bluemke DA, Curl CL, Hough CL, et
al. Traﬃc- related air pollution and the right ventricle. the multi-ethnic
study of atherosclerosis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. (2014) 189:1093–100.
doi: 10.1164/rccm.201312-2298OC
104. Genc S, Zadeoglulari Z, Fuss SH, Genc K. The adverse eﬀects of
air pollution on the nervous system. J Toxicol. (2012) 2012:782462.
doi: 10.1155/2012/782462
105. Calderon-Garciduenas L, Azzarelli B, Acuna H, et al. Air pollution and brain
damage. Toxicol Pathol. (2002) 30:373–89. doi: 10.1080/01926230252929954
106. Rückerl R, Greven S, Ljungman P, Aalto P, Antoniades C, Bellander T,
et al. Air pollution and inﬂammation (interleukin-6, C-reactive protein,
ﬁbrinogen) in myocardial infarction survivors. Environ Health Perspect.
(2007) 115:1072–80. doi: 10.1289/ehp.10021
107. Peters A, Veronesi B, Calderón-Garcidueñas L, Gehr P, Chen LC, Geiser
M, et al. Translocation and potential neurological eﬀects of ﬁne and
ultraﬁne particles a critical update. Part Fibre Toxicol. (2006) 3:13–8.
doi: 10.1186/1743-8977-3-13
108. Kelly FJ. Dietary antioxidants and environmental stress. Proc Nutr Soc.
(2004) 63:579–85. doi: 10.1079/PNS2004388
109. Bellinger DC. Very low lead exposures and children’s neurodevelopment.
Curr Opin Pediatr. (2008) 20:172–7. doi: 10.1097/MOP.0b013e3282f4f97b
110. Balbo P, Silvestri M, Rossi GA, Crimi E, Burastero SE. Diﬀerential role of
CD80 and CD86 on alveolar macrophages in the presentation of allergen to
T lymphocytes in asthma. Clin Exp Allergy J Br Soc Allergy Clin Immunol.
(2001) 31:625–36. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2222.2001.01068.x
111. Drakaki E, Dessinioti C, Antoniou C. Air pollution and the skin. Front
Environ Sci Eng China. (2014) 15:2–8. doi: 10.3389/fenvs.2014.00011
112. Weisskopf MG, Kioumourtzoglou M-A, Roberts AL. Air pollution and
autism spectrum disorders: causal or confounded? Curr Environ Health Rep.
(2015) 2:430–9. doi: 10.1007/s40572-015-0073-9
113. Mo Z, Fu Q, Lyu D, Zhang L, Qin Z, Tang Q, et al. Impacts of air pollution on
dry eye disease among residents in Hangzhou, China: a case-crossover study.
Environ Pollut. (2019) 246:183–9. doi: 10.1016/j.envpol.2018.11.109
114. Klopfer J. Eﬀects of environmental air pollution on the eye. J Am Optom
Assoc. (1989) 60:773–8.
115. Ashfaq A, Sharma P. Environmental eﬀects of air pollution and application
of engineered methods to combat the problem. J Indust Pollut Control.
(2012) 29.
116. Madronich S, de Gruijl F. Skin cancer and UV radiation. Nature. (1993)
366:23–9. doi: 10.1038/366023a0
117. Teramura
A.
Eﬀects
of
UV-B
radiation
on
the
growth
and
yield
of
crop
plants.
Physiol
Plant.
(2006)
58:415–27.
doi: 10.1111/j.1399-3054.1983.tb04203.x
118. Singh E, Tiwari S, Agrawal M. Eﬀects of elevated ozone on photosynthesis
and stomatal conductance of two soybean varieties: a case study to assess
impacts of one component of predicted global climate change. Plant Biol
Stuttg Ger. (2009) 11(Suppl. 1):101–8. doi: 10.1111/j.1438-8677.2009.00263.x
119. Manderson L. How global Warming is Adding to the Health Risks of
Poor People. The Conversation. University of the Witwatersrand. Available
online at: http://theconversation.com/how-global-warming-is-adding-to-
the-health-risks-of-poor-people-109520 (accessed October 5, 2019).
120. Ministers
of
Energy
and
Environment.
Federal/Provincial/Territorial
Ministers of Energy and Environment (Canada), editor. The Canada-Wide
Acid Rain Strategy for Post-2000. Halifax: The Ministers (1999). 11 p.
121. Zuhara S, Isaifan R. The impact of criteria air pollutants on soil and water: a
review. (2018) 278–84. doi: 10.30799/jespr.133.18040205
122. WHO. First WHO Global Conference on Air Pollution and Health. (2018).
Available online at: https://www.who.int/airpollution/events/conference/en/
(accessed October 6, 2019).
123. What is the Kyoto Protocol? UNFCCC. Available online at: https://unfccc.int/
kyoto__protocol (accessed October 6, 2019).
124. Copenhagen Climate Change Conference (UNFCCC). Available online at:
https://unfccc.int/process-and-meetings/conferences/past-conferences/
copenhagen-climate-change-conference-december-2009/copenhagen-
climate-change-conference-december-2009 (accessed October 6, 2019).
125. Durban Climate Change Conference. UNFCCC (2011). Available online
at: https://unfccc.int/process-and-meetings/conferences/past-conferences/
copenhagen-climate-change-conference-december-2009/copenhagen-
climate-change-conference-december-2009 (accessed October 6, 2019).
126. Paris Climate Change Agreement. (2016). Available online at: https://unfccc.
int/process-and-meetings/the-paris-agreement/the-paris-agreement
Conﬂict of Interest: IM is employed by the company Delphis S.A.
The remaining authors declare that the present review paper was conducted
in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be
construed as a potential conﬂict of interest.
Copyright © 2020 Manisalidis, Stavropoulou, Stavropoulos and Bezirtzoglou. This
is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums
is permitted, provided the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited
and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted
academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not
comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Public Health | www.frontiersin.org
13
February 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 14