

----- Page 1 (native) -----
© 2006 Nature Publishing Group 
Temperature sensitivity of soil carbon
decomposition and feedbacks to climate
change
Eric A. Davidson1 & Ivan A. Janssens2
Signiﬁcantly more carbon is stored in the world’s soils—including peatlands, wetlands and permafrost—than is present in
the atmosphere. Disagreement exists, however, regarding the effects of climate change on global soil carbon stocks. If
carbon stored belowground is transferred to the atmosphere by a warming-induced acceleration of its decomposition, a
positive feedback to climate change would occur. Conversely, if increases of plant-derived carbon inputs to soils exceed
increases in decomposition, the feedback would be negative. Despite much research, a consensus has not yet emerged
on the temperature sensitivity of soil carbon decomposition. Unravelling the feedback effect is particularly difﬁcult,
because the diverse soil organic compounds exhibit a wide range of kinetic properties, which determine the intrinsic
temperature sensitivity of their decomposition. Moreover, several environmental constraints obscure the intrinsic
temperature sensitivity of substrate decomposition, causing lower observed ‘apparent’ temperature sensitivity, and
these constraints may, themselves, be sensitive to climate.
T
he temperature sensitivity of decomposition of the enormous
global stocks of soil organic matter (SOM)1–4 has recently
received considerable interest, including several high-proﬁle
publications supporting opposing views5–14. Interest in this
topic is high because of its importance in the global carbon (C) cycle
and potential feedbacks to climate change15. This recent controversy
has focused primarily on organic matter in upland mineral soils.
These soils have reasonably good drainage and aeration, allowing
roots and soil fauna to penetrate into mineral soil layers, thus mixing
SOM with mineral particles. Conditions in upland mineral soils are
also generally favourable for decomposition, resulting in relatively
low carbon densities. In contrast, in wetlands and peatlands where
anaerobic conditions frequently persist, decomposition proceeds
much more slowly, and deep layers of organic matter accumulate
on top of mineral layers. In soils with permanently frozen layers
(permafrost), drainage is also often poor, and organic matter may
become buried in deep soil layers through cryoturbation16. Thus,
wetlands, peatlands and permafrost soils generally contain higher
carbon densities than upland mineral soils, and together they make
up enormous stocks of carbon globally (Table 1). Moreover, perma-
frost soils and a large fraction of peatland soils occur at high latitudes,
where warming is expected to be greatest, and, indeed, has already
begun17,18. In this review, we emphasize that decomposition of all
types of belowground organic matter should be described by a
common set of principles of kinetic theory and environmental
constraints. Our objective is to clarify the issues regarding tempera-
ture sensitivity of decomposition within a framework that helps to
focus the ensuing debate and research.
Factors controlling decomposition of organic matter
The stocks of organic matter in soils result from the balance between
inputs and outputs of carbon within the belowground environment
(Fig. 1). Inputs are primarily from leaf and root detritus. Outputs are
dominated by the efﬂux of carbon dioxide (CO2) from the soil
surface, although methane (CH4) efﬂux and hydrologic leaching of
dissolved and particulate carbon compounds can also be important.
The production of CO2 in soils is almost entirely from root
respiration and microbial decomposition of organic matter. Like
all chemical and biochemical reactions, these processes are tempera-
ture-dependent. Root respiration and microbial decomposition are
also subject to water limitation. Hence, most empirical models relate
the efﬂux of CO2 from soils (often lumping microbial and root
respiration together as ‘soil respiration’) to temperature and often
also to some scalar of soil water content or precipitation19–24. This
much is not controversial.
The kinetics of enzymatic reactions inwell-mixed media are also not
controversial. Activation energies are related to the ambient tempera-
ture and to the molecular structure of the organic-C reactant. The
REVIEWS
Table 1 | Sizes and vulnerabilities of belowground carbon stocks
Carbon ‘pool’
Global
estimates
of size (Pg)
Potential loss by
2100 due to global
warming (Pg)
References
Upland soil inventory (3 m depth)
2,300
–
3,4
Simulated upland soil (litter layer)
200
30
38
Simulated upland soil
(mineral layer to 1 m depth)
Annually cycling
20
3
38
Decadally cycling
700
40
38
Millennially cycling
100
0
38
Peatlands (3 m depth)
400–500
100
4
Permafrost (3 m depth)
400
100
4
Although the estimates here are highly uncertain (all estimates are rounded to one
signiﬁcant ﬁgure), they help to frame the debate about the relative importance of each
type of belowground carbon as a potential feedback to climate change over the next few
decades.
1The Woods Hole Research Center, PO Box 296, Woods Hole, Massachusetts 02543, USA. 2Department of Biology, University of Antwerpen, Universiteitsplein 1, B-2610,
Wilrijk, Belgium.
Vol 440|9 March 2006|doi:10.1038/nature04514
165

----- Page 2 (native) -----
© 2006 Nature Publishing Group 
Box 1 | Must the Q10 of decomposition equal 2?
The Q10 for a reaction rate is deﬁned as the factor by which the rate
increases with a 108 rise in temperature. A rule of thumb widely
accepted in the biological research community is that the rate of
decomposition of SOM, like any other biological reaction rate, tends
to double for every 108 rise in temperature (that is, the Q10 of
decomposition is two). The origin of this rule-of-thumb, however,
and the limits to its validity are less well known. Early experiments by
van ’t Hoff and colleagues indicated that, around room temperature,
reaction rates “roughly double or triple” for every 108 rise in
temperature (that is, reaction rates have Q10 values of the order of
two to three)84. Thus, historically, there has never been any
suggestion that the Q10 should equal two on the basis of ﬁrst
principles. Moreover, an exponential equation does not always
provide the desired relationship between the reaction rate and the
temperature. Arrhenius noticed that a Q10 as high as two or three
cannot originate from the increasing frequency of collisions between
the reacting molecules, which only increases by about 1.5% for every
108 rise in temperature. Arrhenius also noticed that chemical
reactions, even exergonic ones, often require a little ‘push’ to
proceed, which he called the “activation energy” (Ea). He concluded
that the explanation for the unexpected high temperature sensitivity
of reaction rates had to be found in the amounts of reactants that
possessed sufﬁcient energy to react. Although the actual
concentration of a reactant may be relatively constant with
temperature, the active fraction that actually takes part in the
reaction increases rapidly with temperature. Thus, Arrhenius
developed the following equation85: k ¼ aexp(2Ea/RT) where k is
the reaction rate constant; a is a frequency or pre-exponential factor
(that is, the theoretical reaction rate constant in the absence of
activation energy); Ea is the required activation energy; R is the gas
constant (8.314 J K21 mol21); and T is the temperature in Kelvin. The
term exp(2Ea/RT) determines for any given temperature the
fraction of the molecules present with energies equal to or in excess
of the required activation energy. The Arrhenius function reveals
some important properties of the reactions that it describes. For
reactants with an Ea around 50 kJ mol21, and at temperatures
between 273 K and 303 K, the Q10 of a chemical reaction is
around two (Box 1 Figure, upper panel), in agreement with the
rule-of-thumb cited above. However, the Arrhenius equation also
predicts that the Q10 of chemical reactions decreases with
increasing temperature (in Box 1 Figure, upper panel), as is also
commonly observed in nature86. The theoretical explanation for the
decrease in Q10 with increasing temperature is that as temperature
increases, there is a declining relative increase in the fraction of
molecules with sufﬁcient energy to react. The Arrhenius function
also shows that reactants with higher activation energies (that is,
less reactive and more recalcitrant) should have higher temperature
sensitivities (Box 1 Figure, upper panel). Hence, theoretical and
experimental evidence shows that the Q10 of decomposition equals
two only under speciﬁc conditions.
Box 1 Figure | Surface plots of the effects of temperature and activation
energy on Q10 (upper panel) and reaction rate constant (bottom panel).
Reaction rate constants are presented relative to that of glucose at room
temperature. For clarity, the logarithm of this value is indicated. The red
arrows indicate increasing trends and the blue arrows indicate decreasing
trends. That the arrows switch colour between the two panels indicates
that both temperature and activation energy have opposite effects on Q10
and on the reaction rate. The letters represent glucose (G) and tannin (T)
in these graphic presentations of the Q10 and reaction rate constant values
at room temperature.
Figure 1 | Diagram of factors controlling the main
inputs and outputs of soil carbon, superimposed
over a global map of soil organic carbon stocks.
While CO2 is the main product of decomposition
in soil, CH4, dissolved organic carbon (DOC),
particulate organic carbon (POC) in water, and
dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC) are also
signiﬁcant exports from some soils. The
background soil organic carbon (SOC) map
(Miller projection; 1:100,000,000) is from ref. 100.
REVIEWS
NATURE|Vol 440|9 March 2006
166

----- Page 3 (native) -----
© 2006 Nature Publishing Group 
temperature sensitivity of decomposition increases with increasing
molecular complexity of the substrate (Boxes 1 and 2). The reaction
rates are also modiﬁed by substrate concentrations and afﬁnities of
the enzymes for the substrates (Box 3).
In applying this knowledge to soil environments the controversy
begins (hereafter we use ‘soil’ loosely to include wetlands, peatlands
and permafrost). First, soils contain a ‘veritable soup’ of thousands of
different organic-C compounds, each with its own inherent kinetic
properties. Not only do plants produce a wide range of carbon
substrates, but plant detritus also undergoes transformations by
microbial degradation or by abiotic condensation reactions that
produce new aromatic structures, larger molecular weights, insolu-
bility, or other molecular architectures that affect the types and
efﬁcacies of enzymes that can degrade them25,26. These complex
molecular attributes are characterized by low decomposition
rates, high activation energies, and inherently high temperature
sensitivity (Box 1). We shall call the inherent kinetic properties
based on molecular structure and ambient temperature the ‘intrinsic
temperature sensitivity’ of decomposition.
Second, the enzymes for decomposition may be physically or
chemically excluded from many of the organic-C substrates within
the heterogeneous soil environment26, causing substrate limitation at
reaction microsites (Box 3). The observed response to temperature
under these environmental constraints, which we shall call the ‘appar-
ent temperature sensitivity’, may be much lower than the intrinsic
temperature sensitivity of the substrate (Fig. 2). Conversely, if a
temperature-sensitive process alleviates an environmental constraint
to decomposition, then the subsequent increase in substrate avail-
ability could result in the apparent temperature sensitivity tempor-
arily exceeding the intrinsic temperature sensitivity of the substrate.
The environmental constraints that can temporarily or indeﬁnitely
affect apparent temperature sensitivities of decomposition include
the following:
(1) Physical protection. Organic matter may become physically
protected in the interior of soil aggregates27,28, where microorganisms
and their enzymes may have limited access and where oxygen
concentrations may also be low. Similarly, organic compounds can
be physically protected from degradation by water-soluble enzymes if
they have low water solubility or if they occur in hydrophobic
domains of humiﬁed organic matter29.
(2) Chemical protection. Organic matter may become adsorbed
onto mineral surfaces through covalent or electrostatical bonds,
thus chemically protecting it from decomposition27.
(3) Drought. Drought reduces the thickness of soil water ﬁlms, thus
inhibiting diffusion of extracellular enzymes and soluble organic-C
substrates and lowering substrate availability at reaction microsites.
In ﬁre-prone or drought-prone regions, deposition of volatilized
hydrophobic molecules can create water-repellency30, which also
restricts diffusion of organic matter and enzymes in water ﬁlms.
(4) Flooding. Flooding slows oxygen diffusion to decomposition
reaction sites, often allowing only anaerobic decomposition, which
includes fewer and generally slower degradative enzymatic pathways.
(5) Freezing. Although enzymatic reactions can occur below 0 8C
(refs 31, 32), the diffusion of substrates and extracellular enzymes
within the soil is extremely slow where the extracellular soil water is
frozen.
Each of these environmental constraints affects decomposition
reaction rates, directly or indirectly, by decreasing substrate concen-
trations at enzymatic reaction sites. Instead of viewing decomposition
Box 3 | The effect of substrate availability on Q10
The applicability of Arrhenius kinetics may be limited under
conditions of changing substrate availability. The importance of
substrate availability can easily be demonstrated in models of
enzyme-catalysed processes. Enzymes affect reaction rates
primarily by decreasing the required activation energy, such that
they can occur at ambient temperatures. The importance of
substrate availability in enzyme-catalysed reactions is described by
Michaelis–Menten kinetics88: the reaction rate is
Vmax £ [S]/(Km þ [S]) where [S] is the substrate availability (that
is the substrate concentration at the active site of the enzyme),
Vmax is the maximum reaction rate at a given temperature, and Km
is the Michaelis–Menten constant, representing the substrate
concentration at which the reaction rate equals Vmax/2. When [S] is
abundant, Km becomes insigniﬁcant, and the temperature response
of Vmax determines that of the reaction rate. Vmax increases with
temperature89,90 up to an optimum temperature (typically well
above ambient conditions), beyond which the enzyme starts to
denature and Vmax declines rapidly. Therefore, when [S] is abundant
and the temperature does not exceed the optimum temperature,
Vmax follows Arrhenius kinetics and the theory explained in Box 1 is
valid. However, when [S] is low, Km becomes relevant. Because the
Km of most enzymes increases with temperature, the temperature
sensitivities of Km and Vmax can neutralize each other, creating very
low apparent Q10 values90,91. Thus, in addition to substrate quality
and temperature, temporal and spatial differences in substrate
availability can also contribute to the large variability in Q10
observed in nature. This effect of substrate limitation on the
temperature sensitivity of decomposition has not yet been
incorporated into carbon cycle models. Even when combined,
Arrhenius and Michaelis–Menten kinetics may not always describe
decomposition reactions. First, these kinetics assume constant
enzyme concentrations, which may not be the case when microbial
populations ﬂuctuate. Second, temperature can also affect enzyme
conformation92, isozyme production (isozymes have similar
functions but different temperature responses)93,94, and microbial
community structure (and thus enzymatic spectrum)54. Changes in
enzymatic properties, commonly referred to as ‘temperature
acclimation’, could offset temperature-induced increases in
respiratory activity. However, although the existence of these
processes is beyond doubt, their ecological importance remains to
be tested95.
Box 2 | Relative versus absolute changes in decomposition rates
The Arrhenius equation describes changes in relative reaction rates
as a function of temperature, but the change in the absolute rate of
the reaction is what concerns us most. While the relative rate of
decomposition of recalcitrant soil organic matter with high
activation energy may be very sensitive to temperature, the change
in absolute rate may be small and difﬁcult to detect in experiments.
For example, in a temperate ecosystem and under current climate
conditions, the annual decomposition of glucose (an easily
degradable compound with an Ea of about 30 kJ mol21; ref. 87)
would proceed 6.5 million times faster than annual decomposition of
a tannin compound with an Ea of about 70 kJ mol21 (assuming equal
and unlimited pool sizes; Box 1 Figure, lower panel). If the
temperature were to increase by two degrees over the year, glucose
decomposition would accelerate by 10%. Because of its higher
temperature sensitivity, decomposition of the more recalcitrant
tannin would accelerate by 21%. In absolute numbers, this difference
in temperature response appears trivial, because glucose would still
decompose 5.8 million times faster than the more recalcitrant
tannin. Moreover, at similar levels of substrate availability, the
warming-induced increase in C losses from glucose will be much
larger than those associated with the decomposition of tannin,
despite the lower Q10 of glucose decomposition. Hence, it is difﬁcult
to determine temperature responses of decomposition of
recalcitrant organic matter in the presence of more labile
compounds, and it is tempting to classify the temperature response
of recalcitrant compounds as irrelevant. However, in most
environments the stocks of labile and recalcitrant compounds are
not equal, with recalcitrant compounds being much more abundant
than easily degradable compounds. Thus, even a small change in
their decomposition rate could become signiﬁcant, albeit only at
decadal or longer timescales. Hence, sensitivity to temperature
changes must be evaluated within the context of pre-existing
decomposition rates and substrate availability.
NATURE|Vol 440|9 March 2006
REVIEWS
167

----- Page 4 (native) -----
© 2006 Nature Publishing Group 
rates only through the lens of the temperature-dependent Arrhenius
function of the maximum enzymatic reaction rate (Vmax; Box 1), the
substrate concentration and the afﬁnity of the enzyme for the
substrate (kM, as in Michaelis–Menten kinetics; Box 3) are also
crucial for understanding the reaction rate and its sensitivity to
temperature. Indeed, conditions of low substrate concentrations at
active sites of enzymes may be the rule rather than the exception
within the soil matrix.
Common approaches to modelling decomposition
Most efforts to characterize the kinetics of SOM decomposition have
stratiﬁed carbon compounds into ‘pools’ that share similar mean
residence times (MRTs) within the soil. The MRT is the inverse of the
decomposition reaction rate (k) and therefore reﬂects a combination
of inherent reactivity of the compound and the environmental
constraints on its decomposition. The two best-known biogeo-
chemical models of soil carbon dynamics—the CENTURY33
and ROTH-C34 models—compartmentalize soil carbon into 5–7
conceptual pools, including 2–4 pools of decomposable plant
material near the soil surface (litter layer) and three pools of carbon
in the mineral soil, with MRTs ranging from years to millennia
(Fig. 3). Decomposition of the plant detritus in the litter layers is
based on well-supported functions of climate and indices of substrate
decomposability, such as carbon-to-nitrogen ratios and lignin
content35,36. The three C pools in the mineral soil, from the most
labile to the most recalcitrant to decomposition, are called ‘fast’,
‘slow’ and ‘passive’ in CENTURYand ‘microbial biomass’, ‘humiﬁed
organic matter’ and ‘inert’ in ROTH-C. Many attempts have been
made with partial success to measure these various pools through
physical and chemical fractionation of the soil13,28, but they remain
largely simpliﬁed modelling constructs. In lieu of discrete pools, a
continuum of soil C substrates of varying chemical complexity and
MRTs has also been used to simulate soil C dynamics37.
Although direct measurements of the sizes and MRTs of these
conceptual pools of soil C remain imperfect, a consensus has
emerged that using multi-pool soil C models to simulate changes
in soil C stocks is a major improvement over treating soil C as a
single, homogeneous pool38–40. A substantial fraction of the SOM
resides in the most recalcitrant pool that decomposes very slowly.
The importance of this model structure was demonstrated when the
multipool ROTH-C model was used in lieu of a single soil C pool
model for a global simulation of climate change using the Hadley
general circulation climate model. Soil C losses and gains were less
severe with the multipool model, both regionally and globally38.
While these models have proven effective for explaining local and
regional variation in current soil C stocks and changes in stocks due
to management and land-use change, a consensus has not emerged
for their applicability to climate change. Typically, most models of
soil C dynamics assume that decomposition of all SOM is nearly
equally sensitive to temperature12,41,42 but this assumption is contrary
to kinetic theory (ref. 43; Box 1). Moreover, decomposition rates may
be slow (and MRTs may be long) either because the complex
structures of the molecules render them resistant to decomposition,
or because environmental constraints restrict access of enzymes to
the molecules, or because of a combination of these two factors. Both
protected simple compounds and more complex unprotected com-
pounds might be lumped together into a common pool with
common MRTs. If the causes of varying MRTs and their potential
for change are to be understood, the distinction between intrinsic
and apparent temperature sensitivities needs to be addressed
explicitly.
Evidence for a decomposition feedback to warming
Discussions of biospheric feedbacks to climatic disruption have been
inﬂuenced by the perspective that temperature is the dominant
limiting factor of respiration, whereas photosynthesis is limited by
multiple factors, including light, CO2 concentration, water stress,
and nutrient availability44. Woodwell45 and Jenkinson et al.46 argued
that respiration of terrestrial ecosystems, including microbial
decomposition of SOM, would be more sensitive to global warming
than would gross primary productivity. Global warming would thus
lead to a net increase of C release to the atmosphere by the terrestrial
biosphere (or less net C uptake from the atmosphere by the terrestrial
biosphere). However, in the absence of a consensus on the tempera-
ture sensitivity of decomposition of a large fraction of soil C stocks,
the signiﬁcance of this positive feedback continues to be debated.
Current geographical relationships between climate and SOM
stocks provide important clues, such as the presence of large soil C
Figure 2 | Factors affecting the ‘apparent’ sensitivity of decomposition of
soil organic matter. The intrinsic temperature sensitivity (as in Arrhenius
functions, Box 1) of decomposition of an organic-C substrate is a function of
the decomposability of the molecule and the ambient temperature. In
general, more complex molecular structures have higher activation energies
and, hence, higher temperature sensitivity. However, several environmental
constraints on decomposition can dampen or obscure the intrinsic
temperature sensitivity by reducing substrate availability, often causing the
measured (or ‘apparent’) temperature sensitivity to be less than expected.
The responses to these multiple factors are shown here as a plane for graphic
simplicity, but nonlinear functions (for example, oxygen availability) or step
functions (for example, melting of permafrost) may be more realistic for
some factors.
Figure 3 | Diagram of properties of conceptual pools of belowground
carbon stocks in two well-known models. The CENTURY33 and ROTH-C34
models each deﬁne three discrete soil carbon pools in the mineral soil that lie
roughly along a continuum of decomposability and MRT in the soil. The
temperature sensitivity of decomposition of the more recalcitrant forms of C
is the subject of recent debate. Much of this confusion is due to the fact that
the recalcitrant pools are mixtures of simple compounds that have long
MRTs owing to physical or chemical protection from decomposition and
more complex compounds that have inherently low reactivity and require
high activation energy for decomposition.
REVIEWS
NATURE|Vol 440|9 March 2006
168

----- Page 5 (native) -----
© 2006 Nature Publishing Group 
stocks at high latitudes (Fig. 1). Inferences about the effects of
changing climate based on current geographic patterns, however,
require the tenuous assumption that a space-for-time substitution
adequately describes projections of future scenarios of changing
carbon stocks. Nevertheless, in his classical work on soil-forming
factors, Jenny47,48 described how soil N concentrations (which covary
with soil C) increased with decreasing temperature and increasing
precipitation across the Great Plains of central North America.
Kirschbaum49 pointed out that Jenny’s results imply that decompo-
sition does indeed increase more with temperature than does net
primary productivity across this gradient, supporting Woodwell’s
hypothesis45. Post et al.50 demonstrated similar trends globally,
although strong relationships were apparent only for very wet and
very dry climates, suggesting that soil water content also plays an
important role for constraining rates of decomposition.
Not all gradient studies have supported temperature sensitivity of
decomposition11, and there are numerous possible explanations. Not
withstanding Jenny’s example47,48 it is possible that growing-season
length along some north–south gradients could affect gross primary
productivity, and thus C inputs to soil, as much or more than
temperature affects respiration, thus obscuring the effect of tem-
perature on decomposition when interpreting variation in SOM
stocks51. Environmental constraints to decomposition could also
covary with temperature along a particular study transect if factors
such as mineralogy, clay content, aggregation, or soil water content
also covaried along the same gradient. For example, the presence of
clay-sized minerals that effectively adsorb organic matter and
retain soil moisture can be related to temperature-dependent
processes, such as the effects of previous glaciations that expose
new bedrock and biogenic production of acids that promote
mineral weathering52. Finally, in the example of an observed
positive relationship between temperature and soil C stocks
along a climate gradient in Finland11, the inferred temperature-
insensitivity of decomposition of a large fraction of SOM could be
an artefact of model assumptions about ﬁxed or variable mean
residence times of conceptualized soil C pools53. We will return to
this issue of the consequences of model assumptions on interpreted
temperature sensitivities.
When analysing any geographical trend, it is important to remem-
ber that instantaneous temperature responses of decomposition of
current C stocks reﬂect the relative abundances of organic-C sub-
strates of differing kinetic properties. Those relative substrate abun-
dances result, in part, from environmental constraints to
decomposition during the climate and disturbance history of the
soil. For example, the decomposition of organic matter in a highly
weathered mature tropical forest soil with high clay content may, on
average, have low apparent temperature sensitivity because of
chemical protection of a large fraction of soil C on mineral surfaces.
In contrast, the apparent temperature sensitivity may, on average, be
higher in a recently tilled temperate prairie soil because of lower
proportions of substrates under environmental constraints to
decomposition. Giardina and Ryan6 ignored this variation in relative
abundances of different soil substrates when they calculated MRTs of
a single homogeneous soil C pool for a number of soil samples from
different latitudes and under different temperature regimes in
laboratory experiments. Not surprisingly, they found no correlation
between calculated total soil C MRTs and either laboratory incu-
bation temperature or the mean annual ambient temperature of
the ﬁeld locations. They correctly proposed that substrate quality
and other stabilization mechanisms are important factors affecting
variation of soil C stocks among study sites, but they incorrectly
concluded that the temperature sensitivity of decomposition is
unimportant. Temperature insensitivity implies zero activation
energies of decomposition, which is impossible for biochemical
processes. The analysis by Giardina and Ryan6 also did not take
into account that the abundance of the various carbon substrates (or
‘pools’), with differing intrinsic temperature sensitivity and under
differing constraints to decomposition, are themselves partly the
result of climate effects (Box 4).
In addition to observations of natural gradients, several studies of
the temperature sensitivity of decomposition have been carried out
in the laboratory and in ﬁeld experiments. Fang et al.9 experimentally
applied multiple cycles of varying temperature during a 108-day
incubation and estimated the temperature sensitivity for each cycle.
The temperature sensitivities of decomposition were not signiﬁcantly
different for the most labile carbon that was respired early in the
incubation and for the less labile carbon being respired at the end of
the incubation period. They also conducted the experiment on soils
from the surface and from deeper soil horizons, the latter presumably
having more recalcitrant C associated with mineral surfaces. Again,
no statistically signiﬁcant differences in temperature sensitivities
were observed. While the results of Fang et al.9 refuted the notion
proposed by others6,11,54,55 that decomposition of the more recalci-
trant pools would be less sensitive to temperature than the more
labile pools, their results are still contrary to kinetic theory, which
indicates higher intrinsic temperature sensitivity for decomposition
of the recalcitrant C pools.
In contrast, Knorr et al.10 came to a conclusion consistent with
kinetic theory when they ﬁtted data from a laboratory soil incubation
experiment56 to a multi-pool soil C model. They calculated not only
that decomposition responded positively to temperature for a highly
labile pool, but also that decomposition of a less labile pool exhibited
higher temperature sensitivity. Most of the SOM resided in a third
recalcitrant pool that did not decompose signiﬁcantly during the
Box 4 | Assumptions of curve ﬁtting
In the Arrhenius function shown in Box 1, Ea is clearly a variable that
is ﬁtted to observational data to determine a temperature sensitivity
of a reaction. A debate has recently emerged, however, whether the
pre-exponential factor (a), should be a constant or a variable57,61,62.
From a purely mathematical perspective, the statistical ﬁts of Ea and
a are not independent, and so the decision to keep a constant or
allow it to vary affects the ﬁtted value of Ea (ref. 62). Because the
a-term is deﬁned as the theoretical reaction rate constant in the
absence of activation energy, it makes sense that it might have
different values for different substrates53. Hence, model ﬁts in which
all variation in decomposition rates and temperature sensitivity is
attributed to Ea are likely to overemphasize the differences in Ea
among compounds. Nonetheless, there is overwhelming evidence
that Ea does vary considerably among compounds, and that
decomposition of recalcitrant SOM has higher intrinsic temperature
sensitivity than decomposition of labile SOM (Box 1). Because the
statistical ﬁts of Ea and a are not independent, however, curve ﬁtting
is unlikely to have sufﬁcient power to resolve exactly to what degree
decomposition of recalcitrant compounds should have higher
intrinsic temperature sensitivities. A conceptually separate, but
mathematically similar, issue arises when applying the rate constant
(k) from the Arrhenius function to simulate decomposition of
various soil C pools, using the form: gðtÞ ¼ Pcie2kit, where g(t) is
the remaining carbon ﬁtted to observational data and ci are the
initial sizes of carbon ‘pools’ of varying degrees of decomposability.
Note the mathematical similarity between this function and the
Arrhenius function (Box 1), from which the ki value for each c i in this
equation is derived. Just as the variability of the a-term in the
Arrhenius function is being debated, a debate has also emerged in
the literature as to whether temperature dependence should reside
only in the ki-terms or also in the c i-terms96–99. While the ki-term
describes the current instantaneous decomposition rate and its
temperature sensitivity, the relative sizes of the carbon pools (ci) of
varying degrees of decomposability were determined over longer
timescales and may also partially be a consequence of climatic
history, including temperature. In many statistical ﬁts of
observational data, these two terms (ki and c i) are correlated98, and
so it is impossible to determine where the temperature sensitivity
lies by statistical curve ﬁtting alone.
NATURE|Vol 440|9 March 2006
REVIEWS
169

----- Page 6 (native) -----
© 2006 Nature Publishing Group 
incubation period. If not partitioned out in the model, this large pool
of recalcitrant organic matter would obscure the temperature sensi-
tivity of the two smaller, more labile pools. Experimental support for
kinetic theory was also obtained from incubation experiments of leaf
and root litter with varying substrate quality14.
However, each of these studies9–11,14 relied upon curve ﬁtting to
demonstrate temperature sensitivities to decomposition, and doubts
may arise from the underlying assumptions of the models and the
power of the statistical tests to detect signiﬁcantly different curve-
ﬁtting parameters. It is possible, for example, that Fang et al.9 did not
ﬁnd signiﬁcantly higher temperature sensitivity of the more recalci-
trant C pools because of a type II error—accepting a null hypothesis
of no statistically signiﬁcant differences among ﬁtted Ea terms. On
the other hand, the Knorr et al.10 study has been criticized for creating
an artefact of different temperature sensitivities (Ea terms) between
pools because of a model assumption of ﬁxed a-terms in the
Arrhenius function (ref. 57; Boxes 1 and 4). Furthermore, environ-
mental constraints to decomposition of some of the substrates may
have been present during these incubations.
Soil warming experiments in the ﬁeld have also provided equivocal
evidence regarding the temperature sensitivity of decomposition. In
these experiments, an initial increase in soil CO2 efﬂux in response to
experimental warming has been observed, but this measurable pulse
in decomposition often disappears within a few years54,55,58,59. This
result, however, must be interpreted with caution because high
spatial and temporal variability of measured CO2 efﬂux rates often
preclude powerful statistical tests of small treatment effects, resulting
in possible type II errors. Nonetheless, one interpretation of these
ephemeral responses has been that only decomposition of the most
labile soil C pool was sensitive to the warming treatment, and that
decomposition of the older, more recalcitrant soil C was not
temperature sensitive. Another interpretation has been that roots
and soil microbial communities ‘acclimate’ to the higher-tempera-
ture conditions by gradually adapting their metabolism, so that the
newly acclimated communities return to respiration rates similar to
the pre-treatment levels within a relatively short time (Box 3).
However, recent modelling studies10,59,60 have demonstrated that
these ﬁeld experimental data are also consistent with a model of a
small, labile pool that is quickly exhausted and a larger less-labile
pool that is also temperature sensitive, but that decomposes
much more slowly. Model ﬁts of these studies appear better with
the multipool models, and neither temperature insensitivity nor
acclimation needs to be invoked to explain the observations.
Unfortunately, curve ﬁtting of data from laboratory incu-
bations6,9–11,14 and soil warming experiments in the ﬁeld54,55,58–60 is
unlikely to resolve the debate about the underlying mechanisms of
temperature sensitivities. In a series of discussions of the Knorr et al.10
and Fang et al.9 papers, the same data ﬁt equally well models with
different assumptions and, hence, different interpretations of the
temperature sensitivity of decomposition of recalcitrant SOM
(refs 57, 61, 62; Box 4). Another limitation to curve ﬁtting is that it
focuses on the relationship between measured apparent temperature
sensitivity and estimated MRTs of experimentally deﬁned soil C
pools, rather than attempting to distinguish between intrinsic and
apparent temperature sensitivity of the substrates of decomposition.
Despite these controversies, the observational data are converging
to demonstrate that more than one ‘pool’ along the labile/recalcitrant
continuum (Fig. 3) decomposes with detectable apparent tempera-
ture sensitivity. Neither the observational data nor the soil C model
simulations, however, have been able to demonstrate a consistent
apparent temperature sensitivity of decomposition along the entire
spectrum of recalcitrant pools of SOM.
It is tempting to assume that the temperature sensitivity of
decomposition of the more recalcitrant forms of SOM is trivial
with respect to current concern about feedbacks to global warming,
because decomposition of these substrates, even if it is accelerated,
contributes so little to instantaneous CO2 ﬂuxes. Nonetheless,
because of their large contribution to the soil C stocks, even small
changes in the decomposition rates of recalcitrant pools may result in
an important change in soil C stocks over decades (Box 2). In fact, we
do not know where along the soil-C continuum or among the
discrete conceptual pools of SOM (Fig. 3) apparent temperature
sensitivity may become irrelevant to contemporary issues of carbon
cycling. More importantly, might the existing environmental con-
straints to decomposition change with changing climate, thus
exposing to decomposition SOM with high intrinsic temperature
sensitivity? In our opinion, answering this question would be more
informative about biospheric feedbacks to warming than reﬁning the
correlation between current apparent temperature sensitivity and
MRTs of soil C pools.
Temperature dependence of environmental constraints
According to kinetic theory, the constraints to decomposition that
are caused by biological and chemical processes must themselves be
affected by temperature8 and perhaps other climatic drivers. Let us
now reexamine the ﬁve environmental constraints to decomposition
listed above in light of the question of their own dependence on
climate.
(1) Both climate and management affect aggregate formation
(through growth of fungal hyphae and activity of soil fauna),
which physically protects SOM. The breakdown of aggregates can
also be enzymatic26, as the biogenic ‘glue’ that holds the aggregates
together is decomposed. In addition, however, purely physical
processes, such as ploughing and the impact of raindrops, also
destroy aggregates26. These processes are not directly temperature
dependent, but are often inﬂuenced by climate.
(2) Temperature affects the chemical processes of SOM adsorption
and desorption onto mineral surfaces, but little is known about the
activation energies of these processes.
(3) The climate-driven hydrologic balance among drainage, precipi-
tation, and evapotranspiration determines soil water ﬁlm thickness
through which the diffusion of soluble organic-C substrates and
extracellular enzymes occurs. Likewise leaf litter hydrophobicity
associated with drought-prone and ﬁre-prone ecosystems is also
affected by climate.
(4) Climate-driven ﬂooding of wetlands and peatlands determines
oxygen supply for decomposition. Both precipitation and evapo-
transpiration are likely to change in many regions of the world owing
to climatic disruption63, tipping the hydrologic balance towards
summertime drying of many mid-continental peatlands and wet-
lands and thus exposing large stocks of carbon substrates to aerobic
decomposition.
(5) Melting of permafrost will expose organic matter with wide-
ranging kinetic properties that are not currently expressed in frozen
soil. Once the soil thaws, a major constraint to decomposition will be
removed.
Most of the current debate regarding the temperature sensitivity of
decomposition of organic matter in mineral soils concerns only
physical and chemical protection within the mineral soil matrix.
While these processes are extremely important contributors to
variability of soil carbon stocks and soil fertility, the extent to
which they will participate in positive or negative feedbacks
to climate change is not clear. Adsorption and desorption processes
are both temperature sensitive and might both increase such that the
net effect would be minimal over the next few decades. In contrast,
the last two constraints to decomposition—frozen soils and oxygen
limitation due to ﬂooding—are likely to be subject to rapid changes
under plausible climate change scenarios.
When decomposition in wetlands and peatlands slows owing to
lack of oxygen during periods of ﬂooding, the low oxygen concen-
trations inhibit the activity of phenol oxidase, causing accumulation
of phenolic compounds64. These phenolic compounds inhibit the
activity of hydrolase enzymes responsible for decomposition, thus
slowing decomposition further. This inhibition is quickly reversible
REVIEWS
NATURE|Vol 440|9 March 2006
170

----- Page 7 (native) -----
© 2006 Nature Publishing Group 
once peat becomes aerobic. Hence, the 400–500 Pg (1 Pg ¼ 1015 g)
carbon in wetlands and peatlands4,65, which has been accumulating
over centuries and millennia, is ‘stable’ only as long as anaerobic
conditions are sustained. In the continental areas where summertime
soil moisture is expected to decrease63, the upper layers of peat could
dry out. An estimated 100 Pg carbon could become aerobic and thus
available for decomposition (Table 1; ref. 4). Evidence that this
process may already be occurring comes from recently repeated
inventories of soils of England and Wales, which show that peat
soils and bogs lost carbon at a faster rate than upland soils over the
last 25 years (ref. 5).
Carbon losses from peatlands will not necessarily enhance global
warming if an increased emission of CO2 is compensated by a
decrease in the current net emissions of CH4 (ref. 66). The green-
house warming potential of CH4 on a per molecule basis is 23 times
higher than CO2 on a 100-year timescale67. Likewise, growth of forest
vegetation on previously ﬂooded land could sequester signiﬁcant
amounts of C in wood68, although the net carbon balance remains
uncertain69. On the other hand, carbon in desiccated peat is also
subject to natural and human ﬁres, rapidly releasing huge amounts of
carbon to the atmosphere. Siberian and Canadian peatlands are
already subject to important peat losses during ﬁre-prone dry years70
and the combination of higher temperatures and peat drying
may increase ﬁre frequency and severity71. During the 1997 El Nin˜o,
0.6–0.8 Pg of C (10% of anthropogenic emissions) was lost owing to
peat ﬁres in Indonesia alone72. Peat ﬁres could thus have larger effects
on the soil carbon feedback than any of the biotic responses presented
above73.
Permafrost soils store a similar amount of organic matter as
peatlands (Table 1). In these soils with permanently frozen layers,
plant litter accumulates both at the surface and on top of the
permafrost table through a mixing process called cryoturbation16.
When permafrost thaws, large amounts of otherwise mostly unpro-
tected carbon become available for decomposition74,75. A gradual net
loss of deep soil C in a boreal forest has also been attributed to
warming-induced deepening of the layer of seasonal biological
activity76. One estimate suggests that global warming could thaw
25% of the permafrost area by 2100 (ref. 77), thus rendering about
100 Pg carbon vulnerable to decay (Table 1; ref. 4).
Permafrost thaw creates a mosaic of ﬂooded areas interspersed
within higher dry areas. In the drier thawed areas, much of the large
substrate pool is likely to decompose relatively quickly. Within the
ﬂooded thawed areas (thermokarst lakes), however, anaerobic
decomposition of organic matter is likely to proceed more slowly,
but produces large CH4 emissions78, which could constitute a
stronger feedback to the climate system than the larger soil C
losses from the drier areas. To further complicate matters, recent
evidence indicates that thermokarst lakes are increasing in abun-
dance in the most northern range of permafrost, owing to an initial
increase in thermokarst development in response to warming,
whereas thermokarst lakes are draining and disappearing in the
southern range of permafrost, owing to more advanced degradation
of permafrost79.
Frozen and anaerobic conditions merely suspend organic matter
in decomposition time, rather than transform it into inherently
recalcitrant material. The term ‘stabilization’ has not been rigorously
deﬁned with respect to soil carbon dynamics, and it would be
misleading to refer to organic C in wetlands and permafrost as
‘stabilized’ in the same sense that organic C is stabilized in mineral
soils when it is adsorbed to mineral surfaces or protected in aggregate
interiors. In both cases, intrinsic kinetic properties of decomposition
of the organic-C substrates are suppressed by environmental con-
straints (Fig. 2), but the anaerobic and frozen conditions of wetland,
peatland, and permafrost soils are more likely to be subject to rapid
change. Unlike the debate over mineral soils, the unresolved question
regarding peatlands and permafrost is not the degree to which the
currently constrained decomposition rates are temperature sensitive,
but rather how much permafrost is likely to melt and how much of
the peatland area is likely to dry signiﬁcantly. Such regional changes
in temperature, precipitation, and drainage are still difﬁcult to
predict in global circulation models. Hence, the climate change
predictions, as much as our understanding of carbon dynamics,
limit our ability to predict the magnitude of likely vulnerability of
peat and permafrost carbon to climate change. Assuming that 25%
of the estimated stocks of carbon in peatlands and permafrost is
subject to loss due to global warming in the twenty-ﬁrst century,
this potential loss would be two to three times larger than simulated
C losses from mineral soils using current soil C models (Table 1;
refs 38, 42).
Other global change processes, such as CO2 fertilization, N
deposition, improved soil management (for example, conservation
tillage), and land-use change could also change soil carbon stocks.
We have not addressed these changes, partly because our charge in
this review is to focus on the temperature sensitivity controversy, but
also because compelling evidence is lacking for globally signiﬁcant
soil C sinks by these processes15,80–83. In contrast, those belowground
carbon pools where environmental constraints to decomposition are
themselves highly sensitive to climate may become increasingly
important positive feedbacks as global climatic disruption becomes
more pronounced.
Conclusions and future research directions
A signiﬁcant fraction of relatively labile SOM is clearly subject to
temperature-sensitive decomposition, but another signiﬁcant frac-
tion of SOM remains under environmental constraints that often
obscure the intrinsic temperature sensitivity of its decomposition.
The interpretations of natural climatic gradients and of laboratory
and ﬁeld experiments designed to quantify various carbon fractions
and degrees of temperature sensitivity are highly dependent upon
model assumptions and curve ﬁtting techniques. Such studies have
yielded valuable insight into soil carbon dynamics, but they have not
resolved the overall response of global soil C stocks or the magnitude
of expected feedbacks to climatic disruption. Moreover, dividing
SOM into only temperature-sensitive and apparently temperature-
insensitive pools is far too simplistic.
Extrapolation of decomposition rates into a future warmer world
based on observations of current apparent temperature sensitivities
is inadequate. Rather, we need to understand how substrate avail-
ability will change and how a changing set of environmental
constraints to decomposition in a future climate will determine the
future apparent temperature sensitivity of decomposition. Perhaps a
new way forward would be a further reductionist effort to distinguish
between inherent kinetic properties of individual substrates and the
suite of environmental constraints to decomposition that frequently
exist in situ. Our ability to identify and characterize soil substrates is
growing with new developments in nuclear magnetic resonance and
other technologies, but the task is enormous given the diversity of
soil C substrates common in soils. Even when structures are identi-
ﬁed within the soil, their concentrations at reactive sites of enzymes
are more difﬁcult to estimate. Nevertheless, merging the concepts of
substrate availability, such as Michaelis–Menten kinetics, with the
temperature sensitivity prescribed by Arrhenius kinetics may
provoke new measurement and modelling approaches for soil C
dynamics. The multiple processes of environmental constraints that
govern availability of substrates to enzymes should be explicitly
described and studied within the context of climate change.
Regardless of the experimental and modelling approaches used,
the debate about the temperature sensitivity of decomposition
should be broadened beyond upland mineral soils speciﬁcally to
include wetlands, peatlands and permafrost soils. These are the most
obvious environments in which current constraints on decompo-
sition are likely to change as a result of climatic disruption, thus
potentially exposing large stocks of C to less constrained decompo-
sition during the next few decades. A high research priority should be
NATURE|Vol 440|9 March 2006
REVIEWS
171

----- Page 8 (native) -----
© 2006 Nature Publishing Group 
how the constraints to decomposition in these environments are
sensitive to climate.
1.
Batjes, N. H. Total carbon and nitrogen in the soils of the world. Eur. J. Soil Sci.
47, 151–-163 (1996).
2.
Eswaran, H., Van Den Berg, E. & Reich, P. Organic carbon in soils of the world.
Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J. 57, 192–-194 (1993).
3.
Jobba´gy, E. G. & Jackson, R. B. The vertical distribution of soil organic carbon and
its relation to climate and vegetation. Ecol. Appl. 10, 423–-436 (2000).
4.
Gruber, N. et al. in Toward CO2 Stabilization: Issues, Strategies, and Consequences
(eds Field, C. B. & Raupach, M. R.) 45–-76 (Island Press, Washington, DC,
2004).
5.
Bellamy, P. H., Loveland, P. J., Bradley, R. I., Murray Lark, R. & Kirk, G. Carbon
losses from all soils across England and Wales 1978–-2003. Nature 437,
245–-248 (2005).
6.
Giardina, C. P. & Ryan, M. G. Evidence that decomposition rates of organic
matter in mineral soil do not vary with temperature. Nature 404, 858–-861
(2000).
7.
Davidson, E. A., Trumbore, S. E. & Amundson, R. Soil warming and organic
carbon content. Nature 408, 789–-790 (2000).
8.
Thornley, J. H. M. & Cannell, M. G. R. Soil carbon storage response to
temperature: an hypothesis. Ann. Bot. (Lond.) 87, 591–-598 (2001).
9.
Fang, C., Smith, P., Moncrieff, J. B. & Smith, J. U. Similar response of labile and
resistant soil organic matter pools to changes in temperature. Nature 433,
57–-59 (2005).
10. Knorr, W., Prentice, I. C., House, J. I. & Holland, E. A. Long-term sensitivity of
soil carbon turnover to warming. Nature 433, 298–-301 (2005).
11.
Liski, J., Ilvesniemi, H., Ma¨kela¨, A. & Westman, C. J. CO2 emissions from soil in
response to climatic warming are overestimated- the decomposition of old soil
organic matter is tolerant of temperature. Ambio 28, 171–-174 (1999).
12.
Kirschbaum, M. U. F. The temperature dependence of soil organic matter
decomposition, and the effect of global warming on soil organic C storage. Soil
Biol. Biochem. 27, 753–-760 (1995).
13.
Trumbore, S. E., Chadwick, O. A. & Amundson, R. Rapid exchange between soil
carbon and atmospheric carbon dioxide driven by temperature change. Science
272, 393–-396 (1996).
14.
Fierer, N., Craine, J. M., McLaughlan, K. & Schimel, J. P. Litter quality and the
temperature sensitivity of decomposition. Ecology 86, 320–-326 (2005).
15.
Schlesinger, W. H. & Andrews, J. A. Soil respiration and the global carbon
cycle. Biogeochemistry 48, 7–-20 (2000).
16.
Bockheim, J. G. & Tarnocai, C. Recognition of cryoturbation for classifying
permafrost-affected soils. Geoderma 81, 281–-293 (1998).
17.
Arctic Climate Impact Assessment (ACIA). Impacts of a Warming Arctic: Arctic
Climate Impact Assessment (Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 2004);
khttp://amap.no/acia/l.
18.
Chapin, F. S. III et al. Role of land-surface changes in Arctic summer warming.
Science 310, 657–-660 (2005).
19.
Davidson, E. A., Verchot, L. V., Cattaˆnio, J. H., Ackerman, I. L. & Carvalho,
J. E. M. Effects of soil water content on soil respiration in forests and cattle
pastures of eastern Amazonia. Biogeochemistry 48, 53–-69 (2000).
20. Hanson, P. J. et al. in North American Temperate Deciduous Forest Responses to
Changing Precipitation Regimes (eds Hanson, P. J. & Wullschleger, S. D.)
163–-189 (Springer, New York, 2003).
21.
Janssens, I. A. et al. in Canopy Fluxes of Energy, Water and Carbon Dioxide of
European Forests (ed. Valentini, R.) 235–-256 (Springer, Berlin, 2003).
22. Raich, J. W. & Potter, C. S. Global patterns of carbon dioxide emissions from
soils. Glob. Biogeochem. Cycles 9, 23–-36 (1995).
23. Reichstein, M. et al. Modeling temporal and large-scale spatial variability of soil
respiration from soil water availability, temperature and vegetation productivity
indices. Glob. Biogeochem. Cycles 17, 15.1–-15.15 (2003).
24. Schlentner, R. E. & Van Cleve, K. Relationships between CO2 evolution from
soil, substrate temperature, and substrate moisture in four mature forest types
in interior Alaska. Can. J. For. Res. 15, 97–-106 (1985).
25. Kelley, K. R. & Stevenson, F. J. in Humic Substances in Terrestrial Ecosystems
(ed. Picolo, A.) 407–-427 (Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1996).
26. Sollins, P., Homann, P. & Caldwell, B. A. Stabilization and destabilization of soil
organic matter: mechanisms and controls. Geoderma 74, 65–-105 (1996).
27. Oades, J. M. The retention of organic matter in soils. Biogeochemistry 5, 35–-70
(1988).
28. Six, J. et al. Measuring and understanding carbon storage in afforested soils by
physical fractionation. Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J. 66, 1981–-1987 (2002).
29. Spacini, R. et al. Increased soil organic carbon sequestration though hydrophobic
protection by humic substances. Soil Biol. Biochem. 34, 1839–-1851 (2002).
30. McHale, G. et al. Water-repellent soil and its relationship to granularity,
surface roughness and hydrophobicity: a materials science view. Eur. J. Soil Sci.
56, 445–-452 (2005).
31.
Mikan, C. J. et al. Temperature controls of microbial respiration in arctic tundra
soils above and below freezing. Soil Biol. Biochem. 34, 1785–-1795 (2002).
32. Elberling, B. & Brandt, K. K. Uncoupling of microbial CO2 production and
release in frozen soil and its implications for ﬁeld studies of arctic C cycling.
Soil Biol. Biochem. 35, 263–-272 (2003).
33. Parton, W. J., Schimel, D. S., Cole, C. V. & Ojima, D. S. Analysis of factors
controlling soil organic matter levels in Great Plains Grasslands. Soil Sci. Soc.
Am. J. 51, 1173–-1179 (1987).
34. Jenkinson, D. S. The turnover of organic carbon and nitrogen in soil. Phil. Trans.
R. Soc. B 329, 361–-368 (1990).
35. Meentemeyer, V. Macroclimate and lignin control of litter decomposition rates.
Ecology 59, 465–-472 (1978).
36. Melillo, J. M. et al. Nitrogen and lignin control of hardwood leaf litter
decomposition dynamics. Ecology 63, 621–-626 (1982).
37. A˚gren, G. I. & Bosatta, E. Theoretical Ecosystem Ecology—Understanding Element
Cycles (Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 1998).
38. Jones, C. et al. Global climate change and soil carbon stocks; predictions from
two contrasting models for the turnover of organic carbon in soil. Glob. Change
Biol. 11, 154–-166 (2005).
39. Powlson, D. Will soil amplify climate change? Nature 433, 204–-205 (2005).
40. Trumbore, S. Age of soil organic matter and soil respiration: radiocarbon
constraints on belowground C dynamics. Ecol. Appl. 10, 399–-411 (2000).
41.
Jenkinson, D. S. & Rayner, J. H. The turnover of soil organic matter in some of
the Rothamsted Classical Experiments. Soil Sci. 123, 298–-305 (1977).
42. Schimel, D. S. et al. Climatic, edaphic, and biotic controls over storage and
turnover of carbon in soils. Glob. Biogeochem. Cycles 8, 279–-293 (1994).
43. Bosatta, E. & A˚gren, G. I. Soil organic matter quality interpreted
thermodynamically. Soil Biol. Biochem. 31, 1889–-1891 (1999).
44. Farquhar, G. D., von Caemmerer, S. & Berry, J. A. A biochemical model of
photosynthetic CO2 ﬁxation in leaves of C3 species. Planta 149, 78–-90 (1980).
45. Woodwell, G. M. in Changing Climate 216–-241 (NAS Press, Washington DC,
1983).
46. Jenkinson, D. S. et al. model estimates of CO2 emissions from soil in response
to global warming. Nature 351, 304–-306 (1991).
47. Jenny, H. Factors of Soil Formation. A System of Quantitative Pedology 1st edn
(McGraw-Hill Book Co, New York, 1941).
48. Jenny, H. The Soil Resource, Origin and Behavior (Springer, New York, 1980).
49. Kirschbaum, M. U. F. Will changes in soil organic carbon act as a positive or
negative feedback on global warming. Biogeochemistry 48, 21–-51 (2000).
50. Post, W. M., Emanuel, W. R., Zinke, P. J. & Stangenberger, A. G. Soil carbon
pools and world life zones. Nature 298, 156–-159 (1982).
51.
Janssens, I. A. et al. Productivity overshadows temperature in determining soil
and ecosystem respiration across European forests. Glob. Change Biol. 7,
269–-278 (2001).
52. Chadwick, O. A. et al. Carbon dioxide consumption during soil development.
Biogeochemistry 24, 115–-127 (1994).
53. A˚gren, G. Temperature dependence of old soil organic matter. Ambio 29, 55
(2000).
54. Luo, Y., Wan, S. & Hui, D. Acclimatization of soil respiration to warming in tall
grass prairie. Nature 413, 622–-625 (2001).
55. Melillo, J. M. et al. Soil warming and carbon-cycle feedbacks to the climate
system. Science 298, 2173–-2175 (2002).
56. Holland, E. A. et al. Uncertainties in the temperature sensitivity of
decomposition in troical and subtrocipal ecosystems: Implications for models.
Glob. Biogeochem. Cycles 14, 1137–-1151 (2000).
57. Fang, C. et al. Is resistant soil organic matter more sensitive to temperature
then the labile organic matter? Biogeosci. Discuss. 2, 725–-735 (2005).
58. Rustad, L. E. et al. A meta-analysis of the response of soil respiration, net
nitrogen mineralization, and aboveground plant growth to experimental
ecosystem warming. Oecologia 126, 543–-562 (2001).
59. Eliasson, P. E. et al. The response of heterotrophic CO2-ﬂux to soil warming.
Glob. Change Biol. 11, 167–-181 (2005).
60. Kirschbaum, M. U. F. Soil respiration under prolonged soil warming: are rate
reductions caused by acclimation or substrate loss? Glob. Change Biol. 10,
1870–-1877 (2004).
61.
Knorr, W. et al. On the available evidence for the temperature dependence of
soil organic carbon. Biogeosci. Discuss. 2, 749–-755 (2005).
62. Reichstein, M. et al. Does the temperature sensitivity of decomposition vary
with soil organic matter quality? Biogeosci. Discuss. 2, 737–-747 (2005).
63. Wetherald, R. T. & Manabe, S. Detectablity of summer dryness caused by
greenhouse warming. Clim. Change 43, 495–-511 (1999).
64. Freeman, C., Ostle, N. & Kang, H. An enzymatic ‘latch’ on a global carbon
store. Nature 409, 149 (2001).
65. Maltby, E. & Immirzi, P. Carbon dynamics in peatlands and other wetland soils,
regional and global perspectives. Chemosphere 27, 999–-1023 (1993).
66. Whalen, S. C., Reeburgh, W. C. & Reeburge, W. S. Consumption of
atmospheric methane by tundra soils. Nature 346, 160–-162 (1990).
67. Ramaswamy, V. et al. in Climate Change 2001: The Scientiﬁc Basis
(eds Houghton, J. T. et al.) 349–-416 (Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, UK,
2001).
68. Shaver, G. S. et al. Global change and the carbon balance of arctic ecosystems.
Bioscience 42, 433–-441 (1992).
69. Grogan, P. & Jonasson, S. Temperature and substrate controls on intra-annual
variation in ecosystem respiration in two subarctic vegetation types. Glob.
Change Biol. 11, 465–-475 (2005).
70. Turetsky, M. R., Wieder, R. K., Halsey, L. A. & Vitt, D. H. Current disturbance
and the diminishing peatland carbon sink. Geophys. Res. Lett. 29, 10.1029/
2001GL014000 (2002).
REVIEWS
NATURE|Vol 440|9 March 2006
172

----- Page 9 (native) -----
© 2006 Nature Publishing Group 
71.
Turetsky, M. R., Amiro, B. D., Bosch, E. & Bhatti, J. S. Historical burn area in
western Canadian peatlands and its relationship to ﬁre weather indices. Glob.
Biogeochem. Cycles 18, 4014, doi:10.1029/2004GB002222 (2004).
72. Page, S. E. et al. The amount of carbon released during peat and forest ﬁres in
Indonesia during 1997. Nature 420, 61–-65 (2002).
73. Chapin, F. S. III et al. Arctic and boreal ecosystems of western North America
as components of the climate system. Glob. Change Biol. 6 (suppl. 1), 211–-233
(2000).
74. Osterkamp, T. E. & Romanovsky, V. E. Evidence for warming and thawing of
discontinuous permafrost in Alaska. Permafrost Periglacial Process. 10, 17–-37
(1999).
75. Serreze, M. C. et al. Observational evidence of recent change in the northern
high-latitude environment. Clim. Change 46, 159–-207 (2000).
76. Goulden, M. L. et al. Sensitivity of boreal forest carbon balance to soil thaw.
Science 279, 214–-217 (1998).
77. Anisimov, O. A., Nelson, F. E. & Pavlov, A. V. Predictive scenarios of
permafrost development under conditions of global climate change in the XXI
century. Earth Cryology 3, 15–-25 (1999).
78. Zimov, S. A. et al. North Siberian lakes: a methane source fueled by Pleistocene
carbon. Science 277, 800–-802 (1997).
79. Smith, L. C., Sheng, Y., MacDonald, G. M. & Hinzman, L. D. Disappearing arctic
lakes. Science 308, 1429 (2005).
80. Ogle, S. M., Breidt, F. J., Eve, M. D. & Paustian, K. Uncertainty in estimating
land use and management impacts on soil organic carbon storage for US
agricultural lands between 1982–-1997. Glob. Change Biol. 9, 1521–-1542 (2003).
81.
Post, W. M. et al. Enhancement of carbon sequestration in US soils. Bioscience
54, 895–-908 (2004).
82. Telles, E. C. C. et al. Inﬂuence of soil texture on carbon dynamics and storage
potential in tropical forest soils of Amazonia. Glob. Biogeochem. Cycles 17, 1040,
9-1–-12, doi:10.1029/2002GB001953 (2003).
83. Lichter, J. et al. Soil carbon sequestration and turnover in a pine forest after six
years of atmospheric CO2 enrichment. Ecology 86, 1835–-1847 (2005).
84. van ’t Hoff, J. H. Lectures on Theoretical and Physical Chemistry. Part 1. Chemical
Dynamics (Edward Arnold, London, 1898).
85. Arrhenius, S. Uber die Reaktionsgeschwindigkeit bei der Inversion von
Rohrzucker durch Sauren. Z. Phys. Chem. 4, 226–-248 (1889).
86. Tjoelker, M. G., Oleksyn, J. & Reich, P. B. Modelling respiration of vegetation:
evidence for a temperature-dependent Q10. Glob. Change Biol. 7, 223–-230
(2001).
87. Imriskova, I. et al. Biochemical characterization of the glucose kinase from
Streptomyces coelicolor compared to Streptomyces peucetius var. caesius. Res.
Microbiol. 156, 361–-366 (2005).
88. Michaelis, L. & Menten, M. L. Die kinetik der invertin wirkung. Biochem. Z. 49,
334–-336 (1913).
89. Atkin, O. K. & Tjoelker, M. G. Thermal acclimation and the dynamic response
of plant respiration to temperature. Trends Plant Sci. 8, 343–-351 (2003).
90. Berry, J. A. & Raison, J. K. in Physiological Plant Ecology I. Responses to the
Physical Environment (eds Lange, O. L. et al.) 277–-388 (Springer, Berlin, 1981).
91.
Davidson, E. A., Janssens, I. A. & Luo, Y. On the variability of respiration in
terrestrial ecosystems: moving beyond Q10. Glob. Change Biol. (in the press);
published online 8 December 2005 (doi:10.1111/j.1365-2486.2005.01065.x).
92. Linkins, A. E., Melillo, J. M. & Sinsabaugh, R. L. in Current Perspectives in
Microbial Ecology (eds Klug, M. J. & Reddy, C. A.) 572–-579 (American Society
for Microbiology, Washington DC, 1984).
93. Koch, K. E. Carbohydrate-modulated gene expression in plants. Annu. Rev. Plant
Physiol. Plant Mol. Biol. 47, 509–-540 (1996).
94. Sheen, J. Feedback control of gene expression. Photosynth. Res. 39, 427–-438
(1994).
95. Atkin, O. K., Bruhn, D., Hurry, V. M. & Tjoelker, M. G. The hot and the cold:
unravelling the variable response of plant respiration to temperature. Funct.
Plant Biol. 32, 87–-105 (2005).
96. Dalias, P., Anderson, J. M., Bottner, P. & Couˆteaux, M. M. Temperature
response of carbon mineralization in conifer forest soils from different regional
climates incubated under standard laboratory conditions. Glob. Change Biol. 7,
181–-192 (2001).
97. Dalias, P., Anderson, J. M., Bottner, P. & Couˆteaux, M. M. Long-term effects of
temperature on carbon mineralisation processes. Soil Biol. Biochem. 33,
1049–-1057 (2001).
98. Hyvo¨nen, R., A˚gren, G. I. & Dalias, P. Analysing temperature response of
decomposition of organic matter. Glob. Change Biol. 11, 770–-778 (2005).
99. Zak, D. R., Holmes, W. E., MacDonald, N. W. & Pregitzer, K. S. Soil
temperature, matric potential, and the kinetics of microbial respiration and
nitrogen mineralization. Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J. 63, 575–-584 (1999).
100. Soil Organic Carbon Map (US Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources
Conservation Service, Soil Survey Division, World Soil Resources, Washington
DC); khttp://soils.usda.gov/use/worldsoils/mapindex/soc.htmll (1997;
revised 2000).
Acknowledgements We thank G. A˚gren, R. Houghton, C. Potter, D. Sampson,
J. Schimel, P. Smith and D. Thompson for comments on earlier drafts of this
paper. We thank M. Ernst for assistance with graphics. E.A.D. acknowledges
support from the Northeast Regional Center of the National Institute for Global
Environmental Change of the Department of Energy and by the National Science
Foundation. I.A.J. acknowledges the European Commission for support via
CarboEurope-IP. Financial support does not constitute an endorsement by DOE
or NSF of the views expressed in this article.
Author Information Reprints and permissions information is available at
npg.nature.com/reprintsandpermissions. The authors declare no competing
ﬁnancial interests. Correspondence should be addressed to E.A.D.
(edavidson@whrc.org).
NATURE|Vol 440|9 March 2006
REVIEWS
173