

----- Page 1 (native) -----
This PDF is a selection from a published volume from the National 
Bureau of Economic Research
Volume Title: Investment in Human Beings
Volume Author/Editor: Universities-National Bureau Committee for
Economic Research
Volume Publisher: The Journal of Political Economy Vol. LXX, No. 
5, Part 2 (University of Chicago Press)
Volume ISBN: 0-87014-306-9
Volume URL: http://www.nber.org/books/univ62-3
Conference Date: 
Publication Date: October 1962
 
Chapter Title: The Costs and Returns of Human Migration
Chapter Author(s): Larry A. Sjaastad
Chapter URL: http://www.nber.org/chapters/c13573
Chapter pages in book: (p. 80 - 93)

----- Page 2 (native) -----
THE COSTS AND RETURNS OF HUMAN MIGRATION' 
LARRY A. SJAASTAD 
University of Minnesota 
M IGRATION research has dealt 
mainly with the forces which af- 
fect migration and how strong- 
ly they have affected it, but little has 
been done to determine the influence of 
migration as an equilibrating mechanism 
in a changing economy. The movements 
of migrants clearly are in the appropriate 
direction, but we do not know whether 
the numbers are sufficient 
to be efficient 
in correcting income disparities as they 
emerge.2 There is a strong presumption 
that they are not. 
The central purpose of this paper is 
to develop the concepts and tools with 
which to attack the latter problem. I 
propose to identify some of the impor- 
tant costs and returns to migration- 
both public and private-and, to a lim- 
ited extent, devise methods for estimat- 
ing them. This treatment places migra- 
1 I wish to acknowledge discussion and comments 
on an earlier draft by Anthony M. Tang and John 
C. Hause. In addition, I am indebted to T. W. 
Schultz for extensive comments and aid in revision. 
Remaining errors and omissions are, of course, my 
sole responsibility. 
2 A substantial number of highly creditable stud- 
ies on the nature and strength of the forces affecting 
human migration have been completed; the earliest 
of these was published more than seventy-five 
years 
ago (see E. G. Ravenstein, "The Laws of Migra- 
tion," Journal of the (Royal) Statistical Society, Vol. 
XLVIII [June, 1885]). The main concern of econo- 
mists has been with the response of individuals to 
economic opportunity 
at a distance. Harry Jerome's 
Migration and Business Cycles (New York: National 
Bureau of Economic Research, 1926) leaves little 
doubt that international migration is influenced by 
the business cycle, and more recent work indicates a 
parallel relation for internal migration. Moreover, 
recent statistical studies have revealed a relationship 
between internal migration and income differentials 
as well. 
tion in a resource allocation framework 
because it treats migration as a means 
in promoting efficient resource alloca- 
tion and because migration is an ac- 
tivity which requires resources. Within 
this framework, 
my goal will be to deter- 
mine the return to investment in migra- 
tion rather than to relate rates of migra- 
tion to income differentials. 
1. MIGRATION: TOO MUCH OR TOO LITTLE? 
Economists and others are generally 
dissatisfied with the past performance of 
migration in narrowing geographic in- 
come differentials, 
in spite of the tremen- 
dous amount of internal migration taking 
place in the United States.' During the 
twelve months preceding the 1950 Cen- 
sus of Population, 5.6 per cent of the 
United States population moved to a dif- 
ferent county and 2.6 per cent to a 
different 
state.' Accordingly, there were 
enough interstate migrants to replace the 
population of Delaware every month and 
even that of mighty New York within 
twenty-one months. Nevertheless, Dela- 
ware's per capita personal income con- 
tinues to be two and one-half to three 
times that of Mississippi. How can these 
large income differences persist in the 
face of such massive movements? 
Part of the answer lies in the fact that 
these movements are gross rather than 
3 On this point see George H. Borts, "The Equali- 
zation of Returns and Regional Economic Growth," 
American Economic Review, L, No. 3 (June, 1960), 
319-47. 
4 United States Bureau of the Census, 1950 Popu- 
lation Census Report, P-E, No. 4B (Washington: 
Government Printing Office, 1956), p. 13, Table 1. 
80 
This content downloaded from 198.71.7.231 on Tue, 07 Apr 2015 13:00:50 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

----- Page 3 (native) -----
COSTS AND RETURNS OF HUMAN MIGRATION 
81 
net migration rates, and that the gross 
migration rate at the state level is typi- 
cally several times the net rate. But this 
fact raises an even more perplexing prob- 
lem: why is gross migration in one di- 
rection the best single indicator of the 
amount of backflow, as appears to be 
true? For example, the Census estimates 
that 62,500 persons migrated from Mis- 
sissippi in the year preceding the 1950 
count; but it also estimates that 51,900 
migrated into that state during the same 
period.5 If people insist upon migrating 
into the lowest income state in the union 
at such a rate, how are economists to ra- 
tionalize their behavior-much less pre- 
scribe the remedy for their alleged sorry 
earnings? If we take the out-migration 
of 
62,500 persons as evidence that Missis- 
sippi is a low earnings area, we must by 
the same token accept the 51,900 as 
counter evidence that it is indeed a good 
place to earn a living. The simple majori- 
ty favors the out-migrants, 
but this ma- 
jority is unimpressively 
small put along- 
side the income statistics. It is one thing 
to find lack of mobility the culprit that 
prevents spatial equalization of incomes; 
it is quite another to suggest that a lot of 
mobility in the wrong direction may be 
the cause! 
These remarks, of course, beg the ques- 
tion. Mississippi's per capita income may 
have risen as much from the 51,900 influx 
as from the 62,500 outflow. Men are not 
created equal, nor would they be likely to 
stay so if they were. A 10 per cent in- 
migration of highly skilled persons (with 
few children) may improve Mississippi's 
per capita income more than a larger but 
less selective outflow. One can conceive of 
conditions which would cause incomes to 
rise faster the smaller is net migration. 
How may one explain Mississippi's mi- 
I United States Bureau of the Census, op. cit., 
p. 32, Table 8. 
gration pattern (which, incidentally, is 
typical of that of most states)? The year 
1949 was one of recession, which gen- 
erates an increase in return migration. 
Moreover, Mississippi is homogeneous 
neither in occupations nor in industries. 
The out-migrants 
may have left declining 
industries and may not have been quali- 
fied for employment in the expanding 
ones. Or, some or all of the in-migrants 
may have been disillusioned out-migrants 
of previous years. There are also retire- 
ments. Retired persons may seek places 
where labor is cheap, whereas employed 
people are attracted to areas where it is 
dear; or people who are retiring return to 
communities in which they were reared 
and spent the earlier years of their lives. 
Whatever may be the best hypothesis 
for this seemingly paradoxical behavior, 
three related points become clear: (1) 
Net migration is not necessarily a useful 
measure for testing the labor market's 
ability to remove earnings differentials. 
(2) Disaggregation of both the migrant 
and parent population by at least age and 
occupation may be required to confirm 
(or deny) the alleged failure of migration 
to achieve a reasonably equal income dis- 
tribution over space. (3) The "perverse" 
behavior of gross migration is consistent 
with observed income differentials 
being 
generated by occupational as well as ge- 
ographic immobility. Let me add that 
the somewhat paradoxical relation be- 
tween gross in- and out-migration 
may be 
substantially an aggregation problem, as 
I have argued elsewhere.6 
II. DIFFERENCES IN EARNINGS 
Migration poses two broad and dis- 
tinct questions for the economist. The 
6 See my "Migration in the Upper Midwest" in 
"Four Papers on Methodology" (an unpublished 
manuscript of the Upper Midwest Economic Study, 
University of Minnesota). 
This content downloaded from 198.71.7.231 on Tue, 07 Apr 2015 13:00:50 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

----- Page 4 (native) -----
82 
LARRY A. SJAASTAD 
first, and the one which has received the 
major attention, concerns the direction 
and magnitude of the response of mi- 
grants to labor earnings differentials 
over 
space. The second question pertains to 
the connection between migration and 
those earnings, that is, how effective 
is mi- 
gration in equalizing inter-regional 
earn- 
ings of comparable labor? The latter 
question has received much less attention 
than the former. It is also the more diffi- 
cult of the two. 
Most studies concerned about the first 
question have focused upon net migration 
to or from various geographic areas or be- 
tween pairs of such areas. Most of them 
have found a relationship between in- 
come or earnings and migration, and 
usually in the expected direction (that is, 
high earnings are associated with net in- 
migration, low earnings with net out- 
migration). The qualifications, however, 
are numerous; and the observed relation- 
ship is usually quite small and weak. My 
study of interstate migration, for exam- 
ple, shows that over the 1940-50 decade, 
an increase in per capita labor earnings 
of $100 (1947-49 dollars) induces net in- 
migration or retards net out-migration 
by only 4 or at most 5 per cent of the 
population aged fifteen to twenty-four 
years at the end of the decade.7 The per- 
centage was lower for other ages and 
hence lower for the total population. This 
modest response of net migration to earn- 
ings differentials 
implies that per capita 
earnings must be low indeed for net out- 
migration to overcome natural increase 
and effect a local population reduction. 
My study indicates that during thel940's 
the earnings level in a particular state 
would need to be roughly one-half the 
national average in order for migration 
7 Larry A. Sjaastad, "Income and Migration in 
the United States" (unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, 
University of Chicago, 1961), p. 38. 
from that state to offset completely the 
natural increase, thus leaving a static 
population. 
But as was suggested earlier, net mi- 
gration alone is not the only mechanism 
for removing earnings differentials; 
one 
should also consider gross migration. Pre- 
sumably, net migration is required only 
from those industries (or occupations) 
with locally depressed wage rates. If low 
earnings characterize all or most indus- 
tries in a particular area, net out-migra- 
tion is required; and it should bring about 
an increase in the wage rate relative to 
the case without out-migration. If some 
industries in the area, however, are pay- 
ing higher wages than elsewhere, and 
the workers leaving the low-wage indus- 
tries are unqualified and cannot easi- 
ly become qualified for employment in 
the high-wage industries, in-migration 
should also occur. But this diversification 
among high- and low-wage industries is 
almost certain to weaken the expected 
relation between average earnings levels 
and net migration, although there re- 
mains a strong presumption that low av- 
erage earnings will induce net out-mi- 
gration. 
Occupational composition can account 
for some, but not all of the differences 
in 
earnings among states. The results of 
Frank Hanna's admirable study show 
that: (1) the low income states are domi- 
nated by occupations with relatively low 
earnings at the national level, and (2) the 
earnings within particular occupations in 
low-income states tend to be lower than 
the national average.' Opposite relation- 
ships characterize the high-income 
states. 
Hanna's study, together with the ob- 
served relation between income and net 
migration, supports the hypothesis that 
8 Frank A. Hanna, State Income Differentials, 
1919-1954, (Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press, 
1959), p, 128. 
This content downloaded from 198.71.7.231 on Tue, 07 Apr 2015 13:00:50 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

----- Page 5 (native) -----
COSTS AND RETURNS OF HUMAN MIGRATION 
83 
migration does constitute a response to 
spatial earnings differentials; 
moreover, 
this evidence is consistent with the hy- 
pothesis that migration is a search for op- 
portunities in higher-paying 
occupations. 
Both hypotheses are reassuring to the 
economist. 
Although the studies of net migration 
to date partially reveal the functioning 
of the labor market, they tell us little 
more than the fact that net migration is 
in the "right" direction. The estimated 
response magnitude of net migration to 
gaps in earnings is of little value in gaug- 
ing the effectiveness 
of migration as an 
equilibrator. There are, however, several 
alternative approaches. One simple ap- 
proach is to compare rates of (gross) mi- 
gration with changes in earnings over 
time. Numerous compositional correc- 
tions would be necessary, and this ap- 
proach would still have to answer the dif- 
ficult question of how much equalization 
of earnings should be brought about by 
a given amount of migration. Moreover, 
it is possible that the impact of migration 
can be offset by further changes in the 
economic forces which originally gener- 
ated the earnings differentials. 
A better alternative, at least analyti- 
cally, is to cast the problem strictly as 
one of resource allocation. To do this, we 
treat migration as an investment 
increas- 
ing the productivity 
of human resources, 
an 
investment which has costs and which 
also renders returns. 
Treating migration as an investment 
removes one of the difficulties 
inherent to 
the first approach; there exists a ready- 
made criterion to test the effectiveness 
of 
migration in reducing earnings differen- 
tials over space. That criterion is, of 
course, the rate of return on resources al- 
located to migration. The difficulty 
of the 
method is that it is necessary to identify 
and measure the costs as well as the re- 
turns to migration; its credit is the pos- 
sibility of meaningful comparisons be- 
tween migration and alternative methods 
of promoting better resource allocation.9 
III. 
THE PRIVATE 
COSTS OF MIGRATION 
The private costs can be broken down 
into money and non-money costs. The 
former 
include the out-of-poclket 
expenses 
of movement, while the latter include 
foregone earnings and the "psychic" costs 
of changing one's environment. Each of 
these is treated in turn below. 
1. THE MONEY COSTS 
There are no data to my knowledge on 
the expenses incurred by migrants in the 
course of moving. Although these data 
could be collected only from the migrants 
themselves, these costs could, no doubt, 
be estimated reasonably well for given 
distances (and number of dependents, if 
one treats migration of families). Such 
estimates have been made, but I suspect 
they are quite conservative.10 
Neverthe- 
less, since the money costs one ought to 
include are only the increase in expendi- 
ture for food, lodging, transportation (for 
both migrants and their belongings), etc., 
necessitated by migration, the order of 
magnitude of these costs is surely suffi- 
ciently small that it cannot account for 
the large earnings differentials 
encoun- 
tered in the data (even after taking into 
I Obviously, complete or perfect spatial equaliza- 
tion of earnings is ruled out (other than by chance) 
so long as migration involves costs to the migrant. 
10 James G. Maddox, for example, estimates "that 
many farm people can travel as far as five hundred 
miles from their home, take ten days to find non- 
farm jobs, and wait a week for their first paycheck 
after they start work with a nest egg of no more than 
$100 per person" ("Private and Social Costs of 
Movement of People out of Agriculture," American 
Economic Review, L [May, 1960], p. 393). Note that 
this is an estimate of capital requirements 
as opposed 
to money costs, since Maddox does not take account 
of what it would cost to live without migrating. 
This content downloaded from 198.71.7.231 on Tue, 07 Apr 2015 13:00:50 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

----- Page 6 (native) -----
84 
LARRY A. SJAASTAD 
account foregone earnings). Moreover, 
the results of my study of internal migra- 
tion in the United States, 1949-50, sug- 
gest that the marginal costs associated 
with additional distance are considerably 
higher than could be attributed to the 
costs considered in Maddox's estimate. 
The migration variable was defined as 
the number of (net) migrants going from 
state i to state j as a fraction of all (net) 
migrants from state i. Regression coeffi- 
cients obtained indicate that the attrac- 
tiveness of a given destination was unaf- 
fected by a 10 per cent gain in annual 
per capita labor earnings and a simul- 
taneous 16 per cent increase in distance.11 
At the mean of the income and distance 
variables these percentages imply that 
the typical migrant would be indifferent 
between two destinations, one of which 
was 146 miles more distant than the oth- 
er, if the average annual labor earnings 
were $106 (1947-49 dollars) higher in the 
more distant one."2 Marginal costs per 
mile of migration would have to be high 
indeed to reconcile this negative effect of 
distance with the present value of the 
earnings differential even at very high 
discount rates, particularly since the per- 
sons involved are already migrants and 
only their allocation over space is in ques- 
tion. Moreover, this result cannot stem 
from migrants moving in a series of short 
jumps. That explanation would be plau- 
sible if the allocation of gross migrants 
were being studied; in the case under 
11 Sjaastad, "Income and Migration in the United 
States," p. 63. 
12 These estimates are partial regression coeffi- 
cients and since an occupational mix variable was 
also present, it is assumed that the occupational mix 
is either constant or changes such that average earn- 
ings of the labor force remain constant if each mem- 
ber earns the national average within his occupation. 
The occupational mix correction is that devised by 
Hanna and called "rate constant earnings" (op. cit., 
chap. v). 
question, however, the variable is net 
migration. One is strongly tempted to ap- 
peal to market imperfections 
such as the 
lack of information 
to explain the appar- 
ently high distance cost of migration. 
Unfortunately, no simple way has been 
devised for testing that hypothesis-al- 
though attempts have been made.13 Even 
so, the migration-impeding 
effects of un- 
certainty remain to be measured. 
2. THE NON-MONEY 
COSTS 
The non-money considerations in- 
volved in migration are surely significant, 
probably far more so than the money 
costs. The first non-money costs to con- 
sider are opportunity costs-the earnings 
foregone while traveling, searching for, 
and learning a new job.14 Part of these 
foregone earnings will be a function of the 
distance of migration. In addition the 
time required to find a new job is pre- 
sumably affected by the level of unem- 
ployment. Clearly one should be able to 
estimate these components. The costs of 
learning a new job (on-the-job training) 
are treated in detail by Mincer in another 
paper in this Supplement. As Mincer 
demonstrates, these costs are subject to 
measurement. Since they are reflected by 
reduced earnings, these costs are to be 
taken into account by choosing the ap- 
propriate expected earnings stream (aft- 
er migration) for comparison with the 
expected stream had the migrant not 
moved."5 
1" In particular, 
see Philip Nelson, "A Study in the 
Geographic Mobility of Labor" (unpublished Ph.D. 
dissertation, Columbia University, 1957). 
14 One could include in opportunity costs the en- 
tire earnings stream the migrant is expected to earn 
had he not migrated, and then include in returns the 
expected earnings stream after migration. The alter- 
native followed in this paper is to look only at the 
increment to costs and earnings associated with mi- 
gration. 
16 Risk and uncertainty 
"costs" can be treated in 
a fashion similar to on-the-job training costs; that is, 
This content downloaded from 198.71.7.231 on Tue, 07 Apr 2015 13:00:50 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

----- Page 7 (native) -----
COSTS AND RETURNS OF HUMAN MIGRATION 
85 
A second form of non-money costs 
must be considered. Since people are of- 
ten genuinely reluctant to leave familiar 
surroundings, 
family, and friends, migra- 
tion involves a "psychic" cost. It would 
be difficult 
to quantify these costs; more- 
over, if they were quantified, they should 
be treated quite differently 
from the costs 
previously considered. The costs treated 
above represent real resource costs; how- 
ever, the psychic costs do not. Rather 
they are of the nature of lost consumer 
(or producer) surplus on the part of the 
migrant. Given the earnings levels at all 
other places, there is some minimum 
earning level at location i which will 
cause a given individual to be indifferent 
between migrating and remaining at i. 
For any higher earnings at i, he collects 
a surplus in the sense that part of his 
earnings could be taxed away and that 
taxation would not cause him to migrate. 
The maximum amount that could be 
taken away without inducing migration 
represents the value of the surplus. By 
perfect discrimination, it would be pos- 
sible to take away the full amount of the 
surplus, but in doing so leave resource 
allocation unaffected (other than through 
distributive effects). Hence, the psychic 
costs of migration involve no resources 
for the economy and should not be in- 
cluded as part of the investment in mi- 
gration. 
Although the psychic costs involve no 
resource cost, they do affect resource 
allocation. Very likely, more migration 
would take place if psychic costs were 
zero for everyone. In addition, even if 
knowledge were perfect, psychic costs 
could explain the existence of earnings 
by an appropriate increase in the rate of discount for 
the increment 
to expected future earnings created by 
migration. 
Moreover, the adjustment in the discount 
rate need not be made explicitly if internal rate of 
return calculations are made. 
differentials 
larger than those implied by 
the money and opportunity costs of mi- 
gration. However, these excessive differ- 
entials would not represent resource mis- 
allocation. The optimal allocation of re- 
sources must take tastes as given, and 
will differ 
accordingly if people prefer fa- 
miliar over strange surroundings. Mi- 
gration incentive transfers 
to compensate 
for these psychic costs would be as inap- 
propriate as transfers 
to render people in- 
different 
among occupations even though 
strong preferences 
may exist. To compen- 
sate for psychic costs would result in re- 
sources being used for migration to ob- 
tain earnings with a lower value than 
those received before. To draw upon an 
old example, because the public hangman 
earns a high income owing to his dis- 
tasteful job, it does not necessarily follow 
that welfare would be improved with 
more hangmen! 
Although we should not treat psychic 
costs as a component of the costs of mi- 
gration, they pose a problem for the anal- 
ysis of rate of return. To the extent that 
some part of existing earnings differen- 
tials represents tastes alone, the rate of 
return to resources allocated to migration 
is biased. One manner in which this prob- 
lem can be partially circumvented is to 
consider only persons for whom the mar- 
ginal psychic cost is zero. The allocation 
of actual migrants by distance migrated 
should be relatively free of the influence 
of psychic costs, although the percentage 
of all persons who become migrants is 
not. Using education as an analogy, this 
approach is similar to determining the 
rate of return on the nth year of schooling 
as compared to the rate on n years. 
IV. THE PRIVATE RETURNS TO MIGRATION 
For any particular individual, the mon- 
ey returns to migration will consist of a 
positive or negative increment to his real 
This content downloaded from 198.71.7.231 on Tue, 07 Apr 2015 13:00:50 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

----- Page 8 (native) -----
86 
LARRY A. SJAASTAD 
earnings stream to be obtained by mov- 
ing to another place. This increment will 
arise from a change in nominal earn- 
ings, a change in costs of employment, 
a change in prices, or a combination of 
these three. Money returns so defined are 
sufficiently 
general to encompass not on- 
ly those returns stemming from earnings 
differentials 
between places, but also the 
returns accruing to the migrant in his 
capacity as a consumer. Both of these 
returns are net gains; increased efficiency 
in consumption is logically equilavent to 
increased efficiency 
in production. In ad- 
dition, there will be a non-money com- 
ponent, again positive or negative, re- 
flecting his preference for that place as 
compared to his former residence.'6 Fi- 
nally, there is pure consumption. The 
pure consumption return should be re- 
garded as the satisfaction or dissatisfac- 
tion the migrant receives in the course of 
his actual travel. This is analogous, again 
in the case of education, to the satisfac- 
tion the student experiences merely from 
being on campus, quite apart from the 
non-marketable satisfactions he may ob- 
tain over his life span as a result of his 
education.'7 The non-money returns will 
be examined first. 
16 Preference 
for familiar versus strange surround- 
ings are included in psychic cost and are excluded 
here. Preference 
at this point refers to such factors as 
climate, smog, and congestion. It is assumed that the 
individual's production and consumption occur at 
the same place; if that were not true, his preferences 
would be reflected 
in the amount of cost he is willing 
to bear to consume at one place and to be employed 
at another. 
17 The consumption-investment 
dichotomy 
I have 
in mind is based strictly upon the point in time at 
which the migrant actually receives the satisfactions. 
An outlay made to increase future productivity is 
usually called an investment; an outlay for immedi- 
ate satisfaction is labeled consumption. Moreover, 
if a person uses some of his resources to increase 
future satisfactions, 
it should not matter whether or 
not the increase is reflected 
in future market transac- 
tions. From this point of view, there is no logical dif- 
ference between a consumer or producer durable; I 
choose to call them both an investment. 
1. THE NON-MONEY 
RETURNS 
Earlier it was found that we can safely 
ignore psychic costs of migration since 
they involve no resource cost; likewise, 
we should ignore non-money returns aris- 
ing from locational preferences 
to the ex- 
tent that they represent consumption 
which has a zero cost of production. Some 
people, for example, may be indifferent 
between earnings at one level in Minne- 
sota and a lower level in California owing 
to a preference 
for the latter's climate. If 
a large portion of the population showed 
this preference, California would have a 
locational advantage, and industry would 
migrate in that direction to enjoy the re- 
sultant lower labor costs. In a world of 
perfect competition and resource mobili- 
ty no earnings differentials 
arising from 
these preferences would remain in fi- 
nal equilibrium; if discrimination were 
perfect, the existence of the preferences 
would be totally reflected in rents earned 
by factors (land) specific to the climate. 
Moreover, the pure rents so paid should 
not be treated as costs of employment 
since they arise from tastes for location 
rather than differences 
in productivity. 
Even in a world of perfect competition 
and resource mobility there can be earn- 
ings differentials 
arising from variations 
in costs of employment (which must be 
offset by corresponding differentials in 
productivity). Larger cities typically re- 
veal higher earnings within occupations 
than smaller cities. Costs of employment 
are higher in larger cities due to addition- 
al transportation, rent, etc., which are 
compensated by higher earnings. If one 
includes the former as a return to migra- 
tion to the larger city, he should de- 
duct the latter as additional cost of em- 
ployment. Locational preferences 
pose a 
problem in estimating the return to mi- 
gration to the extent that they can give 
rise to rents not to be counted as costs of 
employment; but additional costs arising 
This content downloaded from 198.71.7.231 on Tue, 07 Apr 2015 13:00:50 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

----- Page 9 (native) -----
COSTS AND RETURNS OF HUMAN MIGRATION 
87 
from the superior productivity of a spe- 
cific location are to be deducted. Al- 
though a distinction between those re- 
turns to migration which represent higher 
productivity and those which are merely 
consumption of zero cost goods is analyti- 
cally useful for considering the returns to 
migration arising from increased efficien- 
cy, it is of no practical use. Final spatial 
equilibrium in the real world would per- 
mit variations in earnings (within oc- 
cupations) resulting from non-labor re- 
source immobility (particularly natural 
resources) and from lack of competition 
as well as from differentials 
in cost of em- 
ployment and labor immobility. More- 
over, since discrimination in the land 
market is not perfect, persons can and do 
receive windfalls by moving to a place of 
their preference. Private non-money re- 
turns to migration may very well exist 
and influence behavior; and they cannot 
be separated from those private returns 
reflecting 
higher productivity 
alone. Even 
in a world of perfect competition, of re- 
source mobility, and of discrimination 
according to preference it would not be 
feasible to classify costs of employment 
into the two categories outlined above. 
For practical purposes, the only alterna- 
tive appears to be the unrealistic assump- 
tion that variation in tastes permits a 
spatial distribution of persons such that 
no rents arise from differences 
in amount 
and composition of natural amenities, 
and that this distribution does not seri- 
ously differ 
from the "optimal" distribu- 
tion from the viewpoint of resource allo- 
cation. 
2. THE MONEY RETURNS 
It is obviously not sufficient simply 
to compare labor earnings over space 
and assume that any observed differences 
arise from disequilibrium in the labor 
market. Hanna's study reveals that oc- 
cupational composition explains a sig- 
nificant portion of earnings differentials 
among states.'8 Other variables such as 
age and sex affect earnings within an oc- 
cupation.19 However, assuming occupa- 
tion, age, and sex to be the more im- 
portant compositional variables affecting 
earnings, first estimates of the return to 
migration is the difference in earnings 
within occupations, ages, and sexes, and 
between all places. These estimates would 
almost surely be underestimates because 
they fail to take into account possible 
disequilibrium between as well as within 
occupations and because a change in oc- 
cupation may necessitate migration. The 
more relevant alternatives for migrants 
may be among rather than within occupa- 
tions. While one may be able to show 
that the Alabama farm laborer can im- 
prove his earnings on an Iowa farm, 
his prospective opportunities may be far 
more in an urban area and occupation. 
If the return to migration can be in- 
creased by occupational upgrading, the 
problem in estimating the return be- 
comes far more complex. In this context 
it is particularly useful to employ the 
human capital concept and to view mi- 
gration, training, and experience as in- 
vestments 
in the human agent. These in- 
vestments, specific to the individual, are 
subject to depreciation and deterioration 
both in a physical and an economic sense. 
If market forces reduce the relative wages 
of a particular occupation, practitioners 
of that occupation suffer a capital loss 
and are faced with the alternatives of ac- 
18 Op. cit., p. 121. 
19 The value of leisure is also neglected when com- 
paring earnings. If the individual labor supply func- 
tion is not backward bending, smaller earnings will 
necessarily be accompanied by larger amounts of 
leisure time, which should not be valued at zero. 
Thus one should look at hours of work as well as 
earnings. There remains the problem of the value to 
impute to an hour's leisure. While an imputation 
probably cannot be accurately made, this omission 
should be borne in mind. 
This content downloaded from 198.71.7.231 on Tue, 07 Apr 2015 13:00:50 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

----- Page 10 (native) -----
88 
LARRY A. SJAASTAD 
cepting the lower earnings or making ad- 
ditional investments in themselves to in- 
crease their earnings in a more favorable 
market. If the relative wages in an occu- 
pation are adversely affected locally, mi- 
gration alone is sufficient; 
if the adverse 
effect is national, such as the earnings in 
agriculture, the entire occupational earn- 
ings structure is under stress and migra- 
tion is feasible only if new skills are 
acquired by the migrant. Whether or not 
the additional investment is worthwhile 
depends crucially upon the age of the in- 
dividual. Young persons will typically 
have made only a small investment in 
themselves through training for and ex- 
perience in a specific occupation and a 
relatively large one through formal edu- 
cation; whereas a larger portion of the 
investment in older persons presumably 
arises from skill and experience specific to 
a particular employment.20 
For the form- 
er group, obsolescence is a far smaller 
threat; moreover, their longer life expec- 
tancy increases the present value of the 
returns to additional investment relative 
to the older group. 
Since the age-income relation within 
an occupation is at least partially due to 
the accumulated experience (on-the-job 
training), older persons entering a given 
occupation even after minimal training 
are likely to receive lower earnings than 
persons of similar age but well experi- 
enced in that occupation. Hence, com- 
parisons across occupational groups but 
within age groups lead to overestimates 
of the rate of return to migration alone. 
The return so estimated is to be attrib- 
uted to both the migration investment 
and the investment in on-the-job train- 
ing, as well as costs of pre-employment 
training. Estimates of the return to mi- 
20 In the United States, the difference 
in this in- 
tangible "portfolio" is exaggerated by the secular 
increase in levels of formal education attained. 
gration alone must be preceded by an 
explanation of the age-earnings relation 
so that earnings representing equal ex- 
perience are compared. 
If it is true that complementary in- 
vestments are required to make migra- 
tion feasible, particularly among the old- 
er migrants, one must be extremely care- 
ful in making broad comparsions of earn- 
ings and, upon finding significant differ- 
ences over space, in concluding that vol- 
untary migration is incapable of efficient 
allocation of labor resources. It is clearly 
possible that the migration mechanism 
could be working extremely well in the 
sense that the marginal return to addi- 
tional migration is not "high," but that 
substantial differentials 
in earnings may 
persist. I strongly suspect, for example, 
that the lack of relevant alternatives for 
older farmers in non-farm occupations 
may go a long way in explaining why 
off-farm 
migration has not increased rela- 
tive earnings in agriculture so that "com- 
parable" factors receive comparable re- 
turns. The point is that factors are not 
really comparable, having had different 
occupational histories. 
I have estimated net migration rates 
from rural areas in the upper Midwest 
which sharply reveal the age selectivity 
of net migration from agricultural areas.21 
These are presented in Table 1.22 Al- 
though nearly half of the persons, aged 
10-14 vers 
in 1Q0; 
miarnfti-d frnm the, 
21 The upper Midwest includes the following 
states and parts of states: Montana, North and 
South Dakota, Minnesota, northwestern 
Wisconsin, 
and Upper Michigan. The migration rates are esti- 
mated by the census-survival rate method using 
1950-60 census-survival rates developed by the au- 
thor in connection with his research on the Upper 
Midwest Economic Study. 
22 Since these migration estimates are from rural 
areas only, the problem of the difference 
between net 
and gross migration is less serious than suggested 
earlier. The rural areas of a given region are likely 
to be quite homogeneous, so only a small amount of 
cross-migration 
is anticipated. 
This content downloaded from 198.71.7.231 on Tue, 07 Apr 2015 13:00:50 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

----- Page 11 (native) -----
COSTS AND RETURNS OF HUMAN MIGRATION 
89 
rural areas during the 1950-60 decade, 
less than one in ten of the persons 20 
years of age and over in 1950, migrated. 
Although one might plausibly argue that 
both money and non-money costs of mi- 
gration increase with age, it seems doubt- 
ful that the increase in these costs as 
initial age rises from 15-19 to 20-24 can 
be sufficient 
to reduce the out-migration 
rate from over 30 per cent to less than 10 
per cent. If increases in costs reduce rural 
out-migration 
as age increases, the same 
cost increases should be borne by all mi- 
grants. Table 1 also presents gross migra- 
tion in 1949 for the United States as a 
TABLE 1 
1950-60 NET 
OUT-MIGRATION 
FROM RURAL 
AREAS, UPPER MIDWEST, AS A PER CENT OF 
1950 POPULATION, AND GROSS MIGRATION 
RATES, UNITED STATES, 1949 
Upper Midwest 
United States 
1950 Age 
Per Cent Out- 
Per Cent Gross 
Migration Rate 
Migration* 
0-4 ............ 
13.7 
7.0t 
5-9 ............ 
25.1 
5.0 
10-14 ........... 
44.5 
4. 0T 
15-19 ........... 
30.6 
6.9? 
20-24 ........... 
9.1 
11.3 
25-29 ........... 
10.4 
9.4 
30-34 ........... 
10.7 
6.7 
35-39 ........... 
9.81 
47 
40-44 ........... 
8.6J 
45-49 ........... 
9.2) 
50-54 
75 
3.0 
55-59...... 
. 
9.4 
60-61 ... 
. 
8.81 
65+. ............ 
1.8 
2.6 
* Source: Bureau of the Census, 1950 Population Census Re- 
port, 
P-E, No. 4D, Tables 1 and 2. 
t Aged 1-4 in 1950. 
$ Aged 10-13 in 1950. 
? Aged 14-19 in 1950. 
per cent of parent population. The age- 
migration pattern there is quite different. 
However, the data are not comparable 
since the age range for 1950-60 upper 
Midwest migrants differs, for example, 
0 to 4 in 1950 is from 0 through 14 over 
the decade. The data are reorganized in 
Table 2 for identical age groups, and the 
pattern is similar. Although the migra- 
tion rate falls 70 per cent in the upper 
Midwest as one goes from age ranges 15- 
29 to 20-34, it remains constant for the 
United States. Although not conclusive, 
TABLE 2 
COMPARISON OF RURAL OUT-MIGRATION, UPPER 
MIDWEST, WITH GROSS MIGRATION 
RATES, UNITED STATES 
Upper Mid- 
United States 
Age Range 
Average 
west Per Cent 
Per Cent 
of Range 
Out-Migra- 
Gross 
tion Rate 
Migration 
0-14...... 
7.5 
13.7 
5.5* 
5-19...... 
12.5 
25.1 
5.4 
10-24 ...... 
17.5 
44.5 
7.6 
15-29 ...... 
22.5 
30.6 
9.1t 
20-34 ...... 
27.5 
9.1 
9.1 
25-44. 
35.0 
10.5 
6.5 
35-44...... 
40.0 
10.0 
4.7 
45-64 ...... 
55.0 
8.4 
3.0 
65? 
. 
.......... 
1.8 
2.6 
* Aged 0-13. 
t Aged 14-29. 
1 Approximate. 
the evidence for the United States strong- 
ly suggests that little of the decline in 
migration rates as age increases can be 
explained by associated increases in the 
money or non-money costs of migration. 
As age increases, of course, there is a 
shortening of the time period over which 
the migrant expects to recapture these 
costs; but again it seems unlikely that 
this effect can so sharply reduce the mi- 
gration rate. If retirement comes at age 
65 to 70, the group aged 15 to 19 in 1950 
will have about 45 years, on the average 
over the decade, remaining in the labor 
force-as compared with 40 years for 
those initially aged 20 to 24. At a dis- 
count rate of 10 per cent, the present 
value of an additional dollar per year for 
the former group is $9.89; for the latter 
group it is $9.82, a mere 7 cents less. The 
dispersion in cost of migration would 
This content downloaded from 198.71.7.231 on Tue, 07 Apr 2015 13:00:50 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

----- Page 12 (native) -----
90 
LARRY A. SJAASTAD 
have to be fantastically small if a reduc- 
tion in present value of returns by less 
than 1 per cent (owing to the shortening 
of the amortization period) would reduce 
the migration rate by 70 per cent. Nei- 
ther increasing costs of migration nor re- 
duction in the amortization period alone 
can explain the age-migration relation 
observed in the upper Midwest.23 
However, if substantial additional 
costs of retraining for a new occupation 
must be borne by these rural out-mi- 
grants, the age-migration pattern dis- 
played in Table 2 becomes more com- 
prehensible. The majority of the rural 
out-migrants from the upper Midwest 
will necessarily be changing occupations. 
Clearly they come from agricultural oc- 
cupations but are entering urban occupa- 
tions. New skills must be acquired. Only 
a smaller portion of the gross United 
States migrants, however, need to change 
occupations; much of this mobility can 
be merely geographic and not occupation- 
al. For the latter group, the total costs to 
the individual for migration and acquir- 
ing new skills can be much smaller than 
for the former. 
The sharp reduction in rural out-mi- 
gration at relatively early ages and its 
near constancy thereafter suggests that 
23 Suppose that the distribution of costs, as well 
as the present value, of returns to migration for all 
potential migrants is normal, mean C and PV, re- 
spectively; variance S2 and zero, respectively, and 
that costs and returns are independent. For the 15- 
19 age group, C = C1, S2 = S2, PV = PVj; for 20- 
24, C = C2, S2 = S2, PV = PV2; assume a discount 
rate less than 10 per cent so that PV2 = 0.99PV1. 
For 30.6 per cent of the persons aged 15-19, PV1 > 
cost; for 9.1 per cent of those aged 20-24, PV2 > 
cost. At the margins,PV1 = C1 - .5S1;PV2 = C2- 
1.3S2. Let Cl = C2 = C; SI = S2 = S; then S/C 
0.0135. The implied coefficient 
of variation is a mere 
1.35 per cent. More reasonable coefficients 
of varia- 
tion for both costs and present values are possible if 
there exists a strong positive correlation between 
these two variables. Some positive correlation is 
expected. 
(a) the investment in skills in rural occu- 
pations is concentrated in early years, 
and (b) consequently, the rural age-earn- 
ing relation should rise sharply as returns 
to this investment are realized. Both of 
these propositions can be tested by the 
analysis developed in Mincer's paper. 
Moreover, this hypothesis implies that 
the degree of disequilibrium may differ 
among age groups-being largest for the 
young and less for the older persons. Dif- 
ferences in earnings could, of course, be- 
come larger for the older persons; but 
this is not inconsistent with efficient 
re- 
source allocation. These older people may 
have suffered a capital loss, and their 
remaining lifetime is too short to justify 
large additional investments in them- 
selves. To the extent that the above char- 
acterization is true, such disparities in 
earnings become a question of social poli- 
cy rather than one of resource alloca- 
tion.24 
If, as I suggest, interoccupational earn- 
ing differences 
may be the more relevant 
ones in dealing with migration, but if 
there is as yet no way of making sense out 
of these differences in terms of actual 
incentives offered migrants of different 
ages, some alternative approach to esti- 
mating the rate of return on migration is 
necessary. Fruitful lines of attack may be 
to focus upon migrants only or to make 
comparisons between migrants and non- 
migrants of similar age25 Conceptually, 
24 For a bold approach to the social policy ques- 
tion posed by persons "locked-in" their historic oc- 
cupations, see T. W. Schultz, "A Policy To Redis- 
tribute Losses from Economic Progress" (prepared 
for a labor mobility conference, 
Iowa State Univer- 
sity, November, 1960) (mimeographed). In this pa- 
per Schultz argues that since the losses to individuals 
from economic progress are much more narrowly dis- 
tributed than are the gains, a case can be made for 
redistributing 
those losses over a larger group. 
25 By focusing upon migrants only it would be pos- 
sible to eliminate the effects 
of differences 
in psychic 
costs, as was mentioned above. 
This content downloaded from 198.71.7.231 on Tue, 07 Apr 2015 13:00:50 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

----- Page 13 (native) -----
COSTS AND RETURNS OF HUMAN MIGRATION 
91 
there is no problem in determining 
wbeth- 
er and by how much a migrant's earnings 
are altered by his move. Cross-classified 
data concerning vital characteristics of 
migrants such as age, occupation, earn- 
ings before and after migration, etc., are 
a prerequisite to a thorough study of re- 
turn to migration along these lines. For- 
tunately, substantial data of this sort 
will be available in the 1960 Population 
Census Special Reports and will cover a 
five-year period; the negative transitory 
effect of migration upon the earnings of 
migrants should largely disappear. As far 
as I know there will be no earnings data 
for migrants before migration, but cross- 
classification may permit use of earnings 
of comparable non-migrants 
as a substi- 
tute.26 
V. PRIVATE 
VERSUS 
SOCIAL 
COSTS AND RETURNS 
Does the migrant bear all the costs of 
migration and receive the total reward 
for his activity? The obvious answer is 
probably not. Migration will typically 
involve costs (and rewards) to non-mi- 
26 If a study of the returns to migration were car- 
ried out along these lines, one additional factor must 
be considered. I have assumed that migration is 
mainly in response to differences 
in earnings over 
space. In the case of off-farm 
migration, however, 
rising unemployment 
in the non-farm 
sector has been 
observed to attentuate sharply the outflow from 
agriculture 
even though we may assume earnings dif- 
ferentials 
(for employed persons) to remain relatively 
stable. If unemployment 
is high, the probability of 
the off-farm 
migrant obtaining a job at a given level 
of earnings is reduced, perhaps much more than rates 
of unemployment 
would indicate, owing to seniority 
rules and the like. Observed earnings differentials 
must be further 
discounted for the risk of unemploy- 
ment and the appropriate discount rate may be very 
high, as imperfections 
in the capital market may pre- 
vent potential migrants from assuming this risk dur- 
ing periods of moderate to heavy unemployment. 
The logical choice in this circumstance 
is to defer the 
move until more favorable labor market conditions 
prevail. 
grants as well as migrants; the relative 
prices seen by the migrant are likely to 
be at variance with transformation 
rates 
for the economy as a whole. Divergences 
between social costs and returns arising 
from externalities pose knotty analytical 
problems; those arising from market im- 
perfections and institutional factors are 
somewhat easier to examine and are my 
main concern here. The cases considered 
are illustrative rather than exhaustive; 
consequently, the omissions may be the 
more important.27 
The above discussion of private costs 
and returns places voluntary migration 
in the general framework of a competi- 
tive economy satisfying the minimal re- 
quirements permitting 
an "optimum" al- 
location of resources. Among other fea- 
tures, wages must be freely determined 
and there must be no barriers to the 
free movement of labor and other inputs 
among industries or across space.28 Even 
if wages are freely determined and equal 
marginal product, differences 
in the rela- 
tion between wages and, for example, re- 
tained earnings in different areas will 
cause private returns to differ 
from social 
returns. Consider the case of local dif- 
ferences in the degree of progression in 
income taxation; migration redistributes 
resources in a fashion to equate earnings 
over space subject to the taxation structure, 
a process which may indeed be detrimen- 
tal to resource allocation. 
Divergence between private and social 
costs of migration can also occur when 
the charges for services collectively pro- 
vided (such as schools) are based upon 
the per capita cost rather than the actual 
27 This section draws heavily upon the comments 
of Anthony M. Tang on an earlier draft. 
28 We must also require that product prices also 
be freely determined and barriers to free trade non- 
existent. 
This content downloaded from 198.71.7.231 on Tue, 07 Apr 2015 13:00:50 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

----- Page 14 (native) -----
92 
LARRY A. SJAASTAI) 
marginal cost of providing those services 
to migrants. However, capital losses im- 
posed by migrants upon the privately 
held fixed assets of non-migrants in an 
area experiencing a population decline 
generally cannot be admitted as an ex- 
cess of social over private cost. These 
losses involve no resource cost; persons 
presumably will not migrate until their 
productivity 
elsewhere is sufficiently 
high 
to compensate for rent differentials. 
Another source of an excess of social 
over private returns to migration arises 
from a failure of migrants to consider the 
returns to their progeny from the result- 
ing change in the latter's (initial) loca- 
tion. By assuming the current change in 
market conditions to continue indefinite- 
ly into the future, a crude first approxi- 
mation of this excess is possible. Suppose 
the migrant includes as private return 
the additional earnings obtained by him- 
self and his immediate family but ex- 
cludes any return to unborn children. 
The rate of interest, compounded instan- 
taneously, is assumed to be 10 per cent 
per year; and the rate of population in- 
crease at 1.5 per cent per year. If his first 
as-yet-unborn 
child enters the labor mar- 
ket in twenty years, and if earnings dif- 
ferentials are and remain the same for all 
occupations (since there is no certainty 
that the migrant's progeny will enter his 
occupation), each dollar of his (uniform) 
earnings stream for a forty-five 
year par- 
ticipation in the labor force has a present 
value of $9.90. The present value of a 
permanent income stream of $1.00 be- 
ginning in twenty years and growing at 
the rate of 1.5 per cent per year (due 
to natural population increase) is about 
$1.62. The first figure is the present value 
of the return to the migrant aged twenty 
years of each dollar of earnings differen- 
tial; the second is the present value of the 
return to the stream of unborn children 
he will generate.2" 
If the migrant neglects 
the latter completely, the social return to 
migration will be 16.4 per cent in excess 
of the private return; if the private rate 
of return is in fact 10 per cent, the addi- 
tional social rate of return will be 1.164 
per cent. For older migrants the excess of 
the social return over the private will ap- 
proach zero (they are less likely to have 
more children); and for younger migrants 
the social rate also approaches the pri- 
vate rate because a longer period will 
elapse before their children enter the 
labor market. For all migrants the excess 
of the social over the private rate of re- 
turn is less than the estimate made above. 
VI. CONCLUDING COMMENTS 
My effort in this paper has been to 
place human migration in an investment 
context and in so doing to formulate 
testable hypotheses germane to observed 
migration behavior. My main conclusion 
remains that migration cannot be viewed 
in isolation; complementary 
investments 
in the human agent are probably as im- 
portant or more important than the mi- 
29 The present value of the income stream of the 
migrant of $1.00 per year is computed as 
r45 
j 
ertdt = 9.90 
when r = 0.10. It is assumed that the migrant's chil- 
dren will realize an equal gain per year, and that the 
first child will not enter the labor force until twenty 
years in the future, their number growing continu- 
ously at 1.5 per cent per year thereafter. 
The present 
value of one income stream of $1.00 per year but 
which grows in number at 1.5 per cent per year and 
which will not begin for twenty years is 
rco (ent 
)e-rt 
Jo (e20r ) d t 
which reduces to 
(e20r) 
(n- 
r) e-(r-n)t I 
0 
If r is greater than n, the expression is finite and 
equal to 1.62 for r = 0.10 and n = 0.015. 
This content downloaded from 198.71.7.231 on Tue, 07 Apr 2015 13:00:50 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

----- Page 15 (native) -----
COSTS AND RETURNS OF HUMAN MIGRATION 
93 
gration process itself. As I have indicated, 
cognizance of, and attention to, these 
additional investments offer a promising 
clue to observed immobility in the face 
of large differentials 
in current earnings. 
In addition, only the estimation of the 
direct as well as associated costs of migra- 
tion together with returns can reveal the 
extent of resource misallocation created 
by the frequently 
alleged barriers to mo- 
bility. 
Costs and returns to migration have 
been consistently viewed in a real re- 
source sense. Our tools of analysis are 
applicable only when costs and returns 
are so restricted; measures of psychic 
cost of migration, for example, are hard 
to come by. As I have suggested at vari- 
ous points, indeed the very need for these 
measures can often be circumvented. 
Although my discussion provides only 
a sketchy framework for further empiri- 
cal study of migration, the following ad- 
ditional conclusions are relevant to em- 
pirical undertakings. (1) Gross rather 
than net migration is a more relevant 
concept for studying the returns to mi- 
gration as well as the impact of migration 
upon earnings differentials. 
(2) Migration 
rates are not an appropriate measure for 
estimating the effect 
of migration. (3) Age 
is significant 
as a variable influencing 
mi- 
gration and must be considered in inter- 
preting earnings differentials 
over space 
and among occupations. (4) The relation 
between private and social costs of, and 
returns to, migration at best depends 
upon market structure, resource mobility 
in general, and revenue policies of state 
and local governments. 
This content downloaded from 198.71.7.231 on Tue, 07 Apr 2015 13:00:50 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions