

----- Page 1 (native) -----
Contribution of Primary Care to Health
Systems and Health
BARBARA STARFIELD, LEIYU SHI,
and JAMES MACINKO
Johns Hopkins University; New York University
Evidence of the health-promoting influence of primary care has been accumu-
lating ever since researchers have been able to distinguish primary care from
other aspects of the health services delivery system. This evidence shows that
primary care helps prevent illness and death, regardless of whether the care is
characterized by supply of primary care physicians, a relationship with a source
of primary care, or the receipt of important features of primary care. The evi-
dence also shows that primary care (in contrast to specialty care) is associated
with a more equitable distribution of health in populations, a finding that
holds in both cross-national and within-national studies. The means by which
primary care improves health have been identified, thus suggesting ways to
improve overall health and reduce differences in health across major population
subgroups.
Key Words: Primary care, health outcomes, population health.
T
he term PRIMARY CARE is thought to date back to about
1920, when the Dawson Report was released in the United
Kingdom. That report, an official “white paper,” mentioned
“primary health care centres,” intended to become the hub of region-
alized services in that country. Although primary care came to be the
cornerstone of the health services system in the United Kingdom as
well as in many other countries, no comparable focus developed in the
United States. Indeed, the formation of one after another specialty board
Address correspondence to: Barbara Starfield, Department of Health Policy and
Management, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, 624 N.
Broadway, Room 406, Baltimore, MD 21205 (email: bstarfie@jhsph.edu).
The Milbank Quarterly, Vol. 83, No. 3, 2005 (pp. 457–502)
c⃝2005 Milbank Memorial Fund. Published by Blackwell Publishing.
457

----- Page 2 (native) -----
458
B. Starfield, L. Shi, and J. Macinko
in the early decades of the 20th century signaled the increasing spe-
cialization of the U.S. physician workforce (Stevens 1971). The GI Bill
of Rights, which supported the further training of physicians return-
ing from service in World War II, helped increase the specialization of
many who had been general practitioners (generalists) before the war. At
that time, general practitioners were physicians who lacked additional
training after graduation from medical school, apart from a short clinical
internship.
Concerned that the survival of generalist physicians would be threat-
ened by the disproportionate increase in the supply of specialists in the
United States—to the detriment of generalist practice—family physi-
cians, working with international colleagues, established standards for
credentialing the new “specialty” of family practice. Thus, in the 1960s
and 1970s, longer postgraduate training became part of generalist physi-
cians’ preparation for practice. This recognition of a “specialty” of pri-
mary care, which, in the United States, covered general internal medicine
as well as general pediatrics, resulted in two reports from the Institute of
Medicine (IOM) (Donaldson et al. 1996; IOM 1978). These reports de-
fined primary care as “the provision of integrated, accessible health care
services by clinicians who are accountable for addressing a large majority
of personal health care needs, developing a sustained partnership with
patients, and practicing in the context of family and community.” This
definition is consistent with at least two international reports (WONCA
1991; World Health Organization 1978) and has been used to measure
the four main features of primary care services: first-contact access for
each new need; long-term person- (not disease) focused care; comprehen-
sive care for most health needs; and coordinated care when it must be
sought elsewhere. Primary care is assessed as “good” according to how
well these four features are fulfilled. For some purposes, an orientation
toward family and community is included as well (Starfield 1998).
Despite the greater recognition of the importance of primary care to
health services systems (World Health Organization 1978, 2003), pro-
fessionals have recently called for increasing even further the supply of
specialist physicians in the United States (Cooper et al. 2002). Com-
pared with other industrialized nations, the United States already has a
surplus of specialists, but not of primary care physicians. On the basis
of the studies reviewed in this article, we believe that health of the U.S.
population will improve if this maldistribution is corrected. Specifically,
a greater emphasis on primary care can be expected to lower the costs

----- Page 3 (native) -----
Contribution of Primary Care to Health Systems and Health
459
of care, improve health through access to more appropriate services, and
reduce the inequities in the population’s health.
We first review the evidence concerning the relationship between
primary care and health, using three different measures of primary care.
The effect of health policy on primary care and health can also be de-
termined by between-country comparisons, which we summarize next.
We then consider the impact of primary care in reducing disparities in
health across population groups. After a section on cost considerations,
we discuss why primary care would be expected to have a beneficial ef-
fect on health. We then look at the analyses’ limitations and discuss the
likely nature of primary care in the future in accordance with the policy
implications of this evidence.
Reviewing the Evidence
We used research on the effects of primary care on health from studies of
the supply of primary care physicians, studies of people who identified
a primary care physician as their regular source of care, and studies
linking the receipt of high-quality primary care services with health
status. These three lines of evidence represent a progressively stronger
demonstration that primary care improves health by showing, first, that
health is better in areas with more primary care physicians; second,
that people who receive care from primary care physicians are healthier;
and, third, that the characteristics of primary care are associated with
better health. We used three systematic literature reviews of primary care
(Atun 2004; Engstrom, Foldevi, and Borgquist 2001; Health Council
of the Netherlands 2004), supplemented by our own compilation of
articles in major national and international general medical journals. We
concentrated on publications written in English and mainly on studies
from the United States (which accounted for most of them).We did,
however, include studies from other countries if they addressed primary
care, as measured by at least one of the three types of studies. A study’s
inclusion or exclusion did not depend on its findings. Rather, the only
criterion for inclusion was a clear conceptualization of primary care,
systematic data collection and analysis, and comparison populations.
Several studies in the systematic literature reviews, although uniformly
favorable to primary care, did not meet these criteria and therefore were
excluded.

----- Page 4 (native) -----
460
B. Starfield, L. Shi, and J. Macinko
Primary Care and Health
Health Outcomes and the Supply of Primary
Care Physicians
As a group, these studies covered a variety of health outcomes: total
and cause-specific mortality, low birth weight, and self-reported health.
They examined the relationship between the supply of primary care
physicians and health at different levels of geographic aggregation (state,
county, metropolitan, and nonmetropolitan regions); controlled for var-
ious population characteristics (such as income, education, and racial
distribution); and used several different analytic approaches (standard
regressions, path analyses) in individual years (cross-sectional) as well as
over time (longitudinal).
The number of primary care physicians per 10,000 population is the
measure of “supply.” Primary care physicians include family and general
practitioners, general internists, and general pediatricians. These three
types of physicians constitute the primary care physician workforce and
have been shown to provide the highest levels of primary care character-
istics in their practices (Weiner and Starfield 1983).
Studies in the early 1990s (Shi 1992, 1994) showed that those U.S.
states with higher ratios of primary care physicians to population had
better health outcomes, including lower rates of all causes of mortal-
ity: mortality from heart disease, cancer, or stroke; infant mortality; low
birth weight; and poor self-reported health, even after controlling for
sociodemographic measures (percentages of elderly, urban, and minor-
ity; education; income; unemployment; pollution) and lifestyle factors
(seatbelt use, obesity, and smoking). Vogel and Ackerman (1998) subse-
quently showed that the supply of primary care physicians was associated
with an increase in life span and with reduced low birth-weight rates.
Other studies added sophistication to these early studies by examining
the relationship between primary care and health after considering other
potentially confounding characteristics. One of these confounders was
income inequality, or the extent to which income is concentrated in
certain social groups rather than being equitably distributed. In 1999,
Shi and colleagues reported that both primary care and income inequality
had a strong and significant influence on life expectancy, total mortality,
stroke mortality, and postneonatal mortality at the state level. They also
found smoking rates to be related to these outcomes, but the effect

----- Page 5 (native) -----
Contribution of Primary Care to Health Systems and Health
461
of the primary care physician supply persisted after they controlled for
smoking (Shi et al. 1999). A later study confirmed these findings, this
time using self-assessed health as the health outcome (Shi and Starfield
2000). These relationships remained significant after controlling for
age, sex, race/ethnicity, education, paid work (employment and type of
employment), hourly wage, family income, health insurance, physical
health (SF-12), and smoking.
Additional studies examined the influence of the supply of primary
care physicians at the state level while also taking into account the sup-
ply of specialist physicians. These analyses found, in the same year as
well as in time-lagged (between 1985 and 1995) analyses, that the sup-
ply of primary care physicians was significantly associated with lower
all-cause mortality, whereas a greater supply of specialty physicians was
associated with higher mortality. When the supply of primary care physi-
cians was disaggregated into family physicians, general internists, and
pediatricians, only the supply of family physicians showed a significant
relationship to lower mortality (Shi et al. 2003a).
Mortality attributed to cerebrovascular stroke also was found to be
influenced by the supply of primary care physicians. Using 11 years of
state-level data and adjusting for income inequality, educational level,
unemployment, racial/ethnic composition, and percentage of urban res-
idents, the supply of primary care physicians remained significantly
associated with reduced mortality and even wiped out the adverse effect
of income inequality (Shi et al. 2003b).
Consistent with these findings for total and cause-specific mortality,
the reduction in low birth weight at the state level was significantly
associated with the supply of primary care physicians in the concurrent
year as well as after one-, three-, and five-year lag periods (Shi et al.
2004). A greater supply of primary care physicians was associated with
lower infant mortality as well and persisted after controlling for various
socioeconomic characteristics and income inequality.
County-level analyses confirmed the positive influence of an adequate
supply of primary care physicians by showing that all-cause mortality,
heart disease mortality, and cancer mortality were lower where the sup-
ply of primary care physicians was greater. When urban areas (counties
including a city with at least 50,000 people) and nonurban areas were
examined separately (Shi et al. 2005b), nonurban counties with a greater
number of primary care physicians experienced 2 percent lower all-cause
mortality, 4 percent lower heart disease mortality, and 3 percent lower

----- Page 6 (native) -----
462
B. Starfield, L. Shi, and J. Macinko
cancer mortality than did nonurban counties with a smaller number
of primary care physicians. In urban areas, however, the relationship
appeared more complex, possibly resulting from the lesser degree of in-
come inequality and the greater racial differences in urban areas. A study
of premature mortality (mortality before age 75) in U.S. metropolitan,
urban, and rural areas found inconsistent relationships to the supply of
primary care physicians, possibly owing to a statistical instability in the
way in which the supply of physicians was categorized, which was in-
appropriate for areas with great variability in both the supply and the
population size (Mansfield et al. 1999).
Analyses conducted in counties in the state of Florida used cervi-
cal cancer mortality as the health outcome. Controlling for a variety
of county-level characteristics (percentage of whites, low educational
level, median household income, percentage of married females, and
urban/nonurban), each one per 10,000 population increase in the sup-
ply of family physicians was associated with a decrease in mortality of
0.65 per 100,000 population. That is, a one-third increase in the supply
of family physicians was associated with a 20 percent lower mortality rate
from cervical cancer. The positive effect of primary care was also found in
the significant relationship between reduced mortality and the supply
of general internists, but not the supply of obstetrician-gynecologists
(Campbell et al. 2003).
The relationship between primary care physician supply and better
health is not limited to studies in the United States. In England, the
standardized mortality ratio for all-cause mortality at 15 to 64 years
of age is lower in areas with a greater supply of general practitioners.
(In England, pediatricians and internists are not considered, and do not
function as, primary care physicians.) Each additional general practi-
tioner per 10,000 population (a 15 to 20 percent increase) is associated
with about a 6 percent decrease in mortality (Gulliford 2002). A later
study (Gulliford et al. 2004) found that the ratio of general practitioners
to population was significantly associated with lower all-cause mortality,
acute myocardial infarction mortality, avoidable mortality, acute hospital
admissions (both chronic and acute), and teenage pregnancies, but the
statistical significance disappeared after controlling for socioeconomic
deprivation and for partnership size, which the authors interpreted as
suggesting that the structural characteristics of primary care practices
may have had a greater impact on health outcomes than did the mere
presence of primary care physicians.

----- Page 7 (native) -----
Contribution of Primary Care to Health Systems and Health
463
The supply of general practitioners also has high salience for in-
hospital mortality; that is, it is more closely associated with lower in-
hospital standardized mortality than is the total number of physicians
per 100 hospital beds (Jarman et al. 1999).
Insummary,thestudiesconsistentlyshowarelationshipbetweenmore
or better primary care and most of the health outcomes studied. Primary
care was associated with improved health outcomes, regardless of the
year (1980–1995), after variable lag periods between the assessment of
primary care and of health outcomes, level of analysis (state, county, or
local area), or type of outcome as measured by all-cause mortality, heart
disease mortality, stroke mortality, infant mortality, low birth weight,
life expectancy, and self-rated health. All but a few studies found this
effect for cancer mortality. The magnitude of improvement associated
with an increase of one primary care physician per 10,000 population (a
12.6 percent increase over the current average supply) averaged 5.3 per-
cent. The results of these studies suggest that as many as 127,617 deaths
per year in the United States could be averted through such an increase
in the number of primary care physicians (Macinko, Starfield, and Shi
2005).
Patients’ Relationship to Primary Care
Facilities and Providers
Because a greater number of primary care physicians does not necessarily
mean that all people in the area have greater access to or receipt of
primary care services, analyses considering people’s relationships to or
experiences with a primary care practitioner are helpful to determining
the association between primary care and health outcome. Thus the
second line of evidence for the positive impact of primary care on health
comes from comparing the health of people who do or do not have a
primary care physician as their regular source of care.
A nationally representative survey showed that adult U.S. respon-
dents who reported having a primary care physician rather than a spe-
cialist as their regular source of care had lower subsequent five-year
mortality rates after controlling for initial differences in health status,
demographic characteristics, health insurance status, health perceptions,
reported diagnoses, and smoking status (Franks and Fiscella 1998). That
is, people who identify a primary care physician as their usual source of

----- Page 8 (native) -----
464
B. Starfield, L. Shi, and J. Macinko
care are healthier, regardless of their initial health or various demographic
characteristics.
U.S. populations served by community health centers, which are re-
quired to emphasize primary care as a condition for federal funding, are
healthier than populations with comparable levels of social deprivation
receiving care in other types of physicians’ offices or clinics (O’Malley
et al. 2005). People receiving care in community health centers receive
more of the indicated preventive services than does the general popula-
tion (Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality 2004). A comparison
of rural patients receiving care in these community health centers with
patients receiving care in other types of facilities showed that despite
being sicker, they are significantly more likely to have received a Pap
smear in the previous three years and to have been vaccinated against
pneumococcal infection and less likely to have low-birth-weight babies
(Regan et al. 2003).
In some health systems, both in the United States and abroad, people
normally go to their primary care physician before seeking care elsewhere
(such as from another type of physician). Spain passed a law in the mid-
1980s that strengthened primary care by reorganizing services to better
achieve the main features of primary care, which led to the establishment
of a national program of primary health care centers. The impact of this
reform on health was evaluated after ten years by examining mortality
rates for some major causes of death (Villalbi et al. 1999). Death rates
associated with hypertension and stroke fell most in those areas in which
the reform was first implemented. There even were fewer deaths from
lung cancer in those areas with primary care reform than in other areas.
Health outcomes that would not be expected to be influenced by primary
care, for example, perinatal mortality, did not differ across the areas.
Outcomes of care after surgery in Canada also were shown to be better
when care was sought from a primary care physician who then referred
children to specialists for recurrent tonsillitis or otitis media, compared
with self-referral to a specialist (Roos 1979). The referred children had
fewer postoperative complications, fewer respiratory episodes following
surgery, and fewer episodes of otitis media after surgery, thus implying
that specialist interventions were more appropriate when patients were
referred from primary care.
Finally,wenotethatCubaandCostaRica,whichreformedtheirhealth
systems to provide people with a source of primary care, now have much
lower infant mortality rates than do other countries in Latin America. In

----- Page 9 (native) -----
Contribution of Primary Care to Health Systems and Health
465
Cuba, infant mortality rates now are on a par with those in the United
States (PAHO 2005; Riveron Corteguera 2000; Waitzkin et al. 1997).
The findings from studies of the impact of actually receiving care from
a primary care source consistently show benefits for a variety of health
and health-related outcomes.
How Well the Characteristics of Primary
Care Are Achieved
As we noted earlier, until recently primary care could be assessed only by
determining the type of physician who provided it: family physicians,
general internists, and general pediatricians in the United States; and
family physicians or general practitioners in most other industrialized
countries. The intensive examination of criteria for the designation of
“primary care” in the most recent half century encouraged the develop-
mentoftoolstoassesstheadequacyofthosehealthdeliverycharacteristics
that together define the practice of primary care. This development then
enabled us to examine the extent to which the receipt of better primary
care is associated with better health.
Using these new methods, several studies have demonstrated a positive
association between the adequacy of the features of primary care and the
provision of preventive services. A cross-sectional study using a repre-
sentative sample of 2,889 patients in Ohio evaluated the aforementioned
four attributes of primary care for their relationship to the delivery of
preventive services. After controlling for the patients’ age, race, health,
and insurance in the hierarchical linear regression model (HLM), each of
the measured primary care attributes was significantly associated with
patients’ being up to date on screening, immunization, and health habit–
counseling services (Flocke, Stange, and Zyzanski 1998). According to
another study, adolescents with the same regular source of care for pre-
ventive and illness care (one indication that the source is focused on
providing primary care) were much more likely to receive the indicated
preventive care and less likely to seek care in emergency rooms (Ryan
et al. 2001).
The positive impact of primary care also was shown by comparing the
self-assessed health of those who received better primary care (as assessed
by the health delivery characteristics of primary care) with those who
reported less adequate primary care. Among those who reported better

----- Page 10 (native) -----
466
B. Starfield, L. Shi, and J. Macinko
primary care, more than 5 percent fewer people reported poor health
and 6 percent fewer reported depression than did people experiencing
less adequate primary care. Considering only those who reported the best
primary care experiences, 8 percent fewer reported poor health, and more
than 10 percent fewer reported feeling depressed, compared with those
who received less adequate primary care (Shi et al. 2002).
Studies in two different areas of Brazil confirmed the relationship
between the adequacy of primary care delivery characteristics and self-
reported health. In a study in Petropolis, Macinko, Almeida, and Sa
(2005) showed that patients who had better primary care experiences
were more likely to report better health, even after adjusting for other
salient characteristics such as their age, whether or not they had a chronic
illness or a recent illness, household wealth, educational level, and the
type of facility in which they received their care. Using parents’ reports of
their children’s primary care, Erno Harzheim and colleagues confirmed
these findings in a study conducted in Porto Alegre (Harzheim 2005,
personal communication).
International Comparisons
International comparisons extended our examination of the impact of
primary care according to the achievement of its characteristics. Stud-
ies of the characteristics of different health systems were particularly
useful because they enabled us to assess the impact of various policy
characteristics on the practice and outcomes of primary care. Three stud-
ies, one using data from the mid-1980s and two from a decade later,
demonstrated not only that countries with stronger primary care gen-
erally had a healthier population but also that certain aspects of policy
were important to establishing strong primary care practice.
The first study examined the association of primary care with health
outcomes through an international comparison conducted in 11 industri-
alized countries (Starfield 1991, 1994). Each country’s primary care was
rated according to the four main characteristics of primary care prac-
tice: first-contact care, person-focused care over time, comprehensive
care, and coordinated care, as well as family orientation and community
orientation. Policy characteristics were the attempts to distribute health
servicesresourcesequitably(accordingtotheextentofhealthneedsindif-
ferent areas of the country); universal or near-universal financial coverage

----- Page 11 (native) -----
Contribution of Primary Care to Health Systems and Health
467
guaranteed by a publicly accountable body (government or government-
regulated insurance carriers); low or no copayments for health services;
percentage of physicians who were not primary care physicians; and pro-
fessional earnings of primary care physicians relative to those of other
specialists. (Operational definitions of these indicators and the method
of scoring them are described in Starfield 1998.) The first important
finding is that the score for the practice characteristics was highly corre-
lated with the score for the policy characteristics. That is, the adequate
delivery of primary care services was associated with supportive govern-
mental policies. The second finding is that those countries with low
primary care scores as a group had poorer health outcomes, most no-
tably for indicators in early childhood, particularly low birth weight and
postneonatal mortality.
A more recent comparison, with 13 countries and an expanded set
of indicators of both primary care policy characteristics and health out-
comes, also showed better health outcomes for the primary care–oriented
countries even after controlling for income inequality and smoking rates,
most significantly for postneonatal mortality (r = .74, p < .001) and
rates of low birth weight (r = .38, p < .001). Countries with weak
primary care also performed less well on most major aspects of health,
including mental health, such as years of potential life lost because of
suicide (Starfield and Shi 2002). The positive impact of primary care
orientation on low birth-weight rates may reflect a beneficial effect of
primary care on mothers’ health before pregnancy (Davey Smith and Lynch
2004; Starfield and Shi 2002). The characteristics of primary care prac-
tice present in countries with high primary care scores and absent in
countries with low primary care scores were the degree of comprehen-
siveness of primary care (i.e., the extent to which primary care practi-
tioners provided a broader range of services rather than making referrals
to specialists for those services) and a family orientation (the degree to
which services were provided to all family members by the same practi-
tioner). The most consistent policy characteristics were the government’s
attempts to distribute resources equitably, universal financial coverage
that was either under the aegis of the government or regulated by the
government, and low or no patient cost sharing for primary care services
(Starfield and Shi 2002). The latter two were studied and confirmed by
Or (2001).
The positive contributions of primary care to health also were found
in a much more extensive time-series analysis of 18 industrialized

----- Page 12 (native) -----
468
B. Starfield, L. Shi, and J. Macinko
countries, including the United States (Macinko, Starfield, and Shi
2003). The stronger the country’s primary care orientation (as mea-
sured by the same scoring system as in the earlier international compar-
ison) was, the lower the rates were of all-cause mortality, all-cause pre-
mature mortality, and cause-specific premature mortality from asthma
and bronchitis, emphysema and pneumonia, cardiovascular disease, and
heart disease. This relationship held even after controlling for various
system characteristics (GDP per capita, total physicians per 1,000 pop-
ulation, percentage of elderly people) and population characteristics,
including the average number of ambulatory care visits, per capita in-
come, alcohol consumption, and tobacco consumption. The analyses es-
timated that increasing a country’s primary care score by five points
(on a 20-point scale) would be expected to reduce premature deaths
from asthma and bronchitis by as much as 6.5 percent and that the
reduction in premature mortality for heart disease could be as high as
15 percent.
Data from this study were analyzed as well to ascertain the robust-
ness of primary care scores over time. The average primary care score
increased by nearly one point from the 1970s to the 1990s. Countries
that performed well in the 1970s remained high performers in each
succeeding decade. When countries were divided into high and low per-
formers (above or below the mean for each decade), no country crossed
the threshold from low to high or from high to low, but the score of
some countries changed. One country’s score fell over time; Germany
lowered access to ambulatory care services by imposing higher copay-
ments, thus lowering its overall primary care score (OECD 2001). In
general, policy changes over time paralleled improvements in primary
care practice. For example, in the late 1980s and early 1990s, Spain
strengthened its primary care by moving to a tax-based financing system,
improving its geographic allocation of funds, and increasing the supply
of family physicians as well as developing primary health care centers
that improved integration, family orientation, coordination of care, and
health promotion services (Larizgoitia and Starfield 1997). The United
States’ score rose slightly over time, almost entirely resulting from the
greater participation of Americans in health maintenance organizations
(HMOs), which tend, on average, to use a higher percentage of primary
care practitioners (Weiner 2004) and have (at least among the not-for-
profit HMOs) a tradition of community involvement (Stevens and Shi
2003).

----- Page 13 (native) -----
Contribution of Primary Care to Health Systems and Health
469
Primary Care and Disparities
in Health Outcomes
Both the World Health Organization and many countries (including
the United States) have recognized the existence of marked disparities
(inequities) in health across population subgroups and have identified
reductions (and, for the United States, even elimination) of these as a
priority (Sachs and McArthur 2005; U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services 2000). In reviewing the impact of primary care on
reductions in disparities in health, we looked at studies of physician
supply, studies of the association with a primary care physician, and
studies of the receipt of services that fulfilled the criteria for primary
care delivery.
Higher ratios of primary care physicians to population are associated
with relatively greater effects on various aspects of health in more so-
cially deprived areas (as measured by high levels of income inequality).
Areas with abundant primary care resources and high income inequality
have a 17 percent lower postneonatal mortality rate (compared with the
population mean), whereas the postneonatal mortality rate in areas of
high income inequality and few primary care resources was 7 percent
higher. For stroke mortality, the comparable figures were 2 percent lower
mortality where the primary care resources were abundant and 1 per-
cent higher where the primary care resources were scarce (calculated from
data in Shi et al. 1999). These findings are even more striking in the
case of self-reported health. Income inequality and primary care were
significantly associated with self-rated health, but the supply of primary
care physicians significantly reduced the effects of income inequality
on self-reported health status (Shi and Starfield 2000). People in high-
income-inequality areas were 33 percent more likely to report fair or
poor health if the primary care resources were few (calculated from data
in Shi and Starfield 2000).
As in state-level analyses, the adverse impact of income inequality
on all-cause mortality, heart disease mortality, and cancer mortality was
considerably diminished where the number of primary care physicians
in county-level analyses was high (Shi et al. 2005a).
The supply of primary care physicians in the U.S. states has a larger
positive impact on low birth weight and infant mortality in areas with
high social inequality than it does in areas with less social inequality (Shi
et al. 2004).

----- Page 14 (native) -----
470
B. Starfield, L. Shi, and J. Macinko
Eleven years of state-level data found the supply of primary care physi-
cians to be significantly related to lower all-cause mortality rates in both
African American and white populations, after controlling for income
inequality and socioeconomic characteristics (metropolitan area, percent-
age of unemployed, and educational levels). In these state-level analyses,
the supply of primary care physicians had a greater positive impact on
mortality among African Americans than among whites. The inclusions
of both the supply of primary care physicians and sociodemographic
characteristics eliminated the negative impact of income inequality. The
association between a greater supply of primary care physicians and lower
totalmortalitywasfoundtobefourtimesgreaterintheAfricanAmerican
population than in the white majority population, indicating a reduction
in racial disparities in mortality in the U.S. states (Shi et al. 2005c). But
when exploring further the relationship between the supply of primary
care physicians and health outcomes in African American and white pop-
ulations in metropolitan areas of the United States, both the supply of
primary care and income inequality were significantly associated with
total mortality rates in the white population, whereas only income in-
equality maintained its significant relationships in African American
populations (Shi and Starfield 2001). The authors interpreted this find-
ing as suggesting that in many urban areas, a great supply of primary
care physicians does not ensure certain population subgroups’ access to
primary care; they may receive their care in places such as hospital clinics
and emergency rooms, which do not emphasize primary care.
The equity-related effect of having a good primary care source also
was found in the study that examined the degree of primary care–
oriented services that people received. Good primary care experiences
were associated with reductions in the adverse effects of income in-
equality on health, with fewer differences in self-rated health between
higher and lower income-inequality areas where primary care experi-
ences were stronger (Shi et al. 2002). Although similar in the direction
of effect, the relationship to “feeling depressed” was not statistically
significant.
In county-level analyses that stratified urban areas by race, the supply
ofprimarycarephysicianshadastrongandsignificantinfluenceonwhite
mortalityinbothlow-andhigh-income-inequalityareas,butonlyaweak
association with African American mortality in low-income-inequality
areas and no significant association in high-income-inequality areas (Shi
et al. 2005b).

----- Page 15 (native) -----
Contribution of Primary Care to Health Systems and Health
471
Thus, the U.S. studies showed that an adequate supply of primary care
physicians reduced disparities in health across racial and socioeconomic
groups. Multivariate analyses controlling for individual, community, and
state-level characteristics provided strong evidence for the association of
primary care with fewer disparities in several aspects of health.
These conclusions are buttressed by a study comparing the type of
place where care is received. Disparities in low-birth-weight percentages
between the majority white and African American infants are fewer in
infants of mothers receiving care in primary care–oriented community
health centers, compared with the population as a whole. In both white
and African American populations in both urban and rural areas in the
United States, the rates of low birth weight were lower, in both absolute
numbers and ratios of rates, where the source of care was a community
health center (Politzer et al. 2001).
A study of civil servants in the United Kingdom, where access to
primary care physicians is universal, found that socioeconomic differ-
ences in coronary heart disease mortality were not a result of differ-
ences in cardiac care (Britton et al. 2004). Another exploration of the
effect of primary care found that blacks in London did not have greater
rates of diabetes-related lower-extremity amputation than whites did
(Leggetter et al. 2002), whereas blacks in the United States had rates
two to three times higher than that in the white population. In the
United Kingdom, the rates were lower in black men than in the white
population, a difference wholly accounted for by lower rates of smok-
ing, neuropathy, and peripheral vascular disease. The findings per-
sisted even after controlling for socioeconomic differences, thus con-
firming other findings (van Doorslaer, Koolman, and Jones 2004) that
a health system oriented toward primary care services (such as in the
United Kingdom) reduced the disparities in health care so prominent
in the United States (Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
2004).
Primary care programs aimed at improving health in deprived pop-
ulations in less developed countries succeeded in narrowing the gaps in
health between socially deprived and more socially advantaged popula-
tions. A matched case-control study in Mexico (Reyes et al. 1997) found
that some aspects of primary care delivery had an important independent
effect on reducing the odds of children dying in socially deprived areas.
These processes included adequate referral mechanisms, continuity of
care (being seen by the same provider at each visit), and being attended

----- Page 16 (native) -----
472
B. Starfield, L. Shi, and J. Macinko
in a public facility designed to provide primary care. A study in Bolivia
(Perry et al. 1998) found that a community-based approach to planning
primary health care services in socially deprived areas lowered the mor-
tality of children under age five compared with adjacent similar areas or
the country as a whole.
The Costa Rican primary care reforms, which were instituted first in
the most socially deprived areas, illustrate the importance of primary
care in reducing health disparities. These reforms included transferring
the responsibility for providing health care from the Ministry of Health
to the Costa Rican Social Security Fund (CCSS), expanding the number
of primary care facilities—particularly in underserved areas—and reor-
ganizing primary care into “integrated primary care teams” or EBAIS
(equipos b´asicos de atenci´on integral en salud), which consist of teams
of health professionals assigned to a geographic region covering about
1,000 households (Rosero-Bixby 2004b). By 1985, Costa Rica’s life ex-
pectancy reached 74 years, and infant mortality rates fell from 60 per
1,000 live births in 1970 to 19 per 1,000 live births, levels comparable
to those in more developed countries. The improvements in primary
health care were estimated to have reduced infant mortality by between
40 percent and 75 percent, depending on the particular study (Haines
and Avery 1982; Klijzing and Taylor 1982; Rosero-Bixby 1986). For
every five additional years after primary health care (PHC) reform, child
mortality fell by 13 percent, and adult mortality fell by 4 percent. The
study’squasi-experimentalnatureprovidedevidenceofthepowerofPHC
policies and provision of services to improve health, above and beyond
improvements in social and economic indicators (which the longitudinal
analyses controlled for) (Rosero-Bixby 2004a).
Studies in other developing countries show the considerable potential
of primary care to reduce the large disparities associated with socioeco-
nomic deprivation. In seven African countries, the wealthiest 20 percent
of the population receives well over three times as much financial bene-
fit from overall government spending as does the poorest 20 percent of
the population (40 percent versus 12 percent). For primary care services,
the ratio of rich to poor in the distribution of government expenditures
was notably lower (23 percent to the top group versus 15 percent to
the lowest group) (Castro-Leal et al. 2000), leading one international
expert to conclude that “from an equity perspective, the move toward
primary care represents a clear step in the right direction” (Gwatkin
2001,720). An analysis of preventable deaths in children concluded that

----- Page 17 (native) -----
Contribution of Primary Care to Health Systems and Health
473
in the 42 countries accounting for 90 percent of child deaths worldwide,
63 percent could have been prevented by the full implementation of
primary care. The primary care interventions included integrated care
addressing the very common problems of diarrhea, pneumonia, measles,
malaria, HIV/AIDS, preterm delivery, neonatal tetanus, and neonatal
sepsis (Jones et al. 2003).
Except in metropolitan areas, where a greater supply of primary care
physicians alone may not be associated with reductions in disparities
between African Americans and whites, the findings of fewer disparities
by primary care were consistent across all types of studies and were
particularly marked in studies examining the actual receipt of primary
care services.
Costs of Care
In addition to its relationship to better health outcomes, the supply of
primary care physicians was associated with lower total costs of health
services. Areas with higher ratios of primary care physicians to popula-
tion had much lower total health care costs than did other areas, possibly
partly because of better preventive care and lower hospitalization rates.
This was demonstrated to be the case for the total U.S. adult popula-
tion (Franks and Fiscella 1998), as well as among U.S. elderly living in
metropolitan areas (Mark et al. 1996; Welch et al. 1993). Baicker and
Chandra’s (2004) analysis showed a linear decrease in Medicare spend-
ing along with an increase in the supply of primary care physicians,
as well as better quality of care (as measured by 24 indicators con-
cerning the treatment of six common medical conditions). In contrast,
the supply of specialists was associated with more spending and poorer
care.
Care for illnesses common in the population, for example, community-
acquired pneumonia, was more expensive if provided by specialists than
if provided by generalists, with no difference in outcomes (Rosser 1996;
Whittle et al. 1998).
Consistent with the findings within countries, international compar-
isons of primary care showed that those countries with weaker primary
care had significantly higher costs (r = .61, p < .001) (Starfield and Shi
2002).

----- Page 18 (native) -----
474
B. Starfield, L. Shi, and J. Macinko
Rationale for the Benefits of Primary Care
for Health
Six mechanisms, alone and in combination, may account for the bene-
ficial impact of primary care on population health. They are (1) greater
access to needed services, (2) better quality of care, (3) a greater focus on
prevention, (4) early management of health problems, (5) the cumulative
effect of the main primary care delivery characteristics, and (6) the role of
primary care in reducing unnecessary and potentially harmful specialist
care.
1. Primary care increases access to health services for relatively deprived popu-
lation groups. Primary care, as the point of first contact with health
services, facilitates entry to the rest of the health system. With
the exception of the United States, most industrialized countries
have achieved universal and equitable access to primary health
services, some of them directly provided and others through the
assurance of financial coverage for visits (van Doorslaer, Koolman,
and Jones 2004). In the United States, however, socially deprived
population subgroups are more likely than more advantaged peo-
ple to lack a regular source of care. The evidence is striking with
regard to family income, for which there are marked gradients
in having a regular source of care, hovering around 80 percent
for the poor and near-poor to nearly 90 percent for those in the
middle income range, approaching 95 percent for those with high
incomes, and increasing over time from 1999 to 2001 for mainly
those with high incomes (Agency for Healthcare Research and
Quality 2004).
The principal benefit of health insurance in the United States
is facilitating access to primary care (Lillie-Blanton and Hoffman
2005; Starfield and Shi 2004). Socially deprived population
groups that do not have health insurance are less likely to have a
source of primary care and thus have less access to the entire health
system. Over the past several decades, attempts to improve access
have been mainly the expansion of eligibility for reimbursement
by public funds through Medicare, Medicaid, and related pro-
grams like the State Child Health Insurance Program. Some, but
not all, of these efforts have been accompanied by incentives or

----- Page 19 (native) -----
Contribution of Primary Care to Health Systems and Health
475
even mandated enrollment with a regular source of care, and dis-
parities in identification with a regular source of care have been
reduced. However, differences in the receipt of good primary care
services persist (Seid, Stevens, and Varni 2003; Shi 1999; Stevens
and Shi 2002; Taira et al. 1997). Shi’s national study of adults
(1999) demonstrated not only differences in the likelihood of
having a regular source but also (and more marked) differences
in the type of that regular source, with minorities more likely
to report a place rather than a person as their regular source of
care; to have a specialist (other than a primary care physician) if
they reported a physician as their source of care; and to experi-
ence longer delays in obtaining needed services after controlling
for having a regular source of care. The same was found for chil-
dren (Newacheck, Hughes, and Stoddard 1996). Other studies
show that minority children are more likely to use an emergency
room as their source of care (Weitzman, Byrd, and Auinger 1999).
After controlling for having a regular source of care, there were
few if any differences in reporting difficulty in obtaining needed
services.
Analyses reported by Weinick and Krauss (2000) and Lieu,
Newacheck, and McManus (1993) confirmed the finding of fewer
or no difficulties in access to care when the source is a primary care
source. Once they do have access to adequate primary care services,
deprived minority groups often report better experiences with
their care than the majority white population does, particularly
when the studies were conducted in organized health care settings
that, by design, eliminated many of the access barriers to primary
care services (Morales et al. 2001; Murray-Garcia et al. 2000; Taira
et al. 1997).
In sum, one of the main functions of a primary care source is
reducing or eliminating difficulty with access to needed health
services.
2. The contribution of primary care to the quality of clinical care. Studies
designed by specialists to compare the quality of care of specialty
and generalist practices often find that specialists are better at
adhering to guidelines. For example, adhering to guidelines for
asthma management was better in practices of specialists deal-
ing with asthma (Bartter and Pratter 1996), and gastroenterol-
ogists used antibiotic therapy for helicobacter pylori earlier than

----- Page 20 (native) -----
476
B. Starfield, L. Shi, and J. Macinko
generalists did (unless the generalists were in a group practice
with gastroenterologists) (Hirth, Fendrick, and Chernew 1996).
Most studies comparing generalists and specialists concluded that
the condition-specific quality of care provided by specialists was
better when the condition was in the specialist’s area of special
interest, using indicators of quality of care such as the perfor-
mance of disease-specific preventive procedures, the performance
of indicated laboratory tests for monitoring disease status, and the
prescription of relevant medications (Harrold, Field, and Gurwitz
1999).
The findings concerning the superior quality of care by spe-
cialists were not, however, confirmed by other studies. In demon-
strating the effectiveness of primary care for diabetes, general
practitioner (GP) diabetic clinics in the United Kingdom were
found to do as well as hospital specialists in monitoring for dia-
beticcomplications(Parnell,Zalin,andClarke1993).Inaddition,
in systems in which the GPs were given additional educational
support and had an organized system for recall, GPs’ care of di-
abetic patients was better than that of specialists in hospitals. In
such situations, patients of GPs had lower mortality rates and
better glycemic control than did patients treated by specialists
(Griffin and Kinmonth 1998). Rates of complications, readmis-
sion to the hospital, and length of convalescence were the same
after early discharge from the hospital after minor surgery, regard-
less of whether the care was provided by the hospital’s outpatient
department or general practitioners (Kaag, Wijkel, and de Jong
1996). Moreover, the few studies planned and executed by gener-
alists (Donohoe 1998; Grumbach et al. 1999) concluded that the
quality of care was the same or that primary care was better. These
differences suggest differences in the conceptualization of appro-
priate “outcomes” by the two types of physicians, with specialists
more concerned with specific disease-related measures and adher-
ence to guidelines for these diseases and primary care physicians
more targeted to multiple aspects of health, that is, “generic”
health. Assessing generic outcomes, or quality of care other than
for the particular conditions under study, is important because co-
morbidity is common and causes more visits to both generalists
and specialists than do most specific conditions (Starfield et al.
2003; Starfield et al. 2005a). If the interest is in patients’ health

----- Page 21 (native) -----
Contribution of Primary Care to Health Systems and Health
477
(rather than disease processes or outcomes) as the proper focus
of health services, primary care provides superior care, especially
for conditions commonly seen in primary care, by focusing not
primarily on the condition but on the condition in the context of
the patient’s other health problems or concerns.
In short, primary care physicians do at least as well as specialists
in caring for specific common diseases, and they do better over-
all when the measures of quality are generic. For less common
conditions, the care provided by primary care physicians with
appropriate backup from specialists may be the best; for rare con-
ditions, appropriate specialist care is undoubtedly important, as
primary care physicians would not see such conditions frequently
enough to maintain competence in managing them.
3. The impact of primary care on prevention. The evidence strongly shows
that it is in primary care that preventive interventions are best
when they are not related to any one disease or organ system.
Examplesofthese“generic”(i.e.,notlimitedtoaparticulardisease
or type of disease) measures are breast-feeding, not smoking, using
seat belts, using smoke detectors, being physically active, and
eating a healthy diet. Those U.S. states with higher ratios of
primary care physicians to population have lower smoking rates,
less obesity, and higher seatbelt use than do states with lower
ratios of primary care physicians to population (Shi 1994; Shi and
Starfield 2000). Good primary care, as determined by peoples’
ratings of its main characteristics, is positively associated with
smoking cessation and influenza immunization, as shown in an
ongoing 60-community study in the United States (Saver 2002).
The likelihood of disadvantaged children’s making any preventive
visits is much greater when their source of care is a good primary
care practitioner (Gadomski, Jenkins, and Nichols 1998).
To the extent that many preventive activities stress the early
detection of specific diseases (secondary prevention), the quality of
primary care (compared with specialty care) would not necessarily
beexpectedtobebetter.However,theevidencesuggestsotherwise
for common conditions that are in the purview of primary care.
A greater supply of family physicians (although not necessarily
internists) is associated with an earlier detection of breast cancer,
coloncancer,cervicalcancer,andmelanoma(Campbelletal.2003;
Ferrante et al. 2000; Roetzheim et al. 1999, 2000). Ferrante and

----- Page 22 (native) -----
478
B. Starfield, L. Shi, and J. Macinko
colleagues (2000) found that each tenth-percentile increase in the
supply of primary care physicians was associated with a statisti-
cally significant 4 percent increase in the odds of a diagnosis in
an early (rather than late) stage. Most mammograms (87 percent)
are ordered by primary care physicians (Schappert 1994); more-
over, a physician’s advice to have mammograms enhances their
receipt (Breen and Kessler 1994; Campbell et al. 2003; Fox, Siu,
and Stein 1994; NCI Breast Cancer Screening Consortium 1990;
Roetzheim et al. 1999, 2000). Another study of differences be-
tween primary care physicians and specialists caring for patients
with hypertension, non-insulin-dependent diabetes, recent my-
ocardial infarction, or depression showed that the only preventive
care procedures better performed by specialists were checks for
foot ulcers and infection status in endocrinologists’ diabetic pa-
tients (Greenfield et al. 1992). Moreover, approaches to preven-
tion in primary care practice were more generic and resulted in
more improvement in patients’ health status than was the case
in specialty-oriented practices (Bertakis et al. 1998). When the
data were from the general community rather than from practices,
having a good primary care source was the major determinant of
receiving even disease-focused preventive care, consisting of blood
pressure screening, clinical breast exams, mammograms, and Pap
smears (Bindman et al. 1996).
4. The impact of primary care on the early management of health problems.
Another indication of the benefit of primary care is its demon-
strated impact on managing health problems before they are se-
rious enough to require hospitalization or emergency services.
Several studies support this conclusion.
Shea and colleagues (1992) examined the relationship between
having a primary care physician as the source of care and hospi-
talization for reasons that should be preventable by good primary
care. Men with hypertension who were admitted to the hospital
from the emergency room in a large metropolitan area were di-
vided into two groups. One group was composed of those who
were admitted for a preventable complication of hypertension;
the other group was admitted for a condition unrelated to hyper-
tension. The study found that those admitted for the preventable
complication were four times more likely to lack a primary care
provider than were those admitted for a condition unrelated to

----- Page 23 (native) -----
Contribution of Primary Care to Health Systems and Health
479
hypertension, even after considering other factors such as absence
of health insurance, level of compliance with antihypertensive reg-
imens, and alcohol or drug use–related problems, thus indicating
that those men with a primary care provider were relatively better
protected against hospitalization for a preventable complication
of a common medical problem.
In the United Kingdom, each 15 to 20 percent increase in GP
supply per 10,000 population was significantly associated with
a decrease in hospital admission rates of about 14 per 100,000
for acute illnesses and about 11 per 100,000 for chronic illnesses,
even after controlling for the degree of social deprivation in the
area in which people live, their social class, ethnicity, and limiting
long-term illness (Gulliford 2002).
In the United States, rates of hospitalization for conditions that
should be preventable by exposure to good primary care (ambu-
latory care–sensitive conditions, or ACSC) are strongly associated
with socioeconomic deprivation, at least in part because socially
disadvantaged populations are less likely to have a good source
of primary care (Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
2004; Hansell 1991; Stevens and Shi 2002). In contrast, in Spain,
the rates of hospitalization for these conditions were not asso-
ciated with socioeconomic characteristics, indicating that the
Spanish health system’s primary care orientation reduced the hos-
pitalization rates for these conditions despite social disadvantage
(Casanova, Colomer, and Starfield 1996; Casanova and Starfield
1995).
In a large multispecialty comparison of hospitalization rates,
Greenfield and colleagues found that the rates of hospitalization
were 100 percent higher when, compared with family physicians,
the ongoing care was provided by cardiologists and 50 percent
higher when it was provided by endocrinologists (Greenfield et al.
1992).
The literature is consistent in showing that lower rates of hos-
pitalization for ACSC are strongly associated with the receipt
of primary care. Geographic areas with more family and general
practitioners have lower hospitalization rates for these types of
conditions, including diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and pneu-
monia (Parchman and Culler 1994). Children receiving their care
from a primary care source that fulfills the criteria for its main

----- Page 24 (native) -----
480
B. Starfield, L. Shi, and J. Macinko
characteristicshavelowerhospitalizationratesfortheseconditions
as well as lower hospitalization rates overall. These findings are
associated with the greater receipt of preventive care from primary
care providers (Gadomski, Jenkins, and Nichols 1998). Rates of
hospital admissions of children are lower in those U.S. communi-
ties in which primary care physicians are more involved in caring
for children both before and during hospitalization (Perrin et al.
1996). Adolescents with the same regular source of care for pre-
ventive and illness care are less likely to seek care in emergency
rooms (Ryan et al. 2001). An analysis of national Medicare data
showed that the elderly in the United States who are in fair or
poor health are more likely to experience a potentially preventable
hospitalization if they live in a county designated as a primary care
shortage area (Parchman and Culler 1999).
Only two studies failed to find a positive impact for the supply
of primary care physicians and hospitalizations for conditions sen-
sitive to primary care management. Each of the studies was con-
ducted in only one state, New York or North Carolina (Ricketts
et al. 2001; Schreiber and Zielinski 1997). In both studies, socio-
economic characteristics were more salient, and so it is possible
that in some places, the availability of more primary care physi-
cians did not necessarily mean that deprived populations had ac-
cess to them. A later study in one of those states (New York)
showed that the ratio of primary care physicians to population
was one of the more salient factors associated with lower levels of
hospitalizations for ACSC (Friedman and Basu 2001).
5. The accumulated contribution of primary care characteristics to more
appropriate care. As noted in regard to quality of care, the ben-
eficial effects of primary care on mortality and morbidity can be
attributed, at least in part, to the focus of primary care on the per-
son rather than on the management of particular diseases. Care
focuses on the person when practitioners attend to overall aspects
of the patient’s health rather than to the care of his or her specific
diseases; it focuses on achieving better outcomes for health in all
its aspects rather than on the procedures directed at improving
the processes or outcomes of care for particular conditions. Other
aspects of health services delivery that are characteristic of pri-
mary care also have been associated with better health outcomes.
Although an extensive review of the positive contribution of each

----- Page 25 (native) -----
Contribution of Primary Care to Health Systems and Health
481
of these characteristics is outside the scope of this review (which
concerns primary care as an entity within health service systems)
and has been covered elsewhere (Starfield 1998), a brief summary
of these contributions explains why primary care as a whole might
have positive effects.
We noted earlier that an important element of primary care is
its role as the first contact for patients when a problem develops.
In a seminal article entitled “Gatekeeping Revisited—Protecting
Patients from Overtreatment,” Franks, Clancy, and Nutting
(1992) made the case for seeing a primary care physician before
seeking care from another type of physician. Having a relation-
ship with a primary care practitioner who can serve as an initial
point of contact is strongly and statistically significantly associ-
ated with less use of specialists and emergency rooms (Hurley,
Freund, and Taylor 1989; Martin et al. 1989). Continuity of care,
which implies that individuals use their primary source of care
over time for most of their health care needs, is associated with
greater satisfaction, better compliance, and lower hospitalization
and emergency room use (Freeman and Hjortdahl 1997; Mainous
and Gill 1998; Rosenblatt et al. 2000; Weiss and Blustein 1996).
Previous knowledge of a patient, which reflects good continuity of
care, increases the doctor’s odds of recognizing psychosocial prob-
lems influencing the patient’s health (Gulbrandsen, Hjortdahl,
and Fugelli 1997). Both continuity and first-contact attributes of
primary care ensure greater efficiency of services in the time saved
in the consultation, less use of laboratory tests, and fewer health
care expenditures (Forrest and Starfield 1996, 1998; Hjortdahl
and Borchgrevink 1991; Raddish, Horn, and Sharkey 1999; Roos,
Carriere, and Friesen 1998). Very short-term relationships with
physicians are associated with poor outcomes. For example, veter-
ans with a chronic disease who did not have a previous relationship
with a primary care physician were randomized to receive an in-
tervention of increased follow-up by a newly assigned nurse and
a primary care physician after they were discharged from the hos-
pital. Rehospitalization rates six months later were higher in this
intervention group (Weinberger, Oddone, and Henderson 1996),
thus indicating that relationships over time are an important com-
ponent of primary care. (The study did not assess rehospitaliza-
tion rates for veterans who already had a primary care provider,

----- Page 26 (native) -----
482
B. Starfield, L. Shi, and J. Macinko
and it may be that the assignment of such a provider to peo-
ple without an existing relationship led to the discovery of new
conditions not previously recognized and requiring hospitaliza-
tion.) At least two years of a relationship (and as many as five) are
generally required for patients and practitioners to get to know
each other well enough to provide optimal person-focused care
(Starfield 1998, 175). A freely chosen primary care practitioner
provides better assurance of a good relationship than does assign-
ing a practitioner (Starfield 1998, 151). The evidence is strong
regarding the benefits of an ongoing relationship with a partic-
ular provider rather than with a particular place or no place at
all. People with no source of primary care are more likely to be
hospitalized, to delay seeking needed and timely preventive care,
to receive care in emergency departments, and to have higher
subsequent mortality and higher health care costs, and they are
less likely to see a physician in the presence of symptoms. People
with just a place (such as a particular hospital clinic) are some-
what better off than those without a regular source of care, in
that they are more likely to keep their appointments, have fewer
hospitalizations and lower costs, and receive generally better pre-
ventive care. In addition, people who report a particular doctor
as their regular source of care receive more appropriate preven-
tive care, are more likely to have their problems recognized, have
fewer diagnostic tests and fewer prescriptions, have fewer hos-
pitalizations and visits to emergency departments, and are more
likely to have more accurate diagnoses and lower costs of care
than are either people having a particular place or people hav-
ing no place at all as their regular source of care (Starfield 1998,
chap. 8).
The benefits of the other two main attributes of good pri-
mary care (comprehensiveness and coordination) are less well doc-
umented, but the existing evidence was summarized by Starfield
(1998, chaps. 10 and 11).
6. The role of primary care in reducing unnecessary or inappropriate specialty
care. Nearly all studies of specialist services concluded that there
is either no effect or an adverse effect on major health outcomes
from increasing the supply of specialists in the United States,
which already has a much greater supply of such physicians than
do other industrialized countries (Starfield et al. 2005b). This

----- Page 27 (native) -----
Contribution of Primary Care to Health Systems and Health
483
evidence addresses a wide variety of population health outcomes,
including all-cause (total) mortality; heart and cerebrovascular
disease mortality; cancer mortality; postneonatal, neonatal, and
total infant mortality; and low birth weight; as well as the early
detection of various cancers, including cervical cancer, colorectal
cancers, breast cancer, and melanoma (the evidence was reviewed
by Starfield et al. 2005b). The evidence is also consistent that first
contact with a primary care physician (before seeking care from
a specialist) is associated with more appropriate, more effective,
and less costly care (Starfield 1998, chap. 7).
Other countries, most notably the United Kingdom and the
Netherlands, have led the way with primary care innovations to
reduce the inappropriate use of specialist services. These include
making better use of information systems and video commu-
nications as well as consulting with specialists in primary care
settings.
The adverse effects of seeking care directly from nonprimary
care specialists have a strong theoretical basis. Since these spe-
cialists are trained in the hospital, the patients seen by specialists
are not representative of the way in which patients present symp-
toms in community settings, because the latter have a much lower
prior probability of serious illness requiring the services of a spe-
cialist. The properties of diagnostic tests (sensitivity, specificity,
predictive power of a positive test) are much different in pop-
ulations with a high prevalence of serious illness than they are
in community settings and thus much different in specialty care
than in primary care settings. The result is that specialists prac-
ticing in the community overestimate the likelihood of illness
in the patients they see, with the consequently inappropriate use
of diagnostic and therapeutic modalities, both of which raise the
likelihood of adverse effects (Franks, Clancy, and Nutting 1992;
Hashem, Chi, and Friedman 2003; Sox 1996). Compared with
other Anglophone countries, people in the United States experi-
ence more adverse effects and medical errors (Schoen et al. 2004).
This, combined with evidence concerning the adverse effects of
greater supplies of specialists and estimates of the likelihood of
adverse effects of medical care, may at least partly explain the
United States’ low ranking on health status relative to that of
similarly industrialized countries.

----- Page 28 (native) -----
484
B. Starfield, L. Shi, and J. Macinko
Potential Limitations of Interpretations
of Effectiveness of Primary Care
Despite the consistency of the findings from various types of studies, ar-
eas, and populations and the theoretical rationale for benefit of primary
care on population health, it is possible that the results may be overin-
terpreted. Those countries and areas in which primary care is strongest
(however measured) may be areas in which other social interventions
(such as income supports and welfare policies that influence health) also
are strongest. So far, the effort to identify the social policies that have
a great influence on health has not been successful (Graham and Kelly
2004).
Moreover, the mere presence of primary care physicians may not reflect
the availability of primary care services to certain population groups. At
least two of the reviewed analyses in urban counties showed that the sup-
ply of primary care physicians is less closely related to the health of urban
African Americans than it is for urban whites or for African Americans
in rural areas. This is likely due to the poorer distribution of primary
care physicians in more deprived urban areas, with the consequently
greater need to seek care in such places as hospital outpatient units and
emergency rooms. Supporting this hypothesis are two lines of evidence.
First, African Americans are more likely than whites to report having
their regular source of care in a facility (such as a hospital) and to report a
specialist as their regular source of care (Shi 1999). That is, primary care
physicians in urban areas tend to locate in more socially advantaged areas
(Weiner et al. 1982). As a result, hospital clinics with predominantly
hospital-based physicians not trained to provide the important features
of primary care become the “default” regular source of care. Second, even
in the presence of adequate primary care resources, African Americans
may be less likely than other racial and ethnic groups to use primary
care when other resources (such as hospital clinics) are available; this
has been demonstrated to be the case for the medical care of inner-city
infants (Hoffmann, Broyles, and Tyson 1997). State-level analyses are
not as susceptible to this type of possible error because primary care is
more evenly distributed than is specialty care (Shi and Starfield 2001).
If the supply of primary care physicians is less closely associated with
health outcomes in urban African Americans than in whites because of
difficulties in access to them, the demonstrated association between sup-
plyandhealthoutcomesmayactuallyunderestimatethepotentialimpact

----- Page 29 (native) -----
Contribution of Primary Care to Health Systems and Health
485
of primary care services, particularly for deprived populations. Moreover,
the studies that use alternative measures of primary care, including re-
lationships with a primary care physician and studies considering the
adequacy of primary care health services delivery characteristics, all con-
firm the conclusion that care meeting the criteria for primary care is
associated with the better health of those populations receiving it, with
a greater impact in more deprived populations.
Primary Care in the Future
What issues remain to be addressed in primary care to improve its contri-
bution to the health of populations and equity in distribution of health?
A pervasive U.S. focus on “access” to health services rather than on the
type of health services has detracted from the need to ensure that services
are provided in the most appropriate places. The existing national data
health interview surveys combine various safety net providers into one
group so that people receiving their care from hospital outpatient clinics
are not distinguishable from those receiving care from primary care–
oriented clinics. Combining primary care–focused community health
centers with hospital emergency and outpatient departments as “safety
net providers” masks the high positive contributions to the health of the
former with the lesser primary care focus of the latter. Apart from the
Community Health Center program of the federal Health Resources and
Services Administration and the commitment of certain not-for-profit
health care organizations to strong primary care (Weiner 2004), little or
nothing has been done to ensure that other “regular sources of care” fulfill
the criteria for good primary care. In most other industrialized countries,
primary care physicians are clearly distinguished from other physicians,
and where people receive care is easily identified as primary care or spe-
cialty care. Greater appreciation that it is primary care that plays a major
role in ensuring access to appropriate health services should provide the
rationale for better distinguishing primary care from specialty care in
data on the use of health services in the United States.
At the very least, primary care must be recognized as a distinct aspect
of a health services system. There now are well-validated methods (e.g.,
see Shi, Starfield, and Xu 2001; Starfield et al. 1998) to assess both
the presence and the characteristics of primary care, and all sources of
data on use of health services should include at least a few of these

----- Page 30 (native) -----
486
B. Starfield, L. Shi, and J. Macinko
measures. Understanding people’s primary care experiences (rather than
or in addition to their satisfaction), including the extent to which they
receive the range of services appropriate to their needs and have the
care they receive elsewhere coordinated and integrated, are important to
evaluating the adequacy of health services.
In contrast to the situation in primary care, for which intensive con-
ceptual and methodologic study over the past several decades has clar-
ified its most important aspects, professional specialty groups in the
United States have made little if any attempt to define the practice of
“specialism” or the circumstances that should lead to seeking care from
specialists. Referrals to specialists apparently have three functions: short-
term consultation for diagnosis or management, referral for long-term
management of specific illnesses, and recurrent consultation for periodic
management. A study of referrals from 80 office-based family practices
showed that by far the most referrals for common conditions (over 50 per-
cent of all referrals to most types of specialists) were expected to be for a
short term (less than 12 months) and that for more than 50 percent, they
were for consultation only (no direct intervention) (Starfield et al. 2002).
Very little is known, however, about the relative frequency of these func-
tions from the viewpoint of specialty practice. One report (Hewlett et al.
2005) indicated that about 75 percent of visits to a pulmonary specialty
clinic were just for “checkups,” even though the patients’ primary care
physicians, once they had access to the specialists’ reports, could just as
easily perform this function and report the findings to the specialists.
Such an approach to reducing the number of visits to specialists could
lower the demand for a greater supply of specialists; it at least deserves to
be tested. There is an urgent need for information about the indications
for specialty care and about the impact on outcomes of excessive use of
specialists.
Major challenges to primary care practice concern (1) recognizing and
managing comorbidity, (2) preventing the adverse effects of medical
interventions, (3) maintaining a high quality of the important charac-
teristics of primary care practice, and (4) improving equity in health
services and in the health of populations (Starfield 2001).
1. Historically, principles of delivery of medical care have been
based on preventing and managing specific diseases. In the cur-
rent climate of evidence-based medicine, guidelines for the man-
agement of diseases are proliferating and increasingly used. The

----- Page 31 (native) -----
Contribution of Primary Care to Health Systems and Health
487
development of guidelines is generally based on evidence from
the literature that certain modes of management achieve better
outcomes than others do. The “gold standard” for evidence is the
randomized controlled clinical trial, which generally excludes, as
a requirement for participation in the trial, individuals with co-
morbid conditions. Comorbidity (the simultaneous presence of
apparently unrelated conditions) is common in the population
and is not randomly distributed. Although comorbidity becomes
more common with age, it is in the young that comorbidity occurs
much more frequently than expected by the chance occurrence of
two or more conditions (van den Akker et al. 1998). (That is, the
frequency of illness is much greater in the old than in the young,
so there is much greater likelihood that two unrelated illnesses
will be found together. In the young, illness is much less com-
mon, so that it is statistically much less likely that two or more
will be found together, although in fact this is the case.) Data
systems should be developed that provide a much better basis for
examining the distribution and nature of comorbidity in primary
care; ascertainment of the impact of baseline risks on comorbid-
ity; likelihood of responsiveness to treatment in the presence of
comorbidity; and susceptibility to adverse effects of medical inter-
ventions. Moreover, the applicability to primary care of guidelines
developed from randomized controlled clinical trials may be more
limited than is generally thought, even apart from the issue of co-
morbidity (Kravitz, Duan, and Braslow 2004; Rothwell 2005),
particularly when considering the issue of disease-specific versus
overall clinical end points (Fleming 2005).
2. Primary care practitioners are in the best position to detect the
occurrence of potentially adverse effects of medical interventions,
particularly those stemming from drug reactions and interactions.
In systems of care oriented to primary care (including some HMOs
in the United States), the primary care practitioner is, by far, the
most commonly seen physician, for patients with all degrees of
comorbidity and for both single common conditions and comor-
bid conditions. Only when individual conditions are uncommon
are specialists the type of physician most frequently seen, and only
for that condition (not for comorbid conditions) (Starfield et al.
2003; Starfield et al. 2005a). Thus, primary care physicians are
more likely to see the adverse events that result from their own

----- Page 32 (native) -----
488
B. Starfield, L. Shi, and J. Macinko
care as well as the care of others whom the patient may see. The
challenge for primary care is to establish systems to code unex-
pected symptoms or signs and to create information systems that
could serve as early warnings of the occurrence of adverse events in
persons previously subjected to particular types of interventions.
It is possible that the International Classification of Primary Care
(ICPC) (Lamberts, Wood, and Hofmans-Okkes 1993), which pro-
vides a straightforward classification of problems encountered in
primary care while maintaining comparability with the better
known International Classification of Diseases (originally devel-
oped to code causes of death), could serve as the basis for recording
and classifying these symptoms and signs in the United States, as
it is already being used in several other countries.
3. Improvement in clinical quality and in performance with re-
spect to the main features of primary care practice is a chal-
lenge for primary care practice. Although each of these features is
known to confer benefits on health, the remaining issues require
consideration.
• To what extent can teams of practitioners provide first-contact
care without interfering with the benefits of continuing in-
terpersonal relationships between particular practitioners and
patients?
• Ongoing person-focused care means that care should be focused
on the person rather than on the disease. Can teams of practi-
tioners fulfill this function?
• Comprehensiveness means that all problems in the population
should be cared for in primary care (with short-term referral as
needed), except those that are too unusual (generally a frequency
of less than one or two per thousand in the population served)
for the primary care practitioner or team to treat competently.
How can data systems provide the information needed to decide
when problems are best met in primary care, when they can
be best dealt with in primary care with appropriate specialty
backup, and when patients need to be seen by a specialist?
• Coordination of care means that the primary care practice must
integrate all aspects of care when patients must be seen else-
where. Because 13 to 20 percent (depending on various assump-
tions) of an average practice population requires a referral each
year, this burden is considerable. Very few health systems, even

----- Page 33 (native) -----
Contribution of Primary Care to Health Systems and Health
489
those that rate high on primary care, achieve high coordination
of care, at least as measured by transfer of information from
primary care physicians to specialists and vice versa. Systems
to facilitate coordinating efforts are urgently needed. Lessons
might be gleaned from the experiences of some health systems.
For example, and despite the design limitations (Talbot-Smith
et al. 2004) of the study comparing the Kaiser-Permanente
health care plan in the United States with the National Health
Service in the United Kingdom (Feachem, Sekhri, and White
2002), the lower hospitalization rates and lower resource use
in the United States may well be a result of a system specifi-
cally designed to enhance coordination between primary care
physicians and specialists.
4. The achievement of equity in health services and health is an im-
perative everywhere. Primary care is inherently a more equitable
level of care than other levels of care. It is less costly (hence spar-
ing resources that could be devoted to providing better services to
more disadvantaged populations), and through its key features,
it narrows disparities in health between more and less socially
deprived population groups. The extent to which primary care in
fact does result in more equity depends on the availability of in-
formation about the needs in the various areas in which primary
care practices are located. Better information systems, at both
the area and practice levels, would enhance the already-strong
benefits of primary care to the health of individuals, population
subgroups, and populations (National Committee for Vital and
Health Statistics 2001).
The Relevance of Policy
The relatively poor performance of the United States on major health
indicators, despite per capita health care expenditures that are much
higher than those of any other country, is a pressing concern for policy-
makers, the business community (which has, historically, paid for much
of the health insurance in the country), and, ultimately, taxpayers. Ef-
forts to improve the system to achieve better health at lower cost are
rapidly becoming imperative. Primary care offers an effective and effi-
cient approach to achieve that goal. Evidence of the benefits of a health

----- Page 34 (native) -----
490
B. Starfield, L. Shi, and J. Macinko
system with a strong primary care base is abundant and consistent. These
benefits are not limited to one or only a few aspects of health but, rather,
extend to the major causes of death and disorders as well as to reducing
disparities in health across major population subgroups, including racial
and ethnic minorities as well as socially deprived adults and children.
Federally qualified community health centers (CHCs) currently serve
more than 3,600 urban and rural communities, which are typically low-
income inner-city or resource-poor rural communities. But they serve
only one-quarter of all people living below the poverty level, one in
seven people living under 200 percent of poverty level, and one of eight
uninsured Americans (Proser, Shin, and Hawkins 2005). Expansion of
the CHC network well beyond the current supply is one appropriate
strategy.
Other policy strategies would strengthen primary care on a broader
level (Starfield and Simpson 1993). These include (but are not limited
to) changes in the method of reimbursing primary care physicians and,
particularly, better reimbursement rates for primary care services for both
common conditions and for the important primary care delivery charac-
teristics. Establishing a more rational basis for referrals and improving
the coordination between primary care and specialist physicians would
make primary care practice more challenging and intellectually reward-
ing. States could encourage a better distribution of physicians (both pri-
mary care and specialists) by tailoring their licensing policies to health
needs in different areas or by providing financial incentives for practic-
ing in underserved areas, as is done in some other countries. Incentives
for training primary care practitioners could be improved by reorienting
federal support for graduate medical education toward training primary
care physicians. Similarly, loan forgiveness for primary care practitioners
could be expanded. Reducing the amount of paperwork needed to file
claims and encouraging the creation of electronic medical records would
greatly reduce the tedium of record keeping in practice and, at the same
time, make time to improve the self-monitoring of the quality of care.
Bonus payments for team practice could enhance the comprehensiveness
of primary care. Special recognition of best primary care practices could
enhance public recognition of the importance of primary care and its
characteristics. Finally, offering more funds for research on primary care,
including the support of collaborative practice-based networks (Lanier
2005; Wasserman, Slora, and Bocian 2003), would help meet the intel-
lectual challenges of expanding our knowledge base for the practice of
both primary care and specialty care.

----- Page 35 (native) -----
Contribution of Primary Care to Health Systems and Health
491
References
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. 2004. 2004 National
Healthcare Disparities Report. AHRQ Publication no. 05-0014.
Rockville, Md.
Atun, R. 2004. What Are the Advantages and Disadvantages of Restructuring
a Health Care System to Be More Focused on Primary Care Services?
London: Health Evidence Network.
Baicker, K., and A. Chandra. 2004. Medicare Spending, the Physi-
cian Workforce, and Beneficiaries’ Quality of Care. Health
Affairs W4:184–97 (http://content.healthaffairs.org/cgi/reprint/
hlthaff.w4.184v1.pdf).
Bartter, T., and M.R. Pratter. 1996. Asthma: Better Outcome at Lower
Cost? The Role of the Expert in the Care System. Chest 110:1589–96.
Bertakis, K.D., E.J. Callahan, L.J. Helms, R. Azari, J.A. Robbins, and
J. Miller. 1998. Physician Practice Styles and Patient Outcomes:
Differences between Family Practice and General Internal Medicine.
Medical Care 36:879–91.
Bindman, A.B., K. Grumbach, D. Osmond, K. Vranizan, and A.L.
Stewart. 1996. Primary Care and Receipt of Preventive Services.
Journal of General Internal Medicine 11:269–76.
Breen, N., and L. Kessler. 1994. Changes in the Use of Screening Mam-
mography: Evidence from the 1987 and 1990 National Health In-
terview Surveys. American Journal of Public Health 84:62–7.
Britton, A., M. Shipley, M. Marmot, and H. Hemingway. 2004. Does
Access to Cardiac Investigation and Treatment Contribute to So-
cial and Ethnic Differences in Coronary Heart Disease? White-
hall II Prospective Cohort Study. British Medical Journal 329:318–
23.
Campbell, R.J., A.M. Ramirez, K. Perez, and R.G. Roetzheim. 2003.
Cervical Cancer Rates and the Supply of Primary Care Physicians in
Florida. Family Medicine 35:60–64.
Casanova, C., C. Colomer, and B. Starfield. 1996. Pediatric Hospital-
ization Due to Ambulatory Care-Sensitive Conditions in Valencia
(Spain). International Journal for Quality in Health Care 8:51–9.
Casanova, C., and B. Starfield. 1995. Hospitalizations of Children and
Access to Primary Care: A Cross-National Comparison. International
Journal of Health Services 25:283–94.
Castro-Leal,F.,J.Dayton,L.Demery,andK.Mehra.2000.PublicSpend-
ing on Health Care in Africa: Do the Poor Benefit? Bulletin of the
World Health Organization 78:66–74.
Cooper, R.A., T.E. Getzen, H.J. McKee, and P. Laud. 2002. Economic
and Demographic Trends Signal an Impending Physician Shortage.
Health Affairs 21:140–54.

----- Page 36 (native) -----
492
B. Starfield, L. Shi, and J. Macinko
Davey Smith, G., and J. Lynch. 2004. Commentary: Social Capital, So-
cial Epidemiology and Disease Aetiology. International Journal of
Epidemiology 33:691–700.
Donaldson, M.S., K.D. Yordy, K.N. Lohr, and N.A. Vanselow. 1996.
Primary Care: America’s Health in a New Era. Washington, D.C.:
National Academy Press.
Donohoe, M.T. 1998. Comparing Generalist and Specialty Care: Dis-
crepancies, Deficiencies, and Excesses. Archives of Internal Medicine
158:1596–1608.
Engstrom, S., M. Foldevi, and L. Borgquist. 2001. Is General Practice
Effective? A Systematic Literature Review. Scandinavian Journal of
Primary Health Care 19:131–44.
Feachem, R.G., N.K. Sekhri, and K.L. White. 2002. Getting More for
Their Dollar: A Comparison of the NHS with California’s Kaiser
Permanente. British Medical Journal 324:135–41.
Ferrante,J.M.,E.C.Gonzalez,N.Pal,andR.G.Roetzheim.2000.Effects
of Physician Supply on Early Detection of Breast Cancer. Journal of
the American Board of Family Practice 13:408–14.
Fleming, T.R. 2005. Surrogate Endpoints and FDA’s Accelerated Ap-
proval Process. Health Affairs 24:67–78.
Flocke, S.A., K.C. Stange, and S.J. Zyzanski. 1998. The Association of
Attributes of Primary Care with the Delivery of Clinical Preventive
Services. Medical Care 36:AS21–30.
Forrest, C.B., and B. Starfield. 1996. The Effect of First-Contact Care
with Primary Care Clinicians on Ambulatory Health Care Expendi-
tures. Journal of Family Practice 43:40–48.
Forrest, C.B., and B. Starfield. 1998. Entry into Primary Care and Con-
tinuity: The Effects of Access. American Journal of Public Health
88:1330–36.
Fox, S.A., A.L. Siu, and J.A. Stein. 1994. The Importance of Physi-
cian Communication on Breast Cancer Screening of Older Women.
Archives of Internal Medicine 154:2058–68.
Franks, P., C.M. Clancy, and P.A. Nutting. 1992. Gatekeeping
Revisited—Protecting Patients from Overtreatment. New England
Journal of Medicine 327:424–9.
Franks, P., and K. Fiscella. 1998. Primary Care Physicians and Special-
ists as Personal Physicians. Health Care Expenditures and Mortality
Experience. Journal of Family Practice 47:105–9.
Freeman, G., and P. Hjortdahl. 1997. What Future for Continuity of
Care in General Practice? British Medical Journal 314:1870–73.
Friedman, B., and J. Basu. 2001. Health Insurance, Primary Care, and
Preventable Hospitalization of Children in a Large State. American
Journal of Managed Care 7:473–81.

----- Page 37 (native) -----
Contribution of Primary Care to Health Systems and Health
493
Gadomski, A., P. Jenkins, and M. Nichols. 1998. Impact of a
Medicaid Primary Care Provider and Preventive Care on Pedi-
atric Hospitalization. Pediatrics 101:E1 (http://www.pediatrics.org/
cgi/content/full/101/3/e1).
Graham, H., and M.P. Kelly. 2004. Health Inequalities: Concepts, Frame-
works, and Policy. London: National Health Service/Health Devel-
opment Agency. Available at http://www.publichealth.nice.org.uk/
page.aspx?o=502453 (accessed April 5, 2005).
Greenfield, S., E.C. Nelson, M. Zubkoff, W. Manning, W. Rogers, R.L.
Kravitz, A. Keller, A.R. Tarlov, and J.E. Ware Jr. 1992. Variations in
ResourceUtilizationamongMedicalSpecialtiesandSystemsofCare.
Results from the Medical Outcomes Study. Journal of the American
Medical Association 267:1624–30.
Griffin, S., and A. Kinmonth. 1998. Diabetes Care: The Effectiveness
of Systems for Routine Surveillance for People with Diabetes. Cochrane
Library.
Grumbach, K., J.V. Selby, J.A. Schmittdiel, and C.P. Quesenberry Jr.
1999. Quality of Primary Care Practice in a Large HMO according
to Physician Specialty. Health Services Research 34:485–502.
Gulbrandsen, P., P. Hjortdahl, and P. Fugelli. 1997. General Prac-
titioners’ Knowledge of Their Patients’ Psychosocial Problems:
Multipractice Questionnaire Survey. British Medical Journal 314:
1014–8.
Gulliford, M.C. 2002. Availability of Primary Care Doctors and Popu-
lation Health in England: Is There an Association? Journal of Public
Health Medicine 24:252–4.
Gulliford, M.C., R.H. Jack, G. Adams, and O.C. Ukoumunne. 2004.
Availability and Structure of Primary Medical Care Services and
Population Health and Health Care Indicators in England. BMC
Health Services Research 4:12.
Gwatkin, D.R. 2001. The Need for Equity-Oriented Health Sector Re-
forms. International Journal of Epidemiology 30:720–23.
Haines, M., and R. Avery. 1982. Differential Infant and Child Mortality
in Costa Rica. Population Studies 36:31–43.
Hansell, M.J. 1991. Sociodemographic Factors and the Quality of Pre-
natal Care. American Journal of Public Health 81:1023–8.
Harrold, L.R., T.S. Field, and J.H. Gurwitz. 1999. Knowledge, Patterns
of Care, and Outcomes of Care for Generalists and Specialists. Journal
of General Internal Medicine 14:499–511.
Hashem, A., M.T. Chi, and C.P. Friedman. 2003. Medical Errors as a
Result of Specialization. Journal of Biomedical Informatics 36:61–9.
Health Council of the Netherlands. 2004. European Primary Care. Pub-
lication no. 2004/20E. The Hague.

----- Page 38 (native) -----
494
B. Starfield, L. Shi, and J. Macinko
Hewlett, S., J. Kirwan, J. Pollock, K. Mitchell, M. Hehir, P.S. Blair, D.
Memel, and M.G. Perry. 2005. Patient Initiated Outpatient Follow
up in Rheumatoid Arthritis: Six Year Randomised Controlled Trial.
British Medical Journal 330:171–5.
Hirth, R.A., A.M. Fendrick, and M.E. Chernew. 1996. Specialist and
Generalist Physicians’ Adoption of Antibiotic Therapy to Eradicate
Helicobacter pylori Infection. Medical Care 34:1199–1204.
Hjortdahl, P., and C.F. Borchgrevink. 1991. Continuity of Care: In-
fluence of General Practitioners’ Knowledge about Their Patients
on Use of Resources in Consultations. British Medical Journal
303:1181–4.
Hoffmann, C., R.S. Broyles, and J.E. Tyson. 1997. Emergency Room
Visits Despite the Availability of Primary Care: A Study of High
Risk Inner City Infants. American Journal of Medical Science 313:99–
103.
Hurley, R.E., D.A. Freund, and D.E. Taylor. 1989. Emergency Room
Use and Primary Care Case Management: Evidence from Four Med-
icaid Demonstration Programs. American Journal of Public Health
79:843–6.
Institute of Medicine (IOM). 1978. A Manpower Policy for Primary
Health Care. IOM Publication 78-02. Washington, D.C.: National
Academy of Sciences.
Jarman, B., S. Gault, B. Alves, A. Hider, S. Dolan, A. Cook, B. Hurwitz,
and L.I. Iezzoni. 1999. Explaining Differences in English Hospital
Death Rates Using Routinely Collected Data. British Medical Journal
318:1515–20.
Jones, G., R.W. Steketee, R.E. Black, Z.A. Bhutta, and S.S. Morris.
2003. How Many Child Deaths Can We Prevent This Year? Lancet
362:65–71.
Kaag, M.E., D. Wijkel, and D. de Jong. 1996. Primary Health Care Re-
placing Hospital Care—The Effect on Quality of Care. International
Journal for Quality in Health Care 8:367–73.
Klijzing, F., and H. Taylor. 1982. The Decline of Infant Mortality in
Costa Rica, 1950–73: Modernization or Technological Diffusion?
Malaysian Journal of Tropical Geography 5:22–9.
Kravitz, R.L., N. Duan, and J. Braslow. 2004. Evidence-Based Medicine,
Heterogeneity of Treatment Effects, and the Trouble with Averages.
Milbank Quarterly 82:661–87.
Lamberts, H., M. Wood, and I. Hofmans-Okkes. 1993. The International
Classification of Primary Care in the European Community. Oxford: Ox-
ford University Press.
Lanier, D. 2005. Primary Care Practice-Based Research Comes of Age
in the United States. Annals of Family Medicine 3:S2–4.

----- Page 39 (native) -----
Contribution of Primary Care to Health Systems and Health
495
Larizgoitia, I., and B. Starfield. 1997. Reform of Primary Health Care:
The Case of Spain. Health Policy 41:121–37.
Leggetter, S., N. Chaturvedi, J.H. Fuller, and M.E. Edmonds. 2002.
Ethnicity and Risk of Diabetes-Related Lower Extremity Amputa-
tion: A Population-Based, Case-Control Study of African Caribbeans
and Europeans in the United Kingdom. Archives of Internal Medicine
162:73–8.
Lieu, T.A., P.W. Newacheck, and M.A. McManus. 1993. Race, Ethnicity,
and Access to Ambulatory Care among U.S. Adolescents. American
Journal of Public Health 83:960–5.
Lillie-Blanton, M., and C. Hoffman. 2005. The Role of Health Insurance
Coverage in Reducing Racial/Ethnic Disparities in Health Care.
Health Affairs 24:398–408.
Macinko, J., C. Almeida, and P. Sa. 2005. Evaluating Primary Care
Services in Brazil: A Rapid Appraisal Methodology. Unpublished
manuscript.
Macinko, J., B. Starfield, and L. Shi. 2003. The Contribution of Pri-
mary Care Systems to Health Outcomes within Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) Countries, 1970–
1998. Health Services Research 38:831–65.
Macinko, J., B. Starfield, and L. Shi. 2005. Quantifying the Health
Benefits of Primary Care Physician Supply in the United States.
Unpublished manuscript.
Mainous, A.G. III, and J.M. Gill. 1998. The Importance of Continuity
of Care in the Likelihood of Future Hospitalization: Is Site of Care
Equivalent to a Primary Clinician? American Journal of Public Health
88:1539–41.
Mansfield, C.J., J.L. Wilson, E.J. Kobrinski, and J. Mitchell. 1999.
Premature Mortality in the United States: The Roles of Geographic
Area, Socioeconomic Status, Household Type, and Availability of
Medical Care. American Journal of Public Health 89:893–8.
Mark,D.H.,M.S.Gottlieb,B.B.Zellner,V.K.Chetty,andJ.E.Midtling.
1996. Medicare Costs in Urban Areas and the Supply of Primary Care
Physicians. Journal of Family Practice 43:33–9.
Martin, D.P., P. Diehr, K.F. Price, and W.C. Richardson. 1989. Effect of a
GatekeeperPlanonHealthServicesUseandCharges:ARandomized
Trial. American Journal of Public Health 79:1628–32.
Morales, L.S., M.N. Elliott, R. Weech-Maldonado, K.L. Spritzer, and
R.D. Hays. 2001. Differences in CAHPS Adult Survey Reports and
Ratings by Race and Ethnicity: An Analysis of the National CAHPS
Benchmarking Data 1.0. Health Services Research 36:595–617.
Murray-Garcia, J.L., J.V. Selby, J. Schmittdiel, K. Grumbach, and C.P.
Quesenberry Jr. 2000. Racial and Ethnic Differences in a Patient

----- Page 40 (native) -----
496
B. Starfield, L. Shi, and J. Macinko
Survey: Patients’ Values, Ratings, and Reports Regarding Physician
Primary Care Performance in a Large Health Maintenance Organi-
zation. Medical Care 38:300–10.
National Committee for Vital and Health Statistics. 2001. Information
for Health: A Strategy for Building the National Health Information
Infrastructure. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services.
NCI Breast Cancer Screening Consortium. 1990. Screening Mammogra-
phy: A Missed Clinical Opportunity? Journal of the American Medical
Association 264:54–8.
Newacheck, P.W., D.C. Hughes, and J.J. Stoddard. 1996. Children’s
Access to Primary Care: Differences by Race, Income, and Insurance
Status. Pediatrics 97:26–32.
O’Malley, A.S., C.B. Forrest, R.M. Politzer, J.T. Wulu, and L. Shi. 2005.
Health Center Trends, 1994–2001: What Do They Portend for the
Federal Growth Initiative? Health Affairs 24:465–72.
Or, Z. 2001. Exploring the Effects of Health Care on Mortality across OECD
Countries. Labour Market and Social Policy Occasional Papers no. 46.
Paris: Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD).
2001. Health Data 2001: A Comparative Analysis of 30 Countries.
Paris.
Pan American Health Organization (PAHO). 2005. Regional Core
Health Data. Washington, D.C. Available at http://www.paho.org/
English/SHA/coredata/tabulator/newTabulator.htm (accessed June
8, 2005).
Parchman, M.L., and S.D. Culler. 1994. Primary Care Physicians and
Avoidable Hospitalizations. Journal of Family Practice 39:123–8.
Parchman, M.L., and S.D. Culler. 1999. Preventable Hospitalizations in
Primary Care Shortage Areas. An Analysis of Vulnerable Medicare
Beneficiaries. Archives of Family Medicine 8:487–91.
Parnell, S.J., A.M. Zalin, and C.W. Clarke. 1993. Care of Diabetic Pa-
tients in Hospital Clinics and General Practice Clinics: A Study in
Dudley. British Journal of General Practice 43:65–9; erratum 1993;
43 (369):163.
Perrin, J.M., P. Greenspan, S.R. Bloom, D. Finkelstein, S. Yazdgerdi,
J.M. Leventhal, L. Rodewald, P. Szilagyi, and C.J. Homer. 1996.
Primary Care Involvement among Hospitalized Children. Archives
of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine 150:479–86.
Perry, H., N. Robison, D. Chavez, O. Taja, C. Hilari, D. Shanklin, and
J. Wyon. 1998. The Census-Based, Impact-Oriented Approach: Its
Effectiveness in Promoting Child Health in Bolivia. Health Policy
and Planning 13:140–51.

----- Page 41 (native) -----
Contribution of Primary Care to Health Systems and Health
497
Politzer,R.M.,J.Yoon,L.Shi,R.G.Hughes,J.Regan,andM.H.Gaston.
2001. Inequality in America: The Contribution of Health Centers
in Reducing and Eliminating Disparities in Access to Care. Medical
Care Research and Review 58:234–48.
Proser, M., P. Shin, and D. Hawkins. 2005. A Nation’s Health at Risk III:
Growing Uninsured, Budget Cutbacks Challenge President’s Initiative to
Put a Health Center in Every Poor County. Washington, D.C.: National
Association of Community Health Centers and George Washington
University.
Raddish, M., S.D. Horn, and P.D. Sharkey. 1999. Continuity of Care: Is
It Cost Effective? American Journal of Managed Care 5:727–34.
Regan, J., A.H. Schempf, J. Yoon, and R.M. Politzer. 2003. The Role of
Federally Funded Health Centers in Serving the Rural Population.
Journal of Rural Health 19:117–24.
Reyes, H., R. Perez-Cuevas, J. Salmeron, P. Tome, H. Guiscafre, and
G. Gutierrez. 1997. Infant Mortality Due to Acute Respiratory In-
fections: The Influence of Primary Care Processes. Health Policy and
Planning 12:214–23.
Ricketts, T.C., R. Randolph, H.A. Howard, D. Pathman, and T. Carey.
2001. Hospitalization Rates as Indicators of Access to Primary Care.
Health and Place 7:27–38.
Riveron Corteguera, R. 2000. Estrategias para reducir la mortalidad
infantil. Cuba 1995–1999. Revista Cubana de Pediatria 72:147–64.
Roetzheim, R.G., N. Pal, E.C. Gonzalez, J.M. Ferrante, D.J. Van Durme,
J.Z. Ayanian, and J.P. Krischer. 1999. The Effects of Physician Sup-
ply on the Early Detection of Colorectal Cancer. Journal of Family
Practice 48:850–58.
Roetzheim, R.G., N. Pal, D.J. Van Durme, D. Wathington, J.M.
Ferrante, E.C. Gonzalez, and J.P. Krischer. 2000. Increasing Sup-
plies of Dermatologists and Family Physicians Are Associated with
Earlier Stage of Melanoma Detection. Journal of the American Academy
of Dermatology 43:211–8.
Roos, N.P. 1979. Who Should Do the Surgery? Tonsillectomy-
Adenoidectomy in One Canadian Province. Inquiry 16:73–83.
Roos, N.P., K.C. Carriere, and D. Friesen. 1998. Factors Influencing the
Frequency of Visits by Hypertensive Patients to Primary Care Physi-
cians in Winnipeg. Canadian Medical Association Journal 159:777–
83.
Rosenblatt, R.A., G.E. Wright, L.M. Baldwin, L. Chan, P. Clitherow,
F.M. Chen, and L.G. Hart. 2000. The Effect of the Doctor-Patient
Relationship on Emergency Department Use among the Elderly.
American Journal of Public Health 90:97–102.
Rosero-Bixby, L. 1986. Infant Mortality in Costa Rica: Explaining the
Recent Decline. Studies in Family Planning 17:57–65.

----- Page 42 (native) -----
498
B. Starfield, L. Shi, and J. Macinko
Rosero-Bixby, L. 2004a. Evaluaci´on del impacto de la reforma del sector
de la salud en Costa Rica mediante un estudio cuasiexperimental.
Revista Panamamericana de Salud Publica 15:94–103.
Rosero-Bixby, L. 2004b. Spatial Access to Health Care in Costa Rica and
Its Equity: A GIS-Based Study. Social Science and Medicine 58:1271–
84.
Rosser, W.W. 1996. Approach to Diagnosis by Primary Care Clini-
cians and Specialists: Is There a Difference? Journal of Family Practice
42:139–44.
Rothwell, P.M. 2005. Treating Individuals 2. Subgroup Analysis in Ran-
domised Controlled Trials: Importance, Indications, and Interpre-
tation. Lancet 365:176–86.
Ryan, S., A. Riley, M. Kang, and B. Starfield. 2001. The Effects of Regu-
lar Source of Care and Health Need on Medical Care Use among Ru-
ral Adolescents. Archives of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine 155:184–
90.
Sachs, J.D., and J.W. McArthur. 2005. The Millennium Project: A Plan
for Meeting the Millennium Development Goals. Lancet 365:347–
53.
Saver, B. 2002. Financing and Organization Findings Brief. Academy for
Research and Health Care Policy 5:1–2.
Schappert, S.M. 1994. National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey 1991.
Vital and Health Statistics 13:1–110.
Schoen, C., R. Osborn, P.T. Huynh, M. Doty, K. Davis, K. Zapert,
and J. Peugh. 2004. Primary Care and Health System Performance:
Adults’ Experiences in Five Countries. Health Affairs W4:487–
503.
Schreiber, S., and T. Zielinski. 1997. The Meaning of Ambulatory Care
Sensitive Admissions: Urban and Rural Perspectives. Journal of Rural
Health 13:276–84.
Seid, M., G.D. Stevens, and J.W. Varni. 2003. Parents’ Perceptions of
PediatricPrimaryCareQuality:EffectsofRace/Ethnicity,Language,
and Access. Health Services Research 38:1009–31.
Shea, S., D. Misra, M.H. Ehrlich, L. Field, and C.K. Francis. 1992.
Predisposing Factors for Severe, Uncontrolled Hypertension in an
Inner-City Minority Population. New England Journal of Medicine
327:776–81.
Shi, L. 1992. The Relationship between Primary Care and Life Chances.
Journal of Health Care for the Poor and Underserved 3:321–35.
Shi,L.1994.PrimaryCare,SpecialtyCare,andLifeChances.International
Journal of Health Services 24:431–58.
Shi, L. 1999. Experience of Primary Care by Racial and Ethnic Groups
in the United States. Medical Care 37:1068–77.

----- Page 43 (native) -----
Contribution of Primary Care to Health Systems and Health
499
Shi, L., J. Macinko, B. Starfield, R. Politzer, J. Wulu, and J. Xu. 2005a.
Primary Care, Social Inequalities, and All-Cause, Heart Disease, and
Cancer Mortality in U.S. Counties, 1990. American Journal of Public
Health 95:674–80.
Shi, L., J. Macinko, B. Starfield, R. Politzer, J. Wulu, and J. Xu. 2005b.
Primary Care, Social Inequalities, and All-Cause, Heart Disease,
and Cancer Mortality in U.S. Counties: A Comparison of Urban and
Rural Areas. Public Health 119:699–710.
Shi, L., J. Macinko, B. Starfield, R. Politzer, and J. Xu. 2005c. Primary
Care, Race, and Mortality in U.S. States. Social Science and Medicine
61:65–75.
Shi, L., J. Macinko, B. Starfield, J. Wulu, J. Regan, and R. Politzer.
2003a. The Relationship between Primary Care, Income Inequal-
ity, and Mortality in the United States, 1980–1995. Journal of the
American Board of Family Practice 16:412–22.
Shi, L., J. Macinko, B. Starfield, J. Xu, and R. Politzer. 2003b. Primary
Care, Income Inequality, and Stroke Mortality in the United States.
A Longitudinal Analysis, 1985–1995. Stroke 34:1958–64.
Shi,L.,J.Macinko,B.Starfield,J.Xu,J.Regan,R.Politzer,andJ.Wulu.
2004. Primary Care, Infant Mortality, and Low Birth Weight in the
States of the USA. Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health
58:374–80.
Shi, L., and B. Starfield. 2000. Primary Care, Income Inequality, and
Self-Rated Health in the United States: A Mixed-Level Analysis.
International Journal of Health Services 30:541–55.
Shi, L., and B. Starfield. 2001. The Effect of Primary Care Physician Sup-
ply and Income Inequality on Mortality among Blacks and Whites in
U.S. Metropolitan Areas. American Journal of Public Health 91:1246–
50.
Shi, L., B. Starfield, B.P. Kennedy, and I. Kawachi. 1999. Income In-
equality, Primary Care, and Health Indicators. Journal of Family
Practice 48:275–84.
Shi, L., B. Starfield, R. Politzer, and J. Regan. 2002. Primary Care,
Self-Rated Health, and Reductions in Social Disparities in Health.
Health Services Research 37:529–50.
Shi, L., B. Starfield, and J. Xu. 2001. Validating the Adult Primary
Care Assessment Tool. Journal of Family Practice 50:161W–175W
(http://jfponline.com/content/2001/02/jfp 0201 01610.asp).
Sox, H.C. 1996. Decision-Making: A Comparison of Referral Practice
and Primary Care. Journal of Family Practice 42:155–60.
Starfield, B. 1991. Primary Care and Health. A Cross-National Com-
parison. Journal of the American Medical Association 266:2268–71.
Starfield, B. 1994. Is Primary Care Essential? Lancet 344:1129–33.

----- Page 44 (native) -----
500
B. Starfield, L. Shi, and J. Macinko
Starfield, B. 1998. Primary Care: Balancing Health Needs, Services, and
Technology. New York: Oxford University Press.
Starfield, B. 2001. New Paradigms for Quality in Primary Care. British
Journal of General Practice 51:303–9.
Starfield, B., C. Cassady, J. Nanda, C.B. Forrest, and R. Berk. 1998.
Consumer Experiences and Provider Perceptions of the Quality of
Primary Care: Implications for Managed Care. Journal of Family Prac-
tice 46:216–26.
Starfield, B., C.B. Forrest, P.A. Nutting, and S. von Schrader. 2002.
Variability in Physician Referral Decisions. Journal of the American
Board of Family Practice 15:473–80.
Starfield, B., K.W. Lemke, T. Bernhardt, S.S. Foldes, C.B. Forrest, and
J.P. Weiner. 2003. Comorbidity: Implications for the Importance
of Primary Care in “Case” Management. Annals of Family Medicine
1:8–14.
Starfield, B., K.W. Lemke, R. Herbert, W.D. Pavlovich, and G.
Anderson. 2005a. Comorbidity and the Use of Primary Care and
Specialist Care in the Elderly. Annals of Family Medicine, in press.
Starfield, B., and L. Shi. 2002. Policy Relevant Determinants of Health:
An International Perspective. Health Policy 60:201–18.
Starfield, B., and L. Shi. 2004. The Medical Home, Access to Care, and
Insurance: A Review of Evidence. Pediatrics 113:1493–8.
Starfield, B., L. Shi, A. Grover, and J. Macinko. 2005b. The Role of
Evidence in Physician Workforce Policy. Health Affairs W5:97–107
(http://content.healthaffairs.org/cgi/reprint/hlthaff.w5.97v1).
Starfield, B., and L. Simpson. 1993. Primary Care as Part of U.S.
Health Services Reform. Journal of the American Medical Association
269:3136–9.
Stevens, G.D., and L. Shi. 2002. Racial and Ethnic Disparities in the
Quality of Primary Care for Children. Journal of Family Practice
51:573.
Stevens, G.D., and L. Shi. 2003. Racial and Ethnic Disparities in the
Primary Care Experiences of Children: A Review of the Literature.
Medical Care Research and Review 60:3–30.
Stevens, R. 1971. American Medicine and the Public Interest. New Haven,
Conn.: Yale University Press.
Taira, D.A., D.G. Safran, T.B. Seto, W.H. Rogers, M. Kosinski, J.E.
Ware, N. Lieberman, and A.R. Tarlov. 1997. Asian-American Pa-
tient Ratings of Physician Primary Care Performance. Journal of
General Internal Medicine 12:237–42.
Talbot-Smith, A., S. Gnani, A.M. Pollock, and D.P. Gray. 2004. Ques-
tioning the Claims from Kaiser. British Journal of General Practice
54:415–21.

----- Page 45 (native) -----
Contribution of Primary Care to Health Systems and Health
501
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2000. Healthy People
2010. 2nd ed., with Understanding and Improving Health and Objectives
for Improving Health. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing
Office.
van den Akker, M., F. Buntinx, J.F. Metsemakers, S. Roos, and J.A.
Knottnerus. 1998. Multimorbidity in General Practice: Prevalence,
Incidence,andDeterminantsofCo-occurringChronicandRecurrent
Diseases. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology 51:367–75.
van Doorslaer, E., X. Koolman, and A.M. Jones. 2004. Explaining
Income-Related Inequalities in Doctor Utilisation in Europe. Health
Economics 13:629–47.
Villalbi, J.R., A. Guarga, M.I. Pasarin, M. Gil, C. Borrell, M. Ferran,
and E. Cirera. 1999. An Evaluation of the Impact of Primary Care
Reform on Health. Atenci´on Primaria 24:468–74.
Vogel, R.L., and R.J. Ackermann. 1998. Is Primary Care Physician Sup-
ply Correlated with Health Outcomes? International Journal of Health
Services 28:183–96.
Waitzkin, H., K. Wald, R. Kee, R. Danielson, and L. Robinson. 1997.
Primary Care in Cuba: Low- and High-Technology Developments
Pertinent to Family Medicine. Journal of Family Practice 45:250–58.
Wasserman,R.,E.Slora,andA.Bocian.2003.CurrentStatusofPediatric
Practice-Based Research Networks. Current Problems in Pediatric and
Adolescent Health Care 33:115–23.
Weinberger, M., E.Z. Oddone, and W.G. Henderson. 1996. Does In-
creased Access to Primary Care Reduce Hospital Readmissions? Vet-
eransAffairsCooperativeStudyGrouponPrimaryCareandHospital
Readmission. New England Journal of Medicine 334:1441–7.
Weiner, J.P. 2004. Prepaid Group Practice Staffing and U.S. Physician
Supply: Lessons for Workforce Policy. Health Affairs (suppl.) Web
Exclusives:W4–59.
Weiner, J.P., L.E. Kassel, T.D. Baker, and B.H. Lane. 1982. Baltimore
City Primary Care Study: The Role of the Office-Based Physician.
Maryland State Medical Journal 31:48–52.
Weiner, J.P., and B. Starfield. 1983. Measurement of the Primary Care
Roles of Office-Based Physicians. American Journal of Public Health
73:666–71.
Weinick, R.M., and N.A. Krauss. 2000. Racial/Ethnic Differences in
Children’s Access to Care. American Journal of Public Health 90:
1771–4.
Weiss, L.J., and J. Blustein. 1996. Faithful Patients: The Effect of
Long-Term Physician-Patient Relationships on the Costs and Use of
Health Care by Older Americans. American Journal of Public Health
86:1742–7.

----- Page 46 (native) -----
502
B. Starfield, L. Shi, and J. Macinko
Weitzman, M., R.S. Byrd, and P. Auinger. 1999. Black and White
Middle Class Children Who Have Private Health Insurance in the
United States. Pediatrics 104:151–7.
Welch, W.P., M.E. Miller, H.G. Welch, E.S. Fisher, and J.E. Wennberg.
1993. Geographic Variation in Expenditures for Physicians’ Services
in the United States. New England Journal of Medicine 328:621–7.
Whittle, J., C.J. Lin, J.R. Lave, M.J. Fine, K.M. Delaney, D.Z.
Joyce, W.W. Young, and W.N. Kapoor. 1998. Relationship of
Provider Characteristics to Outcomes, Process, and Costs of Care
for Community-Acquired Pneumonia. Medical Care 36:977–87.
World Health Organization. 1978. Declaration of Alma-Ata: Inter-
national Conference on Primary Health Care, Alma-Ata, USSR, 6–
12 September 1978. Geneva. Available at http://www.who.int/hpr/
NPH/docs/declaration almaata.pdf (accessed December 30, 2004).
World Health Organization. 2003. A Global Review of Primary Health
Care: Emerging Messages. Geneva.
World Organization of National Colleges, Academies and Academic
Association of General Practitioners/Family Physicians (WONCA).
1991. The Role of the General Practitioner/Family Physician in Health
Care Systems. Victoria.
Acknowledgments: This work was funded in part by the Bureau of Health Profes-
sions, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. The authors gratefully
acknowledge the advice of Dr. Neil Holtzman in writing this article.