

----- Page 1 (native) -----
A movement ecology paradigm for unifying organismal
movement research
Ran Nathana,1, Wayne M. Getzb, Eloy Revillac, Marcel Holyoakd, Ronen Kadmona, David Saltze, and Peter E. Smousef
aMovement Ecology Laboratory, Department of Evolution, Systematics and Ecology, Alexander Silberman Institute of Life Sciences, The
Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem 91904, Israel; bDepartment of Environmental Science, Policy and Management, University
of California, Berkeley, CA 94720; cDepartment of Conservation Biology, Estacio´ n Biolo´ gica de Don˜ ana, Spanish Council for Scientiﬁc
Research CSIC, E-41013 Seville, Spain; dDepartment of Environmental Science and Policy, University of California, Davis, CA 95616;
eMitrani Department of Desert Ecology, Jacob Blaustein Institutes for Desert Research, Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Sede Boqer
Campus, 84990 Israel; and fDepartment of Ecology, Evolution and Natural Resources, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ 08901
Edited by James H. Brown, University of New Mexico, Albequerque, NM, and approved June 25, 2008 (received for review March 13, 2008)
Movement of individual organisms is fundamental to life, quilting our planet in a rich tapestry of phenomena with diverse implica-
tions for ecosystems and humans. Movement research is both plentiful and insightful, and recent methodological advances facilitate
obtaining a detailed view of individual movement. Yet, we lack a general unifying paradigm, derived from ﬁrst principles, which can
place movement studies within a common context and advance the development of a mature scientiﬁc discipline. This introductory
article to the Movement Ecology Special Feature proposes a paradigm that integrates conceptual, theoretical, methodological, and
empirical frameworks for studying movement of all organisms, from microbes to trees to elephants. We introduce a conceptual
framework depicting the interplay among four basic mechanistic components of organismal movement: the internal state (why
move?), motion (how to move?), and navigation (when and where to move?) capacities of the individual and the external factors
affecting movement. We demonstrate how the proposed framework aids the study of various taxa and movement types; promotes
the formulation of hypotheses about movement; and complements existing biomechanical, cognitive, random, and optimality para-
digms of movement. The proposed framework integrates eclectic research on movement into a structured paradigm and aims at pro-
viding a basis for hypothesis generation and a vehicle facilitating the understanding of the causes, mechanisms, and spatiotemporal
patterns of movement and their role in various ecological and evolutionary processes.
’’Now we must consider in general the common reason for moving with any movement whatever.‘‘ (Aristotle, De Motu Animalium,
4th century B.C.)
motion capacity  navigation capacity  migration  dispersal  foraging
M
ovement of an organism,
defined as a change in the
spatial location of the
whole individual in time, is
a fundamental characteristic of life,
driven by processes that act across mul-
tiple spatial and temporal scales. It plays
a major role in determining the fate of
individuals; the structure and dynamics
of populations, communities, and eco-
systems; and the evolution and diversity
of life (1–14). Anthropogenic habitat
fragmentation, changes in land-use pat-
tern and climate, and introduction of
exotic species further highlight causal
links in both directions between organis-
mal movement and environmental
change. A more cohesive understanding
of the causes, patterns, mechanisms, and
consequences of organismal movement
is central to managing and restoring de-
graded landscapes and to controlling the
spread of pests, invasive alien species,
allergens, toxins, and infectious diseases.
Movement mechanisms are diverse
among life forms: microorganisms,
plants, and animals move in a variety of
ways, either actively or passively, locally
or in transit to new areas. Movement
research is extensive (15) but adheres to
an idiosyncratic classification of differ-
ent modes that conflate pattern and
process and cause and effect. The same
movement may be classified as foraging,
within-patch movement, or station-keep-
ing, depending on whether it is defined
in terms of a goal, the landscape, or
temporal dynamics. ‘‘Migration’’ has
been applied to nearly all possible
movement types, including the spread of
plants, vertical movement of zooplank-
ton, and seasonal excursions of birds
and butterflies. Terms such as dispersal,
wandering, ranging, and nomadism have
been used to describe apparently distinct
movement modes (5). This idiosyncratic
classification is exacerbated by separa-
tion of movement studies for different
taxonomic groups, geographical regions,
and research approaches into nonover-
lapping literatures. More worrisome is
that we still lack a general framework
for studying why, how, where, and when
organisms move.
This Special Feature proposes a uni-
fying paradigm termed movement ecol-
ogy for studying movements of organ-
isms of all kinds. We introduce a
conceptual framework of organismal
movement derived from first principles,
which links theoretical and empirical
movement studies. By virtue of its gen-
eral mechanistic basis and focus on
movement itself, the proposed para-
digm is intended to stimulate the de-
velopment of new methods and to pro-
mote understanding of the causes,
consequences, underlying mechanisms,
and emergent spatiotemporal patterns
of all movement phenomena.
Here, we first highlight recent quanti-
tative and analytical advances and iden-
tify key challenges for movement re-
search. We then present our framework
and illustrate how it can be used to for-
mulate hypotheses about movement. We
also contrast the proposed scheme with
earlier efforts to unify organismal move-
ments and with existing research para-
digms in related scientific disciplines.
Recent Advances and Key Challenges in
Quantifying and Analyzing Movement
Recent advances in movement research
mark a shift from the Eulerian ap-
proach, which quantifies population re-
distribution (7), to the Lagrangian ap-
Author contributions: R.N. designed research; R.N., W.M.G.,
E.R., M.H., R.K., D.S., and P.E.S. performed research; R.N.,
W.M.G., E.R., M.H., R.K., D.S., and P.E.S. contributed new
reagents/analytic tools; R.N. analyzed data; and R.N.,
W.M.G., and E.R. and M.H. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
1To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail:
rnathan@cc.huji.ac.il.
This article contains supporting information online at www.
pnas.org/cgi/content/full/0800375105/DCSupplemental.
© 2008 by The National Academy of Sciences of the USA
19052–19059 
PNAS 
December 9, 2008 
vol. 105 
no. 49
www.pnas.orgcgidoi10.1073pnas.0800375105

----- Page 2 (native) -----
proach, which quantifies movement of
individuals (7) and has long been ap-
plied to study the movement of self-pro-
pelled microorganisms (2, 16). The Eu-
lerian approach, however, remains the
major and often the only practical way
to study the externally vectored trans-
port of microorganisms, airborne in-
sects, and seeds. Progress in applying
the Lagrangian approach to larger or-
ganisms relies on quantifying movement
paths with sufficiently high spatiotempo-
ral resolution and over sufficiently large
spatiotemporal scales. Inherent tradeoffs
between size and performance (spatial
accuracy, temporal recording frequency,
and battery life) of telemetry tags im-
pose limits on the body size of wild-
ranging organisms that can be tracked
for extensive time periods. Recent tech-
nological advances encompassing nu-
merous techniques, such miniaturized
radio transmitters, global positioning
systems, cellular and satellite networks,
acoustic transmitters, and light-level
geolocators are reducing these limits
(17–19). This growing capacity to collect
high-resolution spatiotemporal move-
ment data requires revolutionary im-
provements in data management, pro-
cessing, and analytical techniques, at
least as challenging as the bioinformat-
ics revolution of genomics and proteom-
ics (20). Rapidly increasing computa-
tional power is driving a parallel
ecoinformatics revolution to the point
where computations not possible a de-
cade ago can now be undertaken on
networked desktop computers. Internet
networking allows easy access to large
ecological and geographic databases,
including movement databases (e.g.,
www.movebank.org). The enhanced
computational capacity has also fueled
the development of new analytical tools,
including Lagrangian simulations of
wind-dispersed seeds (21), and state-
space models of individual animal move-
ment (22) that represent a quantum leap
beyond those used a decade ago (7).
These technological advances improve
our ability to address four fundamental
questions about organismal movement:
(i) why move? (ii) how to move? (iii)
when and where to move? and (iv) what
are the ecological and evolutionary con-
sequences of movement? A central chal-
lenge in addressing these questions is to
elucidate the proximate and ultimate
(evolutionary) causes responsible for the
observed movement paths. Before intro-
ducing a conceptual framework con-
structed to address these questions, we
highlight four major data analysis
challenges.
First, because of its inherent depen-
dency on the sampling protocol and fre-
quency, parsing the movement path into
a string of elemental units is a major
challenge. Fortunately, improved track-
ing technology promises to do for move-
ment ecology what genetic sequencing
did for molecular genetics: to provide an
elemental view of a movement track, in
the same way that a nucleotide sequence
provides an elemental view of a DNA
string. The scientific revolution potenti-
ated by genome sequencing can be com-
pared with insights about movement
drawn from mapping every step and
stop of an individual during its lifetime
track from birth to death (Fig. 1). Prac-
tically and typically, movement data de-
scribe movement paths, each composed
of a temporal sequence of recorded lo-
cations for an individual (Fig. 1). In the
same way that the 3D structure of DNA
strings is central to the function of a
DNA segment, the structure of a move-
ment path is a reflection of the basic
processes that produced it.
Second, path segments need to be
classified in terms of the basic func-
tional units of the lifetime track. Para-
phrasing our DNA metaphor, identify-
ing a nucleotide sequence that
constitutes a functionally relevant DNA
segment is analogous to identifying a
movement phase during which a particu-
lar set of goals is fulfilled (Fig. 1). At-
tempts to understand movement without
being able to identify movement phases
within observed movement paths are
analogous to attempts to understand the
meaning of the DNA sequence without
being able to detect genes. The move-
ment phase is thus a central concept in
our proposed movement ecology para-
digm (Fig. 1), linking the traditional
phenomenological emphasis on move-
ment path analysis (15) to the proposed
mechanistic, process-based, movement
ecology approach. The deconstruction
of a movement path into a sequence of
movement phases depends on the tem-
poral resolution of the data. Because
phases with duration shorter than the
inverse of the sampling frequency are
obscured, the set of movement phases
used to parse the structure of a particu-
lar path must be compatible with the
sampling frequency used to generate
that path (23). Given movement data
sampled with a sufficient resolution, the
greatest challenge is to identify the
proximate and ultimate drivers that
break up the path into different move-
ment phases. Potential solutions for
this challenge used by Special Feature
contributions are highlighted below
(see Applying the Movement Ecology
Approach).
Third, a major challenge is to assess
how processes operating at multiple spa-
tiotemporal scales determine the com-
position of movement phases and their
frequency in an individual’s lifetime
track. Movement phases are made up of
smaller units that we call canonical ac-
tivity modes (23), such as runs and tum-
bles in bacteria (16) and standing, walk-
ing, running, and gliding in larger
animals, much as genes coding for pro-
teins are composed of a limited number
Increasing spatiotemporal scale
Lifetime
track
C
Movement
steps
A
Movement
phases
B
searching
for food
escaping a 
predator
death
birth
ti
ti+2 to ti+5
ti+8
Fig. 1.
Fundamental spatiotemporal scaling of movement of an individual organism. A short movement
path representing ﬁve steps and one stop (A); a longer path representing three movement phases (B); a
lifetime track (C). The concept of movement phase, as deﬁned here, provides the essential link between
movement patterns and their underlying processes. Glossary: Movement, a change in the spatial location
of the whole individual over time; Movement step (or simply ‘‘step’’), a displacement between two
successive positional records of the organism; Movement phase, a sequence of steps and stops associated
with the fulﬁllment of a particular goal or a set of goals; Goal, a proximate cause of movement, combining
ultimate internal drivers (e.g., to gain energy, seek safety, learn, or reproduce) and external stimuli;
Lifetime track, the complete sequence of steps and stops of an individual from birth to death; Movement
path, a general term for a sequential collection of steps and stops, applied ﬂexibly to various step/stop
deﬁnitions and overall length or duration.
Nathan et al.
PNAS 
December 9, 2008 
vol. 105 
no. 49 
19053
SPECIAL FEATURE: PERSPECTIVE

----- Page 3 (native) -----
of trinucleotide codons. Lifetime tracks
may consist of movement phases of dif-
ferent frequencies, which might form
higher-level cassettes that can be identi-
fied as movement phenomena, which
are perhaps analogous to supergenes or
even entire chromosomes. For example,
a newly hatched Danish bird initially
pursues food (foraging) and experience
(learning excursions) within its natal
habitat, departs to wintering grounds in
Ghana (seasonal migration), pursues
food (foraging) and further experience
(learning excursions), and later returns
(seasonal migration) to establish a
breeding territory in Sweden (dispersal).
Comprehending the functional hierarchy
underlying a lifetime track necessitates
investigation of movement mechanisms
and patterns across multiple spatiotem-
poral scales (24, 25).
Fourth, movement data must be
placed into its proper environmental
context. The spatiotemporal distribution
of environmental signals (e.g., odor)
affecting moving individuals can be
quantified in fine detail across the life-
time activity zone of microorganisms
(26). Yet, it is rarely possible to map the
environmental features of an equiva-
lently sized activity zone for larger free-
ranging organisms. This challenge can
be addressed under special circum-
stances, for instance by recording abun-
dance of trees and browsing marks along
elk footprints in snow (24). At larger
spatial scales, GIS can create ecologi-
cally and environmentally detailed land-
scape representations from remotely
sensed data and merge these with data
collected by other means at scales rang-
ing from meters to hundreds of kilome-
ters (e.g., ref. 27) to the whole globe.
Models of oceanic or atmospheric dy-
namics can be used to relate, for exam-
ple, flight trajectories of seeds (21) and
vultures (28) to atmospheric conditions,
although efforts are still needed to
match the spatial and temporal scales by
which flying organisms sense, and re-
spond to, the environmental conditions
they encounter en route (29).
Conceptual Framework for Movement
Ecology
A coherent framework for movement
ecology should be conceptualized from
the standpoint of movement itself. It
should allow us to explore the causes,
mechanisms, and patterns of movement,
and should facilitate the understanding
of the consequences of movement for
the ecology and evolution of individuals,
populations, and communities. Given
data of sufficient spatiotemporal resolu-
tion, the framework should facilitate
identifying the fundamental mechanisms
producing the movement path, encom-
passing the entire range of scales from a
single step and stop through movement
phases to the lifetime track (Fig. 1). We
thus characterize a focal individual using
three components: an internal state, a
motion capacity, and a navigation capac-
ity. A fourth component, external fac-
tors, represents all aspects of the abiotic
and biotic environment influencing
movement (Fig. 2). Consequently, move-
ment paths result from dynamic inter-
play of the four basic components, al-
though, as illustrated below (this
section), for particular movement types,
not all are necessary.
The internal state accounts for the
physiological and, where appropriate,
the psychological state of the focal indi-
vidual, driving the organism to fulfill
one or more goals; hence, it addresses
the question ‘‘why move?’’ It spans both
proximate and ultimate evolutionary
payoffs from moving, which might be
difficult to tell apart. Yet, some specific
activities like searching for food, escap-
ing predation, following adults, or
searching for a mate might indicate the
proximate payoffs and, in turn, might
suggest general (ultimate) goals of gain-
ing energy, seeking safety, learning, and
reproducing. The relative importance of
different goals is expected to vary over
an organism’s lifetime and over much
shorter periods, and an organism may
pursue several goals simultaneously.
Thus, the internal state consists of a
multidimensional vector of many states.
An individual’s motion capacity ac-
counts for its ability to move in various
ways or modes, reflecting its abilities to
perform self-propelled (motile) locomo-
tion or externally vectored transport.
The motion capacity stems from biome-
chanical properties enabling birds to fly,
gazelles to run, fish to swim, spiders to
balloon, bacteria to glide over solid sur-
faces, maple samaras to ride on air ed-
dies, and coconuts to float on ocean
currents. The organism may employ sev-
eral operational modes; for example,
many birds fly, walk, and swim. In gen-
eral, the set of motion machineries is
fixed throughout the individual’s move-
ment path of plant seeds and other
Movement
path
U
Motion
capacity
Ω
How  to move?
Navigation
capacity
Φ
Where to move?
Internal 
state
W
Why move?
External
factors
R
The focal individual
The environment
fN (navigation process)
fM (motion process)
fU (movement propagation process)
fW (internal state dynamics)
fR (external factors dynamics)
Fig. 2.
A general conceptual framework for movement ecology, composed of three basic components
(yellow background) related to the focal individual (internal state, motion capacity, and navigation
capacity) and a fourth basic component (turquoise background) referring to external factors affecting its
movement. Relationships among components related to the processes by which they affect each other,
with arrows indicating the direction of impact. The resulting movement path (deﬁned in Fig. 1) feeds back
to the internal and external components. Glossary: Internal state, the multidimensional state (e.g.,
physiological and neurological) of the focal individual that affects its motivation and readiness to move;
Motion capacity, the set of traits (e.g., biomechanical or morphological machineries) that enables the focal
individual to execute or facilitate movement; Navigation capacity, the set of traits (e.g., cognitive or
sensory machineries to obtain and use information) that enables the focal individual to orient its
movement in space and/or time; External factors, the set of biotic and abiotic environmental factors that
affect the movement of the focal individual; Motion process, the realized motion capacity given the
impact of the current location, internal state, and external factors on the fundamental motion capacity
of the focal individual; Navigation process, the realized navigation capacity given the impact of the
current location, internal state, and external factors on the fundamental navigation capacity of the focal
individual; Movement propagation process, the realized movement produced by the motion process and
(optionally affected by the navigation process).
19054 
www.pnas.orgcgidoi10.1073pnas.0800375105
Nathan et al.

----- Page 4 (native) -----
passively transported organisms but
can vary in motile organisms. These
changes reflect both changes in an in-
dividual’s internal state and/or the ex-
ternal factors.
Many organisms obtain, process, and
use external information. The navigation
capacity (‘‘when and where to move?’’)
accounts for the ability to orient in
space and/or time, selecting where (di-
rection and position) and/or when (initi-
ation and cessation) to move. Movement
goals are often associated with targets,
defined as where and when the individ-
ual can pursue its goal (e.g., the location
of a given food item, safe haven, play-
ground, or mate). The goal may be to
move away from a threat, chemical re-
pellants, or place of competition, rather
than toward a specific attractant. Navi-
gation in space and time requires an
ability to sense and respond to informa-
tion about the spatiotemporal structure
and dynamics of the environment, often
including other individuals. Information
covers direct and indirect cues, memory
of previous experiences, and even genet-
ically coded ‘‘memory.’’ Juvenile bristle-
thighed curlews, for example, navigate a
nonstop 4,000-km route from Alaska to
the small island of Laysan in the Pacific
with no prior experience or guidance by
adults (30). Equivalently, the seed ab-
scission traits of plants synchronize seed
release with conditions favorable for
long-distance dispersal (21). Naviga-
tional information can be goal- and/or
sensory-system-specific. Flying swans,
for example, use visual cues to detect a
lake, kilometers away, but use tactile
cues to detect tubers in the mud, milli-
meters away (31).
Our proposed conceptual framework
(Fig. 2) explicitly integrates the basic
components and processes involved in
the movement of individual organisms.
Five basic questions illustrate its mecha-
nistic approach to understanding move-
ment. First, what motivates this move-
ment; what are the internal goals?
Second, how is this movement per-
formed (motion capacity)? Third, when
and toward what target is this move-
ment performed (navigation capacity)?
Fourth, which external factors affect this
movement and how? Fifth, how do all
four components interact to produce
this movement? By answering these
questions, we strive to identify the key
life history traits, behaviors, and exter-
nal factors determining movement,
keeping in mind that some traits may be
important for more than one function. It
is also important to realize that both the
ecological and evolutionary causes and
consequences of movement contribute
to the generation of movement paths.
Thus, instead of focusing on the short-
term response of the organism to its
current internal state and the contempo-
rary environment, one can extend the
proposed framework to address ques-
tions on the causes and consequences of
movement. Questions on the evolution-
ary history of movement can be ad-
dressed, for example, by characterizing
the motion and navigation capacities
expected to evolve under particular
combinations of internal states and ex-
ternal forces. Questions on the fitness
consequences of movement can be ad-
dressed by incorporating a response to
anticipated changes in the internal state
and/or the environment and by consid-
ering long-term payoffs of particular
movements.
We can model the movement of an
organism from its current location ut to
a potentially new position ut  1 (mea-
sured one time unit later), as a function
of its current location ut, internal state
wt, motion capacity , navigation capac-
ity , and their interactions with the
current environmental factors rt. This
implies a general relationship
ut1  F,,rt,wt,ut.
[1]
Note this formulation permits both steps
(ut  1  ut) and stops (ut  1  ut) (Fig.
1). Insight, however, comes from being
as specific as possible about the struc-
ture of F, without sacrificing framework
generality. Using the notation fM, fN,
and fU to represent actions of the mo-
tion, navigation, and movement progres-
sion processes, respectively, we posit two
alternative structural representations,
the motion-driven case
ut1  fUfM,fN,rt,wt,ut,rt,wt,ut,
[2]
and the navigation-driven case
ut1  fUfN,fM,rt,wt,ut,rt,wt,ut.
[3]
In the motion-driven case, the naviga-
tion process can be viewed as creating a
map of probabilities for the locations to
which the individual can potentially
move at time t  1. The motion process
weights these probabilities, thereby al-
tering their relative values. Thus, the
motion process depends on how the cur-
rent position ut, internal state wt and
environmental conditions rt interact
with navigation options and motion ca-
pacity  to produce motion. The navi-
gation options depend on how wt, rt (po-
tentially different sets of factors than
those affecting the motion process) and
ut interact with the basic navigation ca-
pacity  to enable navigation. The mo-
tion-driven case differs from the naviga-
tion-driven case in the sequence by
which the probability map is generated
and updated. In the navigation-driven
case, the motion process depends on
how wt, rt, and ut interact with  to
produce motion, and the navigation pro-
cess depends on how wt, rt, and ut inter-
act with the motion process and  to
enable navigation (23). Indeed, some
organisms may alternate between the
two types of movement; yet, in both
cases, the movement progression pro-
cess fU evaluates the weighted proba-
bilities presented by the potential
movement map, thereby determining
the next location.
In the simplest case of movement gen-
erated without navigation, fN can be re-
garded as identity map represented by 1,
and fU is simply a stochastic selection
from the probability map generated by
fM. Such cases may arise either when
navigation capacity is lacking or when
the individual has no information. We
then see ‘‘pure search,’’ executed either
by self-propelled motion (e.g., an animal
searching for cryptic randomly distrib-
uted prey) or vector-mediated motion
(e.g., passive transport of seeds by wind
or water), which is affected only by the
interplay between internal and external
constraints on motion. In these cases,
the movement equation reduces to
ut1  fUfM,rt,wt,ut,
[4]
Additionally, we need to account for the
dynamics of the internal state (w) and
all relevant external factors (r). Each
constitutes a set of vectors forming a
mutually interdependent dynamical sys-
tem
rt1  fRrt,wt,ut and
wt1  fWrt,wt,ut,
[5]
where fR is sufficiently flexible so that
the external environment can have its
own dynamics and can be affected by
the focal individual (e.g., the escape
path of a focal prey determines the path
of a predator, an external factor). Simi-
larly, fW allows the focal organism to
have its own dynamics and to depend on
the state of the environment (e.g., a fo-
cal individual’s level of hunger depends
on whether its movement path brings it
to food resources).
Applying the Movement Ecology
Approach
Although the movement ecology frame-
work depicts the processes affecting
movement of individuals in a simple
way, it forces us to be comprehensive in
our evaluation of movement and to
place it in a broader context. That is, we
need to augment the collection of se-
Nathan et al.
PNAS 
December 9, 2008 
vol. 105 
no. 49 
19055

----- Page 5 (native) -----
quential positions with complementary
data on the physiological (e.g., hor-
monal) and behavioral (e.g., feeding
rates) state of the focal individual, and
on potentially influential external factors
(e.g., the proximity of other organisms
or resources). In the absence of such
information, we essentially attempt to
predict the next location (ut  1) from
the current location (ut) alone. Mecha-
nistic simulations demonstrate that envi-
ronmental heterogeneity and dual goals
are required to produce even relatively
simple movement phenomena such as
fission–fusion dynamics of social herbi-
vores (23).
The primary challenge in applying the
movement ecology framework to a par-
ticular system is to identify the key ex-
ternal factors, internal states, and mo-
tion and navigation capacities
influencing the movement of the organ-
ism(s) under study. Such identification
could be straightforward for some traits
or components but complicated for oth-
ers. For example, the mass, surface area
and aerodynamic structure of a Jacar-
anda seed determine its falling velocity
in still air, thereby accounting for its
motion capacity (i.e., the capacity to be
transported by winds) (21). Yet other
traits affecting seed transport by wind
such as the seed release height may af-
fect both the time a seed remains aloft
and the timing of release hence both the
motion and navigation capacities (21).
Empirical manipulations of internal
traits and environmental factors are
probably the best way to elucidate the
basic determinants of movement pat-
terns and processes (32). For example,
external factors can be controlled and
the internal state and navigation and/or
motion capacities can be assessed or
manipulated in studies of motile micro-
organisms (16, 33). It is, however, a lo-
gistical challenge to identify the key ex-
ternal and internal factors influencing
movement in larger free-ranging organ-
isms. Studies in this Special Feature ex-
emplify how these challenges can be ad-
dressed: by using heart-rate transmitters
attached to migrating vultures to assess
their internal state (28); by raising indi-
vidual butterflies from different source
populations in common garden condi-
tions and comparing their movement
paths (34); by using time-series analyses
to compare movement paths of individ-
ual elephants of known social status in
different seasons and environmental
conditions (27); and by assigning a
seed aerodynamic trait and using the
timing of seed release as proxies for
motion and navigation capacities, re-
spectively, in a study of wind-dispersed
tree seeds (21).
Coupling empirical studies with indi-
vidual-based simulations can help evalu-
ate how fine-scale data, obtained over
short time periods, can be used to pre-
dict movement over larger temporal
scales (35). Invoking a theoretical model
forces us to make explicit the motion
and navigation capacities and their in-
teractions with the internal state and the
environment, thus explicitly recognizing
the constraints imposed by the move-
ment process (36). It also forces us to
make explicit our assumptions and to
recognize their potential effects on any
application to real data. If we assume,
for example, that the displacement of
individuals among sites always follows
an exponentially decaying function of
interpatch distance, we implicitly assume
that the environmental factors affecting
movement and the internal state of the
individual are spatiotemporally constant.
If we assume that individuals follow
some form of random walk, we implic-
itly assume they do not use external in-
formation to navigate. Thus, the heuris-
tic filter imposed by the movement
ecology framework helps to identify the
limitations of current theory, thus fos-
tering improvement.
Characterization of Movement
Phenomena in Light of the Conceptual
Framework
The generality of the proposed move-
ment ecology framework provides an
increased capacity, compared with exist-
ing frameworks, to evaluate the relation-
ships among different movement phe-
nomena, based on explicit consideration
of basic mechanisms and/or emergent
patterns. We explored this issue by ask-
ing authors of this Special Feature to
complete a questionnaire [see support-
ing information (SI) Text in SI Appen-
dix] on their perception of the relation-
ships between eight major movement
phenomena, (i) a set of 23 attributes
characterizing movement mechanisms,
all related to four basic components of
the framework; and (ii) 14 attributes
characterizing movement patterns. The
movement phenomena used were forag-
ing, animal dispersal, plant dispersal,
one-way migration, two-way migration,
irruption, nomadism, and accidental dis-
placements. Respondents ranked the
relevance of each attribute to each
movement phenomenon on a scale rang-
ing from 0 (not relevant) to 4 (highly
relevant). These scores were averaged
across respondents, and the two matri-
ces of mean scores were evaluated by
using principal component analysis
(PCA) to quantify the relationship
among movement phenomena and be-
tween movement phenomena and the
mechanistic or pattern attributes.
Despite considerable variation among
respondents, PCA results indicated that
movement can be characterized both
mechanistically and phenomenologically
(SI Appendix). Specifically, PCA results
identified a number of clear relation-
ships between movement phenomena
and mechanistic or pattern attributes
(see SI Appendix) and revealed key dif-
ferences in how movement phenomena
are perceived in terms of their mecha-
nisms and patterns. For example, acci-
dental displacement was perceived to
resemble plant dispersal and one-way
migration to resemble animal dispersal,
based on both mechanisms and move-
ment patterns. Yet, some movement
phenomena appeared highly similar
based on mechanisms but dissimilar
based on patterns, or vice versa. For
example, irruption was perceived to re-
semble nomadism mechanistically but to
be much closer to dispersal of animals
or plants phenomenologically (SI Appen-
dix). Accidental displacement, foraging,
and two-way migration were considered
distinct phenomena, in terms of both
underlying mechanisms and patterns,
whereas plant dispersal was considered
a distinct phenomenon mechanistically
but not phenomenologically. Although
these results are based on a preliminary
analysis of responses of a small group of
movement ecologists, the exercise can
help formulate fundamental mechanistic
hypotheses to test our perceptions of
what might govern various types of
movement (e.g., the mechanistic at-
tributes with relatively high scores for
each component in Table S3 in SI Ap-
pendix). Furthermore, they may help us
predict how those mechanisms could
lead to convergence or divergence of
movement patterns. This survey also
showed that, despite attempts to define
movement terms precisely (5), their gen-
eral usage by even a small group of move-
ment ecologists is still quite variable.
Links to the Earlier Work
Although it was posed 2,300 years ago,
we have not yet fully met Aristotle’s
challenge in De Motu Animalium (On
the Movement of Animals): ‘‘The move-
ment of animals that belong to each ge-
nus, and how these are differentiated,
and what the reasons are for the acci-
dental characteristics of each—all this
we have considered elsewhere. But now
we must consider in general the com-
mon reason for moving with any move-
ment whatever (for some animals move
by flying, some by swimming, some by
stepping, some in other comparable
ways)’’ (37). His treatise begins with a
discussion of motion machineries (here
), arguing for the general mechanical
principle that ‘‘for if one of the parts
19056 
www.pnas.orgcgidoi10.1073pnas.0800375105
Nathan et al.

----- Page 6 (native) -----
move, there must be some part at rest.’’
He then relates motion machineries to
the external environment [here fM(,r)],
essentially proposing the existence of
action–reaction forces, formalized two
millennia later as Newton’s third law. In
the second half of this treatise, Aristotle
focuses on the internal motivation to
move (here w), asserting that ‘‘all ani-
mals impart movement and are moved
for the sake of something, so that this is
the limit of their movement, the thing
for-the-sake-of-which.’’ He divides the
many internal motivations to categories
of desire (e.g., appetite) and cognition
(e.g., imagination) and discusses the role
of sense perception (here ), and how
it affects the animal’s movement, and its
desire. Although Aristotle’s text is vague
and abstract and includes many claims
that are neither explained nor justified,
and although it does not ultimately put
everything together under a general
model of movement, ‘‘De Motu Anima-
lium’’ is remarkable in seeking general
explanations of organismal movements.
It also identifies many, if not all, of the
basic components required to develop
such generalizations.
The literature on the ecology and
evolutionary biology of movement over
the last decade has been extensive (15).
Many books and edited volumes have
focused on particular movements and
taxa, such as bird migration (14), dis-
persal of plants (13), or small mammals
(6). Others have been devoted to more
general movement phenomena such as
dispersal (9, 12) and the flow of life in
the atmosphere (10). Perhaps the most
comprehensive essays about organismal
movement to date are the monographs
of Baker (1) and Dingle (5), in which
each broadly interprets the term ‘‘migra-
tion,’’ although strongly focusing on ani-
mals. Baker’s definition of migration as
‘‘the act of moving from one spatial unit
to another,’’ however, is far too general
in covering every possible type of move-
ment if the definition of a ‘‘spatial unit’’
is not contained. Nevertheless, his 1,000-
page book amply exemplifies the move-
ments of various animal taxa. Impor-
tantly, it highlights the need to consider
lifetime tracks and their fundamental
components, to separate accidental
movements from other types of move-
ment, and ‘‘calculated’’ (‘‘to a specific
destination’’) from noncalculated move-
ments. Dingle’s use of migration is also
broad, encompassing characteristics of
the movement pattern (persistent and
straightened-out) and the underlying
behavior (temporary inhibition of sta-
tion-keeping response). We share his
view on the need to investigate the evo-
lutionary and behavioral mechanisms
underlying movements and not solely
their ecological outcomes.
On the theoretical side, the related
theories of random walk (2), diffusion
(11), and anomalous diffusion (38), and
optimality theories of foraging (4), dis-
persal (9), and migration (39) have pro-
vided a template for investigating move-
ment patterns and their potential causes
and consequences. Turchin’s book (7)
provides the most general compilation
of theory and practical tools to analyze
movement data of any kind, which are
powerful in combination with a formal
framework such as the one proposed
here.
From our historical exposition, it is
clear that our efforts to move movement
ecology forward complement rather
than supersede past efforts by providing
a general framework for identifying un-
derinvestigated components and for car-
ryout comparative analyses across di-
verse taxa. We hope the proposed
movement ecology approach will help to
unify movement research beyond past
considerations of animal migration (1,
5), by including other kinds of move-
ments and encompassing all life forms,
including microorganisms and plants.
We also propose a framework for study-
ing organism movements that combines
the random and optimal perspectives
and principles from biomechanics and
cognitive sciences (see next section).
Finally, we provide an impetus to fur-
ther develop both general and specific
tools for collecting and analyzing move-
ment data.
Links to Existing Movement Research
Paradigms
Questions of organismal movement are
central to various scientific disciplines
(15) that encompass alternative para-
digms for studying movement. To foster
integration, we outline the commonali-
ties and differences between the pro-
posed movement ecology approach and
the standard research approaches pre-
vailing in four major existing paradigms
(Fig. 3).
The biomechanical paradigm focuses
on the physical machineries of motion
for the individual, including their me-
chanics, energetics, and physiology (40).
Studies springing from this paradigm
often use controlled experiments in
which the external conditions are
changed, via walking belts or wind or
water tunnels, while monitoring the indi-
vidual’s physiological state. This ap-
proach provides a good description of
the motion capacity of individuals but
ignores the questions of why, where, and
when organisms move.
The cognitive paradigm focuses on
navigation mechanisms to elucidate the
rules by which individual motile organ-
isms make movement-related decisions.
The mechanistic investigation of move-
ment in this paradigm goes to the level
of specific cells in the animal brain that
are associated with particular movement
or navigation decisions (41). In general,
the paradigm pays less attention to how
individuals implement decisions (motion
capacity) or to how the resulting move-
Movement 
path
U
Movement 
path
U
Motion 
capacity
Ω
How to move?
Motion 
capacity
Ω
How to move?
Motion 
capacity
Ω
How to move?
Motion 
capacity
Ω
How to move?
Internal 
state
W
Why move?
External 
factors
R
fN (navigation process)
fM (motion process)
fU (movement propagation process)
fW (internal state dynamics)
fR (external factors dynamics)
fN (navigation process)
fN (navigation process)
fM (motion process)
fM (motion process)
fU (movement propagation process)
fU (movement propagation process)
fW (internal state dynamics)
fW (internal state dynamics)
fR (external factors dynamics)
fR (external factors dynamics)
cognitive
movement
ecology
External
factors
R
Navigation 
capacity
Φ
Where to move?
Navigation 
capacity
Φ
Where to move?
Navigation 
capacity
Φ
Where to move?
Motion
capacity
Ω
How to move?
Internal
state
W
Why move?
optimality
biomechanical
Movement
path
U
random
Fig. 3.
The relationships among the proposed movement ecology paradigm (Fig. 2) and four existing
paradigms representing different scientiﬁc disciplines in which the movement of organism is being
studied. Elements in the gray background are components of the movement ecology framework.
Nathan et al.
PNAS 
December 9, 2008 
vol. 105 
no. 49 
19057

----- Page 7 (native) -----
ment feeds back to the internal motiva-
tion to move.
The prevailing approach in the ran-
dom paradigm is characterized by simple
phenomenological descriptions of move-
ment paths and by null models related
to the theories of random walk (2), dif-
fusion (11), and anomalous diffusion
(38). The approach is often used to ana-
lyze large-scale movements in landscape
ecology where individuals are assumed
to search with no previous information.
Studies within this paradigm have re-
cently yielded hot debate about the fit
of a particular model (Le´vy walk) to
movement data (ref. 42; see also refs. 23
and 43 and references therein). The
time is now ripe to extend this statistical
approach to assess the role of environ-
mental heterogeneity, perceptual ranges,
memory, and other mechanisms in cre-
ating different movement patterns. New
approaches to explore potential links
between intermittent locomotion, reori-
entation behavior, and search efficiency
(43) may be particularly valuable for
identifying different movement phases
and distinct behaviors from movement
paths.
The optimality paradigm from behav-
ioral and evolutionary ecology explores
the relative efficacy of different strate-
gies in optimizing some particular fitness
currency (e.g., energy gain, survival, or
reproduction) over ecological or evolu-
tionary time scales. Although movement
can strongly affect fitness, studies evalu-
ating the fitness consequences of move-
ment are still rather rare. Consequently,
principal concepts in this paradigm, such
as the ideal-free distribution (44) and
central-place foraging theory (45), do
not explicitly deal with movement per se
and tend to neglect the constraints im-
posed by the limited motion and naviga-
tion capacities of individuals and the
partial information they have about
their environments.
In summary, the biomechanical and
cognitive paradigms do not usually con-
sider movement patterns. They focus
instead on the basic mechanisms under-
lying movements, specifically the motion
and navigation capacities, respectively.
The random and optimality paradigms
tend to overlook the mechanisms; the
former focuses mostly on the movement
patterns, the latter on the interplay be-
tween the internal state and external
factors. Recent studies have already
started to bridge the gaps among these
four paradigms (15, 32, 43). An illustra-
tive example is the extensive and ever-
growing research on movement of pro-
karyotes (33), especially bacterial
chemotaxis, the self-propelled motion in
response to chemical attractants and
repellents (16). Research on chemotaxis
in the bacterium Escherichia coli (16)
has yielded the best-characterized mo-
lecular and neurobiological networks of
signal detection and transduction (cogni-
tive approach), motor operation (biome-
chanical approach), and thorough analy-
ses of movement paths in isotropic-
homogenous medium (random
approach) (2). Our proposed movement
ecology framework can provide a theo-
retical scaffold to synergize research
from these paradigms for bacteria and
any other kind of organism. It may also
motivate the development of new cross-
disciplinary concepts and methodologies.
Strengths, Limitations, and Future
Directions
By integrating the major existing para-
digms and opening a channel for re-
search focusing on all aspects of move-
ment itself, the proposed movement
ecology paradigm sets the stage for the
development of a unified theory of
movement, for elucidating the causes
and underlying mechanisms of move-
ment patterns and their consequences
for various ecological and evolutionary
processes. Because the basic conceptual
framework (Fig. 2) encompasses all fac-
tors affecting the movement of an indi-
vidual, it can consolidate diverse move-
ment phenomena, link and thereby
enrich specialized research fields, and
identify gaps in research (15). The ap-
proach is also likely to help address ap-
plied questions, because movement of
organisms is strongly relevant to most, if
not all, current environmental concerns.
For example, long-distance movements
of various organisms (21, 25, 46) can
greatly impact the spatial dynamics of
local populations and communities, driv-
ing species’ responses to fragmentation
(47), playing a key role in species inva-
sions, responses to climate change, and
other global concerns (48).
An important limitation of the pro-
posed approach is related to practical
difficulties in quantifying the movement
of individuals and especially in under-
standing the mechanisms underlying
these movements. Addressing this limi-
tation requires further technological and
methodological advances (e.g., ref. 43),
to quantify not only movement paths
but also the internal and external com-
ponents involved. The focus on individu-
als complicates the study of processes at
higher levels of organization and longer
temporal scales. Our approach can be
extended to analyze the contemporane-
ous movement trajectories of multiple,
possibly interacting, conspecific individ-
uals (49, 50), and the movement pat-
terns of individuals and their progeny
over several generations. Applications to
biological interactions such as bird-me-
diated seed dispersal require investiga-
tion of the movement ecology of two
(or more) interacting species (47).
Applications of the proposed frame-
work to populations, communities, and
ecosystems or to multigeneration or evo-
lutionary processes are inherently more
difficult but possible and potentially
valuable. Indeed, processes other than
movement (e.g., demography, species
interactions) need to be invoked to ex-
plain the dynamics of populations and
communities, as illustrated by Special
Feature papers applying the movement
ecology framework to study the dynam-
ics of plant communities (47) and lynx
populations (51) in spatially structured
landscapes. Remarkably, though, both
studies also showed that the dynamics of
higher levels of organization were better
explained when a more detailed mecha-
nistic understanding of movement was
available. For example, patterns of com-
munity dynamics were best explained for
bird-dispersed plants, partially explained
for wind-dispersed species, and largely
unexplained for species classified as un-
assisted. The level of understanding of
movement of these three types of vec-
tors in this system followed exactly the
same order: bird movement is well
known, wind regimes are sparsely under-
stood, and transport of ‘‘unassisted’’
seeds remains mysterious (47).
Applications to evolutionary questions
about movement are promising, because
identification of the major mechanisms
underlying movement is a prerequisite to
understand their evolution. Indeed, our
framework is based on fundamental evo-
lutionary principles, assuming that the
internal motivation to move is explicable
in terms of its (post hoc) fitness conse-
quences (Fig. 2). Still, extending this
framework to study processes operating
over evolutionary time scales would re-
quire substantial changes, allowing motion
and navigation capacities and the proper-
ties of the major interactions among the
four components to evolve.
At this stage of enquiry, we believe
the proposed movement ecology frame-
work not only provides an integrated
approach to the acquisition of knowl-
edge pertaining to the processes and
mechanisms that determine movement
pathways, and thereby movement pat-
terns across landscapes, but also facili-
tates the interpretation of movement
data in a more coherent way. Our
framework thus makes it is possible to
more tightly link analyses of movement
paths and studies of movement mecha-
nisms, thereby better elucidating the
interplay between movement patterns
and processes. We also hope our frame-
work encourages future studies, where
possible, to include all four mechanistic
19058 
www.pnas.orgcgidoi10.1073pnas.0800375105
Nathan et al.

----- Page 8 (native) -----
components and their interactions,
thereby taking us to a deeper level in
addressing more ambitious questions
about the mechanisms underlying the
diverse world of movement phenomena.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank E. Rabinovici, P.
Feldman, and all staff of the Institute for Ad-
vanced Studies in Jerusalem for hosting and
sponsoring our group from September 2006 to
August 2007. We thank all visitors, students, and
short-term members of this group, and especially
R. Powell and R. Casagrandi, for insightful discus-
sions. We also thank F. Bartumeus, PNAS editor
J. H. Brown, and an anonymous reviewer for im-
portant feedback. Finally, we thank the Special
Feature authors and members of R.N.’s labora-
tory for answering the questionnaire. R.N. was
supported by National Science Foundation Grants
NSF-DEB-0453665, Israel Science Foundation ISF-
FIRST 1316/05, and US-Israel Binational Science
Foundation BSF 124/2004, and by the Friedrich
Wilhelm Bessel Award from the Humboldt Foun-
dation. W.M.G. was supported by a James S. Mc-
Donnell Foundation 21st Century Science Initia-
tive Award. M.H. was supported by National
Science Foundation Grant NSF-DEB 0414465. P.E.S.
was supported by National Science Foundation
Grants NSF-DEB-0211430 and NSF-DEB-0514956.
1. Baker RR (1978) The Evolutionary Ecology of Animal
Migration (Hodder and Stoughton, London).
2. Berg HC (1983) Random Walks in Biology (Princeton
Univ Press, Princeton, NJ).
3. Swingland IR, Greenwood PJ (1983) The Ecology of
Animal Movement (Clarendon, Oxford).
4. Stephens DW, Krebs JR (1986) Foraging Theory (Prince-
ton Univ Press, Princeton, NJ).
5. Dingle H (1996) Migration: The Biology of Life on the
Move (Oxford Univ Press, Oxford).
6. Stenseth NC, Lidicker WZ (1992) Animal Dispersal:
Small Mammals as a Model (Chapman and Hall, Lon-
don).
7. Turchin P (1998) Quantitative Analysis of Movement
(Sinauer, Sunderland, MA).
8. Hanski I (1999) Metapopulation Ecology (Oxford Univ
Press, Oxford).
9. Clobert J, Danchin E, Dhondt AA, Nichols JD (2001)
Dispersal (Oxford Univ Press, Oxford).
10. Isard SA, Gage SH (2001) Flow of Life in the Atmo-
sphere (Michigan State Univ Press, East Lansing, MI).
11. Okubo A, Levin SA (2001) Diffusion and Ecological
Problems: Modern Perspectives (Springer, New York).
12. Bullock JM, Kenward RE, Hails R (2002) Dispersal Ecol-
ogy (Blackwell, Malden, MA).
13. Levey DJ, Silva WR, Galetti M (2002) Seed Dispersal and
Frugivory: Ecology, Evolution and Conservation (CAB
International, Wallingford, UK).
14. Greenberg RS, Marra PP (2005) Birds of Two Worlds:
The Ecology and Evolution of Migration (John Hopkins
Univ Press, Baltimore).
15. Holyoak M, Casagrandi R, Nathan R, Revilla E, Spiegel O
(2008) Trends and missing parts in the study of move-
ment ecology. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105:19060–
19065.
16. Berg HC (2000) Motile behavior of bacteria. Phys Today
53:24–29.
17. Cooke SJ, et al. (2004) Biotelemetry: A mechanistic
approach to ecology. Trends Ecol Evol 19:334–343.
18. Kays RW, Wikelski M (2007) Review of the NSF-
Sponsored Animal Tracking and Physiological Moni-
toring Workshop. Available at: www.movebank.org.
19. Wikelski M, et al. (2007) Going wild: What a global
small-animal tracking system could do for experimen-
tal biologists. J Exp Biol 210:181–186.
20. Mount DW (2004) Bioinformatics: Sequence and Ge-
nome Analysis (Cold Spring Harbor Lab Press, Cold
Spring Harbor, NY).
21. Wright SJ, et al. (2008) Understanding strategies for
seed dispersal by wind under contrasting atmospheric
conditions. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105:19084–19089.
22. Patterson TA, Thomas L, Wilcox C, Ovaskainen O, Mat-
thiopoulos J (2008) State–space models of individual
animal movement. Trends Ecol Evol 23:87–94.
23. Getz WM, Saltz D (2008) A framework for generating
and analyzing movement paths on ecological land-
scapes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105:19066–19071.
24. Fryxell JM et al. (2008) Multiple movement modes by
large herbivores at multiple spatio-temporal scales.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105:19114–19119.
25. Lohmann KJ, Putnam NF, Lohmann CMF (2008) Geo-
magnetic imprinting: A unifying hypothesis of long-
distance natal homing in salmon and sea turtles. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 105:19096–19101.
26. Moore P, Crimaldi J (2004) Odor landscapes and animal
behavior: Tracking odor plumes in different physical
worlds. J Mar Syst 49:55–64.
27. Wittemyer G, Polansky L, Douglas-Hamilton I, Getz WM
(2008) Disentangling the effects of forage, social rank
and risk on movement autocorrelation of elephants
using Fourier and wavelet analyses. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 19108–19113.
28. Mandel JT, Bildstein KL, Bohrer G, Winkler DW (2008)
The movement ecology of migration in turkey vultures.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105:19102–19107.
29. Nathan R, et al. (2005) Long-distance biological trans-
port processes through the air: Can nature’s complexity
be unfolded in-silico? Divers Distrib 11:131–137.
30. Marks JS, Redmond RL (1994) Migration of bristle-
thighed curlews on Laysan Island: Timing, behavior and
estimated ﬂight range. Condor 96:316–330.
31. Nolet BA, Mooij WM (2002) Search paths of swans
foraging on spatially autocorrelated tubers. J Anim
Ecol 71:451–462.
32. Dickinson MH, et al. (2000) How animals move: An
integrative view. Science 288:100–106.
33. Jarrell KF, McBride MJ (2008) The surprisingly diverse
ways that prokaryotes move. Nat Rev Microbiol 6:466–
476.
34. Ovaskainen O, et al. (2008) Tracking butterﬂy move-
ments with harmonic radar reveals an effect of popu-
lation age on movement distance. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 105:19090–19095.
35. Revilla E, Wiegand T, Palomares F, Ferreras P, Delibes M
(2004) Effects of matrix heterogeneity on animal dis-
persal: From individual behavior to metapopulation-
level parameters. Am Nat 164:E130–E153.
36. Armsworth PR, Roughgarden JE (2005) The impact of
directed versus random movement on population dy-
namics and biodiversity patterns. Am Nat 165:449–
465.
37. Nussbaum MC (1978) Aristotle’s De Motu Animalium
(Princeton Univ Press, Princeton, NJ).
38. Klafter J, Sokolov IM (2005) Anomalous diffusion
spreads its wings. Phys World 18:29–32.
39. Alerstam T, Hedenstrom A, Akesson S (2003) Long-
distance migration: Evolution and determinants. Oikos
103:247–260.
40. Vogel S (2003) Comparative Biomechanics: Life’s Phys-
ical World (Princeton Univ Press, Princeton, NJ).
41. Jeffery KJ (2003) The Neurobiology of Spatial Behav-
iour (Oxford Univ Press, Oxford).
42. Benhamou S (2007) How many animals really do the
Le´vy walk? Ecology 88:1962–1969.
43. Bartumeus F, Levin SA (2008) Fractal reorientation
clocks: Linking animal behavior to statistical patterns of
search. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105:19072–19077.
44. Fretwell SD, Lucas HL, Jr (1969) On territorial behavior
and other factors inﬂuencing habitat distribution in
birds. I. Theoretical development. Acta Biotheor 19:16–
36.
45. Orians GH, Pearson NE (1979) in Analysis of Ecological
Systems, eds Horn DJ, Mitchell RD, Straits GR (Ohio Univ
Press, Athens, OH), pp 154–177.
46. Nathan R (2006) Long-distance dispersal of plants. Sci-
ence 313:786–788.
47. Damschen EI, et al. (2008) The movement ecology and
dynamics of plant communities in fragmented land-
scapes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105:19078–19083.
48. Trakhtenbrot A, Nathan R, Perry G, Richardson DM
(2005) The importance of long-distance dispersal in
biodiversity conservation. Divers Distrib 11:173–181.
49. Couzin ID, Krause J, Franks NR, Levin SA (2005) Effective
leadership and decision-making in animal groups on
the move. Nature 433:513–516.
50. Ballerini M, et al. (2008) Interaction ruling animal col-
lective behavior depends on topological rather than
metric distance: Evidence from a ﬁeld study. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 105:1232–1237.
51. Revilla E, Wiegand T (2008) Individual movement be-
havior, matrix heterogeneity and the dynamics of spa-
tially structured populations. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
105:19120–19125.
Nathan et al.
PNAS 
December 9, 2008 
vol. 105 
no. 49 
19059