

----- Page 1 (native) -----
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 7, NO. 3, AUGUST 2011
381
Demand Side Management: Demand Response,
Intelligent Energy Systems, and Smart Loads
Peter Palensky, Senior Member, IEEE, and Dietmar Dietrich, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—Energy management means to optimize one of the
most complex and important technical creations that we know: the
energy system. While there is plenty of experience in optimizing
energy generation and distribution, it is the demand side that
receives increasing attention by research and industry. Demand
Side Management (DSM) is a portfolio of measures to improve
the energy system at the side of consumption. It ranges from
improving energy efﬁciency by using better materials, over smart
energy tariffs with incentives for certain consumption patterns, up
to sophisticated real-time control of distributed energy resources.
This paper gives an overview and a taxonomy for DSM, analyzes
the various types of DSM, and gives an outlook on the latest
demonstration projects in this domain.
Index Terms—Building automation, demand response, demand
side management (DSM), energy efﬁciency, energy management,
IEC 61850, load management, peak shaving, smart grids.
I. INTRODUCTION
T
HE CLASSICAL modus operandi of electric energy sys-
tems is unidirectional and top-down oriented. A limited
number of large power plants feed into the grid and try to keep
demand and supply balanced at all times. This balance is a very
crucial aspect in operating an electric energy system. Volatile
renewable energy sources [1] and electro-mobility are new
challenges to this balance and call for sophisticated control
methods [2].
Using the load as an additional degree of freedom is not en-
tirely new but affordable global communication infrastructure
and embedded systems make it now relatively easy to add a cer-
tain portion of “smart” to the loads. The development is driven
by the fact that—despite increased efﬁciency of electric de-
vices—consumption is steadily rising some percent every year.
While generation might not be much of a problem, it is the grid
capacity that makes many involved people worry.
Especially new and ambitious projects, like DeserTec (exten-
sive solar power stations in Northern Africa to supply Europe),
and large offshore wind parks in the Northern Sea, raise ques-
tions about the transport of energy. The grids might soon face
their limits, and intelligent Demand Side Management (DSM) is
one way to stretch these limits a bit further. DSM also promotes
Manuscript received February 27, 2011; revised May 05, 2011; accepted May
18, 2011. Date of publication June 27, 2011; date of current version August 10,
2011. Paper no. TII-11-080.
P. Palensky is with the Austrian Institute of Technology, Energy Department,
1210 Vienna, Austria (e-mail: palensky@ieee.org).
D. Dietrich is with the Vienna University of Technology, 1040 Vienna,
Austria (e-mail: dietrich@ict.tuwien.ac.at).
Color versions of one or more of the ﬁgures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TII.2011.2158841
Fig. 1. Categories of DSM.
distributed generation: In order to avoid long-distance transport,
locally generated energy could be consumed by local loads, im-
mediately when it is available. DSM’s main advantage is that it
is less expensive to intelligently inﬂuence a load, than to build
a new power plant or install some electric storage device.
DSM includes everything that is done on the demand side of
an energy system, ranging from exchanging old incandescent
light bulbs to compact ﬂuorescent lights (CFLs) up to installing
a sophisticated dynamic load management system. While DSM
was “utility driven” in the past, it might move a bit towards a
“customer driven” activity in the near future.
Reference [3] shows the utility point-of-view. The authors
perform a sequential Monte Carlo simulation to assess the im-
pact of stochastic grid component outages and how far DSM can
help in these cases. The correlation and sensitivity of the com-
ponent capacity variation to the expected shortage of available
transmission capacity is identiﬁed as well as the contribution of
DSM to transmission capacity. Such centralized structures are
sometimes complemented (if not replaced) by ﬂat and freely or-
ganized market-driven mechanisms [4].
Depending on the timing and the impact of the applied mea-
sures on the customer process, DSM can be categorized into the
following (see Fig. 1).
a) Energy Efﬁciency (EE).
b) Time of Use (TOU).
c) Demand Response (DR).
d) Spinning Reserve (SR).
The “quicker” changes are processed and done, the more un-
wanted impact they potentially have onto the customers’ pro-
cesses. The “processes” can be manufacturing output, pump
power or even optimizing human comfort or health in a building.
1551-3203/$26.00 © 2011 IEEE

----- Page 2 (native) -----
382
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 7, NO. 3, AUGUST 2011
Fig. 2. Impact of improved energy efﬁciency versus demand response.
The lower edge of the DSM spectrum is energy efﬁciency mea-
sures. They include all permanent changes on equipment (e.g.,
exchanging an inefﬁcient ventilation system with a better one)
or improvements on the physical properties of the system (e.g.,
investing in the building shell by adding additional insulation).
Such measures result in immediate and permanent energy and
emissions savings and are therefore the most welcome method.
Sometimes seen as a separate category of DSM, Energy Conser-
vation (EC, [5]) shall be seen as part of Energy Efﬁciency in this
paper. EC focuses on users and behavioral changes to achieve
more efﬁcient energy usage.
Time of use tariffs penalize certain periods of time (e.g.,
17:00–19:00) with a higher price, so customers (re)arrange
their processes to minimize costs. A change in the TOU
price-schedule means a change in a supply contract/tariff and,
therefore, does not happen on a frequent basis. [6] shows
that combining DSM and TOU tariffs signiﬁcantly increases
security and lowers costs and emissions of energy systems with
a high share of wind power.
Dynamic DSM does not necessarily reduce energy consump-
tion, only consumption patterns are inﬂuenced. If a process is in-
terrupted for some reason, it might have to “catch up” once it has
green lights again. An example is a water pumping system that
can—because of its storage tanks—easily be shed for 30 min.
After the shed it has to ﬁll up its tanks again, since they were
drained during the shed period. A so-called “rebound effect” (or
payback) takes place, energy is typically not saved and maybe
even a new peak is generated (see Fig. 2).
Sometimes this effect can be avoided, but it might result in a
reduced process quality. Such an ideal “peak shaving” applied
to a ventilation system would mean that if it normally ran at 50%
and were shed for half an hour, it is prohibited to compensate
that downtime with half an hour of 100%.
Reference [7] distinguish between the following.
a) Incentive-Based DR.
• Direct load control (DLC): utility or grid operator gets
free access to customer processes.
• Interruptible/curtailable rates: customers get special
contract with limited sheds.
• Emergency demand response programs: voluntary
response to emergency signals.
• Capacity market programs: customers guarantee to
pitch in when the grid is in need.
• Demand bidding programs: customers can bid for
curtailing at attractive prices
b) Time-Based Rates DR.
• Time-of-use rates: a static price schedule is applied.
• Critical peak pricing: a less predetermined variant of
TOU.
• Real-time pricing (RTP): wholesale market prices are
forwarded to end customers.
Reference [8] distinguishes the following.
• Level I: Load shape objective.
• Level II: End use, technology alternatives, and market im-
plementation methods.
An alternative way to look at the various ﬂavors of demand
response is to distinguish between the following.
• Market DR: real-time pricing, price signals and incen-
tives, and
• Physical DR: grid management and emergency signals.
Market DR relies on certain market places where prices are
formed and products are traded. Such market places are not ar-
bitrarily quick, which is why most transactions are done a day
ahead. An exception is real-time pricing (RTP), where the ﬁg-
ures of an energy spot market (e.g., EEX—European Energy
Exchange in Leipzig) are forwarded to end users without delay.
A typical way to analyze and optimize market mechanisms is
System Dynamics (SDs). Reference [9] shows an SD approach
for designing energy prices for DSM. The price is split into
a capacity and a quantity part, a government-driven policy is
derived.
Reﬂecting grid congestion or an excess supply of wind power
onto the price can provoke stabilizing customer behavior. This
misleads some people to believe that monetary incentives like
RTP could solve all existing problems of the energy grid. How-
ever, limited customer elasticity and physical situations that are
not mapped onto prices lead to the fact that real load shedding
for grid relief cannot be done via prices alone.
This is where physical DR comes into play. It sends out
binding requests for demand management if the grid or parts of
its infrastructure (power lines, transformers, substations, etc.)
are in a reduced performance due to maintenance or failure.
A good mixture of both market and physical DR is usually
necessary to run a grid optimal.
Spinning Reserves (SR), implemented by loads, represent the
upper (i.e., quick) end of the DSM spectrum. Unfortunately, the
term itself is used in a loose way across the power community.
In this paper, spinning reserve is seen as primary (active power
output directly depends on frequency) and secondary control
(restoring frequency and grid state with additional active power)
[10]. This is typically the task of regulation power plants. Loads
can act as “virtual” (or negative) spinning reserve if they corre-
late their power consumption to the grid state in a “droop con-
trol” or some other smart manner. In its easiest way, devices use
less power if frequency drops (Fig. 3).
This can happen in an autonomous way (similar to primary
control) or in a coordinated way (similar to secondary control).
Depending on the type of DSM, different means of technology
and especially communication are necessary.
Comparing the various ﬂavors of DSM, it is clear that EE is
most wanted. It saves energy and emissions, while most of the

----- Page 3 (native) -----
PALENSKY AND DIETRICH: DEMAND SIDE MANAGEMENT: DEMAND RESPONSE, INTELLIGENT ENERGY SYSTEMS, AND SMART LOADS
383
Fig. 3. A cooperative consumer backs off when grid frequency decreases.
Fig. 4. A web-based energy information system, based on [11].
other types just shift it in time. So, the ﬁrst goal must always
be to improve efﬁciency. After that, the dynamics can be op-
timized. Depending on the boundary conditions (electro-tech-
nical setting, market setting, capabilities of the system) of the
system, one or the other dynamic DSM method might be chosen.
Naturally, the break-even point of automation investments and
ﬁnancial incentives determines how far one can go.
II. DEMAND SIDE MANAGEMENT
A. Energy Efﬁciency
Improving energy efﬁciency of buildings or industrial sites
starts with information and insight into the processes involved.
Practically, every customer site has hidden problems that waste
energy: compressed air leakages, misconﬁgured controls, dirty
ﬁlters, broken equipment, etc. Actually, such trivial problems
are often overlooked, unless a tool for analyzing energy efﬁ-
ciency like [11] is used. The typical parts of such an Energy
Information System (EIS, Fig. 4) are as follows.
• Data acquisition infrastructure (sensor networks, data log-
gers, gateways, modems, etc.).
• An application server with database, calculation and anal-
ysis algorithms, alarming and reporting.
• User interfaces for visualization and conﬁguration.
The classical calculations are as follows.
• Baseline versus peak load comparison: a high baseline
might stem from standby power or old equipment (e.g., bad
insulation).
• Weekly comparison of time series: often lighting or venti-
lation accidentally runs through the night and the weekend.
Fig. 5. An energy controller switches (off) devices.
• Benchmarks: compare your performance to others, es-
pecially useful for multisite customers (e.g., supermarket
chains).
• Process correlations: does your energy consumption
strongly correlate with, for instance, the outside tempera-
ture or solar gains?
Beside such static efﬁciency ﬁgures, it is also the dynamics
that gets evident with such systems. An experienced facility
manager or a smart algorithm can interpret consumption pat-
terns and ﬁnd ways to reduce peak loads. If the energy supply
contract penalized peaks, this would be a valuable result. If
changes to the logistics cannot help, automation equipment
might be necessary.
B. Energy Controllers
If the operations of equipment needs consumption-driven ad-
justment, an energy controller could be used. Such a device is
typically located at the energy meter and monitors the consump-
tion trend. If the trend points to unwanted levels, the controller
switches off equipment, based on certain priorities and other
rules (Fig. 5).
Conﬁguring such an energy controller can be a very complex
task. Especially if consumers are added or removed, the stability
depends on a wise choice of rules. One simple example of how
to determine the priority level depending on the consumption
trend is shown in Fig. 6. The graphic shows one “measurement
period” (country-dependent time of usually 15 or 30 min that
represents the smallest time period for billing purposes). Each
period, the trend starts from zero and moves monotonously up-
wards. The more power is consumed (bottom curve), the steeper
the energy consumption curve.
Once the consumption trajectory crosses one of the upper
threshold lines, certain classes (or groups, priorities) of con-

----- Page 4 (native) -----
384
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 7, NO. 3, AUGUST 2011
Fig. 6. Selection of priorities in a maximum demand monitor.
sumers are switched off (or duty-cycled, etc.). Fig. 6 assumes
three device classes, c1 the most important ones, c3 the least
important ones. The trajectory starts steep since all devices are
allowed on initially. It is steeper than the ideal (dashed) curve
so it necessarily crosses “c3 off” which turns off the least
important ones as a ﬁrst measure to ﬂatten the curve. In this
example, this is not sufﬁcient so it crosses “c2 off” after some
time and also class 2 devices are switched off: only category
1 devices are allowed on now. The resulting (too) ﬂat curve
crosses “c1 on” which has no effect since c1 devices were al-
lowed on anyway. Crossing “c2 on” allows class 2 devices on
again and so forth. “all off” would result in
and a hori-
zontal energy trajectory. With such a system, the consumption
trajectory will (if physically possible) reach the goal at the end
of the period.
Note that the power consumption during
and
is different
although both intervals say “allowed devices classes are 1 and
2.” This demonstrates the fact that devices in one category may
be switched on but do not have to, since they have their own,
independent controls and schedules.
The goal can also change from period to period. With this,
a given load chart can be followed, always assuming that the
process physically allows that.
Fig. 7. OpenADR clients and the system operator connect to the DRAS.
C. Demand Response
A much quicker response is provided by the many ﬂavors of
Demand Response (DR). Typically, a signal is broadcast, e.g.,
by the distribution or transmission system operator (DSO/TSO).
This signal might contain a price or a command for load shed-
ding/shifting. The deadline is not necessarily instantaneous: the
signal might refer to a situation next day at 12:00 noon since
often grid emergencies can be anticipated.
Classical Direct Load Control (DLC) assumes that loads are
fully under control, i.e., they do what they are told to do. All
intelligence is expected in the controller, who ideally uses load
models to make reasonable decisions. Reference [12] used a sto-
chastic state-space model for loads and simulate an urban power
system. The results show savings both in costs and transport
losses.
One modern system for automated demand response,
OpenADR [13], [14], is developed by the leading research
group on DR, the Demand Response Research Center (DRRC)
at the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. OpenADR is
an open speciﬁcation and an open-source reference implemen-
tation of a distributed, client-server oriented DR infrastructure
with a publisher-subscriber model. Its main components are the
following (Fig. 7).
• Demand Response Automation Server (DRAS).
• DRAS Clients at the customers’ sites.
• The Internet as communication infrastructure.
The client side is often just a communication library, used
by controls manufacturers to make their product OpenADR-ca-
pable. Clients can subscribe to DR “programs,” like critical peak
pricing or demand bidding, and the DRAS serves as simple
market platform and subscription manager. It keeps a database
of the participating clients and the program that they are sub-
scribed to.
If, for instance, a utility or system operator issues an emer-
gency message to the DRAS, the server forwards the message
to all clients that participate in the “emergency program.” Trans-
actions need to be recorded by the DRAS since ﬁnancial incen-
tives are connected with reacting to such events.
The above system is almost open-loop control, since nei-
ther load models nor online feedback is used. Reference [15]
combines ripple control1 with a wide area phasor measurement
system, based on global positioning system (GPS) timestamps
used by distributed voltage/current measurement equipment.
The result of adding this feedback loop is wide area control
for energy systems. Assuming 10% of the loads as controllable
1Broadcasting powerline signals at nighttime for electric storage stoves.

----- Page 5 (native) -----
PALENSKY AND DIETRICH: DEMAND SIDE MANAGEMENT: DEMAND RESPONSE, INTELLIGENT ENERGY SYSTEMS, AND SMART LOADS
385
via ripple control, the authors estimate approximately 30%
savings in transmission corridor losses and approximately 40%
in control power savings.
Reference [16] analyzes the business impacts of DSM. Four
business models are analyzed and a district of 300 households
with three different types of electric devices are simulated: loads
with storage (e.g., boiler), shiftable loads (e.g., dishwasher), and
real electric storages (e.g., batteries). The focus is on the district
level, i.e., making a district more self-sustainable with regards
to power consumption, and is entirely market based. It is shown
that ﬂexible loads can be very attractive for DSOs when used
for substation-level peak shaving.
D. Distributed Spinning Reserve
Distributed spinning reserve tries to support the traditional
providers of ancillary services by imitating their behavior. On
the demand side, this means that load can be reduced or in-
creased when the grid frequency drops or rises.
Two implementations of this scheme are the Integral
Resource Optimization Network (IRON) [17] and the “grid-
friendly controller” [18]. Both measure the frequency and react
on it. The difference is that the IRON box has an additional
communication interface (a GSM/3G modem) that allows
cooperative algorithms.
A simple example for such an add-on feature due to its com-
munication capabilities is fairness. If, for example, a number of
devices can shed their load, and already one of them shedding
is sufﬁcient, it might always be the quickest that wins the mon-
etary incentive. With communication, it can be arranged that all
of them have their turn. Such coordination also contributes to
stability. Imagine a community of autonomous, distributed con-
trollers without communication. All of them reacting on grid
problems in the same manner is the perfect recipe for instabili-
ties. They will have do it one after another to avoid a too strong
reaction.
All this is distributed, but still classical control: The frequency
needs to drop so that controllers react, and it needs to be restored
so that they stop ﬁxing it. A slightly more sophisticated version
goes into model-predictive controls. A device that has a load
model of itself might predict how much/long it can shed load
until it has to stop shedding for process reasons. Load models
are the second step towards stability. They give the answer to the
question of how strong the reaction to an (anticipated) problem
needs to be and who can provide it.
E. Demand Shifting
Load models are also used when demand needs to be shifted
to other times. If the weather and other forecasts predict a grid
emergency at 17:30 the next day, intelligent consumers can plan
ahead and—if their process allows it—do their tasks earlier or
later. Examples are precooling, producing for the stock, etc. Pro-
cesses that can be shifted typically belong to one of the fol-
lowing categories.
• Inert thermal processes (heating, cooling).
• Inert diffusion processes (ventilation, irrigation, etc.).
• Mass transport (pumps with tanks, conveyor belts, etc.).
• Logistics (schedules, dependencies, lunch-breaks, etc.).
Shifting load to a later point in time (i.e., postponing) is easy.
The load is shed at the critical time and the process has to catch
up later. Unfortunately, the process quality is not guaranteed: If
there are not enough products on stock or if the tank is almost
empty, the process might run into troubles during the shed time.
It is therefore better to move the peak before the shed time and
be prepared. For this, load models are needed. They predict how
long things can be turned off, how much it takes to ﬁll the “vir-
tual storage,” and what it costs [19].
The “virtual storage” of Demand Shifting can of course be
enhanced by special means. [20] for instance add phase change
material to buildings with electric heating to increase the low
thermal inertia of the structure.
F. Loads as Virtual Storage Power Plants
Virtual Power Plants (VPPs) are a community of typically
smaller generation units (often renewable energy sources) that
appear as one power plant to the grid management [21]. The
(typically distributed) equipment needs to be controlled from a
central dispatch and management node, and modern SCADA
standards like IEC 61850 [22] are used to integrate the indi-
vidual parts.
A special case arises if these parts are loads. Loads cannot
generate, they can only act as virtual storage via load shifting.
Aggregating many of such loads leads to sizes that can par-
ticipate on power markets and compete with traditional elec-
tric storage [23]. Typically, aggregators use proprietary tech-
nology to do this, but IEC 61850 is a good candidate to enable
interoperability.
The most crucial point of VPPs is even more crucial with
load-based virtual storage power plants: guaranteed availability.
If the grid operator requests a certain amount of regulation
power it must be delivered. Unfortunately, many loads behave
in a stochastic manner. A customer process might just at that
time not be interruptible or its virtual storage might be empty.
For this, again, reliable load models are necessary so that the
VPP operator can keep its promises available.
G. Communication Protocols for Load Management
IEC 61850 is a standards series for substation automation.
It contains an addressing scheme for “Intelligent Electronic De-
vices” (IEDs) or Distributed Energy Resources (DERs) and their
properties and functions, an XML-based substation conﬁgura-
tion language, communication protocols for best-effort and real-
time transport, and much more. Modern manufacturers imple-
ment this technology in their latest power engineering prod-
ucts like distribution automation nodes or grid measurement and
diagnostics devices. It is popular for implementing VPPs and
gradually makes its way down to the distribution level.
Coming from the other edge of the system, home and building
automation systems move towards the energy business. Smart
domestic controls can cause signiﬁcant energy savings, [24] re-
port 40% energy savings via enhanced lighting controls. The
current question is how to unify the various devices from a con-
trols perspective?
Several technology groups have published standards for en-
ergy services in the home. One of them is the Zigbee Smart En-
ergy Proﬁle [25], an extensive document that describes a large

----- Page 6 (native) -----
386
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 7, NO. 3, AUGUST 2011
Fig. 8. The states of the BACnet load control object (simpliﬁed).
number of services like meter reading, online pricing, informa-
tion security, or load control. A shorter but nevertheless inter-
esting proposal comes from the American Society of Heating,
Refrigerating and Air Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE), the
BACnet ([26]) load control object (speciﬁed in an addendum
to the ISO BACnet standard [27]). It deﬁnes an abstract state
machine that represents a load with (or without) load shedding
capabilities (Fig. 8).
A device can be queried for its state. “Not active” means it is
capable of shedding and might receive a shed command which
would put it into state “pending” until the shed is fully done. If
the device enters the “not possible” state, it cannot shed (any-
more). This simple ﬁnite-state machine (FSM) is an abstract
way of representing electric consumers. With this, very different
devices can be addressed by a (central) decision unit in a uniﬁed
way.
Another project in the home-domain is KNIVES, a tree-
topology demand management system, developed at Keio Uni-
versity, Japan. It reacts on energy prices and inﬂuences loads,
based on priorities. For integration with home automation infra-
structure, a wireless interface is used [28]. KNIVES uses em-
bedded systems with dry contacts and relays, installed at the
customer’s premises to take inﬂuence on electric loads. A utility
company or system operator can then dispatch messages via the
tree-like, Internet-based network of servers.
There is no uniﬁed DSM communication protocol (yet), dif-
ferent domains like utilities, research or automation companies
have introduced their solutions and ﬁght for dominance. Ope-
nADR and IEC 61850 receive broad acceptance so we might
see the ﬁrst aspects of established standards soon.
III. RECENT DEMONSTRATIONS
Two interesting demonstration projects are done within the
“SmartGrids Model-Region Salzburg”: Building-to-Grid (B2G)
and Consumer-to-Grid (C2G). The two projects aim at two dif-
ferent aspects with regards to an intelligent demand-side: the au-
tomated processes in a building and the customer him/herself.
B2G integrates building automation systems into an intelli-
gent community of cooperating software agents. The smart grid
(operator) can interact with this community to negotiate con-
sumption patterns or ask for support in the case of an emergency.
Fig. 9. Software agents represent and manage buildings in the building-to-grid
project.
Fig. 10. The consumer-to-grid project puts the human back into “the loop.”
The important aspect of B2G is, that the agent has a local “world
model.” It is equipped with a learning model of the building’s
processes. With this model, the agent can plan ahead since it
knows typical usage patterns, time constants of the equipment
and the building itself, and it can even test alternative behavior
in advance (Fig. 9). It is important that this model can be learned
during runtime, since it is impossible to manually conﬁgure all
buildings in the ﬁeld trial.
The target application for B2G is physical and marked-ori-
ented demand response. An example for physical DR in this
project is supporting the DSO in keeping the voltage levels on
the grid, an example for market-oriented DR is real-time pricing.
The Consumer-to-Grid project enables a part in this system
that was long forgotten: the human factor. Control engineers cat-
egorize humans and human behavior typically as “disturbance”
or stochastic variable. In the case of the energy system, humans
can provide remarkable local intelligence if they are included in
the right way. On the other side, any technology is doomed to
fail if the involved users do not like or understand it: Two rea-
sons for C2G to analyze the potential and the mechanisms of
human involvement in the energy demand.
A large number of utility customers are clustered in groups
according to certain statistical rules: categories like “double in-
come no kids” are used to isolate demographic differences, con-
trol groups are created, geographic and social spread is consid-
ered, etc. All probands are equipped with a smart meter to get
ﬁne-grained energy consumption data (Fig. 10).
The probands are then exposed to different types of commu-
nication, ranging from personal conversations, letters, smart-
phone applications, and displays that are installed beside the el-
evator. All these communication channels supply the customers

----- Page 7 (native) -----
PALENSKY AND DIETRICH: DEMAND SIDE MANAGEMENT: DEMAND RESPONSE, INTELLIGENT ENERGY SYSTEMS, AND SMART LOADS
387
with information about their energy consumption, sometimes in
comparison to others. The project analyzes the impact of dif-
ferent types of information, different channels of communica-
tion and how long the impact (energy efﬁciency increase and a
load shifting) lasts. Such “soft” DSM is proven to work [29],
the question is what works best and what is the right medium,
since the way in how we communicate changes constantly.
Both projects are embedded in a larger project bundle that
also covers ICT synergies and market/application platforms.
First, results of B2G and C2G are expected for 2012.
A related project on the European level is EcoGrid EU,2 a
large-scale demonstration project for smart grids and modern
ICT-based energy systems. An entire island (Danish Bornholm)
will be equipped with intelligent buildings, electric storages,
electric vehicles, and distributed generation, all connected with
and cooperating via a new type of real-time market platform.
For the ﬁrst time, real-time control issues and market-based
price formation have a common ground. Usually, marked-driven
DSM relies on the elasticity of the customer with regards to en-
ergy prices. The more ﬂexible the demand side, the quicker and
stronger a response [30]. EcoGrid EU explicitly combines DLC
and marked-based settlement. This accounts for solving multi-
objective problems that a DER faces when entering a new en-
ergy market. A grid segment might signalize overload, the prices
might be attractive and local schedules might add a third voice
in the mind of the local DER controller. EcoGrid EU’s real-time
market might be able to solve parts of these dilemmas. Results
are expected in 2013.
Further exciting insights are expected from the German E-En-
ergy project initiative,3 where six large projects deal with “pro-
sumers” (grid participants that are sometimes producers or con-
sumers), new service providers, ICT gateways, and renewable
energy. Loads and load management play important roles in
these projects.
IV. OUTLOOK
DSM is experiencing a renaissance, driven by the ap-
proaching smart power grids, microgrids [31] and supergrids
[32]. While microgrids obviously (because of their scarce re-
sources) need a ﬂexible demand side to ease system operation,
supergrids import this need from offshore wind farms.
One of the main challenges for DSM is on the ICT side [30].
Surely, DSM potential and operations of the physical parts are
important but they are relatively well researched. It is ICT in-
teroperability, algorithm stability, information security, and (in-
formation) network management that shows the highest levels
of activities. Several international committees are working on
smart grid interoperability, smart metering standards, and infor-
mation security for energy management ([33], [34]).
Out of the classical information security needs, it is the most
popular one—conﬁdentiality—which seams to be the least crit-
ical one for energy systems.
• Conﬁdentiality: keep my shed-actions private.
• Integrity: be sure to get the correct shed signals.
• Authenticity: be sure of the origin of shed information.
2www.eu-ecogrid.net.
3www.e-energy.de.
• Availability: be sure that your DR resources are there when
you need them.
• Access-control: give your DSO access to the ventilation
system but not to the lighting.
• Nonrepudiation: prove your DR participant that he did not
shed when he should have.
Clearly, all security requirements are important and need to
be taken into consideration when designing an ICT-based DSM
system. These requirement stretch up to the required market
platforms, in the case of freely tradable energy resource. Pro-
sumers and other DERs need a solid “digital identity” to act as
business partner on such platforms. Digital signatures, which
address the needs “Integrity” and “Authenticity,” are the min-
imum measures that such a system must implement: DERs must
be sure whom they are cooperating with (other DERs, energy
markets, etc.) and that data is not manipulated. Otherwise, it is
easy to join such a DER community and manipulate entire mar-
kets. The only comparable case for such scenarios can be found
in mobile telecommunication: mobile devices like cell phones
use their tamper-proof subscriber identiﬁcation modules (SIM,
deﬁned as secure platform for this application) to implement
authentication and other security services. DERs clearly need
something comparable.
This is even more evident when the latest trends in electric
mobility is taken into the picture. The storage capabilities of
electric vehicles can—supposing charging stations are equipped
with feedback inverters—offer similar (and even better) services
like intelligent loads. Their roaming nature and dispersed own-
ership, however, makes management and billing a special chal-
lenge. Digital identity of each vehicle and changing station is
one step towards a ﬂexible usage of this enormous potential.
Generally, DSM moves from isolated usage (large industrial
customers that are called via phone for shedding), and old-fash-
ioned ripple control towards a broad, selective, and intelligent
usage of demand resources. Market platforms, a regulatory envi-
ronment that rewards smart consumer behavior, and automation
infrastructure are successfully presented in ﬁeld trials [14], but
still need improvement and a broader application in other coun-
tries. Several demonstration projects that are currently starting
show that there is an active research community in this ﬁeld, and
that industry is already implementing their results.
REFERENCES
[1] Eurelectric, “The role of electricity,” The Union of the Electricity In-
dustry, Bruxelles, Belgium, 2007, Tech. Rep..
[2] M. Prodanovic and T. Green, “High-quality power generation through
distributed control of a power park microgrid,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Elec-
tron. , vol. 53, no. 5, pp. 1471–1482, Oct. 2006.
[3] M. Zhou, Y. Gao, and G. Li, “Study on improvement of available
transfer capability by demand side management,” in Proc. 3rd Int.
Conf. Electric Utility Deregulation and Restructuring and Power
Technologies, DRPT’08, 2008, pp. 545–550.
[4] A. Mohsenian-Rad, V. Wong, J. Jatskevich, R. Schober, and A. Leon-
Garcia, “Autonomous demand-side management based on game-theo-
retic energy consumption scheduling for the future smart grid,” IEEE
Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 320–331, Dec. 2010.
[5] F. Boshell and O. Veloza, “Review of developed demand side man-
agement programs including different concepts and their results,” in
Proc. IEEE Transmission and Distrib. Conf. Expo.: Latin America,
PES, 2008, pp. 1–7.
[6] V. Hamidi, F. Li, L. Yao, and M. Bazargan, “Domestic demand side
management for increasing the value of wind,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Electr. Distrib., CICED, China , 2008, pp. 1–10.

----- Page 8 (native) -----
388
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 7, NO. 3, AUGUST 2011
[7] J. Han and M. Piette, “Solutions for summer electric power shortages:
Demand response and its applications in air conditioning and refrig-
erating systems,” Refrigeration, Air Conditioning, and Electric Power
Machinery, vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 1–4, Jan. 2008.
[8] S. Rahman and . Rinaldy, “An efﬁcient load model for analyzing de-
mand side management impacts,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 8, no.
3, pp. 1219–1226, Aug. 1993.
[9] H. Yang, Y. Zhang, and X. Tong, “System dynamics model for demand
side management,” in Proc. erd Inf. Conf. Electr. Electron. Eng., 2006,
pp. 1–4.
[10] J. Vasquez, J. Guerrero, J. Miret, M. Castilla, and L. de Vicuñanda,
“Hierarchical control of intelligent microgrids,” IEEE Ind. Electron.
Mag., vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 23–29, Dec. 2010.
[11] P. Palensky, The JEVis Service Platform—Distributed Energy Data Ac-
quisition and Management.
Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 2005, pp.
111-1–111-11, no. 0849319854.
[12] A. Gabaldon, A. Molina, C. Roldan, J. Fuentes, E. Gomez, I. Ramirez-
Rosado, P. Lara, J. Dominguez, E. Garcia-Garrido, and E. Tarancon,
“Assessment and simulation of demand-side management potential in
urban power distribution networks,” in IEEE Proc. Tech. Conf. Power
Tech Conf., Bologna, 2003, vol. 4, p. 5.
[13] E. Koch, P. Palensky, M. A. Piette, S. Kiliccote, and G. Ghatikar, “Ar-
chitecture for supporting the automation of demand response,” pre-
sented at the 1st IEEE Ind. Electron. Soc. Industry Forum, Santa Clara,
CA, 2008.
[14] R. Yin, P. Xu, M. Piette, and S. Kiliccote, “Study on auto-DR and
pre-cooling of commercial buildings with thermal mass in California,”
Energy and Buildings, vol. 42, no. 7, pp. 967–975, Jan. 2010.
[15] D. Westermann and A. John, “Demand matching wind power gen-
eration with wide-area measurement and demand-side management,”
IEEE Trans. Energy Conversion, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 145–149, 2007.
[16] F. De Ridder, M. Hommelberg, and E. Peeters, “Four potential business
cases for demand side integration,” in Proc. 6th Eur. Int. Conf. Energy
Market, EEM’09, May 2009, pp. 1–6.
[17] M. Stadler, P. Palensky, B. Lorenz, M. Weihs, and C. Roesener, “In-
tegral resource optimization networks and their techno-economic con-
straints,” Int. J. Distrib. Energy Syst., vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 299–320, Oct.
2005.
[18] L. Cantin, M. Deschenes, B. Comeau, and M. D. Amours, “Controller
for controlling operation of at least one electrical load operating on an
ac supply, and a method thereof,” U.S. Patent 5 442 335, 1995.
[19] F. Kupzog and P. Palensky, “Wide-area control systems for bal-
ance-energy provision by energy consumers,” in Proc. IFAC, FET’07,
Toulouse, France, 2007, pp. 337–345.
[20] W. Qureshi, N.-K. Nair, and M. Farid, “Demand side management
through efﬁcient thermal energy storage using phase change material,”
in Proc. Power Eng. Conf., AUPEC’08, Australasian Universities,
2008, pp. 1–6.
[21] C. Webb, “Virtual power plants: Making the most of distributed gener-
ation,” Power Eng. Int., vol. 18, no. 7, pp. 28–31, 2010.
[22] IEC 61850 Series, IEC Standard 61 850, IEC, 2010.
[23] I. Gyuk, P. Kulkarni, J. Sayer, J. Boyes, G. Corey, and G. Peek, “The
united states of storage [electric energy storage],” IEEE Power and En-
ergy Mag., vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 31–39, Mar. 2005.
[24] T.-J. Park and S.-H. Hong, “Experimental case study of a bacnet-based
lighting control system,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci. Eng., vol. 6, no. 2,
pp. 322–333, Apr. 2009.
[25] ZigBee Smart Energy Proﬁle, ZigBee Alliance Std., 2008, R. Simpson.
[26] S. T. Bushby, “Bacnet: A standard communication infrastructure for in-
telligent buildings,” Autom. Construction, vol. 6, no. 5/6, pp. 529–540,
Sep. 1997.
[27] BACnet Load Control Object, ISO Sttandard ISO 16 484-5 Add-135-
2004e, ISO, 2004.
[28] T. Handa, A. Oda, T. Tachikawa, J. Ichimura, Y. Watanabe, and H.
Nishi, “Knives: A distributed demand side management system—Inte-
gration with zigbee wireless sensor network and application,” in Proc.
6th IEEE Conf. Ind. Informat, INDIN’08, 2008, pp. 324–329.
[29] S. Darby, The effectiveness of feedback on energy consumption. A re-
view for Defra of the literature on metering, billing and direct displays
Environmental Change Inst., Univ. Oxford, Oxford, U.K., 2006, Tech.
Rep..
[30] F. Saffre and R. Gedge, “Demand-side management for the smart grid,”
in Proc. IEEE/IFIP Network Oper. Manage. Symp. Workshops (NOMS
Wksps), Apr. 2010, pp. 300–303.
[31] R. Lasseter, J. Eto, B. Schenkman, J. Stevens, H. Vollkommer, D.
Klapp, E. Linton, H. Hurtado, and J. Roy, “Certs microgrid laboratory
test bed,” IEEE Trans. Power Delivery, vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 325–332,
Jan. 2011.
[32] S. Gordon, “Supergrid to the rescue,” Power Eng., vol. 20, no. 5, pp.
30–33, October 2006.
[33] W. Granzer, F. Praus, and W. Kastner, “Security in building automation
systems,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 57, no. 11, pp. 3622–3630,
Nov. 2010.
[34] A. Treytl, P. Palensky, and T. Sauter, “Security considerations for
energy automation networks,” presented at the 6th IFAC Int. Conf.
Fieldbus Systems and their Applications (FeT 2005), Puebla, Mexico,
2005, no. 9076019096.
Peter Palensky (M’03–SM’05) is Head of the Busi-
ness Unit for Sustainable Building Technologies at
the Austrian Institute of Technology (AIT), Vienna,
Austria. Prior to this, he was CTO of Envidatec
Corporation, Hamburg, Germany, Associate Pro-
fessor at the Department of Electrical, Electronic
and Computer Engineering, University of Pretoria,
South Africa, University Assistant at the Vienna
University of Technology, Austria, and Researcher
at the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, CA.
His main research ﬁelds are automation networks,
distributed embedded systems, home and building automation and energy
management.
Dr. Palensky is an elected AdCom Member of the Industrial Electronics So-
ciety of the IEEE. He is active in international committees like ISO, IEEE, and
CEN.
Dietmar Dietrich (SM’04) became Professor of
Computer Technology at the Vienna University
of Technology, Vienna, Austria, in 1992. He had
been Head of the Institute of Computer Technology
since 1999. Prior to this, he worked in the aviation
and space industry, and later in the communication
industry. He is a member (member of the advisory
board, chair, convenor, etc.) of various national and
international organizations and also a delegate of
the OVE and ON in CEN and CENELEC. He is and
was Associated Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS
ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS (TII) and for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON
INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS (TIE).
Dr. Dietrich is an IEEE IES AdCom member, initiator as well as past TC
Chair of BACM (Building Automation, Control and Management) in IES/IEEE.
Furthermore, he is Associate Editor for EURASIP and co-organizer of various
tracks and conferences for the IEEE. He also became a member of the board
of the OVE in 2002 and was Vice President until Spring 2008. He was Chair
of Section Austria in IEEE R8 from 2006 to 2008. In 1994, he founded the
Center of Excellence for Fieldbus Systems, and in 1995, the International Bi-
ennial Fieldbus Conference FeT. He organized national and international work-
shops and conferences for IEEE and IFAC.