

----- Page 1 (native) -----
Preferred reporting items for systematic review and
meta-analysis protocols (PRISMA-P) 2015: elaboration
and explanation
OPEN ACCESS
Larissa Shamseer
1, David Moher
1, Mike Clarke
2, Davina Ghersi
3, Alessandro Liberati (deceased)
4,
Mark Petticrew
5, Paul Shekelle
6, Lesley A Stewart
7, the PRISMA-P Group
1Ottawa Hospital Research Institute and University of Ottawa, Canada; 2Queen’s University Belfast, Ireland; 3National Health and Medical Research
Council, Australia; 4University of Modena, Italy; 5London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, UK; 6Southern California Evidence-based Practice
Center, USA; 7Centre for Reviews and Dissemination, University of York, UK
Dedication: The PRISMA-P 2015 initiative is dedicated to our colleague
Alessandro Liberati (1954–2012), who passed away while PRISMA-P
2015 was under development and whose contributions to this work were
invaluable.
Abstract
Protocols of systematic reviews and meta-analyses allow for planning
and documentation of review methods, act as a guard against arbitrary
decision making during review conduct, enable readers to assess for
the presence of selective reporting against completed reviews, and,
when made publicly available, reduce duplication of efforts and potentially
prompt collaboration. Evidence documenting the existence of selective
reporting and excessive duplication of reviews on the same or similar
topics is accumulating and many calls have been made in support of
the documentation and public availability of review protocols. Several
efforts have emerged in recent years to rectify these problems, including
development of an international register for prospective reviews
(PROSPERO) and launch of the first open access journal dedicated to
the exclusive publication of systematic review products, including
protocols (BioMed Central’s Systematic Reviews). Furthering these
efforts and building on the PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items for
Systematic Reviews and Meta-analyses) guidelines, an international
group of experts has created a guideline to improve the transparency,
accuracy, completeness, and frequency of documented systematic
review and meta-analysis protocols—PRISMA-P (for protocols) 2015.
The PRISMA-P checklist contains 17 items considered to be essential
and minimum components of a systematic review or meta-analysis
protocol.
This PRISMA-P 2015 Explanation and Elaboration paper provides
readers with a full understanding of and evidence about the necessity
of each item as well as a model example from an existing published
protocol. This paper should be read together with the PRISMA-P 2015
statement. Systematic review authors and assessors are strongly
encouraged to make use of PRISMA-P when drafting and appraising
review protocols.
Introduction
Systematic reviews hold a unique place in healthcare. They help
form the basis for developing practice guidelines and they
provide information on gaps in knowledge, thus informing future
research efforts. This information is relevant to stakeholders
across the health system. The rigour and trustworthiness of
systematic reviews is, in large part, based on the a priori
planning and documentation of a methodical approach to
conduct (that is, a protocol).
A systematic review protocol is important for several reasons:
(1) it allows systematic reviewers to plan carefully and thereby
anticipate potential problems; (2) it allows reviewers to explicitly
document what is planned before they start their review,
enabling others to compare the protocol and the completed
review (that is, to identify selective reporting), to replicate
review methods if desired, and to judge the validity of planned
methods; (3) it prevents arbitrary decision making with respect
to inclusion criteria and extraction of data; and (4) it may reduce
duplication of efforts and enhance collaboration, when available.
Various international organizations such as the Cochrane and
Campbell Collaborations and the Agency for Healthcare
Research and Quality (AHRQ) regularly require and publish
protocols. However, outside of such organizations, few protocols
are published in traditional journals and most reports of
completed reviews (89%) do not mention working from a
protocol1 (2014 update under way). Many experts have called
for improved documentation and availability of review protocols.
In response, experts (some of whom are authors on this
document) launched an international, prospective register for
systematic review protocols (PROSPERO, www.crd.york.ac.
Correspondence to: L Shamseer lshamseer@ohri.ca
No commercial reuse: See rights and reprints http://www.bmj.com/permissions
Subscribe: http://www.bmj.com/subscribe
BMJ 2015;349:g7647 doi: 10.1136/bmj.g7647 (Published 2 January 2015)
Page 1 of 25
Research Methods & Reporting
RESEARCH METHODS & REPORTING
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
2 January 2015. 
10.1136/bmj.g7647 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 2 (native) -----
uk/prospero/) through the Centre for Reviews and Dissemination
at the University of York (UK) in February 2011, in which more
than 5000 systematic review protocols from 69 countries have
been registered as of December 2014. In February 2012, the
first open access journal to exclusively publish systematic review
products including protocols (BioMed Central’s Systematic
Reviews) was launched, in which 142 protocols have been
published (June 2014). Outside of select systematic review
organizations, little to no general guidance exists for preparing
review protocols.
Selective reporting
Arguably one of the most important functions of systematic
review protocols is their role as a documentation of planned
review methods, outcomes, and analyses that can be compared
with completed reviews to detect whether unintended and
undocumented changes were made. Bias related to selective
reporting of outcomes (that is, when reporting is related to the
statistical significance or direction of effect estimate) is a
problem in clinical research. This is a well documented
phenomenon in clinical trials,2-7 and similar findings are starting
to emerge for systematic reviews (see item 13 for full
discussion).8-10 When reviewers selectively choose which
information to include in a report based on the direction and
significance of findings, they risk biasing the evidence base on
which healthcare decisions and policies are made.
Further to recent efforts to increase the documentation and
availability of review protocols, the next logical step is the
development of a set of standards that should be included in a
review protocol. A well described protocol may facilitate and
enhance the detection of undocumented changes to review
methodology; it also may allow readers to gauge the potential
impact of such changes as well as selective reporting of
information on review findings.
To that end, a reporting guideline for systematic review
protocols, an extension of the PRISMA (Preferred Items for
Reporting Systematic Reviews and Meta-analyses) statement
has been developed for protocols (PRISMA-P) and is described
in detail in this paper.
Scope of PRISMA-P
PRISMA-P is intended to guide the development of protocols
of systematic reviews and meta-analyses evaluating therapeutic
efficacy. Even for systematic reviews that are not evaluating
efficacy, authors are encouraged to use PRISMA-P because of
the lack of existing protocol guidance overall. For the purpose
of this guidance, we define a protocol, broadly, as a document
written before the start of a systematic review describing the
rationale and intended purpose of the review, and the planned
methodological and analytical approach (see box 1 for
comprehensive definitions).
PRISMA-P is meant to be used primarily by authors preparing
systematic review protocols for publication, public consumption,
or otherwise. It is also intended for those commissioning and
potentially funding reviews as a guide for applicants on what
should they should include in their review protocols, and as a
tool for peer reviewers to gauge whether a protocol contains
essential details. PRISMA-P will also be helpful for journal
editors and peer reviewers gauging the adequacy of review
protocols for publication. A list of stakeholders to whom we
believe PRISMA-P will be useful along with proposed benefits
for each group is provided in table 1⇓.
Development of PRISMA-P
The PRISMA-P checklist is based on elements from the
PROSPERO register,11 the PRISMA checklist,12 SPIRIT
(Standard Protocol Items: Recommendations for Interventional
Trials) checklist items,13 and Standard 2.6 from the Institute of
Medicine’s Standards for Systematic Reviews.14 A detailed
description of the steps undertaken during PRISMA-P
development can be found in the PRISMA-P Statement paper.15
The process follows general recommendations of the
EQUATOR (Enhancing the Quality and Transparency of health
Research) Network on how to develop a reporting guideline, of
which one fundamental part is a consensus process.16 An
in-person consensus meeting of international experts was held
in June 2011 in Rockville, MD, USA, to develop and refine
PRISMA-P checklist items. All related guidance documents
have undergone iterative revision within the PRISMA-P Group
listed at the end of this document; members of the PRISMA-P
Group contributed to the writing and identifying relevant
examples in this document.
PRISMA-P checklist
The final PRISMA-P checklist contains 17 numbered items (26
sub-items) that should be described, at minimum, in protocols
of systematic reviews and meta-analyses (table 2⇓). The
checklist is divided into three main sections: administrative
information, introduction, and methods. Readers familiar with
PRISMA will observe that wording of the PRISMA-P checklists
has, where possible, been harmonized with PRISMA checklist
items, at least 13 of which are overlapping with PRISMA-P.
We anticipate this will aid authors in transitioning their
systematic review protocols prepared in accordance with
PRISMA-P into full text, PRISMA-compliant, systematic review
reports.
PRISMA-P Elaboration and Explanation
The format of this document follows that of previously
established reporting guidelines such as the PRISMA
Explanation and Elaboration document17; it aims to provide
readers with comprehensive explanations and evidence based
rationales for each checklist item. Examples of good reporting
for each checklist item have been identified from existing
systematic review and meta-analysis protocols and are provided
throughout this document to enhance reader understanding of
items.
Although PRISMA-P focuses on a minimal list of items to
consider when preparing a systematic review protocol, we have
indicated instances where additional information may be
desirable to improve transparency of the planned review process.
The recommendations within PRISMA-P may require more
words or space than authors are accustomed to. Providing
detailed descriptions for some protocol elements (such as item
8, eligibility criteria; item 13, outcomes and prioritisation) will
facilitate transparency and future reproducibility, and allow
authors to shorten their methods section in a completed
systematic review report, if desired, by providing a brief
summary of the methods and referring readers to the completed
protocol or PROSPERO record. We believe that providing in
depth descriptions of planned methodological details for
systematic reviews is in line with emerging journal policies
aimed at facilitating reproducibility.18
Checklist items are numbered as we envision them appearing
in a protocol, and reporting them in this sequential order is a
suggestion that may facilitate reader comprehension. Authors
No commercial reuse: See rights and reprints http://www.bmj.com/permissions
Subscribe: http://www.bmj.com/subscribe
BMJ 2015;349:g7647 doi: 10.1136/bmj.g7647 (Published 2 January 2015)
Page 2 of 25
RESEARCH METHODS & REPORTING
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
2 January 2015. 
10.1136/bmj.g7647 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 3 (native) -----
Box 1: PRISMA-P terminology
Systematic review—A systematic review attempts to collate all relevant evidence that fits pre-specified eligibility criteria to answer a
specific research question. It uses explicit, systematic methods to minimize bias in the identification, selection, synthesis, and summary
of studies. When done well, this provides reliable findings from which conclusions can be drawn and decisions made.179 180 The key
characteristics of a systematic review are: (a) a clearly stated set of objectives with an explicit, reproducible methodology; (b) a systematic
search that attempts to identify all studies that would meet the eligibility criteria; (c) an assessment of the validity of the findings of the
included studies (such as assessment of risk of bias and confidence in cumulative estimates); and (d) systematic presentation, and
synthesis, of the characteristics and findings of the included studies.
Meta-analysis—Meta-analysis is the use of statistical techniques to combine and summarize the results of multiple studies; they may
or may not be contained within a systematic review. By combining data from several studies, meta-analyses can provide more precise
estimates of the effects of healthcare than those derived from the individual studies.
Systematic review protocol—In the context of systematic reviews and meta-analyses, a protocol is a document that presents an explicit
scientific “road map” of a planned, uninitiated systematic review. The protocol details the rational and planned methodological and
analytical approach of the review.
should amend the order of appearance of checklist items if they
deem it to be necessary. Most important is that authors describe
each PRISMA-P item somewhere in their protocol.
One point to note is that, while the development of a protocol
abstract is not a listed requirement on the PRISMA-P checklist,
authors are urged to consult the PRISMA extension for reporting
conference and journal abstracts if so desired.19 The examples
and explanations for each checklist item follow; citations
contained within examples have been removed to avoid potential
confusion with citations in this article.
Section 1: Administrative information
Title
Item 1a: Identification. Identify the report as a
protocol of a systematic review
Example
“Postoperative outcomes following preoperative inspiratory
muscle training in patients undergoing open cardiothoracic or
upper abdominal surgery: protocol for a systematic review”20
Explanation
The knowledge in systematic reviews can be harnessed only if
readers can easily identify them. Data indicate that systematic
reviews are not always described as such in either the title or
abstract; only 50% of systematic reviews included in a
November 2004 sample used the terms “systematic review” or
“meta-analysis” in their title or abstract.1 Similar results have
been reported elsewhere.21 When this happens, reviews and
meta-analyses may not be indexed in databases appropriately
and risk not being found by potential users. This can lead to
wasted efforts by systematic reviewers when knowledge they
produce cannot be identified, one consequence of which may
be unnecessary duplication of efforts by future reviewers.
Authors should title their report as a protocol of a systematic
review and planned meta-analysis (the latter, only if known at
the protocol stage). The term protocol indicates the existence
of a plan for an upcoming, ongoing, or existing systematic
review. Identification as a protocol may reduce unnecessary
redundancy of systematic review efforts22 and may also be
helpful for readers seeking assistance in the design of future
reviews. Although sensitive search strategies have been
developed to identify systematic reviews,23 inclusion of the
terms systematic review or, if a meta-analysis is planned,
meta-analysis in the title of a protocol may improve
identification and retrieval.
We advise authors to use informative titles that make key
information easily accessible to readers. Ideally, a title reflecting
the PICO approach (participants, interventions, comparators,
and outcomes) as well as time frame, setting, and study design,
if desired (see Item 7), will provide readers with key information
about the scope of the planned review.
Item 1b: Update. If the protocol is for an update
of a previous systematic review, identify as such
Example
“The association between proximity to animal-feeding
operations and community health: a protocol for updating a
systematic review”24
Explanation
As explained in item 1a, authors can help to ensure awareness
of the existence of a systematic review and review protocol by
indicating this information in their title. Similar transparency
will help readers identify whether the protocol in question is
for conducting a new systematic review or an update of an
existing one; ideally, this information should be reported within
the title. Updates and, sometimes, expansions of an existing
systematic review allow for the consideration of new evidence
to bring previously published systematic reviews up to date.25
Updating systematic reviews and identifying methods and
signals for when to do so are increasingly being studied,26-30
given that out of date systematic review evidence can be
harmful,31 particularly when updates yield changes in the
direction of effect of one or more outcomes. Although systematic
review updates are not always published as full length articles,
they warrant an independent publication, the title of which
should reflect its purpose.
Registration
Item 2. If registered, provide the name of the
registry (such as PROSPERO) and registration
number
Example
“In accordance with the guidelines, our systematic review
protocol was registered with the International Prospective
Register of Systematic Reviews (PROSPERO) on 11 July 2011
and was last updated on 19 January, 2012 (registration number
CRD42011001410).”32
Explanation
Registration of systematic review protocol details is now
recognized as desirable in order to promote and maintain
transparency in the systematic review process, to assist in
minimizing the risk of bias(es), and help to reduce unnecessary
duplication of reviews.33 At the time of publication, only one
registry for prospective systematic review registration
exists—the PROSPERO register (www.crd.york.ac.uk/prospero/
). The PROSPERO register provides review authors with the
No commercial reuse: See rights and reprints http://www.bmj.com/permissions
Subscribe: http://www.bmj.com/subscribe
BMJ 2015;349:g7647 doi: 10.1136/bmj.g7647 (Published 2 January 2015)
Page 3 of 25
RESEARCH METHODS & REPORTING
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
2 January 2015. 
10.1136/bmj.g7647 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 4 (native) -----
opportunity to freely register reviews evaluating interventions
and strategies to prevent, diagnose, treat, and monitor conditions
for which there is a health related outcome.34 35 Since October
2013, key details from new protocols published in the Cochrane
Library have been automatically added to PROSPERO on a
daily basis. Future plans for PROSPERO include broadening
inclusion to all systematic reviews with a health related outcome
in the broadest sense (such as reviews of risk factors and genetic
associations).
PROSPERO contains 22 mandatory items and 18 optional fields
to capture key review attributes. However, it does not capture
all information that should be included in a review protocol and
does not preclude documentation and publication of a full review
protocol. For easy transition from a registry entry into a full
review protocol, many PRISMA-P items are based on
PROSPERO items.
As with the preparation of a review protocol, the process of
review registration forces authors to think through review
methods and hopefully avoid future changes which may be
associated with reporting biases. Furthermore, the registry entry
itself provides readers with a reference to compare against
complete reviews, in the absence of an available protocol, to
examine for reporting biases. Logically, the planning, conduct,
and reporting of reviews should involve efforts to help detect
and minimize such bias.10 36 Registration helps by prospectively
recording key features of the planned review when the protocol
has been finalized but before any eligibility screening has
started, and making this information available publically and
freely. This information provides those contemplating
commissioning or undertaking a review to identify whether a
relevant review is already planned or underway, if not
completed. This should help avoid unplanned duplication,
ensuring efficient use of resources and offering potential for
future collaboration.37 38 Of 73 randomly selected systematic
reviews of randomised trials published in 2010, 49 (67%) had
at least one overlapping meta-analysis that did not represent an
update (that is, same comparison, type of population or
indication, and outcome).37 This signals a potentially large
degree of wasted efforts.
Details and justification of any changes or amendments (see
Item 4) made during the review process should be added to the
registration record and reported in the final systematic review
results report. By registering this information, the opportunity
for post hoc manipulation and potential consequent bias are
likely minimized. The public record allows comparison of
published review results with what was planned so that readers
can judge whether any discrepancies are likely to have
introduced bias.
Registration information is increasingly being asked for by a
number of journals as part of their submission process.33 39 40
Once reviews are registered on PROSPERO, authors receive a
unique identification number that authors should report in a
review protocol, and in all publications arising from a review
(that is, the protocol and completed review); doing so ensures
that they can easily and confidently be identified as related.
Authors
Item 3a: Contact information. Provide name,
institutional affiliation, and email address of all
protocol authors; provide physical mailing
address of corresponding author
Example
“*Corresponding author: Frances C Hillier
frances.hillier@durham.ac.uk
Author Affiliations
1 Department of Geography, Wolfson Research Institute,
Durham University Queen’s Campus, University Boulevard,
Stockton-on-Tees, TS17 6BH, UK
2 Obesity Related Behaviours Research Group, School of
Medicine and Health, Wolfson Research Institute, Durham
University Queen’s Campus, University Boulevard,
Stockton-on-Tees, TS17 6BH, UK
Email: Clare L Bambra clare.bambra@durham.ac.uk -
Frances C Hillier frances.hillier@durham.ac.uk - Helen J
Moore helen.moore@durham.ac.uk - Carolyn D Summerbell
carolyn.summerbell@durham.ac.uk”41
Explanation
Individuals who have made substantive intellectual contributions
to the development of the systematic review protocol should
provide their names, affiliations, and contact information even
if the protocol is not published or intended to be published.
Together with contributorship (Item 3b), this information can
help identify competing interests and ghost authorship42 and
enhance the recognition and accountability of protocol authors
and transparency of the review.43 Although ghost authorship
itself may not necessarily contribute to scientific bias, it may
reflect the undisclosed shaping role played by companies or
other groups with vested interests in the design or reporting of
a study.42 44-46
In some instances, because of the nature of a relationship with
a funder or sensitivity of the potential data, reviewers may not
wish to have their names on a protocol before the systematic
review is completed. In these instances, reviewers should
provide contact information for the sponsor (host institution or
funder) or for an individual assigned to deal with reader queries.
Item 3b: Contributions. Describe contributions of
protocol authors and identify the guarantor of the
review
Example
“DF is the guarantor. JE, RR and DM drafted the manuscript.
All authors contributed to the development of the selection
criteria, the risk of bias assessment strategy and data extraction
criteria. SB developed the search strategy. RR provided
statistical expertise. DF provided expertise on venous
thromboembolism. SJ contributed to the section on health
economics. All authors read, provided feedback and approved
the final manuscript.”47
Explanation
Some journals urge that published articles include descriptions
of the contributions of each named author.43 48 Likewise, in
review protocols, together with names and contact information,
the role(s) of each author should be clearly described. In
biomedical publishing, journals require authors to have
contributed to an article in at least the following ways: (1)
contributed substantially to the conception and design of the
study, the acquisition of data, or the analysis and interpretation;
(2) drafted or provided critical revision of the article; and (3)
provided final approval of the version to be published.49
No commercial reuse: See rights and reprints http://www.bmj.com/permissions
Subscribe: http://www.bmj.com/subscribe
BMJ 2015;349:g7647 doi: 10.1136/bmj.g7647 (Published 2 January 2015)
Page 4 of 25
RESEARCH METHODS & REPORTING
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
2 January 2015. 
10.1136/bmj.g7647 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 5 (native) -----
The guarantor of a research article is the author who assumes
the overall responsibility for the scientific integrity of the work
as a whole and should be identified as such.46 49 The term
corresponding author typically represents the notion of
“guarantor,” and is also used to indicate which co-author is
responsible for pre- and post-acceptance communication with
the publishing journal and for taking queries to all other
co-authors. A guarantor should be able to answer queries about
the order of authors on the manuscript and about the research
itself.49 The guarantor is often listed as either the first named or
most senior (often last) author.
Amendments
Item 4 If the report represents an amendment of
a previously completed or published protocol,
identify as such and indicate what changes were
made; otherwise state plan for documenting
important protocol amendments
Example 1
“In the event of protocol amendments, the date of each
amendment will be accompanied by a description of the change
and the rationale.”50
Example 2
“If we need to amend this protocol, we will give the date of
each amendment, describe the change and give the rationale in
this section. Changes will not be incorporated into the
protocol.”51
Explanation
Systematic review protocols are typically iterative documents;
modifications to protocols before and during the review process
are to be expected. Systematic reviewers should give careful
consideration to a review’s methodological and analytical
approach early on to avoid unnecessary changes after protocol
development. A study of trials funded by pharmaceutical
companies indicate that at least a third of amendments made to
original trial protocols could have been prevented if key issues
were given more consideration during protocol development52;
this is likely true for systematic reviews as well. A 2002 study
of 66 Cochrane reviews found that 91% of completed reviews
had major changes from the protocol.36 More recently, at least
20% of Cochrane reviews have been found to make
post-protocol modifications to review outcomes (that is,
addition, removal, or reprioritization), many of which are based
on significance of the outcome in the completed review. Making
changes to review outcomes, after knowledge of findings from
included studies can introduce bias into the review process,
mislead readers and possibly affect patient care. Cochrane
reviews have since evolved to provide a dedicated section in
which authors should report any changes made from the
documented protocol.53 Likewise, inclusion of a table
summarizing protocol amendments is a mandatory requirement
for reviews produced by AHRQ’s Effective Health Care
Program (table 3⇓). The PROSPERO register also allows for
and tracks amendments of registered protocols.
Although many amendments do not introduce bias, changes
from earlier protocol versions or from the registry entry should
be transparently identified as such in each documented version
of the protocol so that, at minimum, readers can evaluate the
potential for bias. For protocols in which no amendments have
yet been made, authors should include a description of the
process for dealing with and documenting future amendments
(that is, who will ultimately be responsible for approving,
documenting, and implementing them). An updated protocol
should be identified with a new version number and a list of
specific amendments that were made to the previous version
(see table 3⇓).
Support
Item 5a: Sources. Indicate sources of financial
or other support for the review
Example
“This systematic review is funded by the Institute for
Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addition, Canadian Institutes
of Health Research (funding reference number KSD-115551;
Effectiveness of the Screening, Brief Intervention and Referral
to Treatment (SBIRT) Model for Reducing Illicit Drug Use: A
Systematic Review).”54
Explanation
An updated Cochrane review indicates that drug trials funded
by the pharmaceutical industry report significantly greater
benefits, fewer harms, and more favourable overall conclusions
than those with non-industry funding.55 56 This issue, termed
sponsorship bias, has been characterized less frequently in
systematic reviews and meta-analyses. Of note, since 2004 the
Cochrane Collaboration has prohibited industry support for its
reviews.57 One study indicates that conclusions from company
supported reviews (2003, issue 1) recommended a drug not
recommended in a matching, non-industry funded Cochrane
review, despite both reviews having similar treatment effects;
Cochrane reviews also had greater methodological
transparency.58 Another study of 124 meta-analyses found that
meta-analyses with financial ties to one pharmaceutical company
(n=49) were associated with more favourable conclusions, yet
not more favourable results, than those with other financial
ties.59 Another study failed to replicate these findings, but it did
find that industry supported meta-analyses have worse
methodological quality than meta-analyses supported by
non-profit organizations or unsupported meta-analyses.60
Review authors should disclose sources of financial and
non-financial support for their review, if known at the protocol
stage. If a review is not funded at the time the protocol is first
registered and made available, the proposed sources of support
should be listed and updated once funding is confirmed. Along
with Item 5c (role of funder or sponsor), this information will
help readers assess whether any competing interests or potential
influences are present. As an example, the evaluation of sugar
sweetened beverages and weight gain has recently received
much attention for their purported association with negative
health outcomes. A systematic review of reviews of sugar
sweetened beverages and weight gain found that reviews
identified as being affiliated with or supported by the food
industry were five times more likely to report no positive,
significant association with weight gain than non-industry
affiliated reviews.61 This finding highlights a need for authors
to disclose their affiliations and sources of funding. Inclusion
of the “financial conflicts of interest checklist 2010” with a
protocol is recommended to help readers identify potential
conflicts to be aware of; many journals have already instituted
its use.62
Non-financial sources of support that should be disclosed may
include the provision of services by an institution or funder, an
information specialist who will help to obtain articles, access
to a commercial database not otherwise available to reviewers,
or in-kind use of software to manage or analyze review data.
No commercial reuse: See rights and reprints http://www.bmj.com/permissions
Subscribe: http://www.bmj.com/subscribe
BMJ 2015;349:g7647 doi: 10.1136/bmj.g7647 (Published 2 January 2015)
Page 5 of 25
RESEARCH METHODS & REPORTING
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
2 January 2015. 
10.1136/bmj.g7647 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 6 (native) -----
Item 5b: Sponsor. Provide name of the review
funder and/or sponsor
Example 1
“The Chartered Society of Physiotherapy Charitable Trust
funded this research.”63
Example 2
“The Laboratory of Research and Clinical Applications in
Ophthalmology (Aristotle University of Thessaloniki) is the
Sponsor, meaning that it has overall control of the data. No
funding has been received for this study.”64
Explanation
The term “sponsor” is most often associated with clinical trials
in reference to the individual, company, institution, or
organization assuming overall responsibility for the initiation
and management of the trial.65 However, because systematic
reviews are often commissioned and funded by large agencies
or companies, it is important for protocol authors to name both
the sponsor and funder (Item 5a) in the review protocol, if
applicable. The sponsor may not necessarily refer to the main
funder if, for instance, a funder provides monies to a third party
(sponsor) to carry out the research. This may happen, for
example, if a company provides funds to a university researcher,
whereby the university would become the sponsor of the review.
Where relevant, the sponsor should be named in a review
protocol.
Item 5c: Role of sponsor and/or funder. Describe
roles of funder(s), sponsor(s), and/or
institution(s), if any, in developing the protocol
Example
“The Nova Scotia Health Research Foundation (NSHRF) is
funding the Chronic LBP IPD Meta-analysis project. This
funding will support the collection of the individual participant
data by the original investigators, data management and
analyses. The NSHRF is not involved in any other aspect of the
project, such as the design of the project’s protocol and analysis
plan, the collection and analyses. The funder will have no input
on the interpretation or publication of the study results.”66
Explanation
When the sponsor or funder (sometimes the same entity) with
competing interests has a substantial role in the planning,
conduct, or dissemination of a systematic review, there is
potential for bias if authors do not manage the interests of all
parties appropriately. Although both industry and non-industry
reviews are subject to potential bias(es), published reports of
reviews with commercial sponsorship tend to describe lower
quality methods and more favourable conclusions.58-60 67
Examples exist of unfavourable reviews being suppressed by
commercial sponsors.68 69
To provide full transparency into the potential relevance of
competing interests, review protocols should explicitly describe
the roles (if any) of the sponsor and funders in protocol
development, review conduct, data analysis and interpretation,
and dissemination of the final report. It is important to specify
who will make the final decision about these elements of the
systematic review, particularly if disagreements arise. Any
restrictions on disseminating the final report of the review should
also be documented.
Section 2: Introduction
Rationale
Item 6. Describe the rationale for the review in
the context of what is already known
Example
[Review title: Trends in child and adolescent obesity prevalence
according to socioeconomic position: protocol for a systematic
review]
“It is well recognised that childhood obesity is a significant
public health issue, with adverse physical and psychological
effects that persist beyond childhood into the adult years. After
decades of rapid increase, it appears that childhood obesity
prevalence in developed countries is starting to plateau. Reviews
of international evidence have shown that the prevalence of
obesity in children and adolescents is stabilising in countries
including Australia, Japan, France, the UK and US. However,
evidence also suggests that such progress may not have been
shared among children across all socioeconomic groups.
An international systematic review published in 2010 examined
obesity prevalence trends and reported levelling off of the
obesity epidemic in recent years. Heterogeneity in obesity trends
were reported across socioeconomic strata, with levelling of
obesity prevalence less apparent for more disadvantaged
socioeconomic groups. However, the authors noted that trends
by socioeconomic strata were only explored in a small number
of their included studies. Individual studies reporting the impact
of socioeconomic position (SEP) on obesity prevalence provided
mixed results. Studies from Australia and England reported
socioeconomic differences in obesity trends among children
and adolescents, while evidence from France did not show a
difference. With a specific focus on SEP and childhood obesity,
this review will capture additional data, including papers
published since 2010, to allow greater understanding of trends
in the prevalence of obesity by SEP.
Further investigation is warranted, particularly because of the
existing excess burden of obesity in children in a lower SEP.
Given the health risks associated with excess weight, and the
observed socioeconomic patterning in chronic diseases, if trends
in obesity prevalence are not improving at the same rate across
socioeconomic groups, this will likely lead to further inequalities
across a range of health and wellbeing outcomes. Understanding
the differences between subgroups of the population is critical
to ensuring policy makers can make informed decisions as to
where preventive efforts should be focused. This is particularly
important in light of evidence that demonstrates differential
effectiveness of a number of obesity prevention interventions
according to SEP.”70
Explanation
Readers need to understand the rationale behind the decision to
perform the systematic review and what the results may add to
what is already known. Authors should explain the impetus for
the systematic review (such as to support clinical guideline
development, to address uncertainty or variation in practice in
approaches to a specific clinical problem, to support policy
development, to provide a more precise estimate of effect, to
update a previous review) and briefly summarize how the review
builds on and could add to prior knowledge. In the case of a
protocol to update an existing review, authors should cite the
previous or original review and, in the methods section, point
out any planned modifications from the original review in the
protocol for the update,71 perhaps with a section heading
“updated methods.” Where possible, the primary audience for
No commercial reuse: See rights and reprints http://www.bmj.com/permissions
Subscribe: http://www.bmj.com/subscribe
BMJ 2015;349:g7647 doi: 10.1136/bmj.g7647 (Published 2 January 2015)
Page 6 of 25
RESEARCH METHODS & REPORTING
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
2 January 2015. 
10.1136/bmj.g7647 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 7 (native) -----
the review and the review perspective (that is, patient or clinician
decision making, public health, health policy) should be clear.
Ideally, the rationale section should set the context for both the
protocol as well as the systematic review. Background detail
on the clinical condition should be sufficient to help the reader
establish the overall significance of the proposed systematic
review for developing new knowledge of interest and to help
clarify key decisions or processes undertaken in the research
protocol. These might include the specific focus of the
population, intervention, comparator(s), and outcome (with
emphasis on specific outcomes), settings, study designs, and
time frames. As well, the means by which key perspectives
represented in the review were obtained (that is, patient or other
stakeholder engagement) should be described.
Objectives
Item 7. Provide an explicit statement of the
question(s) the review will address with reference
to participants, interventions, comparators, and
outcomes (PICO)
Example 1
“The aim of this systematic review is to evaluate the
effectiveness and harms of perioperative pregabalin in the
management of postoperative pain for the diverse patients
undergoing various surgical procedures. To this end, the
proposed systematic review will answer the following questions:
1. When compared with standard multimodal analgesia, what
are the comparative effectiveness and harms of the
co-administration of pregabalin in the perioperative pain
management of adult patients?
2. Is there a definitive opioid-sparing advantage of pregabalin
(for example, lower risk of nausea, vomiting, somnolence, opioid
use, and other opioid-related side effects) when used for
perioperative pain management in adults?
3. For questions 1 and 2 above, what clinical and study
methodological characteristics explain the heterogeneity in
results?”72
Example 2
“The objectives of our study are to systematically review the
literature for qualitative evidence that explores the factors that
influence the decision of individuals aged 50 years or over at
average risk for CRC to participate in CRC screening, and how
those factors vary by sex, ethnicity and SES. Our secondary
aim will be to generate a framework to better understand the
perceived benefits and barriers that affect individual
decision-making.”73
Explanation
Among the most crucial pieces of information to include in a
review protocol are the question(s) the reviewers plan to
investigate, or simply, the review’s objectives. Along with the
review’s rationale (Item 6), this information provides the reader
with context and understanding for why the review is being
carried out and what the reviewers hope to achieve. Several key
components, namely the planned population, intervention,
comparator, and outcome (that is, PICO elements) at minimum
should form the basis for developing a specific, well designed
review question. Additional elements such as setting, study
design, and time frame (that is, length of follow-up) may also
be included in the review question, but if not, should certainly
appear in the review’s eligibility criteria (Item 8). Guidance is
available to help researchers develop a research question.74 75
Reviews may focus on one PICO element more than others
given the planned scope of the review; authors should clearly
state this emphasis in the protocol.
Section 3: Methods
Eligibility criteria
Item 8. Specify the study characteristics (such
as PICO, study design, setting, time frame) and
report characteristics (such as years considered,
language, publication status) to be used as
criteria for eligibility for the review
Example:
“Eligibility criteria
“Studies will be selected according to the criteria outlined below.
Study designs
We will include randomized controlled trials (RCTs), including
cluster RCTs, controlled (non-randomized) clinical trials (CCTs)
or cluster trials, interrupted time series (ITS) studies with at
least three data points before and after the intervention,
controlled before-after (CBA) studies, prospective and
retrospective comparative cohort studies, and case-control or
nested case-control studies. Cluster randomized, cluster
non-randomized, or CBA studies will be included only if there
are at least two intervention sites and two control sites. We will
exclude cross-sectional studies, case series, and case reports.
Participants
We will include studies examining the general adult human
population or healthy adult humans (18 years or older). We will
also include studies on people who are overweight or obese, but
will otherwise exclude studies of populations restricted to
specific diseases, conditions, or metabolic disorders. We will
include studies addressing both adults and children if data
provided for adults are reported separately.
Interventions
Of interest are interventions addressing SSB consumption, taking
a broad perspective. In addition to direct consumption studies,
we would consider interventions that influence consumption,
such as those addressing the level of access to SSBs (e.g.
university/college policy) and educational interventions
addressing consumption as relevant. Non-specific or
multi-faceted behavioural, educational, or policy interventions
may also be included subject to the level of evidence that exists
for the aforementioned interventions/exposures. We will also
consider other types of interventions on a case by case basis,
subject to what exists in the literature.
In terms of defining an SSB, we view them as akin to a complex
intervention because they are composed of several parts. For
example, in addition to sugar, some beverages contain caffeine
and the by-products of caramel colouring (2-methylimidazole,
4-methylimidazole), which may contribute independently to
adverse health outcomes. The scope of the review, therefore,
warrants an examination of SSB consumption as a whole, rather
than the specific constituents as exposure variables. Otherwise,
such evaluations would have necessarily required the inclusion
of studies addressing those constituents and in foods and drinks
other than SSBs.
We will use the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC) definition of SSB for drinks that should be included.
According to the CDC, SSBs contain added caloric sweeteners,
which would include natural sweeteners such as honey and
concentrated fruit juice. We have developed a classification
No commercial reuse: See rights and reprints http://www.bmj.com/permissions
Subscribe: http://www.bmj.com/subscribe
BMJ 2015;349:g7647 doi: 10.1136/bmj.g7647 (Published 2 January 2015)
Page 7 of 25
RESEARCH METHODS & REPORTING
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
2 January 2015. 
10.1136/bmj.g7647 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 8 (native) -----
scheme based on the CDC definition for use during the review
(see classification scheme for SSBs below). For beverages such
as coffee, tea, and homemade lemonade, studies will be included
in the review if they explicitly state that sugar was added. We
will exclude artificially sweetened (e.g. with aspartame or
sucralose) beverages, alcoholic beverages, and 100% fruit or
vegetable juices as exposures/interventions.
We will classify SSBs described in studies according to the
following broad categories:
• Sodas-caffeinated/non-caffeinated (soft drinks, soda, pop,
soda pop)
• Other non-carbonated sweetened beverages (fruitades, fruit
drinks, fruit punches, [iced] teas, coffees, non-dairy fruit
smoothies)-caffeinated/non-caffeinated
• Fortified sweetened beverages (energy drinks, fortified
waters, sports drinks)-caffeinated/non-caffeinated and
containing vitamins, amino acids, herbal stimulants, or other
ingredients
• Flavored/sweetened milk or milk alternative beverages
(dairy, soy, almond, milkshakes, dairy based fruit
smoothies)-caffeinated/non-caffeinated
Comparators
Given the broad perspective for interventions of interest, several
comparisons will be relevant to include. Some may be more
likely to come from observational designs and others from
experimental studies.
Direct consumption studies:
1. SSB consumption compared with consumption of non-SSB
drink (e.g. 100% fruit juice, artificially sweetened beverage,
water)
2. Higher level of SSB consumption versus lower level of
SSB consumption for the same drink type (e.g. carbonated
cola beverages)
3. Comparisons among different categories of SSBs (e.g.
soft drinks compared with fruit drinks; see classification
scheme for SSBs) consumed in similar amounts
Interventions that influence consumption:
4. One level of access to SSB compared with another level
of access (e.g. university/college policy on beverages in
vending machines)
5. Educational intervention to specifically promote lower or
no SSB consumption compared with no educational
intervention/regular curriculum coverage/general
health-focussed intervention
6. Non-specific or multi-faceted educational, behavioural,
or policy dietary intervention (may include component of
SSB consumption) compared with no intervention
7. Other comparisons involving interventions that address
our research question (interventions assessed on a case by
case basis, as encountered in the literature)
For comparator groups 2 and 3, we anticipate that volume will
be the most feasible to analyse; however, we will extract all
measures in which consumption is reported (e.g. volume, caloric
intake from sugar) in studies to see what analysis is possible.
For feasibility, category 6 comparisons (non-specific,
multi-faceted interventions) will be coded at title/abstract
screening and not put through to full text screening. If sparse
evidence exists in the other potential comparison types, we will
revisit eligibility for comparison 6.
Outcomes
Endpoints important for decision making are of primary interest.
If reported on, these will be analysed and graded. If a given
clinical endpoint is not reported on, we will analyse and grade
their relevant surrogate outcome(s).
• Endpoints important for decision making:
- Adverse cardiovascular (including cerebrovascular) events
- Cancer (excluding basal cell and squamous cell carcinoma)
- Chronic kidney disease
- Mortality
- Overweight/obesity
- Type 2 diabetes
- Dental caries
- Quality of life (generic, validated tools only, such as those
in Additional file 2)
- Gout
• Surrogate outcomes:
- Pre-diabetes
- Metabolic syndrome
- Change in cardiovascular disease (CVD) risk
- Progression of obesity
- Dyslipidemia
- Hypertension
As some outcomes may be reported as a composite measure,
we will extract all composite and individual outcomes as
reported in the studies.
Outcomes will be collected as reported, with the exception of
quality of life, which will be collected only if assessed with
generic (not disease specific), validated tools. Due to possible
variation in disease definitions over time, we will extract
definitions of outcomes as reported in individual studies. We
will extract outcomes in all data forms (e.g. dichotomous,
continuous) as reported in the included studies.
Timing
Studies will be selected for inclusion based on the length of
follow-up of outcomes. The following will be used as a guide
for all study designs:
• For all decision making endpoint outcomes, studies should
have a follow-up time of at least 1 year.
• For all surrogate outcomes, studies should be at least 6
months duration for follow-up.
• For cancer, studies should be at least 1 year duration for
follow-up. Some types of cancer may need longer than a 1
year follow-up, but this will be evaluated on a case by case
basis.
Setting
There will be no restrictions by type of setting.
Language
We will include articles reported in the English and French
languages. A list of possibly relevant titles in other languages
will be provided as an appendix.”76
Explanation
The requirement and ability to pre-specify eligibility criteria
(sometimes denoted inclusion or exclusion criteria) that
reviewers will use to identify relevant studies for inclusion is a
defining feature of a systematic review.77 Making this
information available to readers of protocols, as in completed
No commercial reuse: See rights and reprints http://www.bmj.com/permissions
Subscribe: http://www.bmj.com/subscribe
BMJ 2015;349:g7647 doi: 10.1136/bmj.g7647 (Published 2 January 2015)
Page 8 of 25
RESEARCH METHODS & REPORTING
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
2 January 2015. 
10.1136/bmj.g7647 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 9 (native) -----
reviews, is essential in appraising the validity, applicability, and
comprehensiveness of a review.74 Thus, authors should provide
an unambiguous description of planned eligibility criteria for
the impending review; such descriptions are a fundamental
component upon which later stages of the review process are
conducted. For instance, eligibility criteria often influence the
terminology used to develop the search strategy and work to
prevent the introduction of bias into the study selection process
of a systematic review.
As in PRISMA, there are two general categories of eligibility
criteria: study characteristics and report characteristics.17 Authors
should describe both. As in the example above, authors can
anticipate that these details will require substantial space in the
methods section of a review protocol while at the same time
facilitating review transparency and future reproducibility.
Study eligibility criteria are the typical PICO elements that form
the basis of clinical questions. These include populations,
interventions, comparators, outcomes, time frames for follow-up,
settings in which the interventions are delivered, and study
designs of interest; they also can include other study specific
elements, such as specifying a minimum length of follow-up or
a minimum sample size for certain types of studies. Authors
should state whether they will exclude studies because the
studies do not include (or report) specific outcomes; doing so
will help readers ascertain whether the eventual review may be
biased as a consequence of selective reporting.4
Review eligibility criteria are likely to include geographical
location, languages of publication, publication status (such as
inclusion of unpublished material or abstracts), and years of
publication. Inclusion or not of literature in multiple
languages,78 79 unpublished data, or older data can influence the
effect estimates in meta-analyses.80 81 If it is planned to filter
out (via search filter, see Item 10) or exclude specific types of
records (such as commentaries, letters, editorials, etc) during
screening, this should be stated.
Information sources
Item 9. Describe all intended information sources
(such as electronic databases, contact with study
authors, trial registers or other grey literature
sources) with planned dates of coverage
Example
“Literature search strategies will be developed using medical
subject headings (MeSH) and text words related to influenza
vaccination. We will search MEDLINE (OVID interface, 1948
onwards), EMBASE (OVID interface, 1980 onwards), and the
Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (Wiley interface,
current issue). The electronic database search will be
supplemented by searching for trial protocols through
metaRegister (http://www.controlled-trials.com/mrct/). The
literature search will be limited to the English language and
human subjects.
To ensure literature saturation, we will scan the reference lists
of included studies or relevant reviews identified through the
search. We will also search the authors’ personal files to make
sure that all relevant material has been captured. Finally, we
will circulate a bibliography of the included articles to the
systematic review team, as well as to influenza experts identified
by the team.”82
Explanation
A systematic review search typically includes a variety of
information sources including electronic bibliographic databases
(such as Medline, Embase), reference lists, contact with authors
of included studies, study registries, and grey literature. Most
biomedical topics will include a Medline search, plus additional
electronic databases. Searching additional electronic databases
helps ensure more complete coverage of the topic by accounting
for variability between the indexing in each database. In
situations in which identifying all relevant studies through hand
searching and database searching is difficult, if any other
searching, such as reference lists, is planned to supplement
searching, authors should report this.83 Documentation of the
planned information sources should include the name of each
source, the date range that was searched (that is, start and end
dates, and, for electronic database searches, the search platform
or provider such, as Ovid or PubMed). This information will
be important to the person developing and conducting the search
if an update to the review is carried out. Authors should also
report who developed and carried out the search.83 84
The Cochrane Collaboration,85 AHRQ’s Effective Health Care
Program,86 and the Institute of Medicine (Standard 3.1),14 among
others, offer guidance on developing a rigorous systematic
review search strategy. If these sources are used, authors should
report this information.
Search strategy
Item 10. Present draft of search strategy to be
used for at least one electronic database,
including planned limits, such that it could be
repeated
Example
“Both qualitative and quantitative studies will be sought. No
study design, date or language limits will be imposed on the
search, although only studies in languages other than English
that can be translated adequately using Google translate1 will
be included, due to resource limits. Medline, EMBASE,
PsycINFO, and the CENTRAL trials registry of the Cochrane
Collaboration will be searched. The specific search strategies
will be created by a Health Sciences Librarian with expertise
in systematic review searching. The MEDLINE strategy will
be developed with input from the project team, then peer
reviewed by a second librarian, not otherwise associated with
the project, using the PRESS standard.2 A draft MEDLINE
search strategy is included in Appendix 1. After the MEDLINE
strategy is finalized, it will be adapted to the syntax and subject
headings of the other databases.
As well, the International Clinical Trials Registry Platform
Search Portal and ClinicalTrials.gov will be searched for
ongoing or recently completed trials, and PROSPERO will be
searched for ongoing or recently completed systematic reviews.
As relevant studies are identified, reviewers will check for
additional relevant cited and citing articles.
“The search will be updated toward the end of the review, after
being validated to ensure that the MEDLINE strategy retrieves
a high proportion of eligible studies found through any means
but indexed in MEDLINE.
…
Appendix 1
Draft MEDLINE search - Ovid interface
1. Infant, Extremely Premature/
2. Infant, Extremely Low Birth Weight/
3. Infant, Very Low Birth Weight/
4. (extreme* adj2 preterm).mp.
No commercial reuse: See rights and reprints http://www.bmj.com/permissions
Subscribe: http://www.bmj.com/subscribe
BMJ 2015;349:g7647 doi: 10.1136/bmj.g7647 (Published 2 January 2015)
Page 9 of 25
RESEARCH METHODS & REPORTING
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
2 January 2015. 
10.1136/bmj.g7647 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 10 (native) -----
5. (extreme* adj2 prematur*).mp.
6. extreme* low birth weight.mp.
7. (low gestational age neonate* or ELGAN*).mp.
8. very preterm.mp.
9. very premature.mp.
10. ELBW.mp.
11. ((limit* adj2 viability) or (margin* adj2 viability)).tw.
or (22 week* or 23 week* or 24 week* or 25 week* or 26
week* or (26* adj5 week*) or (27* adj5 week*) or (28* adj5
week*) or (29* adj5 week*) or (30* adj5 week*) or (31*
adj5 week*) or 32* week* or (32* adj2 fewer week*) or
(32* adj2 less week*)).mp.
12. resuscit*.mp.
13. exp Obstetric Labor, Premature/
14. or/1-13
15. exp Parents/ or parent*.tw. or mother*.tw. or father*.tw.
16. Decision Making/
17. Counseling/
18. Advance Care Planning/ or Advance Directives/
19. (counsel* and decision*).mp.
20. or/16-19
21. (deliver* or predeliver* or prenatal* or antenatal* or
perinatal*).mp.
22. 14 and 15 and 20 and 21”87
Explanation
The comprehensiveness and completeness of a literature search
is extremely important in systematic reviews. High quality
searches of information resources are essential components in
the efforts toward accuracy and completeness of the evidence
base.88
At a minimum, authors should provide the transcript of a draft
search strategy for one major database (such as Medline) for
each search question (if different searches were run for each
question). In the documented strategy, it should be evident which
indexing terms reviewers selected and what limits (such as
language and date restrictions) were (or will be) applied to the
search. If authors plan to use any search filters, information
about their validity and performance metrics should be provided.
Authors should also describe the planned search strategy
approach for other databases, including planned modifications
to indexing terms, free text terms, and limits, which may vary
across databases.
If limits were used to restrict the search to particular study type
(that is, trials, human, or clinical studies) or date range, authors
should report what these were and how they were achieved.
Simply stating, for example, that all publications in the form of
letters will be excluded from the search can be problematic
given that the publication of randomised trials as “letters to the
editor,” is a documented problem,89 and authors may be
intending to make an exception for such reports. Authors should
report the logical construction of text used to create such limits
within the draft search strategy (such as “NOT (letter.pt NOT
randomized controlled trial.pt”).90 Doing so can help readers
assess the appropriateness of intended limits within a search
strategy.
Most searches have constraints—for example, relating to limited
time or financial resources, inaccessible or inadequately indexed
reports and databases, unavailability of experts with particular
language or database searching skills, or review questions for
which pertinent evidence is not easy to find. Authors should be
straightforward in describing their search constraints.17
Authors should also report the approach that was or will be
taken in the development of a search strategy, including
qualifications of the searcher (such as a health information
specialist with systematic review experience), planned databases
to be searched (see Item 9), limits to be imposed (to demonstrate
alignment with review eligibility criteria), and whether the
search was or will be peer reviewed and by whom.91 Having a
search strategy peer reviewed may help to increase its
comprehensiveness or decrease yield where search terminology
is unnecessarily broad.
The draft search strategy can be presented in the body of the
text or as a table. If the protocol is being published in a journal,
the journal may advise on this issue (that is, in their instructions
to authors). If space is a concern, authors should ask the editor
whether it can be included it as a web based appendix or whether
an electronic link to where it can be found can be provided in
the manuscript.
Providing details of the planned search strategy will allow
readers of systematic review protocols to appraise and avoid
potential duplication of efforts, as well as possibly enhance the
development of their own searches. Including at least one main
search strategy can also specifically facilitate updating.
Study records
Item 11a: Data management. Describe the
mechanism(s) that will be used to manage
records and data throughout the review
Example
“Literature search results will be uploaded to Distiller Systematic
Review (DSR) Software, an Internet based software program
that facilitates collaboration among reviewers during the study
selection process. The team will develop and test screening
questions and forms for level 1 and 2 assessments based on the
inclusion and exclusion criteria. Citation abstracts and full text
articles will be uploaded with screening questions to DSR. Prior
to the formal screening process, a calibration exercise will be
undertaken to pilot and refine the screening questions. Further,
we will provide training to new members of the review team
not familiar with the DSR software and the content area prior
to the start of the review.”54
Explanation
Systematic review data management software is becoming
increasingly common. Examples of web based software are
Distiller SR and Eppi-Reviewer. These web based software
management programs are helpful in managing small or large
scale datasets by allowing importation of citations and PDFs to
be screened and included. They may reduce data entry errors
during the data extraction process by allowing direct entry into
pre-created data extraction forms and export of data directly
into statistical analysis software. They may also facilitate the
creation of a PRISMA flow diagram once the screening process
is completed. Whether use of such software is planned to
manage records in the review should be described in the
protocol. Several other tools may be used during the review
process to de-duplicate references (such as reference
management software) and to extract or manage data (such as
electronic software).92 Reviewers using more traditional forms
of data management should also describe their process.
No commercial reuse: See rights and reprints http://www.bmj.com/permissions
Subscribe: http://www.bmj.com/subscribe
BMJ 2015;349:g7647 doi: 10.1136/bmj.g7647 (Published 2 January 2015)
Page 10 of 25
RESEARCH METHODS & REPORTING
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
2 January 2015. 
10.1136/bmj.g7647 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 11 (native) -----
Whatever process is used, it should be described in sufficient
detail so that interested readers can replicate the process.
Some studies are published more than once. Duplicate
publications may be difficult to ascertain, and their inclusion
may introduce bias.93 94 We ask authors to describe any steps
they are proposing to use to avoid double counting and to piece
together data from multiple reports of the same study (such as
juxtaposing author names, treatment comparisons, sample sizes,
or outcomes). We also recommend that authors indicate whether
all reports on a study were considered, as inconsistencies may
reveal important limitations. For example, a review of multiple
publications of drug trials showed that reported study
characteristics may differ from report to report, including the
description of the design, number of patients analyzed, chosen
significance level, and outcomes.95 See Item 12 (data items) for
more information.
Item 11b: Selection process. State the process
that will be used for selecting studies (such as
two independent reviewers) through each phase
of the review (screening, eligibility, and inclusion
in meta-analysis)
Example
“The review authors will independently screen the titles and
abstracts yielded by the search against the inclusion criteria.
We will obtain full reports for all titles that appear to meet the
inclusion criteria or where there is any uncertainty. Review
author pairs will then screen the full text reports and decide
whether these meet the inclusion criteria. We will seek additional
information from study authors where necessary to resolve
questions about eligibility. We will resolve disagreement through
discussion. We will record the reasons for excluding trials.
Neither of the review authors will be blind to the journal titles
or to the study authors or institutions.”96
Explanation
Reviewers will often identify a large number of studies from
electronic database searches, and then use pre-defined eligibility
criteria (Item 8) to determine which records are relevant and
should be included in the review. There is currently no agreed
process for how studies should be selected for inclusion in a
systematic review. For example, it is unclear whether all records
identified by the search should be initially screened for potential
inclusion by two independent reviewers, or if only those noted
as excluded by one reviewer should be. Protocol authors should
therefore describe their specific approach for identifying
potentially eligible records (that is, by title and abstract
screening) and for selecting studies for final inclusion (that is,
by full text screening). Typical methodology for study selection
is aimed at enhancing objectivity and preventing mistakes.
Often, screening is carried out in duplicate by independent
reviewers at each stage of the review to reduce the possibility
of excluding relevant reports.97 The benefit may be greatest for
topics where selection or rejection of an article requires difficult
judgments.98
Authors should report whether one or several persons will be
involved in each stage of screening and name those who will
be involved, if known. If independent screening is planned,
authors should describe the process for dealing with
discrepancies (such as third party arbitration or contacting
authors of original studies) and whether inter-rater agreement
will be calculated.
Item 11c: Data collection process. Describe
planned method of extracting data from reports
(such as piloting forms, done independently, in
duplicate), any processes for obtaining and
confirming data from investigators
Example
“Using standardized forms … and a detailed instruction manual
that will be used to inform specific tailoring of an online data
abstraction program (DistillerSR), ten teams of reviewers will
extract data independently and in duplicate from each eligible
study. To ensure consistency across reviewers, we will conduct
calibration exercises before starting the review. Data abstracted
will include demographic information, methodology,
intervention details, and all reported patient-important outcomes.
Reviewers will resolve disagreements by discussion, and one
of two arbitrators (JWB or GHG) will adjudicate unresolved
disagreements. We will contact study authors to resolve any
uncertainties.”99
Explanation
Reviewers should plan and document the approach they plan
to use to extract data from included studies in the review along
with which data items (Item 12) and types of data. Data
extraction forms should be developed a priori and included in
the published or otherwise available review protocol as an
appendix or as online supplementary materials.
As with screening, data extraction is often carried out in
duplicate by independent reviewers or by one reviewer with
verification by another in order to reduce bias and reduce errors
in data extraction. The planned approach for resolving
discrepancies should be stated. Although single data extraction
has not been shown to substantially affect treatment effect
estimates, reviewers should explicitly indicate whether single
extraction will be employed to allow reviewers and readers to
be more mindful of the possibility for errors in the completed
review.100
Data extraction can be complicated, especially with more
complex topics, and level of reviewer experience has not been
shown to affect extraction error rates.101 102 As such, additional
strategies planned to reduce errors, such as training of reviewers
and piloting of extraction forms should be described. In addition,
if reviewers plan to make use of data extraction techniques to
obtain outcome data not reported in a usable format, such as
translating graphically presented data into a usable (that is,
numeric) format,103 they should plan for this during the protocol
stage and report details of proposed software and its sensitivity
and specificity.
If an individual patient data (IPD) meta-analysis is planned,
authors should also tell readers when and how they sought
individual patient data from the original researchers.104 Data
extraction for IPD reviews will often involve collection and
scrutiny of detailed raw databases; authors should describe their
planned approach clearly. The description might include how
they attempted to contact researchers, what they asked for (that
is, using a reply form with pre-specified data items), and their
plan if they are unable to obtain all requested information. For
IPD meta-analyses or otherwise, reviewers should also state
whether they intend to confirm the accuracy of the extracted
information to be included in their review with original
researchers, for example, by sending them a copy of the draft
review when available.105
Data in primary studies may not always be presented in a format
that is useful to systematic reviewers. Contacting authors for
No commercial reuse: See rights and reprints http://www.bmj.com/permissions
Subscribe: http://www.bmj.com/subscribe
BMJ 2015;349:g7647 doi: 10.1136/bmj.g7647 (Published 2 January 2015)
Page 11 of 25
RESEARCH METHODS & REPORTING
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
2 January 2015. 
10.1136/bmj.g7647 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 12 (native) -----
missing information about treatments, for example, has been
shown to improve the completeness of treatment descriptions
by at least 27%.106 Ideally, authors of primary studies should be
urged to report all aspects of their studies more clearly.107
However, in the absence of complete descriptions of treatments,
outcomes, effect estimates, or other important information,
reviewers may consider asking authors for this information.
Whether reviewers plan to contact authors of included studies
and how this will be done (such as a maximum of three email
attempts) to obtain missing information should be documented
in the protocol.
Knowledge of duplicate, overlapping, or companion studies
(that is, multiple reports of a single study) may come to light
only during the data extraction process.94 The inclusion of data
from multiple reports as separate studies may lead to biased
treatment effects93 and should be anticipated by reviewers.
Methods for identifying and dealing with multiple reports of a
single study have been described.108 109 Authors should present
the algorithm they will follow to select data from overlapping
reports and the planned approach for solving logical
inconsistencies across reports.
Data items
Item 12. List and define all variables for which
data will be sought (such as PICO items, funding
sources) and any pre-planned data assumptions
and simplifications
Example 1
“We will extract the generic and the trade name of the
experimental intervention, the type of control used, dosage,
frequency and duration of treatment, patient characteristics
(average age, gender, mean duration of symptoms, type of joints
affected), type of pain or function related outcome extracted,
trial design, trial size, duration of follow-up, type and source
of financial support and publication status from trial reports.
For non-pharmacological interventions, we will extract type,
modes of application and intensity, if appropriate. When
necessary, means and measures of dispersion will be
approximated from figures in the reports. For cross-over trials,
we will extract data from the first period only because of
possible carry-over effects. Whenever possible, we will use
results from an intention to treat analysis. If effect sizes cannot
be calculated, we will contact the authors for additional data.”110
Example 2 (data simplifications)
“It is possible that individual studies may consist of multiple
treatment groups, such as different types of depression
interventions or different doses of medication. In order to avoid
the possibility of introducing bias caused by multiple statistical
comparisons with one control group, we will combine the groups
from multiple arm studies into a single group.”111
Explanation
Readers need to know what information review authors plan to
obtain from the included studies. Data items and pre-specified
time points are essential to document in a review protocol
because this information allows readers to refer back to the
protocol when the review is complete to determine whether
changes occurred. Extraction forms should include definitions
of variables, with particular details about the planned outcomes,
and their measurement duration and frequency (Item 13).
The selective reporting of information in reviews is a
documented concern.8 36 Providing readers with the opportunity
to identify and make their own judgments about selective
reporting is crucial.112 If the review is limited to reporting only
those variables that were obtained, rather than those that were
deemed important a priori but could not be obtained, bias might
be introduced and the reader might be misled. In protocol
amendments and completed reviews, authors should clearly
outline whether any data items were added after the protocol
was developed or after the review began and give the reasons
why. Such variables might include aspects of treatments or
outcomes identified as important because they recur during the
review process (such as important outcome measures that the
reviewers initially overlooked). A more complete discussion of
selective outcome reporting in systematic reviews and related
bias is found in Item 13.
Authors should describe assumptions they intend to make if
they encounter missing or unclear information and explain how
they plan to deal with such data or lack thereof, in addition to
contacting authors (Item 11c). For example, in studies of women
aged 50 or older it may be reasonable to assume that none was
pregnant even if this is not reported. Ideally, authors should
anticipate as many uncertainties as possible before they arise
and have a documented, agreed approach for dealing with such
data. Likewise, review authors might make assumptions about
the route of administration of drugs assessed. However, a more
prudent approach is required when dealing with qualitative
information. For example, the upper age limit for “children”
can vary from 15 years to 21 years, or the level of severity of
an outcome (such as an adverse effect) might be poorly
described in primary research and mean very different things
to different researchers at different times and for different
patients.
If simplifications such as combining treatment arms (for multiple
treatment trials) or using first period data for cross over trials
are planned, these should be described.
Outcomes and prioritisation
Item 13. List and define all outcomes for which
data will be sought, including prioritisation of main
and additional outcomes, with rationale
Example
“Primary outcomes
“The primary outcome will be the number of patients who
responded to treatment, defined as a reduction of at least 50%
on the Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HAM-D), the
Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale (MADRS) or
any other depression scale, or ‘much or very much improved’
(score 1 or 2) on the Clinical Global Impression (CGI)
Improvement Scale. All response rates will be calculated from
the total number of randomised patients. Where more than one
criterion is provided, we will use the HAM-D for judging the
response and then follow the sequence described above. Despite
the problems surrounding scale-derived response cutoffs,
dichotomous outcomes can be understood more intuitively by
clinicians than the mean values of rating scales and are therefore
preferred.
When studies report response rates at various time points of the
trial, we have decided a priori to subdivide the treatment indices
as follows.
1. Early response, between one and four weeks, the time
point closest to two weeks will be given preference.
2. Acute phase treatment response, between six and 12
weeks, the time point given in the original study as the study
endpoint will be given preference.
No commercial reuse: See rights and reprints http://www.bmj.com/permissions
Subscribe: http://www.bmj.com/subscribe
BMJ 2015;349:g7647 doi: 10.1136/bmj.g7647 (Published 2 January 2015)
Page 12 of 25
RESEARCH METHODS & REPORTING
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
2 January 2015. 
10.1136/bmj.g7647 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 13 (native) -----
3. Follow-up response, between four and six months, the
time point closest to 24 weeks will be given preference.
The acute phase treatment response, that is between six and 12
weeks, was our primary outcome of interest.
Secondary outcomes
1. The number of participants in remission, as defined by either:
(a) at 7 or less on the 17-item HAM-D and at 8 or less for all
the other longer versions of HAM-D; (b) at 10 or less on the
MADRS; (c) ‘not ill or borderline mentally ill’ (score 1 or 2)
on the CGI-Severity; or (d) other criteria as defined by the trial
authors. All remission rates will be calculated out of the total
number of randomised patients. Where two or more scales are
provided, we prefer the first criteria for judging remission.
‘Remission’ is a state of relative absence of symptoms. This
outcome adds to the primary outcome ‘response’ to treatment.
The disadvantage of ‘remission’ is that its frequency depends
on the initial severity of the participants. If they were only
relatively mildly ill, many will be classified as in remission
while only few will be in the case of high average severity at
baseline. Therefore, studies and meta-analyses usually apply
response and not remission as the primary outcome.
2. Change scores from baseline or endpoint score at the time
point in question (early response, acute phase response, or
follow-up response as defined above) on the HAM-D or
MADRS, or any other validated depression scale. The results
of mean values of depression rating scales can be more sensitive
than dichotomous response data. Therefore, they should also
be presented even though their interpretation is less intuitive
than with dichotomous response data. Change data will be
preferred to endpoint data but both will have to be presented
separately because we will use the standardised mean difference
as an effect size measure for which pooling of endpoint and
change data is not appropriate. We prefer change scores to
endpoint scores because they, to a certain extent, take into
account small baseline imbalances.
3. Social adjustment, social functioning including the Global
Assessment of Function scores.
4. Health-related quality of life as measured by validated disease
specific and generic scales such as the Short Form (SF)-36 or
the Health of the Nation Outcome Scales (HoNOS).
5. Various reasons for dropping out of the studies:
a) due to any reason, as a measure of the overall acceptability
of treatment;
b) due to inefficacy of treatment, as a global efficacy
measure;
c) due to adverse events, as a global measure of tolerability.
6. Death:
a) natural causes;
b) suicide;
c) suicide attempts.
7. Side-effects:
a) number of participants experiencing at least one
side-effect, b) agitation or anxiety, c) blurred vision, d)
constipation, e) urination problems, f) delirium, g) diarrhoea,
h) dry mouth, i) fits, j) insomnia, k) hypotension, l) nausea,
m) sedation or somnolence, n) vomiting, o) vertigo.
We anticipate including the following main outcomes in a
summary of findings table using GRADEpro: response to
treatment, acceptability of treatment (dropout due to any reason),
quality of life, death due to suicide and overall tolerability
(dropout due to adverse events).”113
Explanation
Systematic reviews must include a description of all outcomes
(endpoints) of interest,74 and by extension the same applies to
protocols. Systematic reviews that aim to inform decision
making should summarize both benefits and harms of
interventions,114 and specifying what those are during the
planning phases of a review is, at minimum, a reminder or a
commitment to do so. Review protocols should distinguish
between which outcomes are considered the main outcome(s),
also known as primary outcome(s), of a review and those that
are additional (secondary) outcomes; these may differ from the
prioritisation assigned to outcomes in primary studies.
Listing all outcomes for which data will be sought in a review
and providing sufficient details and definitions are essential in
a review protocol. Some outcomes may warrant additional
details in their definitions such as distinctions between surrogate
versus clinical, composite versus non-composite, and objective
measurement versus subjective assessment. If, for example, a
surrogate outcome is specified in lieu of a clinical outcome, a
rationale as to why this was done and how the surrogate outcome
is an indicator (associated) of a clinically important outcome
should be stated. Consider, for example, a systematic review
that focuses primarily on whether continuous positive airway
pressure treatment reduces symptoms of somnolence and fatigue
in patients with obstructive sleep apnoea (an abnormality of
breathing patterns during sleep). The outcomes of interest should
include instruments measuring symptoms (such as the Epworth
Sleepiness Scale)115 but not necessarily neurophysiological
signals such as the frequency of apnoeas (no breathing) or
hypopnoeas (reduced breathing), muscle tone, and heart rate
variability, which are commonly reported but do not correlate
well with symptoms.116 Authors should do sufficient
investigation during the planning stage to ensure that selected
outcomes are relevant. Given increasing efforts to involve
patients in the selection and assessment of outcomes,117 reviewers
should indicate whether planned outcomes are patient centred,
and further, whether they are patient reported, and how such
outcomes will be treated.118
The reporting of composite outcomes within a completed
systematic review has been found to be variable across the
abstract, methods, and results sections of the report.119 Because
the various components of a composite outcome have the
potential to be combined in different ways, yielding differences
in the direction, strength, and significance of an outcome, it is
essential in a review protocol to state and define each component
of a composite outcome explicitly, and, further, state how
components within a composite outcome will be analysed,
whether independently, all together, or in specific combinations
(Item 15b).
Meta-analyses within systematic reviews are often limited by
information available in included study reports. As such, discrete
descriptions of the endpoints are not always possible at the
protocol stage. The minimum and often only information one
can practically specify is a broad description of the “outcome
concept”—for example, what is the effect of an intervention on
“survival or mortality.” Such a description is too generic, and
authors will need to refine it when they conduct their systematic
review. Examples of more refined descriptions are “mortality
at 12 months” or “mortality at 5 years” (for example, as odds
ratios from cross tabulated counts of deaths at these follow-up
durations) and “survival” (typically hazard ratios from
time-to-event analyses). Reviewers should state their plans to
refine outcome definitions based on definitions used in included
studies.
No commercial reuse: See rights and reprints http://www.bmj.com/permissions
Subscribe: http://www.bmj.com/subscribe
BMJ 2015;349:g7647 doi: 10.1136/bmj.g7647 (Published 2 January 2015)
Page 13 of 25
RESEARCH METHODS & REPORTING
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
2 January 2015. 
10.1136/bmj.g7647 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 14 (native) -----
Careful consideration of outcomes during the planning stages
of a review can also improve efficiency in the review process.
For example, if authors make a decision to add an outcome(s)
at some point during data extraction, they will need to revisit
all included papers to extract the additional information; this is
a waste of reviewers’ time. Minimizing such back and forth
economizes time and resources and reduces the likelihood of
mistakes.
The main outcome(s) of a review should be distinguished from
additional outcomes and specific definitions of each should be
provided. The scientific question or the decisional problem that
motivates the systematic review typically dictates the main
outcome(s) of interest. Thus for systematic reviews that aim to
inform healthcare decisions or policy, the main outcomes are
likely to be patient relevant outcomes (such as risk of stroke)
or validated surrogate outcomes (for example, change in
cholesterol levels is a valid surrogate for the risk of
cardiovascular events for statin based interventions). In contrast,
systematic reviews that aim to summarize the state of the science
in the pathophysiology of a disease might appropriately choose
biochemical or other measurements as main outcomes. All other
outcomes are considered additional and are reviewed to provide
complementary information and for completeness.
Listing and defining outcomes in a review protocol, as well as
the prioritization of each as a main or additional outcome, will
facilitate the ability of future readers of completed reviews to
investigate selective reporting. Selective reporting of
outcomes—that is, the addition, removal, or change in the
priority of review outcomes between the protocol, methods
section, and results of a review—is well recognized.10 120 A 2010
study comparing Cochrane protocols with the completed reviews
found that 22% of Cochrane reviews had a discrepancy in at
least one outcome measure compared with their protocols, at
least 75% of which were attributable to changes in the primary
outcome, some after knowledge of review findings.10 This is
described as outcome reporting bias and occurs when the
reporting of an outcome is associated with its significance.
Whether in a completed review, outcomes are prioritized as
main or additional should not be dependent on their prioritization
or statistical significance in included studies.
Readers will note that the contents of this item are overlapping
with Item 8 (eligibility criteria). Given the importance of
outcomes in the review process, issues in the selection of
relevant outcomes, and their potential to be manipulated during
the review process, we felt that an item specifically dedicated
to the reporting of outcomes would greatly facilitate complete
and transparent reporting around this item. Readers should also
note that complete definition and description of planned review
outcomes, as proposed above, will occupy substantial space in
a review protocol.
Risk of bias individual studies
Item 14. Describe anticipated methods for
assessing risk of bias of individual studies,
including whether this will be done at the outcome
or study level, or both; state how this information
will be used in data synthesis
Example 1
“To facilitate the assessment of possible risk of bias for each
study, we will collect information using the Cochrane
Collaboration tool for assessing the risk of bias (Table 8.5.a in
the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of
Interventions), which covers: sequence generation, allocation
concealment, blinding, incomplete outcome data (e.g. dropouts
and withdrawals) and selective outcome reporting. For each
domain in the tool, we will describe the procedures undertaken
for each study, including verbatim quotes. A judgement as to
the possible risk of bias on each of the six domains will be made
from the extracted information, rated as ‘high risk’ or ‘low risk’.
If there is insufficient detail reported in the study we will judge
the risk of bias as ‘unclear’ and the original study investigators
will be contacted for more information. These judgements will
be made independently by two review authors based on the
criteria for judging the risk of bias (Table 8.5.c in the Cochrane
Handbook Higgins 2011). Disagreements will be resolved first
by discussion and then by consulting a third author for
arbitration. We will compute graphic representations of potential
bias within and across studies using RevMan 5.1 (Review
Manager 5.1). We will consider each item in the risk of bias
assessment independently without an attempt to collate and
assign an overall score.”121
Example 2
“Included non-randomised studies may or may not have a
comparison group. To assess the risk of bias within included
… studies, the methodological quality of potential studies will
be assessed by using the Newcastle-Ottawa scale (NOS) for
assessing the quality of non-randomised studies in
meta-analyses. The NOS for case-control and cohort studies
will be adapted (Table 1) to meet the specific needs of this
systematic review. The cohort scale will be modified for use in
case series. Using the NOS, studies will be awarded a maximum
of nine points on items related to the selection of the study
groups, the comparability of the groups, and the ascertainment
of outcome of interest. Using this modified score, case series
will be eligible for a maximum of six points. This will be
undertaken by two separate reviewers. Where there is
disagreement, a third reviewer will be used as an arbitrator.”122
Explanation
An assessment of the risk of bias (or “quality”) of studies
included in a review is an important component of any well
planned or conducted systematic review. Such an assessment
contributes to the evaluation of the overall strength of evidence
of the review (Item 17). Established methods for assessing risk
of bias in reviews have been documented.123 124 Descriptions of
the planned approach to assessing risk of bias should include
the constructs being assessed and a definition for each, reviewer
judgment options (high, low, unclear), the number of assessors,
experience of assessors (training, piloting, previous risk of bias
assessment experience), as well as method(s) of assessment
(independent or in duplicate).125 Whether reviewers are going
to be blinded to studies should also be reported,126 127 as well as
whether agreement between reviewers will be evaluated and, if
so, how.
Details of planned methods to summarise risk of bias
assessments across studies or outcomes should be provided.
Although authors may spend a large proportion of time assessing
risk of bias in included studies, they are often silent on how the
results might influence their review findings.128 129 Thus, we
encourage reviewers to think about this at the development stage
and document their plans in the protocol. Authors should also
describe how risk of bias assessments will be incorporated into
data synthesis (that is, subgroup or sensitivity analyses) and
their potential influence on findings of the review (Item 15c)129
in the protocol.
The likelihood that the treatment effect reported in a systematic
review represents the true effect depends on the validity of the
No commercial reuse: See rights and reprints http://www.bmj.com/permissions
Subscribe: http://www.bmj.com/subscribe
BMJ 2015;349:g7647 doi: 10.1136/bmj.g7647 (Published 2 January 2015)
Page 14 of 25
RESEARCH METHODS & REPORTING
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
2 January 2015. 
10.1136/bmj.g7647 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 15 (native) -----
included studies, namely, the internal validity. Certain
methodological characteristics of primary studies may be
associated with their resulting effect sizes.129-131 For example,
trials describing inadequate methods of allocation concealment
or with unclear concealment exaggerate treatment effects on
average compared with trials reporting adequately concealed
allocation132 Therefore, authors should not only describe risk of
bias methods and constructs to be assessed for each included
study, but also describe how results of the assessment contribute
to the overall findings of the review.128 Additionally, authors
should provide a rationale if they do not intend to assess risk of
bias.
Many methods exist to assess the overall risk of bias in included
studies, including scales, checklists, and individual
components.133 134 As summarized in the PRISMA elaboration
document,17 scales that numerically summarize multiple
components into a single number are misleading and
unhelpful.135 Rather, authors should specify the methodological
components that they plan to assess and how they plan to assess
said components. Common markers of validity for randomised
trials, in the Cochrane Risk of Bias tool,123 include appropriate
generation of random allocation sequence136; concealment of
the allocation sequence132; blinding of participants, healthcare
providers, data collectors, and outcome adjudicators137 138; and
proportion of patients lost to follow-up.139 Reviewers may also
anticipate assessing other items that do not necessarily indicate
bias, such as the impact of early stopping of trials for
benefit,140 141 industry sponsorship,55 142 single trial centres,143
and improper analyses or fabrication of primary study data.144 145
If authors plan such assessments they should explain this
information in the protocol.
Authors should give careful consideration to assessments for
reviews that expect to include non-parallel group randomised
controlled trials and studies of non-randomised design, for which
methodological standards are currently under development.146
The ultimate decision regarding which methodological features
should be evaluated requires consideration of the strength of
the empirical data, theoretical rationale, and the unique
circumstances of the included studies within the context of the
review question.
Data synthesis
Item 15a. Describe criteria under which study
data will be quantitatively synthesised
Example 1
“If studies are sufficiently homogeneous in terms of design and
comparator, we will conduct meta-analyses using a
random-effects model.”121
Explanation
Diversity in study populations, interventions, outcomes, or trial
conduct may mean that including some studies in a
meta-analysis, or even conducting meta-analyses at all, will be
impossible. Authors should describe, with reference to the PICO
criteria, the conditions that should be present before they will
proceed with statistical synthesis (Item 15b). Thus authors might
consider whether to include trials with differing formulations
or doses of the experimental treatment, studies using differing
versions of a technology (such as a device), studies with
different age profiles in the sample population, or studies with
different follow-up times.
Item 15b. If data are appropriate for synthesis,
describe planned summary measures, methods
of handling data, and methods of combining data
from studies, including any planned exploration
of consistency (such as I2, Kendall’s τ)
Example
“Measures of treatment effect
• For dichotomous outcomes
Dichotomous data (occurrence of angiographic restenosis,
mortality; recurrence of myocardial infarction, heart failure,
angina; adverse events and the major adverse cardiac effects)
will be determined by using risk ratio (RR) with 95%
confidence interval (CI). It has been shown that RR is more
intuitive than the odds ratio (OR) and that OR tend to be
interpreted as RR by clinicians, which leads to an
overestimate of the effect.
• For continuous outcomes
Continuous outcomes will be analysed using weighted mean
differences (with 95% CI) or standardized mean differences
(95% CI) if different measurement scales are used. Skewed
data and non-quantitative data will be presented descriptively.
Unit of analysis issues
The primary analysis will be per individual randomised;
however, all included trials will be assessed in order to
determine the unit of randomization and whether or not this unit
of randomization is consistent with the unit of analysis. Special
issues in the analysis of studies with non-standard design, like
cluster randomised trials, cross-over trials, and studies with
multiple treatment groups, will be addressed. For cluster
randomised trials we will extract an interclass correlation
co-efficient to modify the results according to the methods
described in the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews
of Interventions. For cross-over trials, a major concern is
carry-over effect. We will only use the data from the first phase,
guided by the Cochrane Heart Group. When a study has more
than two treatment groups, we will present the additional
treatment arms. Where the additional treatment arms are not
relevant, they will not be taken into account. We will also
acknowledge heterogeneity in the randomization unit and
perform a sensitivity analysis.
Dealing with missing data
When there are missing data, we will attempt to contact the
original authors of the study to obtain the relevant missing data.
Important numerical data will be carefully evaluated. If missing
data cannot be obtained, an imputation method will be used.
We will use sensitivity analysis to assess the impact on the
overall treatment effects of inclusion of trials which do not
report an intention to treat analysis, have high rates of participant
attrition, or with other missing data.
Assessment of heterogeneity
We will test the clinical heterogeneity by considering the
variability in participant factors among trials (for example age)
and trial factors (randomization concealment, blinding of
outcome assessment, losses to follow-up, treatment type,
co-interventions). Statistical heterogeneity will be tested using
the Chi2 test (significance level: 0.1) and I2 statistic (0% to 40%:
might not be important; 30% to 60%: may represent moderate
heterogeneity; 50% to 90%: may represent substantial
heterogeneity; 75% to 100%: considerable heterogeneity). If
high levels of heterogeneity among the trials exist (I2 >=50%
or P <0.1) the study design and characteristics in the included
No commercial reuse: See rights and reprints http://www.bmj.com/permissions
Subscribe: http://www.bmj.com/subscribe
BMJ 2015;349:g7647 doi: 10.1136/bmj.g7647 (Published 2 January 2015)
Page 15 of 25
RESEARCH METHODS & REPORTING
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
2 January 2015. 
10.1136/bmj.g7647 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 16 (native) -----
studies will be analysed. We will try to explain the source of
heterogeneity by subgroup analysis or sensitivity analysis.
Data synthesis
Each outcome will be combined and calculated using the
statistical software RevMan 5.1, according to the statistical
guidelines referenced in the current version of the Cochrane
Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions. The
Mantel-Haenszel method will be used for the fixed effect model
if tests of heterogeneity are not significant. If statistical
heterogeneity is observed (I2 >=50% or P <0.1), the random
effects model will be chosen. If heterogeneity is substantial, we
will not perform a meta-analysis; a narrative, qualitative
summary will be done.”147
Explanation
When authors intend to perform meta-analyses, they should
specify the effect measure (such as relative risk or mean
difference) (Item 13) and the statistical method (such as inverse
variance, DerSimonian-Laird, Mantel-Haenszel, Bayesian) to
be used and whether they plan to apply a fixed or random effects
approach.148 Although experts debate this topic, fixed effects
meta-analyses have been shown to overestimate confidence in
treatment effects; thus, reviewers may wish to use this approach
conservatively.149 150 If estimates of heterogeneity are to be used
to decide between fixed and random effects approaches, authors
should state the threshold of heterogeneity required.151 If
possible, authors should explain the reasons for these choices.
Reviewers should anticipate that data from included studies
may not be in a suitable format for analysis or presentation in
the review. For that reason, authors may need to take various
steps to process the data, even if they do not plan meta-analyses.
Authors should describe their plans for data processing, focusing
on anticipated problems specific to their review. In trials with
more than two intervention groups (for example, receiving
similar but non-identical interventions), combining or splitting
results across groups may be necessary.152 If individual patient
data (IPD) meta-analyses are planned, reviewers should consult
the (forthcoming) PRISMA extension for IPD meta-analyses.153
For analyses of dichotomous data (that is, event data), authors
should consider how best to handle rare events or when events
are absent from some studies. Outcomes reported as
measurement scales (such as for depression) may use different
scales in different studies; results may need to be adjusted so
that all scales are aligned (for example, so that low values
represent good health on all scales).
Reviewers should also anticipate that some desired data will
not be reported in included studies at all. In particular, standard
deviations and standard errors may have to be reconstructed
from other statistics such as P values and t statistics154 155;
occasionally they may be imputed from the standard deviations
observed in other studies.156 157 In analyses of time-to-event data,
reviewers should anticipate spending more time and caution
during data extraction (for example, from Kaplan-Meier survival
curves) and report how conversion to a consistent format is
planned.158
Statistical combination of data from two or more separate studies
in a meta-analysis may not always be necessary, feasible, or
desirable. Regardless of the decision to combine individual
study results, authors should report how they plan to evaluate
between-study variability (heterogeneity or inconsistency), such
as by using I2 or Cochran’s Q test. The consistency of results
across studies may influence the decision whether to combine
individual study data in a meta-analysis. If reviewers plan to
use statistical estimates of consistency (such as I2 or Kendall’s
τ) to determine whether to perform a meta-analysis, they should
state this explicitly (Item 15a) and specify the required number.
Finally, the name (and version) of any software planned for
completing meta-analyses should be reported.
Item 15c. Describe any proposed additional
analyses (e.g., sensitivity or subgroup analyses,
meta-regression)
Example
“Subgroup analysis and investigation of heterogeneity
Subgroup analyses will be used to explore possible sources of
heterogeneity, based on the following.
• Patient characteristic (age, sex).
• Types of treatment (western medicine alone, western
medicine plus Tong-xin-luo).
• Follow-up period (three, six, and 12 months).
• Type of stent (drug-eluting and non-drug eluting stent).
Sensitivity analysis
Sensitivity analysis will be performed in order to explore the
source of heterogeneity as follows.
• Quality components, including full-text publications versus
abstracts, preliminary results versus mature results, published
versus unpublished data.
• Risk of bias (by omitting studies that are judged to be at
high risk of bias).”147
Explanation
Investigating possible causes of between-study variability or
exploring the robustness of meta-analyses by using subgroup
analysis or meta-regression may be desirable. If authors plan
such analyses, they should state this and specify the covariates
anticipated for the analyses (such as disease type or severity, or
treatment dose). For subgroup analyses, authors should describe
how they will partition the covariate into subgroups (for
example, what will constitute mild or severe disease, low or
high treatment dose). Whether they plan a fixed or random
effects approach and how they will evaluate residual
heterogeneity should also be stated.
If any sensitivity analyses are intended—such as including or
excluding small studies, studies with high risk of bias,159 industry
funded studies, or outlier studies—authors should describe their
plan for doing so.
Item 15d. If quantitative synthesis is not
appropriate, describe the type of summary
planned
Example
“A systematic narrative synthesis will be provided with
information presented in the text and tables to summarise and
explain the characteristics and findings of the included studies.
The narrative synthesis will explore the relationship and findings
both within and between the included studies, in line with the
guidance from the Centre for Reviews and Dissemination.”160
Explanation
In nearly all cases, reviews will include a qualitative (narrative)
synthesis or summary even if meta-analyses or other quantitative
analyses have been done. If, in addressing items 15a, 15b, and
15c, authors have concluded that some or all of the expected
data will not be suitable for combining quantitatively, they
No commercial reuse: See rights and reprints http://www.bmj.com/permissions
Subscribe: http://www.bmj.com/subscribe
BMJ 2015;349:g7647 doi: 10.1136/bmj.g7647 (Published 2 January 2015)
Page 16 of 25
RESEARCH METHODS & REPORTING
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
2 January 2015. 
10.1136/bmj.g7647 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 17 (native) -----
should explicitly say so in the protocol and provide the rationale
for such decisions. Then for item 15d they should describe the
way they propose to present results in narrative form.
Established methods for narrative syntheses are available.161 162
Authors should, to the extent possible at the protocol stage,
highlight the order in which they will present information and
what they will give in text or (only) in tables. They should
describe what priority they will give to information about
participant populations (such as overall patient groups before
subgroups, subgroups defined by sociodemographics before
those defined by coexisting conditions) and about interventions
and comparisons of interventions (such as head to head trials
before trials with placebo or usual care controls, ultimate health
outcomes before intermediate outcomes, patient related
outcomes before utilization outcomes, and so forth). For
example, authors may say that they will present results in order
by key question and, within key questions, in order of main then
additional outcomes. In other cases, they might specify that
results will be reported first by key questions but then by
important comparisons and outcomes within comparisons.
In addition, authors should say whether they plan to report only
on studies for which risk of bias was either low or moderate and
omit studies with high risk of bias, or whether they expect to
retain studies of any level of risk of bias in their analyses. They
should note that levels of risk of bias for a given study may
differ depending on the outcome of interest, so that some studies
may be retained for certain key questions or outcomes but not
for others. In some cases, authors might note that they will report
on studies at high risk of bias only when they provide the
available information or a critical outcome or population of
interest.
Authors should describe how they plan to present information
by type of study design (for example, report results only for
randomised controlled trials, and then supplement the results
with information drawn from non-randomised trials or
non-experimental studies). In some cases authors may want to
stratify how they present information based on key aspects of
how studies were conducted (such as whether investigators,
patients, and outcome assessors were all masked to intervention).
If authors will focus on specific types of outcome measures,
such as demonstrably reliable and valid instruments to measure
depression or pain, they should report this information.
Regardless of how many quantitative analyses authors expect
to present, they should indicate the extent to which they plan
to use tables to summarize (a) the characteristics of studies
(perhaps only those of low or moderate risk of bias) and (b) the
principal comparisons or outcomes of concern.
In some cases, review authors may plan to do types of analyses
other than meta-analyses. These may include cost of illness,
cost of treatment, or cost effectiveness analyses, decision
modelling analyses, or various types of subgroup analyses
(independent of any required by a key question). In all these
cases, authors should be as specific as possible about what they
will attempt to do.
Meta-bias(es)
Item 16. Specify any planned assessment of
meta-bias(es) (such as publication bias across
studies, selective reporting within studies)
Example
“In order to determine whether reporting bias is present, we will
determine whether the protocol of the RCT was published before
recruitment of patients of the study was started. For studies
published after July 1st 2005, we will screen the Clinical Trial
Register at the International Clinical Trials Registry Platform
of the World Health Organisation (http://apps.who.int/
trialssearch). We will evaluate whether selective reporting of
outcomes is present (outcome reporting bias). We will compare
the fixed effect estimate against the random effects model to
assess the possible presence of small sample bias in the
published literature (i.e. in which the intervention effect is more
beneficial in smaller studies). In the presence of small sample
bias, the random effects estimate of the intervention is more
beneficial than the fixed effect estimate. The potential for
reporting bias will be further explored by funnel plots if ≥10
studies are available.”163
Explanation
Authors should pre-specify any methods used to explore the
possibility that the data identified are biased due to non-study
related processes.164 Such bias may result from non-publication
of studies (publication or dissemination bias) and the reporting
of a subset of measured outcomes and analyses within studies
(outcome reporting bias) (see box 2).
Detecting or correcting for publication bias in a systematic
review is difficult. The results of available studies may provide
clues that some studies may be missing (such as when smaller
studies have systematically different effect estimates than larger
studies (“small study effects”)).165 Recommendations regarding
appropriate graphical methods (such as funnel plots) and
statistical methods (such as Egger’s test) to assess small study
effects have been proposed.166 However, publication bias is only
one of several possible explanations for small study effects, and
the interpretation of such tests can be problematic.166-168 Authors
should report their planned testing strategy to assess publication
bias in detail. The risk of publication bias was formally assessed
in only 21% of 100 intervention reviews published in 2006, and
only 32% considered this type of bias.169 A review of
antidepressant trials found that effect estimates of meta-analyses
of only the published trials were 32% larger on average than
effect estimates of meta-analyses including published and
unpublished trials.170 The corresponding magnitude of
publication bias in antipsychotic trials was smaller (8%).171
Several methods to detect selective outcome reporting exist. If
a study protocol is available, reviewers can compare outcomes
reported in the protocol and the published report.7 172 Comparing
the outcomes reported in the methods and results sections of
the published report is an option when a protocol is
unavailable.173 For some trials, reviewers might assume that it
is likely that an outcome was measured even if it was not
reported, based on knowledge of the clinical area (such as when
systolic, but not diastolic, blood pressure is reported).112 Authors
may use the Outcome Reporting Bias in Trials (ORBIT)
classification system.4 A sensitivity analysis to assess the impact
of selective reporting on meta-analytic results may also be
considered.174 In eight of 28 Cochrane reviews published in
March 2010, authors did not assess outcome reporting bias; in
16 reviews, authors did assess this bias using the published
report; and in the remaining reviews, trial protocols were used.175
In another study, after investigators applied sensitivity analyses
to adjust for outcome reporting bias in 81 Cochrane reviews,
the treatment effect estimate was reduced by 20% or more in
19 (23%) of the meta-analyses.4
Both publication bias and outcome reporting bias may affect
meta-analyses, and the effect can be unpredictable. Adding
unreported data from both published and unpublished drug trials
to 41 meta-analyses caused 46% of the meta-analytic effect
No commercial reuse: See rights and reprints http://www.bmj.com/permissions
Subscribe: http://www.bmj.com/subscribe
BMJ 2015;349:g7647 doi: 10.1136/bmj.g7647 (Published 2 January 2015)
Page 17 of 25
RESEARCH METHODS & REPORTING
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
2 January 2015. 
10.1136/bmj.g7647 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 18 (native) -----
Box 2: Meta-bias caused by selective publication of studies and selective reporting within studies
Systematic reviews aim to synthesise the results of all relevant studies. However, some studies may not be published, and a subset of
outcomes and analyses may be incompletely, inadequately, or selectively reported in a published article, based on the results (such as
statistical significance, magnitude, or direction of effect). The validity of systematic reviews may be threatened if the outcome data available
to reviewers comprise a biased selection of all data that actually exists.181 182 Such biases are termed meta-biases, meaning that they occur
independent of procedural problems during the conduct of a primary study as do typical methodological biases (such as inappropriate method
of random sequence generation in randomized trials).164
Publication or dissemination bias—Several systematic reviews of empirical studies have found that clinical trials with statistically significant
(P<0.05) or positive results are more likely to be published than those with non-significant or negative results.2 165 183 Investigators’ decisions
not to submit papers with negative results for publication, rather than editors’ rejection of such papers, tend to be the main source of publication
bias.184 However, the decision to write up a study for publication may be influenced by pressure from study sponsors and journal editor.185
Studies with statistically significant results also tend to be published earlier than studies with non-significant results.165 If studies are missing
from a systematic review for these reasons, exaggerated results may be produced.
Outcome reporting bias—The selective reporting of outcomes due to their significance, magnitude, or direction is termed outcome reporting
bias and has been widely documented across the trial literature.2 Outcomes specified in the protocol may be completely omitted from the
published report. When an outcome is measured using multiple scales or at multiple time points, and analysed in various ways (such as
intention-to-treat and per-protocol analysis, unadjusted and adjusted for covariates), the choice of which data to present may be influenced
by the results. Non-significant results may be partially reported (such as reporting an effect estimate with no measure of variation), resulting
in insufficient data to include in a meta-analysis. All of these examples of selectively reported outcome data in primary studies can bias (and
sometimes, overestimate) the results of systematic reviews.2 7 186
Empirical evidence of selective outcome reporting bias in trials exists. A systematic review of 16 cohorts of clinical trials comparing outcomes
reported in trial protocols with the published reports found that at least one primary outcome was omitted, introduced, or changed in 4-50%
of reports.3 In a landmark study, Chan and colleagues found that statistically significant outcomes had higher odds of being fully reported in
trial publications compared with non-significant outcomes for efficacy (pooled odds ratio 2.4 (95% confidence interval 1.4 to 4.0)) and safety
(pooled odds ratio 4.7 (1.8 to 12)).164
estimates to show lower efficacy of the drug, 7% to show
identical efficacy, and 46% to show greater efficacy.176
Confidence in cumulative estimate
Item 17. Describe how the strength of the body
of evidence will be assessed (such as GRADE)
Example
“The quality of evidence for all outcomes will be judged using
the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development
and Evaluation working group methodology. The quality of
evidence will be assessed across the domains of risk of bias,
consistency, directness, precision and publication bias.
Additional domains may be considered where appropriate.
Quality will be adjudicated as high (further research is very
unlikely to change our confidence in the estimate of effect),
moderate (further research is likely to have an important impact
on our confidence in the estimate of effect and may change the
estimate), low (further research is very likely to have an
important impact on our confidence in the estimate of effect
and is likely to change the estimate), or very low (very uncertain
about the estimate of effect).”54
Explanation
Authors should describe which approach they plan on using to
summarize the confidence they have in the resulting body of
evidence, ideally using an established and validated approach.
The description should include a plan for assessing the risk of
bias across studies, inconsistency, imprecision, indirectness,
publication bias, and factors that increase the confidence in an
effect (such as large effects, dose effect relations, and issues
around opposing bias and confounding not explaining an effect
or lack thereof) for each outcome that is included in the PICO.
The Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development
and Evaluation (GRADE) approach is increasingly
recommended.168
If no such assessments are planned, the authors should state this
with a rationale for why not. Authors should describe whether
and how they assess the directness related only to populations
(including applicability) who are included in the evidence that
is assessed (such as if they extrapolated and for what reasons),
so that users of the systematic review can make these judgments
later for other populations.177 178 Authors should specify whether
the assessment of the strength of evidence will include studies
that are excluded from meta-analysis (if applicable).
“Strength of evidence” and “quality of evidence” have been
previously been used interchangeably.
Discussion
We hope this detailed explanatory paper will become a
pedagogical document that the entire systematic review
community can use. Similarly, we have strived to ensure that
the paper is useful to authors seeking guidance in what to include
in a protocol of their systematic review. We recommend that
authors use this paper when seeking a more complete
explanation of each item included in the PRISMA-P checklist.
We developed this protocol extension to PRISMA in the hopes
that it will improve the reporting of protocols and also simplify
the process of reporting a protocol, and registering it with
PROSPERO. The development of the PRISMA-P 2015 checklist
borrowed heavily from the mandatory items included in
PROSPERO. When authors register their protocol on
PROSPERO, much of this information is the same as what is
recommended when completely reporting a protocol using the
PRISMA-P checklist.
Similarly, the intent of using PRISMA-P is to make reporting
completed systematic reviews easier for authors. For example,
once reviewers have described the methods in detail in their
protocol, they may not need to repeat them when reporting the
final systematic review results, particularly if there have been
no protocol amendments. Providing explicit details about
planned review methods in a protocol is essential for clarity,
transparency, and future reproducibility, and is in line with
emerging journal policies.18 Authors may also wish to develop
a protocol to expand on information reported in PROSPERO.
For journals that require a more detailed methods section in
completed review articles, authors can easily cut and paste
information already in their protocol, change the tense of the
wording, and add any necessary documentation about protocol
modifications or post-review changes where relevant (more
likely in complex reviews such as network meta-analyses).
Protocols are important and provide readers with information
about the rationale, question(s), and methods proposed by the
systematic reviewers. They should always be made available
in the public domain. However, for a variety of reasons, they
are not always reported or published. Systematic reviewers may,
No commercial reuse: See rights and reprints http://www.bmj.com/permissions
Subscribe: http://www.bmj.com/subscribe
BMJ 2015;349:g7647 doi: 10.1136/bmj.g7647 (Published 2 January 2015)
Page 18 of 25
RESEARCH METHODS & REPORTING
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
2 January 2015. 
10.1136/bmj.g7647 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 19 (native) -----
for instance, be unsure of what information should be included
in a review protocol—a problem PRISMA-P 2015 aims to solve.
We hope PRISMA-P will help increase the proportion of
systematic review protocols being reported and published. Peer
reviewers, editors, and other interested readers might also find
protocols helpful in their assessment of completed reviews.
Comparing protocols with completed reviews enables users to
assess possible selective reporting and other possible deviations
from the proposed systematic review plan. Investigators
completing systematic reviews of systematic reviews (that is,
overviews) might also find protocols useful for similar reasons.
We hope that journal editors will encourage authors submitting
systematic review protocols for publication to comply with
PRISMA-P. We hope funders and sponsors of systematic
reviews will do likewise. We also invite readers to let us know
what they think of PRISMA-P and ways we can improve it and
keep it up to date.
The PRISMA-P steering committee thank the following staff from DM’s
research group at OHRI: Jodi Peters for her efforts organizing the
PRISMA-P consensus meeting; Michael Zhao for his assistance in
preparing documents for the PRISMA-P meeting; Mohammed Ansari
for valuable input and feedback throughout the process; and Justin
Thielman for his assistance collating group comments during preparation
of the PRISMA-P manuscripts.
Members of the PRISMA-P group (listed alphabetically): Douglas G
Altman, Centre for Statistics in Medicine (CSM), University of Oxford,
Oxford, UK; Alison Booth, Centre for Reviews and Dissemination (CRD),
University of York, York, UK; An-Wen Chan, Women’s College Research
Institute, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada; Stephanie Chang,
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, Rockville, USA; Mike
Clarke, Queen’s University of Belfast, Belfast, Ireland; Tammy Clifford,
Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health (CADTH),
Ottawa, Canada; Kay Dickersin, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of
Public Health; Matthias Egger, Institut für Sozial-und Präventivmedizin;
Davina Ghersi, National Health and Medical Research Council,
Canberra, Australia; Peter C Gøtzsche, Nordic Cochrane Centre,
Copenhagen, Denmark; Jeremy M Grimshaw, Canadian Cochrane
Centre and Ottawa Hospital Research Institute (OHRI), Ottawa, Canada;
Trish Groves, The BMJ, London, UK; Mark Helfand, AHRQ EPC
Scientific Resource Center, Portland VA Research Foundation, Portland,
USA; Julian Higgins, School of Social and Community Medicine, Bristol,
UK; Toby Lasserson, Cochrane Editorial Unit, London, UK; Joseph Lau,
Center for Evidence-based Medicine, Brown University, Providence,
USA; Alessandro Liberati, University of Modena, Modena, Italy; Kathleen
Lohr, Research Triangle Institute-University of North Carolina EPC,
Research Triangle Park, USA; Jessie McGowan, University of Ottawa,
Ottawa, Canada; David Moher, Clinical Epidemiology Program, OHRI
and University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada; Cynthia Mulrow, Annals of
Internal Medicine, San Antonio, USA; Melissa Norton, PLoS Medicine,
London, UK; Matthew Page, Monash University, Australia; Mark
Petticrew, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London,
UK; Margaret Sampson. Children’s Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa,
Canada; Holger Schünemann, McMaster University, Hamilton, Canada;
Larissa Shamseer, Clinical Epidemiology Program, OHRI and University
of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada; Paul Shekelle, Southern California EPC,
Los Angeles, USA; Iveta Simera, CSM, University of Oxford, Oxford,
UK; Lesley A Stewart, CRD, University of York, York, UK; William
Summerskill, The Lancet, London, UK; Jennifer Tetzlaff, Clinical
Epidemiology Program, OHRI, Ottawa, Canada; Thomas A Trikalinos,
Center for Evidence-based Medicine, Brown University, Providence,
USA; David Tovey, The Cochrane Library, London, UK; Lucy Turner,
Clinical Epidemiology Program, OHRI, Ottawa, Canada; Evelyn Whitlock,
Kaiser Permanente Research Affiliates EPC, Portland, Oregon, USA.
Contributors: DM, LS, MC, DG, AL, MP, PS, and LAS conceived of this
paper. DM and LS drafted the article and all authors critically revised it
for important intellectual content. All authors approved the final version
of this article. DM is the guarantor of this work.
Competing interests: All authors have completed the ICMJE uniform
disclosure form at www.icmje.org/coi_disclosure.pdf and declare: (1)
support from the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, USA
(Contract No HHSA 290 2007 10059 I) and the Canadian Institutes for
Health Research (Reference No 114369) for this work; this manuscript
does not reflect the opinions of either agency; one author, SC, is an
employee of AHRQ. (2) No financial relationships with any organisations
that might have an interest in the submitted work in the previous three
years (3) MC, DG, DM, MP, and LAS are members of the Advisory
Board for PROSPERO. TG is the deputy editor of The BMJ and was
not involved in the handling of or the decision to publish this manuscript.
1
Moher D, Tetzlaff J, Tricco AC, Sampson M, Altman DG. Epidemiology and reporting
characteristics of systematic reviews. PLoS Med 2007;4:e78.
2
Dwan K, Gamble C, Williamson PR, Kirkham JJ. Systematic review of the empirical
evidence of study publication bias and outcome reporting bias—An updated review. PloS
One 2013;8:e66844.
3
Dwan K, Altman DG, Cresswell L, Blundell M, Gamble CL, Williamson PR. Comparison
of protocols and registry entries to published reports for randomised controlled trials.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2011;(1):MR000031.
4
Kirkham JJ, Dwan KM, Altman DG, Gamble C, Dodd S, Smyth R, et al. The impact of
outcome reporting bias in randomised controlled trials on a cohort of systematic reviews.
BMJ 2010;340:c365.
5
Dwan K, Altman DG, Arnaiz JA, Bloom J, Chan AW, Cronin E, et al. Systematic review
of the empirical evidence of study publication bias and outcome reporting bias. PLoS One
2008;3:e3081.
6
Chan AW, Krleza-Jeric K, Schmid I, Altman DG. Outcome reporting bias in randomized
trials funded by the canadian institutes of health research. Can Med Assoc J 2004;171:735.
7
Chan AW, Hróbjartsson A, Haahr MT, Gøtzsche PC, Altman DG. Empirical evidence for
selective reporting of outcomes in randomized trials: Comparison of protocols to published
articles. JAMA 2004;291:2457-65.
8
Page MJ, McKenzie JE, Kirkham J, Dwan K, Kramer S, Green S, et al. Bias due to selective
inclusion and reporting of outcomes and analyses in systematic reviews of randomised
trials of healthcare interventions . Cochrane Library, 2014.
9
Page MJ, McKenzie JE, Forbes A. Many scenarios exist for selective inclusion and
reporting of results in randomized trials and systematic reviews. J Clin Epidemiol
2013;66:524-37.
10
Kirkham JJ, Altman DG, Williamson PR. Bias due to changes in specified outcomes during
the systematic review process. PLoS One 2010;5:e9810.
11
Booth A, Clarke M, Ghersi D, Moher D, Petticrew M, Stewart L. Establishing a minimum
dataset for prospective registration of systematic reviews: An international consultation.
PLoS One 2011;6:e27319.
12
Moher D, Liberati A, Tetzlaff J, Altman DG, PRISMA Group. Preferred reporting items for
systematic reviews and meta-analyses: The PRISMA statement. BMJ 2009;339:b2535.
13
Chan A, Tetzlaff JM, Gøtzsche PS, Altman DG, Mann H, Berlin JA, et al. SPIRIT 2013
explanation and elaboration: Guidance for protocols of clinical trials. BMJ 2013;346:e7586.
14
Institute of Medicine. Finding what works in health care: standards for systematic reviews
. National Academies Press, 2011.
15
Moher D, Shamseer L, Clarke M, Ghersi D, Liberati A, Petticrew M, et al. Preferred
reporting items for systematic review and meta-analysis protocols (PRISMA-P) 2015
statement. Syst Rev 2015;4:1.
16
Moher D, Schulz KF, Simera I, Altman DG. Guidance for developers of health research
reporting guidelines. PLoS Med 2010;7:e1000217.
17
Liberati A, Altman DG, Tetzlaff J, Mulrow C, Gotzsche PC, Ioannidis JP, et al. The PRISMA
statement for reporting systematic reviews and meta-analyses of studies that evaluate
health care interventions: explanation and elaboration. PLoS Med 2009;6:e1000100.
18
Enhancing reproducibility. Nature Methods 2013;10:367.
19
Beller EM, Glasziou PP, Altman DG, Hopewell S, Bastian H, Chalmers I, et al. PRISMA
for abstracts: reporting systematic reviews in journal and conference abstracts. PLoS
Med 2013;10:e1001419.
20
Mans CM, Reeve JC, Gasparini CA, Elkins MR. Postoperative outcomes following
preoperative inspiratory muscle training in patients undergoing open cardiothoracic or
upper abdominal surgery: protocol for a systematic review. Syst Rev 2012;1:63.
21
Wen J, Ren Y, Wang L, Li Y, Liu Y, Zhou M, et al. The reporting quality of meta-analyses
improves: a random sampling study. J Clin Epidemiol 2008;61:770.
22
Moher D, Booth A, Stewart L. How to reduce unnecessary duplication: Use PROSPERO.
BJOG 2014;121:784-6.
23
Montori VM, Wilczynski NL, Morgan D, Haynes RB. Optimal search strategies for retrieving
systematic reviews from medline: analytical survey. BMJ 2005;330:68.
24
O’Connor AM, Auvermann BW, Higgins JP, Kirychuk SP, Sargeant JM, Von Essen SG,
et al. The association between proximity to animal-feeding operations and community
health: a protocol for updating a systematic review. Syst Rev 2014;3:99.
25
Moher D, Tsertsvadze A. Systematic reviews: When is an update an update? Lancet
2006;367:881-3.
26
Shojania KG, Sampson M, Ansari MT, Ji J, Doucette S, Moher D. How quickly do
systematic reviews go out of date? A survival analysis. Ann Intern Med 2007;147:224-33.
27
Moher D, Tsertsvadze A, Tricco AC, Eccles M, Grimshaw J, Sampson M, et al. A
systematic review identified few methods and strategies describing when and how to
update systematic reviews. J Clin Epidemiol 2007;60:1095.
28
Garritty C, Tsertsvadze A, Tricco AC, Sampson M, Moher D. Updating systematic reviews:
an international survey. PloS One 2010;5:e9914.
29
Chung M, Newberry SJ, Ansari MT, Yu WW, Wu H, Lee J, et al. Two methods provide
similar signals for the need to update systematic reviews. J Clin Epidemiol 2012;65:660-8.
No commercial reuse: See rights and reprints http://www.bmj.com/permissions
Subscribe: http://www.bmj.com/subscribe
BMJ 2015;349:g7647 doi: 10.1136/bmj.g7647 (Published 2 January 2015)
Page 19 of 25
RESEARCH METHODS & REPORTING
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
2 January 2015. 
10.1136/bmj.g7647 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 20 (native) -----
30
Ahmadzai N, Newberry SJ, Maglione MA, Tsertsvadze A, Ansari MT, Hempel S, et al. A
surveillance system to assess the need for updating systematic reviews. Syst Rev
2013;2:1-16.
31
Chalmers I, Enkin M, Keirse MJ. Preparing and updating systematic reviews of randomized
controlled trials of health care. Milbank Q 1993:411-37.
32
Cancelliere C, Cassidy JD, Côté P, Hincapié CA, Hartvigsen J, Carroll LJ, et al. Protocol
for a systematic review of prognosis after mild traumatic brain injury: an update of the
WHO collaborating centre task force findings. Syst Rev 2012;1:17.
33
Stewart L, Moher D, Shekelle P. Why prospective registration of systematic reviews makes
sense. Syst Rev 2012;1:7.
34
Booth A, Clarke M, Ghersi D, Moher D, Petticrew M, Stewart L. An international registry
of systematic-review protocols. Lancet 2011;377:108-9.
35
Booth A, Clarke M, Dooley G, Ghersi D, Moher D, Petticrew M, et al. The nuts and bolts
of PROSPERO: An international prospective register of systematic reviews. Syst Rev
2012;1:2.
36
Silagy CA, Middleton P, Hopewell S. Publishing protocols of systematic reviews: comparing
what was done to what was planned. JAMA 2002;287:2831-4.
37
Siontis KC, Hernandez-Boussard T, Ioannidis JP. Overlapping meta-analyses on the
same topic: survey of published studies. BMJ 2013;347:f4501.
38
Moher D. The problem of duplicate systematic reviews. BMJ 2013;347:f5040.
39
The PLoS ME. Best practice in systematic reviews: the importance of protocols and
registration. PLoS Med 2011;8:e1001009.
40
Chien PFW, Khan KS, Siassakos D. Registration of systematic reviews: PROSPERO.
BJOG 2012;119:903-5.
41
Bambra C, Hillier F, Moore H, Summerbell C. Tackling inequalities in obesity: a protocol
for a systematic review of the effectiveness of public health interventions at reducing
socioeconomic inequalities in obesity amongst children. Syst Rev 2012;1:16.
42
Mowatt G, Shirran L, Grimshaw JM, Rennie D, Flanagin A, Yank V, et al. Prevalence of
honorary and ghost authorship in cochrane reviews. JAMA 2002;287:2769-71.
43
Rennie D, Yank V, Emanuel L. When authorship fails. JAMA 1997;278:579-85.
44
Sismondo S. Ghost management: How much of the medical literature is shaped behind
the scenes by the pharmaceutical industry? PLoS Med 2007;4:e286.
45
Ross JS, Hill KP, Egilman DS, Krumholz HM. Guest authorship and ghostwriting in
publications related to rofecoxib. JAMA 2008;299:1800-12.
46
Smith R. Maintaining the integrity of the scientific record. BMJ 2001;323:588.
47
Ensor J, Riley RD, Moore D, Bayliss S, Jowett S, Fitzmaurice DA. Protocol for a systematic
review of prognostic models for the recurrence of venous thromboembolism (VTE) following
treatment for a first unprovoked VTE. Syst Rev 2013;2:91.
48
Smith R. Authorship is dying: long live contributorship. BMJ 1997;315:696.
49
Uniform requirements for manuscripts submitted to biomedical journals: writing and editing
for biomedical publication. 2010. www.ICMJE.org.
50
AHRQ Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, Effective Health Care Program.
Research protocol–Apr 3, 2014: Treatments for fibromyalgia in adult subgroups. http://
effectivehealthcare.ahrq.gov/search-for-guides-reviews-and-reports/?
pageaction=displayproduct&productid=1887#8696.
51
AHRQ Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, Effective Health Care Program.
Research Protocol–Jul 21, 2014: Treatment of non-metastatic muscle-invasive bladder
cancer. http://effectivehealthcare.ahrq.gov/search-for-guides-reviews-and-reports/?
pageaction=displayproduct&productid=1940#9004.
52
Getz KA, Zuckerman R, Cropp AB, Hindle AL, Krauss R, Kaitin KI. Measuring the
incidence, causes, and repercussions of protocol amendments. Drug Inf J 2011;45:265-75.
53
Higgins JPT, Green S, eds. Guide to the contents of a Cochrane protocol and review. In:
The Cochrane handbook for systematic reviews of interventions . Wiley-Blackwell, 2011.
54
Young M, Stevens A, Porath-Waller A, Pirie T, Garritty C, Skidmore B, et al. Effectiveness
of brief interventions as part of the screening, brief intervention and referral to treatment
(SBIRT) model for reducing the non-medical use of psychoactive substances: a systematic
review protocol. Syst Rev 2012;1:22.
55
Lundh A, Sismondo S, Lexchin J, Busuioc OA, Bero L. Industry sponsorship and research
outcome. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2012;(12):MR000033.
56
Bero L. Industry sponsorship and research outcome: a cochrane review. JAMA Intern
Med 2013;173:580-1.
57
Roseman M, Turner EH, Lexchin J, Coyne JC, Bero LA, Thombs BD. Reporting of conflicts
of interest from drug trials in Cochrane reviews: cross sectional study. BMJ
2012;345:e5155.
58
Jorgensen AW, Hilden J, Gotzsche PC. Cochrane reviews compared with industry
supported meta-analyses and other meta-analyses of the same drugs: systematic review.
BMJ 2006;333:782.
59
Yank V, Rennie D, Bero LA. Financial ties and concordance between results and
conclusions in meta-analyses: retrospective cohort study. BMJ 2007;335:1202-5.
60
Jorgensen AW, Maric KL, Tendal B, Faurschou A, Gotzsche PC. Industry-supported
meta-analyses compared with meta-analyses with non-profit or no support: differences
in methodological quality and conclusions. BMC Med Res Methodol 2008;8:60.
61
Bes-Rastrollo M, Schulze MB, Ruiz-Canela M, Martinez-Gonzalez MA. Financial conflicts
of interest and reporting bias regarding the association between sugar-sweetened
beverages and weight gain: A systematic review of systematic reviews. PLoS Med
2013;10:e1001578.
62
Rochon PA, Hoey J, Chan A, Ferris LE, Lexchin J, Kalkar SR, et al. Financial conflicts of
interest checklist 2010 for clinical research studies. Open Med 2010;4:e69.
63
Holden MA, Haywood KL, Potia TA, Gee M, McLean S. Recommendations for exercise
adherence measures in musculoskeletal settings: a systematic review and consensus
meeting (protocol). Syst Rev 2014;3:1-6.
64
Founti P, Topouzis F, Anastasopoulos E, Pappas T, Lambropoulos A, Chatzikyriakidou
A, et al. Association of LOXL1 polymorphisms with pseudoexfoliation syndrome and
pseudoexfoliative glaucoma: systematic review and meta-analysis.
PROSPERO:CRD42014009228. www.crd.york.ac.uk/PROSPERO/display_record.asp?
ID=CRD42014009228.
65
CDISC Clinical Data Interchange Standards Consortium. CDISC Clinical Research
Glossary . 2011. www.cdisc.org/stuff/contentmgr/files/0/
08a36984bc61034baed3b019f3a87139/misc/act1211_011_043_gr_glossary.pdf.
66
Hayden J, Cartwright J, Riley R, vanTulder M. Exercise therapy for chronic low back pain:
Protocol for an individual participant data meta-analysis. Syst Rev 2012;1:64.
67
Moseley AM, Elkins MR, Herbert RD, Maher CG, Sherrington C. Cochrane reviews used
more rigorous methods than non-cochrane reviews: survey of systematic reviews in
physiotherapy. J Clin Epidemiol 2009;62:1021-30.
68
Psaty BM, Kronmal RA. Reporting mortality findings in trials of rofecoxib for alzheimer
disease or cognitive impairment: A case study based on documents from rofecoxib
litigation. JAMA 2008;299:1813-7.
69
Cohen D. Rosiglitazone: What went wrong? BMJ 2010;341:c4848.
70
Chung A, Backholer K, Wong E, Palermo C, Keating C, Peeters A. Trends in child and
adolescent obesity prevalence according to socioeconomic position: Protocol for a
systematic review. Syst Rev 2014;3:1-4.
71
Moher D, Tsertsvadze A, Tricco AC, Eccles MG, J., Sampson M, Barrowman N. A
systematic review identified few methods and strategies describing when and how to
update systematic reviews. J Clin Epidemiol 2007;60:1095.
72
Eipe N, Penning J, Ansari M, Yazdi F, Ahmadzai N. A protocol for a systematic review
for perioperative pregabalin use. Syst Rev 2012;1:40.
73
Honein-Abouhaidar GN, Kastner M, Vuong V, Perrier L, Rabeneck L, Tinmouth J, et al.
Benefits and barriers to participation in colorectal cancer screening: A protocol for a
systematic review and synthesis of qualitative studies. BMJ Open 2014;4:e004508.
74
Counsell C. Formulating questions and locating primary studies for inclusion in systematic
reviews. Ann Intern Med 1997;127:380-7.
75
Whitlock EP, Lopez SA, Chang S, Helfand M, Eder M, Floyd N. AHRQ series paper 3:
Identifying, selecting, and refining topics for comparative effectiveness systematic reviews:
AHRQ and the effective health-care program. J Clin Epidemiol 2010;63:491.
76
Hamel C, Stevens A, Singh K, Ansari MT, Myers E, Ziegler P, et al. Do sugar-sweetened
beverages cause adverse health outcomes in adults? A systematic review protocol. Syst
Rev 2014;3:108.
77
Higgins JPT and Green S, eds. Cochrane handbook for systematic reviews of interventions
. version 5.0.2. Cochrane Collaboration, 2009.
78
Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Montori V, Vist G, Kunz R, Brozek J, et al. GRADE guidelines:
5. rating the quality of evidence-publication bias. J Clin Epidemiol 2011;64:1277-82.
79
Adams D, Wu T, Yasui Y, Aung S, Vohra S. Systematic reviews of TCM trials: How does
inclusion of Chinese trials affect outcome? J Evid Based Med 2012;5:89-97.
80
Hopewell S, McDonald S, Clarke Mike J, Egger M. Grey literature in meta-analyses of
randomized trials of health care interventions . John Wiley & Sons, 2007.
81
Van Enst WA, Scholten RJPM, Hooft L. Identification of additional trials in prospective
trial registers for cochrane systematic reviews. PloS One 2012;7:e42812.
82
Tricco A, Chit A, Hallett D, Soobiah C, Meier G, Chen M, et al. Effect of influenza vaccines
against mismatched strains: A systematic review protocol. Syst Rev 2012;1:35.
83
Horsley T, Dingwall O, Sampson M. Checking reference lists to find additional studies for
systematic reviews. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2011;(8):MR000026.
84
Zhang L, Sampson M, McGowan J. Reporting of the role of the expert searcher in cochrane
reviews. Evid Based Libr Inf Pract 2006;1:3-16.
85
Lefebvre C, Manheimer E, Glanville J, Cochrane Information Retrieval Methods Group.
Searching for studies. In: Higgins JPT, Green S, eds. Cochrane handbook for systematic
reviews of interventions . 5.1.0 ed. Cochrane Collaboration, 2011.
86
Relevo R, Balshem H. Finding evidence for comparing medical interventions. In: Methods
guide for effectiveness and comparative effectiveness reviews . AHRQ Publication No
10(12)-EHC063-EF. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, 2012.
87
Daboval T, Ward N, Sampson M, Kharrat A. Antenatal counseling about the perinatal
care plan at the limit of viability: What do parents want? A systematic review protocol.
(unpublished).
88
McGowan J, Sampson M, Lefebvre C. An evidence based checklist for the peer review
of electronic search strategies (PRESS EBC). Evid Based Libr Inf Pract 2010;5:149-54.
89
Deeks JJ, Altman DG. Inadequate reporting of controlled trials as short reports. Lancet
1998;352:1908.
90
Iansavichene AE, Sampson M, McGowan J, Ajiferuke ISY. Should systematic reviewers
search for randomized, controlled trials published as letters? Ann Intern Med
2008;148:714-5.
91
Sampson M, McGowan J, Cogo E, Grimshaw J, Moher D, Lefebvre C. An evidence-based
practice guideline for the peer review of electronic search strategies. J Clin Epidemiol
2009;62:944-52.
92
Elamin MB, Flynn DN, Bassler D, Briel M, Alonso-Coello P, Karanicolas PJ, et al. Choice
of data extraction tools for systematic reviews depends on resources and review
complexity. J Clin Epidemiol 2009;62:506-10.
93
Tramèr MR, Reynolds DJM, Moore RA, McQuay HJ. Impact of covert duplicate publication
on meta-analysis: a case study. BMJ 1997;315:635-40.
94
Von Elm E, Poglia G, Walder B, Tramer MR. Different patterns of duplicate publication.
JAMA 2004;291:974-80.
95
Gøtzsche P. Multiple publication of reports of drug trials. Eur J Clin Pharmacol
1989;36:429-32.
96
Macdonald G, McCartan CJ. Centre-based early education interventions for improving
school readiness. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2014;(1):CD010913.
97
Edwards P, Clarke M, DiGuiseppi C, Pratap S, Roberts I, Wentz R. Identification of
randomized controlled trials in systematic reviews: Accuracy and reliability of screening
records. Stat Med 2002;21:1635-40.
98
Cooper H, Ribble RG. Influences on the outcome of literature searches for integrative
research reviews. Sci Commun 1989;10:179-201.
99
Busse JW, Ebrahim S, Connell G, Coomes EA, Bruno P, Malik K, et al. Systematic review
and network meta-analysis of interventions for fibromyalgia: A protocol. Syst Rev
2013;2:18.
100
Buscemi N, Hartling L, Vandermeer B, Tjosvold L, Klassen TP. Single data extraction
generated more errors than double data extraction in systematic reviews. J Clin Epidemiol
2006;59:697-703.
101
Horton J, Vandermeer B, Hartling L, Tjosvold L, Klassen TP, Buscemi N. Systematic
review data extraction: Cross-sectional study showed that experience did not increase
accuracy. J Clin Epidemiol 2010;63:289-98.
102
Jones AP, Remmington T, Williamson PR, Ashby D, Smyth RL. High prevalence but low
impact of data extraction and reporting errors were found in cochrane systematic reviews.
J Clin Epidemiol 2005;58:741-2.
103
Shadish WR, Brasil ICC, Illingworth DA, White KD, Galindo R, Nagler ED, et al. Using
UnGraph to extract data from image files: Verification of reliability and validity. Behav Res
Methods 2009;41:177-83.
104
Stewart LA. Practical methodology of meta?analyses (overviews) using updated individual
patient data. Stat Med 2007;14:2057-79.
105
Clarke M, Hopewell S, Juszczak E, Eisinga A, Kjeldstrom M. Compression stockings for
preventing deep vein thrombosis in airline passengers. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
2006;(2):CD004002.
No commercial reuse: See rights and reprints http://www.bmj.com/permissions
Subscribe: http://www.bmj.com/subscribe
BMJ 2015;349:g7647 doi: 10.1136/bmj.g7647 (Published 2 January 2015)
Page 20 of 25
RESEARCH METHODS & REPORTING
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
2 January 2015. 
10.1136/bmj.g7647 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 21 (native) -----
106
Glasziou P, Meats E, Heneghan C, Shepperd S. What is missing from descriptions of
treatment in trials and reviews? BMJ 2008;336:1472.
107
Schulz KF, Altman DG, Moher D. CONSORT 2010 statement: Updated guidelines for
reporting parallel group randomised trials. BMC Med 2010;8:18.
108
Higgins JPT, Deeks JJ. Selecting studies and collecting data. In: Higgins JPT, Green S,
eds. The Cochrane handbook for systematic reviews of interventions . 5.1.0 ed. Cochrane
Collaboration, 2011.
109
Errami M, Sun Z, Long TC, George AC, Garner HR. Deja vu: A database of highly similar
citations in the scientific literature. Nucleic Acids Res 2009;37(suppl 1):D921-4.
110
Reichenbach S, Rutjes AWS, Nüesch E, Trelle S, Jüni P. Arthroscopic lavage for
osteoarthritis of the knee. Cochrane Library. 2008, doi:10.1002/14651858.CD007320.
111
Tully PJ, Baumeister H. Collaborative care for the treatment of comorbid depression and
coronary heart disease: A systematic review and meta-analysis protocol. Syst Rev
2014;3:127.
112
Dwan K, Gamble C, Kolamunnage-Dona R, Mohammed S, Powell C, Williamson P.
Assessing the potential for outcome reporting bias in a review: A tutorial. Trials 2010;11:52.
113
Leucht C, Huhn M, Leucht S. Amitriptyline versus placebo for major depressive disorder
(protocol). Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2011;(5):CD009138.
114
Helfand M, Balshem H. AHRQ series paper 2: Principles for developing guidance: AHRQ
and the effective health-care program. J Clin Epidemiol 2010;63:484.
115
Johns MW. A new method for measuring daytime sleepiness: The Epworth sleepiness
scale. Sleep 1991;14:540-5.
116
Johns MW. Reliability and factor analysis of the Epworth sleepiness scale. Sleep
1992;15:376-81.
117
Selby JV, Beal AC, Frank L. The Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute (PCORI)
national priorities for research and initial research agenda. JAMA 2012;307:1583-4.
118
Methodology Committee of the Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute (PCORI).
Methodological standards and patient-centeredness in comparative effectiveness research:
The PCORI perspective. JAMA 2012;307:1636-40.
119
Cordoba G, Schwartz L, Woloshin S, Bae H, Gotzsche PC. Definition, reporting, and
interpretation of composite outcomes in clinical trials: systematic review. BMJ
2010;341:c3920.
120
Page MJ, McKenzie JE, Forbes A. Many scenarios exist for selective inclusion and
reporting of results in randomized trials and systematic reviews. J Clin Epidemiol
2013;66:524-37.
121
Hosseini Araghi M, Chen YF, Jagielski A, Mannan Choudhury S, Banerjee D, Thomas
GN, et al. Weight loss intervention through lifestyle modification or pharmacotherapy for
obstructive sleep apnoea in adults (protocol). Cochrane Database Syst Rev
2012;(12):CD010281.
122
Lawley CM, Lain SJ, Algert CS, Ford JB, Figtree GA, Roberts CL. Prosthetic heart valves
in pregnancy: A systematic review and meta-analysis protocol. Syst Rev 2014;3:8.
123
Higgins JPT, Altman DG, Gøtzsche PC, Jüni P, Moher D, Oxman AD, et al. The Cochrane
Collaboration’s tool for assessing risk of bias in randomised trials. BMJ 2011;343:d5928.
124
Viswanathan M, Ansari MT, Berkman ND, Chang S, Hartling L, McPheeters M, et al.
Assessing the risk of bias of individual studies in systematic reviews of health care
interventions. AHRQ Methods for Effective Health Care 2012 Mar 08.
125
Hartling L, Hamm MP, Milne A, Vandermeer B, Santaguida PL, Ansari M, et al. Testing
the risk of bias tool showed low reliability between individual reviewers and across
consensus assessments of reviewer pairs. J Clin Epidemiol 2013;66:973-81.
126
Jadad AR, Moore RA, Carroll D, Jenkinson C, Reynolds DJ, Gavaghan DJ, et al. Assessing
the quality of reports of randomized clinical trials: Is blinding necessary? Control Clin
Trials 1996;17:1-12.
127
Berlin JA. Does blinding of readers affect the results of meta-analyses? Lancet
1997;350:185-6.
128
Moja LP, Telaro E, D’Amico R, Moschetti I, Coe L, Liberati A. Assessment of
methodological quality of primary studies by systematic reviews: Results of the meta-quality
cross sectional study. BMJ 2005;330:1053.
129
Wood L, Egger M, Gluud LL, Schulz KF, Jüni P, Altman DG, et al. Empirical evidence of
bias in treatment effect estimates in controlled trials with different interventions and
outcomes: Meta-epidemiological study. BMJ 2008;336:601-5.
130
Savović J, Harris RJ, Wood L, Beynon R, Altman D, Als-Nielsen B, et al. Development
of a combined database for meta-epidemiological research. Res Synth Methods 2011;2:78.
131
Dechartres A, Boutron I, Trinquart L, Charles P, Ravaud P. Single-center trials show
larger treatment effects than multicenter trials: Evidence from a meta-epidemiologic study.
Ann Intern Med 2011;155:39.
132
Odgaard-Jensen J, Vist G, Timmer A, Kunz R, Akl E, Schünemann H, et al. Randomised
controlled trials as a safeguard against biased estimates of treatment effects. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 2011;(4):MR000012.
133
Sanderson S, Tatt ID, Higgins JPT. Tools for assessing quality and susceptibility to bias
in observational studies in epidemiology: A systematic review and annotated bibliography.
Int J Epidemiol 2007;36:666-76.
134
Dechartres, A. Charles, P. Hopewell, S. Ravaud, P. Altman, D.G. Reviews assessing the
quality or the reporting of randomized controlled trials are increasing over time but raised
questions about how quality is assessed. J Clin Epidemiol 2011;64:136-44.
135
Jüni P, Witschi A, Bloch R, Egger M. The hazards of scoring the quality of clinical trials
for meta-analysis. JAMA 1999;282:1054-60.
136
Ioannidis JPA, Haidich AB, Pappa M, Pantazis N, Kokori SI, Tektonidou MG, et al.
Comparison of evidence of treatment effects in randomized and nonrandomized studies.
JAMA 2001;286:821-30.
137
Savovic J, Jones HE, Altman DG, Harris RJ, Juni P, Pildal J, et al. Influence of reported
study design characteristics on intervention effect estimates from randomized, controlled
trials. Ann Intern Med 2012;157:429-38.
138
Hróbjartsson A, Thomsen ASS, Emanuelsson F, Tendal B, Hilden J, Boutron I, et al.
Observer bias in randomised clinical trials with binary outcomes: Systematic review of
trials with both blinded and non-blinded outcome assessors. BMJ 2012;344:e1119.
139
Bell ML, Kenward MG, Fairclough DL, Horton NJ. Differential dropout and bias in
randomised controlled trials: When it matters and when it may not. BMJ 2013;346:e8668.
140
Guyatt GH, Briel M, Glasziou P, Bassler D, Montori VM. Problems of stopping trials early.
BMJ 2012;344:e3863.
141
Briel M, Bassler D, Wang AT, Guyatt GH, Montori VM. The dangers of stopping a trial too
early. J Bone Joint Surg 2012;94(suppl 1):56-60.
142
DeAngelis CD FP. Impugning the integrity of medical science: The adverse effects of
industry influence. JAMA 2008;299:1833-5.
143
Kahan BC, Morris TP. Analysis of multicentre trials with continuous outcomes: When and
how should we account for centre effects? Stat Med 2013;32:1136-49.
144
Shephard RJ. Ethics in exercise science research. Sports Med 2002;32:169-83.
145
Fanelli D. How many scientists fabricate and falsify research? A systematic review and
meta-analysis of survey data. PLoS One 2009;4:e5738.
146
Higgins J, Ramsay C, Reeves BC, Deeks JJ, Shea B, Valentine JC, et al. Issues relating
to study design and risk of bias when including non-randomized studies in systematic
reviews on the effects of interventions. Res Synth Methods 2012.
147
Mao C, Yang ZY, Chung VCH, Qin Y, Tam W, Kwong JSW, et al. Tong-xin-luo capsule
for patients with coronary heart disease after percutaneous coronary intervention. Cochrane
Library 2012.
148
Villar J, Mackey ME, Carroli G, Donner A. Meta-analyses in systematic reviews of
randomized controlled trials in perinatal medicine: Comparison of fixed and random effects
models. Stat Med 2001;20:3635-47.
149
Hunter JE, Schmidt FL. Fixed effects vs. random effects meta-analysis models: implications
for cumulative research knowledge. Int J Select Assess 2002;8:275-92.
150
Schmidt FL, Oh IS, Hayes TL. Fixed- versus random-effects models in meta-analysis:
model properties and an empirical comparison of differences in results. Br J Math Stat
Psychol 2009;62:97-128.
151
Higgins J, Thompson SG, Deeks JJ, Altman DG. Measuring inconsistency in
meta-analyses. BMJ 2003;327:557-60.
152
Higgins JPT, Deeks JJ, Altman DG. Special topics in statistics. In: Higgins JPT, Green
S, eds. Cochrane handbook for systematic reviews of interventions . 5.1.0 ed. Cochrane
Collaboration, 2011.
153
Stewart LA, Clarke M, Rovers M, Riley RD, Simmonds M, Stewart G, et al. PRISMA-IPD:
an extension to the PRISMA statement guidance for reporting systematic review and
meta-analysis of individual participant data. (submitted).
154
Thiessen PH, Barrowman N, Garg A. Imputing variance estimates do not alter the
conclusions of a meta-analysis with continuous outcomes: A case study of changes in
renal function after living kidney donation. J Clin Epidemiol 2007;60:228.
155
Stevens JW. A note on dealing with missing standard errors in meta-analyses of continuous
outcome measures in WinBUGS. Pharmaceut Stat 2011;10:374-8.
156
Wiebe N, Vandermeer B, Platt RW, Klassen TP, Moher D, Barrowman NJ. A systematic
review identifies a lack of standardization in methods for handling missing variance data.
J Clin Epidemiol 2006;59:342-53.
157
Furukawa TA, Barbui C, Cipriani A, Brambilla P, Watanabe N. Imputing missing standard
deviations in meta-analyses can provide accurate results. J Clin Epidemiol 2006;59:7.
158
Tierney JF, Stewart LA, Ghersi D, Burdett S, Sydes MR. Practical methods for incorporating
summary time-to-event data into meta-analysis. Trials 2007;8:16.
159
Wood L, Egger M, Gluud LL, Schulz KF, Jüni P, Altman DG, et al. Empirical evidence of
bias in treatment effect estimates in controlled trials with different interventions and
outcomes: meta-epidemiological study. BMJ 2008;336:601-5.
160
Whitehead PJ, Drummond AE, Walker MF, Parry RH. Interventions to reduce dependency
in personal activities of daily living in community-dwelling adults who use homecare
services: protocol for a systematic review. Syst Rev 2013;2:1-7.
161
Greenhalgh T, Robert G, Macfarlane F, Bate P, Kyriakidou O, Peacock R. Storylines of
research in diffusion of innovation: a meta-narrative approach to systematic review. Soc
Sci Med 2005;61:417-30.
162
Popay J, Roberts H, Sowden A, Petticrew M, Arai L, Rodgers M, et al. Guidance on the
conduct of narrative synthesis in systematic reviews. a product from the ESRC methods
programme. Version 1. ESRC, 2006.
163
Richards BL, Whittle SL, Buchbinder R. Neuromodulators for pain management in
rheumatoid arthritis (protocol). Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2011;(1):CD008921.
164
Goodman S, Dickersin K. Metabias: A challenge for comparative effectiveness research.
Ann Intern Med 2011;155:61-2.
165
Song F, Parekh S, Hooper L, Loke Y, Ryder J, Sutton A, et al. Dissemination and
publication of research findings: an updated review of related biases . Prepress Projects,
2010.
166
Sterne JAC, Sutton AJ, Ioannidis JPA, Terrin N, Jones DR, Lau J, et al. Recommendations
for examining and interpreting funnel plot asymmetry in meta-analyses of randomised
controlled trials. BMJ 2011;343:302.
167
Terrin N, Schmid CH, Lau J. In an empirical evaluation of the funnel plot, researchers
could not visually identify publication bias. J Clin Epidemiol 2005;58:894-901.
168
Lau J, Ioannidis J, Terrin N, Schmid CH, Olkin I. The case of the misleading funnel plot.
BMJ 2006;333:597-600.
169
Parekh-Bhurke S, Kwok CS, Pang C, Hooper L, Loke YK, Ryder JJ, et al. Uptake of
methods to deal with publication bias in systematic reviews has increased over time, but
there is still much scope for improvement. J Clin Epidemiol 2011;64:349-57.
170
Turner EH, Matthews AM, Linardatos E, Tell RA, Rosenthal R. Selective publication of
antidepressant trials and its influence on apparent efficacy. N Engl J Med 2008;358:252-60.
171
Turner EH, Knoepflmacher D, Shapley L. Publication bias in antipsychotic trials: An
analysis of efficacy comparing the published literature to the us food and drug
administration database. PLoS Med 2012;9:e1001189.
172
Williamson P, Gamble C, Altman D, Hutton J. Outcome selection bias in meta-analysis.
Stat Methods Med Res 2005;14:515-24.
173
Chan AW, Altman DG. Identifying outcome reporting bias in randomised trials on PubMed:
review of publications and survey of authors. BMJ 2005;330:753.
174
Williamson PR, Gamble C. Application and investigation of a bound for outcome reporting
bias. Trials 2007;8:9.
175
Tharyan P, Kirubakaran R, Jabez P. The use of trial protocols to assess risk of bias due
to selective reporting in cochrane systematic reviews: a cross-sectional survey. 18th
Cochrane Colloquium and 10th Campbell Colloquium; Oct 18-22; Keystone, Colorado;
2010.
176
Hart B, Lundh A, Bero L. Effect of reporting bias on meta-analyses of drug trials: reanalysis
of meta-analyses. BMJ 2012;344:d7202.
177
Guyatt G, Oxman AD, Akl EA, Kunz R, Vist G, Brozek J, et al. GRADE guidelines: 1.
Introduction-GRADE evidence profiles and summary of findings tables. J Clin Epidemiol
2011;64:383-94.
178
Guyatt G, Oxman AD, Sultan S, Brozek J, Glasziou P, Alonso-Coello P, et al. GRADE
guidelines. 11: Making an overall rating of confidence in effect estimates for a single
outcome and for all outcomes. J Clin Epidemiol 2013;66:151-7.
179
Antman EM, Lau J, Kupelnick B, Mosteller F, Chalmers TC. A comparison of results of
meta-analyses of randomized control trials and recommendations of clinical experts.
treatments for myocardial infarction. JAMA 1992;268:240-8.
180
Oxman AD, Guyatt GH. The science of reviewing research. Ann N Y Acad Sci
1993;703:125.
No commercial reuse: See rights and reprints http://www.bmj.com/permissions
Subscribe: http://www.bmj.com/subscribe
BMJ 2015;349:g7647 doi: 10.1136/bmj.g7647 (Published 2 January 2015)
Page 21 of 25
RESEARCH METHODS & REPORTING
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
2 January 2015. 
10.1136/bmj.g7647 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 22 (native) -----
181
Dickersin K. The existence of publication bias and risk factors for its occurrence. JAMA
1990;263:1385-9.
182
Begg CB. Publication bias: A problem in interpreting medical data. J R Stat Soc A
1988;151:419-63.
183
Hopewell S, Loudon K, Clarke MJ, Oxman AD, Dickersin K. Publication bias in clinical
trials due to statistical significance or direction of trial results. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev 2009;(1):MR000006.
184
Dickersin K, Chalmers I. Recognizing, investigating and dealing with incomplete and
biased reporting of clinical research: from Francis Bacon to the WHO. J R Soc Med
2011;104:532-8.
185
Dickersin K. Publication bias: recognizing the problem, understanding its origins and
scope, and preventing harm. In: Rothstein HR, Sutton AJ, Borenstein M, eds. Publication
bias in meta-analysis—Prevention, assessment and adjustments . John Wiley & Sons,
2005:11-33.
186
Williamson PR, Gamble C, Altman DG, Hutton JL. Outcome selection bias in meta-analysis.
Stat Methods Med Res 2005;14:515-24.
Cite this as: BMJ 2015;350:g7647
This is an Open Access article distributed in accordance with the Creative Commons
Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY-NC 4.0) license, which permits others to distribute,
remix, adapt, build upon this work non-commercially, and license their derivative works
on different terms, provided the original work is properly cited and the use is
non-commercial. See: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/
No commercial reuse: See rights and reprints http://www.bmj.com/permissions
Subscribe: http://www.bmj.com/subscribe
BMJ 2015;349:g7647 doi: 10.1136/bmj.g7647 (Published 2 January 2015)
Page 22 of 25
RESEARCH METHODS & REPORTING
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
2 January 2015. 
10.1136/bmj.g7647 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 23 (native) -----
Tables
Table 1| Proposed stakeholders, actions, and potential benefits for supporting adherence to PRISMA-P
Potential benefits
Proposed action
Stakeholder
Improved quality, completeness, and consistency of systematic review
proposals
Standardized protocol content will improve peer review efficiency and
investigator understanding of requirements
Promote or mandate adherence to PRISMA-P or use
PRISMA-P as a template for systematic review proposals
for grant applications
Funders
Improved quality, completeness, and consistency of protocol content
Enables reviewers to anticipate and avoid future changes to review
methods (that is, outcomes)
Increased awareness of minimum content for protocol reporting
Improved completeness of reporting of completed reviews
Use or adhere to PRISMA-P during protocol development
Systematic reviewers,
groups, or organizations
Improved quality of registry entries
Improved consistency across registry entries, protocols, and systematic
reviews
Encourage the development of PRISMA-P based protocols
PROSPERO (and other
review registries)
Enables easy comparison across protocols, registry entries, and completed
systematic reviews
Use PRISMA-P to gauge the completeness of protocols
and facilitate detection of selective reporting when
considering reviews for guideline inclusion
Practice guideline
developers
May yield better quality, more complete, and more consistent reviews to
inform decision making
Advocate use of PRISMA-P by those funding and
conducting systematic reviews
Policymakers
Improved quality, completeness, and consistency of protocols over those
published in journals not endorsing PRISMA-P
Increased efficiency in protocol peer and author understanding of journal
requirements
Improved transparency of reviews and interpretation by readers
Encourage compliance with PRISMA-P for authors
submitting protocols for publication
Offer PRISMA-P as a template to assist in protocol writing
for publication
Journal editors
Simplified teaching and grading of protocols
Improved quality, completeness, and consistency of protocol content
Use PRISMA-P as a training tool
Encourage adherence in students submitting protocols for
coursework
Educators
Improved understanding of the minimum protocol content
Well trained systematic reviewers entering the workforce
Develop protocols for coursework or research using
PRISMA-P
Students
No commercial reuse: See rights and reprints http://www.bmj.com/permissions
Subscribe: http://www.bmj.com/subscribe
BMJ 2015;349:g7647 doi: 10.1136/bmj.g7647 (Published 2 January 2015)
Page 23 of 25
RESEARCH METHODS & REPORTING
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
2 January 2015. 
10.1136/bmj.g7647 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 24 (native) -----
Table 2| PRISMA-P (preferred reporting items for systematic review and meta-analysis protocols) 2015 checklist: recommended items to
address in a systematic review protocol
Checklist item
Item No
Section and topic
Administrative information
Title:
Identify the report as a protocol of a systematic review
1a
Identification
If the protocol is for an update of a previous systematic review, identify as such
1b
Update
If registered, provide the name of the registry (such as PROSPERO) and registration number
2
Registration
Authors:
Provide name, institutional affiliation, e-mail address of all protocol authors; provide physical mailing address of
corresponding author
3a
Contact
Describe contributions of protocol authors and identify the guarantor of the review
3b
Contributions
If the protocol represents an amendment of a previously completed or published protocol, identify as such and list
changes; otherwise, state plan for documenting important protocol amendments
4
Amendments
Support:
Indicate sources of financial or other support for the review
5a
Sources
Provide name for the review funder and/or sponsor
5b
Sponsor
Describe roles of funder(s), sponsor(s), and/or institution(s), if any, in developing the protocol
5c
Role of sponsor or funder
Introduction
Describe the rationale for the review in the context of what is already known
6
Rationale
Provide an explicit statement of the question(s) the review will address with reference to participants, interventions,
comparators, and outcomes (PICO)
7
Objectives
Methods
Specify the study characteristics (such as PICO, study design, setting, time frame) and report characteristics (such
as years considered, language, publication status) to be used as criteria for eligibility for the review
8
Eligibility criteria
Describe all intended information sources (such as electronic databases, contact with study authors, trial registers
or other grey literature sources) with planned dates of coverage
9
Information sources
Present draft of search strategy to be used for at least one electronic database, including planned limits, such that
it could be repeated
10
Search strategy
Study records:
Describe the mechanism(s) that will be used to manage records and data throughout the review
11a
Data management
State the process that will be used for selecting studies (such as two independent reviewers) through each phase
of the review (that is, screening, eligibility and inclusion in meta-analysis)
11b
Selection process
Describe planned method of extracting data from reports (such as piloting forms, done independently, in duplicate),
any processes for obtaining and confirming data from investigators
11c
Data collection process
List and define all variables for which data will be sought (such as PICO items, funding sources), any pre-planned
data assumptions and simplifications
12
Data items
List and define all outcomes for which data will be sought, including prioritization of main and additional outcomes,
with rationale
13
Outcomes and prioritization
Describe anticipated methods for assessing risk of bias of individual studies, including whether this will be done at
the outcome or study level, or both; state how this information will be used in data synthesis
14
Risk of bias in individual studies
Describe criteria under which study data will be quantitatively synthesised
15a
Data synthesis
If data are appropriate for quantitative synthesis, describe planned summary measures, methods of handling data
and methods of combining data from studies, including any planned exploration of consistency (such as I
2, Kendall’s
τ)
15b
Describe any proposed additional analyses (such as sensitivity or subgroup analyses, meta-regression)
15c
If quantitative synthesis is not appropriate, describe the type of summary planned
15d
Specify any planned assessment of meta-bias(es) (such as publication bias across studies, selective reporting within
studies)
16
Meta-bias(es)
Describe how the strength of the body of evidence will be assessed (such as GRADE)
17
Confidence in cumulative evidence
No commercial reuse: See rights and reprints http://www.bmj.com/permissions
Subscribe: http://www.bmj.com/subscribe
BMJ 2015;349:g7647 doi: 10.1136/bmj.g7647 (Published 2 January 2015)
Page 24 of 25
RESEARCH METHODS & REPORTING
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
2 January 2015. 
10.1136/bmj.g7647 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 25 (native) -----
Table 3| AHRQ process for dealing with protocol amendments. Changes made to the protocol should not be incorporated throughout the
various sections of the protocol. Instead, protocol amendments should be noted only in section VII of the protocol, preferably in a tabular
format (see example below), and the date of the amendment noted at the top of the protocol (from
http://effectivehealthcare.ahrq.gov/index.cfm/search-for-guides-reviews-and-reports/?productid=1724&pageaction=displayproduct)
Rationale
Revised protocol
Original protocol
Section
Date
Justify why the change will improve the report. If
necessary, describe why the change does not
introduce bias. Do not use justification such as,
“because the AE/TOO/TEP/Peer reviewer told us to
do so,” but explain what the change hopes to
accomplish
Describe the change in
protocol
Describe language of the
original protocol
Specify where the change
would be found in the
protocol
This should be the
effective date of the
change in protocol
No commercial reuse: See rights and reprints http://www.bmj.com/permissions
Subscribe: http://www.bmj.com/subscribe
BMJ 2015;349:g7647 doi: 10.1136/bmj.g7647 (Published 2 January 2015)
Page 25 of 25
RESEARCH METHODS & REPORTING
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
2 January 2015. 
10.1136/bmj.g7647 on 
BMJ: first published as