

----- Page 1 (native text) -----
International regimes, transactions,
and change: embedded liberalism in
the postwar economic order
John Gerard Ruggie
A philosopher is someone who goes into a dark room at night,
to look for a black cat that isn't there. A theologian does the same thing,
but comes out claiming he found the cat.
Nick Philips, "The Case of the Naked Quark,"
TWA Ambassador Magazine, October 1980.
One of our major purposes in this volume is to establish whether we, as
students of international regimes, most resemble the philosopher, the
theologian or, as most of us would like to believe, the social scientist—
suspecting from the beginning that there is a black cat in there somewhere,
and emerging from the room with scratches on the forearm as vindication.
This article consists of another set of scratches, together with what I hope
will be persuasive reasoning and demonstration that a black cat put them
there.
My focus is on how the regimes for money and trade have reflected and
affected the evolution of the international economic order since World War
II. Let me state my basic approach to this issue at the outset, for, as Krasner
shows in the Introduction, a good deal of the disagreement and confusion
I have benefited from the comments and suggestions of a large number of friends, colleagues,
and fellow travelers, and am particularly indebted to the detailed written remarks of Catherine
Gwin, Ernst Haas, Robert Keohane, Stephen Krasner, and Susan Strange, as well as to Albert
Fishlow's constructive criticism at the Palm Springs conference. Research for this article was
made possible by financial support from the Rockefeller Foundation and the Ira D. Wallach
Chair of World Order Studies at Columbia University.
International Organization 36, 2, Spring 1982
0020-8183/82/020379-37 $1.50
i 
© 1982 by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology
379
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818300018993 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 2 (native text) -----
380 
International Organization
about international regimes stems from deeper epistemological and even
ontological differences among observers.
International regimes have been defined as social institutions around
which actor expectations converge in a given area of international relations.1
Accordingly, as is true of any social institution, international regimes limit
the discretion of their constituent units to decide and act on issues that fall
within the regime's domain. And, as is also true of any social institution,
ultimate expression in converging expectations and delimited discretion
gives international regimes an intersubjective quality. To this extent, inter-
national regimes are akin to language—we may think of them as part of "the
language of state action."2 The constituent units of a regime, like speakers of
a common language, generally have little difficulty in determining what even
an entirely new usage signifies. Should it be technically inappropriate or in-
correct, they nevertheless may still "understand" it—in the dual sense of
being able to comprehend it and willing to acquiesce in it. In sum, we know
international regimes not simply by some descriptive inventory of their con-
crete elements, but by their generative grammar, the underlying principles of
order and meaning that shape the manner of their formation and transforma-
tion. Likewise, we know deviations from regimes not simply by acts that are
undertaken, but by the intentionality and acceptability attributed to those acts
in the context of an intersubjective framework of meaning.3
The analytical components of international regimes we take to consist of
principles, norms, rules, and procedures. As the content for each of these
terms is specified, international regimes diverge from social institutions like
language, for we do not normally attribute to language any specific "con-
summatory" as opposed to "instrumental" values.4 Insofar as international
regimes embody principles about fact, causation, and rectitude, as well as
political rights and obligations that are regarded as legitimate, they fall closer
to the consummatory end of the spectrum, into the realm of political author-
ity. Thus, the formation and transformation of international regimes may be
said to represent a concrete manifestation of the internationalization of
political authority.5
1 Oran R. Young, "International Regimes: Problems of Concept Formation," World Politics
32 (April 1980); and Stephen D. Krasner's introduction to this volume.
2 This phrase is taken from Bruce Andrews's application of the linguistic metaphor to the
study of foreign policy: "The Language of State Action," International Interactions 6
(November 1979).
3 Cf. Noam Chomsky, Current Issues in Linguistic Theory (The Hague: Mouton, 1964),
chap. 1.
4 These are derived from the standard Weberian distinction between Wert- and Zweckra-
tional. Max Weber, Economy and Society, ed. by Guenther Roth and Claus Wittich (Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1978), pp. 24-26.
5 Discussions of political authority often fuse the very meaning of the concept with one of its
specific institutional manifestations, that expressed in super-subordinate relations. But, as
demonstrated repeatedly in organization theory and recognized by Weber, authority rests on a
form of legitimacy that ultimately can derive only from a community of interests. Chester Bar-
nard has carried this line of reasoning the furthest: "Authority is another name for the willing-
ness and capacity of individuals to submit to the necessities of cooperative systems." The
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818300018993 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 3 (native text) -----
International regimes, transactions, and change 
381
What is the "generative grammar" that shapes the internationalization
of political authority? The most common interpretation has been stated suc-
cinctly by Kenneth Waltz: the elements of international authority, he main-
tains, "are barely once removed from the capability that provides [their]
foundation. . . ."6 On this interpretation others, in turn, have built what now
amounts to a prevalent model of the formation and transformation of inter-
national economic regimes. In its simplest form, the model makes this pre-
diction: if economic capabilities are so concentrated that a hegemon exists,
as in the case of Great Britain in the late 19th century and the U.S.A. after
World War II, an "open" or "liberal" international economic order will
come into being.7 In the organization of a liberal order, pride of place is given
to market rationality. This is not to say that authority is absent from such an
order. It is to say that authority relations are constructed in such a way as to
give maximum scope to market forces rather than to constrain them. Specific
regimes that serve such an order, in the areas of money and trade, for exam-
ple, limit the discretion of states to intervene in the functioning of self-
regulating currency and commodity markets. These may be termed
"strong" regimes, because they restrain self-seeking states in a competitive
international political system from meddling directly in domestic and inter-
national economic affairs in the name of their national interests. And the
strength of these regimes, of course, is backed by the capabilities of the heg-
emon. If and as such a concentration of economic capabilities erodes, the
liberal order is expected to unravel and its regimes to become weaker, ulti-
mately being replaced by mercantilist arrangements, that is, by arrange-
ments under which the constituent units reassert national political authority
over transnational economic forces. If the order established by British eco-
nomic supremacy in the 19th century and that reflecting the supremacy of
the United States after World War II illustrate liberal orders with strong
regimes, the interwar period illustrates the darker corollary of the axiom.
I do not claim that this model is fundamentally wrong. But it does not
take us very far in understanding international economic regimes, and, by
extension, the formation and transformation of international regimes in gen-
Functions of the Executive (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1968), p. 184. See also the
important statement by Peter Blau, "Critical Remarks on Weber's Theory of Authority,"
American Political Science Review 57 (June 1963). An illustration (though unintended) of how
not to think of authority if the concept is to be at all useful in a discussion of international
relations is provided by Harry Eckstein, "Authority Patterns: A Structural Basis for Political
Inquiry," American Political Science Review 67 (December 1973). More elaborate typologies of
forms of authority relations in international regimes may be found in my papers, "International
Responses to Technology: Concepts and Trends," International Organization 29 (Summer
1975), and "Changing Frameworks of International Collective Behavior: On the Complemen-
tarity of Contradictory Tendencies," in Nazli Choucri and Thomas Robinson, eds., Forecasting
in International Relations (San Francisco: W. H. Freeman, 1978).
6 Theory of International Politics (Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1979), p. 88.
7 The relevant literature is cited in Robert 0. Keohane, "The Theory of Hegemonic Stability
and Changes in International Economic Regimes, 1967-1977," in Ole Holsti et al., eds.,
Change in the International System (Boulder, Col.: Westview Press, 1980).
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818300018993 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 4 (native text) -----
382 
International Organization
eral.8 This is so precisely because it does not encompass the phenomeno-
logical dimensions of international regimes.
From this vantage point, I develop three theoretical arguments; each
yields an interpretation of central features of the postwar international eco-
nomic order that is distinct from the prevailing view.
The first concerns the "generative grammar" or what I shall call the
"structure" of the internationalization of political authority. Whatever its
institutional manifestations, political authority represents a fusion of power
with legitimate social purpose. The prevailing interpretation of international
authority focuses on power only; it ignores the dimension of social purpose.9
The problem with this formulation is that power may predict the form of the
international order, but not its content. For example, in the era of the third
hegemon in the complex of modern state-system and capitalist-world-
economy, the Dutch in the 17th century, the condition of hegemony
coexisted with mercantilist behavior,10 and it would be straining credulity to
attribute this difference solely or even mainly to differences in the relative
economic supremacy of the three hegemons without discussing differences
in social purpose. Moreover, had the Germans succeeded in their quest to
establish a "New International Order" after World War II, the designs
Hjalmar Schacht would have instituted were the very mirror image of Bret-
ton Woods11—obviously, differences in social purpose again provide the
key. Lastly, the common tendency to equate the 19th century liberal inter-
national economic order and its post-World War II counterpart itself
obscures exceedingly important differences in their domestic and interna-
tional organization, differences that stem from the fact that the one repre-
sented laissez-faire liberalism and the other did not. In sum, to say anything
sensible about the content of international economic orders and about the
regimes that serve them, it is necessary to look at how power and legitimate
social purpose become fused to project political authority into the interna-
tional system. Applied to the post-World War II context, this argument
leads me to characterize the international economic order by the term "em-
8 Nor should it be expected to. As Waltz makes clear, his is a theory intended to predict that
certain conditioning and constraining forces will take effect within the international system as a
whole depending upon variation in its structure, not to account for such "process-level" out-
comes as international regimes. Some of the literature cited by Keohane attempts to do more
than this, however, though Keohane himself reaches a conclusion that is not at variance with
my own.
9 More accurately, it either assumes social purpose (as in Waltz, Theory of International
Politics), or seeks to deduce it from state power (as in Krasner, "State Power and the Structure
of International Trade," World Politics 28 [April 1976]).
10 To my knowledge, the case of Dutch supremacy in the world economy has not been ad-
dressed in the "hegemonic stability" literature; but see Immanuel Wallerstein, The Modern
World System, vol. 2 (New York: Academic Press, 1980), chap. 2.
11 A brief description may be found in Armand Van Dormael, Brettoh Woods: Birth of a
Monetary System (London: Macmillan, 1978), chap. 1. The classic statement of how it actually
worked remains Albert O. Hirschman, National Power and the Structure of Foreign Trade,
expanded ed. (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1980).
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818300018993 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 5 (native text) -----
International regimes, transactions, and change 
383
bedded liberalism," which I show to differ from both its classical ancestor
and its ignominious predecessor even as it has systematically combined
central features of both.
My second theoretical argument concerns the relationship between in-
ternational economic regimes and developments in the international econ-
omy, particularly at the level of private transaction flows.12 Conventional
structural arguments, whether Realist or Marxist, see transnationalization as
a direct reflection of hegemony: high levels of trade and capital flows obtain
under the pax Britannica and the pa* Americana. The regimes for trade and
money are largely epiphenomenal adjuncts that may be invoked to legitimate
this outcome, but they have little or no real bearing on it. Conventional lib-
erals, on the other hand, hold that high levels of trade and capital flows will
obtain only if there is strict adherence to open international economic re-
gimes, so that these become virtually determinative. Neither formulation is
satisfactory.
The relationship between economic regimes and international transac-
tion flows is inherently problematical, because the domain of international
regimes consists of the behavior of states, vis-a-vis one another and vis-a-
vis the market-place, not the market-place itself. Nevertheless, simply on
a priori grounds we may argue that because there is no direct relation-
ship, it is highly unlikely that the character of international regimes would
have a determinative impact on international transaction flows; and yet,
because international regimes do encompass the behavior of states vis-
a-vis the market-place, it stands to reason that they would have some effect
on international transaction flows. I contend that the nature of this relation-
ship, at least in the first instance, is one of complementarity. That is to say,
international economic regimes provide a permissive environment for the
emergence of specific kinds of international transaction flows that actors
take to be complementary to the particular fusion of power and purpose that
is embodied within those regimes.13 The contextual specificity of this com-
plementarity makes equations of the variety "pax Britannica is equal to pax
Americana," as well as insistence on universal regime formulae to achieve a
given outcome, extremely dubious propositions.
Applying this argument to the postwar international economic order, I
conclude that the emergence of several specific developments in transna-
tional economic activities can be accounted for at least in part by their per-
ceived first-order contribution to the regimes for trade and money.14 These
regimes, then, are neither determinative nor irrelevant, but provide part of
the context that shapes the character of transnationalization.
12 In this connection, see also Charles Lipson's chapter in this volume.
13 This is not to ignore the possibility that the same developments may have second-order
consequences or long-term effects that pose stresses or even contradictions for international
economic regimes, a problem which I take up in a later section.
14 The present formulation of this conclusion owes much to Albert Fishlow's commentary on
an earlier version at the Palm Springs Conference, for which I am obliged to him.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818300018993 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 6 (native text) -----
384 
International Organization
My third theoretical argument concerns the occurrence of change in and
of regimes. The prevailing model postulates one source of regime change,
the ascendancy or decline of economic hegemons, and two directions of re-
gime change, greater openness or closure. If, however, we allow for the
possibility that power and purpose do not necessarily covary, then we have
two potential sources of change and no longer any simple one-to-one corre-
spondence between source and direction of change. For example, we could
have a situation in which there exists a predominant economic power whose
economic program differs fundamentally from that of its leading rivals (e.g.,
Dutch supremacy in the 17th century). Or, we could have a situation in which
power and purpose covary negatively, that is, in which neither a hegemon
nor a congruence of social purpose exists among the leading economic pow-
ers (the interwar period approximates this case). We could have a situation
in which power and purpose covary positively (e.g., Bretton Woods). There
remains the situation of no hegemon but a congruence of social purpose
among the leading economic powers (albeit imperfectly, the post-1971 in-
ternational economic order illustrates this possibility).
It is the last possibility that interests me most. It suggests the need for a
more nuanced formulation of regime change than is currently available. If
and as the concentration of economic power erodes, and the "strength" of
international regimes is sapped thereby, we may be sure that the instruments
of regimes also will have to change.15 However, as long as purpose is held
constant, there is no reason to suppose that the normative framework of
regimes must change as well. In other words, referring back to our analytical
components of international regimes, rules and procedures (instruments)
would change but principles and norms (normative frameworks) would not.
Presumably, the new instruments that would emerge would be better
adapted to the new power situation in the international economic order. But
insofar as they continued to reflect the same sense of purpose, they would
represent a case of norm-governed as opposed to norm-transforming change.
Applying this argument to the post-1971 period leads me to suggest that
many of the changes that have occurred in the regimes for money and trade
have been norm-governed changes rather than, as is often maintained,
reflecting the collapse of Bretton Woods and a headlong rush into mercan-
tilism. Indeed, in certain cases earlier acts by the hegemon had violated the
normative frameworks of these regimes, so that some post-1971 changes
may be viewed as adaptive restorations of prior sets of norms in the context
of a new and different international economic environment. Both occur-
rences may to taken to demonstrate what we might call "the relative au-
tonomy" of international regimes (with due apologies to the appropriate
quarters).
The various parts of my argument clearly stand or fall together. Ulti-
15 The "hegemonic stability" school effectively demonstrates why this is so. See Keohane,
"Theory of Hegemonic Stability."
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818300018993 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 7 (native text) -----
t
International regimes, transactions, and change 
385
mately, they lead back to my depiction of international authority as reflect-
ing a fusion of power and legitimate social purpose. An historical illustration
of this interpretation of the "structure" of international authority therefore
serves as my point of departure.
1. The structure of international authority
Karl Polanyi's magisterial work, The Great Transformation, was first
published in 1944. In it, he developed a distinction between "embedded"
and "disembedded" economic orders: "normally, the economic order is
merely a function of the social, in which it is contained. Under neither tribal,
nor feudal, nor mercantile conditions was there, as we have shown, a sepa-
rate economic system in society. Nineteenth century society, in which eco-
nomic activity was isolated and imputed to a distinctive economic motive,
was, indeed, a singular departure."16 The best known international forms
taken by this "singular departure" were, of course, the regimes of free trade
and the gold standard. What were their bases?
The internationalization of domestic authority relations
Charles Kindleberger, who is justly accorded a leading role in having
established the efficacy of the "hegemonic stability" model in his book on
the Great Depression,17 subsequently managed to write an account of the
rise of free trade in western Europe without even mentioning British eco-
nomic supremacy as a possible source of explanation.18 He focused instead
on a fundamental reordering of the relationships between domestic political
authority and economic processes. Free trade, he reminds us, was due first
of all to the general breakdown of the manor and guild system and the
so-called policy of supply, through which a complex structure of social
regulations rather than market exchange determined the organization of
economic activity at home and abroad. Indeed, the earliest measures under-
taken in order to free trade were to dismantle prohibitions on exports, pro-
hibitions that had restricted the outward movement of materials, machinery,
and artisans. The bulk of these prohibitions was not removed until well into
the 1820s and 1830s, and in some instances even later. A second part of the
stimulus "came from the direct self-interest of particular dominant groups.
16 Boston: Beacon Press, 1944, p. 71. The historical claims are backed up in Polanyi et al.,
eds., Trade and Markets in the Early Empires (Glencoe, 111.: Free Press, 1957).
17 Charles P. Kindleberger, The World in Depression, 1929-1939 (Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1973), esp. chaps. 1 and 14.
18 "The Rise of Free Trade in Western Europe, 1820-1875," Journal of Economic History 35
(March 1975): 20-55.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818300018993 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 8 (native text) -----
386 
International Organization
. . ."I9 In the Netherlands, these were merchants, shipowners, and bankers;
in Great Britain, the manufacturing sectors backed by the intellectual
hegemony established by the Manchester School; in France, largely indus-
trial interests employing imported materials and equipment in production,
though they would not have succeeded against the weight of countervailing
interests had not Louis Napoleon imposed free trade for unrelated reasons of
international diplomacy; in Prussia, grain and timber exporters, though
Bismarck was not adverse to using trade treaties in the pursuit of broader
objectives and free trade treaties seemed to be au courant; in Italy, the ef-
forts of Cavour, which prevailed over disorganized opposition. Equally par-
ticularistic factors were at work in Belgium, Denmark, Norway, Sweden,
Spain, and Portugal. But how did such diverse forces come to converge on
the single policy response of free trade? In a certain sense, Kindleberger
contends, Europe in this period should be viewed not as a collection of sepa-
rate economies, but "as a single entity which moved to free trade for
ideological or perhaps better doctrinal reasons."20 The image of the market
became an increasingly captivating social metaphor and served to focus di-
verse responses on the outcome of free trade. And unless one holds that
ideology and doctrine exist in a social vacuum, this ascendancy of market
rationality in turn must be related to the political and cultural ascendance of
the middle classes. In Polanyi's inimitable phrase, "Laissez-faire was
planned 
"21
In sum, this shift in what we might call the balance between "authority"
and "market" fundamentally transformed state-society relations, by rede-
fining the legitimate social purposes in pursuit of which state power was
expected to be employed in the domestic economy. The role of the state
became to institute and safeguard the self-regulating market. To be sure, this
shift occurred unequally throughout western Europe, and at uneven tempos.
And of course nowhere did it take hold so deeply and for so long a period as
in Great Britain. Great Britain's supremacy in the world economy had much
to do with the global expansion of this new economic order, and even more
with its stability and longevity. But the authority relations that were insti-
tuted in the international regimes for money and trade reflected a new bal-
ance of state-society relations that expressed a collective reality.
These expectations about the proper scope of political authority in eco-
nomic relations did not survive World War I. Despite attempts at restora-
tion, by the end of the interwar period there remained little doubt about how
thoroughly they had eroded. Polanyi looked back over the period of the
"twenty years' crisis" from the vantage point of the Second World War—at
the emergence of mass movements from the Left and the Right throughout
Europe, the revolutionary and counterrevolutionary upheavals in central
19 Ibid., p. 50.
20 Ibid., p. 51, italics added.
21 Polanyi describes the parallel movements, in the case of Great Britain, of the middle
class into the political arena and the state out of the economic arena.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818300018993 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 9 (native text) -----
International regimes, transactions, and change 
387
and eastern Europe in the 1917-20 period, the General Strike of 1926 in
Great Britain, and, above all, the rapid succession of the abandonment of the
gold standard by Britain, the instituting of the Five Year Plans in the Soviet
Union, the launching of the New Deal in the United States, unorthodox
budgetary policies in Sweden, corporativismo in Fascist Italy, and
Wirkschaftslenkung followed by the creation of both domestic and interna-
tional variants of the "new economic order" by the Nazis in Germany.
Running throughout these otherwise diverse events and developments, he
saw the common thread of social reaction against market rationality. State-
society relations again had undergone a profound—indeed, the great—
transformation, as land, labor, and capital had all seized upon the state in the
attempt to reimpose broader and more direct social control over market
forces. Once this domestic transformation began, late in the 19th century,
international liberalism of the orthodox kind was doomed. Thus, it was the
singular tragedy of the interwar period, Polanyi felt, to have attempted to
restore internationally, in the form of the gold-exchange standard in par-
ticular, that which no longer had a corresponding social base domestically.
The new international economic order that would emerge from World War
II, Polanyi concluded, on the one hand would mark the end of "capitalist
internationalism," as governments learned the lesson that international au-
tomaticity stands in fundamental and potentially explosive contradiction to
an active state domestically, and, on the other hand, the emergence of delib-
erate management of international economic transactions by means of col-
laboration among governments.22
Some of Polanyi's thoughts about the future had already been enter-
tained by the individuals who would come to be directly responsible for
negotiating the monetary component of the postwar international economic
order. In the depth of the Depression, Harry Dexter White had pondered the
problem of how to buffer national economies from external disturbances
without, at the same time, sacrificing the benefits of international economic
relations. "The path, I suspect, may lie in the direction of centralized control
over foreign exchanges and trade."23 Indeed, in 1934 White had applied for a
fellowship to study planning techniques at the Institute of Economic Investi-
gations of Gosplan in Moscow. Instead, he accepted an offer to go to Wash-
ington and work in the New Deal. For his part, one of the first assignments
that Keynes undertook after he joined the British Treasury in 1940 was to
draft the text of a radio broadcast designed to discredit recent propaganda
proclamations by Walther Funk, minister for economic affairs and president
of the Reichsbank in Berlin, on the economic and social benefits that the
"New Order" would bring to Europe and the world. Keynes was instructed
to stress the traditional virtues of free trade and the gold standard. But this,
he felt, "will not have much propaganda value." Britain would have to offer
22 The Great Transformation, esp. chaps. 2 and 19-21.
23 Quoted in Van Dormael, Bretton Woods, p. 41.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818300018993 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 10 (native text) -----
388 
International Organization
"the same as what Dr. Funk offers, except that we shall do it better and
more honestly."24 He had reached the conclusion that only a refinement and
improvement of the Schachtian device would restore equilibrium after the
war. "To suppose that there exists some smoothly functioning automatic
mechanism of adjustment which preserves equilibrium if only we trust to
methods of laissez-faire is a doctrinaire delusion which disregards the les-
sons of historical experience without having behind it the support of sound
theory."25
Polanyi's prediction of the end of capitalist internationalism does not
stand up well against the subsequent internationalization of production and
finance; White's views were altered considerably over the years as a result
of negotiations within the bureaucracy and the adversarial process with
Congress, before he was driven from Washington altogether in an anticom-
munist witch-hunt; and American resistance scaled down even the multilat-
eral variants of Keynes's ambitious vision. Yet each had been correct in the
essential fact that a new threshold had been crossed in the balance between
"market" and "authority," with governments assuming much more direct
responsibility for domestic social security and economic stability. The ex-
tension of the suffrage and the emergence of working-class political con-
stituencies, parties, and even governments was responsible in part; but
demands for social protection were very nearly universal, coming from all
sides of the political spectrum and from all ranks of the social hierarchy (with
the possible exception of orthodox financial circles). Polanyi, White, and
Keynes were also correct in their premise that, somehow, the postwar inter-
national economic order would have to reflect this change in state-society
relations if the calamities of the interwar period were not to recur.
Transformations in power versus purpose
Changes in the distribution of power and in the structure of social pur-
pose covaried from the pre-World War I era through to the interwar period,
so that we cannot say with any degree of certainty what might have hap- 
4
pened had only one changed. However, by looking at the relationship be-
tween the two in greater detail in a single, circumscribed domain, we may get
closer to a firm answer. I focus on the monetary regime under the gold
standard before World War I, and its attempted approximation in the gold-
exchange standard of the interwar period.
I begin with the domestic side of things, though this distinction itself 
„
would barely apply to currencies under a "gold specie" standard26 where
"Quoted in ibid., p. 7.
25 Quoted in ibid., p. 32.
26 Unless otherwise noted, this paragraph is based on League of Nations [Ragnar Nurkse],
International Currency Experience: Lessons of the Inter-War Period (League of Nations, Eco-
nomic, Financial and Transit Department, 1944), chap. 4. (Hereafter referred to as Nurkse.)
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818300018993 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 11 (native text) -----
International regimes, transactions, and change 
389
both domestic circulation and international means of settlement took the
form largely of gold, and the domestic money supply therefore was deter-
mined directly and immediately by the balance of payments. Under the more
familiar "gold bullion" standard prior to World War I, where the bulk of
domestic money took the form of bank notes and deposits, backed by and
fixed in value in terms of gold, there still existed a strong relationship be-
tween domestic money supply and the balance of payments, but it was more
indirect. In theory, it worked via the effects of gold movements on the
domestic credit supply: an expansion of credit in the gold-receiving country,
and a contraction in the gold-losing country, affected prices and incomes in
such a way as to close the balance of payments discrepancy that had
triggered the gold movement in the first place. This was reinforced by an
attending change in money rates, which would set off equilibrating move-
ments in short-term private funds. In practice, gold movements among the
major economies were relatively infrequent and small. Temporary gaps to a
large extent were filled by short-term capital movements, responding to
interest differentials or slight variations within the gold points.27 More fun-
damental adjustments were produced by the impact of the balance of pay-
ments not only on domestic money stock and the volume of credit, but also
through the direct effects of export earnings on domestic income and effec-
tive demand.
In sum, even in its less than pristine form, the pre-World War I gold
standard was predicated upon particular assumptions concerning the funda-
mental purpose of domestic monetary policy and the role of the state in the
process of adjusting imbalances in the level of external and internal eco-
nomic activity. With respect to the first, in Bloomfield's words, the "domi-
nant and overriding" objective of monetary policy was the maintenance of
gold parity. "The view, so widely recognized and accepted in recent de-
cades, of central banking policy as a means of facilitating the achievement
and maintenance of reasonable stability in the level of economic activity and
prices was scarcely thought about before 1914, and certainly not accepted,
as a formal objective of policy."28 Second, insofar as the adjustment process
ultimately was geared to securing external stability, state abstinence was
prescribed so as not to undermine the equilibrating linkages between the
balance of payments, changes in gold reserves and in domestic credit supply,
27 Note, however, Bloomfield's cautionary remark: "While this picture is broadly accurate,
the nature and role of private short-term capital movements before 1914 have usually been
oversimplified and their degree of sensitivity to interest rates and exchange rates exaggerated.
At the same time these movements have been endowed with a benign character that they did not
always possess." Arthur I. Bloomfield, "Short-Term Capital Movements Under the Pre-1914
Gold Standard," Princeton Studies in International Finance 11 (1963), p. 34. Bloomfield pre-
sents a more complex and balanced picture, which, however, does not contradict the basic
generalization.
28 Arthur I. Bloomfield, Monetary 
Policy Under the International 
Gold Standard 
(New York:
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 1959), p. 23. Bloomfield shows that central banks did
attempt partially to "sterilize" the effects of gold flows.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818300018993 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 12 (native text) -----
390 
International Organization
income, and demand. This was not incompatible with partial efforts at
sterilization. As Nurkse put it, "all that was required for this purpose was
that countries should not attempt to control their national income and outlay
by deliberate measures—a requirement which in the age of laissez-faire was
generally fulfilled."29
It is impossible to say precisely when these assumptions ceased to be
operative and their contraries took hold. But it is clear that after World War I
there was a growing tendency "to make international monetary policy con-
form to domestic social and economic policy and not the other way
round."30 The proportion of currency reserves held in the form of foreign
exchange more than doubled between 1913 and 1925, to 27 percent; in 1928, it
stood at 42 percent. And international reserves increasingly came to serve as
a "buffer" against external economic forces rather than as their "transmit-
ter"; Nurkse found that throughout the interwar period the international and
domestic assets of central banks moved in opposite directions far more often
than in the same direction.31 After the collapse of the gold-exchange
standard in 1931, exchange stabilization funds were established in the at-
tempt to provide more of a cushion than "neutralization" had afforded.
Mere stabilization was followed by direct exchange controls in many in-
stances, with the gold bloc countries attempting to achieve analogous insu-
lation through import quotas. Governments everywhere had developed
increasingly active forms of intervention in the domestic economy in order
to affect the level of prices and employment, and to protect them against exter-
nal sources of dislocation.32 The international monetary order disintegrated
into five more or less distinct blocs, each with its own prevailing currency
arrangement.
On the international side, there is little doubt that the pre-World War I
gold standard functioned as it did because of the central part Great Britain
played in it. In general terms, "if keeping a free market for imports, main-
taining a flow of investment capital, and acting as lender of last resort are the
marks of an 'underwriter' of an international system, then Britain certainly
fulfilled this role in the nineteenth-century international economy."33 More
specifically, in the domain of monetary policy it was the role of sterling as
the major vehicle currency, held by foreign business, banks, and even cen-
tral banks, that gave the Bank of England the influence to shape international
monetary conditions consistent with the fundamental commitments and
29 Nurkse, International 
Currency 
Experience, 
p. 213.
30 Ibid., p. 230.
31 Ibid., pp. 68-88.
32 For a good global overview of these policy shifts, see Asa Briggs, "The World Economy:
Interdependence and Planning," in C. L. Mowat, ed., The New Cambridge Modern History,
vol. 12 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1968).
33 Robert J. A. Skidelsky, "Retreat from Leadership: The Evolution of British Economic
Foreign Policy, 1870-1939," in Benjamin M. Rowland, ed., Balance of Power or Hegemony:
The Interwar Monetary System (New York: New York University Press, 1976), p. 163. Cf.
Kindleberger, The World in Depression, chap. 1.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818300018993 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 13 (native text) -----
International regimes, transactions, and change 
391
dynamics of the regime. And yet, the critical issue in the stability of this
regime was not simply some measure of material "supremacy" on the part
of Britain, but that "national monetary authorities were inclined to 'follow
the market'—and indirectly the Bank of England—rather than to assert in-
dependent national objectives of their own."34 Thus, the international gold
standard rested on both the special position of Great Britain and prevailing
attitudes concerning the role of the state in the conduct of national monetary
policy. It reflected a true "hegemony," as Gramsci used the term.
What of the interwar period? Counterfactual historiography is little bet-
ter than a parlor game under ideal circumstances; it should be especially
suspect when an outcome is as overdetermined as institutional failure in the
international economy between the wars.35 It seems reasonable to assume,
though, that with the end of monetary laissez-faire, "the monetary leader
would need to dispose of more monetary influence and political authority
than Britain ever possessed, except within its own imperial system."36 And
where British hegemony lingered on, as in the Financial Committee of the
League of Nations, the outcome was not salutary. For example, the eastern
European countries that had their currencies stabilized by the League and
were put under the gold-exchange standard before the major countries had
fixed their currency rates did so at considerable domestic social cost.37 And
virtually every effort at constructing a viable international monetary regime
in the interwar period, in which Britain took a leading role, did little more
than decry the newly prevailing social objectives of state policy while
pleading for a speedy return to the principles of "sound finance."38 The con-
sequences of course were counterproductive: just as the rhetoric of the
34 Harold van B. Cleveland, "The International Monetary System in the Interwar Period," in
Rowland, Balance of Power, p. 57, emphasis added. Note, in addition, that major primary-
producing countries, who may well have borne more than their share of the international ad-
justment process under the gold standard, by and large did not establish their own central banks
until the 1930s—this includes Argentina, Canada, India, New Zealand, and Venezuela. The
argument that the adjustment process worked disproportionately on primary-producing coun-
tries is made by Robert Triffin, "National Central Banking and the International Economy," in
Lloyd A. Metzler et al., eds., International Monetary Policies (Washington, D.C.: Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 1947).
35 There is almost no end to the number of dislocating features of the post-World War I
international economy that can be adduced as part of the explanation for its institutional failure.
Kindleberger, The World in Depression, chap. 1, briefly recounts most of them.
36 Cleveland, "International Monetary System," p. 57.
37 "The deflationist's ideal came to be 'a free economy under a strong government'; but while
the phrase on government meant what it said, namely, emergency powers and suspension of
public liberties, 'free economy' meant in practice the opposite of what it said: . . . while the
inflationary governments condemned by Geneva subordinated the stability of the currency to
stability of incomes and employment, the deflationary governments put in power by Geneva
used no fewer interventions in order to subordinate the stability of incomes and employment to
the stability of the currency." Polanyi, The Great Transformation, p. 233. For French skepti-
cism concerning the "dogma of Geneva," see Judith L. Kooker, "French Financial Diplomacy:-
The Interwar Years," in Rowland, Balance of Power.
38 For summary descriptions of the major conferences, see Dean E. Traynor, International
Monetary and Financial Conferences in the Interwar Period (Washington, D.C.: Catholic Uni-
versities Press of America, 1949).
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818300018993 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 14 (native text) -----
392 
International Organization
League concerning collective security and disarmament sought and in some
measure served morally to undermine the balance of power system, without
providing a viable alternative, so too did the League and successive interna-
tional gatherings in the monetary sphere seek to undermine the legitimacy of
domestic stabilization policies while offering only the unacceptable gold-
exchange standard in their place.39
It is hardly surprising, therefore, that apart from Britain, seized by its
own ideology and institutional past and willing to pay the domestic social
cost, there were few takers among the major countries.40 In sum, efforts to
construct international economic regimes in the interwar period failed not
because of the lack of a hegemon. They failed because, even had there been
a hegemon, they stood in contradiction to the transformation in the mediat-
ing role of the state between market and society, which altered fundamen-
tally the social purpose of domestic and international authority. As Ragnar
Nurkse observed in 1944,
There was a growing tendency during the inter-war period to make in-
ternational monetary policy conform to domestic social and economic
policy and not the other way round. Yet the world was still econom-
ically interdependent; and an international currency mechanism for the
multilateral exchange of goods and services, instead of primitive bilat-
eral barter, was still a fundamental necessity for the great majority of
countries. The problem was to find a system of international currency
relations compatible with the requirements of domestic stability. Had
the period been more than a truce between two world wars, the solution
that would have evolved would no doubt have been in the nature of a
compromise.41
Ultimately, it was. The liberalism that was restored after World War II dif-
fered in kind from that which had been known previously. My term for it is
"embedded liberalism."
39 The most trenchant critique of the moral failure of the League remains that of Edward
Hallett Carr, The Twenty Years' Crisis, 1919-1939 (1939,1946; New York: Harper Torchbooks,
1964).
40 For example, France decided in 1928 to accept only gold in settlement of the enormous
surplus it was accruing; and in 1929 the U.S. "went off on a restrictive monetary frolic of its
own" even though it was in surplus" (Cleveland, "International Monetary System," p. 6). Four
years later, in his inaugural address, President Roosevelt proclaimed the primacy of domestic
stabilization, as he did again a few months later when, on the eve of the World Economic
Conference of 1933, he took the U.S. off gold.
41 International Currency Experience, p. 230. Note that Nurkse was speaking of "the great
majority of countries." Those who chose bilateralism as an instrument of economic warfare and
imperialism were unlikely to be accommodated within any multilateral regime. However, mere
state trading or even the participation of centrally planned economies, while posing special
problems, were not seen to be insuperable obstacles to multilateralism; see Herbert Feis, "The
Conflict Over Trade Ideologies," Foreign Affairs 25 (July 1947), and Raymond F. Mikesell,
"The Role of the International Monetary Agreements in a World of Planned Economies," Jour-
nal of Political Economy 55 (December 1947). I think it is fair to say, though, that reconciling
the many variants and depths of state intervention would have been a difficult task in the best of
times, which the 1930s of course weren't. We are justified, therefore, in "coding" the interwar
period as "no hegemon, no agreement on purpose."
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818300018993 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 15 (native text) -----
International regimes, transactions, and change 
393
2. The compromise of embedded liberalism
Liberal internationalist orthodoxy, most prominent in New York finan-
cial circles, proposed to reform the old order simply by shifting its locus
from the pound to the dollar and by ending discriminatory trade and ex-
change practices.42 Opposition to economic liberalism, nearly universal out-
side the United States, differed in substance and intensity depending upon
whether it came from the Left, Right, or Center, but was united in its rejec-
tion of unimpeded multilateralism.43 The task of postwar institutional recon-
struction, as Nurkse sensed, was to maneuver between these two extremes
and to devise a framework which would safeguard and even aid the quest for
domestic stability without, at the same time, triggering the mutually de-
structive external consequences that had plagued the interwar period. This
was the essence of the embedded liberalism compromise: unlike the eco-
nomic nationalism of the thirties, it would be multilateral in character; unlike
the liberalism of the gold standard and free trade, its multilateralism would
be predicated upon domestic interventionism.
If this was the objective of postwar institutional reconstruction for the
international economy, there remained enormous differences among coun-
tries over precisely what it meant and what sorts of policies and institutional
arrangements, domestic and international, the objective necessitated or was
compatible with. This was the stuff of the negotiations on the postwar inter-
national economic order. The story of these negotiations has been told by
others, in detail and very ably.441 make no attempt to repeat it here. I simply
summarize the conjunction of the two themes that constitutes the story's
plot. The first, which we tend to remember more vividly today, concerned
42 Professor John H. Williams, vice-president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, was
a leading spokesman for the New York financial community, which resented having lost control
over international monetary affairs when authority shifted from the FRBNY to the U.S. Trea-
sury under Secretary Morgenthau. Their plan, which had some support in Congress, called
simply for a resurrection of the gold-exchange standard, with the dollar performing the role that
sterling had played previously. They opposed the New Deal "gimmickry" of the White Plan,
and of course they liked Keynes's Clearing Union even less. See Van Dormael, Bretton Woods,
chap. 9.
43 In the case of Britain, the other major actor in the negotiations concerning postwar eco-
nomic arrangements, opposition from the Left was based on the desire to systematize national
economic planning, which would necessarily entail discriminatory instruments for foreign eco-
nomic policy. Opposition from the Right stemmed from a commitment to imperial preferences
and the imperial alternative to a universal economic order. Speaking for many moderates,
Hubert Henderson was opposed because he doubted the viability of a "freely working eco-
nomic system," that is, of laissez-faire. "To attempt this would be not to learn from experience
but to fly in its face. It would be to repeat the mistakes made last time in the name of avoiding
them. It would be to invite the same failure, and the same disillusionment; the same economic
chaos and the same shock to social and political stability; the same discredit for the international
idea." (Richard N. Gardner, Sterling-Dollar Diplomacy in Current Perspective [New York:
Columbia University Press, 1980], chap. 1; the quotation is from a memorandum prepared by
Henderson in December 1943, while serving in the British Treasury; reproduced in Gardner, p.
30.)
** The following account draws heavily on Gardner's classic study, as supplemented by the
greater detail on the monetary side presented in Van Dormael.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818300018993 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 16 (native text) -----
394 
International Organization
multilateralism versus discrimination. It was an achievement of historic pro-
portions for the United States to win adherence to the principle of mul-
tilateralism, particularly in trade. It required the expenditure of enormous
resources. Still, it would not have succeeded but for an acceptable resolution
of the dilemma between internal and external stability, the story's second
theme. Here, history seemed not to require any special agent. True, the
United States from the start of the negotiations was far less "Keynesian" in
its positions than Great Britain. Within the United States, the social and
economic reforms of the New Deal had lacked ideological consistency and
programmatic coherence, and opposition had remained firmly entrenched.
The transformation of the full-employment bill into the Employment Act of
1946 demonstrated the country's continuing ambivalence toward state inter-
vention. This, of course, affected the outcome of the negotiations. Indeed,
the United States would come to use its influence abroad in the immediate
postwar years, through the Marshall Plan, the Occupation Authorities in
Germany and Japan, and its access to transnational labor organizations, for
example, to shape outcomes much more directly, by seeking to moderate the
structure and political direction of labor movements, to encourage the exclu-
sion of Communist Parties from participation in governments, and generally
to discourage collectivist arrangements where possible or at least contain
them within acceptable Center-Left bounds.45 But these differences among
the industrialized countries concerned the forms and depth of state interven-
tion to secure domestic stability, not the legitimacy of the objective.46
In the event, on the list of Anglo-American postwar economic objec-
tives, multilateralism was joined by collaboration to assure domestic eco-
nomic growth and social security as early as the Atlantic Charter, issued in
August 1941. Indeed, progress on multilateralism seemed to be made contin-
gent upon progress in expanding domestic production, employment, and the
exchange and consumption of goods in Article VII of the Mutual Aid
Agreement (Lend Lease), which was signed in February 1942.
On the monetary side, however different White's Stabilization Fund
may have been from Keynes's Clearing Union (and there were considerable
differences on instrumentalities), they shared a common purpose: intergov-
45 Charles S. Maier, "The Politics of Productivity: Foundations of American International
Economic Policy After World War II," International Organization 31 (Autumn 1977), and
Robert W. Cox, "Labor and Hegemony," International Organization 31 (Summer 1977).
46 Interesting in this regard is the role played by Leon Keyserling, appointed in 1949 a? the
first Keynesian on the Council of Economic Advisers, in helping to undermine the previous
"economy-in-defense" policy by providing economic support for the proposed rearmament
program contained in NSC-68 (Fred M. Kaplan, "Our Cold-War Policy, Circa '50," New York
Times Magazine, 18 May 1980). Radicals have implied that "military Keynesianism" was the
only kind of Keynesianism acceptable in the U.S. at that time (cf. Fred L. Block, The Origins of
International Economic Disorder [Berkeley: University of California Press, 1977], pp. 102-8).
But this interpretation slights the substantial state involvement in the U.S. in the postwar years
in infrastructural investment (interstate highways, for example), agricultural price supports, and
even in social expenditures, well before the full impact of Keynesian thinking was felt on mon-
etary and fiscal policy in the 1960s.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818300018993 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 17 (native text) -----
International regimes, transactions, and change 
395
ernmental collaboration to facilitate balance-of-payments equilibrium, in an
international environment of multilateralism and a domestic context of full
employment. Early in 1943, Adolf Berle foresaw that the compromise on the
means to achieve these ends would have to "free the British people from
their fear that they might have to subordinate their internal social policy to
external financial policy, and to assure the United States that a share of its
production was not claimable by tender of a new, 'trick' currency, and that
the economic power represented by the US gold reserves would not be sub-
stantially diminished."47 By the time of the Anglo-American "Joint State-
ment of Principles," issued not long before the Bretton Woods Conference,
the consensus that had emerged provided for free and stable exchanges, on
the one hand, and, on the other, the erection of a "double screen," in
Cooper's words,48 to cushion the domestic economy against the strictures of
the balance of payments. Free exchanges would be assured by the abolition
of all forms of exchange controls and restrictions on current transactions.
Stable exchanges would be secured by setting and maintaining official par
values, expressed in terms of gold. The "double screen" would consist of
short-term assistance to finance payments deficits on current account, pro-
vided by an International Monetary Fund, and, so as to correct "fundamen-
tal disequilibrium," the ability to change exchange rates with Fund concur-
rence. Governments would be permitted to maintain capital controls.
In devising the instruments of the monetary regime, the most intense
negotiations were occasioned by the functioning of the "double screen." On
the question of the Fund, Keynes had argued for an international overdraft
facility. This would have created some $25 billion to $30 billion in new li-
quidity, with the overall balance of credits and debits in the Fund being ex-
pressed in an international unit of account, which was to be monetized. The
arrangement would have been self-clearing unless a country were out of bal-
ance with the system as a whole, in which case corrective measures were
called for on the part of creditors and debtors alike. The White plan origi-
nally called for a $5 billion Fund, though the U.S. ultimately agreed to $8.8
billion. However, these funds would have to be paid in by subscription. Ac-
cess to the Fund as well as total liability were strictly limited by quotas,
which in turn reflected paid-in subscriptions—the initial U.S. contribution
was $3,175 billion. And a country that sought to draw on the Fund had to
make "representations" that the particular currency was needed for making
payments on current account. Thus, with the United States, the sole major
creditor country, seeking to limit its liabilities, the first part of the "double
screen" was both more modest and more rigid than the United Kingdom and
other potential debtor countries would have liked. But there was no question
about its being provided. On the second part, exchange rate changes, the
47 Paraphrased by Van Dormael, Bretton Woods, p. 103.
48 Richard N. Cooper, "Prolegomena to the Choice of an International Monetary System,"
International Organization 29 (Winter 1975), p. 85.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818300018993 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 18 (native text) -----
396 
International Organization
U.K. was more successful in assuring automaticity and limiting intrusions
into the domain of domestic policy. The Fund was required to concur in any
change necessary to correct a "fundamental disequilibrium," and if the
change was less than 10 percent the Fund was given no power even to raise
objections. Most important, the Fund could not oppose any exchange rate
change on the grounds that the domestic social or political policies of the
country requesting the change had led to the disequilibrium that made the
change necessary. Lastly, the final agreement did include a provision to shift
at least some of the burden of adjustment onto creditor countries. This was
by means of the "scarce currency" clause, which Keynes, in the end,
thought to be quite important. It empowered the Fund, by decision of the
Executive Directors, to ration its supply of any currency that had become
scarce in the Fund and authorized members to impose exchange restrictions
on that currency.
Once negotiations on postwar commercial arrangements got under way
seriously, in the context of preparations for an International Conference on
Trade and Employment, the principles of multilateralism and tariff reduc-
tions were affirmed, but so were safeguards, exemptions, exceptions, and
restrictions—all designed to protect the balance of payments and a variety of
domestic social policies. The U.S. found some of these abhorrent and sought
to limit them, but even on so extraordinary an issue as making full employ-
ment an international obligation of governments it could do no better than to
gain a compromise. The U.S. Senate subsequently refused to ratify the
Charter of the International Trade Organization (ITO), as a result of which a
far smaller domain of commercial relations became subject to the authority
of an international regime than would have been the case otherwise. The
regulation of commodity markets, restrictive business practices, and inter-
national investments were the most important areas thereby excluded.49 But
within this smaller domain, consisting of the more traditional subjects of
commercial policy, the conjunction of multilateralism and safeguarding
domestic stability that had evolved over the course of the ITO negotiations
remained intact.50
Jacob Viner summarized the prevailing consensus in 1947, at the time of
the negotiations for a General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT):
"There are few free traders in the present-day world, no one pays any atten-
tion to their views, and no person in authority anywhere advocates free
trade."51 The United States, particularly the State Department, was the
49 The provisions of the ITO Charter became internally so inconsistent that it is difficult to
say just what sort of a regime it would have given rise to. See William Diebold Jr., "The End of
the ITO," Princeton Essays in International Finance 16 (Princeton, N.J., October 1952).
50 The following account draws heavily on Gardner, Sterling-Dollar Diplomacy, and on
Gerard and Victoria Curzon, "The Management of Trade Relations in the GATT," in Andrew
Shonfield, ed., International Economic Relations of the Western World, 1959-1971, vol. I
(London: Oxford University Press for the Royal Institute of International Affairs, 1976).
51 Jacob Viner, "Conflicts of Principle in Drafting a Trade Charter," Foreign Affairs 25
(January 1947), p. 613.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818300018993 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 19 (native text) -----
International regimes, transactions, and change 
397
prime mover behind multilateralism in trade. But this meant nondiscrimina-
tion above all. The reduction of barriers to trade of course also played a role
in American thinking, but here too the concern was more with barriers that
were difficult to apply in a nondiscriminatory manner. Tariff reduction was
subject to much greater domestic constraint. For their part, the British made
it clear from the beginning that they would countenance no dismantling of
imperial preferences unless the U.S. agreed to deep and linear tariff cuts.
The proposed Commercial Union, put forward by James Meade on behalf of
Britain, contained such a formula, together with an intergovernmental code
of conduct for trade and machinery to safeguard the balance of payments.
But the U.S. Congress could not be expected to accept linear tariff cuts.52
The General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade made obligatory the
most-favored-nation rule, but a blanket exception was allowed for all exist-
ing preferential arrangements, and countries were permitted to form customs
unions and free trade areas. Moreover, quantitative restrictions were pro-
hibited, but were deemed suitable measures for safeguarding the balance of
payments—explicitly including payments difficulties that resulted from
domestic policies designed to secure full employment. They could also be
invoked in agricultural trade if they were used in conjunction with a domes-
tic price support program. The substantial reduction of tariffs and other bar-
riers to trade was called for; but it was not made obligatory and it was
coupled with appropriate emergency actions, which were allowed if a
domestic producer was threatened with injury from import competition that
was due to past tariff concessions. The Agreement also offered a blanket
escape from any of its obligations, provided that two-thirds of the contract-
ing parties approved. Lastly, procedures were provided to settle disputes
arising under the Agreement and for the multilateral surveillance of the invo-
cation of most (though not all) of its escape clauses. The principle of reci-
procity was enshrined as a code of conduct, to guide both tariff reductions
and the determination of compensation for injuries suffered.
To repeat my central point: that a multilateral order gained acceptance
reflected the extraordinary power and perseverance of the United States.53
52 In the spring of 1947, the U.S. delegation arrived in Geneva armed with congressional
authorization for an overall tariff reduction to 50% of their 1945 levels (which, however, would
still have left U.S. tariffs relatively high), in return for elimination of preferences. But, at the
same time, the United States entered into preferential trade agreements with Cuba and the
Philippines. Though mutual concessions on several important items were made in Geneva, in
the end some 70% of existing British preferences remained intact (Gardner, Sterling-Dollar
Diplomacy, chap. 17).
53 At the Palm Springs Conference, Peter Kenen argued that this is true more for trade than
for money. He maintains that, with the exception of the particulars of the credit arrangement
(and the future role of the dollar, which I take up below), the general outlines of Bretton Woods
would not have differed appreciably had there not been an American hegemon present. This is
so because the basic design rested on a widely shared consensus. However, in trade, Kenen
suggests, it is unlikely that nondiscrimination would have been accepted as a guiding principle
had it not been for American "muscle." Keep in mind that even here the U.S. was forced to
accept the indefinite continuation of all existing preferential trade agreements.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818300018993 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 20 (native text) -----
398 
International Organization
But that multilateralism and the quest for domestic stability were coupled
and even conditioned by one another reflected the shared legitimacy of a set
of social objectives to which the industrial world had moved, unevenly but
"as a single entity." Therefore, the common tendency to view the postwar
regimes as liberal regimes, but with lots of cheating taking place on the
domestic side, fails to capture the full complexity of the embedded liberalism
compromise.54
3. Complementary transaction flows
The postwar regimes for trade and money got off to a slow start. The
early GATT rounds of tariff negotiations were modest in their effects. As a
lending institution, the IMF remained dormant well into the 1950s. Mean-
while, bilateral currency arrangements in the late 1940s and early 1950s be-
came far more extensive than they had ever been in the 1930s, doubling to
some four hundred between 1947 and 1954.5S But by the late 1950s, the
Europeans had "the worst of their post-war problems behind them—and
new ones had not yet come to take their place." Both Europe and the United
States were poised "on the brink of a decade of phenomenal expansion which
imperiously demanded wider markets through freer trade."56 This in turn
demanded the elimination of exchange restrictions on current account.
Liberalization in trade and money soon followed.
Preoccupation with the fact of subsequent liberalization has tended to
detract from consideration of its precise characteristics, at least on the part of
political scientists.57 The questions that have dominated discussion concern
the impact of liberalization on the expansion of international economic
transactions, or the effects on both of U.S. hegemony (with a time lag),
operating directly by means of the exercise of American state power or indi-
54 The third panel of the Bretton Woods triptych was the World Bank, which to some extent
may also be said to reflect this conjunction of objectives. True, the grandiose concept of an
international bank to engage in countercyclical lending and to help stabilize raw materials
prices, which both White and Keynes had entertained at one point, was shelved due to opposi-
tion on both sides of the Atlantic. Nevertheless, for the first time, international public responsi-
bility was acknowledged for the provision of investment capital, supplementing the market
mechanism. For Secretary Morgenthau's strong views on this subject, see Gardner, Sterling-
Dollar Diplomacy, p. 76.
55 Of the 1954 total, 235 existed in Europe. Margaret G. De Vries and J. Keith Horsefield, The
IMF, 1945-1965, vol. 2 (Washington, D.C.: International Monetary Fund, 1969), chap. 14.
56 Curzon and Curzon, "Management of Trade," pp. 149-50.
57 A notable exception is Kenneth N. Waltz, "The Myth of National Interdependence," in
Charles P. Kindleberger, ed., The International Corporation (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1970).
However, Waltz considers the characteristics of an international division of labor at any given
point in time to be a product solely of international polarity. And this, in turn, requires that he
consider Great Britain in the 19th century to have been but one among several coequal members
of a plural system. He concludes that the international division of labor in the present era has
been less extensive in kind and degree than in the pre-World War I setting because o/bipolarity
today and multipolarity then.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818300018993 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 21 (native text) -----
International regimes, transactions, and change 
399
rectly through the internationalization of American capital. These of course
are interesting questions, but they are not the questions that concern me
here. Having argued that the postwar regimes for trade and money in-
stitutionalized the normative framework of embedded liberalism, I now ex-
amine whether and how this framework is reflected in the character of the
international economic transactions that emerged when imminent expansion
"imperiously" demanded liberalization.
I proceed by way of hypothesis. Imagine a world of governments seized
by the compelling logic of David Ricardo; following a bout with mercan-
tilism, this world is poised "on the brink" of liberalization. What kinds of
international economic transactions are governments likely to encourage?
Under a system of perfectly free trade each country naturally devotes
its capital and labour to such employments as are most beneficial to
each. This pursuit of individual advantage is admirably connected with
the universal good of the whole. By stimulating industry, by rewarding
ingenuity, and by using most efficaciously the peculiar powers bestowed
by nature, it distributes labour most effectively and most economically;
while, by increasing the general mass of productions, it diffuses general
benefit, and binds together, by one common tie of interest and inter-
course, the universal society of nations throughout the civilised world.
It is this principle which determines that wine shall be made in France
and Portugal, that corn shall be grown in America and Poland, and that
hardware and other goods shall be manufactured in England.58
In short, our governments are likely to encourage an international division of
labor based on the functional differentiation of countries that reflects their
comparative advantage. Trade among them therefore would be socially
highly profitable.
Now imagine the same governments under similar circumstances, the
only difference being that they are committed to embedded liberalism rather
than to laissez-faire. What sorts of international economic transactions
would we expect them to favor? The essence of embedded liberalism, it will
be recalled, is to devise a form of multilateralism that is compatible with the
requirements of domestic stability. Presumably, then, governments so
committed would seek to encourage an international division of labor which,
while multilateral in form and reflecting some notion of comparative advan-
tage (and therefore gains from trade), also promised to minimize socially
disruptive domestic adjustment costs as well as any national economic and
political vulnerabilities that might accrue from international functional dif-
ferentiation. They will measure collective welfare by the extent to which
these objectives are achieved. However, as neoclassical trade theory defines
the term, the overall social profitability of this division of labor will be lower
than of the one produced by laissez-faire.
58 David Ricardo, Works, ed. by Piero Sraffa (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1955),
1:133-34.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818300018993 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 22 (native text) -----
400 
International Organization
Let us return from the world of hypothesis and review briefly the
character of postwar transaction flows.59
The great bulk of international economic transactions since the 1950s
shows very definite patterns of concentration. The growth in trade has ex-
ceeded the growth in world output, and the most rapidly growing sector of
trade has been in manufactured products among the industrialized countries.
Within this general category, some two-thirds of the increase in trade from
1955 to 1973 is accounted for by "intracontinental" trade, that is, trade
within western Europe and within North America.60 What is more, it appears
that trade in products originating in the same sector, or "intra-industry"
trade, is growing far more rapidly than trade involving products of different
sectors.61 This in turn reflects a secular decline of specialization in different
sectors of manufacturing activity among the industrialized countries.62
Lastly, there is evidence to suggest that trade among related corporate par-
ties, or "intrafirm" trade, accounts for an ever-larger portion of total world
trade.63 On the financial side, international investments have been rising
even more rapidly than world trade, and they conform roughly to the same
pattern of geographical, sectoral, and institutional concentration.64 This is
also true of international transfers of short-term funds.65
What kind of division of labor among the industrialized countries do
these patterns portray? It is, in Cooper's words, one characterized by a
59 The facts are well enough known, but not enough is made of them. For example, I find that
much of what I have to say is implied in if not anticipated by the locus classicus 
of liberal
interdependence theorists: Richard N. Cooper, The Economics 
of Interdependence 
(1968; New
York: Columbia University Press, 1980). However, Cooper was concerned with telling a differ-
ent story, so he chose not to take up issues and conclusions that, from the present vantage
point, appear more scintillating. To cite but one illustration, Cooper demonstrates a converging
cost structure among the industrialized countries. His major concern is to argue that this con-
tributes to the increasing marginal price sensitivity of rapidly growing foreign trade—that is, to
interdependence as he defines the term. In passing, he mentions another implication of this
convergence, but one "which will not much concern us here." It is "that international trade
becomes less valuable from the viewpoint of increasing economic welfare" (pp. 75-76). This
striking departure from the textbook case for free trade, amidst an explosion in world trade, is
left unexplored.
60 Richard Blackhurst, Nicolas Marian, and Jan Tumlir, "Trade Liberalization, Protectionism
and Interdependence," GATT Studies in International 
Trade 5 (November 1977), pp. 18-19.
61 Ibid., pp. 10-11, 15-16; and Charles Lipson's article in this volume.
62 Richard Cooper has traced this back to 1938, and finds that ten of thirteen manufacturing
sectors show declines in variation among countries, and none shows a sharp increase. Cooper,
Economics 
of Interdependence, 
pp. 74-78. In a further refinement, Blackhurst, Marian, and
Tumlir, "Trade Liberalization," add that the proportion of imports and exports consisting of
intermediate manufactured goods, as opposed to goods destined for final use, is rising rapidly,
particularly in the category of engineering products. This reflects, among other things, "the
growth in intra-branch specialization, foreign processing and sub-contracting" (pp. 15-16).
63 Gerald K. Helleiner, "Transnational Corporations and Trade Structure: The Role of
Intra-Firm Trade," in Herbert Giersch, ed., Intra-industry Trade (Tubingen: J. C. B. Mohr,
Paul Siebeck, 1979).
64 For a historical overview, see John H. Dunning, Studies in International Investments
(London: Allen & Unwin, 1970).
65 A recent survey may be found in Joan Edelman Spero, The Failure of the Franklin National
Bank (New York: Columbia University Press, 1980), chap. 2.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818300018993 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 23 (native text) -----
International regimes, transactions, and change 
401
"narrowing of the economic basis" on which international transactions rest.66
By this he means that international economic transactions increasingly reflect
the effects of marginal cost and price differentials of similar activities and
products, rather than the mutual benefits of divergent investment, produc-
tion, and export structures. Moreover, within this division of labor there is a
critical shift in functional differentiation from the level of country and sector
to the level of product and firm. And the economic gains from trade are
correspondingly smaller.67
All of this stands in stark contrast to the half-century prior to 1914.
Intercontinental trade was higher.68 Intersectoral trade dominated.69 Long-
term capital movements favored capital-deficient areas, and were concen-
trated overwhelmingly in the social-overhead capital sector of the borrowing
countries.70 Marginal cost and price differentials appear to have had only
limited bearing on the pattern of trade and investment flows;71 the require-
ments of international functional differentiation and, later, absorptive
capacity, account for much more of the variance.72 Lastly, the large dif-
60 Economics of Interdependence, p. 68.
67 Ibid., p. 76. Cooper adds that both product differentiation and economies of scale may
modify this conclusion, "but several of the countries under consideration have sufficiently large
domestic markets to reap most benefits likely to flow from large scale production even without
trade."
68 A. G. Kenwood and A. L. Lougheed, The Growth of the International 
Economy, 
1820-
1960 (London: Allen & Unwin, 1971), chap. 5.
69 For example, in 1913 Great Britain imported 87% of the raw materials it consumed
(excluding coal), and virtually as much of its foodstuffs. Moreover, the share of primary prod-
ucts in world trade from 1876-1913 remained steady at about 62%, even though total world
trade trebled. And right up to World War I, Germany, Great Britain's main industrial rival,
remained a major source of supply of manufactured materials for Great Britain, including
chemicals and dyestuffs. Kenwood and Lougheed, Growth of International 
Economy, 
chap. 5,
and Briggs, "World Economy," p. 43.
" D u r i n g the fifty years preceding 1914, the Americas received 5 1 % of British portfolio
foreign investment (North America 34%, South America 17%); overall, some 69% of British
portfolio foreign investment went into transportation, public utilities, and other public works;
12% into extractive industries; and only 4% into manufacturing. Matthew Simon, "The Pattern
of New British Portfolio Foreign Investment, 1865-1914," in A. R. Hall, ed., The Export of
Capital from Britain (London: Methuen, 1968), p. 23; cf. A. K. Cairncross, Home and Foreign
Investment, 1870-1913 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1953). A broader survey of
the various forms of investment from all sources may be found in Kenwood and Lougheed,
Growth of International Economy, chap. 2.
71 For trade, see ibid., chap. 5; for investment, A. I. Bloomfield, "Patterns of Fluctuations in
International Investment Before 1914," Princeton Studies in International Finance 21 (1968),
esp. pp. 35-40. Cooper (Economics of Interdependence, pp. 151-52), concerned to show that
interdependence in the pre-1914 world economy "was something of an illusion," argues that
despite the freedom of capital to move, "it did not in fact move in sufficient volume even to
erase differences in short-term interest rates." (Emphasis added, to underscore his looking at
the pre-1914 world through post-1960 lenses).
72 "The industrialization of Europe and the growth of its population created a steadily growing
demand for raw materials and foodstuffs, much of which had to be imported. At the same time,
important advances in technical knowledge, especially in transportation and communications,
and the existence of underpopulated and land-rich countries in other continents provided the
means whereby these demands could be met. The greater part of the foreign investment under-
taken during the nineteenth century was concerned with promoting this international speciali-
zation between an industrial centre located in Europe (and, later, in the United States) and a
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818300018993 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 24 (native text) -----
402 
International Organization
ferences in comparative cost structures meant that trade was socially very
profitable.73
To explain fully the differences between the pre-1914 and the post-
19508 international division of labor would require linking them to a number
of potentially causal factors. Among these, the most frequently invoked are
differences in the relative levels of economic and technological development
of the major countries concerned;74 the evolution of the global organization
of capital over the course of the past century;73 the effects of differences in
the configuration of interstate power in the two eras;76 and the respective
external consequences of shifts in domestic state-society relations.77 Inter-
national regimes thus do not determine these outcomes. At the same time,
however, the close similarity between our hypothesized expectations of
laissez-faire liberalism and embedded liberalism and actual patterns of trans-
action flows suggests that regimes do play a mediating role.
This mediating role of the postwar regimes for trade and money, and the
complementary transaction flows to which they gave rise, have come to be
recognized even by those most consistently espousing conventional liberal
orthodoxies. As Charles Lipson points out, GATT negotiations have
strongly favored intra-industry specialization.78 And a recent GATT study
notes that liberalization has produced "surprisingly few adjustment prob-
lems" among the industrialized countries because there has been "no aban-
donment of whole industrial sectors." Instead, specialization is "achieved
mainly by individual firms narrowing their product range. . . ."79 As a result,
national export structures among the industrialized countries are becoming
ever more alike.80 On reflection, however, this outcome should not cause
surprise. For governments pursuing domestic stabilization, it is quite safe to
liberalize this kind of trade. Adjustment costs are low. It poses none of the
vulnerabilities that a true Ricardian specialization among sectors would
pose. Whatever political vulnerabilities might arise from it are more or less
shared by all parties to it, so that it is unlikely to lead to a contest for political
periphery of primary producing countries." Kenwood and Lougheed, Growth of International
Economy, p. 48.
73 Cooper, Economics of Interdependence, p. 152.
74 This is generally considered to be the driving force by liberal economists, as exemplified by
Cooper, ibid.
75 Marxists have tended to stress this factor; see, for example, Christian Palloix, "The Self-
Expansion of Capital on a World Scale," Review of Radical Political Economy 9 (Summer
1977), which is drawn from his larger work, L'internationalisation du capital (Paris: Maspero,
1975).
76 This is the realists' explanandum, as developed in Waltz, "Myth of National Interde-
pendence," though most realists, unlike Waltz, would characterize the distribution of power in
the pre-1914 world political economy as having been hegemonic. Cf. Robert Gilpin, U.S. Power
and the Multinational Corporation (New York: Basic Books, 1975).
77 See Polanyi's Great Transformation for one expression of this social-organicist position;
for another, from a different location on the political spectrum, see Gunnar Myrdal, Beyond the
Welfare State (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1960).
78 His article in this volume.
79 Blackhurst, Marian, and Tumlir, "Trade Liberalization," p. 11.
80 See Lipson's article in this volume, and the references he cites.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818300018993 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 25 (native text) -----
International regimes, transactions, and change 
403
advantage among them. And all the while it offers gains from trade. In con-
trast, there has been no progress in liberalizing agricultural trade. Further-
more, where trade in industrial products is based on a more classical notion
of comparative advantage, as it is with imports from the so-called newly
industrializing countries, the trade regime has encountered difficulty.81
Apart from oil, North-South raw materials trade has posed few problems for
the industrialized countries, both because of their overall domination of
world trade and because of the characteristics of the raw materials sector.82
International financial flows may be expected to follow closely the
evolving patterns of production and trade. Since the liberalization of pay-
ments facilities at the end of the 1950s and the loosening of capital controls in
the early 1960s, they have done so. Two additional features of international
financial transactions bear on my argument. First, international investments
in social overhead capital, which provided the great bulk of private flows in
the 1865-1914 period, now are almost the exclusive domain of national and
international public institutions, acting alone or in cofinancing arrangements
with private capital.83 This has meant a welcome supplement to the vagaries
of the market mechanism for recipient countries, and for donor countries as
well, though in a different sense. For the donor countries, it has meant an
ability to exercise far greater discretion over patterns of investment deci-
sions in this leading sector than governments in the 19th century either en-
joyed or sought. Second, the international financial markets that emerged in
the 1960s, above all the Euromarkets, offered governments an important
supplement to the monetary regime. Under Keynes's Clearing Union, capi-
tal controls were combined with generous overdraft allowances and parity
changes as needed. In their absence or, more accurately, under the more
modest forms of each that came to prevail in the 1960s, these markets of-
fered the prospect of an adjustment mechanism to cushion both surplus and
deficit countries (at least in the short run). Accordingly, governments did
little to control and much to encourage the formation and growth of these
markets.84 Today, they constitute the main source of balance-of-payments
financing.85
81 This is not to suggest that the trade regime has encountered no other difficulties. One of the
more serious is surplus capacity, which shows that the apparent ease with which liberalization
has been accommodated was also dependent upon unprecedented rates of economic growth.
82 Paul Bairoch, The Economic 
Development 
of the Third World since 1900 (Berkeley: Uni-
versity of California Press, 1975), chap. 5.
83 Dunning, International 
Investments, 
chap. 1. Governmental loans were largely confined to
Continental Europe in the 19th century, and were small in comparison with private loans.
Today, the situation is reversed in each respect.
84 A good discussion of the role of governments in triggering the expansion of these markets
may be found in Susan Strange, International 
Monetary Relations, 
vol. 2 of Shonfield, ed., Inter-
national Economic 
Relations 
of the Western World, esp. chap. 6. Strange's primary concern is
to show how the Euromarkets transformed from "good servant" to "bad master," by making
difficult the conduct of domestic monetary policy and generally eroding national monetary sov-
ereignty. The good servant role received rather more attention again in the mid to late 1970s,
following the enormous payments imbalances produced by oil price increases. More on this
general problem below.
85 Benjamin J. Cohen's article in this volume.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818300018993 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 26 (native text) -----
404 
International Organization
In sum, international economic regimes do not determine international
economic transactions. For determinants we have to look deeper into basic
structural features of the world political economy. But, as we have seen, nor
are international economic regimes irrelevant to international economic
transactions. They play a mediating role, by providing a permissive envi-
ronment for the emergence of certain kinds of transactions, specifically
transactions that are perceived to be complementary to the normative
frameworks of the regimes having a bearing on them. This conclusion does
not imply that perceptions are never mistaken, that "good servants" never
go on to become "bad masters," that complementarity is never condemned
to coexist with contradiction—or, indeed, that international regimes have a
bearing on the entire range of international transactions. Nor does it suggest
that the effectiveness of international regimes may not become undermined
by such disjunctions. The question of possible responses to second-order
consequences of this sort takes us into a different analytical realm, that of
regime change.
4. Norm-governed change
The 1970s witnessed important changes in central features of the post-
war regimes for money and trade. Among political scientists and some
economists, the decline of U.S. hegemony is most often adduced as the
causa causans of these changes. Terms such as "erosion" and even "col-
lapse" are most often invoked to describe them. Triffin depicted the Jamaica
Accords as "slapstick comedy" rather than monetary reform, while for a
former U.S. trade official the Tokyo Round "performed the coup de grace"
on liberal trade.86 The sense of discontinuity is pervasive. Is it justified?
Once again I take temporary refuge in hypothesis. If we allow that in-
ternational regimes are not simply emanations of the underlying distribution
of interstate power, but represent a fusion of power and legitimate social
purpose, our cause and effect reasoning becomes more complex. For then
the decline of hegemony would not necessarily lead to the collapse of re-
gimes, provided that shared purposes are held constant. Instead, one ought
to find changes in the instrumentalities of regimes, which, under hegemony,
are likely to have relied on disproportionate contributions by and therefore
reflected the preferences of the hegemon.87 At the same time, one ought to
find continuity in the normative frameworks of regimes, which would still
86 Robert Triffin, "Jamaica: 'Major Revision' or Fiasco," in Edward M. Bernstein et al.,
"Reflections on Jamaica," Princeton Essays in International Finance 115 (Princeton, N.J.,
1976), as cited in Benjamin J. Cohen, Organizing the World's Money (New York: Basic Books,
1977), chap. 4, fn. 24; and Thomas Graham, "Revolution in Trade Politics," Foreign Policy 36
(Fall 1979), p. 49.
87 Supporters of the hegemonic stability position speak of "burdens of leadership"; critics, of
"exorbitant privileges." The empirical referents are the same.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818300018993 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 27 (native text) -----
International regimes, transactions, and change 
405
reflect shared purposes. And the new instrumentalities ought to be more
appropriate to the new power distribution while remaining compatible with
the existing normative framework. In short, the result would be "norm-
governed" change.
Let us turn back to the post-1971 changes in the regimes for money and
trade. On the monetary side, the major changes at issue are the end of the
dollar's convertibility into gold and the adoption of floating rates of ex-
change, both in violation of the original Articles of Agreement. On the trade
side, no discrete event fully symbolizes the perceived discontinuities,
though they are characterized generally as "the new protectionism" and
include the proliferation of nontariff barriers to trade and violations of the
principle of nondiscrimination, in the form of domestic interventions as well
as internationally negotiated export restraints. In both cases a weakening of
the central institutions, the IMF and the GATT, is taken to reflect the same
syndrome.
It is my contention that, on balance, the hypothesis of norm-governed
change accounts for more of the variance than claims of fundamental dis-
continuity.
Base-line
The base-line against which change is here to be compared consists of
two parts. First, if we compare changes in the monetary and trade regimes
against some ideal of orthodox liberalism, then we are bound to be disap-
pointed if not shocked by recent trends. But we are also bound to be misled.
For orthodox liberalism has not governed international economic relations at
any time during the postwar period. My starting point, of course, is the in-
stitutional nexus of embedded liberalism. Within this framework, it will be
recalled, multilateralism and domestic stability are linked to and conditioned
by one another. Thus, movement toward greater openness in the interna-
tional economy is likely to be coupled with measures designed to cushion the
domestic economy from external disruptions. At the same time, measures
adopted to effect such domestic cushioning should be commensurate with
the degree of external disturbance and compatible with the long-term expan-
sion of international transactions. Moreover, what constitutes a deviation
from this base-line cannot be determined simply by the "objective" exam-
ination of individual acts in reference to specific texts. Rather, deviation will
be determined by the "intersubjective" evaluation of the intentionality and
consequences of acts within the broader normative framework and prevail-
ing circumstances.
The second component of my base-line is the peculiar relation of the
United States to the institutionalization of embedded liberalism immediately
after the war. The United States was, at one and the same time, the
paramount economic power and the country in which the domestic state-
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818300018993 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 28 (native text) -----
406 
International Organization
society shift remained the most ambivalent. This had several complex con-
sequences, with differential effects on the two regimes. The United States
would have to provide the bulk of the material resources required to trans-
late the negotiated compromises into institutional reality. This would give
the U.S. influence that it could be expected to exercise in keeping not only
with its own interests, but also with its preferred interpretations of both the
compromises and how they were to be realized. The impact on the in-
stitutionalization of the trade agreement, once the ITO was abandoned, on
the whole supported the basic design and need not detain us. But the in-
stitutionalization of the monetary agreement was profoundly skewed by the
asymmetrical position of the U.S.88 At Bretton Woods, through a combina-
tion of stealth and inevitability, the dollar had become equated with gold and
was recognized officially but apparently without the knowledge of Keynes as
the key currency.89 Once the IMF came into existence, the U.S. insisted on
terms of reference and a series of "interpretations" of the Articles, as well
as decisions of the Executive Directors, that had the effect of launching what
would come to be known as "IMF orthodoxy" and, inadvertently or other-
wise, guaranteeing that there would be no intergovernmental alternative to
U.S. payments deficits as the major instrument of international liquidity cre-
ation.90 Thus, the monetary regime that emerged in the 1950s already dif-
fered in several important respects from the intent of Bretton Woods.
It is against this starting point that subsequent developments must be
assessed.
88 The differential impact on the two regimes is explained largely by the total asymmetry that
prevailed in the monetary domain and the relatively more balanced configuration in trade. In the
case of money, the U.S. possessed the fungible resources that everyone required, including
some two-thirds of the world's monetary gold supply, which it acquired as an unbalanced cred-
itor country before World War II. At the same time, the U.S. saw no situation in which it might
become dependent upon the regime as a debtor. The case of trade is inherently somewhat more
symmetrical, since the mutual granting of access to markets is the key resource. It is also a
domain in which the domestic constraints within the United States differed little from domestic
constraints elsewhere.
89 Harry Dexter White and his staff had complete control over the organization of meetings,
scheduling of subjects, rules of procedure, and drafting of all official documentation including
daily minutes and the Final Act. In addition, White headed the so-called special committee,
which resolved ambiguities and elaborated operational details. According to Van Dormael, on
whose account I draw here, this committee "prepared for inclusion in the Final Act a number of
provisions that were never discussed nor even brought u p " (Bretton 
Woods, 
pp. 202-
3). Even senior members of the American delegation were not always fully aware of what
White was up to; Dean Acheson, normally no slouch, expressed confusion, and what he sus-
pected he didn't much care for (ibid., pp. 200-203). In any case, Van Dormael attributes several
features of the Fund to these organizational and procedural manipulations, the most important
of which was an equation that no one else became aware of until after the fact, between gold and
the U.S. dollar. This was in clear violation of the Joint Statement of Principles. Keynes had
rejected any special role for the dollar; he favored the monetization of an international unit of
account, and he assumed a multiple-currency reserve system. But in the final analysis, the
major consequence of White's maneuverings on this issue was simply to give de jure expression
to what surely would have occurred de facto and have been sanctified by subsequent practice.
90 At the inaugural meeting of the Boards of Governors of the IMF and IBRD, held in Savan-
nah, Georgia, the United States succeeded in having both institutions located in Washington,
which could be expected to amplify day-to-day influence by Congress and the Administration,
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818300018993 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 29 (native text) -----
International regimes, transactions, and change 
407
The evolving monetary regime
The post-1971 inconvertibility of the dollar into gold may be usefully
framed within the broader rubric of liquidity problems and floating rates of
exchange within adjustment problems. I take up each in turn, and conclude
with a comment on the IMF.
As noted, the liquidity provisions of Bretton Woods proved inadequate,
even though, as Cohen points out elsewhere in this volume, an adequate
supply of international liquidity was one of its cardinal principles. The
growing volume of international trade increased liquidity requirements, as
did the growing magnitude of speculative pressure on exchange rates. The
dollar exchange standard, which had "solved" this problem in the short run,
was already in trouble when the monetary regime first began to function
without the protective shield of the postwar transitional arrangements. In
1958, just as the Europeans were resuming full convertibility of their curren-
cies, U.S. gold reserves fell permanently below U.S. overseas liabilities.
And before the next year was out, Professor Triffin had articulated his fa-
mous dilemma.91 Throughout the 1960s, a seemingly endless series of stop-
gap measures was tried in an effort to devise what Robert Roosa, former
and in having the Executive Directors be full-time and highly paid officials, which was seen by
the British as assuring greater Fund meddling in the affairs of members when they applied for
assistance. They were not mistaken. In May 1947, the United States pushed through a meeting
of the Executive Directors an "interpretation" of the Articles of Agreement, to the effect that
the Fund could "challenge" the representations made by governments that a currency was
presently needed for balance-of-payments purposes, and that the Fund had the authority to
"postpone or reject the request, or accept it subject to conditions. . . . " (Reproduced in
Horsefield, The IMF, 3: 227, emphasis added.) This interpretation was confirmed by decision of
the Executive Directors in 1948. And thus was IMF conditionality born. In a further decision,
taken in 1952, conditionality was elaborated to include "policies the member will pursue" to
overcome payments deficits. (Ibid., 3: 228.) In the meantime, once the Marshall Plan went into
effect, the United States secured further agreement that recipients of Marshall Plan aid could
not also draw on the Fund. With the Europeans effectively excluded from the Fund, its only
clients were developing countries. And it was during this period, on initiatives by the United
States and in response to requests for assistance by developing countries, that the Fund de-
veloped its program of "stabilization" measures: exchange depreciation, domestic austerity
measures, reduced public spending, rigid conditionality. Total drawings from the Fund dropped
to zero in 1950, and did not exceed 1947 levels again until 1956. With respect to liquidity, the
provisions of Bretton Woods were modest and proved inadequate. The European Reconstruc-
tion Program took care of Europe's needs. But the IMF repeatedly turned aside requests for
new measures to increase its own capacity to supply liquidity, maintaining that the real need
was for adjustment. The dollar exchange standard emerged as a "solution" to this problem.
(Strange, International Monetary Relations, pp. 93-96; Block, Origins of International Eco-
nomic Disorder, chap. 5; Richard Cooper, "Prolegomena to the Choice," p. 86; and Benjamin J.
Cohen, in this volume.)
91 In essence, Triffin argued that if the United States corrected its balance of payments deficit,
the result would be world deflation because gold production at $35 an ounce could not ade-
quately supply world monetary reserves. But if the United States continued running a deficit,
the result would be the collapse of the monetary standard because U.S. foreign liabilities would
far exceed its ability to convert dollars into gold on demand. Robert Triffin, Gold and the Dollar
Crisis (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1960), which was largely a reprint of two journal
articles that appeared the year before.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818300018993 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 30 (native text) -----
408 
International Organization
under-secretary of the treasury, called "outer perimeter defenses" for the
dollar. Roughly speaking, these measures were designed to make gold con-
version financially unattractive, to increase the capacity of the IMF to sup-
ply liquidity, and to increase the capacity of central banks to neutralize the
flow of speculative capital. The U.S. also undertook limited domestic mea-
sures to reduce its payments deficits and pressured surplus countries to re-
value their currencies. By 1968, however, the dollar had become in effect
inconvertible into gold; it was declared formally inconvertible in 1971.
The rise and fall of the gold-convertible dollar has placed the monetary
regime in a paradoxical predicament from beginning to end. It has altered
profoundly central instruments of the regime having to do with the creation of
international liquidity, the system of currency reserves, and the means of
ultimate settlement. It has also violated procedural norms, as unilateral ac-
tion usurped collective decision. But, at the same time, it seems to have been
understood and acknowledged all around that, under the material and politi-
cal conditions prevailing, the substantive norms of Bretton Woods, the com-
promise of embedded liberalism, would not have been realized in the first
place by any other means. So the regime today remains stuck with the unde-
sired consequences of means that helped bring about a desired end. What of
the long-term alternatives? Several have emerged in embryonic form. Were
they to be instituted more fully, all would imply a reduced official role for the
dollar and a return to the kinds of mechanisms anticipated by Bretton
Woods. An internationally created reserve asset exists in the form of the
special drawing right (SDR). A multiple-currency reserve system is slowly
coming into being, and a dollar-substitution account has been under negotia-
tion in the IMF. The U.S. views the SDR with disfavor and actively opposes
the substitution account. It has no objection to other currencies playing a
larger reserve role. As they do, however, the pressure may be expected to
increase both for a substitution facility covering all reserve currencies and for
a noncurrency reserve asset.
With respect to the problem of adjustment, as we saw, few provisions
for international measures to affect the economic policies of deficit or
surplus countries survived the Bretton Woods negotiations. And once the
new creditor-debtor relationships became established in the late 1950s, the
mechanism of exchange rate changes also failed to operate effectively. There
existed no means to compel surplus countries to appreciate, and among the
largest deficit countries, Great Britain resisted depreciation fiercely in a vain
attempt to preserve an international role for sterling while the United States,
as the "Nth country," necessarily remained passive. Thus, the only real
international leverage for adjustment was the conditionality provision de-
veloped by the Fund. The burden of domestic adjustment measures, there-
fore, fell disproportionately on the developing countries. The adjustable peg
system became intolerable when imbalances in the external trade account
came to be overshadowed, both as a source of problems and as a response to
them, by massive movements of short-term speculative funds. This made it
increasingly difficult for governments to conduct domestic macroeconomic
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818300018993 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 31 (native text) -----
International regimes, transactions, and change 
409
policy, and to support exchange rates under pressure. When, in the late
1960s, the full attention of these funds came to be focused on the dollar as a
result of dramatic deficits in the U.S. trade balance and current account, the
system of fixed rates of exchange was doomed.
Shifting to floating rates required formal amendment of the Articles of
Agreement of the Fund, the "slapstick comedy" act of which Triffin spoke.
This is prima facie evidence of discontinuity. However, living within the
Articles provided the international monetary system with an adjustment
mechanism that neither functioned effectively nor fulfilled the expectations
of Bretton Woods. What of the present arrangement? Three aspects bear on
the argument. First, it is important to keep distinct the instrument of fixed
rates from the norm of outlawing competitive currency depreciation and thus
providing a framework for relatively stable exchanges. There is a good case
to be made that the norm had become sufficiently well institutionalized and
recourse to competitive depreciation sufficiently unnecessary given other
means of influencing domestic macroeconomic factors that reliance on an
increasingly burdensome instrument, which itself had begun to contribute to
currency instability, could no longer be justified.92 Moreover, experience
since has shown the managed float to be capable of avoiding serious
disorderliness—the early months of new administrations in Washington
providing the major exceptions—and to have few if any deleterious conse-
quences for international trade. Second, floating rates were widely perceived
to provide a greater cushion for domestic macroeconomic policy, which was
increasingly subjected to dislocation from speculative capital flows that were
often quite out of proportion to underlying economic reality. It is clear now
that the degree of insulation is less than was advertised, but in the absence of
uniform and fairly comprehensive capital controls it is probably as much as
can be secured. Third, as an adjustment mechanism, the managed float ap-
pears to function more symmetrically than fixed rates did. Not only have
surplus countries been forced to take notice, but the precipitous depreciation
of the U.S. dollar caught the attention of American policy makers in the au-
tumn of 1978 more effectively than past balance-of-payments deficits had
done.
On the evolution of the IMF we can be brief; its tendency seems to be to
come full circle. One does not want to exaggerate recent changes in the
Fund, especially in relation to the developing countries. Nevertheless, its
financing facilities have been considerably expanded, repayment periods
lengthened, and conditionally provisions relaxed somewhat as well as now
requiring the Fund "to pay due regard to the domestic social and political
objectives" of borrowing countries.93 Moreover, decision-making power
within the Fund has been reapportioned, at least to the extent of distributing
92 Richard Cooper enumerates the pros and cons of these and related issues in "Prolegomena
to the Choice," esp. pp. 80-81.
93 Reported in The New York Times, 5 February 1980. In exploring the reasons for this
change, the Times cites a "Washington wit" who "once said that the monetary fund had top-
pled more governments than Marx and Lenin combined."
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818300018993 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 32 (native text) -----
410 
International Organization
veto power more equitably. These changes began in the late 1950s, to make
the Fund more acceptable to the Europeans once they accepted the full obli-
gations of IMF membership; they continued in the 1960s to reflect the eco-
nomic status of the European Community and Japan; and they were acceler-
ated and aimed increasingly at the developing countries in the 1970s, as a
result of the massive payments imbalances produced by new energy terms of
trade and subsequent fears about the stability of the international financial
system.
The evolution of the trade regime
The sense of discontinuity concerning the international trade regime is
illustrated in the following excerpt from a Wall Street Journal article, entitled
"Surge in Protectionism Worries and Perplexes Leaders of Many Lands":
After three decades of immense increase in world trade and living
standards, exports and imports are causing tense pressures in nearly
every nation and among the best of allies. The U.S. sets price floors
against Japanese steel, Europe accuses the U.S. of undercutting its
papermakers, the Japanese decry cheap textiles from South Korea,
French farmers have smashed truckloads of Italian wine, and AFL-CIO
President George Meany rattles exporters world-wide by calling free
trade—'a joke.'94
By now, even its most severe critics realize that "the new protectionism" is
not simply the latest manifestation of "old-style" protectionism. "The
emergence of the new protectionism in the Western world reflects the vic-
tory of the interventionist, or welfare, economy over the market econ-
omy."95 However, they continue to have difficulty appreciating that the new
protectionism is not an aberration from the norm of postwar liberalization,
but an integral feature of it.
Today, tariffs on products traded among the industrialized countries are
an insignificant barrier to trade. The Tokyo Round managed to institute fur-
ther tariff cuts, and began to cope with nontariff barriers for the first time. It
produced codes to liberalize such barriers resulting from domestic subsidies
and countervailing duties, government procurement, product standards,
customs valuation, and import licensing. All barriers to trade in civil aircraft
and aircraft parts were removed. And preparations for a new GATT round,
on investment and services, have commenced. What is more, the volume of
world trade continues to increase and its rate of growth, though declining,
still exceeds economic growth rates in several OECD countries. In sum,
liberalization and growth have continued despite the erosion of postwar
94 14 April 1978, as cited in Melvyn B. Krauss, The New Protectionism: 
The Welfare State in
International 
Trade (New York: New York University Press, 1978), pp. xix-xx.
95 Ibid., p. 36.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818300018993 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 33 (native text) -----
International regimes, transactions, and change 
411
prosperity, and despite the erosion of American willingness to absorb dis-
proportionate shares of liberalized trade.96
Restraints on trade have also grown. Much of the time they take one of
two forms: domestic safeguards, and "voluntary" or negotiated export re-
straints. Under the GATT, domestic safeguards may be invoked for
balance-of-payments reasons (Article XII), or to prevent injury to domestic
producers caused by a sudden surge of imports that can be attributed to past
tariff concessions (Article XIX). The first of these has caused little difficulty,
notwithstanding several deviations from prescribed procedure.97 Article
XIX lends itself to greater abuse. It permits alteration or suspension of past
tariff concessions in a nondiscriminatory manner, provided that interested
parties are consulted. It has been invoked with growing frequency, particu-
larly by the U.S. and Australia. It is quite clumsy, however, because by-
standers are likely to be affected and because it may involve renegotiation or
even retaliatory suspension of concessions. As a result, "most governments,
on most occasions, have simply short-circuited Article XIX altogether,
going straight to the heart of the problem by negotiating a minimum price
agreement, or a 'voluntary' export restraint with the presumably reluctant
exporter who has previously been 'softened' by threats of emergency action
under GATT."98 Many of these agreements do not involve governments at
all, but are reached directly between the importing and exporting industries
concerned. They take place beyond the purview of the GATT and therefore
are not subject to official multilateral surveillance. An attempt, made during
the Tokyo Round, to conclude a safeguards code that would have provided
detailed rules and procedures was unsuccessful, though negotiations are
continuing. However, these problems do not afflict the entire trading order,
but are sectorally specific, and a close sectoral analysis will show that there
is not "any decisive movement toward protectionism. . . ."" Lastly, so-
96 Stephen D. Krasner, "The Tokyo Round: Particularistic Interests and Prospects for Sta-
bility in the Global Trading System," International Studies Quarterly 23 (December 1979).
97 F o r example, Article XII calls for quantitative restrictions, but as time has passed import
surcharges have usually been imposed. In an extremely peculiar "non-use" of Article XII,
France imposed emergency measures against imports after the 1968 disturbances, while enjoy-
ing a strong reserve position and only fearing a potential balance-of-payments problem. France
asked for "sympathy and understanding" from its partners in the GATT and got it. The excep-
tional circumstances were stressed all around, the danger of precedent was flagged, and the
measures were approved and soon thereafter discontinued. The case shows, according to Cur-
zon and Curzon, "the complicity which exists between governments when one of them is forced
to take unpopular trade measures because it has a domestic problem on its hands" ("Manage-
ment of Trade," p. 222). Their characterization of the reaction of others as complicitous cap-
tures the very essence of an international regime.
98 Ibid., p. 225.
99 Krasner, "Tokyo Round," p. 507. Krasner examines sectoral crosspressures and finds
roughly this pattern: little pressure for protectionism where there is high intrasectoral trade, and
even less if the sector is highly internationalized; protectionist pressures from import-competing
sectors, which, however, may be balanced off by countervailing pressure from export sectors;
high protectionist pressure when import competition is largely asymmetrical (pp. 502-7). Lip-
son, elsewhere in this volume, relates protectionist pressures to the production characteristics
of sectors and finds that "sectoral protectionism is most likely in standardized, basic industries,
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818300018993 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 34 (native text) -----
412 
International Organization
called orderly marketing arrangements, of which the Longterm Textile
Agreement of 1962 was the first multilateral variant, have also proliferated
vastly. However, each of these has provided for a regular expansion of ex-
ports, though of course more limited than would have been obtained under
conditions of "free" trade. In sum, the impact of these restraints on interna-
tional trade, even by the GATT's own reckoning, has been relatively mod-
est.100 Their purpose, moreover, has not been to freeze the international di-
vision of labor but to slow down structural change and to minimize the social
costs of domestic adjustment.
With respect to the institutional role of the GATT, legal scholars in par-
ticular have lamented the passing of "effective and impartial" dispute set-
tlement mechanisms.101 However, these mechanisms had begun to fall into
disuse by the late 1950s—that is, just as production and trade began to soar
and serious tariff reductions were contemplated. Bilateral consultations and
negotiations among instructed representatives of the disputants have since
been the norm.102 It requires an extremely optimistic view of the possibilities
for international law and conciliation to expect interventionist governments
to behave otherwise.
Assessment
This review does not argue that the world it describes is the best of all
possible worlds. I have only argued that the world has to be looked at as it is:
when the regimes for money and trade are viewed in this light, the hypothe-
sis of norm-governed change accounts for more of the variance than claims
of fundamental discontinuity. Much of the observed change has been at the
level of instrument rather than norm. Moreover, in most cases the new in-
struments are not inimical to the norms of the regimes but represent adapta-
tions to new circumstances. And in some cases the collective response by
governments to changing circumstances reflects a greater affinity to the ex-
or those with high capital requirements. It is least likely in industries where R&D is high and is
oriented to changing market opportunities, where innovation in products and processes is rapid,
and where the rents attributable to proprietary knowledge are short-lived" (draft manuscript).
100 Two figures are pertinent here. First, the GATT estimated in the late 1970s that import
restrictions already in place or seriously threatened would affect some 3%-5% of world
trade—which its Director General took to represent a threat to "the whole fabric of postwar
cooperation in international trade policy." IMF Survey, 12 December 1977, p. 373. The second
concerns the declining portion of world trade subject to MFN principles; here it must be pointed
out that the overwhelming share of this decline is accounted for by customs unions and free
trade areas, which, for better or for worse, have been sanctioned by the GATT. A more funda-
mental problem could emerge as a result of the Tokyo Round, insofar as the codes for govern-
ment procurement, subsidies, and safeguards (if the last materializes) will apply only to
signatories of each individual code. At this point, however, the long-term significance of this
proviso remains unclear.
101 See the literature cited in Lipson's article in this volume.
102 Curzon and Curzon, "Management of Trade," chap. 3.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818300018993 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 35 (native text) -----
International regimes, transactions, and change 
413
pectations of original regime designs than did the arrangements that pre-
vailed in the interval.
This analysis suggests that far more continuity can attend hegemonic
decline than would be predicted by the hegemonic stability thesis, provided
that social purposes are held constant.103 And, since social purposes in turn
reflect particular configurations of state-society relations, it suggests further
that fundamental discontinuity in these regimes would be effected by an ero-
sion in the prevailing balance of state-society relations among the major eco-
nomic powers. Ironically, then, the foremost force for discontinuity at pres-
ent is not "the new protectionism" in money and trade, but the resurgent
ethos of liberal capitalism.
5. Stress, contradiction, and the future
One question remains. How enduring is embedded liberalism? Spe-
cifically, will it survive the current domestic and international economic mal-
aise? A central ingredient in the success of embedded liberalism to date has
been its ability to accommodate and even facilitate the externalizing of ad-
justment costs. There have been three major modes of externalization: an
intertemporal mode, via inflation; an intersectoral mode, whereby pressure
on domestic and international public authorities is vented into the realm of
private markets; and what, for the sake of congruity, we might call an in-
terstratum mode, through which those who are "regime makers" shift a dis-
proportionate share of adjustment costs onto those who are "regime tak-
ers." Each of these has emerged virtually by default as a means to avoid a
still worse outcome.104 The accumulated effects of these practices, however,
have produced severe stresses in the world political economy. As a result,
some manner of renegotiating the forms of domestic and international social
accommodation reflected in embedded liberalism is inevitable. Its future,
then, depends on how this is brought about. I take up the three modes of
externalization in reverse order.
The compromise of embedded liberalism has never been fully extended
to the developing countries. They have been disproportionately subject to
the orthodox stabilization measures of the IMF, often with no beneficial re-
sults in export earnings but substantial increases in import bills and con-
103 The fit between hypothesis and real world obviously is not perfect, because factors other
than those examined here are also at work in the evolution of the postwar regimes. Moreover,
the notion of declining American hegemony itself is very imprecise and, indeed, easy to exag-
gerate. See, respectively, Keohane, "Theory of Hegemonic Stability," and Susan Strange,
"Still an Extraordinary Power: America's Role in a Global Monetary System" (unpublished
ms., n.d.).
lM I am here generalizing from Fred Hirsch's brilliant dissection of the social functions of
inflation: "The Ideological Underlay of Inflation," in Fred Hirsch and John H. Goldthorpe,
eds., The Political Economy of Inflation (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1978), esp. p.
278.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818300018993 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 36 (native text) -----
414 
International Organization
sequent increases in domestic prices. Moreover, the liberalization produced
by the GATT has benefited relatively few among them. On the whole, the
developing countries did well in the 1960s, as an adjunct to expansion in the
OECD area; in the 1970s, they suffered as much from export losses to OECD
markets as they did from the direct impact of increased oil prices. For a time
in the mid 1970s, the developing countries managed to sustain both rates of
growth and imports from the industrialized countries through additional pri-
vate borrowing (their upper tranches in the IMF were left virtually un-
touched). However, neither could be continued indefinitely. Recent IMF
reforms are important, as we have noted, but they cannot initiate economic
recovery in the Third World. Nor are other means forthcoming in abun-
dance. Thus, unlike the pattern under laissez-faire liberalism in the 19th
century, under embedded liberalism lending and investment in the peripheral
areas has been both relatively lower and positively correlated with core ex-
pansion rather than counterpoised to it. From the point of view of the future
of embedded liberalism, the accumulated effects of this practice are not
fatal—though they may prove to be very nearly fatal for some of the poorer
developing countries.105 From the point of view of the established system as
a whole, these effects are more in the nature of lost opportunities whose
realization could have contributed to the resolution of the current economic
malaise.
A second mode of externalizing adjustment costs in recent decades has
been to channel pressure away from domestic and international public au-
thorities into the domain of private markets. A prime example is the vastly
increased role of international financial markets in balance-of-payments
lending, as analyzed by Cohen in this volume. I argued above that the suc-
cess of the monetary and trade regimes may be said to have depended in
some measure on this practice, even before the recycling problems of the
1970s. But it has also come to pose a source of serious stress and potential
contradiction for the monetary regime, particularly as the control of inflation
has become the leading economic objective of governments. One of its con-
sequences, discussed by Cohen, is at least a partial loss of control by gov-
ernments over the process of international liquidity creation. Perhaps even
more important, in attempting to achieve significant restraint in the expan-
sion of credit and money stock effected by these markets, governments may
find that the domestic economy now must shoulder a disproportionate share
of the burden of adjustment. Higher domestic interest rates may have to be
employed than would be warranted by domestic conditions alone, in order to
compensate for the more rapid rate of expansion of the Eurofund component
of the consolidated domestic and international markets. "Today the mass is
still relatively small, but the speed is high. Mass times speed, as the physi-
105 Hollis B. Chenery notes this exception in his otherwise optimistic outlook, "Restructuring
the World Economy: Round II," Foreign Affairs 59 (Summer 1981).
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818300018993 Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 37 (native text) -----
International regimes, transactions, and change 
415
cists like to say, equals momentum."106 From the vantage point of our con-
cerns, then, what has served as a handy and even necessary vent is
threatening to undergo a means-ends reversal, with potentially serious con-
sequences for domestic and international financial stability.
Lastly, I turn to the most pervasive and the most serious mode by which
adjustment costs have been externalized, inflation. It is the most serious
because it is the most likely to lead to a direct renegotiation of the modus
vivendi that has characterized embedded liberalism. The international re-
gimes for money and trade have increasingly accommodated inflation, in
parallel with inflation's becoming the dominant domestic means of dealing
with distributional strife in advanced capitalist societies.107 On the monetary
side, the release of domestic and international money supplies from their
metallic base established the essential permissive condition, facilitated by
subsequent developments in the monetary regime. The primacy of domestic
objectives over external financial discipline was established in the interwar
period. The Bretton Woods adjustment process, when it worked, worked
primarily to devalue the currencies of deficit countries and consequently to
increase their domestic prices. With inconvertible reserve currencies and
floating rates, whatever counterforce may have existed in the pressures that
previously led to gold outflows now leads to a fall in exchange rates and thus
to increases in prices and costs. On the side of the trade regime, the structure
of trade that it has encouraged and the minimization of domestic adjustment
costs that it allows have both had inflationary consequences, by sacrificing
economic efficiency to social stability. Hirsch's conclusion concerning the
monetary regime is equally applicable to both: "Critics who see these inter-
national . . . arrangements as embodying a ratchet effect for world inflation
are probably right. But the relevant question is whether a liberal interna-
tional economy could have been purchased at any more acceptable
price."108 This dilemma will not be easily resolved.109 However, so long as it
remains understood that it is a dilemma, both parts of which have to be
accommodated, the normative framework of embedded liberalism will en-
dure as a central institutional feature of the international economic order.
106 Henry C. Wallich, "Why the Euromarket Needs Restraint," Columbia Journal of World
Business 14 (Fall 1979), p. 17. Wallich estimates that the Euromarkets are expanding at two to
three times the rate of growth of the domestic markets of major countries (p. 23).
107 Hirsch and Goldthorpe, Political Economy of Inflation, especially the chapters by Hirsch;
Goldthorpe, "The Current Inflation: Towards a Sociological Account," pp. 186-214; and
Charles S. Maier, "The Politics of Inflation in the Twentieth Century," pp. 37-72. The follow-
ing discussion of the monetary regime draws heavily on Hirsch.
108 Ibid., p. 279.
109 Recent enthusiasm for simply discrediting Keynesian management and reverting to earlier
monetary and fiscal "discipline" has begun to dampen under the weight of its apparent conse-
quences. For example, in a postmortem of the 1981 summer riots across England, a junior
member of the Tory government chose words that could have been taken directly from Polanyi:
"This is what happens when you separate economic theory from social policy and pursue the
one at the expense of the other." (Cited by David S. Broder, "Britain Offers a Grim Re-
minder," Manchester Guardian Weekly, 26 July 1981, p. 16.)
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818300018993 Published online by Cambridge University Press
