

----- Page 1 (native text) -----
Social Capital: Implications for
Development Theory, Research,
and Policy
Michael Woolcock • Deepa Narayan
In the 1990s the concept of social capital—defined here as the norms and networks that
enable people to act collectively—enjoyed a remarkable rise to prominence across all the
social science disciplines. The authors trace the evolution of social capital research as it
pertains to economic development and identify four distinct approaches the research has
taken: communitarian, networks, institutional, and synergy. The evidence suggests that
of the four, the synergy view, with its emphasis on incorporating different levels and
dimensions of social capital and its recognition of the positive and negative outcomes that
social capital can generate, has the greatest empirical support and lends itself best to com-
prehensive and coherent policy prescriptions. The authors argue that a significant virtue
of the idea of and discourse on social capital is that it helps to bridge orthodox divides
among scholars, practitioners, and policymakers.
What is social capital? How does it affect economic development? What are the
implications for theory, research, and policy? These questions lie at the heart of
recent attempts to make sense of the burgeoning literature on social capital and to
ascertain its relationship to economic development. In this article we endeavor to
answer each of these questions; in so doing, we provide an overview of the scholar-
ship on social capital for those unfamiliar with the term as well as a sense of coher-
ence and direction to those embarking on new empirical research and policy analysis
in this rich field.
What Is Social Capital?
"It's not what you know, it's who you know." This common aphorism sums up
much of the conventional wisdom regarding social capital. It is wisdom born of
The WOTU Bank Research Observer, voL 15, no. 2 (August 2000), pp. 225-49.
O 2000 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / THE WORLD BANK 
338
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
76649


----- Page 2 (native text) -----
experience—that gaining membership to exclusive clubs requires inside contacts,
that close competitions for jobs and contracts are usually won by those widi friends
in high places. When people fall on hard times, they know it is their friends and
family who constitute the final safety net. Conscientious parents devote hours to the
school board and to helping their children with homework, only too aware that a
child's intelligence and motivation are not enough to ensure a bright future. Some of
our happiest and most rewarding hours are spent talking with neighbors, sharing
meals with friends, participating in religious gatherings, and volunteering for com-
munity projects.
Intuitively, then, the basic idea of social capital is that a person's family, friends,
and associates constitute an important asset, one that can be called on in a crisis,
enjoyed for its own sake, and leveraged for material gain. What is true for individu-
als, moreover, also holds for groups. Those communities endowed with a diverse
stock of social networks and civic associations are in a stronger position to confront
poverty and vulnerability (Moser 1996; Narayan 1995), resolve disputes (Schafft
1998; Varshney 2000), and take advantage of new opportunities (Isham 1999).
Conversely, the absence of social ties can have an equally important impact. Office
workers, for example, fear being left out of the loop on important decisions; ambi-
tious professionals recognize that getting ahead in a new venture typically requires an
active commitment to networking. A defining feature of being poor, moreover, is
that one is not a member of—or may even be actively excluded from—certain social
networks and institutions that could be used to secure good jobs and decent housing
(Wilson 1987, 1996).
Intuition and everyday language also recognize an additional feature of social capital:
that it has costs as well as benefits, that social ties can be a liability as well as an asset.
Most parents, for example, worry that their teenage children will fall in with the
wrong crowd and that peer pressure and a strong desire for acceptance will induce
them to take up harmful habits. Even close family members can overstay their wel-
come. At the institutional level, many countries and organizations have nepotism
laws, in explicit recognition that personal connections can be used to discriminate
unfairly, distort, and corrupt. Everyday language and life experience, in short, teach
that the social ties individuals have can be both a blessing and a blight, while those
they do not have can deny them access to key resources. These features of social
capital are well documented by the empirical evidence and have important implica-
tions for economic development and poverty reduction.
These examples suggest a more formal definition: social capital refers to the norms
and networks that enable people to act collectively. This simple definition serves a
number of purposes. First, it focuses on the sources, rather than the consequences, of
social capital (Portes 1998) while recognizing that important features of social capi-
tal, such as trust and reciprocity, are developed in an iterative process. Second, this
definition permits the incorporation of different dimensions of social capital and
326 
The World Bank Research Observer, voL 15, no. 2 (August 2000)


----- Page 3 (native text) -----
recognizes that communities can have access to more or less of diem. The poor, for
example, may have a close-knit and intensive stock of "bonding" social capital that
they can leverage to "get by" (Briggs 1998; Holzmann and Jorgensen 1999), but
diey lack die more diffuse and extensive "bridging" social capital deployed by die
nonpoor to "get ahead" (Barr 1998; Kozel and Parker 2000; Narayan 1999). Ac-
cordingly, such an approach allows the argument that it is different combinations of
bonding and bridging social capital that are responsible for the range of outcomes
observed above and incorporates a dynamic component in which optimal combina-
tions of these dimensions change over time. Third, while this definition presents the
community (rather than individuals, households, or the state) as the primary unit of
analysis, it recognizes that individuals and households (as members of a given com-
munity) can nonetheless appropriate social capital and that the way communities
themselves are structured turns in large part on their relationship with the state.
Weak, hostile, or indifferent governments have a profoundly different effect on com-
munity life and development projects, for example, than do governments that re-
spect civil liberties, uphold the rule of law, honor contracts, and resist corruption
(Isham and Kaufmann 1999).
This conceptualization of the role of social relationships in development repre-
sents an important departure from earlier theoretical approaches and therefore has
important implications for contemporary development research and policy. Until
the 1990s the major theories of development held rather narrow, even contradictory,
views about the role of social relationships in economic development and offered few
constructive policy recommendations. In the 1950s and 1960s, for example, tradi-
tional social relationships and ways of life were viewed as impediments to develop-
ment. When modernization theorists explained "the absence or failure of capital-
ism," Moore (1997:289) correcdy notes, "the focus [was] on social relations as
obstacles." As an influential United Nations (1951) document of the time put it, for
development to proceed, "ancient philosophies have to be scrapped; old social insti-
tutions have to disintegrate; bonds of caste, creed and race have to burst; and large
numbers of persons who cannot keep up with progress have to have their expecta-
tions of a comfortable life frustrated" (cited in Escobar 1995:3).
This view gave way in the 1970s to the arguments of dependency and world-
systems theorists, who held that social relations among corporate and political elites
were a primary mechanism of capitalist exploitation. The social characteristics of
poor countries and communities were defined almost exclusively in terms of their
relation to the means of production and die inherent antipathy between the interests
of capital and labor. Litde mention was made of the possibility (or desirability) of
mutually beneficial relationships between workers and owners, of the tremendous
variation in the degree of success recorded by developing countries, or of political
strategies—other than revolution—by which the poor could improve their lot. At
the same time, communitarian perspectives stressed the inherent beneficence and
Michtul Woolcock and Deep* Ntrayan 
937


----- Page 4 (native text) -----
self-sufficiency of local communities but underestimated die negative aspects of com-
munal obligations, overestimated die virtues of isolationism and self-sufficiency, and
neglected die importance of social relations in constructing effective and account-
able formal institutions. For dieir part, neoclassical and public choice theorists—
whose voices were die most influential in die 1980s and early 1990s—assigned no
distinctive properties to social relations. These perspectives, which focused on die
strategic choices of rational individuals interacting under various time, budgetary,
and legal constraints, held that groups (including firms) existed primarily to lower
die transaction costs of exchange; given undistorted market signals, die optimal size
and combination of groups would duly emerge.
The major development dieories, dien, construed social relations as singularly
burdensome, exploitative, liberating, or irrelevant. Reality, unfortunately, does not
conform so neady to these descriptions and dieir corresponding policy prescriptions.
Events in the post—cold war era—from ethnic violence and civil war to financial
crises and the acknowledgement of widespread corruption—demand a more sophis-
ticated appraisal of the vices, virtues, and vicissitudes of the social dimension as it
pertains to the wealth and poverty of nations (Woolcock forthcoming). The litera-
ture on social capital, in its broadest sense, represents a first approximation to the
answer to this challenge. It is a literature to which all the social science disciplines
have contributed, and it is beginning to generate a remarkable consensus regarding
the role and importance of institutions and communities in development. Indeed,
one of the primary benefits of the idea of social capital is that it allows scholars,
policymakers, and practitioners from different disciplines to enjoy an unprecedented
level of cooperation and dialogue (Brown 1998; Brown and Ashman 1996).
Four Perspectives on Social Capital
and Economic Development
The letter and spirit of social capital have a long intellectual history in the social
sciences (Platteau 1994; Woolcock 1998), but the sense in which the term is used
today dates back more than 80 years to the writings of Lyda J. Hanifan, then the
superintendent of schools in West Virginia. Explaining die importance of commu-
nity participation in enhancing school performance, Hanifan (1916:130) invoked
the concept of social capital, describing it as
those tangible substances [that] count for most in the daily lives of people:
namely good will, fellowship, sympathy, and social intercourse among the
individuals and families who make up a social unit. . . . If [an individual
comes] into contact with his neighbor, and they with other neighbors, there
will be an accumulation of social capital, which may immediately satisfy his
SIS 
The World Bank Research Obterver, voL 15, no. 2 (August 2000)


----- Page 5 (native text) -----
social needs and which may bear a social potentiality sufficient to the
substantial improvement of living conditions in the whole community.
After Hanifan the idea of social capital disappeared for several decades but was rein-
vented in the 1950s by a team of Canadian urban sociologists (Seely, Sim, and Loosely
1956), in the 1960s by an exchange theorist (Homans 1961) and an urban scholar
(Jacobs 1961), and in the 1970s by an economist (Loury 1977). None of these writ-
ers, interestingly, cited earlier work on the subject, but all used the same umbrella
term to encapsulate the vitality and significance of community ties. The seminal
research by Coleman (1987,1988,1990) on education and by Putnam (1993,1995)
on civic participation and institutional performance, however, has provided die in-
spiration for most of the current work, which has since coalesced around studies in
nine primary fields: families and youth behavior; schooling and education; commu-
nity life (virtual and civic); work and organizations; democracy and governance; col-
lective action; public health and environment; crime and violence; and economic
development.'
In this paper we are concerned with this final category and related work in politi-
cal economy and new institutional economics. Research on social capital and eco-
nomic development can be categorized into four distinct perspectives: the
communitarian view, the networks view, the institutional view, and the synergy view.
The Communitarian View
The communitarian perspective equates social capital with such local organizations
as clubs, associations, and civic groups. Communitarians, who look at the number
and density of these groups in a given community, hold that social capital is inhcr-
endy good, that more is better, and that its presence always has a positive effect on a
community's welfare. This perspective has made important contributions to analy-
ses of poverty by stressing the centrality of social ties in helping the poor manage risk
and vulnerability. As Dordick (1997) notes, the poor have "something left to lose"—
each other.
In their celebration of community and civil society, however, many enthusiasts of
this view of social capital have ignored its important downside (Portes and Landolt
1996). For example, where communities or networks are isolated, parochial, or work-
ing at cross-purposes to society's collective interests (in ghettos, gangs, drug cartels,
and so on), productive social capital is replaced by what Rubio (1997)—in discuss-
ing Colombia—calls perverse social capital, which gready hinders development. Many
benefits certainly are associated with being a member of a highly integrated commu-
nity, but there are also significant costs, and for some, the costs may gready outweigh
the benefits. Consider, for instance, the bright girls who are taken out of village
schools in India because of community expectations. The social networks underly-
Micboel WooUock and Dap* Narayan 
M9


----- Page 6 (native text) -----
ing organized crime syndicates in Latin America and Russia may generate large nega-
tive externalities for society in the form of lost lives, wasted resources, and pervasive
uncertainty. The communitarian perspective also implicitly assumes that communi-
ties are homogenous entities that automatically include and benefit all members. But
the extensive literature on caste inequality, ethnic exclusion, and gender discrimina-
tion—the bleak outcomes often produced and maintained by community pressures—
suggests otherwise (Narayan and Shah 1999).
Evidence from the developing world demonstrates why merely having high levels
of social solidarity or informal groups does not necessarily lead to economic prosper-
ity. In Kenya a participatory poverty assessment recorded more than 200,000 com-
munity groups active in rural areas, but most were unconnected to outside resources
and were unable to improve the lot of the poor (Narayan and Nyamwaya 1996). A
World Bank (1989) report on Rwanda cited more than 3,000 registered coopera-
tives and farmers groups and an estimated 30,000 informal groups, yet these groups
were unable to prevent one of history's most gruesome civil wars. In many Latin
American countries, indigenous groups are often marked by high levels of social
solidarity, but they remain excluded economically because they lack the resources
and access to power that are necessary to shift the rules of the game in their favor
(Narayan 1999). This is also the case in Haiti, where social capital, "rich at the local
level," is employed by peasant groups to "meet labor requirements, gain access to
land, protect clientship in the marketplace, promote mutual aid, assure protection
from state authorities, and generally manage risk." Even so, these groups cannot
overcome the crippling effects of colonialism, corruption, "geographical isolation,
political exclusion, and social polarization" (all quotations from White and Smucker
1998:1-3).
The Networks View
A second perspective on social capital, which attempts to account for both its upside
and its downside, stresses the importance of vertical as well as horizontal associations
between people and of relations within and among such organizational entities as
community groups and firms. Building on work by Granovetter (1973), it recog-
nizes that strong intracommunity ties give families and communities a sense of iden-
tity and common purpose (Astone and others 1999). This view also stresses, how-
ever, that without weak intercommunity ties, such as those that cross various social
divides based on religion, class, ethnicity, gender, and socioeconomic status, strong
horizontal ties can become a basis for the pursuit of narrow sectarian interests. In the
recent popular literature, the former has been called "bonding" and the latter "bridg-
ing" social capital (Gittell and Vidal 1998). Different combinations of these dimen-
sions, it is argued, are responsible for the range of outcomes that can be attributed to
social capital. This more nuanced perspective, which we call the networks view, re-
a 3 O 
The World Bank Research Observer, voL 15, no. 2 (August 2000)


----- Page 7 (native text) -----
gards die tension between social capital's virtues and vices as a defining property, one
that explains in part why scholars and policymakers have been so persistendy am-
bivalent about its potential as a theoretical construct and policy instrument.
The networks view of social capital is closely associated with Burt (1992, 1997,
1998); Fafchamps and Minten (1999); Massey (1998); Massey and Espinosa (1997);
Portes (1995, 1997, 1998); and Portes and Sensenbrenner (1993). It is characterized
by two key propositions. First, social capital is a double-edged sword. It can provide
a range of valuable services for community members, ranging from baby-sitting and
house-minding to job referrals and emergency cash. But there are also costs in that
those same ties can place considerable noneconomic claims on members' sense of
obligation and commitment, with negative economic consequences. Group loyalties
may be so strong that they isolate members from information about employment
opportunities, foster a climate of ridicule toward efforts to study and work hard, or
siphon offhard-won assets (say, to support recent immigrants from the home coun-
try). Portes and Sensenbrenner (1993) cite the case of prosperous Asian immigrants
who anglicized their names in order to divest themselves of communal obligations to
subsequent cohorts. Second, the sources of social capital need to be distinguished
from the consequences derived from them. Imputing only desirable outcomes to
social capital, or equating diem with it, ignores the possibility that these outcomes
may be attained at another group's expense, that given outcomes may be subopti-
mal, or that desirable outcomes attained today come at the price of significant costs
tomorrow.
These results have given rise to the logical conclusion that both strong intra-
community ties and weak extracommunity networks are needed to avoid making
tautological claims regarding the efficacy of social capital. (Without this distinction,
for example, it could be argued that successful groups are distinguished by their
dense community ties, failing to consider the possibility that the same ties could be
preventing success in another otherwise similar group.) Accordingly, the networks
view argues that communities can be characterized by their endowments of these
two dimensions of social capital and that different combinations of these dimensions
account for the range of outcomes associated with social capital (table 1).
Furthermore, as community members' welfare changes over time, so too does the
optimal calculus of costs and benefits associated with particular combinations of
bonds and bridges. Poor entrepreneurs, for example, initially dependent on their
Table 1. Dimensions of Social Capital at the
Extracommunity networks
(bridging)
Low
High
Low
Community Level
Intracommunity ties (bonding)
High
Outcasts 
Poor villagers
Recent rural-to-urban 
Successful members of
migrants 
microfinance programs
Michael Woolcock and Deep* Narayan 
231


----- Page 8 (native text) -----
immediate neighbors and friends (their bonding social capital) for credit, insurance,
and support, require access to more extensive product and factor markets as their
businesses expand. Granovetter (1995) argues that economic development takes place
through a mechanism that allows individuals to draw initially on the benefits of close
community membership but that also enables them to acquire the skills and re-
sources to participate in networks that transcend their community, thereby progres-
sively joining the economic mainstream.
These insights can be demonstrated graphically and applied to poverty reduction
more generally. Figure 1 shows that as die social networks of the poor become more
diverse, so too does their welfare. The social capital residing in a given network can
be leveraged or used more efficiendy, which is essentially the genius of group-based
credit programs such as the well-known Grameen Bank in Bangladesh (van Bastelaer
1999). Poor village women with no material collateral are given loans on the basis of
their membership in a small peer group, which helps them start or expand a small
business and thereby improve their families' welfare (A). But the economic returns
Figure 1. Social Capital and Poverty Transitions
w
E
L
F
A
R
E
BONDING
Defense
BRIDGING
Destitution
DIVERSITY OF SOCIAL NETWORKS
Source: Woolcock (2000).
3 3 3
The World Bank Research Observer, voL 15. no. 2 (August 2000)


----- Page 9 (native text) -----
to any given group soon reach a limit (B), especially when they rely on high endow-
ments of "bonding" social capital. If the group continues to expand—for example,
through the arrival of subsequent cohorts from the village—its resources may be-
come overwhelmed, thereby reducing the well-being of long-established members
(C). Similarly, long-term members of group-based credit programs may find that
obligations and commitments to their colleagues present obstacles to further ad-
vancement, especially for the more ambitious (Woolcock 1999). In these circum-
stances, many poor people partially divest themselves of their immediate community
ties (D) and find a potentially more diverse network where "bridging" social capital
is more abundant and economic opportunities more promising (E). Migration from
villages to cities is the most dramatic example of this situation, but Portes and
Sensenbrenner's (1993) name-changing Asian immigrants are doing essentially the
same thing.
The networks view has been employed with great effect in recent development
research. In their analysis of poor communities in rural areas of northern India, for
example, Kozel and Parker (2000) report that social groups among poor villagers
serve vitally important protection, risk management, and solidarity functions. It is
the more extensive and leveraged networks of the nonpoor, by contrast, that are used
for strategic advantage and the advancement of material interests. Crudely put, the
networks of the poor play defense, while those of the nonpoor play offense. Barr
(1998) reports strikingly similar results from her work on the relationship between
the structure of business networks and enterprise performance in Africa. Poor entre-
preneurs, operating small local firms in traditional industries, form what Barr calls
solidarity networks to exchange personal information about members' conduct and
intentions. The primary function of these networks is to reduce risk and uncertainty.
Larger regional firms, in contrast, coalesce into innovation networks that share knowl-
edge about technology and global markets with the explicit goal of enhancing enter-
prise profit, productivity, and market share (see also Van Dijk and Rabellotti 1997;
Fafchamps and Minten 1999). Far from dismissing the vitality of traditional village
groups in poor communities (the modernization view) or romanticizing it (the
communitarian view), the networks view in effect recognizes that these groups can
both help and hinder economic advancement.
The clear challenge to social capital theory, research, and policy from the net-
works perspective is thus to identify the conditions under which the many positive
aspects of bonding social capital in poor communities can be harnessed and its integ-
rity retained (and, if necessary, its negative aspects dissipated), while simultaneously
helping the poor gain access to formal institutions and a more diverse stock of bridg-
ing social capital. This process is fraught with multiple dilemmas, however, espe-
cially for external nongovernmental organizations, extension services, and develop-
ment agencies, because it may entail altering social systems that are the product of
longstanding cultural traditions or of powerful vested interests.
Michael Woolcock and Detpa Narayan 
233


----- Page 10 (native text) -----
The particular strength of the networks view is its willingness to engage in detailed
policy discussions on the basis of compelling empirical evidence and detailed assess-
ments of the veracity of competing explanations. This view, however, minimizes the
"public good" nature of social groups, regarding any benefits of group activity as
primarily the property of the particular individuals involved. Its proponents thus are
highly skeptical of arguments that social capital can (or should) be measured across
larger social aggregates, such as societies or nations (Portes 1998). Neither does the
networks approach explicidy incorporate institutions at the societal level and their
capacity to both shape and be shaped by local communities. To be sure, the net-
works perspective recognizes that weak laws and overt discrimination can under-
mine efforts by poor minorities to act in their collective interest, but the role com-
munities play in shaping institutional performance generally, and the enormous
potential of positive state-society relations in particular, are largely ignored.
The Institutional View
A third perspective of social capital, which we call the institutional view, argues that
the vitality of community networks and civil society is largely the product of the
political, legal, and institutional environment. Where the communitarian and net-
works perspectives largely treat social capital as an independent variable giving rise to
various outcomes, both good and bad, the institutional view instead views social
capital as a dependent variable. This approach argues that the very capacity of social
groups to act in their collective interest depends on the quality of the formal institu-
tions under which they reside (North 1990). It also stresses that the performance of
states and firms themselves depends on their own internal coherence, credibility, and
competence and on their external accountability to civil society.
Research from the institutional view has two variants, both of which have yielded
remarkably complementary results. The first approach, described by Skocpol (1995,
1996), encompasses case studies based on comparative history and contends that it is
wrong to argue that firms and communities thrive to the extent that governments
retreat. On the contrary, Skocpol shows, civil society thrives to the extent that the
state actively encourages it. Tendler's (1997) research on the political economy of
decentralization in Brazil similarly stresses the importance of good government for
making local programs work.
A second, and increasingly influential, approach relies on quantitative cross-
national studies of the effects of government performance and social divisions on
economic performance. This approach, pioneered by Knack and Keefer (1995, 1997),
equates social capital with the quality of a society's political, legal, and economic
institutions. Drawing on various indexes of institutional quality compiled by invest-
ment agencies and human rights groups, these studies show that items such as "general-
ized trust," "rule of law," "civil liberties," and "bureaucratic quality" are positively
The World Bank Research Observer, voL 15, no. 2 (August 2000)


----- Page 11 (native text) -----
associated widi economic growth. In a recent review of this particular strand of the
literature, Knack (1999:28) concludes that "social capital reduces poverty rates and
improves, or at a minimum does not worsen, income inequality."
Collier and Gunning (1999) employ a variation of this view in their analyses of
the causes of slow growth in Africa (see also Collier 1998, 1999; Temple 1998).
Distinguishing between civic and government social capital, they show that slow
growth occurs in societies with both high levels of edinic fragmentation and weak
political rights. Although Rodrik (1998, 1999) does not employ the terminology of
social capital, he makes a similar argument, demonstrating that economies with di-
vided societies and weak institutions for managing conflict respond sluggishly to
shocks. Easterly (2000) also reports that societies able to generate and sustain a middle-
class consensus are those most likely to produce stable and positive rates of growth.
The related literature on social capabilities and development (Hall and Jones 1999;
Temple and Johnson 1998) tells a similar story.
Several empirical and methodological questions can be raised about these studies,
but in aggregate their message is loud and clear. Rampant corruption, frustrating
bureaucratic delays, suppressed civil liberties, vast inequality, divisive ethnic ten-
sions, and failure to safeguard property rights (to the extent that they exist at all) are
major impediments to prosperity. In countries where these conditions prevail, there
is little to show for well-intentioned efforts to build schools, hospitals, roads, and
communications infrastructure or to encourage foreign investment (World Bank
1998). Investments in civic and government social capital are thus highly comple-
mentary to investments in more orthodox forms of capital accumulation.
The very strength of the institutional view in addressing macroeconomic policy
concerns, however, is also a weakness in that it lacks a microeconomic component.
Freedoms, rights, and liberties, for example, have to be secured by government. Co-
herent and competent bureaucracies may take decades to construct and may yield
benefits more immediately suited to corporate interests than to those of the poor. In
providing broad statistical evidence for the importance of social capital, the subdety,
richness, and enormous variation gleaned from case studies of individual countries
and communities is lost, as are the voices of those most direcdy affected by weak
public institutions: die poor.
The Synergy View
In recognition of this disconnect, a number of scholars have recendy proposed what
might be called a synergy view, which attempts to integrate the compelling work
emerging from the networks and institutional camps. Although the synergy view
traces its intellectual antecedents to earlier work in comparative political economy
and anthropology, its most influential body of research was published in a special
issue of World Development (1996). The contributors to this volume examined cases
Muhatl Woolaxk and Detpa Narayan 
339


----- Page 12 (native text) -----
from Brazil, India, Mexico, the Republic of Korea, and Russia in search of the con-
ditions that foster developmental synergies—dynamic professional alliances and re-
lationships between and within state bureaucracies and various actors in civil society.
Three broad conclusions emerged from these studies:
• Neither the state nor societies are inherently good or bad; governments,
corporations, and civic groups are variable in the impact they can have on the
attainment of collective goals.
• States, firms, and communities alone do not possess the resources needed to
promote broad-based, sustainable development; complementarities and partner-
ships forged both within and across these different sectors are required. Iden-
tifying the conditions under which these synergies emerge (or fail to emerge) is
thus a central task of development research and practice.
• Of these different sectors, the state's role in facilitating positive developmental
outcomes is the most important and problematic. This is so because the state is
not only the ultimate provider of public goods (stable currencies, public health,
universal education) and the final arbiter and enforcer of the rule of law (prop-
erty rights, due process, freedom of speech and association) but is also the actor
best able to facilitate enduring alliances across the boundaries of class, ethnicity,
race, gender, politics, and religion. Communities and firms also have an impor-
tant role to play in creating the conditions that produce, recognize, and reward
good governance. In otherwise difficult institutional environments, community
leaders who are able to identify and engage what Fox (1992) calls "pockets of
efficiency within the state" become agents of more general reform.
Evans (1992, 1995, 1996), one of the primary contributors to this view, con-
cludes that synergy between government and citizen action is based on complementarity
and embeddedness. Complementarity refers to mutually supportive relations between
public and private actors and is exemplified in legal frameworks that protect rights of
association and in more humble measures such as chambers of commerce to facili-
tate exchanges among community associations and business groups. Embeddedness
refers to the nature and extent of the ties connecting citizens and public officials. The
classic examples are from irrigation, in which the lowest-level irrigation officials are
from the community being served; they are enmeshed in local social relations and
hence are under pressure by the community to perform and be responsive to them.
Importantly, this approach works only where the actions of public officials are si-
multaneously bound by performance-oriented organizational environments that are
competent, coherent, and credible. As the case of Russia amply demonstrates, weak
public institutions and deep cleavages between powerful authorities and ordinary
citizens can lead to political instability, rampant corruption, rising inequality, and
capital flight (Rose 1998).
936 
The World B*nk Research Observer, voll5.no. 
2 (August 2000)


----- Page 13 (native text) -----
Developing these ideas, Woolcock (1998) shows that a range of development out-
comes flows from different types and combinations of community capacity and state
functioning. Narayan (1999) integrates the core ideas of bridging social capital and
state-society relations and suggests that different interventions are needed for differ-
ent combinations of governance and bridging social capital in a group, community,
or society (figure 2). In societies (or communities) with good governance and high
levels of bridging social capital, there is complementarity between state and society,
and economic prosperity and social order are likely. But when a society's social capi-
tal inheres mainly in primary social groups disconnected from one another, the more
powerful groups dominate the state, to the exclusion of other groups. Such societies,
which include countries in Latin America with large excluded indigenous popula-
tions, are characterized by latent conflict. In these circumstances, a key task for sub-
ordinate groups and activists is to forge broad, coherent coalitions (Keck and Sikkink
1998) and nurture relations with allies in positions of power (Fox and Brown 1998);
should they be successful, weak groups may begin to accrue rights and resources
previously denied them. Similarly, a state that opens up and explicidy builds bridges
Figure 2. Relationship between Bridging Social Capital and Governance
Well-functioning states
Exclusion
(latent conflict)
Low levels of ••
bridging social
capital
Conflict
Social and economic
well-being
-*• High levels of
bridging social
capital
Coping
Dysfunctional states
c
o
M
p
L
E
M
E
N
T
A
R
I
T
Y
S
U
B
S
T
I
T
U
T
O
N
Note: Complementarity refers to the optimal interaction of government and markets in civil society;
substitution is the replacement by informal organizations (families, networks, and so on) of services ordinarily
provided by governments and institutions.
Source: Adapted from Narayan (1999).
Michael Woolcock and Deep* Narayan
SJ7


----- Page 14 (native text) -----
to excluded groups increases the likelihood that the poor will be able to gain access to
the resources and services to which they are entitled.
Alternatively, state-society relations may degenerate into conflict, violence, war or
anarchy—a breakdown that allows warlords, local mafias, and guerrilla movements
to take over the power and authority of the state. Restoring economic prosperity and
peace to Rwanda, for example, will involve forging a measure of reconciliation be-
tween two ethnic groups. Often, when citizens are deprived of services and benefits,
informal networks substitute for the failed state and form the basis of coping strate-
gies. This is the case in Benin and Togo, where women, denied access to formal
credit, established informal revolving credit societies; in Tanzania the absence of
police protection has led some villages to rely on their own system of security guards
(Narayan and others 2000).
When representatives of the state, the corporate sector, and civil society establish
common forums through which they can pursue common goals, development can
proceed. In these circumstances social capital has a role as a mediating variable that is
shaped by public and private institutions. This shaping is an inherently contentious
and political process, one in which the role of the state is crucial. Moreover, the
fundamental social transformation of economic development—from traditional
kinship-based community life to societies organized by formal institutions—alters
the calculus of costs and benefits associated with different dimensions of social capi-
tal and the desirable combinations of these dimensions (Berry 1993). Although de-
velopment struggles are inherendy political, they are not always won by the most
powerful, nor do challenges to authority always entail violent conflict. Patient efforts
by intermediaries to establish partnerships between associations of the poor and out-
siders can reap significant dividends (Isham, Narayan, and Pritchett 1995). As Uphoff
(1992:273) points out,
paradoxical though it may seem, "top-down" efforts are usually needed to
introduce, sustain, and institutionalize "bottom-up" development. We are
commonly constrained to think in "either-or" terms—the more of one the
less of the other—when both are needed in a positive-sum way to achieve
our purposes.
The synergy view suggests three central tasks for theorists, researchers, and policy-
makers: to identify the nature and extent of a community's social relationships and
formal institutions, and the interaction between them; to develop institutional strat-
egies based on these social relations, particularly the extent of bonding and bridging
social capital; and to determine how the positive manifestations of social capital—
cooperation, trust, and institutional efficiency—can offset sectarianism, isolation-
ism, and corruption. Put another way, the challenge is to transform situations where
a community's social capital substitutes for weak, hostile, or indifferent formal insti-
tutions into ones in which both realms complement one another.
MS 
The World Bank Research Observer. coL 15, no. 2 (August 2000)


----- Page 15 (native text) -----
Table 2. Four Views of Social Capital
Perspective
Actors
Policy prescriptions
Communitarian 
view
Local associations
Networks view
Bonding and bridging
community ties
Institutional view
Political and legal
institutions
Synergy view
Community networks and
state-society relations
Community groups
Voluntary organizations
Entrepreneurs
Business groups
Information brokers
Private and public sectors
Community groups, civil
society, firms, states
Small is beautiful
Recognize social assets of the poor
Decentralize
Create enterprise zones
Bridge social divides
Grant civil and political liberties
Institute transparency, accountability
Coproduction, complementarity
Participation, linkages
Enhance capacity and scale of
local organizations
Table 2 summarizes the key elements of the four perspectives on social capital and
development and their corresponding policy prescriptions. The differences between
them are primarily the unit of analysis on which they focus; their treatment of social
capital as an independent, dependent, or mediating variable; and the extent to which
the/ incorporate a theory of the state. The largest and most influential bodies of
work have emerged from the networks and institutional perspectives; the most re-
cent approaches seek a synthesis.
Measuring Social Capital
Several recent innovative studies have attempted to quantify social capital and its
contribution to economic development. To arrive at concrete policy recommenda-
tions for using social capital as a development tool, more comparative research is
required that uses precise measures of social capital to examine within-country and
across-country variations in poverty reduction, government performance, ethnic con-
flict, and economic growth. Obtaining a single, true measure of social capital is prob-
ably not possible, for several reasons. First, the most comprehensive definitions of
social capital are multidimensional, incorporating different levels and units of analy-
sis. Second, the nature and forms of social capital change over time, as the balance
shifts between informal organizations and formal institutions. And third, because no
long-standing cross-country surveys were initially designed to measure social capital,
contemporary researchers have had to compile indexes from a range of approximate
items (measures of trust, confidence in government, voting trends, social mobility,
Michael Wookock and Deepa Nareyan
2 3 9


----- Page 16 (native text) -----
and so on). Several excellent studies have identified useful measures of, and proxies
for, social capital, however.
One measure is membership in informal and formal associations and networks. In
developing countries generally, and in rural areas in particular, measures that capture
the informal give-and-take through communitywide festivals, sporting events, and
other traditional methods of fostering social connections are very important indica-
tors of the underlying stocks of social capital. Based on data from a survey of 1,400
households in 87 villages across Tanzania (Narayan 1997), Narayan and Pritchett
(1999) developed an index of social capital at the household and community levels
that included density and characteristics of informal and formal groups and net-
works. The dimensions of this index included group functioning, financial and in-
kind contributions to groups, participarion in decisionmaking, and heterogeneity of
membership. A series of measures was also constructed on interpersonal trust and
changes over time. These measures demonstrated that social capital was indeed both
social and capital, generating returns diat exceeded those to human capital.
In tandem with die Tanzania study, studies of local institutions in three coun-
tries—Bolivia (Grootaert and Narayan 2000), Burkina Faso (Grootaert, Oh, and
Swamy 1999), and Indonesia (Grootaert 1999)—looked at qualitative service deliv-
ery issues and quantified these variables. These studies demonstrated that the ques-
tionnaire items do in fact capture different dimensions of social capital at the house-
hold and community levels, that certain dimensions of social capital contribute
significantly to household welfare, and that social capital is the capital of the poor.
The most important variables in diese studies are density of associations, heteroge-
neity of membership in associations, and degrees of active participation in them. .
Another manifestation of social capital includes norms and values diat facilitate
exchanges, lower transaction costs, reduce the cost of information, permit trade in
the absence of contracts, and encourage responsible citizenship and the collective
management of resources (Fukuyama 1995). Inglehart's (1997) work on the World
Values Survey is the most comprehensive effort in this area. The questions econo-
mists working on social capital find valuable are those on trust ("Generally speaking,
would you say diat most people can be trusted or diat you can't be too careful in
dealing with people?"). Knack and Keefer (1997), for example, use these data to
show the positive relationship between trust and levels of investment in a country.
Although research attempting to identify the nature of the relationships between
social variables and development has recendy proliferated, the quality of the data is
less than ideal. With mounting pressure to provide simple measures of inherendy
complex and interdependent relationships, there is a danger that expectations will
exceed capacity and that hastily assembled, poorly conceived measures will jeopar-
dize the agenda they purport to serve. One way to strike the balance between quality
and quantity measures is to unbundle social capital into its dimensions and to gener-
ate new data sets that are comparable across many countries.2
The World Bank Research Observer, voL 15, no. 2 (August 2000)


----- Page 17 (native text) -----
Four recent studies attempt to develop indices of social capital at the national or
subnational levels. In the United States several new surveys of civic engagement are
being conducted in addition to the work already collected in surveys of consumer
preferences and changes in lifestyles. The National Commission on Philanthropy
and Civic Renewal (1998), for example, has developed a National Index of Civic
Engagement based on a sample of 1,000 respondents. This index includes five di-
mensions: the giving climate, community engagement, charitable involvement, the
spirit of voluntarism, and active citizenship. Robert Putnam's Saguaro Seminar will
soon launch the Social Capital Community Benchmark, a comprehensive survey of
social capital in the United States (Putnam 2000).
In exploring the roots and determinants of Hindu and Muslim riots in India,
Varshney (2000) focuses on the role of intercommunal networks. In cities where
Hindus and Muslims have little interaction, Varshney shows that latent communal
conflict has few channels for peaceful resolution and periodically descends into vio-
lence; in cities where association memberships overlap and everyday interactions are
frequent, conflict is anticipated and dissipated. This research was based on six Indian
cities carefully arranged in three matched pairs that were similar in terms of Hindu-
Muslim demographic composition but dissimilar in that one city experienced recur-
rent riots whereas the other city remained calm. Varshney's work shows that diver-
sity can be a source of strength where social ties transcend different community
boundaries.
To assess social capital at the community level, Onyx and Bullen (forthcoming)
developed a questionnaire for the state of New South Wales, Australia, from which
they isolated eight underlying factors that constituted an individual's social capital:
participation in the local community, proaction in a social context, feelings of trust
and safety, neighborhood connections, connections with family and friends, toler-
ance of diversity, value of life, and work connections. Looking only at an individual's
social capital score, the authors could predict the community to which the person
belonged, thus raising the prospects for this instrument being used for planning and
monitoring community development activities.
Building on this work, researchers are working to develop social capital instru-
ments that can be used as diagnostic tools at the community level and across coun-
tries. Because the forms of social capital are society-specific and change over time,
the instruments must focus on a range of dimensions of social capital (Narayan and
Cassidy 1999). Such instruments have recently been introduced in Ghana and Uganda
(Narayan 1998) and by the World Bank's Social Capital Initiative in Panama and
India (Krishna and Shrader 1999).3 Analyses of the data reveal that the dimensions
underlying social capital are strikingly similar even when the context is quite differ-
ent. The Ghana study draws on a sample of 1,471 rural and urban households, while
the Uganda study focuses on 950 households in slum communities in Kampala.
Factor analyses reveal a similar underlying structure and clustering of variables.
Michatl Woolcock and Detp* Ntrsyan 
241


----- Page 18 (native text) -----
Implications for Development Theory and Policy
The concept of social capital offers a way to bridge sociological and economic per-
spectives and to provide potentially richer and better explanations of economic de-
velopment. One important way it does this is by showing that the nature and extent
of social interactions between communities and institutions shape economic perfor-
mance. This, in turn, has important implications for development policy, which has
long focused exclusively on an economic dimension. Similarly, understanding how
outside agencies can work to alleviate poverty in diverse and poorly understood com-
munities remains one of the great challenges of development. A social capital per-
spective stresses that technical and financial soundness is a necessary but insufficient
condition for acceptance of a project by poor communities.
Six broad recommendations can be offered for incorporating the concept of social
capital into development policy. First, for development interventions in all sectors
and at all levels (especially the country level), social institutional analysis should be
used to identify correctly the range of stakeholders and their interrelations. Under-
standing how proposed policy interventions will affect the power and political inter-
ests of the stakeholders is a vital consideration, since all policy interventions occur in
a social context characterized by a delicate mix of informal organizations, networks,
and institutions. The design of an intervention needs to pay special attention to the
potential for dominant groups to mobilize in ways that undermine the public good.
Second, it is critical to invest in the organizational capacity of the poor and to help
build bridges between communities and social groups. The latter is particularly im-
portant because many decisions affecting the poor are not made at the local level. To
this end, the use of participatory processes can facilitate consensus-building and so-
cial interaction among stakeholders with diverse interests and resources. Finding
ways and means by which to transcend social divides and build social cohesion and
trust is crucial for economic development. One of the great virtues of the idea and
discourse on social capital is that it provides a common language for these different
stakeholders, enabling them to communicate more easily with one another.
Third, a social capital perspective adds its voice to those calling for information
disclosure policies at all levels to encourage informed citizenship and accountability
of both private and public actors who purport to serve the public good. Fourth,
improvements in physical access and modern communications technology that can
foster information exchange across social groups should be emphasized to comple-
ment social interaction based on face-to-face interchange. Fifth, development inter-
ventions should be viewed through a social capital lens, and assessments of their im-
pact should include the potential effects of the intervention on the social capital of
poor communities. To reiterate, the social networks of the poor are one of the primary
resources they have for managing risk and vulnerability, and outside agents therefore
need to find ways to complement these resources, rather than substitute for them.
The WoHJ Bank Research Observer, voL 15. no. 2 (August 2000)


----- Page 19 (native text) -----
Finally, social capital should be seen as a component of orthodox development
projects, from dams and irrigation systems to local schools and health clinics. Where
poor communities have direct input into die design, implementation, management,
and evaluation of projects, returns on investments and the sustainability of the project
are enhanced (Esman and Uphoff 1984).
Conclusion
Although it is too soon to announce the arrival of a new development paradigm, it is
not unreasonable to claim that a consensus is emerging about the importance of
social relations in development. In unpacking the literature on social capital and
development, a recurring message is that social relations provide opportunities for
mobilizing other growth-enhancing resources, that social capital does not exist in a
political vacuum, and that the nature and extent of the interactions between com-
munities and institutions hold the key to understanding the prospects for develop-
ment in a given society. The evidence supports the argument that social capital can
be used to promote or to undermine the public good. This consideration suggests
that one of the most important examples of social capital at work in the absence of
formal insurance mechanisms and financial instruments is the use by the poor of
social connections to protect themselves against risk and vulnerability.
In many respects the research on social capital is still in its early stages, but practi-
tioners and policymakers cannot wait for researchers to know all there is to know
before acting. Instead, all those involved should adopt a stance of learning by doing.
This implies more rigorous evaluations of project and policy impact on social capi-
tal, more work on unbundling the mechanisms through which social capital works,
and understanding the determinants of social capital itself. It also implies that prac-
tical lessons emerging from development projects can themselves be used to inform
social capital theory.
It would be the ultimate irony if those people most interested in studying social
capital and promoting its use in formulating development policy did not themselves
foster trust, openness, and a willingness to share information, ideas, and opportuni-
ties in this field. Readers are invited to access, use, and contribute to the ongoing
research on social capital.4 It is only through collaborative efforts—with all that this
entails regarding struggle, perseverance, negotiation, and mutual willingness to learn—
that genuine progress will be made.
Notes
Michael Woolcock is a social scientist with the World Bank's Development Research Group and an
adjuna lecturer in public policy at Harvard University. Deepa Narayan is a lead social development
Michael Woolcock and Deepa Narayan 
*4»


----- Page 20 (native text) -----
specialist in the Poverty Reduction and Economic Management Network at the World Bank. For
helpful comments on an earlier draft of this paper, die authors thank John Blaxall, Jonadian Fox,
Christiaan Grootaert, Bill Mulford, Vijayendra Rao, Anders Rudkvist, and anonymous reviewers.
1. For citations on die first eight fields, see Woolcock (1998) and Foley and Edwards (1999). See
also die database of articles on die World Bank's social capital Website, at <http://www.worldbank.org/
poverty/scapital/library/indcx.htm#db>.
2. A number of recent survey instruments are available to researchers doing work in this field. See
the World Bank's social capital Website, <http://www.worldbank.org/poverty/scapital/library/
surveys.htm>.
3. The World Bank's Social Capital Initiative is a $1.2 million dollar project sponsored by die
government of Denmark. Several monographs produced for die initiative have been cited in diis
paper; diese and several odiers can be downloaded at <http://www.worldbank.org/poverty/scapital/
wkrppr/wrkppr.htm>. These papers are currendy being edited and prepared for formal publication.
4. The World Bank's Social Capital Thematic Group Website contains instructions on how to
receive our newsletter and join die e-mail discussion group. Go to <http://www.worldbank.org/pov-
erty/scapiral/>.
References
The word "processed" describes informally reproduced works diat may not be commonly available
dirough library systems.
Astonc, Nan Marie, Constance Nadianson, Robert Schoen, and Young Kim. 1999. "Family Demog-
raphy, Social Theory, and Investment in Social Capital." Population and Development Review
()
Barr, Abigail. 1998. "Enterprise Performance and die Functional Diversity of Social Capital." Working
Paper Scries 98-1. University of Oxford, Institute of Economics and Statistics, Oxford, U.K.
Processed.
Berry, Sara. 1993. No Condition Is Permanent: The Social Dynamics of Agrarian Change in Sub-
Saharan Africa. Madison, Wis.: University of Wisconsin Press.
Briggs, Xavier de Souza. 1998. "Brown Kids in White Suburbs: Housing Mobility and die Multiple
Faces of Social Capital." Housing Policy Debate 9(1): 177-221.
Brown, L. David. 1998. "Creating Social Capital: Nongovernmental Development Organizations
and Intersectoral Problem Solving." In Walter W. Powell and Elisabedi Clemens, eds., Private
Action and the Public Good. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press.
Brown, L. David, and Darcy Ashman. 1996. "Participation, Social Capital, and Intersectoral Prob-
lem Solving: African and Asian Cases." World Development 24(6): 1477-95.
Burt, Ronald. 1992. Structural Holes: The Social Structure of Competition. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press.
. 1997. "The Contingent Value of Social Capital." Administrative Science Quarterly 42:339—
65.
. 1998. "The Gender of Social Capital." Rationality and Society 10(l):5-46.
Coleman, James. 1987. "Norms as Social Capital." In Gerard Radnitzky and Peter Bernholz, eds.,
Economic Imperialism: The Economic Method Applied outside the Field of Economics. New York:
Paragon House Publishers.
. 1988. "Social Capital in die Creation of Human Capital." American Journal of Sociology
94(Supplement):S95-S 120.
The VPorid Bank Research Observer, voL 15. no. 2 (August 2000)


----- Page 21 (native text) -----
-. 1990. Foundations of Social Theory. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Collier, Paul. 1998. "Social Capital and Poverty." Social Capital Initiative Working Paper 4. World
Bank, Social Development Department, Washington, D.C. Processed.
. 1999. "The Political Economy of Edinicity." In Boris Pleskovic and Joseph E. Stiglitz, eds.,
Annual World Bank Conference on Development Economics 1998. Washington, D.C: World Bank.
Collier, Paul, and Jan Willem Gunning. 1999. "Explaining African Economic Performance.°/<wr7M/
of Economic Literature 37(March):64-l 11.
Dordick, Gwendolyn. 1997. Something Left to Lose: Personal Relations andSurvival among New York's
Homeless. Philadelphia, Pa.: Temple University Press.
Easterly, William. 2000. "Happy Societies: The Middle Class Consensus and Economic Develop-
ment." World Bank, Development Research Group, Washington, D.C. Processed.
Escobar, Arturo. 1995. Encountering Development: The Making and Unmaking of the Third World
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Esman, Milton, and Norman Uphoff. 1984. Local Organizations: Intermediaries in Rural Develop-
ment. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press.
Evans, Peter. 1992. "The State as Problem and Solution: Predation, Embedded Autonomy, and
Structural Change." In Stephan Haggard and Robert Kaufman, eds., The Politics of Economic
Adjustment: International Constraints, Distributive Conflicts, and the State. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
University Press.
. 1995. Embedded Autonomy: States and Industrial Transformation. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
University Press.
-. 1996. "Government Action, Social Capital and Development: Reviewing the Evidence on
Synergy." World Development 24(6): 1119-32.
Fafchamps, Marcel, and Bart Minten. 1999. "Social Capital and die Firm: Evidence from Agricul-
tural Trade." Social Capital Initiative Working Paper 17. World Bank, Social Development De-
partment, Washington, D.C. Processed.
Foley, Michael, and Bob Edwards. 1999. "Is It Time to Disinvest in Social Capital?" Journal of "Public
Policy 19:141-73.
Fox, Jonathan. 1992. "Democratic Rural Development: Leadership Accountability in Regional Peas-
ant Organizations." Development and Change 23(2): 1-36.
Fox, Jonathan, and L. David Brown, eds. 1998. The Struggle for Accountability: The World Bank,
NGOs, and Grassroots Movements. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Fukuyama, Francis. 1995. Trust: The Social Virtues and die Creation of Prosperity. New York: Free
Press.
Gittell, Ross, and Avis Vidal. 1998. Community Organizing: Building Social Capital as a Development
Strategy. Newbury Park, Calif.: Sage Publications.
Granovetter, Mark. 1973. "The Strength of'Weak Ties." American Journal ofSociology 78:1360-80.
. 1995. The Economic Sociology of Firms and Entrepreneurs." In Alejandro Portes, ed., The
Economic Sociology of Immigration: Essays on Networks, Ethnicity, and Entrepreneurship. New York:
Russell Sage Foundation.
Grootaert, Christiaan. 1999. "Social Capital, Household Welfare, and Poverty in Indonesia." Local
Level Institutions Working Paper 6. World Bank, Social Development Department, Washington,
D.C. Processed.
Grooraert, Christiaan, and Deepa Narayan. 2000. "Local Institutions, Poverty, and Household Wel-
fare in Bolivia." Working Paper 9. World Bank, Social Development Department, Washington,
D.C. Processed.
Michael Woolcock and Deepa Narayan 
MS


----- Page 22 (native text) -----
Grootaert, Chrisiiaan, Gi-Taik Oh, and Anand Swamy. 1999. "Social Capital and Development
Outcomes in Burkina Faso." Working Paper 7. World Bank, Social Development Department,
Washington, D.C. Processed.
Hall, Robert, and Charles Jones. 1999. "Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More Output
per Worker than Others?" Quarterly Journal of Economics 114(1):83—116.
Hanifan, Lyda J. 1916. "The Rural School Community Center." Annals of the American Academy of
Political and Social Science 67:130-38.
Holzmann, Robert, and Steen Jorgensen. 1999. "Social Protection as Social Risk Management."
Social Protection Discussion Paper 9904. World Bank, Human Development Network, Social
Protection Team, Washington, D.C. Processed.
Homans, George. 1961. Social Behavior. Its Elementary Forms. New York: Harcourt, Brace and World.
Inglehart, Ronald. 1997. Modernization andPostmodernization: Cultural, Economic, and Political Change
in 43 Societies. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Isham, Jonathan. 1999. "The Effect of Social Capital on Technology Adoption: Evidence from Rural
Tanzania." Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Economic Association, New
York. Processed.
Isham, Jonathan, and Daniel Kaufmann. 1999. "The Forgotten Rationale for Policy Reform: The
Productivity of Investment Projects." Quarterly Journal of Economics 114(1): 149—84.
Isham, Jonathan, Deepa Narayan, and Lant Pritchett. 1995. "Does Participation Improve Perfor-
mance? Establishing Causality with Subjective Data." The World Bank Economic Review 9(2): 175—
200.
Jacobs, Jane. 1961. The Life and Death of Great American Cities. New York: Random House.
Keck, Margaret, and Kathryn Sikkink. 1998. Activists beyond Borders: Advocacy Networks in Interna-
tional Politics. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press.
Knack, Stephen. 1999. "Social Capital, Growth, and Poverty: A Survey of Cross-Country Evidence."
Social Capital Initiative Working Paper 7. World Bank, Social Development Department, Wash-
ington, D.C. Processed.
Knack, Stephen, and Philip Keefer. 1995. "Institutions and Economic Performance: Cross-Country
Tests Using Alternative Institutional Measures." Economics and Politics 7(3):207-27.
. 1997. "Does Social Capital Have an Economic Payoff? A Cross-Country Investigation."
Quarterly Journal of Economics 112:1251—88.
Kozel, Valerie, and Barbara Parker. 2000. "Integrated Approaches to Poverty Assessment in India."
In Michael Bamberger, ed., Integrating Quantitative andQualitativeResearch in Development Projects.
Washington, D.C: World Bank.
Krishna, Anirudh, and Elizabeth Shrader. 1999. "Social Capital Assessment Tool." Social Capital
Initiative Working Paper 22. World Bank, Social Development Department, Washington, D.C.
Processed.
Loury, Glenn C. 1977. "A Dynamic Theory of Racial Income Differences." In P. A. Wallace and A.
LeMund, eds., Women, Minorities, and Employment Discrimination. Lexington, Mass.: Lexington
Books.
Massey, Douglas. 1998. "March of Folly: U.S. Immigration Policy after NAFTA." The American Pros-
pea 37:22-33.
Massey, Douglas, and Karin Espinosa. 1997. "What's Driving Mexico-U.S. Migration? A Theoreti-
cal, Empirical, and Policy Analysis." American Journal ofSociology 102(4):939-99.
Moore, Mick. 1997. "Societies, Polities, and Capitalists in Developing Countries: A Literature Sur-
vey. " Journal of Development Studies 33(3):287-363.
246 
The World Bank Research Observer, voL 15. no. 2 (August 2000)


----- Page 23 (native text) -----
Moser, Caroline. 1996. Confronting Crisis: A Comparative Study of Household Responses to Poverty and
Vulnerability in Four Poor Urban Communities. Environmentally Sustainable Development Stud-
ies and Monographs Series 8. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.
Narayan, Deepa. 1995. "Designing Community-Based Development.'' Social Development Paper 7.
World Bank, Environmentally and Socially Sustainable Development Network, Washington, D.C.
Processed.
. 1997. "Voices of the Poor. Poverty and Social Capital in Tanzania." Environmentally Sus-
tainable Development Monograph 20. World Bank, Washington, D.C.
-. 1998. "Social Capital Survey in Ghana—Preliminary Results." World Bank, Poverty Re-
duction and Economic Management Network, Washington, D.C. Processed.
-. 1999. "Bonds and Bridges: Social Capital and Poverty." Policy Research Working Paper
2167. World Bank, Poverty Reduction and Economic Management Network, Washington, D.C.
Processed.
Narayan, Deepa, and Michael Cassidy. 1999. "A Dimensional Approach to Measuring Social Capi-
tal: Development and Validation of a Social Capital Inventory." World Bank, Poverty Reduction
and Economic Management Network, Washington, D.C. Processed.
Narayan, Deepa, and David Nyamwaya. 1996. "Learning from die Poon A Participatory Poverty
Assessment in Kenya." Environment Department Papers, Participation Series 34. World Bank,
Social Policy and Resettlement Division, Washington, D.C. Processed.
Narayan, Deepa, and Lant Pritchett. 1999. "Cents and Sociability: Household Income and Social
Capital in Rural Tanzania." Economic Development and Cultural Change 47(4):871-97.
Narayan, Deepa, and Talat Shah. 1999. "Gender Inequity, Poverty, and Social Capital." Background
paper prepared for the Policy Research Report on Gender and Development. World Bank, Devel-
opment Research Group, Washington, D.C. Processed.
Narayan, Deepa, with Raj Patel, Kai Schafft, Anne Rademacher, and Sarah Koch-Schulte. 2000.
Voices of the Poor. Can Anyone Hear Us? Voicesfrom 46 Countries. Washington, D.C: World Bank.
National Commission on Philanthropy and Civic Renewal. 1998. "National Index of Civic Engage-
ment." University of Connecticut, Storrs, Conn.
North, Douglass C. 1990. Institutions, Institutional Change, and Economic Performance. New York
Cambridge University Press.
Onyx, Jenny, and Paul Bullen. Forthcoming. "Measuring Social Capital in Five Communities. "Jour-
nal of Applied Behavioral Science.
Platteau, Jean-Philippe. 1994. "Behind the Market Stage Where Real Societies Exist" (Parts I and II).
Journal of Development Studies 30:533-77 and 753-817.
Portes, Alejandro, ed. 1995. The Economic Sociology of Immigration: Essays on Networks, Ethnicity, and
Entrepreneurship. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
. 1997. "Neoliberalism and die Sociology of Development." Population and Development
Review 23(2):229-59.
-. 1998. "Social Capital: Its Origins and Applications in Contemporary Sociology." Annual
Review of Sociology 24:1-24.
Pones, Alejandro, and Patricia Landolt. 1996. "The Downside of Social Capital." The American
Prospect 26 (May-June): 18-21, 94.
Portes, Alejandro, and Julia Sensenbrenner. 1993. "Embeddedness and Immigration: Notes on the
Social Determinants of Economic Action." American Journal of Sociology 98(6): 1320-50.
Putnam, Robert. 1993. Making Democracy Work: Civic Traditions in Modern Italy. Princeton, N.J.:
Princeton University Press.
Michael Woolcock and Deepa Narayan 
347


----- Page 24 (native text) -----
. 1995- "Tuning In, Tuning Out: The Strange Disappearance of Social Capital in America."
PS: Political Science and Politia: (December):664-83.
-. 2000. Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival of American Community. New York; Simon
and Schuster.
Rodrik, Dani. 1998. "Where Did All the Growth Go? External Shocks, Social Conflict, and Growth
Collapses." NBER Working Paper 6350. National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass.
. 1999. Making Openness Work. Baltimore, Md.: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Rose, Richard. 1998. "Getting Things Done in an Anti-Modern Society: Social Capital Networks in
Russia." Social Capital Initiative Working Paper 8. World Bank, Social Development Depart-
ment, Washington, D.C. Processed.
Rubio, Mauricio. 1997. "Perverse Social Capital: Some Evidence from Colombia." Journal of Eco-
nomic Issues 3l(3):805-l6.
Schafrt, Kai. 1998. "Grassroots Development and the Reconfiguration of Local Political Institutions:
Local Minority Self-Governance as a Political and Economic Resource for Hungary's Roma Popu-
lation." Paper presented at die Graduate Student Conference on International Affairs, George
Washington University, Washington, D.C. Processed.
Seeley, John R., Alexander R. Sim, and Elizabeth W. Loosley. 1956. Crestwood Heights: A Study of the
Culture of Suburban Life. New York: Basic Books.
Skocpol, Theda. 1995. Protecting Soldiers and Mothers: The Political Origins of Social Policy in the
United States. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
. 1996. "Unraveling from Above." The American Prospect 25:20-25.
Temple, Jonadian. 1998. "Initial Conditions, Social Capital, and Growth in Africa." Journal of Afri-
can Economies 7(3):309-47.
Temple, Jonadian, and Paul Johnson. 1998. "Social Capability and Economic Growth." Quarterly
Journal of Economics 113(3):965-90.
Tendler, Judith. 1997. Good Government in the Tropics. Baltimore, Md.: Johns Hopkins University
Press.
United Nations. 1951. Measures for the Economic Development of Underdeveloped Countries. New
York: United Nations, Department of Social and Economic Affairs.
UphofF, Norman. 1992. Learning from Gal Oya: Possibilities for Participatory Development and Post-
Newtonian Social Science. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press.
van Bastalaer, Thierry. 1999. "Does Social Capital Facilitate die Poor's Access to Credit? A Review of
die Microeconomic Literature." Social Capital Initiative Working Paper 8. World Bank, Social
Development Department, Washington, D.C. Processed.
Van Dijk, Meine Pieter, and Roberta Rabellotti. 1997. Enterprise Clusters and Networks in Developing
Countries. London: Frank Cass.
Varshney, Ashutosh. 2000. Ethnic Conflict and Civic Life: Hindus and Muslims in India. New Haven,
Conn.: Yale University Press.
White, T. Anderson, and Glenn Smucker. 1998. "Social Capital and Governance in Haiti: Tradi-
tions and Trends." In The Challenges of Poverty Reduction. Report 17242-HA. Washington, D.C:
World Bank.
Wilson, William Julius. 1987. The Truly Disadvantage^ Chicago, IU.: University of Chicago Press.
. 1996. When Work Disappears: The World of the New Urban Poor. New York Knopf.
Woolcock, Michael. 1998. "Social Capital and Economic Development: Toward a Theoretical Syn-
thesis and Policy Framework." Theory and Society 27(2): 151-208.
The World Bank Research Observer, vol 15, no. 2 (August 2000)


----- Page 25 (native text) -----
. 1999. "Learning from Failures in Microfinance: What Unsuccessful Cases Tell Us about
How Group-Based Programs Work." American Journal ofEconomics and Sociology 58(l):17-42.
-. 2000. "Managing Risk, Shocks, and Opportunities in Developing Economies: The Role of
Social Capital." In Gustav Ranis, ed., Dimensions of Development. New Haven, Conn.: Yale Cen-
ter for International and Area Studies.
. Forthcoming. Using Social Capital Getting the Social Relations Right in the Theory and Prac-
tice of Economic Development. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
World Bank. 1989. "Staff Appraisal Report, Rwanda, Agricultural Services Project." Report 7599-
RW. Agricultural Operations Division, South-Central and Indian Ocean Department, Africa Re-
gion. Processed.
. 1998. Assessing Aid: What Works, What Doesn't, and Why. New York Oxford University
Press.
World Development. 1996. Special issue on social capital. 24(6).
Michael Woolcock and Detpa Narayan 
149
