

----- Page 1 (native text) -----
90
4
4.1  Introduction
Public signage, which is the object of most linguistic landscape stud-
ies, is usually an easily available source of written language and, at the 
same time, it has strong visual qualities. It is common that someone new 
to the field becomes fascinated by the possibilities of signs as a source of 
data, especially when a researcher discovers that numerous interesting 
questions can be asked about ‘language’ on signs in public spaces. Such 
questions include issues related to the quantities or the characteristics of 
the languages on display, or power relations between language groups. 
After experiencing such an eye-opener, it may lead a researcher to pay 
close attention to signage and thereafter begin to ask some basic ques-
tions about which languages can be observed on signs and why. From 
there onwards, different approaches can be chosen to analyze the written 
languages on public signs depending on the aims of the investigation, 
the theoretical approach chosen and the more specific research questions 
formulated.
The research design typically includes sampling a small or large 
number of digital photographs of public signage, which will then be 
analyzed according to some language-related features. In a large number 
of projects, the photographic data are combined with other well-known 
research methods that are available in applied linguistics, sociolinguis-
tics and other disciplines. Such data collection tools include face-to-face 
interviews, standardized questionnaires, participant observation, record-
ings of spoken language or extracting data from existing sources such 
as documents about language legislation. The rules and norms of such 
known methods and techniques for data collection are well established 
and explained in various textbooks (e.g. Heller et  al., 2018; Hult & 
Johnson, 2015; McKinley & Rose, 2020) and so there is no real need to 
discuss in this chapter how to apply those methods in a research project. 
After collecting the data about linguistic landscapes, the next step in the 
research process is usually data analysis, although it does not always have 
to be strictly linear. Over the past few years, researchers have applied a 
Research Methods: 
Quantitative and 
Qualitative Approaches


----- Page 2 (native text) -----
﻿Research Methods: Quantitative and Qualitative Approaches  91
wide range of different analytic techniques for linguistic landscape data, 
including statistical and corpus analysis, and ethnographic, narrative, 
discourse and critical analysis (Gorter, 2019a; Malinowski, 2018).
We will limit our discussions to some characteristic research meth-
ods that researchers have applied in linguistic landscape studies. As we 
said before, what those studies share is a focus on the use of written 
language in public spaces as an important source of data and analyzing 
such data with regard to the presence, prestige, functions or variations 
of the linguistic, visual, typographic and other features. There are, of 
course, no reasons for linguistic landscape studies to be limited to only 
the written aspects of languages displayed on signs. Studies also include 
multimodal aspects of colors, images, type and font, other visuals and 
materials of signs (e.g. Cook, 2013; Dray, 2010; Sebba, 2013; Stroud & 
Mpendukana, 2009). In addition, some studies have included the sound-
scape of voices, music and other sounds (Backhaus, 2015; Scarvaglieri 
et al., 2013) or smell and scents (Pennycook & Otsuji, 2015). We will 
focus on salient methodological issues that are in some way distinctive 
to the field.
According to Tufi and Blackwood (2010: 197), ‘the methodologies 
employed in the collection and categorization of written signs is still 
controversial’. Likewise, Leimgruber (2020: 711) argued that ‘there are 
no single accepted standard operating procedures for data collection and 
analysis’. We agree that researchers in the field continue their search for 
the most adequate research methods and find out how to apply them. 
Similar to the wide diversity in theoretical approaches (see Chapter 3), 
this variety of possible methods is an inherent dimension of the field.
A general distinction among research methods is often made between 
quantitative and qualitative approaches, a distinction obviously also 
existing in the field of linguistic landscape studies. The two approaches 
can be conceived of as contrasting and recognizable views or epistemolo-
gies on how new knowledge can be generated. On the one hand, in a 
quantitative approach, new knowledge is usually conceived of as objec-
tive, scientific, generalizable and replicable. Generalization and replica-
tion are seen as important aims (or ideals) of this approach. On the other 
hand, in a qualitative approach, new knowledge is created through con-
textually specific, locally relevant, many-sided and subjectively produced 
analysis. Formulated in this way, researchers might believe that the two 
approaches are mutually exclusive or irreconcilable, but others could 
think of the two approaches as supporting each other. In our opinion, 
both quantitative and qualitative methods are legitimate ways of carrying 
out an investigation and for us one approach is not inherently better than 
or preferred over the other.
In a quantitative investigation, researchers usually work with a large 
sample of signs (or of people) to construct a database. A sample can vary 


----- Page 3 (native text) -----
92  A Panorama of Linguistic Landscape Studies﻿
according to the geographic area covered, the criteria for inclusion, the 
total quantity collected and the time period covered. The analysis typi-
cally focuses on establishing distributions of language or other features 
found on signs, the degree of presence (or absence) of certain languages 
or specific linguistic elements. Alternatively, researchers can investigate, 
for example through a standardized questionnaire, the perceptions, atti-
tudes or views of people, who can be designers or policymakers, clients or 
shop owners, locals or visitors. In this type of project, a statistical analy-
sis of the data and a numerical presentation of the results in the form of 
tables or graphs are commonly included. However, presenting quantita-
tive distributions does not have to prevent researchers from having an 
eye for the details or the meaning of a single sign. A detailed analysis of 
a single sign can be included, even when the main aim of trying to find a 
trend or to draw general conclusions remains.
In contrast, a qualitative study commonly focuses more on the par-
ticular characteristics of a sign in a specific context, or on its makers 
or individual users. Qualitative studies often try to provide sensitivity 
to historical developments, social circumstances and the local context. 
The methodology can include (linguistic) ethnography, case studies, 
(participant) observation and semi-structured or informal interviews 
and the results are often presented as a narrative with a small number of 
examples, which are analyzed more or less in depth. The conclusions are 
often more limited in their general application. Of course, a qualitative 
approach does not exclude the possibility of quantifying specific features 
or presenting quantitative results.
Both quantitative and qualitative approaches have proved fruitful in 
contributing to the development of the field and both approaches con-
tinue to be important for linguistic landscape studies. Some researchers 
have chosen to apply a combination of different research methods and 
techniques in what is often called a mixed methods approach. However, 
sometimes it is difficult for a mixed methods approach to overcome basic 
differences in the creation of new knowledge, as we mentioned before.
After these general introductory remarks on the well-known division 
between quantitative and qualitative methods, we discuss the application 
of each approach in linguistic landscape research in the following two 
sections and then in Section  4.4 we show examples of mixed methods 
approaches in which both approaches are combined. Thereafter, we 
reflect on two specific, in some manner unresolved issues of studying 
signs in public spaces, which are the unit of analysis and the sampling 
area. Finally, we draw some conclusions on research methods.
In Chapter 5, we delve into the details of distinctive and innovative 
research methods such as photography, walking interviews, video analy-
sis and eye tracking. Those methods may be less common, but they seem 
well suited for the study of linguistic landscapes.


----- Page 4 (native text) -----
﻿Research Methods: Quantitative and Qualitative Approaches  93
4.2  Quantitative Approaches
Superficially, the question ‘Which languages do we see on public 
signs?’ could be answered by ‘counting the languages on signs’, but the 
reality is rather more complex.
To begin with, it is not always immediately evident what constitutes 
a sign (‘What is the unit of analysis?’). Further, drawing a sample of signs 
can be a challenge (‘How and where do you sample signs?’). We discuss 
these two issues of the unit of analysis and the survey area in Section 4.5. 
A further complication is the attribution of a text to a specific language, 
which is obvious most of the time, but can also be challenging, dubious 
or impossible. For example, authors have asked the challenging question 
‘Do proper names or brand names belong to a language?’, which is an 
issue we discuss in Chapter 11 on names.
In this section, we consider some of the ways researchers have applied 
a quantitative approach. First, we discuss the development of a coding 
scheme and then we present some basic characteristics of quantitative 
studies.
4.2.1  Coding schemes
Researchers who apply a quantitative approach to linguistic land-
scapes typically create a database of the signs they have photographed 
and then use a scheme to code the language features or other elements 
of each sign. Thereafter, a statistical analysis is carried out of the distri-
butional patterns found in the data, which are presented as the results of 
the investigation in the format of frequency tables or graphs. This type 
of study continues to appeal to many researchers because it can provide 
interesting and important information about a specific sociolinguistic 
situation and, in that sense, it can be compared to a language census, a 
survey or a questionnaire. It is important to remark that a quantitative 
approach is more than ‘just counting the signs’. Researchers have to 
develop or apply a coding scheme that takes various characteristics of 
signs into account and is related to their research questions, in order to 
avoid presenting merely superficial results.
In their classic study, Ben-Rafael et al. (2001, 2006) used a relatively 
limited set of coding criteria, which included information about the 
location (city and neighborhood), domain and branch, the number of 
languages on the sign and which languages were the first, second and 
third. It was a simple and straightforward coding scheme. In our own 
early work, we started from this coding scheme of Ben-Rafael and col-
leagues and we added some variables (Cenoz & Gorter, 2003, 2006), 
among others, two variables from the Landry and Bourhis (1997) article. 
The first variable was whether a sign was an official sign placed by the 
government or related institutions versus a non-official sign put up by 
commercial enterprises, private organizations or individuals, which 


----- Page 5 (native text) -----
94  A Panorama of Linguistic Landscape Studies﻿
were called ‘top-down’ versus ‘bottom-up’. Second, we added a variable 
about the function of a sign: whether it was informative, symbolic or 
both. We added still other variables concerning the size of each language 
on multilingual signs, the presence of a translation and possible issues 
with grammar or lexis. For her PhD study, Edelman (2010) applied our 
codebook, but elaborated and refined the scheme further with variables 
such as the order of languages on multilingual signs, the script used and 
the presence of contact phenomena (see Edelman, 2010: 139–145 for the 
full codebook).
Barni and Bagna (2009) applied a similar coding scheme in their study 
of the Esquilino neighborhood in Rome. They coded each photograph 
of a sign for a fixed number of features (see Table  4.1). To enter the 
data, they used a software application, MapGeoLing, which was quite 
innovative at the time because for each sign it could determine its exact 
geographic location (georeference). In this way, they could create a map 
of the different immigrant languages in the urban linguistic landscape. 
Representing linguistic landscape data on maps has become important 
and, today, through the use of GPS, of course, almost any camera in a 
mobile phone can record the exact longitude and latitude of each photo-
graph (see Section 5.7 on the use of geographic maps).
The coding schemes mentioned above have been applied by other 
researchers and were further developed in later quantitative approaches. 
In Table 4.1, we compare three coding schemes. First, the categorization 
developed by Barni and Bagna (2009); second, the refinement by Savela 
(2018) for his study of schoolscapes in Finland; and third, the proposal 
by Amos (2016) in his study of Chinatown in Liverpool. Part of the latter 
scheme was applied by Lyons (2020), who also included georeferencing 
of exact latitude and longitude and added a new variable of the estimated 
value of a business. Reershemius (2020) largely used the same variables, 
but she added a variable for the different sizes of signs in square meters 
(a variable also included in the Metropolenzeigen project and in Amos 
and Soukup [2020]) and a second variable distinguishing if a sign was 
only a text, only a picture or both. The additional variables of Lyons and 
Reershemius are included at the bottom of Table 4.1. Obviously, the cod-
ing schemes in Table 4.1 also largely overlap with the coding schemes we 
mentioned above in the work of Ben-Rafael et al., Edelman and our own.
Table  4.1 offers an opportunity to see some important similarities 
and differences between the three schemes. The first column contains 
the categorization by Barni and Bagna (2009). We explained that it 
originated in the context of their study in Rome. In the second column, 
we find the proposal by Savela (2018). He wanted to add to the work 
by Barni and Bagna (2009), and he was aware of the proposal by Amos 
(2016). He started to distinguish six distinct thematic sets, which then led 
him to develop a data scheme that consisted of 22 different data annota-
tion categories.


----- Page 6 (native text) -----
﻿Research Methods: Quantitative and Qualitative Approaches  95
Table 4.1  Summary of coding schemes
Bagna and Barni (2009)
Savela (2018)
Amos (2016)
(1)  ID observation: 
researcher, date, 
camera
(1)  Administrative: ID 
number, date, etc.
ID number not mentioned; probably 
presumed
(2)  Monolingual or more 
languages
(2)  Linguistic: 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 
number of languages, 
saliency, translation, 
code-mixing
(1)  Languages
(2)  Multilingualism (Reh, 2004) 
replicating, unrelated, 
intersecting
(3)  Textual genre 
(function): poster, 
advertisement
(3)  Function: genre, 
indexicality/
symbolization/iconicity, 
representative
(3)  Communicative function: 
pragmatic role: name, 
information, slogan
(4)  External position: 
sign’s position and 
degree of visibility
(4)  Multimodality: mode, 
salience, medium 
durability
(4)  Materiality: constructed with: 
permanent, professional,  
hand-written
(5) People: staff
(5)  Agency: designer, issuer, 
audience
(5)  Authorship domain: author/body 
responsible: chain, individual, 
municipal
  (6)  Domain (of social 
life): public, work, 
etc.
(6a)  Context (subset of 
domain): services, 
administration, etc.
(6b)  Places (subset 
of context) bars, 
kiosks, etc.
 
(6)  Context frame: type of place: 
shop, restaurant, etc.
(7)  Field: associated discourse: food 
and drink, traffic, travel, sport
(7)  Location: 
georeferenced 
urban–rural, 
neighborhood
(6)  Spatial: spaces, people, 
unit
(8)  Locus: spatial location: wall, 
window, door, object
Added by Lyons (2020):
(9)  Estimated dollar 
value
Reershemius (2020)
(10)  Size in square meters
(11)  Text, picture, text and picture or not
Amos (2016) called his eight main categories ‘systems’, and inside 
each are a number of variables. Altogether, this leads to complex 
and elaborate coding possibilities for each sign. Or, as he stated, 
‘Each of the eight systems used in this study contains between 4 and 
70  variables, offering the potential for over 2  million classifications 
for each sign’ (Amos, 2016: 133). His aim is to link statistical gener-
alizations to detailed qualitative analyses. Later, Amos and Soukup 
(2020) set as their aim to come to a standard canon of linguistic 
landscape variables, similar to sociolinguistic variationist studies, an 
approach already applied in Soukup’s (2016) variationist linguistic 
landscape study (VaLLS) (see Section 4.2.2). In their proposal, Amos 
and Soukup only developed a set of independent variables, because for 
them the dependent variable is language choice. In their canon, they 
include variables that can be found in Table 4.1, with slightly different 
labels. The aim of Amos and Soukup is to facilitate meta-analysis and 
cross-comparison.


----- Page 7 (native text) -----
96  A Panorama of Linguistic Landscape Studies﻿
Table 4.1 demonstrates some obvious similarities between the three 
schemes. As the table shows, each of the authors applied different labels 
that partly depend on the aims of their projects, their research questions, 
their personal preferences or ideas and on the specifics of the study. Of 
course, each of the main categories in Table 4.1 has been further refined 
to contain various sub-variables. It seems that the schemes come down 
to the coding of six main characteristics of each sign (apart from an 
administrative ID number for each unit). The basic coding categories for 
each sign are
	(1)	linguistic or language(s) related;
	(2)	non-language features;
	(3)	function;
	(4)	agency;
	(5)	social context;
	(6)	geographic location.
It depends, of course, on the aims of a project and on the specific research 
questions as to how important each of these categories would be con-
sidered, how they could be further subdivided and if all six categories 
would be included. The type of (statistical) analysis of the data may also 
be considered when developing the coding scheme.
Descriptive statistics are frequently applied in quantitative linguistic 
landscape studies, although more advanced techniques such as linear 
models are still an exception.
4.2.2  Cases of quantitative studies
As stated in the foregoing sections, numerous researchers have 
applied a quantitative-distributive approach when studying linguistic 
landscapes. Many of those studies have provided new and exciting 
insights into the sociolinguistic situations where they were carried out. 
We present some instances of these types of studies and emphasize the 
methodological aspects so they become an example for other researchers 
who want to report on similar work.
In the framework of the European network on sustainable develop-
ment in a diverse world (SUS.DIV), we carried out a straightforward 
quantitative study in Rome. The study was part of a larger local project 
on multiculturalism. With the help of a research assistant, a corpus of 
1,365 signs was collected from 12 streets in 4 neighborhoods, selected to 
reflect the diversity of the city (Gorter, 2009). The same coding scheme 
was used as in our classic study (Cenoz & Gorter, 2006). Four research 
questions were asked: on the languages displayed; the differences 
between the neighborhoods; between top-down and bottom-up signs; 
and the characteristics of multilingual signs. Answering the research 


----- Page 8 (native text) -----
﻿Research Methods: Quantitative and Qualitative Approaches  97
questions, the results were presented descriptively in the following way. 
First, the four neighborhoods were compared in two bar graphs, and then 
a table was drawn up listing the 18 different languages found. We did not 
include graffiti or braille in that count, because braille is not a language 
but a tactile code in which any language can be written, in our case 
Italian. Finally, we presented three tables with percentages for the key 
variables. The publication also included four photographs to illustrate 
different types of signs. The results showed a high degree of linguistic 
diversity in those neighborhoods of Rome. Since the study was part of 
a larger project, it was able to demonstrate the added value of linguistic 
landscape as a research tool next to studies of, for example, multicultural 
markets (Bracalenti et al., 2009).
In a similar descriptive study, Lado (2011) collected signs from two 
commercial streets in the center of the cities of Valencia (102 signs) and 
Gandía (146  signs) in the autonomous community of Valencia, Spain. 
In this community, the Catalan language (Valencian) is co-official with 
Spanish. The three research questions focused on differences between 
top-down versus bottom-up signs and the display of linguistic and ideo-
logical conflicts in the linguistic landscape. The results were presented in 
two tables, one for each street, with percentages and absolute numbers 
for the languages on top-down and bottom-up signs. The publication 
included four photographs of signs as illustrations of graffiti, and of 
top-down and bottom-up signs. Lado’s results uncovered that in the 
Valencian Community, the government’s language policy did not affect 
the bottom-up signs. More studies on Catalan as a minority language are 
mentioned in Chapter 6.
In another, similar but somewhat larger quantitative study, Muth 
(2012) compared the capitals of two post-Soviet societies: Vilnius in 
Lithuania and Chişinău in Moldova. He posed three research questions 
about which languages are visible and the differences between the two 
cities; the assumptions about Russian as a minority language; and about 
the relationship between the occurrences of minority languages related to 
the political framework. In both cities, he selected four districts (neigh-
borhoods) based on their sociogeographic properties: the old center, the 
business district and two residential areas. In each district, he chose the 
main street and some side streets to collect digital pictures of signage. 
The sample in Vilnius was 808 items and in Chişinău 1,309 items. For 
the unit of analysis, he took a shop front or a whole establishment, fol-
lowing our approach (Cenoz & Gorter, 2006; see also Section 4.5.1). The 
results were presented in the form of five tables with the percentages of 
the different languages displayed on bottom-up signs for the whole city 
and for the four districts, as well as the dominant language in bi/multilin-
gual signs. To illustrate the position of Russian in the two cities, he also 
included three photographs of signs: a billboard, a clothing store and a 
tattoo studio. The quantitative results indicated important differences 


----- Page 9 (native text) -----
98  A Panorama of Linguistic Landscape Studies﻿
between the two cities because even though the number of speakers of 
Russian is similar, substantially more Russian was visible in Chişinău.
Another example which can be seen as fairly typical of studies using 
quantitative methods took place in Hong Kong, where Chinese and Eng-
lish are the two official languages. Lai (2013) investigated the linguistic 
landscape by asking four research questions about the dominance of 
Chinese and English; the influence of mainland China; the representation 
of minority groups; and the differences between the center and a subur-
ban area. She collected a sample of 1,160 signs in 4 of the 19 districts of 
the city: the central business district, a tourist hub, a local shopping and 
entertainment area and a residential area. In each district, she identified 
one main street and one side street of comparable length and with com-
mercial activities (Figure 4.1). The results are presented in five frequency 
tables with the absolute numbers and percentages of monolingual, 
bilingual and multilingual signs, the languages on monolingual signs, 
on bilingual and multilingual signs, the prominence of languages and a 
comparison of the four districts. The results showed that just over half 
of the signs were monolingual, mostly in Chinese or in English, whereas 
just under half were bilingual, almost all Chinese–English. Less than 2% 
of the signs had three or more languages, including Japanese, French or 
Korean. She used 12  photographs of signs not only as illustrations of 
the prominence of languages, but also for a more qualitative analysis 
of the differences in the use of the two official languages. Lai concluded 
that Chinese is more prominent in the Hong Kong linguistic landscape, 
although overall, the city displayed a bilingual profile. More studies on 
English in Hong Kong are summarized in Chapter 9.
Replicability, as we stated in the introduction, is often an important 
dimension of a quantitative approach. This is an explicit aim in Lyons 
and Rodrigues (2017) who present a replicable framework of a quantita-
tive and qualitative analysis of the linguistic landscape. They investigated 
the largely Hispanic neighborhood of Pilsen in Chicago, Illinois, which 
Figure 4.1  Three shop signs: Chinese dominant, English dominant and Chinese only 
(Hong Kong)


----- Page 10 (native text) -----
﻿Research Methods: Quantitative and Qualitative Approaches  99
is undergoing a process of gentrification. The two research questions 
regarded the correlation between language representation and socioeco-
nomic changes and, second, the relationship between English and Span-
ish. In five areas of the neighborhood (three main commercial streets and 
two residential areas), they collected 425 signs, following the definition 
provided by Backhaus (2007) of a spatially identifiable frame and exclud-
ing top-down, government-placed signs. The signs were coded for three 
variables: the language used, frame (or context) and location. Based on 
Goffman’s frame analysis (see Chapter 3), they distinguished four frames: 
recent immigrant, familial, established and alternative, and hybrid frame. 
They performed statistical analysis through binomial logistic regressions 
to establish the significance of the location in predicting the frame and 
the language, and the significance of the frame in predicting the language 
used. In the article, the ideas and results are presented using three maps 
of the neighborhood, two figures with line drawings of the frames, four 
tables with absolute numbers and percentages and two tables with the 
outcomes of a regression analysis. Also included are two figures with 
graphs (distribution of languages and frames) and seven figures with one 
or two photographs of signs to give examples of different frames. The 
authors concluded that ‘gentrification is much more than socioeconomic 
change or even linguistic change: its impact can also be found in the vary-
ing ideologies of representation’ (Lyons & Rodrigues, 2017: 358).
One of the strongest proponents of a quantitative approach is Soukup 
(2016, 2020), who named her approach the variationist linguistic land-
scape study (VaLLS). The label is related to variationist sociolinguistics 
and its principles, which she sees as a useful framework for what Amos 
and Soukup (2020: 59) call ‘a relaunch of quantitative linguistic land-
scape analysis’. The main principle is the principle of accountability, 
which purports that data have to be collected in a count-all procedure 
in order to include all signs and all languages. Soukup (2020) contains 
a lengthy discussion on decisions surrounding survey area selection (see 
Section 4.5.2).
4.2.3  Advanced statistical techniques
Lyons’ (2020) aim was to take quantitative analysis a step further 
because she had observed that most quantitative linguistic landscape 
studies are descriptive, only reporting frequencies or comparisons of per-
centages. She shifted to inferential statistics and the application of math-
ematical models, such as generalized linear regression models (GLM) 
and generalized additive models (GAM). Lyons adopted four of the eight 
classifications (or ‘systems’) from the coding scheme by Amos (2016): 
language, communicative function, materiality and context frame. 
She added ‘locus’, the location in a space, by georeferencing the exact 
latitude and longitude of each sign. Another addition was the estimated 


----- Page 11 (native text) -----
100  A Panorama of Linguistic Landscape Studies﻿
dollar value of the business, based on the social media website Yelp (see 
Table 4.1). Her quantitative analyses included as many relevant variables 
as possible, depending on the research questions. She applied the GAM 
in a case study of the Mission district in San Francisco and she was able 
to show new levels of detail by looking at small and gradual changes 
in spatial developments in relation to other elements in the linguistic 
landscape. Lyons (2020) included some illuminating maps based on the 
georeferencing of her data in order to show the language distribution on 
individual signs in detail (see also Section 5.7 on maps). She wanted to 
demonstrate ‘the kinds of research questions and data that can be tackled 
using quantitative methods like GLMs and GAMs and the exciting and 
promising insights these techniques may provide’. For her, this was not 
only about statistical significance, but also about considering the social 
significance of the linguistic landscape data.
In the European research network on sustainability and diversity, we 
applied inferential statistics and linear regression models through our 
interdisciplinary collaboration with economists, with some similarities to 
Lyons (2020). As has been mentioned, we explored the possibility of using 
econometric models to analyze linguistic landscapes when we looked 
into the use and non-use values of signs (Cenoz & Gorter, 2009; Nunes 
et  al., 2008; Onofri et  al., 2010). We applied the contingent valuation 
method to an allocation scenario in which people were asked to answer 
standardized questionnaires about the linguistic landscape during street 
interviews. One research question concerned ‘preference structures’ (i.e. 
‘What languages do the interviewees prefer?’) and another question was 
about ‘priorities’ (i.e. ‘How much is it worth to them?’). The results of 
this study were reported in Aiestaran et al. (2010) (Figure 4.2).
In their study of the linguistic landscape of the Marshall Islands, 
Buchstaller and Alvanides (2017) tried a methodology in which they 
combined the variationist sociolinguistic approach, VaLLS (Soukup, 
2016), with the geospatial visualization methods of density maps (see 
Section 5.7 on the use of maps). In Mājro/Majuro, the capital atoll of 
the Marshall Islands, along the main road and in secondary streets, they 
photographed a corpus of almost 2,500 signs. They present the results in 
various maps, tables, graphs and a number of photographs of signs. For 
the variationist part, they explored the interplay of factors conditioning 
code choices by means of two separate logistic regression analyses. First, 
exploring a model of the factors that influence the presence of the Mar-
shallese language and second, a model that tested the factors related to 
the signage that is in agreement with the new bilingual language policy. 
Similarly, Restrepo-Ramos (2020) applied a principal component analy-
sis (PCA) in his quantitative analysis of the linguistic landscape of the 
Caribbean Archipelago of San Andres (Colombia). In this way, he could 
reduce the data dimensions and then correlate authors of signs with the 


----- Page 12 (native text) -----
﻿Research Methods: Quantitative and Qualitative Approaches  101
different geographic zones of the islands and with language preferences. 
The outcomes clearly visualize a preference for bilingual signs, with 
Spanish as the most frequently displayed language and a small number 
of signs with Island Creole on them. He also included some sophisticated 
maps as visual representations of the languages in different geographic 
zones (see Chapter 6). The works mentioned represent case studies of the 
application of advanced statistical analysis techniques.
4.2.4  Smartphone apps for data collection
From the foregoing, it has become clear that quantitative studies are 
usually based on a substantial database in which photographs of signs are 
stored for later coding and analysis. This can vary from a few hundred 
to tens of thousands of items. Creating a large database of signs is made 
possible by using a smartphone app that is linked to a website. In this 
way, a large amount of photographs of signs can be stored after being 
collected by various researchers, students or basically anyone who wants 
to contribute as a form of citizen science. We can summarize the two 
most important apps: LinguaSnapp and Lingscape.
In October 2015, the Multilingual Manchester project at the Univer-
sity of Manchester launched the LinguaSnapp smartphone application 
for capturing and annotating images of signs (see https://www​.linguas​
napp​.manchester​.ac​.uk/). Its primary aim is to develop a multilingual 
landscape map. The app asks its users to take photographs of multi-
lingual signs which the user then codes for variables such as language, 
alphabet, translation, district, type, content, language purpose, visual 
Figure 4.2  Basque-Spanish sign in Donostia-San Sebastián


----- Page 13 (native text) -----
102  A Panorama of Linguistic Landscape Studies﻿
dominance, position, sector, message function, outlet, design, audience 
selection and arrangement of languages. The photos are georeferenced 
and uploaded to the website where different selections can be made 
among the variables. After clicking on a dot on the map, the image of the 
sign is shown as a pop-up; information about the variables per image is 
included and it is linked to Google Street View. The LinguaSnapp app 
is part of the broader project that aims to study urban multilingualism 
and develop awareness of linguistic diversity in the city-region (Gaiser & 
Matras, 2021).
Matras et al. (2018) presented an example of the application of the 
LinguaSnapp app. They examined Yiddish signage in the Higher Brough-
ton neighborhood of Salford in Manchester, which has a concentration 
of Orthodox Jewish residents. For this study, the researchers visited the 
same locations several times. They analyzed the data from the perspec-
tive of interaction pragmatics, where signs are seen as communicative 
acts that have affective, appellative, mobilizing, regulatory and prohibi-
tive functions.
Photos of signs from anywhere in the world can be uploaded, and 
LinguaSnapp has special projects in cities such as Jerusalem (https://www​
.linguasnappjlem​.manchester​.ac​.uk/), Melbourne (https://www​.linguas​
nappmel​.manchester​.ac​.uk/) and Saint Petersburg. A localized version 
was created in 2018 as part of a University of Hamburg project, which 
focuses on the multilingual landscapes of Hamburg, the second largest 
city in Germany. For the time being, the website (https://www​.linguas​
napp​.uni​-hamburg​.de/) and its publications are mainly available in 
­German (Androutsopoulos, 2021). In 2022, LinguaSnapp Eesti was added 
by the School of Humanities in Tallinn, Estonia (https://linguasnapp​.ee/).
In a short review of the app, Li (2022) mentions as advantages the tag-
ging of signs, adding GPS coordinates and analytic descriptors. Possible 
disadvantages are in the editorial system that may slow innovation and 
the manual review to remove unwanted elements.
Lingscape is the second major app for documenting linguistic land-
scapes. The app was developed at the University of Luxembourg and 
made available in the fall of 2016 (Purschke, 2017a, 2017b). On its website 
(https://lingscape​.uni​.lu/), the aim is stated as ‘to analyse the diversity and 
dynamics of public writing’. The Lingscape app and website are presented 
as a project of citizen science or participatory research, since it invites 
anyone to take part by photographing public signs through the app, anno-
tating the signs, uploading them and thus contributing to the online map 
and the central database. As of October 2022, the database contains some 
35,000 signs. The app is thus a type of crowdsourcing for data collection.
The Lingscape app contains an elaborated annotation system for 
every sign that comprises 14  categories (directedness, discourse, domi-
nance, dynamics, form, layering, material, mode, modification, script, 
status, supplement, temporality and translation). These categories largely 


----- Page 14 (native text) -----
﻿Research Methods: Quantitative and Qualitative Approaches  103
overlap with the variables mentioned in Table 4.1, but some labels are 
slightly different. For example, ‘directedness’ refers to the well-known dis-
tinction between top-down and bottom-up signs. Moreover, five different 
types of ‘layering’ are distinguished, such as crossing out a sign, comments 
later added to a sign or historic layers in the same sign. The website men-
tions various projects that have made use of the app, among others, by 
students in Vienna and in Windhoek, Namibia. This shows how the app 
can be particularly useful in an educational context (Purschke & Trusch, 
2021).
The LinguaSnapp and the Lingscape mobile apps are quite similar, 
although Purschke (2017a) presented a detailed comparison of their tech-
nical differences. One major difference is that Lingscape includes any 
sign that contains writing or lettering, whereas LinguaSnapp focuses on 
multilingual signage.
One critical reflection can be given about the use of these apps. Some 
linguistic landscape researchers might initially be hesitant about the use 
of such apps as part of linguistic landscape studies. Although their aim 
is to be a service for others, it is not immediately obvious how the data 
of these apps could be used by other linguistic landscape researchers or 
which specific research questions can be answered through the available 
online data, other than for a project designed beforehand with the app 
in mind. Such a purposeful use as a tool for data collection occurred 
with the LinguaSnapp Hamburg project. Another obvious application 
is using one of the apps in a course where students are taught to work 
with linguistic landscape materials, as it then becomes a relevant exercise. 
The two apps are good indicators of the adaptability of the field due to 
technological developments.
4.2.5  Critiques of a quantitative approach
Many authors are aware of the value of a quantitative approach, 
but there has been a tendency to reduce it to ‘counting languages on 
signs’ or even ‘merely counting signs’ (Blackwood, 2015). For example, 
Coupland and Garrett (2010) criticized a quantitative approach because 
it is not sensitive enough to historical processes and contexts, and it 
misses out on textual nuances. They argued that a quantitative approach 
‘tends to sacrifice local contextual detail for “big-picture” distributional 
trends’ (Coupland & Garrett, 2010: 13). For them, in contrast, a qualita-
tive approach can ask different questions and signage can be analyzed 
in terms of different meanings and value systems, and also in terms of 
the meanings people take from a linguistic landscape. This critique, of 
course, goes back to the general differences between quantitative and 
qualitative approaches that we mentioned in Section  4.1. The critique 
includes an argument that statistical analysis of a sample of signs gives 
more emphasis to frequencies of languages in public spaces than to the 


----- Page 15 (native text) -----
104  A Panorama of Linguistic Landscape Studies﻿
content of the signs. Supposedly, only limited information is drawn from 
the results and meaningful interpretations are lacking. In that sense, 
Shohamy (2019: 28) has a point when she argues that ‘the sole use of 
quantitative methods often masks the complexities of language diversity 
and is viewed as “necessary” but not “sufficient”’.
Blommaert (2013) strongly proposed a qualitative approach (see 
Section 4.3), but at the same time he acknowledged the importance of a 
quantitative approach. Thus, in his study he included some counting and 
he argued that ‘by introducing qualitative distinctions between signs (…) 
we can make the move from counting languages to understanding how 
they can inform us about social structure’ (Blommaert, 2013: 64). Some 
authors suppose that the field has taken a turn away from quantitative 
work and that qualitative studies have become predominant (although 
see Chapter 2 for our counterarguments). For such reasons, authors such 
as Amos (2016), Savela (2018), Soukup (2016, 2020) and Lyons (2020) 
want to ‘rehabilitate’ or ‘relaunch’ quantitative studies. Amos (2016) 
pointed to the advantages of comparability and a diachronic potential, 
and he concludes by proposing a mixed or hybrid approach of quantita-
tive and qualitative elements. Savela (2018: 42) mentioned the importance 
of the research design and argued that quantitative approaches can help 
the researcher better ‘find what is present and what is absent’. Lyons 
(2020) also offered some counterarguments to the critiques of a quantita-
tive approach. She claims that her categories of communicative function 
and context frame reflect the concern with meanings and contexts of 
signs in qualitative studies and also her category of materiality links to 
interest in multimodal aspects. Lyons (2020) argues further that quantita-
tive methods continue to offer significant insights, especially when infer-
ential statistics are used and on condition that they are carried out with 
caution and precision. In addition, she mentions, not unimportantly, that 
replication is made easier by a quantitative approach. Backhaus (2019: 
165) defends a quantitative approach by arguing: ‘it is my contention that 
[one] should not entirely discredit the element of counting that has moti-
vated and shaped much of the previous studies’. According to Backhaus, 
a mixture of quantitative and qualitative methodologies leads to the best 
results (see Section 4.4).
Overall, we can observe that the analysis of quantitative data is not 
usually limited to just ‘counting languages’, but includes a range of vari-
ables and is often supported by a qualitative analysis. In the next section, 
we discuss qualitative approaches and thereafter the combination of 
both.
4.3  Qualitative Approaches
In the introduction to this chapter, we said that qualitative studies 
focus more on the distinguishing characteristics of a small number of 


----- Page 16 (native text) -----
﻿Research Methods: Quantitative and Qualitative Approaches  105
signs in specific local contexts, or on authors and users of signs, includ-
ing attention to historical developments. Qualitative approaches are 
important for the field, for the design of research projects, the research 
questions asked, the data collection and the subsequent analysis.
In some early linguistic landscape studies, investigators chose a quali-
tative approach. For example, in his comparative study of the ‘words 
on the walls’ of the multilingual cities of Paris and Dakar, Calvet (1990) 
analyzed the differences between the two cities in terms of the social 
functions of languages. He observed how languages coexist in Paris, but 
do not mix, whereas in Dakar the interaction between languages is more 
obvious. In the study of the languages of Jerusalem, Spolsky and Cooper 
(1991) showed how a couple of signs can demonstrate a historical layer 
that uncovers changes the city has undergone (see Chapter 2 for details 
on the example). Lou (2007) is another early example of qualitative eth-
nographic fieldwork in her study of Chinatown in Washington, DC. She 
collected signs of the linguistic landscape, observed community meetings 
and held interviews with residents. In that way, she was able to uncover 
the nuances between the Chinese signage adopted by non-Chinese stores 
and those of Chinese stores. Likewise, Leeman and Modan (2010) carried 
out a qualitative study in the same Chinatown in Washington, DC, in 
which they attended to the specifics of the linguistic and spatial contexts 
and focused on the meaning of the languages on the signs they exam-
ined. Another qualitative case study can be found in Malinowski (2009), 
who obtained his insights from interviews with Korean shop owners. 
He reached a joint interpretation with them about their store’s signs, to 
figure out issues about the use of Korean, English or both. Taylor-Leech 
(2012) took a similar qualitative approach when analyzing language 
choice in the linguistic landscape of Dili in Timor-Leste. She examined 
signs that illustrated indexical, iconic and visual grammatical features 
in order to demonstrate the links between the linguistic landscape and 
the wider social, economic and political context. Similarly, Papen (2012) 
provides an example of a qualitative approach in her study of a trendy 
neighborhood in Berlin. First, she sampled signs of one block of six 
streets leading to a central square by taking detailed notes of all signs as 
well as numerous photos, although a complete inventory of every sign 
‘was too ambitious a goal’ (Papen, 2012: 62). This is, of course, a fairly 
common approach in many linguistic landscape studies. Second, she 
carried out 25  semi-structured interviews with sign producers, such as 
shop owners, activists and street artists, who enabled her to ‘identify and 
analyse some of the different voices present in the linguistic landscape’ 
(Papen, 2012: 77). The results do not include the quantitative data, but 
an analysis of a selection of individual signs intertwined with comments 
by its producers/owners. This qualitative analysis demonstrated that the 
linguistic landscape ‘is part of what makes the neighborhood fashionable 


----- Page 17 (native text) -----
106  A Panorama of Linguistic Landscape Studies﻿
and attractive’ (Papen, 2012: 75) (see also Section 9.4.1 on English in sec-
ond place and Section 12.3.2 on gentrification).
These studies show that by using a qualitative approach numerous 
interesting research questions can be asked and answered, including 
questions about authorship or agency: ‘Who puts up the signs, when and 
where?’. Other questions relate to the readership or audience of the signs: 
‘Who reads the signs, how are the signs perceived?’ and ‘What are read-
ers’ attitudes toward the languages on display?’. Simple answers to such 
research questions are often difficult to provide.
In terms of qualitative approaches, the ethnographic linguistic land-
scape approach (ELLA) stands out as one of the most relevant. A first 
outline was presented in Blommaert (2013), but the name was given in 
a further elaboration of ELLA in Blommaert and Maly (2016). Later, 
ELLA was extended to include online worlds and renamed ELLA 2.0 in 
Blommaert and Maly (2019). A short outline of this useful and important 
approach is given here. Central to Blommaert’s ethnographic approach 
are both the ideas on a material ethnography of Stroud and Mpendu-
kana (2009) and on geosemiotics by Scollon and Scollon (2003) (see 
Chapter 3). In combination with the concept of superdiversity (Vertovec, 
2007), Blommaert carried out a qualitative study of the linguistic land-
scape of the neighborhood of Berchem, in the city of Antwerp, where 
he had been observing signs over a period of 10  years. He looks into 
social change and complexity and provides a fascinating account of how 
multilingual signs can be read as telling the history of changes in his 
neighborhood. The multilingual signs are like chronicles documenting 
the intricate histories of the place and this complex system can be seen 
as a multiscalar order. At the scale of the neighborhood as a whole, it is 
cohesive and characterized by conviviality, but at other, lower levels in 
the relations between groups there are conflicts. Thus, the interpersonal 
level can include heated and unfriendly discussions about wages. The 
regimes of power and control are also distributed unequally over differ-
ent groups, the neighborhood is dynamic and things change all the time. 
For example, Blommaert compares three posters: the first is in Turkish, 
produced in a professional manner, while the other two are in Polish 
and Spanish and are more ‘homemade’ in manner. While the first sign 
indicates an established community of migrants, residing in the neigh-
borhood for a long time, the other two posters publicize groups of more 
recently arrived communities with modest resources. Blommaert’s (2013: 
16) work provides a strong case for linguistic landscape studies to become 
ethnographic, microscopic and detailed investigations, in order to ‘bring 
out its full descriptive and explanatory potential’.
The same qualitative ethnographic approach appears in a case study 
of public signage in the superdiverse neighborhood of Rabot in the city 
of Ghent. Blommaert and Maly (2016) emphasized a historically lay-
ered view of multilingualism and multiculturalism. Using ELLA, the 


----- Page 18 (native text) -----
﻿Research Methods: Quantitative and Qualitative Approaches  107
researchers are able to diagnose a neighborhood based on signage, and 
using data about population distributions and different historical layers 
in this complex, superdiverse neighborhood. The qualitative elements of 
the signage are used to find distinctions between older and newer groups, 
as well as the way in which relationships between groups are organized. 
These findings point to the ambitions and identity aspirations of different 
groups and are part of historical transformation processes (Figure 4.3).
In an extension of ELLA, Blommaert and Maly (2019) follow the ref-
erences to online information in websites and social media as displayed in 
many signs. This implies that signs are not only physically in a concrete 
place, but they are also connected to a translocal online sphere. As the 
authors argue, ‘We have moved from a sociolinguistics of offline areas 
and communities into a sociolinguistics of digital culture, and both are 
inextricably connected in a locally emplaced sign’ (Blommaert & Maly, 
2019: 6). Moving back and forth from offline to online is important for 
ELLA  2.0 to get a better view of the actors and connections between 
places. In the analytic work of Blommaert (and Maly), the processual and 
dynamic character of linguistic landscapes, as well as their complexity, 
is made evident.
Although not using ELLA, the study by Song (2018) is an interesting 
example of the combination of an online and offline analysis of linguistic 
landscapes. Her qualitative approach is, among others, based on how 
we introduced translanguaging as an approach to multilingual linguistic 
landscape studies (Gorter & Cenoz, 2015a; see Chapter 6). She looks into 
‘translingual practices’ through a case study of a photo studio in Shang-
hai. The offline data include photographs, interviews and documents on 
urban planning and the history of the neighborhood. The online data 
include the Weibo homepage and social media posts over a period of 
several months. Examples of the analysis include intertextual references 
in the bilingual English–Chinese logo, and the different historical layers 
of multilingual signage on the storefront (from 1929 to the present). The 
Figure 4.3  Rabot, the superdiverse neighborhood in Ghent


----- Page 19 (native text) -----
108  A Panorama of Linguistic Landscape Studies﻿
targeted consumers ‘need to be able to understand the translingual logic 
of the multilayered, trans-spatial semiotic chain across the online and 
offline linguistic landscapes’ (Song, 2018: 24).
Other examples of a qualitative approach can be found in many of the 
studies we discuss in other chapters, such as our own work on translan-
guaging (Gorter & Cenoz, 2015a; see Chapter 6), Rasinger (2018) or Van 
Mensel and Darquennes (2012) on minority languages (see Chapter 7), 
Sloboda (2009) or Shulist (2018) on language policy (see Chapter 8) or 
Jocuns (2019, 2021) or Choi et al. (2019) on English as a global language 
(see Chapter  9). Studies in the educational contexts have also taken a 
qualitative approach, for example, the account of an ethnography course 
by Li and Marshall (2018) (see Chapter 10). What most of those studies 
have in common is an approach in which the special and unique aspects 
of signs are foregrounded, usually in their specific historical and social 
context. Pandey (2017) pointedly critiqued the ‘acontextual’, ‘static’, 
‘stills-oriented’ and ‘receptor-centric’ approaches in linguistic landscape 
research, and calls for in-depth qualitative accounts that seek to uncover 
the back stories behind signs in order to uncover deeper meanings.
The results of qualitative studies are usually based on a relatively 
small set of non-random and selective empirical data, for example, a 
walk through the city (Kallen, 2010) or a few tourist visits (Sebba, 2010). 
The data can illuminate the relationship of individual signs with issues 
of multilingualism and with wider social, economic or political develop-
ments, but at the same time, qualitative studies make replication and 
generalization more difficult. Amos (2016) has criticized a qualitative 
approach because on its own it cannot provide either the diachronic or 
the comparative aspects of linguistic landscapes. In a similar vein, Lyons 
(2020: 31) points to ‘the fluidity of interpretation’ that researchers may 
have in evaluating the importance of signs in an ethnographic approach.
In a widely quoted article, Tracy (2010) asked the question: ‘What 
makes for good qualitative research?’. She emphasized a range of 
qualitative methods which she contrasted with those in the quantita-
tive community where criteria for good research are validity, reliability, 
generalizability and objectivity. She suggested the following eight criteria 
for high-quality qualitative research: (1) worthy topic, (2) rich rigor, (3) 
sincerity, (4) credibility, (5) resonance, (6) significant contribution, (7) 
ethics and (8) meaningful coherence. She further elaborated each of these 
criteria, for example, for the criterion ‘worthy topic’ the dimensions are 
that the study is relevant, timely, significant and interesting. Or, for the 
criterion ‘rich rigor’, a study has to use sufficient, abundant, appropriate 
and complex theoretical constructs, report the data and time in the field, 
the sample, the context and the processes of data collection and analysis. 
This list is not intended as a single standard of positivist criteria, but 
more as a set of markers that make it possible to evaluate the rather dif-
ferent traditions in qualitative research.


----- Page 20 (native text) -----
﻿Research Methods: Quantitative and Qualitative Approaches  109
It can be useful to look at specific cases taking Tracy’s criteria into 
consideration because some studies do not give sufficient details on how 
signs were selected, what their unit of analysis is or what the boundaries 
of the survey area are. It is not always made clear why a contribution is 
significant, if ethics are considered or if there is coherence with the stated 
goals or the link between the literature, the research focus and the results.
4.4  Mixed Methods: Combining Quantitative 
and Qualitative Research
As both Amos (2016) and Savela (2018) have explained, the aim of a 
quantitative approach is usually to generalize about what applies to all 
items and to discover patterns, thus giving a broad overview; therefore, 
this approach will fall short in the details and unique aspects. In contrast, 
in a qualitative approach, the special, the unexpected or even the exotic 
elements in a linguistic landscape are attractive and researchers try to go 
deep into the details of a limited number of examples in one specific local 
context. As we have tried to make clear in the foregoing, both approaches 
have advantages and disadvantages. For these reasons, various scholars, 
among others, Mitchell (2010), Comajoan Colomé and Long (2012), 
Blackwood and Tufi (2015), Soler-Carbonell (2016), Ben-Rafael and Ben-
Rafael (2015, 2019) and Reershemius (2020) combine research methods 
to report quantitative trends combined with a qualitative analysis of a 
limited number of detailed examples to illustrate the main points of their 
research. Below, we describe some details of how these researchers have 
applied more than one method in their studies.
A solid example is the study by Mitchell (2010), who started out from 
a newspaper report in which metaphors were used such as ‘invasion’ and 
‘flood’ which represented a ‘discourse of fear about Latino immigrants’ 
(Mitchell, 2010: 169). He successfully combined his detailed media dis-
course analysis with a quantitative investigation of the linguistic land-
scape of the neighborhood in question in Pittsburg, Pennsylvania. He 
also included observations of the spoken languages which he overheard 
in the street. Mitchell found that the linguistic landscape is monolingual 
because 96.5% are English-only signs and the ‘soundscape’ is also domi-
nated by English spoken by 80.7% of the people he overheard.
A similar approach, though applying different methods, was used 
in Barcelona by Comajoan Colomé and Long (2012) who analyzed the 
linguistic landscapes of three streets (we mention the outcomes in Chap-
ter 7). They studied the relative prominence of the languages in terms of 
quantitative and qualitative dominance. Variations in language usage are 
related to the context, that is, the demographic composition of the neigh-
borhoods. In a follow-up study, Comajoan Colomé (2013) combined 
research methods when he investigated 120 establishments in one central 
shopping street in Barcelona. He first held an interview with the owner 


----- Page 21 (native text) -----
110  A Panorama of Linguistic Landscape Studies﻿
or a staff member of each establishment, then he took 728 photographs 
of signs and, in a later step, he went back to situate the photographs in 
the totality of the visual configuration of each establishment. His interest 
was in the visual impact and relations between the main elements (e.g. 
the shop name), the secondary information (e.g. on the type of shop) and 
smaller elements (e.g. timetable). He contrasted the findings of his study 
with the perception of the amount of Catalan of those interviewed and 
he found that the two measurements were in agreement.
Blackwood and Tufi (2015) characterized their study in various cities 
along the Mediterranean coast in France and Italy as a mixed methods 
approach, even though the quantitative part was prominent. They posi-
tion their work in relation to three major linguistic landscape projects: 
the study of Jerusalem by Spolsky and Cooper (1991) because they simi-
larly want to contextualize all of their findings; the study of Tokyo by 
Backhaus (2007), as they also capture the multilingualism of the linguis-
tic landscapes with statistical data; and the work of Blommaert (2013) 
because they give special attention to the qualitative analyses of signs in 
terms of the people who place the signs, who read them, their functions 
and the materials. Blackwood and Tufi mention as their explicit aim the 
reconciliation of quantitative and qualitative perspectives in data collec-
tion and analysis (for some of the outcomes of their study, see Chapters 7 
and 9).
Another clear example of a mixed methods approach can be found 
in a study by Soler-Carbonell (2016). First, he presents a quantitative 
description of the distribution of languages on monolingual and mul-
tilingual signs (n  =  161) in the four ports of entry of tourists into the 
city of Tallinn, Estonia, plus in the most touristic street. In three tables, 
Soler-Carbonell shows that the five sites are highly multilingual, but dif-
fer according to intended audiences. Second, he presents a more in-depth 
qualitative analysis of a limited set of 11 examples of the most interesting 
signs in the different settings. In his conclusions, he argues that the quan-
titative distributions can be an index for the linguistic repertoires of the 
people who pass through the sites, but that he also found hybridity and 
fluidity in the signs, as well as a hierarchy of English, Russian and Finnish 
as the most important foreign languages in the linguistic landscape of the 
Estonian capital (​Figure 4.4).
Ben-Rafael and Ben-Rafael (2015, 2019) studied the downtowns and 
some specific neighborhoods in three and then, in their later monograph, 
eight world-cities. For each world-city, the authors provide extensive 
historical, demographic and socioeconomic background information. 
Through a quantitative method the data are compared, to which a 
qualitative analysis is added of, what is called, the singularity of a specific 
type of item, such as murals. They claim to ‘use a methodology typical 
of mainstream linguistic landscape studies’ (Ben-Rafael & Ben-Rafael, 
2019: 25), but in fact this is only partially so. Some of the choices are 


----- Page 22 (native text) -----
﻿Research Methods: Quantitative and Qualitative Approaches  111
uncommon and are not often found in other studies. It is more of an 
exception to exclude all top-down signs placed by government institu-
tions and, more importantly, to focus exclusively on the names of estab-
lishments and omit any other accompanying texts. Names are, of course, 
important, but only one part of linguistic landscapes and by focusing 
on names only, one probably leaves out more than half of all signs (see 
Chapter 11). A consequence of the choice is that the sample of each street 
is relatively small (about 100  items or less). In the downtown streets, 
a relatively important role is played by what they call big commercial 
names (BCNs; see Chapter  11 for a discussion). The results of all the 
streets they investigated are presented in the format of separate tables 
with percentages for each language (i.e. each name is allocated to one 
language, either as bilingual or as a BCN) and, as an illustration, each 
time two photographs of names on storefronts. In a final comparison of 
the downtowns, the residential areas and the ethno-cultural quarters, a 
summary is given of different configurations of languages (and BCNs).
Reershemius (2020) built the Krummhorn Corpus, a database of 
1,294 images of all visible signs, except road signs, which she collected in 
a sample of 19 villages in rural northern Germany where Low German 
is commonly spoken. She used similar research methods as the Metropo-
lenzeigen project (Ziegler et  al., 2018; see Chapter  6 for a summary). 
The results show that the public spaces of the villages have relatively few 
Figure 4.4  Sign in Ülemiste shopping mall near the airport (Tallinn)


----- Page 23 (native text) -----
112  A Panorama of Linguistic Landscape Studies﻿
signs, and most signs are commercial (60%), somewhat less infrastruc-
tural or regulatory (21%) and even less were related to private homes 
(15%). Commemorative, artistic or transgressive signs are exceptions. 
Reershemius presented the distributions in one graph and included no 
tables. She complemented the quantitative results by adding a more qual-
itative analysis. In this area, tourism is an important economic sector, 
where private renting of holiday accommodation occurs in all villages. 
Low German is sometimes used on signs in an emblematic way, which 
makes cultural heritage a selling point.
In our own work, we have applied both a predominantly quantitative 
method (Cenoz & Gorter, 2006) and a more qualitative analysis (Cenoz 
& Gorter, 2008). More recently, we have offered a comprehensive model 
called multilingual inequalities in public spaces (MIPS), which aims at 
an all-inclusive, holistic framework (Gorter, 2021; see Chapter 3 for an 
elaboration). This is an alternative overarching framework that aims to 
include both qualitative and quantitative approaches as methodological 
approaches or combine them. In that sense, we agree with Blackwood 
(2015: 39–40) who argued that the ideal way to work in linguistic land-
scape research is when quantitative and qualitative approaches feed into 
one another in a symbiotic approach, in order to provide a fuller, more 
comprehensive understanding of the phenomena under investigation. 
Amos (2016) reiterates this view in his analysis of Chinatown in Liver-
pool, and he tries to demonstrate the value of bringing both approaches 
together, so that the qualitative details of an ethnographic approach are 
combined with the statistical details of a quantitative approach. Even 
Soukup (2020), who wants to rehabilitate a quantitative approach, is of 
the opinion that a mixed methods design is necessary to understand the 
complexities of meaning-making processes.
Overall, we can observe that the debate in linguistic landscape studies 
about the application of a mixed method research design is still limited 
and much can be learned from other fields. In this context, triangulation 
is a term, or metaphor, that is often used to indicate the combination 
of more than one source of data collection, data analysis or also of dif-
ferent theoretical approaches. Its origins can be found in cartography, 
where it is used to determine the location and distance of a place from 
the two angles of a baseline, applied for the first time in 1533 by Gemma 
Frisius. The assumption of triangulation is that the outcomes, interpre-
tations or conclusions become more accurate, credible or trustworthy 
through some form of combining methods. As Tracy (2010: 943) argued, 
‘Multiple types of data, researcher viewpoints, theoretical frames, and 
methods of analysis allow different facets of problems to be explored, 
increases scope, deepens understanding, and encourages consistent 
(re)interpretation’. An alternative term is crystallization, where the idea 
is to replace the two-dimensional metaphor of a triangle with a three-
dimensional crystal. The goal is not so much to find one single truth, but 


----- Page 24 (native text) -----
﻿Research Methods: Quantitative and Qualitative Approaches  113
‘to open up a more complex, in-depth, but still thoroughly partial, under-
standing of the issue’ (Tracy, 2010: 844). Rose and Johnson (2020) have 
emphasized how triangulation can be used in the field of leisure studies 
to enhance validity and reliability and thus the overall trustworthiness 
of the research. Those authors propose to integrate trustworthiness as 
a component in all research studies. Östlund et al. (2011) discuss mixed 
methods and triangulation for the nursing and health sciences. They dis-
tinguish between three different outcomes from the analysis: convergent 
(when the findings lead to the same conclusion), complementary (when 
the results supplement each other) and divergent (when the results pro-
vide different or contradictory findings). These authors conclude that it 
is ‘particularly important that researchers clearly describe their use of the 
approach and the conclusions made to improve transparency and quality 
within mixed methods research’ (Östlund et al., 2011: 382). In a mixed 
methods study, the purpose of triangulation should be made clear so that 
it can be determined how the methods are related to one another, how 
the findings can be integrated and how they are related to the theoretical 
perspective(s) chosen.
Obviously, the arguments given above by Blackwood, Amos and Sou-
kup about mixed methods show that triangulation is considered a valu-
able strategy because it can potentially take advantage of the strengths 
of both quantitative and qualitative methods, but there is little linguistic 
landscape scholarship that operationalizes the actual process.
After this discussion of the upsides and downsides of quantitative, 
qualitative and mixed methods approaches, it is obvious that a choice 
among the many possibilities remains ‘a thorny debate at the heart of the 
field’ (Pavlenko, 2009: 252) with, on the one hand, arguments regarding 
generalization and replication pleading in favor of quantitative methods, 
while on the other hand, subjective details and contextualization that 
makes qualitative approaches more attractive. For us, it is clear that 
both types of approaches, quantitative and qualitative, are necessary and 
both are valuable in linguistic landscape studies, either on their own or 
combined.
4.5  Unresolved Issues: Unit of Analysis and Survey Area
Two issues that are important for linguistic landscape studies have 
been discussed by several authors; however, as Blackwood (2015) men-
tioned, they have not been resolved completely. First, there is the issue of 
the unit of analysis and, second, the sampling area, and we reflect on both 
issues in the following two sections.
4.5.1  Unit of analysis
The issue of the unit of analysis is more often discussed in the con-
text of quantitative studies, but of course, it can also be relevant for 


----- Page 25 (native text) -----
114  A Panorama of Linguistic Landscape Studies﻿
qualitative studies. The linguistic landscape refers to multiple forms of 
‘language’ as they are displayed in public spaces (see Chapter  1). An 
important issue then becomes, ‘What is the thing that researchers look 
at?’ or ‘What is it that makes up a sign?’. In other words, if one wants to 
investigate signs, ‘What constitutes the unit of analysis?’. In quantitative 
research, signs are classified and codified and most authors give at least a 
working definition of the unit of analysis. However, the unit of analysis 
can be hard to define. Decisions about the unit of analysis are important 
because they concern crucial methodological issues which imply selection 
processes and can allow for comparability (or not) between studies.
In his large-scale study of multilingualism in Tokyo, Backhaus (2007: 
66) defined the unit of analysis as ‘any piece of text within a spatially 
definable frame’. This definition has been followed by many researchers, 
and in an overview of the field Van Mensel et al. (2016: 439) even claimed, 
‘researchers have largely settled on Backhaus’ designation’. However, 
when defining one unit as ‘text within a (…) frame’ there can be puzzling 
complications. Savela (2018: 33–34) discusses several of those problems 
and he mentions three-dimensional language objects, for example the 
LOVE sculptures analyzed by Jaworski (2015c), or the problem of count-
ing with the same weight a small sticker and a huge billboard (see Huebner 
[2009] for some further considerations on the unit of analysis). Reersh-
emius (2020) tried to address this problem of size by including a variable 
about the size of each sign measured in square meters (similar to the 
Metropolenzeigen project; Cindark & Ziegler, 2016). Savela further men-
tions non-angular carriers such as an advertising column or graffiti that is 
commonly placed on top of other carriers or inside another frame, which 
can make it difficult to decide each individual sign or frame (Figure 4.5).
Figure 4.5  LOVE sign: illustrating problems mentioned in Savela (2018)


----- Page 26 (native text) -----
﻿Research Methods: Quantitative and Qualitative Approaches  115
In our early studies, we encountered the problem of repetition 
because a large number of the same language signs can be placed side 
by side or a shop may have its name or slogan repeated innumerous 
times on its storefront. Some shop windows have an endless number of 
products on display. Some items may be repeated once, other items a 
few times and others sometimes hundreds of times because repetition is 
rather common for advertisements and brand names. In counting each 
of those occurrences individually, just one or two establishments in the 
sample can skew the results in one direction. When confronted with this 
issue, we reflected on how to count signs and the decisions to make about 
the unit of analysis. Our intention was to count all visible signs, large 
and small, and in the end we decided to count a street sign or a separate 
poster as one unit, but also ‘the larger whole of the establishment as 
the unit of analysis’ (Cenoz & Gorter, 2006: 71). In the case of a shop 
or any business, all visible texts were taken together as one whole and 
each establishment became one unit of analysis. We were aware of tak-
ing some arbitrary decisions, but we reasoned that such texts are placed 
by the same owner and as such, they have to be considered a whole that 
belongs together. The important decision was to count a whole establish-
ment as one unit and not as a collection of possibly many different units. 
Our more holistic definition has been adopted by several linguistic land-
scape researchers, among those Bogatto and Hélot (2010: 279), Lipovsky 
(2019a: 265) and Vandenbroucke (2015: 6).
Soukup (2020) devised a ‘count-all procedure’ of spatially definable 
frames and took this procedure to its logical consequence by including 
the smallest details. For instance, she counted the text on top of a screw 
used to fix a trash can to a traffic pole. One could ask if that text is in any 
meaningful way part of the linguistic landscape? Except, perhaps, for the 
technician who fixes the screw and needs to know the right type. On the 
other hand, we find the approach taken by Ben-Rafael and Ben-Rafael 
(2015, 2019: 25) who defined their unit of analysis as ‘any linguistic 
combination of elements appearing together’, but then they decided to 
exclude any items placed by official institutions and, for practical rea-
sons, in their presentation of the results they considered only the name of 
commercial establishments and disregarded all surrounding text.
Obviously, there are advantages and disadvantages concerning each 
choice, and while it is important to clarify one’s criteria, it is almost 
impossible to avoid some arbitrary decisions.
BOX 4.1  MOVING SIGNS
An issue closely related to the unit of analysis is whether signs are fixed 
or not. Backhaus (2007: 67) only considered signs fixed on a carrier and 
we also included only fixed signs in our sample in our early work (Cenoz 
& Gorter, 2006). Some signs are fixed for many years and can provide 


----- Page 27 (native text) -----
116  A Panorama of Linguistic Landscape Studies﻿
a historical layer to the linguistic landscape, but most signs change over 
time and, in some cases, from one day to the next (e.g. special offers) 
or from one second to the next (e.g. on video screens). Obviously, the 
dynamic nature of the linguistic landscape can pose a challenge and 
already in 2006 the question was asked ‘Are texts on moving objects 
such as buses or cars to be included?’ (Gorter, 2006a: 3). Sebba (2010: 
59) answered this question affirmatively when he stated: ‘while fixed sig-
nage is undoubtedly of great interest… it needs to be seen and analysed 
as a subset… of all public texts’. He argued for the inclusion of mobile 
or ‘non-fixed’ signs, such as newspapers, bank notes and bus tickets. 
It seems that those objects can indeed have significance when they are 
part of the visible public space, but at the same time seem of little or 
no significance when they are in a wallet or a pocket. Sebba’s advice was 
followed, for example, by Dunlevy (2012: 4) and Moriarty (2014b: 468; 
2015: 203), who both decided to include non-stationary signs. Other 
studies have also included moving signs on buses, bicycles, T-shirts or 
discarded rubbish as part of linguistic landscapes (Figure 4.6). Examples 
can be found in Coupland (2012) who studied texts on T-shirts in Wales, 
Järlehed (2019) on T-shirts in Galicia and the Basque Country and 
Jaworski and Lou (2020) who looked into the ‘words we wear’ in Hong 
Kong, London and Shanghai. Pennycook (2019) analyzed the ‘bikes-
capes’ of shared bikes dispersed around the city of Sydney, and Kallen 
(2010) included trash as part of the linguistic landscape of Dublin. A 
special type of moving signs are tattoos that are fixed on the body, but 
obviously move through public spaces (Peck & Stroud, 2015).
The ever-changing texts included on digital screens of video displays, 
which today make up a substantial part of urban shopping streets, are 
still a little studied part of linguistic landscapes (Gorter, 2019a). The 
digital era poses some further challenges such as the ubiquitous pres-
ence of handheld mobile devices and the possibilities to superimpose 
digital images and texts through augmented reality (AR), a technique 
many people were first acquainted with through the popular Pokémon 
game available on mobile phones since 2016 (see Chapter 12).
In selecting the unit of analysis, one can also look at the linguistic land-
scape as a larger unit, a gestalt, as was already suggested by Ben-Rafael 
et al. (2006: 8). Such a wider and more holistic approach can be useful 
because a landscape can refer to ‘what can be seen from a single view-
point’ (see the discussion on landscape in Chapter  1). It can thus be 
worthwhile to approach the unit of analysis as ‘a landscape’, as what 
can be seen in one single view, an idea we applied to our ideas about the 
relationship between translanguaging and linguistic landscapes (Gorter 
& Cenoz, 2015a; see Chapter 6).


----- Page 28 (native text) -----
﻿Research Methods: Quantitative and Qualitative Approaches  117
The three conceptions of the unit of analysis – an identifiable frame, 
a whole establishment or a visible landscape – are somewhat comple-
mentary and all have been applied in quantitatively oriented studies. 
Researchers continue to struggle somewhat with the issue of the unit 
of analysis (e.g. Hepford, 2017; Neves, 2016), but the most important 
consideration should be the goals of each investigation and the related 
research questions.
4.5.2  Survey area or research site
A second unsettled issue is ‘where’ to study signs. Researchers usually 
go to a specific geographic area, which can include cyberspace (Ivkovic 
& Lotherington, 2009) or a combination of offline and online (see Sec-
tion  4.3). Key questions related to the survey area are ‘What are the 
boundaries of the relevant area?’ and ‘How do you choose?’. In other 
words, not only where you collect (photographs of) signs but also ‘which 
ones and how many?’. Linguistic landscape researchers often try to collect 
a representative cross-section of one or more geographic areas, but the 
choice of a survey area can be challenging. What may seem like a straight-
forward matter is often a difficult process of drawing a clear-cut sample 
from a well-defined population of signs. If representativity is a consider-
ation, then the sample should be representative of something: a street, a 
neighborhood, a community, a town or a city, a region or perhaps even 
a whole country; but a sample can also represent a social group, a genre 
or a special type of sign. Sometimes, a researcher is intrigued by the signs 
during a one-time visit to a place and another researcher may collect data 
in one place over a period of many years. Sometimes, a researcher collects 
a ‘convenience sample’ of a limited number of signs and another researcher 
may go to great lengths to explain the details of the procedures of a sample.
The four classic studies that we mentioned in Chapter 2 on the history 
of the field illustrate different ways to solve the problem of survey areas 
Figure 4.6  Moving signs on trolleybus (Budapest)


----- Page 29 (native text) -----
118  A Panorama of Linguistic Landscape Studies﻿
and sampling. As we made clear, Backhaus (2007: 65–66) undertook one 
of the largest quantitative studies of a linguistic landscape ever in Tokyo.
For his sample, Backhaus selected the 29 stations of the Yamanote 
train line connecting the major centers of this metropolis and for each 
station he selected a stretch of a street between two consecutive traf-
fic lights, of about 150 meters in length. In his final sample, Backhaus 
included only around 20% of the almost 12,000 signs that he had counted 
because he was not interested in the monolingual signs in Japanese only. 
His research goal was to analyze the bilingual and multilingual signs 
(Figure 4.7).
Following public transport axes as Backhaus did, is a solution to the 
survey area problem that other linguistic landscape researchers have also 
followed. In her early linguistic landscape study, Tulp (1978) went along 
the most prominent tram lines crossing Brussels to examine the distribu-
tion of Dutch and French. Another example is Lai (2013), who followed the 
Mass Transit Railway in Hong Kong to study the linguistic landscapes of 
four different neighborhoods. Likewise, Brown (2007) studied Belarusian 
and Russian signs in the metro stations of Minsk, the capital of Belorus-
sia, and De los Reyes (2014) looked into Filipino and English on the signs 
in two railway stations in Manila, the capital of the Philippines. Recently, 
Tang (2020) copied Backhaus’ (2007) sampling method in Singapore by 
going to 30 stations of the Circle Line of the Mass Rapid Transport sys-
tem. The sample included photographs of the signs inside each station as 
well as the part of the street between two traffic lights outside each station. 
What we learn from all these studies is that the transport axes can be a 
way to access a whole city and thus determine the survey area. Huebner 
(2006, 2009) investigated central and suburban parts of Bangkok. He took 
samples from 15 neighborhoods, including the public transportation sys-
tem of the Sky Train, although that is not a physical neighborhood per se. 
Figure 4.7  Train station exit in Tokyo


----- Page 30 (native text) -----
﻿Research Methods: Quantitative and Qualitative Approaches  119
According to Huebner, the data illustrate the range of linguistic diversity 
in a city of this size but are not meant to indicate the linguistic composition 
of the city as a whole. Therefore, he did not demarcate each of his areas 
precisely, but the whole city of Bangkok became his survey area.
For Ben-Rafael et al. (2006) it was important to select localities (cities 
and towns) that represented the ethno-cultural and national divisions in 
Israeli society; thus, the researchers sampled signs in four Jewish locali-
ties, three Israeli-Palestinian localities and one non-Israeli-Palestinian 
locality. Their second step was to sample those parts of the sites where 
major commercial activity takes place. They only sampled a limited 
number of all items in a specific site (30% of public and 70% of com-
mercial sites). From this example, we see that there was not one specific 
demarcated survey area, but that the totality of the sites was intended to 
represent the diversity of Israeli society.
Our own first study took place in one street (Cenoz & Gorter, 2003) 
following the example of Rosenbaum et al. (1977), who studied signs in 
one street in Jerusalem. In our second study, which became a ‘classic’, we 
took one main shopping street of about 600 meters in length in Donostia-
San Sebastián and a street of similar length in Leeuwarden-Ljouwert in 
Friesland (Cenoz & Gorter, 2006) (Figure 4.8).
The selection of one or more (shopping) streets as the survey area 
has become an obvious choice in several linguistic landscape studies. 
For example, Coluzzi (2009) followed this sampling method when he 
recorded the signs in two central streets of a similar length in Milan 
and Udine, two northern Italian cities. He deliberately excluded central 
shopping areas because he wanted to avoid the influence of the presence 
of tourists. Further, for his analysis, he only included multilingual signs 
or signs where the local language was present and the other signs were 
Figure 4.8  Two streets in Donostia-San Sebastián and Leeuwarden-Ljouwert


----- Page 31 (native text) -----
120  A Panorama of Linguistic Landscape Studies﻿
counted as monolingual Italian or English. Therefore, his sample was 
not aimed at giving an overall representative impression of the two cities, 
but aimed at specific signs in specific areas. Likewise, Moriarty (2014b) 
focused on tourist areas. In order to determine the survey area, she used 
information on the routes most frequently walked by tourists in the tour-
ist town of Dingle, Ireland. This gave her the information to decide on 
the streets to take pictures of the linguistic landscape.
In their huge quantitative study of cities along the Mediterranean 
coast in France and Italy, Blackwood and Tufi (2015) randomly selected 
a 50-meter stretch of one main street in 20 different sites and they photo-
graphed the signs in each area. However, after this experience Blackwood 
(2015: 41) remained convinced that the choice of survey area continues 
to be problematic. He argues that ‘it is challenging to the point of being 
unfeasible to survey an entire city or town’, although he hints at possible 
future technological changes that might make this possible. One techno-
logical advanced approach was applied by Hult (2014), who also took 
streets as survey areas. He selected the radial highways passing through 
different neighborhoods of San Antonio, Texas, and he captured the 
signs on video from a car travelling at about 65 mph (±105 km/h). Of 
course, this reminds us of Google Street View, an application that has 
potential for linguistic landscape research (see below for some further 
applications).
Streets were also of concern to Pietikäinen et al. (2011: 284), but 
in contrast to other researchers, they wanted to ‘rethink the “main 
street” starting point typical of much previous linguistic landscape 
research’. In small villages in the north of Norway, Sweden, Finland 
and Russia, they observed that the layout is rather different from cit-
ies. Thus, they selected not streets, but 20 sites that are central for lan-
guage activities. The case of Laitinen (2014) is rather more extreme, 
because his survey area ‘the street’ was actually a series of roads that 
he cycled for 630 kilometers from Helsinki to Oulu in Finland; there 
he observed the use of English on signs. What we can take away from 
these studies is that (parts of) streets as the survey area can be useful 
as demarcation points, but ‘a street’ can also have rather different 
meanings.
The most elaborate design for selecting a survey area in an urban 
context probably comes from Soukup (2016, 2020) who we already 
mentioned for her count-all procedure. She starts out from the prin-
ciples of variationist sociolinguistics, in which the distributional pat-
terns of variants of expression across different social contexts are 
studied. She proposed to select areas based on ‘hypothesis-driven strat-
ified sampling’ because she assumes that potential audiences have a 
direct influence on the language choice on signs. Soukup (2020) consid-
ers four variables to select her survey areas among 23 neighborhoods 


----- Page 32 (native text) -----
﻿Research Methods: Quantitative and Qualitative Approaches  121
(Bezirke or districts) in Vienna. Those variables are age, multilingual-
ism (using citizenship as a proxy), tourism (number of visitors) and 
commerce (based on a register of businesses). This first step resulted 
in the selection of six neighborhoods and, after that, one street repre-
sented a neighborhood. In each street, starting from the mid-point, a 
stretch of 100 meters in both directions was selected. The result of the 
count-all inventory of signs is a database of 17,109 linguistic landscape 
items (Soukup, 2020: 58–68). Based on this fine-grained corpus, she 
was able to calculate an average density of 3.5 items per meter for all 
streets as well as the differences between commercial and residential 
streets (5.8 versus 1.3 items per meter). However, in the final analysis 
only parts of streets are supposed to represent a whole city, even if 
selected based on strict criteria.
BOX 4.2  NEIGHBORHOODS
As we saw, individual streets can be the starting point for an investi-
gation, but in general, survey areas can be better thought of as larger 
research sites. In one of our follow-up studies of the linguistic landscape 
in Donostia-San Sebastián, we observed similarities and differences 
in the display of Basque in nine neighborhoods (Gorter et al., 2012). 
More recently, we proposed that the neighborhood is probably the most 
appropriate level of analysis of the linguistic landscape. The reason is 
that there ‘the individual signs combine, alternate and mix to shape lin-
guistic landscapes as a whole’ (Gorter & Cenoz, 2015a: 54). We argued 
that the neighborhood is a more suitable level of analysis, and thus sur-
vey area, than a single street or a whole city. The signage contributes to 
a sense of place, the configuration of the signs in a neighborhood as a 
whole gives it a certain identity and ‘the ambiance of a neighborhood 
can be experienced and seen as a unity, even if geographic, social or 
language borders are not clearly demarcated’ (Gorter & Cenoz, 2015a: 
69). Linguistic landscapes determine differences in appearance and lead 
to different experiences of a city as a whole and in particular in each of 
its neighborhoods. Huebner (2006: 32) already hinted at the importance 
of a neighborhood when he observed in Bangkok ‘separate and identifi-
able neighborhoods, each with its own linguistic culture’. In addition, 
Shohamy (2015: 165), who examined the linguistic landscape of two 
neighborhoods in the city of Tel Aviv-Jaffa, emphasized that ‘“neigh-
borhood identities” [are] making up a meaningful territorial space and 
special connection with its people’.
O’Connor and Zentz (2016) picked up on our idea of neighbor-
hood in their analysis of mobility through a linguistic landscape 
lens by comparing the contexts of Texas (United States) and Java 
(Indonesia). They used it to take ‘synchronic snapshots’ which are 


----- Page 33 (native text) -----
122  A Panorama of Linguistic Landscape Studies﻿
rooted in historical processes. Various other researchers have also 
used the neighborhood as their main level of analysis. Papen (2012) 
focused her linguistic landscape study of gentrification on the area 
in Berlin known as Helmholtzkiez, where kiez is a northern German 
word for neighborhood. She assumes that changes in political regimes, 
in economic conditions and in the social make-up of the residents 
are reflected in a neighborhood’s linguistic landscape. Blommaert 
(2013) based his ethnographic fieldwork on his own neighborhood in 
Antwerp. He builds a strong case for linguistic landscaping as a supe-
rior and accurate diagnostic tool of transformations in a neighbor-
hood as a survey area. Blommaert and Maly (2016) further elaborated 
their ethnographic study design in the Rabot neighborhood in Ghent. 
It is, by the way, one of the same immigrant neighborhoods where 
Collins and Slembrouck (2004) were already ‘reading the shop win-
dows’. By studying linguistic landscapes in this superdiverse neighbor-
hood as their survey area, Blommaert and Maly (2016) got to know 
more about the different communities living together. Gaiser and 
Matras (2020) have reflected extensively on the usefulness of the con-
cept of community in linguistic landscape studies and its relationship 
with neighborhoods as urban spaces. They do not consider the issue 
of survey area per se, but it is implied in the debate.
The level of neighborhood as survey area has also been applied by 
other authors. For example, using a geosemiotic approach, Kelleher and 
Milani (2015) analyzed the neighborhood of Bosman in Pretoria, South 
Africa, through the metaphor of the ‘surface’, the visible linguistic land-
scape, and the ‘underneath’, i.e. the histories and lived experiences that 
give meaning to the verbal and visual manifestations of the place. They 
conclude that ‘the linguistic landscape is a rich, varied and provocative 
aspect of what it means to live, work, arrive at or pass through a place’ 
(Kelleher & Milani, 2015: 139).
In our opinion, the definition of a neighborhood has to remain rather 
fluid and it can range from one or two streets to a large number, and a 
neighborhood in this sense can be rather different from the bureaucratic 
lines on a map marked by local government.
Other different survey areas, or research sites, have been chosen for 
linguistic landscape work, for example, shopping malls (Akindele, 2011; 
Trumper-Hecht, 2009), airports (Blackwood, 2019; Cunningham & 
King, 2021; Woo & Riget, 2022), markets (Choksi, 2015; Gorter et al., 
2021; Pennycook & Otsuji, 2015; Ramos Pellicia, 2021), museums (Kelly-
Holmes & Pietikäinen, 2016; Xiao & Lee, 2019), monuments (Hueb-
ner & Phoocharoensil, 2017; Shohamy & Waksman, 2009), hospitals 


----- Page 34 (native text) -----
﻿Research Methods: Quantitative and Qualitative Approaches  123
(Sumarlam et al., 2020a; Wroblewski, 2020) and restaurants (Abas, 2019; 
Xu & Wang, 2021). Unsurprisingly for academic researchers, universities 
and campuses (Adekunle et al., 2019; Debras, 2019; Jocuns, 2019, 2021; 
Milani, 2013a) and various other educational institutions are popular 
survey areas (see Chapter 10). The demarcation of the survey area is quite 
clear in most of those cases and researchers spell out the boundaries of 
their research site in greater or lesser details.
An approach that almost does not require delineating a clear survey 
area, although it is implied, is the method called Spot German which 
was applied in Marten and Saagpakk (2016, 2017). In this case, all 
attention goes into finding traces of or ‘spotting’ only one language (and 
culture), i.e. German, in an environment where this language is not com-
mon, e.g. the islands of Malta (Heimrath, 2017) and Cyprus (Marten, 
2017). This implies a detective-like approach where the smallest refer-
ence can count for evidence of the presence of a certain language (or 
culture) in a larger area.
BOX 4.3 CHINATOWNS AS NEIGHBORHOOD
Chinatowns are a special category of neighborhood that can be found 
in many large cities, among others, in Asia, Australia, Europe and 
North America. Those typical neighborhoods can usually be identified 
relatively easily because their signage stands out from other neighbor-
hoods. In Chapter  6, we discuss the outcomes of various studies on 
Chinatowns.
Chinatowns are an example of relatively clear survey areas, although 
some of their physical and linguistic boundaries can be fluid and not 
fixed. For example, Amos (2016) questioned the boundaries of the 
Chinatown in Liverpool. He contrasted the area officially designed by 
the local government with the perceptions and cognitive maps drawn 
by his respondents, and also with his quantitative data obtained from 
signs. Bilingual street signs are an important marker of Chinatown 
and Chinese identity, even though the respondents saw the Imperial 
Arch as even more important. The officially placed bilingual Chinese–
English street signs poorly demarcate the boundaries because in some 
streets those are the only signs with Chinese on them. In her study of 
Chinatown in Washington, DC, Lou (2016a) used a method of maps 
drawn by hand by residents, office workers and visitors to demonstrate 
how these linguistic, ethnic and economic groups perceive the neigh-
borhood differently, even when they live and interact in the same urban 
space. In her study of a Chinatown in Paris, Lipovsky (2019a) claims 
that a neighborhood is an ideal setting because it is a smaller unit with 
a unique identity and its own gestalt. This makes it possible to capture 


----- Page 35 (native text) -----
124  A Panorama of Linguistic Landscape Studies﻿
layers of societal multilingualism and reveal trends that have global, 
national and local relevance. This is also true for the linguistic land-
scapes of other neighborhoods, which is another reason why neighbor-
hoods are an adequate sample area (​Figure 4.9).
In selecting their survey area, researchers often select more than one area 
in order to draw a comparison. We already saw that Ben-Rafael et al. 
(2006) selected different, but comparable locations in Israel; we selected 
two comparable streets (Cenoz & Gorter, 2006) to compare two cities 
(or regions). Similarly, Coluzzi (2009) compared cities, and later the 
countries of Italy and Brunei (Coluzzi, 2012). Several other studies have 
also applied a comparative perspective, although at different levels of 
social organization. This perspective can be used to highlight the contrast 
of linguistic landscapes in different neighborhoods (e.g. Comajoan and 
Long [2012] in Barcelona), between two capital cities of different coun-
tries (e.g. Muth, 2012 who compares Chişinău to Vilnius) or between 
the city where a group of students lives and the campus of the university 
where they study (Shohamy & Abu Ghazaleh-Mahajneh, 2012); many 
other comparisons are also possible.
Figure 4.9  Chinatown arch (Vancouver)


----- Page 36 (native text) -----
﻿Research Methods: Quantitative and Qualitative Approaches  125
Not all linguistic landscape researchers make clear how they have 
chosen their survey area. However, it is advisable to report the choices 
and the decisions for the survey areas, whether it is a street, a shopping 
mall, an airport, a school, a neighborhood or another unit. Part of the 
problem can be solved by giving the exact location or by including a map 
in those cases where it is useful. Another solution is to use Google Street 
View and insert the GPS coordinates of longitude and latitude or to use 
a short URL. In our article on translanguaging and linguistic landscapes 
(Gorter & Cenoz, 2015a), we inserted the link http://goo​.gl​/maps​/Oppec 
to enable readers to go to the exact location that we are describing in 
front of the bookshop in Donostia-San Sebastián (in 2012). Google Street 
View, launched in 2007, is a tool that offers various ways to assist in 
conducting linguistic landscape studies (Figure 4.10).
As Puzey (2016: 398) pointed out: ‘Google Street View enables users to 
scout the linguistic landscape of distant or less accessible areas viewing pan-
oramic images along routes around the world’. Troyer (2016) included a 
nice application in his book review of Blackwood et al. (2016). The editors 
stated in their Preface that ‘the reader is invited to journey across Europe, 
North America, Asia and Africa’ (Blackwood et al., 2016: xxiii), and Troyer 
took the hint literally, visiting all research sites in the book via Street View. 
He further recommends that all future linguistic landscape work includes 
the GPS coordinates from Google Maps. Troyer and Szabó (2017: 68) 
repeat this piece of advice and add the importance of including the dates of 
data collection, because then ‘these tools can be used more effectively’. Of 
Figure 4.10  Our location in Google Street View (screenshot) http://goo​.gl​/maps​/
Oppec


----- Page 37 (native text) -----
126  A Panorama of Linguistic Landscape Studies﻿
course, using images from Google Street View is only a possibility in those 
places where it is available and it excludes, for example, parts of Germany 
where the recording of streets was stopped for privacy reasons.
Various researchers have successfully exploited the possibilities of 
Google Street View and we can give a few examples. We already men-
tioned that the LinguaSnapp app includes a link to Street View. Similarly, 
Martinez (2015) used photos from Google Street View as one of her four 
data sources in her study of the use of English on shop signs in Colombia. 
Likewise, in Bishkek, the capital of Kyrgyzstan, McDermott (2019) col-
lected her photographic data using a random procedure to sample points 
on Google maps. Notably, Jódar-Sánchez (2021) used Street View to 
observe the linguistic landscape in Barcelona, but he concluded that there 
was no advantage to Street View over physically taking the photos. It is 
possible to go back in time with Street View because Google documents 
the streets in major cities once a year and less populated areas about 
once every three years. This possibility to go to the signs of one street in 
the years 2009, 2013 and 2014 was reported by Maly (2016) in Ostend in 
Belgium as part of ethnographic linguistic landscape analysis (ELLA) of 
a superdiverse neighborhood. Likewise, in their study of restaurants in 
suburban Sydney, Xu and Wang (2021) utilized Street View archives to 
compare the signs from 2009 and 2019. In her study of the Mission district 
of San Francisco, Lyons (2020) first collected a sample of photographs of 
signs (n = 1,032) which she revisited over one year later through Google 
Street View to compare the data, observe whether a business had closed 
and to assign latitude and longitude coordinates to each sign. Kim (2017) 
uses a rather different approach in her class for pre-service English teach-
ers in Korea. She applied Google Street View in an introductory course 
to linguistic landscapes to familiarize her students with street signage on 
a virtual tour of New York City. In a follow-up, Kim and Chesnut (2020) 
combined the virtual tour with Google maps. The students were asked, 
among others, to identify certain categories of signs, for example, ‘phar-
macies in New York City’ which were then displayed on a map (Kim & 
Chesnut, 2020: 81). However, there are some limitations to Street View 
and our own master’s students noticed for instance that it is impossible 
to view the details of stickers glued to lamp posts or other pieces of urban 
furniture (see the assignment explained in Chapter 10).
4.6  Concluding Remarks
In this chapter, our emphasis has been on how the research methods 
have been applied, the research questions asked, the manner of reporting 
the results and some of the main conclusions. We have presented a selec-
tion of the ways in which quantitative, qualitative and mixed methods 
have been applied in various studies. Malinowski and Tufi (2020: 32) 
observe that ‘concerns over method have always, and continue to be, 
central to the field of LL’.


----- Page 38 (native text) -----
﻿Research Methods: Quantitative and Qualitative Approaches  127
Different interpretations exist of the methodological direction the 
field seems to be taking. As we mentioned in Chapter 2, among others, 
Moriarty (2014a) and Zabrodskaja and Milani (2014) have suggested that 
the field has taken a ‘qualitative turn’ because studies were supposed to 
have moved away from ‘documenting signs’. However, this overlooks 
the early qualitative work (e.g. Calvet, 1990; Spolsky & Cooper, 1991). It 
further seems to neglect qualitative aspects of earlier quantitative work, 
which usually dealt with more than distributional issues. At the same 
time, the suggestion of ‘turn’ ignores the continuous and never-ending 
stream of research publications predominantly based on quantitative 
methods. Just a few examples of studies that appeared before 2014, the 
year when Moriarty and Zabrodskaja and Milani published their claim, 
can suffice (among others: Blackwood, 2011; Coluzzi, 2012; Grbavac, 
2013; Kotze & Du Plessis, 2010; Lado, 2011; Macalister, 2010, 2012). 
Innumerous predominantly quantitative studies have continued to 
appear (e.g. Amos, 2016; Neves, 2016; Soukup, 2016; Zhang et al., 2020).
Quantitative, qualitative and mixed methods are permeating the field, 
which may seem to be competing, but approaches are complementary 
and all can give direction to a greater or lesser extent to future linguistic 
landscape research. Two recent proposals which we discussed above seem 
to express this contrast between quantitative and qualitative methods. On 
the one hand, there is the Variationist Linguistic Landscape Study (Soukup, 
2020), and on the other hand, ethnographic lin­guistic landscape approach 
(Blommaert & Maly, 2016). Both proposals differ fundamentally in how 
to carry out a linguistic landscape study. It is, however, not clear if either 
approach will be adopted more generally by others and become an impor-
tant tool in linguistic landscape studies. It is our firm belief that combining 
different methods is a productive way forward, by using, for example, 
photography, questionnaires or interviews, ethnographic observation and 
document analysis in one project.
In this chapter, we further discussed the contentious issues of the unit 
of analysis and the survey area. We evidently could not solve these issues 
or give a definitive answer and those issues will undoubtedly continue to 
be debated in future linguistic landscape publications. It is important that 
researchers are aware of such discussions and the limitations of different 
solutions. As a starting point, researchers should consider the observa-
tion made by Huebner (2016a: 5), who stated that ‘the most appropriate 
methodologies, however, are determined by the research questions asked 
and the themes pursued’.
The field of linguistic landscape studies is sometimes thought of 
as in the early stages of methodological development. This can, of 
course, never be a valid reason for researchers not to follow accepted 
methodological practices, unless a researcher wants to break through 
established rules on purpose. Following methodological norms includes 
an emphasis on a rigorous approach to research. An example of such a 


----- Page 39 (native text) -----
128  A Panorama of Linguistic Landscape Studies﻿
rigorous ethnographic approach is the study by Blommaert (2013) of his 
neighborhood in Antwerp. Transparent, controlled, rigorous, verifiable 
and replicable research seems desirable, not only in purely quantitative 
studies, but also as part of qualitative research (Tracy, 2010). It should 
be common practice that researchers provide sufficient details about their 
methodological procedures and make their results verifiable by others. In 
that way, they can also take the replicability of their study into account. 
Backhaus (2019: 165) has already warned that the ease of collecting lin-
guistic landscape data (by taking photographs of signs) leads to ‘a larger 
number of relatively “plain” papers on the topic’, as has happened in 
Japan and elsewhere. By following the advice in handbooks of research 
methods, and learning from the good practices of other researchers, the 
quality of quantitative, qualitative and mixed method studies can surely 
be further enhanced.
