

----- Page 1 (native) -----
The Circular Economy – A new sustainability paradigm? 
 
Geissdoerfer, Martin1,2†; Savaget, Paulo1; Bocken, Nancy M.P.1,2; Hultink, Erik Jan2 
 
1 Institute for Manufacturing, Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, 
Cambridge, CB3 0FS, United Kingdom, Tel. +44 (0) 1223 766141 
2 Industrial Design Engineering, Delft University of Technology, Landbergstraat 15, 2628 
CE Delft, The Netherlands, Tel. +31 (0) 15 278 45 21 
† Email: ml733@cam.ac.uk 
 
 
Journal of Cleaner Production (accepted version), 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.12.048  
 
Please cite as:  
Geissdoerfer, Martin, Paulo Savaget, Nancy M.P. Bocken, and Erik Jan Hultink. 2017. 
“The Circular Economy – A New Sustainability Paradigm?” Journal of Cleaner 
Production 143: 757–768. doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.12.048. 
 
 
Abstract 
While the terms Circular Economy and sustainability are increasingly gaining 
traction with academia, industry, and policymakers, the similarities and 
differences between both concepts remain ambiguous. The relationship 
between the concepts is not made explicit in literature, which is blurring their 
conceptual contours and constrains the efficacy of using the approaches in 
research and practice. This research addresses this gap and aims to provide 
conceptual clarity by distinguishing the terms and synthesising the different 
types of relationships between them. We conducted an extensive literature 
review, employing bibliometric analysis and snowballing techniques to 
investigate the state of the art in the field and synthesise the similarities, 
differences and relationships between both terms. We identified eight different 
relationship types in the literature and illustrated the most evident similarities 
and differences between both concepts.  
Keywords: 
Circular Economy; Sustainability; Sustainable Development; Closed loop; 
Literature Review; Circular Business Model. 
 
1. 
Introduction 
 
There is a pressing need to transition to more sustainable sociotechnical 
systems (Meadows et al., 2004; WBCSD, 2010; Seiffert, 2005; Markard, 2012). 
Environmental problems, such as biodiversity loss, water, air, and soil pollution, 
resource depletion, and excessive land use are increasingly jeopardising the 
earth's life-support systems (Rockström et al., 2009; Jackson, 2009; Meadows 
et al., 2004; WWF, 2014). Societal expectations are not met due to issues such 
as high unemployment, poor working conditions, social vulnerability, the poverty

----- Page 2 (native) -----
trap, inter- and intragenerational equity, and widening inequalities (Banerjee 
and Duflo, 2011; Sen, 2001; Prahalad, 2004). Economic challenges, such as 
supply risk, problematic ownership structures, deregulated markets, and flawed 
incentive structures lead to increasingly frequent financial and economic 
instabilities for individual companies and entire economies (Sachs, 2015; 
Jackson, 2009).  
 
To address these and other sustainability issues, the concept of the Circular 
Economy – while not entirely new – has recently gained importance on the 
agendas of policymakers (Brennan et al., 2015). This becomes evident, for 
instance, in the comprehensive European Circular Economy package 
(European Commission, 2015) and the Chinese Circular Economy Promotion 
Law (Lieder and Rashid, 2016). The Circular Economy has also become an 
important field of academic research with a steep increase in the number of 
articles and journals covering this topic during the last decade. Companies are 
also increasingly aware of the opportunities promised by the Circular Economy 
and have started to realise its value potential for themselves and their 
stakeholders (EMF, 2013 b). 
 
Despite the concept's importance for academia, policymakers, and companies, 
the conceptual relationship between the Circular Economy and sustainability is 
not clear. This has potential detrimental implications for the advancement of 
sustainability science and the diffusion of practices based on these concepts. 
Therefore, this research aims to contribute to conceptual clarity by investigating 
the similarities, differences, and relationships between both concepts in theory. 
 
The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 covers a brief literature review that 
is introducing sustainability and the Circular Economy by presenting their 
origins, synthesising their conceptual definition, and illustrating their relevance 
for research and practice. The subsequent section describes the research 
design by presenting the research questions and the methods employed, 
including the implemented snowballing and the outcomes of a bibliometric 
research that helped to determine the sample of articles that would initially be 
investigated. Section 4 presents the results of the research, first illustrating the 
identified relationships between sustainability and the Circular Economy, before 
similarities and differences are contrasted. This is followed by a discussion of 
our findings. The paper concludes with final remarks on the contributions of this 
research, its limitations, and interesting fields for further research.  
 
2. 
Background 
 
This section provides a short introduction to the two main concepts addressed 
in this research, sustainability and the Circular Economy. Starting with the 
former and concluding with the latter, this chapter briefly introduces the 
historical origins of the concepts, compares and synthesises the selected 
definitions, and discusses the notions' relevance. 
2.1 Sustainability

----- Page 3 (native) -----
Sustainability concerns are increasingly incorporated into both the agendas of 
policymakers and the strategies of companies. The term sustainability itself 
originates in the French verb soutenir, “to hold up or support” (Brown et al., 
1987) and its modern conception has its origins in forestry. It is based on the 
silvicultural principle that the amount of wood harvested should not exceed the 
volume that grows again. This conceptualisation was written down already in 
the early 18th century in “Sylvicultura oeconomica” (von Carlowitz, 1713), and 
there seem to be even older sources that follow the underlying principles in face 
of shortages in wood supply and the husbandry of cooperative systems 
(Mantel,1990). Later, it was transferred to the context of ecology, as a principle 
of respecting the ability of nature to regenerate itself (Duden, 2015), from where 
the modern definition of being “able to be maintained at a certain rate or level” 
(Dictionary, 2010) developed. 
 
Johnston et al. (2007) estimated that there are around 300 definitions of 
sustainability. To cite but a few, sustainability can be defined as a situation in 
which human activity is conducted in a way that conserves the functions of the 
earth’s ecosystems (ISO 15392, 2008), a transformation of human lifestyle that 
optimises the likelihood that living conditions will continuously support security, 
well-being, and health, particularly by maintaining the supply of non-replaceable 
goods and services (McMichael et al., 2003), or an indefinite perpetuation of all 
life forms (Ehrenfeld, 2005). 
 
The concept's uptake can be traced back to the increasing evidence on global-
scale environmental risks, such as ozone depletion, climate change, biodiversity 
loss or the alteration of the nitrogen cycle. These risks have been systematically 
investigated since the 1960s, raising questions about whether present 
prosperity trends can be maintained in the future (Clark and Crutzen, 2005; 
Rockström et al., 2009) and, consequently, revealing many sources of tensions. 
This includes, for example, the limited store of resources, its uneven 
geographical distribution and appropriation (e.g. Georgescu-Roegen, 1977), 
and the implications of the assimilative capacities of ecosystems over economic 
growth (e.g. Daly and Townsend, 1993). 
 
These sources of tensions were condensed by the environmentalists Ehrlich 
and Commoner in their equation “I = P x A x T”. Environmental impact (I) is a 
function of three factors: population (P); affluence, which is a proxy to represent 
consumption (A); and technologies (T) (Chertow, 2001; Commoner, 1972; 
Holdren and Ehrlich, 1974). The emphasis given to population, consumption, 
and technologies, as well as the interrelation between these variables, has 
varied considerably among scholars. Some emphasise demographic control 
(e.g. Hardin, 1968), others would rather advocate for reduction in consumption 
levels (e.g. Woollard and Ostry, 2000), and an increasing number of scholars 
highlight the role of science, technology, and innovation in fuelling social 
inclusion and environmental resilience (e.g. Hart and Milstein, 2003; Kemp and 
Pearson, 2007; Cohen, 2006). 
 
The emergence of such tensions fuelled a series of international discussions on 
the complex and dynamically interconnected nature of the environment, society 
and the economy (Kates et al., 2005). These discussions challenged

----- Page 4 (native) -----
oversimplified development frameworks and their assumptions about economic 
growth. The Stockholm Conference in 1972 and the report Limits to Growth had 
wide repercussions due to their interpretation of “development” and 
“environment” as contradictory elements of an intrinsic trade-off (Sachs, 2015; 
Jackson, 2009). Nevertheless, the most prominent understanding of sustainable 
development arose with the Brundtland Report (1987), which came not as a 
reformulation of the terms of such trade-offs, but rather as an answer to its 
apparent conflicts (Nobre and Amazonas, 2002): “The concept of sustainable 
development does imply limits – not absolute limits but limitations imposed by 
the present state of technology and social organization on environmental 
resources and by the ability of the biosphere to absorb the effects of human 
activities” (Brundtland, 1987:8). 
 
The Brundtland Commission also provided the most commonly accepted 
definition of sustainability as “development that meets the needs of the present 
without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs” 
(Brundtland, 1987). Despite being initially driven by environmental concerns, 
the term sustainable development has since then accommodated a variety of 
expectations for desirable progress: “the concrete challenges of sustainable 
development are at least as heterogeneous and complex as the diversity of 
human societies and natural ecosystems around the world” (Kates et al., 
2005:8). The broad colloquial meaning of the verb “to sustain” refers to 
maintaining unspecified features over time, while “development” can comprise 
multiple interpretations, varying according to values, interests and disciplinary 
conventions. Nevertheless, all perceptions of sustainable development seem to 
invoke feelings of desirability and goodness (or avoidance and badness), 
nurturing reflexivity upon shared responsibilities and alternative directions of 
progress (Stirling, 2009). 
 
Particularly relevant to the widespread diffusion of the term and its most 
contemporary understandings is the so-called triple bottom line (Elkington, 
1997), the three pillars of sustainability: people, profit, and planet. After the 
World Summit in 2002, the triple bottom line has been referred to as the 
balanced integration of economic, environmental and social performance. The 
three spheres are systemically intertwined and continuously and cumulatively 
affect one another through mutual causality and positive feedbacks (Mckelvey, 
2002). In other words, they act as “as interdependent and mutually reinforcing 
pillars” (UN General Assembly, 2005) that can be adapted to a broad range of 
different contexts and time horizons (Wise, 2016). 
 
Based on this, and with regards to maintaining the holistic, adaptive, and 
flexible nature of sustainability, the term sustainability is framed in this article as 
the balanced and systemic integration of intra and intergenerational economic, 
social, and environmental performance. 
 
Instead of merely setting common goals, sustainability opens up the scope for 
multiple expectations about, for example, what should be developed and what 
is to be sustained, for how long, and for the benefit of whom (Acero and 
Savaget, 
2014). 
It 
has 
encouraged 
reflexivity 
on 
how 
to 
expand

----- Page 5 (native) -----
intragenerational prosperity while simultaneously preserving life-support 
systems needed to meet intergenerational needs.  
 
Despite divergence in the perceived strengths and weaknesses of the term and 
its associated responses, sustainability has been institutionalised into the 
agendas of policymakers and strategies of large organisations, becoming 
cumulatively more embedded into the rules that structure social interventions 
and shape behaviour (Hodgson, 2005). While incorporating a broad range of 
contradictions and being ambiguously instrumentalised by diverse interest 
groups, the concept proves to be a “political concept as persistent as are 
democracy, justice and liberty” (O’Riordan, 1993:48). 
 
2.2 Circular Economy 
 
The concept of the Circular Economy has been gaining momentum since the 
late 1970s (EMF, 2013b). Several authors, like Andersen (2007), Ghisellini et al. 
(2016), and Su et al. (2013) attribute the introduction of the concept to Pearce 
and Turner (1989). By describing how natural resources influence the economy 
by providing inputs for production and consumption as well as serving as a sink 
for outputs in the form of waste, they investigate the linear and open-ended 
characteristics of contemporary economic systems. This is influenced by 
Boulding's (1966) work, which describes the earth as a closed and circular 
system with limited assimilative capacity, and inferred from this that the 
economy and the environment should coexist in equilibrium. 
 
Stahel and Reday (1976) introduced certain features of the Circular Economy, 
with a focus on industrial economics. They conceptualised a loop economy to 
describe industrial strategies for waste prevention, regional job creation, 
resource efficiency, and dematerialisation of the industrial economy. Stahel 
(1982) also emphasised selling utilisation instead of ownership of goods as the 
most relevant sustainable business model for a loop economy, allowing 
industries to profit without externalising costs and risks associated with waste. 
 
The contemporary understanding of the Circular Economy and its practical 
applications to economic systems and industrial processes has evolved to 
incorporate different features and contributions from a variety of concepts that 
share the idea of closed loops. Some of the most relevant theoretical influences 
are cradle-to-cradle (McDonough and Braungart, 2002), laws of ecology 
(Commoner, 1971), looped and performance economy (Stahel, 2010), 
regenerative design (Lyle, 1994), industrial ecology (Graedel and Allenby, 
1995), biomimicry (Benyus, 2002), and the blue economy (Pauli, 2010). 
 
The most renowned definition has been framed by the Ellen MacArthur 
Foundation, introducing the Circular Economy as “an industrial economy that is 
restorative or regenerative by intention and design” (2013b: 14). Similarly, Geng 
and Doberstein (2008: 231), focusing on the Chinese implementation of the 
concept, describe the Circular Economy as the “realization of [a] closed loop 
material flow in the whole economic system”. Webster (2015: 16) adds that “a 
circular economy is one that is restorative by design, and which aims to keep 
products, components and materials at their highest utility and value, at all

----- Page 6 (native) -----
times”. Accordingly, Yuan et al. (2008: 5) state that “the core of [the Circular 
Economy] is the circular (closed) flow of materials and the use of raw materials 
and energy through multiple phases”. Bocken et al. (2016: 309) categorise the 
characteristics of the Circular Economy by defining it as “design and business 
model strategies [that are] slowing, closing, and narrowing resource loops”. 
 
Based on these different contributions, we define the Circular Economy as a 
regenerative system in which resource input and waste, emission, and energy 
leakage are minimised by slowing, closing, and narrowing material and energy 
loops. This can be achieved through long-lasting design, maintenance, repair, 
reuse, remanufacturing, refurbishing, and recycling. 
 
The circular economy has received increased attention in academic research 
with a range of reviews on the topic by Andersen (2007), Ghisellini et al. (2016), 
Lieder and Rashid (2016), and Su et al. (2013). Specific areas of attention are 
closed loop value and supply chains (Guide and Van Wassenhove, 2009; Wells 
and Seitz, 2005; Govindan et al., 2015; Stindt and Sahamie, 2014), circular 
business models (Bocken et al., 2016) and circular product design (Bakker et 
al., 2014).  
 
The work of the Ellen MacArthur Foundation is important in this context. The 
Foundation has published a range of publications on the topic, including a book 
by Webster (2015) and a series of reports (EMF, 2014, 2013a, 2013b). The 
Foundation also acts as a collaborative hub for businesses, policy makers, and 
academia. Various consultancies have now tapped into the opportunities of a 
Circular Economy (e.g. Lacey and Rutqvist, 2015 and McKinsey through the 
support of the Ellen MacArthur Foundation in EMF, 2013a, b, for example). 
 
The concept has also gained traction with policymakers, influencing 
governments and intergovernmental agencies at the local, regional, national, 
and international level. Germany was a pioneer in integrating the Circular 
Economy into national laws, as early as 1996, with the enactment of the 
“Closed Substance Cycle and Waste Management Act” (Su et al., 2013). This 
was followed by Japan’s 2002 “Basic Law for Establishing a Recycling-Based 
Society” (METI, 2004), and China’s 2009 “Circular Economy Promotion Law of 
the People's Republic of China” (Lieder and Rashid, 2016). Supranational 
bodies have also incorporated circular economy concerns – most notably the 
EU’s 2015 Circular Economy Strategy (European Commission, 2015). 
 
3. 
Research Design 
 
The previous sections summarised the history, definition, and relevance of 
sustainability and the Circular Economy. Both concepts are essentially global in 
their nature, sharing concerns with the current state of technology, industrial 
production, and consumption, which might not only jeopardise future 
generations, but also present sources of unexplored competitive advantage. 
They also stress the importance of better integrating environmental and social 
aspects with economic progress, and set system-level changes at their very 
core.

----- Page 7 (native) -----
Apart from these similarities, the concepts are notably used in different contexts 
and with different purposes. Sustainability, in particular in its early rooting of 
sustainable development (Brundtland, 1987), is more open-ended than the 
Circular Economy (Yuan et al., 2008) and used to justify a broader variety of 
institutional commitments and to signal a wider set of risks and opportunities. 
Although both concepts are being adopted by a growing number of academics 
and practitioners, the relationship between both notions has not been studied 
extensively, and the similarities and differences between them remain 
underexplored. Knowledge about their relationship, similarities, and differences 
is relevant for conceptual clarity, as well as to reveal the interests and goals 
behind the use of these terms by policymakers and companies. Therefore, this 
research can assist efforts aiming at integrating these concepts to better 
promote social inclusion, environmental resilience, and economic prosperity. 
 
To investigate the research gap, the following two research questions were 
formulated: 
 
RQ 1: What are the main conceptual similarities and differences between 
sustainability and the Circular Economy? 
 
RQ 2: How is the Circular Economy conceptually related to sustainability?  
 
To work towards answering these two research questions, we employed 
different methodological techniques.  
 
First, we conducted a bibliometric research, a well-established form of meta-
analytical research of literature (Kim and McMillan, 2008). This is a method that 
analyses published data, measuring texts and information such as authorship, 
affiliation, citations, and keywords (Bellis, 2009), unveiling articles and 
illustrating linkages between and among articles about a certain research topic 
(Fetscherin and Usunier, 2012). It can be used to describe, evaluate and 
monitor the state of a particular field over time, evaluating meta-analytically the 
development of a given research area to identify their key components and 
underlying theoretical frameworks (Fetscherin and Heinrich, 2015). A 
bibliometric review was thus conducted to identify the articles that describe both 
sustainability and the Circular Economy, while also revealing the most cited 
authors, keywords mentioned, and the journals in which they were published.  
 
Data were collected from Web of Science in January 2016 by searching with the 
strings “circular economy”, sustainability and "circular economy" AND 
sustainability, as shown in Table 1. The search was applied to topics and for 
publications in English that were published after 1950. These searches helped 
identifying the initial sample of papers that would be investigated in depth 
through an extensive literature review. Furthermore, as the Circular Economy is 
a recent research topic, we observed the importance of analysing its 
emergence and progress before analysing its relationship with literature on 
sustainability. Therefore, for the 295 records on the Circular Economy, we used 
the open source software NAILS to carry out the statistical and network analysis 
functions (Knutas et al., 2015) needed to uncover and quantitatively describe

----- Page 8 (native) -----
our dataset. It is important to mention that all abstracts resulting from the 
searches were scanned to filter out irrelevant publications. The most relevant 
results are demonstrated below, in Figures 1 to 4. 
 
Table 1: Number of articles and reviews resulting from search string 
Search term 
Number of articles and reviews found in 
Web of Science 
"circular economy" 
 
295 
sustainability 
 
"circular economy" AND 
sustainability 
59,464 
 
67 
 
Figure 1 shows a steep increase in the number of publications on the Circular 
Economy, reaching a more than tenfold growth in the last 10 years. 
Nevertheless, the absolute number of publications on the Circular Economy is 
small when compared to publications on sustainability (see Table 1). This 
finding suggests that research on the Circular Economy may be far from 
saturated, and there is great room for improvement in terms of conceptual 
development and cross-fertilisation from other research fields.   
 
 
Figure 1: Number of reviews and articles per year with the topic circular 
economy on Web-of-Science 
 
Figures 2 and 3 show, respectively, the most common locations of authors and 
the most cited publications. Only one country (China) has more than 100 
publications, presenting almost four times the number of the second in the 
ranking, England. The same applies to the most cited publications, as the first, 
Journal of Cleaner Production, has more than twice the number of publications 
than the second in the ranking. That indicates that a few players have taken the 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016

----- Page 9 (native) -----
lead in the conceptual development of this emerging topic, with China as the 
top-ranking country, which is not surprising given its Circular Economy 
Promotion Law (Lieder and Rashid, 2016). 
 
 
Figure 2: Most common geographical locations of authors of reviews and 
articles with the topic circular economy that have more than three publications 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90 100 110 120 130
China
UK
Netherlands
USA
Italy
Japan
Sweden
Germany
Belgium
Canada
Spain
Australia
Denmark
Finland
France
Greece
Asutria
Poland
India
Norway
Taiwan
South Korea
Russia
Serbia
Singapore

----- Page 10 (native) -----
Figure 3: Publications per journal of reviews and articles with the topic circular 
economy that have more than three publications 
 
Figure 4 presents the most popular keywords. Among them are subtopics of the 
Circular Economy, such as recycling, reuse, waste management, and eco-
efficiency. It also incorporates other concepts and schools of thought that are 
cross-fertilised with the Circular Economy, such as industrial symbiosis and 
sustainable development. Interestingly, China, in addition to being the country 
of origin of most of the authors, is also one of the most popular keywords, 
reflecting the efforts the country has been taking since it began regulatory 
implementation in 2009 (Lieder and Rashid, 2016), inspiring not only new 
practices and evidences, but also authors covering the geographical contexts 
and jurisdictional performances. 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Journal of Cleaner Production
Resources Conservation And Recycling
Sustainability
Journal Of Industrial Ecology
Waste Management
Bioresource Technology
Waste Management Research
Environmental Science Technology
Journal Of Material Cycles And Waste…
Renewable Sustainable Energy Reviews
Environmental Science And Pollution…
Science Of The Total Environment
Sustainability Science
Ecological Indicators
Energy
Environment International
International Journal Of Sustainable…
Physicochemical Problems Of Mineral…

----- Page 11 (native) -----
Figure 4: Number of occurrences of most important keywords of reviews and 
articles with the topic circular economy 
 
These steps offered a better understanding of the coverage of our research 
topic and contributed to identifying the sample of articles that should be 
investigated in depth through an extensive review of the literature. This review 
started with a sample of relevant papers published by highly cited journals and 
academics, which was then followed by a semi-structured snowballing approach 
(Wohlin, 2014), to capture both established and emerging conceptual trends 
(see Figure 5).

----- Page 12 (native) -----
The snowballing started with the definition of an initial sample of relevant 
papers, which contained 295 documents arising from the search on "Circular 
Economy". As demonstrated in our bibliometric results, we included publications 
since 1950 into our sample, although most publications are dated since 2006 
and the numbers of documents increased steeply in the last 4 years. 
The authors first scanned the titles and abstracts of these papers, then focusing 
on examining the full content of the 67 articles stemming from the search on 
"Circular Economy" AND "Sustainability". It is important to stress that we 
concentrated on peer-reviewed scientific journal articles in English to ensure the 
quality of our sample, but we subsequently selected a limited number of 
influential publications from non-profits and international organizations (such as 
the OECD and the Ellen MacArthur Foundation). The inclusion of non peer-
reviewed articles was appropriate since Circular Economy is a new area of 
research, and its relationship with Sustainability has not been extensively 
addressed by peer-reviewed articles.  
After reviewing our initial sample, we conducted a process of identifying and 
scanning articles referenced by the ones we reviewed, including the relevant 
ones into our sample. The inclusion/exclusion process depended on whether 
publications can provide new insights on the phenomena investigated, and this 
decision was reached after analysing their titles, contents and abstracts. In 
other words, relevant papers were defined as the ones capable of contributing 
with novel insight on similarities, differences or relationship types between the 
studied concepts. Furthermore, if a new paper was included in the sample, we 
would also analyse its references, in search for new inputs – and these 
iterations would occur until new papers were not contributing significantly to 
answer to our research questions.  
Figure 5: Literature Review Process

----- Page 13 (native) -----
Finally, all papers within our sample were thoroughly examined and contrasted, 
by using techniques for content analysis. This was used as a method of 
analysing written communication (Elo & Kyngäs, 2008), with the purpose of 
providing a condensed description by examining text to reveal patterns. This 
was a rather exploratory process, as the categories of similarities, differences 
and relationship types were not pre-defined, neither were the relationship types 
explicitly defined by the reviewed literature. Therefore, patterns emerged 
throughout the content analysis and were subsequently validated through the 
triangulation (Creswell, 1998) of the research outputs between the authors of 
this article, aiming at ensuring robustness and comprehensiveness of its 
conclusions.   
 
4. 
Results  
 
The following two subsections first summarise the identified relationship types 
between the Circular Economy and sustainability, and then, the main similarities 
and differences between both concepts in literature.  
 
4.1 Similarities and differences  
 
Table 2 provides an overview of the most relevant similarities between 
sustainability and the Circular Economy. Both notions emphasise intra- and 
intergenerational commitments motivated by environmental hazards and signal 
the importance of increasing agency and public deliberation upon the multiple 
and coexisting pathways for development. They also share an essentially global 
perspective, emphasising problems on a planetary scale that lead to shared 
responsibilities and to the relevance of coordination between multiple agents. 
 
Both concepts frequently employ multi- or interdisciplinary approaches to better 
integrate non-economic aspects into development, which often conclude that 
system design and innovations are the main drivers for reaching their ambitions. 
They also describe not only potential costs and risks, but also the importance of 
diversification in taking advantage of distinct opportunities for value creation. 
Both concepts view cooperation between stakeholders not only as desirable, 
but as imperative to reach their expectations. 
 
To guide and align stakeholder behaviour, both concepts rely heavily on 
regulation and increasingly on the deliberate design of incentive structures. 
Private business plays a central role among relevant stakeholders because it 
commands more capabilities and resources than any other actor. Since the 
implementation of more sustainable solutions seems to lag behind expectations 
and technological capabilities and advances in material and production 
technology are becoming ever more incremental, authors increasingly see 
business model innovation as the key pathway to the necessary socio-technical 
transitions (see also Geissdoerfer et al. 2016b).

----- Page 14 (native) -----
Table 2: Selected similarities between sustainability and the Circular Economy 
Similarities between sustainability and the Circular Economy 
 Intra and intergenerational commitments 
 More agency for the multiple and coexisting pathways of development 
 Global models 
 Integrating non-economic aspects into development 
 System change/design and innovation at the core 
 Multi-/interdisciplinary research field 
 Potential cost, risk, diversification, value co-creation opportunities 
 Cooperation of different stakeholders necessary 
 Regulation and incentives as core implementation tools 
 Central role of private business, due to resources and capabilities 
 Business model innovation as a key for industry transformation 
 Technological solutions are important but often pose implementation 
problems   
 
The literature review also reveals a range of differences between the two 
concepts. For example, the concepts have different origins, goals, motivations, 
system prioritisations, institutionalisations, beneficiaries, timeframes, and 
perceptions of responsibilities. 
 
The modern understanding of the term Circular Economy seems to have 
emerged more recently than that of sustainability. While the Circular Economy 
is traced back by EMF (2013b) to different schools of thought like cradle-to-
cradle and industrial ecology, the concept of sustainability is considerably older 
(Mantel, 1990) and was institutionalised by environmental movements and 
supranational bodies, especially after the publication of the Brundtland report in 
1987. 
 
Furthermore, there are different goals associated with the Circular Economy 
and sustainability in the literature. While it seems clear to most authors that the 
Circular Economy is aiming at a closed loop, eliminating all resource inputs and 
waste and emission leakages of the system, the goals of sustainability are 
open-ended and different authors address a considerable multitude of goals, 
which also shift depending on the considered agents and their interests. 
 
This is also reflected in the main motivation underlying each concept. The 
motives behind sustainability are based on past trajectories, are diffused and 
diverse, and often embrace reflexivity and adaptivity to different contexts. In 
contrast, the Circular Economy is mainly motivated by the observation that 
resources could be better used and waste and emissions reduced with circular 
rather than linear make-use-dispose systems. 
 
In fact, sustainability aims at benefiting the environment, the economy, and 
society at large (e.g. Elkington, 1997), while the main beneficiaries of the 
Circular Economy appear to be the economic actors that implement the system. 
The environment is also seen to benefit through less resource depletion and 
pollution, and society benefits from the environmental improvements and certain

----- Page 15 (native) -----
add-ons and assumptions, like more manual labour or fairer taxation (e.g. 
Webster, 2015). 
 
Different underlying motivations also lead to different systems being prioritised 
in the literature. The Circular Economy clearly seems to prioritise the economic 
systems with primary benefits for the environment, and only implicit gains for 
social aspects. Sustainability was originally conceptualised as holistically 
treating all three dimensions as equal and balanced, although portfolios of 
interventions should be prioritised according to contextual differences. For 
instance, it is conceptually plausible to design policies and industrial 
interventions with more environmental emphasis in rich countries like Sweden, 
and more social emphasis in developing countries like Zambia. 
 
The literature also assumes differences in the way both concepts became 
institutionalised. While sustainability provides a broader framing (e.g. 
Brundtland, 1987), which can be adapted to different contexts and aspirations, 
the Circular Economy emphasises economic and environmental benefits 
compared to a linear system (e.g. Rashid et al., 2013). 
 
There is also a difference in agency, influencing the understanding of the 
agents that should influence system changes. While agency is diffused in the 
case of sustainability (e.g. Bocken, 2015), as the priorities should be defined by 
all stakeholders, the Circular Economy has a clear emphasis on governments 
and companies (e.g. Webster, 2015). 
 
Furthermore, the timeframes for the required changes differ for both concepts. 
The temporal dimension for sustainability is open-ended, as goals can be 
constantly adapted or reframed over time. In contrast, there are theoretical 
limits to optimisation and practical ones to implementation that could set the 
thresholds for the successful conclusion of the implementation of a Circular 
Economy within a geographical unit (EMF, 2013b). 
 
Finally, the perception of responsibilities is also clearly distinct between both 
concepts. In the sustainability debate, responsibilities are shared, but not clearly 
defined, while the literature considers that the responsibility for the transition to 
a circular system lies primarily with private business, regulators, and 
policymakers. Moreover, the commitments, goals, and interests behind the use 
of the terms differ greatly. The focus seems to be on interest alignment between 
stakeholders for sustainability, whereas the Circular Economy prioritises 
financial advantages for companies, and less resource consumption and 
pollution for the environment. 
 
Table 3 summarises the identified differences between the concepts that are 
discussed in this paper.

----- Page 16 (native) -----
Table 3: Selected differences between sustainability and the Circular Economy 
 
Sustainability 
Circular Economy 
Origins of the 
term 
Environmental movements, NGOs, 
non-profit and intergovernmental 
agencies, principles in silviculture and 
cooperative systems  
Different schools of thought like 
cradle-to-cradle, regulatory 
implementation by governments, 
lobbying by NGOs like the EMF, 
inclusion in political agendas, e.g. 
European Horizon 2020 
 
Goals 
Open-ended, multitude of goals 
depending on the considered agent 
and her interests 
 
Closed loop, ideally eliminating all 
resource input into and leakage out of 
the system 
Main motivation 
Diffused and diverse  reflexivity and 
adaptive --> past trajectories 
Better use of resources, waste, 
leakage (from linear to circular) 
 
What system is 
prioritised? 
 
Triple bottom line (horizontal) 
The economic system (hierarchical) 
To whose 
benefit? 
The environment, the economy, and 
society at large. 
 
Economic actors are at the core, 
benefitting the economy and the 
environment. Society benefits from 
environmental 
improvements 
and 
certain add-ons and assumptions, like 
more manual labour or fairer taxation 
 
How did they 
institutionalise 
(wide diffusion)? 
Providing vague framing that can be 
adapted to different contexts and 
aspirations. 
 
Emphasising economic and 
environmental benefits 
Agency (Who 
influences? Who 
should 
influence?) 
Diffused (priorities should be defined 
by all stakeholders) 
 
Governments, companies, NGOs 
Timeframe of 
changes 
Open-ended, sustain current status 
“indefinitely” 
 
 
Theoretical limits to optimisation and 
practical ones to implementation 
could set input and leakage 
thresholds for the successful 
conclusion of the implementation of a 
Circular Economy 
 
Perceptions of 
responsibilities 
 
Responsibilities are shared, but not 
clearly defined 
 
Private business and 
regulators/policymakers 
Commitments, 
goals, and 
interests behind 
the use of the 
term 
Interest alignment between 
stakeholders, e.g. less waste is good 
for the environment, organisational 
profits, and consumer prices 
Economic/financial advantages for 
companies, and less resource 
consumption and pollution for the 
environment

----- Page 17 (native) -----
4.2 Relationship types  
 
Rashid et al. (2013) describe circularity in business models and supply chains 
as a precondition for sustainable manufacturing, which in turn is necessary for 
the improved economic and environmental performance of industrialised and 
developing countries. Similarly, Läpple (2007) describes a circular economy as 
an important element of sustainable development.  
 
A much stronger conditional relationship is assumed by the Ellen MacArthur 
Foundation (2013b) and Webster (2015). Maybe even more pronounced, at 
least in the environmental dimension, are Bakker et al. (2014), who consider 
circularity as absolutely necessary for sustaining economic output. A similar 
approach is also held by the United Nations Environment Programme (2006), 
which presents the Circular Economy as a necessary condition for maintaining 
economic growth in a sustainable way, but here other pathways for establishing 
this condition are not excluded.  
 
A third type of conditional relation is identified by Nakajima (2000), who 
describes circularity and service-based systems as a necessary but not 
sufficient condition for a sustainable system. Other conditions, like a change of 
lifestyle, must accompany a closed loop system to pursue long-term 
sustainability.  
 
A similar view is held by the European Commission (2014), which presents 
circular economic systems as beneficial for different sustainability dimensions 
like resource productivity, job creation and GDP growth, but does not elaborate 
on whether this is a necessary or sufficient condition or how it relates to other 
concepts that could foster sustainability. 
 
Differently, Bocken et al. (2014) identified circularity as one archetype of 
sustainable business models among others. Circularity is seen as one of 
several options to foster the sustainability of the system. These options are all 
seen as beneficial in principle and can also be combined to add up gains or 
achieve synergies. Similarly, Evans et al. (2009) and Weissbrod and Bocken (in 
press) describe circular strategies as one option among others, like increasing 
efficiency or dematerialisation. This is a view that is also shared by other 
manufacturing scholars like Allwood et al. (2012), Garetti and Taisch (2012), 
and Seliger (2007), who do not explicitly group and highlight circular strategies, 
such as reuse and remanufacturing, among other manufacturing and societal 
changes that benefit sustainability, like energy efficiency or consumer 
sufficiency. 
 
The OECD (2009) holds a hierarchical view and considers closed loop 
manufacturing systems to be more sustainable than most other manufacturing 
concepts because they comprise more eco-innovation targets and mechanisms.

----- Page 18 (native) -----
The only exception in this prioritisation is the industrial ecology framework, 
which is seen as even more sustainable.  
 
Negative relationships between circularity and sustainability are also 
highlighted. Andersen (2007), for example, describes not only the potential 
benefits but also the costs of circular systems that must be balanced to avoid 
the creation of negative value. A similar view is held by Allwood (2014), who 
suggests a range of problems that the circular economy brings with it, such as 
the technical impossibility of a closed circle in combination with growing 
demand or problems with the energy required to recycle materials. This energy 
and its impact may be higher for many materials than the overall environmental 
effect of acquiring the material from conventional sources like mining. Thus, the 
circular economy might worsen the emission of greenhouse gasses and, as a 
result, accelerate global warming. Therefore, a more pragmatic approach is 
necessary, where material efficiency and other forms of reducing inputs should 
have higher priority than the circular economy. 
 
Similarly, Murray et al. (2015) argue that while circularity has a positive 
influence on certain aspects of sustainability, it does not integrate other 
dimensions, especially the social one. These missing dimensions could be 
added to the concept of the Circular Economy.  
 
Table 4 provides an overview of the different types of relationships between 
sustainability and the Circular Economy that were identified in the research. 
These categories aim at stressing the most evident differences identified within 
our sample. It is nonetheless important to stress that this table does not aim to 
be exhaustive, as each type of relationship could be further subcategorized and 
consequently be investigated in more depth.

----- Page 19 (native) -----
Table 4: Relationship types between the Circular Economy and sustainability 
General 
direction 
Type of 
relationship 
Short description 
Circularity/closed 
loop systems are 
seen as... 
Examples in 
literature 
Graphical 
representati
on 
Conditional 
 
Conditional 
relation 
 
one of the conditions 
for a sustainable 
system 
Läpple, 2007 
Rashid et al., 2013 
 
Strong 
conditional 
relation 
 
the main solution for 
a transformation to a 
sustainable system 
 
Bakker et al., 2014 
EMF, 2013b 
UNEP, 2006 
 
Necessary but 
not sufficient 
conditional 
relation 
 
a necessary but not 
sufficient condition 
for a sustainable 
system 
Nakajima, 2000 
 
Beneficial 
Beneficial 
relationship 
beneficial in terms of 
sustainability, 
without referring to 
condition-ality or 
alternative 
approaches 
 
European 
Commission, 2014 
 
Subset relation 
(structured and 
unstructured) 
one among several 
solutions for 
fostering a 
sustainable system 
Allwood et al., 2012 
Bocken et al., 2014 
Evans et al., 2009 
Garetti and Taisch, 
2012 
Seliger, 2007 
Weissbrod and 
Bocken, in press 
 
 
Degree relation 
 
yielding a degree of 
sustainability with 
other concepts 
being more and/or 
less sustainable 
 
OECD, 2009 
 
Trade-off  
 
Cost-
benefit/trade-
off relation 
 
having costs and 
benefits in regard to 
sustainability, which 
can also lead to 
negative outcomes 
 
Allwood, 2014 
Andersen, 2007 
 
 
Selective 
relation 
 
fostering certain 
aspects of 
sustainability but 
lacking others 
Murray et al., 2015

----- Page 20 (native) -----
5. 
Discussion 
 
Our research shows that most authors (e.g. Bakker et al., 2014; Bocken et al., 
2016; EMF, 2013b; Rashid et al., 2014) focus on the environmental 
performance improvements of the Circular Economy rather than taking a holistic 
view on all three dimensions of sustainability, although this is also true for a 
range of authors in the latter field (e.g. Muniz and Cruz, 2015; Shiva, 1992). 
While the environmental perspective taken by sustainability can vary from 
explicitly and implicitly holistic to the investigation of a specific set of issues, 
most authors conceptually simplify the Circular Economy to resource input, 
waste and emission output. Other issues like land use or biodiversity loss are 
only implicitly addressed by the latter authors (see e.g. Bakker et al., 2014; 
EMF, 2013b). 
  
This more limited focus comprises a narrow coverage of social wellbeing by 
most Circular Economy authors. If social aspects are mentioned, the reference 
is mostly to job creation, as there seems to be no clear understanding of the 
extent to which the circular economy could contribute to subjective well-being 
(Frey and Stutzer, 2001). Some authors, like Webster (2015) try to construct 
other elements of a social dimension of the Circular Economy by adding a more 
just and efficient tax system and changing lifestyles through the shared 
economy. However, the conceptual integration is unclear in the work of most 
authors, and the increasingly apparent negative effects of the shared economy, 
like the deterioration of secure employment that is subject to social insurance 
contributions and the elimination of affordable housing in cities and tourist 
destinations (Malhotra and Van Alstyne, 2014), in fact imply detrimental effects 
on social inclusion and wellbeing. 
  
The Circular Economy also refers mostly to individual economic benefits 
through input reduction, efficiency gains, and waste avoidance with relatively 
immediate results compared to sustainability (e.g. EMF, 2013b; Elkington, 
1997). Differently from sustainability, long-term viability seems to be excluded 
from most discussions (e.g. EMF, 2013b; Brundtland, 1987). Furthermore, the 
behaviour of organisational actors and consumers should be nudged with 
incentives in the Circular Economy, while many sustainability approaches 
favour behaviour change through engagement and education, although 
incentives also play an increasing role in the literature (e.g. Webster, 2015; 
Jackson, 2009).  
 
While some authors consider the interpretive flexibility of the sustainability 
paradigm as a strength, that allows its adaptation to different contexts and wide 
institutionalisation (e.g. Leach et al., 2007), others argue that it is too vague 
and, consequently, hinders operationalisation (e.g. Middleton and O’Keefe, 
1993). The concept of Circular Economy, on the other hand, is often seen as 
more narrowly framed by these authors, which would provide clearer directions 
for its implementation. This is sometimes accompanied by a – seemingly 
unrealistically promising – business case for the private sector (e.g. EMF, 
2013b).

----- Page 21 (native) -----
Also because many conceptualisations of the Circular Economy (e.g. Allwood et 
al., 2012; Bakker et al., 2014) appear to exclude large parts of the social 
dimension, emphasise economic benefits, and simplify the environmental 
perspective, the concept might be more attractive for policy makers and private 
business than competing approaches. This can be problematic for the transition 
to a more sustainable economic system because attention and resources are 
diverted from more comprehensive and holistic approaches.  
  
To address this issue, we consider the identified subset relation to be adequate. 
It not only enhances diversity and adapts to different contexts but also allows 
the combination of circular with complementary strategies, because it does not 
prescribe an intrinsic hierarchy between the Circular Economy and other 
sustainability strategies. An example for this are the sustainable business model 
archetypes of Bocken et al. (2014). Therefore, we would propose this, as well 
as other work exploring the multiple dimensions of sustainable business models 
(e.g., Boons et al., 2013; Geissdoerfer et al., 2016a) as a good base for future 
research and practice. In this way, environmentally focused approaches to CE, 
like the work by Allwood et al., (2012) and Bakker et al. (2014), can be 
complemented with concepts that take a more holistic stakeholder view – and 
especially social considerations – into account. 
 
6. 
Conclusions 
 
First, based on key literature, we define the Circular Economy as a regenerative 
system in which resource input and waste, emission, and energy leakage are 
minimised by slowing, closing, and narrowing material and energy loops. This 
can be achieved through long-lasting design, maintenance, repair, reuse, 
remanufacturing, refurbishing, and recycling. Second, we define sustainability 
as the balanced integration of economic performance, social inclusiveness, and 
environmental resilience, to the benefit of current and future generations. 
 
We found that the Circular Economy is an emerging topic that has attracted 
increasing research interest. While the roots of the topic are European, much of 
this recent surge started with Chinese authors after the implementation of 
regulatory controls in this country. Chinese and European scholars have in 
particular have taken up this topic and there is an exponential growth in 
publications. This could reflect the increased interest from companies and 
policymakers in these regions.  
 
To answer the first research question - What are the main conceptual 
similarities and differences between sustainability and the Circular Economy? - 
this paper summarises the main similarities and differences between 
sustainability and the circular economy. Despite often being used in similar 
contexts, the similarities and differences between these concepts have not 
been made explicit in the literature, therefore blurring their conceptual contours 
and constraining the efficacy of their use. We believe that by shedding light on 
their differences, this paper contributes not only to conceptual development, but 
also serves to better reveal the interests, motivations and practical implications 
of their use in the public and private sectors.

----- Page 22 (native) -----
Furthermore, the paper addressed the second research question - How is the 
Circular Economy conceptually related to sustainability? We found that the 
Circular Economy is viewed as a condition for sustainability, a beneficial 
relation, or a trade-off in literature. This can be broken down into eight different 
relationships. Based on the investigated literature, this paper argues that the 
subset relationship seems to be appropriate to maintain diversity while, 
concomitantly, shedding light on the wide range of complementary strategies 
that managers and policymakers can adopt. 
 
The most relevant limitations of this work derive from the methodologies 
employed for our literature review. Bibliometric analysis assumes that 
researchers publish their most important findings in journals and base their 
research on previously published articles (Fetscherin and Usunier, 2012). This 
paper used bibliometric tools for meta-analysis to cover the differences, 
similarities and interrelationship of the Circular Economy and sustainability by 
unravelling the evolution of these fields and the most relevant academic 
sources of research that would be initially sampled for literature review. 
However, contributions might arise from unpublished documents, as well as 
reports and other documents that are not published in academic journals. 
Moreover, bibliometric analysis was followed by semi-structured snowballing to 
capture 
emerging 
conceptual 
trends. 
The 
central 
limitation 
of 
this 
methodological step consists of the lack of randomised representativeness, 
resulting in selection bias. These limitations can be overcome by further 
research, using different methodological techniques to not only test the validity 
of these results, but also to clarify the contexts in which they might not be 
applicable.  
 
Finally, there is a wide range of opportunities for future research in this area, of 
which we believe two are particularly critical to the advancement of literature. 
We would first encourage research about how the investigated relationship is 
seen by a wider range of companies and by policy makers, which can then be 
contrasted with the results presented in this article. Moreover, the linkage 
between Circular Economy and emerging concepts such as the Performance 
Economy (Stahel, 2010), Sharing Economy, and new business forms such as 
benefit corporations could be investigated (Bocken et al., 2014). Importantly, 
the actual impacts of Circular Economy initiatives need to be analysed – how do 
these perform against the triple bottom line (Elkington, 1997) and contribute to 
‘strong sustainability’ and slower forms of consumption, i.e., closing as well as 
slowing resource loops (Bocken et al., 2016)? Lastly, it is critical to investigate 
the influence of a better understanding of the relationship between the Circular 
Economy and sustainability and their influences over the performance of supply 
chains, business models, and innovation systems. 
 
References 
Acero, L. & Savaget, P., 2014. Plural Understandings of Sociotechnical 
Progress Within the OECD. 12th Globelics International Conference, 19-31 
October 2014, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.  
Allwood, J.M., 2014. Squaring the Circular Economy: The Role of Recycling 
within a Hierarchy of Material Management Strategies, in: Worrell, E.,

----- Page 23 (native) -----
Reuter, M. (eds.), Handbook of Recycling: State-of-the-Art for Practitioners, 
Analysts, and Scientists. 445–477.  
Allwood, J.M., Cullen, J.M., Carruth, M.A., 2012. Sustainable materials: With 
both eyes open. UIT Cambridge Ltd, Cambridge. 
Andersen, M.S., 2007. An introductory note on the environmental economics of 
the circular economy. Sustain. Sci. 2, 133–140.  
Bakker, C.A., Hollander, M.C. den, Hinte, E. van, Zljlstra, Y., 2014. Products 
That Last - Product design for circular business models. TU Delft Library, 
Delft. 
Banerjee, A. & Duflo, E., 2011. Poor economics: A radical rethinking of the way 
to fight global poverty. 
Bellis, N. De., 2009. Bibliometrics and Citation Analysis. The Scarecrow Press, 
Lanham. 
Benyus, J.M., 2002. Biomimicry. Harper Perennial, New York. 
Bocken, N.M.P., de Pauw, I., Bakker, C., van der Grinten, B., 2016. Product 
design and business model strategies for a circular economy. J. Ind. Prod. 
Eng. 33, 308–320.  
Bocken, N.M.P., Rana, P., Short, S.W., 2015. Value mapping for sustainable 
business thinking. J. Ind. Prod. Eng. 32, 67–81. 
Bocken, N.M.P., Short, S.W., Rana, P., Evans, S., 2014. A literature and 
practice review to develop sustainable business model archetypes. J. 
Clean. Prod. 65, 42–56.  
Boons, F., Montalvo, C.,Quist, J. & Wagner, M., 2013. Sustainable innovation, 
business models and economic performance: an overview. J. Clean. Prod., 
45, 1-8. 
Brennan, G., Tennant, M. and Blomsma, F., 2015. Business and production 
solutions: Closing the Loop in Kopnina, H. and Shoreman-Ouimet, E. (Eds). 
Sustainability: Key Issues. EarthScan, Routledge, 219-239. 
Brundtland, G.H., 1987. Our common future: Report of the 1987 World 
Commission on Environment and Development. United Nations, Oslo. 
Chertow, M.R., 2001. The IPAT Equation and Its Variants: Changing Views of 
Technology and Environmental Impact. J. Ind. Ecol. 4, 13–29.  
Clark, W., Crutzen, P., 2005. Science for global sustainability: toward a new 
paradigm. KSG Working Paper. 120, 1–28.  
Cohen, M.J., 2006. Ecological modernization and its discontents: The American 
environmental movement’s resistance to an innovation-driven future. 
Futures 38, 528–547. 
Commoner, B., 1971. The closing circle: Nature, man, and technology. Random 
House, New York. 
Creswell, J.W., 1998. Qualitative Inquiry and Research Design Choosing 
Among Five Traditions. Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks. 
Daly, H.E. & Townsend, K.N.,1993. Valuing the earth: economics, ecology, 
ethics. MIT Press, Boston. 
Dictionary, O., 2010. Oxford Dictionary of English, 3rd ed. Oxford University 
Press, Oxford.  
Duden, 2015. Duden: Deutsches Universalwörterbuch, 8th ed. 
Bibliographisches Institut GmbH, Berlin. 
Ehrenfeld, J.R., 2010. The roots of sustainability. Sloan Manage. Rev. 46, 23–
25. 
Elkington, J., 1997. Cannibals with Forks: The triple bottom line of 21st century.

----- Page 24 (native) -----
Capstone, Oxford. 
Ellen MacArthur Foundation (EMF), 2013a. Towards the Circular Economy 
vol.2. Isle of Wight. 
Ellen MacArthur Foundation (EMF), 2013b. Towards the Circular Economy 
vol.1. Isle of Wight. 
Ellen MacArthur Foundation (EMF), 2014. Towards the Circular Economy vol.3. 
Isle of Wight. 
Elo, S. & Kyngäs, H., 2008. The qualitative content analysis process. J. Adv. 
Nurs. 62, 107–115.  
European Commission, 2014. Towards a Circular Economy: A Zero Waste 
Programme for Europe, Communication from the Commission to the 
European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social 
Committee and the Committee of the Regions. European Commission, 
Brussels. 
European Commission, 2015. Closing the loop - An EU action plan for the 
Circular Economy, Com(2015) 614 communication from the commission to 
the european parliament, the council, the european economic and social 
committee and the committee of the regions. European Commission, 
Brussels. 
Evans, S., Gregory, M., Ryan, C., Bergendahl, M., Tan, A., 2009. Towards a 
sustainable industrial system: With recommendations for education, 
research, industry and policy. 
Fetscherin, M., Heinrich, D., 2015. Consumer brand relationships research: A 
bibliometric citation meta-analysis. J. Bus. Res. 68, 380–390.  
Fetscherin, M., Usunier, J., 2012. Corporate branding: an interdisciplinary 
literature review. Eur. J. Mark. 46, 733–753.  
Frey, B.S., Stutzer, A., 2001. Happiness and Economics: How the Economy 
and Institutions Affect Human Well-Being. Princeton University Press, 
Princeton. 
Garetti, M., Taisch, M., 2012. Sustainable manufacturing: trends and research 
challenges. Prod. Plan. Control 23, 83–104.  
Geissdoerfer, M., Bocken, N.M.P., Hultink, E.J., 2016a. Design thinking to 
enhance the sustainable business modelling process. J. Clean. Prod. 135, 
1218–1232.  
Geissdoerfer, M., Savaget, P., Evans, S., 2016b. The Cambridge Business 
Model Innovation Process. 14th Global Conference on Sustainable 
Manufacturing, GCSM, 3-5 October 2016, Stellenbosch, South Africa 
Geng, Y., Doberstein, B., 2008. Developing the circular economy in China: 
Challenges and opportunities for achieving “leapfrog development.” Int. J. 
Sustain. Dev. World Ecol. 15, 231–239.  
Georgescu-Roegen, N., 1977. Inequality, Limits and Growth from a 
Bioeconomic Viewpoint. Rev. Soc. Econ. 35, 361–375.  
Ghisellini, P., Cialani, C., Ulgiati, S., 2016. A review on circular economy: the 
expected transition to a balanced interplay of environmental and economic 
systems. J. Clean. Prod. 114, 11–32.  
Govindan, K., Soleimani, H., Kannan, D., 2015. Reverse logistics and closed-
loop supply chain: A comprehensive review to explore the future. Eur. J. 
Oper. Res. 240, 603–626.  
Graedel, T.E., Allenby, B.R., 1995. Industrial ecology. Prentice Hall, Englewood 
Cliffs, N.J.

----- Page 25 (native) -----
Guide, V.D.R.J., Wassenhove, L.N. Van, 2009. Or Forum—The Evolution of 
Closed-Loop Supply Chain Research. Oper. Res. 57, 10–18.  
Hardin, G., 1968. The Tragedy of the Commons. Science, 162, 1243–1248. 
Hart, S.L., Milstein, M.B., 2003. Creating sustainable value. Acad. Manag. Exec. 
17, 56–67.  
Hodgson, G., 2005. Institutions and Economic Development: Constraining, 
Enabling and Reconstituting, in: G. Dymski & S. De Paula, eds. 
Reimagining Growth: Towards a Renewal of Development Theory. Zed 
Books, 88–95. 
Holdren, J. and P. Ehrlich. 1974. Human population and the global 
environment. Am. Sci. 62, 282–292. 
ISO 15392:2008. Sustainability in building construction. General principles. 
Geneva: International Organization for Standardization. 
Jackson, T. 2009. Prosperity without growth. Economics for a finite planet. 
Earthscan, London, New York. 
Johnston, P., Everard, M., Santillo, D., Robért, K., 2007. Reclaiming the 
definition of sustainability. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 14, 60–66. 
Kates, R.W., Parris, T.M., Leiserowitz, A.A., 2005. What Is Sustainable 
Development? Goals, Indicators, Values, and Practice. Environ. Sci. Policy 
47, 8–21. 
Kemp, R. & Pearson, P., 2007. Final report MEI project about measuring eco-
innovation. 
Kim, J., McMillan, S.J., 2008. Evaluation of Internet Advertising Research: A 
Bibliometric Analysis of Citations from Key Sources. J. Advert. 37, 99–112. 
Knutas, A., Hajikhani, A., Salminen, J., Ikonen, J., Porras, J., 2015. Cloud-
based bibliometric analysis service for systematic mapping studies. ACM 
Int. Conf. Proceeding Ser. 1008, 184–191.  
Lacey, P. and J. Rutqvist. 2015. Waste to Wealth. The Circular Economy 
Advantage. Palgrave MacMillan: New York. 
Läpple, F., 2007. Abfall- und kreislaufwirtschaftlicher Transformationsprozess in 
Deutschland und in China: Analyse, Vergleich, Übertragbarkeit. Universität 
Heidelberg, Heidelberg. 
Leach, M., Scoones, I., Stirling, A., 2007. Pathways to Sustainability: an 
overview of the STEPS Centre approach 19. 
Lieder, M., Rashid, A., 2016. Towards circular economy implementation: A 
comprehensive review in context of manufacturing industry. J. Clean. Prod. 
115, 36–51.  
Lyle, J.T., 1994. Regenerative design for sustainable development. John Wiley 
& Sons, New York; Chichester. 
Malhotra, A., Van Alstyne, M., 2014. The dark side of the sharing economy … 
and how to lighten it. Commun. ACM 57, 24–27.  
Mantel, K., 1990. Wald und Forst in der Geschichte. M. & H. Schaper, 
Hannover. 
Markard, J., Raven, R., Truffer, B., 2012. Sustainability transitions: An emerging 
field of research and its prospects. Res. Policy 41, 955–967.  
McDonough, W., Braungart, M., 2002. Cradle to cradle: Remaking the way we 
make things, 1st ed. North Point Press, New York. 
Mckelvey, B., 2002. Managing Coevolutionary Dynamics. 8th EGOS Colloq. 
McMichael, A.J., Butler, C.D., Folke, C., 2003. New visions for addressing 
sustainability. Science, 302, 1919-1920.

----- Page 26 (native) -----
Meadows, D. H.; Randers, J.; Meadows, D. L., 2004: The limits to growth. The 
30-year update. Routledge, London. 
METI, 2004. Handbook on Resource Recycling Legislation and 3R Initiatives. 
Tokyo: Japanese Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry. 
Middleton, N., & O’Keefe, P., 1993. Tears of the Crocodile: From Rio to Reality 
in the Developing World. Pluto Press 
Muniz, R., Cruz, M., 2015. Making Nature Valuable, Not Profitable: Are 
Payments for Ecosystem Services SuiT for Degrowth? Sustainability 7, 
10895–10921.  
Murray, A., Skene, K., Haynes, K., 2015. The Circular Economy: An 
Interdisciplinary Exploration of the Concept and Application in a Global 
Context. J. Bus. Ethics 1–12.  
Nakajima, N., 2000. A Vision of Industrial Ecology: State-of-the-Art Practices for 
a Circular and Service-Based Economy. Bull. Sci. Technol. Soc. 20, 54–69.  
Nobre, M., Amazonas, M. de C., 2002. Desenvolvimento sustentável : a 
institucionalização de um conceito. Ediçoes IBAMA, Brasília. 
O’Riordan, 1993. The Politics of Sustainability, in: Turner, K. (Ed.), Sustainable 
Environment Economics and Management: Principles and Practice. 
Belhaven Press, London, pp. 37–69. 
OECD, 2009. Sustainable Manufacturing and Eco-Innovation: Framework, 
Practices and Measurement. Organisation for Economic Cooperation and 
Development, Paris.  
Pauli, G.A., 2010. The blue economy: 10 years, 100 innovations, 100 million 
jobs. Paradigm Publications, Taos, NM. 
Prahalad, C.K., 2004. The Fortune at the Bottom of the Pyramid: Eradicating 
Poverty Through Profits, Wharton School Publishing.  
Rashid, A., Asif, F.M.A., Krajnik, P., Nicolescu, C.M., 2013. Resource 
Conservative Manufacturing: an essential change in business and 
technology paradigm for sustainable manufacturing. J. Clean. Prod. 57, 
166–177.  
Rockström, J., W. Steffen, K. Noone, Å. Persson, F. S. Chapin, III, E. Lambin, 
T. M. Lenton, M. Scheffer, C. Folke, H. Schellnhuber, B. Nykvist, C. A. De 
Wit, T. Hughes, S. van der Leeuw, H. Rodhe, S. Sörlin, P. K. Snyder, R. 
Costanza, U. Svedin, M. Falke,  and J.F., 2009. Planetary Boundaries: 
Exploring the safe operating space for humanity. Ecol. Soc. 14. 
Sachs, J., 2015. The Age of Sustainable Development., Columbia University 
Press.  
Seiffert, M. & Loch, C., 2005. Systemic thinking in environmental management: 
support for sustainable development. J. Clean. Prod, 13(12), 1197–1202. 
Seliger, G., 2007. Sustainability in manufacturing: Recovery of resources in 
product and material cycles. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg. 
Sen, A., 2001. Development as freedom, Oxford University Press. 
Shiva, V., 1992. Recovering the real meaning of sustainability, in: Cooper, D., 
Palmer, J.A., E. (ed.), The Environment in Question: Ethics and Global 
Issues. Routledge, London, 187–193. 
Stahel, W., Reday, G., 1976. The potential for substituting manpower for 
energy, Report to the Commission of the European Communities. 
Stahel,W., 1982. The product life factor, in: Orr, G.S. (ed.), An Inquiry into the 
Nature of Sustainable Societies. The Role of the Private Sector. Houston 
Area Research Centre, Houston, 72-105.

----- Page 27 (native) -----
Stahel, W.R., 2010. The performance economy, 2nd ed. Palgrave Macmillan, 
Basingstoke, New York. 
Stindt, D., Sahamie, R., 2014. Review of research on closed loop supply chain 
management in the process industry. Flex. Serv. Manuf. J. 26, 268–293.  
Stirling, A., 2009. Direction, Distribution and Diversity! Pluralising Progress in 
Innovation, Sustainability and Development. STEPS Work. Pap. 32 1–45. 
Su, B., Heshmati, A., Geng, Y., Yu, X., 2013. A review of the circular economy 
in China: moving from rhetoric to implementation. J. Clean. Prod. 42, 215–
227.  
UN General Assembly, 2005. Resolution adopted by the General Assembly. 
60/1. 2005 World Summit Outcome, New York. 
http://www.un.org/womenwatch/ods/A-RES-60-1-E.pdf. Accessed June 18, 
2014. 
UNEP, 2006. Circular Economy. An alternative model for economic 
development. United Nations Environment Programme, Paris. 
von Carlowitz, H.C., 1713. Sylvicultura Oeconomica: Hausswirthliche Nachricht 
und Naturmäßige Anweisung zur Wilden Baum-Zucht. Johann Friedrich 
Braun, Leipzig. 
Webster, K., 2015. The Circular Economy: A Wealth of Flows. Ellen MacArthur 
Foundation, Isle of Wight. 
Weissbrod, I. & Bocken, N.M.P., in press. Developing sustainable business 
experimentation capability – A case study. J. Clean. Prod.   
Wells, P. and Seitz, M., 2005. Business models and closed-loop supply chains: 
a typology. Supply Chain Manag.10, 249-251. 
Wise, N., 2016. Outlining triple bottom line contexts in urban tourism 
regeneration. Cities, 53, 30-34.  
Wohlin, C., 2014. Guidelines for snowballing in systematic literature studies and 
a replication in software engineering. EASE’14 Proc. 18th Int. Conf. Eval. 
Assess. Softw. Eng. 
Woollard, R.F., Ostry, A.S., 2000. Fatal consumption: rethinking sustainable 
development. UBC Press. 
World Business Council for Sustainable Development (WBCSD), 2010. Vision 
2050. The new agenda for business. Conches-Geneva. 
World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF), 2014. Living Planet Report 2014: Species 
and spaces, people and places Gland. 
Yuan, Z., Bi, J., Moriguichi, Y., 2008. The Circular Economy: A New 
Development Strategy in China. J. Ind. Ecol. 10, 4–8.