

----- Page 1 (native text) -----
Resource
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-021-01079-8
1Blavatnik School of Government, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. 2Brazilian School of Public and Business Administration, Getulio Vargas Foundation,  
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. 3, London, UK. ✉e-mail: Thomas.Hale@bsg.ox.ac.uk
T
he rapid spread of COVID-19 globally has been met with an 
extraordinary range of government responses. These mea-
sures include school closings, travel restrictions, bans on 
public gatherings, emergency investments in healthcare facilities, 
new forms of social welfare provision, contact tracing and other 
interventions to contain the spread of the virus, augment health 
systems and manage the economic consequences of these actions. 
The Oxford COVID-19 Government Response Tracker (OxCGRT) 
provides a systematic set of cross-national, longitudinal measures 
of government responses from 1 January 2020. The project tracks 
national and, for some countries, subnational governments’ poli-
cies and interventions across a standardized series of indicators. It 
further creates a suite of composite indices to measure the extent 
of these responses. By providing open-access, near-real-time data 
in an easily accessible, time-series format, the project offers a criti-
cal resource for policymakers and researchers to understand the 
effect of policies on disease spread, socioeconomic welfare and 
other outcomes of interest. Consequently, the data offer an objective 
grounding for debate as policymakers and publics deliberate over 
approaches to COVID-19.
While OxCGRT is continuously expanding, at present it includes 
19 policy indicators covering closure and containment, health and 
economic policies (Table 1). These data cover over 180 countries, as 
well as subnational jurisdictions of the United States, Brazil, United 
Kingdom and Canada, with subnational units of more countries 
being added over time (Extended Data Fig. 1). A team of more than 
400 volunteers around the world, affiliated with Oxford University 
and its partners, have been working to collect and code the data in 
real time. Members of this large and diverse team use their con-
textual knowledge and expertise in 88 languages to parse report-
ing and government announcements. Coder training, testing and 
weekly meetings that generate rules of thumb for edge-case policies 
ensure coding consistency, and every data point is reviewed by a 
second coder.
OxCGRT’s design emphasizes comparability, legibility and trans-
parency. The data are published in multiple time-series formats for 
ease of use by non-experts and researchers alike, with legacy data 
available for continuity as we add new indicators. Several features 
underpin our approach. First, observations for most indicators are 
reported on monotonic ordinal scales, with others coded on contin-
uous scales, allowing for quantitative analysis of the degree of gov-
ernment response. Second, the indicators are aggregated in different 
combinations into four composite indices (Table 2) that provide a 
snapshot of the number and degree of policies in place in a given 
area. Third, geographic scope is recorded for appropriate indica-
tors. Fourth, source notes and archived links to original sources are 
included to support detailed interpretation of specific policies.
OxCGRT has been used widely (see examples below) during the 
pandemic, revealing that the global coverage, granularity of policy 
detail and systematic structure of the data have been able to inform 
diverse literatures1. For instance, the data have been used by health 
policy experts and data scientists to calculate the levels of healthcare 
resources that are associated with different levels of transmission2, 
to estimate the impact of combinations of physical distancing mea-
sures on disease incidence3,4 and on the time-varying reproduction 
number (Rt)5. Environmental scientists have drawn on the data to 
examine whether COVID-19 response policies affect air pollution 
levels6,7. Political scientists have considered whether policies vary by 
regime type8,9, and assessed whether upcoming elections reduce the 
strength of responses10. Economists have used the data to explore 
how working from home has shifted countries’ sectoral structures11, 
to link stay-at-home policies to increasing food prices12, and to 
identify knock-on effects of large countries’ response policies on the 
gross domestic product growth of smaller trade partners13.
A global panel database of pandemic policies 
(Oxford COVID-19 Government Response 
Tracker)
Thomas Hale   1 ✉, Noam Angrist   1, Rafael Goldszmidt2, Beatriz Kira1, Anna Petherick   1, Toby Phillips1, 
Samuel Webster3, Emily Cameron-Blake   1, Laura Hallas1, Saptarshi Majumdar1 and Helen Tatlow   1
COVID-19 has prompted unprecedented government action around the world. We introduce the Oxford COVID-19 Government 
Response Tracker (OxCGRT), a dataset that addresses the need for continuously updated, readily usable and comparable infor-
mation on policy measures. From 1 January 2020, the data capture government policies related to closure and containment, 
health and economic policy for more than 180 countries, plus several countries’ subnational jurisdictions. Policy responses are 
recorded on ordinal or continuous scales for 19 policy areas, capturing variation in degree of response. We present two motivat-
ing applications of the data, highlighting patterns in the timing of policy adoption and subsequent policy easing and reimposi-
tion, and illustrating how the data can be combined with behavioural and epidemiological indicators. This database enables 
researchers and policymakers to explore the empirical effects of policy responses on the spread of COVID-19 cases and deaths, 
as well as on economic and social welfare.
Nature Human Behaviour | VOL 5 | April 2021 | 529–538 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
529


----- Page 2 (native text) -----
Resource
NaTuRE Human BEhaVIOuR
Many of those using the data have benefited from the specific 
features listed above. The ordinal indicator scales permit separate 
assessment of policy recommendations, as well as permissive and 
strict regulations14. While substantial attention has focused on 
the closure and containment measures captured in the stringency 
index, some studies have used all four15, or selected from among 
the containment and health index (CHI), the more holistic gov-
ernment response index (GRI)16 and the economic support index 
(ESI)17, which provides an overall measure of financial assistance 
to households. Moreover, the coding of policies’ geographic scope 
has enabled analysis of strictly national policies18, and comparison 
between national and localized approaches. These examples illus-
trate the value of OxCGRT data and related datasets19 in helping 
researchers—in addition to decision-makers and publics—to make 
sense of the effects of governments’ responses to COVID-19 across 
different populations and contexts, as well as what leads govern-
ments to adopt different policies.
In the following sections, we describe patterns of global COVID-
19 government responses with the OxCGRT data in order to dem-
onstrate what kinds of questions the data can help researchers tackle. 
We describe cross-national patterns in the timing of containment 
and health policies, followed by a more detailed presentation of 
policy sequencing. We then combine the data with mobile phone 
mobility data to relate policies to human behaviour20 and review the 
potential for bringing together OxCGRT data with additional data 
sources in the Discussion. In the Methods, we describe the individual 
indicators in more detail, along with the data collection process, data 
coverage and how we calculate the indices. We also briefly compare 
OxCGRT with related projects to highlight their complementarities.
Results
To motivate applications of the data, we present general trends 
and patterns in government responses in the first months of the 
pandemic. We focus here on cross-national patterns, although 
OxCGRT contains more granular data on subnational jurisdictions 
as well. First, we document a surprising degree of commonality 
across countries in the early months of the pandemic followed by 
growing divergence. We also note patterns in policy reimposition 
and geographical scope—topics that have, to date, been relatively 
underexplored in the literature, yet they have important implica-
tions for how countries manage each wave of the pandemic. Second, 
we consider associations between the OxCGRT indices and a key 
outcome of interest, individual mobility, to illustrate the potential 
for the data to be combined with other indicators to investigate eco-
nomic, social and epidemiological questions of interest.
What government responses do we observe? The data reveal 
a striking degree of commonality in government responses to 
COVID-19 in the first months of the pandemic. We group the 19 
indicators into themes of closure and containment, health and 
economic support (Table 1), normalized to vary from 0–100 (for 
a full description, see Table 2). The CHI measures the number and 
Table 1 | OxCGRT Indicators
ID
Name
Type
Targeted/
general?
Containment and closure
 C1
School closing
Ordinal
Geographic
 C2
Workplace closing
Ordinal
Geographic
 C3
Cancel public events
Ordinal
Geographic
 C4
Restrictions on gathering size
Ordinal
Geographic
 C5
Close public transport
Ordinal
Geographic
 C6
Stay-at-home requirements
Ordinal
Geographic
 C7
Restrictions on internal movement
Ordinal
Geographic
 C8
Restrictions on international travel
Ordinal
No
Economic response
 E1
Income support
Ordinal
Sectoral
 E2
Debt/contract relief for households Ordinal
No
 E3
Fiscal measures
Numerical
No
 E4
Giving international support
Numerical
No
Health systems
 H1
Public information campaign
Ordinal
Geographic
 H2
Testing policy
Ordinal
No
 H3
Contact tracing
Ordinal
No
 H4
Emergency investment in health 
care
Numerical
No
 H5
Investment in COVID-19 vaccines
Numerical
No
 H6
Facial coverings
Ordinal
Geographic
 H7
Vaccination policy
Ordinal
Funding
Miscellaneous
 M1
Other responses
Text
No
For detailed descriptions and coding information, see the project website: https://www.bsg.ox.ac.
uk/covidtracker.
Table 2 | OxCGRT index composition and values
GRI
CHI
Stringency 
index
ESI
Legacy 
stringency 
index
Maximum 
value (Nj)
Flag 
(Fj)
k
13
11
9
2
7
C1
x
x
x
x
3 (0, 1, 2, 3)
Yes = 1
C2
x
x
x
x
3 (0, 1, 2, 3)
Yes = 1
C3
x
x
x
x
2 (0, 1, 2)
Yes = 1
C4
x
x
x
4 (0, 1, 2, 
3, 4)
Yes = 1
C5
x
x
x
x
2 (0, 1, 2)
Yes = 1
C6
x
x
x
3 (0, 1, 2, 3)
Yes = 1
C7
x
x
x
x
2 (0, 1, 2)
Yes = 1
C8
x
x
x
x
4 (0, 1, 2, 
3, 4)
No = 0
E1
x
x
2 (0, 1, 2)
Yes = 1
E2
x
x
2 (0, 1, 2)
No = 0
E3
E4
H1
x
x
x
x
2 (0, 1, 2)
Yes = 1
H2
x
x
3 (0, 1, 2, 3)
No = 0
H3
x
x
2 (0, 1, 2)
No = 0
H4
H5
H6
x
x
4 (0, 1, 2, 
3, 4)
Yes = 1
H7
x
x
5 (0, 1, 2, 3, 
4, 5)
Yes = 1
M1
k is the number of component indicators in an index (see Methods); x indicates that an indicator 
contributes to that index.
Nature Human Behaviour | VOL 5 | April 2021 | 529–538 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
530


----- Page 3 (native text) -----
Resource
NaTuRE Human BEhaVIOuR
intensity of closure and containment policies (for example, school 
closings and stay-at-home measures) and policies towards dis-
ease surveillance (for example, testing and contact tracing). Only 
a handful of countries had adopted strong containment (often 
referred to as lockdown) and health policies in early March, as 
Fig. 1 shows, yet within 1 month the world had changed and inten-
sive policy responses had become a global phenomenon. In subse-
quent months, however, countries lifted policy restrictions, then, in 
1 August 2020
1 December 2020
1 March 2020
1 April 2020
CHI score
No data
<20
20−40
40−60
60−80
>80
Fig. 1 | Containment and Health Index (CHI) by country on the first day of each month. The colour scale bar indicates the CHI score, from <20 (pale 
yellow) to >80 (dark red).
Middle East and Africa
1 Jan
1 Mar
1 May
1 Jul
1 Sep
1 Nov
31 Dec
Europe and Central Asia
1 Jan
1 Mar
1 May
1 Jul
1 Sep
1 Nov
31 Dec
Americas
1 Jan
1 Mar
1 May
1 Jul
1 Sep
1 Nov
31 Dec
South and East Asia and the Pacific
1 Jan
1 Mar
1 May
1 Jul
1 Sep
1 Nov
31 Dec
95
5
Index
Fig. 2 | Clustering of initial government responses compared with the spread of COVID-19. The graphs depict how 183 countries (each row), grouped 
by world region, ramped up their response policies to scores of 50 (out of 100) on the CHI within approximately the same 2-week period in mid-March 
2020 (as shown by the two vertical dash-dotted lines), despite the more scattered pattern of disease progression over time (as indicated by circles that 
mark the date a country experienced its tenth death) and in contrast with the greater divergence in policies observed in later months. Although the disease 
affected countries at different times, nearly all countries changed policy substantially in the same 2-week period. The x axis dates are all in the year 2020.
Nature Human Behaviour | VOL 5 | April 2021 | 529–538 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
531


----- Page 4 (native text) -----
Resource
NaTuRE Human BEhaVIOuR
some cases, reimposed policies in a policy see-saw as the epidemic 
waxed and waned.
During the initial, global rise in policy responses, the data reveal 
a number of intriguing patterns. Most governments moved to a 
high level of response within a 2-week period around the middle 
of March, showing remarkable clustering. Figure 2 displays this ini-
tial policy convergence across 183 countries, which is not observed 
in later policy decisions (such as rolling back measures). This ini-
tial clustering pattern in mid-March contrasts with what would be 
expected if countries reacted according to the local epidemiologi-
cal progression of the pandemic. For instance, in most countries, 
the sudden ramping up of response policies happened before they 
had experienced their tenth COVID-19-related death, while many 
other countries’ responses preceded even their tenth recorded 
case. Countries may have observed their neighbours or the global 
response and reacted in concert. This clustering then seems to dissi-
pate in later months as countries’ responses diverge. This pattern has 
important implications for the coordination of responses to global 
infectious diseases considering that the World Health Organization’s 
policy guidance to governments is tailored to the local progression 
of an infectious disease rather than potential herd behaviour.
Next, we examine specific policies, both during the initial pro-
cess of policy adoption and in the months that followed as mea-
sures were either rolled back or maintained. The left panel of Fig. 
3 captures the ramping up of policies, showing the proportion of 
countries adopting a particular policy, with day zero representing 
the first day of the COVID-19 policy response in each country. 
The very limited crossing of the lines in this figure suggests that 
policies adopted by the median country (in terms of the speed of 
policy responses) occurred in approximately the same order as those 
adopted by countries in the first and third quartiles. In other words, 
the sequence of policy adoption is largely similar across countries. 
Specifically, there is more than a 50% chance that a randomly drawn 
country will have introduced public information campaigns, inter-
national travel controls and testing policies within 20 d of the first 
government response of any policy type; there is a 40% chance of 
this within 10 d and a >90% chance within 2 months. Economic 
support policies have tended to be established later than closure or 
containment and health policies, facial coverings aside.
A common pattern also characterizes policy reversal. The right 
panel of Fig. 3 indicates the proportion of countries maintaining the 
highest point they reach on the ordinal scale for each policy area. 
The global rate of policy reduction is indicated by the slope of the 
lines. There is crossing over among policies, but little among those 
lines representing closure and containment policies, which have 
roughly similar rates of rollback. During the initial 2 months of pol-
icy easing, while closure and containment policies were loosened, 
economic support policies and health policies were maintained at 
countries’ individual maximum strengths.
While we see similarities in the policies that were adopted and 
relaxed, as well as when this occurred, there is interesting variation 
across policies’ strength and geographic coverage and the extent to 
which they were later reimposed. Figure 4 shows how frequently 
countries imposed the strongest possible policies, what portion of 
0
20
40
60
80
100
Percentage of countries adopting requirement policy
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Days after first requirement policy
0
20
40
60
80
100
Percentage of countries mantaining their maximum policy level
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Days after first policy level reduction
School closing
Workplace closing
Cancel public events
Restrictions on
gathering size
Close public transport
Stay-at-home
requirements
Restrictions on internal
movement
Restrictions on
international travel
Public information
campaign
Testing
Contact tracing
Facial coverings
Income support
Debt relief
Fig. 3 | Sequencing of initial policy adoption (from first policy enacted) and reduction (from first policy eased). The graphs show the ramping up (left) 
and rollback (right) of different government response policies. The number of days after the first policy reduction are counted from the first reduction 
in the level of any policy for at least five consecutive days. A difference in the level of a policy line between the two panels—from 60 d into the ramp up 
(the far right of the left-hand panel) and the starting position of a policy line during rollback (the far left of the right-hand panel)—indicates the minimum 
percentage of countries that eased policies on the first day of policy reduction (if negative) or the percentage of countries adopting the policy after 60 d 
following the first measure but before first policy reduction (if positive). For example, workplace closures have more commonly been eased at the initiation 
of rollback than regulations prohibiting public events. Countries that have increased policy intensity after 5 d of reducing policy strength are counted as 
countries that did not maintain their original maximum. The sample comprises 66,978 observations from 183 countries between 1 January 2020 and 31 
December 2020.
Nature Human Behaviour | VOL 5 | April 2021 | 529–538 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
532


----- Page 5 (native text) -----
Resource
NaTuRE Human BEhaVIOuR
observed policies applied nationally versus subnationally and which 
policies were reduced and subsequently reimposed. Most closure 
policies were adopted nationally at some point, and in approxi-
mately 20% of countries, stronger closure and containment policies 
were reimposed by the end of December 2020. In the case of work-
place policies, approximately 80% of countries had reduced their 
restrictions by that point in the year, but 40% of all countries later 
reversed course.
The clustering of policy responses during the process of adop-
tion has a critical implication for researchers. Analysis of individual 
policies is difficult because there is limited variation across and 
within countries, resulting in collinear relationships. This has meant 
that most analyses of government responses to date have had to 
focus on aggregate indices. However, in later periods, we document 
substantially more variation. This variation enables more credible 
quasi-experimental analysis of individual policies, such as school 
reopening, testing campaigns and income support. Understanding 
the role of individual policies, in addition to aggregate government 
response levels, is of central importance for further research and 
policy action, which this database can enable.
Motivating applications of the data: how do government 
responses relate to behaviour? A key application of the OxCGRT 
data is to understand how policies relate to human behaviour. A 
number of studies have used OxCGRT and similar data to try to 
estimate the effect of policies on behaviour and the spread of the 
disease. Here, we do not aim to establish new estimates of causal 
effects, but rather seek only to demonstrate potential use cases 
to motivate further research. Figure 5 summarizes the results of 
linear panel regression models, comparing the strength of associa-
tions between the CHI, GRI and stringency index with changes in 
citizen mobility over time, as recorded by mobile phone applications 
(the full results are presented in Supplementary Tables 1 and 2). 
These models use standard techniques in the literature. We include 
country and date fixed effects in order to isolate within-country 
associations over time, accounting for seasonal and other calendar 
effects. In the Supplementary Information, we include models that 
also control for new daily deaths, to identify the association between 
policies and mobility unconfounded by the relationship between 
the severity of the epidemic and mobility.
The coefficients and confidence intervals in Fig. 5 show strong 
associations between OxCGRT indices and measures of behaviour. 
These associations are stronger the greater the number of policy 
indicators that are included in an index. All three indices shown 
contain eight indicators of closure and containment policies plus 
at least one additional indicator. Increases in the GRI—our broad-
est index of government responses—are most strongly associated 
with increases in the percentage of time spent in residences, as well 
as with decreases in the frequency of visits to groceries and phar-
macies, workplaces, transit stations, places for retail and recreation, 
and parks. The CHI, which adds to closure and containment indica-
tors all of our health policy indicators, shows only slightly weaker 
associations. The stringency index, which brings together the con-
tainment and health indicators with just one additional indicator 
(that is, public information campaigns) shows still less pronounced 
relationships in the same directions.
These analyses highlight the potential of OxCGRT data, 
combined with other datasets, to capture important changes in 
0
20
40
60
80
100
Percentage of countries ever adopting
School
closing
Workplace
closing
Cancel
public
events
Restrictions
on gathering
size
Close
public
transport
Stay-at-
home
requirements
Restrictions
on internal
movement
Restrictions on
international
travel
Public
information
campaign
Testing
Contact
tracing
Facial
coverings
Income
support
Debt relief
Policy at any level
Policy at national level
Policy at maximum level
Policy reduction
Policy reduction reversal
Fig. 4 | Variation in the degree, geographic coverage and permanence of policies. The graph shows the proportion of countries that, for various indicators, 
adopted any policies, adopted policies nationally (as opposed to geographically targeted policies) and adopted policies that correspond to the highest 
point on the ordinal scale. It also shows the percentage of countries that at some point reduced and reimposed such policies. A policy reduction is defined 
by a reduction in policy level sustained for at least 5 d. A policy reduction reversal is defined by an increase in policy level after a policy reduction that is 
sustained for at least 5 d. Adoption rates of some policies at any level (for example, facial coverings, income support and debt relief) are much higher than 
those depicted in the left panel of Fig. 3 because countries often continue to adopt these policies after the first policy reduction. The sample comprises 
66,978 observations from 183 countries between 1 January 2020 and 31 December 2020.
Nature Human Behaviour | VOL 5 | April 2021 | 529–538 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
533


----- Page 6 (native text) -----
Resource
NaTuRE Human BEhaVIOuR
behaviour in response to historic government action. While the 
associations presented here are merely suggestive, researchers are 
already using the data for more in-depth analyses2,3,5. Identifying 
causal effects of government policies is not straightforward due 
to many confounding factors and potential sources of endogene-
ity. Given these challenges, the rich nature of this database with 
day-by-day policy changes across a global distribution of countries 
and subnational jurisdictions enables rigorous quasi-experimental 
analysis. This illustrative application is designed to motivate further 
in-depth research and to demonstrate the potential for policymak-
ers and researchers to answer important public policy and epide-
miological questions using OxCGRT data.
Discussion
Alongside epidemiological and behavioural data, measures of gov-
ernment response help researchers and decision-makers to explore 
how best to address COVID-19. However, measuring government 
policies in a consistent and comparable way across jurisdictions 
and across time raises a number of methodological considerations, 
which can present difficult choices. In this section, we review these 
trade-offs and outline strategies for addressing them.
First, while the OxCGRT ordinal scales distinguish, for example, 
a ban on gatherings of over ten people from a ban on gatherings 
of over 100 people, the limitation of an ordinal approach is that it 
groups heterogeneous observations into pre-established categories. 
For instance, both the United Kingdom and France had broadly 
similar stay-at-home orders during spring 2020, and both were 
categorized as the second-highest ordinal point on that indica-
tor. However, French residents had to submit a form to authorities 
to leave their house, while UK residents did not. To mitigate the 
inevitable simplification that comes with codification, OxCGRT 
includes detailed notes and archived links to source materials for all 
observations in the dataset, helping researchers to draw on OxCGRT 
data in a more detailed way should it be required.
Second, the coding scheme loses granularity when applied 
to large jurisdictions with many heterogeneous subunits. As 
described in the Methods, OxCGRT data include three types of 
observation: those that describe all policies that apply to a given 
jurisdiction; those that describe policies put in place by a given 
level and lower levels of government; and those that describe 
only those instigated at a given level of government. Policies that 
apply only to a subunit of the given jurisdiction (for example, a 
single state of a country being coded) are flagged as targeted, while 
policies that apply to the whole jurisdiction are flagged as general. 
When both general and targeted policies exist simultaneously, 
OxCGRT always records the stricter policy. This choice may make 
the data more useful for evaluating the effect of policies on the 
spread of disease (since it records the stronger targeted measures 
that probably exist where there is a local outbreak) while reducing 
their ability to describe the overall state of policy across the coun-
try. For example, if a jurisdiction with many subunits has weak 
general policies and strong policies targeted at a single subunit, 
its overall coding will be high. In cases where this is frequently 
an issue, such as Brazil and the United States, OxCGRT has also 
comprehensively coded subunit jurisdictions (see Supplementary 
Fig. 2). We encourage users to consider this granularity issue care-
fully when making cross-national comparisons, and to considering 
using subnational information for large, heterogeneous jurisdic-
tions where available.
Third, OxCGRT records policy interventions as a time series (the 
unit of observation is a jurisdiction day), recording the intensity and 
scope of policy in place for a given indicator at that place and time. 
An alternative approach that has been pursued by comparable data 
projects is to record the start and end dates of individual policies 
Time in residences
Grocery and pharmacy visits
Workplace visits
Transit station visits
Retail and recreation visits
Visit to parks
–1.5
–1
–0.5
0
0.5
Percentage change in mobility associated with a one-unit increase in three OxCGRT indices
GRI
CHI
Stringency index
Fig. 5 | Associations between different combinations of government responses and aggregate population behaviour. This graph plots coefficients with 
95% confidence intervals of the GRI, CHI and stringency index, used as independent variables in separate panel regression models predicting changes 
in Google mobility data. The models use standard errors clustered by country and include country and date fixed effects (Supplementary Fig. 1 plots the 
coefficients of the same indices in models that control for daily deaths; Supplementary Tables 1 and 2 report the full results). Note that change in the 
duration of time spent at home, as a proportion of the day, shows less variation than the other dependent variables, which capture change in the frequency 
of visits to different categories of location. These results were calculated for 15 February to 9 October 2020.
Nature Human Behaviour | VOL 5 | April 2021 | 529–538 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
534


----- Page 7 (native text) -----
Resource
NaTuRE Human BEhaVIOuR
(see more detailed comparison in the Methods). While both options 
have merit, the time-series structure allows researchers to more eas-
ily match policy indicators to other time-series data, such as to case 
or death rates, mobile phone mobility data and panel surveys. It also 
helps OxCGRT data collectors to capture government responses 
that do not take the form of discrete, formal policy interventions, 
but more ad hoc announcements, such as temporary limitations to 
internal movement during public holidays or religious events.
Fourth, the data are published continuously. Data collection 
occurs weekly, which enables OxCGRT to provide up-to-date infor-
mation on government responses. Given that severe acute respiratory 
syndrome coronavirus 2 can spread extremely quickly, this speed is 
essential for effective use of the data. However, our volunteers are 
not necessarily able to update every jurisdiction in every cycle; con-
sequently, some data can be up to 7 d out of date. To minimize recent 
gaps, we therefore publish our data in real time so that they can be 
utilized as soon as they have been contributed. The trade-off to this 
speed is that the most recent data are published in advance of their 
final validation check (see Methods for further details) and may 
therefore be corrected in the review process or through external feed-
back (although, in practice, large revisions are rare; see Methods).
Fifth, OxCGRT relies on human judgement and contextual exper-
tise, rather than automated data collection or coding, to provide the 
best possible degree of accuracy and consistency. The ordinal scales 
require individual contributors to carefully interpret various poli-
cies within each domain, in order to assign a code that best fits each 
indicator. For example, many countries have taken similar action 
to close workplaces, yet the types of workplaces that are required 
to close often differ from country to country. This means that each 
data contributor needs to assess the policy announcements in a 
country alongside detailed guidance material and apply judgement. 
Volunteers go through a training process to instil a high level of con-
sistency and attend weekly meetings to discuss coding queries and 
standardize interpretations. Many of our contributors are special-
ists in the countries that they code, and understand the country’s 
culture, language and legal system in such a way that allows them 
to code with context and have access to local information to verify 
policies. While this shoe-leather-science approach is very human 
resource intensive, we have not found it possible to achieve compa-
rable results with purely automated methods. Going forward, it may 
be fruitful to explore how different technological approaches can be 
combined with human coders.
Finally, and critically, the OxCGRT dataset records only the 
number and degree of government policies. It does not have a way 
to measure how well policies are implemented or enforced, nor does 
it measure the degree of compliance with official policies. OxCGRT 
data should therefore be considered one among several key ele-
ments in the broader puzzle of understanding governments’ policy 
adoption and the links between government interventions, human 
behaviour and the spread of COVID-19.
Methods
This section describes OxCGRT’s design and structure, as well as the processes 
through which data are collected and confirmed. Because the project is continually 
evolving, adding further indicators and jurisdictions over time, users should always 
check the project website for the most current information. All OxCGRT data are 
available on GitHub and via an application programming interface (API), and are 
licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution CC BY standard.
We hope that the methods outlined below will be of use not only to data 
users (the primary audience) but also to researchers who may be contemplating 
developing complementary measures or data collection projects for response to 
COVID-19 or other issues. In line with OxCGRT’s open-source ethos, we invite 
the scientific community to use and build on not just the data we collect but the 
methods and system described below.
Indicators. OxCGRT reports publicly available information on 19 indicators (see 
Table 1) of government response, as well as recording miscellaneous policies. The 
indicators capture all government measures related to a specific domain, including 
formally adopted laws, policies promulgated by executive or regulatory authorities, 
and softer guidance or advice. OxCGRT has added new indicators and refined 
old indicators as the pandemic has evolved. Future iterations may include further 
indicators or more nuanced versions of existing indicators. The indicators are of 
three types: ordinal, numerical and text.
• 
Ordinal indicators measure policies on a simple scale of severity or intensity, 
allowing us to describe the degree or strength of government response in 
each category. For these indicators, the rank order of the different levels 
is meaningful, but we make no claims regarding the scale of the intervals. 
Instead, each level has a specific meaning, which allows the different values to 
also be used as categorical variables. These indicators are reported for each day 
a policy is in place (not the day it is announced). Many have a further flag to 
note whether they are targeted (applying only to a subregion of a jurisdiction 
or to a specific sector) or general (applying throughout that jurisdiction or 
across the economy). For the newly added H7 (vaccination policy), the flag 
indicates whether the vaccine is being funded by the government or at a cost 
to individuals.
• 
Numerical indicators measure a specific number, reporting fiscal values 
in US dollars. These indicators are only reported once, on the day they are 
announced.
• 
Text is a free response indicator that records other information of interest.
All observations also have a notes cell that reports sources and comments to 
justify and substantiate the designation.
Data collection and reliability. The initial set of data collectors in March 2020 
were recruited largely from the postgraduate student body of the Blavatnik School 
of Government at the University of Oxford. Since then, additional contributors 
have been recruited through Oxford University departmental mailing lists, student 
societies and alumni email lists, as well as referrals from existing contributors. 
Subnational coders are mostly students or recent graduates from partner 
institutions in the countries where we are collecting subnational data (for example, 
the University of São Paulo, Fundação Getulio Vargas and the State University 
of Pará in the case of Brazil). To date, approximately 400 data collectors have 
contributed to OxCGRT, and are listed on the project website.
New members of the data collection team undergo a series of training steps. 
First, they complete a self-directed tutorial of training slides and videos that explain 
how to search for data, interpret policies and submit contributions through the 
online interface. New contributors are then given a short test for comprehension 
and understanding of the coding schema and collection process. After that, new 
data collectors are expected to attend a weekly all-contributor meeting, at which 
point they will start being included in the regular task allocation.
OxCGRT collects national data on a weekly schedule, during which new 
task allocations are sent to the data collection team. This allocation is based on 
a regular review of database coverage, prioritizing those countries that have not 
been updated within the past week. Most contributors are assigned to a list of four 
to six jurisdictions and will cycle through that list each allocation round, building 
up expertise in a small set of jurisdictions. The data are published in real time as 
contributors enter them into the system.
After data are entered, they are marked provisional, which flags them for the 
review process. First, after each allocation round, a small team will perform quick 
spot checks to ensure that the data have been entered and there are no gross errors 
(for example, accidental deletion of a whole column can be noticed and fixed 
during this quick review). The provisional data are then queued for attention by a 
more thorough review team. This review team will examine the data entry and the 
original source and either confirm its veracity or flag the data entry for escalation. 
The review process suggests a high degree of accuracy in the initial data collection. 
As of 31 December 2020, 84.79% of all data points have never been changed, and 
since 1 June 2020, 87.45% of data points have not required revision. Note that 
these revisions include both post-hoc alterations to the coding scheme and factual 
errors. Meanwhile, just 0.41% of observations have been escalated by reviewers 
for adjudication (0.25% since 1 June 2020). Of the 1.2 million data points captured 
between 1 June 2020 and 31 December 2020, 319,840 were reviewed or changed; of 
these, 51% were confirmed without edits.
Data are collected from publicly available sources, such as government press 
releases and briefings, international organization reports and trusted news articles. 
OxCGRT records the original source material using archived links so that coding 
can be checked and substantiated.
Coding different levels of government response. OxCGRT includes data at the 
country level for nearly all countries in the world. It also includes subnational-level 
data for selected countries—currently, Brazil (all states, the Federal District, state 
capitals and the next largest cities that are not geographically connected to the 
state capitals), the United States (all states plus Washington DC and a number 
of territories), the United Kingdom (the four devolved nations) and Canada (all 
provinces and territories).
OxCGRT data are typically used in three ways: (1) primarily, to describe all 
government responses relevant to a given jurisdiction; (2) less commonly, to 
describe policies put in place by a given level and lower levels of government; and 
(3) to compare government responses across different levels of government.
Nature Human Behaviour | VOL 5 | April 2021 | 529–538 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
535


----- Page 8 (native text) -----
Resource
NaTuRE Human BEhaVIOuR
To distinguish between these uses, different published versions of OxCGRT 
data are tagged in the database. The TOTAL label implies that all government 
responses relevant to the people in a given jurisdiction are included in the coding, 
regardless of whether those policies are set by national or subnational governments 
(these may also be presented without any jurisdiction label in some of our data 
products). The jurisdiction label WIDE refers to policies put in place by a given 
level and lower levels of government. WIDE observations therefore do not 
incorporate general policies from higher levels of government that may supersede 
local policies. For example, if a country has an international travel restriction that 
applies country wide, this would not be registered in a STATE_WIDE record. The 
jurisdiction label GOV indicates that observations include only policies instigated 
by a particular level of government; higher- or lower-level jurisdictions do not 
inform this coding.
In the main OxCGRT dataset, we show the total set of policies that apply to 
a given jurisdiction (the TOTAL policies described above). Specifically, in the 
main dataset, this means that we replace subnational-level responses with relevant 
national government (NAT_GOV) indicators when the following two conditions 
are met:
• 
The corresponding NAT_GOV indicator is general, not targeted, and is there-
fore applied across the whole country
• 
The corresponding NAT_GOV indicator is equal to or greater than the 
STATE_WIDE or STATE_GOV indicator on the ordinal scale for that 
indicator
In this way, national and subnational measures in the core dataset are 
comparable, in that they show the totality of policies in effect within a given 
jurisdiction.
Note that STATE_WIDE observations at the subnational level also capture 
policies that the national government may specifically target at a subnational 
jurisdiction. This is the case, for example, if a national government orders events to 
close in a particular city experiencing an outbreak. These kinds of policies are not 
inferred from NAT_GOV.
On our GitHub repositories, these different types of data are available in three 
groups, as summarized in Extended Data Fig. 1:
	(1)	 A main repository (NAT_TOTAL for all countries and STATE_TOTAL for 
Brazil, the United States, the United Kingdom and Canada
	(2)	 A US repository (NAT_GOV and STATE_WIDE)
	(3)	 A Brazil repository (NAT_TOTAL, NAT_GOV, STATE_WIDE, STATE_GOV, 
CITY_TOTAL and CITY_WIDE)
For large, heterogeneous jurisdictions, users may wish to use a weighted 
average of subnational jurisdiction observations (for example, STATE_WIDE) 
instead of national observations (NAT_TOTAL). See Supplementary Fig. 2 for a 
comparison.
Composite indices. To make it easier to describe government responses in 
aggregate, OxCGRT calculates simple indices that combine individual indicators 
to provide an overall measure of the intensity of government response across a 
family of indicators. These indices are designed to provide a simple snapshot of 
the number and degree of government responses in a particular domain. Because 
we have not designed the indices for any specific analytic usage, we aim to make 
them as simple and transparent as possible. Those using the data to study the effect 
of government policies on outcomes of interest will therefore probably wish to 
modify the indices to suit the exact research questions they are seeking to answer 
(for example, selecting only the variables they believe to be relevant, or weighting 
those they believe to be of greater importance). In other words, we offer the indices 
as a convenient prix fixe menu option, but we urge users to tailor the data to their 
specific needs by ordering a la carte.
As noted above, we stress that composite indices have strengths and weaknesses 
as descriptive and analytic tools. Governments’ responses to COVID-19 exhibit 
nuance and heterogeneity. These issues create substantial measurement difficulties 
when seeking to compare national responses in a systematic way. Composite 
measures, which combine different indicators into a general index, inevitably 
abstract away from these nuances. It is hoped that cross-national measures allow 
for systematic comparisons across countries. By measuring a range of indicators, 
they mitigate the possibility that any one indicator may be over- or misinterpreted. 
However, composite measures also leave out much important information 
and make strong assumptions about what kinds of information count. If the 
information left out is systematically correlated with the outcomes of interest, 
or systematically under- or overvalued compared with other indicators, such 
composite indices may introduce measurement bias.
Broadly, there are two common ways to create a composite index: a simple 
additive or multiplicative index that aggregates the indicators, potentially 
weighting some; or a latent variable approach, in which observed indicators 
are used to predict an unobserved variable (that is, the index). While there are 
several approaches to latent variable analysis, such as factor analysis or principal 
component analysis, item response theory (IRT) models are particularly suitable 
in this case due to the ordinal nature of most indicators. Each approach has 
advantages and disadvantages for different research questions.
OxCGRT uses simple, additive, unweighted indices because this approach is 
most transparent and easiest to interpret. Because the purpose of these indices 
is to describe the number and degree of government responses, we weight each 
indicator and each interval on the ordinal scale equally (within each indicator). 
In other words, the difference between a 1 and a 2 in a given indicator contributes 
as much to an index as the difference between a 2 and a 3. Again, this strong 
assumption will not be appropriate for all uses, so we encourage users to carefully 
consider which combinations and weightings of policies best capture the 
dimensions they are seeking to measure.
Despite this caveat, we find significant internal consistency within the indices. 
We used a latent variable approach—specifically, IRT—as a robustness check for 
the stringency index (see Supplementary Table 3). IRT models have been used 
extensively in education to estimate the ability of a student (latent variable) based 
on the responses to individual test questions (observable indicators). In our case, 
the individual policy levels (added to the geographic flag) are the observable 
indicators and the policy index is the unobservable variable. The scores generated 
by an IRT model were highly correlated to our linear index (r = 0.98), which 
reinforces the validity of our approach.
OxCGRT publishes four indices that group different families of policy 
indicators:
• 
GRI (all categories)
• 
Stringency index (containment and closure policies, sometimes referred to as 
lockdown policies)
• 
CHI (containment and closure and health policies)
• 
ESI (economic support measures)
Each index is composed of a series of individual policy response indicators. 
For each indicator, we create a score by taking the ordinal value and subtracting 
half a point if the policy is targeted rather than general, if applicable. We then 
rescale each of these by their maximum value to create a score between 0 and 100, 
with a missing value contributing 0. These scores are then averaged to obtain the 
composite indices. This calculation is described in equation (1) below, where k is 
the number of component indicators in an index and Ij is the subindex score for an 
individual indicator.
We use a conservative assumption to calculate the indices. Where a datum 
for one of the component indicators is missing, it contributes 0 to the index. An 
alternative assumption would be to not count missing indicators in the score, 
essentially assuming they are equal to the mean of the indicators for which we 
have data. Our conservative approach therefore punishes countries for which less 
information is available, but also avoids the risk of over-generalizing from limited 
information.
Index ¼ 1
k
X
k
j¼1
Ij
ð1Þ
The different indices are comprised as described in Table 2.
To facilitate usage, two versions of each indicator are present in the database: 
a regular version (which will return null values if there are not enough data to 
calculate the index) and a display version (which will extrapolate to smooth over 
the past 7 days of the index based on the most recent complete data).
Calculating subindex scores for each indicator. All of the indices use ordinal 
indicators where policies are ranked on a simple numerical scale. The project also 
records five non-ordinal indicators (E3, E4, H4, H5 and M1) but these are not used 
in our index calculations.
Some indicators (C1–C7, E1, H1, H6 and H7) have an additional binary flag 
variable that can be either 0 or 1. For C1–C7, H1 and H6, this corresponds to the 
geographic scope of the policy. For E1, this flag variable corresponds to the sectoral 
scope of income support. For H7, this flag variable corresponds to whether or not 
the vaccine is government funded.
The codebook has details about each indicator and what the different values 
represent.
Because different indicators (j) have different maximum values (Nj) in their 
ordinal scales and only some have flag variables, each subindex score must be 
calculated separately.
Each subindex score (I) for any given indicator (j) on any given day (t) is 
calculated by the function described in equation (2) based on the following 
parameters:
• 
The maximum value of the indicator (Nj)
• 
Whether that indicator has a flag (Fj = 1 if the indicator has a flag variable and 
0 if the indicator does not have a flag variable)
• 
The recorded policy value on the ordinal scale (vj,t)
• 
The recorded binary flag for that indicator (fj,t)
This normalizes the different ordinal scales to produce a subindex score 
between 0 and 100, where each full point on the ordinal scale is equally spaced. 
For indicators that do have a flag variable, if this flag is recorded as 0 (that is, if the 
policy is geographically targeted, or for E1 if the support only applies to informal 
sector workers), this is treated as a half-step between ordinal values.
Nature Human Behaviour | VOL 5 | April 2021 | 529–538 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
536


----- Page 9 (native text) -----
Resource
NaTuRE Human BEhaVIOuR
Note that the database only contains flag values if the indicator has a non-zero 
value. If a government has no policy for a given indicator (that is, the indicator 
equals zero), the corresponding flag is blank/null in the database. For the purpose 
of calculating the index, this is equivalent to a subindex score of zero. In other 
words, Ij,t = 0 if vj,t = 0.
Ij;t ¼ 100 vj;t  0:5ðFj  fj;tÞ
Nj
ð2Þ
(if vj,t = 0, the function Fj − fj,t is also treated as 0; see paragraph above).
Data usage. The data are published in real time. Unless a country has been 
updated in the past 24 h, there will be at least some gaps in coverage for the most 
recent days. In addition, if data are exported in the middle of an update, there 
can occasionally be missing data points in the time series. The dataset is also 
published with numbers of reported COVID-19 cases and deaths, drawn from 
open datasets at the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control and 
Johns Hopkins University. Occasionally, there have been missing days for some 
countries in these sources (for example, if a country has not updated their case 
data over a long weekend). For this reason, particularly when using the dataset for 
descriptive analysis, we usually interpolate to cover any single missing days and use 
a carryforward function to extend the latest value of a missing variable.
In addition, we caution users against overinterpreting small fluctuations of 
single-digit changes in our index values. A small change in an index value may not 
necessarily represent a substantive change in the country’s policy stance; it could, 
for example, just as easily represent a marginally different geographic coverage.
Comparison with related datasets. A number of datasets have tracked 
governments’ responses to COVID-19 since the start of the pandemic21. While it 
is beyond the scope of this article to describe all of them in detail, here we report 
similarities and differences compared with two sister projects: CoronaNet19 and 
the Complexity Science Hub COVID-19 Control Strategies List (CCCSL)22. 
While these projects overlap with OxCGRT to some extent, allowing for direct 
comparisons, the three projects also offer complementary attributes, expanding the 
knowledge and options available to the research community.
The three projects have constructed datasets with a number of similar features 
but also points of difference.
Unit of analysis. Both CoronaNet and CCCSL record government policies or 
measures as the unit of analysis; instead, OxCGRT uses the jurisdiction day. While 
each approach can be converted into the other, the OxCGRT dataset is purpose 
built as a panel. In contrast, CoronaNet and CCCSL are structured as unbalanced 
panels, requiring additional steps to convert into a format that facilitates 
conventional analysis.
Coverage of jurisdictions and dates. OxCGRT publishes data on 184 countries 
and several subnational jurisdictions (50 states in the United States, 13 Canadian 
provinces and territories, 27 Brazilian states and over 50 cities and four UK 
devolved nations). CoronaNet publishes data on 195 countries and the following 
subnational jurisdictions: Brazil, China, Canada, France, Germany, India, Italy, 
Japan, Nigeria, Russia, Spain, Switzerland and the United States. CCCSL publishes 
data on 56 countries, 33 of them European. All three datasets aim to update 
continuously, although at the time of writing only OxCGRT had up-to-date 
information for all jurisdictions.
Coverage of government responses. All three datasets broadly cover what we have 
termed closure and containment and health policies. In addition, OxCGRT and 
CCCSL record economic support measures. OxCGRT uniquely covers public 
transportation-related and vaccine policies. However, it does not include states 
of emergency or enforcement measures (as CoronaNet does), nor does it include 
receiving international help, measures to secure supply chains, crisis management 
plans or port and ship restrictions (as CCCSL does).
Design of indicators. The 19 indicators of OxCGRT are either ordinal or numerical, 
with an additional binary flag that records whether measures are general or 
targeted. CoronaNet considers different elements, such as the directionality of 
policies (for example, inbound or outbound flights), the mechanism of travel 
(flights or trains), enforcement (mandatory or voluntary) and enforcers (national 
government or military). While the CCCSL covers fewer countries, their indicators 
are more granularly split into four levels, without an ordinal scale. This more 
descriptive approach then needs further processing before it can be analysed. 
While the detailed text descriptions enable rich qualitative analysis, they are less 
suited for quantitative analysis.
Data collection methods. All three datasets rely on hand-coded data entered by a 
large international pool of trained contributors into a central database. All three use 
publicly available sources, including policy documents and media reports. A key 
difference of the CoronaNet methodology is its use of a machine learning software 
instrument to extract data from news articles to aid contributors in their data 
collection. The CCCSL shares information sources in an open-source Zotero library. 
From examination of the CoronaNet and CCCSL data and papers, it seems that 
OxCGRT is the only dataset to include archived web links to all original sources.
Looking at the data reveals further complementarities and differences between 
OxCGRT and related projects. OxCGRT most closely resembles CoronaNet, which 
also has global coverage for over 180 countries and which produces a government 
policy activity index that can be compared quantitatively to the OxCGRT indices. 
Our database is highly correlated with CoronaNet within a given country. 
Supplementary Fig. 3 shows the example of the United States, demonstrating 
how both indices track each other over time. Supplementary Fig. 4 quantifies this 
relationship for all countries, showing the average within-country correlation 
between the CoronaNet and OxCGRT government response indices within a 
given country. The average correlation (Pearson’s r) is high at 0.85. This suggests 
robustness across the databases.
At the same time, the OxCGRT indices provide new information beyond the 
CoronaNet index, as indicated by a positive but not perfect correlation within 
countries (Pearson’s r = 0.85). This is even more the case across countries. Fig. 
3 illustrates the cross-country relationship between the Oxford and CoronaNet 
databases (Pearson’s r = 0.28). This lower cross-country correlation may be 
partially associated with the difference in the methodology used by Coronanet 
to calculate the index (ideal point model of item response theory). These results 
reveal that the two databases are highly consistent within countries, enhancing 
confidence in both, and that OxGRT indices provide substantial new information 
especially for across country comparisons and analyses.
We note a few other distinctions. First, our absolute indices show more 
variation. The CoronaNet index falls, by and large, within 10 points on a 100-point 
scale with a standard deviation of 1.2. In contrast, countries in our database span 
the entire 100-point range across countries and over time with a standard deviation 
of 12. This granularity is particularly essential to capture important variation in 
waxing and waning of policies over time, in addition to more sweeping lockdowns, 
which can be captured with coarser measurement.
In summary, OxCGRT complements related efforts in a few dimensions. Our 
database has global coverage, enables comparable within- and across-country 
analysis, will be consistently updated and expanded, is publicly available, is built 
with a team of coders with contextual expertise in the respective countries in which 
they focus, and has a systematic panel data structure that has enabled merging with 
other databases and quantitative analysis.
Reporting Summary. Further information on research design is available in the 
Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
The most up-to-date OxCGRT data and documentation are available via the 
project GitHub repository at https://github.com/OxCGRT/covid-policy-tracker. 
Source data are provided with this paper.
Received: 28 October 2020; Accepted: 15 February 2021;  
Published online: 8 March 2021
References
	1.	 Shuja, J., Alanazi, E., Alasmary, W. & Alashaikh, A. COVID-19 open source 
data sets: a comprehensive survey. Appl. Intell. 51, 1296–1325 (2021).
	2.	 Tan-Torres, E. et al. Projected health-care resource needs for an effective 
response to COVID-19 in 73 low-income and middle-income countries: a 
modelling study. Lancet Glob. Health 8, e1372–e1379 (2020).
	3.	 Islam, N. et al. Physical distancing interventions and incidence of  
coronavirus disease 2019: natural experiment in 149 countries. Br. Med. J. 
370, m2743 (2020).
	4.	 Hale T. et al. Global assessment of the relationship between government 
response measures and COVID-19 deaths. Preprint at medRxiv https://doi.
org/10.1101/2020.07.04.20145334 (2020).
	5.	 Koh, W. C., Niang, L. & Wong, J. Estimating the impact of physical distancing 
measures in containing COVID-19: an empirical analysis. Int. J. Infect. Dis. 
100, 42–49 (2020).
	6.	 Liu, F., Wang, M. & Zheng, M. Effects of COVID-19 lockdown on global air 
quality and health. Sci. Total Environ. 755, 142533 (2020).
	7.	 Venter, Z., Aunan, K., Chowdhury, S. & Lelieveld, J. COVID-19 lockdowns 
cause global air pollution declines. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 117, 
18984–18990 (2020).
	8.	 Frey, C. B., Chen, C. & Presidente, G. Democracy, culture, and contagion: 
political regimes and countries responsiveness to COVID-19. Covid Econ. 18, 
1–20 (2020).
	9.	 Hale, T. et al. Pandemic governance requires understanding socioeconomic 
variation in government and citizen responses to COVID-19. Preprint at 
SSRN https://ssrn.com/abstract=3641927 (2020).
	10.	Pulejo, M. & Querubín, P. Electoral Concerns Reduce Restrictive Measures 
During the COVID-19 Pandemic NBER Working Paper 27498 (National 
Bureau of Economic Research, 2020).
	11.	Gottlieb C., Grobovsek J., Poschke M. & Saltiel F. Lockdown Accounting IZA 
Discussion Paper No. 13397 https://ssrn.com/abstract=3636626 (SSRN, 2020).
Nature Human Behaviour | VOL 5 | April 2021 | 529–538 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
537


----- Page 10 (native text) -----
Resource
NaTuRE Human BEhaVIOuR
	12.	Akter, S. The impact of COVID-19 related ‘stay-at-home’ restrictions on food 
prices in Europe: findings from a preliminary analysis. Food Security 12, 
719–725 (2020).
	13.	Bonadio, B., Huo, Z., Levchenko, A. & Pandalai-Nayar, N. Global Supply 
Chains in the Pandemic NBER Working Paper 27224 (National Bureau of 
Economic Research, 2020).
	14.	Asfaw, A. Trade-offs between moral hazard and health: the effect of income 
support programs on job search and COVID-19. Preprint at SSRN https://
ssrn.com/abstract=3662711 (2020).
	15.	Berardi, C. et al. The COVID-19 pandemic in Italy: policy and technology 
impact on health and non-health outcomes. Health Policy Technol. 9,  
454–487 (2020).
	16.	Michielsen, K. et al. International Sexual Health And REproductive Health 
(I-SHARE) survey during COVID-19: study protocol for online national 
surveys and global comparative analyses. Sex. Transm. Infect. 97, 88–92 (2021).
	17.	Danquah, M., Schotte, S. & Sen, K. COVID-19 and employment: insights from 
the Sub-Saharan African experience. Indian J. Labour Econ. 63, 23–30 (2020).
	18.	Sebhatu, A., Wennberg, K., Arora-Jonsson, S. & Lindberg, S. I. Explaining the 
homogeneous diffusion of COVID-19 nonpharmaceutical interventions across 
heterogeneous countries. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 117, 21201–21208 (2020).
	19.	Cheng, C., Barceló, J., Hartnett, A., Kubinec, R. & Messerschmidt, L. 
COVID-19 government response event dataset (CoronaNet v.1.0). Nat. Hum. 
Behav. 4, 756–768 (2020).
	20.	Oliver, N. et al. Mobile phone data for informing public health actions across 
the COVID-19 pandemic life cycle. Sci. Adv. 6, eabc0764 (2020).
	21.	Daly, M., Ebbinghaus, B., Lehner, L., Naczyk, M. & Vlandas. T. Oxford 
Supertracker: The Global Directory for COVID Policy Trackers and Surveys 
(Department of Social Policy and Intervention, Univ. Oxford, 2020).
	22.	Desvars-Larrive, A. et al. A structured open dataset of government 
interventions in response to COVID-19. Sci. Data 7, 285 (2020).
Acknowledgements
Support for the OxCGRT has been provided by the Blavatnik Family Foundation,  
F. Hoffmann-La Roche and the UK Cabinet Office. We thank E. Teo and  
M. Luciano for valuable research assistance, K. Amar and L. Dixon for superb project 
management and T. Boby for database operations. We also thank the Blavatnik School 
finance, communications and IT teams. The project’s Advisory Board provided wise 
guidance throughout the development of this dataset. Most importantly, we are 
deeply grateful to the hundreds of volunteer data collectors who contributed their 
time, energy and expertise to sustaining the project. A complete and updated list of 
contributors can be found at https://www.bsg.ox.ac.uk/research/research-projects/
coronavirus-government-response-tracker. The funders had no role in study design, data 
collection and analysis, decision to publish or preparation of the manuscript.
Author contributions
T.H., B.K., A.P., T.P., S.W., E.C.-B., L.H., S.M. and H.T. conceived of the study. T.H., 
N.A., B.K., A.P., T.P. and S.W. designed the database. B.K., E.C.-B., L.H., S.M. and H.T. 
collected the data. T.H., N.A., R.G., A.P. and T.P. analysed the data. T.H., B.K., A.P., T.P., 
E.C.-B., L.H., S.M. and H.T. managed the project.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Extended data is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-021-01079-8.
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material 
available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-021-01079-8.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to T.H.
Peer review information Nature Human Behaviour thanks Damien Bol, Giliberto 
Capano, Dimiter Toshkov and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution 
to the peer review of this work.
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2021
Nature Human Behaviour | VOL 5 | April 2021 | 529–538 | www.nature.com/nathumbehav
538


----- Page 11 (native text) -----
Resource
NaTuRE Human BEhaVIOuR
Resource
NaTuRE Human BEhaVIOuR
Extended Data Fig. 1 | Currently available OxCGRT data across different levels of government. 1. The “TOTAL” dataset is hand-coded at the national 
level, and at other subnational levels it combines the other datasets to report the overall policy settings that apply to residents within the jurisdictions. 
2. NAT_WIDE does not exist. The “WIDE” label refers to data that ignores policies implemented by higher levels of government (for example reporting 
policies that apply to a state without including federal government policies). There are no higher levels of government above National, so any NAT_WIDE 
record would simply duplicate NAT_TOTAL. 3. In practice, we would not record CITY_GOV. The data recorded as CITY_WIDE would include only 
decisions made by city governments and any lower-level governments (if they existed), while ignoring policies from state and national governments.
Nature Human Behaviour | www.nature.com/nathumbehav


----- Page 12 (native text) -----
1
nature research  |  reporting summary
April 2020
Corresponding author(s):
Thomas Hale, thomas.hale@bsg.ox.ac.uk
Last updated by author(s): Feb 1, 2021
Reporting Summary
Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency 
in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see our Editorial Policies and the Editorial Policy Checklist.
Statistics
For all statistical analyses, confirm that the following items are present in the figure legend, table legend, main text, or Methods section.
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
A statement on whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided 
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
A description of all covariates tested
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
A full description of the statistical parameters including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient) 
AND variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)
For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted 
Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.
For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
Our web collection on statistics for biologists contains articles on many of the points above.
Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
Data collection
Data collection occurs through Internet searches that trained contributors enter into a Azure-based SQL database using a custom-made 
website. The database endpoints are made publicly available via a Github repository. 
Data analysis
Stata 16.1 was used to manipulate and analyze the data. 
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors and 
reviewers. We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Research guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.
Data
Policy information about availability of data
All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable: 
- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets 
- A list of figures that have associated raw data 
- A description of any restrictions on data availability
The most up-to-date OxCGRT data and documentation are available via the project github repository: https://github.com/OxCGRT/covid-policy-tracker. Data for all 
figures in the manuscript and supplemental information can be obtained from this repository. There are no restrictions on data availability. 


----- Page 13 (native text) -----
2
nature research  |  reporting summary
April 2020
Field-specific reporting
Please select the one below that is the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
Life sciences
Behavioural & social sciences
 Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences
For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/documents/nr-reporting-summary-flat.pdf
Behavioural & social sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Study description
This 'resource' article describes presents a dataset that provides both quantitative and qualitative data. It does not carry out causal 
inference. 
Research sample
The database includes information on nearly all countries in the world and a number of subnational jurisdictions in the United States, 
Brazil, Canada, and the UK. 
Sampling strategy
This article does not rely on sampling. 
Data collection
The initial set of data collectors in March 2020 were recruited largely from the postgraduate student body of the Blavatnik School of 
Government at the University of Oxford. Since then, additional contributors have been recruited through Oxford University 
departmental mailing lists, student societies and alumni email lists, as well as referrals from existing contributors. Subnational coders 
are mostly students or recent graduates from partner institutions in the countries we are collecting subnational data (for example 
the University of São Paulo, Fundação Getulio Vargas, and the State University of Pará in the case of Brazil). To date approximately 
400 data collectors have contributed to OxCGRT.  
 
New members of the data collection team undergo a series of training steps. First, they complete a self-directed tutorial of training 
slides and videos that explain how to search for data, interpret policies, and submit contributions through the online interface. New 
contributors are then given a short test for comprehension and understanding of the coding schema and collection process. After 
that, new data collectors are expected to attend a weekly all-contributor meeting, at which point they will start being included in the 
regular task allocation.  
 
OxCGRT collects national data on a weekly schedule, during which new task allocations are sent to the data collection team. This 
allocation is based on a regular review of database coverage – prioritizing those countries that have not been updated within the last 
week. Most contributors are assigned to a list of 4-6 jurisdictions and will cycle through that list each allocation round, building up 
expertise in a small set of jurisdictions. The data is published in real-time as contributors enter it into the system. 
 
After data is entered, it is marked ‘provisional’, which flags it for the review process. First, after each allocation round, a small team 
will do quick spot checks to ensure that data has been entered and there are no gross errors (for example, accidental deletion of a 
whole column can be noticed and fixed during this quick review). The provisional data is then queued for attention by a more 
thorough review team. This review team will examine the data entry and the original source, and either confirm its veracity or flag 
the data entry for escalation. The reviews process suggests a high degree of accurate in the initial data collection. As of 31 December 
2020, 84.79 percent of all datapoints have never been changed, and, since 1 June 2020, 87.45 percent of data points have not 
required revision. Note these revisions include both post-hoc alterations to the coding scheme and factual errors. Meanwhile, just 
0.41 percent of observations have been escalated by reviewers for adjudication, 0.25 percent since 1 June 2020. Of the 1.2 million 
data points captured between 1 June 2020 and 31 December 2020, 319,840 were reviewed or changed; of these 51 percent were 
confirmed without edits.  
 
Data is collected from publicly available sources such as government press releases and briefings, international organizations reports, 
and trusted news articles. OxCGRT records the original source material using archived links so that coding can be checked and 
substantiated.  
Timing
Data collection began in March 2020 and continues through the present.
Data exclusions
The article does not contain analysis, but presents 'snapshots' of the data to demonstrate its potential uses. No data are excluded 
from these presentations. 
Non-participation
There are no participants in this study. 
Randomization
This study did not rely on randomization. 
Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods
We require information from authors about some types of materials, experimental systems and methods used in many studies. Here, indicate whether each material, 
system or method listed is relevant to your study. If you are not sure if a list item applies to your research, read the appropriate section before selecting a response. 


----- Page 14 (native text) -----
3
nature research  |  reporting summary
April 2020
Materials & experimental systems
n/a Involved in the study
Antibodies
Eukaryotic cell lines
Palaeontology and archaeology
Animals and other organisms
Human research participants
Clinical data
Dual use research of concern
Methods
n/a Involved in the study
ChIP-seq
Flow cytometry
MRI-based neuroimaging
