

----- Page 1 (native) -----
I 
CAMBRIDGE 
systematic 
conservation 
Planning 
Chris Margules and sahotra Sarkar

----- Page 2 (native) -----
Syste1natic Conservation Planning 
Systematic Conservation Planning provides a clear, comprehensive guide to the 
process of deriving conservation area networks that will represent biodiversity 
in cost-effective ways. The measurement of biodiversity, the design of field col-
lections to sample biodiversity and data treatment methods together provide 
baseline information on the distribution patterns of biodiversity. The book then 
describes methods for identifying biodiversity priority areas underpinned by the 
concept of complementarity. It goes on to describe how biodiversity targets 
can be set and how multi-criteria analyses can incorporate costs and other con-
straints into the area selection process, enabling trade-offs between production 
and protection to be made. The book finishes with a series of case studies and a 
conclusion that emphasizes the socio-economic and cultural contexts in which 
conservation planning takes place. 
A clear procedure is provided for identifying biodiversity priority areas, under-
pinned by current best science practice and sound common sense, making this 
volume of interest not only to graduate students and academic conservation 
biologists, but also planners and decision-makers dealing with natural resource 
management together with conservation NGOs. 
C HRIS MARGULES is Executive Director at the Melanesia Centre for Biodiver-
sity Conservation, Conservation International. 
SAHOTRA SARKAR is a Professor in the Section of Integrative Biology at the 
University of Texas at Austin.

----- Page 3 (native) -----
ECOLOGY, BIODIVERSITY AND CONSERVATION 
Series editors 
Michael Usher 
University of Stirling, and formerly Scottish Natural Heritage 
Denis Saunders 
Formerly CSIRO Division cif S11staina[J/e Ecosyste111s, Ca11berra 
Robert Peet 
University c?f North Carolina, Chapel Hill 
Andrew Dobson 
Princeton University 
Editorial Board 
Paul Adam 
University ef New So11tli Wales, Australia 
H.J. B. Birks 
University of Be1;ge11, Norway 
Lena Gustafason 
Swedish University of Agric11/t11ml Science 
JetT McNeely !llternational Unio11 for the Co11sen1atio11 ef Nature 
R. T. Paine 
University <?f VV<ishi11gto11 
David Richardson 
University ef Cape Town 
Jeremy Wilson 
Royal Society for the Protectio11 of Birds 
The world's biological diversity faces unprecedented threats. The urgent challenge facing 
the concerned biologist is to understand ecological processes well enough to maintain 
their functioning in the face of the pressures resulting from human population growth. 
Those concerned with the conservation ofbiodiversity and with restoration also need to 
be acquainted with the political, social, historical, economic and legal frameworks within 
which ecological and conservation practice must be developed. This series will present 
balanced, comprehensive, up-to-date and critical reviews of selected topics within the 
sciences of ecology and conservation biology, both botanical and zoological, and both 
"pure" and "applied". It is aimed at advanced final-year undergraduates, graduate stu-
dents, researchers and university teachers, as well as ecologists and conservationists in 
industry, government and the voluntary sectors. The series encompasses a wide range of 
approaches and scales (spatial, temporal, and taxonomic), including quantitative, theoret-
ical, population, community, ecosystem, landscape, historical, experimental, behavioral 
and evolutionary studies. The emphasis is on science related to the real world of plants and 
animals, rather than on purely theoretical abstractions and mathematical models. Books in 
this series will, wherever possible, consider issues from a broad perspective. Some books 
will challenge existing paradigms and present new ecological concepts, empirical or the-
oretical models, and testable hypotheses. Other books will explore new approaches and 
present syntheses on topics of ecological importance. 
The Ecology <?f Phytopla11kton 
C. S. Reynolds 
Invertebrate Co11servatio11 and Agriwltuml Ecosyste111s 
T. R. New 
Risks and Decisions for Co11servatio11 and E11viro11111e11tal i\lla11age11ie11t 
Mark Burgman 
No11eq11ilibri11111 Ecology 
Klaus Rohde 
Ecolo<itY <if Populations 
Esa Ranta, Veijo Kaitala and Per Lundberg 
Ecology a11d Control of llltroduced Pla11ts 
Judith H. Myers, Dawn Bazely

----- Page 4 (native) -----
Systematic 
Conservation 
Planning 
CHR.ISTOPHER I<... MARGULES 
Co115eruatio11 lntematio11al and CSIRO S11stai11able Ecosystems, 
Ti·opical Forest Research Centre, A therto11, Queensla11d 
SAHOTR .. A SARKAR_ 
Section of lntegratiuc Biolog)~ a11d Depart111e11t 
of Philosoph)~ U11ir;ersity ef Texas at A11sti11 
~.:.:.~ CAMBRIDGE 
UNIVERSITY PRESS

----- Page 5 (native) -----
CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS 
Cambridge, New York, Melbourne, Madrid, Cape Town, Singapore, Sao Paulo 
Cambridge University Press 
The Edinburgh Building, Cambridge CB2 8RU, UK 
Published in the United States of America by Cambridge University Press, New York 
www.cambridge.org 
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9780521878753 
© C. Margules and S. Sarkar 2007 
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception 
and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements, 
no reproduction of any part may take place without 
the written permission of Cambridge University Press. 
First published 2007 
Printed in the United Kingdom at the University Press, Cambridge 
A catalog record for this publication is mmilableJi·o111 the British Library 
ISBN 978-0-521-87875-3 hardback 
TSBN 978-0-521-70344-4 paperback 
Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy of UR.Ls for 
external or third-party internet websites referred to in this publication, and does not guarantee that 
any content on such websites is, or will remain, accurate or appropriate.

----- Page 6 (native) -----
Contents 
Acknowledgments 
page vm 
1 Introduction 
1 
1.1 
Conservation-area networks 
2 
1.2 What do we n1ean by biodiversity? 
5 
1.3 
Systematic conservation planning 
8 
1.4 
Smnmary 
16 
2 
Biodiversity surrogates 
19 
2.1 
True and estinutor surrogates 
20 
2.2 
Establishing the adequacy of an 
estimator-surrogate set 
22 
2.3 
Traditional species-based surrogates 
27 
2.4 
Systematic surrogate sets 
30 
2.5 
Surrogacy and spatial scale 
42 
2.6 
A protocol for the identification of an 
adequate surrogate set 
43 
2.7 
Diversity of ecological processes 
44 
2.8 
Sun1mary 
45 
3 
Data collection 
47 
3.1 
Areas and features 
47 
3.2 
Sources of data 
51 
3.3 
Collecting new data with field surveys 
56 
3.4 
Sun1mary 
76 
4 Data treatments 
79 
4.1 
Conceptual fran1ework 
79 
4.2 
Multi-variate pattern analysis 
83 
4.3 
Heuristic n1odels 
90 
4.4 
Regression models 
93

----- Page 7 (native) -----
Vl 
Contents 
4.5 
Machine-learning inethods 
100 
4.6 
Sun1mary 
103 
5 
Conservation-area networks 
105 
5.1 
The role of conservation-area networks 
105 
5.2 The goals of networks: representativeness, 
persistence and econo111y 
108 
5.3 
Selecting networks: con1plen1entarity 
112 
5.4 
Selecting networks: rarity and adjacency 
120 
5.5 
Subsidiary goals: flexibility, transparency, 
n1odularity, genericity and irreplaceability 
121 
5.6 
Algorithms for the selection of networks 
124 
5.7 
The trouble with scoring and ranking 
procedures 
127 
5.8 
Sun1mary 
129 
6 
Persistence and vulnerability 
131 
6.1 
Incorporating biological processes 
132 
6.2 
Viability analysis 
135 
6.3 
Targets for representation 
151 
6.4 
Fonnal decision analysis 
162 
6.5 
Summary 
166 
7 
Satisfying multiple criteria 
169 
7.l 
Iterative- and tenninal-stage procedures 
171 
7.2 
The valuation framework 
172 
7.3 
Non-dominated alternatives 
176 
7.4 R_efining non-do111inated sets 
180 
7.5 
Sensitivity analysis 
188 
7.6 
Summary 
194 
8 
Systematic conservation plans 
197 
8.1 
Con1plementarity by inspection in the 
Nullarbor region, Australia 
197 
8.2 
Con1plementarity using species records 
in Quebec 
205 
8.3 
A marine conservation plan for the California 
Channel Islands, United States 
209 
8.4 A conservation plan for the Cape Floristic 
l"tegion of South Africa 
214 
8-5 
A conservation plan for Papua New Guinea 
219 
8.6 
Sumn1ary 
225

----- Page 8 (native) -----
9 
Conclusions 
9 .1 
Coping with uncertainty 
9 .2 
Practicing conservation science in 
a con1plex world 
9 .3 
Future directions 
9 .4 
Sun1nury 
R~ferences 
Index 
Contents 
The colour plates are situated between pages 130 and 131. 
.. 
Vll 
227 
228 
231 
233 
238 
239 
265

----- Page 9 (native) -----
Acknowledgments 
The collaboration fron1 which this book emerged began at the 
Wissenscluiftskolleg zu Berlin where both authors were fellows in the n1id-
1990s. We thank the Kolleg for its support. We also thank Paul Griffiths 
of the University of Queensland Biohumanities Project for providing us 
with hospitality while we finished the book. A huge thanks also to Elva 
Castino for all her help with finalizing material and getting everything 
ready for publication. 
The text of the first two parts of Chapter 3 draws heavily on mate-
rial fron1 Margules et al. (2002) and Williams et al. (2002). The text of 
Chapter 7 draws heavily on Moffett & Sarkar (2005) and Moffett et al. 
(2006). We thank Jim Dyer, David Hilbert, Alex Moffett, Bob Pressey 
and Paul Willia111s for pern1ission to use this material, as well as for n1any 
c0111ments and discussions over the years. 
For co111111enting on the entire n1anuscript we thank Trevon Fuller, 
Justin Garson, David Grice, Ja111es Justus and Liz Poon. For con1n1ent-
ing on individual chapters we thank Mark Burgn1an, Dan Faith, Simon 
Ferrier, Nick Nicholls and Michael Usher. 
For critical con1n1ent and discussion on many of the ideas in this book, 
son1etim.es over 111any years, we would also like to thank Anshu Aggar-
wal, Mike Austin, Mark Boyce, Helen Cortes-Burns, Chris Humphries, 
Patricia Illoldi, Chris Johnson, Chris Kelley, Vanessa Lujan, Can1ille 
Parn1esan, San1raat Pawar, Hugh Possingham, Karen Richardson, Victor 
Sanchez-Cordero, Helen Sarakinos, Mike Singer, Dick Vane-Wright, 
Paul Walker, Kristen Willia1ns and Paul Williams. 
Cl-lM would like to record a very special thanks to Janice Marion 
Margules, 1955-94, for her tireless support and encouragement of the 
ideas embodied in this book.

----- Page 10 (native) -----
1 
Introduction 
The earth is experiencing a wave of extinctions possibly unprecedented 
in recent evolutionary history. The ecological advantage conferred upon 
humans by the evolution of reason and language has enabled us to obtain 
con1petitive dominance over all other species and expand our realized 
niche to include con1ponents of ahnost all habitats on the planet. We 
have sin1plified con1p1ex and diverse natural syste1ns and processes. for the 
production of food and shelter, leading to massive extinctions of species 
(Taylor 2004). The previous six niass extinctions caused by cataclysn1ic 
events decimated life on the planet and the current wave shows signs 
of approaching this level. These previous waves of extinction occurred 
over inillennia; brief in geological tim.e but long in ecological ti111e. Life 
forms had the opportunity to adapt and evolve. Many species becan1e 
extinct, but many others prospered and new species evolved. The cur-
rent wave is not yet 300 years old; a brief aberration even in ecological 
time. Though humans have undoubtedly changed ecological processes 
and caused extinctions for longer than that, it was not at the current scale. 
Perhaps what is n1ost troubling about the current wave of extinctions is 
that, unlike previous events, it is taking place because of a type of irre-
versible transformation of the land and even the oceans that is likely to 
make them unsuitable as habitat for many forms of life into the distant 
future. 
The task for conservation biology is to halt the current extinction 
wave and chart a course for a future which includes biological diversity 
not only for its direct contribution to human welfare as a resource, but 
also because it appeals to iinportant human values (Norton l 987; Sarkar 
2005). In that future, nature conservation must exist alongside nature 
exploitation, not instead of it. Better still, the protection of biodiversity 
should becon1e integrated into natural resource management that has 
sustainable livelihoods as an equally in1portant goal. The protection of 
biodiversity will not win out in direct competition with other needs and 
aspirations of people (R.osenzweig 2003). Indeed, the research frontiers

----- Page 11 (native) -----
2 
Introduction 
in conservation biology clearly n1ust link a biophysical understanding of 
the world around us with a socio-econon1ic understanding of what drives 
decisions on natural resource use, as well as an understanding of natural 
resource governance niechanisms and the institutional arrangements that 
societies use to regulate the exploitation of natural resources. This task 
of planning for the future is made even 111ore c0111plex by global envi-
ronn1ental changes, especially climate change, the detailed consequences 
of which we can only di111ly foresee, and even that only for a very few 
species. We will return to this issue oflinking socio-econon1ic goals with 
biodiversity conservation in Chapters 5 through 9, especially Chapters 7, 
8 and 9. The focus in Chapters 2, 3 and 4 is on methods for deriving 
biodiversity data sets suitable for use in conservation planning. 
1.1 
Conservation area networks 
Central to the conservation of biological diversity is the establishn1ent of 
networks of conservation areas which are managed to minimize the risk 
of extinction. These are often called protected areas, but we use the term 
conservation areas to include all areas that perform a conservation func-
tion, whether they are strictly protected or not (Sarkar 2003). These are 
the priority areas for the allocation of scarce biodiversity managernent 
resources. Systonatic conservation planning consists of the use of specific 
protocols to identify such priority areas and separate them fro111 processes 
which threaten their persistence. Identifying and securing biodiversity 
priority areas will not in itself protect biodiversity, but networks of pri-
ority areas in each region of the world should form the fra111ework upon 
which other conservation actions build. 
The key concept underpinning systematic conservation planning is 
con1plen1entarity. Co1nple111entarity is a measure of the contribution an 
area in a planning region makes to the full c0111ple111ent of biodiver-
sity features: species, asse111blages, ecological processes, etc. As discussed 
below and in later chapters, we can never know the full comple111ent 
of biodiversity features; consequently we must use partial measures or 
surrogates and we must set goals for the representation of these surro-
gates. Con1plen1entarity can then be measured by the contribution an 
area makes to the conservation goal. For example, pretend that the con-
servation goal is to represent at least one population of all of the vascular 
plant species that occur in a planning region in a minimal set of biodi-
versity priority areas. The first area we choose might be the one with 
the n1ost species. The next area we choose will be the one with the n1ost

----- Page 12 (native) -----
Conservation area networks 
3 
species that were not represented in the first area and the next area after 
that will be the one with the most remaining unrepresented species, and 
so on until all species are represented. There are two important points 
to note about this process. The first is that as areas are added to the set, 
the contribution that renuining areas make to the goal changes. This is 
because son1e of the species in those areas may have already been con-
tributed by other areas previously selected for the set. The second is that 
areas with the highest complementarity will not necessarily be those with 
the most species. In this example, complementarity is ineasured at each 
step as the number of unrepresented species. If an area has few species, 
but they do not occur widely in the planning region, it may have higher 
complen1entarity than an area with many species that are widespread 
throughout the planning region (depending on which species occur in 
areas that have already been selected). Thus, species richness cannot be 
used to measure complementarity. There are many variations on the si111-
ple area selection process outlined above and many of these are described 
later in the book. As it turns out, for exa1nple, it is often more econon1ical 
to begin the area-selection process by selecting that area with the rarest 
species on it and then the one with the highest number of rarest unrep-
resented species, and so on until all species are represented (Sarkar et al. 
2002). Vane-Wright et al. (1991) coined the tern1 "complementarity," 
but it appears to have been independently discovered at least four times 
Gustus & Sarkar 2002), twice in Australia (Kirkpatrick, 1983; Margules & 
Nicholls 1.987; Margules et al. 1988), in the United Kingdom (Ackery & 
Vane-Wright 1984) and in South Africa (H .. ebelo & Siegfried 1990). 
Complementarity is described in detail in Chapter 5 (Section 5.4). 
Systematic conservation planning is usually in1plen1ented with soft-
ware tools using digital georeferenced data sets and area selection algo-
rithms. Algorithmic approaches ensure that planning exercises are stan-
dardized and repeatable -
this is the most important sense in which 
conservation planning is systematic. However, this nun1erical computer-
based approach has led to some criticisms, in particular that large data 
sets are needed to run the software (R .. edford et al. 1997; Prendergast 
et al. 1999), that local expertise is not consulted and incorporated 
(Redford et al. 1997) and that they are expensive and 1noney could bet-
ter be spent acquiring reserves (Prendergast et al. 1999). Any reading 
of the conservation planning literature will show that these criticisms 
are unjustified. There is no substitute for local expertise, which should 
always be consulted. In fact, systematic conservation planning works best 
when local experts are the ones doing the planning. The inethods are

----- Page 13 (native) -----
4 
Introduction 
inexpensive, can be used without computers and with minimal data. It 
is just that con1puters speed up the process and enable large data sets to 
be used efficiently when they are available. Also, the recent growth in 
biological and enviromnental databases, in part due to rapid in1prove-
ni.ents in reni.ote sensing and nlodeling, nieans that there is now ahnost 
no terrestrial region on Earth with so little data that systeni.atic planning 
tools cannot ini.prove policy forn1ulation. 
Where population density is high and land is in private ownership, 
conservation agencies have, in the past, found it necessary to take oppor-
tunities whenever and wherever they occurred believing that when land 
is privately owned there is no opportunity for a more strategic systen1atic 
approach. However, if conservation NGOs (non-govermnent organiza-
tions) such as The Nature Conservancy in the United States and Bush 
Heritage in Australia are purchasing land, as they currently are, they need 
to know what the genuine biodiversity priorities are or they will not make 
best use of their funds. If they purchase the cheapest land or just whatever 
beco1nes available they will not make the contributions to biodiversity 
conservation that they could nlake, and which are sorely needed. As sev-
eral past studies have shown, ad hoc conservation-area selection has been 
reni.arkably cost-ineffective (Pressey et al. 1996; Pressey & Cowling 2001). 
This is because conservation areas all over the world contain a biased 
sa1nple of biodiversity from ecosysteni.s and habitats that were selected 
because they are remote and inaccessible, or they are unfit for alternative 
uses such as agriculture, which nieans they are cheap. The identification 
of biodiversity priority areas should be based on good science and sound 
con1ni.on sense and not on such ad hoc grounds. Some priority areas will 
inevitably be expensive. But even if they prove too expensive to buy, we 
should know about them. They inight beconi.e subject to policy change 
and/ or nlanagement agreen1ents in future. Planning tools support that 
process. They do not replace it. Conservation planning is a dynan1ic iter-
ative process and these planning tools are designed for decision support 
to help local experts identify good policy options, not fonnulate policy 
on their behalf. 
In the United States, Texas provides a striking example of the potential 
continued inefficient use of resources when conservation policy is not 
deterni.ined by systematic planning (Alford 2005). In 2003 tax exemptions 
given to landowners for maintaining or restoring their land as wildlife 
habitat were estimated to be over $1 billion. Land n1anagen1ent options 
included habitat control (such as clearing juniper overgrowth), erosion 
control, control of predators (such as feral cats or dogs), providing water

----- Page 14 (native) -----
What do we mean by biodiversity? 
5 
resources, providing supple111ental food for wild animals, growing nutri-
tional plants, providing ani1nal shelters (such as leaving dead trees for bird 
nests) and conducting animal censuses. There is no coordination among 
efforts of individual landowners. Although those who receive the tax 
break have to formulate explicit wildlife nunagen1ent plans, these do not 
have to be filed with any state agency, but only be appraised by county 
officials who need not have any wildlife expertise. There is no monitor-
ing to determine whether plans are successful in pron1oting wildlife. In 
some cases anecdotal evidence suggests no change: the deer population 
growth rate remained the san1e before and after the policy was introduced 
in 1995. In other cases, there may be son1e success: while the decline of 
wild turkey populations was 54 % in the five years preceding 1995, it was 
only 9 % in the subsequent five years. Given the lack of coordination 
and monitoring it is in1possible to evaluate what is being conserved or 
restored and how effectively. Perhaps more importantly, there is no prior-
itization ofland on the basis of its potential contribution to a biodiversity 
goal, given appropriate management, and therefore no prioritization of 
the landowners who should receive these tax breaks. This is the type of 
problen1 that systematic conservation planning aims to mitigate. 
In some places where land is privately owned and there are few oppor-
tunities for biodiversity protection using traditional approaches, market-
based instruments are being tested and evaluated. In a recent pilot study 
in the highly fragmented landscape of the Western Australian wheatbelt 
called "Auction for Landscape Recovery" (Gole et al. 2005), landowners 
were invited to non1inate portions of their holdings and propose manage-
ment actions for these portions and then bid for funds to in1plement those 
actions. Bids were judged on two criteria. One was the contribution the 
nominated areas made to a regional biodiversity goal, i.e., complemen-
tarity, and the other was the likely success of the proposed management 
actions. This is an example of how the systematic approach is begin-
ning to find wide application in the developn1ent and implementation of 
conservation policies and practices. 
1.2 What do we mean by biodiversity? 
Biodiversity consists of the biological variety bequeathed to us by evolu-
tionary processes over millennia. It is what we have to conserve if we do 
not want to squander this inheritance. The biological realm is character-
ized by variability and con1plexity at every level of structural, taxonomic 
and functional organization. The term "biodiversity" was introduced in

----- Page 15 (native) -----
6 
Introduction 
the n1id 1980s as a contraction of "biological diversity" to refer to the 
totality of this variability (Takacs 1996). From a biological perspective, 
all such diversity is important because it provides the raw material for 
evolution. Ideally, all of it should be conserved. 
Ecosysten1 processes such as nutrient cycling, the n1oven1ent of water 
and energy and the dispersal of propagules are necessary for the per-
sistence of biodiversity, but in this book we will restrict the definition 
of "biodiversity" to biological patterns such as the distribution patterns 
of biological entities and dynan1ic behavioral pheno1nena such as inigra-
tions. Two hierarchical schen1es are used for the classification of biological 
entities (Sarkar 1998). One is a spatial (or ecological) hierarchy starting 
with nlolecules and macron1olecules, then cell organelles, cells, individu-
als, populations and metapopulations, comn11mities, ecosystems and ulti-
mately the biosphere. The second is a taxonon1ic hierarchy fron1 alleles 
to loci, linkage groups, genotypes, subspecies, species, genera, fa1nilies, 
orders, classes, phyla and kingdon1s. Both hierarchies reflect evolution-
ary history and are constrained by evolutionary mechanisms. Since the 
future for biodiversity is dependent on evolutionary processes, under-
standing the relationships between these two hierarchies and phylogeny 
is also necessary for the formulation of successful conservation strategies. 
In practice we never know these relationships fully but must proceed 
anyway, accepting that conservation priorities and strategies will change 
as knowledge accun1ulates. 
There are two points to note about both hierarchies. The first is that 
they are not clean and tidy in the sense that biological entities fall neatly 
into well-defined classes without exception. The second is that classes 
at all levels in each hierarchy are heterogeneous: there is variety within 
each class at every level. The variety of viable biological configurations 
at all hierarchical levels is extremely large, currently unknown, and prob-
ably unmeasurable. This second point is aln1ost trivial, but emphasizes 
the complexity of biodiversity. Almost any two populations, even of the 
same subspecies, differ in their genetic profiles. Except for son1e clonal 
organisms, almost any two individuals of the same species have different 
genotypes. There are virtually no two identical ecological co1nmunities, 
and so on. The first point is equally important when we consider how to 
describe biodiversity. While son1e entities such as organelles and cells are 
reasonably well defined, exa1nples such as fungi, symbionts and clonal 
organisms show that even biological "individuals" are not always pre-
cisely defined. Asexual species are notoriously difficult to define and even 
sexual species, usually defined by the ability to interbreed and produce

----- Page 16 (native) -----
What do we mean by biodiversity? 
7 
offspring (Mayr 1957), cause problems, for instance in the case of so-
called "ring species." In such species, "rings" are con1posed of circular 
geographically successive populations that evolved fron1 a single ancestral 
population. Each pair of neighboring populations can interbreed except 
for the two terminal ones which, by definition, should now be regarded 
as different species. Examples include the greenish warbler, Phylloscop11s 
troclziloides, populations surro~mding Tibet and the salanlander, Ensatina 
eschsc/10/tzii, surrounding the central valley of California (Wake 2001). 
As we will discuss in detail in Chapter 2, biodiversity, described in 
such a complex way, is impossible to estimate or quantify in the field; 
it is not an operational concept (Sarkar 2002; Sarkar & Margules 2002). 
In practice, the concept of biodiversity has often been sin1plified to refer 
to diversity at three levels of organization: genes (alleles), species and 
ecosystems (e.g., Meffe & Carroll 1994; Vermeulen & Koziell 2002 and 
see Lindenmayer & Burgnun 2005 for a detailed discussion ofbiodiversity 
at diflerent organizational and functional levels). Any such definition is 
necessarily partly conventional. However, that does not mean that it must 
be arbitrary. Such a definition is conventional because we know that it 
does not include all of what we mean by diversity. For instance, the 
definition of biodiversity as diversity of alleles, species and ecosystems 
excludes interspecific hybrids. More importantly, it excludes biological 
phenomena such as the annual migrations of north American n1onarch 
butterflies (Danaus plexippus), which may be endangered and deserving 
protection (Brower & Malcoln1 1991; see Chapter 2). Nevertheless, the 
definition is not arbitrary because focusing conservation efforts on genes, 
species and ecosystems will protect much of the diversity within species, 
taxonomic diversity at levels higher than species and many com1nunities 
(see Chapter 2). 
As Austin and Margules (1986) first explicitly pointed out, the concept 
of biodiversity nlust be operationalized through the use of "surrogates," 
features of the landscape such as the presence of species or other taxa, 
habitat type, etc., that can in principle be quantified and assessed in the 
field. Surrogates that are used to represent biodiversity in its full generality 
we call "true" surrogates. For exan1ple, "biodiversity in general" is often 
thought to be adequately represented by species diversity. The identi-
fication and adoption of true surrogates operationalizes the concept of 
biodiversity for systematic conservation planning. But, as we noted ear-
lier, any choice of a true surrogate set is partly conventional. Moreover, 
since general biodiversity cannot be quantified, the success of a true surro-
gate set in representing general biodiversity also cannot be quantitatively

----- Page 17 (native) -----
8 
Introduction 
assessed. What we must do is give good reasons for what we choose to 
be the true surrogate set in a given planning context. Quite often, we 
are not in a position even to assess the full distribution of a true surrogate 
set. For instance, if we take all species within even well-docun1ented taxa 
such as inamn1als and birds, there are nuny areas of the world for which 
we will not have all the distributional data we need (see Chapter 3). In 
many situations we n1ay not even be able to inodel such distributions 
completely (see, however, Chapter 4). We then have to use "esti1nator 
surrogates" for biodiversity; those features which we can in practice quan-
tify and assess in the field. The question whether an estimator surrogate 
set adequately represents a true surrogate set is amenable to quantitative 
assessment, as we discuss in detail in Chapter 2. 
1.3 
Systematic conservation planning 
Systematic conservation planning is a structured step-wise approach to 
mapping conservation area networks, with feedback, revision and re-
iteration, where needed, at any stage. Though prioritizing new areas for 
conservation is central to systen1atic conservation planning, this process 
does not ignore or throw away, literally or nletaphorically, existing con-
servation areas or networks. In alrnost all regions of the world, there is a 
heritage of conservation areas, which more than likely have been accu-
1nulated opportunistically and are therefore unrepresentative of regional 
biodiversity. Systematic planning normally accepts these imperfect net-
works and inaps onto, or builds on, what already exists, with the objec-
tive of transforming the111 into better networks. In addition, analyses of 
the extent to which existing conservation areas contribute to regional 
biodiversity goals might provide options for future rationalization. For 
example, it may be possible to trade ex.isting conservation areas inaking 
low contributions to biodiversity representation for new areas that would 
make higher contributions. 
Margules and Pressey (2000), Groves et al. (2002), Cowling and Pressey 
(2003) and Sarkar (2004) identified several distinguishing characteristics 
of syste1natic conservation planning. In the first place, it requires the 
identification and engagement of stakeholders. The people who rely on 
or influence the use of natural resources in the planning region must be 
party to the planning process or it will fail. This point deserves en1phasis: 
far too often conservation policies have failed because people who have 
a stake in the land or water that is the subject of those policies have 
not been consulted (Sarkar 1999; Justus & Sarkar 2002). Someti111es,

----- Page 18 (native) -----
Systematic conservation planning 
9 
when the planners have con1e fro1n international organizations or distant 
national governn1ents, this has led to accusations of paternalism, colonial-
isn1 and other ideological ren1nants of the Northern colonial era (Guha 
1989). Recent reports have documented the creation of "conservation 
refugees," people involuntarily displaced by conservation policies such 
as the creation of reserves and the abrogation of traditional resource-use 
rights such as hunting (Dowie 2005). Throughout this book we e1npha-
size the point that systematic conservation planning must be viewed as 
part of social policy which explicitly recognizes and addresses these issues. 
Systenutic conservation planning also requires that clear choices are 
made about how biodiversity is to be nleasured and mapped. This is partly 
the surrogacy issue raised in Section 1.2 above and discussed in detail in 
Chapter 2. But it also includes collecting data, building and managing data 
sets and databases, and carrying out data treat1nents to derive the chosen 
surrogates. These issues are discussed in Chapters 3 and 4. Si1nilarly, clear 
goals have to be set and preferably then translated into explicit nleasurable 
conservation targets. Next, the extent to which conservation goals have 
been nlet in existing reserves or priority areas nlust be recognized so that 
the simple explicit methods described in Chapter 5 can be used to identify 
new priority areas to com.ple1nent existing conservation areas in achieving 
the set goals. Finally, explicit criteria for implementing planning choices 
on the ground have to be formulated and applied, objectives for individual 
conservation areas have to be set, the achievement of those objectives 
has to be monitored and appropriate management actions have to be 
taken to ensure continued contribution ofindividual conservation areas to 
overall conservation goals. This book addresses all of these issues, though 
Chapter 6 is the only one to focus on the last, while also addressing issues 
of threat and vulnerability at all stages in the process. 
Table 1.1, modified fron1 M.argules and Pressey (2000) and Sarkar 
(2004), describes this overall approach in eleven nlore-detailed stages. The 
first stage is stakeholder engage111ent. Stakeholders will often be local res-
idents, farmers or pastoralists, but can also include government agencies 
responsible for managing natural resources such as water and forests, non-
government organizations (NGOs), including conservation NGOs, both 
local and global, and industries, e.g., mining and agri-businesses. Stake-
holders include all those people who have decision-n1aking powers over 
a region, all those who will be affected by the conservation plans that are 
fonnulated, those with scientific or other expertise about the region and 
those who may comn1it resources for conservation planning and in1ple-
mentation. For. a conservation plan to be successful, the involvem.ent of

----- Page 19 (native) -----
10 
Introduction 
Table 1.1 Systematic conservation planning 
(1) Identify stakeholders for the _planning region: 
• Stakeholders include: (a) those who have decision-making powers; (b) those 
who will be affected by conservation plans for the region; (c) those with 
expertise about the region and (d) those who may commit resources for 
conservation plans; 
• Include both local and global stakeholders; 
• Ensure transparency in the involvement of all stakeholders from the beginning. 
(2) Compile, assess, and refine biodiversity and socio-economic data for 
the region: 
• Compile available geographical distribution data on as many biotic and 
environmental parameters as possible at every level of organization; 
• Compile available socio-economic data, including values for alternate uses, 
resource ownership and infrastructure; 
• Collect relevant ne\v data to the extent feasible within available time; 
remote-sensing data should be easily accessible; systematic surveys at the level 
of species (or lower levels) will rarely be possible; 
• Assess conservation status for biotic entities, for instance, their rarity, 
endemism and endangerment; 
• Assess the reliability of the data, formally and informally; in particular, 
critically analyze the process of data selection; 
• When data do not reflect representative samples of the landscape, correct for 
bias and model distributions. 
(3) Identify biodiversity surrogates for the region: 
• Choose true surrogate sets for biodiversity (representing general 
"biodiversity") for part of the region; be explicit about criteria used for this 
choice; 
• Choose alternate estimator surrogate sets (for representing true surrogate sets 
in the planning process); 
• Prioritize sites using true surrogate sets; prioritize sites using as many 
cmnbinations of estimator surrogate sets as feasible and compare them; 
• Potentially also use other methods of surrogacy analysis to assess estimator 
surrogate sets, including measures of spatial congruence between plans 
formulated using the true and estimator surrogate sets; 
• Assess which estimator surrogate set is best on the basis of (a) economy and (b) 
representation. 
(4) Establish conservation targets and goals: 
• Set quantitative targets for surrogate coverage; 
• Set quantitative targets for total network area; 
• Set quantitative targets for minimum size for population, unit area, etc.; 
• Set design criteria such as shape, size, dispersion, connectivity, alignment and 
replication; 
• Set precise goals for criteria other than biodiversity, including socio-political 
criteria.

----- Page 20 (native) -----
Systematic conservation planning 
11 
Table 1.1 (cont.) 
(5) Review the existing conservation-area network (CAN): 
• Estimate the extent to which conservation targets and goals are met by the 
existing set of conservation areas; 
• Determine the prognosis for the existing CAN; 
• Refine the first estimate. 
(6) Prioritize new areas for potential conservation action: 
• Using principles such as complementarity, rarity and endemism, prioritize 
areas for their biodiversity content to create a set of potential 
conservation-area networks; 
• Starting with the existing CAN, repeat the process of prioritization to 
compare results; 
• Incorporate socio-political criteria, such as various costs, if desired, using a 
trade-off analysis; 
• Incorporate design criteria such as shape, size, dispersion, connectivity, 
alignment and replication, if desired, using a trade-off analysis. 
• Alternatively, carry out the last three steps using optimal algorithms. 
(7) Assess prognosis for biodiversity within each newly selected area: 
• Assess the likelihood of persistence of all biodiversity surrogates in all selected 
areas. This may include population viability analysis for as many species using 
as many models as feasible; 
• Perform the best feasible habitat-based viability analysis to obtain a general 
assessment of the prognosis for all species in a potential conservation area; 
• Assess vulnerability of a potential conservation area from external threats, 
using techniques such as risk analysis. 
(8) Refine networks of areas selected for conservation action: 
• Delete the presence of surrogates from potential conservation areas if the 
viability of that surrogate is not sufficiently high; 
• Run the prioritization protocol again to prioritize potential conservation 
areas by biodiversity value; 
• Incorporate design criteria such as shape, size, dispersion, connectivity, 
alignment and replication. 
(9) Examine feasibility using multi-criteria analysis: 
• Order each set of potential conservation areas by each of the criteria other 
than those used in Stage 6; 
• Find all best solutions; discard all other solutions; 
• Select one of the best solutions. 
(10) Implement a conservation plan: 
• Decide on most appropriate legal mode of protection for each targeted place; 
• Decide on most appropriate mode of management for persistence of each 
targeted surrogate; 
• If implementation is impossible return to Stage 5; 
• Decide on a timeframe for implementation, depending on available resources. 
(11) Periodically reassess the network: 
• Set management goals in an appropriate timeframe for each protected area; 
• Decide on indicators that will show whether goals are met; 
• Periodically measure these indicators; 
• Return to Stage 1.

----- Page 21 (native) -----
12 
Introduction 
stakeholders should be transparent. Identifying and involving stakeholders 
can be a difficult and laborious process, but, if it is done properly, it can 
help mitigate threats to potential priority areas and improve the chances 
that conservation plans will be in1plen1ented (Wilson et al. 2005; see also 
Chapter 5, Example 5.5). Son1e recent planning exercises have en1pha-
sized that protocols and tools developed to aid planning need to be easy 
to use and transparent to stakeholders (Pierce et al. 2005; Knight et al. 
2006; Rouget et al. 2006). 
The second stage is data collection and treat111ent. This involves collat-
ing existing data, collecting new data if required, and any treatment of data 
that 111ight be needed for subsequent use in conservation planning. The 
care and attention given this stage has a nujor bearing on the quality of 
the outcon1e. It can be time-consmning, labor intensive, and scientifically 
and technically challenging. However, the collection and treatn1ent of the 
biological and environn1ental data are crucial co.mponents of systematic 
conservation planning. They can place severe constraints on the planning 
process if not done properly. We regard the collection and treat111ent of the 
biological and environmental data as so in1portant that we have devoted 
two whole chapters to it (Chapters 3 and 4). Cost and the urgency to 
act tend to foster the use of existing data held, for example, in n1use-
mns and herbariun1s or data that can be derived remotely, for exa111ple 
environn1ental data such as climate surfaces and other maps. All possible 
use should be made of such data. However, much greater attention than 
has been paid in the past should be devoted to the design of surveys to 
collect new biological records fron1 the field (Margules & Austin 1994; 
Haila & Margules 1996). Field collections of species records are always 
being made by museun1s, herbariums, manage111ent agencies and others. 
Environmental stratification combined with recording the absence as well 
as the presence of species will deliver data sets that are con1prehensive and 
consistent in detail across entire planning regions (Chapter 3). At this stage 
it is also desirable to con1pile as n1uch social and econonuc data as possible, 
which nuy then be used in a trade-off analysis in Stage 6, or alternatively 
in a multi-criteria analysis at Stage 9 in Table 1.1. Socio-economic data 
include the expected monetary value of the natural resources in candi-
date conservation areas, or alternative ineasures such as ti111ber volume or 
agricultural potential (as in Chapter 8, Section 8.5). They can also include 
human population density, cultural practices and preferences, including 
inforn1ation on land ownership and tenure, as well as infrastructure. 
The third stage is to choose biodiversity surrogates. This nleans select-
ing those features that are going to be used to represent biodiversity in the

----- Page 22 (native) -----
Systematic conservation planning 
13 
planning process. Taxa subsets, species assen1blages, and environn1ental 
variables and classes, or combinations of two or tnore of these three, have 
all been used in conservation planning. Species or other features at risk, 
and rare or endemic species or features are obvious candidate surrogates. 
Note that social, cultural and econonuc significance have at tin1es been 
just as important as biological significance in the choice of surrogates. 
Charismatic or iconic species and species with con1n1ercial value have 
often been used as biodiversity surrogates. The choice of surrogates is 
also a crucial stage and is discussed at length in Chapter 2. The choice of 
surrogates will always be constrained to a certain extent by what data are 
available, or realistically obtainable in an acceptable tin1eframe. Therefore, 
this choice is never independent of the results of the previous stage. 
The fourth stage is to establish planning region goals and targets. The 
overall goals, identifying priority areas and separating them from threats, 
were identified above. At this stage, explicit targets for the representation 
of surrogates within a conservation-area network for the region ofinterest 
must be set. Without these targets it is impossible to determine the success 
or failure of a plan. Typical targets might be populations of a certain size, 
or a specified number of populations of species, or the spatial extent 
(percentage of coverage) of assen1blages or environmental classes. Again, 
the actual numbers used here are often not determined, son1etimes not 
even strongly suggested, by biological criteria such as nlodels or empirical 
data. Viable population sizes are known for only a handful of species in a 
few habitats. Actual targets most often represent conventions arrived at by 
biological intuition, or a limited budget. Soule and Sanjayan (1998) have 
argued that the achieven1ent of such targets could provide an unwarranted 
sense of security, suggesting that biodiversity was being protected when in 
fact the targets have little or no biological meaning. This is undoubtedly 
true, but, as noted above, conservation areas are priority areas for the 
allocation of scarce n1anagement resources, and their identification is not 
supposed to provide a complete solution to the problem of protecting 
biodiversity. Priority areas alone will not protect biodiversity. Identifying 
priority areas is only one stage in the challenging, but necessary, task of 
learning to manage whole regions so that ecosyste111 processes and the 
biodiversity they give rise to can be sustained along with the generation 
of livelihoods. 
At this stage it is also appropriate to introduce design criteria. Though 
not usually included in setting targets, these are ecological characteristics 
of the actual conservation areas - size, shape, dispersion, connectivity, 
alignn1ent and replication, for example. In meeting conservation goals

----- Page 23 (native) -----
14 
Introduction 
there seems no doubt that big is better than small, but ecology does not 
say how big is big enough. In addition, the roles of shape, dispersion, con-
nectivity, alignn1ent and replication in conservation-area networks remain 
controversial (Diamond 1975; Margules et al. 1982; Margules & Pressey 
2000). Biogeographical theory, successional pathways, space requirements 
(especially for wide-ranging species), source-sink population structures, 
and habitat modification all impact conservation area design (Chapter 6). 
The fifth stage is a review of any existing conservation areas within 
the planning region. The purpose is to determine the extent to which 
conservation targets have already been 1net and therefore to identify gaps 
that need to be filled by new conservation areas. Usually, existing conser-
vation areas have been established on land that has (or had at the time of 
establishment) little economic value. Gaps in existing conservation-area 
networks therefore are often in productive areas or close to population 
centers where competition for natural resources is highest. This empha-
sizes the need for flexibility in planning and signals the iinportance of cost 
trade-offs (Chapters 7 and 8). A careful assessment of the performance 
of existing conservation areas is critical because, in practice, conservation 
plans will typically consist of augmenting an existing network rather than 
creating one fr0111 scratch. 
The sixth stage involves prioritizing new areas for conservation action 
to satisfy the targets and goals set in the fourth stage. This stage corre-
sponds to what has previously been thought of as reserve network selec-
tion. It is discussed in detail in Chapter 5 and examples of how it has been 
done are worked through in Chapter 8. The change of terminology rec-
ognizes the fact that designating reserves that exclude human habitation 
is only one of many possible conservation measures that could be imple-
mented in biodiversity priority areas (Sarkar 2003). This stage is at the 
heart of systematic conservation planning. It implements complementarity 
as a m.easure of conservation value: one site has greater complementar-
ity than another if it has more biodiversity features (species, assemblages, 
habitat types, etc.) that have not already met their representation tar-
get in the conservation area network. Some measures of complemen-
tarity also implement cost trade-offs (Faith & Walker 2002; Faith et al. 
2001a). This takes advantage of the fact that there are usually many spatial 
arrangements of selected areas in planning regions that each achieves the 
conservation goals. A set of conservation priority areas can be sought 
that optimizes opportunity costs such as agriculture, logging, recreation, 
industrial development and urbanization, but nevertheless achieves the 
conservation goal. Stage 9 below represents an alternative approach to

----- Page 24 (native) -----
Systematic conservation planning 
15 
taking costs and con1peting uses of biodiversity into account. In nuny 
practical applications, area selection will be limited to those areas that 
are not obviously irrelevant to conservation because of extensive habitat 
degradation, for instance, con1pletely built-up areas. Thus, Stage 6 may 
include a prelin1inary exclusion of such areas. 
The seventh stage assesses the risks to the persistence of biodiversity 
in selected areas. Threats can come from outside or within. Size, shape, 
dispersal, connectivity, alignment and replication are son1e ecological cri-
teria for risk assessment. Suitability for competing uses such as agriculture 
or urban develop1nent increases the probability that a site will be lost to 
these land uses (Pressey & Taffs 2001). Risk assessment is a difficult task 
and more remains uncertain than what is known. Chapter 6 considers 
how vulnerability and threat 1night be taken into account in conserva-
tion planning. Once risks to persistence have been assessed, it is likely 
that some areas with a poor prognosis will be dropped and prioritization 
repeated without those areas as candidates. It m.ay be that there are no 
substitutes for an area with a poor prognosis and in that case a decision has 
to be made whether to spend potentially scarce managen1ent resources 
on intensive management actions to improve the prognosis or relinquish 
the biodiversity features of that site to their fate and divert management 
resources to areas and features with a greater likelihood of long-term 
persistence. The eighth stage then, is the reiteration of the prioritization 
process in Stage 6. 
The ninth stage atte111pts to take account of con1peting uses of land 
other than biodiversity conservation such as agriculture, recreation, etc. 
Typically, a munber of sets of selected areas (or "solutions" from an area 
prioritization algorithn1) are first produced with each satisfying the bio-
diversity representation targets. Stakeholders decide the relative impor-
tance of different potential uses of land, and these preferences are used 
to order each of the alternative solutions by all the criteria other than 
biodiversity. Biological criteria other than representation of surrogates, 
such as size, shape, dispersal, connectivity, alignn1ent and replication, can 
also be incorporated in this way through multi-criteria analysis. The 
best solutions become candidates for implen1entation and the others 
are discarded. There are a variety of techniques for carrying out such a 
multi-criteria analysis, n1ainly developed by economists and the decision-
theory community and only lately being explicitly incorporated into 
conservation planning (Moffett & Sarkar 2005). The most useful tech-
niques of n1ulti-criteria analysis are discussed in Chapter 7. If the alter-
native of incorporating trade-offs in the area selection process (Stage 6)

----- Page 25 (native) -----
16 
Introduction 
is preferred, and all relevant criteria have been incorporated into the 
trade-off analysis, then this stage is redundant. 
The tenth stage is imple1nentation of the conservation plan. This 
requires decisions on the n1ost appropriate forn1 of legal protection for 
each selected area and the n1ost appropriate n1anagement actions for each 
selected area. An in1portant consideration here is the scheduling of imple-
n1entation. R.esources are not norn1ally available to act on all selected areas 
simultaneously. More vulnerable areas might receive priority, especially 
if the features they contain are absent or scarce in other areas (Pressey 
& Taffs 2001; Wilson et al. 2005). If it proves irnpossible to i111plen1ent 
the plan because, for exa111ple, s01ne areas are seriously degraded, bud-
gets have changed or the forgone opportunity costs associated with parts 
of the plan are unacceptable to society, then it is necessary to return to 
Stage 6 and try again. Because of this inevitable scheduling problen1 we 
n1ust accept that planning is a dynan1ic iterative process. Planners and 
policy-nukers should return to earlier stages repeatedly because social 
and econonlic conditions change, social and political attitudes change, 
and knowledge accumulates. The plan that was right given the knowl-
edge base and the social, econom.ic and political climate last year will not 
necessarily be the best plan this year. 
The eleventh and final stage is to monitor the effectiveness of man-
age111ent actions in sustaining the features that areas were selected for. 
Monitoring also requires that thresholds are defined, which, if passed, 
warn that unacceptable changes rnight be underway. The status of bio-
logical entities changes over time, as do social and econo111ic conditions. 
Managen1ent actions that seen1ed appropriate at one point in time might 
be less effective at another point in time. Changes to managen1ent pre-
scriptions are one response. As suggested above, another response might 
be to repeat the entire conservation-planning process periodically. The 
n1ost desirable situation is that conservation planners have the facility to 
repeat the process as and when needed in order to take account of societal 
change and the gaining of new knowledge. Such iterative, dyna111ic 111an-
agerial response with feedback is called "adaptive 111anage111ent" (Holling 
1978). 
1.4 Summary 
The goal of systematic conservation planning is to identify areas that 
should have priority for the allocation of scarce biodiversity-nunagement 
resources and to separate those areas from factors that threaten their

----- Page 26 (native) -----
Summary 
17 
persistence. Biodiversity is a con1plex concept that is impossible to esti-
mate or quantify con1pletely. For planning purposes we have to use partial 
measures or biodiversity surrogates that can be quantified and assessed in 
the field, for exan1ple taxa subsets, habitat types, etc. A key concept in 
systematic conservation planning is complementarity; the marginal con-
tribution an area makes to representing the full set of attributes chosen as 
biodiversity surrogates. 
Systematic conservation planning is a structured approach with feed-
back and reiteration, where needed, at any stage. In this book we recog-
nize 11 distinct stages. They range fron1 the engagement of people who 
influence, use and n1anage biodiversity in the planning region, through 
choices about how biodiversity is to be nleasured and mapped, to setting 
biodiversity goals that can be translated into quantifiable targets, esti1nat-
ing the extent to which targets have been met in existing conservation 
areas, using complementarity to identify new priority conservation areas, 
implementing planning choices on the ground and 1nonitoring nunage-
ment actions to ensure the continued contribution by chosen areas to the 
conservation goal.