

----- Page 1 (native) -----
RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
the bmj | BMJ 2021;374:n2061 | doi: 10.1136/bmj.n2061
1
A new framework for developing and evaluating complex 
­interventions: update of Medical Research Council guidance
Kathryn Skivington,1 Lynsay Matthews,1 Sharon Anne Simpson,1 Peter Craig,1 Janis Baird,2  
Jane M Blazeby,3 Kathleen Anne Boyd,4 Neil Craig,5 David P French,6 Emma McIntosh,4  
Mark Petticrew,7 Jo Rycroft-Malone,8 Martin White,9 Laurence Moore1
The UK Medical Research Council’s 
widely used guidance for developing 
and evaluating complex interventions 
has been replaced by a new framework, 
commissioned jointly by the Medical 
Research Council and the National 
Institute for Health Research, which 
takes account of recent developments 
in theory and methods and the need to 
maximise the efficiency, use, and 
impact of research.
Complex interventions are commonly used in the 
health and social care services, public health practice, 
and other areas of social and economic policy that 
have consequences for health. Such interventions 
are delivered and evaluated at different levels, from 
individual to societal levels. Examples include a 
new surgical procedure, the redesign of a healthcare 
programme, and a change in welfare policy. The 
UK Medical Research Council (MRC) published a 
framework for researchers and research funders on 
developing and evaluating complex interventions in 
2000 and revised guidance in 2006.1-3 Although these 
documents continue to be widely used and are now 
accompanied by a range of more detailed guidance 
on specific aspects of the research process,4-8 several 
important conceptual, methodological and theoretical 
developments have taken place since 2006. These 
developments have been included in a new framework 
commissioned by the National Institute of Health 
Research (NIHR) and the MRC.9 The framework aims 
to help researchers work with other stakeholders to 
identify the key questions about complex interventions, 
and to design and conduct research with a diversity of 
perspectives and appropriate choice of methods.
Development of the Framework for Developing and 
Evaluating Complex Interventions
The updated Framework for Developing and Evaluating 
Complex Interventions is the culmination of a process 
that included four stages: 
•	
A gap analysis to identify developments in 
the methods and practice since the previous 
framework was published
•	
A full day expert workshop, in May 2018, of 36 
participants to discuss the topics identified in the 
gap analysis
•	
An open consultation on a draft of the framework 
in April 2019, whereby we sought stakeholder 
opinion by advertising via social media, email 
lists and other networks for written feedback 
(52 detailed responses were received from 
stakeholders internationally)
•	
Redraft using findings from the previous stages, 
followed by a final expert review. 
We also sought stakeholder views at various 
interactive workshops throughout the development of 
the framework: at the annual meetings of the Society 
for Social Medicine and Population Health (2018), the 
UK Society for Behavioural Medicine (2017, 2018), 
and internationally at the International Congress of 
Behavioural Medicine (2018). The entire process was 
For numbered affiliations see 
end of the article.
Correspondence to:  
K Skivington  
Kathryn.skivington@glasgow.ac.uk 
(ORCID 0000-0002-3571-1561)
Cite this as: BMJ 2021;374:n2061 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.n2061
Accepted: 9 August 2021
SUMMARY POINTS
Complex intervention research can take an efficacy, effectiveness, theory based, 
and/or systems perspective, the choice of which is based on what is known 
already and what further evidence would add most to knowledge
Complex intervention research goes beyond asking whether an intervention 
works in the sense of achieving its intended outcome—to asking a broader range 
of questions (eg, identifying what other impact it has, assessing its value relative 
to the resources required to deliver it, theorising how it works, taking account of 
how it interacts with the context in which it is implemented, how it contributes to 
system change, and how the evidence can be used to support real world decision 
making)
A trade-off exists between precise unbiased answers to narrow questions and 
more uncertain answers to broader, more complex questions; researchers should 
answer the questions that are most useful to decision makers rather than those 
that can be answered with greater certainty
Complex intervention research can be considered in terms of phases, although 
these phases are not necessarily sequential: development or identification of an 
intervention, assessment of feasibility of the intervention and evaluation design, 
evaluation of the intervention, and impactful implementation
At each phase, six core elements should be considered to answer the following 
questions: 
How does the intervention interact with its context? 
What is the underpinning programme theory? 
How can diverse stakeholder perspectives be included in the research? 
What are the key uncertainties? 
How can the intervention be refined? 
What are the comparative resource and outcome consequences of the 
intervention?
The answers to these questions should be used to decide whether the research 
should proceed to the next phase, return to a previous phase, repeat a phase, or 
stop
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
30 September 2021. 
10.1136/bmj.n2061 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 2 (native) -----
RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
2
doi: 10.1136/bmj.n2061 | BMJ 2021;374:n2061 | the bmj
overseen by a scientific advisory group representing 
the range of relevant NIHR programmes and MRC 
population health investments. The framework was 
reviewed by the MRC-NIHR Methodology Research 
Programme Advisory Group and then approved by the 
MRC Population Health Sciences Group in March 2020 
before undergoing further external peer and editorial 
review through the NIHR Journals Library peer review 
process. More detailed information and the methods 
used to develop this new framework are described 
elsewhere.9 This article introduces the framework and 
summarises the main messages for producers and 
users of evidence.
What are complex interventions?
An intervention might be considered complex 
because of properties of the intervention itself, such 
as the number of components involved; the range of 
behaviours targeted; expertise and skills required 
by those delivering and receiving the intervention; 
the number of groups, settings, or levels targeted; or 
the permitted level of flexibility of the intervention 
or its components. For example, the Links Worker 
Programme was an intervention in primary care in 
Glasgow, Scotland, that aimed to link people with 
community resources to help them “live well” in their 
communities. It targeted individual, primary care 
(general practitioner (GP) surgery), and community 
levels. The intervention was flexible in that it could 
differ between primary care GP surgeries. In addition, 
the Link Workers did not support just one specific 
health or wellbeing issue: bereavement, substance 
use, employment, and learning difficulties were all 
included.10 11 The complexity of this intervention had 
implications for many aspects of its evaluation, such 
as the choice of appropriate outcomes and processes 
to assess.
Flexibility in intervention delivery and adherence 
might be permitted to allow for variation in how, 
where, and by whom interventions are delivered and 
received. Standardisation of interventions could relate 
more to the underlying process and functions of the 
intervention than on the specific form of components 
delivered.12 For example, in surgical trials, protocols 
can be designed with flexibility for intervention 
delivery.13 
Interventions 
require 
a 
theoretical 
deconstruction into components and then agreement 
about permissible and prohibited variation in the 
delivery of those components. This approach allows 
implementation of a complex intervention to vary 
across different contexts yet maintain the integrity of 
the core intervention components. Drawing on this 
approach in the ROMIO pilot trial, core components 
of minimally invasive oesophagectomy were agreed 
and subsequently monitored during main trial delivery 
using photography.14
Complexity might also arise through interactions 
between the intervention and its context, by which 
we mean “any feature of the circumstances in which 
an intervention is conceived, developed, implemented 
and evaluated.”6 15-17 Much of the criticism of and 
extensions to the existing framework and guidance 
have focused on the need for greater attention on 
understanding how and under what circumstances 
interventions bring about change.7 15 18 The importance 
of interactions between the intervention and its context 
emphasises the value of identifying mechanisms 
of change, where mechanisms are the causal links 
between intervention components and outcomes; 
and contextual factors, which determine and shape 
whether and how outcomes are generated.19
Thus, attention is given not only to the design of the 
intervention itself but also to the conditions needed to 
realise its mechanisms of change and/or the resources 
required to support intervention reach and impact in 
real world implementation. For example, in a cluster 
randomised trial of ASSIST (a peer led, smoking 
prevention intervention), researchers found that the 
intervention worked particularly well in cohesive 
communities that were served by one secondary school 
where peer supporters were in regular contact with 
their peers—a key contextual factor consistent with 
diffusion of innovation theory, which underpinned the 
intervention design.20 A process evaluation conducted 
alongside a trial of robot assisted surgery identified key 
contextual factors to support effective implementation 
of this procedure, including engaging staff at different 
levels and surgeons who would not be using robot 
assisted surgery, whole team training, and an operating 
theatre of suitable size.21
With this framing, complex interventions can 
helpfully be considered as events in systems.16 Thinking 
about systems helps us understand the interaction 
between an intervention and the context in which it 
is implemented in a dynamic way.22 Systems can be 
thought of as complex and adaptive,23 characterised by 
properties such as emergence, feedback, adaptation, 
and self-organisation (table 1).
For complex intervention research to be most useful 
to decision makers, it should take into account the 
complexity that arises both from the intervention’s 
components and from its interaction with the context 
in which it is being implemented.
Research perspectives
The previous framework and guidance were based 
on a paradigm in which the salient question was 
to identify whether an intervention was effective. 
Complex intervention research driven primarily by 
this question could fail to deliver interventions that 
are implementable, cost effective, transferable, and 
scalable in real world conditions. To deliver solutions 
for real world practice, complex intervention research 
requires strong and early engagement with patients, 
practitioners, and policy makers, shifting the focus 
from the “binary question of effectiveness”26 to 
whether and how the intervention will be acceptable, 
implementable, cost effective, scalable, and transferable 
across contexts. In line with a broader conception of 
complexity, the scope of complex intervention research 
needs to include the development, identification, and 
evaluation of whole system interventions and the 
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
30 September 2021. 
10.1136/bmj.n2061 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 3 (native) -----
RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
the bmj | BMJ 2021;374:n2061 | doi: 10.1136/bmj.n2061
3
assessment of how interventions contribute to system 
change.22 27 The new framework therefore takes a 
pluralistic approach and identifies four perspectives 
that can be used to guide the design and conduct of 
complex intervention research: efficacy, effectiveness, 
theory based, and systems (table 2).
Although 
each 
research 
perspective 
prompts 
different types of research question, they should 
be thought of as overlapping rather than mutually 
exclusive. For example, theory based and systems 
perspectives to evaluation can be used in conjunction,33 
while an effectiveness evaluation can draw on a theory 
based or systems perspective through an embedded 
process evaluation to explore how and under what 
circumstances outcomes are achieved.34-36
Most complex health intervention research so far 
has taken an efficacy or effectiveness perspective and 
for some research questions these perspectives will 
continue to be the most appropriate. However, some 
questions equally relevant to the needs of decision 
makers cannot be answered by research restricted 
to an efficacy or effectiveness perspective. A wider 
range and combination of research perspectives and 
methods, which answer questions beyond efficacy 
and effectiveness, need to be used by researchers and 
supported by funders. Doing so will help to improve 
the extent to which key questions for decision makers 
can be answered by complex intervention research. 
Example questions include: 
•	
Will this effective intervention reproduce the 
effects found in the trial when implemented here?
•	
Is the intervention cost effective?
•	
What are the most important things we need to do 
that will collectively improve health outcomes?
•	
In the absence of evidence from randomised trials 
and the infeasibility of conducting such a trial, 
what does the existing evidence suggest is the best 
option now and how can this be evaluated?
•	
What wider changes will occur as a result of this 
intervention?
•	
How are the intervention effects mediated by 
different settings and contexts?
Phases and core elements of complex intervention 
research
The framework divides complex intervention research 
into four phases: development or identification 
of the intervention, feasibility, evaluation, and 
implementation (fig 1). A research programme might 
begin at any phase, depending on the key uncertainties 
about the intervention in question. Repeating phases 
Table 1 | Properties and examples of complex adaptive systems
System properties
Example
Emergence
Complex systems have emergent, often unanticipated, 
properties that are a feature of the system as a whole
Group based interventions that target young people at risk could be undermined by the emergence of new social 
relationships among the group that increase members’ exposure to risk behaviours, while reducing their contact with 
other young people less tolerant of risk taking24
Feedback
Where one change reinforces, promotes, balances, or 
diminishes another
A smoking ban in public places reduces the visibility and convenience of smoking; fewer young people start smoking, 
further reducing its visibility, in a reinforcing loop22
Adaptation
Change of system behaviour in response to an 
intervention
Retailers adapted to the ban on multi-buy discounts by discounting individual alcohol products, offering them at the 
same price individually as they would have been if part of a multi-buy offer25
Self-organisation
Order arising from spontaneous local interaction rather 
than a preconceived plan or external control
Recognising that individual treatment did not address some social aspects of alcohol dependency, recovering drinkers 
self-organised to form Alcoholics Anonymous
Table 2 | Research perspectives
Perspective and research question
Key points
Vaccine study example
Efficacy
To what extent does the intervention produce the 
intended outcomes in experimental or ideal settings?
Conducted under idealised conditions; maximises 
internal validity to provide a precise, unbiased estimate 
of efficacy
Seeks to measure the effect of the vaccine on immune 
system response and report its safety28
Effectiveness
To what extent does the intervention produce the 
intended outcomes in real world settings?
Intervention often compared against treatment as usual; 
results inform choices between an established and a 
novel approach to achieving the desired outcome
Seeks to determine whether the vaccination programme, 
implemented in a range of real world populations and 
settings, is effective in terms of what it set out to do (eg, 
prevent disease)29
Theory based
What works in which circumstances and how?
Aims to understand how change is brought about, 
including the interplay of mechanisms and context; can 
lead to refinement of theory
Asks why effectiveness varies across contexts, and asks 
what this variation indicates about the conditions for 
a successful vaccination programme30; considerations 
that might be explored go beyond whether the vaccine 
works31
Systems
How do the system and intervention adapt to one 
another?
Treats the intervention as a disruption to a complex 
system16
Seeks to understand the dynamic interdependence 
of vaccination rollout, population risk of infection 
and willingness to be vaccinated, as the vaccination 
programme proceeds32
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
30 September 2021. 
10.1136/bmj.n2061 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 4 (native) -----
RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
4
doi: 10.1136/bmj.n2061 | BMJ 2021;374:n2061 | the bmj
is preferable to automatic progression if uncertainties 
remain unresolved. Each phase has a common set of 
core elements—considering context, developing and 
refining programme theory, engaging stakeholders, 
identifying key uncertainties, refining the intervention, 
and 
economic 
considerations. 
These 
elements 
should be considered early and continually revisited 
throughout the research process, and especially 
before moving between phases (for example, between 
feasibility testing and evaluation).
Core elements
Context
The effects of a complex intervention might often be 
highly dependent on context, such that an intervention 
that is effective in some settings could be ineffective or 
even harmful elsewhere.6 As the examples in table 1 
show, interventions can modify the contexts in which 
they are implemented, by eliciting responses from 
other agents, or by changing behavioural norms or 
exposure to risk, so that their effects will also vary over 
time. Context can be considered as both dynamic and 
multi-dimensional. Key dimensions include physical, 
spatial, organisational, social, cultural, political, or 
economic features of the healthcare, health system, 
or public health contexts in which interventions are 
implemented. For example, the evaluation of the 
Breastfeeding In Groups intervention found that the 
context of the different localities (eg, staff morale and 
suitable premises) influenced policy implementation 
and was an explanatory factor in why breastfeeding 
rates increased in some intervention localities and 
declined in others.37
Programme theory
Programme theory describes how an intervention 
is expected to lead to its effects and under what 
conditions. It articulates the key components of the 
intervention and how they interact, the mechanisms 
of the intervention, the features of the context that 
are expected to influence those mechanisms, and 
how those mechanisms might influence the context.38 
Programme theory can be used to promote shared 
understanding of the intervention among diverse 
stakeholders, and to identify key uncertainties and 
research questions. Where an intervention (such as a 
policy) is developed by others, researchers still need to 
theorise the intervention before attempting to evaluate 
it.39 Best practice is to develop programme theory at 
the beginning of the research project with involvement 
of diverse stakeholders, based on evidence and theory 
from relevant fields, and to refine it during successive 
phases. The EPOCH trial tested a large scale quality 
improvement programme aimed at improving 90 day 
survival rates for patients undergoing emergency 
abdominal surgery; it included a well articulated 
programme theory at the outset, which supported the 
tailoring of programme delivery to local contexts.40 
The development, implementation, and post-study 
reflection of the programme theory resulted in 
suggested improvements for future implementation of 
the quality improvement programme.
Core elements
• Consider context
• Develop, reﬁne, and (re)test programme theory
• Engage stakeholders
• Identify key uncertainties
• Reﬁne intervention
• Economic considerations
Develop intervention
Either developing a new intervention,
or adapting an existing intervention for
a new context, based on research
evidence and theory of the problem
OR
Feasibility
Assessing feasibility and acceptability
of intervention and evaluation design
in order to make decisions about
progression to next stage of evaluation
Deliberate eﬀorts to increase
impact and uptake of successfully
tested health innovations
Implementation
Identify intervention
Choosing an intervention that already
exists (or is planned), either via policy or
practice, and exploring its options for
evaluation (evaluability assessment)
Evaluation
Assessing an intervention using
the most appropriate method to
address research questions
Fig 1 | Framework for developing and evaluating complex interventions. Context=any feature of the circumstances in which an intervention is 
conceived, developed, evaluated, and implemented; programme theory=describes how an intervention is expected to lead to its effects and under 
what conditions—the programme theory should be tested and refined at all stages and used to guide the identification of uncertainties and research 
questions; stakeholders=those who are targeted by the intervention or policy, involved in its development or delivery, or more broadly those whose 
personal or professional interests are affected (that is, who have a stake in the topic)—this includes patients and members of the public as well 
as those linked in a professional capacity; uncertainties=identifying the key uncertainties that exist, given what is already known and what the 
programme theory, research team, and stakeholders identify as being most important to discover—these judgments inform the framing of research 
questions, which in turn govern the choice of research perspective; refinement=the process of fine tuning or making changes to the intervention 
once a preliminary version (prototype) has been developed; economic considerations=determining the comparative resource and outcome 
consequences of the interventions for those people and organisations affected
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
30 September 2021. 
10.1136/bmj.n2061 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 5 (native) -----
RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
the bmj | BMJ 2021;374:n2061 | doi: 10.1136/bmj.n2061
5
A refined programme theory is an important 
evaluation outcome and is the principal aim where 
a theory based perspective is taken. Improved 
programme theory will help inform transferability 
of interventions across settings and help produce 
evidence and understanding that is useful to decision 
makers. In addition to full articulation of programme 
theory, it can help provide visual representations—for 
example, using a logic model,41-43 realist matrix,44 or 
a system map,45 with the choice depending on which 
is most appropriate for the research perspective and 
research questions. Although useful, any single visual 
representation is unlikely to sufficiently articulate the 
programme theory—it should always be articulated 
well within the text of publications, reports, and 
funding applications.
Stakeholders
Stakeholders include those individuals who are 
targeted by the intervention or policy, those involved 
in its development or delivery, or those whose personal 
or professional interests are affected (that is, all those 
who have a stake in the topic). Patients and the public 
are key stakeholders. Meaningful engagement with 
appropriate stakeholders at each phase of the research 
is needed to maximise the potential of developing 
or identifying an intervention that is likely to have 
positive impacts on health and to enhance prospects of 
achieving changes in policy or practice. For example, 
patient and public involvement46 activities in the 
PARADES programme, which evaluated approaches 
to reduce harm and improve outcomes for people 
with bipolar disorder, were wide ranging and central 
to the project.47 Involving service users with lived 
experiences of bipolar disorder had many benefits, 
for example, it enhanced the intervention but also 
improved the evaluation and dissemination methods. 
Service users involved in the study also had positive 
outcomes, including more settled employment and 
progression to further education. Broad thinking and 
consultation is needed to identify a diverse range of 
appropriate stakeholders.
The purpose of stakeholder engagement will differ 
depending on the context and phase of the research, 
but is essential for prioritising research questions, the 
co-development of programme theory, choosing the 
most useful research perspective, and overcoming 
practical obstacles to evaluation and implementation. 
Researchers should nevertheless be mindful of conflicts 
of interest among stakeholders and use transparent 
methods to record potential conflicts of interest. Research 
should not only elicit stakeholder priorities, but also 
consider why they are priorities. Careful consideration 
of the appropriateness and methods of identification 
and engagement of stakeholders is needed.46 48
Key uncertainties
Many questions could be answered at each phase of the 
research process. The design and conduct of research 
need to engage pragmatically with the multiple 
uncertainties involved and offer a flexible and emergent 
approach to exploring them.15 Therefore, researchers 
should spend time developing the programme theory, 
clearly identifying the remaining uncertainties, given 
what is already known and what the research team 
and stakeholders identify as being most important 
to determine. Judgments about the key uncertainties 
inform the framing of research questions, which in 
turn govern the choice of research perspective.
Efficacy 
trials 
of 
relatively 
uncomplicated 
interventions in tightly controlled conditions, where 
research questions are answered with great certainty, 
will always be important, but translation of the 
evidence into the diverse settings of everyday practice 
is often highly problematic.27 For intervention research 
in healthcare and public health settings to take on 
more challenging evaluation questions, greater priority 
should be given to mixed methods, theory based, or 
systems evaluation that is sensitive to complexity and 
that emphasises implementation, context, and system 
fit. This approach could help improve understanding 
and identify important implications for decision 
makers, albeit with caveats, assumptions, and 
limitations.22 Rather than maintaining the established 
tendency to prioritise strong research designs that 
answer some questions with certainty but are unsuited 
to resolving many important evaluation questions, 
this more inclusive, deliberative process could place 
greater value on equivocal findings that nevertheless 
inform important decisions where evidence is sparse.
Intervention refinement
Within each phase of complex intervention research 
and on transition from one phase to another, the 
intervention might need to be refined, on the basis of 
data collected or development of programme theory.4 
The feasibility and acceptability of interventions can 
be improved by engaging potential intervention users 
to inform refinements. For example, an online physical 
activity planner for people with diabetes mellitus 
was found to be difficult to use, resulting in the tool 
providing incorrect personalised advice. To improve 
usability and the advice given, several iterations of 
the planner were developed on the basis of interviews 
and observations. This iterative process led to the 
refined planner demonstrating greater feasibility and 
accuracy.49
Refinements should be guided by the programme 
theory, with acceptable boundaries agreed and 
specified at the beginning of each research phase, 
and with transparent reporting of the rationale for 
change. Scope for refinement might also be limited by 
the policy or practice context. Refinement will be rare 
in the evaluation phase of efficacy and effectiveness 
research, where interventions will ideally not change 
or evolve within the course of the study. However, 
between the phases of research and within systems 
and theory based evaluation studies, refinement of 
interventions in response to accumulated data or as 
an adaptive and variable response to context and 
system change are likely to be desirable features of the 
intervention and a key focus of the research.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
30 September 2021. 
10.1136/bmj.n2061 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 6 (native) -----
RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
6
doi: 10.1136/bmj.n2061 | BMJ 2021;374:n2061 | the bmj
Economic considerations
Economic 
evaluation—the 
comparative 
analysis 
of alternative courses of action in terms of both 
costs (resource use) and consequences (outcomes, 
effects)—should be a core component of all phases of 
intervention research. Early engagement of economic 
expertise will help identify the scope of costs and 
benefits to assess in order to answer questions that 
matter most to decision makers.50 Broad ranging 
approaches such as cost benefit analysis or cost 
consequence analysis, which seek to capture the full 
range of health and non-health costs and benefits 
across different sectors,51 will often be more suitable 
for an economic evaluation of a complex intervention 
than narrower approaches such as cost effectiveness 
or cost utility analysis. For example, evaluation of the 
New Orleans Intervention Model for infants entering 
foster care in Glasgow included short and long term 
economic analysis from multiple perspectives (the 
UK’s health service and personal social services, 
public sector, and wider societal perspectives); and 
used a range of frameworks, including cost utility 
and cost consequence analysis, to capture changes in 
the intersectoral costs and outcomes associated with 
child maltreatment.52 53 The use of multiple economic 
evaluation frameworks provides decision makers with 
a comprehensive, multi-perspective guide to the cost 
effectiveness of the New Orleans Intervention Model.
Phases
Developing or identifying a complex intervention
Development refers to the whole process of designing 
and planning an intervention, from initial conception 
through to feasibility, pilot, or evaluation study. 
Guidance on intervention development has recently 
been developed through the INDEX study4; although 
here we highlight that complex intervention research 
does not always begin with new or researcher led 
interventions. For example:
•	
A key source of intervention development 
might be an intervention that has been 
developed elsewhere and has the possibility of 
being adapted to a new context. Adaptation of 
existing interventions could include adapting 
to a new population, to a new setting,54 55 
or to target other outcomes (eg, a smoking 
prevention intervention being adapted to 
tackle substance misuse and sexual health).20 
56 57 A well developed programme theory can 
help identify what features of the antecedent 
intervention(s) need to be adapted for different 
applications, and the key mechanisms that 
should be retained even if delivered slightly 
differently.54 58
•	
Policy or practice led interventions are an 
important 
focus 
of 
evaluation 
research. 
Again, uncovering the implicit theoretical 
basis of an intervention and developing a 
programme theory is essential to identifying 
key uncertainties and working out how the 
intervention might be evaluated. This step is 
important, even if rollout has begun, because 
it supports the identification of mechanisms 
of change, important contextual factors, and 
relevant outcome measures. For example, 
researchers evaluating the UK soft drinks 
industry levy developed a bounded conceptual 
system map to articulate their understanding 
(drawing on stakeholder views and document 
review) of how the intervention was expected 
to work. This system map guided the evaluation 
design and helped identify data sources to 
support evaluation.45 Another example is 
a recent analysis of the implicit theory of 
the NHS diabetes prevention programme, 
involving analysis of documentation by NHS 
England and four providers, showing that 
there was no explicit theoretical basis for the 
programme, and no logic model showing how 
the intervention was expected to work. This 
meant that the justification for the inclusion of 
intervention components was unclear.59
Intervention 
identification 
and 
intervention 
development represent two distinct pathways of 
evidence generation,60 but in both cases, the key 
considerations in this phase relate to the core elements 
described above.
Feasibility
A feasibility study should be designed to assess 
predefined progression criteria that relate to the 
evaluation design (eg, reducing uncertainty around 
recruitment, data collection, retention, outcomes, 
and analysis) or the intervention itself (eg, around 
optimal content and delivery, acceptability, adherence, 
likelihood of cost effectiveness, or capacity of providers 
to deliver the intervention). If the programme theory 
suggests that contextual or implementation factors 
might influence the acceptability, effectiveness, or 
cost effectiveness of the intervention, these questions 
should be considered.
Despite being overlooked or rushed in the past, 
the value of feasibility testing is now widely accepted 
with key terms and concepts well defined.61 62 Before 
initiating a feasibility study, researchers should 
consider conducting an evaluability assessment to 
determine whether and how an intervention can 
usefully be evaluated. Evaluability assessment involves 
collaboration with stakeholders to reach agreement on 
the expected outcomes of the intervention, the data that 
could be collected to assess processes and outcomes, 
and the options for designing the evaluation.63 The end 
result is a recommendation on whether an evaluation 
is feasible, whether it can be carried out at a reasonable 
cost, and by which methods.64
Economic modelling can be undertaken at the 
feasibility stage to assess the likelihood that the 
expected benefits of the intervention justify the costs 
(including the cost of further research), and to help 
decision makers decide whether proceeding to a full 
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
30 September 2021. 
10.1136/bmj.n2061 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 7 (native) -----
RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
the bmj | BMJ 2021;374:n2061 | doi: 10.1136/bmj.n2061
7
scale evaluation is worthwhile.65 Depending on the 
results of the feasibility study, further work might be 
required to progressively refine the intervention before 
embarking on a full scale evaluation.
Evaluation
The new framework defines evaluation as going beyond 
asking whether an intervention works (in the sense of 
achieving its intended outcome), to a broader range of 
questions including identifying what other impact it 
has, theorising how it works, taking account of how it 
interacts with the context in which it is implemented, 
how it contributes to system change, and how the 
evidence can be used to support decision making in the 
real world. This implies a shift from an exclusive focus on 
obtaining unbiased estimates of effectiveness66 towards 
prioritising the usefulness of information for decision 
making in selecting the optimal research perspective 
and in prioritising answerable research questions.
A crucial aspect of evaluation design is the 
choice of outcome measures or evidence of change. 
Evaluators should work with stakeholders to assess 
which outcomes are most important, and how to 
deal with multiple outcomes in the analysis with due 
consideration of statistical power and transparent 
reporting. A sharp distinction between one primary 
outcome and several secondary outcomes is not 
necessarily 
appropriate, 
particularly 
where 
the 
programme theory identifies impacts across a range 
of domains. Where needed to support the research 
questions, prespecified subgroup analyses should be 
carried out and reported. Even where such analyses are 
underpowered, they should be included in the protocol 
because they might be useful for subsequent meta-
analyses, or for developing hypotheses for testing in 
further research. Outcome measures could capture 
changes to a system rather than changes in individuals. 
Examples include changes in relationships within an 
organisation, the introduction of policies, changes in 
social norms, or normalisation of practice. Such system 
level outcomes include how changing the dynamics of 
one part of a system alters behaviours in other parts, 
such as the potential for displacement of smoking into 
the home after a public smoking ban.
A helpful illustration of the use of system level 
outcomes is the evaluation of the Delaware Young 
Health Program—an initiative to improve the health 
and wellbeing of young people in Delaware, USA. 
The intervention aimed to change underlying system 
dynamics, structures, and conditions, so the evaluation 
identified systems oriented research questions and 
methods. Three systems science methods were used: 
group model building and viable systems model 
assessment to identify underlying patterns and 
structures; and social network analysis to evaluate 
change in relationships over time.67
Researchers have many study designs to choose 
from, and different designs are optimally suited to 
consider different research questions and different 
circumstances.68 Extensions to standard designs of 
randomised controlled trials (including adaptive 
designs, SMART trials (sequential multiple assignment 
randomised 
trials), 
n-of-1 
trials, 
and 
hybrid 
effectiveness-implementation designs) are important 
areas of methods development to improve the efficiency 
of complex intervention research.69-72 Non-randomised 
designs and modelling approaches might work best if 
a randomised design is not practical, for example, in 
natural experiments or systems evaluations.5 73 74 A 
purely quantitative approach, using an experimental 
design with no additional elements such as a process 
evaluation, is rarely adequate for complex intervention 
research, where qualitative and mixed methods 
designs might be necessary to answer questions 
beyond effectiveness. In many evaluations, the nature 
of the intervention, the programme theory, or the 
priorities of stakeholders could lead to a greater focus 
on improving theories about how to intervene. In this 
view, effect estimates are inherently context bound, so 
that average effects are not a useful guide to decision 
makers working in different contexts. Contextualised 
understandings of how an intervention induces change 
might be more useful, as well as details on the most 
important enablers and constraints on its delivery 
across a range of settings.7
Process evaluation can answer questions around 
fidelity and quality of implementation (eg, what is 
implemented and how?), mechanisms of change 
(eg, how does the delivered intervention produce 
change?), and context (eg, how does context affect 
implementation and outcomes?).7 Process evaluation 
can help determine why an intervention fails 
unexpectedly or has unanticipated consequences, 
or why it works and how it can be optimised. Such 
findings can facilitate further development of the 
intervention programme theory.75 In a theory based 
or systems evaluation, there is not necessarily such 
a clear distinction between process and outcome 
evaluation as there is in an effectiveness study.76 These 
perspectives could prioritise theory building over 
evidence production and use case study or simulation 
methods to understand how outcomes or system 
behaviour are generated through intervention.74 77
Implementation
Early consideration of implementation increases the 
potential of developing an intervention that can be 
widely adopted and maintained in real world settings. 
Implementation questions should be anticipated in 
the intervention programme theory, and considered 
throughout the phases of intervention development, 
feasibility testing, process, and outcome evaluation. 
Alongside implementation specific outcomes (such as 
reach or uptake of services), attention to the components 
of the implementation strategy, and contextual factors 
that support or hinder the achievement of impacts, are 
key. Some flexibility in intervention implementation 
might 
support 
intervention 
transferability 
into 
different contexts (an important aspect of long term 
implementation78), provided that the key functions 
of the programme are maintained, and that the 
adaptations made are clearly understood.8
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
30 September 2021. 
10.1136/bmj.n2061 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 8 (native) -----
RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
8
doi: 10.1136/bmj.n2061 | BMJ 2021;374:n2061 | the bmj
In the ASSIST study,20 a school based, peer led 
intervention for smoking prevention, researchers 
considered implementation at each phase. The 
intervention was developed to have minimal disruption 
on school resources; the feasibility study resulted in 
intervention refinements to improve acceptability and 
improve reach to male students; and in the evaluation 
(cluster randomised controlled trial), the intervention 
was delivered as closely as possible to real world 
implementation. Drawing on the process evaluation, 
the 
implementation 
included 
an 
intervention 
manual that identified critical components and other 
components that could be adapted or dropped to allow 
flexible implementation while achieving delivery of 
the key mechanisms of change; and a training manual 
for the trainers and ongoing quality assurance built 
into rollout for the longer term.
In a natural experimental study, evaluation takes 
place during or after the implementation of the 
intervention in a real world context. Highly pragmatic 
effectiveness trials or specific hybrid effectiveness-
implementation designs also combine effectiveness 
and implementation outcomes in one study, with the 
aim of reducing time for translation of research on 
effectiveness into routine practice.72 79 80
Implementation questions should be included in 
economic considerations during the early stages of 
intervention and study development. How the results 
of economic analyses are reported and presented to 
decision makers can affect whether and how they act 
on the results.81 A key consideration is how to deal 
with interventions across different sectors, where 
those paying for interventions and those receiving the 
benefits of them could differ, reducing the incentive 
to implement an intervention, even if shown to be 
beneficial and cost effective. Early engagement with 
appropriate stakeholders will help frame appropriate 
research 
questions 
and 
could 
anticipate 
any 
implementation challenges that might arise.82
Conclusions
One of the motivations for developing this new 
framework was to answer calls for a change in research 
priorities, towards allocating greater effort and 
funding to research that can have the optimum impact 
on healthcare or population health outcomes. The 
framework challenges the view that unbiased estimates 
of effectiveness are the cardinal goal of evaluation. It 
asserts that improving theories and understanding 
how interventions contribute to change, including how 
they interact with their context and wider dynamic 
systems, is an equally important goal. For some 
complex intervention research problems, an efficacy or 
effectiveness perspective will be the optimal approach, 
and a randomised controlled trial will provide the best 
design to achieve an unbiased estimate. For others, 
alternative perspectives and designs might work better, 
or might be the only way to generate new knowledge to 
reduce decision maker uncertainty.
What is important for the future is that the scope of 
intervention research is not constrained by an unduly 
limited set of perspectives and approaches that might 
be less risky to commission and more likely to produce 
a clear and unbiased answer to a specific question. A 
bolder approach is needed—to include methods and 
perspectives where experience is still quite limited, 
but where we, supported by our workshop participants 
and respondents to our consultations, believe there is 
an urgent need to make progress. This endeavour will 
involve mainstreaming new methods that are not yet 
widely used, as well as undertaking methodological 
innovation and development. The deliberative and 
flexible approach that we encourage is intended to 
reduce research waste,83 maximise usefulness for 
decision makers, and increase the efficiency with 
which complex intervention research generates 
knowledge that contributes to health improvement.
Monitoring the use of the framework and evaluating 
its acceptability and impact is important but has 
been lacking in the past. We encourage research 
funders and journal editors to support the diversity of 
research perspectives and methods that are advocated 
here and to seek evidence that the core elements are 
attended to in research design and conduct. We have 
developed a checklist to support the preparation of 
funding applications, research protocols, and journal 
publications.9 This checklist offers one way to monitor 
impact of the guidance on researchers, funders, and 
journal editors.
We recommend that the guidance is continually 
updated, and future updates continue to adopt a 
broad, pluralist perspective. Given its wider scope, and 
the range of detailed guidance that is now available 
on specific methods and topics, we believe that the 
framework is best seen as meta-guidance. Further 
editions should be published in a fluid, web based 
format, and more frequently updated to incorporate 
new material, further case studies, and additional 
links to other new resources.
AUTHOR AFFILIATIONS
1MRC/CSO Social and Public Health Sciences Unit, Institute of 
Health and Wellbeing, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK
2Medical Research Council Lifecourse Epidemiology Unit, University 
of Southampton, Southampton, UK
3Medical Research Council ConDuCT-II Hub for Trials Methodology 
Research and Bristol Biomedical Research Centre, Bristol, UK
4Health Economics and Health Technology Assessment Unit, 
Institute of Health and Wellbeing, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK
5Public Health Scotland, Glasgow, UK
6Manchester Centre for Health Psychology, University of 
Manchester, Manchester, UK
7London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, UK
8Faculty of Health and Medicine, Lancaster University, Lancaster, UK
9Medical Research Council Epidemiology Unit, University of 
Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
We thank the experts who provided input at the workshop, those 
who responded to the consultation, and those who provided advice 
and review throughout the process. The many people involved 
are acknowledged in the full framework document.9 Parts of this 
manuscript have been reproduced (some with edits and formatting 
changes), with permission, from that longer framework document.
Contributors: All authors made a substantial contribution to all 
stages of the development of the framework—they contributed to 
its development, drafting, and final approval. KS and LMa led the 
writing of the framework, and KS wrote the first draft of this paper. 
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
30 September 2021. 
10.1136/bmj.n2061 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 9 (native) -----
RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
the bmj | BMJ 2021;374:n2061 | doi: 10.1136/bmj.n2061
9
PC, SAS, and LMo provided critical insights to the development of the 
framework and contributed to writing both the framework and this 
paper. KS, LMa, SAS, PC, and LMo facilitated the expert workshop, 
KS and LMa developed the gap analysis and led the analysis of the 
consultation. KAB, NC, and EM contributed the economic components 
to the framework. The scientific advisory group (JB, JMB, DPF, MP, JR-M, 
and MW) provided feedback and edits on drafts of the framework, 
with particular attention to process evaluation (JB), clinical research 
(JMB), implementation (JR-M, DPF), systems perspective (MP), theory 
based perspective (JR-M), and population health (MW). LMo is senior 
author. KS and LMo are the guarantors of this work and accept the full 
responsibility for the finished article. The corresponding author attests 
that all listed authors meet authorship criteria and that no others 
meeting authorship criteria have been omitted.
Funding: The work was funded by the National Institute for Health 
Research (Department of Health and Social Care 73514) and Medical 
Research Council (MRC). Additional time on the study was funded by 
grants from the MRC for KS (MC_UU_12017/11, MC_UU_00022/3), 
LMa, SAS, and LMo (MC_UU_12017/14, MC_UU_00022/1); PC 
(MC_UU_12017/15, MC_UU_00022/2); and MW (MC_UU_12015/6 
and MC_UU_00006/7). Additional time on the study was also funded 
by grants from the Chief Scientist Office of the Scottish Government 
Health Directorates for KS (SPHSU11 and SPHSU18); LMa, SAS, and 
LMo (SPHSU14 and SPHSU16); and PC (SPHSU13 and SPHSU15). 
KS and SAS were also supported by an MRC Strategic Award (MC_
PC_13027). JMB received funding from the NIHR Biomedical Research 
Centre at University Hospitals Bristol NHS Foundation Trust and the 
University of Bristol and by the MRC ConDuCT-II Hub (Collaboration 
and innovation for Difficult and Complex randomised controlled Trials 
In Invasive procedures - MR/K025643/1). DF is funded in part by the 
NIHR Manchester Biomedical Research Centre (IS-BRC-1215-20007) 
and NIHR Applied Research Collaboration - Greater Manchester 
(NIHR200174). MP is funded in part as director of the NIHR’s Public 
Health Policy Research Unit. This project was overseen by a scientific 
advisory group that comprised representatives of NIHR research 
programmes, of the MRC/NIHR Methodology Research Programme 
Panel, of key MRC population health research investments, and 
authors of the 2006 guidance. A prospectively agreed protocol, 
outlining the workplan, was agreed with MRC and NIHR, and signed 
off by the scientific advisory group. The framework was reviewed 
and approved by the MRC/NIHR Methodology Research Programme 
Advisory Group and MRC Population Health Sciences Group and 
completed NIHR HTA Monograph editorial and peer review processes.
Competing interests: All authors have completed the ICMJE uniform 
disclosure form at http://www.icmje.org/coi_disclosure.pdf and 
declare: support from the NIHR, MRC, and the funders listed above for 
the submitted work; KS has project grant funding from the Scottish 
Government Chief Scientist Office; SAS is a former member of the 
NIHR Health Technology Assessment Clinical Evaluation and Trials 
Programme Panel (November 2016 - November 2020) and member 
of the Chief Scientist Office Health HIPS Committee (since 2018) 
and NIHR Policy Research Programme (since November 2019), and 
has project grant funding from the Economic and Social Research 
Council, MRC, and NIHR; LMo is a former member of the MRC-NIHR 
Methodology Research Programme Panel (2015-19) and MRC 
Population Health Sciences Group (2015-20); JB is a member of the 
NIHR Public Health Research Funding Committee (since May 2019), 
and a core member (since 2016) and vice chairperson (since 2018) 
of a public health advisory committee of the National Institute for 
Health and Care Excellence; JMB is a former member of the NIHR 
Clinical Trials Unit Standing Advisory Committee (2015-19); DPF is 
a former member of the NIHR Public Health Research programme 
research funding board (2015-2019), the MRC-NIHR Methodology 
Research Programme panel member (2014-2018), and is a panel 
member of the Research Excellence Framework 2021, subpanel 
2 (public health, health services, and primary care; November 
2020 - February 2022), and has grant funding from the European 
Commission, NIHR, MRC, Natural Environment Research Council, 
Prevent Breast Cancer, Breast Cancer Now, Greater Sport, Manchester 
University NHS Foundation Trust, Christie Hospital NHS Trust, and 
BXS GP; EM is a member of the NIHR Public Health Research funding 
board; MP has grant funding from the MRC, UK Prevention Research 
Partnership, and NIHR; JR-M is programme director and chairperson 
of the NIHR’s Health Services Delivery Research Programme (since 
2014) and member of the NIHR Strategy Board (since 2014); MW 
received a salary as director of the NIHR PHR Programme (2014-20), 
has grant funding from NIHR, and is a former member of the MRC’s 
Population Health Sciences Strategic Committee (July 2014 to June 
2020). There are no other relationships or activities that could appear 
to have influenced the submitted work.
Patient and public involvement: This project was methodological; 
views of patients and the public were included at the open 
consultation stage of the update. The open consultation, involving 
access to an initial draft, was promoted to our networks via email and 
digital channels, such as our unit Twitter account (@theSPHSU). We 
received five responses from people who identified as service users 
(rather than researchers or professionals in a relevant capacity). Their 
input included helpful feedback on the main complexity diagram, the 
different research perspectives, the challenge of moving interventions 
between different contexts and overall readability and accessibility of 
the document. Several respondents also highlighted useful signposts 
to include for readers. Various dissemination events are planned, but 
as this project is methodological we will not specifically disseminate to 
patients and the public beyond the planned dissemination activities.
Provenance and peer review: Not commissioned; externally peer 
reviewed.
This is an Open Access article distributed in accordance with the 
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY 4.0) license, which 
permits others to distribute, remix, adapt and build upon this work, 
for commercial use, provided the original work is properly cited. See: 
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
1 	
Craig P, Dieppe P, Macintyre S, Michie S, Nazareth I, Petticrew M, 
Medical Research Council Guidance. Developing and evaluating 
complex interventions: the new Medical Research Council guidance. 
BMJ 2008;337:a1655. doi:10.1136/bmj.a1655 
2 	
Craig P, Dieppe P, Macintyre S, et al. Developing and evaluating 
complex interventions: new guidance. Medical Research Council, 
2006.
3 	
Campbell M, Fitzpatrick R, Haines A, et al. Framework for design 
and evaluation of complex interventions to improve health. 
BMJ 2000;321:694-6. doi:10.1136/bmj.321.7262.694
4 	
O’Cathain A, Croot L, Duncan E, et al. Guidance on how to develop 
complex interventions to improve health and healthcare. BMJ 
Open 2019;9:e029954. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2019-029954 
5 	
Craig P, Cooper C, Gunnell D, et al. Using natural experiments to 
evaluate population health interventions: new Medical Research 
Council guidance. J Epidemiol Community Health 2012;66:1182-6. 
doi:10.1136/jech-2011-200375 
6 	
Craig P, Ruggiero ED, Frohlich KL, et al. Taking account of context in 
population health intervention research: guidance for producers, 
users and funders of research. NIHR Journals Library, 2018.  
doi:10.3310/CIHR-NIHR-01
7 	
Moore GF, Audrey S, Barker M, et al. Process evaluation of 
complex interventions: Medical Research Council guidance. 
BMJ 2015;350:h1258. doi:10.1136/bmj.h1258 
8 	
Moore G, Campbell M, Copeland L, et al. Adapting interventions 
to new contexts-the ADAPT guidance. BMJ 2021;374:n1679. 
doi:10.1136/bmj.n1679 
9 	
Skivington K, Matthews L, Simpson SA, et al. Framework for the 
development and evaluation of complex interventions: gap analysis, 
workshop and consultation-informed update. Health Technol Assess 
2021 [forthcoming].
10 	 Chng NR, Hawkins K, Fitzpatrick B, et al. Implementing social 
prescribing in primary care in areas of high socioeconomic 
deprivation: process evaluation of the ‘Deep End’ community links 
worker programme. Br J Gen Pract 2021;1153:BJGP.2020.1153. 
doi:10.3399/BJGP.2020.1153 
11 	 Mercer SW, Fitzpatrick B, Grant L, et al. Effectiveness of Community-
Links Practitioners in Areas of High Socioeconomic Deprivation. Ann 
Fam Med 2019;17:518-25. doi:10.1370/afm.2429 
12 	 Hawe P, Shiell A, Riley T. Complex interventions: how “out of control” 
can a randomised controlled trial be?BMJ 2004;328:1561-3. 
doi:10.1136/bmj.328.7455.1561 
13 	 Blencowe NS, Mills N, Cook JA, et al. Standardizing and monitoring 
the delivery of surgical interventions in randomized clinical trials. Br J 
Surg 2016;103:1377-84. doi:10.1002/bjs.10254 
14 	 Blencowe NS, Skilton A, Gaunt D, et al, ROMIO Study team. Protocol 
for developing quality assurance measures to use in surgical trials: 
an example from the ROMIO study. BMJ Open 2019;9:e026209. 
doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2018-026209 
15 	 Greenhalgh T, Papoutsi C. Studying complexity in health services 
research: desperately seeking an overdue paradigm shift. BMC 
Med 2018;16:95. doi:10.1186/s12916-018-1089-4 
16 	 Hawe P, Shiell A, Riley T. Theorising interventions as events in 
systems. Am J Community Psychol 2009;43:267-76. doi:10.1007/
s10464-009-9229-9 
17 	 Petticrew M. When are complex interventions ‘complex’? When are 
simple interventions ‘simple’? Eur J Public Health 2011;21:397-8. 
doi:10.1093/eurpub/ckr084 
18 	 Anderson R. New MRC guidance on evaluating complex interventions. 
BMJ 2008;337:a1937. doi:10.1136/bmj.a1937 
19 	 Pawson R, Tilley N. Realistic Evaluation. Sage, 1997.
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
30 September 2021. 
10.1136/bmj.n2061 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 10 (native) -----
RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
10
doi: 10.1136/bmj.n2061 | BMJ 2021;374:n2061 | the bmj
20 	 Campbell R, Starkey F, Holliday J, et al. An informal school-based 
peer-led intervention for smoking prevention in adolescence 
(ASSIST): a cluster randomised trial. Lancet 2008;371:1595-602. 
doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(08)60692-3 
21 	 Randell R, Honey S, Hindmarsh J, et al. A realist process evaluation of 
robot-assisted surgery: integration into routine practice and impacts 
on communication, collaboration and decision-making. NIHR Journals 
Library, 2017. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK447438/.
22 	 Rutter H, Savona N, Glonti K, et al. The need for a complex systems 
model of evidence for public health. Lancet 2017;390:2602-4. 
doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(17)31267-9 
23 	 The Health Foundation. Evidence Scan. Complex adaptive systems. 
Health Foundation 2010. https://www.health.org.uk/publications/
complex-adaptive-systems.
24 	 Wiggins M, Bonell C, Sawtell M, et al. Health outcomes of youth 
development programme in England: prospective matched 
comparison study. BMJ 2009;339:b2534. doi:10.1136/bmj.b2534 
25 	 Robinson M, Geue C, Lewsey J, et al. Evaluating the impact of the 
alcohol act on off-trade alcohol sales: a natural experiment in 
Scotland. Addiction 2014;109:2035-43. doi:10.1111/add.12701 
26 	 Raine R, Fitzpatrick R, de Pury J. Challenges, solutions and 
future directions in evaluative research. J Health Serv Res 
Policy 2016;21:215-6. doi:10.1177/1355819616664495 
27 	 Kessler R, Glasgow RE. A proposal to speed translation of healthcare 
research into practice: dramatic change is needed. Am J Prev 
Med 2011;40:637-44. doi:10.1016/j.amepre.2011.02.023 
28 	 Folegatti PM, Ewer KJ, Aley PK, et al, Oxford COVID Vaccine Trial 
Group. Safety and immunogenicity of the ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 
vaccine against SARS-CoV-2: a preliminary report of a phase 1/2, 
single-blind, randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2020;396:467-78. 
doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(20)31604-4 
29 	 Voysey M, Clemens SAC, Madhi SA, et al, Oxford COVID Vaccine 
Trial Group. Safety and efficacy of the ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 vaccine 
(AZD1222) against SARS-CoV-2: an interim analysis of four 
randomised controlled trials in Brazil, South Africa, and the UK. 
Lancet 2021;397:99-111. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(20)32661-1 
30 	 Soi C, Shearer JC, Budden A, et al. How to evaluate the 
implementation of complex health programmes in low-income 
settings: the approach of the Gavi Full Country Evaluations. Health 
Policy Plan 2020;35(Supplement_2):ii35-46. doi:10.1093/heapol/
czaa127 
31 	 Burgess RA, Osborne RH, Yongabi KA, et al. The COVID-19 vaccines 
rush: participatory community engagement matters more than ever. 
Lancet 2021;397:8-10. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(20)32642-8 
32 	 Paltiel AD, Schwartz JL, Zheng A, Walensky RP. Clinical Outcomes 
Of A COVID-19 Vaccine: Implementation Over Efficacy. Health Aff 
(Millwood) 2021;40:42-52. doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2020.02054 
33 	 Dalkin S, Lhussier M, Williams L, et al. Exploring the use of Soft 
Systems Methodology with realist approaches: A novel way to map 
programme complexity and develop and refine programme theory. 
Evaluation 2018;24:84-97. doi:10.1177/1356389017749036 .
34 	 Mann C, Shaw ARG, Guthrie B, et al. Can implementation failure 
or intervention failure explain the result of the 3D multimorbidity 
trial in general practice: mixed-methods process evaluation. BMJ 
Open 2019;9:e031438. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2019-031438 
35 	 French C, Pinnock H, Forbes G, Skene I, Taylor SJC. Process evaluation 
within pragmatic randomised controlled trials: what is it, why is it 
done, and can we find it?-a systematic review. Trials 2020;21:916. 
doi:10.1186/s13063-020-04762-9 
36 	 Penney T, Adams J, Briggs A, et al. Evaluation of the impacts on health 
of the proposed UK industry levy on sugar sweetened beverages: 
developing a systems map and data platform, and collection 
of baseline and early impact data. National Institute for Health 
Research, 2018. https://www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk/programmes/
phr/164901/#/.
37 	 Hoddinott P, Britten J, Pill R. Why do interventions work in some 
places and not others: a breastfeeding support group trial. Soc Sci 
Med 2010;70:769-78. doi:10.1016/j.socscimed.2009.10.067 
38 	 Funnell SC, Rogers PJ. Purposeful program theory: effective use of 
theories of change and logic models. 1st ed. Jossey-Bass, 2011.
39 	 Lawless A, Baum F, Delany-Crowe T, et al. Developing a Framework 
for a Program Theory-Based Approach to Evaluating Policy Processes 
and Outcomes: Health in All Policies in South Australia. Int J Health 
Policy Manag 2018;7:510-21. doi:10.15171/ijhpm.2017.121 
40 	 Stephens TJ, Peden CJ, Pearse RM, et al, EPOCH trial group. Improving 
care at scale: process evaluation of a multi-component quality 
improvement intervention to reduce mortality after emergency 
abdominal surgery (EPOCH trial). Implement Sci 2018;13:142. 
doi:10.1186/s13012-018-0823-9 
41 	 Bonell C, Jamal F, Melendez-Torres GJ, Cummins S. ‘Dark logic’: 
theorising the harmful consequences of public health interventions. 
J Epidemiol Community Health 2015;69:95-8. doi:10.1136/jech-
2014-204671 
42 	 Maini R, Mounier-Jack S, Borghi J. How to and how not to develop 
a theory of change to evaluate a complex intervention: reflections 
on an experience in the Democratic Republic of Congo. BMJ Glob 
Health 2018;3:e000617. doi:10.1136/bmjgh-2017-000617 
43 	 Cook PA, Hargreaves SC, Burns EJ, et al. Communities in charge of 
alcohol (CICA): a protocol for a stepped-wedge randomised control 
trial of an alcohol health champions programme. BMC Public 
Health 2018;18:522. doi:10.1186/s12889-018-5410-0 
44 	 Ebenso B, Manzano A, Uzochukwu B, et al. Dealing with context in 
logic model development: Reflections from a realist evaluation of 
a community health worker programme in Nigeria. Eval Program 
Plann 2019;73:97-110. doi:10.1016/j.evalprogplan.2018.12.002 
45 	 White M, Cummins S, Raynor M, et al. Evaluation of the health 
impacts of the UK Treasury Soft Drinks Industry Levy (SDIL) Project 
Protocol. NIHR Journals Library, 2018. https://www.journalslibrary.
nihr.ac.uk/programmes/phr/1613001/#/summary-of-research.
46 	 National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. What is public 
involvement in research? – INVOLVE. https://www.invo.org.uk/find-
out-more/what-is-public-involvement-in-research-2/.
47 	 Jones S, Riste L, Barrowclough C, et al. Reducing relapse and suicide 
in bipolar disorder: practical clinical approaches to identifying risk, 
reducing harm and engaging service users in planning and delivery 
of care – the PARADES (Psychoeducation, Anxiety, Relapse, Advance 
Directive Evaluation and Suicidality) programme. Programme Grants 
for Applied Research 2018;6:1-296. doi:10.3310/pgfar06060 
48 	 Moodie R, Stuckler D, Monteiro C, et al, Lancet NCD Action 
Group. Profits and pandemics: prevention of harmful effects of 
tobacco, alcohol, and ultra-processed food and drink industries. 
Lancet 2013;381:670-9. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(12)62089-3 
49 	 Yardley L, Ainsworth B, Arden-Close E, Muller I. The person-
based approach to enhancing the acceptability and feasibility 
of interventions. Pilot Feasibility Stud 2015;1:37. doi:10.1186/
s40814-015-0033-z 
50 	 Barnett ML, Dopp AR, Klein C, Ettner SL, Powell BJ, Saldana L. 
Collaborating with health economists to advance implementation 
science: a qualitative study. Implement Sci Commun 2020;1:82. 
doi:10.1186/s43058-020-00074-w 
51 	 National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Developing NICE 
guidelines: the manual. NICE, 2014. https://www.nice.org.uk/
process/pmg20/resources/developing-nice-guidelines-the-manual-
pdf-72286708700869.
52 	 Boyd KA, Balogun MO, Minnis H, et al. Development of a radical 
foster care intervention in Glasgow, Scotland. Health Promot 
Int 2016;31:665-73. doi:10.1093/heapro/dav041 
53 	 Deidda M, Boyd KA, Minnis H, et al, BeST study team. Protocol for 
the economic evaluation of a complex intervention to improve the 
mental health of maltreated infants and children in foster care in 
the UK (The BeST? services trial). BMJ Open 2018;8:e020066. 
doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2017-020066 
54 	 Escoffery C, Lebow-Skelley E, Haardoerfer R, et al. A systematic 
review of adaptations of evidence-based public health interventions 
globally. Implement Sci 2018;13:125. doi:10.1186/s13012-018-
0815-9 
55 	 Stirman SW, Miller CJ, Toder K, Calloway A. Development of a 
framework and coding system for modifications and adaptations 
of evidence-based interventions. Implement Sci 2013;8:65. 
doi:10.1186/1748-5908-8-65 
56 	 Forsyth R, Purcell C, Barry S, et al. Peer-led intervention to prevent 
and reduce STI transmission and improve sexual health in secondary 
schools (STASH): protocol for a feasibility study. Pilot Feasibility 
Stud 2018;4:180. doi:10.1186/s40814-018-0354-9 
57 	 White J, Hawkins J, Madden K, et al. Adapting the ASSIST model of 
informal peer-led intervention delivery to the Talk to FRANK drug 
prevention programme in UK secondary schools (ASSIST + FRANK): 
intervention development, refinement and a pilot cluster randomised 
controlled trial. Public Health Research 2017;5:1-98. doi:10.3310/
phr05070 
58 	 Evans RE, Moore G, Movsisyan A, Rehfuess E, ADAPT Panel, ADAPT 
Panel comprises of Laura Arnold. How can we adapt complex 
population health interventions for new contexts? Progressing 
debates and research priorities. J Epidemiol Community 
Health 2021;75:40-5. doi:10.1136/jech-2020-214468. 
59 	 Hawkes RE, Miles LM, French DP. The theoretical basis of a nationally 
implemented type 2 diabetes prevention programme: how is the 
programme expected to produce changes in behaviour?Int J Behav 
Nutr Phys Act 2021;18:64. doi:10.1186/s12966-021-01134-7 
60 	 Ogilvie D, Adams J, Bauman A, et al. Using natural experimental 
studies to guide public health action: turning the evidence-based 
medicine paradigm on its head.SocArXiv 2019. doi:10.31235/osf.io/
s36km. 
61 	 Eldridge SM, Chan CL, Campbell MJ, et al, PAFS consensus group. 
CONSORT 2010 statement: extension to randomised pilot and 
feasibility trials. BMJ 2016;355:i5239. doi:10.1136/bmj.i5239 
62 	 Thabane L, Hopewell S, Lancaster GA, et al. Methods and processes 
for development of a CONSORT extension for reporting pilot 
randomized controlled trials. Pilot Feasibility Stud 2016;2:25. 
doi:10.1186/s40814-016-0065-z 
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
30 September 2021. 
10.1136/bmj.n2061 on 
BMJ: first published as

----- Page 11 (native) -----
RESEARCH METHODS AND REPORTING
No commercial reuse: See rights and reprints http://www.bmj.com/permissions
Subscribe: http://www.bmj.com/subscribe
63 	 Craig P, Campbell M. Evaluability Assessment: a systematic 
approach to deciding whether and how to evaluate programmes 
and policies. Evaluability Assessment working paper. 2015. http://
whatworksscotland.ac.uk/wp-content/uploads/2015/07/WWS-
Evaluability-Assessment-Working-paper-final-June-2015.pdf
64 	 Ogilvie D, Cummins S, Petticrew M, White M, Jones A, Wheeler K. 
Assessing the evaluability of complex public health interventions: 
five questions for researchers, funders, and policymakers. Milbank 
Q 2011;89:206-25. doi:10.1111/j.1468-0009.2011.00626.x 
65 	 Expected Value of Perfect Information (EVPI). YHEC - York Health 
Econ. Consort. https://yhec.co.uk/glossary/expected-value-of-
perfect-information-evpi/.
66 	 Deaton A, Cartwright N. Understanding and misunderstanding 
randomized controlled trials. Soc Sci Med 2018;210:2-21. 
doi:10.1016/j.socscimed.2017.12.005 
67 	 Rosas S, Knight E. Evaluating a complex health promotion 
intervention: case application of three systems methods. Crit Public 
Health 2019;29:337-52. doi:10.1080/09581596.2018.1455966 .
68 	 McKee M, Britton A, Black N, McPherson K, Sanderson C, Bain C. 
Methods in health services research. Interpreting the evidence: 
choosing between randomised and non-randomised studies. 
BMJ 1999;319:312-5. doi:10.1136/bmj.319.7205.312 
69 	 Burnett T, Mozgunov P, Pallmann P, Villar SS, Wheeler GM, Jaki T. 
Adding flexibility to clinical trial designs: an example-based guide 
to the practical use of adaptive designs. BMC Med 2020;18:352. 
doi:10.1186/s12916-020-01808-2 
70 	 Collins LM, Murphy SA, Strecher V. The multiphase optimization strategy 
(MOST) and the sequential multiple assignment randomized trial 
(SMART): new methods for more potent eHealth interventions. Am J Prev 
Med 2007;32(Suppl):S112-8. doi:10.1016/j.amepre.2007.01.022 
71 	 McDonald S, Quinn F, Vieira R, et al. The state of the art and future 
opportunities for using longitudinal n-of-1 methods in health 
behaviour research: a systematic literature overview. Health Psychol 
Rev 2017;11:307-23. doi:10.1080/17437199.2017.1316672 
72 	 Green BB, Coronado GD, Schwartz M, Coury J, Baldwin LM. Using a 
continuum of hybrid effectiveness-implementation studies to put 
research-tested colorectal screening interventions into practice. 
Implement Sci 2019;14:53. doi:10.1186/s13012-019-0903-5 
73 	 Tugwell P, Knottnerus JA, McGowan J, Tricco A. Big-5 Quasi-
Experimental designs. J Clin Epidemiol 2017;89:1-3. doi:10.1016/j.
jclinepi.2017.09.010 
74 	 Egan M, McGill E, Penney T, et al. NIHR SPHR Guidance on Systems 
Approaches to Local Public Health Evaluation. Part 1: Introducing 
systems thinking. NIHR School for Public Health Research, 2019. 
https://sphr.nihr.ac.uk/wp-content/uploads/2018/08/NIHR-SPHR-
SYSTEM-GUIDANCE-PART-1-FINAL_SBnavy.pdf.
75 	 Bonell C, Fletcher A, Morton M, Lorenc T, Moore L. Realist randomised 
controlled trials: a new approach to evaluating complex public health 
interventions. Soc Sci Med 2012;75:2299-306. doi:10.1016/j.
socscimed.2012.08.032 
76 	 McGill E, Marks D, Er V, Penney T, Petticrew M, Egan M. Qualitative 
process evaluation from a complex systems perspective: A 
systematic review and framework for public health evaluators. PLoS 
Med 2020;17:e1003368. doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1003368 
77 	 Bicket M, Christie I, Gilbert N, et al. Magenta Book 2020 
Supplementary Guide: Handling Complexity in Policy Evaluation. 
Lond HM Treas 2020. https://assets.publishing.service.gov.
uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/
file/879437/Magenta_Book_supplementary_guide._Handling_
Complexity_in_policy_evaluation.pdf
78 	 Pfadenhauer LM, Gerhardus A, Mozygemba K, et al. Making 
sense of complexity in context and implementation: the Context 
and Implementation of Complex Interventions (CICI) framework. 
Implement Sci 2017;12:21. doi:10.1186/s13012-017-0552-5 
79 	 Curran GM, Bauer M, Mittman B, Pyne JM, Stetler C. Effectiveness-
implementation hybrid designs: combining elements of clinical 
effectiveness and implementation research to enhance public 
health impact. Med Care 2012;50:217-26. doi:10.1097/
MLR.0b013e3182408812 
80 	 Landes SJ, McBain SA, Curran GM. An introduction to effectiveness-
implementation hybrid designs. Psychiatry Res 2019;280:112513. 
doi:10.1016/j.psychres.2019.112513 
81 	 Imison C, Curry N, Holder H, et al. Shifting the balance of care: 
great expectations. Research report. Nuffield Trust. https://www.
nuffieldtrust.org.uk/research/shifting-the-balance-of-care-great-
expectations
82 	 Remme M, Martinez-Alvarez M, Vassall A. Cost-Effectiveness 
Thresholds in Global Health: Taking a Multisectoral Perspective. 
Value Health 2017;20:699-704. doi:10.1016/j.jval.2016.11.009 
83 	 Chalmers I, Glasziou P. Avoidable waste in the production 
and reporting of research evidence. Lancet 2009;374:86-9. 
doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(09)60329-9
Protected by copyright, including for uses related to text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 
.
by guest
 
on 1 November 2025
 
https://www.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
30 September 2021. 
10.1136/bmj.n2061 on 
BMJ: first published as