

----- Page 1 (native text) -----
Geosci. Model Dev., 9, 3461–3482, 2016
www.geosci-model-dev.net/9/3461/2016/
doi:10.5194/gmd-9-3461-2016
© Author(s) 2016. CC Attribution 3.0 License.
The Scenario Model Intercomparison Project (ScenarioMIP)
for CMIP6
Brian C. O’Neill1, Claudia Tebaldi1, Detlef P. van Vuuren2,3, Veronika Eyring4, Pierre Friedlingstein5, George Hurtt6,
Reto Knutti7, Elmar Kriegler8, Jean-Francois Lamarque1, Jason Lowe9, Gerald A. Meehl1, Richard Moss10,
Keywan Riahi11,12, and Benjamin M. Sanderson1
1National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR), Boulder, CO 80305, USA
2Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency (PBL), The Hague, the Netherlands
3Copernicus Institute for Sustainable Development, Utrecht University, Utrecht, the Netherlands
4Deutsches Zentrum für Luft- und Raumfahrt (DLR), Institut für Physik der Atmosphäre, Oberpfaffenhofen, Germany
5University of Exeter, Exeter, UK
6University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA
7Institute for Atmospheric and Climate Science, ETH Zurich, 8092 Zurich, Switzerland
8Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research (PIK), Potsdam, Germany
9Met Ofﬁce Hadley Centre, Exeter, UK
10Paciﬁc Northwest National Laboratory’s Joint Global Change Research Institute at the University of Maryland,
College Park, MD, USA
11International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA), Laxenburg, Austria
12Graz University of Technology, Graz, Austria
Correspondence to: Brian C. O’Neill (boneill@ucar.edu)
Received: 8 April 2016 – Published in Geosci. Model Dev. Discuss.: 22 April 2016
Revised: 16 August 2016 – Accepted: 31 August 2016 – Published: 28 September 2016
Abstract. Projections of future climate change play a funda-
mental role in improving understanding of the climate sys-
tem as well as characterizing societal risks and response op-
tions. The Scenario Model Intercomparison Project (Scenar-
ioMIP) is the primary activity within Phase 6 of the Coupled
Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP6) that will provide
multi-model climate projections based on alternative scenar-
ios of future emissions and land use changes produced with
integrated assessment models. In this paper, we describe Sce-
narioMIP’s objectives, experimental design, and its relation
to other activities within CMIP6. The ScenarioMIP design
is one component of a larger scenario process that aims to
facilitate a wide range of integrated studies across the cli-
mate science, integrated assessment modeling, and impacts,
adaptation, and vulnerability communities, and will form an
important part of the evidence base in the forthcoming Inter-
governmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) assessments.
At the same time, it will provide the basis for investigating
a number of targeted science and policy questions that are
especially relevant to scenario-based analysis, including the
role of speciﬁc forcings such as land use and aerosols, the
effect of a peak and decline in forcing, the consequences
of scenarios that limit warming to below 2 ◦C, the relative
contributions to uncertainty from scenarios, climate models,
and internal variability, and long-term climate system out-
comes beyond the 21st century. To serve this wide range of
scientiﬁc communities and address these questions, a design
has been identiﬁed consisting of eight alternative 21st cen-
tury scenarios plus one large initial condition ensemble and
a set of long-term extensions, divided into two tiers deﬁned
by relative priority. Some of these scenarios will also pro-
vide a basis for variants planned to be run in other CMIP6-
Endorsed MIPs to investigate questions related to speciﬁc
forcings. Harmonized, spatially explicit emissions and land
use scenarios generated with integrated assessment models
will be provided to participating climate modeling groups by
late 2016, with the climate model simulations run within the
2017–2018 time frame, and output from the climate model
Published by Copernicus Publications on behalf of the European Geosciences Union.


----- Page 2 (native text) -----
3462
B. C. O’Neill et al.: The Scenario Model Intercomparison Project (ScenarioMIP) for CMIP6
projections made available and analyses performed over the
2018–2020 period.
1
Introduction
Scenarios describing possible future developments of anthro-
pogenic drivers of climate change (i.e., greenhouse gases,
chemically reactive gases, aerosols, and land use) consis-
tent with socioeconomic developments play an important
role in climate research. They allow an assessment of pos-
sible changes in the climate system, impacts on society and
ecosystems, and the effectiveness of response options such
as adaptation and mitigation under a wide range of future
outcomes.
Scenarios produced in the Intergovernmental Panel on Cli-
mate Change (IPCC) Special Report on Emissions Scenarios
(SRES; Nakicénovi´c et al., 2000) formed the basis for cli-
mate model projections in Phase 3 of the Coupled Model
Intercomparison Project (CMIP3; Meehl et al., 2007) and
their assessment in the IPCC AR4 Working Group I (IPCC,
2007a), and were used to model impacts on society and
ecosystems (IPCC, 2007, 2014a, b) and mitigation strategies
(IPCC, 2001b, 2007c, 2014c). In 2007, an expert meeting at
Noordwijkerhout agreed on a process for the development
of new community scenarios (Moss et al., 2008, 2010). That
process began with the identiﬁcation of the Representative
Concentration Pathways (RCPs; van Vuuren et al., 2011a),
a set of four pathways of land use and emissions of air pol-
lutants and greenhouse gases that spanned a wide range of
future outcomes through 2100. The RCPs were the basis for
climate model projections in CMIP5 (Taylor et al., 2012) and
their assessment in the IPCC AR5 (IPCC, 2013).
The Scenario Model Intercomparison Project (Scenari-
oMIP) is now the primary activity within CMIP6 that will
provide multi-model climate projections based on alterna-
tive scenarios that are directly relevant to societal concerns
regarding climate change mitigation, adaptation, or impacts.
These climate projections will be driven by a new set of emis-
sions and land use scenarios (Riahi et al., 2016) produced
with integrated assessment models (IAMs) based on new fu-
ture pathways of societal development, the Shared Socioe-
conomic Pathways (SSPs), and related to the RCPs. CMIP6
climate projections will differ from those in CMIP5 not only
because they are produced with updated versions of climate
models, but also because they are driven with SSP-based sce-
narios produced with updated versions of IAMs and based on
updated data on recent emissions trends. Unlike in CMIP3
and CMIP5, where climate model projections were part of
the core experiments, in CMIP6 they are part of a dedicated
CMIP6-Endorsed MIP (Eyring et al., 2016).
In Sect. 2, we describe the process by which Scenari-
oMIP’s experimental design was formulated and its objec-
tives. This includes its role in providing an integrating re-
search framework across communities and in addressing spe-
ciﬁc research and policy questions. We provide background
on the broader scenario process in which ScenarioMIP sim-
ulations will play a role and identify the speciﬁc scientiﬁc
questions it aims to address. Section 3 then describes the ex-
perimental design, summarizing the types of model exper-
iments to be run by the CMIP6 climate model groups sepa-
rated into two tiers differentiated by priority, as well as the re-
lation of the design to other components of CMIP6. Section 4
describes the planned inputs to climate models to be provided
by integrated assessment models developing the emissions
and land use scenarios, as well as the climate model outputs
to be analyzed and made available to the community. Sec-
tion 5 provides a concluding discussion.
2
ScenarioMIP process, objectives, and background
2.1
ScenarioMIP process
Because of the importance of the ScenarioMIP simulations
across multiple research ﬁelds and to policy makers, the
experimental design was developed collaboratively by re-
searchers within the climate science, IAM, and impacts,
adaptation, and vulnerability (IAV) communities. The idea
for an activity within CMIP6 focused on scenarios was elab-
orated in discussions in 2013 among the IAM, IAV and
climate modeling communities.1 A ScenarioMIP Scientiﬁc
Steering Committee (SSC) charged with proposing an exper-
imental design was then formed following the 17th session
of the World Climate Research Programme (WCRP) Work-
ing Group on Coupled Modeling (WGCM) in October 2013
in Victoria, Canada.
The ScenarioMIP SSC together with other communities
(see below) systematically investigated a number of issues
that could substantially inﬂuence the experimental design,
especially those that would affect the required number of
model runs. First, the possibility was considered to iden-
tify a smaller subset of scenarios to be run by statistically
sampling from among the large number of possible com-
binations of different SSPs, forcing targets, IAMs, and cli-
mate models. It was decided that this approach could cur-
rently not be carried out with a reasonable number of cli-
mate model simulations without sacriﬁcing the representa-
tion of uncertainty for a given scenario. Second, the po-
tential for pattern scaling or other statistical emulators of
climate model output to meet some of the demand for
scenario-based climate information was considered. A work-
shop held for this purpose concluded that pattern scaling
has currently not yet been demonstrated to be able to reli-
1Key discussions occurred at the annual meeting of the inte-
grated assessment and impacts communities in Snowmass, CO, in
July 2013, and a meeting on CMIP6 at the Aspen Global Change
Institute in Aspen, CO, in August 2013, Next Generation Climate
Change Experiments Needed to Advance Knowledge and for As-
sessment of CMIP6 (Meehl et al., 2014).
Geosci. Model Dev., 9, 3461–3482, 2016
www.geosci-model-dev.net/9/3461/2016/


----- Page 3 (native text) -----
B. C. O’Neill et al.: The Scenario Model Intercomparison Project (ScenarioMIP) for CMIP6
3463
ably replace the need for climate model projections to gen-
erate information for impact studies (although it might play
a role for some applications, e.g. Tebaldi and Arblaster,
2014; see workshop report at https://www2.image.ucar.edu/
sites/default/ﬁles/event/PS2014WorkshopReport_0.pdf). Fi-
nally, the difference between scenarios (in terms of global
average forcing or temperature change) that is required to
produce signiﬁcantly different climate outcomes was inves-
tigated. Initial studies indicate that scenario differences of at
least 0.3 ◦C in global average surface temperature are likely
necessary to generate statistically signiﬁcant differences in
local temperature over a substantial fraction of the surface,
and substantially larger differences are required to produce
similarly signiﬁcant and extensive differences in precipita-
tion outcomes (Tebaldi et al., 2015). Further work on this
topic is desirable, especially to explore the sensitivity of ad-
ditional impact-relevant variables, time and spatial scales of
interest, and local forcings.
Informed by these conclusions, a process was organized
by the SSC to develop a ﬁnal protocol. This process in-
cluded close interaction with the climate research, IAMs and
IAV communities through presentations and discussions at
a number of meetings in 2014 and 2015,2 as well as coor-
dination with other MIPs developing proposals for CMIP6.
It also involved discussions with representatives of the Inte-
grated Assessment Modeling Consortium’s (IAMC’s) Work-
ing Group on Scenarios, which is coordinating the produc-
tion of SSP-based energy–land use–emissions scenarios (Ri-
ahi et al., 2016) for CMIP6, and discussions with key in-
dividuals in other relevant research communities, including
through the International Committee On New Integrated Cli-
mate change assessment Scenarios (ICONICS). Feedback on
various drafts was also received from the CMIP review pro-
cess and from relevant groups including ICONICS, the IPCC
Task Group on Data and Scenario Support for Impacts and
Climate Analysis (TGICA), the CMIP panel, and the WCRP
Working Group on Regional Climate.
2.2
ScenarioMIP objectives
ScenarioMIP has three primary objectives:
a. Facilitate integrated research leading to a better under-
standing not only of the physical climate system con-
sequences of these scenarios, but also of the climate
impact on societies. The results of the ScenarioMIP
experiments will provide new climate information for
2Session at the July 2014 Snowmass meeting on integrated as-
sessment and impacts; joint meeting on proposed CMIP6 MIPs
on scenarios, land use, and aerosols and chemistry, Aspen Global
Change Institute, August 2014 (O’Neill et al., 2014a); WCRP-IPCC
WG1 meeting in Bern, Switzerland, September 2014; WGCM18
meeting in October 2014; annual meeting of the Integrated Assess-
ment Modeling Consortium, November 2014; IPCC expert meeting
on scenarios, IIASA, Laxenburg, Austria, May 2015.
future scenarios that will facilitate integrated research
across multiple communities including the (1) climate
science, (2) integrated assessment modeling, and (3) im-
pacts, adaptation, and vulnerability communities. This
research will be key in informing mitigation and adap-
tation policy considerations, including processes that
are part of the UN Framework Convention on Climate
Change (UNFCCC) such as the 2015 Paris Climate
Agreement.
b. Provide a basis for addressing targeted science ques-
tions in ScenarioMIP and other CMIP6 projects, regard-
ing the climate effects of particular aspects of forcing
relevant to scenario-based research. This includes the
effects of a substantial overshoot in radiative forcing
and the effect of different assumptions on land use and
near-term climate forcers (NTCFs; namely tropospheric
aerosols, tropospheric O3 precursors, and CH4) on cli-
mate change and its impacts. Therefore, a set of vari-
ants of the scenarios proposed here are being proposed
in other CMIP6-Endorsed MIPs (see Sect. 2.3.3) to ad-
dress targeted questions.
c. Provide a basis for research efforts that target improved
methods to quantify projection uncertainties based on
multi-model ensembles, taking into account model per-
formance, model dependence and observational un-
certainty. This extends the knowledge basis derived
from the Diagnostic, Evaluation and Characterization
of Klima (DECK) experiments and the CMIP6 histor-
ical simulations (Eyring et al., 2016) and allows for the
quantiﬁcation of uncertainties on different timescales.
ScenarioMIP will provide some of the results needed
in the next IPCC assessment to characterize the uncer-
tainty in future climate and impacts.
The ﬁrst objective is considered to be the highest priority
for several reasons. First, “scenarios for integration” serve a
large scientiﬁc audience, underpinning hundreds of scenario-
based studies addressing a wide variety of scientiﬁc ques-
tions regarding physical climate changes, mitigation, im-
pacts, and adaptation. Having common climate and socioeco-
nomic scenarios serves as a critical means to enhance direct
comparability of a wide variety of studies, allowing synthetic
conclusions to be drawn that would not be possible from a
variety of uncoordinated studies (van Vuuren et al., 2012;
Kriegler et al., 2012). The climate simulations produced by
ScenarioMIP will constitute a key element of a larger, coor-
dinated process within the climate change research commu-
nity to produce both socioeconomic and climate scenarios
that can underpin integrated research for many years to come
(Sect. 2.3).
Second, scenarios for integration can serve as a key means
for producing better integrated scientiﬁc assessments, such as
those connecting different working groups and the synthesis
report of IPCC.
www.geosci-model-dev.net/9/3461/2016/
Geosci. Model Dev., 9, 3461–3482, 2016


----- Page 4 (native text) -----
3464
B. C. O’Neill et al.: The Scenario Model Intercomparison Project (ScenarioMIP) for CMIP6
Third, the recent Paris Agreement adopted by parties to
the UNFCCC (2015) has focused renewed attention on the
goal of limiting warming to below 2 ◦C global mean temper-
ature change relative to pre-industrial and encouraged coun-
tries to pursue efforts to limit warming to an even lower goal
of 1.5 ◦C. Integrated scenarios can help inform dialogues and
associated comparative climate changes to help address these
political goals.
Finally, a common set of scenarios for integration reduces
the need for individual research projects to develop their own
scenario information to support scenario-based studies. The
availability of common scenarios reduces possible redun-
dancy in efforts and makes scenario-based research feasible
for many groups that otherwise would not be able to carry it
out.
2.3
The scenario framework
Moss et al. (2010) introduced a parallel approach for devel-
oping new community scenarios, followed by an integration
phase. One of the parallel tracks was the production of cli-
mate model projections based on the four RCPs as part of
CMIP5 (Taylor et al., 2012). The other track developed alter-
native future societal development pathways (the SSPs) and
emissions and land use scenarios based on them, generated
with IAMs. The integration phase brings together the climate
simulations and SSP-based societal futures to carry out inte-
grated analysis.
The SSPs were developed over the last several years as
a community effort and describe global developments lead-
ing to different challenges for mitigation and adaptation to
climate change. A conceptual framework for the SSPs and
how they could be used with RCP-based climate simulations
to carry out integrated research was developed ﬁrst (van Vu-
uren et al., 2012, 2014; O’Neill et al., 2014b; Kriegler et al.,
2012, 2014a). The speciﬁc content of the SSPs was devel-
oped next (Riahi et al, 2016). These comprise ﬁve alternative
narratives that describe the main characteristics of the path-
ways in qualitative terms (O’Neill et al., 2015) as well as
quantitative descriptions for key elements including popula-
tion (KC and Lutz, 2014), economic growth (Dellink et al.,
2015), and urbanization (Jiang and O’Neill, 2015).
In short, the SSPs describe alternative evolutions of future
society in the absence of climate change or climate policy.
SSPs 1 and 5 envision relatively optimistic trends for human
development, with substantial investments in education and
health, rapid economic growth, and well-functioning institu-
tions. However, SSP5 assumes an energy intensive, fossil-
based economy, while in SSP1 there is an increasing shift
toward sustainable practices. SSPs 3 and 4 envision more
pessimistic development trends, with little investment in ed-
ucation or health, fast growing population, and increasing
inequalities. In SSP3 countries prioritize regional security,
whereas in SSP4 large inequalities within and across coun-
tries dominate, in both cases leading to societies that are
highly vulnerable to climate change. SSP2 envisions a cen-
tral pathway in which trends continue their historical patterns
without substantial deviations.
IAM scenarios were then developed based on the SSPs by
elaborating on their implications for energy systems (Bauer
et al., 2016) and land use changes (Popp et al., 2016) and
quantifying resulting greenhouse gas emissions and atmo-
spheric concentrations (Riahi et al., 2016). These SSP-based
IAM scenarios consist of a set of baseline scenarios, which
provide a description of future developments in the absence
of climate change impacts or new climate policies beyond
those in place today, as well as mitigation scenarios which
explore the implications of climate change mitigation poli-
cies applied to the baseline scenarios. Multiple IAMs were
used for the quantiﬁcation of the SSP scenarios, and a sin-
gle “marker” scenario was selected as representative in each
case. Scenarios in the ScenarioMIP design are selected from
these marker scenarios.
Integrated analyses drawing on the qualitative and quanti-
tative elements of the SSPs and climate change information
from the CMIP5 simulations of the RCPs have already be-
gun to appear (e.g., Alﬁeri et al., 2015; Arnell et al., 2014;
Biewald et al., 2015; Dong et al., 2015; Hejazi et al., 2015)
and climate model simulations with the RCPs will continue
to be a key input to research on climate change and impacts
for many years. ScenarioMIP is playing a key role by iden-
tifying an updated and expanded set of concentration path-
ways based on the SSPs to be run by climate models as part
of CMIP6. These CMIP6 simulations will allow integrated
analyses to be carried out using climate simulations based
on the latest versions of climate models, for a larger set of
concentration pathways based on the most recent versions of
IAMs.
Figure 1 visualizes how SSPs can be combined with cli-
mate simulations from either CMIP5 or CMIP6, using the
example of a forcing pathway stabilizing at 4.5 W m−2. In
general, each SSP forcing pathway combination represents
an integrated scenario of future climate and societal change
which would be used to investigate issues such as the miti-
gation effort required to achieve that particular climate out-
come, the possibilities for adaptation under that climate out-
come and assumed societal conditions, and the remaining
impacts on society or ecosystems. The full set of multiple
SSPs and forcing outcomes forms a matrix of possible in-
tegrated scenarios (van Vuuren et al., 2012, 2014; Kriegler
et al., 2012). Each row contains climate model simulations
based on a forcing pathway (e.g., a 4.5 W m−2 pathway in
Fig. 1), which can be used in combination with the societal
conditions described by any of the SSPs, as long as it is fea-
sible that SSP emissions could be made consistent with that
forcing pathway (see Sect. 3.1.1 for a discussion of feasibil-
ity). We refer to these scenarios as SSPx–y, where x is the
speciﬁc SSP and y represents the forcing pathway, deﬁned
Geosci. Model Dev., 9, 3461–3482, 2016
www.geosci-model-dev.net/9/3461/2016/


----- Page 5 (native text) -----
B. C. O’Neill et al.: The Scenario Model Intercomparison Project (ScenarioMIP) for CMIP6
3465
Figure 1. SSP forcing scenario matrix illustrating the combination of a 4.5 W m−2 forcing pathway with alternative SSPs. The dark blue
cell illustrates a scenario serving as part of the design of ScenarioMIP. The green cell represents RCP4.5 in CMIP5, which was based on a
previous emissions and land use scenario. White cells indicate scenarios for which climate information would come from either the CMIP5
or CMIP6 simulations.
by its long-term global average radiative forcing level.3 In
the example shown in the ﬁgure, mitigation policies would
be added to each SSP to produce a forcing pathway that sta-
bilized at 4.5 W m−2, and SSP2-4.5 is singled out as the spe-
ciﬁc scenario that would be used as input to climate model
simulations in ScenarioMIP.
Currently, RCP simulations from CMIP5 are available to
provide climate information for integrated scenarios combin-
ing SSP-based socioeconomic and energy–emissions–land
use scenarios (as, e.g., SSP2-4.5) with the climate change
projections from CMIP5 (e.g., the RCP4.5 simulations).
CMIP5 RCPs were derived from earlier emissions and land
use scenarios (van Vuuren et al., 2011b), and therefore the
regional pattern of climate change resulting from an RCP
climate simulation would not be identical with an SSPx–y
simulation following a similar global forcing pathway. An
enabling hypothesis of the parallel process is that differences
in climate change projections would be small enough to still
warrant integration of the two sets of information into mit-
igation, impacts and adaptation analysis. The ScenarioMIP
design will include an updated and expanded set of forc-
ing pathways directly derived from SSPs. Once they become
available, climate model simulations based on these path-
ways will then be used to provide climate information for
integrated studies.
3Following practice established for the RCPs, the forcing level
usually refers to the forcing achieved in 2100 but in some cases
refers to an intended forcing stabilization level that is reached be-
yond 2100. Forcing is reported as global average radiative forcing,
not effective radiative forcing (Myhre et al., 2013).
2.4
Scientiﬁc questions addressed by ScenarioMIP
As noted in Sect. 2.2, the highest priority objective for Sce-
narioMIP is to provide climate model simulations that can
facilitate a wide range of integrated research on the climate
impact on societies, including considerations of mitigation
and adaptation. Thus, an overarching interdisciplinary
science question addressed by ScenarioMIP simulations is
What are the mitigation efforts, climate outcomes, im-
pacts, and adaptation options that would be associated with
a range of radiative forcing pathways?
However in addition, ScenarioMIP simulations will be key
to addressing two of the three CMIP6 science questions that
have informed the overall CMIP6 design and the endorse-
ment of proposed MIPs, related to the effects of external
forcings on the Earth system and to the confounding effects
of different sources of uncertainty on future anthropogenic
climate change outcomes. Table 1 lists the two questions
along with a number of sub-questions that ScenarioMIP ex-
periments are intended to explore. In addition, studies ad-
dressing WCRP Grand Challenges (clouds, circulation and
climate sensitivity, melting ice and global consequences, cli-
mate extremes, regional sea-level change and coastal impacts
and water availability) will beneﬁt from the availability of
outcomes from future scenario simulations.
The scenario framework described in Sect. 2.3 raises spe-
ciﬁc questions that ScenarioMIP, in collaboration with other
CMIP6-Endorsed MIPs (in particular, the Land Use MIP
(LUMIP) and Aerosols and Chemistry MIP (AerChemMIP))
will also help address through coordinated experiments in
www.geosci-model-dev.net/9/3461/2016/
Geosci. Model Dev., 9, 3461–3482, 2016


----- Page 6 (native text) -----
3466
B. C. O’Neill et al.: The Scenario Model Intercomparison Project (ScenarioMIP) for CMIP6
Table 1. Scientiﬁc questions addressed by ScenarioMIP related to the CMIP6 science questions.
CMIP6 science question
Sub-questions addressed by ScenarioMIP
– How does the Earth system
respond to forcing?
– How does the Earth system respond to forcing pathways relevant to IAM and IAV research
and to policy considerations?
– What is the uncertainty in global and regional climate change due to variations in future land
use and NTCFs emissions that are feasible in an IAM, and how does it compare to multi-model
uncertainty in the response to a given forcing pathway?
How much do alternative shapes of forcing pathways (e.g. overshoot) feasible to produce in an
IAM matter to climate change outcomes, and therefore to questions about mitigation, impacts,
and adaptation?
– What is the uncertainty in global and regional climate as a result of model uncertainty (as
opposed to scenario variations), and how can this be estimated from a model ensemble of op-
portunity without a speciﬁc design to sample uncertainty?
Can emergent constraints (i.e., statistical relationships between features of current and pro-
jected future climate that emerge from considering the multi-model ensemble as a whole) be
used to recalibrate the ensemble and to quantify or reduce the uncertainty in the response to a
given scenario of future forcing?
– In which part of the Earth system, and when, are such constraints expected to emerge, how do
they trace back to modeled processes, are those processes adequately represented, and how can
this information be used to improve models, point to critical observations and monitoring pro-
grams, and link process understanding, detection and attribution, projections, and uncertainty
quantiﬁcation?
– How can we assess future cli-
mate changes given climate vari-
ability, climate predictability, and
uncertainties in scenarios?
– How can we assess future climate changes for forcing pathways spanning a range of uncer-
tainties in global and regional forcing relevant to IAM and IAV research, as well as to policy?
which variants of ScenarioMIP scenarios will be run by
other MIPs.
Are differences in regional forcing, or forcings not in-
cluded in deﬁnition of targets (e.g., biophysical effects), a
source of signiﬁcant differences in climate outcomes across
a matrix row?
The rows of the SSP forcing matrix shown in Fig. 1 are
deﬁned by forcing pathways that achieve the same level of
global average radiative forcing in 2100. ScenarioMIP will
carry out climate model simulations for one particular land
use and concentration pathway that leads to this level of ra-
diative forcing. However, in principle this forcing level can
be achieved via pathways of emissions and land use that dif-
fer widely in terms of regional land use patterns, regional
patterns of emissions of NTCFs, and mixes of global emis-
sions of greenhouse gases (GHGs) and NTCFs. For example,
the different SSPs making up a given row of the matrix will
have different patterns of regional economic growth, energy
system development, air quality policies, land use, and other
characteristics that will lead to the same global average forc-
ing outcome being achieved by different means in each case.
Thus, an open scientiﬁc question is the degree to which cli-
mate outcomes can be expected to differ between land use
and emissions pathways that achieve the same global aver-
age radiative forcing level in 2100 but have different patterns
of regional forcing.
An assumption underlying the parallel process (Moss et
al., 2010) and the SSP scenario framework is that these dif-
ferences in climate outcomes are likely to be small relative
to the overall uncertainty in applications of these simulations
to integrated analyses (including impact assessments). This
assumption is critical to be able to combine a ScenarioMIP
climate simulation for a given SSP and forcing level with sce-
narios based on other SSPs achieving the same forcing level.
Experiments carried out in other MIPs based on scenarios in
the ScenarioMIP design will help test this assumption (see
Sect. 3.3.3). If it turns out that climate outcomes are much
more sensitive to local forcing differences than currently as-
sumed, the ability to use ScenarioMIP simulations for each
forcing level for all SSPs might not be possible for all studies.
In that case, Earth system model (ESM) simulations speciﬁc
to each combination of SSP and forcing pathway would be
required.
In addition, the deﬁnition of global average forcing in
2100 includes the forcing effect of GHGs and NTCFs,
but excludes the biophysical effects of land use change on
climate (e.g., through albedo or changes to the hydrological
cycle). Thus, it is also an open question whether alternative
pathways that achieve the same level of global average
radiative forcing as deﬁned here, but differ in forcing due to
Geosci. Model Dev., 9, 3461–3482, 2016
www.geosci-model-dev.net/9/3461/2016/


----- Page 7 (native text) -----
B. C. O’Neill et al.: The Scenario Model Intercomparison Project (ScenarioMIP) for CMIP6
3467
the biophysical effects of land use change, would produce
substantially different climate outcomes.
What are global and regional climate differences between
scenarios with small differences in forcing levels?
The experimental design includes six out of eight 21st
century scenarios that are within a maximum of 1.0 W m−2
of another scenario in terms of global average radiative
forcing in 2100. Early in the design of the scenario frame-
work, a criterion for selecting RCPs was that they be well
separated in terms of radiative forcing (Moss et al., 2008).
More recent work (Tebaldi et al., 2015) has reﬁned this
view, indicating that regional temperature outcomes that are
statistically signiﬁcantly different at a 5 % level for more
than half the land surface area, and robustly so across the
multi-model ensemble, require a separation of at least 0.3 ◦C
in global average temperature. This difference in global
temperature is roughly equivalent to about 0.75 W m−2 of
global average forcing in an idealized 1 % yr−1 CO2 increase
experiment, although the equivalent value is sensitive to
the forcing pathway. For regional precipitation, a much
wider separation is required to ensure that scenarios are
statistically different. From a policy-making perspective
the issue of scenario separation is also important, as policy
interest often focuses on the differential impacts between
climate change or forcing levels that are relatively close to
each other. The ScenarioMIP design will allow for further
analysis of these types of questions, providing simulations
that will allow addressing region- and variable-speciﬁc
sensitivities, dependence on geographic and temporal scale
of variable differences, and the role of internal variability.
What are the effects of declines in forcing (overshoot
scenarios)?
There is both scientiﬁc and policy interest in the climate
outcomes associated with forcing pathways that exceed a
given forcing level and later peak and decline back to that
level (overshoot pathways). Such pathways may become
increasingly a point of discussion if there is a persistent gap
between moderate near-term emission reduction efforts and
the ambition to limit climate forcing and global mean warm-
ing to very low levels. To this end, the lowest RCP (RCP2.6),
and the low SSP scenarios, already exhibit a limited degree
of concentration overshoot. One of the scenarios within the
ScenarioMIP design describes a much stronger overshoot
pathway with radiative forcing that peaks and declines within
the 21st century and declines further thereafter, allowing
for investigation of the effect of overshoot and declining
forcing on the climate system and society. In particular,
it allows investigating to what extent climate impacts are
higher and what long-lasting and potentially irreversible
changes in the climate system occur in an overshoot scenario.
Can pattern scaling, or other approaches to climate model
emulation, be used to produce climate outcomes for forcing
pathways not represented in the ScenarioMIP design?
Climate model emulators have the potential to provide
a computationally efﬁcient means of generating climate
outcomes for arbitrary scenarios and, in so doing, facilitate
the representation of uncertainty in applications to impact
studies (Tebaldi and Arblaster, 2014). However, the state of
development of such emulators is such that many situations
remain where they are not suitable, their behavior deviating
signiﬁcantly from the more computationally complex,
physically based models that they seek to emulate, or falling
short of producing temporally coherent projections, or
projections of multiple variables physically inter-related. A
more systematic exploration and development of such tech-
niques in order to realize their potential will be facilitated by
the availability of ScenarioMIP simulations, according to a
design that deliberately explores a large range of forcings
(both with respect to a lower and upper end, recently found
to be important in training emulators by Herger et al., 2015),
non-traditional pathways like substantial overshoots and
long-term extensions and, together with collaborating MIPs,
the effects of regionally and time-varying forcers other than
well-mixed, long-lived GHGs, in particular land use changes
and NTCFs.
Can emergent constraints (i.e., statistical relationships
between features of current and projected future climate
that emerge from considering the multi-model ensemble as
a whole) be used to recalibrate the ensemble and to reduce
the uncertainty in the response to a given scenario of future
forcing?
A longstanding open scientiﬁc question is the relation
between present-day model performance and future projec-
tions. A method to relate observed aspects of the present-day
mean climate or recent trends to the Earth system response in
some quantity is the so-called Emergent Constraints method
(Allen and Ingram, 2002; Bracegirdle and Stephenson, 2013;
Hall and Qu, 2006). An emergent constraint refers to the use
of observations to constrain a simulated future Earth system
feedback. It is referred to as emergent because a relation-
ship between such a feedback and an observable element
of climate variability emerges from an ensemble of ESM
projections, providing a constraint on the future feedback.
If physically plausible relationships can be found between,
for example, changes occurring on seasonal or interannual
timescales and changes found in anthropogenically-forced
climate change, then models that simulate correctly the sea-
sonal or interannual responses might make projections more
reliably. For example, Hall and Qu (2006) found that large
inter-model variations in the seasonal cycle of the albedo
between April and May in the 20th century are well corre-
lated with similarly large inter-model variations in the snow–
www.geosci-model-dev.net/9/3461/2016/
Geosci. Model Dev., 9, 3461–3482, 2016


----- Page 8 (native text) -----
3468
B. C. O’Neill et al.: The Scenario Model Intercomparison Project (ScenarioMIP) for CMIP6
albedo feedback on climatological timescales. The observ-
able variation in the seasonal cycle of the snow albedo is then
a useful proxy for constraining the unobservable feedback
strength to climate warming, as both are driven by the same
physical mechanisms on different timescales. Other exam-
ples include constraints on climate–carbon feedbacks (Cox
et al., 2013; Wenzel et al., 2014), the Austral jet stream posi-
tion (Wenzel et al., 2016), cloud feedbacks and equilibrium
climate sensitivity (Huber et al., 2011; Fasullo and Trenberth,
2012; Fasullo et al., 2015; Klein and Hall, 2015; Knutti et
al., 2006; Sherwood et al., 2014), and relations of past and
future sea ice or temperature trends (Boé et al., 2009; Knutti
and Tomassini, 2008; Mahlstein and Knutti, 2012; Massonet
et al., 2012). The ScenarioMIP design will allow for testing
emergent constraint results under various forcing pathways.
The results will be valuable for guiding the design of future
ensembles, e.g., how many and which models are needed to
maximize information at minimal computational cost.
3
Overview of ScenarioMIP experiment design
The ScenarioMIP experimental design consists of a set of
eight pathways of future emissions, concentrations and land
use, with additional ensemble members and long-term exten-
sions, grouped into two tiers of priority (of which only the
ﬁrst constitutes a required set for modeling centers partici-
pating in ScenarioMIP). We ﬁrst discuss the rationale behind
the types of pathways identiﬁed for inclusion in the design
and then present a summary of the pathways constituting the
design. Finally, we describe in more detail the features of the
ScenarioMIP design and the speciﬁc scenarios on which it is
based.
3.1
Rationale for scenario selection
The identiﬁcation of the forcing pathways to be included in
the ScenarioMIP design can be described in two parts: de-
ciding on the forcing levels to include, and then on the spe-
ciﬁc SSP-based scenario that each forcing pathway should be
based on. Additional decisions were then necessary on the
number of ensemble members to request from each model
for each scenario, and on long-term extensions beyond 2100.
3.1.1
Choosing forcing levels for CMIP6 scenarios
Choices of the global average forcing level for scenarios to
include in ScenarioMIP were based on the objectives out-
lined in Sect. 2.2. These objectives imply that the global av-
erage forcing pathways should cover a wide range of forcing
levels, provide continuity with CMIP5 experiments, and ﬁll
in gaps in CMIP5 forcing pathways that would be of interest
to the climate science, IAM, and IAV communities.
Based on these considerations, two types of pathways
were included in the ScenarioMIP design:
1. Updated CMIP5 RCPs: new versions of the four RCPs
used in CMIP5, based on the Shared Socioeconomic
Pathways and new IAM simulations derived from them.
This implies new, SSP-based versions of RCPs 2.6, 4.5,
6.0, and 8.5.
2. “Gap scenarios”: new forcing pathways not covered by
the RCPs, including new unmitigated SSP baseline sce-
narios and new mitigation pathways. Pathways iden-
tiﬁed of special interest, as discussed further below,
were those reaching 7.0, 3.4, and below 2.6 W m−2 in
2100 (the latter explicitly to inform understanding of
the 1.5 ◦C goal in the Paris agreement). The 7.0 W m−2
pathway represents an unmitigated baseline scenario,
whereas the 3.4 and < 2.6 W m−2 pathways are new
mitigation scenarios. In addition, there was interest in
a scenario with a substantial overshoot in radiative
forcing within the 21st century. An overshoot of the
3.4 W m−2 pathway was identiﬁed as the preferred can-
didate.
Moreover, 21st century scenarios in ScenarioMIP were also
required to be feasible in a narrow sense; i.e., speciﬁc sce-
nario outcomes had to be able to be produced with an inte-
grated assessment model (Hare et al., 2010). Each scenario
in ScenarioMIP is thus based on a set of internally consis-
tent assumptions leading to a distinct evolution of the un-
derlying socioeconomic systems. The details of the underly-
ing IAM scenarios help identify broader socioeconomic and
technological conditions under which speciﬁc pathways may
be attained in the real world. Feasibility in an IAM model
needs to be strictly differentiated, however, from the feasi-
bility of a scenario in the real world, i.e. whether or not the
scenario is capable of being attained. The latter hinges on a
number of additional factors, such as political and social con-
cerns, which might render feasible model solutions unattain-
able in the real world (see, e.g, Riahi et al., 2015). There
might also be feasible developments in the real world that are
not anticipated by the IAM. Results from major international
IAM comparison projects (Clarke et al., 2009; Kriegler et
al., 2014b; Riahi et al., 2015) indicate that not all scenarios
considered in ScenarioMIP may be equally attainable. For
example, under speciﬁc conditions (e.g., limited availability
of technologies or delayed mitigation) some models ﬁnd the
low forcing target of 2.6 W m−2 unattainable.
3.1.2
Choosing SSP-based scenarios
For each of these eight forcing pathways, an SSP was se-
lected on which to base emissions and land use scenario lead-
ing to the desired forcing level in 2100. The criteria for mak-
ing these choices revolved around the potential for different
SSPs (and emissions/land use scenarios based on them) to
Geosci. Model Dev., 9, 3461–3482, 2016
www.geosci-model-dev.net/9/3461/2016/


----- Page 9 (native text) -----
B. C. O’Neill et al.: The Scenario Model Intercomparison Project (ScenarioMIP) for CMIP6
3469
lead to different climate outcomes, even if they reached the
same global average forcing level in 2100 (see Sect. 2.4.2).
The prevailing hypothesis is that differences in climate out-
comes produced by different scenarios for the same global
forcing pathway are likely small relative to regional climate
variability, uncertainty across climate models, and uncer-
tainty in impact models used to investigate outcomes of in-
terest to the IAV community (see Sect. 2.4.2). Therefore, cli-
mate simulations based on a forcing pathway produced with
one SSP scenario will be used in studies aimed at investigat-
ing the effects of that same global average forcing pathway
but under future socioeconomic conditions given by a differ-
ent SSP.
However, the degree to which this hypothesis is correct re-
mains an open scientiﬁc question. We therefore choose an
SSP for each global average forcing pathway by taking into
consideration the possibility that the sensitivity of climate
outcomes to SSP choice may be larger than anticipated. To
account for that possibility, choices were based on one or,
when compatible, more of the following goals:
1. Facilitate climate research so that one can learn more
about the climate effects of aspects of forcing that
may vary by SSP for the same global average forcing
pathway, particularly those from land use changes and
aerosol emissions.
2. Minimize differences in climate between the outcomes
produced by the SSP chosen for a given global aver-
age forcing pathway and the climate that would have
been produced by choosing other SSPs. These differ-
ences would be minimized by choosing an SSP with
land use and aerosol pathways that are central relative
to other SSPs for the same global average forcing path-
way. However, given difﬁculties in identifying a cen-
tral scenario (due for example to consideration of mul-
tiple variables and regions), in practice this goal implies
avoiding SSPs with trends for land use or aerosols that
are outliers relative to other SSPs.
3. Ensure consistency with scenarios that are most rele-
vant to the IAM/IAV communities. Not all scenarios for
a given global average forcing pathway are anticipated
to be equally relevant to IAM and IAV research. This
goal implies choosing the SSP that we anticipate to be
especially relevant, so that if the climate effects of land
use and aerosols turn out to be larger than anticipated,
climate simulations will still be consistent with that sce-
nario.
3.2
Scenarios
3.2.1
General features of design
Table 2 lists all simulations being included in the Scenari-
oMIP experimental design, divided into two tiers by priority,
and the design is summarized visually within the context of
the scenario matrix in Fig. 2. Overall, the design has the fol-
lowing general features:
– Four new SSP-based scenarios that update the RCPs,
achieving forcing levels of 2.6, 4.5, 6.0, and 8.5 W m−2
in the long run.
– Four new “gap” scenarios that deﬁne forcing pathways
not represented by the RCPs to address new questions
of interest for integrated analysis. Two of these ﬁll in
gaps between RCPs, one represents a substantial forc-
ing overshoot pathway, and one investigates a forcing
pathway below the RCP2.6.
– Scenarios that inform the Paris Agreement goals of lim-
iting warming to below 2 or 1.5 ◦C. One of the up-
dated RCPs (2.6 W m−2) is expected to produce 1.7 ◦C
warming by 2100 (and would have a likely probabil-
ity to stay below 2.0 ◦C), while one of the gap scenarios
(< 2.6 W m−2) is designed to produce a global warming
that would likely be below 1.5 ◦C by 2100.
– Three long-term extensions of scenarios to 2300 to al-
low investigation of questions related to climate change
beyond 2100.
– Scenarios that can anchor experiments in a number of
other MIPs (see below) to investigate targeted ques-
tions, including for example the inﬂuence of land
use, aerosols and other NTCFs, and overshoot on cli-
mate outcomes; carbon cycle feedbacks; and ice sheet–
climate interactions.
– Only four scenarios (in Tier 1) with only one simulation
per scenario are required for any climate model partici-
pating in this MIP.
These scenarios are arranged into two Tiers as follows:
– Tier 1 spans a wide range of uncertainty in future forc-
ing pathways important for research in climate sci-
ence, IAM, and IAV studies, while also providing key
scenarios to anchor experiments in a number of other
MIPs (see last column in Table 2). It includes new
SSP-based scenarios as continuations of the RCP2.6,
RCP4.5, and RCP8.5 forcing levels, and an additional
unmitigated forcing scenario (SSP3-7.0) with particu-
larly high aerosol emissions and land use change.
– Tier 2 includes additional scenarios of interest as well
as additional ensemble members and long-term exten-
sions. It adds the fourth RCP forcing level, RCP6.0,
and two mitigation scenarios achieving relatively low
forcing outcomes: SSP4-3.4 (reaching 3.4 W m−2 by
2100) addresses policy discussions of mitigation path-
ways that fall between RCPs 2.6 and 4.5, and a scenario
www.geosci-model-dev.net/9/3461/2016/
Geosci. Model Dev., 9, 3461–3482, 2016


----- Page 10 (native text) -----
3470
B. C. O’Neill et al.: The Scenario Model Intercomparison Project (ScenarioMIP) for CMIP6
Figure 2. SSP-RCP scenario matrix illustrating ScenarioMIP simulations. Each cell in the matrix indicates a combination of socioeconomic
development pathway (i.e., an SSP) and climate outcome based on a particular forcing pathway that current IAM runs have shown to
be feasible (Riahi et al., 2016). Dark blue cells indicate scenarios that will serve as the basis for climate model projections in Tier 1 of
ScenarioMIP; light blue cells indicate scenarios in Tier 2. An overshoot version of the 3.4 W m−2 pathway is also part of Tier 2, as are
long-term extensions of SSP5-8.5, SSP1-2.6 and the overshoot scenario, and initial condition ensemble members of SSP3-7.0. White cells
indicate scenarios for which climate information is intended to come from the SSP scenario to be simulated for that row. CMIP5 RCPs, which
were developed from previous socioeconomic scenarios rather than SSPs, are shown for comparison. Note the SSP1-1.9 scenario indicated
here is preliminary (see text).
lower than the RCP 2.6 forcing pathway aims to help in-
form policy discussion of a global average temperature
limit below 1.5 ◦C warming relative to pre-industrial
levels. It also includes SSP5-3.4-OS, an overshoot path-
way, which explores the climate science and policy im-
plications of a peak and decline in forcing during the
21st century.
3.2.2
Description of each scenario and its rationale
We provide here more speciﬁc descriptions and justiﬁcations
for each of the experiments in the design, as well as for some
over-arching features of the design. For each of the 21st cen-
tury scenarios, we describe the relevance of the forcing path-
way and also the rationale for the choice of the driving SSP.
Figures 3 and 4 summarize the emissions and land use path-
ways associated with each scenario, and also provide atmo-
spheric concentrations and global average temperature re-
sponses as estimated with a simple climate model.
Tier 1: 21st century scenarios
SSP5-8.5: this scenario represents the high end of the range
of future pathways in the IAM literature, updates the
RCP8.5 pathway, and is planned to be used by a num-
ber of other CMIP6-Endorsed MIPs (Table 2) to help
address their scientiﬁc questions. SSP5 was chosen for
this forcing pathway because it is the only SSP scenario
with emissions high enough to produce a radiative forc-
ing of 8.5 W m−2 in 2100.
SSP3-7.0: this scenario represents the medium to high end
of the range of future forcing pathways. It ﬁlls a gap
in CMIP5 forcing pathways that is particularly impor-
tant because it represents a forcing level that is sim-
ilar to forcing in the SSP2 baseline scenario as well.
Baseline scenarios will be very important to IAV stud-
ies interested in quantifying “avoided impacts,” which
requires comparing impacts in a mitigation scenario
with those occurring in an unmitigated baseline sce-
nario. SSP3 was chosen because SSP3-7.0 is a scenario
with both substantial land use change (in particular de-
creased global forest cover) and high NTCF emissions
(particularly SO2) and therefore will play an important
role in LUMIP and AerChemMIP, addressing scenario-
relevant questions about the sensitivity of regional cli-
mate to land use and aerosols. In addition, SSP3 (com-
bined with this forcing pathway) is especially relevant
to IAM/IAV studies because it combines relatively high
societal vulnerability (SSP3) with relatively high forc-
ing. This scenario is also the basis for the requested
large ensemble (discussed below).
Geosci. Model Dev., 9, 3461–3482, 2016
www.geosci-model-dev.net/9/3461/2016/


----- Page 11 (native text) -----
B. C. O’Neill et al.: The Scenario Model Intercomparison Project (ScenarioMIP) for CMIP6
3471
Table 2. ScenarioMIP experimental design.
Scenario name
Forcing category
2100 forcing1 (W m−2)
SSP
Use by other MIPs2
Tier 13
SSP5-8.5
High
8.5
5
C4MIP, GeoMIP, ISMIP6, RFMIP
SSP3-7.0
High
7.0
3
AerChemMIP, LUMIP
SSP2-4.5
Medium
4.5
2
VIACS AB, CORDEX, GeoMIP, DAMIP, DCPP
SSP1-2.6
Low
2.6
1
LUMIP
Tier 2
Additional 21st century scenarios
SSP4-6.0
Medium
5.4
4
GeoMIP
SSP4-3.4
Low
3.4
4
SSP5-3.4-OS
Overshoot
3.4
5
SSPa-b
Low
Around or below 2.0
1 (prelim.)
Ensembles4
SSP3-7.0
Nine-member ensemble
7.0
3
AerChemMIP, LUMIP
Extensions
SSP5-8.5-Ext
Long-term extension
8.5
5
C4MIP, ISMIP6, GeoMIP
SSP5-3.4-OS-Ext
Long-term extension
3.4
5
SSP1-2.6-Ext
Long-term extension
2.6
1
1 Forcing levels are nominal identiﬁers. Actual forcing levels of the scenarios depend, for non-climate policy scenarios, on socioeconomic developments while for scenarios that
include climate policy, the objective was to replicate forcing in the RCPs run as part of CMIP5. These values differed somewhat from the nominal levels. In addition, for SSP4-6.0, the
6.0 W m−2 forcing refers to a stabilization level achieved beyond 2100. 2 Current plans by other MIPs to use ScenarioMIP scenarios either directly or as a basis for a variant to be run
as part of their own design are indicated here. These plans are subject to change in the ﬁnal versions of MIP designs. 3 We strongly recommend that modeling groups participating in
ScenarioMIP run at least the four scenarios in Tier 1, and as many additional scenarios as possible, guided by this prioritization. However, for any group running fewer than four
scenarios, SSP5-8.5 should be considered the highest priority. 4 We request that models run nine or more additional initial condition ensemble members for the SSP3-7.0 scenario (if
not nine, then as many as possible).
SSP2-4.5: this scenario represents the medium part of the
range of future forcing pathways and updates the
RCP4.5 pathway. It will be used by several other
CMIP6-Endorsed MIPs as a reference experiment, for
example by the Coordinated Regional Climate Down-
scaling Experiment (CORDEX, which will also use
SSP5-8.5) for regional downscaling (a product that will
be valuable to the IAV community), by Decadal Cli-
mate Prediction Project (DCPP) for short-term predic-
tions until 2030, and by the Detection and Attribution
MIP (DAMIP) as a continuation of the historical simu-
lations to update regression-based estimates of the role
of single forcings beyond 2015 and to run single forc-
ing experiments into the future by using it as the ref-
erence scenario. SSP2 was chosen because its land use
and aerosol pathways are not extreme relative to other
SSPs (and therefore appear as central for the concerns
of DAMIP and DCPP), and also because it is relevant to
IAM/IAV research as a scenario that combines interme-
diate societal vulnerability with an intermediate forcing
level.
SSP1-2.6: this scenario represents the low end of the range
of future forcing pathways in the IAM literature and
updates the RCP2.6 pathway. It is anticipated that it
will produce a multi-model mean of signiﬁcantly less
than 2 ◦C warming by 2100 (Fig. 3), and therefore can
support analyses of this policy goal. SSP1 was chosen
because it has substantial land use change (in particu-
lar increased global forest cover) and will be used by
LUMIP to help address their scientiﬁc questions. From
the IAM/IAV perspective this scenario is highly relevant
since it combines low vulnerability with low challenges
for mitigation as well as a low forcing signal.
Tier 2: 21st century scenarios
SSP4-6.0: this scenario ﬁlls in the range of medium forcing
pathways and updates the RCP6.0 pathway. SSP4 was
chosen because together with SSP4-3.4 it could be used
to investigate differences in impacts across global aver-
age forcing pathways even if the regional climate effects
of land use and aerosols turn out to be strong.
SSP4-3.4: this scenario ﬁlls a gap at the low end of the range
of future forcing pathways. There is substantial mitiga-
tion policy interest in scenarios that reach 3.4 W m−2
by 2100, since mitigation costs differ substantially be-
tween forcing levels of 4.5 and 2.6 W m−2 (depicted by
www.geosci-model-dev.net/9/3461/2016/
Geosci. Model Dev., 9, 3461–3482, 2016


----- Page 12 (native text) -----
3472
B. C. O’Neill et al.: The Scenario Model Intercomparison Project (ScenarioMIP) for CMIP6
Figure 3. CO2 emissions (a), concentrations (b), anthropogenic radiative forcing (c), and global mean temperature (d) for the 21st century
scenarios in the ScenarioMIP design, from Riahi et al. (2016). Concentration, forcing, and temperature outcomes are calculated with a
simple climate model (MAGICC version 6.8.01 BETA; Meinshausen et al., 2011a, b). Temperature outcomes include natural forcing in the
historical period; projections assume zero volcanic forcing and maintain 11-year solar forcing cycles, consistent with the CMIP5 approach
(Meinshausen et al., 2011c). Gray areas represent the range of scenarios in the scenarios database for the IPCC Fifth Assessment Report
(Clarke et al., 2014).
the RCPs, Clarke et al., 2014). Climate model simu-
lations would allow for impacts of a 3.4 W m−2 sce-
nario to be compared to those occurring in the 4.5 or
2.6 W m−2 scenarios, to evaluate relative costs and ben-
eﬁts of these scenarios. SSP4 was chosen because it is
relevant to IAM/IAV research as a scenario with rela-
tively low challenges to mitigation (SSP4) and therefore
is a plausible pairing with a relatively low forcing path-
way.
SSP5-3.4-OS: this scenario ﬁlls a gap in existing climate
simulations by investigating the implications of a sub-
stantial 21st century overshoot in radiative forcing rela-
tive to a longer-term target. There is substantial inter-
est in the impact, mitigation and adaptation implica-
tions of such overshoot, which begins with understand-
ing the climate consequences of such a pathway. This
scenario follows SSP5-8.5, an unmitigated baseline sce-
nario, through 2040, at which point aggressive mitiga-
tion is undertaken to rapidly reduce emissions to zero by
about 2070 and to net negative levels thereafter (Fig. 3).
This design will enable climate modeling teams to run
the scenario by branching from their Tier 1 SSP5-8.5
simulation in 2040. The ﬁnal design of the overshoot
scenario is subject to additional consideration of spe-
ciﬁc features including the emissions reduction rates af-
ter 2040 and the amount of net negative emissions by
the end of the century.
SSPa-b (with b around or below 2.0): this scenario repre-
sents the very low end of the range of scenarios in
the literature measured by their radiative forcing path-
way. Scenarios feasible to produce in an IAM that are
signiﬁcantly below RCP2.6 in terms of radiative forc-
ing are currently rare and have only recently become
available in the peer reviewed literature (Rogelj et al.,
2015). There is policy interest in scenarios that would
inform a possible goal of limiting global mean warming
to 1.5 ◦C above pre-industrial levels based on the Paris
COP21 agreement (UNFCCC, 2015). CMIP5 RCP2.6
projections, which have a median outcome across mod-
els of about 1.6 ◦C global mean surface temperature in
2100, and the SSP1-2.6 scenario and its long-term ex-
tension, which is estimated to decline to 1.5 ◦C warm-
Geosci. Model Dev., 9, 3461–3482, 2016
www.geosci-model-dev.net/9/3461/2016/


----- Page 13 (native text) -----
B. C. O’Neill et al.: The Scenario Model Intercomparison Project (ScenarioMIP) for CMIP6
3473
Figure 4. Changes in cropland (a), forest (b), pasture (c), and other natural land (d) for the 21st century scenarios in the ScenarioMIP design,
from the same IAM runs used to produce Fig. 3. Land use change for the RCPs (van Vuuren et al., 2011b) is shown for comparison.
ing in the 22nd century (Fig. 5), can inform analyses of
the implications of the 1.5 ◦C target. To provide addi-
tional information on this target, the ScenarioMIP de-
sign will include a scenario with forcing substantially
below RCP2.6 in 2100. Multiple IAM groups produc-
ing SSP-based scenarios have been able to produce
preliminary scenarios based on SSP1 that reach about
1.9 W m−2 in 2100, leading to a likely (> 66 %) prob-
ability of staying below 1.5 ◦C in 2100 (but a lower
probability around mid-century). We therefore consider
SSP1-1.9 to be a preliminary candidate for this sce-
nario. The ﬁnal design is subject to additional consid-
eration of speciﬁc features of this scenario, including
the SSP on which it is based, its 2030 emissions level,
the likelihood of peak warming exceeding 1.5 ◦C, and
the likelihood of warming being below 1.5 ◦C in 2100.
The emission proﬁle will be characterized by a rapid de-
cline to zero and a long period of negative emissions for
CO2. Research groups interested in comparing climate
outcomes between SSPa-b and SSP1-2.6 (anticipated to
lead to below 1.5 and 2 ◦C, respectively) are encouraged
to run additional ensemble members of both scenarios
to enhance the detection of differences that can be dis-
tinguished from natural variability.
Tier 2: initial condition ensemble
It is important for scenario-based research to represent the
inﬂuence of internal variability on climate outcomes. To ac-
commodate this need, while also economizing on model
runs, we include an initial condition ensemble for one sce-
nario, based on the assumption that variability estimated for
one scenario can be applied to outcomes for others. This ini-
tial condition ensemble should be carried out for SSP3-7.0 (a
Tier 1 scenario), which has been selected among the Tier 1
experiments for two reasons:
– The relatively high forcing level reached by this sce-
nario by the end of the 21st century will enable the ex-
ploration of potential changes in internal variability over
a substantial range of global average radiative forcing
and temperature change, which could not be assessed
if the large ensemble was run for a lower scenario, e.g.
SSP2-4.5. Understanding potential changes in variabil-
ity over a wide range of forcing levels is essential to
support the possibility of transferring variability under
the large ensemble to other scenarios for which we re-
quest only a single ensemble member.
www.geosci-model-dev.net/9/3461/2016/
Geosci. Model Dev., 9, 3461–3482, 2016


----- Page 14 (native text) -----
3474
B. C. O’Neill et al.: The Scenario Model Intercomparison Project (ScenarioMIP) for CMIP6
– SSP3-7.0 has relatively strong land use change and high
emissions of NTCFs (unlike the SSP5-8.5 scenario),
and therefore has been identiﬁed as an important ex-
periment on which variants will be conducted by LU-
MIP and AerChemMIP to investigate the climate impli-
cations of regional differences in land use and aerosol
emissions. This topic is also very important to scenario-
based studies. In those MIPs, the opportunity to conduct
signal-to-noise studies made possible by multiple initial
condition ensemble members will be critical.
We request that models run nine additional ensemble mem-
bers (if not nine, then as many as possible). These addi-
tional ensemble members would be considered Tier 2 sce-
narios (i.e., not required model runs for participation in Sce-
narioMIP). For all other scenarios, only a single ensemble
member is requested.
Tier 2: long-term extensions
There is strong interest from the climate and impacts com-
munities in long-term extensions of scenarios beyond 2100
to address questions of long term feedbacks and reversibil-
ity which might not be apparent from a shorter simulation.
The ScenarioMIP long-term extensions will consist of three
experiments (Fig. 5).
– Two of these will provide low and high cases for long-
term change, comprising extensions for SSP5-8.5 and
SSP1-2.6 in a style similar to the extensions of RCP8.5
and RCP2.6 in CMIP5. For the extension of SSP5-8.5,
this involves CO2 emissions that are reduced linearly
starting in 2100 to less than 10 GtC yr−1 in 2250, while
all other emissions are held constant at 2100 levels.
This emissions pathway is estimated to produce equi-
librated radiative forcing over the period 2200–2300 at
a level similar to the level reached in the long-term ex-
tension of RCP8.5 designed for CMIP5 (Meinshausen
et al., 2011c; just above 12 W m−2 in the simple climate
model used in Fig. 5). For SSP1-2.6 the rate of nega-
tive carbon emissions from fossil fuels reached in 2100
is extended to 2140 and then increases linearly to zero
in 2185, with all other emissions (including CO2 from
land use) held constant at 2100 levels, leading to slowly
declining forcing that approximately stabilizes beyond
2200 around 2.0 W m−2. This extension is expected to
achieve a long-term equilibrium temperature of 1.25 ◦C
above pre-industrial temperatures, based on the simple
climate model used in Fig. 5.
– A third case will extend the overshoot scenario (SSP5-
3.4-OS) such that forcing continues to decline beyond
2100 to eventually reach very low forcing levels, in the
vicinity of the SSP1-2.6 extension. In this way, the sce-
nario can be seen as an overshoot of the 3.4 W m−2 level
(which it exceeds and then returns to by about 2100) and
of the 2.6 W m−2 level, which it returns to in the ﬁrst
half of the 22nd century. The extension assumes that
the level of negative CO2 emissions from fossil fuels
reached in 2100 remains constant until 2140, and then
increase linearly to reach zero by 2190. CO2 emissions
from land use are linearly reduced from 2100 to reach
the SSP1-2.6 level in 2120 (and then remain at that level
thereafter), while all other emissions are held constant
at 2100 levels. Like the SSP1-2.6 extension, this path-
way also produces a global mean temperature that equi-
librates at about 1.25 ◦C above pre-industrial tempera-
tures beyond 2200, but with a higher peak temperature
(about 2.4 ◦C) during the 21st century.
3.3
Other design features
3.3.1
Emissions driven vs. concentration driven
The scenarios speciﬁed in the ScenarioMIP design are to
be run as concentration-driven experiments for long-lived
greenhouse gases. Such scenarios are more consistent with
the “integration” role that these scenarios will play in the
broader research community. The conceptual framework for
scenario-based research (Sect. 2.3) is based on investigating
the implications of alternative climate futures. In order for re-
search using ScenarioMIP climate projections to be as com-
parable across studies as possible, it is important to ensure
that the climate outcomes of the experiments roughly repre-
sent the intended forcing levels.
The scenario simulations speciﬁed in ScenarioMIP are to
be performed in the same conﬁguration as the one used in
the CMIP6 historical simulations, ensuring continuity in the
climate simulations. In addition, this means that the conﬁg-
uration used for the scenario simulations can beneﬁt from
the model evaluation over the historical period. This im-
plies that the modeling groups must use the ScenarioMIP-
provided concentrations for all long-lived greenhouse gases
(CO2, CH4, N2O, CFCs). For all other radiatively active con-
stituents (i.e., aerosols and ozone), the modeling groups will
use either the ScenarioMIP emissions (from anthropogenic
and biomass burning sources only, consistent with the histor-
ical emissions) or the CMIP-provided concentrations.
The choice between concentration- and emissions-driven
runs relates to a trade-off between the use of scenarios as
means of integration across the different communities and
the representation of model differences and overall uncer-
tainty. In particular, concentration-driven scenarios do not
allow for assessing ampliﬁcation effects of biogeochem-
ical feedbacks (e.g., in which climate change inﬂuences
the carbon cycle, producing more emissions and more cli-
mate change, and further inﬂuencing the carbon cycle) be-
yond what is included in the model used to generate the
ScenarioMIP-provided GHG concentrations. The ampliﬁca-
tion impacts will however be partially investigated in C4MIP
and AerChemMIP simulations (see Sect. 3.3.3. below) and
Geosci. Model Dev., 9, 3461–3482, 2016
www.geosci-model-dev.net/9/3461/2016/


----- Page 15 (native text) -----
B. C. O’Neill et al.: The Scenario Model Intercomparison Project (ScenarioMIP) for CMIP6
3475
Figure 5. CO2 emissions (a) and concentrations (b), anthropogenic radiative forcing (c), and global mean temperature change (d) for the
three long-term extensions. As in Fig. 3, concentration, forcing, and temperature outcomes are calculated with a simple climate model
(MAGICC version 6.8.01 BETA; Meinshausen et al., 2011a, b). Outcomes for the CMIP5 versions of the long-term extensions of RCP2.6
and RCP8.5 (Meinshausen et al., 2011c), as calculated with the same model, are shown for comparison.
an assessment of a range of sources of uncertainty will be
possible by combining the results from several of the CMIP6-
Endorsed MIPs.
3.3.2
Relation to CMIP5
CMIP6 climate projections will differ from those for CMIP5
due to a new generation of climate models, a new start
year for the future scenarios (2015 for CMIP6 vs. 2006 for
CMIP5), as well as a new set of scenarios of concentrations,
emissions, and land use (Figs. 3 and 4). We recognize that
such an approach could be problematic for uncertainty anal-
ysis, as the separation of model vs. scenario uncertainty is
unclear (Knutti and Sedláˇcek, 2013). For multiple research
communities it will be useful to evaluate the difference in
climate outcomes that is due to the changes in climate mod-
els alone, in particular to understand how the new models
have revised our understanding of the climate response to
anthropogenic forcing. Such an evaluation is also valuable
in order to determine whether CMIP5 and CMIP6 results
could be used together in research on impacts and adapta-
tion (and how), or whether IAM and IAV researchers should
abandon CMIP5 simulations in favor of CMIP6 simulations
when they become available. It is not part of the ScenarioMIP
design to carry out simulations that would inform this eval-
uation. However, it would be interesting to the community
if climate modeling teams investigated this question. Possi-
ble approaches include running the CMIP6 SSP-based RCPs
with single models of the previous (CMIP5) generation, run-
ning the CMIP5 RCPs using new (CMIP6) model versions,
or carrying out relevant analyses with climate model emula-
tors.
3.3.3
Relation to other CMIP6-Endorsed MIPs, the
DECK, and the CMIP6 historical simulations
The ScenarioMIP design is intended to provide a basis for
targeted scenarios to be run in other CMIP6-Endorsed MIPs
in order to address speciﬁc questions regarding the sensitiv-
ity of climate change outcomes to particular aspects of these
scenarios, especially land use and emissions of NTCFs. We
describe here current plans for coordinated experiments. A
summary of the scenarios within the ScenarioMIP design that
are currently part of plans for other CMIP6-Endorsed MIPs
is provided in the experimental design table (Table 2).
DECK and CMIP6 historical simulations
Models participating in CMIP6 must carry out a small set
of simulations intended to maintain continuity and docu-
ment basic characteristics of models across different phases
of CMIP. The ScenarioMIP simulations relate to the DECK
www.geosci-model-dev.net/9/3461/2016/
Geosci. Model Dev., 9, 3461–3482, 2016


----- Page 16 (native text) -----
3476
B. C. O’Neill et al.: The Scenario Model Intercomparison Project (ScenarioMIP) for CMIP6
and the CMIP6 historical simulations by using the end of
the historical simulations (31 December 2014) as the starting
point of future projections (1 January 2015, with consistency
ensured through the harmonization of emissions, concentra-
tions, and land use across scenarios and between scenarios
and historical simulations). Analysis of present-day climate
will likely connect the ﬁrst few years of the climate projec-
tions to the historical runs for those studies using the most
up-to-date observational data sets (extending to the years af-
ter 2015). An evaluation of the CMP6 historical simulations
will provide insights into the reliability of the CMIP6 mod-
els and emergent constraints (see Sect. 2.2) can be will be
sought to recalibrate the ensemble and to reduce the uncer-
tainty in the response to a given scenario of future forcing.
Internal variability characterized through the pre-industrial
control runs of the DECK will also serve as a basis of com-
parison with internal and forced variability simulated with
future scenarios.
Aerosols and Chemistry MIP (AerChemMIP)
AerChemMIP (Collins et al., 2016) has a Tier 1 experiment
(with additional Tier 2 and 3 related studies) directed at the
sensitivity of climate to near-term climate forcers. This ex-
periment will use the SSP3-7.0 scenario from ScenarioMIP
as a starting point and devise a lower air pollutant variant of
this scenario by assuming pollution controls, or maximum
feasible reductions in air pollutants. In addition, AerChem-
MIP will make use of the LUMIP land use variant on SSP3-
7.0 (with land use from SSP1-2.6) to study couplings be-
tween land use changes and atmospheric chemistry.
Coupled Climate Carbon Cycle MIP (C4MIP)
ScenarioMIP will coordinate with C4MIP (Jones et al., 2016)
on targeted scenarios regarding concentration vs. emission-
driven simulations. While the ScenarioMIP protocol will
request CO2 concentration-driven simulations (see above),
C4MIP/Tier 1 will recommend emission-driven simulations
for SSP5-8.5 in order to explore the implications of carbon
cycle feedbacks on projected atmospheric CO2 and hence on
climate change. As mentioned before, C4MIP also has an in-
terest in the extensions of scenarios beyond 2100 (e.g. up
to 2300 as in CMIP5). C4MIP/Tier2 proposes an uncoupled
simulation (called BGC mode) for SSP5-8.5 and its exten-
sion beyond 2100 in order to investigate climate change im-
pacts on Earth system components that operate on longer
timescales (vegetation, permafrost, oceanic circulation and
carbon export, etc.). C4MIP has expressed high interest in
analyzing the ScenarioMIP overshoot scenario.
Detection and Attribution MIP (DAMIP)
DAMIP (Gillett et al., 2016) plans to use SSP2-4.5 as an
anchoring scenario on the basis of which individual forc-
ing simulations extended to the end of the century will be
speciﬁed and then compared. These experiments are aimed
at distinguishing the climate effects of different forcers and
facilitating the identiﬁcation of observational constraints and
their use in future projections. SSP2-4.5 will also be used
to extend the historical (all forcing) runs to 2020 for use in
regression-based estimates of the role of individual forcings
within the observational constraint provided by observational
records up to the years beyond 2015 (by the time CMIP6
output will be available and the next IPCC assessment report
will be written).
Decadal Climate Prediction Project (DCPP)
DCPP (Boer et al., 2016) plans to use SSP2-4.5 forcings for
its initialized short-term predictions out to 2030, and SSP2-
4.5 runs as comparison to evaluate the skills of those predic-
tions.
Geoengineering MIP (GeoMIP)
GeoMIP (Kravitz et al., 2016) has proposed several exper-
iments that will use two scenarios from ScenarioMIP as a
basis from which geoengineering measures would be im-
plemented. Forcing pathways from other ScenarioMIP sce-
narios would serve as targets for those measures. In par-
ticular, SSP5-8.5 would be used as a basis for four experi-
ments: using geoengineering to reduce forcing to a medium
forcing (G6Sulfur and G6Solar experiments) or low forcing
(G6Sulfur_SSP1-2.6) Tier 1 scenario, investigating the effect
of cirrus cloud thinning (G7Cirrus experiment), and investi-
gating the effect of ﬁxed levels of stratospheric aerosol in-
jections (GeoFixed10, 20, 50). The G6Sulfur and G6Solar
experiments will also be extended beyond 2100, with geo-
engineering applied to reduce forcing from the extension of
RCP8.5 down to the forcing level of SSP2-4.5 (the medium
forcing Tier 1 scenario). In addition, SSP2-4.5 would be used
as a basis for a stratospheric aerosol injection experiment
(G4SSA). Overshoot scenarios are also of potential interest
to GeoMIP given that geoengineering may be an option for
avoiding overshoot.
Ice Sheet MIP for CMIP6 (ISMIP6)
ISMIP6 (Nowicki et al., 2016) will be proposing two types of
experiments that will draw on long-term extensions of a sce-
nario from ScenarioMIP in order to investigate ice sheet re-
sponse and ice–climate interactions on centennial timescales.
In particular, an extension of SSP5-8.5 to 2300 would be used
to provide climate model output for ofﬂine (uncoupled) ice
sheet simulations, and to provide emissions/concentrations
for fully coupled ice sheet–climate model experiments.
Land Use MIP (LUMIP)
LUMIP (Lawrence et al., 2016) plans to design experiments
that use two scenarios, SSP3-7.0 and SSP1-2.6, from Sce-
Geosci. Model Dev., 9, 3461–3482, 2016
www.geosci-model-dev.net/9/3461/2016/


----- Page 17 (native text) -----
B. C. O’Neill et al.: The Scenario Model Intercomparison Project (ScenarioMIP) for CMIP6
3477
Table 3. Anthropogenic forcing in ScenarioMIP experiments.
Variable
Subcategories
Resolution
Sources
Land use
Crop, pasture, urban area, veg-
etation, forest (latter two both
primary and secondary).
Spatial maps indicating land
use and transition matrices
Methods for historical data and
scenarios developed by LUMIP
Emissions of long-lived
greenhouse gases
CO2, N2O, halogenated gases
Spatial maps and/or emissions
by region.
Historical
data
described
in
Meinshausen et al. (2016)
Concentrations of long-
lived greenhouse gases
CO2, N2O, halogenated gases
Time series
Emissions of air pollu-
tants
CH4, SO2, NOx, VOC, CO,
NHy, BC, OC
Spatial maps
Historical
data
described
to
be
provided
by
the
Com-
munity Emissions Data Sys-
tem
(CEDS)
project
(http:
//www.globalchange.umd.edu/
ceds/ceds-cmip6-data/)
Short-lived forcing
Ozone, optical depth
Spatial maps
narioMIP as a basis for testing sensitivity to land use change.
The two scenarios would differ both in forcing levels, span-
ning a range of approximately 4.5 W m−2 by 2100, and in
land use change, with substantial deforestation in the SSP3-
7.0 scenario and net afforestation in SSP1-2.6.
Radiative Forcing MIP (RFMIP)
RFMIP (Pincus et al., 2016) has plans to estimate radiative
forcing in different models for a future scenario, preferably a
high forcing pathway. At the moment the candidate is SSP5-
8.5, whose forcings would be applied to current day ﬁxed
SSTs (sea surface temperatures) in the idealized setting of
the RFMIP experiments.
Vulnerability, impacts, adaptation and climate services
(VIACS) advisory board
Researchers examining the consequences of climate change
and potential adaptations are a key user group of CMIP out-
puts and products. ScenarioMIP will establish a close link
with the impact community through the VIACS Advisory
Board (Ruane et al., 2016) and other relevant groups to facil-
itate integrated research that leads to a better understanding
not only of the physical consequences of these scenarios on
the climate system, but also of the climate impact on societies
and ecosystems. In particular ScenarioMIP will link with the
VIACS Advisory Board to ensure that the climate model out-
put from the scenarios allows for sector-speciﬁc indices be-
ing derived (e.g., heat damage degree days for ecosystems,
consecutive dry days for agriculture and water resources).
4
Inputs (forcings) and outputs
The forcings required to run the climate model simulations of
the experiments listed in Table 2 include global spatial distri-
butions of emissions and concentrations of greenhouse gases,
ozone concentrations (or precursors, for emissions-driven ex-
periments), and aerosols and land use, at a level of spatial
detail suitable for the generation of climate models that will
be used in CMIP6. Table 3 provides a list of input variables.
These projections will be the results of IAM-based scenarios
at the level of world regions with a time horizon of 2015–
2100. The underlying IAM scenarios are documented in a
Special Issue in Global Environmental Change (Riahi et al.,
2016).
The IAM output will be harmonized to be consistent with
recent historical data for land use, greenhouse gas and air
pollutant emissions and concentrations (which will also be
used for the historical runs in CMIP6). In a subsequent step
the data will be downscaled to spatial grids. This process will
basically be done using the methods applied earlier for the
RCPs (Van Vuuren et al., 2011a). The methods and results
for land use data are described in detail in Hurtt et al. (2016).
Figures 3 and 5 show preliminary versions of the forc-
ing pathways associated with the eight 21st century scenarios
and three long-term extensions, as calculated by the IAMs.
Future simulations will also require speciﬁcation of nat-
ural forcings, in particular solar forcing and volcanic emis-
sions. For CMIP6, these forcings will differ from what
was used in CMIP5. Solar time series will be provided
as described on the SOLARIS-HEPPA website at http://
solarisheppa.geomar.de/cmip6 and in Matthes et al. (2016).
Volcanic forcing will be ramped up from the value at the end
of the historical simulation period (2015) over 10 years to the
same constant value prescribed for the piControl simulations
in the DECK, and then will be kept ﬁxed.
ScenarioMIP has not deﬁned a separate data request for
CMIP6, but rather recommends that variables that are re-
quested for the DECK and the CMIP6 historical simulations
are also stored for the future climate model simulations. This
includes climate model output of interest to the IAM and IAV
www.geosci-model-dev.net/9/3461/2016/
Geosci. Model Dev., 9, 3461–3482, 2016


----- Page 18 (native text) -----
3478
B. C. O’Neill et al.: The Scenario Model Intercomparison Project (ScenarioMIP) for CMIP6
communities as identiﬁed by the CMIP6 VIACS advisory
board, see the contribution on the CMIP6 data request to this
Special Issue for further details.
5
Conclusions
The ScenarioMIP experimental design aims to facilitate a
wide range of integrated studies across the climate science,
integrated assessment modeling and IAV communities. It
will do so as one element of a larger scenario process that
also includes a new set of societal development pathways
(the SSPs) over the 21st century. Integrating climate simu-
lations from ScenarioMIP with the SSPs or other character-
izations of societal futures will allow for analyses of future
mitigation, adaptation, and impacts that account for both cli-
mate and societal change in a coherent fashion. Multi-model
climate model projections from ScenarioMIP will also pro-
vide the basis for investigating a number of targeted scientiﬁc
questions regarding the role of speciﬁc forcings and the con-
tribution of forcing uncertainty to the total uncertainty bud-
get, the effect of a peak and decline in forcing, and long-
term climate system outcomes beyond the 21st century. The
multi-model approach will allow for a better characterization
of uncertainty in climate outcomes than would otherwise be
possible, and the design also calls for a large initial condition
ensemble that will allow for representation of internal vari-
ability in impact studies as well as improved signal detec-
tion in experiments in other MIPs that will carry out variants
of this scenario. Ultimately, the success of ScenarioMIP lies
in the broad participation of the CMIP6 modeling groups in
Tier 1 experiments, but also in Tier 2 experiments since they
offer the opportunity to study additional interesting and new
science and policy questions.
Beyond the establishment of the experimental design, re-
maining tasks for ScenarioMIP include ensuring that emis-
sions, concentrations, and land use scenarios from inte-
grated assessment models are provided to participating cli-
mate models as inputs for their simulations. While Scenari-
oMIP will participate in this process, primary leadership for
the emissions will come from separate groups. The IAMC
Scenarios Working Group is coordinating the production of
SSP-based IAM scenarios, which include emissions and land
use generated at the level of world regions. That group will
also coordinate a process for harmonizing emissions across
IAMs to be consistent with a common estimate of recent his-
torical data, as well for downscaling emissions to the grid
cell level needed for climate model input. Land use scenarios
produced by IAMs will be downscaled using a methodology
developed within LUMIP, in coordination with the IAMC
working group.
Once climate model simulations for ScenarioMIP have
been completed, the SSC will coordinate some of the ﬁrst
analyses of results, aiming at delivering the initial description
of the new scenarios’ principal physical climate outcomes,
ideally in comparison to the CMIP5 RCP outcomes. How-
ever, we do not include a speciﬁc comprehensive analysis
plan in this paper, because the research communities that are
interested in analyzing our MIP results are well established,
diverse, and large. Individual modeling and research groups
and investigators will likely self-organize to carry out studies
of future changes on variables, regional domains, impacts,
and mitigation measures of interest.
6
Data availability
The climate model output from ScenarioMIP experiments
described in this paper will be distributed through the Earth
System Grid Federation (ESGF) with DOIs assigned. As in
CMIP5, the model output will be freely accessible through
data portals after registration. In order to document CMIP6’s
impact and enable ongoing support of CMIP, users are obli-
gated to acknowledge CMIP6 and the participating modeling
groups (see details on the CMIP panel website at http://www.
wcrp-climate.org/index.php/wgcm-cmip/about-cmip). In or-
der to run the experiments, data sets for future natural and an-
thropogenic forcings are required. The recommendation for
the future solar forcing data sets and background volcanic
aerosol are described in separate contributions to this Spe-
cial Issue. These data sets for natural forcings will be made
available through the ESGF with version control and DOIs
assigned. All other forcing data (land use, emissions, con-
centrations, extensions) required for the future SSP-RCPs
selected in ScenarioMIP will be made publicly accessible
on the SSP database at https://tntcat.iiasa.ac.at/SspDb/dsd?
Action=htmlpage&page=about.
Acknowledgements. CRESCENDO project members (V. Eyring,
P. Friedlingstein, E. Kriegler, R. Knutti, J. Lowe, K. Riahi, D. van
Vuuren) acknowledge funding received from the Horizon 2020
European Union’s Framework Programme for Research and Inno-
vation under grant agreement no. 641816. C. Tebaldi, G. A. Meehl
and B. M. Sanderson acknowledge the support of the Regional
and Global Climate Modeling Program (RGCM) of the U.S.
Department of Energy’s, Ofﬁce of Science (BER), Cooperative
Agreement DE-FC02-97ER62402.
Edited by: S. Easterbrook
Reviewed by: two anonymous referees
References
Alﬁeri,
L.,
Feyen,
L.,
Dottori,
F.,
and
Bianchi,
A.:
En-
semble ﬂood risk assessment in Europe under high end
climate scenarios, Global Environ. Chang., 35, 199–212,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2015.09.004, 2015.
Allen, M. R. and Ingram, W. J.: Constraints on future changes in
climate and the hydrologic cycle, Nature, 419, p. 224, 2002.
Geosci. Model Dev., 9, 3461–3482, 2016
www.geosci-model-dev.net/9/3461/2016/


----- Page 19 (native text) -----
B. C. O’Neill et al.: The Scenario Model Intercomparison Project (ScenarioMIP) for CMIP6
3479
Arnell, N. W. and Lloyd-Hughes, B.: The global-scale impacts of
climate change on water resources and ﬂooding under new cli-
mate and socio-economic scenarios, Climatic Change, 122, 127–
140, doi:10.1007/s10584-013-0984-4, 2014.
Bauer, N., Calvin, K., Emmerling, J., Fricko, O., Fujimori S.,
Hilaire, J., Eom, J., Krey, V., Kriegler, E., Mouratiadou, I.,
Sytze de Boer, H., van den Berg, M., Carrara, S., Daioglou,
V., Drouet, L., Edmonds, J. E., Gernaat, D., Havlik, P., John-
son, N., Klein, D., Kyle, P., Marangoni, G., Masui, T., Piet-
zcker, R. C., Strubegger, M., Wise, M., Riahi, K., van Vu-
uren, D.P .: Shared Socio-Economic Pathways of the Energy
Sector – Quantifying the Narratives, Global Environ. Chang.,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2016.07.006, in press, 2016.
Biewald, A., Lotze-Campen, H., Otto, I., Brinckmann, N., Bodirsky,
B., Weindl, I., Popp, A., and Schellnhuber, H. J.: The impacts of
climate change on costs of food and people exposed to hunger at
subnational scale, PIK Report 128, Potsdam Institute for Climate
Impact Research (PIK), Potsdam, Germany, 2015.
Boé, J. L., Hall, A., and Qu, X.: September sea-ice cover in the
Arctic Ocean projected to vanish by 2100, Nat. Geosci., 2, 341–
343, 2009.
Boer, G. J., Smith, D. M., Cassou, C., Doblas-Reyes, F., Danaba-
soglu, G., Kirtman, B., Kushnir, Y., Kimoto, M., Meehl, G. A.,
Msadek, R., Mueller, W. A., Taylor, K., and Zwiers, F.: The
Decadal Climate Prediction Project, Geosci. Model Dev. Dis-
cuss., doi:10.5194/gmd-2016-78, in review, 2016.
Bracegirdle, T. J. and Stephenson, D. B.: On the Robustness of
Emergent Constraints Used in Multimodel Climate Change Pro-
jections of Arctic Warming, J. Climate, 26, 669–678, 2013.
Clarke, L., Edmonds, J., Krey, V., Richels, R., Rose, S., and Tavoni,
M.: International climate policy architectures: Overview of the
EMF 22 International Scenarios, Energ. Econ., 31, S64–S81,
2009.
Clarke, L., Jiang, K., Akimoto, K., Babiker, M., Blanford, G.,
Fisher-Vanden, K., Hourcade, J.-C., Krey, V., Kriegler, E.,
Löschel, A., McCollum, D., Paltsev, S., Rose, S., Shukla, P.R.,
Tavoni, M., van der Zwaan, B. C. C., and van Vuuren, D. P.:
Assessing Transformation Pathways, in: Climate Change 2014:
Mitigation of Climate Change. Contribution of Working Group
III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change, edited by: Edenhofer, O., Pichs-Madruga,
R., Sokona, Y., Farahani, E., Kadner, S., Seyboth, K., Adler, A.,
Baum, I., Brunner, S., Eickemeier, P., Kriemann, B., Savolainen,
J., Schlömer, S., von Stechow, C., Zwickel, T., and Minx, J. C.,
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and
New York, NY, USA, 2014.
Collins, W. J., Lamarque, J.-F., Schulz, M., Boucher, O., Eyring, V.,
Hegglin, M. I., Maycock, A., Myhre, G., Prather, M., Shindell,
D., and Smith, S. J.: AerChemMIP: Quantifying the effects of
chemistry and aerosols in CMIP6, Geosci. Model Dev. Discuss.,
doi:10.5194/gmd-2016-139, in review, 2016.
Cox, P. M., Pearson, D., Booth, B. B., Friedlingstein, P., Hunting-
ford, C., Jones, C. D., and Luke, C. M.: Sensitivity of tropical
carbon to climate change constrained by carbon dioxide variabil-
ity, Nature, 494, 341–344, 2013.
Dellink,
R.,
Chateau,
J.,
Lanzi,
E.,
and
Magne,
B.:
Long-term
economic
growth
projections
in
the
Shared
Socioeconomic
Pathways,
Global
Environ.
Chang.,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2015.06.004, online ﬁrst, 2015.
Dong, W., Liu, Z., Liao, H., Tang, Q., and Li, X.: New cli-
mate and socio-economic scenarios for assessing global human
health challenges due to heat risk, Climatic Change, 4, 505–518,
doi:10.1007/s10584-015-1372-8, 2015.
Eyring, V., Bony, S., Meehl, G. A., Senior, C. A., Stevens, B.,
Stouffer, R. J., and Taylor, K. E.: Overview of the Coupled
Model Intercomparison Project Phase 6 (CMIP6) experimen-
tal design and organization, Geosci. Model Dev., 9, 1937–1958,
doi:10.5194/gmd-9-1937-2016, 2016.
Fasullo, J. T. and Trenberth, K. E.: A Less Cloudy Future: The Role
of Subtropical Subsidence in Climate Sensitivity, Science, 338,
792–794, 2012.
Fasullo, J. T., Sanderson, B. M., and Trenberth, K. E.: Recent
Progress in Constraining Climate Sensitivity With Model En-
sembles, Current Climate Change Reports, 1, 268–275, 2015.
Gillett, N. P., Shiogama, H., Funke, B., Hegerl, G., Knutti, R.,
Matthes, K., Santer, B. D., Stone, D., and Tebaldi, C.: Detec-
tion and Attribution Model Intercomparison Project (DAMIP),
Geosci. Model Dev. Discuss., doi:10.5194/gmd-2016-74, in re-
view, 2016.
Hall, A. and Qu, X.: Using the current seasonal cycle to constrain
snow albedo feedback in future climate change, Geophys. Res.
Lett., 33, L03502, doi:10.1029/2005GL025127, 2006.
Hare, W., Lowe, J., Rogelj, J., Sawin, E., van Vuuren, D., Bosetti,
V., Hanaoka, T., Kejun, J., Matthews, B., O’Neill, B. C., Ranger,
N., and Riahi, K.: Which emission pathways are consistent with a
2 ◦C or 1.5 ◦C temperature limit?, in: The Emissions Gap Report:
Are the Copenhagen Accord Pledges Sufﬁcient to Limit Global
Warming to 2 ◦C or 1.5 ◦C? A preliminary assessment (UNEP,
Nairobi, Kenya), 23–31, 2010.
Hejazi, M. I., Voisin, N., Liu, L., Bramer, L. M., Fortin, D. C., Hath-
away, J. E., Huang, M., Kyle, P., Leung, L. R., Li, H.-Y., Liu, Y.,
Patel, P. L., Pulsipher, T. C., Rice, J. S., Tesfa, T. K., Vernon,
C. R., and Zhou, Y.: 21st century United States emissions miti-
gation could increase water stress more than the climate change
it is mitigating, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci USA, 112, 10635–10640,
doi:10.1073/pnas.1421675112, 2015.
Herger, N., Sanderson, B. M., and Knutti, R.: Improved pattern scal-
ing approaches for the use in climate impact studies, Geophys.
Res. Lett., 42, 3486–3494, doi:10.1002/2015GL063569, 2015.
Huber, M., Mahlstein, I., Wild, M., Fasullo, J., and Knutti, R.: Con-
straints on climate sensitivity from radiation patterns in climate
models, J. Climate, 24, 1034–1052, 2011.
IPCC: Climate Change 2001: Mitigation of Climate Change, Con-
tribution of Working Group III to the Third Assessment Report
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, edited by:
Davidson, O. R. and Mertz, B., Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 2001.
IPCC: Climate Change 2007: The physical science basis: Contri-
bution of Working Group I to the Fourth Assessment Report
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, edited by:
Solomon, S., Qin, D., Manning, M., Chen, Z., Marquis, M., Av-
eryt, K. B., Tignor, M., and Miller, H. L., Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA,
996 pp., 2007a.
IPCC: Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerabil-
ity: Contribution of Working Group II to the Fourth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, edited
by: Parry, M. L., Canziani, O. F., Palutikof, J. P., van der Linden,
www.geosci-model-dev.net/9/3461/2016/
Geosci. Model Dev., 9, 3461–3482, 2016


----- Page 20 (native text) -----
3480
B. C. O’Neill et al.: The Scenario Model Intercomparison Project (ScenarioMIP) for CMIP6
P. J., and Hanson, C. E., Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 976 pp., 2007b.
IPCC: Climate Change 2007: Mitigation of Climate Change, Con-
tribution of Working Group III to the Fourth Assessment Report
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, edited by:
Metz, B., Davidson, O. R., Bosch, P. R., Dave, R., and Meyer, L.
A., Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom
and New York, NY, USA, 2007c.
IPCC: Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis, Contri-
bution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, edited by: Stocker,
T. F., Qin, D., Plattner, G.-K., Tignor, M., Allen, S. K., Boschung,
J., Nauels, A., Xia, Y., Bex, V., and Midgley, P. M., Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York,
NY, USA, 1535 pp., 2013.
IPCC: Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerabil-
ity. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of Work-
ing Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovern-
mental Panel on Climate Change, edited by: Field, C. B., Barros,
V. R., Dokken, D. J., Mach, K. J., Mastrandrea, M. D., Bilir, T. E.,
Chatterjee, M., Ebi, K. L., Estrada, Y. O., Genova, R. C., Girma,
B., Kissel, E. S., Levy, A. N., MacCracken, S., Mastrandrea, P.
R., and White, L. L., Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 1132 pp., 2014a.
IPCC: Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerabil-
ity. Part B: Regional Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II
to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change, edited by: Barros, V. R., Field, C. B., Dokken,
D. J., Mastrandrea, M. D., Mach, K. J., Bilir, T. E., Chatterjee,
M., Ebi, K. L., Estrada, Y. O., Genova, R. C., Girma, B., Kissel,
E. S., Levy, A. N., MacCracken, S., Mastrandrea, P. R., and
White, L. L., Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United
Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 688 pp., 2014b.
IPCC: Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change. Con-
tribution of Working Group III to the Fifth Assessment Re-
port of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, edited
by: Edenhofer, O., Pichs-Madruga, R., Sokona, Y., Farahani, E.,
Kadner, S., Seyboth, K., Adler, A., Baum, I., Brunner, S., Eick-
emeier, P., Kriemann, B., Savolainen, J., Schlömer, S., von Ste-
chow, C., Zwickel, T., and Minx, J. C., Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA,
2014c.
Jiang, L. and O’Neill, B. C.: Global urbanization projections for
the Shared Socioeconomic Pathways, Global Environ. Chang.,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2015.03.008, online ﬁrst, 2015.
Jones, C. D., Arora, V., Friedlingstein, P., Bopp, L., Brovkin, V.,
Dunne, J., Graven, H., Hoffman, F., Ilyina, T., John, J. G., Jung,
M., Kawamiya, M., Koven, C., Pongratz, J., Raddatz, T., Rander-
son, J. T., and Zaehle, S.: C4MIP – The Coupled Climate–Carbon
Cycle Model Intercomparison Project: experimental protocol for
CMIP6, Geosci. Model Dev., 9, 2853–2880, doi:10.5194/gmd-9-
2853-2016, 2016.
KC, S. and Lutz, W.: The human core of the shared socioeco-
nomic pathways: Population scenarios by age, sex and level of
education for all countries to 2100, Global Environ. Chang.,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2014.06.004, online ﬁrst, 2014.
Klein, S. A. and Hall, A.: Emergent Constraints for Cloud Feed-
backs, Current Climate Change Reports, 1, 276–287, 2015.
Knutti, R. and Sedlacek, J.: Robustness and uncertainties in the new
CMIP5 climate model projections, Nature Climate Change, 3,
369–373, 2013.
Knutti, R. and Tomassini, L.: Constraints on the transient climate re-
sponse from observed global temperature and ocean heat uptake,
Geophys. Res. Lett., 35, L09701, doi:10.1029/2007GL032904,
2008.
Knutti, R., Meehl, G. A., Allen, M. R., and Stainforth, D. A.: Con-
straining climate sensitivity from the seasonal cycle in surface
temperature, J. Climate, 19, 4224–4233, 2006.
Kravitz, B., Robock, A., Tilmes, S., Boucher, O., English, J. M.,
Irvine, P. J., Jones, A., Lawrence, M. G., MacCracken, M.,
Muri, H., Moore, J. C., Niemeier, U., Phipps, S. J., Sillmann, J.,
Storelvmo, T., Wang, H., and Watanabe, S.: The Geoengineer-
ing Model Intercomparison Project Phase 6 (GeoMIP6): simula-
tion design and preliminary results, Geosci. Model Dev., 8, 3379-
3392, doi:10.5194/gmd-8-3379-2015, 2015.
Kriegler, E., O’Neill, B. C., Hallegatte, S., Kram, T., Lempert, R.
J., Moss, R. H., and Wilbanks, T.: The need for and use of
socio-economic scenarios for climate change analysis: a new ap-
proach based on shared socio-economic pathways, Global Envi-
ron. Chang., 22, 807–822, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2012.05.005,
2012.
Kriegler, E., Edmonds, J., Hallegatte, S., Ebi, K., Kram, T., Riahi,
K., Winkler, H., and van Vuuren, D.: A new scenario framework
for climate change research: the concept of shared climate policy
assumptions, Climatic Change, 122, 401–414, 2014a.
Kriegler, E., Weyant, J. P., Blanford, G. J., Krey, V., Clarke, L., Ed-
monds, J., Fawcett, A., Luderer, G., Riahi, K., Richels, R., Rose,
S. K., Tavoni, M., and van Vuuren, D. P.: The role of technology
for achieving climate policy objectives: Overview of the EMF
27 study on global technology and climate policy strategies, Cli-
matic Change, 123, 353–367, 2014b.
Lawrence, D. M., Hurtt, G. C., Arneth, A., Brovkin, V., Calvin,
K. V., Jones, A. D., Jones, C. D., Lawrence, P. J., de Noblet-
Ducoudré, N., Pongratz, J., Seneviratne, S. I., and Shevli-
akova, E.: The Land Use Model Intercomparison Project (LU-
MIP) contribution to CMIP6: rationale and experimental design,
Geosci. Model Dev., 9, 2973–2998, doi:10.5194/gmd-9-2973-
2016, 2016.
Mahlstein, I. and Knutti, R.: September Arctic sea ice predicted to
disappear near 2 ◦C global warming above present, J. Geophys.
Res., 117, D06104, doi:10.1029/2011JD016709, 2012.
Massonnet, F., Fichefet, T., Goosse, H., Bitz, C. M., Philippon-
Berthier, G., Holland, M. M., and Barriat, P.-Y.: Constraining
projections of summer Arctic sea ice, The Cryosphere, 6, 1383–
1394, doi:10.5194/tc-6-1383-2012, 2012.
Matthes, K., Funke, B., Anderson, M. E., Barnard, L., Beer, J.,
Charbonneau, P., Clilverd, M. A., Dudok de Wit, T., Haberre-
iter, M., Hendry, A., Jackman, C. H., Kretschmar, M., Kruschke,
T., Kunze, M., Langematz, U., Marsh, D. R., Maycock, A., Mi-
sios, S., Rodger, C. J., Scaife, A. A., Seppälä, A., Shangguan,
M., Sinnhuber, M., Tourpali, K., Usoskin, I., van de Kamp, M.,
Verronen, P. T., and Versick, S.: Solar Forcing for CMIP6 (v3.1),
Geosci. Model Dev. Discuss., doi:10.5194/gmd-2016-91, in re-
view, 2016.
Meehl, G., Covey, C., Delworth, T., Latif, M., McAvaney, B.,
Mitchell, J., Stouffer, R. and Taylor, K.: The WCRP CMIP3 mul-
timodel dataset, B. Am. Meteorol. Soc., 88, 1383–1394, 2007.
Geosci. Model Dev., 9, 3461–3482, 2016
www.geosci-model-dev.net/9/3461/2016/


----- Page 21 (native text) -----
B. C. O’Neill et al.: The Scenario Model Intercomparison Project (ScenarioMIP) for CMIP6
3481
Meehl, G. A., Moss, R. H., Taylor, K. E., Eyring, V., Stouffer, R.
J., Bony, S., and Stevens, B.: Climate Model Intercomparisons:
Preparing for the Next Phase, Eos Trans., AGU, 95, 77, 2014.
Meinshausen, M., Raper, S. C. B., and Wigley, T. M. L.: Emulat-
ing coupled atmosphere-ocean and carbon cycle models with a
simpler model, MAGICC6 – Part 1: Model description and cal-
ibration, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 11, 1417–1456, doi:10.5194/acp-
11-1417-2011, 2011a.
Meinshausen, M., Wigley, T. M. L., and Raper, S. C. B.: Emulat-
ing atmosphere-ocean and carbon cycle models with a simpler
model, MAGICC6 – Part 2: Applications, Atmos. Chem. Phys.,
11, 1457–1471, doi:10.5194/acp-11-1457-2011, 2011b.
Meinshausen, M., Smith, S. J., Calvin, K., Daniel, J. S., Kainuma,
M. L. T., Lamarque, J.-F., Matsumoto, K., Montzka, S. A., Raper,
S. C. B., Riahi, K., Thomson, A., Velders, G. J. M., and van Vu-
uren, D. P.: The RCP greenhouse gas concentrations and their
extensions from 1765 to 2300, Climatic Change, 109, 213–241,
2011c.
Meinshausen, M., Vogel, E., Nauels, A., Lorbacher, K., Mein-
shausen, N., Etheridge, D., Fraser, P., Montzka, S. A., Rayner,
P., Trudinger, C., Krummel, P., Beyerle, U., Cannadell, J. G.,
Daniel, J. S., Enting, I., Law, R. M., O’Doherty, S., Prinn, R.
G., Reimann, S., Rubino, M., Velders, G. J. M., Vollmer, M.
K., and Weiss, R.: Historical greenhouse gas concentrations,
Geosci. Model Dev. Discuss., doi:10.5194/gmd-2016-169, in re-
view, 2016.
Moss, R., Babiker, M., Brinkman, S., Calvo, E., Carter, T., Ed-
monds, J., Elgizouli, I., Emori, S., Erda, L., Hibbard, K., Jones,
R., Kainuma, M., Kelleher, J., Lamarque, J.-F., Manning, M.,
Matthews, B., Meehl, J., Meyer, L., Mitchell, J., Nakicenovic, N.,
O’Neill, B., Pichs, R., Riahi, K., Rose, S., Runci, P., Stouffer, R.,
van Vuuren, D., Weyant, J., Wilbanks, T., van Ypersele, J.-P., and
Zurek, M. : Towards New Scenarios for Analysis of Emissions,
Climate Change, Impacts, and Response Strategies, Technical
Summary. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Geneva,
25 pp., 2008.
Moss, R. H., Edmonds, J. A., Hibbard, K. A., Manning, M. R., Rose,
S. K., van Vuuren, D. P., Carter, T. R., Emori, S., Kainuma, M.,
Kram, T., Meehl, G. A., Mitchell, J. F. B., Nakicenovic, N., Riahi,
K., Smith, S. J., Stouffer, R.J., Thomson, A. M., Weyant, J. P.,
and Wilbanks, T. J.: The next generation of scenarios for climate
change research and assessment, Nature, 463, 747–756, 2010.
Myhre, G., Shindell, D., Bréon, F.-M., Collins, W., Fuglestvedt,
J., Huang, J., Koch, D., Lamarque, J.-F., Lee, D., Mendoza,
B., Nakajima, T., Robock, A., Stephens, G., Takemura, T., and
Zhang, H.: Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing, in:
Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis, Contribution
of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Inter-
governmental Panel on Climate Change, edited by: Stocker, T.
F., Qin, D., Plattner, G.-K., Tignor, M., Allen, S. K., Boschung,
J., Nauels, A., Xia, Y., Bex, V., and Midgley, P. M., Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York,
NY, USA, 2013.
Naki´cenovi´c, N., Davidson, O., Davis, G., Grübler, A., Kram,T.,
Lebre La Rovere, E., Metz, B., Morita, T., Pepper, W., Pitcher,
H., Sankovshi, A., Shukla, P., Swart, R., Watson, R., and Dadi,
Z.: Special Report on Emissions Scenarios: A Special Report of
Working Group III of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United King-
dom, 599 pp., 2000.
Nowicki, S. M. J., Payne, T., Larour, E., Seroussi, H., Goelzer, H.,
Lipscomb, W., Gregory, J., Abe-Ouchi, A., and Shepherd, A.:
Ice Sheet Model Intercomparison Project (ISMIP6) contribution
to CMIP6, Geosci. Model Dev. Discuss., doi:10.5194/gmd-2016-
105, in review, 2016.
O’Neill, B. C., Lawrence, D., and Larmarque, J.-F.: Developing cli-
mate model comparisons, Eos, 95, p. 462, 2014a.
O’Neill, B. C., Kriegler, E., Riahi, K., Ebi, K., Hallegatte, S., Carter,
T. R., Mathur, R., and van Vuuren, D. P.: A new scenario frame-
work for climate change research: The concept of shared socio-
economic pathways, Climatic Change, 122, 387–400, 2014b.
O’Neill, B. C., Kriegler, E., Ebi, K. L., Kemp-Benedict, E., Ri-
ahi, K., Rothman, D. S., van Ruijven, B. J., van Vuuren, D. P.,
Birkmann, J., Kok, K., Levy, M., and Solecki, W.: The roads
ahead: Narratives for shared socioeconomic pathways describ-
ing world futures in the 21st century, Global Environ. Chang.,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2015.01.004, online ﬁrst, 2015.
Pincus, R., Forster, P. M., and Stevens, B.: The Radiative Forcing
Model Intercomparison Project (RFMIP): Experimental Proto-
col for CMIP6, Geosci. Model Dev. Discuss., doi:10.5194/gmd-
2016-88, in review, 2016.
Popp, A., Calvin, K., Fujimori, S., Humpenöder, F., Stehfest, E.,
Bodirsky, B., Dietrich, J. P., Doelmann, J., Gusti, M., Hasegawa,
T., Kyle, P., Obersteiner, M., Tabeau, A., Takahashi, K., Valin, H.,
Waldhoff, S., Weindl, I., Wise, M., Kriegler, E., Lotze-Campen,
H., Fricko, O., Riahi, K., and van Vuuren, D. P.: Land use fu-
tures in the Shared Socio-Economic Pathways, Global Environ.
Chang., accepted, 2016.
Riahi, K., Kriegler, E., Johnson, N., Bertram, C., den Elzen, M.,
Eom, J., Schaeffer, M., Edmonds, J., Isaac, M., Krey, V., Long-
den, T., Luderer, G., Méjean, A., McCollum, D. L., Mima, S.,
Turton, H., van Vuuren, D. P., Wada, K., Bosetti, V., Capros, P.,
Criqui, P., Hamdi-Cherif, M., Kainuma, M., and Edenhofer, O.:
Locked into Copenhagen pledges – Implications of short-term
emission targets for the cost and feasibility of long-term climate
goals, Technol. Forecast. Soc., 90, 8–23, 2015.
Riahi, K., van Vuuren, D. P., Kriegler, E., Edmonds, J., O’Neill,
B. C., Fujimori, S., Bauer, N., Calvin, K., Dellink, R., Fricko,
O., Lutz, W., Popp, A., Crespo Cuaresma, J., KC, S., Leim-
bach, M., Jiang, L., Kram, T., Rao, S., Emmerling, J., Ebi, K.,
Hasegawa, T., Havlik, P., Humpenöder, F., Aleluia Da Silva, L.,
Smith, S., Stehfest, E., Bosetti, V., Eom, J., Gernaat, D., Ma-
sui, T., Rogelj, J., Streﬂer, J., Drouet, L., Krey, V., Luderer,
G., Harmsen, M., Takahashi, K., Baumstark, L., Doelman, J.,
Kainuma, M., Klimont, Z., Marangoni, G., Lotze-Campen, H.,
Obersteiner, M., Tabeau, A., and Tavoni, M.: The Shared Socioe-
conomic Pathways and their energy, land use, and greenhouse gas
emissions implications: An Overview, Global Environ. Chang.,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2016.05.009, online ﬁrst, 2016.
Rogelj, J., Luderer, G., Pietzcker, R. C., Kriegler, E., Schaeffer, M.,
Krey, V., and Riahi, K.: Energy system transformations for lim-
iting end-of-century warming to below 1.5 ◦C, Nature Climate
Change, 5, 519–527, doi:10.1038/nclimate2572, 2015.
Ruane, A. C., Teichmann, C., Arnell, N., Carter, T. R., Ebi, K. L.,
Frieler, K., Goodess, C. M., Hewitson, B., Horton, R., Kovats,
R. S., Lotze, H. K., Mearns, L. O., Navarra, A., Ojima, D. S.,
Riahi, K., Rosenzweig, C., Themessl, M., and Vincent, K.: The
www.geosci-model-dev.net/9/3461/2016/
Geosci. Model Dev., 9, 3461–3482, 2016


----- Page 22 (native text) -----
3482
B. C. O’Neill et al.: The Scenario Model Intercomparison Project (ScenarioMIP) for CMIP6
Vulnerability, Impacts, Adaptation, and Climate Services (VI-
ACS) Advisory Board for CMIP6, Geosci. Model Dev. Discuss.,
doi:10.5194/gmd-2016-71, in review, 2016.
Sherwood, S. C., Bony, S., and Dufresne, J. L.: Spread in model
climate sensitivity traced to atmospheric convective mixing, Na-
ture, 505, 37–42, 2014.
Taylor, K. E., Stouffer, R. J., and Meehl, G. A.: An overview of
CMIP5 and the experiment design, B. Am. Meteorol. Soc., 93,
485–498, doi:10.1175/BAMS-D-11-00094.1, 2012.
Tebaldi, C. and Arblaster, J. M.: Pattern scaling: its strengths and
limitations and an update on the latest model simulations, Cli-
matic Change, 122, 459–471, 2014.
Tebaldi, C., O’Neill, B. C., and Lamarque, J.-F.: Sensitivity of re-
gional climate to global temperature and forcing, Environ. Res.
Lett., 10, 074001, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/10/7/074001, 2015.
UNFCCC 2015 Paris Agreements: Durban Platform for Enhanced
Action (decision 1/CP.17) Adoption of a protocol, another legal
instrument, or an agreed outcome with legal force under the Con-
vention applicable to all Parties, 2015.
van Vuuren, D. P., Edmonds, J., Thomson, A., Riahi, K., Kainuma,
M., Matsui, T., Hurtt, G. C., Lamarque, J.-F., Meinshausen, M.,
Smith, S., Granier, C., Rose, S. K., and Hibbard, K. A.: The
Representative Concentration Pathways: an overview, Climatic
Change, 109, 5–31, 2011a.
van Vuuren, D.P., Edmonds, J., Kainuma, M., Riahi, K., and
Weyant, J.: A special issue on the RCPs, Climatic Change, 109,
1–4, doi:10.1007/s10584-011-0157-y, 2011b.
van Vuuren, D. P., Riahi, K., Moss, R., Edmonds, J., Thomson, A.,
Nakicenovic, N., Kram, T., Berkhout, F., Swart, R., Janetos, A.,
Rose, S. K., and Arnell, N.: A proposal for a new scenario frame-
work to support research and assessment in different climate re-
search communities, Global Environ. Chang., 22, 21–35, 2012.
van Vuuren, D. P., Kriegler, E., O’Neill, B. C., Ebi, K. L., Riahi, K.,
Carter, T. R., Edmonds, J., Hallegatte, S., Kram, T., Mathur, R.,
and Winkler, H.: A new scenario framework for climate change
research: scenario matrix architecture, Climatic Change, 122,
373–86, 2014.
Wenzel, S., Cox, P. M., Eyring, V., and Friedlingstein, P.: Emer-
gent constraints on climate-carbon cycle feedbacks in the
CMIP5 Earth system models, J. Geophys. Res.-Biogeo., 119,
2013JG002591, doi:10.1002/2013JG002591, 2014.
Wenzel, S., Eyring, V., Gerber, E. P., and Karpechko, A. Y.:
Constraining Future Summer Austral Jet Stream Positions in
the CMIP5 Ensemble by Process-Oriented Multiple Diagnostic
Regression, J. Climate, 29, 673–687, doi:10.1175/JCLI-D-15-
0412.1, 2016.
Geosci. Model Dev., 9, 3461–3482, 2016
www.geosci-model-dev.net/9/3461/2016/
