

----- Page 1 (native text) -----
Copyright © 2004 by the author(s). Published here under licence by The Resilience Alliance. 
Walker, B., C. S. Holling, S. R. Carpenter, and A. Kinzig. 2004. Resilience, adaptability and 
transformability in social–ecological systems. Ecology and Society 9(2): 5. [online] URL: 
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol9/iss2/art5 
 
 
Perspective 
Resilience, Adaptability and Transformability in Social–
ecological Systems 
 
Brian Walker1, C. S. Holling, Stephen R. Carpenter2, and Ann Kinzig3 
 
ABSTRACT. The concept of resilience has evolved considerably since Holling’s (1973) seminal paper. Different 
interpretations of what is meant by resilience, however, cause confusion. Resilience of a system needs to be 
considered in terms of the attributes that govern the system’s dynamics. Three related attributes of social–
ecological systems (SESs) determine their future trajectories: resilience, adaptability, and transformability. 
Resilience (the capacity of a system to absorb disturbance and reorganize while undergoing change so as to still 
retain essentially the same function, structure, identity, and feedbacks) has four components—latitude, resistance, 
precariousness, and panarchy—most readily portrayed using the metaphor of a stability landscape. Adaptability is 
the capacity of actors in the system to influence resilience (in a SES, essentially to manage it). There are four 
general ways in which this can be done, corresponding to the four aspects of resilience. Transformability is the 
capacity to create a fundamentally new system when ecological, economic, or social structures make the existing 
system untenable.  
The implications of this interpretation of SES dynamics for sustainability science include changing the focus from 
seeking optimal states and the determinants of maximum sustainable yield (the MSY paradigm), to resilience 
analysis, adaptive resource management, and adaptive governance. 
INTRODUCTION 
An inherent difficulty in the application of these 
concepts is that, by their nature, they are rather 
imprecise. They fall into the same sort of category as 
“justice” 
or 
“wellbeing,” 
and 
it 
can 
be 
counterproductive to seek definitions that are too 
narrow. Because different groups adopt different 
interpretations to fit their understanding and purpose, 
however, there is confusion in their use. The confusion 
then extends to how a resilience approach (Holling 
1973, Gunderson and Holling 2002) can contribute to 
the goals of sustainable development. In what follows, 
we provide an interpretation and an explanation of 
how these concepts are reflected in the adaptive cycles 
of complex, multi-scalar SESs.  
We need a better scientific basis for sustainable 
development than is generally applied (e.g., a new 
“sustainability 
science”). 
The 
“Consortium 
for 
Sustainable Development” (of the International Council 
for Science, the Initiative on Science and Technology for 
Sustainability, and the Third World Academy of 
Science), the US National Research Council (1999, 
2002), and the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment 
(2003), have all focused increasing attention on such 
notions as robustness, vulnerability, and risk. There is 
good reason for this, as it is these characteristics of 
social–ecological systems (SESs) that will determine 
their ability to adapt to and benefit from change. In 
particular, the stability dynamics of all linked systems of 
humans and nature emerge from three complementary 
attributes: resilience, adaptability, and transformability. 
The purpose of this paper is to examine these three 
attributes; what they mean, how they interact, and their 
implications for our future well-being.  
There is little fundamentally new theory in this paper. 
What is new is that it uses established theory of non-
linear stability (Levin 1999, Scheffer et al. 2001, 
Gunderson and Holling 2002, Berkes et al. 2003) to 
clarify, explain, and diagnose known examples of 
regional development, regional poverty, and regional 
 
1CSIRO Sustainable Ecosystems; 2University of Wisconsin-Madison; 3Arizona State University 
 


----- Page 2 (native text) -----
Ecology and Society 9(2): 5. 
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol9/iss2/art5 
 
sustainability. These include, among others, the 
Everglades and the Wisconsin Northern Highlands 
Lake District in the USA, rangelands and an 
agricultural catchment in southeastern Australia, the 
semi-arid savanna in southeastern Zimbabwe, the 
Kristianstad “Water Kingdom” in southern Sweden, 
and the Mae Ping valley in northern Thailand. These 
regions provide examples of both successes and 
failures of development. Some from rich countries 
have generated several pulses of solutions over a span 
of a hundred years and have generated huge costs of 
recovery (the Everglades). Some from poor countries 
have emerged in a transformed way but then, in some 
cases, have been dragged back by higher-level 
autocratic regimes (Zimbabwe). Some began as local-
scale solutions and then developed as transformations 
across scales from local to regional (Kristianstad and 
northern Wisconsin). In all of them, the outcomes 
were determined by the interplay of their resilience, 
adaptability, and transformability.  
There is a major distinction between resilience and 
adaptability, on the one hand, and transformability on 
the other. Resilience and adaptability have to do with 
the dynamics of a particular system, or a closely 
related set of systems. Transformability refers to 
fundamentally altering the nature of a system. As with 
many terms under the resilience rubric, the dividing 
line between “closely related” and “fundamentally 
altered” can be fuzzy, and subject to interpretation. So 
we begin by first offering the most general, qualitative 
set of definitions, without reference to conceptual 
frameworks, that can be used to describe these terms. 
We then use some examples and the literature on 
“basins of attraction” and “stability landscapes” to 
further refine our definitions. Before giving the 
definitions, however, we need to briefly introduce the 
concept of adaptive cycles.  
Adaptive Cycles and Cross-scale Effects 
The dynamics of SESs can be usefully described and 
analyzed in terms of a cycle, known as an adaptive 
cycle, that passes through four phases. Two of them—
a growth and exploitation phase (r) merging into a 
conservation phase (K)—comprise a slow, cumulative 
forward loop of the cycle, during which the dynamics 
of the system are reasonably predictable. As the K 
phase continues, resources become increasingly locked 
up and the system becomes progressively less flexible 
and responsive to external shocks. It is eventually, 
inevitably, followed by a chaotic collapse and release 
phase (Ω) that rapidly gives way to a phase of 
reorganization (α), which may be rapid or slow, and 
during which, innovation and new opportunities are 
possible. The Ω and α phases together comprise an 
unpredictable backloop. The α phase leads into a 
subsequent r phase, which may resemble the previous r 
phase or be significantly different.  
This metaphor of the adaptive cycle is based on 
observed system changes, and does not imply fixed, 
regular cycling. Systems can move back from K 
toward r, or from r directly into Ω, or back from α to 
Ω. Finally (and importantly), the cycles occur at a 
number of scales and SESs exist as “panarchies”—
adaptive cycles interacting across multiple scales. 
These cross-scale effects are of great significance in 
the dynamics of SESs.  
Resilience 
Resilience is the capacity of a system to absorb 
disturbance and reorganize while undergoing change 
so as to still retain essentially the same function, 
structure, identity, and feedbacks. As amplified below, 
the focus is on the dynamics of the system when it is 
disturbed far from its modal state. The notion of speed 
of return to equilibrium (Pimm 1991) leads to what has 
been termed “engineering resilience” (Holling 1996) 
and, although related to one aspect of “ecological 
resilience,” cannot be considered as the measure of 
resilience. Because of the possibility of multiple stable 
states, when considering the extent to which a system 
can be changed, return time doesn’t measure all of the 
ways in which a system may fail—permanently or 
temporarily—to retain essential functions. It is also 
important to bear in mind that “systems” consist of 
nested dynamics operating at particular organizational 
scales—“sub-systems,” as it were, of households to 
villages to nations, trees to patches to landscapes.  
There are four crucial aspects of resilience. The first 
three can apply both to a whole system or the sub-
systems that make it up.  
1. Latitude: the maximum amount a system can 
be changed before losing its ability to recover 
(before crossing a threshold which, if 
breached, 
makes 
recovery 
difficult 
or 
impossible).  
2. Resistance: the ease or difficulty of changing 
the system; how “resistant” it is to being 
changed.  
 
 


----- Page 3 (native text) -----
Ecology and Society 9(2): 5. 
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol9/iss2/art5 
 
EXPLANATION 
3. Precariousness: how close the current state of 
the system is to a limit or “threshold.”  
Resilience: States, Attractors, and Stability 
Landscapes 
4. Panarchy: because of cross-scale interactions, 
the resilience of a system at a particular focal 
scale will depend on the influences from states 
and dynamics at scales above and below. For 
example, 
external 
oppressive 
politics, 
invasions, market shifts, or global climate 
change can trigger local surprises and regime 
shifts. 
The “state space” of a system is defined by the (state) 
variables that constitute the system. If, for example, 
we define a rangeland system by the amount of grass, 
shrubs,and livestock, then the state space is the three-
dimensional space of all possible combinations of the 
amounts of these three variables. The state of the 
system at any time is defined by their current values.  
Adaptability 
Adaptability is the capacity of actors in a system to 
influence resilience. In a SES, this amounts to the 
capacity of humans to manage resilience. A 
characteristic feature of complex adaptive systems is 
self-organization without intent (Levin 1998), and 
although the dynamics of SESs are dominated by 
individual human actors who do exhibit intent, the 
system as a whole does not (as in the case of a 
market). 
Nevertheless, 
because 
human 
actions 
dominate in SESs, adaptability of the system is mainly 
a function of the social component—the individuals 
and groups acting to manage the system. Their actions 
influence 
resilience, 
either 
intentionally 
or 
unintentionally. Their collective capacity to manage 
resilience, intentionally, determines whether they can 
successfully avoid crossing into an undesirable system 
regime, or succeed in crossing back into a desirable 
one. There are four ways to do this, corresponding to 
the four aspects of resilience. Actors can move 
thresholds away from or closer to the current state of 
the system (by altering (1) above), move the current 
state of the system away from or closer to the 
threshold (altering 3), or make the threshold more 
difficult or easier to reach (altering 2). In addition, 
actors can manage cross-scale interactions to avoid or 
generate loss of resilience at the largest and most 
socially catastrophic scales (altering 4).  
A “basin of attraction” is a region in state space in 
which the system tends to remain. For systems that 
tend toward an equilibrium, the equilibrium state is 
defined as an “attractor,” and the basin of attraction 
constitutes all initial conditions that will tend toward 
that equilibrium state. All real-world SESs are, 
however, continuously buffeted by disturbances, 
stochasticity, and decisions of actors that tend to move 
the system off the attractor. Therefore, we think of 
SESs as moving about within a particular basin of 
attraction, rather than tending directly toward an 
attractor. There may be more than one such basin of 
attraction for any given system (for example, two or 
more combinations of amounts of grass, shrubs, and 
livestock toward which a rangeland might tend, 
depending on the starting point). The various basins 
that a system may occupy, and the boundaries that 
separate them, are known as a “stability landscape.” 
Fig. 1a depicts the first three components of resilience 
for a basin in a stability landscape of two state 
variables. A good review and summary of stability 
landscape dynamics in ecology is given in Beisner et 
al. (2003).  
Both exogenous drivers (rainfall, exchange rates) and 
endogenous processes (plant succession, predator–prey 
cycles, management practices) can lead to changes in 
the stability landscape, such as: changes in the number 
of basins of attraction, changes in the positions of the 
basins within the state space, changes in the positions 
of the thresholds (edges) between basins (latitude—L 
in Fig. 1a), or changes in the “depths” of basins, a 
measure of how difficult it is to move the system 
around within the basin—steep sides imply greater 
perturbations or management efforts are needed to 
change the state of the system, i.e., its position within 
the basin (resistance—R in Fig. 1a). Moving the 
system around changes its position within a basin 
relative to the edge (precariousness—Pr in Fig. 1a), or 
Transformability 
The capacity to create a fundamentally new system 
when ecological, economic, or social (including 
political) conditions make the existing system 
untenable. 
 
 


----- Page 4 (native text) -----
Ecology and Society 9(2): 5. 
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol9/iss2/art5 
 
moves it into a new basin (e.g., Fig. 1b, where, without 
the state of the system itself changing, the system finds 
itself in a new basin of attraction, owing to changes in 
the stability landscape). The people in this system 
might consider some basins to be desirable (lots of 
grass, few shrubs, plentiful livestock) and the objective 
might be to prevent the system from moving into an 
alternate, undesirable basin (little grass, many shrubs, 
few livestock) from which it may be difficult or 
impossible to recover.  
In evolved systems that have been subjected to strong 
selection pressures, the three aspects of resilience have 
co-developed and are often strongly inter-related. For 
example, one dimension (axis) of the stability 
landscape for individual human health is temperature. 
(One could imagine three basins of attraction in this 
landscape—healthy, 
sick, 
or 
dead). 
For 
good 
physiological reasons, the optimal temperature for the 
body is very close to the threshold between life and 
death (very precarious). A hundred million years of 
homeotherm natural selection has ensured that there 
are strong negative feedbacks—temperature regulation 
mechanisms—making it very unlikely and difficult for 
the body to move across the critical temperature 
threshold. In other words, being precariously close to 
such a threshold has meant the evolution of strong 
resistance. Evolving toward the edge of chaos 
(corresponding, in this case, to the edge of a basin of 
attraction) is a seemingly common consequence of 
selection (Kaufmann 2000) for maximum efficiency. 
Recently developed SESs (managed fisheries and 
virtually all agro-ecosystems, for example) have short 
co-evolutionary histories. Therefore, we cannot rely on 
such selected relationships with appropriate feedback 
controls, and the likelihood of crossing thresholds is 
much higher (as evidenced by the many examples of 
collapsed fisheries and salinized or otherwise degraded 
agricultural regions).  
 
Fig. 1a. Three-dimensional stability landscape with two 
basins of attraction showing, in one basin, the current 
position of the system and three aspects of resilience, L = 
latitude, R = resistance, Pr = precariousness.  
 
No SES can be understood by examining it at only one 
scale. The social component of a SES consists of 
groups of people organized at multiple levels with 
differing views as to whether some basins are 
desirable and others undesirable. At any particular 
scale, the system is actually a sub-system of the whole 
panarchy, and the first three aspects of resilience are 
influenced by what is happening in the panarchy at 
scales above and below the scale of interest. Panarchy, 
the cross-scale effects, is the fourth aspect of resilience 
that needs to be considered (Pa in Fig. 2). For 
example, many lakes occupy a stability landscape with 
essentially two basins of attraction: one that is initially 
wide and cavernous, characterized by clear water, and 
a smaller one characterized by turbid water (Carpenter 
2003). Agricultural practices within the larger SES, 
through application of fertilizers and manure, have 
gradually increased the phosphorus content of soils in 
some watersheds. This cross-scale effect has changed 
the stability landscapes of the lakes in several ways. 
As lake basins fill with sediment, a third basin of 
attraction has appeared, one in which the lake is 
dominated by rooted vegetation. The first basin—clear 
Fig. 1b. Changes in the stability landscape have resulted in 
a contraction of the basin the system was in and an 
expansion of the alternate basin. Without itself changing, 
the system has changed basins.  
 
 
 
 


----- Page 5 (native text) -----
Ecology and Society 9(2): 5. 
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol9/iss2/art5 
 
water and sparse vegetation—shrinks and nearly 
disappears from the stability landscape. The second 
basin—turbid water and frequent blooms of toxic 
algae—moves from being small to being wider and 
more cavernous. 
 
Fig. 2. The fourth aspect of resilience in relation to a 
stability landscape—Panarchy (Pa); the influence of the 
states of the system (including where they are in their 
adaptive cycles) at scales above and below the focal scale, 
which affects the other three aspects (Fig. 1) by impacting 
the system directly (from the finer scale) or changing the 
stability landscape (from the coarser scale). 
 
 
 
Some loss of resilience, at some scales, is an inevitable 
feature of the cross-scale dynamics in complex 
adaptive systems. Losses, however, can be managed so 
as to be confined to smaller organizational scales, with 
less consequent social and environmental dislocation. 
All else being equal, a system that loses resilience at 
small, and more societally manageable, scales of 
organization (e.g., patches) will be more resilient than 
one where these losses occur at larger scales (e.g., 
landscapes). Note, however, that resilience is not 
always a good thing. Sometimes change is desirable, 
generally at larger scales, and then effective 
management requires overcoming the resilience in the 
system to precipitate changes at these scales.  
Components of Adaptability 
As explained in the initial definition, because the 
dynamics and direction of change in a SES are 
dominated by human actions, we consider adaptability 
to be mainly a function of the social component—the 
individuals and groups acting to manage the system 
(see Berkes et al. 2003, for a good account). The 
ability to either control the trajectory of the system 
(change precariousness), change the topology of the 
stability landscape (latitude and resistance), or change 
the processes in response to dynamics at other scales 
(panarchy response), is a measure of adaptability. 
Consider both strategies in the case of the lake that has 
fallen into a turbid basin. Managers could attempt to 
move the ecosystem to another basin without changing 
the stability landscape by chemically immobilizing the 
phosphate in the lake. If the land-use practices of the 
SES change in ways that reduce phosphorus levels in 
soils, in contrast, the stability landscape changes, the 
turbid basin shrinks, and the clear water basin 
expands. Both purposeful movements between basins, 
and purposeful reshaping of the stability landscape, 
demonstrate adaptability. SESs can move from one 
basin of attraction to another either by the system 
crossing a threshold, or by a threshold moving across 
the system.  
Transformability 
At times societies or groups may find themselves 
trapped in an undesirable basin that is becoming so 
wide, and so deep, that movement to a new basin or 
sufficient reconfiguration of the existing basin 
becomes extremely difficult. At some point, it may 
prove necessary to configure an entirely new stability 
landscape—one defined by new state variables, or the 
old state variables supplemented by new ones. For 
instance, in the rangeland case—defined originally by 
the amount of grass, shrubs, and cattle—a new 
stability landscape could be created by introducing 
new ways for earning a living, such as ecotourism, 
based on wildlife and rivers. This is what occurred in 
southeastern Zimbabwe (Cumming 1999) where, after 
many decades of cattle ranching, the rangeland 
ecosystem had changed undesirably for livestock and 
terms of trade had declined. A severe drought in the 
early 1980s triggered a transformation from many 
individual 
cattle 
ranches 
to 
a 
few 
wildlife 
“conservancies” with all livestock and fences removed 
and managed collectively for tourism and hunting. The 
capacity to create such a new stability landscape is 
known as transformability—the capacity to create 
untried beginnings from which to evolve a new way of 
living when existing ecological, economic, or social 
structures become untenable. New variables are 
introduced or allowed to emerge. The changes cascade 
through and may transform the whole panarchy with 
all its constituent adaptive cycles. There are many 
 
 


----- Page 6 (native text) -----
Ecology and Society 9(2): 5. 
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol9/iss2/art5 
 
examples of SESs becoming locked in and unable to 
transform until it is too late (salinized agricultural 
systems; dams, floodplains and flood control; forest 
fire suppression at ever larger scales). How can society 
develop transformability and avoid such lock-ins?  
Examples of globally new phenomena at large 
time/space scales are the dramatic jump that saw the 
replacement of dominance by reptiles with dominance 
by mammals (the transformational success of 
homeothermy in the course of biological evolution), 
and, at scales in the course of human civilization, the 
agrarian revolution, the emergence of cities, and the 
industrial revolution, all examples of transformative 
changes. But consider more local or regional 
situations, as in the following example.  
Scenario planning is a process of envisioning plausible 
transformations and bringing them into social decision 
processes (Peterson et al. 2003). As part of a project 
on resilience analysis and governance in the Northern 
Highlands of Wisconsin, USA, a diverse group of 
local people and scientists evaluated possible futures 
of 
the 
region 
and 
envisioned 
four 
plausible 
transformations 
(http://lakefutures.wisc.edu): 
a 
tourism-based theme park region (“Annaheim North”); 
a region with an environmentally induced drop in 
population followed by gradual reorganization around 
tribal initiatives (“Walleye Commons”); an expanded 
and diversified population leading to resource conflicts 
being resolved by allocating recreational lands and 
lakes for certain specified uses (“Northwoods Quilts”); 
and a region in which terrorism in Chicago leads to 
population growth, as well as more governmental 
control of resource use (“Refugee Revolution”). The 
scenarios, widely covered in local media, evoked 
spirited debate about change in the region, and 
whether and how the local people can or should 
manipulate 
change. 
They 
helped 
overcome 
a 
fundamental problem in thinking about transformation 
in a coherent way. With so many changes happening 
simultaneously, the very complexity of the situation 
became a barrier to understanding and action. The 
scenarios organized information about transformation 
in a comprehensible way that facilitated discussion and 
action. Knowing if, when, and how to initiate 
transformative change, before it is too late to escape a 
seriously 
undesirable 
and 
deepening 
basin 
of 
attraction, is at the heart of SES transformability.  
A tension will exist between maintaining the resilience 
of a desired current configuration in the face of known 
(and some unknown) shocks, and simultaneously 
building a capacity for transformability, should it be 
needed. How can we foster or maintain the flexibility 
that will be required to cope with unforeseen 
challenges? It is nevertheless likely that there is 
overlap in the attributes that promote adaptability and 
transformability. In addition to such common 
attributes (e.g., diverse and high levels of natural and 
built capital), we speculate that attributes required for 
transformability will emphasize novelty, diversity, and 
organization in human capital—diversity of functional 
types (kinds of education, expertise, and occupations); 
trust, strengths, and variety in institutions; speeds and 
kinds of cross-scale communication, both within the 
panarchy and between other systems elsewhere. Such 
attributes are implicit (although not specifically 
identified) in Stiglitz”s (2002) comparison of “good” 
and 
“bad” 
outcomes 
of 
socio-economic 
transformations following the fall of communism in 
Russia and the Southeast Asian economic crisis. He 
highlights 
the 
role 
played 
by 
sequencing of 
institutional development and economic rules—
attributes that fall within the crucial area (for 
resilience) of adaptive governance, a good account of 
which is given in Dietz et al. (2003). We return to it 
later.  
A RETURN TO THE DEFINITIONS 
Using the concepts of basins of attraction and stability 
landscapes, we can now offer more precise definitions 
of resilience, adaptability, and transformability:  
Resilience 
Resilience is the capacity of a system to absorb 
disturbance and reorganize while undergoing change 
so as to still retain essentially the same function, 
structure, identity, and feedbacks—in other words, 
stay in the same basin of attraction. Resilience has 
multiple attributes, but four aspects are critical for 
these definitions:  
• 
Latitude: the maximum amount the system can 
be changed before losing its ability to recover; 
basically the width of the basin of attraction. 
Wide basins mean a greater number of system 
states can be experienced without crossing a 
threshold (L, Fig. 1).  
• 
Resistance: the ease or difficulty of changing 
the system; related to the topology of the 
basin—deep basins of attraction (R, or more 
 
 


----- Page 7 (native text) -----
Ecology and Society 9(2): 5. 
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol9/iss2/art5 
 
accurately, higher ratios of R:L) indicate that 
greater forces or perturbations are required to 
change the current state of the system away 
from the attractor.  
• 
Precariousness: the current trajectory of the 
system, and how close it currently is to a limit 
or “threshold” which, if breached, makes 
recovery difficult or impossible (Pr).  
• 
Panarchy: how the above three attributes are 
influenced by the states and dynamics of the 
(sub)systems at scales above and below the 
scale of interest (Pa). 
Throughout this paper, we use stability landscapes as a 
metaphor for our measures of resilience—latitude, 
resistance, and precariousness. But not all systems can 
be adequately described by a stability landscape, 
particularly when one must grapple with both social 
and ecological components playing out over several 
scales of space, time, and organization. Even fewer 
lend themselves to the formal representation of such 
landscapes required to accurately measure P, L, and R. 
In some cases, the change in regime is not from one 
point attractor to another. Stable limit cycles might 
represent very similar management challenges as do 
thresholds between basins (managers would try to 
maximize the time spent in the desirable portion of the 
limit cycle and minimize the time spent in the 
undesirable part). Nonetheless, the general concepts 
would still apply. Social–ecological systems can be 
close to, or far away from, important thresholds (Pr). 
They can be easy or hard to change (R). The range of 
dynamics that can be accommodated while still 
retaining basically the same system can be large, or 
small (L). Different management interventions would 
be required to enhance resilience for each of these. 
Although we do not believe in or advocate their 
separate measurement (especially because of their 
inter-dependencies), we do believe that substantive 
qualitative assessments can be made of each of these 
components of resilience. And considering these 
assessments collectively enables a more complete and 
better focused assessment of resilience, and what to do 
about it, than would be achieved without them.  
Adaptability 
In a SES, adaptability is the collective capacity of the 
human actors in the system to manage resilience. 
Although the system as a whole self-organizes without 
intent, the capacities and intent of the human actors 
strongly influence the resilience and the trajectory of 
the SES. Putting this definition in the context of 
stability landscapes, adaptability can take many forms, 
including: (i) making desirable basins of attraction 
wider and/or deeper, and shrinking undesirable basins; 
(ii) creating new desirable basins, or eliminating 
undesirable ones; and (iii) changing the current state of 
the system so as to move either deeper into a desirable 
basin, or closer to the edge of an undesirable one.  
Transformability 
The capacity to create a fundamentally new system 
when ecological, economic, or social (including 
political) conditions make the existing system 
untenable. Transformability means defining and 
creating new stability landscapes by introducing new 
components and ways of making a living, thereby 
changing the state variables, and often the scale, that 
define the system.  
CLOSING COMMENTS 
Strategies for sustainability must take many forms. 
There is no “one size fits all” approach to the future. 
Sometimes SESs are already in desirable basins of 
attraction, and the challenge is to ensure that the basin 
does not get smaller, or the system doesn’t move too 
close to a threshold. At other times, they are in 
undesirable basins and the challenge is to reduce their 
resilience and to move toward or enlarge more 
desirable basins. (Note, from the earlier discussion on 
regime shifts other than between basins of attraction, 
whatever metaphor is used, the notion of resilience 
holds.) Strategies will be context dependent, and will 
themselves have to change over time because of the 
inevitable changes inherent in complex, coupled SESs.  
The need to know the details of the local and regional 
context—the particular attributes of the systems that 
determine the four aspects of resilience and 
adaptability—means a different approach to resource 
governance than currently applied will be required for 
a sustainable future. It changes the focus from seeking 
desirable states and the determinants of maximum 
sustainable yield, in its many guises (the MSY 
paradigm), to resilience analysis, with a simultaneous 
focus on adaptive resource management and adaptive 
governance. Adaptive governance is a process of 
creating adaptability and transformability in SESs. 
Adaptive management (Walters 1986), widely and 
deservedly promoted as a necessary basis for 
sustainable 
development, 
has 
frequently 
failed 
 
 


----- Page 8 (native text) -----
Ecology and Society 9(2): 5. 
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol9/iss2/art5 
 
(Walters 1997) because the existing governance 
structures have not allowed it to function effectively. 
Because the stability landscape is constantly changing, 
the 
“adaptive” 
part 
of 
both 
governance 
and 
management is required in all phases of the adaptive 
cycle. But, because it has received the least attention, 
we emphasize especially the importance of the back 
loop, and in particular the flexible management needed 
to retain critical ecological resources (adaptive 
management), and the evolution of rules that influence 
resilience 
during 
self-organization 
(adaptive 
governance). 
Responses to this article can be read online at: http://www. 
ecologyandsociety.org/vol9/iss2/art5/responses/index.html 
 
Acknowledgments: 
This paper results from many discussions in meetings of the 
Resilience Alliance. We acknowledge all our colleagues 
who have contributed to the development of these concepts. 
We thank Don Ludwig and Elinor Ostrom for helpful 
comments on an early draft, Art Langston for the 
construction of Fig. 1, and the comments of an unknown 
referee. The work leading to the paper has been supported 
by a grant to two of us (BW and SC) by the James S. 
MacDonnell Foundation. 
 
LITERATURE CITED 
Beisner, B. E., D. T. Haydon, and K. Cuddington. 2003. 
Alternative stable states in ecology. Frontiers in Ecology 
and the Environment 1:376–82.  
Berkes, F., J. Colding, and C. Folke, editors. 2003. 
Navigating social–ecological systems: building resilience 
for complexity and change. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, UK.  
Carpenter, S. R. 2003. Regime shifts in lake ecosystems. 
Ecology Institute, Oldendorf/Luhe, Germany.  
Cumming, D. H. M. 1999. Living off “biodiversity”: 
whose land, whose resources and where? Environment and 
Development Economics 4:220–226.  
Dietz, T., E. Ostrom, and P. C.Stern. 2003. The struggle 
to govern the commons. Science 302:1907–1912.  
Gunderson, L. H., and C. S.Holling, editors. 2002. 
Panarchy: understanding transformations in human and 
natural systems. Island Press, Washington, D.C., USA  
Holling, C. S. 1973. Resilience and stability of ecological 
systems. Annual Review of Ecological Systems 4:1–23.  
Holling, C. S. 1996. Engineering resilience versus 
ecological resilience. In P. C. Schulze, editor. Engineering 
within ecological constraints. National Academy Press, 
Washington, D.C., USA.  
Kaufmann, S. 2000. Investigations. Oxford University 
Press, New York, New York, USA.  
Levin, S. A. 1998. Ecosystems and the biosphere as 
complex adaptive systems. Ecosystems 1:431–436.  
Levin, S. A. 1999. Fragile dominion. Perseus Books Group, 
Cambridge, Massachussetts, USA.  
Millennium Ecosystem Assessment. 2003. Ecosystems and 
human well-being. Island Press, Washington, D.C., USA.  
National Research Council. 1999. Our common journey. 
National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., USA.  
National Research Council. 2002. The drama of the 
commons. National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 
USA.  
Peterson, G. D., C. R. Allen, and C. S. Holling. 1998. 
Ecological resilience, biodiversity, and scale. Ecosystems 
1:6–18.  
Peterson, G. D., G. S. Cumming, and S. R. Carpenter. 
2003. Scenario planning: a tool for conservation in an 
uncertain world. Conservation Biology 17:358–366.  
Pimm, S. L. 1991. The balance of nature? University of 
Chicago Press, Chicago, Illinois, USA.  
Scheffer, M., S. R. Carpenter, J. A. Foley, C. Folke, and 
B. Walker. 2001. Catastrophic shifts in ecosystems. Nature 
413:591–596.  
Stiglitz, J. 2002. Globalization and its discontents. W. W. 
Norton and Company, New York, New York, USA.  
 
 


----- Page 9 (native text) -----
Ecology and Society 9(2): 5. 
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol9/iss2/art5 
 
 
 
Walters, C. J. 1986. Adaptive management of renewable 
resources. Collier Macmillan, New York, New York, USA.  
Walters, C. J. 1997. Challenges in adaptive management of 
riparian and coastal ecosystems. Conservation Ecology 
1(2):1. 
(Online.) 
URL: 
http://www.consecol.org/vol1/iss2/art1. 
