

----- Page 1 (native) -----
James C. Scott. Seeing Like a State: How Certain Schemes to Improve the Human
Condition Have Failed. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1998. xiv + 445 pp.
$19.00, paper, ISBN 978-0-300-07815-2. 
 
Reviewed by Ulf Zimmermann 
Published on H-PCAACA (December, 1998) 
While  originally  trying  to  understand  why
governments seemed forever seeking to "sedenta‐
rize" people, Scott gradually came to see these ef‐
forts as "a state's attempt to make a society legi‐
ble, to arrange the population in ways that simpli‐
fied the classic state functions of taxation, con‐
scription, and the prevention of rebellion" (p. 2).
This made clear to him "processes as disparate as
the creation of permanent last names, the stan‐
dardization of weights and measures, the estab‐
lishment of cadastral surveys and population reg‐
isters ... the standardization of language and legal
discourse, the design of cities ... as attempts at leg‐
ibility and simplification" (p. 2). With this insight
he believes to offer a better "optic" on fiascoes
such as Third World development efforts and sim‐
ilar ones in Eastern Europe, including the "Great
Leap Forward" in China, collectivization in Russia,
and  compulsory  villagization  in  Tanzania,  and
why such (often well-intended) schemes too often
proved disastrous. 
Full-fledged  disasters  of  social  engineering
like these require a combination of four elements.
The first is the administrative ordering of nature
and society; the second is "high-modernist" ideolo‐
gy," a hubris of scientific and technical progress
that believes itself in mastery of nature and soci‐
ety as well. But these two only become pernicious
when joined, third, by an authoritarian state will‐
ing to use all its coercive power to implement
these schemes. That's easiest in times of war, de‐
pression, crises, or efforts at national liberation,
when the fourth element is likeliest, a civil society
too debilitated to resist. (He later reduces these
four to three and, in the end, to two: "the combi‐
nation [his emphasis] of the universalist preten‐
sions of epistemic knowledge and authoritarian
social engineering" [p. 34].) 
Though schemes like this had been put into
practice in Renaissance and Baroque city plan‐
ning  (and  he  discusses  the  later  Haussmann's
Paris and the modern Brasilia built along Le Cor‐
busier lines), he uses the invention of scientific
forestry in eighteenth-century Prussia to illustrate
the  sort  of  simplified  perspective  he  is  writing
about. He starts out by showing how forest "sci‐
ence" pretty much overlooks everything that nat‐
uralists as well as anthropologists might see in fa‐

----- Page 2 (native) -----
vor of commercial/state value. "Nature" became
"natural resources," forests "tree units," plants be‐
came  either  "crops"  or  "weeds,"  animals  "live‐
stock" or "varmints." Forestry science was a sub‐
field of cameral science which seeks "to reduce
the fiscal management of a kingdom to scientific
principles that would allow systematic planning"
(p. 14). This science replaced the real, diverse, and
chaotic old-growth forest with a new uniform one
that resembled the administrative grid of its tech‐
nique. The resulting "monocropped" forest was, in
the short term, great for "cameral" exploitation
but terrible for peasants who could no longer get
any food, firewood, medicines, and other raw ma‐
terials they had previously extracted from it and,
in the long term, ecologically disastrous. But these
forests had become the "hegemonic" model for
the world when Gifford Pinchot studied forestry
in France. 
Scott explores the same theme in measure‐
ment. Before the "state," people measured things
through local practices based on human scale. In
Malaysia, for example, if you ask how far it is to
the  next  village  you  might  be  told  "three  rice-
cookings." That explains how long it will take to
get there; distance in miles would not tell you that
because how long it takes to cover a mile depends
entirely on the terrain. As he says, telling a farmer
he has gotten twenty acres--but not where it is-- is
about as helpful as telling a scholar he has re‐
ceived six kilograms of books. 
What ultimately enabled the "metrical revolu‐
tion" to begin in France were three things: market
exchange  was  growing;  popular  sentiment  and
Enlightenment rationality both favored a single
standard throughout the nation; and the Revolu‐
tion, and especially Napoleon, actually enforced
the metric system. What went hand-in-hand with
it was another measurement- cum-political sim‐
plification: If meters were to be the same for ev‐
erybody across the country, everybody across the
country had to be the same in some measure, that
is, a uniform concept of citizenship had to be in‐
stituted. This was thus a simplification with some‐
thing of an emancipatory effect. Two other relat‐
ed and equally two-sided simplifications, precon‐
ditions for many others, were linguistic: the in‐
vention of permanent family names and the im‐
position of a single, official language. These can
enhance property and commercial relations, often
benefiting individuals--and always the state--but it
is with these simplifications that the real trouble
starts. 
Much of twentieth-century social engineering
has been implemented by progressives, often rev‐
olutionaries, because "it is typically progressives
who have come to power with a comprehensive
critique of existing society and a popular mandate
(at least initially) to transform it" (p. 89), but of
course these are always elites. Yet the hubris of
these idealist elites who combine the faith that
they know what's best for everyone with the pow‐
er to implement it runs across the political spec‐
trum--Taylorism  and  technocracy,  for  example,
seemed to offer as much of a "fix" for the class
struggle to Russians as it did to Americans. So we
get implemented the plans of Lenin and Le Cor‐
busier, Robert Moses and Robert McNamara, but
not those of their opposite numbers such as Rosa
Luxemburg, Jane Jacobs, Rachel Carson, et al. (not
coincidentally often women) who truly represent
the interests of the people. 
Such state incursions can be limited. Some
liberal societies have managed to preserve priva‐
cy (though, as Foucault has shown, even our sex
and sanity have been "invaded") and a private
sector economy. But the most important barrier is
actually  working  representative  institutions.
These have been championed by the Luxemburgs
and Jacobses and countless others who start from
the "user" perspective. 
The  source  of  this  is  "metis,"  the  practical
skills and acquired intelligence that comes from
having to deal with a constantly changing envi‐
ronment.  Aristotle  observed,  Scott  reminds  us,
that there are things like navigation and medicine
H-Net Reviews
2

----- Page 3 (native) -----
in which practical experience often plays a more
important role than universal rules. So this has
been known for a good while. 
In this sense the book does not offer much
that is new to students of urban affairs, political
science, and public administration--or of the Holo‐
caust. We know of the failings of, say, city plan‐
ning and housing projects, the evils of totalitari‐
anism, and the abuses of bureaucracy. Perhaps
Scott's  chief  contribution  is  to  show  that  these
evils can reach entirely unprecedented scopes un‐
der high modernism, though, as he acknowledges,
it is chiefly high modernism as practiced by au‐
thoritarian states (not that we lack examples in
the US such as the deleterious housing policies of
the 1950s and 1960s which he also cites--or malig‐
nancies in the marketplace such as the Microsoft
monopoly). 
It is important to keep in mind, as Scott like‐
wise notes, that many of these projects replaced
even worse social orders and at least occasionally
introduced somewhat more egalitarian principles,
never  mind  improving  public  health  and  such.
And, in the end, many of the worst were suffi‐
ciently  resisted  in  their  absurdity,  as  he  had
shown so well in his Weapons of the Weak and as
best demonstrated by the utter collapse of the so‐
viet  system.  "Metis"  alone  is  not  sufficient;  we
need to find a way to link it felicitously with--to
stick with Scott's Aristotelian vocabulary--phrone‐
sis and praxis, or, in more ordinary terms, to pro‐
duce theories more profoundly grounded in actu‐
al practice so that the state may see better in im‐
plementing policies. 
This review is copyrighted (c) 1998 by H-Net
and the Popular Culture and the American Cul‐
ture Associations. It may be reproduced electroni‐
cally for educational or scholarly use. The Associ‐
ations reserve print rights and permissions. (Con‐
tact:  P.C.Rollins  at  the  following  electronic  ad‐
dress: Rollinspc@aol.com) 
H-Net Reviews
3

----- Page 4 (native) -----
If there is additional discussion of this review, you may access it through the network, at
https://networks.h-net.org/h-pcaaca 
Citation: Ulf Zimmermann. Review of Scott, James C. Seeing Like a State: How Certain Schemes to
Improve the Human Condition Have Failed. H-PCAACA, H-Net Reviews. December, 1998. 
URL: https://www.h-net.org/reviews/showrev.php?id=2533 
 This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-Noncommercial-No
Derivative Works 3.0 United States License. 
H-Net Reviews
4