

----- Page 1 (native) -----
Environmental Health Perspectives •
VOLUME 113 | NUMBER 7 | July 2005
823
Exposures to airborne nanosized particles
(NSPs; < 100 nm) have been experienced by
humans throughout their evolutionary stages,
but it is only with the advent of the industrial
revolution that such exposures have increased
dramatically because of anthropogenic sources
such as internal combustion engines, power
plants, and many other sources of thermo-
degradation. The rapidly developing field of
nanotechnology is likely to become yet another
source for human exposures to NSPs—engi-
neered nanoparticles (NPs)—by different
routes: inhalation (respiratory tract), ingestion
[gastrointestinal (GI) tract], dermal (skin),
and injection (blood circulation). Table 1
summarizes some of the natural and anthro-
pogenic sources of NSPs, the latter divided
into unintentional and intentional sources.
Biologically based or naturally occurring
molecules that are found inside organisms
since the beginning of life can serve as model
nanosized materials. For example, biogenic
magnetite is a naturally occurring NSP that
occurs in many species ranging from bacteria
to protozoa to animals (Blakemore 1975;
Kirschvink et al.  2001). Biogenic magnetite
has even been found in brains of humans
(Dunn et al. 1995; Kirschvink et al. 1992;
Schultheiss-Grassi et al. 1999) and has been
associated with neurodegenerative diseases
(Dobson 2001; Hautot et al. 2003). A biologic
model of coated nanomaterials can be found in
ferritin, which is an approximately 12-nm-
large iron storage protein that contains 5- to
7-nm-sized hydrous ferric oxide phosphate
inside a protective protein shell (Donlin et al.
1998). Nanosized materials, including
fullerenes, occur naturally from combustion
processes such as forest ﬁres and volcanoes.
Obvious differences between unintentional
and intentional anthropogenic NSPs are the
polydispersed and chemically complex nature
(elemental, soluble, and volatile carbon com-
pounds; soluble and poorly soluble inorganics;
Cyrys et al. 2003; Hughes et al. 1998) of the
former, in contrast to the monodisperse and
precise chemically engineered characteristics
and solid form of the latter, generated in gas or
liquid phase [National Nanotechnology
Initiative (NNI) 2004]. However, despite
these differences, the same toxicologic princi-
ples are likely to apply for NPs, because not
only size but also a number of other particle
parameters determine their biologic activity.
The multitude of interactions of these factors
has yet to be assessed, and in this article we
attempt to summarize our present knowledge.
NSPs are variably called ultraﬁne particles
(UFPs) by toxicologists [U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) 2004], Aitken mode
and nucleation mode particles by atmospheric
scientists [Kulmala 2004; National Research
Council (NRC) 1983], and engineered nano-
structured materials by materials scientists
(NNI 2004). Figure 1 depicts the range of sizes
of airborne ambient particulate matter, includ-
ing the nucleation-mode, Aitken-mode, accu-
mulation-mode, and coarse-mode particles.
Ambient particles < 0.1 µm, deﬁned as UFPs in
the toxicologic literature, consist of transient
nuclei or Aitken nuclei (NRC 1983). More
recently, even smaller particles in the nucleation
mode with peak diameters around 4 nm have
been observed (McMurry and Woo 2002).
The distinction between NSPs generated by
internal combustion engines and NPs becomes
further clouded by the ﬁnding of nanotubes in
diesel exhaust (Evelyn et al. 2003). The use of
the term “nano” in this review reﬂects only par-
ticle size and not chemical composition. For
Address correspondence to G. Oberdörster, University of
Rochester, Department of Environmental Medicine, 575
Elmwood Ave., MRBx Building, Box 850, Rochester,
NY 14642 USA. Telephone: (585) 275-3804. Fax:
(585) 256-2631. E-mail: Gunter_Oberdorster@
urmc.rochester.edu
Supplemental Material is available online at
http://ehp.niehs.nih.gov/members/2005/7339/
supplemental.pdf
We thank J. Havalack for excellent assistance in
preparing the manuscript.
This work was supported in part by the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) STAR
Program grant R827354, National Institute of
Environmental Health Sciences grant ESO1247,
U.S. Department of Defense MURI grant FA9550-
04-1-430, and the National Science Foundation
(SGER) BES-0427262. 
The views expressed by the authors are their own
and do not necessarily reﬂect those of the EPA.
J. Oberdörster is an employee of Bayer
CropScience. The other authors declare they have no
competing ﬁnancial interests.
Received 18 June 2004; accepted 22 March 2005.
Nanotoxicology: An Emerging Discipline Evolving from Studies 
of Ultraﬁne Particles
Günter Oberdörster,1 Eva Oberdörster,2 and Jan Oberdörster 3
1Department of Environmental Medicine, University of Rochester, Rochester, New York, USA; 2Department of Biology, Southern
Methodist University, Dallas, Texas, USA; 3Toxicology Department, Bayer CropScience, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina, USA
Although humans have been exposed to airborne nanosized particles (NSPs; < 100 nm) through-
out their evolutionary stages, such exposure has increased dramatically over the last century due to
anthropogenic sources. The rapidly developing field of nanotechnology is likely to become yet
another source through inhalation, ingestion, skin uptake, and injection of engineered nano-
materials. Information about safety and potential hazards is urgently needed. Results of older bio-
kinetic studies with NSPs and newer epidemiologic and toxicologic studies with airborne ultraﬁne
particles can be viewed as the basis for the expanding field of nanotoxicology, which can be
defined as safety evaluation of engineered nanostructures and nanodevices. Collectively, some
emerging concepts of nanotoxicology can be identified from the results of these studies. When
inhaled, speciﬁc sizes of NSPs are efﬁciently deposited by diffusional mechanisms in all regions of
the respiratory tract. The small size facilitates uptake into cells and transcytosis across epithelial
and endothelial cells into the blood and lymph circulation to reach potentially sensitive target sites
such as bone marrow, lymph nodes, spleen, and heart. Access to the central nervous system and
ganglia via translocation along axons and dendrites of neurons has also been observed. NSPs pene-
trating the skin distribute via uptake into lymphatic channels. Endocytosis and biokinetics are
largely dependent on NSP surface chemistry (coating) and in vivo surface modifications. The
greater surface area per mass compared with larger-sized particles of the same chemistry renders
NSPs more active biologically. This activity includes a potential for inﬂammatory and pro-oxidant,
but also antioxidant, activity, which can explain early ﬁndings showing mixed results in terms of
toxicity of NSPs to environmentally relevant species. Evidence of mitochondrial distribution and
oxidative stress response after NSP endocytosis points to a need for basic research on their inter-
actions with subcellular structures. Additional considerations for assessing safety of engineered
NSPs include careful selections of appropriate and relevant doses/concentrations, the likelihood of
increased effects in a compromised organism, and also the beneﬁts of possible desirable effects. An
interdisciplinary team approach (e.g., toxicology, materials science, medicine, molecular biology,
and bioinformatics, to name a few) is mandatory for nanotoxicology research to arrive at an
appropriate risk assessment. Key words: biokinetics, central nervous system, engineered nanomate-
rials, environmental health, human health, nanosized particles, respiratory tract, risk assessment,
skin, ultrafine particles. Environ Health Perspect 113:823–839 (2005). doi:10.1289/ehp.7339
available via http://dx.doi.org/ [Online 22 March 2005]
Review

----- Page 2 (native) -----
the purposes of this review, we use the follow-
ing terms: “Nanosized particle” (NSP) includes
all engineered and ambient nanosized spherical
particles < 100 nm. “Engineered nanoparticle”
(NP) includes only spherical NSPs speciﬁcally
engineered in the laboratory; other engineered
nanosized structures will be labeled according
to their shape, for example, nanotubes, nano-
fibers, nanowires, nanorings, and so on.
“Ultrafine particle” (UFP) includes ambient
and laboratory-generated NSPs that are not
produced in a controlled, engineered way.
Table 2 shows the tremendous differences
in particle number concentrations and particle
surface areas for particles of the four ambient
modes, assuming an airborne concentration of
10 µg/m3 of unit density particles of each size.
The extraordinarily high number concentra-
tions of NSPs per given mass will likely be of
toxicologic significance when these particles
interact with cells and subcellular components.
Likewise, their increased surface area per unit
mass can be toxicologically important if other
characteristics such as surface chemistry and
bulk chemistry are the same. Although the
mass of UFPs in ambient air is very low,
approaching only 0.5–2 µg/m3 at background
levels (Hughes et al. 1998), it can increase sev-
eral-fold during high pollution episodes or on
highways (Brand et al. 1991; Shi et al. 2001;
Zhu et al. 2002).
Physicochemical characteristics as determi-
nants of biologic activity. The small size and
corresponding large specific surface area of
solid NSPs (Table 2) confer speciﬁc properties
to them, for example, making them desirable
as catalysts for chemical reactions. The impor-
tance of surface area becomes evident when
considering that surface atoms or molecules
play a dominant role in determining bulk
properties (Amato 1989); the ratio of surface to
total atoms or molecules increases exponen-
tially with decreasing particle size (Figure 2).
Increased surface reactivity predicts that NSPs
exhibit greater biologic activity per given mass
compared with larger particles, should they be
taken up into living organisms and provided
they are solid rather than solute particles. This
increased biologic activity can be either positive
and desirable (e.g., antioxidant activity, carrier
capacity for therapeutics, penetration of cellu-
lar barriers for drug delivery) or negative and
undesirable (e.g., toxicity, induction of oxida-
tive stress or of cellular dysfunction), or a mix
of both. Not only may adverse effects be
induced, but interactions of NSPs with cells
and subcellular structures and their biokinetics
are likely to be very different from those of
larger-sized particles. For example, more than
60 years ago virologists described the trans-
location of 30- to 50-nm-sized virus particles
along axons and dendrites of neurons and across
epithelia (Howe and Bodian 1940), whereas
first reports about increased inflammatory
activity and epithelial translocation of man-
made 20- and 30-nm solid particles appeared
only more recently (Ferin et al. 1990;
Oberdörster et al. 1990).
The characteristic biokinetic behaviors of
NPs are attractive qualities for promising appli-
cations in medicine as diagnostic and therapeu-
tic devices and as tools to investigate and
understand molecular processes and structures
in living cells (Akerman et al. 2002; Foley et al.
2002; Kreuter 2001; Li et al. 2003). For exam-
ple, targeted drug delivery to tissues that are
difﬁcult to reach [e.g., central nervous system
(CNS)], NPs for the ﬁght against cancer, intra-
vascular nanosensor and nanorobotic devices,
and diagnostic and imaging procedures are
presently under development. The discipline of
nanomedicine—deﬁned as medical application
of nanotechnology and related research—has
arisen to design, test, and optimize these appli-
cations so that they can eventually be used rou-
tinely by physicians (Freitas 1999).
However, in apparent stark contrast to the
many efforts aimed at exploiting desirable
properties of NPs for improving human health
are the limited attempts to evaluate potential
undesirable effects of NPs when administered
intentionally for medicinal purposes, or after
unintentional exposure during manufacture or
processing for industrial applications. The
same properties that make NPs so attractive for
development in nanomedicine and for speciﬁc
industrial processes could also prove deleteri-
ous when NPs interact with cells. Thus, evalu-
ating the safety of NPs should be of highest
priority given their expected worldwide distri-
bution for industrial applications and the like-
lihood of human exposure, directly or through
release into the environment (air, water, soil).
Nanotoxicology—an emerging discipline
that can be deﬁned as “science of engineered
nanodevices and nanostructures that deals with
their effects in living organisms”—is gaining
increased attention. Nanotoxicology research
not only will provide data for safety evaluation
of engineered nanostructures and devices but
also will help to advance the field of nano-
medicine by providing information about their
undesirable properties and means to avoid them.
Human exposure to nanosized materials.
In addition to natural and anthropogenic
sources of UFPs in the ambient air, certain
Oberdörster et al.
824
VOLUME 113 | NUMBER 7 | July 2005 • Environmental Health Perspectives
Table 1. UFPs/NPs (< 100 nm), natural and anthropogenic sources.
Anthropogenic
Natural
Unintentional
Intentional (NPs)
Gas-to-particle conversions
Internal combustion engines
Controlled size and shape, designed
Forest ﬁres
Power plants
for functionality
Volcanoes (hot lava)
Incinerators 
Metals, semiconductors, metal oxides,
Viruses
Jet engines
carbon, polymers
Biogenic magnetite: magnetotactic 
Metal fumes (smelting, 
Nanospheres, -wires, -needles, -tubes,
bacteria protoctists, mollusks,
welding, etc.)
-shells, -rings, -platelets
arthropods, ﬁsh, birds
Polymer fumes
human brain, meteorite (?)
Other fumes
Untreated, coated (nanotechnology 
Ferritin (12.5 nm)
Heated surfaces
applied to many products: cosmetics,
Microparticles (< 100 nm;
Frying, broiling, grilling
medical, fabrics, electronics, optics, 
activated cells)
Electric motors
displays, etc.)
Figure 1. Idealized size distribution of trafﬁc-related particulate matter (U.S. EPA 2004). Dp, particle diame-
ter. The four polydisperse modes of traffic-related ambient particulate matter span approximately four
orders of magnitude from < 1 nm to > 10 µm. Nucleation- and Aitken-mode particles are deﬁned as UFPs
(< approximately 100 nm). Source-dependent chemical composition is not well controlled and varies con-
siderably. In contrast, NPs (1–100 nm) have well-controlled chemistry and are generally monodispersed.
Dp (µm)
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
0.001
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
Vapor
Nucleation
Condensation
Mechanically
generated
Coagulation
Coagulation
∆V/ ∆log Dp (µm3/cm3)

----- Page 3 (native) -----
workplace conditions also generate NSPs that
can reach much higher exposure concentra-
tions, up to several hundred micrograms per
cubic meter, than is typically found at ambient
levels. In contrast to airborne UFP exposures
occurring via inhalation at the workplace and
from ambient air, not much is known about
levels of exposure via different routes for NPs,
whether it is by direct human exposure or indi-
rectly through contamination of the environ-
ment. For example, are there or will there be
signiﬁcant exposures to airborne singlet engi-
neered carbon nanotubes or C60 fullerenes?
First measurements at a model workplace gave
only very low concentrations, < 50 µg/m3, and
these were most likely in the form of aggregates
(Maynard et al. 2004). However, even very low
concentrations of nanosized materials in the air
represent very high particle number concentra-
tions, as is well known from measurements of
ambient UFPs (Hughes et al. 1998). For
example, a low concentration of 10 µg/m3 of
unit density 20-nm particles translates into
> 1 × 106 particles/cm3 (Table 2). Inhalation
may be the major route of exposure for NPs,
yet ingestion and dermal exposures also need
to be considered during manufacture, use, and
disposal of engineered nanomaterials, and spe-
ciﬁc biomedical applications for diagnostic and
therapeutic purposes will require intravenous,
subcutaneous, or intramuscular administration
(Table l). It can be assumed, however, that the
toxicology of NPs can build on the experience
and data already present in the toxicology 
literature of ambient UFPs. [Additional details
provided in Supplemental Material available
online (http://ehp.niehs.nih.gov/members/
2005/7339/supplemental.pdf).]
Manufactured nanomaterials in the envi-
ronment. Manufactured nanomaterials are
likely to enter the environment for several rea-
sons. Some are and others will be produced by
the ton, and some of any material produced in
such mass quantities is likely to reach the
environment from manufacturing efﬂuent or
from spillage during shipping and handling.
They are being used in personal-care products
such as cosmetics and sunscreens and can
therefore enter the environment on a continual
basis from washing off of consumer products
(Daughton and Ternes 1999). They are being
used in electronics, tires, fuel cells, and many
other products, and it is unknown whether
some of these materials may leak out or be
worn off over the period of use. They are also
being used in disposable materials such as ﬁl-
ters and electronics and may therefore reach
the environment through landfills and other
methods of disposal.
Scientists have also found ways of using
nanomaterials in remediation. Although many
of these are still in testing stages (Chitose et al.
2003; Jaques and Kim 2000; Joo et al. 2004;
Nagaveni et al. 2004; Nghiem et al. 2004;
Tungittiplakorn et al. 2004), dozens of sites
have already been injected with various nano-
materials, including nano-iron (Mach 2004).
Testing to determine the safety of these NPs
used for remediation to environmentally rele-
vant species has not yet been done. Although
most people are concerned with effects on large
wildlife, the basis of many food chains depends
on the benthic and soil ﬂora and fauna, which
could be dramatically affected by such NP
injections. In addition, as noted by Lecoanet
et al. (2004), nanosized materials may not
migrate through soils at rapid enough rates to
be valuable in remediation. Future laboratory
and ﬁeld trials will help clarify the line between
remediation and contamination [Supplemental
Material available online (http://ehp.niehs.nih.
gov/members/2005/7339/supplemental.pdf)].
Toxicology of Airborne UFPs
In recent years, interest in potential effects of
exposure to airborne UFPs has increased con-
siderably, and studies have shown that they
can contribute to adverse health effects in the
respiratory tract as well as in extrapulmonary
organs. Results on direct effects of ambient
and model UFPs have been reported from epi-
demiologic studies and controlled clinical
studies in humans, inhalation/instillation
studies in rodents, or in vitro cell culture sys-
tems. For example, several epidemiologic stud-
ies have found associations of ambient UFPs
with adverse respiratory and cardiovascular
effects resulting in morbidity and mortality in
susceptible parts of the population (Pekkanen
et al. 1997; Penttinen et al. 2001; Peters
et al. 1997a, 1997b; von Klot et al. 2002;
Wichmann et al. 2002), whereas other epi-
demiologic studies have not seen such associa-
tions (Pekkanen et al. 1997; Tiittanen et al.
1999). Controlled clinical studies evaluated
deposition and effects of laboratory-generated
UFPs. High deposition efﬁciencies in the total
respiratory tract of healthy subjects were
found, and deposition was even greater in sub-
jects with asthma or chronic obstructive pul-
monary disease. In addition, effects on the
cardiovascular system, including blood mark-
ers of coagulation and systemic inﬂammation
and pulmonary diffusion capacity, were
observed after controlled exposures to carbo-
naceous UFPs (Anderson et al. 1990; Brown
et al. 2002; Chalupa et al. 2004; Henneberger
et al., 2005; Jaques and Kim 2000; Pekkanen
et al. 2002; Pietropaoli et al. 2004; Wichmann
et al. 2000).
Studies in animals using laboratory-gener-
ated model UFPs or ambient UFPs showed
that UFPs consistently induced mild yet signif-
icant pulmonary inflammatory responses as
well as effects in extrapulmonary organs.
Animal inhalation studies included the use of
different susceptibility models in rodents, with
analysis of lung lavage parameters and lung
histopathology, effects on the blood coagula-
tion cascade, and translocation studies to extra-
pulmonary tissues (Elder et al. 2000, 2002,
2004; Ferin et al. 1991; Ferin and Oberdörster
1992; Kreyling et al. 2002; Li et al. 1999;
Nemmar et al. 1999, 2002a, 2002b, 2003;
Oberdörster et al. 1992a, 1995, 2000, 2002,
2004; Semmler et al. 2004; Zhou et al. 2003).
In vitro studies using different cell systems
showed varying degrees of proinflammatory-
and oxidative-stress–related cellular responses
after dosing with laboratory-generated or ﬁlter-
collected ambient UFPs (Brown et al. 2000,
2001; Li et al. 2003). Collectively, the in vitro
results have identiﬁed oxidative-stress–related
changes of gene expression and cell signaling
pathways as underlying mechanisms of UFP
effects, as well as a role of transition metals and
certain organic compounds on combustion-
generated UFPs (Figure 3). These can alter cell
signaling pathways, including Ca2+ signaling
and cytokine signaling (e.g., interleukin-8)
(Donaldson et al. 2002; Donaldson and Stone
2003). Effects were on a mass basis greater for
model UFPs than for fine particles, whereas
effects for ambient UFP cellular responses were
sometimes greater and sometimes less than those
of ﬁne and coarse particles. The interpretation
of the in vitro studies is oftentimes difficult
because particles of different chemical composi-
tions were used, target cells were different, and
duration, end points, and generally high dose
levels also differed. Results from high doses in
particular should be viewed with caution if
Nanotoxicology
Environmental Health Perspectives •
VOLUME 113 | NUMBER 7 | July 2005
825
Table 2. Particle number and particle surface area
per 10 µg/m3 airborne particles.
Particle
Particle
Particle surface
diameter (µm)
no. (cm–3)
area (µm2/cm3)
5
153,000,000
12,000
20
2,400,000
3,016
250
1,200
240
5,000
0.15
12
Figure 2. Surface molecules as a function of parti-
cle size. Surface molecules increase exponentially
when particle size decreases < 100 nm, reflecting
the importance of surface area for increased
chemical and biologic activity of NSPs. The
increased biologic activity can be positive and
desirable (e.g., antioxidant activity, carrier capacity
for therapeutics, penetration of cellular barriers),
negative and undesirable (e.g., toxicity, induction
of oxidative stress or of cellular dysfunction), or a
mix of both. Figure courtesy of H. Fissan (personal
communication). 
60
40
20
0
1
10
100
1,000
10,000
Percent surface molecules
Diameter (nm)

----- Page 4 (native) -----
they are orders of magnitude higher than pre-
dicted from relevant ambient exposures (see
“Exposure dose–response considerations,”
below). [Supplemental Material available
online (http://ehp.niehs.nih.gov/members/
2005/7339/supplemental.pdf).]
Concepts of Nanotoxicology
Laboratory rodent studies. With respect to
potential health effects of NSPs, two examples
should serve to illustrate a) that NSPs have a
higher inﬂammatory potential per given mass
than do larger particles, provided they are
chemically the same, and b) that NSPs gener-
ated under certain occupational conditions can
elicit severe acute lung injury.
The first example involves studies with
ultraﬁne and ﬁne titanium dioxide (TiO2) par-
ticles, which showed that ultrafine anatase
TiO2 (20 nm), when instilled intratracheally
into rats and mice, induced a much greater
pulmonary-inﬂammatory neutrophil response
(determined by lung lavage 24 hr after dosing)
than did fine anatase TiO2 (250 nm) when
both types of particles were instilled at the
same mass dose (Figure 4A,C). However,
when the instilled dose was expressed as parti-
cle surface area, it became obvious that the
neutrophil response in the lung for both ultra-
fine and fine TiO2 fitted the same dose–
response curve (Figure 4B,D), suggesting that
particle surface area for particles of different
sizes but of the same chemistry, such as TiO2,
is a better dosemetric than is particle mass or
particle number (Oberdörster G 2000).
Moreover, normalizing the particle surface
dose to lung weight shows excellent agreement
of the inﬂammatory response in both rats and
mice [Figure S-2 in Supplemental Material
available online (http://ehp.niehs.nih.gov/
members/2005/7339/supplemental.pdf)]. The
better fit of dose–response relationships by
expressing the dose as surface area rather than
mass when describing toxicologic effects of
inhaled solid particles of different sizes has
been pointed out repeatedly, especially when
particles of different size ranges—nano to
fine—were studied (Brown et al. 2001;
Donaldson et al. 1998, 2002; Driscoll 1996;
Oberdörster and Yu 1990; Oberdörster et al.
1992a; Tran et al. 1998, 2000) [Supplemental
Material available online (http://ehp.niehs.nih.
gov/members/2005/7339/supplemental.pdf)].
Particle chemistry, and speciﬁcally surface
chemistry, plays a decisive role in addition to
particle size, as shown in the second example:
exposure of rats to polytetrafluoroethylene
(PTFE) fume. PTFE fume (generated by heat-
ing PTFE) has long been known to be of high
acute toxicity to birds and mammals, includ-
ing humans (Cavagna et al. 1961; Coleman
et al. 1968; Grifﬁth et al. 1973; Nuttall et al.
1964; Waritz and Kwon 1968). Analysis of
these fumes revealed the nanosized nature of
the particles generated by heating PTFE to
about 480°C, with a count median diameter
(CMD) of 18 nm. They were highly toxic to
rats, causing severe acute lung injury with high
mortality within 4 hr after a 15-min inhalation
exposure to 50 µg/m3 (Oberdörster et al.
1995). This short exposure resulted in an esti-
mated deposited dose in the alveolar regions of
only approximately 60 ng. In humans, acute
lung injury, known as polymer fume fever, can
result from exposures to PTFE fumes (Auclair
et al. 1983; Goldstein et al. 1987; Lee et al.
1997; Williams et al. 1974; Woo et al. 2001).
Additional rat studies showed that the gas
phase alone was not acutely toxic and that
aging of the PTFE fume particles for 3 min
increased their particle size to > 100 nm
because of accumulation, which resulted in a
loss of toxicity (Johnston et al. 2000).
However, it is most likely that changes in parti-
cle surface chemistry during the aging period
contributed to this loss of toxicity, and that
this is not just an effect of the accumulated
larger particle size [Supplemental Material
available online (http://ehp.niehs.nih.gov/
members/2005/7339/supplemental.pdf)].
These examples seem to represent the
extremes of NSPs in terms of pulmonary toxic-
ity, one (TiO2) being rather benign yet still
inducing significantly greater inflammatory
effects on a mass basis than ﬁne particles of the
same chemical makeup, the other (PTFE
fumes) inducing very high acute toxicity, possi-
bly related to reactive groups on the large
surface per unit mass.
Oberdörster et al.
826
VOLUME 113 | NUMBER 7 | July 2005 • Environmental Health Perspectives
Figure 3. Hypothetical cellular interaction of NSPs
(adapted from Donaldson and Tran 2002). EGFR, epi-
dermal growth factor receptor. Inflammation and
oxidative stress can be mediated by several primary
pathways: a) the particle surface causes oxidative
stress resulting in increased intracellular calcium
and gene activation; b) transition metals released
from particles result in oxidative stress, increased
intracellular calcium, and gene activation; c) cell
surface receptors are activated by transition metals
released from particles, resulting in subsequent
gene activation; or d) intracellular distribution of
NSPs to mitochondria generates oxidative stress.
Activation of
receptor (e.g., EGFR)
Particle releases
transition metals
Particle surface
causes oxidative
stress
Phagocytosis
Inflammation
Inflammatory mediators
Signaling pathways
Increased cytosolic
calcium and
oxidative stress
NF-κB
Figure 4. Percentage of neutrophils in lung lavage of rats (A,B) and mice (C,D) as indicators of inﬂamma-
tion 24 hr after intratracheal instillation of different mass doses of 20-nm and 250-nm TiO2 particles in rats
and mice. (A,C) The steeper dose response of nanosized TiO2 is obvious when the dose is expressed as
mass. (B,D) The same dose response relationship as in (A,C) but with dose expressed as particle surface
area; this indicates that particle surface area seems to be a more appropriate dosemetric for comparing
effects of different-sized particles, provided they are of the same chemical structure (anatase TiO2 in this
case). Data show mean ± SD.
50
40
30
20
10
0
50
40
30
20
10
0
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
0
50
100
150
200
250
50
40
30
20
10
0
300
400
200
100
0
50
40
30
20
10
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
B
A
C
D
TiO2 mass (µg)
TiO2 surface area (cm2)
TiO2 mass (µg)
TiO2 surface area (cm2)
Percent neutrophils (rats)
Percent neutrophils (mice)
20 nm TiO2
250 nm TiO2
Saline control
Percent neutrophils (rats)
Percent neutrophils (mice)

----- Page 5 (native) -----
Engineered nanomaterials can have very
different shapes, for example, spheres, ﬁbers,
tubes, rings, and planes. Toxicologic studies of
spherical and ﬁbrous particles have well estab-
lished that natural (e.g., asbestos) and man-
made (e.g., biopersistent vitreous) fibers are
associated with increased risks of pulmonary
ﬁbrosis and cancer after prolonged exposures
[Greim et al. 2001; International Agency for
Research on Cancer (IARC) 2002]. Critical
parameters are the three Ds: dose, dimension,
and durability of the ﬁbers. Fibers are deﬁned
as elongated structures with a diameter-to-
length ratio (aspect ratio) of 1:3 or greater and
with a length of > 5 µm and diameter ≤3 µm
[World Health Organization (WHO) 1985].
Carbon nanotubes have aspect ratios of up to
≥100, and length can exceed 5 µm with diam-
eters ranging from 0.7 to 1.5 nm for single-
walled nanotubes, and 2 to 50 nm for
multiwalled nanotubes. Results from three
studies using intratracheal dosing of carbon
nanotubes in rodents indicate signiﬁcant acute
inflammatory pulmonary effects that either
subsided in rats (Warheit et al. 2004) or were
more persistent in mice (Lam et al. 2004;
Shvedova et al. 2004b). Administered doses
were very high, ranging from 1 to 5 mg/kg in
rats; in mice doses ranged from 3.3 to
16.6 mg/kg (Lam et al. 2004) or somewhat
lower, from 0.3 to 1.3 mg/kg (Shvedova et al.
2004a). Granuloma formation as a normal for-
eign body response of the lung to high doses of
a persistent particulate material was a consis-
tent ﬁnding in these studies. Metal impurities
(e.g., iron) from the nanotube generation
process may also have contributed to the
observed effects. Although these in vivo first
studies revealed high acute effects, including
mortality, this was explained by the large doses
of the instilled highly aggregated nanotubes
that caused death by obstructing the airways
and should not be considered a nanotube
effect per se (Warheit et al. 2004). In vitro
studies with carbon nanotubes also reported
significant effects. Dosing keratinocytes and
bronchial epithelial cells in vitro with single-
walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) resulted in
oxidative stress, as evidenced by the formation
of free radicals, accumulation of peroxidative
products, and depletion of cell antioxidants
(Shvedova et al. 2004a, 2004b). Multiwalled
carbon nanotubes (MWNTs) showed pro-
inﬂammatory effects and were internalized in
keratinocytes (Monteiro-Riviere et al. 2005).
Again, the relatively high doses applied in these
studies need to be considered when discussing
the relevancy of these ﬁndings for in vivo expo-
sures. A most recent study in macrophages com-
paring SWNTs and MWNTs with C60
fullerenes found a cytotoxicity ranking on a
mass basis in the order SWNT > MWNT >
C60. Profound cytotoxicity (mitochondrial func-
tion, cell morphology, phagocytic function) was
seen for SWNTs, even at a low concentration
of 0.38 µg/cm2. The possible contribution of
metal impurities of the nanotubes still needs to
be assessed. Therefore, whether the generally
recognized principles of ﬁber toxicology apply
to these nanoﬁber structures needs still to be
determined (Huczko et al. 2001).
Future studies should be designed to inves-
tigate both effects and also the fate of nano-
tubes after deposition in the respiratory
tract, preferentially by inhalation using well-
dispersed (singlet) airborne nanotubes. In order
to design the studies using appropriate dosing,
it is necessary to assess the likelihood and
degree of human exposure. It is of utmost
importance to characterize human exposures in
terms of the physicochemical nature, the aggre-
gation state, and concentration (number, mass,
surface area) of engineered nanomaterials and
perform animal and in vitro studies accord-
ingly. If using direct instillation into the lower
respiratory tract, a large range of doses, which
include expected realistic exposures of appro-
priately prepared samples, needs to be consid-
ered [Supplemental Material available online
(http://ehp.niehs.nih.gov/members/2005/
7339/supplemental.pdf)].
Ecotoxicologic studies. Studies have been
carried out to date on only a few species that
have been accepted by regulatory agencies as
models for defining ecotoxicologic effects.
Tests with uncoated, water-soluble, colloidal
fullerenes (nC60) show that the 48-hr LC50
(median lethal concentration) in Daphnia
magna is 800 ppb (Oberdörster E 2004b),
using standard U.S. EPA protocols (U.S. EPA
1994). In largemouth bass (Micropterus
salmoides), although no mortality was seen,
lipid peroxidation in the brain and glutathione
depletion in the gill were observed after expo-
sure to 0.5 ppm nC60 for 48 hr (Oberdörster E
2004a). There are several hypotheses as to how
lipid damage may have occurred in the brain,
including direct redox activity by fullerenes
reaching the brain via circulation or axonal
translocation (see also “Disposition of NSPs in
the respiratory tract,” below) and dissolving
into the lipid-rich brain tissue; oxyradical pro-
duction by microglia; or reactive fullerene
metabolites may be produced by cytochrome
P450 metabolism. Initial follow-up studies
using suppressive subtractive hybridization of
pooled control fish versus pooled 0.5-ppm–
exposed ﬁsh liver mRNA were also performed.
Proteins related to immune responses and tis-
sue repair were up-regulated, and several pro-
teins related to homeostatic control and
immune control were down-regulated. A
cytochrome P450 (CYP2K4) involved in lipid
metabolism was up-regulated [Supplemental
Material available online (http://ehp.niehs.nih.
gov/members/2005/7339/supplemental.pdf)].
In addition to these biochemical and molecu-
lar-level changes in ﬁsh, bactericidal properties
of fullerenes have also been reported and are
being explored as potential new antimicrobial
agents (Yamakoshi et al. 2003). Engineered
nanomaterials used as antimicrobials may shift
microbial communities if they are released into
the environment via effluents. As we know
from anthropogenic endocrine-disrupting
compounds, interference of signaling between
nitrogen-ﬁxing bacteria and their plant hosts
could be extremely harmful both ecologically
and economically in terms of crop production
(Fox et al. 2001).
Aqueous fullerenes and coated SWNTs are
stable in salt solutions (Cheng et al. 2004;
Warheit et al. 2004), cell culture media (Lu
et al. 2004; Sayes et al. 2004), reconstituted
hard water, and MilliQ water (Dieckmann
et al. 2003; Oberdörster E 2004a, 2004b).
NSPs will tend to sorb onto sediment and soil
particles and be immobilized because of their
high surface area:mass ratio (Lecoanet and
Wiesner 2004). Biologic transport would occur
from ingested sediments, and one would
expect movement of nanomaterials through
the food chain (Figure 5).
To make engineered nanomaterials more
biocompatible, both surface coatings and cova-
lent surface modiﬁcations have been incorpo-
rated. Some studies have shown that both the
surface coating and the covalent modiﬁcations
can be weathered either by exposure to the
oxygen in air or by ultraviolet (UV) irradiation
for 1–4 hr (Derfus et al. 2004; Rancan et al.
2002). Therefore, although coatings and sur-
face modiﬁcations may be critically important
in drug-delivery devices, the likelihood of
weathering under environmental conditions
makes it important to study toxicity under UV
and air exposure conditions. Even coatings
used in drug delivery of NPs may not be bio-
persistent or could be metabolized to expose
the core NP material [Supplemental Material
available online (http://ehp.niehs.nih.gov/
members/2005/7339/supplemental.pdf)].
Reactive oxygen species mechanisms of NSP
toxicity. Both in vivo and in vitro, NSPs of var-
ious chemistries have been shown to create
reactive oxygen species (ROS). ROS produc-
tion has been found in NPs as diverse as C60
fullerenes, SWNTs, quantum dots, and UFPs,
especially under concomitant exposure to
light, UV, or transition metals (Brown et al.
2000, 2001; Derfus et al. 2004; Joo et al.
2004; Li et al. 2003; Nagaveni et al. 2004;
Oberdörster E 2004a; Rancan et al. 2002;
Sayes et al. 2004; Shvedova et al. 2004a,
2004b; Wilson et al. 2002; Yamakoshi et al.
2003). It has been demonstrated that NSPs of
various sizes and various chemical composi-
tions preferentially mobilize to mitochondria
(de Lorenzo 1970; Foley et al. 2002; Gopinath
et al. 1978; Li et al. 2003; Rodoslav et al.
2003). Because mitochondria are redox active
organelles, there is a likelihood of altering ROS
Nanotoxicology
Environmental Health Perspectives •
VOLUME 113 | NUMBER 7 | July 2005
827

----- Page 6 (native) -----
production and thereby overloading or inter-
fering with antioxidant defenses (Figure 3).
Figure 6 diagrams some of the antioxidant
defense systems that occur in animals, and pos-
sible areas where NSPs may create oxyradicals.
The C60 fullerene is shown as a model NP pro-
ducing superoxide, as has been shown by
Yamakoshi et al. (2003). The exact mechanism
by which each of these diverse NPs cause ROS
is not yet fully understood, but suggested
mechanisms include a) photo excitation of
fullerenes and SWNTs, causing intersystem
crossing to create free electrons; b) metabolism
of NPs to create redox active intermediates,
especially if metabolism is via cytochrome
P450s; and c) inflammation responses in
vivo that may cause oxyradical release by
macrophages. Other mechanisms will likely
emerge as studies on NP toxicity continue.
The small size and respective large speciﬁc
surface area of NPs, like those of ambient air-
borne UFPs, give them unique properties with
respect to a potential to cause adverse effects.
Certainly, as shown in studies with UFPs,
chemical composition and other particle para-
meters are additional important effect modi-
ﬁers. Results from these studies will therefore
serve as a basis for future studies in the ﬁeld of
nanotoxicology, for example, the propensity of
NSPs to translocate across cell layers and along
neuronal pathways (see “Disposition of NSPs
in the respiratory tract” below).
Exposure dose–response considerations. A
careful evaluation of exposure–dose–response
relationships is critical to the toxicologic assess-
ment of NSPs. This includes not only questions
about the dosemetric—mass, number, or sur-
face of the particles, as discussed above—but
most important, also the relevance of dose lev-
els. For example, it is tempting, and a continual
practice, to dose primary cells or cell lines
in vitro with very high doses without any con-
sideration or discussion of realistic in vivo expo-
sures; for instance, 100 µg NSPs/mL culture
medium—labeled as a low dose—is extremely
high and is unlikely to be encountered in vivo.
Likewise, intratracheal instillations of several
hundred micrograms into a rat does not resem-
ble a relevant in vivo inhalation exposure; both
dose and dose rate cause high bolus dose arti-
facts. Although such studies may be used in a
ﬁrst proof-of-principle approach, it is manda-
tory to follow up and validate results using
orders of magnitude lower concentrations
resembling realistic in vivo exposures, including
worst-case scenarios. The 500-year-old phrase
“the dose makes the poison” can also be para-
phrased as “the dose makes the mechanism.”
The mechanistic pathways that operate at low
realistic doses are likely to be different from
those operating at very high doses when the
cell’s or organism’s defenses are overwhelmed.
Therefore, in vivo and in vitro studies will
provide useful data on the toxicity and mode
of action of NSPs only if justiﬁable concentra-
tions/doses are considered when designing
such studies. This approach is particularly
important for the proper identiﬁcation of the
dose–response curve. When data are generated
only at high concentrations/doses, it is difﬁcult
to determine whether the dose–response curve
in question is best described by a linear (no
threshold), supralinear, threshold, or hormetic
model (Figure 7). Study designs should include
doses that most closely reflect the expected
exposure levels. A critical gap that urgently
needs to be filled in this context is the com-
plete lack of data for human or environmental
exposure levels of NSPs. Furthermore, some
knowledge about the biokinetics of NSPs is
required in order to estimate appropriate doses.
Oberdörster et al.
828
VOLUME 113 | NUMBER 7 | July 2005 • Environmental Health Perspectives
Figure 5. Routes of exposure, uptake, distribution, and degradation of NSPs in the environment. Solid lines
indicate routes that have been demonstrated in the laboratory or ﬁeld or that are currently in use (remedia-
tion). Magenta lettering indicates possible degradation routes, and blue lettering indicates possible sinks
and sources of NSPs.
Wildlife and
humans
Deposition/
spillage
Wildlife and
humans
Sorption to
organic matter
Volatilization/
dust
Injection for
remediation
UV degradation
Biodegradation?
Benthic organisms
Chemical
degradation?
Biodegradation?
Sediment
Filter
feeders
Water
Soil
Aquifer
Leaching
(Soil) flora
and fauna
Air
Food
chain
Food
chain
Food
chain
Figure 6. NPs have been shown to release oxyradicals [pictured here is the mechanism of C60 as deter-
mined by Yamakoshi et al. (2003)], which can interact with the antioxidant defense system. Abbreviations:
GPx, glutathione peroxidase; GSH, reduced glutathione; GSSG, oxidized glutathione; ISC, intersystem cross-
ing; R, any organic molecule; SOD, superoxide dismutase. In addition to fullerenes, metals such as cadmium,
iron, or nickel quantum dots, or iron from SWNT manufacturing, could also act in Fenton-type reactions.
Phase II biotransformation, ascorbic acid, vitamin E, beta carotene, and other interactions are not shown.
DNA strand breaks, covalent modification of DNA
Metallothionein induction
Redox
cycle
Protein
oxidation
Lipid
peroxidation
GSH
reductase
GSH
Catalase
GPx
GSSG
GS–
H2O2
H2O + O2
H2O + O2
•OH + OH–
GSSG–• + O2
Nanoparticles
or metals
Intermediates from
oxyradical attacks
O2
RH•
O2
–•
RH2 + GS•
SOD
Superoxide
ISC
O2
C60
3C60
•
1C60
•
1C60
hv
Figure 7. Some basic shapes of exposure–response
or dose–response relationships. Abbreviations: H,
hormetic (biphasic); L, linear (no threshold); S,
supralinear; T, threshold. Prerequisites for establish-
ing these relationships for NSPs from in vitro or
in vivo studies include a sufficient number of data
points, that is, over a wide range of exposure con-
centrations or doses; knowledge about exposure
levels; and information about correlation of expo-
sure with doses at the organismal or cellular level
(an exposure is not a dose). Dose–response curves
of different shapes can be extrapolated when only
response data at high dose levels (indicated by
dashed oval) are available. Lack of data in the low—
oftentimes the most relevant—dose range can
result in severe misinterpretation if a threshold or
even a hormetic response is present. Consideration
also needs to be given to the likelihood that the
shape or slope of exposure–dose–response relation-
ships change for susceptible parts of the population. 
Exposure or dose
S
L
H
T
Toxic
Beneficial
Response
0
0

----- Page 7 (native) -----
Do speciﬁc NPs reach certain target sites? If so,
what are the doses, dose rates, and their persis-
tence? Further, although it may be tempting to
extrapolate from in vitro results to an in vivo
risk assessment, it is important to keep in mind
that in vitro tests are most useful in providing
information on mechanistic processes and in
elucidating mechanisms/mode of actions sug-
gested by studies in whole animals. A combina-
tion of in vitro and in vivo studies with relevant
dose levels will be most useful in identifying
the potential hazards of NPs, and a thorough
discussion and justification of selected dose
levels should be mandatory.
Portals of Entry and 
Target Tissues
Most of the toxicity research on NSPs in vivo
has been carried out in mammalian systems,
with a focus on respiratory system exposures
for testing the hypothesis that airborne UFPs
cause signiﬁcant health effects. With respect to
NPs, other exposure routes, such as skin and
GI tract, also need to be considered as poten-
tial portals of entry. Portal-of-entry–specific
defense mechanisms protect the mammalian
organism from harmful materials. However,
these defenses may not always be as effective
for NSPs, as is discussed below.
Respiratory Tract
In order to appreciate what dose the organism
receives when airborne particles are inhaled,
information about their deposition as well as
their subsequent fate is needed. Here we focus
on the fate of inhaled nanosized materials both
within the respiratory tract itself and trans-
located out of the respiratory tract. There are
signiﬁcant differences between NSPs and larger
particles regarding their behavior during depo-
sition and clearance in the respiratory tract
[Supplemental Material available online
(http://ehp.niehs.nih.gov/members/2005/
7339/supplemental.pdf)].
Efﬁcient deposition of inhaled NSPs. The
main mechanism for deposition of inhaled
NSPs in the respiratory tract is diffusion due to
displacement when they collide with air mole-
cules. Other deposition mechanisms of impor-
tance for larger particles, such as inertial
impaction, gravitational settling, and intercep-
tion, do not contribute to NSP deposition, and
electrostatic precipitation occurs only in cases
where NSPs carry signiﬁcant electric charges.
Figure 8 shows the fractional deposition of
inhaled particles in the nasopharyngeal,
tracheobronchial, and alveolar regions of the
human respiratory tract under conditions of
nose breathing during rest, based on a predic-
tive mathematical model (International
Commission on Radiological Protection
1994). These predictions apply to particles that
are inhaled as singlet particles of a given size
and not as aggregates; the latter obviously will
have larger particle size and different deposi-
tion site. In each of the three regions of the res-
piratory tract, signiﬁcant amounts of a certain
size of NSPs (1–100 nm) are deposited. For
example, 90% of inhaled 1-nm particles are
deposited in the nasopharyngeal compartment,
only approximately 10% in the tracheo-
bronchial region, and essentially none in the
alveolar region. On the other hand, 5-nm par-
ticles show about equal deposition of approxi-
mately 30% of the inhaled particles in all three
regions; 20-nm particles have the highest depo-
sition efﬁciency in the alveolar region (~ 50%),
whereas in tracheobronchial and naso-
pharyngeal regions this particle size deposits
with approximately 15% efﬁciency. These dif-
ferent deposition efﬁciencies should have con-
sequences for potential effects induced by
inhaled NSPs of different sizes as well as for
their disposition to extrapulmonary organs, as
discussed further below.
Disposition of NSPs in the respiratory
tract. In the preceding section we summa-
rized data demonstrating that inhaled NSPs
of different sizes can target all three regions of
the respiratory tract. Several defense mecha-
nisms exist throughout the respiratory tract
aimed at keeping the mucosal surfaces free
from cell debris and particles deposited by
inhalation. Several reviews describe the well-
known classic clearance mechanisms and
pathways for deposited particles (Kreyling
and Scheuch 2000; Schlesinger et al. 1997;
U.S. EPA 2004), so here we only brieﬂy men-
tion those mechanisms and point out speciﬁc
differences that exist with respect to inhaled
NSPs [Supplemental Material available online
(http://ehp.niehs.nih.gov/members/2005/
7339/supplemental.pdf)].
Once deposited, NSPs—in contrast to
larger-sized particles—appear to translocate
readily to extrapulmonary sites and reach other
target organs by different transfer routes and
mechanisms. One involves transcytosis across
epithelia of the respiratory tract into the inter-
stitium and access to the blood circulation
directly or via lymphatics, resulting in distribu-
tion throughout the body. The other is a not
generally recognized mechanism that appears
to be distinct for NSPs and that involves their
uptake by sensory nerve endings embedded in
airway epithelia, followed by axonal trans-
location to ganglionic and CNS structures.
Classical clearance pathways. The clear-
ance of deposited particles in the respiratory
tract is basically due to two processes (Table 3):
a) physical translocation of particles by differ-
ent mechanisms and b) chemical clearance
processes. Leaching refers to loss of elements
from a particle matrix (e.g., loss of sodium
from asbestos ﬁbers due to dissolution in intra-
or extracellular milieu). Chemical dissolution is
directed at biosoluble particles or components
of particles that are either lipid soluble or solu-
ble in intracellular and extracellular fluids.
Solutes and soluble components can then
undergo absorption and diffusion or binding
to proteins and other subcellular structures and
may be eventually cleared into blood and lym-
phatic circulation. Chemical clearance for
Nanotoxicology
Environmental Health Perspectives •
VOLUME 113 | NUMBER 7 | July 2005
829
Figure 8. Predicted fractional deposition of inhaled particles in the nasopharyngeal, tracheobronchial, and
alveolar region of the human respiratory tract during nose breathing. Based on data from the International
Commission on Radiological Protection (1994). Drawing courtesy of J. Harkema.
Nasal airway
Pharynx
Trachea
Bronchi
Larynx
Lymph nodes
Pulmonary
arteries
Pulmonary
veins
Alveolar
capillary
bed
Nonrespiratory
bronchioles
Respiratory
bronchioles
Alveolar
ducts
Alveolar
sacs
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.0001 0.001 0.01
0.1
1
10
100
Diameter (µm)
Regional deposition (%)
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.0001 0.001
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
Regional deposition (%)
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.0001 0.001
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
Diameter (µm)
Diameter (µm)
Regional deposition (%)
Nasal, pharyngeal, laryngeal
Tracheobronchial
Alveolar

----- Page 8 (native) -----
biosoluble materials can happen at any location
within the three regions of the respiratory tract,
although to different degrees, depending on
local extracellular and intracellular conditions
(pH). In contrast, a number of diverse
processes involving physical translocation of
inhaled particles exist in the respiratory tract
and are different in the three regions. Figure 9
summarizes these clearance processes for solid
particles. As discussed further below, some of
them show signiﬁcant particle-size–dependent
differences, making them uniquely effective for
a certain particle size but very inefficient for
other sizes.
The most prevalent mechanism for solid
particle clearance in the alveolar region is medi-
ated by alveolar macrophages, through phago-
cytosis of deposited particles. The success of
macrophage–particle encounter appears to be
facilitated by chemotactic attraction of alveolar
macrophages to the site of particle deposition
(Warheit et al. 1988). The chemotactic signal
is most likely complement protein 5a (C5a),
derived from activation of the complement cas-
cade from serum proteins present on the alveo-
lar surface (Warheit et al. 1986; Warheit and
Hartsky 1993). This is followed by gradual
movement of the macrophages with internal-
ized particles toward the mucociliary escalator.
The retention half-time of solid particles in the
alveolar region based on this clearance mecha-
nism is about 70 days in rats and up to
700 days in humans. The efﬁcacy of this clear-
ance mechanism depends highly on the effi-
ciency of alveolar macrophages to “sense”
deposited particles, move to the site of their
deposition, and then phagocytize them. This
process of phagocytosis of deposited particles
takes place within a few hours, so by 6–12 hr
after deposition essentially all of the particles
are phagocytized by alveolar macrophages, to
be cleared subsequently by the slow alveolar
clearance mentioned above. However, it
appears that there are significant particle-
size–dependent differences in the cascade of
events leading to effective alveolar macrophage-
mediated clearance.
Figure 10 displays results of several studies
in which rats were exposed to different-sized
particles (for the 3- and 10-µm particles, 10-µg
and 40-µg polystyrene beads, respectively, were
instilled intratracheally) (Kreyling et al. 2002;
Oberdörster et al. 1992b, 2000; Semmler et al.
2004). Twenty-four hours later, the lungs of
the animals were lavaged repeatedly, retrieving
about 80% of the total macrophages as deter-
mined in earlier lavage experiments (Ferin et al.
1991). As shown in Figure 10, approximately
80% of 0.5-, 3-, and 10-µm particles could be
retrieved with the macrophages, whereas only
approximately 20% of nanosized 15–20-nm
and 80-nm particles could be lavaged with the
macrophages. In effect, approximately 80% of
the UFPs were retained in the lavaged lung
after exhaustive lavage, whereas approximately
20% of the larger particles > 0.5 µm remained
in the lavaged lung. This indicates that NSPs
either were in epithelial cells or had further
translocated to the interstitium [Supplemental
Material available online (http://ehp.niehs.nih.
gov/members/2005/7339/supplemental.pdf)].
Epithelial translocation. Because of the
apparent inefﬁciency of alveolar macrophage
phagocytosis of NSPs, one might expect that
these particles interact instead with epithelial
cells. Indeed, results from several studies show
that NSPs deposited in the respiratory tract
readily gain access to epithelial and interstitial
sites. This was also shown in studies with ultra-
ﬁne PTFE fumes: shortly after a 15-min expo-
sure, the ﬂuorine-containing particles could be
found in interstitial and submucosal sites of the
conducting airways as well as in the intersti-
tium of the lung periphery close to the pleura
(Oberdörster G 2000). Such interstitial
translocation represents a shift in target site
away from the alveolar space to the intersti-
tium, potentially causing direct particle-
induced effects there.
In a study evaluating the pulmonary
inﬂammatory response of TiO2 particles, rang-
ing from NP TiO2 to pigment-grade TiO2
(12–250 nm), a surprising finding was that,
24 hr after intratracheal instillation of different
doses, higher doses induced a lower effect
(Oberdörster et al. 1992a). This was explained
by the additional finding that at the higher
doses (expressed as particle surface area) of the
nanosized TiO2, ≥50% had reached the pul-
monary interstitium, causing a shift of the
inﬂammatory cell response from the alveolar
space to the interstitium [Supplemental
Material available online (http://ehp.niehs.nih.
gov/members/2005/7339/supplemental.pdf)].
The smaller particle size of 12 and 20 nm ver-
sus 220 and 250 nm also means that the
administered particle number was more than
three orders of magnitude higher for the NSPs,
a factor that seems to be an important determi-
nant for particle translocation across the alveo-
lar epithelium, as are the delivered total dose
and the dose rate (Ferin et al. 1992). Because
interstitial translocation of ﬁne particles across
the alveolar epithelium is more prominent in
larger species (dogs, nonhuman primates) than
in rodents (Kreyling and Scheuch 2000;
Nikula et al. 1997), it is reasonable to assume
that the high translocation of NSPs observed
in rats occurs in humans as well [Supplemental
Material available online (http://ehp.niehs.nih.
gov/members/2005/7339/supplemental.pdf)].
Oberdörster et al.
830
VOLUME 113 | NUMBER 7 | July 2005 • Environmental Health Perspectives
Figure 9. Pathways of particle clearance (disposition) in and out of the respiratory tract. There are signiﬁ-
cant differences between NSPs and larger particles for some of these pathways (see “Disposition of
NSPs in the respiratory tract”). Drawing courtesy of J. Harkema.
Nasal airway
Pharynx
Trachea
Bronchi
Larynx
Lymph nodes
Pulmonary
arteries
Pulmonary
veins
Alveolar
capillary
bed
Nonrespiratory
bronchioles
Respiratory
bronchioles
Alveolar
ducts
Alveolar
sacs
Vagal ganglion
Mucociliary escalator
GI tract
AM-mediated clearance
Interstitium (via epithelium)
Lymphatic circulation
Blood circulation
Sensory neurons
(olfactory, trigeminal,
tracheobronchial)
Table 3. Clearance mechanisms for inhaled solid
particles in the respiratory tract.
Physical clearance processes (translocation)
Mucociliary movement (nasal, tracheobronchial)
Macrophage phagocytosis (tracheobronchial, alveolar)
Epithelial endocytosis (nasal, tracheobronchial, alveolar)
Interstitial translocation (tracheobronchial, alveolar)
Lymphatic drainage (tracheobronchial)
Blood circulation (tracheobronchial, alveolar)
Sensory neurons (nasal, tracheobronchial)
Chemical clearance processesa
Dissolution
Leaching
Protein binding
aNasal, tracheobronchial, and alveolar regions.

----- Page 9 (native) -----
Translocation to the circulatory system.
Once the particles have reached pulmonary
interstitial sites, uptake into the blood circula-
tion, in addition to lymphatic pathways, can
occur; again, this pathway is dependent on par-
ticle size, favoring NSPs. Berry et al. (1977)
were the ﬁrst to describe translocation of NSPs
across the alveolar epithelium using intratra-
cheal instillations of 30-nm gold particles in
rats. Within 30 min postexposure, they found
large amounts of these particles in platelets of
pulmonary capillaries; the researchers suggested
that this is an elimination pathway for inhaled
particles that is signiﬁcant for transporting the
smallest air pollutant particles—in particular,
particles of tobacco smoke—to distant organs.
They also hypothesized that this “might predis-
pose to platelet aggregation with formation of
microthrombi atheromatous plaques” (Berry
et al. 1977).
Since then, a number of studies with differ-
ent particle types have conﬁrmed the existence
of this translocation pathway, as summarized
in Table 4. Collectively, these studies indicate
that particle size and surface chemistry (coat-
ing), and possibly charge, govern translocation
across epithelial and endothelial cell layers. In
particular, the studies summarized by Mehta
et al. (2004) and those performed by Heckel
et al. (2004) using intravenous administration
of albumin-coated gold nanoparticles in
rodents demonstrated receptor-mediated trans-
cytosis (albumin-binding proteins) via caveolae
(Figure 11). These 50–100 nm vesicles, first
described by Simionescu et al. (1975), form
from indentations of the plasmalemma and are
coated with the caveolin-1 protein. Albumin,
as the most abundant protein in plasma and
interstitium, appears to facilitate NP endo-
cytosis, as does lecithin, a phospholipid: even
240-nm polystyrene particles translocated
across the alveolo-capillary barrier when coated
with lecithin, whereas uncoated particles did
not (Kato et al. 2003). The presence of both
albumin and phospholipids in alveolar epithe-
lial lining ﬂuid may, therefore, be important
constituents for facilitated epithelial cell uptake
of NSPs after deposition in the alveolar space.
Rejman et al. (2004) reviewed a number of
different endocytic pathways for internalization
of a variety of substances, including phagocyto-
sis, macropinocytosis, clathrin-mediated endo-
cytosis, and caveolae-mediated endocytosis.
They found in nonphagocytic cells in vitro that
internalization via clathrin-coated pits pre-
vailed for latex microspheres < 200 nm,
whereas with increasing size up to 500 nm,
caveolae became the predominant pathway.
However, as shown in Table 4, surface coating
of NSPs with albumin clearly causes even the
smallest particles to be internalized via caveo-
lae. The presence of caveolae on cells differs:
they are abundant in lung capillaries and alveo-
lar type l cells but not in brain capillaries
(Gumbleton 2001). In the lung, during inspira-
tory expansion and expiratory contraction of
the alveolar walls, caveolae with openings
around 40 nm disappear and reappear, forming
vesicles that are thought to function as trans-
port pathways across the cells for macromole-
cules (Patton 1996). Knowledge from virology
about cell entry of biologic NSPs (viruses) via
clathrin-coated pits and caveolae mechanisms
should also be considered (Smith and Helenius
2004) and can shed light on the mechanism by
which engineered NPs may enter cells and
interact with subcellular structures.
Evidence in humans for the translocation
of inhaled NSPs into the blood circulation is
ambiguous, with one study showing rapid
appearance in the blood and signiﬁcant accu-
mulation of label in the liver of humans inhal-
ing 99Tc-labeled 20-nm carbon particles
(Nemmar et al. 2002a), whereas another study
using the same labeled particles reported no
such accumulation (Brown et al. 2002). Taking
into consideration all of the evidence from
animal and human studies for alveolar trans-
location of NSPs, it is likely that this pathway
also exists in humans; however, the extent of
extrapulmonary translocation is highly depen-
dent on particle surface characteristics/chem-
istry, in addition to particle size. Translocation
to the blood circulation could provide a
mechanism for a direct particle effect on the
cardiovascular system as an explanation for epi-
demiologic findings of cardiovascular effects
associated with inhaled ambient UFPs
(Pekkanen et al. 2002; Wichmann et al. 2000)
and for results of clinical studies showing vas-
cular responses to inhaled elemental carbon
UFPs (Pietropaoli et al. 2004). In addition to
direct alveolar translocation of NSPs, cardio-
vascular effects may also be the corollary of a
sequence of events starting with particle-
induced alveolar inﬂammation initiating a sys-
temic acute phase response with changes in
blood coagulability and resulting in cardio-
vascular effects (Seaton et al. 1995).
Once NSPs have translocated to the blood
circulation, they can be distributed throughout
the body. The liver is the major distribution
site via uptake by Kupffer cells, followed by
the spleen as another organ of the reticulo-
endothelial system, although coating with
polyethylene glycol (PEG) almost completely
prevents hepatic and splenic localization so that
other organs can be targeted (Akerman et al.
2002). Distribution to heart, kidney, and
immune-modulating organs (spleen, bone
marrow) has been reported. For example, sev-
eral types of NPs, ranging from 10 to 240 nm,
localized to a signiﬁcant degree in bone mar-
row after intravenous injection into mice
(Table 5). Such target specificity may be
extremely valuable for drug delivery; for exam-
ple, drug delivery to the CNS via blood-borne
NPs requires NP surface modifications in
order to facilitate translocation across the tight
blood–brain barrier via speciﬁc receptors (e.g.,
apolipoprotein coating for LDL-receptor–
mediated endocytosis in brain capillaries)
(Kreuter 2001, 2004; Kreuter et al. 2002).
Such highly desirable properties of NPs must
be carefully weighed against potential adverse
cellular responses of targeted NP drug delivery,
and a rigorous toxicologic assessment is
mandatory [Supplemental Material available
online (http://ehp.niehs.nih.gov/members/
2005/7339/supplemental.pdf)].
Nanotoxicology
Environmental Health Perspectives •
VOLUME 113 | NUMBER 7 | July 2005
831
Figure 10. In vivo retention of inhaled nanosized and larger particles in alveolar macrophages (A) and in
exhaustively lavaged lungs (epithelial and interstitial retention; B) 24 hr postexposure. The alveolar
macrophage is the most important defense mechanism in the alveolar region for ﬁne and coarse particles,
yet inhaled singlet NSPs are not efﬁciently phagocytized by alveolar macrophages.
100
80
60
40
20
0
100
80
60
40
20
0
Particle size
Percent total particle lung burden
B
A
Particle size
Percent total particle lung burden
~ 15–20 nm
80 nm
80 nm
0.5 µm
3 µm
3 µm
10 µm
10 µm
0.5 µm
~ 15–20 nm

----- Page 10 (native) -----
Neuronal uptake and translocation. A
translocation pathway for solid particles in the
respiratory tract involving neuronal axons is
apparently speciﬁc for NSPs. Respective stud-
ies are summarized in Table 6. This pathway
was described > 60 years ago, yet it has received
little or no attention from toxicologists. This
pathway, shown in Figure 9 for the nasal and
tracheobronchial regions, comprises sensory
nerve endings of the olfactory and the trigemi-
nus nerves and an intricate network of sensory
nerve endings in the tracheobronchial region.
These early studies concerned a large series of
studies with 30-nm polio virus intranasally
instilled into chimpanzees and rhesus monkeys
(Bodian and Howe 1941a, 1941b; Howe and
Bodian 1940). Their studies revealed that the
olfactory nerve and olfactory bulbs are, indeed,
portals of entry to the CNS for intranasally
instilled nanosized polio virus particles, which
could subsequently be recovered from the
olfactory bulbs. The close proximity of nasal
olfactory mucosa and olfactory bulb requires
only a short distance to be covered by neuronal
transport (Figure 12). Bodian and Howe
(1941b) determined the transport velocity of
the virus in the axoplasm of axons to be
2.4 mm/hr, which is very well in agreement
with neuronal transport velocities measured
later by Adams and Bray (1983) for solid parti-
cles (up to 500 nm) directly microinjected into
giant axons of crabs, and by de Lorenzo (1970)
for silver-coated colloidal gold (50 nm) in
squirrel monkeys.
The de Lorenzo (1970) study demon-
strated in squirrel monkeys that intranasally
instilled silver-coated colloidal gold particles
(50 nm) translocated anterogradely in the
axons of the olfactory nerves to the olfactory
bulbs. The 50-nm gold particles even crossed
synapses in the olfactory glomerulus to reach
mitral cell dendrites within 1 hr after intranasal
instillation. An interesting finding in this
study—and important for potential adverse
effects—was that the NSPs in the olfactory
bulb were no longer freely distributed in the
cytoplasm but were preferentially located in
mitochondria (see also “Reactive oxygen
species mechanisms of NSP toxicity,” above).
Newer studies indicated that this trans-
location pathway is also operational for inhaled
NSPs. Inhalation of elemental 13C UFPs
(CMD = 35 nm) resulted in a significant
increase of 13C in the olfactory bulb on day 1,
which increased further throughout day 7 post-
exposure (Oberdörster et al. 2004). Results of
another inhalation study with solid nanosized
(CMD = 30 nm) manganese oxide (MnO2)
particles in rats showed after a 12-day exposure
a more than 3.5-fold signiﬁcant increase of Mn
in the olfactory bulb, compared with only a
doubling of Mn in the lung. When one nostril
was occluded during a 6-hr exposure, Mn
accumulation in the olfactory bulb was
restricted to the side of the open nostril only
(Figure 13) (Feikert et al. 2004). This result
contrasts with 15-day inhalation of larger-sized
MnO2 particles in rats (1.3 and 18 µm mass
median aerodynamic diameter) where no sig-
niﬁcant increases in olfactory Mn was found
(Fechter et al. 2002). This was to be expected
given that the individual axons of the ﬁla olfac-
toria (forming the olfactory nerve) are only
100–200 nm in diameter (de Lorenzo 1957;
Plattig 1989).
Collectively, these studies point out that
the olfactory nerve pathway should also be
considered a portal of entry to the CNS for
humans under conditions of environmental
and occupational exposures to airborne NSPs.
However, there are important differences
between rodents and humans. The olfactory
mucosa of the human nose comprises only
5% of the total nasal mucosal surface as
opposed to 50% in rats—which in addition
are obligatory nose breathers (Table 7). One
can argue that the olfactory route may there-
fore be an important transfer route to the
CNS for inhaled NSPs in animals with a well-
developed olfaction system, yet at the same
time its importance for humans with a more
rudimentary olfactory system can be ques-
tioned. However, estimates using a predictive
particle deposition model and data from
Table 7 show that concentrations of 20-nm
translocated particles in the human olfactory
bulb can, indeed, be 1.6–10 times greater
than in rats [Supplemental Material available
online (http://ehp.niehs.nih.gov/members/
2005/7339/supplemental.pdf)].
Translocation into deeper brain structures
may possibly occur as well, as shown in rats
for soluble Mn (Gianutsos et al. 1997), but
requires further confirmatory studies with
respect to solid NSPs. Further evidence for
movement of NSPs along axons and dendrites
in humans is provided by knowledge accumu-
lated by virologists who have long understood
the movement of human meningitis virus
through olfactory and trigeminal neurons and,
Oberdörster et al.
832
VOLUME 113 | NUMBER 7 | July 2005 • Environmental Health Perspectives
Table 4. Particle size and surface chemistry-related alveolar–capillary translocation.
Particle size (nm)
Type
Translocation
Localization/effect
Reference
5–20
Gold, albumin coated
Yes
Via caveolae
Mehta et al. 2004
8
Gold, albumin coated
Yes
Via “vesicles”
König et al. 1993
8
Gold, albumin coated
Yes
Via caveolae
Heckel et al. 2004
18
Iridium
Yesa
Extrapulmonary organs
Kreyling et al. 2002
30
Gold
Yes
Platelet?
Berry et al. 1977
35
Carbon
Yes
Liver
Oberdörster et al. 2002
60
Polystyreneb
Yes
Thrombus, early
Nemmar et al. 2002b
Silva et al., in press 
60
Polystyrene
?
No thrombus
Nemmar et al. 2002b
80
Iridium
Yesa
Extrapulmonary organs
Kreyling et al. 2002
240
Polystyrene, lecithin
Yes
Monocytes
Kato et al. 2003
240
Polystyrene, uncoated
No
Kato et al. 2003
400
Polystyrene
No
Thrombus, late
Nemmar et al. 2003
?, unknown.
aMinimal. bIndirect evidence.
Figure 11. Different forms of caveolae and cellular tight junctions function as translocation mechanisms
across cell layers. Depending on particle surface chemistry, NSPs have been shown to transcytose
across alveolar type I epithelial cells and capillary endothelial cells (Table 4), but not via cellular tight
junctions in the healthy state (A). However, in a compromised or disease state (e.g., endotoxin
exposure; B) translocation across widened tight junction occurs as well (Heckel et al. 2004). This indicates
that assessing potential effects of NSPs in the compromised state is an important component of nano-
toxicology. Adapted from Cohen et al. (2004).
B
A
Capillary
Endothelial cell
Interstitial space
Alveolar
type I cell
Surfactant
Alveolar space
To lymph
To lymph
3
4
5
2
1
6
7
1  Traditional caveolae
2  Static caveolae
3  Mobile caveolae
4  Caveosome
5  Transcellular channel
Caveolae
6  Capillary endothelial tight junctions
7  Alveolar epithelial cell tight junction
    Nanosized particle

----- Page 11 (native) -----
similarly, herpes virus movement up and down
the trigeminal neuron to trigger outbreaks of
herpes cold sores in humans (Kennedy and
Chaudhuri 2002; Terasaki et al. 1997).
There are additional neuronal translocation
pathways for solid NSPs via the trigeminus
nerve and tracheobronchial sensory nerves
(Table 6). A study by Hunter and Dey (1998)
in rats demonstrated the translocation of
intranasally instilled rhodamine-labeled
microspheres (20–200 nm) to the trigeminal
ganglion inside the cranium via uptake into the
ophthalmic and maxillary branches of the
trigeminus nerve that supplies sensory nerve
endings throughout the nasal mucosa. In
another study, Hunter and Undem (1999)
instilled the same microparticles intratracheally
into guinea pigs; they found neuronal trans-
location of these solid microparticles to the
ganglion nodosum in the neck area that is net-
worked into the vagal system. This finding
may be relevant for ambient UFPs because it
can be hypothesized that cardiovascular effects
associated with ambient particles in epidemio-
logic studies (Utell et al. 2002) are in part due
to direct effects of translocated UFPs on the
autonomic nervous system via sensory nerves
in the respiratory tract.
In the context of potential CNS effects of
air pollution, including ambient UFPs, two
recent studies with exposures of mice to con-
centrated ambient fine particles and UFPs
should be mentioned. Campbell et al. (2005)
and Veronesi et al. (in press) found signiﬁcant
increases of tumor necrosis factor-α or
decreases in dopaminergic neurons, supporting
the hypothesis of ambient PM causing neuro-
degenerative disease. A study by Calderon-
Garcidueñas et al. (2002) may also point to an
interesting link between air pollution and
CNS effects: these authors described signifi-
cant inflammatory or neurodegenerative
changes in the olfactory mucosa, olfactory
bulb, and cortical and subcortical brain struc-
tures in dogs from a heavily polluted area in
Mexico City, whereas these changes were not
seen in dogs from a less-polluted rural control
city. However, whether direct effects of air-
borne UFPs are the cause of these effects
remains to be determined.
Although the existence of neuronal translo-
cation of NSPs has been well established, size
alone is only one particle parameter governing
this process. Surface characteristics of NSPs
(chemistry, charge, shape, aggregation) are
essential determinants as well, and it should
not be assumed that all NSPs, when inhaled,
will be distributed by the mechanism described
here. It should be kept in mind, however, that
the unique biokinetic behavior of NSPs—
cellular endocytosis, transcytosis, neuronal and
circulatory translocation and distribution—
which makes them desirable for medical thera-
peutic or diagnostic applications—may be
associated with potential toxicity. For example,
NP-facilitated drug delivery to the CNS raises
the question of the fate of NPs after their trans-
location to speciﬁc cell types or to subcellular
structures in the brain. For example, does
mitochondrial localization induce oxidative
stress? How persistent is the coating or the core
of the NPs? A respective safety evaluation is
key [Supplemental Material available online
(http://ehp.niehs.nih.gov/members/
2005/7339/supplemental.pdf)].
Exposure via GI Tract and Skin
NSPs cleared from the respiratory tract via the
mucociliary escalator can subsequently be
ingested into the GI tract. Alternatively, nano-
materials can be ingested directly, for example,
if contained in food or water or if used in cos-
metics or as drugs or drug delivery devices.
Only a few studies have investigated the uptake
and disposition of nanomaterials by the GI
tract, and most have shown that NSPs pass
through the GI tract and are eliminated
rapidly. In rats dosed orally with radiolabeled
functionalized C60 fullerenes, water solubilized
using PEG and albumin (18 kBq in 100 µL),
Nanotoxicology
Environmental Health Perspectives •
VOLUME 113 | NUMBER 7 | July 2005
833
Table 5. Translocation of NSPs in the blood circulation to bone marrow in mice.
Particle size
Type
Finding
Reference
~10 nm
PEG quantum dots
Fast appearance of quantum dots
Ballou et al. 2004
in liver, spleen, lymph nodes,
and bone marrow (mouse)
< 220 nm
Metallo-fullerene
Highest accumulation in bone
Cagle et al. 1999
marrow after liver; continued
increase in bone marrow but
decrease in liver (mouse)
90–250 nm
HSA-coated polylactic
Signiﬁcant accumulation in bone
Bazile et al. 1992
acid nanoparticles
marrow, second to liver (rat)
240 nm
Polystyrene
Rapid passage through
Gibaud et al. 1996,
(nonbiodegradable)
endothelium in bone marrow,
1998, 1994
polylisohexylcyonacrylate
uptake by phagocytizing cells
(biodegradable)
in tissue (mouse)
HSA, human serum albumin. 
Table 6. Studies of neuronal translocation of UFPs from respiratory tract.
Reference
Study
Bodian and Howe 1941
Olfactory axonal transport of polio virus (30 nm) after intranasal instillation in 
chimpanzee; transport velocity, 2.4 mm/hr
de Lorenzo 1970
Olfactory axonal transport of 50 nm silver-coated gold after intranasal instillation 
in squirrel monkey; transport velocity, 2.5 mm/hr
Hunter and Dey 1998
Retrograde tracing of trigeminal neurons from nasal epithelium with microspheres
Hunter and Undem 1999
Rhodamine-labeled microspheres (20–200 nm) translocation via sensory nerves of 
TB region to ganglion nodosum in hamster after intratracheal instillation
Oberdörster et al. 2004
13C particles (CMD ~ 36 nm) in olfactory bulb after whole-body inhalation exposure 
in rats
TB, tracheobronchial.
Figure 12. Close proximity of olfactory mucosa to olfactory bulb of the CNS. Inhaled NSP[s], especially
below 10 nm, deposit efficiently on the olfactory mucosa by diffusion, similar to airborne “smell” mole-
cules which deposit in this area of olfactory dendritic cilia. Subsequent uptake and translocation of solid
NSP[s] along axons of the olfactory nerve has been demonstrated in non-human primates and rodents.
Surface chemistry of the particles may inﬂuence their neuronal translocation. Copyright © the McGraw-
Hill Companies, Inc. Reproduced from Widmaier et al. (2004) with permission from McGraw-Hill. 
Olfactory bulb
Afferent nerve fibers
(olfactory nerve)
Olfactory
cells
Nose
Upper lip
Inner
chamber
of nose
Hard
palate
Mucus
layer
Olfactory
epithelium
Cilia
Supporting
cell
Olfactory
receptor
cell
Stern cell
Axon
Olfactory
nerve
Copyright © The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Permission required for reproduction or display.

----- Page 12 (native) -----
98% were cleared in the feces within 48 hr,
whereas the rest was eliminated via urine, indi-
cating some uptake into the blood circulation
(Yamago et al. 1995). In contrast, in this same
study, 90% of the same radiolabeled fullerenes
administered intravenously (9.6 kBq in
~ 50 µL or 14–18 kBq in 215 µL) were
retained after 1 week, with most (73–80%,
depending on time course) found in the liver.
Studies by Kreyling and colleagues (Kreyling
et al. 2002; Semmler et al. 2004) using ultra-
fine 192Ir did not show significant uptake in
the GI tract, whereas earlier studies with larger
TiO2 particles (150–500 nm) found uptake
into the blood and movement to the liver
(Böckmann et al. 2000; Jani et al. 1994).
Likely there are differences in GI tract uptake
dependent on both particle surface chemistry
and particle size. Indeed, after oral dosing
in rats, Jani et al. (1990) found a particle-
size–dependent uptake of polystyrene particles
(ranging from 50 to 3,000 nm) by the GI
mucosa. This uptake (6.6% of the adminis-
tered 50 nm, 5.8% of the 100 nm NSP, 0.8%
of 1 µm particles, and 0% for 3 µm particles)
was mainly via the Peyer's patches with trans-
location into the mesenteric lymph and then to
systemic organs (i.e., liver, spleen, blood, bone
marrow, and kidney). 
A potentially important uptake route is
through dermal exposure. The epidermis, con-
sisting of the outer horny layer (stratum
corneum), the prickle cell layer (stratum spin-
osum), and basal cell layer (stratum basale),
forms a very tight protective layer for the
underlying dermis (Figure 14). The dermis has
a rich supply of blood and tissue macrophages,
lymph vessels, dendritic cells (Langerhans, also
in stratum spinosum of epidermis), and five
different types of sensory nerve endings.
Broken skin represents a readily available portal
of entry even for larger (0.5–7 µm) particles, as
evidenced by reports about accumulation of
large amounts of soil particles in inguinal
lymph nodes of people who often run or walk
barefoot; this can be associated with elephan-
tiatic lymphedema (podoconiosis; Corachan
et al. 1988; Blundell et al. 1989). Tinkle et al.
(2003) hypothesized that unbroken skin when
ﬂexed—as in wrist movements—would make
the epidermis permeable for NSPs. They
demonstrated in a proof-of-concept experi-
ment that, indeed, ﬂexing the skin, but not ﬂat
skin, resulted in penetration of even 1 µm ﬂuo-
rescent beads to the dermis. The follow-up
question about access of particles in the dermis
to the circulation is answered by the aforemen-
tioned reports of podoconiosis, that is, uptake
into the lymphatic system and regional lymph
nodes. Subsequent translocation of NSPs
beyond lymph nodes to the blood circulation is
likely to occur as well, as shown in studies with
small asbestos ﬁbers (Oberdörster et al. 1988).
Newer studies by Kim et al. (2004) in mice
and pigs with intradermally injected near-
infrared quantum dots confirmed that NPs,
once in the dermis, will localize to regional
lymph nodes, which makes these particles very
useful for in vivo imaging. Likely transport
mechanisms to the lymph nodes are skin
macrophages and dendritic (Langerhans) cells
(Ohl et al. 2004; Sato et al. 1998); this raises a
question about potential modulation of
immune responses, after interaction of these
NP-containing macrophages and dendritic cells
with T lymphocytes. For example, Chen et al.
(1998) were able to raise antibodies in mice
speciﬁc for C60 after intraperitoneal injections
of C60 conjugated to thyroglobulin and serum
albumin. Clearly, research is needed to deter-
mine whether and under what conditions NPs
can be recognized by the immune system, fol-
lowing any route of uptake into the organism.
Another question relates to the potential of
sensory skin nerves to take up and translocate
NPs. Given that this mechanism has been
demonstrated for the nasal and tracheo-
bronchial regions of the respiratory tract, how
likely is this to occur in the dermis layer of the
skin with its dense supply of different types of
Oberdörster et al.
834
VOLUME 113 | NUMBER 7 | July 2005 • Environmental Health Perspectives
Table 7. Rat versus human nasal and olfactory parameters.
Measure
Rat
Human
Breathing mode
Obligatory nose
Nasal/oronasal
Area of nasal mucosa
~16 cm3
~105 cm2
Area of olfactory mucosa (% total mucosa)
~8 cm3 (50)
~5.25 cm2 (5)
Percent nasal airﬂow going to olfactory mucosa
~15
~10
Weight of olfactory bulb
~85 ng
~168 ng
Based on Keyhani et al. (1997), Kimbell et al. (1997), and Turetsky et al. (2003).
Figure 13. Occlusion of the right nostril of rats during
6-hr inhalation of nanosized MnO2 particles (~ 30 nm
CMD, ~ 450 µg/m3) resulted in accumulation of Mn
only in the left olfactory bulb only at 24 hr after dosing.
Data are mean ± SD. Data from Feikert et al. (2004). 
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
Unexposed
Exposed
Both nostrils
open
Right nostril
occluded
ng Mn/mg wet weight
Left olfactory bulb
Right olfactory bulb
Figure 14. The epidermis represents a tight barrier against NSP penetration. Quantitatively, dermal trans-
location will therefore be minimal or nonexistent under normal conditions but increases in areas of skin
ﬂexing (Tinkle et al. 2003) and broken skin. Once in the dermis, lymphatic uptake is a major translocation
route, likely facilitated by uptake in dendritic cells (epidermis) and macrophages; other potential pathways
may include the dense networks of blood circulation and sensory nerves in the dermis. Adapted from
Essential Day Spa (2005) with permission from www.essentialdayspa.com. 
Hair shaft
Langerhans/
dendritic cells
Stratum corneum
Pigment layer
Stratum spinosum
Stratum basale
Stratum
germinativum
Arrector pili muscle
Sebaceous (oil) gland
Hair follicle
Papilla of hair
Nerve fiber
Blood and lymph
vessels
Sweat gland
Pacinian corpuscle
Vein
Artery
Subcutaneous
fatty tissue
(hypodermis)
Dermis
Epidermis
Macrophages
Sensory nerve ending for touch
Dermal papilla
Sweat pore

----- Page 13 (native) -----
sensory nerves? It may be conceivable, consid-
ering data on neuronal uptake and transloca-
tion of NSPs after intramuscular injection. For
example, nanosized ferritin and iron-dextran,
after injection into the tongue of mice, labeled
the neurons of the hypoglossal nuclei, and
injection of both of these NSPs into facial
muscles of mice also resulted in synaptic
uptake; cationized ferritin was also detected in
cell bodies of facial neurons, indicating that
electrical charge is of importance for incorpora-
tion into axons and axonal transport (Arvidson
1994; Malmgren et al. 1978; Olsson and
Kristensson 1981). Other studies using intra-
muscular injection of ferritin (~ 112 nm), iron-
dextran (11 or 21 nm), and gold protein
(20–25 nm) NSPs also showed rapid penetra-
tion through the basal lamina into the synaptic
clef of the neuromuscular junction, but this
was restricted to only the smaller nanoparticles,
implying that there may be a size-dependent
penetration of the basal lamina with a thresh-
old somewhere between 10 and 20 nm
(Oldfors and Fardeau 1983).
Neuronal transport of NSPs along sensory
skin nerves is well established for herpes virus.
After passing through the skin—especially bro-
ken skin—the viruses are transported retro-
gradely along dendrites of sensory neurons to
the dorsal root ganglion, where they remain
dormant until a stress situation triggers antero-
grade translocation along the dendrites back to
the skin (Kennedy and Chaudhuri 2002;
Terasaki et al. 1997). Future studies need to
determine whether and to what degree such
translocation along sensory skin neurons also
occurs with NPs penetrating the epidermis.
Risk Assessment
The lack of toxicology data on engineered NPs
does not allow for adequate risk assessment.
Because of this, some may even believe that
engineered NPs are so risky that they call for a
precautionary halt in NP-related research.
However, the precautionary principle should
not be used to stop research related to nano-
technology and NPs. Instead, we should strive
for a sound balance between further develop-
ment of nanotechnology and the necessary
research to identify potential hazards in order
to develop a scientiﬁcally defensible database
for the purpose of risk assessment. To be able
to do this, a basic knowledge about mam-
malian and ecotoxicologic profiles of NPs is
necessary, rather than attempting to assess NP
risks based on some popular science ﬁction lit-
erature. Most important, sufficient resources
should be allocated by governmental agencies
and industries to be able to perform a scientiﬁ-
cally based risk assessment and then establish
justifiable procedures for risk management.
The data needed for this risk assessment should
be determined a priori so that limited resources
can be used efficiently to develop useful and
well-planned studies.
At this point, governmental regulation is
not possible, given the lack of needed informa-
tion on which to base such regulations.
However, academia, industry, and regulatory
governmental agencies should seriously con-
sider the view that NPs have new and unique
biologic properties and that the potential risks
of NPs are not the same as those of the bulk
material of the same chemistry. Assigning a
unique identiﬁer to nanosized materials would
indicate that the toxicology proﬁle of the mate-
rial in question may not be the same as the
bulk material. Toxicologic tests and the result-
ing database would provide information for
material safety data sheets for NPs as well as a
basis for potential NP risk assessments and risk
management. Obviously, this approach may
not be appropriate for all NPs, for example,
when embedded in a matrix, and the feasibility
of this proposed strategy needs to be thor-
oughly discussed and considered. For dis-
cussing this, and for developing and deciding
upon a reasonable battery of tests for toxico-
logic proﬁling, it would be very useful to con-
vene international multidisciplinary workshops
of experts from industry, academia, and regula-
tory agencies (including material scientists,
chemists, chemical engineers, toxicologists,
physicians, regulators, statisticians, and others)
to establish an NP classification scheme and
testing guidelines. A multidisciplinary and
multinational collaborative team approach is
critical. Respective efforts have been initiated
nationally by the American National Standards
Institute (ANSI 2004) and internationally by
the International Council on Nanotechnology
(ICON 2004) as well as the International
Organization for Standardization (Geneva,
Switzerland).
Because many regulatory agencies do not
consider a nanotechnologically manufactured
substance different from the conventional sub-
stance, the manufacture and use of nano-
technology products are currently not
specifically regulated. Typically, nanosized
substances are treated as variations of the
technical material or existing formulation and
thus do not require a separate registration. A
main reason for producing a nanosize form of
a registered substance, however, is that con-
version of a substance to a nanoparticle
imparts new properties to the substance (e.g.,
enhanced mechanical, electrical, optical, cata-
lytic, biologic activity). Thus, as stated above,
although the toxicology of the base material
may be well deﬁned, the toxicity of the nano-
size form of the substance may be dramatically
different from its parent form. As a result, new
toxicology data on the nanosize form of a sub-
stance is likely to result in a different hazard
assessment for the NPs. Figure 15 shows a risk
assessment/risk management paradigm that
points out different steps and data required for
this process.
As described in the preceding sections, the
difference in toxicologic proﬁle of NPs com-
pared with its parent form is due to not only its
intrinsic chemical properties but also to a large
degree to its differing kinetics in vivo.
Although larger particles may not enter the
CNS, the potential exists for inhaled NSPs to
be translocated to the CNS via the axons of
sensory neurons in the upper respiratory tract.
Furthermore, although the toxicity per unit
Nanotoxicology
Environmental Health Perspectives •
VOLUME 113 | NUMBER 7 | July 2005
835
Figure 15. Risk assessment (NRC 1983) and risk management paradigm for NPs. Risk assessment requires
answers to the following questions: Do NPs have adverse effects? What are the dose–response relation-
ships? What are occupational/environmental levels in different media? What is the calculated risk? Once
a risk is determined, a risk management decision can be established, including exposure standards and
regulations and efforts for effective risk communication. Modiﬁed from Oberdörster (1994).
Hazard indentification
Exposure assessment
Risk management
Public health/social/
economic/political
consequences
Regulations and
exposure standards
Prevention/intervention
measures,
biomedical/engineering
  Susceptibility
  extrapolation models
(high
low)
(animal
  human)
Mechanistic
data
Dose–response assessment
Risk characterization
Physicochemical
parameters and effects
Risk
calculation
In vitro studies
(primary cells and cell lines;
animal and human)
In vivo studies
(acute and chronic;
species differ)
Exposure–response
data
Inhalation,
ingestion, dermal
Occupational and
environmental
monitoring
Biological
monitoring
(markers of exposure)
Humans
Adverse NP effect
at portal of entry
and remote organs
Experimental
animals

----- Page 14 (native) -----
mass of a particular substance may vary
depending on the nano versus larger form, it
will be important to take into account not
only new biologic activities but also potential
new target organs and routes of exposure. To
what degree does the nanoform of a substance
have enhanced dermal penetration, or
increased systemic uptake via the lung or GI
tract? What determines how many nano-
particles that enter the systemic circulation
will distribute throughout the body, reach the
bone marrow, cross the blood–brain barrier,
cross the placenta to affect the developing off-
spring, or sequester effectively in the liver? Do
nanoparticles released into the environment
affect species that are important in food chain
dynamics? What are the long-term conse-
quences of exposure to nanoparticles?
Changes in toxicity profile and new target
organs can be expected, and it will then be
necessary to establish new risk assessments for
nanoparticles in addition to the bulk material.
Currently there exists a paucity of data to
effectively address these questions, but it will
be important to determine whether there exist
common modes of action/behavior of NPs to
establish baseline assumptions for use in risk
assessments.
The use of nanotechnology products will
likely increase dramatically over the next
decade. In fact, nanomaterials are already being
used in applications ranging from burn and
wound dressings to dental-bonding agents to
sunscreens and cosmetics to fuel cells, tires,
optics, clothing, and electronics. Although cur-
rently there exists little public awareness of
nanotechnology in everyday life (e.g., stain-free
clothing), it would be prudent to examine and
address environmental and human health con-
cerns before the widespread adoption of nan-
otechnology. Both the societal benefits and
potential risks of nanotechnology should be
evaluated and clearly communicated to the
general public and regulators. This type of
open communication and risk/beneﬁt evalua-
tion will avoid the pitfalls encountered with
genetically modiﬁed organisms recently experi-
enced in the field of biotechnology. In that
instance, the beneﬁts of the emerging ﬁeld of
biotechnology were not communicated effec-
tively before the introduction of the technol-
ogy. As the public’s awareness of this new
technology grew, regulators and producers of
biotechnology failed to effectively acknowledge
public concerns that genetically modified
organisms could adversely affect ecosystem bal-
ance. As a result, the public support of geneti-
cally modified organisms, particularly in the
European Union, is low. For nanomaterial
producers, it will be important to demonstrate
that what they may perceive as a new and
potentially harmless form of a familiar material
has, indeed, an acceptable risk proﬁle. If such
proactive steps are not taken, nanomaterials
may be regarded as dangerous by the public
and regulators, which could lead to inappropri-
ate categorization and unnecessarily burden-
some regulations. Such action (or inaction on
the side of producers), in turn, could result in
signiﬁcant barriers to commercialization and
the widespread acceptance of otherwise useful
nanotechnology materials.
Summary and Outlook
Research on ambient UFPs has laid the foun-
dation for the emerging field of nano-
toxicology, with the goal of studying the
biokinetics and the potential of engineered
nanomaterials (particles, tubes, shells, quantum
dots, etc.) to cause adverse effects. Major differ-
ences between ambient UFPs and NPs are the
polydisperse nature of the former versus the
monodisperse size of the latter, and particle
morphology, oftentimes a branched structure
from combustion particles versus spherical
form of NPs, although other shapes (tubes,
wires, rings, planes) are also manufactured. In
addition, combustion-derived volatile organic
compounds and inorganic constituents (e.g.,
metals, nitrates, sulfates) of different solubilities
on UFPs predict differences in the toxicologic
proﬁle between UFPs and NPs. However, as
far as the insoluble particle is concerned, con-
cepts of NSPs kinetics, including cell inter-
actions, will most likely be the same for UFPs
and NPs (Figure 16).
The introduction of nanostructured mate-
rials for biomedical and electronics applications
opens tremendous opportunities for biomedi-
cal applications as therapeutic and diagnostic
tools as well as in the fields of engineering,
electronics, optics, consumer products, alterna-
tive energy, soil/water remediation, and others.
However, very little is yet known about their
potential to cause adverse effects or humoral
immune responses once they are introduced
into the organism—unintentionally or inten-
tionally. Nanomedicine products will be well
tested before introduction into the market-
place. However, for the manufacturers of most
current nanotechnology products, regulations
requiring nanomaterial-speciﬁc data on toxicity
before introduction into the marketplace are
an evolving area and presently under discussion
(Bergeson and Auerbach 2004; Foresight and
Governance Project 2003). During a product’s
life cycle (manufacture, use, disposal), it is
probable that nanomaterials will enter the
environment, and currently there is no uniﬁed
plan to examine ecotoxicologic effects of NPs.
In addition, the stability of coatings and cova-
lent surface modifications need to be deter-
mined both in ecologic settings and in vivo.
[Supplemental Material available online
(http://ehp.niehs.nih.gov/members/
2005/7339/supplemental.pdf).]
Results of older biokinetic studies and
some new toxicology studies with NSPs
(mostly ambient UFPs) can be viewed as the
basis for the expanding ﬁeld of nanotoxicology.
These studies showed that the greater surface
area per mass renders NSPs more active biolog-
ically than larger-sized particles of the same
chemistry, and that particle surface area and
number appear to be better predictors for
NSPs-induced inflammatory and oxidative
stress responses. The following emerging 
Oberdörster et al.
836
VOLUME 113 | NUMBER 7 | July 2005 • Environmental Health Perspectives
Figure 16. Biokinetics of NSPs. PNS, peripheral nervous system. Although many uptake and translocation
routes have been demonstrated, others still are hypothetical and need to be investigated. Translocation
rates are largely unknown, as are accumulation and retention in critical target sites and their underlying
mechanisms. These, as well as potential adverse effects, largely depend on physicochemical characteris-
tics of the surface and core of NSPs. Both qualitative and quantitative changes in NSP biokinetics in a dis-
eased or compromised organism also need to be considered. 
Air, water, clothes
Drug delivery
Air
Food, water
Skin
Deposition
Injection
Inhalation
Ingestion
Lymph
Liver
GI tract
CNS
PNS
Bone marrow
Kidney
Spleen
Heart
Urine
Breast milk
Feces
Sweat/exfoliation
Other sites
(e.g., muscle, placenta)
Lymph
Blood
(platelets, monocytes,
endothelial cells)
Neurons
Neurons
Neurons
Respiratory tract
Nasal
Aveolar
Tracheo-
bronchial
Exposure media
Uptake pathways
Translocation
and distribution
Excretory pathways
Confirmed routes
Potential routes

----- Page 15 (native) -----
concepts of nanotoxicology can be identiﬁed
from these studies:
The biokinetics of NSPs are different from
larger particles. When inhaled, they are
efﬁciently deposited in all regions of the respi-
ratory tract; they evade speciﬁc defense mecha-
nisms; and they can translocate out of the
respiratory tract via different pathways and
mechanisms (endocytosis and transcytosis).
When in contact with skin, there is evidence of
penetration to the dermis followed by translo-
cation via lymph to regional lymph nodes. A
possible uptake into sensory nerves needs to be
investigated. When ingested, systemic uptake
via lymph into the organism can occur, but
most are excreted via feces. When in blood
circulation, they can distribute throughout
the organism, and they are taken up into
liver, spleen, bone marrow, heart, and other
organs. In general, translocation rates are
largely unknown; they are probably very low
but are likely to change in a compromised/
diseased state.
The biologic activity and biokinetics are
dependent on many parameters: size, shape,
chemistry, crystallinity, surface properties (area,
porosity, charge, surface modiﬁcations, weath-
ering of coating), agglomeration state, biopersis-
tence, and dose. These parameters are likely to
modify responses and cell interactions, such as a
greater inﬂammatory potential than larger par-
ticles per given mass, translocation across
epithelia from portal of entry to other organs,
translocation along axons and dendrites of neu-
rons, induction of oxidative stress, pro-oxidant
and antioxidant activity of NSPs in environ-
mentally relevant species, binding to proteins
and receptors, and localization in mitochondria.
The principles of cellular and organismal
interactions discussed in this article should be
applicable for both ambient UFPs and NPs,
even if the latter are coated with a bio-
compatible material. Knowledge about the bio-
persistence of this coating is as essential as is
knowledge about the bioavailability of the core
material that could have intrinsic toxic proper-
ties, for example, semiconductor metal com-
pounds in sub-10-nm quantum dots consisting
of cadmium and lead compounds. The very
small size of these materials makes them avail-
able to the same translocation processes
described here for polydisperse NSPs, possibly
even in a more efﬁcient way because of their
uniform size. When studying biologic/toxico-
logic effects, new processes of interactions with
subcellular structures (e.g., microtubuli, mito-
chondria) will likely be discovered. The diver-
sity of engineered nanomaterials and of the
potential effects represents major challenges
and research needs for nanotoxicology, includ-
ing also the need for assessing human exposure
during manufacture and use. The goal to
exploit positive aspects of engineered nano-
materials and avoid potential toxic effects can
best be achieved through a multidisciplinary
team effort involving researchers in toxicology,
materials science, medicine, molecular biology,
bioinformatics, and their subspecialties.
REFERENCES
Adams RJ, Bray D. 1983. Rapid transport of foreign particles
microinjected into crab axons. Nature 303:718–720.
Akerman MA, Chan WCW, Laakkonen P, Bhatia SN, Ruoslahti E.
2002. Nanocrystal targeting in vivo. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
99:12617–12621.
Amato I. 1989. Making the right stuff. Sci News 136:108–110.
Anderson PJ, Wilson JD, Hiller FC. 1990. Respiratory tract deposi-
tion of ultrafine particles in subjects with obstructive or
restrictive lung disease. Chest 97:1115–1120.
ANSI. 2004. Home page. American National Standards Institute.
Available: http://www.ansi.org. [accessed 16 March 2005].
Arvidson B. 1994. A review of axonal transport of metals.
Toxicology 88:1–14.
Auclair F, Baudot P, Beiler D, Limasset J. 1983. Accidents benines
et mortetels dus aux “traitement” du polytetraﬂuoroethylene
en millieu industriel: observations cliniques et measures
physio-chemiques des atmosphere pollues. Toxicol Eur Res
1:43–48.
Ballou B, Lagerholm BC, Ernst LA, Bruchez MP, Waggoner AS.
2004. Non-invasive imaging of quantum dots in mice.
Bioconjug Chem 15:79–86.
Bazile DV, Ropert C, Huve P, Verrecchia T, Marlard M,
Frydman A, et al. 1992. Body distribution of fully biodegrad-
able [14C]-poly(lactic acid) nanoparticles coated with albu-
min after parenteral administration to rats. Biomaterials
13(15):1093–1102.
Bergeson LL, Auerbach B. 2004. The Environmental Regulatory
Implications of Nanotechnology. Daily Environment Report
No. 71. Washington, DC:Bureau of National Affairs, Inc.
Available: http://www.lawbc.com/other_pdfs/The%
20Environmental%20Regulatory%20Implications%20of%20N
anotechnology.pdf [accessed 26 April 2005].
Berry JP, Arnoux B, Stanislas G, Galle P, Chretien J. 1977. A
microanalytic study of particles transport across the alveoli:
role of blood platelets. Biomedicine 27:354–357.
Blakemore R. 1975. Magnetotactic bacteria. Science 190:377–379.
Blundell G, Henderson WJ, Price EW. 1989. Soil particles in the
tissues of the foot in endemic elephantiasis of the lower
legs. Ann Trop Med Parasitol 83 (4):381–385.
Böckmann J, Lahl H, Eckert T, Unterhalt B. 2000. Titan-Blutspiegel
vor und nach Belastungsversuchen mit Titandioxid [in
German]. Pharmazie 55:140–143.
Bodian D, Howe HA. 1941a. Experimental studies on intraneural
spread of poliomyelitis virus. Bull Johns Hopkins Hosp
69:248–267.
Bodian D, Howe HA. 1941b. The rate of progression of polio-
myelitis virus in nerves. Bull Johns Hopkins Hosp 69:79–85.
Brand P, Gebhart J, Below M, Georgi B, Heyder J. 1991.
Characterization of environmental aerosols on Helgoland
Island. Atmos Environ 25A(3/4):581–585.
Brown DM, Stone V, Findlay P, MacNee W, Donaldson K. 2000.
Increased inflammation and intracellular calcium caused
by ultraﬁne carbon black is independent of transition met-
als or other soluble components. Occup Environ Med
57:685–691.
Brown DM, Wilson MR, MacNee W, Stone V, Donaldson K. 2001.
Size-dependent proinflammatory effects of ultrafine poly-
styrene particles: a role for surface area and oxidative
stress in the enhanced activity of ultrafines. Toxicol Appl
Pharmacol 175:191–199.
Brown JS, Zeman KL, Bennett WD. 2002. Ultraﬁne particle depo-
sition and clearance in the healthy and obstructed lung. Am
J Respir Crit Care Med 166:1240–1247.
Cagle DW, Kenmnel SJ, Mirzadeh S, Alford JM, Wilson LJ. 1999.
In vivo studies of fullerene-based materials using endohe-
dral metallofullerene radiotracers. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
96:5182–5187.
Calderon-Garcidueñas L, Azzarelli B, Acuna H, Garcia R,
Gambling TM, Osnaya N, et al. 2002. Air pollution and brain
damage. Toxicol Pathol 30(3):373–389.
Campbell A, Oldham M, Becaria A, Bondy SC, Meacher D,
Sioutas C, et al. 2005. Particulate matter in polluted air may
increase biomarkers of inflammation in mouse brain.
Neurotoxicology 26:133–140.
Cavagna G, Finulli M, Vigliani EC. 1961. Studio sperimentale sulla
patogenesi della febre da inalazione di fumi di Teﬂon (polite-
traﬂuoroetilene) [in Italian]. Med Lavoro 52:251–261.
Chalupa DC, Morrow PE, Oberdörster G, Utell MJ, Frampton MW.
2004. Ultraﬁne particle deposition in subjects with asthma.
Environ Health Perspect 112:879–882.
Chen B, Wilson S, Das M, Coughlin D, Erlanger B. 1998.
Antigenicity of fullerenes: antibodies speciﬁc for fullerenes
and their characteristics. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
95:10809–10813.
Cheng X, Kan A, Tomson M. 2004. Napthalene adsorption and
desorption from aqueous C60 fullerene. J Chem Engineer
Data 49:675–678.
Chitose N, Ueta S, Seino S, Yamamoto T. 2003. Radiolysis of aque-
ous phenol solutions with nanoparticles. 1. Phenol degrada-
tion and TOC removal in solutions containing TiO2 induced by
UV, gamma-ray and electron beams. Chemosphere
50:1007–1013.
Cohen A, Hnasko R, Schubert W, Lisanti M. 2004. Role of caveo-
lae and caveolins in health and disease. Physiol Rev
84:1341–1379.
Coleman WE, Scheel LD, Gorski CH. 1968. The particle resulting
from polytetraﬂuorethylene (PTFE) pyrolysis in air. AIHA J
29:54–60.
Corachan M, Tura JM, Campo E, Soley M, Traveria A. 1988.
Poedoconiosis in Aequatorial Guinea. Report of two cases
from different geological environments. Trop Geogr Med
40:359–364.
Cyrys J, Stolzel M, Heinrich J, Kreyling WG, Menzel N,
Wittmaack K, et al. 2003. Elemental composition and sources
of ﬁne and ultraﬁne ambient particles in Erfurt, Germany. Sci
Tot Environ 305:143–156.
Daughton C, Ternes T. 1999. Pharmaceuticals and personal care
products in the environment: agents of subtle change?
Environ Health Perspect 107(suppl 6):907–938.
de Lorenzo AJ. 1957. Electron microscopic observations of the
olfactory mucosa and olfactory nerve. J Biophys Biochem
Cytol 3:839–850.
de Lorenzo AJ. 1970. The olfactory neuron and the blood-brain
barrier. In: Taste and Smell in Vertebrates (Wolstenholme G,
Knight J, eds). London:Churchill, 151–176.
Derfus AM, Chan WCW, Bhatia SN. 2004. Probing the cytotoxicity
of semiconductor quantum dots. Nano Lett 4(1):11–18.
Dieckmann G, Dalton A, Johnson P, Razal J, Chen J, Giordano
GM, et al. 2003. Controlled assembly of carbon nanotubes by
designed amphiphilic peptide helices. J Am Chem Soc
125:1770–1777.
Dobson J. 2001. Nanoscale biogenic iron oxides and neuro-
degenerative disease. FEBS Lett 496:1–5.
Donaldson K, Brown D, Clouter A, Dufﬁn R, MacNee W, Renwick
L, et al. 2002. The pulmonary toxicology of ultraﬁne particles.
J Aerosol Med 15:213–220.
Donaldson K, Li XY, MacNee W. 1998. Ultraﬁne (nanometre) parti-
cle mediated lung injury. J Aerosol Sci 29:553–560.
Donaldson K, Stone V. 2003. Current hypotheses on the mecha-
nisms of toxicity of ultraﬁne particles. Ann Ist Super Sanita
39:405–410.
Donaldson K, Tran C-L. 2002. Inﬂammation caused by particles
and ﬁbers. Inhal Toxicol 14:5–27.
Donlin M, Frey R, Putnam C, Proctor J, Bashkin J. 1998. Analysis
of iron in ferritin, the iron-storage protein. J Chem Educ
75:437–441.
Driscoll KE. 1996. Role of inﬂammation in the development of rat
lung tumors in response to chronic particle exposure. Inhal
Toxicol 8(suppl):139–153.
Dunn JR, Fuller M, Zoeger J, Dobson J, Heller F, Hamnmann J,
et al. 1995. Magnetic material in the human hippocampus.
Brain Res Bull 36:149–153.
Elder ACP, Gelein R, Azadniv M, Frampton M, Finkelstein J,
Oberdorster G. 2002. Systemic interactions between inhaled
ultraﬁne particles and endotoxin. Ann Occup Hyg 46(suppl
1):231–234.
Elder ACP, Gelein R, Azadniv M, Frampton M, Finkelstein J,
CORRECTION
The authors found additional information
on GI tract uptake of NSPs that was not in
the original manuscript published online.
This information has been included here in
“Exposure via GI Tract and Skin.”
Nanotoxicology
Environmental Health Perspectives •
VOLUME 113 | NUMBER 7 | July 2005
837

----- Page 16 (native) -----
Oberdörster et al.
838
VOLUME 113 | NUMBER 7 | July 2005 • Environmental Health Perspectives
Oberdorster G. 2004. Systemic effects of inhaled ultrafine
particles in two compromised, aged rat strains. Inhal Toxicol
16(6/7):461–471.
Elder ACP, Gelein R, Finkelstein JN, Cox C, Oberdörster G. 2000.
Pulmonary inﬂammatory response to inhaled ultraﬁne parti-
cles is modiﬁed by age, ozone exposure, and bacterial toxin.
Inhal Toxicol 12(suppl 4):227–246.
Essential Day Spa. 2005. Skin Anatomy and Physiology. Available:
http://www.essentialdayspa.com/Skin_Anathomy_and_
Physiology.htm [accessed 26 April 2005].
Evelyn A, Mannick S, Sermon PA. 2003. Unusual carbon-based
nanoﬁbers and chains among diesel-emitted particles. Nano
Lett 3:63–64.
Fechter LD, Johnson DL, Lynch RA. 2002. The relationship of par-
ticle size to olfactory nerve uptake of a non-soluble form of
manganese into brain. Neurotoxicology 23:177–183.
Feikert T, Mercer P, Corson N, Gelein R, Opanashuk L, Elder A,
et al. 2004. Inhaled solid ultrafine particles (UFP) are effi-
ciently translocated via neuronal naso-olfactory pathways
[Abstract]. Toxicologist 78(suppl 1):435–436.
Ferin J, Oberdörster G. 1992. Translocation of particles from pul-
monary alveoli into the interstitium. J Aerosol Med
5:179–187.
Ferin J, Oberdörster G, Penney DP. 1992. Pulmonary retention of
ultraﬁne and ﬁne particles in rats. Am J Resp Cell Mol Biol
6:535–542.
Ferin J, Oberdörster G, Penney DP, Soderholm SC, Gelein R, Piper
HC. 1990. Increased pulmonary toxicity of ultraﬁne particles?
I. Particle clearance, translocation, morphology. J Aerosol
Sci 21:381–384.
Ferin J, Oberdörster G, Soderholm SC, Gelein R. 1991. Pulmonary
tissue access of ultraﬁne particles. J Aerosol Med 4(1):57–68.
Foley S, Crowley C, Smaihi M, Bonﬁls C, Erlanger BF, Seta P, et al.
2002. Cellular localisation of a water-soluble fullerene deriv-
ative. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 294:116–119.
Foresight and Governance Project. 2003. Nanotechnology &
Regulation: A Case Study using the Toxic Substance Control
Act (TSCA): A Discussion Paper. Publication 2003-6.
Washington, DC:Woodrow Wilson International Center for
Scholars. Available: http://www.nanotechcongress.com/
Nanotech-Regulation.pdf [accessed 26 April 2005]. 
Fox JE, Starcevic M, Kow KY, Burow ME, McLachlan JA. 2001.
Nitrogen fixation: endocrine disrupters and flavonoid sig-
nalling. Nature 413:128–129.
Freitas RA Jr. 1999. Nanomedicine, Volume I: Basic Capabilities.
Georgetown, TX:Landes Bioscience.
Gianutsos G, Morrow GR, Morris JB. 1997. Accumulation of man-
ganese in rat brain following intranasal administration.
Fundam Appl Toxicol 37:102–105.
Gibaud S, Andreux JP, Weingarten C, Renard M, Couvreur P.
1994. Increased bone marrow toxicity of doxorubicin bound
to nanoparticles. Eur J Cancer 30A:820–826.
Gibaud S, Demoy M, Andreux JP, Weingarten C, Gouritin B,
Couvreur P. 1996. Cells involved in the capture of nano-
particles in hematopoietic organs. J Pharm Sci 85:944–950.
Gibaud S, Rousseau C, Weingarten C, Favier R, Douay L,
Andreux JP, et al. 1998. Polyalkylcyanoacrylate nano-
particles as carriers for granulocyte-colony stimulating fac-
tor (G-CSF). J Control Release 52:131–139.
Goldstein M, Weiss H, Wade K, Penek J, Andrews L, Brandt-Rauf
P. 1987. An outbreak of fume fever in an electronics instru-
ment testing laboratory. J Occup Med 29:746–749.
Gopinath PG, Gopinath G, Kumar A. 1978. Target site of intra-
nasally sprayed substances and their transport across the
nasal mucosa: a new insight into the intranasal route of drug
delivery. Curr Ther Res 23 (5):596–607.
Greim H, Borm P, Schins R, Donaldson K, Driscoll K, Hartwig A,
et al. 2001. Toxicity of fibers and particles—report of the
workshop held in Munich, Germany, 26–27 October 2000.
Inhal Toxicol 13:737–754.
Grifﬁth FD, Stephens SS, Tayfun FO. 1973. Exposure of Japanese
quail and parakeets to the pyrolysis products of fry pans
coated with teflon and common cooking oils. Am Ind Hyg
Assoc J 34:176–178.
Gumbleton M. 2001. Caveolae as potential macromolecule traf-
ﬁcking compartments within alveolar epithelium. Adv Drug
Deliv Rev 49:281–300.
Hautot D, Pankhurst QA, Khan N, Dobson J. 2003. Preliminary
evaluation of nanoscale biogenic magnetite in Alzheimer’s
disease brain tissue. Proc R Soc Lon B 270(suppl 1):S62–S64.
Heckel K, Kiefmann R, Dorger M, Stoeckelhuber M, Goetz AE.
2004. Colloidal gold particles as a new in vivo marker of early
acute lung injury. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol
287:L867–L878.
Henneberger A, Zareba W, Ibald-Mulli A, Ruckerl R, Cyrys J,
Couderc JP, et al. 2005. Repolarization changes induced by
air pollution in ischemic heart disease patients. Environ
Health Perspect 113:440–446.
Howe HA, Bodian D. 1940. Portals of entry of poliomyelitis virus in
the chimpanzee. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 43:718–721.
Huczko A, Lange H, Calko E, Grubek-Jaworska H, Droszcz P. 2001.
Physiological testing of carbon nanotubes: are they
asbestos-like? Fullerene Sci Technol 9:251–254.
Hughes LS, Cass GR, Gone J, Ames M, Olmez I. 1998. Physical
and chemical characterization of atmospheric ultraﬁne par-
ticles in the Los Angeles area. Environ Sci Technol
32:1153–1161.
Hunter DD, Dey RD. 1998. Identiﬁcation and neuropeptide content
of trigeminal neurons innervating the rat nasal epithelium.
Neuroscience 83:591–599.
Hunter DD, Undem BJ. 1999. Identiﬁcation and substance P con-
tent of vagal afferent neurons innervating the epithelium of
the guinea pig trachea. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
159:1943–1948.
IARC (International Agency for Research on Cancer). 2002. Man-
made Vitreous Fibres. IARC Monogr Eval Carcinog Risks
Hum 81:1–418. 
ICON. 2004. International Council on Nanotechnology Home
page. Available: http://icon.rice.edu [accessed 16 March
2005].
International Commission on Radiological Protection. 1994.
Human respiratory model for radiological protection. Ann
ICRP 24:1–300. 
Jani P, Halbert GW, Langridge J,  Florence AT. 1990. Nano-
particle uptake by the rat gastrointestinal mucosa: quantita-
tion and particle size dependency. J Pharm Pharmacol
42:821–826
Jani PU, McCarthy DE, Florence AT. 1994. Titanium dioxide (rutile)
particle uptake from the rat GI tract and translocation to sys-
temic organs after oral administration. Int J Pharm
105:157–168.
Jaques PA, Kim CS. 2000. Measurement of total lung deposition
of inhaled ultrafine particles in healthy men and women.
Inhal Toxicol 12:715–731.
Johnston CJ, Finkelstein JN, Mercer P, Corson N, Gelein R,
Oberdorster G. 2000. Pulmonary effects induced by ultraﬁne
PTFE particles. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 168:208–215.
Joo SH, Feitz AJ, Waite TD. 2004. Oxidative degradation of the
carbothioate herbicide, molinate, using nanoscale zero-
valent iron. Environ Sci Technol 38:2242–2247.
Kato T, Yashiro T, Murata Y, Herbert DC, Oshikawa K, Bando M,
et al. 2003. Evidence that exogenous substances can be
phagocytized by alveolar epithelial cells and transported into
blood capillaries. Cell Tiss Res 311:47–51.
Kennedy P, Chaudhuri A. 2002. Herpes simplex encephalitis.
J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 73:237–238.
Keyhani K, Scherer PW, Mozell MM. 1997. A numerical model of
nasal odorant transport for the analysis of human olfaction.
J Theor Biol 186:279–301.
Kim S, Lim YS, Soltesz EG, De Grand AM, Lee J, Nakayama A,
et al. 2004. Near infrared ﬂuorescent type II quantum dots for
sentinel lymph node mapping. Nat Biotechnol 22(1):93–97.
Kimbell JS, Godo MN, Gross EA, Joyner DR, Richardson RB,
Morgan KT. 1997. Computer simulation of inspiratory airﬂow
in all regions of the F344 rat nasal passages. Toxicol Appl
Pharmacol 145:388–398.
Kirschvink JL, Kobayashi-Kirschvink A, Woodford BJ. 1992.
Magnetite biomineralization in the human brain. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 89:7683–7687.
Kirschvink J, Walker M, Diebel C. 2001. Magnetite-based mag-
neto-reception. Curr Opin Neurobiol 11:462–468.
König MF, Lucocq JM, Webel ER. 1993. Demonstration of pul-
monary vascular perfusion by electron and light microscopy.
J Appl Physiol 75(4):1877–1883.
Kreuter J. 2001. Nanoparticulate systems for brain delivery of
drugs. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 47:65–81.
Kreuter J. 2004. Inﬂuence of the surface properties on nanoparti-
cle-mediated transport of drugs to the brain. J Nanosci
Nanotech 4:484–488.
Kreuter J, Shamenkov D, Petrov V, Ramge P, Cychutek K, Koch-
Brandt C, et al. 2002. Apolipoprotein-mediated transport of
nanoparticle-bound drugs across the blood-brain barrier.
J Drug Target 10:317–325.
Kreyling WG, Scheuch G. 2000. Clearance of particles deposited
in the lungs. In: Particle-Lung Interactions (Gehr P, Heyder J,
eds). New York:Marcel Dekker Inc., 323–376.
Kreyling W, Semmler M, Erbe F, Mayer P, Takenaka S, Schulz H,
et al. 2002. Translocation of ultrafine insoluble iridium
particles from lung epithelium to extrapulmonary organs is
size dependent but very low. J Toxicol Environ Health
65A:1513–1530.
Kulmala M. 2004. Formation and growth rates of ultraﬁne atmos-
pheric particles: a review of observations. J Aerosol Sci
35:143–176.
Lam CW, James JT, McCluskey R, Hunter RL. 2004. Pulmonary
toxicity of single-wall carbon nanotubes in mice 7 and 90
days after intratracheal instillation. Toxicol Sci 77:126–134.
Lecoanet H, Bottero J, Wiesner M. 2004. Laboratory assessment
of the mobility of nanomaterials in porous media. Environ Sci
Technol 38:5164–5169.
Lecoanet H, Wiesner M. 2004. Velocity effects on fullerene and
oxide nanoparticle deposition in porous media. Environ Sci
Technol 38(16):4377–4382.
Lee CH, Guo YL, Tsai PJ, Chang HY, Chen CR, Chen CW, et al.
1997. Fatal acute pulmonary oedema after inhalation of
fumes from polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE). Eur Res J
10:1408–1411.
Li N, Sioutas C, Cho A, Schmitz D, Misra C, Sempf J, et al. 2003.
Ultraﬁne particulate pollutants induce oxidative stress and
mitochondrial damage. Environ Health Perspect 111:455–460.
Li X, Brown D, Smith S, MacNee W, Donaldson K. 1999. Short-
term inﬂammatory responses following intratracheal instilla-
tion of ﬁne and ultraﬁne carbon black in rats. Inhal Toxicol
11:709–731.
Lu Q, Moore JM, Huang G, Mount AS, Rao AM, Larcom LL, et al.
2004. RNA polymer translocation with single-walled carbon
nanotubes. Nano Lett 4:2473–2477.
Mach R. 2004. Nanoscale Particle Treatment of Groundwater.
Federal Remedial Technology Roundtable: Naval Facilities
Engineering Command. Available http://www.frtr.gov/pdf/
meetings/l--mach_09jun04.pdf [accessed 16 March 2005].
Malmgren L, Olsson Y, Olsson T, Kristensson K. 1978. Uptake and
retrograde axonal transport of various exogenous macro-
molecules in normal and crushed hypoglossal nerves. Brain
Res 153:477–493.
Maynard AD, Baron PA, Foley M, Shvedova AA, Kisin ER,
Castranova V. 2004. Exposure to carbon nanotube material:
aerosol release during the handling of unrefined single-
walled carbon nanotube material. J Toxicol Environ Health A
67:87–107.
McMurry PH, Woo KS. 2002. Size distributions of 3 to 100 nm
urban Atlanta aerosols: measurement and observations.
J Aerosol Med 15(2):169–178.
Mehta D, Bhattacharya J, Matthay MA, Malik AB. 2004.
Integrated control of lung ﬂuid balance. Am J Physiol Lung
Cell Mol Physiol 287:L1081–L1090.
Monteiro-Riviere N, Nemanich R, Inman A, Wang Y, Riviere J.
2005. Multi-walled carbon nanotube interactions with human
epidermal keratinocytes. Toxicol Lett 155:377–384.
Nagaveni K, Sivalingam G, Hegde M, Madras G. 2004. Photo-
catalytic degradation of organic compounds over combus-
tion-sized nano-TiO2. Environ Sci Technol 38:1600–1604.
Nemmar A, Delaunois A, Nemery B, Dessy-Doize C, Beckers JF,
Sulon J, et al. 1999. Inflammatory effect of intratracheal
instillation of ultraﬁne particles in the rabbit: role of C-ﬁber
and mast cells. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 160:250–261.
Nemmar A, Hoet PHM, Vanquickenborne B, Dinsdale D,
Thomeer M, Hoylaerts MF, et al. 2002a. Passage of inhaled
particles into the blood circulation in humans. Circulation
105:411–414.
Nemmar A, Hoylaerts MF, Hoet PHM, Dinsdale D, Smith T, Xu H,
et al. 2002b. Ultraﬁne particles affect experimental thrombo-
sis in an in vivo hamster model. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
166:998–1004.
Nemmar A, Hoylaerts MF, Hoet PHM, Vermylen J, Nemery B.
2003. Size effect of intratracheally instilled particles on pul-
monary inﬂammation and vascular thrombosis. Toxicol Appl
Pharmacol 186:38–45.
Nghiem LD, Schäfer AI, Elimelech M. 2004. Removal of natural
hormones by nanoﬁltration membranes: measurement, mod-
eling, and mechanisms. Environ Sci Technol 38:1888–1896.
Nikula KJ, Avila KJ, Grifﬁth WC, Mauderly JL. 1997. Lung tissue
responses and sites of particle retention differ between rats
and cynomolgus monkeys exposed chronically to diesel
exhaust and coal dust. Fundam Appl Toxicol 37:37–53.
NNI (National Nanotechnology Initiative). 2004. What Is
Nanotechnology? Available: http://www.nano.gov/html/
facts/whatIsNano.html [accessed 16 March 2005].
NRC (National Research Council). 1983. Risk Assessment in the
Federal Government: Managing the Process. Washington,
DC:National Academy Press.
Nuttall JB, Kelly RJ, Smith BS, Whiteside CK Jr. 1964. Inflight

----- Page 17 (native) -----
Nanotoxicology
Environmental Health Perspectives •
VOLUME 113 | NUMBER 7 | July 2005
839
toxic reactions resulting from ﬂuorocarbon resin pyrolysis.
Aerospace Med 35:676–683.
Oberdörster E. 2004a. Manufactured nanomaterials (fullerenes,
C60) induce oxidative stress in brain of juvenile largemouth
bass. Environ Health Perspect 112:1058–1062.
Oberdörster E. 2004b. Toxicity of nC60 fullerenes to two aquatic
species: Daphnia and largemouth bass [Abstract]. In:  227th
American Chemical Society National Meeting, 27 March–1
April 2004, Anaheim, CA. Washington, DC:American
Chemical Society, IEC 21.
Oberdörster G. 2000. Toxicology of ultraﬁne particles: in vivo stud-
ies. Philos Trans R Soc Lond A 358:2719–2740.
Oberdörster G, Ferin J, Finkelstein J, Wade P, Corson N. 1990.
Increased pulmonary toxicity of ultraﬁne particles? II. Lung
lavage studies. J Aerosol Sci 21:384–387.
Oberdörster G, Ferin J, Gelein R, Soderholm SC, Finkelstein J.
1992a. Role of the alveolar macrophage in lung injury: stud-
ies with ultrafine particles. Environ Health Perspect
97:193–197.
Oberdörster G, Ferin J, Morrow PE. 1992b. Volumetric loading of
alveolar macrophages (AM): a possible basis for diminished
AM-mediated particle clearance. Exp Lung Res 18:87–104.
Oberdörster G, Finkelstein JN, Johnston C, Gelein R, Cox C,
Baggs R, et al. 2000. Acute pulmonary effects of ultrafine
particles in rats and mice. Res Rep Health Eff Inst 96:5–74.
Oberdörster G, Gelein RM, Ferin J, Weiss B. 1995. Association of
particulate air pollution and acute mortality: involvement of
ultraﬁne particles? Inhal Toxicol 7:111–124.
Oberdörster G, Morrow PE, Spurny K. 1988. Size dependent lym-
phatic short term clearance of amosite fibers in the lung.
Ann Occup Hyg 32(suppl 4):149–156.
Oberdörster G, Sharp Z, Atudorei V, Elder A, Gelein R, Kreyling W,
et al. 2004. Translocation of inhaled ultraﬁne particles to the
brain. Inhal Toxicol 16(6/7):437–445.
Oberdörster G, Sharp Z, Atudorei V, Elder A, Gelein R, Lunts A,
et al. 2002. Extrapulmonary transloction of ultraﬁne carbon
particles following whole-body inhalation exposure of rats.
J Toxicol Environ Health 65A:1531–1543.
Oberdörster G, Yu CP. 1990. The carcinogenic potential of inhaled
diesel exhaust: a particle effect? J Aerosol Sci 21(suppl
1):S397–S401.
Ohl L, Mohaupt M, Czeloth N, Hintzen G, Kiafard Z, Zwirner J,
et al. 2004. CCR7 governs skin dendritic cell migration under
inflammatory and steady-state conditions. Immunity
21:279–288.
Oldfors A, Fardeau M. 1983. The permeability of the basal lamina
at the neuromuscular junction. An ultrastructural study of rat
skeletal muscle using particulate tracers. Neuropathol Appl
Neurobiol 9:419–432.
Olsson T, Kristensson K. 1981. Neuronal uptake of iron:
somatopetal axonal transport and fate of cationized and
native ferretin, and iron-dextran after intramuscular injec-
tions. Neuropath Appl Neurobiol 7:87–95.
Patton JS. 1996. Review—mechanisms of macromolecule
absorption by the lungs. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 19:3–36.
Pekkanen J, Peters A, Hoek G, Tiittanen P, Brunekreef B,
de Hartog J, et al. 2002. Particulate air pollution and risk of
ST-segment depression during repeated submaximal exer-
cise tests among subjects with coronary heart disease. The
Exposure and Risk Assessment for Fine and Ultrafine
Particles in Ambient Air [ULTRA] study. Circulation
106:933–938.
Pekkanen J, Timonen KL, Ruuskanen J, Reponen A, Mirme A.
1997. Effects of ultraﬁne and ﬁne particles in urban air on
peak expiratory ﬂow among children with asthmatic symp-
toms. Environ Res 74:24–33.
Penttinen P, Timonen KL, Tiittanen P, Mirme A, Ruuskanen J,
Pekkanen J. 2001. Ultrafine particles in urban air and
respiratory health among adult asthmatics. Eur Resp J
17:428–435.
Peters A, Doring A, Wichmann H-E, Koenig W. 1997a. Increased
plasma viscosity during an air pollution episode: a link to
mortality? Lancet 349:1582–1587.
Peters A, Wichmann HE, Tuch T, Heinrich J, Heyder J. 1997b.
Respiratory effects are associated with the number of ultra-
ﬁne particles. Am Respir Crit Care Med 155:1376–1383.
Pietropaoli AP, Frampton MW, Oberdörster G, Cox C,
Huang L-S, Marder V, et al. Blood markers of coagulation
and inflammation in healthy human subjects exposed to
carbon ultrafine particles. In: Effects of Air Contaminants
on the Respiratory Tract - Interpretations from Molecular
to Meta Ananlysis (Heinrich U, ed). INIS Monographs.
Stuttgart, Germany:Fraunhofer IRB Verlag, 181–194.
Plattig K-H. 1989. Electrophysiology of taste and smell. Clin Phys
Physiol Meas 10:91–126.
Rancan F, Rosan S, Boehm F, Cantrell A, Brellreich M,
Schoenberger H, et al. 2002. Cytotoxicity and photocytotoxic-
ity of a dendritic C(60) mono-adduct and a malonic acid C(60)
tris-adduct on Jurkat cells. J Photochem Photobiol B
67(3):157–162.
Rejman J, Oberle V, Zuhorn IS, Hoekstra D. 2004. Size-dependent
internalization of particles via the pathways of clathrin- and
caveolae-mediated endocytosis. Biochem J 377:159–169.
Rodoslav S, Laibin L, Eisenberg A, Dusica M. 2003. Micellar
nanocontainers distribute to deﬁned cytoplasmic organelles.
Science 300:615–618.
Sato K, Imai Y, Irimura RT. 1998. Contribution of dermal
macrophage trafﬁcking in the sensitization phase of contact
hypersensitivity. J Immunol 161:6835–6844.
Sayes C, Fortner J, Guo W, Lyon D, Boyd AM, Ausman KD, et al.
2004. The differential cytotoxicity of water-soluble fullerenes.
Nano Lett 4:1881–1887.
Schlesinger RB, Ben-Jebria A, Dahl AR, Snipes MB, Ultman J.
1997. Disposition of inhaled toxicants. In: Handbook of
Human Toxicology (Massaro EJ, ed). New York:CRC Press,
493–550.
Schultheiss-Grassi PP, Wessiken R, Dobson J. 1999. TEM investi-
gations of biogenic magnetite extracted from the human
hippocampus. Biochim Biophys Acta 1426:212–216.
Seaton A, MacNee W, Donaldson K, Godden D. 1995. Particulate
air pollution and acute health effects. Lancet 345:176–178.
Semmler M, Seitz J, Erbe F, Mayer P, Heyder J, Oberdörster G,
et al. 2004. Long-term clearance kinetics of inhaled ultraﬁne
insoluble iridium particles from the rat lung, including tran-
sient translocation into secondary organs. Inhal Toxicol
16:453–459.
Shi JP, Evans DE, Khan AA, Harrison RM. 2001. Sources and con-
centration of nanoparticles (< 10 nm diameer) in the urban
atmosphere. Atmos Environ 35:1193–1202.
Shvedova AA, Kisin E, Keshava N, Murray AR, Gorelik O, Arepalli
S, et al. 2004a. Cytotoxic and genotoxic effects of single wall
carbon nanotube exposure on human keratinocytes and
bronchial epithelial cells [Abstract]. In: 227th American
Chemical Society National Meeting, 27 March–1 April 2004,
Anaheim, CA. Washington, DC:American Chemical Society,
IEC 20.
Shvedova AA, Kisin E, Murray A, Schwegler-Berry D,
Gandelsman V, Baron P, et al. 2004b. Exposure of human
bronchial cells to carbon nanotubes caused oxidative stress
and cytotoxicity. In: Proceedings of the Meeting of the SFRR
Europe 2004, Ioannina, Greece. Philadelphia:Taylor &
Francis Group, 91–103.
Silva VM, Corson N, Elder A, Oberdörster G. In press. The rat ear
vein model for investigating in vivo thrombogenicity of ultra-
ﬁne particles (UFP). Toxicol Sci.
Simionescu N, Simionescu M, Palade GE. 1975. Permeability of
muscle capillaries to small heme-peptides. J Cell Biol
64:586–607.
Smith AE, Helenius A. 2004. How viruses enter animal cells.
Science 304:237–242
Terasaki S, Kameyama T, Yamamoto S. 1997. A case of zoster in
the 2nd and 3rd branches of the trigeminal nerve associated
with simultaneous herpes labialis infection—a case report.
Kurume Med J 44(1):61–66.
Tiittanen P, Timonen KL, Ruuskanen J, Mirme A, Pekkanen J.
1999. Fine particulate air pollution, resuspended road dust
and respiratory health among symptomatic children. Eur
Resp J 13(2):266–273.
Tinkle SS, Antonini JM, Rich BA, Roberts JR, Salmen R,
DePree K, et al. 2003. Skin as a route of exposure and
sensitization in chronic beryllium disease. Environ Health
Perspect 111:1202–1208.
Tran CL, Buchanan D, Cullen RT, Searl A, Jones AD, Donaldson K.
2000. Inhalation of poorly soluble particles. II. Inﬂuence of
particle surface area on inﬂammation and clearance. Inhal
Toxicol 12:1113–1126.
Tran CL, Jones AD, Cullen RT, Donaldson K. 1998. Inﬂuence of
particle characteristics on the clearance of low toxicity
dusts from lungs. J Aerosol Sci 29(suppl 1):S1269–S1270.
Tungittiplakorn W, Lion LW, Cohen C, Kim J-Y. 2004. Engineered
polymeric nanoparticles for soil remediation. Environ Sci
Technol 38(5):1605–1610.
Turetsky BI, Moberg PJ, Arnold SE, Doty RL, Gur RE. 2003. Low
olfactory bulb volume in first-degree relatives of patients
with schizophrenia. Am J Psychiatry 160(4):703–708.
U.S. EPA. 1994. 10-Day Chronic Daphnia magna or Daphnia pulex.
SOP 2028. Washington DC:U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency. Available: http://www.ert.org/products/2028.pdf
[accessed 16 March 2005].
U.S. EPA. 2004. Air Quality Criteria for Particulate Matter. Vol 3.
600/P-95-001cF. Washington DC:U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, Ofﬁce of Research and Development.
Utell M, Frampton M, Zareba W, Devlin R, Cascio W. 2002.
Cardiovascular effects associated with air pollution: poten-
tial mechanisms and methods of testing. Inhal Toxicol
14:1231–1247.
Veronesi B, Makwana O, Pooler M, Chen LC. In press. Effects of
subchronic exposure to CAPs in ApoE-/- mice: VII.
Degeneration of dopaminergic neurons. Inhal Toxicol.
von Klot S, Wolke G, Tuch T, Heinrich J, Dockery DW, Schwartz
J, et al. 2002. Increased asthma medication use in associa-
tion with ambient ﬁne and ultraﬁne particles. Eur Respir J
20:691–702.
Warheit DB, Hartsky MA. 1993. Role of alveolar macrophage
chemotaxis and phagocytosis in pulmonary clearance
responses to inhaled particles: comparisons among rodent
species. Microsc Res Tech 26:412–422.
Warheit DB, Hill LH, George G, Brody AR. 1986. Time course of
chemotactic factor generation and the corresponding
macrophage response to asbestos inhalation. Am Rev
Respir Dis 134:128–133.
Warheit DB, Laurence BR, Reed KL, Roach DH, Reynolds GAM,
Webb TR. 2004. Comparative pulmonary toxicity assessment
of single-wall carbon nanotubes in rats. Toxicol Sci
77:117–125.
Warheit DB, Overby LH, George G, Brody AR. 1988. Pulmonary
macrophages are attracted to inhaled particles on alveolar
surfaces. Exp Lung Res 14:51–66.
Waritz RS, Kwon BK. 1968. The inhalation toxicity of pyrolysis
products of polytetrafluoroethylene heated below 500
degrees centigrade. Am Ind Hyg Assoc J 29:19–26.
WHO. 1985. Reference Methods for Measuring Airborne Man-
Made Mineral Fibers. Environmental Health Series 4.
Copenhagen:World Health Organization.
Wichmann H-E, Cyrys J, Stölzel M, Spix C, Wittmaack K, Tuch T,
et al. 2002. Sources and elemental composition of ambient
particles in Erfurt, Germany. In: Fortschritte in der
Umweltmedizin (Wichmann HE, Schlipköter HW, Fülgraff G,
eds). Erfurt, Germany:Ecomed Publishers. 
Wichmann H-E, Spix C, Tuch T, Wolke G, Peters A, Heinrich J,
et al. 2000. Daily Mortality and Fine and Ultraﬁne Particles in
Erfurt, Germany. Part I: Role of Particle Number and Particle
Mass. Res Rep Health Eff Inst 98:5–86.
Widmaier EP, Raff H, Strang KT. 2004. Vander, Sherman &
Luciano's Human Physiology: The Mechanisms of Body
Functions. 9th ed. New York:McGraw Hill.
Williams N, Atkinson G, Patchefsky A. 1974. Polymer fume fever:
not so benign. J Occup Med 16:519–522.
Wilson M, Lightbody J, Donaldson K, Sales J, Stone V. 2002.
Interactions between ultrafine particles and transition
metals in vivo and in vitro. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol
184(3):172–179.
Woo KS, Chen D-R, Pui D, McMurry P. 2001. Measurement of
Atlanta aerosol size distributions: observations of ultraﬁne
particle events. Aerosol Sci Technol 34:75–87.
Yamago S, Tokuyama H, Nakamura E, Kikuchi K, Kananishi S,
Sueki K, et al. 1995. In vivo biological behavior of a water-
miscible fullerene: 14C labeling, absorption, distribution,
excretion and acute toxicity. Chem Biol 2:385–389.
Yamakoshi Y, Umezawa N, Ryu A, Arakane K, Miyata N, Goda Y,
et al. 2003. Active oxygen species generated from photo-
excited fullerene (C60) as potential medicines: O2-* versus
1O2. J Am Chem Soc 125:12803–12809. 
Zhou Y-M, Zhong C-Y, Kennedy IM, Leppert VJ, Pinkerton KE.
2003. Oxidative stress and NFκB activation in the lungs of
rats: a synergistic interaction between soot and iron parti-
cles. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 190:157–169.
Zhu Y, Hinds WC, Kim S, Shen SK, Sioutas C. 2002. Study of ultra-
ﬁne particles near a major highway with heavy-duty diesel
trafﬁc. Atmos Environ 36:4323–4335.