

----- Page 1 (native text) -----
Understanding the Warburg Effect: The Metabolic Requirements
of Cell Proliferation
Matthew G. Vander Heiden1,2, Lewis C. Cantley2,*, and Craig B. Thompson3,*
1 Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02115, USA
2 Beth-Israel Deaconess Cancer Center and Department of Systems Biology, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA
3 Department of Cancer Biology, Abramson Cancer Center, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
Abstract
In contrast to normal differentiated cells, which rely primarily on mitochondrial oxidative
phosphorylation to generate the energy needed for cellular processes, most cancer cells instead rely
on aerobic glycolysis, a phenomenon termed “the Warburg effect.” Aerobic glycolysis is an
inefficient way to generate adenosine 5′-triphosphate (ATP), however, and the advantage it confers
to cancer cells has been unclear. Here we propose that the metabolism of cancer cells, and indeed all
proliferating cells, is adapted to facilitate the uptake and incorporation of nutrients into the biomass
(e.g., nucleotides, amino acids, and lipids) needed to produce a new cell. Supporting this idea are
recent studies showing that (i) several signaling pathways implicated in cell proliferation also regulate
metabolic pathways that incorporate nutrients into biomass; and that (ii) certain cancer-associated
mutations enable cancer cells to acquire and metabolize nutrients in a manner conducive to
proliferation rather than efficient ATP production. A better understanding of the mechanistic links
between cellular metabolism and growth control may ultimately lead to better treatments for human
cancer.
For unicellular organisms such as microbes, there is evolutionary pressure to reproduce as
quickly as possible when nutrients are available. Their metabolic control systems have evolved
to sense an adequate supply of nutrients and channel the requisite carbon, nitrogen, and free
energy into generating the building blocks needed to produce a new cell. When nutrients are
scarce, the cells cease biomass production and adapt metabolism to extract the maximum free
energy from available resources to survive the starvation period (Fig. 1). Reflecting these
fundamental differences in metabolic needs, distinct regulatory mechanisms have evolved to
control cellular metabolism in proliferating versus non-proliferating cells.
In multicellular organisms, most cells are exposed to a constant supply of nutrients. Survival
of the organism requires control systems that prevent aberrant individual cell proliferation
when nutrient availability exceeds the levels needed to support cell division. Uncontrolled
proliferation is prevented because mammalian cells do not normally take up nutrients from
their environment unless stimulated to do so by growth factors. Cancer cells overcome this
growth factor dependence by acquiring genetic mutations that functionally alter receptor-
initiated signaling pathways. There is growing evidence that some of these pathways
constitutively activate the uptake and metabolism of nutrients that both promote cell survival
and fuel cell growth (1,2). Oncogenic mutations can result in the uptake of nutrients,
*To whom correspondence should be addressed: lewis_cantley@hms.harvard.edu; craig@mail.med.upenn.edu.
NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Science. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 April 5.
Published in final edited form as:
Science. 2009 May 22; 324(5930): 1029–1033. doi:10.1126/science.1160809.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript


----- Page 2 (native text) -----
particularly glucose, that meet or exceed the bioenergetic demands of cell growth and
proliferation. This realization has brought renewed attention to Otto Warburg’s observation in
1924 that cancer cells metabolize glucose in a manner that is distinct from that of cells in normal
tissues (3,4). By examining how Louis Pasteur’s observations regarding fermentation of
glucose to ethanol might apply to mammalian tissues, Warburg found that unlike most normal
tissues, cancer cells tend to “ferment” glucose into lactate even in the presence of sufficient
oxygen to support mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation. A definitive explanation for
Warburg’s observation has remained elusive, at least in part because the energy requirements
of cell proliferation appear at first glance to be better met by complete catabolism of glucose
using mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation to maximize adenosine 5′-triphosphate (ATP)
production.
In this review, we explore the metabolic requirements of cell proliferation in an attempt to
understand why proliferating cells metabolize glucose by aerobic glycolysis. Knowledge of
what proliferating cells need in terms of energy to generate biomass will help illuminate the
connection between signaling pathways that drive cell growth and the regulation of cell
metabolism.
Proliferating Mammalian Cells Exhibit Anabolic Metabolism
Our current understanding of metabolic pathways is based largely on studies of
nonproliferating cells in differentiated tissues. In the presence of oxygen, most differentiated
cells primarily metabolize glucose to carbon dioxide by oxidation of glycolytic pyruvate in the
mitochondrial tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle. This reaction produces NADH [nicotinamide
adenine dinucleotide (NAD+), reduced], which then fuels oxidative phosphorylation to
maximize ATP production, with minimal production of lactate (Fig. 2). It is only under
anaerobic conditions that differentiated cells produce large amounts of lactate. In contrast, most
cancer cells produce large amounts of lactate regardless of the availability of oxygen and hence
their metabolism is often referred to as “aerobic glycolysis.” Warburg originally hypothesized
that cancer cells develop a defect in mitochondria that leads to impaired aerobic respiration
and a subsequent reliance on glycolytic metabolism (4). However, subsequent work showed
that mitochondrial function is not impaired in most cancer cells (5–7), suggesting an alternative
explanation for aerobic glycolysis in cancer cells.
Why Do Proliferating Cells Switch to a Less Efficient Metabolism?
As noted above, many unicellular organisms proliferate using fermentation, a microbial
equivalent of aerobic glycolysis, and analogous to human cancer cells, preferentially ferment
glucose even when oxygen is abundant (Fig. 1). This demonstrates that aerobic glycolytic
metabolism can provide sufficient energy for cell proliferation. The metabolism of glucose to
lactate generates only 2 ATPs per molecule of glucose, whereas oxidative phosphorylation
generates up to 36 ATPs upon complete oxidation of one glucose molecule (8). This raises the
question of why a less efficient metabolism, at least in terms of ATP production, would be
selected for in proliferating cells.
One possible explanation is that inefficient ATP production is a problem only when resources
are scarce. This is not the case for proliferating mammalian cells, which are exposed to a
continual supply of glucose and other nutrients in circulating blood. Metabolic pathways and
their regulation have only recently been studied in actively proliferating cells, and there is
evidence that ATP may never be limiting in these cells. No matter how much they are stimulated
to divide, cells using aerobic glycolysis also exhibit high ratios of ATP/ADP (adenosine 5′-
diphosphate) and NADH/NAD+ (2,9). Further, even minor perturbations in the ATP/ADP ratio
can impair growth. Cells deficient in ATP often undergo apoptosis (10,11). Normal
proliferating cells can also undergo cell cycle arrest and reactivate catabolic metabolism when
Vander Heiden et al.
Page 2
Science. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 April 5.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript


----- Page 3 (native text) -----
their ability to produce ATP from glucose is compromised (12,13), and signaling pathways
exist to sense energy status. The best characterized of these is initiated by the activity of
adenylate kinases that buffer declining ATP production by converting two ADPs to one ATP
and one AMP (adenosine 5′-monophosphate). This helps maintain a viable ATP/ADP ratio as
ATP production declines, but the accumulation of AMP activates AMP-activated protein
kinase (AMPK). This activation is dependent on the tumor suppressor protein LKB1 and leads
to phosphorylation of several targets to improve energy charge in cells (14). LKB1 was initially
identified as a tumor suppressor gene, suggesting that the ability to sense energy stress could
be an important checkpoint to prevent malignant transformation in some cell types.
A second possible explanation for the switch to aerobic glycolysis, discussed in detail below,
is that proliferating cells have important metabolic requirements that extend beyond ATP.
Crunching the Numbers–What Are the Metabolic Needs of Proliferating
Cells?
To produce two viable daughter cells at mitosis, a proliferating cell must replicate all of its
cellular contents. This imposes a large requirement for nucleotides, amino acids, and lipids.
During growth, glucose is used to generate biomass as well as produce ATP. Although ATP
hydrolysis provides free energy for some of the biochemical reactions responsible for
replication of biomass, these reactions have additional requirements. For instance, synthesis
of palmitate, a major constituent of cellular membranes, requires 7 molecules of ATP, 16
carbons from 8 molecules of acetyl-CoA (coenzyme A), and 28 electrons from 14 molecules
of NADPH [nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADP+), reduced] (8). Likewise,
synthesis of amino acids and nucleotides also consumes more equivalents of carbon and
NADPH than of ATP. A glucose molecule can generate up to 36 ATPs, or 30 ATPs and 2
NADPHs [if diverted into the pentose phosphate shunt (8,15)], or provide 6 carbons for
macromolecular synthesis. Thus, to make a 16-carbon fatty acyl chain, a single glucose
molecule can provide five times the ATP required, whereas 7 glucose molecules are needed
to generate the NADPH required. This 35-fold asymmetry is only partially compensated by
the consumption of 3 glucose molecules in acetyl-CoA production to satisfy the carbon
requirement of the acyl chain itself. It is clear that for a cell to proliferate, the bulk of the glucose
cannot be committed to carbon catabolism for ATP production. In addition, if this were the
case, the resulting rise in the ATP/ADP ratio would severely impair the flux through glycolytic
intermediates, limiting the production of the acetyl-CoA and NADPH required for
macromolecular synthesis.
For most mammalian cells in culture, the only two molecules catabolized in appreciable
quantities are glucose and glutamine. This means that glucose and glutamine supply most of
the carbon, nitrogen, free energy, and reducing equivalents necessary to support cell growth
and division. From this perspective, it becomes clear that converting all of the glucose to
CO2 via oxidative phosphorylation in the mitochondria to maximize ATP production runs
counter to the needs of a proliferating cell. Some glucose must be diverted to macromolecular
precursors such as acetyl-CoA for fatty acids, glycolytic intermediates for nonessential amino
acids, and ribose for nucleotides. This may explain at least part of the selective advantage
provided by the Warburg effect, a hypothesis supported by recent 13C–nuclear magnetic
resonance spectroscopy measurements showing that glioblastoma cells in culture convert as
much as 90% of glucose and 60% of glutamine they acquire into lactate or alanine (16).
Although most of this lactate and alanine is excreted from the cell as waste, one “byproduct”
of their generation is a robust production of NADPH (Fig. 3). In addition to providing nitrogen
for nonessential amino acids through transamination reactions, the catabolism of glutamine
into lactate produces NADPH via the activity of NADP+-specific malate dehydrogenase (malic
enzyme). Growth factor signaling also regulates the activity of the glycolytic enzyme pyruvate
Vander Heiden et al.
Page 3
Science. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 April 5.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript


----- Page 4 (native text) -----
kinase and modulates flux of carbon through the later steps of glycolysis (9,17). This
modulation of pyruvate kinase may facilitate the redirection of glucose metabolites into the
pentose phosphate shunt, as well as nucleotide and amino acid biosynthesis pathways. The
conversion of both glucose and glutamine to lactate involves the enzyme lactate dehydrogenase
(LDH). Inhibiting LDH activity impairs cell proliferation (6), possibly by interfering with the
cell’s ability to excrete excess carbon. Elimination of excess carbon might be required to
generate sufficient NADPH to support cell proliferation.
Most of the carbon for fatty acid synthesis is derived from glucose. During this process, glucose
is first converted to acetyl-CoA in the mitochondrial matrix and used to synthesize citrate in
the TCA cycle. Under conditions of high ATP/ADP and NADH/NAD+ exhibited by most
proliferating cells, this citrate is excreted back into the cytosol where lipids are generated. In
the cytosol, acetyl-CoA is recaptured from citrate and used as the carbon source for the growing
acyl chains. Synthesis of acetyl-CoA from citrate requires the enzyme ATP citrate lyase (ACL),
and disruption of ACL impairs tumor growth (18). Glutamine uptake also appears to be critical
for lipid synthesis in that it supplies carbon in the form of mitochondrial oxaloacetate to
maintain citrate production in the first step of the TCA cycle (16). Thus, metabolism of both
glutamine and glucose is orchestrated to support the production of acetyl-CoA and NADPH
needed for fatty acid synthesis. Flux of metabolites into other synthetic pathways for nucleic
acid and amino acid synthesis must be similarly balanced.
The excess generation of lactate that accompanies the Warburg effect would appear to be an
inefficient use of cellular resources. Each lactate excreted from the cell wastes three carbons
that might otherwise be utilized for either ATP production or macromolecular precursor
biosynthesis. Possibly the dumping of excess carbon as lactate is effective because it allows
faster incorporation of carbon into biomass, which in turn facilitates rapid cell division. For
most proliferating cells, nutrients are not limiting so there is no selective pressure to optimize
metabolism for ATP yield. In contrast, a selective pressure for rate of metabolism does exist.
Immune responses and wound repair depend on the speed of the proliferative expansion of
effector cells. To survive, the organism must signal the responding cells to maximize their rate
of anabolic growth. Cells that convert glucose and glutamine into biomass most efficiently will
proliferate fastest. For the organism, nutrients may be scarce and there are pathways active in
specialized, nonproliferating tissues to recycle the excess lactate and alanine dumped during
the rapid cell growth of proliferating cells. The Cori cycle in the liver can recycle lactate
generated from actively proliferating tissues to glucose, and analogous pathways exist to
recycle the alanine generated from “inefficient” glutamine metabolism (8). This ability to
recycle the organic waste produced by cell proliferation during an immune response or wound
repair results in a minimal impact on the energy reserves of the whole organism. In addition,
there is emerging evidence that cellular metabolism within a tumor can be heterogeneous, with
some cells using the excess lactate generated as a fuel for mitochondrial oxidative
phosphorylation (19).
Metabolic Regulation Is a Component of the Cell Growth Machinery
The phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) signaling pathway is linked to both growth control and
glucose metabolism. In addition to a well-described role in directing available amino acids into
protein synthesis via mTOR, the PI3K pathway regulates glucose uptake and utilization (Fig.
3). Even in non–insulin-dependent tissues, PI3K signaling through AKT can regulate glucose
transporter expression, enhance glucose capture by hexokinase, and stimulate
phosphofructokinase activity (2). PI3K pathway activation renders cells dependent on high
levels of glucose flux (20). Small molecules that disrupt PI3K signaling lead to decreased
glucose uptake by tumors as measured by 18F-deoxyglucose positron emission tomography
(FDG-PET), and the ability to inhibit tumor FDG uptake correlates with tumor regression
Vander Heiden et al.
Page 4
Science. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 April 5.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript


----- Page 5 (native text) -----
(21). Glucose withdrawal induces cell death in a manner indistinguishable from that seen upon
withdrawal of growth factor signaling, a phenomenon that may contribute to “oncogene
addiction” (22). Indeed, where it has been examined in cancer patients, response to therapy is
predicted by the ability to disrupt glucose metabolism as measured by FDG-PET (23) (Fig. 4).
There is growing evidence that metabolic enzymes can directly contribute to carcinogenesis.
Germline mutations in the TCA cycle enzymes succinate dehydrogenase and fumarate
hydratase have been identified in some forms of human renal cell cancer, paraganglioma, and
pheochromocytoma (24,25). One effect of these mutations is activation of Hif1α-mediated
glucose utilization (26). A recent analysis of human glioblastoma multiforme, an aggressive
brain cancer, revealed that up to 12% of the tumors harbor the same point mutation in the gene
encoding cytosolic isocitrate dehydrogenase–1 (IDH1) (27). Monoallelic mutation of the same
residue in IDH1, or the analogous residue in the related enzyme IDH2, is a common feature
of gliomas as more than 80% of indolent gliomas harbor such a mutation (28,29). IDH1 and
IDH2 couple the interconversion of cytosolic isocitrate and α-ketoglutarate in an NADP+/
NADPH-dependent reaction. What effect this mutation has on cellular metabolism is not clear;
however, given the important requirement for NADPH in macromolecular synthesis and redox
control, alterations in NADPH production may affect cellular proliferation or mutation rates
(30). Alternatively, such mutations may favor the production of citrate from α-ketoglutarate
as a carbon precursor for macromolecular synthesis.
Many oncogenes are tyrosine kinases. One common feature of tyrosine kinase signaling
associated with cell proliferation is regulation of glucose metabolism. In contrast to
differentiated cells, proliferating cells selectively express the M2 isoform of the glycolytic
enzyme pyruvate kinase (PK-M2) (9). Unlike other pyruvate kinase isoforms, PK-M2 is
regulated by tyrosine-phosphorylated proteins (17). Phosphotyrosine signaling downstream of
a variety of cell growth signals shares the common ability to negatively regulate PK-M2 activity
(17). In response to phosphotyrosine-protein binding, PK-M2 is induced into a low-activity
state. This regulation of enzyme activity may constitute a molecular switch that allows cells
to metabolize glucose through glycolysis in a manner that is consistent with proliferating cell
metabolism only when growth signals are present (Fig. 3). Although counterintuitive, it is the
low-activity form of PK-M2 that is necessary for cell proliferation. This regulation allows PK-
M2 to act as a gatekeeper that dictates the flow of carbon into biosynthetic pathways versus
complete catabolism for ATP production. In support of this idea, PK-M2 is required for
proliferation in vivo (9).
Human tumor cells whose growth is driven by the MYC oncogene are particularly sensitive to
glutamine withdrawal (31), and genes involved in glutamine metabolism appear to be under
both the direct and indirect transcriptional control of the MYC protein (32,33). Glutamine
depletion from MYC-transformed cells results in the rapid loss of TCA cycle intermediates and
cell death (31). Furthermore, this dependence on glutamine for survival is not related to the
generation of ATP by glutamine metabolism.
Tumor suppressor pathways can also regulate cellular metabolism and may act to coordinate
nutrient utilization with cell physiology. For instance, p53 expression controls metabolic genes
and alters glucose utilization. Expression of TIGAR, a gene induced by p53, leads to inhibition
of phosphofructokinase, redirection of glucose toward the pentose phosphate shunt, and
NADPH production (34). This may be an adaptive response that protects the cell from oxidative
stress, as NADPH is required to generate the reduced form of glutathione, which is a major
intracellular defense against damage mediated by reactive oxygen species (ROS).
Mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation is the major cellular source of ROS production. Cells
with excess nutrient uptake that have not converted to aerobic glycolysis would be predicted
Vander Heiden et al.
Page 5
Science. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 April 5.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript


----- Page 6 (native text) -----
to have increased oxidative phosphorylation and ROS production. This maladaptive metabolic
state may underlie the evolutionary selection for induction of apoptosis and/or senescence in
the setting of increased ROS. Because some oncogenes drive glucose uptake, this hypothesis
may explain oncogene-induced senescence. For instance, oncogenic Ras causes alterations in
glucose metabolism (35) but causes senescence when expressed in cells without a cooperating
oncogene (36). Further supporting this hypothesis is the observation that stationary-phase yeast
lose viability when exposed to high levels of glucose and no additional nutrients (37). Yeast
studies have also demonstrated that oxidative phosphorylation stops during S phase to limit
ROS-mediated DNA damage, underscoring the importance of limiting oxidative
phosphorylation and ROS production in proliferating cells (38).
What Triggers the Switch from Oxidative Phosphorylation to Aerobic
Glycolysis?
One proposed explanation for Warburg’s observation is that tumor hypoxia selects for cells
dependent on anaerobic metabolism (39). However, cancer cells appear to use glycolytic
metabolism before exposure to hypoxic conditions. For example, leukemic cells are highly
glycolytic (40,41), yet these cells reside within the bloodstream at higher oxygen tensions than
cells in most normal tissues. Similarly, lung tumors arising in the airways exhibit aerobic
glycolysis even though these tumor cells are exposed to oxygen during tumorigenesis (9,42).
Thus, although tumor hypoxia is clearly important for other aspects of cancer biology, the
available evidence suggests that it is a late-occurring event that may not be a major contributor
in the switch to aerobic glycolysis by cancer cells.
The classic view of metabolism is that of a self-correcting, homeostatic system where a core
set of housekeeping enzymes enables the cell to respond to changing bioenergetic demands.
However, as described above, the evolving evidence instead points to a dynamically regulated
system that is programmed to fit the requirements for cell proliferation or meet the specific
needs of each differentiated tissue as appropriate. For normal proliferating tissues, such as in
the developing embryo or during an immune response in the adult, signals from growth factors
allow cells to utilize nutrients for growth (41,43). Perhaps one function of oncogenic pathways
is to drive cell-autonomous nutrient uptake and program proliferative metabolism, whereas
one function of tumor suppressor pathways is to prevent nutrient utilization for anabolic
processes. In this model, for cancer to arise, mutations are needed to give cells the ability to
acquire nutrients and coordinately regulate metabolic pathways to support proliferation. This
alteration in metabolic control may result by reverting to an embryonic program, or evolving
the capability to alter existing cell metabolism in a way that supports cell growth.
Cellular Metabolism and Human Cancer
In principle, the metabolic dependencies of cancer cells can be exploited for cancer treatment.
For instance, a large fraction of human cancer is dependent on aberrant signaling through the
PI3K/Akt pathway, and agents that target PI3K and various downstream signaling molecules
are now in clinical trials. The growing evidence that activation of PI3K causes increased
dependency on glycolysis suggests that these agents may exert some of their effect by
disrupting glucose metabolism. Drugs targeting key metabolic control points important for
aerobic glycolysis, such as PK-M2 or LDH-A, might also warrant investigation as potential
cancer therapies. In addition, the drugs developed to target metabolic diseases such as type 2
diabetes may have use in treating cancer. A number of retrospective clinical studies have found
that the widely used diabetes drug metformin may offer a possible benefit in cancer prevention
as well as improved outcomes when used with other cancer therapies (44). Metformin and the
more potent related compound Phenformin activate AMPK in cells, suggesting that
Phenformin or other activators of AMPK might also be used as an adjunct to cancer therapy.
Vander Heiden et al.
Page 6
Science. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 April 5.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript


----- Page 7 (native text) -----
Optimal use of these drugs will require a better understanding of cancer cell metabolism and
identification of the signaling pathways that represent an Achilles’ heel for cell proliferation
or survival.
Metabolic tissues in mammals transform ingested food into a near-constant supply of glucose,
glutamine, and lipids to balance the metabolic needs of both differentiated and proliferating
tissues. Alterations in the appropriate balance of fuels and/or signal transduction pathways that
deal with nutrient utilization may underlie the cancer predisposition associated with metabolic
diseases such as diabetes and obesity (45,46). A better understanding of how whole-body
metabolism interacts with tumor metabolism may better define these risks and identify potential
points of therapeutic intervention. In addition, it is possible that the cachexia associated with
many cancers is exacerbated by the excess nutrient consumption by the tumor, which would
affect whole-body metabolic regulation. To this end, the potential role of dietary supplements
and tight glucose control as adjuncts to cancer treatment is an active field of investigation.
Future Prospects
Metabolism is involved directly or indirectly in essentially everything a cell does. There is
mounting evidence for cross-talk between signaling pathways and metabolic control in every
multicellular organism studied. There is still much to learn about how proliferating cell
metabolism is regulated. Despite a long and rich history of research, the complex connection
between metabolism and proliferation remains an exciting area of investigation. Indeed, new
metabolic pathways have been discovered as recently as the 1980s (47), and it is possible that
additional pathways have yet to be described. Understanding this important aspect of biology
is likely to have a major impact on our understanding of cell proliferation control and cancer.
Acknowledgments
We thank A. Van den Abbeele (Department of Imaging, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston) for the FDG-PET
image. We also thank K. D. Courtney, A. J. Shaywitz, and K. D. Swanson for thoughtful discussions and critical
reading of the manuscript and the Damon Runyon Cancer Research Foundation for support (to M.G.V.H.). M.G.V.H.
receives grant support from the National Cancer Institute (NCI) and NIH; L.C.C. receives grant support from the NIH;
and C.B.T. receives grant support from the NCI, NIH, and Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute to study aspects
of cancer cell metabolism. M.G.V.H., L.C.C., and C.B.T. hold patents related to the targeting of cancer cell metabolism
and have financial interests in Agios Pharmaceuticals, a company that seeks to exploit alterations in cancer metabolism
for novel therapeutics.
References and Notes
1. Hsu PP, Sabatini DM. Cell 2008;134:703. [PubMed: 18775299]
2. Deberardinis RJ, Lum JJ, Hatzivassiliou G, Thompson CB. Cell Metab 2008;7:11. [PubMed:
18177721]
3. Warburg O, Posener K, Negelein E. Biochem Z 1924;152:319.
4. Warburg O. Science 1956;123:309. [PubMed: 13298683]
5. Weinhouse S. Z Krebsforsch Klin Onkol Cancer Res Clin Oncol 1976;87:115. [PubMed: 136820]
6. Fantin VR, St-Pierre J, Leder P. Cancer Cell 2006;9:425. [PubMed: 16766262]
7. Moreno-Sanchez R, Rodriguez-Enriquez S, Marin-Hernandez A, Saavedra E. FEBS J 2007;274:1393.
[PubMed: 17302740]
8. Lehninger, AL.; Nelson, DL.; Cox, MM. Principles of Biochemistry. 2. Worth; New York: 1993.
9. Christofk HR, et al. Nature 2008;452:230. [PubMed: 18337823]
10. Izyumov DS, et al. Biochim Biophys Acta 2004;1658:141. [PubMed: 15282185]
11. Vander Heiden MG, Chandel NS, Schumacker PT, Thompson CB. Mol Cell 1999;3:159. [PubMed:
10078199]
12. Shaw RJ, et al. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004;101:3329. [PubMed: 14985505]
Vander Heiden et al.
Page 7
Science. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 April 5.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript


----- Page 8 (native text) -----
13. Lum JJ, et al. Cell 2005;120:237. [PubMed: 15680329]
14. Hardie DG. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2007;8:774. [PubMed: 17712357]
15. Possibly up to four NADPH molecules per glucose can be produced if the products of the pentose
phosphate shunt are metabolized via the TCA cycle and malic enzyme or cytosolic isocitrate
dehydrogenase 1 (IDH1) to generate two additional NADPH molecules.
16. DeBerardinis RJ, et al. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007;104:19345. [PubMed: 18032601]
17. Christofk HR, Vander Heiden MG, Wu N, Asara JM, Cantley LC. Nature 2008;452:181. [PubMed:
18337815]
18. Hatzivassiliou G, et al. Cancer Cell 2005;8:311. [PubMed: 16226706]
19. Sonveaux P, et al. J Clin Invest 2008;118:3930. [PubMed: 19033663]
20. Buzzai M, et al. Oncogene 2005;24:4165. [PubMed: 15806154]
21. Engelman JA, et al. Nat Med 2008;14:1351. [PubMed: 19029981]
22. Vander Heiden MG, et al. Mol Cell Biol 2001;21:5899. [PubMed: 11486029]
23. Ben-Haim S, Ell P. J Nucl Med 2009;50:88. [PubMed: 19139187]
24. Baysal BE, et al. Science 2000;287:848. [PubMed: 10657297]
25. Pollard PJ, Wortham NC, Tomlinson IP. Ann Med 2003;35:634.
26. Selak MA, et al. Cancer Cell 2005;7:77. [PubMed: 15652751]
27. Parsons DW, et al. Science 2008;321:1807. [PubMed: 18772396]
28. Bleeker FE, et al. Hum Mutat 2009;30:7. [PubMed: 19117336]
29. Yan H, et al. N Engl J Med 2009;360:765. [PubMed: 19228619]
30. Thompson CB. N Engl J Med 2009;360:813. [PubMed: 19228626]
31. Yuneva M, Zamboni N, Oefner P, Sachidanandam R, Lazebnik Y. J Cell Biol 2007;178:93. [PubMed:
17606868]
32. Wise DR, et al. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008;105:18782. [PubMed: 19033189]
33. Gao P, et al. Nature 2009;458:762. [PubMed: 19219026]
34. Bensaad K, et al. Cell 2006;126:107. [PubMed: 16839880]
35. Chiaradonna F, et al. Oncogene 2006;25:5391. [PubMed: 16607279]
36. Serrano M, Lin AW, McCurrach ME, Beach D, Lowe SW. Cell 1997;88:593. [PubMed: 9054499]
37. Granot D, Snyder M. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1991;88:5724. [PubMed: 1648229]
38. Chen Z, Odstrcil EA, Tu BP, McKnight SL. Science 2007;316:1916. [PubMed: 17600220]
39. Gatenby RA, Gillies RJ. Nat Rev Cancer 2004;4:891. [PubMed: 15516961]
40. Gottschalk S, Anderson N, Hainz C, Eckhardt SG, Serkova NJ. Clin Cancer Res 2004;10:6661.
[PubMed: 15475456]
41. Elstrom RL, et al. Cancer Res 2004;64:3892. [PubMed: 15172999]
42. Nolop KB, et al. Cancer 1987;60:2682. [PubMed: 3499969]
43. Kondoh H, et al. Antioxid Redox Signal 2007;9:293. [PubMed: 17184172]
44. Evans JM, Donnelly LA, Emslie-Smith AM, Alessi DR, Morris AD. BMJ 2005;330:1304. [PubMed:
15849206]
45. Calle EE, Kaaks R. Nat Rev Cancer 2004;4:579. [PubMed: 15286738]
46. Pollak M. Nat Rev Cancer 2008;8:915. [PubMed: 19029956]
47. El-Maghrabi MR, Pilkis SJ. J Cell Biochem 1984;26:1. [PubMed: 6096384]
Vander Heiden et al.
Page 8
Science. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 April 5.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript


----- Page 9 (native text) -----
Fig. 1.
Microbes and cells from multicellular organisms have similar metabolic phenotypes under
similar environmental conditions. Unicellular organisms undergoing exponential growth often
grow by fermentation of glucose into a small organic molecule such as ethanol. These
organisms, and proliferating cells in a multicellular organism, both metabolize glucose
primarily through glycolysis, excreting large amounts of carbon in the form of ethanol, lactate,
or another organic acid such as acetate or butyrate. Unicellular organisms starved of nutrients
rely primarily on oxidative metabolism, as do cells in a multicellular organism that are not
stimulated to proliferate. This evolutionary conservation suggests that there is an advantage to
oxidative metabolism during nutrient limitation and nonoxidative metabolism during cell
proliferation.
Vander Heiden et al.
Page 9
Science. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 April 5.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript


----- Page 10 (native text) -----
Fig. 2.
Schematic representation of the differences between oxidative phosphorylation, anaerobic
glycolysis, and aerobic glycolysis (Warburg effect). In the presence of oxygen,
nonproliferating (differentiated) tissues first metabolize glucose to pyruvate via glycolysis and
then completely oxidize most of that pyruvate in the mitochondria to CO2 during the process
of oxidative phosphorylation. Because oxygen is required as the final electron acceptor to
completely oxidize the glucose, oxygen is essential for this process. When oxygen is limiting,
cells can redirect the pyruvate generated by glycolysis away from mitochondrial oxidative
phosphorylation by generating lactate (anaerobic glycolysis). This generation of lactate during
anaerobic glycolysis allows glycolysis to continue (by cycling NADH back to NAD+), but
results in minimal ATP production when compared with oxidative phosphorylation. Warburg
observed that cancer cells tend to convert most glucose to lactate regardless of whether oxygen
is present (aerobic glycolysis). This property is shared by normal proliferative tissues.
Mitochondria remain functional and some oxidative phosphorylation continues in both cancer
cells and normal proliferating cells. Nevertheless, aerobic glycolysis is less efficient than
oxidative phosphorylation for generating ATP. In proliferating cells, ~10% of the glucose is
diverted into biosynthetic pathways upstream of pyruvate production.
Vander Heiden et al.
Page 10
Science. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 April 5.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript


----- Page 11 (native text) -----
Fig. 3.
Metabolic pathways active in proliferating cells are directly controlled by signaling pathways
involving known oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes. This schematic shows our current
understanding of how glycolysis, oxidative phosphorylation, the pentose phosphate pathway,
and glutamine metabolism are interconnected in proliferating cells. This metabolic wiring
allows for both NADPH production and acetyl-CoA flux to the cytosol for lipid synthesis. Key
steps in these metabolic pathways can be influenced by signaling pathways known to be
important for cell proliferation. Activation of growth factor receptors leads to both tyrosine
kinase signaling and PI3K activation. Via AKT, PI3K activation stimulates glucose uptake and
flux through the early part of glycolysis. Tyrosine kinase signaling negatively regulates flux
through the late steps of glycolysis, making glycolytic intermediates available for
macromolecular synthesis as well as supporting NADPH production. Myc drives glutamine
metabolism, which also supports NADPH production. LKB1/AMPK signaling and p53
decrease metabolic flux through glycolysis in response to cell stress. Decreased glycolytic flux
in response to LKB/AMPK or p53 may be an adaptive response to shut off proliferative
metabolism during periods of low energy availability or oxidative stress. Tumor suppressors
are shown in red, and oncogenes are in green. Key metabolic pathways are labeled in purple
with white boxes, and the enzymes controlling critical steps in these pathways are shown in
blue. Some of these enzymes are candidates as novel therapeutic targets in cancer. Malic
enzyme refers to NADP+-specific malate dehydrogenase [systematic name (S)-
malate:NADP+ oxidoreductase (oxaloacetate-decarboxylating)].
Vander Heiden et al.
Page 11
Science. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 April 5.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript


----- Page 12 (native text) -----
Fig. 4.
Decreased metabolism of glucose by tumors, visualized by PET with the glucose analog FDG,
predicts response to anticancer therapy. Shown are fused coronal images of FDG-PET and
computerized tomography (CT) obtained on a hybrid PET/CT scanner after the infusion of
FDG in a patient with a form of malignant sarcoma (gastrointestinal stromal tumor) before and
after therapy with a tyrosine kinase inhibitor (sunitinib). The tumor (T) is readily visualized
by FDG-PET/CT before therapy (left). After 4 weeks of therapy (right), the tumor shows no
uptake of FDG despite persistent abnormalities on CT. Excess FDG is excreted in the urine,
and therefore the kidneys (K) and bladder (B) are also visualized as labeled. [Image courtesy
of A. D. Van den Abbeele, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston]
Vander Heiden et al.
Page 12
Science. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 April 5.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
