

----- Page 1 (native text) -----
EDITORIAL
The American Joint Committee on Cancer: the 7th Edition
of the AJCC Cancer Staging Manual and the Future of TNM
Stephen B. Edge, MD1,2 and Carolyn C. Compton, MD, PhD1,3
1American Joint Committee on Cancer, Chicago, IL; 2Department of Surgical Oncology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute,
Buffalo, NY; 3National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD
ABSTRACT The American Joint Committee on Cancer
and the International Union for Cancer Control update the
tumor–node–metastasis
(TNM)
cancer
staging
system
periodically. The most recent revision is the 7th edition,
effective for cancers diagnosed on or after January 1, 2010.
This editorial summarizes the background of the current
revision and outlines the major issues revised. Most notable
are the marked increase in the use of international datasets
for more highly evidenced-based changes in staging, and
the enhanced use of nonanatomic prognostic factors in
deﬁning the stage grouping. The future of cancer staging
lies in the use of enhanced registry data standards to sup-
port personalization of cancer care through cancer outcome
prediction models and nomograms.
The extent of a cancer at time of diagnosis is a key
factor used to deﬁne treatment and to assess the chance of
successful treatment outcome. Cancer staging systems
codify the extent of cancer to provide clinicians and
patients with the means to quantify prognosis for individual
patients and to compare groups of patients in clinical trials
and who receive standard care around the world. There are
three staging systems used in the USA. Some state cancer
registries used for population incidence and surveillance
employ the relatively simply Summary Stage System. The
National Cancer Institute Surveillance, Epidemiology, and
End Results (SEER) program developed its own ‘‘extent of
disease’’ system. The most widely used staging system
among clinicians is the TNM system maintained by the
American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) and the
International Union for Cancer Control (UICC). This
system codes the extent of the primary tumor (T), regional
lymph nodes (N), and distant metastases (M) and provides
a ‘‘stage grouping’’ based on T, N, and M.
TNM is updated periodically based on advances in
understanding of advances of cancer prognosis to remain
current and relevant to clinical practice. The latest revision
of TNM, presented in the 7th edition of the AJCC Cancer
Staging Manual, takes effect for cases diagnosed on or
after January 1, 2010.1 This supplants the 6th edition, in
use since 2003. Beginning in this volume, the Annals of
Surgical Oncology is publishing a series of editorials that
highlight the major changes in staging presented in the 7th
edition of TNM.
Publication of the 7th edition of the AJCC Cancer
Staging Manual comes at a major watershed for cancer
staging and the AJCC. First, the revolution in under-
standing cancer biology is dramatically altering clinical
oncology. Historically, cancer staging and treatment plan-
ning was based solely on the anatomic extent of the cancer.
Anatomy continues to be a key prognostic factor for can-
cer, and anatomic-based staging will remain critically
important.
However
the
rapidly
increasing
speciﬁc
knowledge of cancer biology provides prognostic infor-
mation that complements and in some cases is more
relevant than anatomic extent. This information must be
incorporated into cancer prognostic models, and into the
TNM nomenclature, if staging systems are to remain useful
for patients and clinicians. Maintaining clear systems for
deﬁning anatomic stage while including biologic prog-
nostic information is a key challenge and opportunity for
the AJCC.
Secondly, the rise in the availability and use of elec-
tronic records is revolutionizing the capacity to capture,
store, and use detailed information on cancer. This will
lead to structured data tools integrated with clinical care
systems that allow real-time data capture and provide
immediate
support
to
clinicians.
In
addition,
the
 Society of Surgical Oncology 2010
Published Online: 24 February 2010
S. B. Edge, MD
e-mail: stephen.edge@roswellpark.org
Ann Surg Oncol (2010) 17:1471–1474
DOI 10.1245/s10434-010-0985-4


----- Page 2 (native text) -----
availability of highly granular data including biologic
information will hasten the development of new prognostic
and predictive models that provide individual precise out-
come prediction that supplants stage groupings in clinical
use. Such models are already in use for some common
diseases. A prime example is Adjuvantonline, a prog-
nostic and predictive model to assist clinicians and patients
in decisions regarding adjuvant therapy in breast, colon,
and lung cancer.2 Developing and supporting implemen-
tation of electronic data capture and analytic tools and their
incorporation into patient care documentation is another
important opportunity for the AJCC.
With the publication of the 7th edition of the AJCC
Cancer Staging Manual and related products, the AJCC is
taking important steps to use these opportunities to
improve patient care. The 7th edition extends the use of
nonanatomic factors in cancer staging where supported by
clear evidence. In addition, the 7th edition of the AJCC
Cancer Staging Manual provides new tools for recording
and using stage in the medical record and the cancer reg-
istry, to support electronic capture of these data, and to
foster the integration of other prognostic and response
predictive factors with stage. These include a new ‘‘staging
form’’ included in each disease chapter in the manual, an
electronic version of the form, and a new tool for electronic
capture of staging data and derivation of stage being
released in late 2009.
The AJCC is also working closely with the cancer sur-
veillance community and specialty organizations to deﬁne
and implement clinical instruments that collect data in the
format needed to transmit stage, store, and use stage and
prognostic data. Beginning in 2004, the AJCC and its cancer
surveillance partners implemented a data collection tool
across all US hospital and population registries for cancer
stage information, called the Collaborative Stage Data
Collection System (CS).3 This uses a standardized data
dictionary to collect information on T, N, M, and site-spe-
ciﬁc prognostic and predictive factors. The CS system
includes the computer algorithms to derive TNM stage. The
CS system is built into all cancer registry software systems
in the USA. The primary data and derived stage are stored
locally at the hospital registry and are also transmitted to
central registries including state registries, SEER, and the
National Cancer Data Base (NCDB). This data collection
and storage tool may be expanded in the future to incor-
porate new factors relevant to cancer prognosis. It is also
designed for an interoperable electronic environment to
allow use of the CS primary staging elements and the CS-
derived TNM cancer stage in other electronic platforms.
In parallel with the publication of the 7th edition of the
AJCC Cancer Staging Manual, the CS system is under-
going a major revision to be compatible with TNM, and to
enhance its utility. In addition, the College of American
Pathologists (CAP) and a team led by the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) are revising the
CAP Cancer Templates for reporting pathology on cancer
specimens to collect core elements on tumor size, exten-
sion, nodal involvement, and metastases in the format
needed for recording in the CS system. The CS system is
currently being implemented in Canada, and organizations
in other nations have inquired about adoption of this tool.
Finally, it is expected that the CS system will be incor-
porated in the NCI’s Cancer Bioinformatics Grid (caBIG)
as the accepted standard for recording data on the extent of
disease and stage.
Looking to the future, the AJCC is also working with
leaders in the epidemiology and statistical modeling sci-
entiﬁc communities to foster the use of prognostic and
predictive models in clinical oncology. With an increasing
plethora of prognostic tools available on the Internet, the
AJCC will provide the key leadership to help developers
and users to coordinate use of existing models. More
importantly, the AJCC will provide the leadership to
coordinate and sponsor development of new prognostic and
predictive models, a process already underway under the
leadership of the current AJCC chair, Carolyn Compton.
These efforts will be enhanced through the standardization
of data collection with the CS system, coordination with
CAP, and the electronic AJCC staging tools.
A key feature of the 7th edition of TNM is coordination
with the UICC. This is critical to maintain a single,
worldwide system for recording and communicating cancer
stage. This is particularly important, as cancer becomes one
of the leading causes of death around the world. UICC
representatives participated on all of the AJCC disease site
taskforces. There were major international collaborations
for data collection and analysis to revise TNM, which
included the establishment of international data collection
efforts in a number of diseases. Among these were a
worldwide collaboration and database for lung cancer
staging led by the International Association for the Study of
Lung Cancer, a Worldwide Esophageal Cancer Collabora-
tion, and the melanoma taskforce. Other major international
collaborations led to the uniﬁcation of gastric cancer staging
across Asia, Europe, and North America, and coordination
with the International Federation of Gynecology and
Obstetric (FIGO) for staging of gynecologic malignancies.
The AJCC manual and UICC manual were fully coordi-
nated to be sure any issues were coordinated. Finally, the
AJCC and UICC carefully reviewed the rules for TNM
staging to ensure a uniform and clear approach to staging.
The editorials that will appear in subsequent issues of
the Annals of Surgical Oncology will summarize speciﬁc
information on the revisions made in key disease sites.
These changes are clearly presented using an improved
format for the AJCC Cancer Staging Manual. The manual
1472
S. B. Edge, C. C. Compton


----- Page 3 (native text) -----
includes 57 chapters from 16 taskforces that included 266
individuals from 5 continents and 11 countries. There are
seven new chapters, as shown in Table 1. In addition, there
were major changes and expansion of the scope of a
number of chapters, also shown in Table 1.
The AJCC taskforces were charged with making revi-
sions to TNM based on the highest level of evidence
possible. Where possible, taskforces used outcomes data
from the NCDB and other existing and newly developed
datasets. Where such data were more limited, they also
based changes on expert consensus. The taskforces were
also charged with deﬁning key nonanatomic prognostic
factors in two classiﬁcations: those necessary to deﬁne
stage, and those critical to deﬁning treatment. The use of
nonanatomic factors was allowed in the deﬁnition of stage
groups, now termed ‘‘anatomic stage/prognostic groups’’ to
highlight the prognostic signiﬁcance of the groupings.
Examples of use of nonanatomic factors include incorpo-
ration of prostate-speciﬁc antigen (PSA) and Gleason’s
score in deﬁning groupings in prostate cancer. A key fea-
ture in the use of these nonanatomic factors is that, in each
case, the factors are used to modify the anatomic stage
grouping, and not to deﬁne the T, N, and M. In addition,
the grouping schemas provide for assigning a stage group
when the nonanatomic factors are not available. This is
critical to assure worldwide applicability. These factors are
also incorporated into the CS data collection system ver-
sion 2 (CSv2).
A number of disease taskforces identiﬁed the response
of the cancer to systemic or radiation therapy as key
prognostic information. These included breast cancer,
rectal cancer, esophageal cancer, head and neck cancers,
and others. A number of these sites include response to
treatment as a prognostic factor for collection. To address
this need, the CS system will be further revised to include
data ﬁelds for collection of information on the extent of T
and N before and after neoadjuvant treatment. This will
allow standardized recording of pretreatment stage and
posttreatment stage (deﬁned using the preﬁx ‘‘y’’) and
allow derivation of the response to treatment. This
enhancement of CS will be implemented in 2011.
Another enhancement in the 7th edition of the AJCC
Cancer Staging Manual is expansion of the ﬁrst chapter on
‘‘Purposes and Principles of Cancer Staging’’ to more
clearly delineate the rules of TNM staging. It is expected
that this detailed exposition of the rules will reduce vari-
ation in interpretation of staging rules and result in higher-
quality data. In addition, in collaboration with the UICC,
key rules have been clariﬁed and revised. An important
example is the rule related to the timeframe in which data
may be obtained for clinical and pathologic staging in
relation to date of diagnosis and initiation of treatment.
Another critical change is the elimination of the classiﬁ-
cation of ‘‘MX’’ for unknown status of metastatic disease.
Inappropriate use of ‘‘MX’’ in the past has led to many
cases being ‘‘unstageable.’’ Moving forward, any case
without clinical or pathologic evidence of metastases is to
be classiﬁed as clinically M0 (cM0). Assignment of cM0
does not require any imaging or other evaluation beyond
history and physical examination. Users of cancer staging
are urged to carefully read chapter 1 of the AJCC Cancer
Staging Manual and to maintain this for reference.
The appearance of the manual itself has been enhanced
to make it more user-friendly. The manual uses enhanced
type fonts plus color-coding for T, N, and M elements.
Each chapter starts with a clear table of changes from the
prior edition and a summary called ‘‘staging-at-a-glance.’’
In addition, paper and electronic versions of staging forms
are enhanced to improve utility. The manual will be fol-
lowed by companion print and electronic publications,
including a smaller AJCC Cancer Staging Handbook, the
2nd edition of the AJCC Cancer Staging Atlas, and the
electronic staging forms and staging software application.
The AJCC believes that this 7th edition of the AJCC
Cancer Staging Manual will enhance the utility of the
TNM staging to patients and clinicians. We hope that this
series of editorials in the Annals of Surgical Oncology will
further assist clinicians in understanding staging, and the
changes made in TNM. However, publication of the 7th
edition is just the next step. The 7th edition is also a
springboard to the exciting future of personalized cancer
care using data to more speciﬁcally deﬁne prognosis and
the potential for beneﬁt from speciﬁc therapies. The AJCC
will lead the charge to bring scientiﬁc advances to broad
clinical use to provide these advantages to all cancer
patients worldwide.
TABLE 1 New and revised chapters in the AJCC cancer staging
manual, 7th edition
New chapters
Mucosal Melanoma of the Head and Neck
Appendix
Gastrointestinal Stromal Tumors (GIST)
Neuroendocrine Tumors
Merkel Cell Carcinoma
Adrenal Gland
Ocular Adnexal Lymphoma
Major revisions to chapter structure
Intrahepatic Bile Ducts (separated from Liver)
Extrahepatic Bile Ducts, split into
Perihilar Bile Ducts
Distal Bile Ducts
Carcinoma of the Skin
Cutaneous Squamous Cell Cancer
Other Cutaneous Cancer
AJCC Cancer Staging Manual and TNM
1473


----- Page 4 (native text) -----
All such efforts require the input of legions of people
who deserve enormous credit for their efforts. Members of
each taskforce are listed in the manual. In addition, the
AJCC owes a deep debt of gratitude to the staff at the
AJCC, the registrars and scientists in surveillance organi-
zations working on CSv2, and the many around the world
who have contributed. Finally, the AJCC expresses a spe-
cial thanks to the former chair of the AJCC, Irvin Fleming,
to whom the manual is dedicated. His vision over the last
three decades led to many of the strategic decisions that led
the AJCC to its current position, from where it is poised for
an exciting future.
REFERENCES
1. Edge SB, Byrd DR, Compton CC, Fritz AG, Greene FL, Trotti A,
editors. AJCC cancer staging manual (7th ed). New York, NY:
Springer; 2010.
2. www.adjuvantonline.com. Accessed 26 Dec 2009.
3. www.cancerstaging.org. Accessed 26 Dec 2009.
1474
S. B. Edge, C. C. Compton
