

----- Page 1 (native) -----
insight review articles
NATURE | VOL 414 | 1 NOVEMBER 2001 | www.nature.com
105
S
tem cells are defined as cells that have the
ability to perpetuate themselves through self-
renewal and to generate mature cells of a
particular tissue through differentiation. In
most tissues, stem cells are rare. As a result,
stem cells must be identified prospectively and purified
carefully in order to study their properties. Although it
seems reasonable to propose that each tissue arises from a
tissue-specific stem cell, the rigorous identification and
isolation of these somatic stem cells has been
accomplished only in a few instances. For example,
haematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) have been isolated from
mice and humans1–4, and have been shown to be
responsible for the generation and regeneration of the
blood-forming and immune (haematolymphoid) systems
(Fig. 1). Stem cells from a variety of organs might have the
potential to be used for therapy in the future, but HSCs —
the vital elements in bone-marrow transplantation — have
already been used extensively in therapeutic settings
(reviewed in ref. 5).
The recent discovery that bone marrow6–8, as well as
purified HSCs9,10, can give rise to non-haematopoietic 
tissues suggests that these cells may have greater differentia-
tion potential than was assumed previously. Definitive
experiments are needed to determine whether the cells from
the bone marrow that are capable of giving rise to different
non-haematopoietic lineages are indeed HSCs or another
population. If further studies support the idea of HSC 
plasticity, this will undoubtedly open new frontiers for
understanding the developmental potential of HSCs, as well
as expand their therapeutic application.
As the characteristics of HSCs, their differentiation
potential and clinical applications have been covered in earli-
er reviews, here we discuss emerging evidence that stem cell
biology could provide new insights into cancer biology. In
particular, we focus on three aspects of the relationship
between stem cells and tumour cells: first, the similarities in
the mechanisms that regulate self-renewal of normal stem
cells and cancer cells; second, the possibility that tumour cells
might arise from normal stem cells; and third, the notion that
tumours might contain ‘cancer stem cells’ —  rare cells with
indefinite proliferative potential that drive the formation
and growth of tumours. Through much of this review we
focus on the haematopoietic system because both normal
stem cells and cancer cells from this tissue are well character-
ized. Moreover, cancers of the haematopoietic system (that
is, leukaemias) provide the best evidence that normal stem
cells are the targets of transforming mutations, and that 
cancer cell proliferation is driven by cancer stem cells.
Self-renewal of haematopoietic stem cells
One of the most important issues in stem cell biology is
understanding the mechanisms that regulate self-renewal.
Self-renewal is crucial to stem cell function, because it is
required by many types of stem cells to persist for the 
lifetime of the animal. Moreover, whereas stem cells from
different organs may vary in their developmental potential,
all stem cells must self-renew and regulate the relative 
balance between self-renewal and differentiation. Under-
standing the regulation of normal stem cell self-renewal is
also fundamental to understanding the regulation of cancer
cell proliferation, because cancer can be considered to be a
disease of unregulated self-renewal.
In the haematopoietic system, stem cells are heteroge-
neous with respect to their ability to self-renew. Multipotent
progenitors constitute 0.05% of mouse bone-marrow cells,
and can be divided into three different populations: long-
term self-renewing HSCs, short-term self-renewing HSCs,
and multipotent progenitors without detectable self-renewal
potential2,11. These populations form a lineage in which the
long-term HSCs give rise to short-term HSCs, which in turn
give rise to multipotent progenitors11. As HSCs mature from
the long-term self-renewing pool to multipotent progenitors,
they progressively lose their potential to self-renew but
become more mitotically active. Whereas long-term HSCs
give rise to mature haematopoietic cells for the lifetime of the
mouse, short-term HSCs and multipotent progenitors 
reconstitute lethally irradiated mice for less than eight weeks.
Although the phenotypic and functional properties of
HSCs have been extensively characterized (reviewed in 
Stem cells, cancer, and
cancer stem cells
Tannishtha Reya*§||, Sean J. Morrison†||, Michael F. Clarke‡ & Irving L. Weissman*
*Departments of Pathology and Developmental Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Palo Alto, California 94305, USA 
(e-mail: irv@stanford.edu)
†Howard Hughes Medical Institute, and Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-0934, USA
‡Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-0936, USA
§Present address: Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA
||These authors contributed equally to this work
Stem cell biology has come of age. Unequivocal proof that stem cells exist in the haematopoietic system has given
way to the prospective isolation of several tissue-specific stem and progenitor cells, the initial delineation of their
properties and expressed genetic programmes, and the beginnings of their utility in regenerative medicine. 
Perhaps the most important and useful property of stem cells is that of self-renewal. Through this property, striking
parallels can be found between stem cells and cancer cells: tumours may often originate from the transformation of
normal stem cells, similar signalling pathways may regulate self-renewal in stem cells and cancer cells, and cancer
cells may include ‘cancer stem cells’ — rare cells with indefinite potential for self-renewal that drive tumorigenesis.
© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

----- Page 2 (native) -----
ref. 12), the fundamental question of how self-renewal is regulated
remains unanswered. In most cases, combinations of growth factors
that can induce potent proliferation cannot prevent the differentia-
tion of HSCs in long-term cultures. Although progress has been
made in identifying culture conditions that maintain HSC activity in
culture (for example, see ref. 13), it has proved exceedingly difficult to
identify combinations of defined growth factors that cause a 
significant expansion in culture in the number of progenitors with
transplantable HSC activity.
Pathways regulating stem cell self-renewal and oncogenesis
Because normal stem cells and cancer cells share the ability to self-
renew, it seems reasonable to propose that newly arising cancer cells
appropriate the machinery for self-renewing cell division that is nor-
mally expressed in stem cells. Evidence shows that many pathways
that are classically associated with cancer may also regulate normal
stem cell development (Fig. 2). For example, the prevention of 
apoptosis by enforced expression of the oncogene bcl-2 results in
increased numbers of HSCs in vivo, suggesting that cell death has a
role in regulating the homeostasis of HSCs14,15.
Other signalling pathways associated with oncogenesis, such as
the Notch, Sonic hedgehog (Shh) and Wnt signalling pathways, may
also regulate stem cell self-renewal (reviewed in ref. 16). Notch acti-
vation in HSCs in culture using the ligand Jagged-1 have consistently
increased the amount of primitive progenitor activity that can be
observed in vitro and in vivo, suggesting that Notch activation 
promotes HSC self-renewal, or at least the maintenance of 
multipotentiality17,18. Shh signalling has also been implicated in the
regulation of self-renewal by the finding that populations highly
enriched for human HSCs (CD34+Lin–CD38–)exhibit increased self-
renewal in response to Shh stimulation in vitro,albeit in combination
with other growth factors19. The involvement of Notch and Shh in the
self-renewal of HSCs is especially interesting in light of studies that
implicate these pathways in the regulation of self-renewal of stem
cells from other tissues as well (Fig. 2, and see review in this issue by
Spradling and colleagues, pages 98–104).
One particularly interesting pathway that has also been shown to
regulate both self-renewal and oncogenesis in different organs is 
the Wnt signalling pathway (Fig. 2). Wnt proteins are intercellular 
signalling molecules20 that regulate development in several organ-
isms21 and contribute to cancer when dysregulated. The expression of
Wnt proteins in the bone marrow22 suggests that they may influence
HSCs as well. Using highly purified mouse bone-marrow HSCs, we
have shown that overexpression of activated b-catenin (a downstream
activator of the Wnt signalling pathway) in long-term cultures of
HSCs expands the pool of transplantable HSCs determined by both
phenotype (Thy1.1loLin–/loSca1+c-kit+) and function (ability to 
reconstitute the haematopoietic system in vivo). Moreover, ectopic
expression of Axin, an inhibitor of Wnt signalling, leads to inhibition
of HSC proliferation, increased death of HSCs in vitro, and reduced
reconstitution in vivo(T.R. et al., submitted). In separate studies, solu-
ble Wnt proteins from conditioned supernatants have also been
shown to influence the proliferation of haematopoietic progenitors
from mouse fetal liver and human bone marrow23,24.
insight review articles
106
NATURE | VOL 414 | 1 NOVEMBER 2001 | www.nature.com
Haematopoietic stem cell
Leukaemic mouse models
Long term
Short term
Multipotent
progenitor
CMML
AML
APML
CML/Blast
MRP8-BCL-2
MRP8-BCL2Xlpr/lpr
MRP8-PML-RARα
MRP8-BCRablXBCL-2
B cells
T cells
NK cells
Dendritic cells
Granulocytes
Macrophages
Platelets
Red cells
Pro-B
Pro-T
Pro-NK
CLP
CMP
GMP
MEP
MkP
ErP
Figure 1 Development of
haematopoietic stem cells. HSCs can
be subdivided into long-term self-
renewing HSCs, short-term self-
renewing HSCs and multipotent
progenitors (red arrows indicate self-
renewal). They give rise to common
lymphoid progenitors (CLPs; the
precursors of all lymphoid cells) and
common myeloid progenitors (CMPs;
the precursors of all myeloid cells).
Both CMPs/GMPs (granulocyte
macrophage precursors) and CLPs
can give rise to all known mouse
dendritic cells. The isolation of
precursors in the haematopoietic
system has allowed the generation of
a series of mouse models for myeloid
leukaemia (see box, lower left). The
expression of the oncogenes BCL-2,
BCR–Abl and PML–RARa under the
control of the hMRP8 promoter,
individually or together, and in
combination with Fas deficiency,
results in diseases that resemble
several human leukaemias, including
chronic myelomonocytic leukaemia
(CMML), acute myeloid leukaemia
(AML), acute promyelocytic
leukaemia (APML)77, and chronic
myeloid leukaemia (CML)/Blast 
(S. Jaswal, K. Akashi and I.L.W.,
submitted). ErP, erythrocyte
precursor; MEP, megakaryocyte
erythrocyte precursor; MkP,
megakaryocyte precursor; NK,
natural killer.
© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

----- Page 3 (native) -----
Studies of epidermal and gut progenitors suggest that the Wnt 
signalling pathway may contribute to the regulation of stem
cell/progenitor cell self-renewal in other tissues. Cultured human
keratinocytes with higher proliferative potential have increased levels
of b-catenin compared with keratinocytes with lower proliferative
capacity. Moreover, retroviral transduction of activated b-catenin
results in increased epidermal stem cell self-renewal and decreased
differentiation25. In vivo data from transgenic mice suggest that 
activation of the Wnt signalling pathway in epidermal stem cells leads
to epithelial cancers26. Furthermore, mice lacking TCF-4, one of the
transcriptional mediators of the Wnt signalling pathway, quickly
exhaust the undifferentiated progenitors in the crypts of the gut
epithelium during fetal development27, suggesting that this 
pathway is required for the maintenance or self-renewal of gut
epithelial stem cells.
Cumulatively, the above findings suggest that Wnt signalling may
promote stem cell self-renewal in a variety of different epithelia in
addition to HSCs. The molecular mechanisms by which Wnt sig-
nalling influences stem cells remain to be elucidated. It will also be
important to determine whether the Wnt, Notch and Shh pathways
interact to regulate stem and progenitor cell self-renewal.
Self-renewal and leukaemogenesis
If the signalling pathways that normally regulate stem cell self-
renewal lead to tumorigenesis when dysregulated, then are stem cells
themselves the target of transformation in certain types of cancer28,29?
There are two reasons to think that this may be the case. First, because
stem cells have the machinery for self-renewal already activated,
maintaining this activation may be simpler than turning it on de novo
in a more differentiated cell; that is, fewer mutations may be required
to maintain self-renewal than to activate it ectopically. Second, by
self-renewing, stem cells often persist for long periods of time,
instead of dying after short periods of time like many mature cells in
highly proliferative tissues. This means that there is a much greater
opportunity for mutations to accumulate in individual stem cells
than in most mature cell types (Fig. 3).
Even restricted progenitor cells are less likely than stem cells to
undergo neoplastic transformation because they proliferate for a
much shorter period of time before terminally differentiating.
Restricted haematopoietic progenitors of the lymphoid30and myeloid
lineages all fail to self-renew detectably on transplantation (K. Nanko-
rn, Traver, D., I.L.W. and K. Akashi, submitted). Thus, restricted prog-
enitors would first need to acquire the extensive self-renewal potential
of stem cells to have the opportunity to experience additional 
mutations that would lead to transformation. Nonetheless, restricted
progenitors could potentially be transformed either by acquiring
mutations that cause them to self-renew like stem cells, or by inherit-
ing existing mutations from stem cells such that only a single mutation
is required in the progenitors to cause transformation (Fig. 3).
Stem cells as targets of mutation
For most cancers, the target cell of transforming mutations is
unknown; however, there is considerable evidence that certain types
of leukaemia arise from mutations that accumulate in HSCs. The
cells capable of initiating human acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) in
NOD/SCID (non-obese diabetic/severe combined immunodefi-
ciency) mice have a CD34+CD38–phenotype in most AML subtypes,
and thus have a phenotype similar to normal HSCs31. Conversely,
insight review articles
NATURE | VOL 414 | 1 NOVEMBER 2001 | www.nature.com
107
Stem/progenitor cell self-renewal
Tumorigenesis
Colon
carcinoma
Epidermal
tumours
Medulloblastoma
Basal cell
carcinoma
Leukaemia
Mammary
tumours
Haematopoietic
Epidermal
Gut
Haematopoietic
Neural
Germ line
Haematopoietic
Neural
Germ line
Shh
Ptc
Ptc
Gli
Wnt
LRP
Fzd
GSK3β
β-cat
β-cat
LEF/
TCF Cyclin D1
Notch
Notch1
Hes-1
Smo
Gli
CBF-1
Figure 2 Signalling pathways that regulate self-renewal mechanisms during normal stem cell development and during transformation. Wnt (refs 25, 27; and T.R. et al.,
submitted), Shh19,78,79 and Notch pathways17,80,81 have been shown to contribute to the self-renewal of stem cells and/or progenitors in a variety of organs, including the
haematopoietic and nervous systems. When dysregulated, these pathways can contribute to oncogenesis. Mutations of these pathways have been associated with a number of
human tumours, including colon carcinoma37 and epidermal tumours82 (Wnt), medulloblastoma83 and basal cell carcinoma84 (Shh), and T-cell leukaemias85 (Notch). (Images
courtesy of Eye of Science/SPL and R. Wechsler-Reya/M. Scott/Annual Reviews.)
© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

----- Page 4 (native) -----
CD34+CD38+ leukaemia cells cannot transfer disease to mice in the
vast majority of cases, despite the fact that they exhibit a leukaemic
blast phenotype. This suggests that normal HSCs rather than 
committed progenitors are the target for leukaemic transformation.
The most frequent chromosomal abnormalities in AML involve
the 8;21 translocation, which results in AML1–ETO chimaeric 
transcripts in leukaemic cells. In work done on human HSCs from
patients in remission, AML1–ETO transcripts were found in a 
fraction of normal HSCs in the marrow32. These prospectively 
isolated HSCs and their progeny were not leukaemic, and could 
differentiate to normal myeloerythroid cells in vitro. This indicates
that the translocation occurred originally in normal HSCs and that
additional mutations in a subset of these HSCs or their progeny 
subsequently lead to leukaemia32. In this study, the normal HSCs
were CD34+CD38–Thy-1+, whereas the leukaemic blasts were
CD34+CD38–Thy-1–. Although the translocation must have
occurred in normal HSCs, subsequent transforming mutations
might have occurred either in downstream Thy-1– progenitors, or in
HSCs if one consequence of neoplastic proliferation was the loss of
Thy-1 expression. The idea that stem cells are a common target of
pre-leukaemic events or leukaemic transformation is also supported
by work in lymphoid33 and chronic myeloid leukaemias34 where
clonotypic leukaemia-associated chromosomal rearrangements
have also been found in CD34+CD38–cells, a population enriched for
HSCs. Thus, a variety of leukaemias may arise from mutations that
accumulate in HSCs to cause their malignant transformation at the
stage of stem cells or their progeny.
Progenitor cells as targets of transformation
Although stem cells are often the target of genetic events that are 
necessary or sufficient for malignant transformation, in other cases
restricted progenitors or even differentiated cells may become trans-
formed (Fig. 3). By targeting the expression of transgenes specifically
to restricted myeloid progenitors using the hMRP-8 promoter, it is
possible to create a mouse model in which myeloid leukaemia arises
from restricted progenitors. These leukaemias resemble human
leukaemias in many respects, even though the targeted genetic
changes cause the leukaemias to arise from restricted progenitors
rather than stem cells. For example, we have generated transgenic
mouse models for myeloid leukaemias using an hMRP-8 promoter,
which targets the expression of transgenes specifically to myeloid
progenitors35. The enforced expression of the anti-apoptotic gene
bcl-2 in the myeloid lineage leads to a disease that is similar to human
chronic myelomonocytic leukaemia, including monocytosis,
splenomegaly and neutropenia, as the mice age. However, these mice
rarely develop acute malignancies.
To test whether additional mutations are required to synergize
with bcl-2 to promote AML, hMRP8–bcl-2 transgenic mice were bred
with lpr/lpr Fas-deficient mice. Remarkably, the loss of these two 
distinct apoptosis pathways led to the development of AML in 15% of
the mice36. These mice have an expansion of myeloblasts in all
haematopoietic tissues, with a substantially lowered number of 
granulocytes in the marrow and blood. These studies show that 
prevention of cell death is a crucial event in myeloid leukaemogenesis
and that restricted progenitors can be transformed. As described
above, in the case of spontaneously arising human leukaemias it is
likely that stem cells accumulate the mutations that are necessary for
neoplastic proliferation; however, these mutations may accumulate
in stem cells even while the effects of the mutations are expressed in
restricted progenitors. That is, mutations that accumulate in stem
cells may lead to neoplastic proliferation of primitive progenitors
downstream of stem cells.
Perhaps the reason why only 15% of mice progress to AML in mice
expressing Bcl-2 and lacking Fas is that the progenitors in these mice
also must acquire an additional mutation that causes dysregulated
self-renewal (Fig. 3). If a single additional mutation causes transfor-
mation then this transforming event is probably a gain-of-function
mutation, such as one that promotes constitutive self-renewal.
Because stabilized b-catenin can promote the self-renewal of HSCs
and other types of progenitors (ref. 25, and T.R. et al., submitted; 
Fig. 2), we propose that gain-of-function mutations in b-catenin
may, in many cases, transform deathless pre-malignant cells to 
cancer cells by promoting proliferation. In support of this is evidence
to show that activation of b-catenin and dysregulation of the Wnt
signalling pathway in general is common in cancer37, and that the 
targeted overactivation of this pathway can lead to tumours in 
transgenic mice38. It is also possible that mutations in other signalling
pathways promote progenitor self-renewal. It is important to study
this further, because understanding the molecular basis of the 
unregulated self-renewal of cancer cells will allow the design of more
effective therapies.
In essence, newly arising cancer cells may appropriate the
machinery for self-renewing cell divisions that is normally expressed
in stem cells. In the haematopoietic system, the only long-term self-
renewing cells in the myeloerythroid pathway (Fig. 1, bottom) are
HSCs; however, at least two differentiated cell types (Fig. 1, top) can
also self-renew. Both T and B lymphocytes undergo clonal expansion
on stimulation to produce resting memory lymphocytes. These 
lymphocytes proliferate again when the antigens are re-encountered.
Lymphoid leukaemias can activate these receptor-mediated 
mitogenic pathways in the course of leukaemogenesis39–43.
Cancer stem cells and aberrant organogenesis
Basic cancer research has focused on identifying the genetic changes
that lead to cancer. This has led to major advances in our understand-
ing of the molecular and biochemical pathways that are involved in
tumorigenesis and malignant transformation. But while we have
focused on the molecular biology of cancer, our understanding of the
cellular biology has lagged. That is, although we understand (to a first
approximation) the effects of particular mutations on the prolifera-
tion and survival of model cells, such as fibroblasts or cell lines, we
insight review articles
108
NATURE | VOL 414 | 1 NOVEMBER 2001 | www.nature.com
Normal haematopoiesis
Cancer
Cancer in
stem cells
Cancer in
progenitor
cells
Stem
cell
Progenitor
cell
Oligolineage
precursors
Mature
cells
Stem cell
Progenitor cell
Mature cell
Figure 3 Comparison of self-renewal during haematopoietic stem cell development
and leukaemic transformation. Because of their high level of self-renewal, stem cells
are particularly good targets of leukaemic transformation. Unlike normal
haematopoiesis, where signalling pathways that have been proposed to regulate self-
renewal are tightly regulated (top), during transformation of stem cells, the same
mechanisms may be dysregulated to allow uncontrolled self-renewal (middle).
Furthermore, if the transformation event occurs in progenitor cells, it must endow the
progenitor cell with the self-renewal properties of a stem cell, because these
progenitors would otherwise differentiate (bottom).
© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

----- Page 5 (native) -----
can often only guess what the effects of such mutations will be on 
the actual cells involved in particular cancers. This has handicapped
our ability to translate our identification of mutations into new 
therapies.
A tumour can be viewed as an aberrant organ initiated by a
tumorigenic cancer cell that acquired the capacity for indefinite 
proliferation through accumulated mutations. If one views a tumour
as an abnormal organ, then the principles of normal stem cell 
biology12,44can be applied to understand better how tumours develop
(reviewed in ref. 45). In fact, many observations suggest that 
analogies between normal stem cells and tumorigenic cells may be
appropriate. Both normal stem cells and tumorigenic cells have
extensive proliferative potential and the ability to give rise to new
(normal or abnormal) tissues. Both tumours and normal tissues are
composed of heterogeneous combinations of cells, with different
phenotypic characteristics and different proliferative potentials46–49.
Because most tumours have a clonal origin50–52, tumorigenic cancer
cells must give rise to phenotypically diverse progeny, including 
cancer cells with indefinite proliferative potential, as well as cancer
cells with limited or no proliferative potential. This suggests that
tumorigenic cancer cells undergo processes that are analogous to the
self-renewal and differentiation of normal stem cells.
Although some of the heterogeneity in tumours arises as a result
of continuing mutagenesis, it is likely that heterogeneity also arises
through the aberrant differentiation of cancer cells. It is well 
documented that many types of tumours contain cancer cells with
heterogeneous phenotypes reflecting aspects of the differentiation
that normally occurs in the tissues from which the tumours arise.
The variable expression of normal differentiation markers by cancer
cells in a tumour suggests that some of the heterogeneity in tumours
arises as a result of the anomalous differentiation of tumour cells.
Examples of this include the variable expression of myeloid markers
in chronic myeloid leukaemia, the variable expression of neuronal
markers within peripheral neurectodermal tumours, and the 
variable expression of milk proteins or the oestrogen receptor 
within breast cancer.
In other words, both normal stem cells and tumorigenic cells give
rise to phenotypically heterogeneous cells that exhibit various
degrees of differentiation. Thus, tumorigenic cells can be thought of
as cancer stem cells that undergo an aberrant and poorly regulated
process of organogenesis analogous to what normal stem cells do. It is
perhaps not surprising that tumorigenic cells behave in ways that are
analogous to normal stem cells given that cancer cells tend to display
functional and phenotypic attributes of the normal cells from which
they are derived28.
Evidence for cancer stem cells
It was first extensively documented for leukaemia and multiple
myeloma that only a small subset of cancer cells is capable of extensive
proliferation. For example, when mouse myeloma cells were
obtained from mouse ascites, separated from normal haematopoiet-
ic cells and put in clonal in vitro colony-forming assays, only 1 in
10,000 to 1 in 100 cancer cells were able to form colonies53. Even when
leukaemic cells were transplanted in vivo, only 1–4% of cells could
form spleen colonies54–56. Because the differences in clonogenicity
among the leukaemia cells mirrored the differences in clonogenicity
among normal haematopoietic cells, the clonogenic leukaemic cells
were described as leukaemic stem cells (for example, see ref. 53). But
two formal possibilities remained: either all leukaemia cells had a low
probability of proliferating extensively in these assays such that all
leukaemia cells had the potential to behave as leukaemic stem cells, or
most leukaemia cells were unable to proliferate extensively and only a
small, definable subset of cells was consistently clonogenic.
To prove the second possibility, it would be necessary to separate
different classes of leukaemia cell and show that one subset is highly
enriched for clonogenic capacity and all other cells are greatly 
depleted for clonogenicity. This has been accomplished by Dick and
colleagues57, who showed that human AML stem cells could be 
identified prospectively and purified as CD34+CD38– cells from
patient samples. Despite the fact that these cells represented a small
but variable proportion of AML cells (0.2% in one patient), they were
the only cells capable of transferring AML from human patients to
NOD/SCID mice in the vast majority of cases. This excluded the first
possibility that all AML cells had a similar clonogenic capacity, and
showed that a small, predictable subset was consistently enriched for
the ability to proliferate and transfer disease.
It has also been shown for solid cancers that the cells are pheno-
typically heterogeneous and that only a small proportion of cells are
clonogenic in culture and in vivo46–49,58. For example, only 1 in 1,000
to 1 in 5,000 lung cancer, ovarian cancer or neuroblastoma cells were
found to form colonies in soft agar59. Just as in the context of
leukaemic stem cells, these observations led to the hypothesis that
only a few cancer cells are actually tumorigenic and that these
tumorigenic cells could be considered as cancer stem cells59. But, as
explained above, two possibilities remain: either all solid cancer cells
have a low probability of proliferating extensively and behaving in
clonogenic assays as cancer stem cells, or most cancer cells have only a
limited proliferative potential and cannot behave as cancer stem cells,
but a small, definable subset of cells is enriched for the ability to 
proliferate extensively and form tumours.
In both cases, some of the cancer cell heterogeneity would arise as
a result of environmental differences within the tumour and 
continuing mutagenesis. The essential difference between these 
possibilities is the prediction, according to the second possibility, that
whatever the environment or mutational status of the cells, only a
small, phenotypically distinct subset of cancer cells has the ability to
proliferate extensively or form a new tumour (Fig. 4). It has not been
possible to distinguish between these models of solid cancer hetero-
geneity, because as yet no one has published the identity of purified
subsets of uncultured solid cancer cells that are enriched for the 
ability to form new tumours.
The implications of solid cancer stem cells
If the growth of solid cancers were driven by cancer stem cells, it
would have profound implications for cancer therapy. At present, all
of the phenotypically diverse cancer cells are treated as though they
insight review articles
NATURE | VOL 414 | 1 NOVEMBER 2001 | www.nature.com
109
Tumour cells are
heterogeneous, but most
cells can proliferate
extensively and form
new tumours
Tumour cells are heterogeneous
and only the cancer stem cell
subset (CSC; yellow) has the ability
to proliferate extensively and
form new tumours
a
b
CSC
CSC
CSC
CSC
Figure 4 Two general models of heterogeneity in solid cancer cells. a, Cancer cells of
many different phenotypes have the potential to proliferate extensively, but any one
cell would have a low probability of exhibiting this potential in an assay of
clonogenicity or tumorigenicity. b, Most cancer cells have only limited proliferative
potential, but a subset of cancer cells consistently proliferate extensively in
clonogenic assays and can form new tumours on transplantation. The model shown
in b predicts that a distinct subset of cells is enriched for the ability to form new
tumours, whereas most cells are depleted of this ability. Existing therapeutic
approaches have been based largely on the model shown in a, but the failure of
these therapies to cure most solid cancers suggests that the model shown in b may
be more accurate.
© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

----- Page 6 (native) -----
have unlimited proliferative potential and can acquire the ability to
metastasize. For many years, however, it has been recognized that
small numbers of disseminated cancer cells can be detected at sites
distant from primary tumours in patients that never manifest
metastatic disease58,60. One possibility is that immune surveillance is
highly effective at killing disseminated cancer cells before they can
form a detectable tumour. Another possibility is that most cancer
cells lack the ability to form a new tumour such that only the 
dissemination of rare cancer stem cells can lead to metastatic disease
(reviewed in ref. 45). If so, the goal of therapy must be to identify and
kill this cancer stem cell population. If solid cancer stem cells can be
identified prospectively and isolated, then we should be able to iden-
tify more efficiently new diagnostic markers and therapeutic targets
expressed by the stem cells.
If tumour growth and metastasis are driven by a small population
of cancer stem cells, this might explain the failure to develop thera-
pies that are consistently able to eradicate solid tumours61. Although
currently available drugs can shrink metastatic tumours, these effects
are usually transient and often do not appreciably extend the life of
patients62,63. One reason for the failure of these treatments is the
acquisition of drug resistance by the cancer cells as they evolve;
another possibility is that existing therapies fail to kill cancer stem
cells effectively.
Existing therapies have been developed largely against the bulk
population of tumour cells because they are often identified by their
ability to shrink tumours. Because most cells with a cancer have 
limited proliferative potential, an ability to shrink a tumour mainly
reflects an ability to kill these cells. It seems that normal stem cells
from various tissues tend to be more resistant to chemotherapeutics
than mature cell types from the same tissues64. The reasons for this are
not clear, but may relate to high levels of expression of anti-apoptotic
proteins65–68 or ABC transporters such as the multidrug resistance
gene69,70. If the same were true of cancer stem cells, then one would
predict that these cells would be more resistant to chemotherapeutics
than tumour cells with limited proliferative potential. Even therapies
that cause complete regression of tumours might spare enough 
cancer stem cells to allow regrowth of the tumours. Therapies that 
are more specifically directed against cancer stem cells might 
result in much more durable responses and even cures of metastatic
tumours (Fig. 5).
Genomics may provide a powerful means for identifying drug 
targets in cancer cells. Although targeting genetic mutations does not
require isolation of the stem cells, there are likely to be differences in
gene expression between cancer stem cells and tumour cells with 
limited proliferative potential. The application of microarray 
analysis to malignant tumours has shown that patterns of gene
expression can be used to group tumours into different categories,
often reflecting different mutations71–74. As a result, tumour types
that cannot be distinguished pathologically, but that can be 
distinguished on the basis of differences in gene-expression profile,
can be examined for differences in treatment sensitivity. 
However, gene-expression profiling is often conducted on tumour
samples that contain a mixture of normal cells, highly proliferative
cancer cells, and cancer cells with limited proliferation potential.
This results in a composite profile that may obscure differences
between tumours, because the highly proliferative cells that drive
tumorigenesis often represent a minority of cancer cells. 
Gene-expression profiling of cancer stem cells would allow the 
profile to reflect the biology of the cells that are actually driving
tumorigenesis. Microdissection of morphologically homogeneous
collections of cancer cells is one way of generating profiles that reflect
more homogeneous collections of cells75,76. The next frontier will be
to purify the cancer stem cells from the whole tumour that retain
unlimited proliferative potential and to perform gene-expression
profiling on those cells. In addition to being a more efficient way of
identifying new therapeutic and diagnostic targets, the profiling of
cancer stem cells might sharpen the differences in patterns observed
between different tumours.
Perspectives
The ideas discussed in this review can be summarized as a set of
propositions. First, self-renewal is the hallmark property of stem cells
in normal and neoplastic tissues. Second, in the haematopoietic 
system, long-term self-renewal is limited to rare long-term HSCs and
some lymphocytes; other cell types lack this potential. Third, 
cells that continue to divide over long periods of time are much more
likely to accumulate mutations that cause neoplasia. Thus 
genetic changes that lead to myeloid leukaemias must occur either in
long-term HSCs or in progeny that first acquire the ability to 
self-renew. The fact that normal long-term HSCs in leukaemia
patients often have leukaemia-associated translocations strongly
supports the idea that leukaemic mutations often accumulate in
HSCs. Mutations that lead to certain types of lymphoma may 
accumulate in lymphocytes, given their ability to self-renew over the
long term. Fourth, in other normal tissues that contain self-renewing
stem cells, such as the epithelia, the genetic changes that are steps in
the progression to solid tumours probably also occur in the stem
cells, or in progeny that acquire the potential for self-renewal. 
Fifth, distinct signalling pathways control stem cell self-renewal in
different tissues. But perhaps within individual tissues, the same
pathways are used consistently by both normal stem cells and cancer
cells to regulate proliferation. For example, Wnt signalling regulates
the self-renewal of normal stem cells in the blood and epithelia. 
Constitutive activation of the Wnt pathway has been implicated 
in a number of epithelial cancers. The regulation and consequences
of Wnt signalling in normal and neoplastic cells need to be 
further elucidated. Sixth, understanding the signalling pathways that
are used by for normal stem cells and neoplastic cells should 
facilitate the use of normal stem cells for regenerative medicine and
the identification of cancer stem cell targets for anticancer therapies.
Seventh, within most tumours there may exist cancer stem cells that
can self-renew indefinitely, in contrast to most stem cells that 
may have limited proliferative potential. Finally, in order to cure 
cancer, it is necessary and sufficient to kill cancer stem cells. To
accomplish this it will be necessary to identify and characterize the
properties of these cells.
There are many connections between stem cells and cancer that
are important to understand. Just as the signals that are known to
control oncogenesis are providing clues about the control of 
insight review articles
110
NATURE | VOL 414 | 1 NOVEMBER 2001 | www.nature.com
CSC
CSC
CSC
Tumour
degenerates
Tumour loses its
ability to generate
new cells
Drugs that
kill tumour
stem cells
Drugs that kill
tumour cells
but not cancer
stem cells
Tumour shrinks
but grows back
Figure 5 Conventional therapies may shrink tumours by killing mainly cells with
limited proliferative potential. If the putative cancer stem cells are less sensitive to
these therapies, then they will remain viable after therapy and re-establish the
tumour. By contrast, if therapies can be targeted against cancer stem cells, then they
might more effectively kill the cancer stem cells, rendering the tumours unable to
maintain themselves or grow. Thus, even if cancer stem cell-directed therapies do
not shrink tumours initially, they may eventually lead to cures.
© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

----- Page 7 (native) -----
self-renewal of normal stem cells, studies of stem cell biology are
lending insight into the origins of cancer and will ultimately yield
new approaches to fight this disease.
I
1. Spangrude, G. J., Heimfeld, S. & Weissman, I. L. Purification and characterization of mouse
hematopoietic stem cells. Science 241, 58–62 (1988).
2. Morrison, S. J. & Weissman, I. L. The long-term repopulating subset of hematopoietic stem cells is
deterministic and isolatable by phenotype. Immunity 1, 661–673 (1994).
3. Baum, C. M., Weissman, I. L., Tsukamoto, A. S., Buckle, A. M. & Peault, B. Isolation of a candidate
human hematopoietic stem-cell population. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 89, 2804–2808 (1992).
4. Osawa, M., Hanada, K., Hamada, H. & Nakauchi, H. Long-term lymphohematopoietic
reconstitution by a single CD34-low/negative hematopoietic stem cell. Science 273, 242–245 (1996).
5. Akashi, K. & Weissman, I. L. in Developmental Biology of Hematopoiesis (ed. Zon, L. I.) 15–34 (Oxford
Univ. Press, New York, 2001).
6. Petersen, B. E. et al.Bone marrow as a potential source of hepatic oval cells. Science284,1168–1170 (1999).
7. Brazelton, T. R., Rossi, F. M. V., Keshet, G. I. & Blau, H. M. From marrow to brain: expression of
neuronal phenotypes in adult mice. Science 290, 1775–1779 (2000).
8. Mezey, E., Chandross, K. J., Harta, G., Maki, R. A. & McKercher, S. R. Turning blood into brain: cells
bearing neuronal antigens generated in vivo from bone marrow. Science 290, 1779–1782 (2000).
9. Lagasse, E. et al. Purified hematopoietic stem cells can differentiate to hepatocytes in vivo. Nature
Med. 6, 1229–1234 (2000).
10.Krause, D. S. et al. Multi-organ, multi-lineage engraftment by a single bone marrow derived stem cell.
Cell 105, 369–377 (2001).
11.Morrison, S. J., Wandycz, A. M., Hemmati, H. D., Wright, D. E. & Weissman, I. L. Identification of a
lineage of multipotent hematopoietic progenitors. Development 124, 1929–1939 (1997).
12.Weissman, I. L. Translating stem and progenitor cell biology to the clinic: barriers and opportunities.
Science 287, 1442–1446 (2000).
13.Miller, C. L. & Eaves, C. J. Expansion in vitro of adult murine hematopoietic stem cells with transplantable
lympho-myeloid reconstituting ability. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 94, 13648–13653 (1997).
14.Domen, J., Gandy, K. L. & Weissman, I. L. Systemic overexpression of BCL-2 in the hematopoietic system
protects transgenic mice from the consequences of lethal irradiation. Blood 91, 2272–2282 (1998).
15.Domen, J. & Weissman, I. L. Hematopoietic stem cells need two signals to prevent apoptosis; BCL-2
can provide one of these, Kitl/c-Kit signaling the other. J. Exp. Med. 192, 1707–1718 (2000).
16.Taipale, J. & Beachy, P. A. The Hedgehog and Wnt signaling pathways in cancer. Nature 411,
349–354 (2001).
17.Varnum-Finney, B. et al. Pluripotent, cytokine-dependent, hematopoietic stem cells are immortalized
by constitutive Notch1 signaling. Nature Med. 6, 1278–1281 (2000).
18.Karanu, F. N. et al. The Notch ligand Jagged-1 represents a novel growth factor of human
hematopoietic stem cells. J. Exp. Med. 192, 1365–1372 (2000).
19.Bhardwaj, G. et al. Sonic hedgehog induces the proliferation of primitive human hematopoietic cells
via BMP regulation. Nature Immunol. 2, 172–180 (2001).
20.Nusse, R. & Varmus, H. E. Many tumors induced by the mouse mammary tumor virus contain a
provirus integrated in the same region of the host genome. Cell 31, 99–109 (1982).
21.Cadigan, K. M. & Nusse, R. Wnt signaling: a common theme in animal development. Genes Dev. 11,
3286–3305 (1997).
22.Reya, T. et al. Wnt signaling regulates B lymphocyte proliferation through a LEF-1 dependent
mechanism. Immunity 13, 15–24 (2000).
23.Austin, T. W., Solar, G. P., Ziegler, F. C., Liem, L. & Matthews, W. A role for the Wnt gene family in
hematopoiesis: expansion of multilineage progenitor cells. Blood 89, 3624–3635 (1997).
24.Van Den Berg, D. J., Sharma, A. K., Bruno, E. & Hoffman, R. Role of members of the Wnt gene family
in human hematopoiesis. Blood 92, 3189–3202 (1998).
25.Zhu, A. J. & Watt, F. M. b-catenin signalling modulates proliferative potential of human epidermal
keratinocytes independently of intercellular adhesion. Development 126, 2285–2298 (1999).
26.Gat, U., DasGupta, R., Degenstein, L. & Fuchs, E. De novo hair follicle morphogenesis and hair
tumors in mice expressing a truncated b-catenin in skin. Cell 95, 605–614 (1998).
27.Korinek, V. et al. Depletion of epithelia stem-cell compartments in the small intestine of mice lacking
Tcf-4. Nature Genet. 19, 1–5 (1998).
28.Sell, S. & Pierce, G. B. Maturation arrest of stem cell differentiation is a common pathway for the
cellular origin of teratocarcinomas and epithelial cancers. Lab. Invest. 70, 6–22 (1994).
29.Sawyers, C., Denny, C. & Witte, O. Leukemia and the disruption of normal hematopoiesis. Cell 64,
337–350 (1991).
30.Kondo, M., Weissman, I. L. & Akashi, K. Identification of clonogenic common lymphoid progenitors
in mouse bone marrow. Cell 91, 661–672 (1997).
31.Bonnet, D. & Dick, J. E. Human acute myeloid leukemia is organized as a hierarchy that originates
from a primitive hematopoietic cell. Nature Med. 3, 730–737 (1997).
32.Miyamoto, T., Weissman, I. L. & Akashi, K. AML1/ETO-expressing nonleukemic stem cells in acute
myelogenous leukemia with 8;21 chromosomal translocation. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 97,
7521–7526 (2000).
33.George, A. A. et al. Detection of leukemic cells in the CD34+CD38– bone marrow progenitor
population in children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Blood 97, 3925–3930 (2001).
34.Mauro, M. J. & Druker, B. J. Chronic myelogenous leukemia. Curr. Opin. Oncol. 13, 3–7 (2001).
35.Lagasse, E. & Weissman, I. L. bcl-2 inhibits apoptosis of neutrophils but not their engulfment by
macrophages. J. Exp. Med. 179, 1047–1052 (1994).
36.Traver, D., Akashi, K., Weissman, I. L. & Lagasse, E. Mice defective in two apoptosis pathways in the
myeloid lineage develop acute myeloblastic leukemia. Immunity 9, 47–57 (1998).
37.Polakis, P. Wnt signaling and cancer. Genes Dev. 14, 1837–1851 (2000).
38.Tsukamoto, A., Grosschedl, R., Guzman, R., Parslow, T. & Varmus, H. E. Expression of the int-1 gene
in transgenic mice is associated with mammary gland hyperplasia and adenocarcinomas in male and
female mice. Cell 55, 619–625 (1988).
39.Weissman, I. L. & Baird, S. in Neoplastic Transformation: Mechanisms and Consequences (ed.
Korprowski, H.) 135–152 (Dahlem Conferenzen, Berlin, 1977).
40.McGrath, M. S. & Weissman, I. L. AKR leukemogenesis: identification and biological significance of
thymic lymphoma receptors for AKR retroviruses. Cell 17, 65–75 (1979).
41.McGrath, M. S., Pillemer, E. & Weissman, I. L. Murine leukaemogenesis: monoclonal antibodies to T-
cell determinants arrest T-lymphoma cell proliferation. Nature 285, 259–261 (1980).
42.Quinn, E. R. et al. The B cell receptor of a hepatitis C virus associated non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma
binds the viral E-2 envelope protein, implicating immunoglobulin activation in lymphomagenesis.
Blood (in the press).
43.O’Neill, H. C., McGrath, M. S., Allison, J. P. & Weissman, I. L. A subset of T cell receptors associated with
L3T4 molecules mediates C6VL leukemia cell binding of its cognate retrovirus. Cell 49, 143–151 (1987).
44.Morrison, S. J., Shah, N. M. & Anderson, D. J. Regulatory mechanisms in stem cell biology. Cell 88,
287–298 (1997).
45.Kummermehr, J. & Trott, K.-R. in Stem Cells (ed. Potten, C. S.) 363–399 (Academic, New York, 1997).
46.Fidler, I. J. & Kripke, M. L. Metastasis results from preexisting variant cells within a malignant tumor.
Science 197, 893–895 (1977).
47.Fidler, I. J. & Hart, I. R. Biological diversity in metastatic neoplasms: origins and implications. Science
217, 998–1003 (1982).
48.Heppner, G. H. Tumor heterogeneity. Cancer Res. 44, 2259–2265 (1984).
49.Nowell, P. C. Mechanisms of tumor progression. Cancer Res. 46, 2203–2207 (1986).
50.Nowell, P. C. A minute chromosome in human granulocytic leukemia. Science 132, 1497 (1960).
51.Fialkow, P. J. Clonal origin of human tumors. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 458, 283–321 (1976).
52.Fearon, E. R., Hamilton, S. R. & Vogelstein, B. Clonal analysis of human colorectal tumors. Science
238, 193–197 (1987).
53.Park, C. H., Bergsagel, D. E. & McCulloch, E. A. Mouse myeloma tumor stem cells: a primary cell
culture assay. J. Natl Cancer Inst. 46, 411–422 (1971).
54.Bruce, W. R. & Gaag, H. v. d. A quantitative assay for the number of murine lymphoma cells capable
of proliferation in vivo. Nature 199, 79–80 (1963).
55.Wodinsky, I., Swiniarski, J. & Kensler, C. J. Spleen colony studies of leukemia L1210. I. Growth
kinetics of lymphocytic L1210 cells in vivo as determined by spleen colony assay. Cancer Chemother.
Rep. 51, 415–421 (1967).
56.Bergsagel, D. E. & Valeriote, F. A. Growth characteristics of a mouse plasma cell tumor. Cancer Res. 28,
2187–2196 (1968).
57.Bonnet, D. & Dick, J. E. Human acute myeloid leukemia is organized as a hierarchy that originates
from a primitive hematopoietic cell. Nature Med. 3, 730–737 (1997).
58.Southam, C. M. & Brunschwig, A. Quantitative studies of autotransplantation of human cancer.
Cancer 14, 971–978 (1961).
59.Hamburger, A. W. & Salmon, S. E. Primary bioassay of human tumor stem cells. Science 197,
461–463 (1977).
60.Salsbury, A. J. The significance of the circulating cancer cell. Cancer Treatment Rev. 2, 55–72 (1975).
61.Williams, S. D. Treatment of disseminated germ cell tumors with cisplatin, bleomycin, and either
vinblastine or etoposide. N. Engl. J. Med. 316, 1435–1439 (1987).
62.Stockler, M., Wilcken, N. R. C., Ghersi, D. & Simes, R. J. Systematic reviews of chemotherapy and
endocrine therapy in metastatic breast cancer. Cancer Treatment Rev. 26, 151–168 (2000).
63.Lippman, M. E. High-dose chemotherapy plus autologous bone marrow transplantation for
metastatic breast cancer. N. Engl. J. Med. 342, 1119–1120 (2000).
64.Harrison, D. E. & Lerner, C. P. Most primitive hematopoietic stem cells are stimulated to cycle rapidly
after treatment with 5-fluorouracil. Blood 78, 1237–1240 (1991).
65.Bouwens, L. & DeBlay, E. Islet morphogenesis and stem cell markers in rat pancreas. J. Histochem.
Cytochem. 44, 947–951 (1996).
66.Peters, R., Leyvraz, S. & Perey, L. Apoptotic regulation in primitive hematopoietic precursors. Blood
92, 2041–2052 (1998).
67.Domen, J., Gandy, K. L. & Weissman, I. L. Systemic overexpression of BCL-2 in the hematopoietic system
protects transgenic mice from the consequences of lethal irradiation. Blood 91, 2272–2282 (1998).
68.Feuerhake, F., Sigg, W., Hofter, E. A., Dimpfl, T. & Welsch, U. Immunohistochemical analysis of Bcl-2
and Bax expression in relation to cell turnover and epithelial differentiation markers in the non-
lactating human mammary gland epithelium. Cell Tissue Res. 299, 47–58 (2000).
69.Zhou, S. et al. The ABC transporter Bcrp1/ABCG2 is expressed in a wide variety of stem cells and is a
molecular determinant of the side-population phenotype. Nature Med. 7, 1028–1034 (2001).
70.Terskikh, A. V. et al. From hematopoiesis to neuropoiesis: evidence of overlapping genetic programs.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 98, 7934–7939. (2001).
71.Bittner, M. et al. Molecular classification of cutaneous malignant melanoma by gene expression
profiling. Nature 406, 536–540 (2000).
72.Perou, C. M. et al. Molecular portraits of human breast tumours. Nature 406, 747–752 (2000).
73.Alizadeh, A. A. et al. Distinct types of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma identified by gene expression
profiling. Nature 403, 503–511 (2000).
74.Golub, T. R. Genome-wide views of cancer. N. Engl. J. Med. 344, 601–602 (2001).
75.Sgroi, D. C. et al. In vivo gene expression profile analysis of human breast cancer progression. Cancer
Res. 59, 5656–5661 (1999).
76.Leethanakul, C. et al. Distinct pattern of expression of differentiation and growth-related genes in
squamous cell carcinomas of the head and neck revealed by the use of laser capture microdissection
and cDNA arrays. Oncogene 19, 3220–3224 (2000).
77.Kogan, S. C. et al. BCL-2 cooperates with promyelocytic leukemia retinoic acid receptor a chimeric
protein (PMLRARa) to block neutrophil differentiation and initiate acute leukemia. J. Exp. Med. 193,
531–543 (2001).
78.Wechsler-Reya, R. J. & Scott, M. P. Control of neuronal precursor proliferation in the cerebellum by
Sonic Hedgehog. Neuron 22, 103–114 (1999).
79.Zhang, Y. & Kalderon, D. Hedgehog acts as a somatic stem cell factor in the Drosophila ovary. Nature
410, 599–604 (2001).
80.Henrique, D. et al. Maintenance of neuroepithelial progenitor cells by Delta-Notch signalling in the
embryonic chick retina. Curr. Biol. 7, 661–670 (1997).
81.Austin, J. & Kimble, J. glp-1 is required in the germ line for regulation of the decision between mitosis
and meiosis in C. elegans. Cell 51, 589–599 (1987).
82.Chan, E. F., Gat, U., McNiff, J. M. & Fuchs, E. A common human skin tumour is caused by activating
mutations in b-catenin. Nature Genet. 21, 410–413 (1999).
83.Wechsler-Reya, R. & Scott, M. P. The developmental biology of brain tumors. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 24,
385–428 (2001).
84.Gailani, M. R. & Bale, A. E. Acquired and inherited basal cell carcinomas and the patched gene. Adv.
Dermatol. 14, 261–283 (1999).
85.Ellisen, L. W. et al. TAN-1, the human homolog of the Drosophila notch gene, is broken by
chromosomal translocations in T lymphoblastic neoplasms. Cell 66, 649–661 (1991).
insight review articles
NATURE | VOL 414 | 1 NOVEMBER 2001 | www.nature.com
111
© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd