

----- Page 1 (native text) -----
Cancer Genome Landscapes
Bert Vogelstein, Nickolas Papadopoulos, Victor E. Velculescu, Shibin Zhou, Luis A. Diaz
Jr., and Kenneth W. Kinzler*
The Ludwig Center and The Howard Hughes Medical Institute at Johns Hopkins Kimmel Cancer
Center, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA
Abstract
Over the past decade, comprehensive sequencing efforts have revealed the genomic landscapes of
common forms of human cancer. For most cancer types, this landscape consists of a small number
of “mountains” (genes altered in a high percentage of tumors) and a much larger number of “hills”
(genes altered infrequently). To date, these studies have revealed ~140 genes that, when altered by
intragenic mutations, can promote or “drive” tumorigenesis. A typical tumor contains two to eight
of these “driver gene” mutations; the remaining mutations are passengers that confer no selective
growth advantage. Driver genes can be classified into 12 signaling pathways that regulate three
core cellular processes: cell fate, cell survival, and genome maintenance. A better understanding
of these pathways is one of the most pressing needs in basic cancer research. Even now, however,
our knowledge of cancer genomes is sufficient to guide the development of more effective
approaches for reducing cancer morbidity and mortality.
Ten years ago, the idea that all of the genes altered in cancer could be identified at base-pair
resolution would have seemed like science fiction. Today, such genome-wide analysis,
through sequencing of the exome (see Box 1, Glossary, for definitions of terms used in this
Review) or of the whole genome, is routine.
Box 1
Glossary
Adenoma
A benign tumor composed of epithelial cells.
Alternative
lengthening of
telomeres (ALT)
A process of maintaining telomeres independent of
telomerase, the enzyme normally responsible for telomere
replication.
Amplification
A genetic alteration producing a large number of copies of
a small segment (less than a few megabases) of the
genome.
Angiogenesis
the process of forming vascular conduits, including veins,
arteries, and lymphatics.
Copyright 2013 by the American Association for the Advancement of Science; all rights reserved.
*Corresponding author. kinzlke@jhmi.edu.
Supplementary Materials
www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/full/339/6127/1546/DC1 Tables S1 to S5
NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Science. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 22.
Published in final edited form as:
Science. 2013 March 29; 339(6127): 1546–1558. doi:10.1126/science.1235122.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript


----- Page 2 (native text) -----
Benign tumor
An abnormal proliferation of cells driven by at least one
mutation in an oncogene or tumor suppressor gene. These
cells are not invasive (i.e., they cannot penetrate the
basement membrane lining them), which distinguishes
them from malignant cells.
Carcinoma
A type of malignant tumor composed of epithelial cells.
Clonal mutation
A mutation that exists in the vast majority of the neoplastic
cells within a tumor.
Driver gene mutation
(driver)
A mutation that directly or indirectly confers a selective
growth advantage to the cell in which it occurs.
Driver gene
A gene that contains driver gene mutations (Mut-Driver
gene) or is expressed aberrantly in a fashion that confers a
selective growth advantage (Epi-Driver gene).
Epi-driver gene
A gene that is expressed aberrantly in cancers in a fashion
that confers a selective growth advantage.
Epigenetic
Changes in gene expression or cellular phenotype caused
by mechanisms other than changes in the DNA sequence.
Exome
The collection of exons in the human genome. Exome
sequencing generally refers to the collection of exons that
encode proteins.
Gatekeeper
A gene that, when mutated, initiates tumorigenesis.
Examples include RB, mutations of which initiate
retinoblastomas, and VHL, whose mutations initiate renal
cell carcinomas.
Germline genome
An individual’s genome, as inherited from their parents.
Germline variants
Variations in sequences observed in different individuals.
Two randomly chosen individuals differ by ~20,000
genetic variations distributed throughout the exome.
Human leukocyte
antigen (HLA)
A protein encoded by genes that determine an individual’s
capacity to respond to specific antigens or reject
transplants from other individuals.
Homozygous
deletion
Deletion of both copies of a gene segment (the one
inherited from the mother, as well as that inherited from
the father).
Vogelstein et al.
Page 2
Science. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 22.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript


----- Page 3 (native text) -----
Indel
A mutation due to small insertion or deletion of one or a
few nucleotides.
Karyotype
Display of the chromosomes of a cell on a microscopic
slide, used to evaluate changes in chromosome number as
well as structural alterations of chromosomes.
Kinase
A protein that catalyzes the addition of phosphate groups
to other molecules, such as proteins or lipids. These
proteins are essential to nearly all signal transduction
pathways.
Liquid tumors
Tumors composed of hematopoietic (blood) cells, such as
leukemias. Though lymphomas generally form solid
masses in lymph nodes, they are often classified as liquid
tumors because of their derivation from hematopoietic
cells and ability to travel through lymphatics.
Malignant tumor
An abnormal proliferation of cells driven by mutations in
oncogenes or tumor suppressor genes that has already
invaded their surrounding stroma. It is impossible to
distinguish an isolated benign tumor cell from an isolated
malignant tumor cell. This distinction can be made only
through examination of tissue architecture.
Metastatic tumor
A malignant tumor that has migrated away from its
primary site, such as to draining lymph nodes or another
organ.
Methylation
Covalent addition of a methyl group to a protein, DNA, or
other molecule.
Missense mutation
A single-nucleotide substitution (e.g., C to T) that results in
an amino acid substitution (e.g., histidine to arginine).
Mut-driver gene
A gene that contains driver gene mutations.
Nonsense mutation
A single-nucleotide substitution (e.g., C to T) that results in
the production of a stop codon.
Nonsynonymous
mutation
A mutation that alters the encoded amino acid sequence of
a protein. These include missense, nonsense, splice site,
translation start, translation stop, and indel mutations.
Oncogene
A gene that, when activated by mutation, increases the
selective growth advantage of the cell in which it resides.
Vogelstein et al.
Page 3
Science. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 22.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript


----- Page 4 (native text) -----
Passenger mutation
(passenger)
A mutation that has no direct or indirect effect on the
selective growth advantage of the cell in which it occurred.
Primary tumor
The original tumor at the site where tumor growth was
initiated. This can be defined for solid tumors, but not for
liquid tumors.
Promoter
A region within or near the gene that helps regulate its
expression.
Rearrangement
A mutation that juxtaposes nucleotides that are normally
separated, such as those on two different chromosomes.
Selective growth
advantage (s)
The difference between birth and death in a cell
population. In normal adult cells in the absence of injury, s
= 0.000000.
Self-renewing tissues
Tissues whose cells normally repopulate themselves, such
as those lining the gastrointestinal or urogenital tracts, as
well as blood cells.
Single-base
substitution (SBS)
A single-nucleotide substitution (e.g., C to T) relative to a
reference sequence or, in the case of somatic mutations,
relative to the germline genome of the person with a tumor.
Solid tumors
Tumors that form discrete masses, such as carcinomas or
sarcomas.
Somatic mutations
Mutations that occur in any non–germ cell of the body
after conception, such as those that initiate tumorigenesis.
Splice sites
Small regions of genes that are juxtaposed to the exons and
direct exon splicing.
Stem cell
An immortal cell that can repopulate a particular cell type.
Subclonal mutation
A mutation that exists in only a subset of the neoplastic
cells within a tumor.
Translocation
A specific type of rearrangement where regions from two
nonhomologous chromosomes are joined.
Tumor suppressor
gene
A gene that, when inactivated by mutation, increases the
selective growth advantage of the cell in which it resides.
Untranslated regions
Regions within the exons at the 5′ and 3′ ends of the gene
that do not encode amino acids.
Vogelstein et al.
Page 4
Science. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 22.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript


----- Page 5 (native text) -----
The prototypical exomic studies of cancer evaluated ~20 tumors at a cost of >$100,000 per
case (1–3). Today, the cost of this sequencing has been reduced 100-fold, and studies
reporting the sequencing of more than 100 tumors of a given type are the norm (table S1A).
Although vast amounts of data can now be readily obtained, deciphering this information in
meaningful terms is still challenging. Here, we review what has been learned about cancer
genomes from these sequencing studies—and, more importantly, what this information has
taught us about cancer biology and future cancer management strategies.
How Many Genes Are Subtly Mutated in a Typical Human Cancer?
In common solid tumors such as those derived from the colon, breast, brain, or pancreas, an
average of 33 to 66 genes display subtle somatic mutations that would be expected to alter
their protein products (Fig. 1A). About 95% of these mutations are single-base substitutions
(such as C>G), whereas the remainder are deletions or insertions of one or a few bases (such
as CTT>CT) (table S1B). Of the base substitutions, 90.7% result in missense changes, 7.6%
result in nonsense changes, and 1.7% result in alterations of splice sites or untranslated
regions immediately adjacent to the start and stop codons (table S1B).
Certain tumor types display many more or many fewer mutations than average (Fig. 1B).
Notable among these outliers are melanomas and lung tumors, which contain ~200
nonsynonymous mutations per tumor (table S1C). These larger numbers reflect the
involvement of potent mutagens (ultraviolet light and cigarette smoke, respectively) in the
pathogenesis of these tumor types. Accordingly, lung cancers from smokers have 10 times
as many somatic mutations as those from nonsmokers (4). Tumors with defects in DNA
repair form another group of outliers (5). For example, tumors with mismatch repair defects
can harbor thousands of mutations (Fig. 1B), even more than lung tumors or melanomas.
Recent studies have shown that high numbers of mutations are also found in tumors with
genetic alterations of the proofreading domain of DNA polymerases POLE or POLD1 (6, 7).
At the other end of the spectrum, pediatric tumors and leukemias harbor far fewer point
mutations: on average, 9.6 per tumor (table S1C). The basis for this observation is
considered below.
Mutation Timing
When do these mutations occur? Tumors evolve from benign to malignant lesions by
acquiring a series of mutations over time, a process that has been particularly well studied in
colorectal tumors (8, 9). The first, or “gatekeeping,” mutation provides a selective growth
advantage to a normal epithelial cell, allowing it to outgrow the cells that surround it and
become a microscopic clone (Fig. 2). Gatekeeping mutations in the colon most often occur
in the APC gene (10). The small adenoma that results from this mutation grows slowly, but
a second mutation in another gene, such as KRAS, unleashes a second round of clonal
growth that allows an expansion of cell number (9). The cells with only the APC mutation
may persist, but their cell numbers are small compared with the cells that have mutations in
both genes. This process of mutation followed by clonal expansion continues, with
mutations in genes such as PIK3CA, SMAD4, and TP53, eventually generating a malignant
tumor that can invade through the underlying basement membrane and metastasize to lymph
nodes and distant organs such as the liver (11). The mutations that confer a selective growth
advantage to the tumor cell are called “driver” mutations. It has been estimated (12) that
each driver mutation provides only a small selective growth advantage to the cell, on the
order of a 0.4% increase in the difference between cell birth and cell death. Over many
years, however, this slight increase, compounded once or twice per week, can result in a
large mass, containing billions of cells.
Vogelstein et al.
Page 5
Science. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 22.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript


----- Page 6 (native text) -----
The number of mutations in certain tumors of self-renewing tissues is directly correlated
with age (13). When evaluated through linear regression, this correlation implies that more
than half of the somatic mutations identified in these tumors occur during the preneoplastic
phase; that is, during the growth of normal cells that continuously replenish gastrointestinal
and genito-urinary epithelium and other tissues. All of these pre-neoplastic mutations are
“passenger” mutations that have no effect on the neoplastic process. This result explains
why a colorectal tumor in a 90-year-old patient has nearly twice as many mutations as a
morphologically identical colorectal tumor in a 45-year-old patient. This finding also partly
explains why advanced brain tumors (glioblastomas) and pancreatic cancers (pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinomas) have fewer mutations than colorectal tumors; glial cells of the
brain and epithelial cells of the pancreatic ducts do not replicate, unlike the epithelial cells
lining the crypts of the colon. Therefore, the gatekeeping mutation in a pancreatic or brain
cancer is predicted to occur in a precursor cell that contains many fewer mutations than are
present in a colorectal precursor cell. This line of reasoning also helps to explain why
pediatric cancers have fewer mutations than adult tumors. Pediatric cancers often occur in
non–self-renewing tissues, and those that arise in renewing tissues (such as leukemias)
originate from precursor cells that have not renewed themselves as often as in adults. In
addition, pediatric tumors, as well as adult leukemias and lymphomas, may require fewer
rounds of clonal expansion than adult solid tumors (8, 14). Genome sequencing studies of
leukemia patients support the idea that mutations occur as random events in normal
precursor cells before these cells acquire an initiating mutation (15).
When during tumorigenesis do the remaining somatic mutations occur? Because mutations
in tumors occur at predictable and calculable rates (see below), the number of somatic
mutations in tumors provides a clock, much like the clock used in evolutionary biology to
determine species divergence time. The number of mutations has been measured in tumors
representing progressive stages of colorectal and pancreatic cancers (11, 16). Applying the
evolutionary clock model to these data leads to two unambiguous conclusions: First, it takes
decades to develop a full-blown, metastatic cancer. Second, virtually all of the mutations in
metastatic lesions were already present in a large number of cells in the primary tumors.
The timing of mutations is relevant to our understanding of metastasis, which is responsible
for the death of most patients with cancer. The primary tumor can be surgically removed,
but the residual metastatic lesions—often undetectable and widespread—remain and
eventually enlarge, compromising the function of the lungs, liver, or other organs. From a
genetics perspective, it would seem that there must be mutations that convert a primary
cancer to a metastatic one, just as there are mutations that convert a normal cell to a benign
tumor, or a benign tumor to a malignant one (Fig. 2). Despite intensive effort, however,
consistent genetic alterations that distinguish cancers that metastasize from cancers that have
not yet metastasized remain to be identified.
One potential explanation invokes mutations or epigenetic changes that are difficult to
identify with current technologies (see section on “dark matter” below). Another explanation
is that meta-static lesions have not yet been studied in sufficient detail to identify these
genetic alterations, particularly if the mutations are heterogeneous in nature. But another
possible explanation is that there are no metastasis genes. A malignant primary tumor can
take many years to metastasize, but this process is, in principle, explicable by stochastic
processes alone (17, 18). Advanced tumors release millions of cells into the circulation each
day, but these cells have short half-lives, and only a miniscule fraction establish metastatic
lesions (19). Conceivably, these circulating cells may, in a nondeterministic manner,
infrequently and randomly lodge in a capillary bed in an organ that provides a favorable
microenvironment for growth. The bigger the primary tumor mass, the more likely that this
process will occur. In this scenario, the continual evolution of the primary tumor would
Vogelstein et al.
Page 6
Science. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 22.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript


----- Page 7 (native text) -----
reflect local selective advantages rather than future selective advantages. The idea that
growth at metastatic sites is not dependent on additional genetic alterations is also supported
by recent results showing that even normal cells, when placed in suitable environments such
as lymph nodes, can grow into organoids, complete with a functioning vasculature (20).
Other Types of Genetic Alterations in Tumors
Though the rate of point mutations in tumors is similar to that of normal cells, the rate of
chromosomal changes in cancer is elevated (21). Therefore, most solid tumors display
widespread changes in chromosome number (aneuploidy), as well as deletions, inversions,
translocations, and other genetic abnormalities. When a large part of a chromosome is
duplicated or deleted, it is difficult to identify the specific “target” gene(s) on the
chromosome whose gain or loss confers a growth advantage to the tumor cell. Target genes
are more easily identified in the case of chromosome translocations, homozygous deletions,
and gene amplifications. Translocations generally fuse two genes to create an oncogene
(such as BCR-ABL in chronic myelogenous leukemia) but, in a small number of cases, can
inactivate a tumor suppressor gene by truncating it or separating it from its promoter.
Homozygous deletions often involve just one or a few genes, and the target is always a
tumor suppressor gene. Amplifications contain an oncogene whose protein product is
abnormally active simply because the tumor cell contains 10 to 100 copies of the gene per
cell, compared with the two copies present in normal cells.
Most solid tumors have dozens of translocations; however, as with point mutations, the
majority of translocations appear to be passengers rather than drivers. The breakpoints of the
translocations are often in “gene deserts” devoid of known genes, and many of the
translocations and homozygous deletions are adjacent to fragile sites that are prone to
breakage. Cancer cells can, perhaps, survive such chromosome breaks more easily than
normal cells because they contain mutations that incapacitate genes like TP53, which would
normally respond to DNA damage by triggering cell death. Studies to date indicate that there
are roughly 10 times fewer genes affected by chromosomal changes than by point mutations.
Figure 3 shows the types and distribution of genetic alterations that affect protein-coding
genes in five representative tumor types. Protein-coding genes account for only ~1.5% of the
total genome, and the number of alterations in noncoding regions is proportionately higher
than the number affecting coding regions. The vast majority of the alterations in noncoding
regions are presumably passengers. These noncoding mutations, as well as the numerous
epigenetic changes found in cancers, will be discussed later.
Drivers Versus Passenger Mutations
Though it is easy to define a “driver gene mutation” in physiologic terms (as one conferring
a selective growth advantage), it is more difficult to identify which somatic mutations are
drivers and which are passengers. Moreover, it is important to point out that there is a
fundamental difference between a driver gene and a driver gene mutation. A driver gene is
one that contains driver gene mutations. But driver genes may also contain passenger gene
mutations. For example, APC is a large driver gene, but only those mutations that truncate
the encoded protein within its N-terminal 1600 amino acids are driver gene mutations.
Missense mutations throughout the gene, as well as protein-truncating mutations in the C-
terminal 1200 amino acids, are passenger gene mutations.
Numerous statistical methods to identify driver genes have been described. Some are based
on the frequency of mutations in an individual gene compared with the mutation frequency
of other genes in the same or related tumors after correction for sequence context and gene
size (22, 23). Other methods are based on the predicted effects of mutation on the encoded
protein, as inferred from biophysical studies (24–26). All of these methods are useful for
Vogelstein et al.
Page 7
Science. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 22.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript


----- Page 8 (native text) -----
prioritizing genes that are most likely to promote a selective growth advantage when
mutated. When the number of mutations in a gene is very high, as with TP53 or KRAS, any
reasonable statistic will indicate that the gene is extremely likely to be a driver gene. These
highly mutated genes have been termed “mountains” (1). Unfortunately, however, genes
with more than one, but still relatively few mutations (so called “hills”) numerically
dominate cancer genome landscapes (1). In these cases, methods based on mutation
frequency and context alone cannot reliably indicate which genes are drivers, because the
background rates of mutation vary so much among different patients and regions of the
genome. Recent studies of normal cells have indicated that the rate of mutation varies by
more than 100-fold within the genome (27). In tumor cells, this variation can be higher and
may affect whole regions of the genome in an apparently random fashion (28). Thus, at best,
methods based on mutation frequency can only prioritize genes for further analysis but
cannot unambiguously identify driver genes that are mutated at relatively low frequencies.
Further complicating matters, there are two distinct meanings of the term “driver gene” that
are used in the cancer literature. The driver-versus-passenger concept was originally used to
distinguish mutations that caused a selective growth advantage from those that did not (29).
According to this definition, a gene that does not harbor driver gene mutations cannot be a
driver gene. But many genes that contain few or no driver gene mutations have been labeled
driver genes in the literature. These include genes that are overexpressed, underexpressed, or
epigenetically altered in tumors, or those that enhance or inhibit some aspect of
tumorigenicity when their expression is experimentally manipulated. Though a subset of
these genes may indeed play an important role in the neoplastic process, it is confusing to
lump them all together as driver genes.
To reconcile the two connotations of driver genes, we suggest that genes suspected of
increasing the selective growth advantage of tumor cells be categorized as either “Mut-
driver genes” or “Epi-driver genes.” Mut-driver genes contain a sufficient number or type of
driver gene mutations to unambiguously distinguish them from other genes. Epi-driver
genes are expressed aberrantly in tumors but not frequently mutated; they are altered
through changes in DNA methylation or chromatin modification that persist as the tumor
cell divides.
A Ratiometric Method to Identify and Classify Mut-Driver Genes
If mutation frequency, corrected for mutation context, gene length, and other parameters,
cannot reliably identify modestly mutated driver genes, what can? In our experience, the
best way to identify Mut-driver genes is through their pattern of mutation rather than
through their mutation frequency. The patterns of mutations in well-studied oncogenes and
tumor suppressor genes are highly characteristic and nonrandom. Oncogenes are recurrently
mutated at the same amino acid positions, whereas tumor suppressor genes are mutated
through protein-truncating alterations throughout their length (Fig. 4 and table S2A).
On the basis of these mutation patterns rather than frequencies, we can determine which of
the 18,306 mutated genes containing a total of 404,863 subtle mutations that have been
recorded in the Catalogue of Somatic Mutations in Cancer (COSMIC) database (30) are
Mut-driver genes and whether they are likely to function as oncogenes or tumor suppressor
genes. To be classified as an oncogene, we simply require that >20% of the recorded
mutations in the gene are at recurrent positions and are missense (see legend to table S2A).
To be classified as a tumor suppressor gene, we analogously require that >20% of the
recorded mutations in the gene are inactivating. This “20/20 rule” is lenient in that all well-
documented cancer genes far surpass these criteria (table S2A).
Vogelstein et al.
Page 8
Science. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 22.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript


----- Page 9 (native text) -----
The following examples illustrate the value of the 20/20 rule. When IDH1 mutations were
first identified in brain tumors, their role in tumorigenesis was unknown (2, 31). Initial
functional studies suggested that IDH1 was a tumor suppressor gene and that mutations
inactivated this gene (32). However, nearly all of the mutations in IDH1 were at the identical
amino acid, codon 132 (Fig. 4). As assessed by the 20/20 rule, this distribution
unambiguously indicated that IDH1 was an oncogene rather than a tumor suppressor gene,
and this conclusion was eventually supported by biochemical experiments (33, 34). Another
example is provided by mutations in NOTCH1. In this case, some functional studies
suggested that NOTCH1 was an oncogene, whereas others suggested it was a tumor
suppressor gene (35, 36). The situation could be clarified through the application of the
20/20 rule to NOTCH1 mutations in cancers. In “liquid tumors” such as lymphomas and
leukemias, the mutations were often recurrent and did not truncate the predicted protein
(37). In squamous cell carcinomas, the mutations were not recurrent and were usually
inactivating (38–40). Thus, the genetic data clearly indicated that NOTCH1 functions
differently in different tumor types. The idea that the same gene can function in completely
opposite ways in different cell types is important for understanding cell signaling pathways.
How Many Mut-Driver Genes Exist?
Though all 20,000 protein-coding genes have been evaluated in the genome-wide
sequencing studies of 3284 tumors, with a total of 294,881 mutations reported, only 125
Mut-driver genes, as defined by the 20/20 rule, have been discovered to date (table S2A). Of
these, 71 are tumor suppressor genes and 54 are oncogenes. An important but relatively
small fraction (29%) of these genes was discovered to be mutated through unbiased genome-
wide sequencing; most of these genes had already been identified by previous, more directed
investigations.
How many more Mut-driver genes are yet to be discovered? We believe that a plateau is
being reached, because the same Mut-driver genes keep being “rediscovered” in different
tumor types. For example, MLL2 and MLL3 mutations were originally discovered in
medulloblastomas (41) and were subsequently discovered to be mutated in non-Hodgkin
lymphomas, prostate cancers, breast cancers, and other tumor types (42–45). Similarly,
ARID1A mutations were first discovered to be mutated in clear-cell ovarian cancers (46, 47)
and were subsequently shown to be mutated in tumors of several other organs, including
those of the stomach and liver (48–50). In recent studies of several types of lung cancer (4,
51, 52), nearly all genes found to be mutated at significant frequencies had already been
identified in tumors of other organs. In other words, the number of frequently altered Mut-
driver genes (mountains) is nearing saturation. More mountains will undoubtedly be
discovered, but these will likely be in uncommon tumor types that have not yet been studied
in depth.
The newly discovered Mut-driver genes that have been detected through genome-wide
sequencing have often proved illuminating. For example, nearly half of these genes encode
proteins that directly regulate chromatin through modification of histones or DNA.
Examples include the histones HIST1H3B and H3F3A, as well as the proteins DNMT1 and
TET1, which covalently modify DNA, EZH2, SETD2, and KDM6A, which, in turn,
methylate or demethylate histones (53–57). These discoveries have profound implications
for understanding the mechanistic basis of the epigenetic changes that are rampant in tumors
(58). The discovery of genetic alterations in genes encoding mRNA splicing factors, such as
SF3B1 and U2AF1 (59–61), was similarly stunning, as mutations in these genes would be
expected to lead to a plethora of nonspecific cellular stresses rather than to promote specific
tumor types. Another example is provided by mutations in the cooperating proteins ATRX
and DAXX (62). Tumors with mutations in these genes all have a specific type of telomere
Vogelstein et al.
Page 9
Science. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 22.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript


----- Page 10 (native text) -----
elongation process termed “ALT” (for “alternative lengthening of telomeres”) (63). Though
the ALT phenotype had been recognized for more than a decade, its genetic basis was
mysterious before the discovery of mutations of these genes and their perfect correlation
with the ALT phenotype (64). A final example is provided by IDH1 and IDH2, whose
mutations have stimulated the burgeoning field of tumor metabolism (65) and have had
fascinating implications for epigenetics (66, 67).
The Mut-driver genes listed in table S2A are affected by subtle mutations: base
substitutions, intragenic insertions, or deletions. As noted above, Mut-driver genes can also
be altered by less subtle changes, such as translocations, amplifications, and large-scale
deletions. As with point mutations, it can be difficult to distinguish Mut-driver genes that are
altered by these types of changes from genes that contain only passenger mutations. Genes
that are not point-mutated, but are recurrently amplified (e.g., MYC family genes) or
homozygously deleted (e.g., MAP2K4) and that meet other criteria (e.g., being the only gene
in the amplicon or homozygously deleted region) are listed in table S2B. This adds 13 Mut-
driver genes—10 oncogenes that are amplified and 3 tumor suppressor genes that are
homozygously deleted—to the 125 driver genes that are affected by subtle mutations, for a
total of 138 driver genes discovered to date (table S2).
Translocations provide similar challenges for driver classification. An important discovery
related to this point is chromothripsis (68), a rare cataclysmic event involving one or a small
number of chromosomes that results in a large number of chromosomal rearrangements.
This complicates any inferences about causality, in the same way that mismatch repair
deficiency compromises the interpretation of point mutations. However, for completeness,
all fusion genes that have been identified in at least three independent tumors are listed in
table S3. Virtually all of these genes were discovered through conventional approaches
before the advent of genome-wide DNA sequencing studies, with some notable exceptions
such as those described in (6) and (69). The great majority of these translocations are found
in liquid tumors (leukemias and lymphomas) (table S3C) or mesenchymal tumors (table
S3B) and were initially identified through karyotypic analyses. A relatively small number of
recurrent fusions, the most important of which include ERG in prostate cancers (70) and
ALK in lung cancers (71), have been described in more common tumors (table S3A).
Genes exist that predispose to cancer when inherited in mutant form in the germ line, but are
not somatically mutated in cancer to a substantial degree. These genes generally do not
confer an increase in selective growth advantage when they are abnormal, but they stimulate
tumorigenesis in indirect ways (such as by increasing genetic instability, as discussed later
in this Review). For completeness, these genes and the hereditary syndromes for which they
are responsible are listed in table S4.
Dark Matter
Classic epidemiologic studies have suggested that solid tumors ordinarily require five to
eight “hits,” now interpreted as alterations in driver genes, to develop (72). Is this number
compatible with the molecular genetic data? In pediatric tumors such as medulloblastomas,
the number of driver gene mutations is low (zero to two), as expected from the discussion
above (Fig. 5). In common adult tumors—such as pancreatic, colorectal, breast, and brain
cancers—the number of mutated driver genes is often three to six, but several tumors have
only one or two driver gene mutations (Fig. 5). How can this be explained, given the widely
accepted notion that tumor development and progression require multiple, sequential genetic
alterations acquired over decades?
First, technical issues explain some of the “missing mutations.” Genome-wide sequencing is
far from perfect, at least with the technologies available today. Some regions of the genome
Vogelstein et al.
Page 10
Science. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 22.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript


----- Page 11 (native text) -----
are not well represented because their sequences are difficult to amplify, capture, or
unambiguously map to the genome (73–76). Second, there is usually a wide distribution in
the number of times that a specific nucleotide in a given gene is observed in the sequence
data, so some regions will not be well represented by chance factors alone (77). Finally,
primary tumors contain not only neoplastic cells, but also stromal cells that dilute the signal
from the mutated base, further reducing the probability of finding a mutation (78).
What fraction of mutations are missed by these three technical issues? A recent study of
pancreatic cancers is informative in this regard. Biankin et al. used immunohistochemical
and genetic analyses to select a set of primary tumor samples enriched in neoplastic cells
(79). They used massively parallel sequencing to analyze the exomes of these samples, then
compared their mutational data with a set of pancreatic cancer cell lines and xenografts in
which mutations had previously been identified, using conventional Sanger sequencing, and
confirmed to be present in the primary tumors (3, 16). Only 159 (63%) of the expected 251
driver gene mutations were identified in the primary tumors studied by next-generation
sequencing alone, indicating a false-negative rate of 37%. Genome-wide studies in which
the proportion of neoplastic cells within tumors is not as carefully evaluated as in (79) will
have higher false-negative rates. Moreover, these technical problems are exacerbated in
whole-genome studies compared with exomic analyses, because the sequence coverage of
the former is often lower than that of the latter (generally 30-fold in whole-genome studies
versus more than 100-fold in exomic studies).
Conceptual issues also limit the number of detectable drivers. Virtually all studies, either at
the whole-genome or whole-exome level, have focused on the coding regions. The reason
for this is practical; it is difficult enough to identify driver gene mutations when they
qualitatively alter the sequence of the encoded protein. Trying to make sense of intergenic or
intronic mutations is much more difficult. Based on analogous studies of the identifiable
mutations in patients with monogenic diseases, more than 80% of mutations should be
detectable through analysis of the coding regions (80). However, this still leaves some
mutations as unidentifiable “dark matter,” even in the germline genomes of heritable cases,
which are usually easier to interpret than the somatic mutations in cancers. The first
examples of light coming to such dark matter have recently been published: Recurrent
mutations in the promoter of the TERT gene, encoding the catalytic subunit of telomerase,
have been identified and shown to activate its transcription (81, 82).
Mut-driver genes other than those listed in table S2 will undoubtedly be discovered as
genome-wide sequencing continues. However, based on the trends noted above, most of the
Mut-driver genes will likely be mountains in rare tumor types or small hills in common
tumor types; thus, these genes are unlikely to account for the bulk of the presumptive dark
matter. Other types of dark matter can be envisioned, however. Copy-number alterations are
ubiquitous in cancers, at either the whole-chromosome or subchromosomal levels. These
alterations could subtly change the expression of their driver genes. Recent studies have
suggested that the loss of one copy of chromosomes containing several tumor suppressor
genes, each plausibly connected to neoplasia but not altered by mutation, may confer a
selective growth advantage (83, 84).
The most obvious source of dark matter is in Epi-driver genes. Human tumors contain large
numbers of epigenetic changes affecting DNA or chromatin proteins. For example, a recent
study of colorectal cancers showed that more than 10% of the protein-coding genes were
differentially methylated when compared with normal colorectal epithelial cells (85). Some
of these changes (i.e., those in Epi-driver genes) are likely to provide a selective growth
advantage (86, 87). For example, epigenetic silencing of CDK2NA and MLH1 is much
more common than mutational inactivation of either of these two well-recognized driver
Vogelstein et al.
Page 11
Science. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 22.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript


----- Page 12 (native text) -----
genes (85) However, there is a critical difference between a genetic and an epigenetic
change in a gene. Unlike the sequence of a gene in a given individual, methylation is plastic,
varying with cell type, developmental stage, and patient age (21). The methylation state of
the normal precursor cells that initiate tumorigenesis is unknown; these cells, such as normal
stem cells, may represent only a tiny fraction of the cells in a normal organ. This plasticity
also means that methylation can change under microenvironmental cues, such as those
associated with low nutrient concentrations or abnormal cell contacts. It is therefore difficult
to know whether specific epigenetic changes observed in cancer cells reflect, rather than
contribute to, the neoplastic state. Criteria for distinguishing epigenetic changes that exert a
selective growth advantage from those that do not (passenger epigenetic changes) have not
yet been formulated. Given that Epi-driver genes are likely to compose a major component
of the dark matter, further research on this topic is essential (58).
Genetic Heterogeneity
The mutations depicted in Fig. 1 are clonal; that is, they are present in the majority of the
neoplastic cells in the tumors. But additional, subclonal (i.e., heterogeneous within the
tumor) mutations are important for understanding tumor evolution. Four types of genetic
heterogeneity are relevant to tumorigenesis (Fig. 6):
1.
Intratumoral: heterogeneity among the cells of one tumor. This type of
heterogeneity has been recognized for decades. For example, it is rare to see a
cytogenetic study of a solid tumor in which all of the tumor cells display the same
karyotype (88). The same phenomenon has been noted for individual genes [e.g.,
(89)] and more recently has been observed throughout the genome (16, 90–96).
This kind of heterogeneity must exist: Every time a normal (or tumor) cell divides,
it acquires a few mutations, and the number of mutations that distinguish any two
cells simply marks the time from their last common ancestor (their founder cell).
Cells at the opposite ends of large tumors will be spatially distinct and, in general,
will display more differences than neighboring cells (16). This phenomenon is
analogous to speciation, wherein organisms on different islands are more likely to
diverge from one another than are organisms on the same island.
In studies that have evaluated intratumoral heterogeneity by genome-wide
sequencing, the majority of somatic mutations are present in all tumor cells. These
mutations form the trunk of the somatic evolutionary tree. What is the importance
of the mutations in the branches (i.e., those that are not shared by all tumor cells)?
From a medical perspective, these mutations are often meaningless because the
primary tumors are surgically removed. How much heterogeneity existed in the
various branches before surgery is not important. However, this heterogeneity
provides the seeds for intermetastastic heterogeneity, which is of great clinical
importance.
2.
Intermetastatic: heterogeneity among different metastatic lesions of the same
patient. The vast majority of cancer patients die because their tumors were not
removed before metastasis to surgically inaccessible sites, such as the liver, brain,
lung, or bone. Patients who relapse with a single metastatic lesion can often still be
cured by surgery or radiotherapy, but single metastases are the exception rather
than the rule. A typical patient on a clinical trial has a dozen or more metastatic
lesions large enough to be visualized by imaging, and many more that are smaller.
If each of the metastatic lesions in a single patient was founded by a cell with a
very different genetic constitution, then chemotherapeutic cures would be nearly
impossible to achieve: Eradicating a subset of the metastatic lesions in a patient
will not be adequate for long-term survival.
Vogelstein et al.
Page 12
Science. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 22.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript


----- Page 13 (native text) -----
How much heterogeneity is there among different metastatic lesions? In short, a lot.
It is not uncommon for one metastatic lesion to have 20 clonal genetic alterations
not shared by other metastases in the same patient (16, 97). Because they are
clonal, these mutations occurred in the founder cell of the metastasis; that is, the
cell that escaped from the primary tumor and multiplied to form the metastasis. The
founder cell for each metastasis is present in different, geographically distinct areas
of the primary tumors, as expected (16).
This potentially disastrous situation is tempered by the fact that the heterogeneity
appears largely confined to passenger gene mutations. In most of the studies
documenting heterogeneity in malignancies, the Mut-driver genes are present in the
trunks of the trees, though exceptions have been noted (95). These findings are
consistent with the idea, discussed above, that the genetic alterations required for
metastasis were present (i.e., selected for) before metastasis actually occurred. The
data are also consistent with the observation that in patients responsive to targeted
agents, the response is often seen in all metastatic lesions rather than just a small
subset (98).
3.
Intrametastatic: heterogeneity among the cells of an individual metastasis. Each
metastasis is established by a single cell (or small group of cells) with a set of
founder mutations. As it grows, the metastasis acquires new mutations with each
cell division. Though the founder mutations may make the lesion susceptible to
antitumor agents, the new mutations provide the seeds for drug resistance. Unlike
primary tumors, the metastatic lesions generally cannot be removed by surgery and
must be treated with systemic therapies. Patients with complete responses to
targeted therapies invariably relapse. Most of the initial lesions generally recur, and
the time frame at which they recur is notably similar. This time course can be
explained by the presence of resistance mutations that existed within each
metastasis before the onset of the targeted therapy (99–102). Calculations show that
any metastatic lesion of a size visible on medical imaging has thousands of cells
(among the billions present) that are already resistant to virtually any drug that can
be imagined (99, 101, 102). Thus, recurrence is simply a matter of time, entirely
predictable on the basis of known mutation frequencies and tumor cell growth
rates. This “fait accompli” can be circumvented, in principle, by treatment with
multiple agents, as it is unlikely that a single tumor cell will be resistant to multiple
drugs that act on different targets.
4.
Interpatient: heterogeneity among the tumors of different patients. This type of
heterogeneity has been observed by every oncologist; no two cancer patients have
identical clinical courses, with or without therapy. Some of these differences could
be related to host factors, such as germline variants that determine drug half-life or
vascular permeability to drugs or cells, and some could be related to nongenetic
factors (103). However, much of this interpatient heterogeneity is probably related
to somatic mutations within tumors. Though several dozen somatic mutations may
be present in the breast cancers from two patients, only a small number are in the
same genes, and in the vast majority of cases, these are the Mut-driver genes (1,
104, 105). Even in these driver genes, the actual mutations are often different.
Mutations altering different domains of a protein would certainly not be expected
to have identical effects on cellular properties, as experimentally confirmed (106).
Though it may seem that different mutations in adjacent codons would have
identical effects, detailed studies of large numbers of patients have shown that this
need not be the case. For example, a Gly12→Asp12 (G12D) mutation of KRAS
does not have the same clinical implications as a G13D mutation of the same gene
(107). Interpatient heterogeneity has always been one of the major obstacles to
Vogelstein et al.
Page 13
Science. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 22.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript


----- Page 14 (native text) -----
designing uniformly effective treatments for cancer. Efforts to individualize
treatments based on knowledge of the genomes of cancer patients are largely based
on an appreciation of this heterogeneity.
Signaling Pathways in Tumors
The immense complexity of cancer genomes that could be inferred from the data described
above is somewhat misleading. After all, even advanced tumors are not completely out of
control, as evidenced by the dramatic responses to agents that target mutant BRAF in
melanomas (108) or mutant ALK in lung cancers (109). Albeit transient, these responses
mean that interference with even a single mutant gene product is sufficient to stop cancer in
its tracks, at least transiently. How can the genomic complexity of cancer be reconciled with
these clinical observations?
Two concepts bear on this point. The first, mentioned above, is that >99.9% of the
alterations in tumors (including point mutations, copy-number alterations, translocations,
and epigenetic changes distributed throughout the genome, not just in the coding regions)
are immaterial to neoplasia. They are simply passenger changes that mark the time that has
elapsed between successive clonal expansions. Normal cells also undergo genetic alterations
as they divide, both at the nucleotide and chromosomal levels. However, normal cells are
programmed to undergo cell death in response to such alterations, perhaps as a protective
mechanism against cancer. In contrast, cancer cells have evolved to tolerate genome
complexity by acquiring mutations in genes such as TP53 (110). Thus, genomic complexity
is, in part, the result of cancer, rather than the cause.
To appreciate the second concept, one must take the 30,000-foot view. A jungle might look
chaotic at ground level, but the aerial view shows a clear order, with all the animals
gathering at the streams at certain points in the day, and all the streams converging at a river.
There is order in cancer, too. Mutations in all of the 138 driver genes listed in table S2 do
one thing: cause a selective growth advantage, either directly or indirectly. Moreover, there
appears to be only a limited number of cellular signaling pathways through which a growth
advantage can be incurred (Fig. 7 and table S5).
All of the known driver genes can be classified into one or more of 12 pathways (Fig. 7).
The discovery of the molecular components of these pathways is one of the greatest
achievements of biomedical research, a tribute to investigators working in fields that
encompass biochemistry, cell biology, and development, as well as cancer. These pathways
can themselves be further organized into three core cellular processes:
1.
Cell fate: Numerous studies have demonstrated the opposing relationship between
cell division and differentiation, the arbiters of cell fate. Dividing cells that are
responsible for populating normal tissues (stem cells) do not differentiate, and vice
versa. Regenerative medicine is based on this distinction, predicated on ways to get
differentiated cells to de-differentiate into stem cells, then forcing the stem cells to
differentiate into useful cell types for transplantation back into the patient. Many of
the genetic alterations in cancer abrogate the precise balance between
differentiation and division, favoring the latter. This causes a selective growth
advantage, because differentiating cells eventually die or become quiescent.
Pathways that function through this process include APC, HH, and NOTCH, all of
which are well known to control cell fate in organisms ranging from worms to
mammals (111). Genes encoding chromatin-modifying enzymes can also be
included in this category. In normal development, the heritable switch from
division to differentiation is not determined by mutation, as it is in cancer, but
rather by epigenetic alterations affecting DNA and chromatin proteins. What better
Vogelstein et al.
Page 14
Science. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 22.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript


----- Page 15 (native text) -----
way to subvert this normal mechanism for controlling tissue architecture than to
debilitate the epigenetic modifying apparatus itself?
2.
Cell survival: Though cancer cells divide abnormally because of cell-autonomous
alterations, such as those controlling cell fate, their surrounding stromal cells are
perfectly normal and do not keep pace. The most obvious ramification of this
asymmetry is the abnormal vasculature of tumors. As opposed to the well-ordered
network of arteries, veins, and lymphatics that control nutrient concentrations in
normal tissues, the vascular system in cancers is tortuous and lacks uniformity of
structure (112, 113). Normal cells are always within 100 μm of a capillary, but this
is not true for cancer cells (114). As a result, a cancer cell acquiring a mutation that
allows it to proliferate under limiting nutrient concentrations will have a selective
growth advantage, thriving in environments in which its sister cells cannot.
Mutations of this sort occur, for example, in the EGFR, HER2, FGFR2, PDGFR,
TGFbR2, MET, KIT, RAS, RAF, PIK3CA, and PTEN genes (table S2A). Some of
these genes encode receptors for the growth factors themselves, whereas others
relay the signal from the growth factor to the interior of the cell, stimulating growth
when activated (115, 116). For instance, mutations in KRAS or BRAF genes confer
on cancer cells the ability to grow in glucose concentrations that are lower than
those required for the growth of normal cells or of cancer cells that do not have
mutations in these genes (117, 118). Progression through the cell cycle (and its
antithesis, apoptosis) can be directly controlled by intracellular metabolites, and
driver genes that directly regulate the cell cycle or apoptosis, such as CDKN2A,
MYC, and BCL2, are often mutated in cancers. Another gene whose mutations
enhance cell survival is VHL, the product of which stimulates angiogenesis through
the secretion of vascular endothelial growth factor. What better way to provision
growth factors to a rogue tumor than to lure the unsuspecting vasculature to its
hideout?
3.
Genome maintenance: As a result of the exotic microenvironments in which they
reside, cancer cells are exposed to a variety of toxic substances, such as reactive
oxygen species. Even without microenvironmental poisons, cells make mistakes
while replicating their DNA or during division (119, 120), and checkpoints exist to
either slow down such cells or make them commit suicide (apoptosis) under such
circumstances (110, 121, 122). Although it is good for the organism to remove
these damaged cells, tumor cells that can survive the damage will, by definition,
have a selective growth advantage. Therefore, it is not surprising that genes whose
mutations abrogate these checkpoints, such as TP53 and ATM, are mutated in
cancers (123). Defects in these genes can also indirectly confer a selective growth
advantage by allowing cells that have a gross chromosomal change favoring
growth, such as a translocation or an extra chromosome, to survive and divide.
Analogously, genes that control point mutation rates, such as MLH1 or MSH2, are
mutated in cancers (table S2A) or in the germ line of patients predisposed to
cancers (table S4) because they accelerate the acquisition of mutations that function
through processes that regulate cell fate or survival. What better way to promote
cancer than by increasing the rate of occurrence of the mutations that drive the
process?
Because the protein products of genes regulating cell fate, cell survival, and genome
maintenance often interact with one another, the pathways within them overlap; they are not
as discrete as might be inferred from the description above. However, grouping genes into
pathways makes perfect sense from a genetics standpoint. Given that cancer is a genetic
disease, the principles of genetics should apply to its pathogenesis. When performing a
conventional mutagenesis screen in bacteria, yeast, fruit flies, or worms, one expects to
Vogelstein et al.
Page 15
Science. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 22.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript


----- Page 16 (native text) -----
discover mutations in several different genes that confer similar phenotypes. The products of
these genes often interact with one another and define a biochemical or developmental
pathway. Therefore, it should not be surprising that several different genes can result in the
same selective growth advantage for cancer cells and that the products of these genes
interact. The analogy between cancer pathways and biochemical or developmental pathways
in other organisms goes even deeper: The vast majority of our knowledge of the function of
driver genes has been derived from the study of the pathways through which their homologs
work in nonhuman organisms. Though the functions are not identical to those in human
cells, they are highly related and have provided the starting point for analogous studies in
human cells.
Recognition of these pathways also has important ramifications for our ability to understand
interpatient heterogeneity. One lung cancer might have an activating mutation in a receptor
for a stimulatory growth factor, making it able to grow in low concentrations of epidermal
growth factor (EGF). A second lung cancer might have an activating mutation in KRAS,
whose protein product normally transmits the signal from the epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) to other cell signaling molecules. A third lung cancer might have an
inactivating mutation in NF1, a regulatory protein that normally inactivates the KRAS
protein. Finally, a fourth lung cancer might have a mutation in BRAF, which transmits the
signal from KRAS to downstream kinases (Fig. 8). One would predict that mutations in the
various components of a single pathway would be mutually exclusive—that is, not occurring
in the same tumor—and this has been experimentally confirmed (124, 125). Apart from
being intellectually satisfying, knowledge of these pathways has implications for cancer
therapy, as discussed in the next section.
A Perspective on Genome-Based Medicine in Oncology
Opportunities
Though cancer genome sequencing is a relatively new endeavor, it has already had an
impact on the clinical care of cancer patients. The recognition that certain tumors contain
activating mutations in driver genes encoding protein kinases has led to the development of
small-molecule inhibitor drugs targeting those kinases.
Representative examples of this type of genome-based medicine include the use of EGFR
kinase inhibitors to treat cancers with EGFR gene mutations (126), the aforementioned ana-
plastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) inhibitors to treat cancers with ALK gene translocations
(109), and specific inhibitors of mutant BRAF to treat cancers with BRAF mutations (108).
Before instituting treatment with such agents, it is imperative to determine whether the
cancer harbors the mutations that the drug targets. Only a small fraction of lung cancer
patients have EGFR gene mutations or ALK gene translocations, and only these patients will
respond to the drugs. Treating lung cancer patients without these particular genetic
alterations would be detrimental, as such patients would develop the toxic side effects of the
drugs while their tumors progressed.
A second type of genome-based medicine focuses on the side effects and metabolism of the
therapeutic agents, rather than the genetic alterations they target. At present, the dose of
cancer drugs given to patients is based on the patients’ size (body weight or surface area).
But the therapeutic ratio of cancer drugs (ratio of the concentration that causes side effects to
the concentration required to kill tumor cells) is generally low, particularly for conventional
(nontargeted) therapeutic agents. Small changes in circulating concentrations of these drugs
can make the difference between substantial tumor regression and intolerable side effects.
Interrogation of the germline status of the genes encoding drug-metabolizing enzymes could
substantially improve the outcomes of treatment by informing drug dosing (127). Optimally,
Vogelstein et al.
Page 16
Science. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 22.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript


----- Page 17 (native text) -----
this genome interrogation would be accompanied by pharmacokinetic measurements of drug
concentrations in each patient. The additional cost of such analyses would be small
compared with the exorbitant costs of new cancer therapies—for recently approved drugs,
the cost is estimated to be $200,000 to $300,000 per quality life year produced (128).
Challenges
One challenge of genome-based medicine in oncology is already apparent from the
opportunities described above: All of the clinically approved drugs that target the products
of genetically altered genes are directed against kinases. One reason for this is that kinases
are relatively easy to target with small molecules and have been extensively studied at the
biochemical, structural, and physiologic levels (129). But another reason has far deeper
ramifications. The vast majority of drugs on the market today, for cancer or other diseases,
inhibit the actions of their protein targets. This inhibition occurs because the drugs interfere
with the protein’s enzymatic activity (such as the phosphorylation catalyzed by kinases) or
with the binding of the protein to a small ligand (such as with G protein–coupled receptors).
Only 31 of the oncogenes listed in tables S2 and S3 have enzymatic activities that are
targetable in this manner. Many others participate in protein complexes, involving large
interfaces and numerous weak interactions. Inhibiting the function of such proteins with
small drugs is notoriously difficult because small compounds can only inhibit one of these
interactions (130, 131).
Though one can at least imagine the development of drugs that inhibit nonenzymatic protein
functions, the second challenge evident from table S2 poses even greater difficulties: A large
fraction of the Mut-driver genes encode tumor suppressors. Drugs generally interfere with
protein function; they cannot, in general, replace the function of defective genes such as
those resulting from mutations in tumor suppressor genes. Unfortunately, tumor suppressor
gene–inactivating mutations predominate over oncogene-activating mutations in the most
common solid tumors: Few individual tumors contain more than one oncogene mutation
(Fig. 5).
The relatively small number of oncogene mutations in tumors is important in light of the
intrametastatic heterogeneity described earlier. To circumvent the inevitable development of
resistance to targeted therapies, it will likely be necessary to treat patients with two or more
drugs. The probability that a single cancer cell within a large metastatic lesion will be
resistant to two agents that target two independent pathways is exponentially less than the
probability that the cell will be resistant to a single agent. However, if the cancer cell does
not contain more than one targetable genetic alteration (i.e., an oncogene mutation), then this
combination strategy is not feasible.
Given the paucity of oncogene alterations in common solid tumors and these principles, can
targeted therapeutic approaches ever be expected to induce long-term remissions, even
cures, rather than the short-term remissions now being achieved? The saviors are pathways;
every tumor suppressor gene inactivation is expected to result in the activation of some
growth-promoting signal downstream of the pathway. An example is provided by PTEN
mutations: Inactivation of the tumor suppressor gene PTEN results in activation of the AKT
kinase (Fig. 8). Similarly, inactivation of the tumor suppressor gene CDKN2A results in
activation of kinases, such as cyclin-dependent kinase 4, that promote cell cycle traverse
(132). Furthermore, inactivation of tumor suppressor gene APC results in constitutive
activity of oncogenes such as CTNNB1 and CMYC (133–135).
We believe that greater knowledge of these pathways and the ways in which they function is
the most pressing need in basic cancer research. Successful research on this topic should
allow the development of agents that target, albeit indirectly, defective tumor suppressor
Vogelstein et al.
Page 17
Science. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 22.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript


----- Page 18 (native text) -----
genes. Indeed, there are already examples of such indirect targeting. Inactivating mutations
of the tumor suppressor genes BRCA1 or BRCA2 lead to activation of downstream
pathways required to repair DNA damage in the absence of BRCA function. Thus, cancer
cells with defects in BRCA1 or BRCA2 are more susceptible to DNA damaging agents or to
drugs that inhibit enzymes that facilitate the repair of DNA damage such as PARP
[poly(adenosine diphosphate–ribose) polymerase] (136). PARP inhibitors have shown
encouraging results in clinical trials when used in patients whose tumors have inactivating
mutations of BRCA genes (137).
Further progress in this area will require more detailed information about the signaling
pathways through which cancer genes function in human cancer cells, as well as in model
organisms. One of the lessons of molecular biology over the past two decades is that
pathway functions are different, depending on the organism, cell type, and precise genetic
alterations in that cell (138). A pertinent example of this principle is provided by results of
treatment with drugs inhibiting mutant BRAF kinase activity. In the majority of patients
with melanomas harboring (V600E; V, Val; E, Glu) mutations in the BRAF gene, these
drugs induce dramatic (though transient) remissions (108). But the same drugs have no
therapeutic effect in colorectal cancer patients harboring the identical BRAF mutations
(139). This observation has been attributed to the expression of EGFR, which occurs in
some colorectal cancers but not in melanoma and is thought to circumvent the growth-
inhibitory effects of the BRAF inhibitors. With this example in mind, no one should be
surprised that a new drug that works well in an engineered tumor in mice fails in human
trials; the organism is different, the cell type is usually different, and the precise genetic
constitutions are always different. The converse of this statement—that a drug that fails in
animal trials will not necessarily fail in human trials—has important practical consequences.
In our view, if the biochemical and conceptual bases for a drug’s actions are solid and the
drug is shown to be safe in animals, then a human trial may be warranted, even if it does not
shrink tumors in mice.
Genome-Based Medicines of the Future
Cancer genomes can also be exploited for the development of more effective
immunotherapies. As noted above, typical solid tumors contain 30 to 70 mutations that alter
the amino acid sequences of the proteins encoded by the affected genes. Each of these
alterations is foreign to the immune system, as none have been encountered during
embryonic or postnatal life. Therefore, these alterations, in principle, provide a “holy grail”
for tumor immunology: truly tumor-specific antigens. These antigens could be incorporated
into any of the numerous platforms that already exist for the immunotherapy of cancer.
These include administration of vaccines containing the mutant peptide, viruses encoding
the mutant peptides on their surfaces, dendritic cells presenting the mutated peptide, and
antibodies or T cells with reactivity directed against the mutant peptides (140).
To realize these sorts of therapeutics, several conditions must be met. First, the mutant
protein must be expressed. As cancer cells generally express about half of the proteins that
are encoded by the human genome (141), this condition is not limiting. Second, as most
proteins affected by mutations are intracellular, these mutations will not be visible to the
immune system unless the mutant residue is presented in the context of a human leukocyte
antigen (HLA) protein. Based on in silico analyses of binding affinities, it has been
estimated that a typical breast or colorectal cancer contains 7 to 10 mutant proteins that can
bind to an individual patient’s HLA type (142). These theoretical predictions have recently
gained experimental support. Studies of mouse tumors have identified mutant genes and
shown that the corresponding peptides can induce antitumor immunity when administered as
vaccines (143). Moreover, clinical trials of brain cancer patients immunized against a mutant
peptide have yielded encouraging results (144).
Vogelstein et al.
Page 18
Science. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 22.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript


----- Page 19 (native text) -----
As with all cancer therapies that are attractive in concept, obstacles abound in practice. If a
tumor expresses a mutant protein that is recognizable as foreign, why has the host immune
system not eradicated that tumor already? Indeed, immunoediting in cancers has been shown
to exist, resulting in the down-regulation or absence of mutant epitopes that should have,
and perhaps did, elicit an immune response during tumor development (145, 146).
Additionally, tumors can lose immunogenicity through a variety of genetic alterations,
thereby precluding the presentation of epitopes that would otherwise be recognized as
foreign (147). Though these theoretical limitations are disheartening, recent studies on
immune regulation in humans portend cautious optimism (148, 149).
Other Ways to Reduce Morbidity and Mortality Through Knowledge of Cancer Genomics
When we think about eradicating cancer, we generally think about curing advanced cases—
those that cannot be cured by surgery alone because they have already metastasized. This is
a curious way of thinking about this disease. When we think of cardiovascular or infectious
diseases, we first consider ways to prevent them rather than drugs to cure their most
advanced forms. Today, we are in no better position to cure polio or massive myocardial
infarctions than we were a thousand years ago. But we can prevent these diseases entirely
(vaccines), reduce incidence (dietary changes, statins), or mitigate severity (stents,
thrombolytic agents) and thereby make a major impact on morbidity and mortality.
This focus on curing advanced cancers might have been reasonable 50 years ago, when the
molecular pathogenesis of cancers was mysterious and when chemotherapeutic agents
against advanced cancers were showing promise. But this mindset is no longer acceptable.
We now know precisely what causes cancer: a sequential series of alterations in well-
defined genes that alter the function of a limited number of pathways. Moreover, we know
that this process takes decades to develop and that the incurable stage, metastasis, occurs
only a few years before death. In other words, of the one million people that will die from
cancer this year, the vast majority will die only because their cancers were not detected in
the first 90% of the cancers’ lifetimes, when they were amenable to the surgeons’ scalpel.
This new knowledge of cancer (Box 2) has reinvigorated the search for cures for advanced
cancers, but has not yet permeated other fields of applied cancer research. A common and
limited set of driver genes and pathways is responsible for most common forms of cancer
(table S2); these genes and pathways offer distinct potential for early diagnosis. The genes
themselves, the proteins encoded by these genes, and the end products of their pathways are,
in principle, detectable in many ways, including analyses of relevant body fluids, such as
urine for genitourinary cancers, sputum for lung cancers, and stool for gastrointestinal
cancers (150). Equally exciting are the possibilities afforded by molecular imaging, which
not only indicate the presence of a cancer but also reveal its precise location and extent.
Additionally, research into the relationship between particular environmental influences
(diet and lifestyle) and the genetic alterations in cancer is sparse, despite its potential for
preventative measures.
Box 2
Highlights
1.
Most human cancers are caused by two to eight sequential alterations that
develop over the course of 20 to 30 years.
2.
Each of these alterations directly or indirectly increases the ratio of cell birth to
cell death; that is, each alteration causes a selective growth advantage to the cell
in which it resides.
Vogelstein et al.
Page 19
Science. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 22.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript


----- Page 20 (native text) -----
3.
The evidence to date suggests that there are ~140 genes whose intragenic
mutations contribute to cancer (so-called Mut-driver genes). There are probably
other genes (Epi-driver genes) that are altered by epigenetic mechanisms and
cause a selective growth advantage, but the definitive identification of these
genes has been challenging.
4.
The known driver genes function through a dozen signaling pathways that
regulate three core cellular processes: cell fate determination, cell survival, and
genome maintenance.
5.
Every individual tumor, even of the same histopathologic subtype as another
tumor, is distinct with respect to its genetic alterations, but the pathways
affected in different tumors are similar.
6.
Genetic heterogeneity among the cells of an individual tumor always exists and
can impact the response to therapeutics.
7.
In the future, the most appropriate management plan for a patient with cancer
will be informed by an assessment of the components of the patient’s germline
genome and the genome of his or her tumor.
8.
The information from cancer genome studies can also be exploited to improve
methods for prevention and early detection of cancer, which will be essential to
reduce cancer morbidity and mortality.
The reasons that society invests so much more in research on cures for advanced cancers
than on prevention or early detection are complex. Economic issues play a part: New drugs
are far more lucrative for industry than new tests, and large individual costs for treating
patients with advanced disease have become acceptable, even in developing countries (151).
From a technical standpoint, the development of new and improved methods for early
detection and prevention will not be easy, but there is no reason to assume that it will be
more difficult than the development of new therapies aimed at treating widely metastatic
disease.
Our point is not that strenuous efforts to develop new therapies for advanced cancer patients
should be abandoned. These will always be required, no matter our arsenal of early detection
or preventative measures. Instead, we are suggesting that “plan A” should be prevention and
early detection, and “plan B” (therapy for advanced cancers) should be necessary only when
plan A fails. To make plan A viable, government and philanthropic organizations must
dedicate a much greater fraction of their resources to this cause, with long-term
considerations in mind. We believe that cancer deaths can be reduced by more than 75% in
the coming decades (152), but that this reduction will only come about if greater efforts are
made toward early detection and prevention.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank M. Nowak and I. Bozic for critical reading of the manuscript, S. Gabelli for assisting with the production
of Fig. 8, and A. Dixon, V. Ferranta, and E. Cook for artwork. This work was supported by The Virginia and D.K.
Ludwig Fund for Cancer Research; The Lustgarten Foundation for Pancreatic Cancer Research; and NIH grants CA
43460, CA 47345, CA 62924, and CA 121113. All authors are Founding Scientific Advisors of Personal Genome
Diagnostics (PGDx), a company focused on the identification of genetic alterations in human cancer for diagnostic
and therapeutic purposes. All authors are also members of the Scientific Advisory Board of Inostics, a company
Vogelstein et al.
Page 20
Science. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 22.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript


----- Page 21 (native text) -----
that is developing technologies for the molecular diagnosis of cancer. All authors own stock in PGDx and Inostics.
The terms of these arrangements are being managed by Johns Hopkins University, in accordance with their
conflict-of-interest policies.
References and Notes
1. Wood LD, et al. Science. 2007; 318:1108. [PubMed: 17932254]
2. Parsons DW, et al. Science. 2008; 321:1807. [PubMed: 18772396]
3. Jones S, et al. Science. 2008; 321:1801. [PubMed: 18772397]
4. Govindan R, et al. Cell. 2012; 150:1121. [PubMed: 22980976]
5. Gryfe R, Gallinger S. Surgery. 2001; 130:17. [PubMed: 11436007]
6. The Cancer Genome Atlas Network. Nature. 2012; 487:330. [PubMed: 22810696]
7. Palles C, et al. Nat Genet. 2013; 45:136. [PubMed: 23263490]
8. Nowell PC. Science. 1976; 194:23. [PubMed: 959840]
9. Fearon ER, Vogelstein B. Cell. 1990; 61:759. [PubMed: 2188735]
10. Kinzler KW, Vogelstein B. Nature. 1997; 386:761. [PubMed: 9126728]
11. Jones S, et al. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2008; 105:4283. [PubMed: 18337506]
12. Bozic I, et al. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2010; 107:18545. [PubMed: 20876136]
13. Tomasetti C, Vogelstein B, Parmigiani G. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2013; 110:1999. [PubMed:
23345422]
14. Laurenti E, Dick JE. Ann NY Acad Sci. 2012; 1266:68. [PubMed: 22901258]
15. Welch JS, et al. Cell. 2012; 150:264. [PubMed: 22817890]
16. Yachida S, et al. Nature. 2010; 467:1114. [PubMed: 20981102]
17. Kerbel RS. Adv Cancer Res. 1990; 55:87. [PubMed: 2167000]
18. Bernards R, Weinberg RA. Nature. 2002; 418:823. [PubMed: 12192390]
19. Yu M, Stott S, Toner M, Maheswaran S, Haber DA. J Cell Biol. 2011; 192:373. [PubMed:
21300848]
20. Komori J, Boone L, DeWard A, Hoppo T, Lagasse E. Nat Biotechnol. 2012; 30:976. [PubMed:
23000933]
21. Pelizzola M, Ecker JR. FEBS Lett. 2011; 585:1994. [PubMed: 21056564]
22. Parmigiani G, et al. Genomics. 2009; 93:17. [PubMed: 18692126]
23. Meyerson M, Gabriel S, Getz G. Nat Rev Genet. 2010; 11:685. [PubMed: 20847746]
24. Carter H, et al. Cancer Res. 2009; 69:6660. [PubMed: 19654296]
25. Youn A, Simon R. Bioinformatics. 2011; 27:175. [PubMed: 21169372]
26. Kaminker JS, Zhang Y, Watanabe C, Zhang Z. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007; 35:W595. [PubMed:
17537827]
27. Michaelson JJ, et al. Cell. 2012; 151:1431. [PubMed: 23260136]
28. Nik-Zainal S, et al. Cell. 2012; 149:979. [PubMed: 22608084]
29. Thiagalingam S, et al. Nat Genet. 1996; 13:343. [PubMed: 8673134]
30. Forbes SA, et al. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011; 39:D945. [PubMed: 20952405]
31. Yan H, et al. N Engl J Med. 2009; 360:765. [PubMed: 19228619]
32. Zhao S, et al. Science. 2009; 324:261. [PubMed: 19359588]
33. Ward PS, et al. Cancer Cell. 2010; 17:225. [PubMed: 20171147]
34. Dang L, et al. Nature. 2010; 465:966. [PubMed: 20559394]
35. Pear WS, Aster JC. Curr Opin Hematol. 2004; 11:426. [PubMed: 15548998]
36. Nicolas M, et al. Nat Genet. 2003; 33:416. [PubMed: 12590261]
37. Weng AP, et al. Science. 2004; 306:269. [PubMed: 15472075]
38. Agrawal N, et al. Science. 2011; 333:1154. [PubMed: 21798897]
39. Stransky N, et al. Science. 2011; 333:1157. [PubMed: 21798893]
40. Agrawal N, et al. Cancer Discovery. 2012; 2:899. [PubMed: 22877736]
Vogelstein et al.
Page 21
Science. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 22.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript


----- Page 22 (native text) -----
41. Parsons DW, et al. Science. 2011; 331:435. [PubMed: 21163964]
42. Pasqualucci L, et al. Nat Genet. 2011; 43:830. [PubMed: 21804550]
43. Morin RD, et al. Nature. 2011; 476:298. [PubMed: 21796119]
44. Grasso CS, et al. Nature. 2012; 487:239. [PubMed: 22722839]
45. Ellis MJ, et al. Nature. 2012; 486:353. [PubMed: 22722193]
46. Wiegand KC, et al. N Engl J Med. 2010; 363:1532. [PubMed: 20942669]
47. Jones S, et al. Science. 2010; 330:228. [PubMed: 20826764]
48. Jones S, et al. Hum Mutat. 2012; 33:100. [PubMed: 22009941]
49. Wang K, et al. Nat Genet. 2011; 43:1219. [PubMed: 22037554]
50. Huang J, et al. Nat Genet. 2012; 44:1117. [PubMed: 22922871]
51. Imielinski M, et al. Cell. 2012; 150:1107. [PubMed: 22980975]
52. Rudin CM, et al. Nat Genet. 2012; 44:1111. [PubMed: 22941189]
53. Delhommeau F, et al. N Engl J Med. 2009; 360:2289. [PubMed: 19474426]
54. Schwartzentruber J, et al. Nature. 2012; 482:226. [PubMed: 22286061]
55. Wu G, et al. Nat Genet. 2012; 44:251. [PubMed: 22286216]
56. Ley TJ, et al. N Engl J Med. 2010; 363:2424. [PubMed: 21067377]
57. Dalgliesh GL, et al. Nature. 2010; 463:360. [PubMed: 20054297]
58. Suvà ML, Riggi N, Bernstein BE. Science. 2013; 339:1567. [PubMed: 23539597]
59. Papaemmanuil E, et al. N Engl J Med. 2011; 365:1384. [PubMed: 21995386]
60. Graubert TA, et al. Nat Genet. 2012; 44:53. [PubMed: 22158538]
61. Yoshida K, et al. Nature. 2011; 478:64. [PubMed: 21909114]
62. Jiao Y, et al. Science. 2011; 331:1199. [PubMed: 21252315]
63. Cesare AJ, Reddel RR. Nat Rev Genet. 2010; 11:319. [PubMed: 20351727]
64. Heaphy CM, et al. Science. 2011; 333:425. [PubMed: 21719641]
65. Vander Heiden MG, Cantley LC, Thompson CB. Science. 2009; 324:1029. [PubMed: 19460998]
66. Lu C, et al. Nature. 2012; 483:474. [PubMed: 22343901]
67. Turcan S, et al. Nature. 2012; 483:479. [PubMed: 22343889]
68. Stephens PJ, et al. Cell. 2011; 144:27. [PubMed: 21215367]
69. Bass AJ, et al. Nat Genet. 2011; 43:964. [PubMed: 21892161]
70. Tomlins SA, et al. Science. 2005; 310:644. [PubMed: 16254181]
71. Soda M, et al. Nature. 2007; 448:561. [PubMed: 17625570]
72. Armitage P, Doll R. Br J Cancer. 1954; 8:1. [PubMed: 13172380]
73. Böttcher R, et al. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012; 40:e125. [PubMed: 22581774]
74. Forster M, et al. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013; 41:e16. [PubMed: 22965131]
75. Ding J, et al. Bioinformatics. 2012; 28:167. [PubMed: 22084253]
76. Beal MA, Glenn TC, Somers CM. Mutat Res. 2012; 750:96. [PubMed: 22178956]
77. Mertes F, et al. Brief Funct Genomics. 2011; 10:374. [PubMed: 22121152]
78. Gundry M, Vijg J. Mutat Res. 2012; 729:1. [PubMed: 22016070]
79. Biankin AV, et al. Nature. 2012; 491:399. [PubMed: 23103869]
80. Yan H, Kinzler KW, Vogelstein B. Science. 2000; 289:1890. [PubMed: 11012364]
81. Huang FW, et al. Science. 2013; 339:957. [PubMed: 23348506]
82. Horn S, et al. Science. 2013; 339:959. [PubMed: 23348503]
83. Xue W, et al. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2012; 109:8212. [PubMed: 22566646]
84. Solimini NL, et al. Science. 2012; 337:104. [PubMed: 22628553]
85. Beggs AD, et al. J Pathol. 201210.1002/path.4132
86. Feinberg AP, Tycko B. Nat Rev Cancer. 2004; 4:143. [PubMed: 14732866]
87. Jones PA, Baylin SB. Cell. 2007; 128:683. [PubMed: 17320506]
88. Höglund M, Gisselsson D, Säll T, Mitelman F. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2002; 135:103. [PubMed:
12127394]
Vogelstein et al.
Page 22
Science. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 22.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript


----- Page 23 (native text) -----
89. Shibata D, Schaeffer J, Li ZH, Capella G, Perucho M. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1993; 85:1058.
[PubMed: 8515492]
90. Sottoriva A, Spiteri I, Shibata D, Curtis C, Tavaré S. Cancer Res. 2013; 73:41. [PubMed:
23090114]
91. Shah SP, et al. Nature. 2009; 461:809. [PubMed: 19812674]
92. Anderson K, et al. Nature. 2011; 469:356. [PubMed: 21160474]
93. Navin N, et al. Nature. 2011; 472:90. [PubMed: 21399628]
94. Nik-Zainal S, et al. Cell. 2012; 149:994. [PubMed: 22608083]
95. Gerlinger M, et al. N Engl J Med. 2012; 366:883. [PubMed: 22397650]
96. Xu X, et al. Cell. 2012; 148:886. [PubMed: 22385958]
97. Campbell PJ, et al. Nature. 2010; 467:1109. [PubMed: 20981101]
98. Wagle N, et al. J Clin Oncol. 2011; 29:3085. [PubMed: 21383288]
99. Komarova NL, Wodarz D. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2005; 102:9714. [PubMed: 15980154]
100. Turke AB, et al. Cancer Cell. 2010; 17:77. [PubMed: 20129249]
101. Durrett R, Moseley S. Theor Popul Biol. 2010; 77:42. [PubMed: 19896491]
102. Diaz LA Jr, et al. Nature. 2012; 486:537. [PubMed: 22722843]
103. Kreso A, et al. Science. 2013; 339:543. [PubMed: 23239622]
104. Stephens PJ, et al. Nature. 2012; 486:400. [PubMed: 22722201]
105. The Cancer Genome Atlas Network. Nature. 2012; 490:61. [PubMed: 23000897]
106. Pang H, et al. Cancer Res. 2009; 69:8868. [PubMed: 19903845]
107. Chen J, Ye Y, Sun H, Shi G. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2013; 71:265. [PubMed: 23090619]
108. Chapman PB, et al. N Engl J Med. 2011; 364:2507. [PubMed: 21639808]
109. Kwak EL, et al. N Engl J Med. 2010; 363:1693. [PubMed: 20979469]
110. Ljungman M, Lane DP. Nat Rev Cancer. 2004; 4:727. [PubMed: 15343279]
111. Perrimon N, Pitsouli C, Shilo BZ. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2012; 4:a005975. [PubMed:
22855721]
112. Kerbel RS. N Engl J Med. 2008; 358:2039. [PubMed: 18463380]
113. Chung AS, Ferrara N. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol. 2011; 27:563. [PubMed: 21756109]
114. Baish JW, et al. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2011; 108:1799. [PubMed: 21224417]
115. Hynes NE, Lane HA. Nat Rev Cancer. 2005; 5:341. [PubMed: 15864276]
116. Turner N, Grose R. Nat Rev Cancer. 2010; 10:116. [PubMed: 20094046]
117. Yun J, et al. Science. 2009; 325:1555. [PubMed: 19661383]
118. Ying H, et al. Cell. 2012; 149:656. [PubMed: 22541435]
119. Araten DJ, et al. Cancer Res. 2005; 65:8111. [PubMed: 16166284]
120. Kunkel TA. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 2009; 74:91. [PubMed: 19903750]
121. Zhou BBS, Elledge SJ. Nature. 2000; 408:433. [PubMed: 11100718]
122. Medema RH, Macůrek L. Oncogene. 2012; 31:2601. [PubMed: 21963855]
123. Derheimer FA, Kastan MB. FEBS Lett. 2010; 584:3675. [PubMed: 20580718]
124. Ciriello G, Cerami E, Sander C, Schultz N. Genome Res. 2012; 22:398. [PubMed: 21908773]
125. Yeang CH, McCormick F, Levine A. FASEB J. 2008; 22:2605. [PubMed: 18434431]
126. Sharma SV, Bell DW, Settleman J, Haber DA. Nat Rev Cancer. 2007; 7:169. [PubMed:
17318210]
127. McLeod HL. Science. 2013; 339:1563. [PubMed: 23539596]
128. Brock DW. Oncologist. 2010; 15(suppl 1):36. [PubMed: 20237216]
129. Lemmon MA, Schlessinger J. Cell. 2010; 141:1117. [PubMed: 20602996]
130. Arkin MR, Wells JA. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2004; 3:301. [PubMed: 15060526]
131. Bienstock RJ. Curr Pharm Des. 2012; 18:1240. [PubMed: 22316151]
132. Besson A, Dowdy SF, Roberts JM. Dev Cell. 2008; 14:159. [PubMed: 18267085]
133. Morin PJ, et al. Science. 1997; 275:1787. [PubMed: 9065402]
Vogelstein et al.
Page 23
Science. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 22.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript


----- Page 24 (native text) -----
134. He TC, et al. Science. 1998; 281:1509. [PubMed: 9727977]
135. van de Wetering M, et al. Cell. 2002; 111:241. [PubMed: 12408868]
136. Farmer H, et al. Nature. 2005; 434:917. [PubMed: 15829967]
137. Irshad S, Ashworth A, Tutt A. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther. 2011; 11:1243. [PubMed: 21916578]
138. Grueneberg DA, et al. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2008; 105:16472. [PubMed: 18948591]
139. Mao M, et al. Clin Cancer Res. 2013; 19:657. [PubMed: 23251002]
140. Kirkwood JM, et al. CA Cancer J Clin. 2012; 62:309. [PubMed: 22576456]
141. Barrett T, et al. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011; 39:D1005. [PubMed: 21097893]
142. Segal NH, et al. Cancer Res. 2008; 68:889. [PubMed: 18245491]
143. Castle JC, et al. Cancer Res. 2012; 72:1081. [PubMed: 22237626]
144. Sampson JH, et al. J Clin Oncol. 2010; 28:4722. [PubMed: 20921459]
145. Matsushita H, et al. Nature. 2012; 482:400. [PubMed: 22318521]
146. DuPage M, Mazumdar C, Schmidt LM, Cheung AF, Jacks T. Nature. 2012; 482:405. [PubMed:
22318517]
147. Challa-Malladi M, et al. Cancer Cell. 2011; 20:728. [PubMed: 22137796]
148. Hodi FS, et al. N Engl J Med. 2010; 363:711. [PubMed: 20525992]
149. Topalian SL, et al. N Engl J Med. 2012; 366:2443. [PubMed: 22658127]
150. Dunn BK, Jegalian K, Greenwald P. Recent Results Cancer Res. 2011; 188:21. [PubMed:
21253787]
151. Lopes LC, Barberato-Filho S, Costa AC, Osorio-de-Castro CGS. Rev Saude Publica. 2010;
44:620. [PubMed: 20676553]
152. Colditz GA, Wolin KY, Gehlert S. Sci Transl Med. 2012; 4:127rv4.
Vogelstein et al.
Page 24
Science. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 22.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript


----- Page 25 (native text) -----
Fig. 1. Number of somatic mutations in representative human cancers, detected by genome-wide
sequencing studies
(A) The genomes of a diverse group of adult (right) and pediatric (left) cancers have been
analyzed. Numbers in parentheses indicate the median number of nonsynonymous mutations
per tumor. (B) The median number of nonsynonymous mutations per tumor in a variety of
tumor types. Horizontal bars indicate the 25 and 75% quartiles. MSI, microsatellite
instability; SCLC, small cell lung cancers; NSCLC, non–small cell lung cancers; ESCC,
esophageal squamous cell carcinomas; MSS, microsatellite stable; EAC, esophageal
adenocarcinomas. The published data on which this figure is based are provided in table
S1C.
Vogelstein et al.
Page 25
Science. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 22.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript


----- Page 26 (native text) -----
Fig. 2. Genetic alterations and the progression of colorectal cancer
The major signaling pathways that drive tumorigenesis are shown at the transitions between
each tumor stage. One of several driver genes that encode components of these pathways
can be altered in any individual tumor. Patient age indicates the time intervals during which
the driver genes are usually mutated. Note that this model may not apply to all tumor types.
TGF-β, transforming growth factor–β.
Vogelstein et al.
Page 26
Science. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 22.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript


----- Page 27 (native text) -----
Fig. 3. Total alterations affecting protein-coding genes in selected tumors
Average number and types of genomic alterations per tumor, including single-base
substitutions (SBS), small insertions and deletions (indels), amplifications, and homozygous
deletions, as determined by genome-wide sequencing studies. For colorectal, breast, and
pancreatic ductal cancer, and medulloblastomas, translocations are also included. The
published data on which this figure is based are provided in table S1D.
Vogelstein et al.
Page 27
Science. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 22.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript


----- Page 28 (native text) -----
Fig. 4. Distribution of mutations in two oncogenes (PIK3CA and IDH1) and two tumor
suppressor genes (RB1 and VHL)
The distribution of missense mutations (red arrowheads) and truncating mutations (blue
arrowheads) in representative oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes are shown. The data
were collected from genome-wide studies annotated in the COSMIC database (release
version 61). For PIK3CA and IDH1, mutations obtained from the COSMIC database were
randomized by the Excel RAND function, and the first 50 are shown. For RB1 and VHL, all
mutations recorded in COSMIC are plotted. aa, amino acids.
Vogelstein et al.
Page 28
Science. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 22.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript


----- Page 29 (native text) -----
Fig. 5. Number and distribution of driver gene mutations in five tumor types
The total number of driver gene mutations [in oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes
(TSGs)] is shown, as well as the number of oncogene mutations alone. The driver genes are
listed in tables S2A and S2B. Translocations are not included in this figure, because few
studies report translocations along with the other types of genetic alterations on a per-case
basis. In the tumor types shown here, translocations affecting driver genes occur in less than
10% of samples. The published data on which this figure is based are provided in table S1E.
Vogelstein et al.
Page 29
Science. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 22.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript


----- Page 30 (native text) -----
Fig. 6. Four types of genetic heterogeneity in tumors, illustrated by a primary tumor in the
pancreas and its metastatic lesions in the liver
Mutations introduced during primary tumor cell growth result in clonal heterogeneity. At the
top left, a typical tumor is represented by cells with a large fraction of the total mutations
(founder cells) from which subclones are derived. The differently colored regions in the
subclones represent stages of evolution within a subclone. (A) Intratumoral: heterogeneity
among the cells of the primary tumor. (B) Intermetastatic: heterogeneity among different
metastatic lesions in the same patient. In the case illustrated here, each metastasis was
derived from a different subclone. (C) Intrametastatic: heterogeneity among the cells of each
metastasis develops as the metastases grow. (D) Interpatient: heterogeneity among the
tumors of different patients. The mutations in the founder cells of the tumors of these two
patients are almost completely distinct (see text).
Vogelstein et al.
Page 30
Science. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 22.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript


----- Page 31 (native text) -----
Fig. 7. Cancer cell signaling pathways and the cellular processes they regulate
All of the driver genes listed in table S2 can be classified into one or more of 12 pathways
(middle ring) that confer a selective growth advantage (inner circle; see main text). These
pathways can themselves be further organized into three core cellular processes (outer ring).
The publications on which this figure is based are provided in table S5.
Vogelstein et al.
Page 31
Science. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 22.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript


----- Page 32 (native text) -----
Fig. 8. Signal transduction pathways affected by mutations in human cancer
Two representative pathways from Fig. 7 (RAS and PI3K) are illustrated. The signal
transducers are color coded: red indicates protein components encoded by the driver genes
listed in table S2; yellow balls denote sites of phosphorylation. Examples of therapeutic
agents that target some of the signal transducers are shown. RTK, receptor tyrosine kinase;
GDP, guanosine diphosphate; MEK, MAPK kinase; ERK, extracellular signal–regulated
kinase; NFkB, nuclear factor κB; mTOR, mammalian target of rapamycin.
Vogelstein et al.
Page 32
Science. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 22.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
