

----- Page 1 (native text) -----
Years lived with disability (YLDs) for 1160 sequelae of 289 
diseases and injuries 1990-2010: a systematic analysis for the 
Global Burden of Disease Study 2010
A full list of authors and affiliations appears at the end of the article.
Summary
Background—Non-fatal health outcomes from diseases and injuries are a crucial consideration 
in the promotion and monitoring of individual and population health. The Global Burden of 
Disease (GBD) studies done in 1990 and 2000 have been the only studies to quantify non-fatal 
health outcomes across an exhaustive set of disorders at the global and regional level. Neither 
effort quantified uncertainty in prevalence or years lived with disability (YLDs).
‡Correspondence to: Prof Christopher J L Murray, Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation, University of Washington, 2301 Fifth 
Avenue, Suite 600, Seattle, WA 98121, USA cjlm@uw.edu.
Contributors
CJLM, ADL, and TV prepared the first draft. TV, AF, MN, RL, CM, ME, KS, JS, ADL, and CJLM finalised the draft on the basis of 
comments from all other authors and reviewer feedback. CJLM and ADL had the idea for the study and provided overall guidance. All 
other authors developed cause-specific models, reviewed results, provided guidance on the selection of key covariates, and reviewed 
the paper.
Conflicts of interest
C E Canter has worked as an Optum Health consultant, Blue Cross Blue Shield consultant, and received Berlin Heart Honoraria and 
travel fees. E R Dorsey has received payments for consulting services from Lundbeck and Medtronic and research support from 
Lundbeck and Prana Biotechnology. T Driscoll was supported in part by funding from the National Occupational Health and Safety 
Commission (now Safework Australia). M Ezzati chaired a session and gave a talk at the World Cardiology Congress (WCC), with 
travel cost reimbursed by the World Heart Federation. At the WCC, he also gave a talk at a session organised by PepsiCo with no 
financial or other remuneration. F Guillemin did a study on osteoarthritis epidemiology in an institution that received grants from 
public sources: Assurance-Maladie (CNAMTS) InVS, Inserm, CHU de Nancy, CHU de Nice, Conseil Regional de Lorraine, Societe 
Francaise de Negma-Lerads, Pfizer, Pierre Fabre Medicaments, Sanofi-Aventis France. H J Hoffman is a US Federal Government 
employee of the National Institutes of Health (NIH). P J Hotez reports holding several positions: Dean, National School of Tropical 
Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine; Director, Sabin Vaccine Institute Texas Children’s Hospital Center for Vaccine Development; 
and President, Sabin Vaccine Institute. He also is an inventor on several patents: 5,527,937 “Hookworm Anticoagulant”; 5,753,787 
“Nucleic Acids for Ancylostoma Secreted Proteins”; 7,303,752 B2 “Hookworm vaccine”; 12/492,734 “Human Hookworm Vaccine”; 
61/077,256 “Multivalent Anthelminthic Vaccine”; and PCT-20100701/0.20.5.18 “Malaria Transmission blocking vaccine”. G A 
Mensah is a former employee of PepsiCo. F Perez-Ruiz was an advisor for Ardea, Menarini, Novartis, Metabolex; was a member of 
the Speaker’s Bureau for Menarini, Novartis; an advisor for educational issues for Savient; led investigation grants for the Spanish 
Health Ministry, Hospital de Cruces Rheumatology Association; and was principal investigator in clinical trials for Ardea. G V 
Polanczyk has served as a speaker or consultant to Eli-Lily, Novartis, Janssen-Cilag, and Shire Pharmaceuticals, developed educational 
material for Janssen-Cilag, and received an independent investigator grant from Novartis and from the National Council for Scientific 
and Technological Development (CNPq, Brazil). L Rushton received honorarium for board membership of the European Centre for 
Ecotoxicology and Toxicology of Chemicals and received research grants to Imperial College London (as PI) from the European 
Chemical Industry Council (CEFIC) and CONCAWE (Conservation of Clean Air and Water Europe). J A Singh has received research 
grants from Takeda and Savient and consultant fees from Savient, Takeda, Ardea, Regeneron, Allergan, URL pharmaceuticals, and 
Novartis. J A Singh is a member of the executive of OMERACT, an organisation that develops outcome measures in rheumatology and 
receives arms-length funding from 36 companies; a member of the American College of Rheumatology’s Guidelines Subcommittee of 
the Quality of Care Committee; and a member of the Veterans Affairs Rheumatology Field Advisory Committee. J A Singh is 
supported by research grants from the National Institutes of Arthritis, Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases (NIAMS), National Institute 
on Aging (NIA), National Cancer Institute (NCI) and the Agency for Health Quality and Research Center for Education and Research 
on Therapeutics (CERTs) and is also supported by the resources and the use of facilities at the VA Medical Center at Birmingham, 
Alabama, USA.
*Authors listed alphabetically
†Joint senior authors
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Published in final edited form as:
Lancet. 2012 December 15; 380(9859): 2163–2196. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(12)61729-2.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 2 (native text) -----
Methods—Of the 291 diseases and injuries in the GBD cause list, 289 cause disability. For 1160 
sequelae of the 289 diseases and injuries, we undertook a systematic analysis of prevalence, 
incidence, remission, duration, and excess mortality. Sources included published studies, case 
notification, population-based cancer registries, other disease registries, antenatal clinic 
serosurveillance, hospital discharge data, ambulatory care data, household surveys, other surveys, 
and cohort studies. For most sequelae, we used a Bayesian meta-regression method, DisMod-MR, 
designed to address key limitations in descriptive epidemiological data, including missing data, 
inconsistency, and large methodological variation between data sources. For some disorders, we 
used natural history models, geospatial models, back-calculation models (models calculating 
incidence from population mortality rates and case fatality), or registration completeness models 
(models adjusting for incomplete registration with health-system access and other covariates). 
Disability weights for 220 unique health states were used to capture the severity of health loss. 
YLDs by cause at age, sex, country, and year levels were adjusted for comorbidity with simulation 
methods. We included uncertainty estimates at all stages of the analysis.
Findings—Global prevalence for all ages combined in 2010 across the 1160 sequelae ranged 
from fewer than one case per 1 million people to 350 000 cases per 1 million people. Prevalence 
and severity of health loss were weakly correlated (correlation coeffi cient –0·37). In 2010, there 
were 777 million YLDs from all causes, up from 583 million in 1990. The main contributors to 
global YLDs were mental and behavioural disorders, musculoskeletal disorders, and diabetes or 
endocrine diseases. The leading specific causes of YLDs were much the same in 2010 as they 
were in 1990: low back pain, major depressive disorder, iron-deficiency anaemia, neck pain, 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, anxiety disorders, migraine, diabetes, and falls. Age-
specific prevalence of YLDs increased with age in all regions and has decreased slightly from 
1990 to 2010. Regional patterns of the leading causes of YLDs were more similar compared with 
years of life lost due to premature mortality. Neglected tropical diseases, HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, 
malaria, and anaemia were important causes of YLDs in sub-Saharan Africa.
Interpretation—Rates of YLDs per 100 000 people have remained largely constant over time but 
rise steadily with age. Population growth and ageing have increased YLD numbers and crude rates 
over the past two decades. Prevalences of the most common causes of YLDs, such as mental and 
behavioural disorders and musculoskeletal disorders, have not decreased. Health systems will need 
to address the needs of the rising numbers of individuals with a range of disorders that largely 
cause disability but not mortality. Quantifi cation of the burden of non-fatal health outcomes will 
be crucial to understand how well health systems are responding to these challenges. Effective and 
affordable strategies to deal with this rising burden are an urgent priority for health systems in 
most parts of the world.
Funding—Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation.
Introduction
Non-fatal health outcomes from diseases and injuries are a crucial consideration in the 
promotion and monitoring of individual and population health. In an era in which the 
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) have refocused global health attention on 
prevention of mortality from selected disorders, it is important to emphasise that health is 
about more than avoiding death. Individuals, households, and health systems devote 
Vos et al.
Page 2
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 3 (native text) -----
enormous resources to the cure, prevention, and amelioration of non-fatal sequelae of 
diseases and injuries. Some form of periodic accounting about the burden of non-fatal illness 
in populations, and how it is changing, should therefore be available for policy making and 
planning. Quantification of the burden of non-fatal health outcomes was one of the main 
goals in launching the Global Burden of Disease study (GBD) in the 1990s.1 The study 
introduced the disability-adjusted life-year (DALY) as a time-based measure of health that 
enables commensurable measurement of years of life lost due to premature mortality (YLLs) 
with years of life lived in less than ideal health (years lived with disability [YLDs]). The 
amalgamation of both components of individual and population health under a 
comprehensive framework for measuring population health can provide important insights 
into a broader set of causes of disease burden than can consideration of mortality alone.
To our knowledge, the various revisions of the GBD are the only effort to quantify non-fatal 
health outcomes across an exhaustive set of disorders at the global and regional level.2‒8 
Many national burden of disease studies and subnational studies have analysed local patterns 
of YLDs as well.9‒16 Publication of the GBD 1990 results raised awareness about a range of 
disorders that primarily cause ill health and not death, such as unipolar major depression, 
bipolar disorder, asthma, and osteoarthritis.17‒19 This attention has led to greater policy 
debate and action on mental health and other non-communicable diseases at WHO,4,20,21 in 
non–governmental organisations, and in many countries.22 The burden of non-fatal illness 
attributed to some parasitic diseases has also been an important issue highlighted by the 
GBD findings.23‒26
Despite the unique role of the GBD in provision of comparative quantification of the burden 
of non-fatal health outcomes, there have been important limitations. The evidence on MDG-
related diseases has been regularly revised and incorporated into updates of the GBD, but 
many disorders have not been systematically analysed since 1990. Global Health Statistics, a 
companion volume to the original Global Burden of Disease and Injuries book, provided 
estimates of incidence, prevalence, remission, and case fatality for 483 sequelae, by age and 
sex, for eight regions of the world.27 The GBD 2000 revisions included 474 sequelae. A 
substantial number, but not all, of these sequelae were revised since GBD 1990. Those that 
were not revised were approximated with constant relations between YLLs and YLDs or 
YLD rates estimated from the GBD 1990. Even when revisions were undertaken, however, 
many were not based on systematic analyses of published studies and unpublished sources. 
The epidemiological inputs to YLD estimates such as prevalence have been released for only 
40 sequelae. The most important limitation of both the GBD 1990 and 2000 efforts is that 
YLDs have not been estimated with uncertainty. Uncertainty can come from many sources, 
including heterogeneity in the empirical data that are available and uncertainty in the indirect 
estimation models used to make predictions for populations with little or no data. Because 
the empirical basis for estimating prevalence or incidence is much weaker for some sequelae 
than it is for others, uncertainty is likely to vary substantially across sequelae and across 
countries and regions for the same sequelae.8,28
The Global Burden of Diseases, Injuries, and Risk Factors Study 2010 (GBD 2010) 
provided an important opportunity to address the key limitations of past burden of disease 
assessments, including a more standardised approach to evidence synthesis, epidemiological 
Vos et al.
Page 3
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 4 (native text) -----
estimation with uncertainty, and assessment of comorbidity. In this Article, we describe the 
approach to undertaking these analyses with the available evidence, and discuss key 
comparative results. Subsequent disease-specific and injury-specific papers are planned that 
will provide much more detail on data, methods, and results for various disorders of interest.
Methods
Overview
Details of the GBD 2010 hierarchical cause list, the 21 epidemiological regions (and 
combinations of these into seven super-regions), the 20 age groups, and the relation between 
different components of GBD 2010 are published elsewhere.29 For the GBD 2010, YLDs are 
computed as the prevalence of a sequela multiplied by the disability weight for that sequela 
without age weighting or discounting. The YLDs arising from a disease or injury are the 
sum of the YLDs for each of the sequelae associated with that disease. Across the 291 
diseases and injury causes in the study, 289 cause disability—for these causes there were 
1160 sequelae that captured the major outcomes of these diseases and injuries.29,30 The key 
analytical task for the study was to estimate the prevalence with uncertainty of each of the 
1160 sequelae for 20 age groups, both sexes, and 21 regions for 1990, 2005, and 2010. See 
panel for terminology used in GBD 2010.
For each disease or injury, we identified the key sequelae from that cause. Sequelae could 
include the disease itself, such as diabetes, or the outcomes associated with that disease such 
as diabetic foot, neuropathy, or retinopathy. Some clinical disorders were classified as a 
disease but also can be a consequence of another disease—eg, chronic kidney disease 
secondary to diabetes is a consequence of diabetes but was classified as a disease. Any given 
outcome appears in the GBD cause and sequela list only once to avoid double counting of 
the associated burden. Across the 1160 sequelae, we identified 220 unique health states, 
representing a parsimonious list providing enough detail to describe the large variations 
between health states while still a manageable number for which we were able to derive 
disability weights by survey. In principle, we estimated YLDs at the level of an individual 
and then assigned individual health loss to all the contributing sequelae present in an 
individual. The analysis can be divided into seven specific steps (figure 1) which are briefly 
described below.
Identification and documentation of data sources—The analysis for each sequela 
began with the identification and documentation of sources of data for incidence, prevalence, 
remission, duration, and excess mortality. We used nine types of data sources. First, 
contributors to the GBD have undertaken systematic reviews for disease sequelae. For 
example, for epilepsy we retrieved: 230 prevalence studies from 83 countries in all 21 world 
regions, a further 97 studies of incidence, 25 studies of the mortality risk in people with 
epilepsy, and only one study on remission meeting inclusion criteria. For other disease 
sequelae, only a small fraction of the existing data appear in the published literature, and 
other sources predominate such as local surveys of schistosomiasis prevalence or antenatal 
clinic serosurveillance for HIV/AIDS. Second, reports to governments of cases have been 
used for African trypanosomiasis, measles, pertussis, tuberculosis, leprosy, dengue, cholera, 
Vos et al.
Page 4
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 5 (native text) -----
and yellow fever. Use of these data for burden of disease assessment required explicit 
modelling of the case detection rate for every disease. Third, we used population-based 
disease registry data for cancers,32‒40 chronic kidney diseases, multiple sclerosis,41 
Parkinson’s disease,42,43 and congenital anomalies.44 Cancer registries have been 
established in many developed countries and are being rapidly established in developing 
countries. For example, by the end of 2010, cancer registries had expanded in China to 149 
registries covering 31 provinces;45 India now has 23 registries.46 Fourth, many countries, in 
collaboration with UNAIDS and WHO, have established networks of antenatal clinics that 
test women presenting for antenatal care for HIV, syphilis, and other disorders. Fifth, for 43 
countries, we obtained hospital discharge data coded to ICD9 or ICD10. Use of these data 
required an explicit model of selection bias to take into account variations in access to care. 
Additionally, for chronic diseases, we had to estimate the average number of admissions to 
hospital per person per year with a disease to interpret the results. We analysed datasets with 
unique identifiers for every patient for seven US states from 2003 to 2007 for cirrhosis and 
pneumoconiosis. Hospital discharge data were an important source for acute disorders such 
as stroke, myocardial infarction, appendicitis, or pancreatitis, and for injuries. Sixth, for skin 
diseases and other mental and behavioural disorders, outpatient data collected in health 
systems with nearly complete or at least representative samples of ambulatory data47‒55 
have also been used after taking into account selection bias. Seventh, we used interview 
questions, direct measurements (eg, hearing, vision, and lung function testing), serological 
measurements, and anthropometry from the re-analysis of multiple household surveys. 
Surveys of selected populations such as school children for intellectual disability,56 nursing 
home residents for dementia,57 or mental health clinic attendees for schizo-phrenia58 have 
also been used after taking into consideration selection bias. Eighth, re-analysis of cohort or 
follow-up studies has been used for some causes such as impairment due to injury. We also 
used cohort studies to provide information about remission rates, duration, and mortality 
risks for many chronic disorders. Finally, we used indirect prevalence studies as an input to 
estimate the total number of drug users.59 These estimates were produced from a 
combination of multiplier, capture-recapture, and back- projection methods combining data 
from treatment centres, police records, court records, and survey data.
Developing prevalence estimates for sequelae—Meta-analysis or meta-regression 
of descriptive epidemiological studies60‒63 poses many challenges. First, for many regions 
and for many sequelae data are scarce. Predictions of prevalence need to take advantage of 
relations with covariates in a meta-regression or default to the average of a region, super-
region, or the world. Second, in settings with multiple measurements, study results can be 
highly heterogeneous because of much non-sampling error. Sources of non-sampling error 
include selection bias in the population studied, study design, implementation issues in data 
collection, widely varying case definitions across studies, and the use of different diagnostic 
technologies or laboratory techniques. Third, available studies have often used diverse age 
groups like 17–38 years or 15 years and above. Fourth, data for various disorders were 
collected for many different outcomes such as incidence, prevalence, remission, excess 
mortality, or cause-specific mortality. The mix of data varies across diseases and across 
regions for a disease. All of these sources provide some relevant information for the 
estimation of prevalence. Fifth, within regions or countries, the true prevalence of a sequela 
Vos et al.
Page 5
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 6 (native text) -----
can vary enormously. Sixth, on the basis of biology or clinical series, there might be strong 
prior views on the age pattern of incidence or prevalence for a disorder that should be 
reflected in the results. For instance, we would not expect prevalence of Alzheimer’s disease 
before age 40 years and diagnostic rules stipulate that the onset of attention deficit and 
hyperactivity disorder cannot occur before age 4 years or after age 8 years.64
To address these challenges, we have developed a Bayesian meta-regression method, 
DisMod-MR, which estimates a generalised negative binomial model for all epidemioiogical 
data. The model includes the following: covariates that predict variation in true rates; 
covariates that predict variation across studies because of measurement bias; super-region, 
region, and country random intercepts; and age-specific fixed effects. When appropriate, the 
rates were assumed to have been constant over time, which allowed data for incidence, 
prevalence, excess mortality, and cause-specific mortality to inform prevalence estimates. 
The differential equations governing the relation between the parameters of incidence, 
remission, mortality, prevalence, and duration are well charac-terised.65,66 DisMod-MR can 
use data reported for any age group to inform the maximum likelihood estimate. We used a 
large set of 179 covariates that have been appropriately imputed so that the data provide a 
complete time series for all 187 countries in the analysis (see the appendix for details of the 
estimation equations used for DisMod-MR and the approach to numerical solution, as well 
as an example of its application).29
For cancer incidence and prevalence, we used the approach applied by Forouzanfar and 
colleagues67 to breast and cervical cancers. We estimated the mortality- to-incidence ratio 
for each cancer for all country, age, and sex groups using data from all high-quality 
registries that reported on both incidence and mortality. We developed separate models for 
both sexes. Cause of death estimates for each cancer by country, year, age, and sex68 were 
divided by the predicted mortality-to-incidence ratio to generate incidence estimates. To 
estimate the prevalence of each of four sequelae of cancer including: diagnosis or treatment 
phase, remission, recurrence, and terminal phase, we estimated the natural history of 
incident cases using a calculated 5 year survival and relative duration of each cancer phase. 
We also used a variant of this approach to estimate incidence and prevalence for visceral 
leishmaniasis.
We used four sets of alternative methods for some disorders because of variation in the types 
of data available and the complexity of their spatial and temporal distributions (see appendix 
for further details). For HIV/ AIDS, we used the UNAIDS natural history model developed 
with the Spectrum platform.69,70 Detailed estimates of prevalence and mortality with 
uncertainty by age and sex have been provided based on the 2012 revision of HIV/AIDS 
epidemiology. We developed natural history models for measles and pertussis. For 
ascariasis, trichuriasis, hookworm, and schistosomiasis, prevalence of the disease has been 
estimated with geospatial estimation methods.71‒73 For diphtheria, tetanus, and rabies, we 
have used systematic reviews of data for case-fatality rates with estimates of mortality to 
estimate incidence—the mortality estimates for these diseases are described elsewhere.68 
For these disorders, DisMod-MR was used as a meta-regression method to estimate the case-
fatality rate by age, sex, and region. For tuberculosis and dengue, the key source of 
information was registered cases. We developed statistical models that simultaneously model 
Vos et al.
Page 6
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 7 (native text) -----
the expected rates as a function of covariates and the undercount of cases as a function of 
health system access.
Severity distributions—For 41 diseases, the sequelae of the disease have been linked to 
more than one health state including stroke, anxiety, major depressive disorder, symptomatic 
heart failure, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). After analysing the 
prevalence of the overall disorder, we estimated the distribution of these prevalent cases 
across severity levels. Disability weights were measured in population surveys30 for 
individuals without comorbidity. Two estimates are needed to calculate YLDs: the disability 
weight for individuals with a single sequela and the disability weight for individuals with 
multiple sequelae, which is a common occurrence. The prevalence of comorbid disorders 
can be estimated with micro-simulation. However, we needed to estimate the distribution of 
severity controlling for comorbidity, otherwise the severity distribution would be 
systematically biased towards more severe symptoms caused by comorbidity. For example, 
if individuals with depression are also likely to have anxiety and substance-use disorders, the 
reported distribution of functional health status would be shifted towards the more severe 
end.
Data for severity distributions are often scarcer and of poorer quality than are data for 
prevalence of disorders, with some exceptions.74,75 Approaches to severity classification are 
inconsistent across disorders.76 Because of the heterogeneity of the available evidence for 
disease severity, we supplemented disease specific reviews with an analysis of three data 
sources: the US Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS) 2000–09,77 the US National 
Epidemiological Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions (NESARC) 2000–01 and 2004–
05,78 and the Australian National Survey of Mental Health and Wellbeing of Adults (AHS) 
1997.79 These sources allow the assessment of the severity distributions taking into account 
co morbidity (see appendix for more details of this analysis). For some diseases for which 
data are available for the distribution of severity by age, sex, and region, we pooled 
proportions in each health state using DisMod-MR or simple meta-analysis methods.
Impairments—For selected impairments, we have constrained the estimates for sequelae 
related to that impairment to sum to estimates of the impairment prevalence from 
independent sources of data. For example, nine dis orders have blindness as a sequela. We 
have analysed all available blindness survey data and we constrain the prevalence of all 
blindness sequelae to sum to blindness prevalence. We did this impairment prevalence 
analysis for anaemia, blindness, low vision, hearing impairment, infertility, heart failure, 
epilepsy, and intellectual disability (appendix).
Analysis of injury burden—The analysis of YLDs from injuries needed careful 
consideration because injuries are classified in the cause list according to the external cause 
such as a road injury, animal bite, or drowning, whereas the functional limitations after 
injury are determined by the nature of injury such as brain trauma, femur fracture, or spinal 
cord transection. We did the injuries analysis in five steps, which are briefly outlined here 
with further details in the appendix. First, we analysed household survey and hospital 
discharge data using DisMod-MR for each external cause to generate estimates of incidence 
by age, sex, country, and year. Survey data included recall of injuries warranting admission 
Vos et al.
Page 7
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 8 (native text) -----
to hospital as well as injuries that warranted medical attention but not admission to hospital. 
The metaregression included a covariate for whether an individual was admitted to hospital 
or not, which we used to generate predictions both for injury warranting hospital admission 
and injury warranting outpatient care. Second, we analysed hospital data from 28 countries 
that had dual coding of discharges by external cause and nature of injury after ICD9 and 
ICD10, using negative binomial models to estimate the probability of different groups of 
nature of injury as a function of age, sex, and an indicator variable for developed versus 
developing countries. Separate models were created for injury warranting hospital admission 
and injury warranting other health care. Third, for each nature of injury we estimated the 
probability of individuals developing long-term functional impairment. We re-analysed 
follow-up data from four studies using data from the Dutch Injury Surveillance system 
(LIS),80 the South Carolina Traumatic Brain Injury Follow-up Registry (SCTBIFR),81 the 
National Study on Costs and Outcomes of Trauma (NSCOT),82 and MEPS.77 Fourth, we 
used DisMod-MR to estimate the prevalence of individuals in the population who are likely 
to have functional limitation because of a previous injury. Prevalence was estimated from 
incidence assuming zero remission and a relative risk of death compared with the general 
population based on available studies. In the fifth step, the YLDs due to prevalent cases of 
long-term injury were attributed back to external causes in proportion with the contributions 
of these causes to every type of injury.
Comorbidity—Comorbidity was taken into account in the calculation of YLDs, which 
needed three analytical steps (appendix). First, we estimated the co-occurrence of all the 
sequelae for each age, sex, country, and year. Co-occurrence is a function of the prevalence 
of each sequela and whether the probabilities of co-occurrence are independent of, or 
dependent on, each other.83 We could not identify sufficiently large datasets to estimate 
these dependent probabilities reliably within age groups. We therefore adopted the 
simplifying assumption of independence. For each age-sex-country-year, we used a Monte 
Carlo simulation of 20 000 individuals to estimate the cooccurrence of sequelae. To capture 
uncertainty in the prevalences of each of the sequelae, for each age-sex- country-year, we 
ran 1000 different micro-simulations of 20 000 individuals.
Second, we calculated the combined disability weight for the estimated individuals with 
every combination of disorders. For all combinations of disorders generated in the micro-
simulation, the combined disability weight for a simulated individual with two or more 
disorders is one minus the product of one minus each disability weight. Tests on real data 
such as MEPS as well as other studies suggest that this multiplicative model was the most 
appropriate.84,85 To propagate uncertainty in disability weights into the YLD estimates, each 
computation was based on a draw from the uncertainty distribution of each disability weight. 
Third, the combined disability weight from the co-occurrence of sequelae was apportioned 
to each of the contributing sequelae in proportion to the disability weight of a sequela on its 
own.
We tested the validity of our assumption of independence within an age-sex-country-year 
using the MEPS data (described above), which includes both individual-level measurement 
of functional status using SF‒12 and ICD‒ coded diagnoses. We applied the GBD 
approach assuming multiplicative disability weights and independent disorder probabilities 
Vos et al.
Page 8
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 9 (native text) -----
to estimate YLDs and we computed directly from the MEPS data taking into account actual 
comorbid patterns at the individual level. The correlation coefficient for the two approaches 
was 0.999.
YLDs from residual categories
There are nine causes on the cause list such as other neglected tropical diseases, other 
neurological disorders, or other congenital anomalies that are groupings of a large number of 
often rare disorders. We approximate the YLDs for these disorders using the ratio of YLDs 
to YLLs for similar or related disorders to then estimate YLDs for these residual categories 
from YLLs that have been directly estimated.68
Ranking lists
For the presentation of leading causes of YLDs, the level at which causes are ranked is 
subject to debate. We have opted to use the level of disaggregation that seems most relevant 
for public health decision making. For example, we have chosen to include diarrhoeal 
diseases, lower respiratory infections, maternal disorders, stroke, liver cancer, cirrhosis, drug 
use, road injury, exposure to mechanical forces, animal contact, interpersonal violence, and 
congenital anomalies in the ranking list.
Decomposing changes in YLDs into demographic and epidemiological factors
To help understand the drivers of change in the number of YLDs by cause or region, we 
have estimated the proportion of the change from 1990 to 2010 due to growth in total 
population, change in population age-structure and sexstructure, and change in age-specifi c 
and sex-specifi c rates. We computed two counterfactual sets of YLDs. First, a population 
growth scenario computed as the number of YLDs expected in 2010 if only total population 
numbers increased to the level of 2010 but the age-sex structure of population stayed the 
same as in 1990 and age-sex specifi c rates remained at 1990 levels. Second, a popu lation 
growth and population ageing scenario computed as the number of YLDs expected in 2010, 
using 1990 age-specifi c and sex-specifi c rates and 2010 age-specifi c and sexspecific 
population numbers. The diff erence between 1990 numbers and the population growth 
scenario is the change in YLDs due strictly to the growth in total population. The change 
from the population growth scenario to the population growth and ageing scenario is the 
number of YLDs due to ageing of the population. The diff erence between 2010 YLDs and 
the population growth and ageing scenario is the difference in YLDs due to epidemiological 
change in age-specific and sex-specific YLDs per person. Each of these three differences is 
also presented as a percentage change with reference to the 1990 YLD estimate. Further 
details about the data and methods used for specific causes of YLDs are available on request 
from the corresponding author.
Role of the funding source
The sponsor of the study had no role in study design, data collection, data analysis, data 
interpretation, or writing of the report. The corresponding author had full access to all of the 
data in the study and the final responsibility to submit for publication.
Vos et al.
Page 9
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 10 (native text) -----
Results
Global prevalence for all ages combined in 2010 across the 1160 sequelae varied from fewer 
than one case per 1 million people to 350 000 cases per 1 million people. 58 sequelae each 
affected more than 1% of the global population. Table 1 shows the global prevalence of the 
50 most common sequelae in 2010. Of these sequelae, four were oral health disorders 
(dental caries of permanent teeth, chronic periodontitis, dental caries of baby teeth, and 
edentulism). Four skin diseases were also very common: fungal skin disease, acne vulgaris, 
pruritus, and eczema; collectively these disorders affected 2·1 billion individuals (table 1). 
The number of individuals affected by tension-type headaches or migraine was also very 
large—these neurological causes respectively ranked as the second and third most common. 
Low back pain, neck pain, other musculoskeletal, and osteoarthritis of the knee were also 
very common (table 1). Hearing loss affected 1·3 billion people and vision loss affected 661 
million people. Two mental and behavioural disorders, anxiety and major depressive 
disorder, were in the top 30 most common causes. Two respiratory disorders, COPD and 
asthma, were also highly prevalent. Although prevalences varied substantially across 
communities, iron-deficiency anaemia affected 14·9% and infection with schistosomiasis 
affected 3·5% of the world’s population. Five of the top 50 most common sequelae affected 
only one sex: genital prolapse, uterine fibroids, benign prostatic hyperplasia, premenstrual 
syndrome, and polycystic ovarian disease. Table 1, however, shows prevalences at the level 
of only sequelae and not at the level of disease or injuries. Disorders such as chronic kidney 
diseases (CKD) does not appear in the top 30 causes because, at the sequelae level, we have 
separate estimates for CKD from hypertension, CKD from diabetes, and CKD from other 
causes.
We detected a huge range of severity across sequelae with similar prevalence when 
comparing prevalence rate per 100 000 individuals on a log scale for each sequela compared 
with the average disability weight (appendix p 36). In general, more severe disorders were 
less common than less severe disorders, but there were notable exceptions. The variation in 
prevalence across disorders extended by more than a factor of 100 000. A weak relation 
exists when the more common sequelae are milder than the less common sequelae 
(correlation coefficient –0·37). The lack of a strong association between prevalence and 
severity plus the substantial number of highly prevalent, but mild, disorders draws attention 
to why consideration of prevalence of disorders alone is insufficient in quantifying burden of 
disease. To understand which causes contribute the greatest burden, we need to take into 
account both prevalence and severity of the health states. The disability weights collected 
from the general public provide the mechanism by which the highly diverse set of sequelae 
can be compared by adjusting for severity.30
In 2010, there were a total of 777 million YLDs globally, implying an average health loss of 
0·11 years per person. By sex, the YLD rate was 10 819 per 100 000 male individuals and 11 
755 per 100 000 female individuals, with female individuals accounting for 51·6% of all 
YLDs globally. Disaggregated into three broad cause groups, 15·3% of YLDs in 2010 were 
due to communicable, maternal, neonatal, and nutritional disorders, 78·6% to non-
communicable diseases, and 6·1% to injuries. The heavy preponderance of YLDs from non-
Vos et al.
Page 10
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 11 (native text) -----
communicable diseases is substantially different from the distribution of years of life lost 
because of premature mortality (YLLs; 42·8%).68
We detected a characteristic pattern of the prevalence of disease adjusted for severity by age 
and sex at the global level in 2010 (figure 2). This figure provides an analysis using the 21 
mutually exclusive and collectively exhaustive cause categories at the second level in the 
GBD cause list for male and female individuals. In children younger than 5 years, leading 
causes of YLDs included neonatal disorders, nutritional deficiencies, diarrhoea, lower 
respiratory infections, other infectious diseases, and neglected tropical diseases and malaria. 
Beginning at age 10 years and extending to age 65 years, mental and behavioural disorders 
were a major cause, contributing as much as 36% at age 20–29 years. Nearly as important 
but with an older age distribution, the other dominant cause was musculoskeletal disorders. 
The third most important factor in adults was other non-communicable diseases, which 
includes congenital anomalies, skin diseases, sense organ disorders, and oral disorders 
(figure 2). Diabetes, urogenital, blood, and endocrine diseases made a progressively larger 
contribution with age. Neurological disorders (Alzheimer’s disease and Parkinson’s disease 
in particular) started to make a major contribution in individuals aged 80 years or older. 
Chronic respiratory disorders made a substantial contribution in individuals aged 10 years 
and older, whereas cardiovascular diseases seemed progressively more important at older 
ages. The long-term cumulative disability from unintentional injuries is also an important 
factor. This age-sex pattern of the leading causes was very different from the pattern for 
mortality by cause, which was dominated by causes such as cancers, cardiovascular diseases, 
HIV and tuberculosis, diarrhoea, pneumonia, and other infectious diseases.68
The GBD 2010 includes the assessment of 1160 sequelae, of which 600 are 40 different 
nature of injury sequelae (such as hip fracture or traumatic brain injury) for each of the 25 
external causes of injury (such as falls or road injury). For simplicity of presentation, table 2 
shows YLD estimates for all non-fatal health outcomes and some select groupings of 
sequelae. For example, we estimated YLDs for mild, moderate, and severe anaemia from a 
variety of causes but the table shows YLDs from all three forms of anaemia. For injuries we 
show only the YLDs by external cause without giving details for each nature of injury. 
Furthermore, we show results for both sexes combined for summary age groups (table 2) and 
the full age and sex detail for 2010 and 1990 (appendix pp 37–270). A substantial number of 
causes contribute to the overall YLDs at the global level (appendix pp 37–270). The leading 
causes were low back pain, which contributed 10·7% of total YLDs, and major depressive 
disorder, which contributed 8·1% of total YLDs. Within the broad category of 
communicable, maternal, neonatal, and nutritional disorders, the most important causes of 
YLDs included iron-deficiency anaemia, which accounted for 5·5% of all YLDs. Other 
causes within this group that caused 4 million or more YLDs included tuberculosis, HIV, 
diarrhoeal diseases, otitis media, malaria, intestinal nematodes, and neonatal disorders. 
Several neglected tropical diseases caused between 1 million and 4 million YLDs, including 
schistosomiasis, lymphatic filariasis, and food-borne trematodiases. Although major 
contributors to YLLs, the entire list of cancers caused a total of 4·5 million YLDs. 
Cardiovascular and circulatory diseases accounted for 2. 8% of all YLDs with ischaemic 
heart disease and stroke accounting for 60% of the total for the cardiovascular category and 
the rest distributed across a wide range of causes. Chronic respiratory diseases accounted for 
Vos et al.
Page 11
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 12 (native text) -----
6·3% of global YLDs with the largest contributor being COPD (29·4 million YLDs) 
followed by asthma with 13·8 million YLDs. YLD rates for COPD have risen since 1990 
whereas asthma rates have decreased marginally in this period. Neurological disorders 
accounted for another 42·9 million YLDs—migraine accounted for more than half of these 
YLDs.
Mental and behavioural disorders accounted for 22·7% of all YLDs. YLDs for the category 
as a whole have increased by 37% from 1990 to 2010 from 129 million to 177 million and 
rates have also increased slightly by 5% over the two decades (from 2440 per 100 000 
people to 2564 per 100 000 people). Within this category, six disorders or clusters of 
disorders accounted for more than 10 million YLDs each. The largest category was 
depressive disorders: major depressive disorder caused 63 million YLDs and dysthymia 
caused 11 million YLDs—together accounting for 9·6% of all YLDs. Schizophrenia, alcohol 
use disorders, drug use disorders, and bipolar disorder accounted for 12·9–16·4 million 
YLDs. Anxiety disorders were also a major global cause, contributing 3·5% of all YLDs. 
Another important category of diseases causing YLDs was diabetes, urogenital, blood, and 
endocrine diseases, which accounted for 56·9 million YLDs. Major causes included diabetes 
mellitus (20·8 million YLDs), benign prostatic hyperplasia (6·8 million YLDs), 
gynaecological disorders (10·0 million YLDs), and haemoglobinopathies and haemolytic 
anaemias (10·2 million YLDs). Together, musculoskeletal disorders caused 21·3% of all 
YLDs. The main contributors were low back pain (83·1 million YLDs), neck pain (33·6 
million YLDs), osteoarthritis (17·1 million YLDs), and the other musculoskeletal category 
(28·2 million YLDs). Osteoarthritis of the knee accounted for 83% of the total osteoarthritis 
burden. We included the assessment of 13 separate skin diseases. Collectively they caused 
33·7 million YLDs, with the largest cause being eczema followed by acne vulgaris. Many of 
the skin diseases have low disability weights but because of very high prevalences, they still 
accounted for a substantial number of YLDs. Oral disorders combined caused 15·0 million 
YLDs, with about equal shares caused by dental caries, periodontal disease, and edentulism. 
Injuries collectively caused 6·1% of global YLDs. Falls accounted for 41% of the total 
YLDs caused by injuries. The other major contributors were road injuries, causing 13·5 
million YLDs.
Between 1990 and 2010, the total number of YLDs increased by 194 million—a 33·3% 
increase. We have decomposed this change into three components (table 3): growth in total 
population, ageing of the global population, and changes in the YLD rates. We have 
decomposed change both for YLDs from all causes and also for the three broad cause 
groups. For YLDs from all causes, population growth alone led to a 30·1% increase in YLDs 
and population ageing led to a further 10·9% increase in YLDs. Reductions in age-sex 
specific prevalence rates would have reduced YLDs by 7·7%, leading to an overall increase 
of about a third. Examination of change by the three broad groups shows distinct patterns. 
Age-specific and sex-specific YLD rates for communicable, maternal, neonatal, and 
nutritional disorders have decreased, and alone would have led to a 27·9% decrease in 
YLDs. Overall, YLDs from this cluster of causes increased, slightly, by 4·6% because of 
population growth, which increased more in the regions with the highest YLDs from these 
causes. For non-communicable diseases, the overall increase has been 40·3%, but this 
increase was driven by both population growth and population ageing, with very small 
Vos et al.
Page 12
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 13 (native text) -----
decreases in prevalence rates. For injuries we saw a similar pattern, except that the decrease 
in age-sex specific rates would have caused a 9·1% decline.
For all causes of YLDs combined, the small decrease expected because of changes in age-
specific and sex- specific YLDs per person of 7·7% shown in table 3 can also be seen in 
figure 3, which shows age-specific YLDs per person in 1990 and 2010 for both sexes. 
Values in figure 3 can be interpreted as the fraction of health lost to short-term and long-term 
disabling sequelae in each age group. As expected, the YLDs per person rose with age; 
YLDs per person aged 5 years were 5·4%, rising to28·6% (28·2% for women; 29·4% for 
men) for individuals aged 80 years. Female YLDs per person were higher than male YLDs 
for individuals aged 10–60 years at the global level; the difference is highest for individuals 
aged 30 years, when YLDs per woman were 1·4 percentage points higher than YLDs per 
man. The decrease in overall YLDs per person over the 20 year period (between 1990 and 
2010) was much smaller than the approximate 20% decrease in mortality.68
Faster rates of increase in YLDs for non-communicable diseases led to their share of total 
YLDs increasing from 74·6% in 1990 to 78·6% in 2010. Causes are ordered by their mean 
rank across 1000 draws. The order based on the mean rank across draws is not the same as 
the order based on the mean value of YLDs. The 25 most common causes in 1990 and 2010 
are shown in figure 4. Non-communicable diseases were the most common cause of YLDs 
(figure 4); 21 of the 25 leading causes are from non-communicable diseases, up from 19 of 
the 25 most common in 1990. The four leading causes in 2010 were also the four leading 
causes in 1990: low back pain, major depressive disorder, iron-deficiency anaemia, and neck 
pain. COPD increased from sixth to fifth, and anxiety and migraine retained the same 
ranking as in 1990 (figure 4). Other notable changes over the time period include the drop in 
the ranking of asthma, although the number of YLDs it caused increased by 28%. Road 
injury YLDs also increased but to a lesser extent than the increase in many of the non-
communicable diseases, meaning that it also dropped in the rank list. We detected larger 
decreases in the rank of diarrhoea and tuberculosis than the other 25 most common causes in 
1990.
The appendix (pp 280–88) shows YLDs per person by age and sex for the 21 GBD regions 
in 2010 and 1990. In general, in almost all age groups, the lowest YLDs per person were in 
the high-income Asia Pacific and east Asia regions. Western Europe and Australasia had the 
next lowest levels of YLDs per person, with rates of YLDs typically 10·15% lower than in 
high-income North America for most age groups. We estimate that the highest levels of 
YLDs per person were in the Caribbean, Oceania, and sub-Saharan Africa, particularly in 
the age groups affected by HIV in southern sub-Saharan Africa. The ratio of YLDs per 
person, comparing regions with the highest rates to the lowest rates, ranges from 9·71 in 
post-neonatal boys to 1·39 in men aged 80 years or older. This range is much smaller than 
we saw for YLLs across the same region-age-sex groups (the highest being 84·90 in male 
individuals aged 1–4 years and the lowest being 2·04 in male individuals aged 80 years or 
older).
Figure 5 shows how the broad composition of the causes of YLDs varied by region in 2010. 
At the 21 cause-group level, which is level 2 in the GBD cause hierarchy,29 we detected a 
Vos et al.
Page 13
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 14 (native text) -----
clear association between the demographic and epidemiological transition. Mental and 
behavioural, musculoskeletal, other non-communicable, and chronic respiratory causes were 
consistently important in all regions. Some causes played a much more important part in 
regions that are less advanced in the demographic and epidemiological transition as 
measured by the mean age of death.86 HIV/AIDS and tuberculosis, neglected tropical 
diseases, and nutritional deficiencies stand out as being the most variable. For example, 
neglected tropical diseases and malaria ranged from 11·4% of total YLDs in western sub-
Saharan Africa to less than 0·01% in high- income North America. Injuries have made a 
greater contribution to overall disability, in percentage terms, in those regions that are more 
advanced in the demographic and epidemiological transition. The contribution of stroke and 
diabetes, urogenital, blood, and endocrine diseases also increased with the demographic and 
epidemiological transition. Cardiovascular diseases did not contribute more than 5% of 
YLDs. The large fraction in the Caribbean attributable to war and disaster in 2010 is related 
to the Haiti earthquake.
Figure 6 shows how the leading causes of YLDs varied by region in 2010. Causes were 
included if they were in the 25 most common globally or in the 25 most common for any 
region. By contrast with a similar analysis for YLLs,68 we recorded much consistency in the 
ranking of causes of YLDs for the 15 most common causes, with the exception of iron-
deficiency anaemia, which was the third most common cause globally. Iron-deficiency 
anaemia ranged from the most common cause in sub-Saharan Africa (western, eastern, and 
cent ral) to the 88th most common cause in high-income North America. Other causes that 
were highly variable across regions included malaria, cataracts, hookworm disease, sickle 
cell anaemia, thalassaemia, lymphatic filariasis, onchocerciasis, and schistosomiasis. The 
consistency of ranks for most major causes is related to the comparatively small variation in 
the prevalence of major mental and behavioural disorders and musculoskeletal disorders 
across different regions of the world.
Injuries accounted for a total of 47·2 million YLDs in 2010, up from 34·1 million in 1990. 
Table 2 provides the results of YLDs for each external cause of injury (see appendix pp 37–
270 for more detailed results by age and sex). In terms of external causes, falls and road 
injuries combined accounted for more than two-thirds (69·8%) of all YLDs due to injuries. 
YLDs from injuries stem from the nature of the injury rather than the external cause. Figure 
7 shows the global breakdown of the nature of injury by age. In terms of the nature of injury 
that health services should address, 52·3% of YLDs were accounted for by the following: 
lacerations, multiple wounds, other dislocations, and eye injuries; fractures of the patella, 
fibula, tibia, or ankle; and moderate-to-severe traumatic brain injury. The number of YLDs 
from lacerations, multiple wounds, other dislocations, and eye injuries stemmed from the 
large numbers of people who had this type of injury and the evidence from follow-up studies 
that some individuals have long-term decreases in functioning. More severe injuries such as 
spinal cord injury are much less common according to the hospital and non-hospital data for 
external cause and nature of injury, even though they have more severe long-term 
consequences for individuals affected. The age pattern shows a slow rise by age of the 
fraction of the nature of injury due to fractures of the sternum, face, and pelvis. The 
percentage due to burns decreased with age as did moderate to severe brain trauma. (figure 
7).
Vos et al.
Page 14
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 15 (native text) -----
An important innovation in GBD 2010 was the assessment of selected impairments overall 
as well as their attribution by cause. The results of the impairment analysis are not easily 
discernible in table 2 because the burden is distributed across multiple disease or injury 
sequelae. Anaemia was perhaps the most important of these disorders in terms of its overall 
contribution to global YLDs. The burden of anaemia overall was large—68·2 million YLDs 
or almost a tenth (8·8%) of all YLDs worldwide, showing the high prevalence as well as the 
moderately severe disability weight especially for severe anaemia. By far the most important 
contributor to this health loss was iron-deficiency anaemia, which accounted for 62·2% of 
anaemia YLDs globally. However, our assessment of iron-deficiency anaemia was based on 
the results of iron supplementation trials which by their nature will capture both iron 
deficiency anaemia due to inadequate dietary intake but also some anaemia due to blood loss 
that is iron sensitive. The second leading specific cause of anaemia YLDs was thalassaemia 
(6·7% of total anaemia YLDs) followed by malaria (4·9%). Hookworm and sickle cell 
anaemia together account for a further 7·2%. Figure 8 shows the YLD rate per 100 000 
individuals across regions; YLD rates varied from nearly 2300 in central sub-Saharan Africa 
to less than 300 in high-income North America. The cause composition of anaemia YLDs 
also varied across regions. In sub-Saharan Africa, higher anaemia rates were caused mainly 
by malaria, hookworm, schistosomiasis, sickle cell anaemia, and higher iron-deficiency 
anaemia. South Asia had the highest rates after sub-Saharan Africa, with the largest 
contributor being iron-deficiency anaemia. Although in absolute terms not a major cause of 
global anaemia, chronic kidney diseases accounted for a substantial proportion of anaemia 
burden in high-income regions.
Left-side and right-side heart failure was another impairment that was included in the GBD 
cause-sequelae list in many locations. Worldwide, we recorded an estimated 37·7 million 
cases of prevalent heart failure in 2010, leading to 4·2 million YLDs. This assessment of 
heart failure includes only symptomatic heart failure and does not include the large number 
of individuals with pre-symptomatic disease. For those with symptoms, the average 
disability weight was 0·12, although severity varies widely between individuals. Heart 
failure was distributed across 17 causes (figure 9). Slightly more than two-thirds (68·7%) of 
heart failure globally was due to four causes: ischaemic heart disease, COPD, hypertensive 
heart disease, and rheumatic heart disease. The pattern varied by region: ischaemic heart 
disease and COPD caused proportionally more YLDs in developed regions, whereas 
hypertensive heart disease, rheumatic heart disease, and cardiomyopathy and myocarditis 
made a larger contribution in some developing regions.
Another important cause of global YLDs is blindness and low vision. Overall, visual 
impairment accounted for 21·1 million YLDs or 2·7% of the global total. Figure 10 shows 
the main causes of low vision and blindness. The largest global cause of YLDs from vision 
impairment globally was other vision loss (mainly from trauma, occupational exposures, and 
idiopathic disorders), which accounted for 29·5% of the total number of vision-loss YLDs. 
Uncorrected refractive error was the second most common cause and accounted for 26·5% 
of vision impairment. Cataracts were the third largest contributor (22·4% of vision-loss 
YLDs). Glaucoma and macular degeneration together accounted for a further 10·7%, with 
trachoma and onchocerciasis accounting for 2·1% of YLDs from vision loss in 2010. Most 
blindness and low vision YLDs were in individuals aged 45 years or older. We recorded a 
Vos et al.
Page 15
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 16 (native text) -----
substantial increase in the absolute number of YLDs from low vision and blindness since 
1990, primarily driven by changes in population age structure.The regional pattern shows 
that in sub-Saharan Africa, uncorrected refractive error, trachoma, onchocerciasis, and 
vitamin A deficiency play a much greater part than in other regions. As expected in more 
epidemiologically advanced regions, the composition of causes of blindness and low vision 
burden was shifted towards macular degeneration, glaucoma, diabetes, and other vision loss.
Hearing impairment accounted for 19·9 million YLDs—2·6% of the total number of YLDs. 
Adult-onset hearing loss unrelated to a specific disease process accounted for 79·0% of the 
total YLDs due to hearingimpairment. Other major causes included otitis media, which 
caused 14·1% of hearing loss YLDs. Smaller causes included congenital hearing loss and 
meningitis. Of the 19·9 million YLDs due to hearing loss, mild-to-moderate severity 
accounted for 74·7%, whereas complete hearing loss accounted for only 3·7%. We detected 
a substantial increase in the number of YLDs due to hearing impairment since 1990, again 
driven by the ageing of populations.
Intellectual disability and borderline intellectual impairment accounted for 3·1 million 
YLDs. The prevalence of these disorders were quite low, ranging from 0·5% in high-income 
Asia Pacific to 2·2% in sub-Saharan Africa and south Asia, with disability weights from 
0·003 for mild disorders to 0·149 for profound disorders. Prevalence varied across regions by 
about two-fold from east sub-Saharan Africa to high-income Asia Pacific. Figure 11 shows 
YLD rates per 100 000 people across regions by cause. Globally, the main causes of 
intellectual disability YLDs were idiopathic, Down’s syndrome, autism, preterm birth, and 
other congenital disorders. Some causes, however, were much more important in selected 
regions, such as meningitis in west and central sub-Saharan Africa and cretinism in south 
Asia. In terms of YLD rates, the largest variation across regions was from idiopathic causes.
Discussion
We know of no other complete assessment of the prevalence of sequelae from diseases and 
injuries and their associated YLDs since GBD 1990. Prevalences of the 1160 sequelae 
ranged by more than a factor of 100 000 from the least to the most common. Taking into 
account severity, on average, every person in the world had an 11% reduction in their overall 
health in 2010 because of diseases and injuries. The prevalence of diseases and injuries and 
YLDs per person increased steadily with age in all regions. We have identified the main 
causes that contributed to YLDs as mental and behavioural disorders and musculoskeletal 
disorders. Neurological disorders, chronic respiratory diseases, some neglected tropical 
diseases, gynaecological disorders, and long-term disability from injuries were also 
important causes of YLDs. Compared with causes of mortality and years of life lost because 
of premature mortality, the main drivers of disability were much more consistent across 
regions. YLDs from non-communicable diseases ranged from 62·0% (central sub-Saharan 
Africa) to 92·6% (high-income North America) of the total. However, we detected large 
regional variation when assessing all disorders; the 25 most common disorders in any region 
included 49 different disorders globally.
Vos et al.
Page 16
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 17 (native text) -----
There has been much debate in demographic, epidemiological, and gerontological studies 
about whether the prevalence of morbidity and disability increases or decreases with the 
epidemiological transition.87–93 Fries88 argued that with mortality reduction the onset of 
disabling chronic illness could be delayed, leading to individuals spending fewer years with 
morbidity—this hypothesis is known as the compression of morbidity hypothesis. 
Alternative views have stressed the effect of medical intervention in extending the lifespan 
of people with disabling disorders,92 which is commonly referred to as expansion of 
morbidity. Manton and colleagues94 argued using self-reported data that the prevalence of 
disability in elderly people in the USA was decreasing, providing support for the 
compression hypothesis. Demographic historians have noted the rise in reported morbidity 
as mortality decreases,87,89 which could be indicative of a real rise in disease pathology or a 
changing perception of the importance of lesser morbidities. The results reported here, 
constructed from multiple sources for nearly all major contributors to functional impairment, 
suggest that the prevalence of disability in nearly all regions of the world has been stable 
over the past two decades. In four regions (the Caribbean, western Europe, high-income 
North America, and southern sub-Saharan Africa), age- standardised YLDs per person 
increased, whereas in all other regions they decreased, although in all cases the changes 
were small. The implications of stable age-specific YLDs per person that steadily rise with 
age are important. As life expectancy increases, people can expect to spend a greater number 
ofyears living with reduced health because the added years are at older ages with increased 
rates of disability. If compression is defined as a decreasing number of years of life lived 
with disability, then our findings are not consistent with this hypothesis. Of course, the 
evidence for some causes of YLDs over time is scarce, which might mean that we did not 
identify important secular decreases in disability. However, for the leading causes of YLDs, 
such as major depressive disorder and most musculoskeletal disorders, much available 
evidence does not suggest clear trends in age-specific prevalences.
We detected a clear difference between patterns of selfrated health and the YLD rate per 
person estimated in the GBD 2010, which was constructed from a careful assessment of the 
evidence for 1160 disabling sequelae across regions. Analysis of the general health question 
in the World Health Survey,95 for example, suggests that levels of self-reported health are 
much lower in North America than they are in Africa. Yet we saw that YLDs per person are 
higher in Africa than they were in North America. The gap between these self-assessments 
and the results of the GBD derives from several key factors. First, many studies have been 
done on variations in the use of categorical responses across cultures;96–98 attempts to 
correct for this variation (eg, anchoring vignettes) have been proposed and implemented in 
various surveys.99–100 Second, in this study, we assumed the health loss, but not the welfare 
loss, associated with a sequela would be the same over time or across populations. 
Responses to general health questions could be confounded by other welfare or wellbeing 
considerations. In this analysis, however, we saw that self-rated functional health status 
measured using SF-12 or EQ5D survey instruments in cohort follow-up studies provided 
useful inputs into the assessment of long-term disability after an event and the distribution of 
severity within a disorder. Yet the same selfrated health data seem problematic when used to 
compare overall prevalence of functional impairment across linguistic or cultural groups. 
Our view of the gap is that substantial research will be needed to enhance the cross-
Vos et al.
Page 17
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 18 (native text) -----
population comparability of self-rated health instruments to the point at which they can be 
useful inputs for the assessment of the level of YLDs across populations.
The largest contributor to global YLDs were mental and behavioural disorders. In this study, 
the number of mental and behavioural disorders that we included increased from eight in 
GBD 1990 to 22 in GBD 2010. The present analysis used a much more extensive database 
than was used for GBD 1990, using data from multiple sources and survey programmes. 
Prevalence estimates for these disorders are based largely on self-reported symptoms with 
standardised screening instruments. In GBD 1990 and 2000, we included three specific 
anxiety disorders: post-traumatic stress disorder, panic disorder, and obsessive-compulsive 
disorder. On the basis of the high degree of comorbidity across anxiety disorders, we chose 
to assess the burden of all anxiety disorders but not to provide estimates for specific forms of 
anxiety disorders. Despite some claims to the contrary,101,102 our systematic analysis and 
meta-regression have not detected notable trends in the age-specific prevalences of these 
disorders overall; a notable exception is the rise in some regions in drug use disorders. The 
overall YLDs per person due to mental and behavioural disorders ranged from 2·0% in 
western sub-Saharan Africa to 3·3% in high-income North America. This narrow variation 
in the estimated YLD rates contrasts with some published analyses of variations in 
prevalence; the differences stem from both the data sources used and the methods applied for 
meta-regression.103 The findings of large and increasing YLDs due to mental and 
behavioural disorders draws attention to the urgent need for identification and 
implementation of effective and affordable strategies for this set of problems.
The second largest contributor to YLDs globally and in nearly all regions were 
musculoskeletal (MSK) disorders. Osteoarthritis (OA) of the knees and hips combined was 
the third most prevalent MSK disorder, and, because we did not include OA in other joints 
or the spine, is an underestimate of OA, although the burden of OA in other joints or the 
spine was captured under the categories of low back pain, neck pain, and other MSK. Low 
back pain stands out as the leading MSK disorder because of a combination of similarly high 
prevalence and a greater disability weight associated with this health state. Low back pain 
was one of the four most common disorders in all regions, and was the leading cause of 
YLDs in all developed countries; neck pain was also a major contributor in many regions. 
Low back and neck pain accounted for 70% of all YLDs from musculoskeletal disorders, 
and for every YLD due to neck pain there were 2· 5YLDs related to low back pain. The 
burden as estimated here is substantially higher than previously assessed in the GBD 1990 
and GBD 2000 rounds of estimations. We believe the estimates presented here are more 
accurate because the empirical basis for prevalence generated through the systematic reviews 
and the analysis of survey data such as the World Health Survey is much stronger than in the 
past and a greater body of data was available for analysis. The increase in burden is also 
attributable to the higher disability weights that emerged from the disability weight surveys 
of the general population. Across all countries surveyed, respondents consistently recorded 
high levels of health loss caused by pain. These findings combined with the 33·3% increase 
in YLDs from 1990 to 2010 driven largely by population growth and ageing have important 
implications for health systems. Health systems will need to develop effective and affordable 
strategies to respond to this growing and nearly universal burden.
Vos et al.
Page 18
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 19 (native text) -----
Intellectual disability (ID) accounted for 3·1 million YLDs, or 0·4% of the global total. This 
magnitude of ID is small compared with some claims about cognitive impairment in 
developing countries.102 There are several explanations for this discrepancy. First, the 
epidemiological data, especially those from low-income settings, are very scarce and our 
estimations consequently have large uncertainty intervals. Better data collection for ID 
would help in future revisions to narrow uncertainty intervals. Second, the disability weights 
selected by the general public for mild, moderate, severe, and profound intellectual disability 
ranged from 0·031 to 0·157, which were quite low. Some studies of anaemia and of helminth 
infections have reported evidence of irreversible cognitive deficits associated with these 
disorders.103–109 The reversible component of cognitive deficit associated with anaemia that 
is related to lethargy is captured in the disability weight for anaemia. The important issue, 
however, is the irreversible component of ID. In this analysis, this burden is classified as 
idiopathic intellectual disability. In the allocation of ID to different causes, 1·0 million YLDs 
were allocated to the idiopathic category in developing countries. If there are irreversible 
cognitive deficits associated with anaemia and helminth infections that lead to affected 
individuals being classified as disabled, we would capture this health loss in our estimates of 
intellectual disability. In sub-Saharan Africa and south Asia, the residual category of 
intellectual disability is larger than in other regions, which might be an indication of the 
effect of these other disorders. Nevertheless, the number of YLDs from idiopathic 
intellectual disability is not large enough to substantially change the ranks of the parasitic 
diseases or nutritional deficiencies presented here. Also, only IQs below 85 are assigned a 
disability weight so that if parasitic infections or nutritional deficiencies lowered IQ by two 
or three points in individuals but did not lower them below the threshold of 85, this effect 
would not be represented here. The disability weight, even for borderline ID (IQs of 70–84), 
is very small, suggesting that the general public does not consider small IQ reductions as a 
health loss; although such changes might have important effects on the general welfare of 
populations.
Hearing impairments accounted for less than 3% of all YLDs, which was a smaller 
contribution than that estimated in the GBD 2004 revision (4·5%).8 The main reason for this 
lower estimate is that disability weights for severe hearing loss are substantially lower in the 
current study than in the GBD 1990. As discussed by Salomon and colleagues,30 the main 
basis for estimation of disability weights comes from population-based surveys in which 
respondents make a series of paired comparisons between health states presented as brief lay 
descriptions. For hearing loss, the lay descriptions focused on the hearing impairment itself, 
excluding other possible outcomes that might accompany severe levels of hearing loss—eg, 
depression or learning disabilities. So far as these outcomes are part of the construct being 
measured in the Global Burden of Disease, their exclusion from the descriptions for hearing 
outcomes would be expected to lower the overall burden estimated for these causes. 
Furthermore, findings from some studies suggest that hearing loss can itself be a contributor 
to depression and other outcomes.110–112 To the extent that these relations are causal, the 
YLDs estimated in the present study for hearing loss do not capture these relations. These 
issues might also apply to the YLDs estimated for blindness or low vision.
A study of this magnitude with so many outcomes estimated for many different age-sex-
country-years inevitably has many limitations. In view of the GBD philosophy that it is 
Vos et al.
Page 19
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 20 (native text) -----
better to make estimates based on the best available evidence than not to make estimates, 
some YLD figures are based on a restricted database. The uncertainty intervals are meant to 
convey the strength of the evidence. Nevertheless, there are likely sources of uncertainty that 
have not been captured. In the GBD 2010 causes ofdeath analysis,68 we used out-of-sample 
predictive validity to more objectively quantify the validity of uncertainty intervals. We have 
not been able to apply this approach to the Bayesian meta-regression step in the YLD 
analysis for two reasons. First, the meta-regression step with DisMod-MR needed too much 
computing time to allow for repeated out-of-sample predictive validity testing. Future 
improvements in computational efficiency might allow such analysis, but at present it is not 
feasible. Second, data for many disorders are more scarce than they are for causes of death. 
Out-of-sample predictive validity testing is not very stable when data are very scarce. 
Another important limitation of the study is the disease and sequelae list itself. Although we 
included 1160 sequelae, there are many smaller sequelae of diseases and less common 
diseases that are only captured in the residual categories in the cause list. The estimates for 
these residual categories are, by their nature, very approximate. Compared with GBD 2000, 
the percentage of YLDs estimated in these residual categories has decreased from 9·0% to 
less than 2·0%. Future iterations of the GBD could add more disorders and reduce the 
uncertainty that stems from the residual categories.
Other limitations of this study include the restricted evidence-base for some disorders for 
crosswalking (adjusting data inputs based on less desirable study characteristics to the 
expected level of data inputs from optimally conducted studies) different case definitions or 
item recall periods such as 12-month versus 1-month recall. These crosswalks are estimated 
on the basis of a comparison of datapoints identified as having the desirable case definition, 
recall period, or other study quality characteristic with values with the less desirable 
attributes. This approach assumes that the relation between different study attributes is 
constant across age, sex, and region. In some cases, when such a relation does not exist, we 
estimated the crosswalks separately by age and sex using data collected with multiple 
definitions, such as for different decibel thresholds for hearing loss. The idea of using results 
of studies done with different definitions or diagnostic approaches in the final systematic 
analysis has substantially expanded the empirical basis available for assessing prevalence 
across age, sex, and regions. It does, however, draw attention to the importance of 
investigators publishing or making available data from existing studies using alternative case 
definitions or diagnostic approaches.
Another limitation of the study is that long-term follow- up data for injuries were available 
only from high-income countries. Long-term follow-up in developing countries could be 
different. Because of higher case-fatality rates in such countries, the average severity in 
surviving cases might be better than it is in high-income countries, if medical and surgical 
intervention extends the lifespan of those with more severe disabilities. Alternatively, the 
probability of long-term disability could be higher because of care that lowers mortality but 
does not restore function as effectively as does care in developed countries.
For the first time, we have adjusted GBD results for YLDs for comorbidity. The analysis of 
comorbidity, however, has several major limitations. Very few data are available that have 
been collected with a sufficiently large sample size and covering enough sequelae to 
Vos et al.
Page 20
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 21 (native text) -----
estimate the correlation matrix for sequelae prevalence by age. National health information 
systems that capture detailed ICD-coded encounter data could provide a source of data for 
this type of analysis in the future. In general, if substantial dependent comorbidity (ie, one 
disease predisposes a person to be more or less likely to have another disease) exists, our 
estimates of YLDs might be slightly overestimated.83 The effect, however, is unlikely to be 
large because of the validation results seen in the 171 354 respondents in MEPS.77 In the 
microsimulation step for each country, age, sex, and year, we used 20 000 simulated 
individuals, then repeated the microsimulation 1000 times to capture uncertainty in the 
prevalences of all sequelae and disability weights. The effect of the microsimulation, 
especially for rare disorders, is to increase the estimated uncertainty in YLDs. For most 
disorders, this increase in uncertainty is small, but it can be quite substantial for rare 
disorders. The comorbidity process will tend to overestimate uncertainty in uncommon 
disorders. There are many potential uses of the comorbidity results of the GBD other than 
correction to YLD calculations. For instance, estimations of the expected number of 
individuals with multiple disorders might be useful for health planning purposes. We expect 
that comorbidity will be an important area for future burden research.
Consideration of comorbidity has put more emphasis on understanding the distribution of 
severity of disease. We directly model combinations of disorders and their effect on 
individual disability weights; to avoid double-counting, severity distributions for each 
disorder need to be estimated either controlling for comorbidity or in individuals without 
comorbidities, although the latter might be intractably affected by selection bias. In either 
case, the available data are limited. Datasets like the MEPS77 that collect repeated 
observations over time on functional health status and collect ICD-coded information on 
multiple conditions can be extremely useful for future assessments of severity. Other data 
collection strategies are possible but future burden of disease research needs to foster new 
data collection that provides direct assessments of severity distributions. Studies of severity 
need also to take into account that individuals might be asymptomatic for some time, and to 
quantify this as part of the protocol. In datasets in which clinical diagnoses can be verified, 
more routine collection of information using a standard self-reported functional health status 
instrument will enhance their utility.
In view of the fact that there is almost no relation between the prevalence of a sequela and 
the severity of the sequela as captured in the disability weights, recognition that our results 
depend on the validity of the disability weights themselves is crucial. Some disability 
weights have changed substantially compared with GBD 1990 weights, such as for blindness 
or profound hearing loss. Elsewhere, Salomon and colleagues30 describe the methods used 
to measure the GBD 2010 disability weights in multiple populations around the world. The 
shift to the use of samples of the general population, rather than small panels of health-care 
professionals as used for the GBD 1990 disability weights, we believe strengthens the 
findings presented here. Nevertheless, the crucial mechanism by which the general public 
can assess the level of health for different health states is through brief descriptions in lay 
language. Salomon and colleagues30 lay out a future research agenda to better understand 
how alternative lay descriptions of health states might affect the resulting disability weight.
Vos et al.
Page 21
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 22 (native text) -----
One important function for health information systems should be to provide national 
decision makers with timely information about the burden of non-fatal health outcomes. The 
GBD 2010 analysis of YLDs provides important insights into which types of data can be 
informative for assessing non-fatal health outcomes. Not surprisingly, there is an important 
role for household surveys that involve interviews and the collection of blood and other 
functional tests (eg, hearing, vision, and lung function). Making sure a household survey 
collects data with a general functional health status instrument and collects information on a 
broad array of sequelae can make such data collection opportunities even more valuable. 
Building on the analysis of YLDs and YLLs as well, construction of a household interview 
and examination survey instrument that can capture the main sources of disease burden 
would be useful. The detail in the GBD 2010 now makes this approach feasible. Beyond 
household surveys, however, we have seen that ICD-coded hospital discharge and 
ambulatory care data, when individual records are available and other sociodemographic 
data have been collected, can be very valuable, especially if these datasets can be linked. 
Disease registries for cancer, renal disease, and congenital anomalies have also been an 
important resource, drawing attention to the importance of tracking individuals with chronic 
disorders over time who come into contact with health services.
Health priorities have, for much of the past 100 years or more, been largely driven by the 
imperative of improving the survival of populations, particularly child survival. This was 
justified, in view of the availability of technologies to treat and prevent childhood illness. 
However, societies also spend substantial resources on keeping people healthy, not only on 
keeping them alive into old age, so the availability of strategies to monitor their effectiveness 
in doing so is important. In this Article, we have shown that quantification of health loss in 
populations is possible, using comparable metrics that identify the leading causes of non-
fatal illness in different regions, at different ages, and at different points in time. The 
principal findings, namely that mental health, musculoskeletal health, and the rising 
importance of diabetes need urgent policy responses, are well established. Monitoring 
progress in reducing the effect of these, and other major contributors to health loss, is as 
important for improving population health as monitoring progress against the leading causes 
of death. YLDs provide a convenient framework and metric to do so; ensuring the routine 
availability of data collection suitable for computation of these measures of health loss 
should be a key focus of national health information system strategies.
Authors 
Prof Theo Vos, PhD,
School of Population Health
Abraham D Flaxman, PhD,
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
Mohsen Naghavi, PhD,
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
Prof Rafael Lozano, MD,
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
Vos et al.
Page 22
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 23 (native text) -----
Catherine Michaud, MD,
China Medical Board, Boston, MA, USA
Prof Majid Ezzati, PhD,
MRC-HPA Centre for Environment and Healthe, Department of Epidemiology and 
Biostatistics, School of Public Health
Prof Kenji Shibuya, MD,
Department of Global Health Policy
Prof Joshua A Salomon, PhD,
School of Public Health
Safa Abdalla, MBBS,
Sudanese Public Health Consultancy Group, Sudan
Prof Victor Aboyans, M,
Department of Cardiology, Dupuytren University Hospital, Limoges, France
jerry Abraham, MPH,
University of Texas, San Antonio, TX, USA
Ilana Ackerman, PhD,
University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC,Australia
Prof Rakesh Aggarwal, MD,
Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute of Medical Sciences, Lucknow,India
Stephanie Y Ahn, MPH,
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
Mohammed K Ali, MBChB,
Emory University, Atlanta, GA,USA
Mohammad A AlMazroa, MD,
Ministry of Health, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
Miriam Alvarado, BA,
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
Prof H Ross Anderson, MD,
St George’s University of London, London, UK
Laurie M Anderson, PhD,
Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health
Kathryn G Andrews, MPH,
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
Charles Atkinson, BS,
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
Prof Larry M Baddour, MD,
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN,USA
Vos et al.
Page 23
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 24 (native text) -----
Adil N Bahalim, MEng,
Independent Consultant, Geneva, Switzerland
Suzanne Barker-Collo, PhD,
University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand
Lope H Barrero, ScD,
Department of Industrial Engineering, School of Engineering, Pontifi cia Universidad 
Javeriana, Bogota,Colombia
David H Bartels, BA,
Harvard Medical School, Harvard University, Boston, MA, USA
Prof Maria-Gloria Basáñez, PhD,
Imperial College London, London, UK
Amanda Baxter, MPH,
Queensland Centre for Mental Health Research
Prof Michelle L Bell, PhD,
Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA
Prof Emelia J Benjamin, MD,
Boston University, Boston, MA, USA
Derrick Bennett, PhD,
Clinical Trial Service Unit and Epidemiological Studies Unit
Eduardo Bernabé, PhD,
Dental Institute
Kavi Bhalla, PhD,
Harvard Medical School, Harvard University, Boston, MA, USA
Bishal Bhandari, MSc,
Queen Mary University of London, London, UK
Boris Bikbov, MD,
Moscow State University of Medicine and Dentistry, Research Institute of 
Transplantology and Artifi cial Organs, Moscow, Russia
Aref Bin Abdulhak, MD,
King Fahad Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
Prof Gretchen Birbeck, MD,
Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, USA
James A Black, MPhil,
MRC Epidemiology Unit, Cambridge,UK
Hannah Blencowe, MBChB,
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, UK
Jed D Blore, PhD,
School of Population Health
Vos et al.
Page 24
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 25 (native text) -----
Fiona Blyth, PhD,
University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia
Ian Bolliger, AB,
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
Audrey Bonaventure, MD,
Inserm, Paris,France
Soufiane Boufous, PhD,
Transport and Road Safety Research
Prof Rupert Bourne, MD,
Vision and Eye Research Unit, Anglia Ruskin University, Cambridge, UK
Michel Boussinesq, MD,
Institut de Recherche pour le Développement, Martinique, France
Tasanee Braithwaite, BMBCh,
Moorfi elds Eye Hospital, London, UK
Prof Carol Brayne, MD,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
Lisa Bridgett, PhD,
University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia
Prof Simon Brooker, DPhil,
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, UK
Peter Brooks, MD,
University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC,Australia
Prof Traolach S Brugha, MD,
University of Leicester, Leicester, UK
Claire Bryan-Hancock, BPsych,
Flinders University, Adelaide,SA, Australia
Chiara Bucello, BPsyc,
University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia
Prof Rachelle Buchbinder,
Institute, Malvern, VIC, Australia
Geoffrey Buckle, MPH,
Bloomberg School of Public Health
Christine M Budke, PhD,
Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, USA
Michael Burch, MD,
Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, UK
Prof Peter Burney, MD,
Vos et al.
Page 25
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 26 (native text) -----
Imperial College London, London, UK
Roy Burstein, BA,
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
Bianca Calabria,
National Drug and Alcohol Research Centre
Benjamin Campbell, BA,
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
Prof Charles E Canter, MD,
Washington University, St Louis, MO, USA
Prof Hélène Carabin, PhD,
University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK, USA
Prof Jonathan Carapetis, MBBS,
Telethon Institute for Child Health Research, Centre for Child, Health Research
Loreto Carmona, MD,
Universidad Camilo Jose Cela, Villanueva de la Cañada, Spain
Claudia Cella, PharmChemD,
Mario Negri, Institute for Pharmacological, Research, Bergamo, Italy
Fiona Charlson, MPH,
School of Population Health
Honglei Chen, PhD,
National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, Research, Triangle Park, NC, 
USA
Prof Andrew Tai-Ann Cheng, MD,
Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan
David Chou, BA,
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
Prof Sumeet S Chugh, MD,
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA
Luc E Coffeng, MD,
Erasmus MC, University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands
Prof Steven D Colan, MD,
Boston Children’s Hospital
Samantha Colquhoun, MPH,
Menzies School of Health Research, Darwin, NT, Australia
K Ellicott Colson, BA,
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
John Condon, PhD,
Vos et al.
Page 26
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 27 (native text) -----
Menzies School of Health, Research, Darwin, NT, Australia
Myles D Connor, PhD,
National Health Services, Fife, Edinburgh, Scotland, UK
Prof Leslie T Cooper, MD,
Loyola University Medical School, Chicago, IL, USA
Matthew Corriere, MD,
School of Public Health Sciences, Wake Forest University, Winston-Salem, NC, 
USA
Monica Cortinovis, BiotechD,
Mario Negri Institute for Pharmacological, Research, Bergamo, Italy
Karen Courville de Vaccaro, MD,
Hospital Dr Gustavo N Collado, Puerto Chitre, Panama
Prof William Couser, MD,
University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
Benjamin C Cowie, MBBS,
Victorian Infectious Diseases Reference Laboratory, Melbourne, VIC, Australia
Prof Michael H Criqui, MD,
University of California, San Diego, San Diego, CA, USA
Marita Cross, PhD,
University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia
Kaustubh C Dabhadkar, MBBS,
Emory University, Atlanta, GA,USA
Manu Dahiya, BDS,
Institute of Dentistry
Nabila Dahodwala, MD,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA
James Damsere-Derry, MPH,
Building and Road Research Institute, Kumasi, Ghana
Goodarz Danaei, MD,
School of Public Health
Prof Adrian Davis, PhD,
MRC Hearing and Communication Group, Manchester, UK
Prof Diego De Leo, DSc,
Griffi th University, Brisbane, QLD, Australia
Prof Louisa Degenhardt, PhD,
National Drug and Alcohol Research Centre
Centre for Health Policy, Programs and Economics
Vos et al.
Page 27
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 28 (native text) -----
Robert Dellavalle, MD,
Denver VA Medical Center, Denver, CO, USA
Allyne Delossantos, BS,
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
Julie Denenberg, MA,
University of California, San Diego, San Diego, CA, USA
Sarah Derrett, PhD,
University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand
Don CDes Jarlais, PhD,
Beth Israel Medical Center, New York, City, NY, USA
Prof Samath D Dharmaratne, MBBS,
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
Mukesh Dherani, PhD,
The University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK
Cesar Diaz-Torne, MD,
Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain
Prof Helen Dolk, DrPH,
University of Ulster, Ulster, UK
E Ray Dorsey, MD,
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA
Tim Driscoll, PhD,
Sydney School of Public Health
Herbert Duber, MD,
University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
Beth Ebel, MD,
University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
Karen Edmond, PhD,
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, UK
Alexis Elbaz, MD,
Inserm, Paris,France
Suad Eltahir Ali, Mcs,
Federal Ministry of Health, Khartoum, Sudan
Holly Erskine, BPsySc,
Queensland Centre for Mental Health Research
Patricia J Erwin, MLS,
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN,USA
Patricia Espindola, MD,
Vos et al.
Page 28
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 29 (native text) -----
Hospital Maciel, Montevideo, Uruguay
Stalin E Ewoigbokhan, MPH,
Emerald Public Health Consulting Services Ltd, Abuja, Nigeria
Farshad Farzadfar, MD,
Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran
Prof Valery Feigin, MD,
National Institute for Stroke and Applied Neurosciences
Prof David T Felson, MD,
School of Medicine
Alize Ferrari, BPsySc,
Queensland Centre for Mental Health Research
Cleusa P Ferri, PhD,
Federal University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil
Eric M Fèvre, PhD,
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, Scotland, UK
Mariel M Finucane, PhD,
Department of Biostatistics
Seth Flaxman, BA,
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Louise Flood, MBBS,
Flinders University, Adelaide,SA, Australia
Kyle Foreman, MPH,
Imperial College London, London, UK
Mohammad H Forouzanfar, MD,
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
Prof Francis Gerry R Fowkes, FRCPE,
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, Scotland, UK
Richard Franklin, PhD,
Royal Life Saving Society, Sydney, NSW, Australia
Marlene Fransen, PhD,
Faculty of Health Sciences
Michael K Freeman, BA,
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
Belinda J Gabbe, PhD,
Department of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine
Prof Sherine E Gabriel, MD,
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN,USA
Vos et al.
Page 29
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 30 (native text) -----
Emmanuela Gakidou, PhD,
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
Hammad A Ganatra, MBBS,
Emory University, Atlanta, GA,USA
Bianca Garcia, MPH,
University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, Australia
Flavio Gaspari, ChemD,
Mario Negri Institute for Pharmacological, Research, Bergamo, Italy
Prof Richard F Gillum, MD,
Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, DC, USA
Prof Gerhard Gmel, PhD,
Addiction Info Switzerland, Lausanne, Switzerland
Prof Richard Gosselin, MD,
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA
Rebecca Grainger, PhD,
University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand
Justina Groeger, MPH,
College of Medicine, SUNY Downstate Medicle Center, Brooklyn, NY, USA
Prof Francis Guillemin, MD,
Université de Lorraine, Nancy, France
Prof David Gunnell, DSc,
University of Bristol, Bristol, UK
Ramyani Gupta, MSc,
St George’s University of London, London, UK
Juanita Haagsma, PhD,
Erasmus MC, University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands
Prof Holly Hagan, PhD,
New York University, New York City, NY
Yara A Halasa, DDS,
Brandeis University, Waltham, MA, USA
Prof Wayne Hall, PhD,
University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, Australia
Diana Haring, BS,
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
Josep Maria Haro, MD,
Parc Sanitari Sant Joan de Déu, CIBERSAM, Universitat de Barcelona, Sant, Boi de 
Llobregat, Spain
Vos et al.
Page 30
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 31 (native text) -----
Prof James E Harrison, MBBS,
Flinders University, Adelaide,SA, Australia
Rasmus Havmoeller, MD,
Heart Institute
Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden
Prof Roderick J Hay, DM,
Hospital NHS Trust
Hideki Higashi, PhD,
School of Population Health
Catherine Hill, MBBS,
The Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Adelaide, SA, Australia
Prof Bruno Hoen, MD,
Université de Franche-Comté, Besançon, France
Howard Hoffman, MA,
National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders
Prof Peter J Hotez, MD,
National School of Tropical Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, 
USA
Damian Hoy, PhD,
Monash University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia
John J Huang, MD,
Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA
Sydney E Ibeanusi, MBBS,
University of Port Harcourt, Port Harcourt, Nigeria
Kathryn H Jacobsen, PhD,
George Mason University, Fairfax, VA, USA
Spencer L James, MPH,
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
Deborah Jarvis, FFPH,
Imperial College London, London, UK
Rashmi Jasrasaria, BA,
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
Sudha Jayaraman, MD,
Brigham and Women’s Hospital
Nicole Johns, BA,
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
Prof Jost B Jonas, MD,
Vos et al.
Page 31
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 32 (native text) -----
Department of Ophthalmology, Medical Faculty Mannheim, Ruprecht Karls 
University, Heidelberg, Germany
Ganesan Karthikeyan, MD,
All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India
Nicholas Kassebaum, MD,
Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine
Prof Norito Kawakami, MD,
University of Tokyo, Tokyo,Japan
Prof Andre Keren, MD,
Department of Cardiology, Hebrew University Hadassah Medical School, 
Jerusalem, Israel
Jon-Paul Khoo, MBBS,
Queensland Centre for Mental Health Research
Prof Charles H King, MD,
Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, USA
Lisa Marie Knowlton, MD,
Harvard Humanitarian Initiative
Olive Kobusingye, MMed,
School of Public Health, Makerere University, Kampala, Uganda
Adofo Koranteng, MSc,
Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology, Kumasi, Ghana
Rita Krishnamurthi, PhD,
Auckland Technical University, Auckland, New Zealand
Prof Ratilal Lalloo, PhD,
School of Dentistry and Oral Health
Laura L Laslett, MMedSci,
University of Tasmania, Tasmania, Australia
Tim Lathlean, MA,
FlindersUniversity, Adelaide,SA, Australia
Janet L Leasher, OD,
Nova Southeastern University, Fort, Lauderdale, FL, USA
Yong Yi Lee, MHEcon,
School of Population Health
James Leigh, MBBS,
Sydney School of Public Health
Stephen S Lim, PhD,
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
Vos et al.
Page 32
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 33 (native text) -----
Elizabeth Limb, MSc,
St George’s University of London, London, UK
John Kent Lin, AB,
School of Public Health
Michael Lipnick, MD,
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA
Prof Steven E Lipshultz, MD,
Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA
Wei Liu, MD,
Department of Epidemiology
Maria Loane, MSc,
University of Ulster, Ulster, UK
Summer Lockett Ohno, BA,
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
Prof Ronan Lyons, MD,
Swansea University, Swansea, UK
Jixiang Ma, PhD,
National Center for Non-Communicable, Disease Control and Prevention, China 
Centers for Disease Control, Beijing, China
Jacqueline Mabweijano, MMed,
Mulago Hospital, Kampala, Uganda
Michael F MacIntyre, EdM,
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
Prof Reza Malekzadeh, MD,
Digestive Disease Research Center
Leslie Mallinger, MPH,
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
Sivabalan Manivannan, ScM,
Bloomberg School of Public Health
Prof Wagner Marcenes, PhD,
Queen Mary University of London, London, UK
Prof Lyn March, MD,
Institute of Bone and Joint Research
Prof David J Margolis, MD,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA
Prof Guy B Marks, PhD,
University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia
Vos et al.
Page 33
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 34 (native text) -----
Prof Robin Marks, MBBS,
University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC,Australia
Akira Matsumori, MD,
Asian Pacific Society of Cardiology, Kyoto, Japan
Richard Matzopoulos, MPhil,
Medical Research Council, Tygerberg, South Africa
Prof Bongani M Mayosi, DPhil,
University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa
John H McAnulty, MD,
Legacy Health System, Portland, Oregon
Prof Mary M McDermott, MD,
Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Evanston, IL, USA
Neil McGill, FRACP,
University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia
Prof John McGrath, MD,
Queensland Brain Institute
Maria Elena Medina-Mora, PhD,
National Institute on Psychiatry Ramón de la Fuente, Mexico City, Mexico
Michele Meltzer, MD,
Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, USA
Prof Ziad A Memish, MD,
Ministry of Health, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
Prof George A Mensah, MD,
Department of Medicine
Tony R Merriman, PhD,
University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand
Ana-Claire Meyer, MD,
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA
Valeria Miglioli,
Mario Negri Institute for Pharmacological Research, Bergamo, Italy
Matthew Miller, MD,
School of Public Health
Ted R Miller, PhD,
Pacific Institute for Research and Evaluation, Calverton, MD, USA
Prof Philip B Mitchell, MD,
University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia
Prof Ana Olga Mocumbi, MD,
Vos et al.
Page 34
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 35 (native text) -----
National Institute of Health, Maputo, Mozambique
Prof Terrie E Moffitt, PhD,
Duke University, Durham, NC, USA
Ali A Mokdad, MD,
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
Lorenzo Monasta, DSc,
Institute for Maternal and Child Health, IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy
Marcella Montico, Msc,
Institute for Maternal and Child Health, IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy
Maziar Moradi-Lakeh, MD,
Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran
Andrew Moran, MD,
Columbia University, New York City, NY, USA
Prof Lidia Morawska, PhD,
Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, QLD, Australia
Rintaro Mori, MD,
National Center for Child Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan
Michele E Murdoch, FRCP,
Watford General Hospital, Watford, UK
Michael K Mwaniki, MBChB,
Kemri-Wellcome Trust, Kilifi, Kenya
Prof Kovin Naidoo, PhD,
AVRI, University of KwaZulu-Natal, Durban, South Africa
M Nathan Nair, MD,
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation, University of Washington, 2301 Fifth 
Avenue, Suite 600, Seattle, WA 98121, USA
Luigi Naldi, MD,
Centro Studi GISED, Bergamo, Italy
KM Venkat Narayan, MD,
Emory University, Atlanta, GA,USA
Paul K Nelson, MHSc,
National Drug and Alcohol Research Centre
Robert G Nelson, MD,
National Institute of Diabetes, and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA
Michael C Nevitt, PhD,
Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics
Vos et al.
Page 35
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 36 (native text) -----
Prof Charles R Newton, MD,
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
Sandra Nolte, PhD,
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany
Prof Paul Norman, MD,
University of Western Australia, Perth, WA, Australia
Rosana Norman, PhD,
School of Population Health
Martin O’Donnell, PhD,
HRB-Clinical Research Facility, National University of Ireland Galway, Galway, 
Ireland, UK
Simon O’Hanlon, MSc,
Imperial College London, London, UK
Casey Olives, PhD,
University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
Saad B Omer, MBBS,
Schools of Public Health and Medicine
Katrina Ortblad, BA,
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation, University of Washington, 2301 Fifth 
Avenue, Suite 600, Seattle, WA 98121, USA
Prof Richard Osborne, PhD,
Deakin University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia
Doruk Ozgediz, MD,
Global Partners in Anesthesia and Surgery
Andrew Page, PhD,
School of Population Health
Bishnu Pahari, MD,
B P Koirala Institute of Health Sciences, Dharan, Nepal
Jeyaraj Durai Pandian, MD,
Betty Cowan Research and Innovation Center, Ludhiana, India
Andrea Panozo Rivero, MD,
Hospital Juan XXIII, La Paz, Bolivia
Prof Scott B Patten, MD,
University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada
Prof Neil Pearce, PhD,
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, UK
Rogelio Perez Padilla, MD,
Instituto Nacional de Enfermedades Respiratorias, Mexico City, Mexico
Vos et al.
Page 36
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 37 (native text) -----
Fernando Perez-Ruiz, MD,
Hospital Universitario Cruces, Barakaldo, Spain
Norberto Perico, MD,
Mario Negri Institute for Pharmacological Research, Bergamo, Italy
Prof Konrad Pesudovs, PhD,
Flinders University, Adelaide, SA, Australia
David Phillips, BS,
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
Prof Michael R Phillips, MD,
Shanghai Mental Health Center, School of Medicine
Kelsey Pierce, BA,
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation, University of Washington, 2301 Fifth 
Avenue, Suite 600, Seattle, WA 98121, USA
Sébastien Pion, MD,
Institut de Recherche pour le Développement, Martinique, France
Guilherme V Polanczyk, MD,
Medical School,Chicago, IL, USA
Suzanne Polinder, PhD,
Department of Public Health
Prof C Arden Pope III, PhD,
Brigham Young University, Provo, UT, USA
Svetlana Popova, MD,
Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, ON, Canada
Esteban Porrini, MD,
Hospital Universitario de Canarias, Tenerif, Spain
Farshad Pourmalek, MD,
Faculty of Medicine, School of Population and Public Health, University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada
Prof Martin Prince, MD,
Psychiatry, King’s College London, London, UK
Rachel L Pullan, PhD,
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, UK
Kapa D Ramaiah, PhD,
Vector Control Research Centre, Pondicherry, India
Dharani Ranganathan, BS,
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation, University of Washington, 2301 Fifth 
Avenue, Suite 600, Seattle, WA 98121, USA
Homie Razavi, PhD,
Vos et al.
Page 37
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 38 (native text) -----
Center for Disease Analysis, Louisville, CO, USA
Mathilda Regan, MPH,
University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA
Prof Jürgen T Rehm, PhD,
Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, ON, Canada
David B Rein, PhD,
NORC, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA
Prof Guiseppe Remuzzi, MD,
Mario Negri Institute for Pharmacological Research, Bergamo, Italy
Kathryn Richardson, MSc,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
Prof Frederick P Rivara, MD,
University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
Thomas Roberts, BA,
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
Carolyn Robinson, BS,
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA
Felipe Rodriguez De Leòn, MD,
Complejo Hospitalario Caja De Seguro Social, Panama City, Panama
Luca Ronfani, PhD,
Institute for Maternal and Child Health, IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy
Prof Robin Room, PhD,
School of Population Health
Lisa C Rosenfeld, MPH,
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
Lesley Rushton, PhD,
Imperial College London, London, UK
Prof Ralph L Sacco, MD,
Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA
Sukanta Saha, PhD,
Queensland Centre for Mental Health Research
Prof Uchechukwu Sampson, MD,
Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA
Lidia Sanchez-Riera, MD,
Institute of Bone and Joint Research
Ella Sanman, BS,
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
Vos et al.
Page 38
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 39 (native text) -----
Prof David C Schwebel, PhD,
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA
James Graham Scott, PhD,
Centre for Clinical Research
Maria Segui-Gomez, MD,
Ministry of Interior, Madrid, Spain
Saeid Shahraz, MD,
Brandeis University, Waltham, MA, USA
Prof Donald S Shepard, PhD,
Brandeis University, Waltham, MA, USA
Hwashin Shin, PhD,
Health Canada, Ottawa, ON, Canada
Rupak Shivakoti, BA,
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA
Prof Donald Silberberg, MD,
Department of Neurology, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA
David Singh, MD,
Queens Medical Center, Honolulu, HI, USA
Gitanjali M Singh, PhD,
School of Public Health
Jasvinder A Singh, MBBS,
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA
Jessica Singleton, MIPH,
National Drug and Alcohol Research Centre
David A Sleet, PhD,
National Center for Injury Prevention and Control
Prof Karen Sliwa, MD,
Hatter Institute
Emma Smith, PhD,
Department of Rheumatology, Northern Clinical School
Jennifer L Smith, MSc,
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, UK
Nicolas J C Stapelberg, MBBS,
Griffith University, Brisbane, QLD, Australia
Andrew Steer, MBBS,
Centre for International Child Health
Vos et al.
Page 39
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 40 (native text) -----
Prof Timothy Steiner, PhD,
Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway
Wilma A Stolk, PhD,
Erasmus MC, University Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands
Prof Lars Jacob Stovner, PhD,
Department of Neuroscience
Christopher Sudfeld, ScM,
School of Public Health
Sana Syed, MBBS,
Agwa Khan University, Karachi, Pakistan
Giorgio Tamburlini, PhD,
Institute for Maternal and Child Health, IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy
Mohammad Tavakkoli, MD,
School of Public Health
Prof Hugh R Taylor, MD,
University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC,Australia
Jennifer A Taylor, PhD,
Drexel University School of Public Health, Philadelphia, PA, USA
William J Taylor, PhD,
University of Otago, Dunedin, NewZealand
Bernadette Thomas, MD,
University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
Prof W Murray Thomson, PhD,
University of Otago, Dunedin, NewZealand
Prof George D Thurston, ScD,
NewYork University, NewYork City, NY
Imad M Tleyjeh, MD,
King Fahad Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
Prof Marcello Tonelli, MD,
Alberta Kidney Disease Network, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada
Prof Jeffrey A Towbin, MD,
Cincinnati Children’s Hospital, Cincinnati, OH, USA
Thomas Truelsen, MD,
Department of Neurology, Copenhagen University Hospital, Herlev, Denmark
Prof Miltiadis K Tsilimbaris, MD,
University of Crete Medical School, Crete, Greece
Clotilde Ubeda, MD,
Vos et al.
Page 40
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 41 (native text) -----
Instituto Nacional de Epidemiología, ANLIS, Malbran, Argentina
Eduardo A Undurraga, PhD,
Brandeis University, Waltham, MA, USA
Marieke J van der Werf, PhD,
KNCV Tuberculosis Foundation, The Hague, Netherlands
Prof Jim va nOs, PhD,
Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht, Netherlands
Prof Monica S Vavilala, MD,
University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
N Venketasubramanian, FRCP,
National University of Singapore, Singapore
Mengru Wang, MPH,
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
Prof Wenzhi Wang, MD,
Beijing Neurosurgical Institute, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China
Kerrianne Watt, PhD,
James Cook University, Townsville, QLD, Australia
David J Weatherall, MD,
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
Prof Martin A Weinstock, MD,
Brown University, Providence, RI, USA
Robert Weintraub, MBBS,
Department of Paediatrics
Marc G Weisskopf, PhD,
School of Public Health
Prof Myrna M Weissman, PhD,
Mailman School of Public Health
Richard A White, MA,
School of Public Health
Prof Harvey Whiteford, MBBS,
Queensland Centre for Mental Health Research
Steven T Wiersma, MD,
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA
Prof James D Wilkinson, MD,
Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA
Prof Hywel C Williams, PhD,
University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK
Vos et al.
Page 41
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 42 (native text) -----
Sean R M Williams, MBBS,
University of Western Sydney, Campbelltown, NSW, Australia
Emma Witt, MSc,
Auckland Technical University, Auckland, New Zealand
Frederick Wolfe, MD,
Arthritis Research, Wichita, KS, USA
Prof Anthony D Woolf, MBBS,
Royal Cornwall Hospital, Truro, UK
Sarah Wulf, MPH,
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
Pon-Hsiu Yeh, MS,
London School of Economics, London,UK
Anita K M Zaidi, MBBS,
Agwa Khan University, Karachi, Pakistan
Prof Zhi-Jie Zheng,
School of Public Health, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
David Zonies, MD,
Landstuhl Regional Medical Center, Landstuhl, Germany
Prof Alan D Lopez, PhD, and
School of Population Health
Prof Christopher J L Murray, MD
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
Affiliations
School of Population Health
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
China Medical Board, Boston, MA, USA
MRC-HPA Centre for Environment and Healthe, Department of Epidemiology and 
Biostatistics, School of Public Health
Department of Global Health Policy
School of Public Health
Sudanese Public Health Consultancy Group, Sudan
Department of Cardiology, Dupuytren University Hospital, Limoges, France
University of Texas, San Antonio, TX, USA
Vos et al.
Page 42
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 43 (native text) -----
University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC,Australia
Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute of Medical Sciences, Lucknow,India
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
Emory University, Atlanta, GA,USA
Ministry of Health, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
St George’s University of London, London, UK
Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN,USA
Independent Consultant, Geneva, Switzerland
University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand
Department of Industrial Engineering, School of Engineering, Pontifi cia Universidad 
Javeriana, Bogota,Colombia
Harvard Medical School, Harvard University, Boston, MA, USA
Imperial College London, London, UK
Queensland Centre for Mental Health Research
Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA
Boston University, Boston, MA, USA
Clinical Trial Service Unit and Epidemiological Studies Unit
Dental Institute
Harvard Medical School, Harvard University, Boston, MA, USA
Queen Mary University of London, London, UK
Moscow State University of Medicine and Dentistry, Research Institute of 
Transplantology and Artifi cial Organs, Moscow, Russia
King Fahad Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, USA
MRC Epidemiology Unit, Cambridge,UK
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, UK
School of Population Health
University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia
Vos et al.
Page 43
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 44 (native text) -----
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
Inserm, Paris,France
Transport and Road Safety Research
Vision and Eye Research Unit, Anglia Ruskin University, Cambridge, UK
Institut de Recherche pour le Développement, Martinique, France
Moorfi elds Eye Hospital, London, UK
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, UK
University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC,Australia
University of Leicester, Leicester, UK
Flinders University, Adelaide,SA, Australia
University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia
Institute, Malvern, VIC, Australia
Bloomberg School of Public Health
Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, USA
Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, UK
Imperial College London, London, UK
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
National Drug and Alcohol Research Centre
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
Washington University, St Louis, MO, USA
University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK, USA
Telethon Institute for Child Health Research, Centre for Child, Health Research
Universidad Camilo Jose Cela, Villanueva de la Cañada, Spain
Mario Negri, Institute for Pharmacological, Research, Bergamo, Italy
School of Population Health
National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, Research, Triangle Park, NC, 
USA
Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA
Vos et al.
Page 44
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 45 (native text) -----
Erasmus MC, University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands
Boston Children’s Hospital
Menzies School of Health Research, Darwin, NT, Australia
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
Menzies School of Health, Research, Darwin, NT, Australia
National Health Services, Fife, Edinburgh, Scotland, UK
Loyola University Medical School, Chicago, IL, USA
School of Public Health Sciences, Wake Forest University, Winston-Salem, NC, 
USA
Mario Negri Institute for Pharmacological, Research, Bergamo, Italy
Hospital Dr Gustavo N Collado, Puerto Chitre, Panama
University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
Victorian Infectious Diseases Reference Laboratory, Melbourne, VIC, Australia
University of California, San Diego, San Diego, CA, USA
University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia
Emory University, Atlanta, GA,USA
Institute of Dentistry
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA
Building and Road Research Institute, Kumasi, Ghana
School of Public Health
MRC Hearing and Communication Group, Manchester, UK
Griffi th University, Brisbane, QLD, Australia
National Drug and Alcohol Research Centre
Centre for Health Policy, Programs and Economics
Denver VA Medical Center, Denver, CO, USA
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
University of California, San Diego, San Diego, CA, USA
University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand
Beth Israel Medical Center, New York, City, NY, USA
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
The University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK
Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain
Vos et al.
Page 45
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 46 (native text) -----
University of Ulster, Ulster, UK
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA
Sydney School of Public Health
University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, UK
Inserm, Paris,France
Federal Ministry of Health, Khartoum, Sudan
Queensland Centre for Mental Health Research
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN,USA
Hospital Maciel, Montevideo, Uruguay
Emerald Public Health Consulting Services Ltd, Abuja, Nigeria
Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran
National Institute for Stroke and Applied Neurosciences
School of Medicine
Queensland Centre for Mental Health Research
Federal University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, Scotland, UK
Department of Biostatistics
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Flinders University, Adelaide,SA, Australia
Imperial College London, London, UK
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, Scotland, UK
Royal Life Saving Society, Sydney, NSW, Australia
Faculty of Health Sciences
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
Department of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN,USA
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
Emory University, Atlanta, GA,USA
University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, Australia
Vos et al.
Page 46
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 47 (native text) -----
Mario Negri Institute for Pharmacological, Research, Bergamo, Italy
Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, DC, USA
Addiction Info Switzerland, Lausanne, Switzerland
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA
University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand
College of Medicine, SUNY Downstate Medicle Center, Brooklyn, NY, USA
Université de Lorraine, Nancy, France
University of Bristol, Bristol, UK
St George’s University of London, London, UK
Erasmus MC, University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands
New York University, New York City, NY
Brandeis University, Waltham, MA, USA
University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, Australia
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
Parc Sanitari Sant Joan de Déu, CIBERSAM, Universitat de Barcelona, Sant, Boi de 
Llobregat, Spain
Flinders University, Adelaide,SA, Australia
Heart Institute
Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden
Hospital NHS Trust
School of Population Health
The Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Adelaide, SA, Australia
Université de Franche-Comté, Besançon, France
National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders
National School of Tropical Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, 
USA
Monash University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia
Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA
University of Port Harcourt, Port Harcourt, Nigeria
George Mason University, Fairfax, VA, USA
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
Imperial College London, London, UK
Vos et al.
Page 47
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 48 (native text) -----
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
Brigham and Women’s Hospital
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
Department of Ophthalmology, Medical Faculty Mannheim, Ruprecht Karls 
University, Heidelberg, Germany
All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India
Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine
University of Tokyo, Tokyo,Japan
Department of Cardiology, Hebrew University Hadassah Medical School, 
Jerusalem, Israel
Queensland Centre for Mental Health Research
Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, USA
Harvard Humanitarian Initiative
School of Public Health, Makerere University, Kampala, Uganda
Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology, Kumasi, Ghana
Auckland Technical University, Auckland, New Zealand
School of Dentistry and Oral Health
University of Tasmania, Tasmania, Australia
FlindersUniversity, Adelaide,SA, Australia
Nova Southeastern University, Fort, Lauderdale, FL, USA
School of Population Health
Sydney School of Public Health
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
St George’s University of London, London, UK
School of Public Health
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA
Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA
Department of Epidemiology
University of Ulster, Ulster, UK
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
Swansea University, Swansea, UK
National Center for Non-Communicable, Disease Control and Prevention, China 
Centers for Disease Control, Beijing, China
Vos et al.
Page 48
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 49 (native text) -----
Mulago Hospital, Kampala, Uganda
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
Digestive Disease Research Center
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
Bloomberg School of Public Health
Queen Mary University of London, London, UK
Institute of Bone and Joint Research
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA
University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia
University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC,Australia
Asian Pacific Society of Cardiology, Kyoto, Japan
Medical Research Council, Tygerberg, South Africa
University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa
Legacy Health System, Portland, Oregon
Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Evanston, IL, USA
University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia
Queensland Brain Institute
National Institute on Psychiatry Ramón de la Fuente, Mexico City, Mexico
Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, USA
Ministry of Health, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
Department of Medicine
University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA
Mario Negri Institute for Pharmacological Research, Bergamo, Italy
School of Public Health
Pacific Institute for Research and Evaluation, Calverton, MD, USA
University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia
National Institute of Health, Maputo, Mozambique
Duke University, Durham, NC, USA
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
Institute for Maternal and Child Health, IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy
Institute for Maternal and Child Health, IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy
Vos et al.
Page 49
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 50 (native text) -----
Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran
Columbia University, New York City, NY, USA
Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, QLD, Australia
National Center for Child Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan
Watford General Hospital, Watford, UK
Kemri-Wellcome Trust, Kilifi, Kenya
AVRI, University of KwaZulu-Natal, Durban, South Africa
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation, University of Washington, 2301 Fifth 
Avenue, Suite 600, Seattle, WA 98121, USA
Centro Studi GISED, Bergamo, Italy
Emory University, Atlanta, GA,USA
National Drug and Alcohol Research Centre
National Institute of Diabetes, and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA
Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany
University of Western Australia, Perth, WA, Australia
School of Population Health
HRB-Clinical Research Facility, National University of Ireland Galway, Galway, 
Ireland, UK
Imperial College London, London, UK
University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
Schools of Public Health and Medicine
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation, University of Washington, 2301 Fifth 
Avenue, Suite 600, Seattle, WA 98121, USA
Deakin University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia
Global Partners in Anesthesia and Surgery
School of Population Health
B P Koirala Institute of Health Sciences, Dharan, Nepal
Betty Cowan Research and Innovation Center, Ludhiana, India
Hospital Juan XXIII, La Paz, Bolivia
University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada
Vos et al.
Page 50
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 51 (native text) -----
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, UK
Instituto Nacional de Enfermedades Respiratorias, Mexico City, Mexico
Hospital Universitario Cruces, Barakaldo, Spain
Mario Negri Institute for Pharmacological Research, Bergamo, Italy
Flinders University, Adelaide, SA, Australia
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
Shanghai Mental Health Center, School of Medicine
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation, University of Washington, 2301 Fifth 
Avenue, Suite 600, Seattle, WA 98121, USA
Institut de Recherche pour le Développement, Martinique, France
Medical School,Chicago, IL, USA
Department of Public Health
Brigham Young University, Provo, UT, USA
Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, ON, Canada
Hospital Universitario de Canarias, Tenerif, Spain
Faculty of Medicine, School of Population and Public Health, University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada
Psychiatry, King’s College London, London, UK
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, UK
Vector Control Research Centre, Pondicherry, India
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation, University of Washington, 2301 Fifth 
Avenue, Suite 600, Seattle, WA 98121, USA
Center for Disease Analysis, Louisville, CO, USA
University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA
Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, ON, Canada
NORC, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA
Mario Negri Institute for Pharmacological Research, Bergamo, Italy
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA
Complejo Hospitalario Caja De Seguro Social, Panama City, Panama
Institute for Maternal and Child Health, IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy
Vos et al.
Page 51
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 52 (native text) -----
School of Population Health
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
Imperial College London, London, UK
Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA
Queensland Centre for Mental Health Research
Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA
Institute of Bone and Joint Research
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA
Centre for Clinical Research
Ministry of Interior, Madrid, Spain
Brandeis University, Waltham, MA, USA
Brandeis University, Waltham, MA, USA
Health Canada, Ottawa, ON, Canada
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA
Department of Neurology, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA
Queens Medical Center, Honolulu, HI, USA
School of Public Health
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA
National Drug and Alcohol Research Centre
National Center for Injury Prevention and Control
Hatter Institute
Department of Rheumatology, Northern Clinical School
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, UK
Griffith University, Brisbane, QLD, Australia
Centre for International Child Health
Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway
Erasmus MC, University Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands
Department of Neuroscience
School of Public Health
Agwa Khan University, Karachi, Pakistan
Vos et al.
Page 52
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 53 (native text) -----
Institute for Maternal and Child Health, IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy
School of Public Health
University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC,Australia
Drexel University School of Public Health, Philadelphia, PA, USA
University of Otago, Dunedin, NewZealand
University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
University of Otago, Dunedin, NewZealand
NewYork University, NewYork City, NY
King Fahad Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
Alberta Kidney Disease Network, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada
Cincinnati Children’s Hospital, Cincinnati, OH, USA
Department of Neurology, Copenhagen University Hospital, Herlev, Denmark
University of Crete Medical School, Crete, Greece
Instituto Nacional de Epidemiología, ANLIS, Malbran, Argentina
Brandeis University, Waltham, MA, USA
KNCV Tuberculosis Foundation, The Hague, Netherlands
Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht, Netherlands
University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
National University of Singapore, Singapore
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
Beijing Neurosurgical Institute, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China
James Cook University, Townsville, QLD, Australia
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
Brown University, Providence, RI, USA
Department of Paediatrics
School of Public Health
Mailman School of Public Health
School of Public Health
Queensland Centre for Mental Health Research
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA
Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA
University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK
Vos et al.
Page 53
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 54 (native text) -----
University of Western Sydney, Campbelltown, NSW, Australia
Auckland Technical University, Auckland, New Zealand
Arthritis Research, Wichita, KS, USA
Royal Cornwall Hospital, Truro, UK
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
London School of Economics, London,UK
Agwa Khan University, Karachi, Pakistan
School of Public Health, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
Landstuhl Regional Medical Center, Landstuhl, Germany
School of Population Health
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the countless individuals who have contributed to the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010 
in various capacities. We would also like to specifically acknowledge the important contribution to this work from 
multiple staff members of the World Health Organization. We also wish to express our gratitude to the following 
organizations that hosted consultations during the final stages of the analytic process, providing valuable feedback 
about the results and the data to improve the study’s findings overall: Pan American Health Organization; Eastern 
Mediterranean Regional Office of WHO; UNAIDS; Ministry of Health, Brazil; China Centers for Disease Control; 
and the University of Zambia. We would like to thank Lori M Newman, Jordis Ott, Poul Erik Petersen, Shekhar 
Saxena, and Gretchen A Stevens for their collaboration and input into the analyses and estimates. Finally, we would 
like to acknowledge the extensive support from all staff members at the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation 
and specifically thank: James Bullard, Andrew Ernst, and Serkan Yalcin for their tireless support of the 
computational infrastructure required to produce the results; Linda A Ettinger for her expert administrative support 
in order to facilitate communication and coordination amongst the authors; Peter Speyer, Abigail McLain, 
Katherine Leach-Kemon, and Eden Stork for their persistent and valuable work to gain access to and catalog as 
much data as possible to inform the estimates; Erin C Mullany for her systematic efforts in organizing drafts of 
papers, formatting correspondence with expert groups, and preparing the final manuscript; Brad Bell for his review, 
critiques, and insights about the DisMod-MR software which helped to improve its performance and results; and 
Jiaji Du for his work developing the user interface for the DisMod-MR software so that multiple expert groups 
could use it and easily assess the results.
The following individuals would like to acknowledge various forms of institutional support. J P Abraham, B 
Bartels, and P Yeh recognize the support of the World Bank Global Road Safety Facility and Department of Global 
Health & Population, Harvard School of Public Health, and the World Health Organization Violence and Injury 
Prevention. B Bikbov acknowledges support from the Moscow State University of Medicine and Dentistry, 
Moscow, Russia; Academician V.I.Shumakov Federal Research Center of Transplantology and Artificial Organs, 
Moscow, Russia; International Society of Nephrology. R Bourne acknowledges the Vision & Eye Research Unit, 
Postgraduate Medical Institute, Anglia Ruskin University, Cambridge, UK. S Brooker is supported by a Wellcome 
Trust Senior Fellowship in Basic Biomedical Science (098045). T S Brugha received funding from the Department 
of Health London, for the National Health Service Information Centre, by the University of Leicester. R Buchbinder 
is partially funded by an Australian National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC) Practitioner 
Fellowship, Monash University and Cabrini Health. P Burney and D Jarvis acknowledge that the Chronic 
Respiratory Disease Group received support from the BUPA Foundation, who had no role in study design, data 
collection and analysis, interpretation of data, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript. C Cella, M 
Cortinovis, F Gaspari, V Miglioli, and N Perico on behalf of the entire Genitourinary Expert Group acknowledge 
the International Society of Nephrology (ISN). H Chen acknowledges that his participation in this study was in part 
supported by the intramural research program of the NIH, the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences. 
L E Coffeng and W A Stolk received financial support from the Africa Programme for Onchocerciasis Control 
(WHO/APOC) for their work on onchocerciasis. B C Cowie received institutional support from the Victorian 
Infectious Diseases Reference Laboratory, Melbourne, Australia. M Cross and L March acknowledge the University 
of Sydney (USYD); Institute of Bone and Joint Research, University of Sydney, Department of Rheumatology, 
Royal North Shore Hospital, St Leonards NSW 2065 Australia. N Dahodwala was supported by NIH grant K23 
Vos et al.
Page 54
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 55 (native text) -----
AG034236 and the Parkinson Council while working on this project. L Degenhardt is supported by an Australian 
NHMRC Senior Research Fellowship and funding to support her work for illicit drug dependence was provided by 
the Australian National Drug and Alcohol Research Centre of the University of New South Wales, Australia. R 
Dellavalle was supported by the US Department of Veterans Affairs while contributing to this study. S Derrett 
acknowledges the Health Research Council of New Zealand and the University of Otago for their support. V Feigin 
and R Krishnamurthi were supported by the National Institute for Stroke and Applied Neurosciences, AUT 
University. E Fevre acknowledges the Wellcome Trust for grant 085308. W Hall was supported by an NHMRC 
Australia Fellowship. R Havmoeller was supported by a grant from the Swedish Research Council (#2011–1071). D 
Hoy was supported by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation and the Australian National Health and Medical 
Research Council. K H Jacobsen was supported by the World Health Organization for her work on hepatitis A. N 
Kawakami notes that the collection of data ultimately used in this study was supported by the following grants: The 
World Mental Health Japan (WMH-J) is supported by the Grant for Research on Psychiatric and Neurological 
Diseases and Mental Health (H13-SHOGAI-023, H14-TOKUBETSU-026, H16-KOKORO-013) from the Japan 
Ministry of Health, Labour, and Welfare. He would like to thank staffmembers, field coordinators, and interviewers 
of the WMH Japan 2002–2004 Survey. L L Laslett is supported by an Australian Government Australian 
Postgraduate Award. She also notes that the TasOAC study, the results of which were used in this research, was 
supported by the National Health and Medical Research Council of Australia; Arthritis Foundation of Australia; 
Tasmanian Community Fund; Masonic Centenary Medical Research Foundation, Royal Hobart Hospital Research 
Foundation, and University of Tasmania Institutional Research Grants Scheme. R Malekzadeh funding from 
research grant of Tehran University of Medical Sciences to do the related studies. R Matzopoulos acknowledges the 
two institutions that support his research work: South African Medical Research Council Burden of Disease 
Research Unit; and the University of Cape Town School of Public Health and Family Medicine. T Merriman 
acknowledges the Health Research Council of New Zealand. K Naidoo was supported by the Brien Holden Vision 
Institute. P Nelson was supported by the National Drug and Alcohol Research Centre (UNSW, Australia). R G 
Nelson acknowledges his research was supported in part by the Intramural Research Program of the National 
Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. C Olives was funded in part by the Biostatistics, 
Epidemiologic and Bioinformatic Training in Environmental Health Training Grant (ES015459). D Ozgediz 
acknowledges the staffand collaborators at the Mulago Hospital and Makerere University in Kampala, Uganda. K 
Pesudovs received institutional support from Flinders University. R Room’s position at the University of Melbourne 
and Turning Point Alcohol and Drug Centre is funded by the Foundation for Alcohol Research and Education and 
the Victorian Department of Health. J A Salomon received support from the Burke Global Health Fellowship while 
working on this study. U Sampson received funding support from the Harold Amos Medical Faculty Development 
Award of the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation and the Vanderbilt Clinical and Translational Scholars Award. L 
Sanchez-Riera acknowledges the Spanish Society of Rheumatology (Sociedad Española de Reumatología). M 
Segui-Gomez’s participation was partly supported by funds from the European Center for Injury Prevention, 
Universidad de Navarra. E Smith acknowledges the Department of Health and Ageing, Commonwealth 
Government of Australia, Institute of Bone and Joint Research (IBJR), University of Sydney (USYD). G D 
Thurston was supported in part by Center grant ES00260 from the National Institute of Environmental Health 
Sciences. D J Weatherall was supported by the Wellcome Trust UK, the Medical Research Council UK and the 
Anthony Cerami and Ann Dunne Research Trust.
References
1. Murray CJ, Lopez AD. Evidence-based health policy-lessons from the Global Burden of Disease 
Study. Science 1996; 274: 740–3. [PubMed: 8966556] 
2. Murray CJ, Lopez AD. Regional patterns of disability-free life expectancy and disability-adjusted 
life expectancy: Global Burden of Disease Study. Lancet 1997; 349: 1347–52. [PubMed: 9149696] 
3. World Health Organization. The world health report 2000—Health systems: improving 
performance. 2010 http://www.who.int/whr/2000/en/whr00_en.pdf (accessed July 9, 2012).
4. World Health Organization. The world health report 2001—Mental Health: New Understanding, 
New Hope. 2001 http://www.who.int/whr/2001/en/whr01_en.pdf (accessed June 25, 2012).
5. World Health Organization. The world health report 2002— Reducing Risks, Promoting Healthy 
Life. 2002 http://www.who.int/whr/2002/en/whr02_en.pdf (accessed July 9, 2012).
6. World Health Organization. The world health report 2003—Shaping the future. 2003 http://
www.who.int/whr/2003/en/index. html (accessed July 9, 2012).
7. World Health Organization. The world health report 2004— Changing history. 2004 http://
www.who.int/whr/2002/en/whr02_en.pdf (accessed July 9, 2012).
8. Mathers C, Fat DM, Boerma JT. The Global Burden of Disease: 2004 Update. Geneva: World 
Health Organization, 2008.
Vos et al.
Page 55
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 56 (native text) -----
9. Begg SJ, Vos T, Barker B, Stanley L, Lopez AD. Burden of disease and injury in Australia in the 
new millennium: measuring health loss from diseases, injuries and risk factors. Med J Aust 
2008;188:36–40. [PubMed: 18205562] 
10. Michaud CM, McKenna MT, Begg S, et al. The burden of disease and injury in the United States 
1996. Popul Health Metr 2006; 4: 11. [PubMed: 17049081] 
11. Schopper D, Pereira J, Torres A, et al. Estimating the burden of disease in one Swiss canton: what 
do disability adjusted life years (DALY) tell us? Int J Epidemiol 2000; 29: 871–77 [PubMed: 
11034971] 
12. Kominski GF, Simon PA, Ho A, Luck J, Lim Y-W, Fielding JE. Assessing the burden of disease 
and injury in Los Angeles County using disability-adjusted life years. Public Health Rep 2002; 
117: 185–91. [PubMed: 12357003] 
13. Zhou S-C, Cai L, Wan C-H, Lv Y-L, Fang P-Q. Assessing the disease burden of Yi people by years 
of life lost in Shilin county of Yunnan province, China. BMC Public Health 2009; 9: 188. 
[PubMed: 19534776] 
14. Friedman C, McKenna MT, Ahmed F, et al. Assessing the burden of disease among an employed 
population: implications for employer- sponsored prevention programs. J Occup Environ Med 
2004; 46: 3–9. [PubMed: 14724472] 
15. Hsairi M, Fekih H, Fakhfakh R, Kassis M, Achour N, Dammak J. Années de vie perdues et 
transition épidémiologique dans le gouvernorat de Sfax (Tunisie). Sante Publique 2003; 15: 25–37 
[PubMed: 12806806] 
16. Dodhia H, Phillips K. Measuring burden of disease in two inner London boroughs using Disability 
Adjusted Life Years.J Public Health (Oxf) 2008; 30: 313–21. [PubMed: 18400697] 
17. Soriano JB, Kiri VA, Maier WC, Strachan D. Increasing prevalence of asthma in UK primary care 
during the 1990s.Int J Tuberc Lung Dis 2003; 7: 415–21. [PubMed: 12757040] 
18. Goldman LS, Nielsen NH, Champion HC, and the Council on Scientific Affairs AMA. Awareness, 
diagnosis, and treatment of depression. J Gen Intern Med 1999; 14: 569–80. [PubMed: 10491249] 
19. Woolf AD, Akesson K. Understanding the burden of musculoskeletal conditions. The burden is 
huge and not reflected in national health priorities. BMJ 2001; 322: 1079–80. [PubMed: 
11337425] 
20. Woolf AD. The bone and joint decade 2000–2010. Ann Rheum Dis 2000; 59: 81–82. [PubMed: 
10666159] 
21. Cohen A, Kleinman A, Saraceno B. World mental health casebook: Social and Mental Health 
Programs in Low-Income Countries. Springer, 2002.
22. Brooks PM. Musculoskeletal medicine: the challenge of the Bone and Joint Decade. APLAR J 
Rheumatol 2004; 7: 272–77
23. King CH, Bertino A-M. Asymmetries of poverty: why global burden of disease valuations 
underestimate the burden of neglected tropical diseases. PLoS Negl Trop Dis 2008; 2: e209. 
[PubMed: 18365036] 
24. Brooker S Estimating the global distribution and disease burden of intestinal nematode infections: 
adding up the numbers—a review. Int J Parasitol 2010; 40: 1137–44. [PubMed: 20430032] 
25. Mathers CD, Ezzati M, Lopez AD. Measuring the burden of neglected tropical diseases: the global 
burden of disease framework. PLoS Negl Trop Dis 2007; 1: e114. [PubMed: 18060077] 
26. Hotez PJ, Brindley PJ, Bethony JM, King CH, Pearce EJ, Jacobson J. Helminth infections: the 
great neglected tropical diseases.J Clin Invest 2008; 118: 1311–21. [PubMed: 18382743] 
27. Murray CJL, Lopez AD. Global health statistics: a compendium of incidence, prevalence, and 
mortality estimates for over 200 conditions. Published by the Harvard School of Public Health on 
behalf of the World Health Organization and the World Bank,1996.
28. Jamison DT, Breman JG, Measham AR, et al., eds. Disease control priorities in developing 
countries, 2nd edn World Bank Publications, 2006.
29. Murray CJ, Ezzati M, Flaxman A, et al. The Global Burden of Disease Study 2010: design, 
definitions, and metrics. Lancet 2012; 380: 2063–66. [PubMed: 23245602] 
30. Salomon JA, Vos T, Hogan DR, et al. Common values in assessing health outcomes from disease 
and injury: disability weights measurement study for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010. 
Lancet 2012; 380: 2129–3. [PubMed: 23245605] 
Vos et al.
Page 56
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 57 (native text) -----
31. WHO. World report on disability, 2011 http://whqlibdoc.who.int/publications/
2011/9789240685215_eng.pdf (accessed Nov 26,2012).
32. Doll R, Payne P, Waterhouse J. Cancer incidence in five continents, Vol. I Geneva: Union 
Internationale Contre le Cancer, 1966.
33. Doll R, Muir C, Waterhouse J. Cancer incidence in five continents, Vol. II Geneva: Union 
Internationale Contre le Cancer, 1970.
34. Waterhouse J, Muir C, Correa P, Powell J. Cancer incidence in five continents, Vol. III IARC 
Scientific Publications No. 15. Lyon: IARC, 1976.
35. Waterhouse J, Muir C, Shanmugaratnam K, Powell J. Cancer incidence in five continents, Vol. IV 
IARC Scientific Publications No. 42. Lyon: IARC, 1982.
36. Muir C, Waterhouse J, Mack T, Powell J, Whelan S. Cancer Incidence in Five Continents, Vol. V, 
IARC Scientific Publications No. 88. Lyon: IARC, 1987.
37. Parkin D, Muir C, Whelan S, Gao Y, Ferlay J, Powell J. Cancer incidence in five continents, Vol. 
VI IARC Scientific Publications No. 120. Lyon: IARC, 1992.
38. Parkin D, Whelan S, Ferlay J, Raymond L, Young J. Cancer incidence in five continents, Vol. VII 
IARC Scientific Publications No. 143. Lyon: IARC, 1997
39. Parkin D, Whelan S, Ferlay J, Teppo L, Thomas D. Cancer Incidence in Five Continents, Vol. VIII 
IARC Scientific Publications No. 155. Lyon: IARC, 2002.
40. Curado M, Edwards B, Shin H, et al. Cancer incidence in five continents, Vol. IX IARC Scientific 
Publications No. 160. Lyon: IARC, 2007.
41. Mayr WT, Pittock SJ, McClelland RL, Jorgensen NW, Noseworthy JH, Rodriguez M. Incidence 
and prevalence of multiple sclerosis in Olmsted County, Minnesota, 1985–2000. Neurology 2003; 
61: 1373–77 [PubMed: 14638958] 
42. Strickland D, Bertoni JM. Parkinson’s prevalence estimated by a state registry. Mov Disord 2004; 
19: 318–23. [PubMed: 15022187] 
43. Bhidayasiri R, Wannachai N, Limpabandhu S, et al. A national registry to determine the 
distribution and prevalence of Parkinson’s disease in Thailand: implications of urbanization and 
pesticides as risk factors for Parkinson’s disease. Neuroepidemiology 2011; 37: 222–30. [PubMed: 
22133707] 
44. European Surveillance of Congenital Anomalies. http://www.eurocat-network.eu/ (accessed July 9, 
2011).
45. Chen WQ, Zhao P, Rao KQ. [Strengthening cancer registration system in China]. Zhonghua Yu 
Fang Yi Xue Za Zhi 2010; 44: 374–75. [PubMed: 20654223] 
46. National Cancer Registry Programme. http://www.ncrpindia.org/ (accessed June 20, 2011).
47. Canadian Institute for Health Information. National Ambulatory Care Reporting System 2002–
2009. 2011.
48. CDC National Center for Health Statistics. National Hospital Ambulatory Medical Care Survey. 
1992.
49. CDC National Center for Health Statistics. National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey. 1993.
50. RCGP Research & Surveillance Centre. Weekly Returns Service Annual Report, 2005 http://
www.rcgp.org.uk/pdf/ANNUAL%20REPORT%202005.pdf (accessed March 5, 2012).
51. RCGP Research & Surveillance Centre. Weekly Returns Service Annual Report, 2006 http://
www.rcgp.org.uk/pdf/bru_annual%20report%202006%20final.pdf (accessed March 5, 2012).
52. RCGP Research & Surveillance Centre. Weekly Returns Service Annual Report, 2007 http://
www.rcgp.org.uk/pdf/ANNUAL%20REPORT%202007%20FINAL%20COMPLETE.pdf 
(accessed March 5, 2012).
53. RCGP Research & Surveillance Centre. Weekly Returns Service Annual Report, 2008 http://
www.rcgp.org.uk/PDF/ANNUAL%20REPORT%202008%202%20FINAL.pdf (accessed March 5, 
2012).
54. RCGP Research & Surveillance Centre. Weekly Returns Service Annual Report, 2009 http://
www.rcgp.org.uk/pdf/ANNUAL%20REPORT%202009%20FINAL.pdf (accessed March 5, 2012).
55. RCGP Research & Surveillance Centre. Weekly Returns Service Annual Report, 2010 http://
www.rcgp.org.uk/pdf/ANNUAL%20REPORT%202010%20FINAL.pdf (accessed March 5, 2012).
Vos et al.
Page 57
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 58 (native text) -----
56. Leonard H, Petterson B, Bower C, Sanders R. Prevalence of intellectual disability in Western 
Australia. Paediatr Perinat Epidemiol 2003; 17: 58–67 [PubMed: 12562473] 
57. Hofman A, Rocca WA, Brayne C, et al., and the Eurodem Prevalence Research Group. The 
prevalence of dementia in Europe: a collaborative study of 1980–1990 findings. Int J Epidemiol 
1991; 20: 736–48. [PubMed: 1955260] 
58. Jablensky A, McGrath J, Herrman H, et al. Psychotic disorders in urban areas: an overview of the 
Study on Low Prevalence Disorders. Aust N Z J Psychiatry 2000; 34: 221–36. [PubMed: 
10789527] 
59. Hickman M, Taylor C, Chatterjee A, et al. Estimating the prevalence of problematic drug use: a 
review of methods and their application. Bull Narc 2002; 54: 15–32.
60. Imdad A, Jabeen A, Bhutta ZA. Role of calcium supplementation during pregnancy in reducing 
risk of developing gestational hypertensive disorders: a meta-analysis of studies from developing 
countries. BMC Public Health 2011; 11 (suppl 3): S18. [PubMed: 21501435] 
61. Imdad A, Bhutta ZA. Effect of preventive zinc supplementation on linear growth in children under 
5 years of age in developing countries: a meta-analysis of studies for input to the lives saved tool. 
BMC Public Health 2011; 11 (suppl 3): S22. [PubMed: 21501440] 
62. Munos MK, Walker CLF, Black RE. The effect of rotavirus vaccine on diarrhoea mortality. Int J 
Epidemiol 2010; 39 (suppl 1): i56–62. [PubMed: 20348127] 
63. Imdad A, Yakoob MY, Sudfeld C, Haider BA, Black RE, Bhutta ZA. Impact of vitamin A 
supplementation on infant and childhood mortality. BMC Public Health 2011; 11 (suppl 3): S20. 
[PubMed: 21501438] 
64. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (DSM-IV-
TR). Washington DC: American Psychiatric Association, 2000.
65. Murray CJL, Lopez AD. The global burden of disease:a comprehensive assessment of mortality 
and disability from diseases, injuries, and risk factors in 1990 and projected in 2020. http://
cdsweb.cern.ch/record/732931 (accessed June 25, 2012).
66. Barendregt JJ, Van Oortmarssen GJ, Vos T, Murray CJ. A generic model for the assessment of 
disease epidemiology: the computational basis of DisMod II. Popul Health Metr 2003; 1: 4. 
[PubMed: 12773212] 
67. Forouzanfar MH, Foreman KJ, Delossantos AM, et al. Breast and cervical cancer in 187 countries 
between 1980 and 2010: a systematic analysis. Lancet 2011; 378: 1461–84. [PubMed: 21924486] 
68. Lozano R, Naghavi M, Foreman K, et al. Global and regional mortality from 235 causes of death 
for 20 age groups in 1990 and 2010: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 
2010. Lancet 2012; 380: 2095–128. [PubMed: 23245604] 
69. Ghys PD, Brown T, Grassly NC, et al. The UNAIDS Estimation and Projection Package: a 
software package to estimate and project national HIV epidemics. Sex Transm Infect 2004; 80 
(suppl 1): i5–9. [PubMed: 15249692] 
70. UNAIDS. Spectrum/EPP 2011 http://www.unaids.org/en/ataanalysis/tools/spectrumepp2011/ 
(accessed June 19, 2012).
71. Brooker S, Hay SI, Issae W, et al. Predicting the distribution of urinary schistosomiasis in Tanzania 
using satellite sensor data.Trop Med Int Health 2001; 6: 998–1007 [PubMed: 11737837] 
72. Clements ACA, Firth S, Dembele R, et al. Use of Bayesian geostatistical prediction to estimate 
local variations in Schistosoma haematobium infection in western Africa. Bull World Health 
Organ 2009; 87: 921–29. [PubMed: 20454483] 
73. Schur N, Hurlimann E, Stensgaard A-S, et al. Spatially explicit Schistosoma infection risk in 
eastern Africa using Bayesian geostatistical modelling. Acta Trop 2011; published online Oct 14. 
D0I:10.1016/j.actatropica.2011.10.006.
74. New York Heart Association. Diseases of the heart and blood vessels: nomenclature and criteria for 
diagnosis. Boston: Little, Brown, 1964.
75. Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease. Global strategy for the diagnosis, 
management, and prevention of COPD. 2011 http://www.goldcopd.org/ (accessed July 6, 2012).
76. Kessler RC, Berglund P, Demler O, et al., and the National Comorbidity Survey Replication. The 
epidemiology of major depressive disorder: results from the National Comorbidity Survey 
Replication (NCS-R). JAMA 2003; 289: 3095–105. [PubMed: 12813115] 
Vos et al.
Page 58
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 59 (native text) -----
77. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. United States Medical Expenditure Panel Survey 
2000–2009. Rockville, United States, Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality.
78. US National Institutes of Health National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. National 
Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions Wave 1 and Wave 2. Bethesda, MD: 
National Institutes of Health.
79. Australian Bureau of Statistics. National Survey of Mental Health and Wellbeing of Adults 1997 
Canberra: Australian Bureau of Statistics.
80. Polinder S, van Beeck EF, Essink-Bot ML, et al. Functional outcome at 2.5, 5, 9, and 24 months 
after injury in the Netherlands. J Trauma 2007; 62: 133–41. [PubMed: 17215744] 
81. South Carolina Traumatic Brain Injury Follow-up Registry (SCTBIFR). http://www.musc.edu/
sctbifr/ (accessed on July 9, 2012).
82. Mackenzie EJ, Rivara FP, Jurkovich GJ, et al. The National Study on Costs and Outcomes of 
Trauma. J Trauma 2007; 63: S54–67; [PubMed: 18091213] 
83. Mathers CD, Iburg KM, Begg S. Adjusting for dependent comorbidity in the calculation of healthy 
life expectancy.Popul Health Metr 2006; 4: 4. [PubMed: 16620383] 
84. van Baal PHM, Hoeymans N, Hoogenveen RT, de Wit GA,Westert GP. Disability weights for 
comorbidity and their influence on health-adjusted life expectancy. Popul Health Metr 2006; 4: 1. 
[PubMed: 16606448] 
85. van Baal PHM, Hoogenveen RT, de Wit GA, Boshuizen HC. Estimating health-adjusted life 
expectancy conditional on risk factors: results for smoking and obesity. Popul Health Metr 2006; 
4: 14. [PubMed: 17083719] 
86. Wang H, Dwyer-Lindgren L, Lofgren KT, et al. Age-specific and sex-specific mortality in 187 
countries, 1970–2010: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010. Lancet 
2012; 380: 2071–94. [PubMed: 23245603] 
87. Alter G, Riley JC. Frailty, sickness, and death: models of morbidity and mortality in historical 
populations. Popul Stud (Camb) 1989;43: 25–5. [PubMed: 11622025] 
88. Fries JF. Aging, natural death, and the compression of morbidity.N Engl J Med 1980; 303: 130–35. 
[PubMed: 7383070] 
89. Johansson SR. The health transition: the cultural inflation of morbidity during the decline of 
mortality. Health Transit Rev 1991;1: 39–68. [PubMed: 10148803] 
90. Gruenberg EM. The failures of success.Milbank Mem Fund Q Health Soc 1977; 55: 3–24. 
[PubMed: 141009] 
91. Verbrugge LM. Longer life but worsening health? Trends in health and mortality of middle-aged 
and older persons.Milbank Mem Fund Q Health Soc 1984; 62: 475–519. [PubMed: 6566016] 
92. Olshansky SJ, Rudberg MA, Carnes BA, Cassel CK, Brody JA. Trading off longer life for 
worsening health: the expansion of morbidity hypothesis. J Aging Health 1991; 3: 194–216.
93. Brody JA, Miles TP. Mortality postponed and the unmasking of age-dependent non-fatal 
conditions. Aging (Milano) 1990; 2: 283–89. [PubMed: 2094367] 
94. Manton KG, Gu X, Lowrimore GR. Cohort changes in active life expectancy in the U.S. elderly 
population: experience from the 1982–2004 National Long-Term Care Survey.J Gerontol B 
Psychol Sci Soc Sci 2008; 63: s269–81. [PubMed: 18818447] 
95. Moussavi S, Chatterji S, Verdes E, Tandon A, Patel V, Ustun B. Depression, chronic diseases, and 
decrements in health: results from the World Health Surveys. Lancet 2007; 370: 851–58. 
[PubMed: 17826170] 
96. King G, Murray CJL, Salomon JA, Tandon A. Enhancing the validity and cross-cultural 
comparability of measurement in survey research. Am Polit Sci Rev 2004; 98: 191–207.
97. Salomon JA, Tandon A, Murray CJL. Comparability of self rated health: cross sectional multi-
country survey using anchoring vignettes. BMJ 2004; 328: 258. [PubMed: 14742348] 
98. Iwata N, Turner RJ, Lloyd DA. Race/ethnicity and depressive symptoms in community-dwelling 
young adults: a differential item functioning analysis. Psychiatry Res 2002; 110: 281–89. 
[PubMed: 12127478] 
99. Kapteyn A, Smith JP, van Soest A. Vignettes and self-reports of work disability in the United 
States and the Netherlands.Am Econ Rev 2007; 97: 461–73.
Vos et al.
Page 59
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 60 (native text) -----
100. Kristensen N, Johansson E. New evidence on cross-country differences in job satisfaction using 
anchoring vignettes.Labour Econ 2008; 15: 96–1177
101. Kramer M The rising pandemic of mental disorders and associated chronic diseases and 
disabilities. Acta Psychiatr Scand 1980; 62: 382–97 [PubMed: 7468297] 
102. Eaton WW, Kalaydjian A, Scharfstein DO, Mezuk B, Ding Y. Prevalence and incidence of 
depressive disorder: the Baltimore ECA follow-up, 1981–2004. Acta Psychiatr Scand 2007; 116: 
182–88. [PubMed: 17655559] 
103. Kessler RC, Angermeyer M, Anthony JC, et al. Lifetime prevalence and age-of-onset distributions 
of mental disorders in the World Health Organization’s World Mental Health Survey 
Initiative.World Psychiatry 2007; 6: 168–76. [PubMed: 18188442] 
104. Eppig C, Fincher CL, Thornhill R. Parasite prevalence and the worldwide distribution of cognitive 
ability. Proc Biol Sci 2010;277: 3801–08. [PubMed: 20591860] 
105. Walter T, De Andraca I, Chadud P, Perales CG. Iron deficiency anemia: adverse effects on infant 
psychomotor development. Pediatrics 1989; 84: 7–177 [PubMed: 2472596] 
106. Lozoff B, Wolf AW, Jimenez E Iron-deficiency anemia and infant development: effects of 
extended oral iron therapy. J Pediatr 1996; 129: 382–89. [PubMed: 8804327] 
107. Watkins WE, Cruz JR, Pollitt E. The effects of deworming on indicators of school performance in 
Guatemala.Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 1996; 90: 156–61. [PubMed: 8761577] 
108. Simeon DT, Grantham McGregor SM, Callender JEM, Robinson S, Wong MS. Treatment of mild 
to moderate trichuris trichiura infections in children: effects on school performance and growth— 
abstract. West Indian Med J 1995: 277
109. Hotez PJ, Bundy DAP, Beegle K, et al., eds. Helminth infections: soil-transmitted helminth 
infections and SchistosomiasisIn: Disease control priorities in developing countries, 2nd edn, 
World Bank Publications, 2006.
110. Wallhagen MI, Strawbridge WJ, Shema SJ. The relationship between hearing impairment and 
cognitive function: a 5-year longitudinal study. Res Gerontol Nurs 2008; 1: 80–86. [PubMed: 
20078020] 
111. Gates GA, Beiser A, Rees TS, D’Agostino RB, Wolf PA. Central auditory dysfunction may 
precede the onset of clinical dementia in people with probable Alzheimer’s disease. J Am Geriatr 
Soc 2002;50: 482–88. [PubMed: 11943044] 
112. Sugawara N, Sasaki A, Yasui-Furukori N, et al. Hearing impairment and cognitive function 
among a community-dwelling population in Japan. Ann Gen Psychiatry 2011; 10: 27 [PubMed: 
21961439] 
Vos et al.
Page 60
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 61 (native text) -----
Panel:
Terminology used in the Global Burden of Disease study (GBD)
Disability
Disability refers to any short-term or long-term health loss. Many other definitions of 
disability are in use such as those in the WHO World Report on Disabilities.31 These 
definitions often stress moderate to severe health loss and the role of the environment in 
the loss of individuals’ wellbeing.
Sequelae
In the GBD 2010 cause list there are 291 diseases and injuries, of which 289 cause 
disability. In total, we have identified 1160 sequelae of these diseases and injuries. For 
example, diabetic neuropathy is a sequela of diabetes mellitus. To avoid double counting, 
a sequela can only be counted in the cause list once even if the same outcome might be 
caused by more than one disease.
Health state
Across the 1160 sequelae, we identified 220 unique health states. For example, both 
malaria and hookworm have mild anaemia as a sequela. Mild anaemia is a unique health 
state. The list of unique health states serves two purposes: to allow assessment of the total 
burden of some health states such as anaemia across various causes, and to simplify the 
task of measuring disability weights for sequelae.
Disability weights
A quantification of the severity of health loss associated with the 220 unique health states 
on a scale from 0 to 1, when 0 is commensurate with perfect health and 1 is 
commensurate with death. In the GBD 2010, disability weights for health states are 
measured based on survey respondents representing the general public.
Years lived with disability (YLDs)
For the GBD 2010, YLDs per person from a sequela are equal to the prevalence of the 
sequela multiplied by the disability weight for the health state associated with that 
sequela. YLDs for a disease or injury are the sum of the YLDs for each sequela 
associated with the disease or injury.
Impairments
In the GBD 2010 we estimated the prevalence and burden of several unique health states 
that are sequelae for multiple diseases including anaemia, heart failure, vision loss, 
seizures, hearing loss, infertility, and intellectual disability. These are referred to as 
impairments.
Vos et al.
Page 61
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 62 (native text) -----
Figure 1: 
Overview of the seven steps in the estimation of prevalence and years lived with disability 
(YLDs) DW=disability weight.
Vos et al.
Page 62
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 63 (native text) -----
Figure 2: 
Percentage of years lived with disability (YLDs) in 2010, by cause and age
Vos et al.
Page 63
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 64 (native text) -----
Figure 3: 
Global years lived with disability (YLDs) per person in 1990 and 2010 for all ages, by sex
Vos et al.
Page 64
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 65 (native text) -----
Figure 4: 
Global years lived with disability (YLDs) ranks with 95% uncertainty intervals (UI) for the 
25 most common causes in 1990 and 2010. COPD=chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. 
BPH=benign prostatic hyperplasia. *Includes birth asphyxia/trauma. An interactive version 
of this figure is available online at http://healthmetricsandevaluation.org/gbd/visualizations/
regional.
Vos et al.
Page 65
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 66 (native text) -----
Figure5: 
Percentage of years lived with disability (YLDs) by 21 major cause groupings and region for 
2010 An interactive version of this figure is available online at http://
healthmetricsandevaluation.org/gbd/visualizations/regional.
Vos et al.
Page 66
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 67 (native text) -----
Figure 6: 
Variation in the leading causes of years lived with disability (YLDs), by region, in 2010 
Causes in the figure are ordered according to global ranks for causes. The figure shows all 
causes that are in the 25 leading causes in at least one region. Ranks are also colour shaded 
to indicate rank intervals. *Includes birth asphyxia/trauma. An interactive version of this 
figure is available online at http://healthmetricsandevaluation.org/gbd/visualizations/
regional.
Vos et al.
Page 67
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 68 (native text) -----
Figure 7: 
Global years lived with disability (YLDs) for injury in 2010, by type of injury and age
Vos et al.
Page 68
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 69 (native text) -----
Figure 8: 
Years lived with disability (YLD) estimates for anaemia in 2010, by cause and region
Vos et al.
Page 69
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 70 (native text) -----
Figure 9: 
Years lived with disability (YLD) estimates for heart failure in 2010, by cause and region
Vos et al.
Page 70
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 71 (native text) -----
Figure 10: 
Years lived with disability (YLD) estimates for vision loss in 2010, by cause and region
Vos et al.
Page 71
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 72 (native text) -----
Figure 11: 
Years lived with disability (YLDs) estimates for intellectual disability in 2010, by cause and 
region
Vos et al.
Page 72
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript


----- Page 73 (native text) -----
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Vos et al.
Page 73
Table 1:
Global prevalence of the 50 most common sequelae o
Prevalence (both sexes)
Male prevalence
Female prevalence
Total
(thousands)
Proportion of
population 
(%)
Total
(thousands)
Proportion of
population 
(%)
Total
(thousands)
Proportion of
population 
(%)
Dental caries of permanent teeth
2431636
35. 29%
1 194 051
34.37%
1 237 585
36.23%
Tension-type headache
1431 067
20.77%
655 937
18.88%
775131
22.69%
Migraine
1012944
14.70%
371 072
10.68%
641 873
18.79%
Fungal skin diseases
985 457
14.30%
516 167
14.86%
469 291
13.74%
Other skin and subcutaneous diseases
803597
11.66%
417 129
12.01%
386 468
11.32%
Chronic periodontitis
743 187
1079%
378 407
10.89%
364 780
10.68%
Mild hearing loss with perinatal onset due 
to other hearing loss
724 689
1.0.52%
386 147
11.11%
338 543
9.91%
Acne vulgaris
646 488
9.38%
311 349
8.96%
335 140
9.81%
Low back pain
632 045
9.17%
334 793
9. 64%
297 252
8.70%
Dental caries of baby teeth
621 507
9.02%
352 085
10.13%
269 421
7.89%
Moderate iron-deficiency anaemia
608 915
8.84%
269 596
7.76%
339 319
9.93%
Other musculoskeletal disorders
560 978
8.14%
262779
7.56%
298 199
8.73%
Near sighted due to other vision loss
459 646
6.67%
235 052
6.77%
224 593
6.58%
Mild iron-deficiency anaemia
375 438
5.45%
152 523
4.39%
222915
6.53%
Asthma
334 247
4.85%
160 346
4.61%
173 901
5.09%
Neck pain
332 049
4.82%
135 134
3. 89%
196 915
5.77%
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
328 615
4.77%
168 445
4.85%
160170
4.69%
Genital prolapse
316 897
4.55%
..
..
316 897
9.28%
Major depressive disorder
298 441
4.33%
111 441
3.21%
187 000
5.48%
Pruritus
280 229
4.07%
117758
3.39%
162471
4.76%
Anxiety disorders
272 777
3.96%
95 731
2.76%
177 046
5.18%
Mild anaemia due to hookworm disease
260254
3.78%
149 572
4.30%
110 681
3.24%
Osteoarthritis of the knee
250 785
3.64%
88 885
2.56%
161 900
4.74%
Schistosomiasis
238 366
3.46%
124 289
3.58%
114 077
3.34%
Eczema
229761
3.33%
104 259
3.00%
125 502
3.67%
Uncomplicated diabetes mellitus
227 588
3.30%
114 817
3.30%
112 771
3.30%
Uterine fibroids
225 259
3.23%
..
..
225 259
6.60%
Sexually transmitted chlamydial diseases
215 621
3.13%
85 675
2.47%
129 946
3.80%
Benign prostatic hyperplasia
210 142
3.05%
210 142
6.05%
..
..
Premenstrual syndrome
199 072
2.89%
..
..
199 072
5.83%
Moderate hearing loss with perinatal 
onset due to other hearing loss
189 919
2.76%
103 629
2.98%
86 290
2.53%
Goitre due to iodine deficiency
187 181
2.72%
69 752
2.01%
117 429
3.44%
Lacerations, multiple wounds, other 
dislocations, and eye injuries due to falls
185 700
2.70%
110 263
3.17%
75 438
2.21%
Edentulism
158 284
2.30%
67 264
1.94%
91 020
2.66%
Trichomoniasis
152232
2.21%
49731
1.43%
102501
3.00%
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.


----- Page 74 (native text) -----
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Vos et al.
Page 74
Prevalence (both sexes)
Male prevalence
Female prevalence
Total
(thousands)
Proportion of
population 
(%)
Total
(thousands)
Proportion of
population 
(%)
Total
(thousands)
Proportion of
population 
(%)
Chronic urolithiasis
144346
2.10%
90446
2.60%
53901
1.58%
Mild hearing loss due to otitis media
141600
2.06%
79359
2.28%
62241
1.82%
Mild anaemia due to sickle cell disorders
141419
2.05%
64343
1.85%
77075
2.26%
Impetigo
140495
2.04%
67464
1.94%
73031
2.14%
Diabetic neuropathy
131930
1.91%
63509
1.83%
68421
2.00%
Other cardiovascular and circulatory 
diseases
127990
1.86%
48040
1.38%
79950
2.34%
Molluscum contagiosum
122601
1.78%
65841
1.89%
56760
1.66%
Otitis media (chronic)
117881
1.71%
55891
1.61%
61989
1.81%
Polycystic ovarian syndrome
116730
1.68%
..
..
116730
3.42%
Angina due to ischaemic heart disease
111705
1.62%
59683
1.72%
52022
1.52%
Dysthymia
105520
1.53%
43863
1.26%
61657
1.81%
Scabies
100625
1.46%
51736
1.49%
48889
1.43%
Mild anaemia due to thalassaemias
95731
1.39%
44362
1.28%
51370
1.50%
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.


----- Page 75 (native text) -----
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Vos et al.
Page 75
Table 2:
Global years lived with disability (YLDs) for a comprehensive set of 289 causes and select sequelae in 1990 
and 2010, for all ages, both sexes combined, and per 100 000
All ages YLDs (thousands)
YLDs (per 100 000)
1990
2010
%Δ
1990
2010
%Δ
All causes
583 393 (484 
649-694 406)
777 401 (648 
158-921 711)
333%
11 004 (9142-13 
098)
11 283 (9407-13 
378)
2.5%
Communicable, maternal, 
neonatal, and nutritional 
disorders
113 925 (85 
875-148 463)
119 164 (91 
399-152 096)
46%
2149 (1620-2800)
1730 (1327-2207)
−19.5%
HIV/AIDS and tuberculosis
7681 (5222-10 722)
11 117 (7718-15 
187)
44.7%
145 (99-202)
161 (112-220)
11.4%
Tuberculosis
6085 (4020-8737)
6774 (4500-9756)
11.3%
115 (76-165)
98 (65-142)
−14.3%
HIV/AIDS
1596 (1132-2125)
4342 (3142-5629)
172.2%
30 (21-40)
63(46-82)
109.4%
HIV disease resulting in 
mycobacterial infection
220 (143-314)
1224 (793-1746)
456.8%
4(3-6)
18 (12-25)
328.4%
HIV disease resulting in other 
specified or unspecified 
diseases
1376 (967-1857)
3119 (2241-4107)
126.7%
26 (18-35)
45 (33-60)
74.4%
HIV pre-AIDS asymptomatic
376 (227-569)
889 (546-1338)
136.8%
7 (4-11)
13(8-19)
82.2%
HIV pre-AIDS symptomatic
289 (193-411)
531 (350-756)
83.6%
5 (4-8)
8 (5-11)
41.3%
AIDS with antiretroviral 
treatment
0 (0-0)
389 (251-578)
..
0 (0-0)
6 (4-8)
..
AIDS without antiretroviral 
treatment
711 (483-958)
1309 (913-1758)
84.2%
13 (9-18)
19 (13-26)
41.7%
Diarrhoea, lower respiratory 
infections, meningitis, and 
other common infectious 
diseases
18 579 (13 419-25 
301)
19 921 (14 241-27 
439)
7.2%
350 (253-477)
289 (207-398)
−17.5%
Diarrhoeal diseases
7654 (5135-10 855)
8045 (5371-11 366)
5.1%
144 (97-205)
117 (78-165)
−19.1%
Cholera
115 (59-188)
80 (42-134)
−30.1%
2 (1-4)
1 (1-2)
−46.2%
Other salmonella infections
263 (150-410)
341 (202-523)
29.8%
5(3-8)
5(3-8)
−0.1%
Shigellosis
703 (391-1111)
744 (440-1147)
5.8%
13 (7-21)
11 (6-17)
−18.6%
Enteropathogenic E coli 
infection
972 (438-1652)
845 (387-1416)
−13.0%
18 (8-31)
12 (6-21)
−33.1%
Enterotoxigenic E coli 
infection
889 (520-1409)
1065 (649-1643)
19.8%
17 (10-27)
15 (9-24)
−7.8%
Campylobacter enteritis
753 (407-1211)
746 (416-1180)
−1.0%
14 (8-23)
11 (6-17)
−23.8%
Campylobacter enteritis
753 (406-1211)
746 (415-1181)
−0.9%
14 (8-23)
11 (6-17)
−23.8%
Guillain-Barre syndrome due 
to C enteritis
1 (0-1)
1 (1-2)
35.7%
<0.5 (0-0.5)
<0.5 (0-0.5)
4.4%
Amoebiasis
142 (84-217)
205 (126-314)
44.1%
3 (2-4)
3(2-5)
10.9%
Cryptosporidiosis
651 (312-1101)
661 (316-1096)
1.6%
12 (6-21)
10 (5-16)
−21.8%
Rotaviral enteritis
1159 (624-1885)
1269 (701-2006)
9.5%
22 (12-36)
18 (10-29)
−15.8%
Other diarrhoeal diseases
2007 (1027-3412)
2089 (1054-3521)
4.1%
38 (19-64)
30 (15-51)
−19.9%
Typhoid and paratyphoid 
fevers
134 (25-348)
172 (33-435)
27.8%
3 (0-7)
2(0-6)
−1.7%
Typhoid and paratyphoid 
fevers
124 (16-337)
159 (20-423)
27.8%
2(0-6)
2(0-6)
−1.6%
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.


----- Page 76 (native text) -----
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Vos et al.
Page 76
All ages YLDs (thousands)
YLDs (per 100 000)
1990
2010
%Δ
1990
2010
%Δ
Liver abscess and cysts due to 
typhoid and paratyphoid 
fevers
10 (7-15)
13 (8-20)
27.4%
<0.5 (0-0.5)
<0.5 (0-0.5)
−1.9%
Lower respiratory infections
2113 (1444-2941)
2331 (1592-3240)
10.3%
40 (27-55)
34 (23-47)
−15.1%
Influenza
510 (344-714)
583 (393-815)
14.2%
10 (6-13)
8(6-12)
−12.1%
Influenza
510 (343-713)
582 (392-814)
14.2%
10 (6-13)
8(6-12)
−12.1%
Guillain-Barre syndrome due 
to influenza
1 (1-2)
2(1-3)
34.3%
<0.5 (0-0.5)
<0.5 (0-0.5)
3.3%
Pneumococcal pneumonia
298 (203-414)
367 (248-509)
23.2%
6 (4-8)
5 (4-7)
−5.2%
H influenzae type B 
pneumonia
216 (145-306)
201 (134-286)
−6.6%
4(3-6)
3 (2-4)
−28.2%
Respiratory syncytial virus 
pneumonia
52 (31-82)
36 (21-55)
−31.3%
1 (1-2)
1 (0-1)
−47.2%
Other lower respiratory 
infections
1037 (702-1459)
1144 (779-1589)
10.2%
20 (13-28)
17 (11-23)
−15.2%
Upper respiratory infections
1438 (755-2542)
1728 (911-3050)
20.2%
27 (14-48)
25 (13-44)
−7.5%
Upper respiratory infections
1437 (753-2541)
1727 (910-3048)
20.2%
27 (14-48)
25 (13-44)
−7.5%
Guillain-Barre syndrome due 
to upper respiratory infections
1 (1-2)
2(1-3)
33.8%
<0.5 (0-0.5)
<0.5 (0-0.5)
3.0%
Otitis media
3794 (2456-5829)
4436 (2887-6668)
16.9%
72 (46-110)
64 (42-97)
−10.0%
Otitis media
1359 (819-2150)
1613 (979-2594)
18.7%
26 (15-41)
23 (14-38)
−8.7%
Hearing loss due to otitis 
media
2435 (1423-3929)
2824 (1669-4533)
16.0%
46 (27-74)
41 (24-66)
−10.8%
Meningitis
2757 (1973-3732)
2628 (1857-3643)
−4.7%
52 (37-70)
38 (27-53)
−26.7%
Pneumococcal meningitis
920 (624-1298)
886 (595-1254)
−3.7%
17 (12-24)
13(9-18)
−25.9%
Spneumoniae meningitis
9 (5-14)
11 (6-17)
19.6%
<0.5 (0-0.5)
<0.5 (0-0.5)
−8.0%
Long term sequelae due to S 
pneumoniae meningitis
571 (324-899)
488 (261-806)
−14.5%
11 (6-17)
7 (4-12)
−34.2%
Seizures due to S pneumoniae 
meningitis
80 (52-118)
79 (55-113)
−0.4%
2(1-2)
1 (1-2)
−23.4%
Hearing loss due to 
Spneumoniae meningitis
261 (154-420)
308 (185-500)
18.2%
5 (3-8)
4 (3-7)
−9.0%
H influenzae type B 
meningitis
646 (429-933)
371 (247-524)
−42.6%
12 (8-18)
5 (4-8)
−55.8%
H influenzae type B 
meningitis
10 (6-17)
7 (4-12)
−32.0%
<0.5 (0-0.5)
<0.5 (0-0.5)
−47.7%
Long term sequelae due to H 
influenzae type B meningitis
448 (253-715)
233 (124-368)
−48.4%
8(5-13)
3(2-5)
−60.0%
Seizures due to H influenzae 
type B meningitis
65 (38-110)
31 (18-51)
−52.2%
1(1-2)
<0.5 (0-1)
−63.3%
Hearing loss due to H 
influenzae type B meningitis
123 (74-198)
100 (60-160)
−18.5%
2 (1-4)
1 (1-2)
−37.3%
Meningococcal infection
424 (302-597)
403 (281-566)
−4.8%
8 (6-11)
6 (4-8)
−26.7%
Meningococcal infection
6 (4-10)
7 (4-12)
13.0%
<0.5 (0-0.5)
<0.5 (0-0.5)
−13.0%
Long term sequelae due to 
meningococcal infection
195 (115-306)
165 (92-269)
−15.2%
4(2-6)
2 (1-4)
−34.8%
Seizures due to 
meningococcal infection
35 (23-52)
28 (18-40)
−21.4%
1 (0-1)
<0.5 (0-1)
−39.5%
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.


----- Page 77 (native text) -----
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Vos et al.
Page 77
All ages YLDs (thousands)
YLDs (per 100 000)
1990
2010
%Δ
1990
2010
%Δ
Hearing loss due to 
meningococcal infection
187 (110-297)
203 (119-325)
8.6%
4 (2-6)
3(2-5)
−16.5%
Other meningitis
733 (509-1036)
930 (647-1361)
27.0%
14 (10-20)
14 (9-20)
−2.3%
Other meningitis
37 (24-53)
49 (31-72)
34.4%
1 (0-1)
1 (0-1)
3.4%
Long term sequelae due to 
other bacterial meningitis 
infection
283 (157-446)
289 (149-476)
2.2%
5 (3-8)
4 (2-7)
−21.4%
Seizures due to other bacterial 
meningitis infection
48 (32-71)
46 (31-66)
−4.0%
1 (1-1)
1 (0-1)
−26.1%
Hearing loss due to other 
bacterial meningitis infection
365 (221-572)
546 (322-883)
49.6%
7 (4-11)
8 (5-13)
15.1%
Encephalitis
183 (120-260)
205 (133-292)
12.6%
3 (2-5)
3 (2-4)
−13.4%
Encephalitis
5 (3-9)
7 (4-12)
35.7%
<0.5 (0-0.5)
<0.5 (0-0.5)
4.4%
Motor cognitive impairments 
due to encephalitis
177 (117-253)
198 (128-283)
11.9%
3(2-5)
3 (2-4)
−13.9%
Diphtheria
<0'5 (0-2)
<0.5 (0-1)
−49.1%
<0.5 (0-0.5)
<0.5 (0-0.5)
−60.9%
Whooping cough
181 (103-287)
122 (70-195)
−32.5%
3(2-5)
2(1-3)
−48.0%
Tetanus
78 (35-159)
21(9-43)
−72.3%
1 (1-3)
<0.5 (0-1)
−78.7%
Tetanus
77 (35-158)
21(9-43)
−72.3%
1 (1-3)
<0.5 (0-1)
−78.7%
Long-term sequelae from 
neonatal tetanus
1 (0-2)
<0.5 (0-1)
−73.2%
<0.5 (0-0.5)
<0.5 (0-0.5)
−79.4%
Measles
106 (58-180)
31 (17-51)
−70.8%
2(1-3)
<0.5 (0-1)
−77.5%
Varicella
142 (87-219)
202 (124-308)
42.0%
3 (2-4)
3 (2-4)
9.3%
Chickenpox
7 (2-16)
7 (2-16)
−0.9%
<0.5 (0-0.5)
<0.5 (0-0.5)
−23.8%
Herpes zoster
135 (84-209)
195 (120-295)
44.3%
3 (2-4)
3 (2-4)
11.0%
Neglected tropical diseases 
and malaria
23 491 (15 715-36 
639)
22 219 (15 693-31 
544)
−5.4%
443 (296-691)
322 (228-458)
−27.2%
Malaria
2662 (1257-4481)
4070 (1853-6980)
52.9%
50 (24-85)
59 (27-101)
17.7%
Malaria
433 (194-854)
498 (218-933)
14.8%
8(4-16)
7 (3-14)
−11.6%
Anaemia due to malaria
2127 (833-3972)
3367 (1312-6294)
58.3%
40 (16-75)
49 (19-91)
21.8%
Motor cognitive impairments 
due to malaria
104 (41-273)
211(81-556)
102.8%
2(1-5)
3 (1-8)
56.0%
Chagas disease
324 (108-594)
303(106-573)
−6.4%
6(2-11)
4(2-8)
−28.0%
Acute Chagas disease
31 (7-62)
28 (7-59)
−8.8%
1(0-1)
<0.5 (0-1)
−29.8%
Chronic heart disease due to 
Chagas disease
213 (38-429)
195 (36-411)
−8.4%
4(1-8)
3 (1-6)
−29.5%
Chronic digestive disease due 
to Chagas disease
73 (8-178)
67 (7-157)
−8.5%
1(0-3)
1 (0-2)
−29.6%
Heart failure due to Chagas 
disease
7 (4-10)
13 (8-19)
92.6%
<0.5 (0-0.5)
<0.5 (0-0.5)
48.2%
Leishmaniasis
113 (53-215)
124 (60-235)
10.2%
2 (1-4)
2(1-3)
−15.2%
Visceral leishmaniasis
8 (2-16)
6(2-13)
−17.2%
<0.5 (0-0.5)
<0.5 (0-0.5)
−36.3%
Cutaneous leishmaniasis
105 (47-206)
118 (56-229)
12.2%
2 (1-4)
2(1-3)
−13.7%
African trypanosomiasis
33 (12-86)
8(2-25)
−75.2%
1(0-2)
<0.5 (0-0.5)
−80.9%
Schistosomiasis
1797 (923-3413)
2986 (1541-5666)
66.2%
34 (17-64)
43 (22-82)
27.9%
Schistosomiasis
696 (229-1579)
1148 (377-2607)
65.0%
13 (4-30)
17 (5-38)
27.0%
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.


----- Page 78 (native text) -----
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Vos et al.
Page 78
All ages YLDs (thousands)
YLDs (per 100 000)
1990
2010
%Δ
1990
2010
%Δ
Mild diarrhoea due to 
schistosomiasis
1 (0-1)
1 (1-2)
77.2%
<0.5 (0-0.5)
<0.5 (0-0.5)
36.3%
Anaemia due to 
schistosomiasis
433 (219-766)
687 (344-1217)
58.8%
8 (4-14)
10 (5-18)
22.2%
Hepatomegaly due to 
schistosomiasis
104 (47-200)
185(84-355)
77.8%
2 (1-4)
3(1-5)
36.8%
Haematemesis due to 
schistosomiasis
39 (26-55)
69 (46-97)
76.6%
1(0-1)
1 (1-1)
35.9%
Ascites due to schistosomiasis
31 (21-44)
56 (38-77)
78.9%
1 (0-1)
1(1-1)
37.7%
Dysuria due to schistosomiasis
174 (80-334)
298 (135-572)
71.0%
3(2-6)
4(2-8)
31.5%
Bladder pathology due to 
schistosomiasis
159 (72-304)
268 (122-515)
68.9%
3 (1-6)
4 (2-7)
30.0%
Hydronephrosis due to 
schistosomiasis
162 (74-310)
277(126-533)
71.5%
3 (1-6)
4(2-8)
32.0%
Cysticercosis
484 (378-600)
457 (357-566)
−5.5%
9(7-11)
7 (5-8)
−27.3%
Echinococcosis
89 (44-187)
110 (55-228)
23.9%
2 (1-4)
2 (1-3)
−4.7%
Chronic respiratory disease 
due to echinococcosis
2 (1-6)
3 (1-7)
22.8%
<0.5 (0-0.5)
<0.5 (0-0.5)
−5.5%
Epilepsy due to 
echinococcosis
13 (6-28)
16 (8-32)
24.1%
<0.5 (0-1)
<0.5 (0-0.5)
−4.5%
Abdominopelvic problems 
due to echinococcosis
73 (36-155)
91 (43-193)
23.9%
1 (1-3)
1 (1-3)
−4.7%
Lymphatic filariasis
2368 (1551-3399)
2775 (1807-4000)
17.2%
45 (29-64)
40 (26-58)
−9.9%
Lymphoedema
955 (585-1454)
1151 (698-1773)
20.5%
18 (11-27)
17 (10-26)
−7.3%
Hydrocele due to lymphatic 
filariasis
1414 (842-2103)
1624 (981-2450)
14.9%
27 (16-40)
24 (14-36)
−11.6%
Onchocerciasis
512 (361-687)
494 (360-656)
−3.5%
10 (7-13)
7 (5-10)
−25.7%
Skin disease due to 
onchocerciasis
407 (277-559)
352 (240-486)
−13.3%
8(5-11)
5 (3-7)
−33.3%
Vision loss due to 
onchocerciasis
105 (79-134)
142 (108-185)
34.5%
2(1-3)
2 (2-3)
3.5%
Trachoma
144 (104-189)
334 (243-438)
132.5%
3 (2-4)
5 (4-6)
78.9%
Dengue
6(2-13)
12 (6-23)
103.9%
<0.5 (0-0.5)
<0.5 (0-0.5)
56.9%
Dengue
5(2-11)
10 (5-20)
105.9%
<0.5 (0-0.5)
<0.5 (0-0.5)
58.5%
Post-dengue chronic fatigue 
syndrome
1 (0-2)
2 (0-4)
92.6%
<0.5 (0-0.5)
<0.5 (0-0.5)
48.2%
Yellow fever
<0.5 (0-0.5)
<0.5 (0-0.5)
15.1%
<0.5 (0-0.5)
<0.5 (0-0.5)
−11-4%
Rabies
<0.5 (0-1)
<0.5 (0-1)
−56.7%
<0.5 (0-0.5)
<0.5 (0-0.5)
−66.7%
Intestinal nematode infections
8741 (4778-15 094)
4980 (2722-8442)
−43-0%
165 (90-285)
72 (40-123)
−56.2%
Ascariasis
3950(2080-6805)
1111 (618-1864)
−71'9%
75 (39-128)
16 (9-27)
−78.4%
Ascariasis infestation
1995 (1091-3254)
758 (419-1232)
−62.0%
38 (21-61)
11 (6-18)
−70.8%
Severe wasting due to 
ascariasis
49 (32-72)
43 (28-62)
−12.8%
1 (1-1)
1(0-1)
−32.9%
Mild abdominopelvic 
problems due to ascariasis
1906 (871-3673)
310 (139-598)
−83.7%
36 (16-69)
4(2-9)
−87.5%
Trichuriasis
857 (465-1420)
638 (349-1061)
−25.5%
16 (9-27)
9 (5-15)
−42.7%
Trichuriasis infestation
677 (367-1104)
504 (277-821)
−25.6%
13 (7-21)
7 (4-12)
−42.8%
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.


----- Page 79 (native text) -----
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Vos et al.
Page 79
All ages YLDs (thousands)
YLDs (per 100 000)
1990
2010
%Δ
1990
2010
%Δ
Severe wasting due to 
trichuriasis
9(5-13)
9(5-13)
−0.5%
<0.5 (0-0.5)
<0.5 (0-0.5)
−23.4%
Mild abdominopelvic 
problems due to trichuriasis
171 (77-327)
126 (57-246)
−26.3%
3 (1-6)
2 (1-4)
−43.3%
Hookworm disease
3934(2056-6983)
3231(1695-5732)
−17.9%
74 (39-132)
47 (25-83)
−36.8%
Hookworm infestation
1315 (718-2150)
1011 (556-1655)
−23.1%
25 (14-41)
15(8-24)
−40.9%
Severe wasting due to 
hookworm disease
34 (21-49)
42 (27-61)
23.4%
1 (0-1)
1(0-1)
−5.0%
Mild abdominopelvic 
problems due to hookworm 
disease
241(110-462)
217(98-422)
−10.0%
5(2-9)
3(1-6)
−30.8%
Anaemia due to hookworm 
disease
2344 (983-4348)
1962 (895-3672)
−16.3%
44 (19-82)
28 (13-53)
−35.6%
Food-borne trematodiases
2394 (635-8501)
1875 (708-4837)
−21.7%
45 (12-160)
27 (10-70)
−39.7%
Heavy clonorchiasis
367 (95-1145)
296 (100-822)
−19.4%
7 (2-22)
4(1-12)
−37.9%
Heavy fascioliasis
32 (18-53)
42 (26-65)
32.5%
1 (0-1)
1(0-1)
2.0%%
Heavy intestinal fluke 
infection
101 (58-179)
106 (64-170)
4.9%
2(1-3)
2(1-2)
−19.3%
Heavy opisthorchiasis
48 (29-77)
60 (37-92)
27.0%
1 (1-1)
1(1-1)
−2.3%
Cerebral paragonimiasis
57 (7-245)
43 (8-148)
−25.2%
1 (0-5)
1 (0-2)
−42.4%
Heavy paragonimiasis
1789 (233-7696)
1328 (280-4234)
−25.8%
34 (4-145)
19 (4-61)
−42.9%
Other neglected tropical 
diseases
3825 (2517-6057)
3690 (2556-5303)
−3.5%
72 (47-114)
54 (37-77)
−25.8%
Other neglected tropical 
disease
1007 (533-2568)
949 (657-1557)
−5.8%
19 (10-48)
14 (10-23)
−27.5%
Anaemia due to other 
neglected tropical diseases
2873 (1920-4163)
2800 (1857-4054)
−2.5%
54 (36-79)
41 (27-59)
−25.0%
Maternal disorders
1394 (935-2271)
1790 (1138-2936)
28.4%
26 (18-43)
26 (17-43)
−1.2%
Maternal haemorrhage
143 (84-234)
98 (61-151)
−31.7%
3 (2-4)
1 (1-2)
−47.5%
Maternal haemorrhage
29 (18-46)
19 (12-29)
−34.2%
1 (0-1)
<0.5 (0-0.5)
−49.4%
Anaemia due to maternal 
haemorrhage
114(65-193)
79 (47-124)
−31.1%
2 (1-4)
1 (1-2)
−47.0%
Maternal sepsis
80 (46-128)
42 (25-65)
−48.4%
2(1-2)
1 (0-1)
−60.3%
Hypertensive disorders of 
pregnancy
69 (41-111)
93 (53-151)
33.2%
1(1-2)
1 (1-2)
2.5%
Pre-eclampsia
60 (33-100)
83 (44-141)
38.9%
1(1-2)
1 (1-2)
6.9%
Eclampsia
4 (1-7)
3 (1-7)
−14.6%
<0.5 (0-0.5)
<0.5 (0-0.5)
−34.3%
Long-term sequelae for 
hypertensive disorders of 
pregnancy
6(1-15)
7 (2-15)
6.3%
<0.5 (0-0.5)
<0.5 (0-0.5)
−18.2%
Obstructed labour
809 (458-1493)
1182 (641-2194)
46.0%
15(9-28)
17 (9-32)
12.4%
Obstructed labour
77 (40-140)
34 (19-57)
−56.1%
1(1-3)
<0.5 (0-1)
−66.3%
Fistula
732 (390-1425)
1148 (601-2138)
56.8%
14 (7-27)
17 (9-31)
20.6%
Abortion
27 (15-52)
32 (19-59)
19.8%
1 (0-1)
<0.5 (0-1)
−7.8%
Other maternal disorders
264 (180-420)
343 (225-526)
30.1%
5(3-8)
5(3-8)
0.1%
Neonatal disorders
8422(6368-10706)
9464 (7167-11 937)
12.4%
159 (120-202)
137 (104-173)
−13.5%
Preterm birth complications
2298 (1743-2895)
2982 (2236-3716)
29.7%
43 (33-55)
43 (32-54)
−0.2%
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.


----- Page 80 (native text) -----
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Vos et al.
Page 80
All ages YLDs (thousands)
YLDs (per 100 000)
1990
2010
%Δ
1990
2010
%Δ
Impairment due to preterm 
birth complications
2041 (1471-2613)
2636 (1882-3359)
29.1%
39 (28-49)
38 (27-49)
−0.7%
Retinopathy of prematurity 
due to preterm birth 
complications
257 (154-376)
347 (212-508)
34.9%
5 (3-7)
5 (3-7)
3.8%
Neonatal encephalopathy 
(birth asphyxia/trauma)
5625 (4116-7298)
6132 (4471-8030)
9.0%
106 (78-138)
89 (65-117)
−16.1%
Sepsis and other infectious 
disorders of the newborn baby
18 (9-32)
23 (12-40)
24.9%
<0.5 (0-1)
<0.5(0-1)
−3.9%
Other neonatal disorders
481 (357-618)
328 (244-417)
−31.8%
9(7-12)
5 (4-6)
−47.5%
Nutritional deficiencies
49 887 (34 714-70 
780)
49 942 (34 705-70 
350)
0.1%
941(655-1335)
725 (504-1021)
−23.0%
Protein-energy malnutrition
3200 (2071-4743)
2720(1766-3972)
−15.0%
60 (39-89)
39 (26-58)
−34.6%
Kwashiokor or marasmus due 
to protein-energy malnutrition
298 (155-520)
197 (103-339)
−33.7%
6 (3-10)
3(1-5)
−49.0%
Severe wasting due to protein-
energy malnutrition
2906 (1803-4418)
2530 (1604-3772)
−12.9%
55 (34-83)
37 (23-55)
−33.0%
Iodine deficiency
3181 (2049-4912)
3889(2468-6136)
22.3%
60 (39-93)
56 (36-89)
−5.9%
Goitre due to iodine 
deficiency
2902 (1823-4617)
3767 (2382-5990)
29.8%
55 (34-87)
55 (35-87)
−0.1%
Idiopathic intellectual 
disability due to iodine 
deficiency
271 (181-386)
113 (73-167)
−58.4%
5 (3-7)
2(1-2)
−68.0%
Heart failure due to iodine 
deficiency
7(5-11)
10 (6-14)
33.3%
<0.5 (0-0.5)
<0.5 (0-0.5)
2.6%
Vitamin A deficiency
740 (565-941)
806 (612-1037)
9.0%
14 (11-18)
12 (9-15)
−16.1%
Iron-deficiency anaemia
42 731 (28 506-61 
896)
42 494 (28 170-61 
626)
−0.6%
806 (538-1167)
617 (409-894)
−23.5%
Iron-deficiency anaemia
42 728 (28 497-61 
897)
42 505 (28 166-61 
656)
−0.5%
806 (538-1168)
617(409-895)
−23.5%
Heart failure due to iron-
deficiency anaemia
17 (11-24)
24 (16-36)
46.7%
<0.5 (0-0.5)
<0.5(0-1)
12.9%
Other nutritional deficiencies
35 (31-44)
32 (24-36)
−9.2%
1 (1-1)
<0.5(0-1)
−30.1%
Other communicable, 
maternal, neonatal, and 
nutritional disorders
4472 (3188-6195)
4711(3352-6562)
5.3%
84 (60-117)
68 (49-95)
−18.9%
Sexually transmitted diseases 
excluding HIV
1111 (589-2072)
1298 (704-2439)
16.9%
21 (11-39)
19 (10-35)
−10.0%
Syphilis
73 (3-156)
91 (4-200)
25.5%
1(0-3)
1 (0-3)
−3.4%
Sexually transmitted 
chlamydial diseases
560 (268-1025)
669 (324-1233)
19.6%
11 (5-19)
10 (5-18)
−8.0%
Sexually transmitted 
chlamydial diseases
507 (233-952)
609 (281-1143)
20.1%
10 (4-18)
9 (4-17)
−7.6%
Salpingitis, inflammatory 
disease of cervix, and other 
female pelvic inflammatory 
diseases due to sexually 
transmitted chlamydial 
diseases
27 (16-43)
25 (15-40)
−7.5%
1(0-1)
<0.5(0-1)
−28.8%
Infertility due to sexually 
transmitted chlamydial 
diseases
25 (9-53)
35 (14-72)
37.7%
<0.5 (0-1)
1 (0-1)
6.0%
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.


----- Page 81 (native text) -----
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Vos et al.
Page 81
All ages YLDs (thousands)
YLDs (per 100 000)
1990
2010
%Δ
1990
2010
%Δ
Gonococcal infection
184 (94-336)
249 (123-450)
35.1%
3(2-6)
4 (2-7)
4.0%
Gonococcal infection
147 (69-282)
207(96-390)
40.7%
3(1-5)
3 (1-6)
8.3%
Salpingitis, inflammatory 
disease of cervix, and other 
female pelvic inflammatory 
diseases due to gonococcal 
infection
20 (12-33)
19 (11-31)
−7.7%
<0.5 (0-1)
<0.5 (0-0.5)
−29.0%
Infertility due to gonococcal 
infection
17(7-35)
23 (9-47)
37.7%
<0.5 (0-1)
<0.5(0-1)
5.9%
Trichomoniasis
182 (0-549)
167 (0-493)
−8.4%
3 (0-10)
2 (0-7)
−29.5%
Other sexually transmitted 
diseases
112 (68-181)
122 (74-200)
9.3%
2 (1-3)
2 (1-3)
−15.9%
Other sexually transmitted 
diseases
70 (42-111)
64 (39-105)
−7.8%
1 (1-2)
1(1-2)
−29.0%
Infertility due to other 
sexually transmitted diseases
42 (17-91)
58 (23-125)
37.7%
1 (0-2)
1 (0-2)
5.9%
Hepatitis
449 (230-810)
542 (280-981)
20.7%
8 (4-15)
8 (4-14)
−7.1%
Acute hepatitis A
172 (85-294)
185 (95-311)
7.6%
3(2-6)
3(1-5)
−17.2%
Acute hepatitis B
194 (24-456)
248 (28-585)
28.1%
4(0-9)
4(0-8)
−1.4%
Acute hepatitis C
24 (4-50)
39 (7-79)
61.2%
<0.5 (0-1)
1 (0-1)
24.1%
Acute hepatitis E
59 (20-121)
69 (24-142)
17.8%
1 (0-2)
1 (0-2)
−9.3%
Leprosy
26 (12-48)
6 (3-11)
−76.6%
<0.5 (0-1)
<0.5 (0-0.5)
−82.0%
Other infectious diseases
2886 (1920-4175)
2864 (1902-4141)
−0.8%
54 (36-79)
42 (28-60)
−23.6%
Other infectious diseases
922 (615-1330)
957 (635-1386)
3.8%
17 (12-25)
14 (9-20)
−20.2%
Anaemia due to other 
infectious diseases
2000 (1329-2897)
1947 (1292-2812)
−2.7%
38 (25-55)
28 (19-41)
−25.1%
Guillain-Barré syndrome due 
to other infectious diseases
1 (0-1)
1 (0-1)
35.8%
<0.5 (0-0.5)
<0.5 (0-0.5)
4.5%
Non-communicable diseases
435 400 (365 
526-515 063)
611 076 (512 
645-721 956)
40.3%
8213(6895-9715)
8869 (7440-10 478)
8.0%
Neoplasms
2540 (1876-3348)
4483 (3324-5861)
76.5%
48 (35-63)
65(48-85)
35.8%
Oesophageal cancer
61(42-86)
75 (49-103)
22.8%
1 (1-2)
1(1-1)
−5.5%
Stomach cancer
204 (137-286)
229 (150-323)
12.3%
4(3-5)
3(2-5)
−13.6%
Liver cancer
77 (53-104)
140 (96-189)
82.7%
1 (1-2)
2(1-3)
40.6%
Liver cancer secondary to 
hepatitis B
35 (23-49)
64 (43-89)
81.4%
1 (0-1)
1 (1-1)
39.6%
Liver cancer secondary to 
hepatitis C
19 (13-27)
34 (23-47)
80.5%
<0.5 (0-1)
<0.5 (0-1)
38.9%
Liver cancer secondary to 
alcohol use
15 (9-21)
29 (19-42)
100.2%
<0.5 (0-0.5)
<0.5 (0-1)
54.1%
Other liver cancer
8(4-12)
12 (7-19)
60.3%
<0.5 (0-0.5)
<0.5 (0-0.5)
23.3%
Larynx cancer
47 (26-77)
63 (34-102)
32.5%
1 (0-1)
1 (0-1)
2.0%
Trachea, bronchus, and lung 
cancers
227 (154-317)
355 (234-493)
56.5%
4(3-6)
5 (3-7)
20.5%
Breast cancer
504 (351-714)
898 (623-1268)
78.0%
10 (7-13)
13 (9-18)
37.0%
Cervical cancer
99 (59-146)
111 (64-160)
11.8%
2(1-3)
2(1-2)
−14.0%
Uterine cancer
47(25-82)
68 (30-107)
44.5%
1 (0-2)
1 (0-2)
11.2%
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.


----- Page 82 (native text) -----
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Vos et al.
Page 82
All ages YLDs (thousands)
YLDs (per 100 000)
1990
2010
%Δ
1990
2010
%Δ
Prostate cancer
165 (109-249)
464 (298-729)
181.3%
3(2-5)
7 (4-11)
116.4%
Colon and rectum cancers
307 (223-411)
564 (408-759)
83.9%
6 (4-8)
8(6-11)
41.5%
Mouth cancer
63 (44-84)
101 (71-136)
61.6%
1 (1-2)
1 (1-2)
24.3%
Nasopharynx cancer
15 (9-23)
25 (14-39)
64.1%
<0.5 (0-0.5)
<0.5 (0-1)
26.3%
Cancer of other part of 
pharynx and oropharynx
29 (16-42)
45 (25-67)
53.3%
1 (0-1)
1 (0-1)
18.0%
Gallbladder and biliary tract 
cancer
19 (12-29)
35 (20-53)
81.2%
<0.5 (0-1)
1 (0-1)
39.5%
Pancreatic cancer
23 (15-33)
37 (23-54)
59.4%
<0.5 (0-1)
1 (0-1)
22.6%
Malignant melanoma of skin
24 (15-40)
45 (25-74)
84.5%
<0.5 (0-1)
1 (0-1)
42.0%
Non-melanoma skin cancer
115 (85-148)
255 (192-326)
122.2%
2(2-3)
4(3-5)
71.0%
Ovarian cancer
41 (27-56)
63 (39-89)
53.8%
1 (1-1)
1 (1-1)
18.3%
Testicular cancer
8(4-12)
12 (7-20)
64.2%
<0.5 (0-0.5)
<0.5 (0-0.5)
26.4%
Kidney and other urinary 
organ cancers
32 (21-48)
79 (52-118)
143.4%
1 (0-1)
1 (1-2)
87.3%
Bladder cancer
81 (57-110)
125 (85-171)
54.6%
2(1-2)
2(1-2)
18.9%
Brain and nervous system 
cancers
57 (34-84)
94 (51-134)
63.3%
1 (1-2)
1(1-2)
25.6%
Thyroid cancer
21 (13-32)
48 (28-75)
132.4%
<0.5 (0-1)
1 (0-1)
78.8%
Hodgkin's disease
13 (8-20)
17 (10-27)
25.7%
<0.5 (0-0.5)
<0.5 (0-0.5)
−3.3%
Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma
60 (42-80)
110 (77-147)
83.5%
1 (1-2)
2 (1-2)
41.2%
Multiple myeloma
22 (13-34)
36 (21-53)
64.9%
<0-5 (0-1)
1 (0-1)
26.9%
Leukaemia
79 (53-110)
123 (83-170)
57.2%
1 (1-2)
2(1-2)
20.9%
Other neoplasms
99 (67-139)
266 (174-366)
168.2%
2(1-3)
4(3-5)
106.4%
Cardiovascular and circulatory 
diseases
14 373 (11 094-18 
134)
21 985 (16 947-27 
516)
53.0%
271(209-342)
319 (246-399)
17.7%
Rheumatic heart disease
1150 (765-1709)
1430 (944-2067)
24.3%
22 (14-32)
21 (14-30)
−4.4%
Valvular disease due to 
rheumatic heart disease
861 (477-1429)
1009 (557-1646)
17.3%
16 (9-27)
15 (8-24)
−9.8%
Heart failure due to rheumatic 
heart disease
290 (191-412)
420 (278-592)
45.1%
5 (4-8)
6 (4-9)
11.6%
Ischaemic heart disease
5952 (3679-8768)
8795 (5447-12 806)
47.8%
112 (69-165)
128 (79-186)
13.7%
Myocardial infarction due to 
ischaemic heart disease
29 (15-45)
42 (22-67)
45.5%
1 (0-1)
1 (0-1)
11.9%
Angina due to ischaemic heart 
disease
5030 (2942-7567)
7234 (4232-10 986)
43.8%
95 (55-143)
105 (61-159)
10.7%
Heart failure due to ischaemic 
heart disease
894 (609-1236)
1518 (1038-2128)
69.9%
17 (11-23)
22 (15-31)
30.8%
Cerebrovascular disease
2328 (1864-2837)
4346 (3476-5298)
86.7%
44 (35-54)
63 (50-77)
43.6%
Ischaemic stroke
1857 (1489-2263)
3384 (2705-4121)
82.2%
35 (28-43)
49 (39-60)
40.2%
Ischaemic stroke (acute)
77 (52-107)
133 (90-183)
72.8%
1(1-2)
2 (1-3)
32.9%
Ischaemic stroke (chronic)
1780 (1416-2187)
3251 (2583-3999)
82.6%
34 (27-41)
47 (37-58)
40.5%
Haemorrhagic and other non-
ischaemic stroke
471(373-585)
961 (769-1178)
104.1%
9 (7-11)
14 (11-17)
57.0%
Haemorrhagic non-ischaemic 
stroke (acute)
28 (18-38)
56 (37-78)
104.1%
1 (0-1)
1 (1-1)
57.1%
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.


----- Page 83 (native text) -----
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Vos et al.
Page 83
All ages YLDs (thousands)
YLDs (per 100 000)
1990
2010
%Δ
1990
2010
%Δ
Haemorrhagic non-ischaemic 
stroke (chronic)
444 (345-558)
905 (717-1121)
104.1%
8 (7-11)
13 (10-16)
57.0%
Hypertensive heart disease
292 (202-412)
460 (315-639)
57.4%
6 (4-8)
7 (5-9)
21.1%
Cardiomyopathy and myocarditis
272 (183-378)
394 (269-551)
44.8%
5 (3-7)
6 (4-8)
11.4%
Acute myocarditis
1 (0-1)
1 (0-1)
30.9%
<0.5 (0-0.5)
<0.5 (0-0.5)
0.7%
Heart failure due to 
cardiomyopathy and 
myocarditis
271 (182-378)
393 (268-551)
44.8%
5 (3-7)
6 (4-8)
11.4%
Atrial fibrillation and flutter
1433 (970-1987)
2425 (1631-3382)
69.2%
27 (18-37)
35 (24-49)
30.2%
Peripheral vascular disease
256 (132-453)
419 (218-744)
63.7%
5 (2-9)
6 (3-11)
26.0%
Endocarditis
42 (28-60)
62 (42-87)
46.1%
1 (1-1)
1 (1-1)
12.4%
Endocarditis
<0.5 (0-1)
1 (0-1)
87.7%
<0.5 (0-0.5)
<0.5 (0-0.5)
44.4%
Heart failure due to 
endocarditis
42 (28-59)
61 (42-87)
45.8%
1 (1-1)
1 (1-1)
12.2%
Other cardiovascular and 
circulatory diseases
2646 (1448-4148)
3655(2053-5581)
38.1%
50 (27-78)
53 (30-81)
6.3%
Heart failure due to other 
circulatory diseases
183 (123-259)
268 (180-372)
46.3%
3 (2-5)
4 (3-5)
12.6%
Other cardiovascular and 
circulatory diseases
2463 (1271-3992)
3388 (1783-5346)
37.5%
46 (24-75)
49 (26-78)
5.8%
Chronic respiratory diseases
34 976 (24 536-47 
579)
49 303 (33 874-67 
087)
41.0%
660 (463-897)
716 (492-974)
8.5%
Chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease
20 097 (13 793-28 
248)
29 373 (19 850-41 
822)
46.2%
379 (260-533)
426 (288-607)
12.5%
Chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease
19 805 (13 571-27 
835)
28 893 (19 455-41 
183)
45.9%
374 (256-525)
419 (282-598)
12.3%
Heart failure due to chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease
292 (195-410)
480 (316-678)
64.1%
6 (4-8)
7 (5-10)
26.3%
Pneumoconiosis
212 (104-477)
445 (193-1377)
109.9%
4(2-9)
6(3-20)
61.5%
Silicosis
76 (22-199)
136 (38-408)
79.8%
1 (0-4)
2 (1-6)
38.3%
Asbestosis
44 (4-253)
130(8-974)
192.4%
1(0-5)
2 (0-14)
125.0%
Coal workers' pneumoconiosis
24 (10-43)
33 (13-64)
41.1%
<0.5 (0-1)
<0.5 (0-1)
8.6%
Other pneumoconiosis
43 (12-108)
101 (26-261)
135.2%
1(0-2)
1 (0-4)
80.9%
Heart failure due to 
pneumoconiosis
25 (17-36)
45 (31-63)
77.1%
<0.5 (0-1)
1 (0-1)
36.3%
Asthma
10 835 (7247-15 
268)
13 835 (9286-19 
487)
27.7%
204 (137-288)
201 (135-283)
−1.7%
Interstitial lung disease and 
pulmonary sarcoidosis
111 (68-182)
162 (99-268)
45.8%
2(1-3)
2 (1-4)
12.2%
Interstitial lung disease and 
pulmonary sarcoidosis
69 (37-134)
99 (52-191)
44.6%
1(1-3)
1 (1-3)
11.3%
Heart failure due to interstitial 
lung disease and pulmonary 
sarcoidosis
42 (28-60)
62 (42-90)
47.9%
1 (1-1)
1 (1-1)
13.8%
Other chronic respiratory 
diseases
3722 (2529-5177)
5488 (3773-7675)
47.5%
70 (48-98)
80 (55-111)
13.5%
Cirrhosis of the liver
455 (309-630)
613 (415-862)
34.8%
9 (6-12)
9(6-13)
3.7%
Cirrhosis of the liver 
secondary to hepatitis B
156 (93-235)
198 (120-298)
26.7%
3 (2-4)
3 (2-4)
−2.5%
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.


----- Page 84 (native text) -----
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Vos et al.
Page 84
All ages YLDs (thousands)
YLDs (per 100 000)
1990
2010
%Δ
1990
2010
%Δ
Cirrhosis of the liver 
secondary to hepatitis C
113 (67-170)
155(93-235)
37.5%
2 (1-3)
2(1-3)
5.8%
Cirrhosis of the liver 
secondary to alcohol use
109 (65-163)
160 (94-241)
46.6%
2 (1-3)
2(1-3)
12.8%
Other cirrhosis of the liver
77(46-118)
101 (61-150)
30.2%
1(1-2)
1 (1-2)
0.2%
Digestive diseases (except 
cirrhosis)
4467 (3265-5979)
5473 (3916-7380)
22.5%
84 (62-113)
79 (57-107)
−5.7%
Peptic ulcer disease
355 (224-570)
311 (196-485)
−12.3%
7 (4-11)
5 (3-7)
−32.5%
Peptic ulcer disease
190 (111-328)
154 (93-254)
−18.8%
4(2-6)
2 (1-4)
−37.5%
Anaemia due to peptic ulcer 
disease
165(89-325)
157 (87-273)
−4.8%
3(2-6)
2 (1-4)
−26.7%
Gastritis and duodenitis
820 (498-1253)
855 (525-1386)
4.2%
15 (9-24)
12 (8-20)
−19.8%
Gastritis and duodenitis
178 (120-259)
182 (121-264)
2.3%
3(2-5)
3 (2-4)
−21.3%
Anaemia due to gastritis and 
duodenitis
642 (368-1046)
673 (389-1174)
4.7%
12 (7-20)
10(6-17)
−19.4%
Appendicitis
154 (99-226)
176 (112-257)
14.3%
3 (2-4)
3 (2-4)
−12.0%
Paralytic ileus and intestinal 
obstruction without hernia
10 (4-24)
12 (6-27)
24.4%
<0.5 (0-0.5)
<0.5 (0-0.5)
−4.2%
Inguinal or femoral hernia
333 (144-689)
441 (189-861)
32.5%
6(3-13)
6(3-12)
1.9%
Non-infective inflammatory 
bowel disease
1582 (1130-2151)
1795 (1272-2460)
13.5%
30 (21-41)
26 (18-36)
−12.7%
Non-infective inflammatory 
bowel disease due to 
ulcerative colitis
932 (583-1492)
1169 (734-1801)
25.4%
18 (11-28)
17 (11-26)
−3.5%
Non-infective inflammatory 
bowel disease due to Crohn's 
disease
541 (356-775)
513 (334-733)
−5.2%
10 (7-15)
7 (5-11)
−27.0%
Non-infective inflammatory 
bowel disease severe episodes 
due to ulcerative colitis
54 (32-89)
64 (39-102)
18.6%
1 (1-2)
1(1-1)
−8.7%
Non-infective inflammatory 
bowel disease severe episodes 
due to Crohn's disease
54 (31-91)
50 (30-81)
−8.5%
1 (1-2)
1 (0-1)
−29.6%
Vascular disorders of intestine
6 (4-10)
14 (8-20)
121.6%
<0.5 (0-0.5)
<0.5 (0-0.5)
70.5%
Gallbladder and bile duct 
disease
314 (215-440)
453 (310-635)
44.6%
6 (4-8)
7 (4-9)
11.2%
Pancreatitis
133 (85-198)
206 (131-303)
54.9%
3 (2-4)
3 (2-4)
19.2%
Other digestive diseases
761 (553-1025)
1209 (852-1638)
58.9%
14 (10-19)
18 (12-24)
22.3%
Neurological disorders
29 389 (23 635-35 
837)
42 943 (34 605-52 
115)
46.1%
554(446-676)
623(502-756)
12.4%
Alzheimer's disease and other 
dementias
3785 (2720-5007)
6801 (4898-9043)
79.7%
71 (51-94)
99 (71-131)
38.3%
Parkinson's disease
356 (231-560)
606 (396-964)
70.5%
7 (4-11)
9(6-14)
31.2%
Epilepsy
6415 (4993-7799)
8740 (6762-10 594)
36.2%
121 (94-147)
127 (98-154)
4.8%
Multiple sclerosis
373 (276-473)
524 (379-660)
40.8%
7 (5-9)
8 (5-10)
8.3%
Migraine
15 927 (10 394-22 
023)
22 362 (14 395-31 
121)
40.4%
300 (196-415)
325(209-452)
8.0%
Tension-type headache
1266 (754-2016)
1779 (1056-2822)
40.5%
24 (14-38)
26 (15-41)
8.1%
Other neurological disorders
1267 (958-1616)
2129 (1619-2723)
68.0%
24 (18-30)
31(23-40)
29.3%
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.


----- Page 85 (native text) -----
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Vos et al.
Page 85
All ages YLDs (thousands)
YLDs (per 100 000)
1990
2010
%Δ
1990
2010
%Δ
Other neurological disorders
1399 (1056-1789)
2353 (1785-3011)
68.2%
26 (20-34)
34 (26-44)
29.4%
Guillain-Barre syndrome due 
to other neurological disorders
2 (1-3)
3 (2-4)
35.6%
<0.5 (0-0.5)
<0.5 (0-0.5)
4.4%
Mental and behavioural 
disorders
129 377 (106 
771-154 032)
176 626 (145 
613-209 122)
36.5%
2440 (2014-2905)
2564 (2113-3035)
5.0%
Schizophrenia
9760 (6186-13 369)
14 400 (9160-19 
752)
47.5%
184 (117-252)
209 (133-287)
13.5%
Alcohol use disorders
10 470 (7173-14 
644)
13 826 (9248-19 
212)
32.1%
197 (135-276)
201 (134-279)
1.6%
Alcohol dependence
10 385 (7086-14 
556)
13 735 (9164-19 
108)
32.3%
196 (134-275)
199 (133-277)
1.8%
Fetal alcohol syndrome
85 (49-133)
91 (55-138)
6.9%
2(1-3)
1 (1-2)
−17.7%
Drug use disorders
11 764 (8388-15 
468)
16 412 (11 836-21 
583)
39.5%
222 (158-292)
238 (172-313)
7.3%
Opioid use disorders
4812 (3350-6281)
7170 (5143-9257)
49.0%
91 (63-118)
104 (75-134)
14.6%
Cocaine use disorders
800 (475-1214)
1085 (633-1639)
35.7%
15 (9-23)
16 (9-24)
4.4%
Amphetamine use disorders
1894 (1067-2955)
2596 (1460-3957)
37.1%
36 (20-56)
38 (21-57)
5.5%
Cannabis use disorders
1693 (1105-2418)
2057 (1348-2929)
21.5%
32 (21-46)
30 (20-43)
−6.5%
Other drug use disorders
2565 (1583-3817)
3503 (2108-5170)
36.6%
48 (30-72)
51 (31-75)
5.1%
Unipolar depressive disorders
54 010 (40 381-68 
450)
74 264 (55 670-94 
240)
37.5%
1019 (762-1291)
1078 (808-1368)
5.8%
Major depressive disorder
46 139 (34 517-58 
427)
63 179 (47 779-80 
891)
36.9%
870 (651-1102)
917 (693-1174)
5.4%
Dysthymia
7871 (5266-10 858)
11 084 (7297-15 
447)
40.8%
148 (99-205)
161 (106-224)
8.4%
Bipolar affective disorder
9129 (5757-13 169)
12 867 (8084-18 
654)
40.9%
172 (109-248)
187 (117-271)
8.5%
Anxiety disorders
19 664 (13 868-26 
820)
26 826 (18 779-36 
795)
36.4%
371(262-506)
389 (273-534)
5.0%
Eating disorders
1120 (749-1554)
1956 (1316-2742)
74.6%
21 (14-29)
28 (19-40)
34.3%
Anorexia nervosa
95 (65-136)
188 (125-265)
97.1%
2(1-3)
3 (2-4)
51.7%
Bulimia nervosa
1025 (687-1417)
1768 (1183-2480)
72.5%
19 (13-27)
26 (17-36)
32.7%
Pervasive development disorders
5918 (4133-8130)
7666 (5355-10 565)
29.5%
112 (78-153)
111 (78-153)
−0.3%
Autism
3088 (2119-4260)
4007 (2752-5563)
29.8%
58 (40-80)
58 (40-81)
−0.2%
Asperger's syndrome
2830 (1917-4016)
3659 (2463-5150)
29.3%
53 (36-76)
53 (36-75)
−0.5%
Childhood behavioural disorders
5472 (3277-8359)
6245 (3785-9347)
14.1%
103 (62-158)
91 (55-136)
−12.2%
Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder424 (244-667)
491(280-775)
15.8%
8 (5-13)
7 (4-11)
−10.9%
Conduct disorder
5047 (2960-7840)
5753 (3428-8748)
14.0%
95 (56-148)
84 (50-127)
−12.3%
Idiopathic intellectual disability
1247 (746-1924)
1043 (572-1687)
−16.4%
24 (14-36)
15 (8-24)
−35.7%
Other mental and behavioural 
disorders
822 (485-1307)
1121 (661-1774)
36.4%
16 (9-25)
16 (10-26)
5.0%
Diabetes, urogenital, blood, 
and endocrine diseases
38 626 (28 236-51 
159)
56 924 (42 172-75 
399)
47.4%
729 (533-965)
826 (612-1094)
13.4%
Diabetes mellitus
12 412 (8403-17 
524)
20 758 (14 415-28 
762)
67.2%
234 (158-331)
301 (209-417)
28.7%
Uncomplicated diabetes mellitus
4260 (2420-6828)
6569 (3684-10 380)
54.2%
80 (46-129)
95 (53-151)
18.7%
Diabetic foot
209 (108-356)
308 (160-518)
47.1%
4 (2-7)
4(2-8)
13.2%
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.


----- Page 86 (native text) -----
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Vos et al.
Page 86
All ages YLDs (thousands)
YLDs (per 100 000)
1990
2010
%Δ
1990
2010
%Δ
Diabetic neuropathy
7325 (4967-10 520)
11 914 (7977-17 
035)
62.6%
138 (94-198)
173 (116-247)
25.2%
Amputation due to diabetes 
mellitus
392 (192-669)
905 (481-1427)
130.9%
7 (4-13)
13 (7-21)
77.6%
Vision loss due to diabetes 
mellitus
227 (166-307)
1062 (795-1395)
368.6%
4 (3-6)
15 (12-20)
260.6%
Acute glomerulonephritis
1 (0-2)
1 (0-2)
1.6%
<0.5 (0-0.5)
<0.5 (0-0.5)
−21.8%
Chronic kidney diseases
2558 (1900-3288)
4018 (2972-5204)
57.1%
48 (36-62)
58 (43-76)
20.9%
Chronic kidney disease due to 
diabetes mellitus
621 (453-796)
1003 (740-1317)
61.5%
12 (9-15)
15 (11-19)
24.2%
Stage IV chronic kidney 
disease due to diabetes 
mellitus
88 (58-126)
141 (94-205)
60.5%
2(1-2)
2(1-3)
23.5%
End-stage renal disease due to 
diabetes mellitus
388 (270-506)
626 (436-817)
61.5%
7 (5-10)
9(6-12)
24.2%
Anaemia due to chronic 
kidney disease stage III from 
diabetes mellitus
145 (79-237)
235 (126-378)
62.0%
3 (1-4)
3(2-5)
24.7%
Chronic kidney disease due to 
hypertension
550 (411-711)
872 (645-1123)
58.4%
10 (8-13)
13 (9-16)
21.9%
Stage IV chronic kidney 
disease due to hypertension
88 (59-128)
138 (93-198)
56.7%
2(1-2)
2(1-3)
20.6%
End-stage renal disease due to 
hypertension
326 (225-422)
515(359-670)
58.0%
6 (4-8)
7(5-10)
21.6%
Anaemia due to chronic 
kidney disease stage III from 
hypertension
136 (77-222)
219 (124-354)
60.6%
3 (1-4)
3(2-5)
23.6%
Chronic kidney disease 
unspecified
1386 (1032-1800)
2143(1585-2779)
54.6%
26 (19-34)
31(23-40)
19.0%
Stage IV unspecified or other 
chronic kidney disease
229 (154-335)
352 (233-506)
53.9%
4(3-6)
5 (3-7)
18.4%
End-stage renal disease from 
unspecified or other chronic 
kidney disease
799 (555-1042)
1242 (872-1607)
55.5%
15 (10-20)
18 (13-23)
19.6%
Anaemia due to unspecified or 
other chronic kidney disease 
stage III
359 (208-579)
549 (314-889)
53.1%
7 (4-11)
8(5-13)
17.8%
Urinary diseases and male 
infertility
4651 (3057-7025)
8188 (5398-11 978)
76.0%
88 (58-133)
119 (78-174)
35.5%
Tubulointerstitial nephritis, 
pyelonephritis, and urinary 
tract infections
156 (84-269)
207 (109-360)
33.2%
3 (2-5)
3(2-5)
2.5%
Urolithiasis
480 (306-842)
716 (447-1425)
49.1%
9 (6-16)
10 (6-21)
14.7%
Urolithiasis episodes
204 (107-526)
225 (104-918)
10.5%
4 (2-10)
3(2-13)
−15.0%
Chronic urolithiasis
277 (156-443)
491(276-785)
77.5%
5 (3-8)
7 (4-11)
36.6%
Benign prostatic hyperplasia
3726 (2392-5645)
6834 (4377-10 179)
83.4%
70 (45-106)
99 (64-148)
41.1%
Male infertility
126 (50-270)
173 (70-365)
36.9%
2 (1-5)
3(1-5)
5.3%
Other urinary diseases
162 (103-267)
258 (167-415)
58.8%
3 (2-5)
4(2-6)
22.2%
Gynaecological diseases
7671(4880-11715)
10 042(6226-15619)
30.9%
145 (92-221)
146 (90-227)
0.7%
Uterine fibroids
2341 (1568-3340)
3037 (1967-4551)
29.7%
44 (30-63)
44 (29-66)
−0.2%
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.


----- Page 87 (native text) -----
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Vos et al.
Page 87
All ages YLDs (thousands)
YLDs (per 100 000)
1990
2010
%Δ
1990
2010
%Δ
Uterine fibroids
934 (401-1852)
1527(664-3059)
63.5%
18 (8-35)
22 (10-44)
25.8%
Anaemia due to uterine 
fibroids
1407 (943-2023)
1509 (1000-2199)
7.3%
27 (18-38)
22 (15-32)
−17.4%
Polycystic ovarian syndrome
2027 (971-3786)
2756 (1312-5212)
35.9%
38 (18-71)
40 (19-76)
4.6%
Polycystic ovarian syndrome
1982 (931-3747)
2694 (1245-5171)
35.9%
37 (18-71)
39 (18-75)
4.6%
Infertility due to polycystic 
ovarian syndrome
45 (18-95)
62 (25-128)
37.5%
1(0-2)
1 (0-2)
5.8%
Female infertility
91 (36-189)
125 (50-259)
37.6%
2 (1-4)
2 (1-4)
5.9%
Endometriosis
404 (142-738)
544 (188-1007)
34.6%
8 (3-14)
8(3-15)
3.5%
Endometriosis
388 (129-715)
522 (166-974)
34.4%
7 (2-13)
8(2-14)
3.4%
Infertility due to 
endometriosis
16(6-35)
22 (9-46)
37.8%
<0.5 (0-1)
<0.5 (0-1)
6.0%
Genital prolapse
1339 (544-2686)
1811 (741-3649)
35.2%
25 (10-51)
26 (11-53)
4.1%
Premenstrual syndrome
983 (49-2592)
1249 (63-3337)
27.0%
19 (1-49)
18 (1-48)
−2.3%
Other gynaecological diseases
485 (330-703)
520 (345-759)
7.3%
9(6-13)
8 (5-11)
−17.4%
Haemoglobinopathies and 
haemolytic anaemias
8271 (5746-11276)
10 197 (7166-13 
843)
23.3%
156 (108-213)
148 (104-201)
−5.1%
Thalassaemias
3725 (2499-5279)
4636 (3098-6621)
24.4%
70 (47-100)
67(45-96)
−4.2%
β-thalassaemia major
31 (17-56)
33 (19-59)
7.9%
1 (0-1)
<0.5 (0-1)
−16.9%
Haemoglobin E/β-thalassaemia
22 (14-34)
24 (15-37)
8.8%
<0.5 (0-1)
<0.5 (0-1)
−16.3%
Haemoglobin H/β-thalassaemia
10 (6-16)
10 (6-16)
3.7%
<0.5 (0-0.5)
<0.5 (0-0.5)
−20.2%
Anaemia due to thalassaemias
3653 (2427-5219)
4557(3024-6530)
24.7%
69 (46-98)
66 (44-95)
−4.0%
Heart failure due to 
thalassaemias
10 (6-14)
13 (8-19)
34.1%
<0.5 (0-0.5)
<0.5 (0-0.5)
3.2%
Sickle cell disorders
2647 (1829-3615)
3665 (2612-4949)
38.5%
50 (34-68)
53 (38-72)
6.5%
Homozygous sickle cell and 
severe sickle cell/β-
thalassaemia
334 (238-441)
546 (389-736)
63.8%
6 (4-8)
8(6-11)
26.1%
Haemoglobin sickle cell 
disorders
78 (54-107)
130 (88-182)
65.5%
1 (1-2)
2(1-3)
27.3%
Mild sickle cell/β-thalassaemia
26 (18-37)
38 (27-53)
43.8%
<0.5 (0-1)
1 (0-1)
10.6%
Anaemia due to sickle cell 
disorders
2211 (1439-3181)
2954 (1957-4240)
33.6%
42 (27-60)
43 (28-62)
2.8%
G6PD deficiency
120 (81-174)
146 (97-210)
22.1%
2(2-3)
2(1-3)
−6.1%
Anaemia due to G6PD 
deficiency
116 (77-171)
141(93-205)
21.5%
2(1-3)
2(1-3)
−6.5%
Heart failure due to G6PD 
deficiency
4 (2-6)
5(3-8)
40.2%
<0.5 (0-0.5)
<0.5 (0-0.5)
7.8%
Other haemoglobinopathies 
and haemolytic anaemias
1779 (1193-2565)
1750 (1171-2503)
−1.6%
34 (23-48)
25 (17-36)
−24.3%
Anaemia due to other 
haemoglobinopathies and 
haemolytic anaemias
1757 (1173-2545)
1720 (1138-2483)
−2.1%
33 (22-48)
25 (17-36)
−24.7%
Heart failure due to other 
haemoglobinopathies and 
haemolytic anaemias
22 (14-32)
31(20-45)
39.5%
<0.5 (0-1)
<0.5 (0-1)
7.4%
Other endocrine, nutritional, 
blood, and immune disorders
3063 (2256-4177)
3721 (2713-5114)
21.5%
58 (43-79)
54 (39-74)
−6.5%
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.


----- Page 88 (native text) -----
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Vos et al.
Page 88
All ages YLDs (thousands)
YLDs (per 100 000)
1990
2010
%Δ
1990
2010
%Δ
Other endocrine, nutritional, 
blood, and immune disorders
1254 (739-1952)
1919 (1133-2991)
53.0%
24 (14-37)
28 (16-43)
17.7%
Anaemia due to other 
endocrine, nutritional, blood, 
and immune disorders
1777 (1187-2562)
1756 (1166-2542)
−1.2%
34 (22-48)
25 (17-37)
−23.9%
Heart failure due to other 
endocrine, nutritional, blood, 
and immune disorders
33 (22-47)
48 (33-69)
46.1%
1 (0-1)
1 (0-1)
12.4%
Musculoskeletal disorders
114 719 (87 
053-145 247)
165 955 (126 
364-208 779)
44.7%
2164 (1642-2740)
2409 (1834-3030)
11.3%
Rheumatoid arthritis
2566 (1831-3381)
3776 (2672-4954)
47.1%
48 (35-64)
55(39-72)
13.2%
Osteoarthritis
10 449 (7100-14 
788)
17 135 (11 884-24 
256)
64.0%
197 (134-279)
249 (172-352)
26.2%
Osteoarthritis of the hip
1821 (1200-2616)
2917 (1945-4389)
60.2%
34 (23-49)
42 (28-64)
23.2%
Osteoarthritis of the knee
8627 (5929-12 276)
14 218 (9809-19 
968)
64.8%
163 (112-232)
206 (142-290)
26.8%
Low back and neck pain
82 111 (56 962-110 
433)
116 704 (80 
615-156 527)
42.1%
1549 (1074-2083)
1694 (1170-2272)
9.4%
Low back pain
58 245 (39 934-78 
139)
83 063 (56 632-111 
880)
42.6%
1099 (753-1474)
1206 (822-1624)
9.7%
Neck pain
23 866 (16 535-33 
105)
33 640 (23 469-46 
476)
41.0%
450 (312-624)
488 (341-675)
8.5%
Gout
76 (48-112)
114 (72-167)
49.3%
1 (1-2)
2(1-2)
14.9%
Other musculoskeletal disorders
19 517 (16 148-22 
127)
28 226 (23 201-31 
884)
44.6%
368 (305-417)
410 (337-463)
11.3%
Other non-communicable diseases 66 478 (45 586-97 
937)
86 771 (59 561-128 
605)
30.5%
1254 (860-1847)
1259 (864-1867)
0.4%
Congenital anomalies
2620(2088-3333)
3279 (2594-4167)
25.2%
49 (39-63)
48 (38-60)
−3.7%
Neural tube defects
569 (330-901)
754 (439-1142)
32.6%
11 (6-17)
11 (6-17)
2.0%
Congenital heart anomalies
498 (350-711)
563 (388-804)
13.0%
9 (7-13)
8(6-12)
−13.0%
Congenital heart anomalies
189 (86-354)
226 (103-425)
19.1%
4 (2-7)
3 (1-6)
−8.3%
Heart failure due to congenital 
heart anomalies
308 (203-442)
337 (221-486)
9.3%
6 (4-8)
5 (3-7)
−15.9%
Ccenter lip and ccenter palate
259 (180-362)
254 (181-346)
−1.7%
5 (3-7)
4(3-5)
−24.4%
Down's syndrome
462 (306-664)
627 (425-888)
35.7%
9(6-13)
9(6-13)
4.4%
Other chromosomal abnormalities
191 (127-274)
276 (182-392)
44.1%
4(2-5)
4(3-6)
10.8%
Turner syndrome
3 (1-6)
4(2-8)
35.6%
<0.5 (0-0.5)
<0.5 (0-0.5)
4.3%
Klinefelter syndrome
5 (2-10)
6 (3-14)
38.7%
<0.5 (0-0.5)
<0.5 (0-0.5)
6.8%
Chromosomal unbalanced rearrangements
184 (123-261)
265 (176-377)
44.3%
3(2-5)
4 (3-5)
11.1%
Other congenital anomalies
642 (464-868)
806 (596-1053)
25.6%
12 (9-16)
12 (9-15)
−3.3%
Other congenital anomalies
437 (325-580)
595 (446-775)
36.4%
8 (6-11)
9 (6-11)
4.9%
Hearing loss due to other 
congenital anomalies
225 (142-336)
240 (152-363)
6.6%
4 (3-6)
3 (2-5)
−17.9%
Skin and subcutaneous 
diseases
26 273 (16 798-40 
932)
33 744 (21 503-52 
280)
28.4%
496 (317-772)
490 (312-759)
−1.2%
Eczema
6890 (3508-10 872)
8897 (4518-14 049)
29.1%
130 (66-205)
129 (66-204)
−0.6%
Psoriasis
742 (371-1179)
1059 (528-1690)
42.8%
14 (7-22)
15 (8-25)
9.8%
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.


----- Page 89 (native text) -----
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Vos et al.
Page 89
All ages YLDs (thousands)
YLDs (per 100 000)
1990
2010
%Δ
1990
2010
%Δ
Cellulitis
302 (126-648)
376 (163-831)
24.5%
6 (2-12)
5(2-12)
−4.2%
Abscess, impetigo, and other 
bacterial skin diseases
1038 (473-2016)
1322 (599-2511)
27.4%
20(9-38)
19 (9-36)
−1.9%
Impetigo
871 (417-1624)
1088 (514-2048)
24.9%
16 (8-31)
16 (7-30)
−3.9%
Abscess and other bacterial 
skin diseases cases
167 (54-386)
235 (78-539)
40.8%
3 (1-7)
3(1-8)
8.3%
Scabies
1881 (956-3384)
1580 (807-2792)
−16.0%
35 (18-64)
23 (12-41)
−35.4%
Fungal skin diseases
1618 (532-3754)
2303 (740-5435)
42.3%
31 (10-71)
33 (11-79)
9.5%
Viral skin diseases
2354(1058-4369)
2731(1203-4941)
16.0%
44 (20-82)
40 (17-72)
−10.7%
Molluscum contagiosum
289 (88-702)
270(85-645)
−6.6%
5(2-13)
4 (1-9)
−28.1%
Viral warts
2065 (816-3960)
2461 (984-4720)
19.2%
39 (15-75)
36 (14-69)
−8.3%
Acne vulgaris
3281 (1545-6205)
4002 (1869-7575)
22.0%
62 (29-117)
58 (27-110)
−6.2%
Alopecia areata
1002 (313-1906)
1352 (424-2567)
35.0%
19 (6-36)
20 (6-37)
3.9%
Pruritus
1433 (682-2676)
2086 (1004-3951)
45.6%
27 (13-50)
30 (15-57)
12.1%
Urticaria
1968 (757-3431)
2600 (980-4441)
32.1%
37 (14-65)
38 (14-64)
1.6%
Decubitus ulcer
320 (165-524)
476 (237-779)
48.8%
6 (3-10)
7 (3-11)
14.5%
Other skin and subcutaneous 
diseases
3445 (1638-6437)
4961 (2324-9239)
44.0%
65 (31-121)
72 (34-134)
10.8%
Sense organ diseases
25 169 (18 140-35 
220)
34 733 (25 167-47 
663)
38.0%
475 (342-664)
504 (365-692)
6.2%
Glaucoma
443 (338-561)
943 (725-1178)
112.7%
8(6-11)
14 (11-17)
63.7%
Cataracts
4225 (3283-5364)
4732 (3647-6010)
12.0%
80 (62-101)
69 (53-87)
−13.8%
Macular degeneration
513 (388-647)
1329 (1026-1668)
158.9%
10 (7-12)
19 (15-24)
99.2%
Refraction and 
accommodation disorders
3608 (2688-4762)
5593 (4117-7468)
55.0%
68 (51-90)
81 (60-108)
19.3%
Other hearing loss
12 211 (7258-19 
495)
15 761 (9455-25 
210)
29.1%
230 (137-368)
229 (137-366)
−0.7%
Other vision loss
4069 (2171-7180)
6240(3260-11208)
53.4%
77 (41-135)
91(47-163)
18.0%
Other sense organ diseases
100 (34-231)
136 (46-309)
35.4%
2 (1-4)
2 (1-4)
4.2%
Oral disorders
12 417 (6824-20 
984)
15 015 (7795-26 
482)
20.9%
234 (129-396)
218 (113-384)
−7.0%
Dental caries
3704 (1523-7150)
4984(2086-9356)
34.5%
70 (29-135)
72 (30-136)
3.5%
Dental caries of baby teeth
403 (164-774)
425 (172-818)
5.7%
8 (3-15)
6(3-12)
−18.7%
Dental caries of permanent 
teeth
3302 (1347-6455)
4559 (1907-8554)
38.1%
62 (25-122)
66 (28-124)
6.2%
Periodontal disease
3440 (1310-7305)
5410 (2051-11 286)
57.3%
65 (25-138)
79 (30-164)
21.0%
Edentulism
5273 (3100-8127)
4621 (2678-7296)
−12.4%
99 (58-153)
67 (39-106)
−32.6%
Injuries
34 068 (24 209-47 
034)
47162 (32 958-66 
050)
38.4%
643 (457-887)
685 (478-959)
6.5%
Transport injuries
12062 (8524-16826)
16 268 (11 304-22 
717)
34.9%
228 (161-317)
236 (164-330)
3.8%
Road injury
10 363 (7315-14 
487)
13 485 (9362-18 
950)
30.1%
195 (138-273)
196 (136-275)
0.1%
Pedestrian injury by road 
vehicle
3106 (2183-4360)
4520 (3139-6367)
45.6%
59 (41-82)
66(46-92)
12.0%
Pedal cycle vehicle
755 (536-1056)
1025 (714-1436)
35.7%
14 (10-20)
15 (10-21)
4.4%
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.


----- Page 90 (native text) -----
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Vos et al.
Page 90
All ages YLDs (thousands)
YLDs (per 100 000)
1990
2010
%Δ
1990
2010
%Δ
Motorised vehicle with two 
wheels
1750 (1234-2435)
2224 (1529-3133)
27.1%
33 (23-46)
32 (22-45)
−2.2%
Motorised vehicle with three 
or more wheels
4138 (2901-5793)
5792 (4041-8114)
40.0%
78 (55-109)
84 (59-118)
7.7%
Road injury other
1440 (1 013-2 020)
1196 (824-1673)
−16.9%
27 (19-38)
17 (12-24)
−36.1%
Other transport injury
1699 (1184-2386)
2783 (1902-3872)
63.8%
32(22-45)
40(28-56)
26.0%
Unintentional injuries other 
than transport injuries
19 036 (13 233-26 
794)
26 620 (18 472-37 
641)
39.8%
359 (250-505)
386 (268-546)
7.6%
Falls
13 324 (9110-18 
725)
19 459 (13 559-27 
481)
46.0%
251(172-353)
282 (197-399)
12.4%
Drowning
233 (161-326)
281 (191-391)
20.9%
4 (3-6)
4(3-6)
−7.0%
Fire, heat, and hot substances
1010 (637-1575)
1398 (857-2232)
38.4%
19 (12-30)
20 (12-32)
6.5%
Poisonings
323(210-470)
417(276-621)
29.3%
6 (4-9)
6(4-9)
−0.5%
Exposure to mechanical forces
922 (599-1387)
1021 (662-1490)
10.8%
17 (11-26)
15 (10-22)
−14.7%
Mechanical forces (firearm)
526 (346-784)
467 (305-676)
−11.2%
10 (7-15)
7(4-10)
−31.7%
Mechanical forces (other)
710 (460-1074)
910 (588-1336)
28.2%
13 (9-20)
13(9-19)
−1.3%
Adverse effects of medical 
treatment
585 (401-824)
1088 (727-1537)
85.9%
11 (8-16)
16 (11-22)
43.1%
Animal contact
437 (293-634)
234 (154-329)
−46.4%
8 (6-12)
3(2-5)
−58.7%
Animal contact (venomous)
355 (233-526)
168 (110-242)
−52.5%
7 (4-10)
2 (2-4)
−63.4%
Animal contact (non-venomous)
82 (55-119)
66 (44-93)
−20.0%
2(1-2)
1 (1-1)
−38.4%
Unintentional injuries not 
classified elsewhere
2202 (1484-3108)
2720 (1866-3827)
23.5%
42 (28-59)
39 (27-56)
−4.9%
Self-harm and interpersonal 
violence
1571(1066-2188)
1985 (1366-2726)
26.4%
30 (20-41)
29 (20-40)
−2.8%
Self-harm
308 (209-428)
407 (278-577)
32.3%
6 (4-8)
6 (4-8)
1.8%
Interpersonal violence
1263 (840-1775)
1578 (1085-2180)
24.9%
24 (16-33)
23(16-32)
−3.9%
Assault by firearm
504 (336-714)
587(404-808)
16.5%
10 (6-13)
9(6-12)
−10.4%
Assault by sharp object
368 (245-516)
540 (369-743)
46.8%
7(5-10)
8 (5-11)
12.9%
Assault by other means
543(362-758)
678 (464-940)
25.0%
10 (7-14)
10 (7-14)
−3.9%
Forces of nature, war, and 
legal intervention
1399 (903-2080)
2289 (1550-3341)
63.6%
26 (17-39)
33 (22-48)
25.9%
Exposure to forces of nature
173 (110-269)
2187 (1480-3210)
1164.7%
3(2-5)
32 (21-47)
873.1%
Collective violence and legal 
intervention
1226 (779-1854)
102 (66-153)
−91.7%
23 (15-35)
1 (1-2)
−93.6%
Data are YLDs (95% uncertainty interval) or percentage change (%A). G6PD=glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency. Ecoli=Escherichia 
coli. H influenzae=Haemophilus influenzae. S pneumoniae=Streptococcus pneumoniae.
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.


----- Page 91 (native text) -----
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Vos et al.
Page 91
Table 3:
Decomposition analysis of the change of global years lived with disability (thousands) by level 1 causes from 
1990 to 2010 into total population growth, population ageing, and changes in age-specifi c, sex-specifi c, and 
cause-specifi c years lived with disability rates
All causes
Communicable,
maternal, neonatal, and
nutritional disorders
Non-communicable
diseases
Injuries
1990 YLDs (thousands)
583393
113925
435400
34068
YLDs expected with 2010 population, 1990 population age 
structure, and 1990 YLD rates (thousands)
759024
158213
557726
43084
YLDs expected with 2010 population, 2010 population age 
structure, and 1990 YLD rates (thousands)
822452
150982
621220
50250
2010 YLDs (thousands)
777401
119164
611076
47162
Percentage change from 1990 due to population growth
30.1%
38.9%
28.1%
26.5%
Percentage change from 1990 due to population ageing
10.9%
−6.3%
14.6%
21.0%
Percentage change from 1990 due to change in YLD rates
−7.7%
−27.9%
−2.3%
−9.1%
Percentage change from 1990 to 2010
33.3%
4.6%
40.3%
38.4%
YLD=years lived with disability.
Lancet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 January 29.
