

----- Page 1 (native text) -----
Fiji - an Open Source platform for biological image analysis
Johannes Schindelin1,2, Ignacio Arganda-Carreras3, Erwin Frise4, Verena Kaynig5, Mark
Longair6, Tobias Pietzsch1, Stephan Preibisch1, Curtis Rueden7, Stephan Saalfeld1,
Benjamin Schmid8, Jean-Yves Tinevez9, Daniel James White1, Volker Hartenstein10, Kevin
Eliceiri7, Pavel Tomancak1,*, and Albert Cardona6,*
1Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics, Dresden, Germany 3Department of
Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA
4Berkeley Drosophila Genome Project, Department of Genome Dynamics, Lawrence Berkeley
National Labs, Berkeley, CA, USA 5Department of Computer Science, of the Swiss Federal
Institute of Technology Zürich, Switzerland 6Institute of Neuroinformatics of the University of
Zürich and Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Zürich, Switzerland 7University of Wisconsin at
Madison, LOCI, Madison, WI, USA 8University of Würzburg, Department of Neurobiology and
Genetics, Würzburg, Germany 9Institute Pasteur, La plate-forme d’imagerie dynamique -
imagopole, Paris, France 10Department of Molecular, Cell and Developmental Biology, University
of California, Los Angeles, USA
Abstract
Fiji is a distribution of the popular Open Source software ImageJ focused on biological image
analysis. Fiji uses modern software engineering practices to combine powerful software libraries
with a broad range of scripting languages to enable rapid prototyping of image processing
algorithms. Fiji facilitates the transformation of novel algorithms into ImageJ plugins that can be
shared with end users through an integrated update system. We propose Fiji as a platform for
productive collaboration between computer science and biology research communities.
Introduction
Much primary biological data is acquired as images. In recent years, with the adoption of
automated microscopy technologies, the volume and complexity of image data has increased
to the point that it is no longer feasible to extract information without employing computers.
Thus biologists increasingly rely on computer scientists to come up with new solutions and
on software to apply those solutions. Starting with Alan Turing’s seminal paper on
morphogenesis1, through the development of efficient algorithms for sequence search2 and
to computational whole genome assembly3, computer scientists have had a profound impact
on biological research. In its simplest form, computerized image analysis overcomes the
limitations and bias of the human observer. More importantly, computers have been
essential for processing the images generated during high-throughput microscopy of large
numbers and varieties of biological samples under a variety of conditions4–6. Additionally,
imaging of single intact small organisms is now feasible with high resolution in 2d, 3d and
across time7, resulting in massive image data sets that are well beyond the scale accessible
by subjective observation8,9. The analysis of both types of image data requires computer
vision techniques for reconstructing image volumes from numerous overlapping parts
(registration)10,11; for searching biologically relevant features (segmentation)12; for
*Correspondence should be addressed to: tomancak@mpi-cbg.de and acardona@ini.phys.ethz.ch.
2present address University of Wisconsin at Madison, LOCI, Madison, WI, USA
NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 07.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Methods. ; 9(7): . doi:10.1038/nmeth.2019.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript


----- Page 2 (native text) -----
following relevant objects across space and time (tracking)13,14; and for comparing
specimens through mapping to anatomical or cellular digital atlases15,16.
Algorithms to achieve these tasks have been developed for natural images such as an urban
street view, and must be adapted for biological image data. The mathematical formulations
of the algorithms need to be transferred into an environment that is accessible to biologists.
Such an environment must provide intuitive and comprehensive mechanisms to apply an
algorithm to biological data and visualize the results in a user-friendly fashion. At the same
time, the sheer size of many image data sets demands that algorithms run fast. These needs
are tackled by the emerging interdisciplinary field of Bioimage Informatics that applies
computer vision and other image processing approaches to biological research
questions17,18.
There are several commercial (for example Imaris, Volocity, Amira) and Open Source (for
instance ImageJ19, CellProfiler20, Vaa3D21, BioImageXD, Icy22, KNIME23 etc.) platforms
for biological image analysis. Commercial platforms often focus on ease-of-use and broad
coverage of image processing tasks, targeting relatively inexperienced users. Almost
invariably the principle details of the available image processing algorithms are hidden,
which is unsuitable for solving frontier research questions. Conversely, these details are
completely transparent in Open Source platforms such as ImageJ whose long existence,
wide adoption and extensible plugin architecture has made it a tool of choice for scientists
from a broad range of disciplines. But ImageJ was developed primarily by biologists for
biologists and its architecture does not follow modern software engineering principles. This
makes the platform less attractive for computer scientists to use it to deliver new solutions to
biologists.
To address this deficiency in ImageJ we started a new Open Source software project Fiji
(Fiji Is Just ImageJ) that updates the underlying architecture of ImageJ and allows
researchers to focus on the process of developing innovative, cutting edge solutions for
biological image analysis. Fiji introduces powerful software libraries for rapid transfer from
algorithmic discoveries to practical image analysis tools. Core algorithms available in Fiji
can be exploited through a broad range of scripting languages that are familiar to
bioinformaticians and further simplify the prototyping of new biomage solutions. Finally,
Fiji provides a robust distribution system, which ensures that new algorithms reach its broad
user base as soon as possible, initiating an iterative refinement based on communication
between developers and users. In summary, Fiji is designed to serve as a software
engineering ecosystem where computer science and biology research communities can
collaborate to turn algorithms into usable programs for solving biological research
questions.
How Fiji enhances ImageJ
ImageJ was created by Wayne Rasband at NIH19, and provides easy installation on arbitrary
platforms and a simple user interface. Although it is primarily targeted at researchers with
minimal computer skills, because ImageJ’s functionality can be easily extended with plugins
(software components that can be separately installed to add functionality) ImageJ has also
been attractive to researchers with training in software development. Over the years an
impressive assortment of ImageJ plugins has been developed, touching on most areas of
biological image analysis (http://imagej.nih.gov/ij/).
Fiji maintains compatibility with ImageJ and supplements it with additional core
functionality. The Fiji project was created in the first place to support the installation and
maintenance of one of the more complex ImageJ plugins, TrakEM2, which provides
comprehensive solutions for management, registration, segmentation and annotation of large
Schindelin et al.
Page 2
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 07.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript


----- Page 3 (native text) -----
electron microscopy datasets (Cardona A, et al., unpublished results). TrakEM2 outgrew in
its complexity and software infrastructure demands the facilities offered by classical ImageJ.
Subsequently, several other advanced plugins (4D Viewer24, SPIM registration25, Trainable
Segmentation and many more; see Supplementary Table 1) came to rely on Fiji’s modern
software engineering practices such as a software versioning system, inclusion of third party
libraries, automatic updates and straightforward compilation.
The combination of advanced image analysis solutions and the simplicity and familiarity of
ImageJ’s user interface has attracted a substantial number of users to the platform. Fiji is
effectively an Open Source distribution of ImageJ that includes a great variety of organized
libraries, plugins relevant for biological research (Supplementary Table 1), scripting
languages and extensive tutorials and documentation. The overproliferation and redundancy
of plugins in ImageJ can make it difficult to identify solutions suitable for a particular
biological problem. Fiji addresses this issue by offering a curated selection of plugins that
are organized into categories within the plugin menu (Supplementary Fig. 1).
The Fiji project aims to provide useful functionality for a broad range of researchers, starting
from programming agnostic biologists, through bioinformaticians and software engineers to
professional computer vision researchers (Fig. 1a). Fiji enhances ImageJ’s ease of
installation by bundling all required components into a self-contained package that will run
on any computer platform. In addition, programatically skilled biologists can use its many
familiar scripting languages to build custom image processing pipelines. For professional
software engineers Fiji offers source code management, high-performance implementation
of algorithms and simple worldwide deployment. Finally, Fiji could become useful to
computer vision researchers as it bundles standard libraries, builds bridges to other platforms
(for instance MATLAB through the Miji plugin) and provides facilities for rapid prototyping
of data-type agnostic, generic algorithms.
Fiji’s source code is hosted in a version controlled source code repository (Git) for people to
download and tinker with and compiles in one step (http://fiji.sc/cgi-bin/gitweb.cgi). A
special “contrib” branch is accessible for anybody to publish their plugin, library or script.
Upon successful review, the code is included in the Fiji package system and immediately
released to thousands of worldwide Fiji users via an integrated Fiji Updater (Fig. 1b). This
mechanism provides a formalized way to release new image analysis solutions to biological
researchers while also ensuring quality control of the contributed code and its long-term
maintenance. Research groups can set up their own update sites and offer new plugins to the
community by following simple instructions (http://fiji.sc/Adding_Update_Sites).
Consequently, users can select which set of plugins they obtain from the various update
sites, forming their own customized Fiji installation that suits their image analysis needs
(Fig. 1b).
The Fiji project puts special emphasis on communication among users and developers. Fiji
plugins are extensively documented via an active Wiki representing the definitive guide to
all aspects of Fiji’s installation, maintenance, programming and usage (http://fiji.sc and
Supplementary Fig. 2). Feedback and feature requests are posted to a dedicated mailing list.
Fiji developers engage in active discussions online and the core Fiji developers meet
regularly for coding sprees called ‘hackathons’ where they work collaboratively on the Fiji
source code. These events typically result in dramatic improvement and extension of the Fiji
code base, the so called ‘hackathon effect’ (Supplementary video 1).
In short, Fiji focuses on the process of making new solutions practical and bringing them
immediately to the users. In the following section we discuss how scripting languages in Fiji
Schindelin et al.
Page 3
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 07.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript


----- Page 4 (native text) -----
empower biologists to do complex image analysis by themselves and how the Fiji library
ImgLib simplifies transfer of abstract algorithms into usable programs.
Scripting and ImgLib for implementing algorithms
Analysis of biological image data typically requires applying multiple algorithms in
sequence to many images. Scripting uses a series of simple programming commands (the
“script”) to define a sequence of algorithmic operations and then apply them to an image
collection.
The simple macro language that allows recording of commands and construction of basic
programs made scripting popular among ImageJ users. Fiji builds on that functionality by
supporting a broad range of scripting languages (Jython, Clojure, Javascript, JRuby,
Beanshell), providing the most comprehensive selection of programming tools on both the
Open Source and commercial bioimaging platforms. These languages are usable without
knowledge of Java, and compared to the macro language offer more advanced programming
syntax while retaining relative simplicity for the casual programmer.
In Fiji, individual scripting commands can be quickly tested by applying them interactively
to opened images using the appropriate Interpreter plugin (for example Jython Interpreter).
Beyond interactive execution of commands on current images Fiji also provides a Script
Editor that enables writing, debugging, testing and running of arbitrarily complex scripts in
all the above languages and additionally Java itself. With the Script Editor users can perform
complex tasks with a few lines of code requiring minimal programming knowledge. It
becomes relatively simple (16 lines of code) to load a multi-channel 3d image stack, identify
all cells in one channel and visualize the results in the 4d Viewer plugin (Fig. 2a). Similarly
users can implement a simple task such as swapping fluorescent channels in
multidimensional images and apply it to a large collection of images in a directory using
scripting commands for file manipulation (Supplementary Fig. 3). The details of the code
are unimportant (extensive tutorials are available at http://fiji.sc/wiki/index.php/
Category:Scripting) however it is crucial to note that all the scripting languages enable users
to access Fiji’s extensive algorithmic libraries that implement advanced image analysis
techniques in Java. Thus researchers do not need to become fluent in Java programming and
can use their existing scripting skills to apply complex algorithms to their data. Scripts are
seamlessly included in Fiji’s menu structure and can be publicly distributed through the Fiji
Updater. These publishing mechanisms ensure validity and long-term viability, and are more
convenient for biologists compared with closed scripting environments such as MATLAB.
A key feature of the Fiji project is ImgLib (Fig. 2b–j)26, a library for type-, dimension-, and
storage-independent representation of image data that enables writing generic algorithms in
a high-performance manner. In ImgLib, image processing algorithms are implemented just
once and can be applied without change to most kinds of images. In other words, ImgLib
enables users to apply a complex image processing algorithm to any image regardless of
how many dimensions the image has (1d, 2d, 3d, 2d+t, 3d+t, etc.), what the underlying data
type is (8-bit, 16-bit, etc.) or how the image is stored (in memory, paged to disc, distributed
over the net).
We demonstrate the dimensionality independence of ImgLib when applying segmentation
algorithms to confocal scans of C. elegans larvae expressing fluorescent markers of cell
nuclei (Fig. 2b–j). Difference of Gaussian (DoG) and Maximally Stable Extremal Regions
(MSER)27 are two examples of blob detection algorithms inspired by computer vision
literature that are suitable for detecting cells in biological images. The DoG is computed by
subtracting two consecutive Gaussian convolutions of the image. Intensity maxima and
Schindelin et al.
Page 4
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 07.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript


----- Page 5 (native text) -----
minima in the DoG represent bright and dark blob detections, respectively. The MSER tree
provides a nested hierarchy of blob segmentation hypotheses, which is particularly relevant
in densely packed cellular field. Both algorithms are applicable for processing of 1d curves
(Fig. 2b–d), 2d image slices (Fig. 2e–g) and 3d image volumes (Fig. 2h–j). With ImgLib a
single, simple piece of computer code (Supplementary Fig. 4) is capable of running the
algorithms on images of arbitrary dimensions without any modification (DoG Fig. 2c,f,i and
MSER Fig. 2d,g,j for 1d, 2d, 3d respectively).
ImgLib is and should be invisible to casual users. It is an “under the hood” advanced
software engineering concept that makes programming easier. ImgLib empowers users and
computer vision researchers with the abstraction necessary to seamlessly translate
mathematical description of an advanced idea or algorithm into concise code that will run
efficiently on large bioimages. Similar libraries that separate the algorithm essence from the
actual implementation are available on other platforms such as ITK/VTK28 and VIGRA29.
Both examples of scripts mentioned above use ImgLib to do the processing steered by
simple scripting commands. Equivalent programs in ImageJ’s macro language or Java
would be much more complex or not possible. This is due to the combination of scripting
language simplicity and the dimension-, type- and storage-strategy independence of ImgLib.
In the next section we showcase how the synergy of Fiji, ImgLib and other libraries results
in transformation of abstract algorithms into usable biological image analysis applications.
Synergy as a design principle
The growing collection of modern image analysis algorithms in Fiji is a product of
interactions between Fiji projects (Supplementary Fig. 5) that use computer vision
algorithms to support ongoing biological research. We briefly outline three advanced image
processing pipelines for stitching multidimensional images from tiles (Fig. 3a–e),
reconstruction of massive serial section transmission electron microscopy (ssTEM) mosaics
(Fig. 3f–j) and reconstruction of long-term, time-lapse, multi-view recordings of
development with Selective Plane Illumination Microscopy (SPIM) (Fig. 3k–o). Many more
examples of projects and synergies can be found on the Fiji Wiki (http://fiji.sc) and we
invite programmatically skilled biologists, professional developers with interest in biology
and computer vision researchers with a novel algorithm looking for applications to join the
Fiji movement and contribute new approaches, ideas and plugins.
Stitching of Confocal Stacks
Large biological samples are frequently imaged with high-resolution microscopy techniques
as sets of overlapping images or image stacks (Fig. 3a). The reconstruction of the entire
specimen involves pairwise registration of the overlapping images, with a strategy to
minimize the displacement of the corresponding image content. The Stitching plugin uses
phase correlation to compute the optimal translation among pairs of overlapping 2d or 3d
image tiles (Fig. 3b). Subsequently, the plugin uses a global optimization procedure that
evenly spreads the error of the registration steps, avoiding the introduction of artifactual
deformations and delivering an undistorted representation of the specimen30. The
reconstructed volume is visualized in the 4d Viewer24 (Fig. 3c), structures are segmented
using manual segmentation tools such as Segmentation Editor (Fig. 3d) allowing
measurements of lengths, areas, volumes of segmented elements (Fig. 3e) and quantification
of their overlap by Colocalization Analysis.
ssTEM Reconstruction
ssTEM is experiencing a renaissance as a tool of choice for mapping brain micro-
circuitry31,32. Large sections are typically imaged as sets of overlapping image tiles (Fig. 3f)
Schindelin et al.
Page 5
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 07.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript


----- Page 6 (native text) -----
and datasets consisting of hundreds or even thousands of such sections are becoming
available. Fiji users can first apply lens deformation model to pre-process the ssTEM images
before registration using the Distortion Correction plugin33. Relatively simple ssTEM
datasets can be reconstructed using standalone plugins such as Register Virtual Stack Slices,
Elastic Alignment and Montage (Saalfeld, S., et al. unpublished data) or bUnwarpJ34.
Arbitrarily large ssTEM datasets consisting of tens of thousands images are best assembled
using the integrative TrakEM2 plugin for registration, segmentation and analysis of electron
microscopy data. One of the many avenues for reconstructing ssTEM data in TrakEM2
applies scale invariant feature transform (SIFT)35 to detect corresponding image content and
then solves the globally optimal configuration of massive tile systems11 (Fig. 3g,h and
Supplementary video 2 and 3).
Reconstructed volumes can be segmented into a series of profiles following individual
neurons either using the powerful manual segmentation tools (Fig. 3i) or automatically with
Active Contours36 and Level Sets37 algorithms integrated into TrakEM2. Alternatively, in
order to extract the neuronal tracks from electron microscopy data, users can employ the
Trainable Segmentation plugin that leverages the Waikato Environment for Knowledge
Analysis (WEKA) library for machine learning38 to extract statistical properties from user-
provided examples and apply them to classify the rest of the image or other similar
images39. The analysis of the reconstructed ssTEM scans of parts of the nervous system
requires quantitative comparisons across different samples40 such as counting individual
synaptic connections between segmented neurons (Fig. 3j). Ultimately high-resolution TEM
scans need to be registered to low-resolution light microscopy data for correlative analysis
and tools such as the Simple Neurite Tracer plugin41, the VIB Protocol and Interactive
Image Transformations using various Landmark Correpondences are ready to be adapted for
this purpose. The flexibility and integrative nature of TrakEM2 with its unique ability to
reconstruct very large electron microscopy datasets on commodity hardware cannot be
found on any other bioimaging platform.
Processing of Multi-view SPIM Data
Modern developmental biologists want to image developing embryos in toto with resolution
sufficient to distinguish and track individual labeled cells throughout development. SPIM is
an emerging technique to achieve these goals and Fiji provides a comprehensive pipeline for
acquisition, reconstruction, segmentation, tracking and analysis of terabyte-size long-term,
time-lapse, multi-view SPIM datasets.
For image acquisition with SPIM Fiji synergizes with another large ImageJ offshoot project
Micro-Manager42 to provide Open Source steering software for custom OpenSPIM
microscopes (Tomancak, P. unpublished results) to deliver 3d stacks of the same specimen
imaged from different angles directly into the Fiji environment (Fig. 3k). Following
acquisition, the multi-view data can be reconstructed into a continuous 3d volume using
fluorescent beads in the rigid agarose medium as fiduciary markers (Bead-Based SPIM
Registration plugin25). The constellations of fluorescent beads form local geometric
descriptors that are matched across views and used to create a 3d image by globally
optimizing local affine transformation models (Fig. 3l and Supplementary video 4). The
reconstructed images can be optionally fused into a single output volume (Fig. 3m) using the
Multi-view Fusion plugin. Interactive Difference of Gaussian segmentation that is part of the
Bead-Based SPIM Registration plugin can be used to segment and count the nuclei in the
reconstructed specimen (Fig. 3n). The registration process, the segmentation results (Fig. 3o)
and the tracking of nuclei across time (Supplementary video 5) can be visualized by
programatically steering the Fiji 4d Viewer24. All this is happening on top of truly massive
Schindelin et al.
Page 6
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 07.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript


----- Page 7 (native text) -----
long-term, time-lapse, multi-view SPIM datasets in the terabyte range and makes Fiji
currently the only widely available solution for dealing with this type of data.
Fiji plugin integration
The various Fiji plugins interact on two principal levels. Trivially, the output of one plugin
can serve as input for another since they all run in a common platform. More elaborate
integration is possible because most Fiji methods are increasingly implemented as software
libraries using ImgLib for data representation. For instance the confocal stack, ssTEM
mosaic and multi-view SPIM registration plugins are using a common global optimizer
capable of accepting different representations of image content (phase correlation, SIFT and
local geometric descriptors) and minimizing the displacement of correspondences using the
transformation model appropriate for the given imaging modality (translation only, rigid and
affine). The integration of standalone plugins into tightly cooperating suites such as
TrakEM2 is an ongoing trend in all Fiji projects. Casual users benefit from this level of
integration by being able to seamlessly combine solutions from diverse areas of bioimage
analysis and create efficient analysis pipelines to interpret their images.
Conclusion
ImageJ has for a long time been the tool of choice for biologists who need basic as well as
advanced image analysis. Over the lifetime of ImageJ, a revolution in microscopy brought
about an order of magnitude increase in typical image sizes and two or more orders of
magnitude increase in throughput. The Fiji project provides biologists with powerful tools
for the generation of advanced image processing pipelines, via scripting languages and
feature-rich libraries for processing large quantities of large images, while building upon the
simplicity of ImageJ.
Over the past two years the Fiji project has achieved remarkable international recognition
(Fig. 4a). Analysis of Fiji updater records reveals that Fiji is used in every major academic
research center throughout the world (Fig. 4b). The number of Fiji downloads and the access
to the Fiji Wiki (Fig. 4a and Supplementary Fig. 6) has grown steadily over the past years
with currently twenty thousand estimated users. Several prominent scientific institutions use
Fiji as an Open Source solution for image processing needs of their researchers. As the
community grows, new projects and new talented researchers join, expanding the ability of
biologists to cope with image data.
Many image analysis solutions available for Fiji were developed uniquely under Fiji and do
not have a comparable alternative in other platforms. Some of the standard image processing
or visualization tasks implemented in Fiji plugins are addressed, sometimes more
comprehensively, by other platforms (for instance 3d visualization (Vaa3D21) or Trainable
Segmentation (CellProfiler20)). However in Fiji these tools are embedded in a large
ecosystem of plugins that can interact through a common infrastructure, for example by
assembling diverse image processing steps into complex pipeline with the use of scripting
languages.
The reliance on Java invites the question whether Fiji is able to deal efficiently with
computing intensive tasks on top of large biological image data. It is true that careful
algorithm implementations in the C/C++ programming language will sometimes execute
faster than the equivalent Java program. In other cases, Java outperforms C/C++ (see for
example http://fiji.sc/Why_Java). It is equally true that specialized implementations will
typically outperform generic ones. Many of the flagship Fiji projects described above deal
with massive terabyte-sized datasets and yet deliver interactive performance on standard
hardware. Important advantages of Java are the ease of installation on a variety of platforms,
Schindelin et al.
Page 7
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 07.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript


----- Page 8 (native text) -----
portability, stability and backwards compatibility that are harder to achieve with packages
built with C. Thus, Fiji strikes a balance between usability, performance and flexibility and
as such it occupies a unique position in the landscape of biological image analysis where it
synergistically complements other tools as well as provides unique and novel capabilities.
Fiji is open not only with respect to its source code but also in its relationship with other
platforms. It aims to communicate and integrate with other bioimage analysis software that
outperform Fiji on a particular task. An example of such integration is the interface to
MATLAB and ITK, the availability of ImgLib for adoption in any Java based platform (for
instance KNIME and ImageJ2) and the participation of developers from diverse platforms in
Fiji-centered hackathons (the last two hackathons were attended by representatives of
ImageJ2, CellProfiler, Micro-Manager, ITK, KNIME, Icy, BioImageXD and OMERO).
Most importantly, in the future, Fiji will reconnect to its roots by becoming the outer,
application-oriented layer of the ImageJ2 (http://developer.imagej.net/) project which aims
at redesigning the very core of ImageJ in order to meet the demands of next generation
biology research. Fiji will focus on developing state-of-the-art plugins inspired by the needs
of biological research projects while ImageJ2 will put emphasis on creating the
infrastructure necessary to prototype, realize, distribute and deploy the novel algorithmic
solutions in a sustainable manner. The two projects share a common starting point, the
classical ImageJ enviroment and are committed to work together exchanging code and
coordinating design decisions. The process of creating a powerful synergy between Fiji and
ImageJ2 has already begun by incorporating the flagship Fiji plugins and libraries (such as
the Fiji Updater and ImgLib) into ImageJ2 (Supplementary Fig. 7) forming a basis of a long-
term partnership that will combine professional software engineering of the ImageJ2 core
and biological application driven plugin development in Fiji.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank W. Rasband for developing ImageJ and helping thousands of scientists around the world on a daily basis.
We would like to thank the scientists who contributed to the Fiji movement by financing and organizing the
hackathons. Namely G.M. Rubin for hackathons at Janelia Farm, I. Baines for hackathons at MPI-CBG, R. Douglas
for a hackathon at INI, F. Peri and K. Miura for the EMBL hackathon, and INCF for Fiji Image Processing School.
We thank W. Pereanu (UCLA) for the confocal image of the larval fly brain and M. Sarov (MPI-CBG) for the
confocal scan of C. elegans larva. We thank all the numerous scientists who released their code under Open Source
licenses and made the Fiji project possible. J. S. and P. T. were funded by Human Frontier Science Program Young
Investigator Grant RGY0083. P.T. was additionally supported by The European Research Council Community’s
Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013)/ERC grant agreement no. 260746.
References
1. Turing AM. The chemical basis of morphogenesis. 1953. Bull Math Biol. 1990; 52:153–197.
discussion 119–152. [PubMed: 2185858]
2. Altschul SF, Gish W, Miller W, Myers EW, Lipman DJ. Basic local alignment search tool. J Mol
Biol. 1990; 215:403–410. [PubMed: 2231712]
3. Myers EW, et al. A whole-genome assembly of Drosophila. Science. 2000; 287:2196–2204.
[PubMed: 10731133]
4. Neumann B, et al. Phenotypic profiling of the human genome by time-lapse microscopy reveals cell
division genes. Nature. 2010; 464:721–727. [PubMed: 20360735]
5. Collinet C, et al. Systems survey of endocytosis by multiparametric image analysis. Nature. 2010;
464:243–249. [PubMed: 20190736]
Schindelin et al.
Page 8
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 07.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript


----- Page 9 (native text) -----
6. Shariff A, Kangas J, Coelho LP, Quinn S, Murphy RF. Automated image analysis for high-content
screening and analysis. J Biomol Screen. 2010; 15:726–734. [PubMed: 20488979]
7. Megason SG, Fraser SE. Imaging in systems biology. Cell. 2007; 130:784–795. [PubMed:
17803903]
8. Keller PJ, Schmidt AD, Wittbrodt J, Stelzer EH. Reconstruction of zebrafish early embryonic
development by scanned light sheet microscopy. Science. 2008; 322:1065–1069. [PubMed:
18845710]
9. Fowlkes CC, et al. A quantitative spatiotemporal atlas of gene expression in the Drosophila
blastoderm. Cell. 2008; 133:364–374. [PubMed: 18423206]
10. Anderson JR, et al. A computational framework for ultrastructural mapping of neural circuitry.
PLoS Biol. 2009; 7:e1000074. [PubMed: 19855814]
11. Saalfeld S, Cardona A, Hartenstein V, Tomancak P. As-rigid-as-possible mosaicking and serial
section registration of large ssTEM datasets. Bioinformatics. 2010; 26:i57–63. [PubMed:
20529937]
12. Murray JI, et al. Automated analysis of embryonic gene expression with cellular resolution in C.
elegans. Nat Methods. 2008; 5:703–709. [PubMed: 18587405]
13. Fernandez R, et al. Imaging plant growth in 4D: robust tissue reconstruction and lineaging at cell
resolution. Nat Methods. 2010; 7:547–553. [PubMed: 20543845]
14. Bao Z, et al. Automated cell lineage tracing in Caenorhabditis elegans. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA.
2006; 103:2707–2712. [PubMed: 16477039]
15. Long F, Peng H, Liu X, Kim SK, Myers E. A 3D digital atlas of C. elegans and its application to
single-cell analyses. Nat Methods. 2009; 6:667–672. [PubMed: 19684595]
16. Peng H, et al. BrainAligner: 3D registration atlases of Drosophila brains. Nat Methods. 2011;
8:493–500. [PubMed: 21532582]
17. Swedlow JR, Eliceiri KW. Open source bioimage informatics for cell biology. Trends Cell Biol.
2009; 19:656–660. [PubMed: 19833518]
18. Peng H. Bioimage informatics: a new area of engineering biology. Bioinformatics. 2008; 24:1827–
1836. [PubMed: 18603566]
19. Rasband, WS. ImageJ. U. S. National Institutes of Health; Bethesda, Maryland, USA: 1997–2008.
http://rsb.info.nih.gov/ij/
20. Carpenter AE, et al. CellProfiler: image analysis software for identifying and quantifying cell
phenotypes. Genome Biol. 2006; 7:R100. [PubMed: 17076895]
21. Peng H, Ruan Z, Long F, Simpson JH, Myers EW. V3D enables real-time 3D visualization and
quantitative analysis of large-scale biological image data sets. Nat Biotechnol. 2010; 28:348–353.
[PubMed: 20231818]
22. de Chaumont F, Dallongeville S, Olivo-Marin J-C. ICY: A new open-source community image
processing software. IEEE Int Symp on Biomedical Imaging. 2011:234–237.
23. Berthold, MR., et al. Studies in Classification, Data Analysis, and Knowledge Organization.
Springer; 2007. KNIME: The Konstanz Information Miner. (GfKL 2007)
24. Schmid B, Schindelin J, Cardona A, Longair M, Heisenberg M. A high-level 3D visualization API
for Java and ImageJ. BMC Bioinformatics. 2010; 11:274. [PubMed: 20492697]
25. Preibisch S, Saalfeld S, Schindelin J, Tomancak P. Software for bead-based registration of
selective plane illumination microscopy data. Nat Methods. 2010; 7:418–419. [PubMed:
20508634]
26. Preibisch S, Tomancak P, Saalfeld S. Proceedings of ImageJ User and Developer Conference.
2010; 1:72–76.
27. Matas J, Chum O, Urban M, Pajdla T. Robust Wide Baseline Stereo from Maximally Stable
Extremal Regions. Image and Vision Computing. 2004; 22(10):761–767.
28. Ibanez, L.; Schroeder, W.; Ng, L.; Cates, J. The ITK Software Guide. Kitware Inc; 2005.
29. Köthe, U. Reusable Software in Computer Vision. In: Jähne, B.; Haussecker, H.; Geissler, P.,
editors. Handbook of Computer Vision and Applications. Vol. 3. San Diego: Academic Press;
1999. p. 103-132.
Schindelin et al.
Page 9
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 07.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript


----- Page 10 (native text) -----
30. Preibisch S, Saalfeld S, Tomancak P. Globally Optimal Stitching of Tiled 3D Microscopic Image
Acquisitions. Bioinformatics. 2009; 25:1463–1465. [PubMed: 19346324]
31. Cardona A, et al. An integrated micro- and macroarchitectural analysis of the Drosophila brain by
computer-assisted serial section electron microscopy. PLoS Biol. 2010; 8
32. Bock DD, et al. Network anatomy and in vivo physiology of visual cortical neurons. Nature.
471:177–182. [PubMed: 21390124]
33. Kaynig V, Fischer B, Müller E, Buhmann JM. Fully automatic stitching and distortion correction
of transmission electron microscope images. Journal of Structural Biology. 2010; 171:163–173.
[PubMed: 20450977]
34. Arganda-Carreras, I.; Sorzano, COS.; Marabini, R.; Carazo, JM.; Ortizde Solorzano, C.; Kybic, J.
Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Vol. 4241. Springer; Berlin/Heidelberg: 2006. Consistent and
Elastic Registration of Histological Sections using Vector-Spline Regularization in Lecture Notes
in Computer Science ser; p. 85-95.
35. Lowe DG. Distinctive Image Features from Scale-Invariant Keypoints. International Journal of
Computer Vision. 2004; 60:91–110.
36. Sethian, JA. Level Set Methods and Fast Marching Methods: Evolving Interfaces in Computational
Geometry, Fluid Mechanics, Computer Vision, and Materials Science. Cambridge University
Press; 1999.
37. Kass M, Witkin A, Terzopoulos D. Snakes: Active contour models. International Journal of
Computer Vision. 1988; 1:321–331.
38. Hall M, et al. The WEKA Data Mining Software: An Update. SIGKDD Explorations. 2009; 11
39. Kaynig V, Fuchs TJ, Buhmann JM. Geometrical consistent 3D tracing of neuronal processes in
ssTEM data. Med Image Comput Comput Assist Interv. 2010; 13:209–216. [PubMed: 20879317]
40. Cardona A, et al. Identifying neuronal lineages of Drosophila by sequence analysis of axon tracts. J
Neurosci. 2010; 30:7538–7553. [PubMed: 20519528]
41. Longair MH, Baker DA, Armstrong JD. Simple Neurite Tracer: open source software for
reconstruction, visualization and analysis of neuronal processes. Bioinformatics. 27:2453–2454.
[PubMed: 21727141]
42. Edelstein, A.; Amodaj, N.; Hoover, K.; Vale, R.; Stuurman, N. Current Protocols in Molecular
Biology. John Wiley & Sons, Inc; 2010. Computer Control of Microscopes Using μManager.
Schindelin et al.
Page 10
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 07.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript


----- Page 11 (native text) -----
Figure 1. Fiji as a high-powered distribution of ImageJ
(a) The Fiji platform enables interaction with multidimentional image data in point-and-
click interface identical to ImageJ. It simplifies transition from mathematical formulations
coming from computer vision researchers to functional programs written by software
engineers using version control and algorithmic libraries (schematic diagram of ImgLib
design) and allows bioinformaticians to construct powerful image processing pipelines using
scripting languages (Script Editor plugin screenshot). (b) The Fiji Updater provides a unique
mechanism for releasing new algorithmic developments to the user community. Every time
Fiji is launched it offers to download available updates from the main server in Dresden,
Germany or from alternative update sites. New plugins approved by the Fiji developer
community are instantaneously delivered to thousands of Fiji users worldwide or can be
offered directly through user initiated update sites.
Schindelin et al.
Page 11
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 07.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript


----- Page 12 (native text) -----
Figure 2. Scripting and ImgLib
(a) An example of a simple Jython script that achieves complex segmentation and 3d
visualization drawing on the Fiji libraries steered by simple scripting commands. The task is
to open a 3d RGB image (line 5) of a Drosophila first instar brain where cortex and
neuropile glia are labeled in green by Nirvana-Gal4 and UASmcd8GFP, surface glial cells
are labeled red with anti-repo antibody, and all nuclei are labeled blue with Sytox. The goal
is to automatically count red surface glial cells using the Difference of Gaussian (DoG)
detector (line 9) applying the constraints for cell size and labeling intensity (lines 3 and 4).
These constraints are expressed as DoG sigma parameters (lines 7 and 8) by extracting
image dimensions from metadata (line 6). The cell count is printed in the dialog box (line
10) and cells are subsequently displayed in the 4d viewer as red spheres of fixed diameter,
overlaid with orthogonal view of the raw 3d images (lines 13–16). (b–j) Algorithms
implemented using generic ImgLib constructs operate on images regardless of
dimensionality. The figure shows the output of two ImgLib algorithms: Maximally Stable
Extremal Regions (MSER) and again DoG. The 3d input image is a confocal stack of a C.
elegans worm expressing nuclear marker. Scale bar 10 μm. (h). A slice from the stack is
used as the 2d input image. Scale bar 10 μm. (e). A line segment from the slice is used as the
1d input image (b). The results of the DoG algorithm for 1d, 2d, and 3d are visualized in (c),
(f), and (i). The results of the MSER algorithm for 1d, 2d, and 3d are shown in (d), (g), and
(j). The algorithms are run on 1d (c,d), 2d (f,g), and 3d (i,j) input without changing a single
Schindelin et al.
Page 12
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 07.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript


----- Page 13 (native text) -----
line of code (see Supplementary Fig. 4). The nested MSER regions representing competing
segmentation hypotheses for the nuclei are color coded (green, red, blue and magenta).
Schindelin et al.
Page 13
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 07.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript


----- Page 14 (native text) -----
Figure 3. Fiji projects
(a–e) Stitching plugin for globally optimal registration of tiled 3d confocal images. The
source data of Drosophila first instar larval nervous system (a) were registered using phase
correlation with global optimization (b) and visualized in Fiji 4d Viewer (c). Four labeled
neurons (colour coded in 4d Viewer (d)) were segmented using a manual segmentation
plugin (Segmentation Editor) and their volumes were measured (e). (f–j) Globally optimal
reconstruction of large ssTEM mosaics using TrakEM2 plugin. Schematic view of ssTEM
mosaic, each square is an individual image tile and the independent sections are color coded
(f). (g) Screenshot of a video visualizing the progress of global optimization for a single
section. SIFT features are in cyan and the residual error signifying displacement of
corresponding SIFT features at the current iteration is depicted by red lines. (h) Dual color
overlay of two registered consecutive sections showing the entire hemisphere of the larval
brain. Scale bar 10 μm. (i) Axonal profiles within a small part of a single section in the
ssTEM dataset were manually segmented using TrakEM2. Each profile is labeled with a
different color. Scale bar 0.5 μm. (j) Relationship between numbers of pre-synaptic partners
and post-synaptic sites extracted manually with TrakEM2 from a micro-cube of the
registered data. (k–o) Plugin suite for processing of multi-view SPIM data. (k) Schematic
representation of multi-view SPIM imaging showing the 3d stacks of the same specimen
acquired from different angles. (l) Progress of the global optimization of multi-view SPIM
acquisition of Drosophila embryo. Corresponding geometric bead descriptors are colored
according to their residual displacement at the current iteration of the optimizer. (m) The
resulting reconstructed embryo at the 12th (top) and 13th (bottom) nuclear division cycle
shown as 3d rendering in Fiji’s 3d viewer. Scale bar 50 μm. (n) Results of Difference of
Gaussian segmentation of the nuclei marked with His-YFP; same stages as in (m). Each
nucleus is marked with a different color. (o) Quantification of the nuclear counts at the 12th
and 13th nuclear division in the embryo shown in (m) and (n).
Schindelin et al.
Page 14
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 07.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript


----- Page 15 (native text) -----
Figure 4. Fiji usage
(a) A chart showing the number of unique visitors to Fiji wiki per month over the last three
years. (b) World map overlaid with geolocations of computers that updated Fiji over a
period of one week.
Schindelin et al.
Page 15
Nat Methods. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 07.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
