

----- Page 1 (native text) -----
3
Rational Choice and the Structure 
of the Environment
Herbert A. Simon
A 
growing interest in decision making in psychology is evidenced by the 
recent publication of Edwards’ review article in the Psychological Bulletin
(1) and the Santa Monica Conference volume, Decision Processes (7). In 
this work, much attention has been focused on the characterization of rational 
choice, and because the latter topic has been a central concern in economics, 
the theory of decision making has become a natural meeting ground for psycho-
logical and economic theory.
A comparative examination of the models of adaptive behavior employed 
in psychology (e.g., learning theories), and of the models of rational behavior 
employed in economics, shows that in almost all respects the latter postulate a 
much greater complexity in the choice mechanisms, and a much larger capacity 
in the organism for obtaining information and performing computations, than 
do the former. Moreover, in the limited range of situations where the predictions 
of the two theories have been compared (see [7, Ch. 9, 10, 18]), the learn-
ing theories appear to account for the observed behavior rather better than do 
the theories of rational behavior.
Both from these scanty data and from an examination of the postulates of the 
economic models it appears probable that, however adaptive the behavior of or-
ganisms in learning and choice situations, this adaptiveness falls far short of the 
ideal of “maximizing” postulated in economic theory. Evidently, organisms adapt 
well enough to “satisfice”; they do not, in general, “optimize.”
If this is the case, a great deal can be learned about rational decision making 
by taking into account, at the outset, the limitations upon the capacities and com-
plexity of the organism, and by taking account of the fact that the environments 
to which it must adapt possess properties that permit further simplication of its 
choice mechanisms. It may be useful, therefore, to ask: How simple a set of choice 
mechanisms can we postulate and still obtain the gross features of observed adap-
tive choice behavior?
In a previous paper (6) I have put forth some suggestions as to the kinds of 
“approximate” rationality that might be employed by an organism possessing 
limited information and limited computational facilities. The suggestions were 
“hypothetical” in that, lacking definitive knowledge of the human decisional 
processes, we can only conjecture on the basis of our everyday experiences, our 
introspection, and a very limited body of psychological literature what these 
Source: Psychological Review, 63(2) (1956): 129–138.


----- Page 2 (native text) -----
2 Rationality
processes are. The suggestions were intended, however, as empirical statements, 
however tentative, about some of the actual mechanisms involved in human and 
other organismic choice.1
Now if an organism is confronted with the problem of behaving approximately 
rationally, or adaptively, in a particular environment, the kinds of simplifications 
that are suitable may depend not only on the characteristics – sensory, neural, 
and other – of the organism, but equally upon the structure of the environment. 
Hence, we might hope to discover, by a careful examination of some of the fun-
damental structural characteristics of the environment, some further clues as to 
the nature of the approximating mechanisms used in decision making. This is the 
line of attack that will be adopted in the present paper.
The environment we shall discuss initially is perhaps a more appropriate one for 
a rat than for a human. For the term environment is ambiguous. We are not inter-
ested in describing some physically objective world in its totality, but only those 
aspects of the totality that have relevance as the “life space” of the organism con-
sidered. Hence, what we call the “environment” will depend upon the “needs,” 
“drives,” or “goals” of the organism, and upon its perceptual apparatus.
The Environment of the Organism
We consider first a simplified (perhaps “simple-minded”) organism that has a single 
need – food – and is capable of three kinds of activity: resting, exploration, and 
food getting. The precise nature of these activities will be explained later. The or-
ganism’s life space may be described as a surface over which it can locomote. Most 
of the surface is perfectly bare, but at isolated, widely scattered points there are 
little heaps of food, each adequate for a meal.
The organism’s vision permits it to see, at any moment, a circular portion of the 
surface about the point in which it is standing. It is able to move at some fixed 
maximum rate over the surface. It metabolizes at a given average rate and is able 
to store a certain amount of food energy, so that it needs to eat a meal at certain 
average intervals. It has the capacity, once it sees a food heap, to proceed toward 
it at the maximum rate of locomotion. The problem of rational choice is to choose 
its path in such a way that it will not starve.
Now I submit that a rational way for the organism to behave is the following: 
(a) it explores the surface at random, watching for a food heap; (b) when it sees 
one, it proceeds to it and eats (food getting); (c) if the total consumption of energy 
during the average time required, per meal, for exploration and food getting is 
less than the energy of the food consumed in the meal, it can spend the remainder 
of its time in resting.2
There is nothing particularly remarkable about this description of rational 
choice, except that it differs so sharply from the more sophisticated models of 
human rationality that have been proposed by economists and others. Let us see 
what it is about the organism and its environment that makes its choice so simple.
1. It has only a single goal: food. It does not need to weigh the respective 
advantages of different goals. It requires no “utility function” or set of 
“indifference curves” to permit it to choose between alternatives.


----- Page 3 (native text) -----
Simon z Rational Choice 3
2. It has no problem of maximization. It needs only to maintain a certain 
average rate of food intake, and additional food is of no use to it. In the 
psychologist’s language, it has a definite, fixed aspiration level, and its 
successes or failures do not change its aspirations.
3. The nature of its perceptions and its environment limit sharply its plan-
ning horizon. Since the food heaps are distributed randomly, there is no 
need for pattern in its searching activities. Once it sees a food heap, it can 
follow a definite “best” path until it reaches it.
4. The nature of its needs and environment create a very natural separation 
between “means” and “ends.” Except for the food heaps, one point on the 
surface is as agreeable to it as another. Locomotion has significance only 
as it is a means to reaching food.3
We shall see that the first point is not essential. As long as aspirations are fixed, 
the planning horizon is limited, and there is a sharp distinction between means 
and ends, the existence of multiple goals does not create any real difficulties in 
choice. The real complications ensue only when we relax the last three condi-
tions; but to see clearly what is involved, we must formulate the model a little 
more precisely.
Perceptual Powers, Storage Capacity, 
and Survival
It is convenient to describe the organism’s life space not as a continuous surface, 
but as a branching system of paths, like a maze, each branch point representing a 
choice point. We call the selection of a branch and locomotion to the next branch 
point a “move.” At a small fraction of the branch points are heaps of food.
Let p, 0 < p < 1, be the percentage of branch points, randomly distributed, at 
which food is found. Let d be the average number of paths diverging from each 
branch point. Let v be the number of moves ahead the organism can see. That is, if 
there is food at any of the branch points within v moves of the organism’s present 
position, it can select the proper paths and reach it. Finally let H be the maximum 
number of moves the organism can make between meals without starving.
At any given moment, the organism can see d branch points at a distance of 
one move from his present position, d2 points two moves away, and in general, 
dk points k moves away. In all, it can see d + d2 + · · · + dv = 
d
d −1  (dv – 1) points. 
When it chooses a branch and makes a move, dv new points become visible on 
its horizon. Hence, in the course of m moves, mdv new points appear. Since it 
can make a maximum of H moves, and since v of these will be required to reach 
food that it has discovered on its horizon, the probability, Q = 1 – P, that 
it will not survive will be equal to the probability that no food points will be 
visible in (H – v) moves. (If p is small, we can disregard the possibility that 
food will be visible inside its planning horizon on the first move.) Let ρ be the 
probability that none of the dv new points visible at the end of a particular move 
is a food point.


----- Page 4 (native text) -----
4 Rationality
 
ρ = (1 – p)dv. 
[2.1]
Then:
 
1 – P = Q = ρ (H – v) = (1 – p)(H – v)dv. 
[2.2]
We see that the survival chances, from meal to meal, of this simple organism 
depend on four parameters, two that describe the organism and two the envir-
onment: p, the richness of the environment in food; d, the richness of the en-
vironment in paths; H, the storage capacity of the organism; and v, the range of 
vision of the organism.
To give some impression of the magnitudes involved, let us assume that p is 
1/10,000, (H – v) is 100, d is 10 and v is 3. Then the probability of seeing a new 
food point after a move is 1 – ρ = 1 – (1 – p)1000 ∼ 880/10,000, and the probabil-
ity of survival is P = 1 – ρ100 ∼ 9999/10,000. Hence there is in this case only one 
chance in 10,000 that the organism will fail to reach a food point before the end 
of the survival interval. Suppose now that the survival time (H – v) is increased 
one-third, that is, from 100 to 133. Then a similar computation shows that the 
chance of starvation is reduced to less than one chance in 100,000. A one-third 
increase in v will, of course, have an even greater effect, reducing the chance of 
starvation from one in 10–4 to one in 10–40.
Using the same values, p = .0001, and (H – v) = 100, we can compute the 
probability of survival if the organism behaves completely randomly. In this case 
P′ = [1 – (1 – p)100] = .009. From these computations, we see that the organism’s 
modest capacity to perform purposive acts over a short planning horizon permits 
it to survive easily in an environment where random behavior would lead to rapid 
extinction. A simple computation shows that its perceptual powers multiply by a 
factor of 880 the average speed with which it discovers food.
If p, d, and v are given, and in addition we specify that the survival probability 
must be greater than some number close to unity (P ≥ 1 – 
∋
), we can compute 
from [2.2] the corresponding minimum value of H:
 
log (1 – P) = (H – v) log ρ 
[2.3]
 
H
v
≥
+ log
log
.
ρ
∋
 
[2.4]
For example, if ρ = .95 and 
∋
 = 10–10, then log ρ = – .022, log 
∋
 = – 10 and 
(H – v) ≥ 455. The parameter, H, can be interpreted as the “storage capacity” 
of the organism. That is, if the organism metabolizes at the rate of α units per 
move, then a storage of αH food units, where H is given by Equation 4, would be 
required to provide survival at the specified risk level, 
∋
.
Further insight into the meaning of H can be gained by considering the aver-
age number of moves, M, required to discover food. From Equation 1, the prob-
ability of making (k – 1) moves without discovering food, and then discovering 
it on the kth is:
 
Pk = (1 – ρ)ρ(k – 1). 
[2.5]
Hence, the average number of moves, M, required to discover food is:


----- Page 5 (native text) -----
Simon z Rational Choice 5
 
M
k
k
k
=
−
=
−
−
=
−
−
=
∞
∑(
)
(
)
(
)
(
).
(
)
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
ρ ρ
ρ
ρ
ρ
 
[2.6]
Since (1 – ρ) is the probability of discovering food in any one move, M is the 
reciprocal of this probability. Combining [2.3] and [2.6], we obtain:
 
M
H
v
P
−
=
−
−
log
(
) log(
).
ρ
ρ
1
1
1
 
[2.7]
Since ρ is close to one, loge ρ ∼– (1 – p), and [2.7] reduces approximately to:
 
M
H
v
P
−
−

1
1
log (
).
e
 
[2.8]
For example, if we require (1 – P) = 
∋
 ≤ 10–4 (one chance in 10,000 of star-
vation), then M/(H – v) ≤ .11. For this survival level we require food storage 
approximately equal to α(v + 9M) – food enough to sustain the organism for 
nine times the period required, on the average, to discover food, plus the period 
required to reach the food.4
Choice Mechanisms for Multiple Goals
We consider now a more complex organism capable of searching for and responding 
to two or more kinds of goal objects. In doing this we could introduce any desired 
degree of complexity into the choice process; but the interesting problem is how 
to introduce multiple goals with a minimum complication of the process – that 
is, to construct an organism capable of handling its decision problems with rela-
tively primitive choice mechanisms.
At the very least, the presence of two goals will introduce a consistency re-
quirement – the time consumed in attaining one goal will limit the time available 
for pursuit of the other. But in an environment like the one we have been con-
sidering, there need be no further relationship between the two goals. In our 
original formulation, the only essential stipulation was that H, the storage capacity, 
be adequate to maintain the risk of starvation below a stipulated level (1 – P). 
Now we introduce the additional stipulation that the organism should only devote 
a fraction, λ, of its time to food-seeking activities, leaving the remaining fraction, 
1 – λ, to other activities. This new stipulation leads to a requirement of additional 
storage capacity.
In order to control the risk of starving, the organism must begin its exploration 
for food whenever it has reached a level of H periods of food storage. If it has a 
total storage of (μ + H) periods of food, and if the food heaps are at least α(μ + H) 
in size, then it need begin the search for food only μ periods after its last feeding. 
But the food research will require, on the average, M periods. Hence, if a hunger 
threshold is established that leads the organism to begin to explore μ periods 
after feeding, we will have:
 
λ
μ
=
+
M
M
.
 
[3.1]


----- Page 6 (native text) -----
6 Rationality
Hence, by making μ sufficiently large, we can make λ as small as we please. 
Parenthetically, it may be noted that we have here a close analogue to the very 
common two-bin system of controlling industrial inventories. The primary storage, 
H, is a buffer stock to meet demands pending the receipt of new orders (with risk, 
1 – P, of running out); the secondary storage, μ, defines the “order point”; and 
μ + M is the average order quantity. The storage μ is fixed to balance storage “costs” 
against the cost (in this case, time pressure) of too frequent reordering.
If food and the second goal object (water, let us say) are randomly and inde-
pendently distributed, then there are no important complications resulting from 
interference between the two activities. Designate by the subscript 1 the vari-
ables and parameters referring to food getting (e.g., μ1 is the food threshold in 
periods), and by the subscript 2 the quantities referring to water seeking. The 
organism will have adequate time for both activities if λ1 + λ2 < 1.
Now when the organism reaches either its hunger or thirst threshold, it will 
begin exploration. We assume that if either of the goal objects becomes visible, it 
will proceed to that object and satisfy its hunger or thirst (this will not increase 
the number of moves required, on the average, to reach the other object); but if 
both objects become visible at the same time, and if S1 and S2 are the respective 
quantities remaining in storage at this time, then it will proceed to food or water 
as M1/S1 is greater or less than M2/S2. This choice will maximize its survival prob-
ability. What is required, then, is a mechanism that produces a drive proportional 
to Mi/Si.
A priority mechanism of the kind just described is by no means the only or 
simplest one that can be postulated. An even simpler rule is for the organism to 
persist in searching for points that will satisfy the particular need that first reached 
its threshold and initiated exploratory behavior. This is not usually an efficient 
procedure, from the standpoint of conserving goal-reaching time, but it may be 
entirely adequate for an organism generously endowed with storage capacity.
We see that an organism can satisfy a number of distinct needs without re-
quiring a very elaborate mechanism for choosing among them. In particular, we 
do not have to postulate a utility function or a “marginal rate of substitution.”
We can go even further, and assert that a primitive choice mechanism is ad-
equate to take advantage of important economies, if they exist, which are derivable 
from the interdependence of the activities involved in satisfying the different needs. 
For suppose the organism has n needs, and that points at which he can satisfy each 
are distributed randomly and independently through the environment, each with 
the same probability, p. Then the probability that no points satisfying any of the 
needs will be visible on a particular move is ρ n, and the mean number of moves 
for discovery of the first need-satisfying point is:
 
mn
n
=
−
1
1
(
).
ρ
 
[3.2]
Suppose that the organism begins to explore, moves to the first need-satisfying 
point it discovers, resumes its exploration, moves to the next point it discovers that 
satisfies a need other than the one already satisfied, and so on. Then the mean 
time required to search for all n goals will be:


----- Page 7 (native text) -----
Simon z Rational Choice 7
 
Mn = mn + mn – 1 + · · · =
−
<<
−
=∑
1
1
1
1 (
)
(
).
ρ
ρ
i
i
n
n
 
[3.3]
In particular, if ρ is close to one, that is, if need-satisfying points are rare, we 
will have:
 
M
M
M
n
n
n
n
i
i
n
−
=
−
=
−
⋅
−
=∑
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
(
)
(
)
,
ρ
ρ
ρ

 
[3.4]
and
 
M
M
i
n
i
n

1
1
1
=∑
⋅
 
[3.5]
Now substituting particular values for n in [3.5] we get: M2 = 3/2 M1; 
M3 = 11/6 M1; M4 = 25/12 M1, etc. We see that if the organism has two separate 
needs, its exploration time will be only 50 per cent greater than – and not twice as 
great as – if it has only one need; for four needs the exploration time will be only 
slightly more than twice as great as for a single need, and so on. A little con-
sideration of the program just described will show that the joint exploratory pro-
cess does not reduce the primary storage capacity required by the organism but 
does reduce the secondary storage capacity required. As a matter of fact, there 
would be no necessity at all for secondary storage.
This conclusion holds only if the need-satisfying points are independently dis-
tributed. If there is a negative correlation in the joint distribution of points satisfying 
different needs, then it may be economical for the organism to pursue its needs 
separately, and hence to have a simple signaling mechanism, involving secondary 
storage, to trigger its several exploration drives. This point will be developed 
further in the next section.
A word may be said here about “avoidance needs.” Suppose that certain 
points in the organism’s behavior space are designated as “dangerous.” Then it 
will need to avoid those paths that lead to these particular points. If r per cent 
of all points, randomly distributed, are dangerous, then the number of available 
paths, among those visible at a given move, will be reduced to (1 – r)dv. Hence, 
ρ′= (1 – p)(1 – r)dv will be smaller than ρ (Equation 2.1), and M (Equation 2.6) will 
be correspondingly larger. Hence, the presence of danger points simply increases 
the average exploration time and, consequently, the required storage capacity 
of the organism.
Further Speciﬁ cation of the Environment: Clues
In our discussion up to the present point, the range of the organism’s anticipations 
of the future has been limited by the number of behavior alternatives available 
to it at each move (d), and the length of the “vision” (v). It is a simple matter to 
introduce into the model the consequences of several types of learning. An increase 


----- Page 8 (native text) -----
8 Rationality
in the repertoire of behavior alternatives or in the length of vision can simply be 
represented by changes in d and v, respectively.
A more interesting possibility arises if the food points are not distributed com-
pletely at random, and if there are clues that indicate whether a particular inter-
mediate point is rich or poor in paths leading to food points. First, let us suppose 
that on the path leading up to each food point the k preceding choice points are 
marked with a food clue. Once the association between the clue and the subsequent 
appearance of the food point is learned by the organism, its exploration can ter-
minate with the discovery of the clue, and it can follow a determinate path from 
that point on. This amounts to substituting v′ = (v + k) for v.
A different kind of clue might operate in the following fashion. Each choice 
point has a distinguishable characteristic that is associated with the probability 
of encountering a food point if a path is selected at random leading out of this 
choice point. The organism can then select at each move the choice point with the 
highest probability. If only certain choice points are provided with such clues, 
then a combination of random and systematic exploration can be employed. Thus 
the organism may be led into “regions” where the probability of goal attainment 
is high relative to other regions, but it may have to explore randomly for food 
within a given region.
A concrete example of such behavior in humans is the “position play” char-
acteristic of the first phase of a chess game. The player chooses moves on the basis 
of certain characteristics of resulting positions (e.g., the extent to which his pieces 
are developed). Certain positions are adjudged richer in attacking and defensive 
possibilities than others, but the original choice may involve no definite plan for 
the subsequent action after the “good” position has been reached.
Next, we turn to the problem of choice that arises when those regions of the 
behavior space that are rich in points satisfying one need (p1 is high in these 
regions) are poor in points satisfying another need (p2 is low in these same regions). 
In the earlier case of goal conflict (two or more points simultaneously visible me-
diating different needs), we postulated a priority mechanism that amounted to a 
mechanism for computing relative need intensity and for responding to the more 
intense need. In the environment with clues, the learning process would need to 
include a conditioning mechanism that would attach the priority mechanism to the 
response to competing clues, as well as to the response to competing visible needs.
Finally, we have thus far specified the environment in such a way that there 
is only one path leading to each point. Formally, this condition can always be 
satisfied by representing as two or more points any point that can be reached by 
multiple paths. For some purposes, it might be preferable to specify an environment 
in which paths converge as well as diverge. This can be done without disturbing 
the really essential conditions of the foregoing analysis. For behavior of the sort 
we have been describing, we require of the environment only:
1. that if a path is selected completely at random the probability of survival 
is negligible;
2. that there exist clues in the envitonment (either the actual visibility of 
need-satisfying points or anticipatory clues) which permit the organism, 
sufficiently frequently for survival, to select specific paths that lead with 
certainty, or with very high probability, to a need-satisfying point.


----- Page 9 (native text) -----
Simon z Rational Choice 9
Concluding Comments on Multiple Goals
The central problem of this paper has been to construct a simple mechanism of 
choice that would suffice for the behavior of an organism confronted with multiple 
goals. Since the organism, like those of the real world, has neither the senses nor 
the wits to discover an “optimal” path – even assuming the concept of optimal to 
be clearly defined – we are concerned only with finding a choice mechanism that 
will lead it to pursue a “satisficing” path, a path that will permit satisfaction at 
some specified level of all of its needs.
Certain of the assumptions we have introduced to make this possible represent 
characteristics of the organism. (a) It is able to plan short purposive behavior 
sequences (of length not exceeding v), but not long sequences. (b) Its needs are 
not insatiable, and hence it does not need to balance marginal increments of satis-
faction. If all its needs are satisfied, it simply becomes inactive. (c) It possesses 
sufficient storage capacity so that the exact moment of satisfaction of any particular 
need is not critical.
We have introduced other assumptions that represent characteristics of the 
environment, the most important being that need satisfaction can take place 
only at “rare” points which (with some qualifications we have indicated) are dis-
tributed randomly.
The most important conclusion we have reached is that blocks of the organism’s 
time can be allocated to activities related to individual needs (separate means-
end chains) without creating any problem of over-all allocation or coordination 
or the need for any general “utility function.” The only scarce resource in the situ-
ation is time, and its scarcity, measured by the proportion of the total time that 
the organism will need to be engaged in some activity, can be reduced by the pro-
vision of generous storage capacity.
This does not mean that a more efficient procedure cannot be constructed, from 
the standpoint of the total time required to meet the organism’s needs. We have 
already explored some simple possibilities for increasing efficiency by recognizing 
complementarities among activities (particularly the exploration activity). But the 
point is that these complications are not essential to the survival of an organism. 
Moreover, if the environment is so constructed (as it often is in fact) that regions 
rich in possibilities for one kind of need satisfaction are poor in possibilities for 
other satisfactions, such efficiencies may not be available.
It may be objected that even relatively simple organisms appear to conform 
to efficiency criteria in their behavior, and hence that their choice mechanisms are 
much more elaborate than those we have described. A rat, for example, learns to 
take shorter rather than longer paths to food. But this observation does not affect 
the central argument. We can introduce a mechanism that leads the organism to 
choose time-conserving paths, where multiple paths are available for satisfying a 
given need, without any assumption of a mechanism that allocates time among 
different needs. The former mechanism simply increases the “slack” in the whole 
system, and makes it even more feasible to ignore the complementarities among 
activities in programming the over-all behavior of the organism.
This is not the place to discuss at length the application of the model to human 
behavior, but a few general statements may be in order. First, the analysis has 
been a static one, in the sense that we have taken the organism’s needs and its 
sensing and planning capacities as given. Except for a few comments, we have not 


----- Page 10 (native text) -----
10 Rationality
considered how the organism develops needs or learns to meet them. One would 
conjecture, from general observation and from experimentation with aspiration 
levels, that in humans the balance between the time required to meet needs and 
the total time available is maintained by the raising and lowering of aspiration 
levels. I have commented on this point at greater length in my previous paper.5
Second, there is nothing about the model that implies that the needs are physio-
logical and innate rather than sociological and acquired. Provided that the needs 
of the organism can be specified at any given time in terms of the aspiration levels 
for the various kinds of consummatory behavior, the model can be applied.
The principal positive implication of the model is that we should be skeptical 
in postulating for humans, or other organisms, elaborate mechanisms for choosing 
among diverse needs. Common denominators among needs may simply not exist, 
or may exist only in very rudimentary form; and the nature of the organism’s needs 
in relation to the environment may make their nonexistence entirely tolerable.
There is some positive evidence bearing on this point in the work that has 
been done on conflict and frustration. A common method of producing conflict 
in the laboratory is to place the organism in a situation where: (a) it is stimulated 
to address itself simultaneously to alternative goal-oriented behaviors, or (b) it 
is stimulated to a goal-oriented behavior, but restricted from carrying out the 
behaviors it usually evinces in similar natural situations. This suggests that conflict 
may arise (at least in a large class of situations) from presenting the animal with 
situations with which it is not “programmed” to deal. Conflict of choice may often 
be equivalent to an absence of a choice mechanism in the given situation. And 
while it may be easy to create such situations in the laboratory, the absence of a 
mechanism to deal with them may simply reflect the fact that the organism seldom 
encounters equivalent situations in its natural environment.6
Conclusion
In this paper I have attempted to identify some of the structural character-
istics that are typical of the “psychological” environments of organisms. We have 
seen that an organism in an environment with these characteristics requires 
only very simple perceptual and choice mechanisms to satisfy its several needs 
and to assure a high probability of its survival over extended periods of time. In 
particular, no “utility function” needs to be postulated for the organism, nor does 
it require any elaborate procedure for calculating marginal rates of substitution 
among different wants.
The analysis set forth here casts serious doubt on the usefulness of current 
economic and statistical theories of rational behavior as bases for explaining the 
characteristics of human and other organismic rationality. It suggests an alternative 
approach to the description of rational behavior that is more closely related to 
psychological theories of perception and cognition, and that is in closer agreement 
with the facts of behavior as observed in laboratory and field.
Acknowledgement
I am indebted to Allen Newell for numerous enlightening conversations on the subject of this 
paper, and to the Ford Foundation for a grant that permitted me leisure to complete it.


----- Page 11 (native text) -----
Simon z Rational Choice 11
Notes
1. Since writing the paper referred to I have found confirmation for a number of its hypo-
theses in the interesting and significant study, by A. de Groot, of the thought processes 
of chess players (3). I intend to discuss the implications of these empirical findings for 
my model in another place.
2. A reader who is familiar with W. Grey Walter’s mechanical turtle, Machina speculatrix (8), 
will see as we proceed that the description of our organism could well be used as a set 
of design specifications to assure the survival of his turtle in an environment sparsely 
provided with battery chargers. Since I was not familiar with the structure of the turtle 
when I developed this model, there are some differences in their behavior – but the 
resemblance is striking.
3. It is charactcristic of economic models of rationality that the distinction between “means” 
and “ends” plays no essential role in them. This distinction cannot be identified with the 
distinction between behavior alternatives and utilities, for reasons that are set forth at 
some length in the author’s Administrative Behavior, Ch. 4 and 5 (5).
4. I have not discovered any very satisfactory data on the food storage capacities of animals, 
but the order of magnitude suggested above for the ratio of average search time to 
storage capacity is certainly correct. It may be noted that, in some cases at least, where 
the “food” substance is ubiquitous, and hence the search time negligible, the storage 
capacity is also small. Thus, in terrestrial animals there is little oxygen storage and 
life can be maintained in the absence of air for only a few minutes. I am not arguing 
as to which way the causal arrow runs, but only that the organisms, in this respect, are 
adapted to their environments and do not provide storage that is superfluous.
5. See (6, pp. 111, 117–18). For an experiment demonstrating the adjustment of the rat’s 
aspiration levels to considerations of realizability, see Festinger (2).
6. See, for example, Neal E. Miller, “Experimental Studies of Conflict” in (4, Ch. 14).
References
1. Edwards, W. The theory of decision making. Psychol. Bull., 1954, 51, 380–417.
2. Festinger, L. Development of differential appetite in the rat. J. exp. Psychol., 1953, 
32, 226–234.
3. De Groot, A. Het Denken van den Schaker. Amsterdam: Noord-Hollandsche Uitgevers 
Maatschapij, 1946.
4. Hunt, J. McV. Personality and the behavior disorders. New York: Ronald, 1944.
5. Simon, H. A. Administrative behavior. New York: Macmillan, 1947.
6. Simon, H. A. A behavioral model of rational choice. Quart. J. Econ., 1955, 59, 99–118.
7. Thrall, R. M., Coombs, C. H., & Davis, R. L. (Eds.). Decision processes. New York: Wiley, 
1954.
8. Walter, W. G. The living brain. New York: Norton, 1953.
