

----- Page 1 (native text) -----
Education and debate
Qualitative research and evidence based medicine
Judith Green, Nicky Britten
Qualitative
research
may
seem
unscientific
and
anecdotal to many medical scientists. However, as the
critics of evidence based medicine are quick to point
out, medicine itself is more than the application of sci-
entific rules.
1 Clinical experience, based on personal
observation, reflection, and judgment, is also needed to
translate scientific results into treatment of individual
patients.
2 Personal experience is often characterised as
being anecdotal, ungeneralisable, and a poor basis for
making scientific decisions. However, it is often a more
powerful
persuader
than
scientific
publication
in
changing clinical practice,
3–5 as illustrated by the
occasional series “A patient who changed my practice”
in the BMJ.
6
In an attempt to widen the scope of evidence based
medicine, recent workshops have included units on
other
subjects,
including
economic
analysis
and
qualitative research.
7 However, to do so is to move
beyond the discipline of clinical epidemiology that
underpins
evidence
based
medicine.
Qualitative
research, in particular, addresses research questions
that are different from those considered by clinical epi-
demiology. Qualitative research can investigate practi-
tioners’ and patients’ attitudes, beliefs, and preferences,
and the whole question of how evidence is turned into
practice. The value of qualitative methods lies in their
ability to pursue systematically the kinds of research
questions that are not easily answerable by experimen-
tal methods.
We use the example of asthma treatment to
illustrate how qualitative methods can broaden the
scope of evidence based medicine. Although there is
consensus
over
evidence
based
practice
in
the
treatment of asthma,
8 questions remain about general
practitioners’ use of clinical guidelines and patients’ use
of prescribed medication.
9
Naturalism
Various
qualitative
methods
are
used
in
health
research, but they share some basic orientations (see
box).
10 The first is a commitment to naturalism, or
understanding
health
behaviour
in
its
everyday
context. Results of drug trials may inform practitioners
about the optimum effects of therapeutic agents, but
even pragmatic trials are not the same as everyday
experience. For instance, in today’s highly competitive
workplace, some people report that they need to seem
“healthy” at work and do not want to be seen taking
medications.
11 12 Thus, appearances may be more
important to some people than symptom relief.
Interpretation
A second aim of most qualitative studies is that of
interpretation: investigating how patients and practi-
tioners make sense of “objective” variables such as peak
flow readings. Subjective meanings are crucial to an
understanding of how treatment regimens integrate
with everyday life. For instance, Adams et al found that
half of the asthmatic people they interviewed did not
see themselves as asthma sufferers.
12 Their “bad chests”
were perceived as an acute and temporary problem,
better treated with drugs to relieve the symptoms than
daily prophylactic medication.
Various strategies that enable asthma sufferers to
continue “normal” everyday life, despite symptoms
that health professionals would see as objectively prob-
lematic, have been reported. Adams et al cite avoidance
of
triggers
such
as
sexual
intercourse,
physical
exertion, or spending time outdoors in the summer.
12
Although
these
adaptive
strategies
might
seem
extreme, patients interpret alternatives, such as using
daily preventative medication, as accepting a stigmatis-
ing label of “asthmatic.” Thus, findings about patients’
possible interpretations of symptoms are essential to
understanding likely medication use.
Process
The third contribution of qualitative studies to the evi-
dence base on asthma is the assumption that social life
is a process, and that interventions and the changes
Summary points
Qualitative methods can help bridge the gap
between scientific evidence and clinical practice
Qualitative research findings provide rigorous
accounts of treatment regimens in everyday
contexts
This can help us understand the barriers to using
evidence based medicine, and its limitations in
informing decisions about treatment
Recognising the limits of evidence based
medicine does not imply a rejection of research
evidence but awareness that different research
questions require different kinds of research
Health Services
Research Unit,
London School of
Hygiene and
Tropical Medicine,
London
WC1E 7HT
Judith Green,
lecturer in sociology
Department of
General Practice,
United Medical and
Dental School of
Guy’s and
St Thomas’s
Hospitals, London
SE11 6SP
Nicky Britten,
senior lecturer in
medical sociology
Correspondence to:
Dr Green
j.green@lshtm.
ac.uk
BMJ 1998;316:1230–2
1230
BMJ VOLUME 316
18 APRIL 1998
www.bmj.com


----- Page 2 (native text) -----
they bring have to be accommodated within the
patient’s “biography.”
13 Patients with asthma may have
to manage medication over a whole lifetime, rather
than for the limited duration of even a long drug trial,
and integrate an “asthmatic” identity into their other
social roles. As the study by Adams et al suggests, for
many patients this will involve taking control of their
medication, and limiting contact with professionals.
12
Conrad’s classic study of compliance with medication
showed that patients with epilepsy often “tested” them-
selves to see if their epilepsy had resolved by taking
themselves off medication completely or for short
periods of time.
14 People with asthma also have to inte-
grate symptoms and their management with both the
practicalities of everyday life and the psychological
“self” over time.
12
Interaction and relativism
Qualitative studies often take interaction as a focus of
research, rather than a given factor. Katon and
Kleinman viewed encounters between doctors and
their patients as the bringing together of often
conflicting explanatory systems about health and
illness, which required negotiation to achieve good
outcomes.
15 The medical interview may be a meeting
between very different views of reality.
16 Qualitative
sociologists have shown the value of a relativist
approach, that focuses on these different explanatory
systems.
Attitudes and adherence
One illustration of this from published reports on
adherence is general attitudes to medication. Although
one “reality” is that medication for asthma reduces
morbidity and mortality, and can benefit users with few
costs to their everyday lives, qualitative studies suggest
a rather different “reality” for patients. Firstly, there is
evidence that some patients have negative views about
medicines, regarding these as unnatural substances
that diminish the body’s own ability to fight disease and
cause dependence.
17 Many doctors, however, make the
commonsense assumption that patients are seeking
medication.
18 This general finding is borne out in
specific studies of patients with asthma.
19 These studies
show that patients worry about becoming physically
and psychologically dependent on bronchodilators,
and have even more deep seated worries about the
long term effects of inhaled corticosteroids.
11 Regard-
ing patients’ views of reality as ignorant or misguided
and attempting to persuade them of the value of a bio-
medical approach have limited value in increasing
adherence, and the need to integrate patients’ perspec-
tives has been recognised recently.
15 20 21
Assessing qualitative research
These
orientations
of
naturalism,
interpretation,
process, interaction, and relativism may be shared by
commonsense accounts of medical practice, such as
the personal anecdote. There are, however, important
differences between anecdotes (stories told for their
dramatic or other qualities, without analysis or critical
evaluation) and qualitative research. Rigorously con-
ducted
qualitative
research
is
based
on
explicit
sampling strategies, systematic analysis of data, and a
commitment
to
examining
counter
explanations.
Ideally, methods should be transparent, allowing the
reader to assess the validity and the extent to which
results might be applicable to their own clinical
practice. The generalisability of qualitative research is
likely to be conceptual rather than numerical.
22 The
studies discussed here, for instance, provide evidence
for a number of conceptual issues such as the links
between denial of the diagnosis of asthma and
medication
use
or
the
importance
of
generally
negative views about medication. For the practitioner,
the value of these findings is that they are sensitised to
issues which could usefully be explored with patients. A
number of guidelines now exist to aid both journal
editors and readers in assessing qualitative health
research.
10 23–25
Conclusion
The argument that qualitative research can contribute
answers to questions not easily addressed by ran-
domised controlled trials is not new. Much has been
written on the uses and value of sociology for
medicine, and indeed there has been a growing accept-
ance of its methods in healthcare research, including
its contribution to randomised controlled trials when
these are appropriate.
26 However, in the context of the
debate about evidence based medicine, it is vital to reit-
erate that good “evidence” goes further than the results
of meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. The
Basic orientations of qualitative methods
• Naturalism—understanding treatment regimens in
an everyday context
• Interpretation—what meaning do symptoms and
treatment regimens have for patients and
practitioners?
• Process—how might these meanings change over
time?
• Interaction—how does communication between
patients and practitioners impact on the meaning of
medication?
• Relativism—scientific “reality” may look different
from different perspectives
DOLLY THOMPSETT
Education and debate
1231
BMJ VOLUME 316
18 APRIL 1998
www.bmj.com


----- Page 3 (native text) -----
limitations of these trials, and the evidence about barri-
ers to their utilisation by practitioners, should not lead
to cynicism about the role of research evidence in
health care. We need to be sure that it is the right kind
of research to answer the questions posed.
Funding: No additional funding.
Conflict of interest: None.
1
Naylor CD. Grey zones of clinical practice: some limits to evidence-based
medicine. Lancet 1995;345:840-2.
2
Freidson E. Profession of medicine:a study of the sociology of applied knowledge.
New York: Dodd, Mead and Company, 1970.
3
Atkinson P. Medical talk and medical work: the liturgy of the clinic. London:
Sage, 1995.
4
Greer A. The state of the art versus the state of the science. Int J Technol
Assess Health Care 1988;4:5-26.
5
Greer A. Scientific knowledge and social consensus. Controlled Clin Trials
1994;15:431-6.
6
Burdett-Smith P. A patient who changed my practice: always check the
respiratory rate. BMJ 1997;314:1549.
7
Unit for Evidence Based Practice and Policy. Fourth UK workshop on teach-
ing evidence-based practice study pack. London: University College London
Medical School, 1997.
8
British Thoracic Society and others. Guidelines for the management of
asthma: a summary. BMJ 1993;306:776-82.
9
Audit Commission. What the doctor ordered: a study of GP fundholders in
England and Wales. London: HMSO, 1996.
10 Mays N, Pope C, eds. Qualitative research in health care. London: BMJ Pub-
lishing Group, 1996.
11 Hewett G. “Just a part of me”: men’s reflections on chronic asthma. London:
South Bank University, 1994. (Occasional papers in sociology and social
policy.)
12 Adams S, Pill R, Jones A. Medication, chronic illness and identity: the per-
spective of people with asthma. Soc Sci Med 1997;45:189-201.
13 Bury M. Chronic illness as biographical disruption. Sociology of Health and
Illness 1982;4:167-82.
14 Conrad P. The meaning of medications: another look at compliance. Soc
Sci Med 1985;20:29-37.
15 Katon W, Kleinman A. Doctor-patient negotiation and other social
science strategies in patient care. In: Eisenberg L, Kleinman A, eds. The
relevance of social science to medicine. Dordrecht: Reidel, 1981.
16 Mishler EG. The discourse of medicine: dialectics of medical interviews.
Norwood, NJ: Ablex, 1984.
17 Britten N. Patients’ ideas about medicines: a qualitative study in a general
practice population Br J Gen Pract 1994;44:465-8.
18 Hull FM, Marshall T. Sources of information about new drugs and
attitudes towards drug prescribing: an international study of differences
between primary care physicians. Fam Pract 1987;4:123-8.
19 Osman LM, Russell IT, Friend JAR, Legge JS, Douglas JG. Predicting
patient attitudes to asthma medication. Thorax 1993;48:827-30.
20 Marinker M. Writing prescriptions is easy. BMJ 1997;314:747-8.
21 Tuckett D, Boulton M, Olson C, Williams A. Meetings between experts: an
approach to sharing ideas in medical consultations. London: Tavistock, 1985.
22 Fitzpatrick R, Boulton M. Qualitative methods for assessing health care.
Quality in Health Care 1994;3:107-113.
23 Dowell J, Huby G, Smith C, eds. Scottish consensus statement on qualitative
research in primary health care. Dundee: Tayside Centre for General Prac-
tice, 1995.
24 Boulton M, Fitzpatrick R, Swinburn C. Qualitative research in health care.
II. A structured review and evaluation of studies. J Eval Clin Pract
1996;2:171-9.
25 Blaxter M. Criteria for the evaluation of qualitative research papers. Med
Sociol News 1996;22:68-71.
26 Oakley A. Who’s afraid of the randomised controlled trial? Some dilem-
mas of the scientific method and good research practice. In: Women’s
health counts. London: Routledge, 1990.
(Accepted 21 November 1997)
North of England evidence based guidelines development
project: methods of developing guidelines for efficient
drug use in primary care
Martin Eccles, Nick Freemantle, James Mason
Practice guidelines are valid if “they lead to the health
gains and costs predicted for them.”
1 When imple-
mented, valid guidelines lead to changes in clinical
practice and improvements in outcomes for patients.
2–5
Invalid guidelines, however, may lead to the use of inef-
fective interventions that waste resources, or even to
harm.
Guidelines must offer recommendations for both
effective
and
efficient
care, and
these
have
not
previously been available in the United Kingdom. We
have reported the development and content of guide-
lines for primary care in the United Kingdom based
explicitly on evidence of effectiveness.
6–9 Here, we
present the methods used to develop evidence based
guidelines
on
the
use
in
primary
care
of
four
important groups of drugs—angiotensin converting
enzyme inhibitors in patients with heart failure, choice
of antidepressants, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs in patients with osteoarthritis, and aspirin as an
antithrombotic agent.
10–13 Abridged versions of the
guidelines on angiotensin converting enzyme inhibi-
tors,
aspirin,
and
non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory
drugs will be published in subsequent articles.
14–16
Guideline development groups
Guideline development groups comprised three broad
classes of members—relevant healthcare professionals
(up to five general practitioners (all with an interest and
Summary points
Guideline development groups defined important
clinical questions, produced search criteria, and
drew up protocols for systematic review and,
where appropriate, meta-analysis
Medline and Embase were searched for systematic
reviews and meta-analyses, randomised trials,
quality of life studies, and economic studies
Meta-analysis was used extensively by the group
to answer specific clinical questions
Statements on evidence were categorised in
relation to study design, reflecting their
susceptibility to bias
Strength of recommendations was graded
according to the category of evidence and its
applicability, economic issues, values of the
guideline group and society, and the groups’
awareness of practical issues
Recommendations cease to apply in December
1999, by which time relevant results that may
affect recommendations may be known
Education and debate
Centre for Health
Services Research,
University of
Newcastle upon
Tyne, Newcastle
upon Tyne
NE2 4AA
Martin Eccles,
professor
Centre for Health
Economics,
University of York,
York YP1 5DD
Nick Freemantle,
senior research fellow
James Mason,
research fellow
Correspondence to:
Professor Eccles
Martin.Eccles@
ncl.ac.uk
BMJ 1998;316:1232–5
1232
BMJ VOLUME 316
18 APRIL 1998
www.bmj.com


----- Page 4 (native text) -----
postgraduate training in primary care therapeutics), up
to two hospital consultants, a health authority medical
or pharmaceutical adviser, and a pharmacist); specialist
resources (an epidemiologist (NF) and a health econo-
mist (JM)); and a specialist in guideline methodology
and in leading small groups (ME). All group members
were
offered
reimbursement
of
their
travelling
expenses and general practitioners could also claim for
any expenses incurred in employing a locum.
Evidence: identification and overview
As a first step, the guideline development groups
defined a set of clinical questions within the area of the
guideline. This ensured that the guideline develop-
ment work outside the meeting focused on issues that
practitioners considered important and produced
criteria for the search and the protocol for systematic
review and, where appropriate, meta-analysis.
Search strategy
Searches were undertaken using Medline and, where
appropriate, Embase. Using a combination of subject
heading and free text terms, the search strategies located
systematic reviews and meta-analyses, randomised trials,
quality of life studies, and economic studies. Further
details of the specific search strategies are provided in
the full versions of the guidelines.
10–13 Recent, high
quality review articles and bibliographies and contacts
with experts were used extensively. New searches were
concentrated on areas where existing systematic reviews
were unable to provide valid or up to date answers. The
search strategy was backed up by the expert knowledge
and experience of group members.
Synthesising published reports
We assessed the quality of relevant studies retrieved
and their ability to provide valid answers to the
questions posed. Assessment of the quality of studies
considered issues of internal, external, and construct
validity.
17 The criteria used are shown in the box. Once
individual
papers
had
been
assessed
for
methodological rigour and clinical importance, the
information was synthesised.
Describing evidence
We used meta-analysis to summarise and describe the
results of studies, conducting analyses to answer
specific questions raised by the guideline development
groups. Our
primary
aim
was
to
provide
valid
estimates of treatment effects using approaches that
provided results in a form that could best inform treat-
ment recommendations.
Meta-analyses combine statistically the results from
similar studies and provide a weighted average of study
estimates of effect. The most important criterion for
combining studies is that their combination makes prac-
tical sense and, therefore, the results are interpretable.
Statistical analysis procedures for meta-analysis using
different outcomes are essentially analogous; all involve
large sample theory and differ mainly in the details of
calculations of standard errors and bias correction.
18
Fixed effects models assume a common underlying
effect and weight each study by the inverse of the
variance. Random effects models assume a distribution
of effects and incorporate this heterogeneity into the
overall estimate of effect and its precision.
19 20 Decisions
on the appropriateness of fixed or random effects mod-
els were based primarily on a priori assumptions about
the construct being tested in each case. Where heteroge-
neity between studies was identified, we also reported
routinely random effects results.
Publication bias
Publication bias and missing data can undermine sub-
stantially the validity of meta-analyses.
21 Besides using
sensitive search strategies, we went to considerable
lengths to obtain missing data from the trials identified.
We wrote to investigators and the companies sponsor-
ing them, and followed up non-respondents with
further letters and, where appropriate, other forms of
communication.
Binary outcomes
Meta-analysis of binary data, such as the number of
deaths in a randomised trial, enables the results of a
group of trials to be expressed in several ways (box).
The pooled odds ratio is a statistically robust measure
but is hard to interpret clinically; risk ratios are easier to
interpret. Both are inadequate for exploring the practi-
cal implications of interventions in primary care. Risk
differences are less helpful for exploring underlying
effects, but are useful for describing the importance of
the effects of an intervention in practice. Pooled risk
differences can be adjusted for time of exposure when
reviews include trials of varying lengths. This provides
estimates of annual risk that can also be expressed as
numbers needed to treat.
22
Criteria for assessing quality of randomised
trials
• Appropriateness of inclusion and exclusion criteria
• Concealment of allocation
• Blinding of patients
• Blinding of health professionals
• Objective or blind method of data collection
• Valid or blind method of data analysis
• Completeness and length of follow up
• Appropriateness of outcome measures
• Statistical power of results
MARK HUDSON
Education and debate
1233
BMJ VOLUME 316
18 APRIL 1998
www.bmj.com


----- Page 5 (native text) -----
Continuous outcomes
Where continuous outcomes are measured similarly in
different studies, meta-analysis can be used to calculate
a weighted mean difference. If measurement between
studies is not undertaken using a common metric—
because
different
instruments
are
used
or
poor
reliability between those undertaking rating is likely—
standardised scores based on variance within the study
may be calculated for each trial. This approach, for
example, enables the statistical pooling of outcomes
expressed
in
different
versions
of
the
Hamilton
depression rating scale, in which the 17 and 21 item
forms are commonly used. We used the straight-
forward approach proposed by Hedges and Olkin,
25 in
which
the
variance
estimate
is
based
upon
the
intervention and control group and the effect size is
corrected for bias due to small sample size.
Economic analysis
The
guidelines
include
systematic
appraisals
of
effectiveness, compliance, safety, health service resource
use, and costs of medical interventions in British
general practice. The economic analysis is presented in
a straightforward manner, showing the possible bounds
of cost effectiveness that may result from treatment.
Lower and higher estimates of cost effectiveness reflect
the available evidence and the concerns of the guideline
development group. Economic analyses are susceptible
to bias through the methods used; we avoided making
strong statements where uncertainty existed. However,
the simplicity of presentation permits simple reworking
with different values from the ones used by the group.
This practice reflects the desire of group members for
understandable and robust information upon which to
base recommendations.
Presenting a review of previous economic analyses
which have adopted a variety of differing perspectives,
analytic
techniques,
and
baseline
data
was
not
considered helpful. However, economic reports were
reviewed to compare findings of the guideline project
with representative published economic analyses and
to interpret differences when these occurred.
Categorising evidence
Summarised evidence was categorised according to
study design, and reflects susceptibility to bias. The box
shows the categories in descending order of importance.
Categories
of
evidence
were
adapted
from
the
classification of the United States Agency for Health
Care Policy and Research.
26 Questions were answered
using the best evidence available. If, for example, a ques-
tion on the effect of an intervention could be answered
by category I evidence, then studies of weaker design
(controlled studies without randomisation) were not
reviewed. This categorisation is most appropriate to
questions of causal relations. Similar taxonomies for
other types of research question do not yet exist.
Strength of recommendation
Informal consensus methods were used to derive
recommendations, and reflect the certainty with which
the effectiveness and cost effectiveness of a medical
intervention can be recommended. Recommendations
are based upon consideration of the following: the
strength of evidence, the applicability of the evidence
to the population of interest, economic considerations,
values of the guideline developers and society, and
guideline developers’ awareness of practical issues.
While the process of interpreting evidence inevitably
involves value judgments, we clarified the basis of these
judgments as far as possible by making this process
explicit. The relation between the strength of a
recommendation and the category of evidence is
shown in the box.
Areas without evidence
Informal consensus methods were used to develop
recommendations
in
areas
where
there
was
no
Meta-analysis of binary data
Worked example
In the study of left ventricular disease treatment trial of
enalapril in patients with heart failure, there were 452
deaths in 1285 patients randomised to receive
enalapril and 510 deaths in 1284 patients allocated to
placebo at the end of the four years’ follow up.23 24 In a
two by two table these data provide an odds ratio of
0.82, a risk ratio of 0.89, and a risk difference of −0.045
(or a 4.5% reduction in the risk of death).
Intervention group
Odds ratios are defined as
÷
Risk ratios are defined as
Risk differences are defined as
Control
A
A
B
C
B
Dead
Alive
D
C
D
÷
A
A+B
C
C+D
−
A
A+B
C
C+D
Categories of evidence
Ia—Evidence from meta-analysis of randomised
controlled trials
Ib—Evidence from at least one randomised controlled
trial
IIa—Evidence from at least one controlled study
without randomisation
IIb—Evidence from at least one other type of
quasi-experimental study
III—Evidence from descriptive studies, such as
comparative studies, correlation studies and
case-control studies
IV—Evidence from expert committee reports or
opinions or clinical experience of respected
authorities, or both
Strength of recommendation
A—Directly based on category I evidence
B—Directly based on category II evidence or
extrapolated recommendation from category I
evidence
C—Directly based on category III evidence or
extrapolated recommendation from category I or II
evidence
D—Directly based on category IV evidence or
extrapolated recommendation from category I, II or
III evidence
Education and debate
1234
BMJ VOLUME 316
18 APRIL 1998
www.bmj.com


----- Page 6 (native text) -----
evidence. This process sometimes identified important
unanswered research questions. These are recorded at
the end of the relevant section of the guideline.
Review of the guideline
External
External reviewers were chosen to reflect three groups:
potential users of the guidelines, experts in the subject
area, and guideline methodologists. Although the
reviewers’ comments influenced the style and content
of the guidelines, these remained the responsibility of
the development group.
Scheduled review
The recommendations of these guidelines cease to
apply at the end of 1999, by which time new, relevant
results that may affect recommendations are likely to
be available.
We thank the following for their contribution to the functioning
of the guidelines development group and the development of
the practice guideline: Janette Boynton, Anne Burton, Julie
Glanville, Susan Mottram.
Funding: The development of the guideline was funded by
the Prescribing Research Initiative of the Department of Health.
Conflict of interest: None.
1
Institute of Medicine. In: Field MJ, Lohr KN, eds. Guidelines for clinical
practice. From development to use. Washington, DC: National Academy
Press, 1992.
2
Grimshaw JM, Russell IT. Effect of clinical guidelines on medical practice:
a systematic review of rigorous evaluations. Lancet 1993;342:1317-22.
3
Grimshaw JM, Russell IT. Achieving health gain through clinical
guidelines. I. Developing scientifically valid guidelines. Qual Health Care
1993;2:243-8.
4
Grimshaw JM, Russell IT. Achieving health gain through clinical
guidelines. II. Ensuring guidelines change medical practice. Qual Health
Care 1994;3:552-8
5
Implementing clinical practice guidelines: can guidelines be used to improve
clinical practice? Leeds: University of Leeds, 1994. (Effective Health Care
Bulletin No 8.)
6
Eccles M, Clapp Z, Grimshaw J, Adams PC, Higgins B, Purves I, et al.
Developing valid guidelines: methodological and procedural issues from
the North of England evidence based guideline development project.
Qual Health Care 1996;5:44-50.
7
Eccles M, Clapp Z, Grimshaw J, Adams PC, Higgins B, Purves I, et al.
North of England evidence based guideline development project: meth-
ods of guideline development. BMJ 1996;312:760-2.
8
North of England Stable Angina Guideline Development Group. North
of England evidence based guidelines development project: summary
version of evidence based guideline for the primary care management of
stable angina. BMJ 1996;312:827-32.
9
North of England Asthma Guideline Development Group. North of
England evidence based guidelines development project: summary
version of evidence based guideline for the primary care management of
asthma in adults. BMJ 1996;312:762-6.
10 North of England Evidence Based Guideline Development Project.
Evidence based clinical practice guideline: ACE inhibitors in the primary care
management of adults with symptomatic heart failure. Newcastle upon Tyne:
Centre for Health Services Research, 1997.
11 North of England Evidence Based Guideline Development Project.
Evidence based clinical practice guideline: the choice of antidepressants for
depression in primary care. Newcastle upon Tyne: Centre for Health Serv-
ices Research, 1997.
12 North of England Evidence Based Guideline Development Project.
Evidence based clinical practice guideline: the use of aspirin for the secondary
prophylaxis of vascular disease in primary care. Newcastle upon Tyne: Centre
for Health Services Research, 1997.
13 North of England Evidence Based Guideline Development Project.
Evidence based clinical practice guideline: non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs (NSAIDs) versus basic analgesia in the treatment of pain believed to be due
to degenerative arthritis. Newcastle upon Tyne: Centre for Health Services
Research, 1997.
14 Eccles M, Freemantle N, Mason J for the North of England ACE-inhibitor
Guideline Development Group. North of England evidence based devel-
opment project: guideline for angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors
in primary care management of adults with symptomatic heart failure.
BMJ (in press).
15 Eccles M, Freemantle N, Mason J for the North of England ACE-inhibitor
Guideline Development Group. Evidence based guideline for the use of
aspirin for the secondary prophylaxis of vascular disease in primary care.
BMJ (in press).
16 Eccles M, Freemantle N, Mason J for the North of England Non-steroidal
Anti-inflammatory Drug Guideline Development Group. Evidence based
guideline for the use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs versus
basic analgesia in the treatment of pain believed to be due to degenera-
tive arthritis. BMJ (in press).
17 Cook TD, Campbell DT. Quasi-experimentation:design and analysis issues for
field settings. Chicago: Rand McNally, 1979.
18 Hedges LV. Meta-analysis. J Educ Stat 1992;17:279-96.
19 DerSimonian R, Laird N. Meta analysis in clinical trials. Controlled Clin
Trials 1986;7:177-88.
20 Whitehead A, Whitehead J. A general parametric approach to the meta-
analysis of randomised clinical trials. Stat Med 1991;10:1665-77.
21 Freemantle N, Mason JM, Haines A, Eccles MP. CONSORT: an important
step toward evidence-based health care. Ann Intern Med 1997;126:81-3.
22 Ioannidis JPA, Cappelleri JC, Lau J, Skolnik PR, Melville B, Chalmers TC,
et al. Early or deferred zidovudine therapy in HIV-infected patients with-
out an AIDS-defining illness. Ann Intern Med 1995;122:856-66.
23 Hedges LV, Olkin I. Statistical methods for meta-analysis. London: Academic
Press, 1985.
24 United States Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health
Service, Agency for Health Care Policy and Research. Acute pain manage-
ment: operative or medical procedures and trauma. Rockville, MD: Agency for
Health Care Policy and Research Publications, 1992.
25 SOLVD
Investigators.
Effect
of
enalapril
on
mortality
and
the
development of heart failure in asymptomatic patients with reduced left
ventricular ejection fractions. N Engl J Med 1992;327:685-91.
26 SOLVD Investigators. Effect of enalapril on survival in patients with
reduced left ventricular ejection fractions and congestive heart failure.
N Engl J Med 1991;325:293-302.
(Accepted 11 December 1997)
A rare opportunity
I saved my father’s life
Fifteen years ago I was working as the only consultant surgeon in a
small hospital with basic facilities in the northern part of Sri Lanka.
One weekend, after my duties at the hospital, I paid a visit to my
parents, who lived close to my hospital. As it was not safe to travel
late at night due to the ongoing war at that time, I decided to spend
the night with my parents. At midnight, I was woken up by my
mother, informing me that my father had developed sudden severe
pain in his inguinal hernia and started vomiting. My father had
previously declined surgery for the hernia. It was not difficult for
me to realise that the hernia was strangulated and needed
immediate surgery. Being the only surgeon available at that time, I
had no choice other than to do the surgery myself. I sent for the
anaesthetist on call, and arranged the theatre for the emergency
operation. In the changing room, though I have operated on many
hundreds of elderly patients in that hospital, I was nervous of the
outcome, with varying thoughts flashing in my mind. My father was
72, though relatively healthy. “Will there be any anaesthetic
complication, bearing in mind the basic facilities available—with no
electrocardiogram, monitoring, or pulse oximeter? Will there be
any gangrenous bowel needing resection? Will my father survive
the surgery? If not, how will I face my mother and relatives?”
Quickly, I composed myself, leaving the emotions behind.
Fortunately, the strangulation was relieved in time without a need
for a resection of the bowel, and he made a full recovery. Everyone
including the relatives praised me for my bravery to operate on my
father. But who else, except myself, will know about the nervous
moments I had? Since then my father has been boasting about the
successful surgery by his son to all his friends. I will always feel
proud and happy to be given the rare opportunity to treat and save
my father, who encouraged me to study medicine.
M Vetpillai, staff grade surgeon, Watford
Education and debate
1235
BMJ VOLUME 316
18 APRIL 1998
www.bmj.com


----- Page 7 (native text) -----
What’s wrong with Bonferroni adjustments
Thomas V Perneger
When more than one statistical test is performed in
analysing
the
data
from
a
clinical
study,
some
statisticians and journal editors demand that a more
stringent criterion be used for “statistical significance”
than the conventional P < 0.05.
1 Many well meaning
researchers, eager for methodological rigour, comply
without fully grasping what is at stake. Recently, adjust-
ments for multiple tests (or Bonferroni adjustments)
have found their way into introductory texts on medi-
cal statistics, which has increased their apparent legiti-
macy.
2 3 This paper advances the view, widely held by
epidemiologists, that Bonferroni adjustments are, at
best, unnecessary and, at worst, deleterious to sound
statistical inference.
4 5
Adjustment for multiple tests
Bonferroni adjustments are based on the following
reasoning.
1–3 If a null hypothesis is true (for instance,
two treatment groups in a randomised trial do not
differ in terms of cure rates), a significant difference
(P < 0.05) will be observed by chance once in 20 trials.
This is the type I error, or á. When 20 independent
tests are performed (for example, study groups are
compared with regard to 20 unrelated variables) and
the null hypothesis holds for all 20 comparisons, the
chance of at least one test being significant is no longer
0.05, but 0.64. The formula for the error rate across the
study is 1 −(1 −á)
n, where n is the number of tests per-
formed. However, the Bonferroni adjustment deflates
the á applied to each, so the study-wide error rate
remains at 0.05. The adjusted significance level is
1 −(1 −á)
1/n (in this case 0.00256), often approximated
by á/n (here 0.0025). What is wrong with this statistical
approach?
Problems
Irrelevant null hypothesis
The first problem is that Bonferroni adjustments are
concerned with the wrong hypothesis.
4–6 The study-
wide error rate applies only to the hypothesis that the
two groups are identical on all 20 variables (the univer-
sal null hypothesis). If one or more of the 20 P values is
less than 0.00256, the universal null hypothesis is
rejected. We can say that the two groups are not equal
for all 20 variables, but we cannot say which, or even
how many, variables differ. Such information is usually
of no interest to the researcher, who wants to assess
each variable in its own right. A clinical equivalent
would be the case of a doctor who orders 20 different
laboratory tests for a patient, only to be told that some
are abnormal, without further detail. Thus, Bonferroni
adjustments provide a correct answer to a largely irrel-
evant question.
Inference defies common sense
Bonferroni adjustments imply that a given comparison
will be interpreted differently according to how many
other
tests
were
performed.
For
example,
the
difference in remission rates between two chemothera-
peutic treatments could be interpreted as statistically
significant or not depending on whether or not
survival rates, quality of life scores, and complication
rates were also tested. In a clinical setting, a patient’s
packed cell volume might be abnormally low, except if
the doctor also ordered a platelet count, in which case
it could be deemed normal. Surely this is absurd, at
least within the current scientific paradigm. Evidence
in data is what the data say—other considerations, such
as
how
many
other
tests
were
performed,
are
irrelevant.
Increase in type II errors
Type I errors cannot decrease (the whole point of Bon-
ferroni adjustments) without inflating type II errors
(the probability of accepting the null hypothesis when
the alternative is true).
4 And type II errors are no less
false than type I errors. In clinical practice, if a high
concentration of creatine kinase were considered com-
patible with “no myocardial infarction” by virtue of a
Bonferroni adjustment, the patient would be denied
appropriate care. In research, an effective treatment
may be deemed no better than placebo. Thus, contrary
to what some researchers believe, Bonferroni adjust-
ments do not guarantee a “prudent” interpretation of
results.
What tests should be included?
Most proponents of the Bonferroni method would
count at least all the statistical tests in a given report as
a basis for adjusting P values. But how about tests that
were performed, but not published, or tests published
in other papers based on the same study? If several
Summary points
Adjusting statistical significance for the number of
tests that have been performed on study data—the
Bonferroni method—creates more problems than
it solves
The Bonferroni method is concerned with the
general null hypothesis (that all null hypotheses
are true simultaneously), which is rarely of interest
or use to researchers
The main weakness is that the interpretation of a
finding depends on the number of other tests
performed
The likelihood of type II errors is also increased,
so that truly important differences are deemed
non-significant
Simply describing what tests of significance have
been performed, and why, is generally the best
way of dealing with multiple comparisons
Education and debate
Institute of Social
and Preventive
Medicine,
University of
Geneva, CH-1211
Geneva 4,
Switzerland
Thomas V
Perneger,
medical epidemiologist
Correspondence to:
Dr Perneger
perneger@cmu.
unige.ch
BMJ 1998;316:1236–8
1236
BMJ VOLUME 316
18 APRIL 1998
www.bmj.com


----- Page 8 (native text) -----
papers are planned, should future ones be accounted
for in the first publication? Should we worry about
error rates related to an investigator—taking the
number of tests he or she has done in their lifetime
into consideration
6—or error rates related to journals?
Should confidence intervals, which are not statistical
tests, but are often interpreted as such (the confidence
interval includes 0, hence the groups do not differ) be
counted? No statistical theory provides answers for
these practical issues.
A futuristic scenario
What would happen to biomedical research if Bonfer-
roni adjustments became routine? Cynical researchers
would slice their results like salami, publishing one P
value at a time to escape the wrath of the statistical
reviewer. Idealists would conduct studies to examine
only one association at a time—wasting time, energy,
and public money. Meta-analysts would go out of
business, since a pooled analysis would invalidate
retrospectively all original findings by adding more
tests to be adjusted for. Journals would have to create
a new section entitled “P value updates,” in which P val-
ues of previously published papers would be corrected
for newly published tests based on the same study. And
so on . . . .
Back to the Neyman-Pearson theory
These objections seem so compelling that the reader
may wonder why adjustments for multiple tests were
developed at all. The answer is that such adjustments
are correct in the original framework of statistical test
theory, proposed by Neyman and Pearson in the
1920s.
7 This theory was intended to aid decisions in
repetitive situations. Imagine that your factory pro-
duces light bulbs in lots of 1000, and that testing each
bulb before shipment would be impractical. You can
decide to test only a sample in each lot, and to reject
(literally) any lots in which more than a predefined
number (x) of bulbs in the sample are defective. Of
course, your decision might be wrong for any particu-
lar lot, but the Neyman-Pearson theory provides a
decision rule (the number x), so that over many trials
your error rates (type I and type II) will be minimised.
Now, if for some reason you took 20 samples out of a
given lot instead of one, and decided that you would
reject the lot if the number of defective bulbs exceeded
x in only one sample, you would be much too likely to
reject a good lot in error, and a Bonferroni adjustment
would restore the original optimal error rates.
The catch is that Neyman and Pearson developed
their statistical tests to aid decision making, not to
assess evidence in data. The latter practice may be
objected to for several reasons (this topic would
deserve a discussion of its own), and alternative
approaches to statistical inference, such as estimation
procedures, use of likelihood ratios, and Bayesian
methods, have been proposed.
8–11 Bonferroni adjust-
ments follow the original logic of statistical tests as
supports of repeated decisions, but they are of little
help in determining what the data say in one particular
study.
Should Bonferroni adjustments ever be
used?
Statistical adjustment for multiple tests make sense in a
few situations. Firstly, the universal null hypothesis is
occasionally of interest. For instance, to verify that a
disease is not associated with an HLA phenotype, we
may compare available HLA antigens (perhaps 40) in a
group of cases and controls. If no association existed, at
least one test would be significant with a probability of
0.87, and
Bonferroni
adjustments
would
protect
against making excessive claims. A clinical equivalent is
the case of a healthy person undergoing several
laboratory tests as part of a general health check. Sec-
ondly, adjustments are appropriate when the same test
is repeated in many subsamples, such as when stratified
analyses (by age group, sex, income status, etc) are con-
ducted without an a priori hypothesis that the primary
association should differ between these subgroups.
Note that this is the scenario, reminiscent of repeated
sampling of the same lot, that Tukey and Bland and
Altman use in their justifications of multiple test
adjustments.
1 3 Sequential testing of trial results also
falls in this category. A final situation in which Bonfer-
roni adjustments may be acceptable is when searching
for significant associations without pre-established
hypotheses.
The best approach
However, even in these situations, simply describing
what was done and why, and discussing the possible
interpretations of each result, should enable the reader
to reach a reasonable conclusion without the help of
Bonferroni adjustments.
5 12 There is an important
difference between what the data say and what the
researcher (or the reader) believes to be true.
8 The lat-
ter depends not only on the data at hand but also on
considerations such as whether a finding is biologically
plausible
or
whether
the
significant
test
was
a
serendipitous finding in a fishing expedition. The
DAVID HITCH
Education and debate
1237
BMJ VOLUME 316
18 APRIL 1998
www.bmj.com


----- Page 9 (native text) -----
integration of prior beliefs with evidence is best
achieved by Bayesian methods, not by Bonferroni
adjustments. In summary, Bonferroni adjustments
have, at
best, limited
applications
in
biomedical
research, and should not be used when assessing
evidence about specific hypotheses.
I thank Dr Richard M Royall, Department of Biostatistics, Johns
Hopkins University, for helpful comments on the manuscript.
Funding: Swiss National Science Foundation (PROSPER
3233-32609.91).
Conflict of interest: None.
1
Tukey JW. Some thoughts on clinical trials, especially problems of multi-
plicity. Science 1977;198:679-84.
2
Greenhalgh T. Statistics for the non-statistician. l. Different types of data
need different statistical tests. BMJ 1997;315:364-6.
3
Bland JM, Altman DG. Multiple significance tests: the Bonferroni
method. BMJ 1995;310:170.
4
Rothman KJ. No adjustments are needed for multiple comparisons.
Epidemiology 1990;1:43-6.
5
Savitz DA, Olshan AF. Multiple comparisons and related issues in the
interpretation of epidemiologic data. Am J Epidemiol 1995;142:904-8.
6
Thomas DC, Siemiatycki J, Dewar R, Robins J, Goldberg M, Armstrong
RG. The problem of multiple inference in studies designed to generate
hypotheses. Am J Epidemiol 1985;122:1080-95.
7
Neyman J, Pearson ES. On the use and interpretation of certain test crite-
ria for purposes of statistical inference. Biometrika 1928;20A:175-240,
263-97.
8
Royall RM. Statistical inference: a likelihood paradigm. New York: Chapman
and Hall, 1997.
9
Berkson J. Tests of significance considered as evidence. J Am Stat Assoc
1942;37:325-35.
10 Goodman SN, Royall R. Evidence and scientific research. Am J Public
Health 1988;78:1568-74.
11 Oakes M. Statistical inference. Boston: Epidemiologic Resources, 1990.
12 Jones DR, Rushton L. Simultaneous inference in epidemiologic studies.
Int J Epidemiol 1982;11:276-82.
(Accepted 16 January 1998)
Coping with loss
The doctor’s losses: ideals versus realities
Glin Bennet
After five years of study, newly qualified doctors may
find it hard to realise that much of their future
development
will
involve
loss. They
will
go
on
gathering information and acquiring skills, but if they
are to retain their enthusiasm and to mature as people,
they will be learning to live with various losses.
Tiredness
New doctors should enjoy the initial enthusiasm, the
ideals and the sense of omnipotence and invulnerabil-
ity, the buoyant feeling of being able to contribute to
the general good, because it may not last for long. Very
likely a few months of broken nights will blur the ideals
and push the ambitions into the distance. The immedi-
ate objective becomes to get through the job.
The grinding tiredness teaches them a lot: about
their limitations, that sleep matters, and that it is
difficult to be a good doctor when their eyes will not
stay open. They become impatient over explanations,
and tiredness comes up like a barrier so that they can
no longer reach out to anxious and grieving patients.
They are learning that they cannot meet the ideals
they set for themselves or the expectations of others.
But tiredness is cured by a good sleep and enthusiasm
is restored by a relaxing weekend. They can be
admired for the long hours they work. They work
harder than other people, they work amid the basic
crises of living, they know about suffering, they see
that people get better through their individual efforts,
though they are not successful all the time. The death
of a patient is a loss that reminds doctors of their
limitations and the limitations of medical science, in
which they had been taught to have so much faith. The
first time it happens, the doctor is sad, shocked,
perhaps angry that the patient could have done that
to them.
Loss of unreality
Most doctors have relatively simple lives in these early
years, so it is possible, if they want, to give all their wak-
ing hours to the work in hand. Then there comes a
time when the work is not sufficiently sustaining on its
own—at least it ceases to be for most people, especially
when the needs of others have to be considered. Now
the people with the idealism and enthusiasm are con-
fronted with a fresh reality, and much of a doctor’s sub-
sequent life and career will depend on how this matter
is addressed.
This is a further lesson in the loss of omnipotence,
but in no way is it the beginning of a decline. It is a time
for redirecting energy. Doctors who accomplish this
and can control the circumstances of their work can
have a satisfying life, because medicine offers such
abundant opportunities.
Summary points
Reality often disappoints the expectations of young
doctors, who become tired and disillusioned with
themselves and with the health care system
A plateau in middle life is often associated with
loss of further opportunities, and high achievers
may interpret this as failure
To enjoy medicine we must achieve a balance
between meeting the needs of our patients and
maintaining our own resources of strength,
energy, and commitment
Doctors who can acknowledge their own fallibility,
accept their own wounds, and accept help from
colleagues or others may emerge warmer and
more humane
Education and debate
This is the sixth
in a series of
10 articles
dealing with the
different types
of loss that
doctors will
meet in their
practice
44 Wellington Park,
Bristol BS8 2UW
Glin Bennet,
formerly consultant
psychiatrist, United
Bristol Healthcare
NHS Trust
Glin.Bennet@
quadbtinternet.com
Series editors:
Colin Murray
Parkes and Andrew
Markus
BMJ 1998;316:1238–40
1238
BMJ VOLUME 316
18 APRIL 1998
www.bmj.com


----- Page 10 (native text) -----
Many doctors make choices that put them in the
front line, where they are directly exposed to needy
members of the public. Here, the external pressures
may seem always to be about to overwhelm them. The
ideals are abandoned, and the redirection cannot be
achieved. The giving out exceeds the individual’s
restorative powers. If as established doctors we find
ourselves perpetually rushing to catch up with the
demand as we see it, if our families tell us that we are
irritable and our friends that we look tired all the time,
then we are letting our resources become depleted: the
signs of burnout will appear.
There is a phrase: “You have to be on fire before
you can burn out.” The idealism is gradually replaced
by a mild cynicism, patients are perceived as inconsid-
erate and ungrateful, the telephone becomes an
enemy. The process is familiar and, if unchecked, leads
on to an apathy, in which minimum energy goes into
the clinical work, although it may be redirected into
administrative and extracurricular activities.
Men and women have different experiences
The traditional male approach has been to disregard
these issues, at the outset of his career or later, and
carry on up the professional ladder, regardless of per-
sonal considerations. If he becomes powerful enough
he can sustain this style of life and put off his maturing,
possibly forever. Sadly, these are qualities that make for
professional success, and such people can be found
among the more influential teachers of medical
students, who are thereby exposed to the model of
brashness and emotional immaturity.
Women doctors often experience loss before they
qualify. They are affected more than most men by the
brutalising
aspect
of
medical
education,
which
diminishes the empathic part of clinical work. They
delay childbearing to their late 20s or beyond, and then
they have to work that much harder to achieve the
same professional goals as men.
Loss of meaning, loss of spirit
In the professional man’s progress there are critical
points, or hurdles, that can be cleared successively and
that set him fair for the next stage. The loss of omnipo-
tence is a necessary first stage. Another critical time for
men comes in their late 30s, when they usually have their
consultant post or their partnership in general practice.
They are probably married with children, have a house,
a good car, and a boat as well perhaps. The challenge
here is that there are no more explicit challenges, such as
qualifications and jobs; they have all been attained. Thus,
there is a loss of these defining events and the
excitement about all that is one day going to be. The
doctor wakes one morning and says: “My life is now. This
is what I am.” This is the plateau of middle life.
High achievers imagine, albeit subconsciously, that
the only way on from the plateau is downhill, and that
once they have reached a particular professional peak
there can only be loss of status, loss of role, diminishing
health, and so on. The losses are real, but like all losses
they are points of transition, which can be seized crea-
tively. There are gains from this new state: it is no
longer necessary to meet all the expectations of others,
to keep on achieving or publishing; it is no longer nec-
essary to be wise and in control. There is more time.
Life can broaden out at this point, provided that the
losses are understood and seen for what they really are.
Women suffer loss in the process of becoming doc-
tors, but there are great benefits later on, and
unfulfilled male doctors could learn from their female
colleagues. A woman doctor has professional work that
she enjoys and often she has a family; thus she is not
looking solely to her job to give her a life that is mean-
ingful. Male doctors can do the same, only so often
they avoid their families.
Doctors going wrong
When
their
life
can
no
longer
be
defined
by
achievement, doctors often fail to cope. The work has
lost its meaning because there is simply too much of it
or because the doctor has not adapted to changing cir-
cumstances. The issues of omnipotence and invulner-
ability appear again, but in a more subtle form: it is no
longer a matter of one not being able to accomplish
everything, but rather accepting that one is merely a
vulnerable human being. This comes hard to powerful
doctors, and they may try to avoid the transition in
various ways: by blotting it out (through alcohol); by
reassuring themselves of their potency (with a new
relationship); by channelling their energies in new
directions (by getting on the train to London, where
the
important
committees
meet);
by
developing
symptoms and becoming depressed.
Most problems that doctors experience in middle
life are essentially problems of meaning, and their lives
have lost their meaning because they have not been
able to make the fundamental transitions and to value
themselves simply for being who they are.
If, as doctors, we are to retain our enthusiasm and to
mature as people, we must learn to live with loss
ADRIANA DORSETT
All losses are points of transition, which can be seized
creatively
Education and debate
1239
BMJ VOLUME 316
18 APRIL 1998
www.bmj.com


----- Page 11 (native text) -----
What is to be done?
It is good that schemes have been organised whereby
doctors in difficulties can get confidential help at a dis-
tance from their places of work, but there is a measure
of failure here. Doctors become involved in such
schemes because they have not been able to share their
deeper feelings with their immediate colleagues, or
because problems have been neglected until the situa-
tion is out of hand and the doctor is ceasing to function
competently.
These doctors are stranded. They have of course
lost their omnipotence and invulnerability, and they
are no longer climbing the ladder to success, but these
losses are denied by them, so they are unable to make
the essential transitions. It is as if they can accept
themselves only as immaculate and all-competent
professionals, and any blemish on that image is seen as
a failure.
In fact the blemishes have the potential to be a
great advantage, and these doctors would do well to
attend to the ancient idea that only the wounded phy-
sician heals. In myth it is presented in a literal form, but
in ordinary life the “wounded” state refers merely to
the acceptance of one’s imperfections.
When doctors can accept their blemishes and
vulnerabilities and their inability to achieve everything,
they are free to make warm and ordinary relationships
with their patients, family, and friends. They are free to
look at the quality of their work and to make changes
where these are needed. The losses are losses of
illusions; the gains are gains in reality, and the quality
of work and the quality of life can improve beyond
recognition.
Further reading
Bennet G. The wound and the doctor: healing, technology and
power in modern medicine. London: Secker and Warburg,
1987.
The articles in this
series are adapted
from Coping with
Loss, edited by
Colin Murray
Parkes and
Andrew Markus,
which will be
published in July.
Confidential advice and support
There are currently many agencies for helping doctors.
One example is the BMA’s Stress Counselling Service
(tel 0645 200169). It offers confidential telephone
counselling 24 hours a day, 365 days a year, on a wide
range of personal, emotional, and work related
problems in areas such as:
• Debt and other financial concerns
• Workplace problems
• Difficulties with marital and personal relationships
• Alcohol and drug misuse
• Loss of confidence
• Stress and anxiety
• Bereavement.
Helpline numbers of two other agencies are 07071
223372 and 0121 558 0278.
A memorable patient
Old remedy effective
On a Shetland island, the home of hardy people, it was surprising
to find that a runny nose and a cough meant that a visit to the
doctor was required. And this was 40 years ago when life was less
comfortable than today, when television was hardly known, and
when people visited each other of an evening to talk and drink “a
peerie glass o’ the hame brew.”
I was covering the period between the departure of the island’s
only doctor and the arrival of his successor. It was a wonderful six
weeks among wonderful people. Their attitude to the common
cold, though, was a bore. Mr X came to the surgery requesting a
bottle of medicine for his cough. Explanation of the self limiting
nature of his illness was treated with contempt. This being a
dispensing practice I handed him some proprietary cough
mixture from the big cupboard. No good. In two days he was
back, seeking something more effective. My advice to hang on was
again abruptly treated as nonsense and he went away with
something of a different colour. Again, no good. It was too soon
to consider investigating his cough, and as he was as determined
as ever to take medicine I turned yet again to the cornucopia in
the wall. There were now no more cough mixtures. There were,
however, many big stock bottles of coloured glass containing
ancient remedies with Latin names, and wedged among them, an
out of date National Formulary. I sent Mr X home, promising to
see if I could concoct something for him.
Mist Morph et Ipecac, with another now forgotten ingredient,
was the result, the whole being dignified by the suffix “BPC.” I
made this up, using strange little measuring glasses graduated in
outdated units of measurement. I poured it into a bottle, stuck a
cork in it, and labelled it with the instructions. It is with pride that
I recall that I then took a dose of this concoction, believing that if
I survived it he would. Mr X received this medicine and I heard
no more till he returned four weeks later to have a loose tooth
removed. This gave much less trouble than his cough but to the
latter there was to be a sequel.
I took a phone call from an isolated cottage at the south end of
the island. “Hello,” a woman said, “I don’t want you to come down
but I’ve got a terrible cough and I just wondered if you would give
the Postie a bottle of that medicine you made for Mr X to bring
down to me. He says it’s the same one that old Dr S used to make
30 years ago.”
It is said that the only thing that distinguishes man from the
lower animals is man’s desire to take medicine. Especially it seems
old medicines, and even in Shetland.
Bill Yule, retired general practitioner, Forfar
We welcome articles up to 600 words on topics such as
A memorable patient, A paper that changed my practice, My most
unfortunate mistake, or any other piece conveying instruction,
pathos, or humour. If possible the article should be supplied on a
disk. Permission is needed from the patient or a relative if an
identifiable patient is referred to. We also welcome contributions
for “Endpieces,” consisting of quotations of up to 80 words (but
most are considerably shorter) from any source, ancient or
modern, which have appealed to the reader.
The losses are losses of illusions; the gains are gains in
reality
Education and debate
1240
BMJ VOLUME 316
18 APRIL 1998
www.bmj.com
