

----- Page 1 (native text) -----
1940
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 54, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2007
OpenSim: Open-Source Software to Create and
Analyze Dynamic Simulations of Movement
Scott L. Delp*, Frank C. Anderson, Allison S. Arnold, Peter Loan, Ayman Habib, Chand T. John,
Eran Guendelman, and Darryl G. Thelen
Abstract—Dynamic simulations of movement allow one to study
neuromuscular coordination, analyze athletic performance, and
estimate internal loading of the musculoskeletal system. Simu-
lations can also be used to identify the sources of pathological
movement and establish a scientiﬁc basis for treatment planning.
We have developed a freely available, open-source software system
(OpenSim) that lets users develop models of musculoskeletal
structures and create dynamic simulations of a wide variety of
movements. We are using this system to simulate the dynamics of
individuals with pathological gait and to explore the biomechan-
ical effects of treatments. OpenSim provides a platform on which
the biomechanics community can build a library of simulations
that can be exchanged, tested, analyzed, and improved through a
multi-institutional collaboration. Developing software that enables
a concerted effort from many investigators poses technical and
sociological challenges. Meeting those challenges will accelerate
the discovery of principles that govern movement control and
improve treatments for individuals with movement pathologies.
Index Terms—Computed muscle control, forward dynamic sim-
ulation, musculoskeletal modeling, open-source software.
I. INTRODUCTION
M
ANY elements of the neuromusculoskeletal system in-
teract to enable coordinated movement. Scientists fasci-
nated by human movement have performed an extensive range
of studies to describe these elements. As a result, there is a
wealth of data that characterize the mechanics of muscle, the
geometric relationships between muscles and bones, and the
motions of joints. Clinicians who treat movement abnormali-
ties in individuals with cerebral palsy, stroke, osteoarthritis and
Parkinson’s disease have examined the neuromuscular excita-
tion patterns and movement kinematics of literally thousands
Manuscript received August 10, 2006. This work was supported in part by
the National Institutes of Health through the NIH Roadmap for Medical Re-
search Grant U54 GM072970 and through NIH Grants HD33929, HD046814,
and GM63495. Asterisk indicates corresponding author.
*S. L. Delp is with the Departments of Bioengineering and Mechanical En-
gineering, Stanford University, Clark Center, Room S-170, 318 Campus Drive,
Stanford, CA 94305-5450 USA (e-mail: delp@stanford.edu).
F. C. Anderson, A. S. Arnold, and E. Guendelman are with the Department
of Bioengineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305 USA (e-mail:
fca@stanford.edu; asarnold@alum.mit.edu; erang@stanford.edu).
P. Loan is with the MusculoGraphics Division of Motion Analysis Corpora-
tion, Chicago, IL 60640, USA (e-mail: peter@musculographics.com).
A. Habib is with Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305 USA (e-mail:
ahabib@stanford.edu).
C. T. John is with the Computer Science Department, Stanford University,
Stanford, CA 94305 USA (e-mail: ctj@stanford.edu).
D. G. Thelen is with the Mechanical Engineering Department, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706 USA (e-mail: thelen@engr.wisc.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the ﬁgures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TBME.2007.901024
of patients, both before and after treatment interventions. How-
ever, synthesizing detailed descriptions of the elements of the
neuromusculoskeletal system with measurements of movement
to create an integrated understanding of normal movement and
to establish a scientiﬁc basis for correcting abnormal movement
remains a major challenge.
Using experiments alone to understand movement dynamics
has two fundamental limitations. First, important variables,
including the forces generated by muscles, are not generally
measurable in experiments. Second, it is difﬁcult to establish
cause-effect relationships in complex dynamic systems from
experimental data alone. As a result, elucidating the functions
of muscles from experiments is not straightforward. For ex-
ample, electromyographic (EMG) recordings can indicate when
a muscle is active, but examination of EMG recordings does
not allow one to determine which motions of the body arise
from a muscle’s activity. Determining how individual muscles
contribute to observed motions is difﬁcult because a muscle
can accelerate joints that it does not span and body segments to
which it does not attach [1].
A theoretical framework is needed, in combination with ex-
periments, to uncover the principles that govern the coordination
of muscles during normal movement, to determine how neuro-
muscular impairments contribute to abnormal movement, and
to predict the functional consequences of treatments. To achieve
these goals, the theoretical framework must reveal the cause-ef-
fect relationships between neuromuscular excitation patterns,
muscle forces, and motions of the body.
A dynamic simulation of movement that integrates models
describing the anatomy and physiology of the elements of the
neuromusculoskeletal system and the mechanics of multijoint
movement provides such a framework. Muscle-driven dynamic
simulations complement experimental approaches by providing
estimates of important variables, such as muscle and joint
forces, which are difﬁcult to measure experimentally. Simu-
lations also enable cause-effect relationships to be identiﬁed
and allow “what if?” studies to be performed in which, for
example, the excitation pattern of a muscle can be changed and
the resulting motion can be observed.
Although the value of dynamic simulations of movement is
broadly recognized [2]–[8], the ﬁeld is fragmented. Many labo-
ratories develop their own simulation software, and do not pro-
vide this software to others; thus, it is difﬁcult for a simula-
tion to be used or evaluated outside the laboratory where it is
developed. The inability to reproduce results is a major limi-
tation to advancing the science of biomedical simulation. Indi-
vidual investigators have made elegant contributions to simula-
tion technology, including the development of novel methods to
model muscle [9]–[11], simulate contact [12], [13], and repre-
0018-9294/$25.00 © 2007 IEEE


----- Page 2 (native text) -----
DELP et al.: OPENSIM: OPEN-SOURCE SOFTWARE TO CREATE AND ANALYZE DYNAMIC SIMULATIONS OF MOVEMENT
1941
sent musculoskeletal geometry [14]–[16], but it is difﬁcult for
others to make use of these new techniques because the soft-
ware that implements them is generally unavailable. Since soft-
ware tools are not freely accessible to assist in the development,
analysis, and control of musculoskeletal dynamic simulations,
researchers typically must spend a great deal of time imple-
menting each new simulation and creating tools to analyze it.
Developing dynamic simulations of movement is technically
challenging, and many movement science laboratories lack the
resources or technical expertise to generate their own simula-
tions. These conditions create a major barrier to advancing sim-
ulation technology and achieving the scientiﬁc potential of mus-
culoskeletal simulations.
In the early 1990s, Delp and Loan introduced a muscu-
loskeletal modeling environment, called SIMM [17]–[19], that
lets users create, alter, and evaluate models of many different
musculoskeletal structures [20]–[22]. This software is now used
by hundreds of biomechanics researchers to create computer
models of musculoskeletal structures and to simulate move-
ments such as walking [23]–[25], cycling [26]–[28], running
[29], [30], and stair climbing [31]. Using SIMM, models of the
lower and upper extremities were developed to examine the
biomechanical consequences of surgical procedures including
tendon surgeries [32]–[38], osteotomies [39]–[41] and total
joint replacements [42]–[44]. A lower-extremity model was
used to estimate muscle-tendon lengths, velocities, moment
arms, and induced accelerations during normal and pathologic
gait [45]–[52]. Studies have been conducted to investigate the
treatment of individuals with spinal cord injury [53]–[56], to
analyze joint mechanics in subjects with patellofemoral pain
[57], [58], to calculate forces at the knee during running [59]
and cutting [60], to examine the inﬂuence of foot positioning
and joint compliance on the occurrence of ankle sprains [61],
[62], and to investigate causes of abnormal gait [63]–[65].
These studies have demonstrated the utility of musculoskeletal
models and dynamic simulations for analyzing the causes of
gait abnormalities and the effects of various treatments. SIMM
has helped bring simulation to biologists who have created
computational models of the frog [66], [67], Tyrannosaur [22],
cockroach [68], and other animals.
Although SIMM helps users formulate models of the muscu-
loskeletal system and dynamic simulations of movement, it pro-
vides no assistance with the computation of muscle excitations
that produce coordinated movement and has limited tools for an-
alyzing the results of dynamic simulations. Furthermore, SIMM
and other commercial packages, such as Visual 3-D (C-Motion
Inc.), Anybody (Anybody Technology) or Adams (MSC Soft-
ware Corp.), do not provide full access to source code, which
makes it difﬁcult for biomechanics researchers to extend their
capabilities. Over the past decade, new software engineering
methods have emerged that enable the development of software
systems that are more extensible. We view this as an opportunity
to develop a simulation platform that engages a broader spec-
trum of the biomechanics community.
We have established an open-source simulation environment,
called OpenSim, to accelerate the development and sharing of
simulation technology and to better integrate dynamic simula-
tions into the ﬁeld of movement science (Fig. 1). Open-source
software development has become a successful strategy for
Fig. 1. Schematic of OpenSim, an open source software system for modeling,
simulating, and analyzing the neuromusculoskeletal system. OpenSim is built
on top of core computational components that allow one to derive equations
of motion for dynamical systems, perform numerical integration, and solve
constrained non-linear optimization problems. In addition, OpenSim offers
access to control algorithms (e.g., computed muscle control), actuators (e.g.,
muscle and contact models), and analyses (e.g., muscle-induced accelerations).
OpenSim integrates these components into a modeling and simulation plat-
form. Users can extend OpenSim by writing their own plug-ins for analysis or
control, or to represent neuromusculoskeletal elements (e.g., muscle models).
In a graphical user interface, the user is able to access a suite of high-level tools
for viewing models, editing muscles, plotting results, and other functions. Sim-
Track, one of the OpenSim tools, enables accurate muscle-driven simulations
to be generated that represent the dynamics of individual subjects. OpenSim
is being developed and maintained on Simtk.org; all of the software is freely
available.
both commercial and academic efforts (e.g., the Linux operating
system). Making source code available enables researchers to
reproduce results produced by other laboratories and to make
improvements and adapt code to meet their needs. Modern
plug-in technology, which we have adopted, lets users extend
software functionality and allows new tools to be shared more
easily. We believe that the biomechanics community will
beneﬁt from a greater degree of collaboration as a result of an
open-source effort.
Enticing researchers to help develop and test open-source
software requires the initial developers to provide tools that
others can use and extend. OpenSim provides two. The ﬁrst
comprises a set of modeling and analysis tools that complement
those included in SIMM [17], [19]. The second, SimTrack, en-
ables researchers to generate dynamic simulations of movement
from motion capture data.
This article ﬁrst provides a brief overview of OpenSim. We
then focus on SimTrack and how simulations that characterize
the dynamics of individual subjects can assist in treatment plan-
ning. We describe a method to generate subject-speciﬁc simula-
tions and present a case study, in which we used a dynamic simu-
lation of a subject with stiff-knee gait to understand the causes of


----- Page 3 (native text) -----
1942
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 54, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2007
his abnormal movement and the effects of possible treatments.
We close with a review of the challenges for the ﬁeld.
II. WHAT IS OPENSIM?
OpenSim is an open-source platform for modeling, sim-
ulating, and analyzing the neuromusculoskeletal system. It
includes low-level computational tools that are invoked by
an application (Fig. 1). A graphical user interface provides
access to key functionality. OpenSim is being developed and
maintained on Simtk.org by a growing group of participants.
Simtk.org serves as a public repository for data, models, and
computational tools related to physics-based simulation of
biological structures.
The software is written in ANSI C++, and the graphical user
interface is written in Java, allowing OpenSim to compile and
run on common operating systems. Open-source, third-party
tools are used for some basic functionality, including the Xerces
Parser from the Apache Foundation for reading and writing
XML ﬁles (xml.apache.org/xerces-c) and the Visualization
Toolkit from Kitware for visualization (www.vtk.org). Use of
plug-in technology allows low-level computational components
such as dynamics engines, integrators, and optimizers to be
updated as appropriate without extensive restructuring. For
example, OpenSim initially used SDFast (Parametric Tech-
nology Corp.) as its dynamics engine; however, current releases
will allow Simbody
to be used as well. Simbody™is an
open-source order-n dynamics engine under development at
Simtk.org.
The plug-in architecture of OpenSim encourages users to
extend functionality by developing their own muscle models,
contact models, controllers, and analyses. For example, about
a dozen analysis plug-ins, authored by different users, are
available in OpenSim. These analysis tools calculate joint
forces, muscle-induced accelerations, muscle powers, and other
variables. Although these analyses were developed for different
musculoskeletal models, they have general applicability and
can be used with any OpenSim model. The plug-in architecture
of OpenSim thus provides a means of rapidly disseminating
new functionality to the biomechanics community.
To add a plug-in (e.g., an analysis), a user must write a
new C++ class (e.g., InducedAcceleration) derived from the
appropriate base class (e.g., Analysis), implement a number
of required methods, and compile the class into a dynamically
linked library. The new plug-in (e.g., the InducedAcceleration
analysis) can then be used in simulations and shared with
other users. Independently, plug-ins can also be developed to
enhance the capabilities of the graphical user interface. The
user interface gets nearly all its functionality from plug-ins. For
example, the modules for motion viewing, plotting, and muscle
editing are all plug-ins. A user interface plug-in example is
provided with OpenSim that users can adapt to extend the
functionality of the graphical interface. Like the low-level C++
plug-ins for analyses, muscle models, controllers, etc., user
interface plug-ins can be shared with other users.
The OpenSim graphical user interface includes a suite of tools
for analyzing musculoskeletal models, generating simulations,
and visualizing results (Fig. 2). Some of the basic functionality
of SIMM is available in OpenSim, including, for example, the
Fig. 2. Screenshot from OpenSim. Models of many different musculoskeletal
structures, including the lower extremity, upper extremity, and neck, can be
loaded, viewed and analyzed. Muscles are shown as red lines; virtual markers
are shown as blue spheres.
ability to edit muscles and plot variables of interest. In addi-
tion, SIMM joint (*.jnt) and muscle (*.msl) ﬁles [18] can be
imported. OpenSim provides simulation and control capabilities
that complement SIMM. SimTrack, in particular, is a tool ca-
pable of generating muscle-actuated simulations of subject-spe-
ciﬁc motion quickly and accurately, as described below.
III. SIMTRACK: AN OPENSIM TOOL FOR GENERATING
DYNAMIC SIMULATIONS
To create a muscle-driven simulation of a movement, one
must ﬁrst formulate a dynamic model of the musculoskeletal
system and its interactions with the environment. The elements
of the musculoskeletal system are modeled by sets of differential
equations that describe muscle contraction dynamics, muscu-
loskeletal geometry, and body segmental dynamics. These equa-
tions characterize the time-dependent behavior of the muscu-
loskeletal system in response to neuromuscular excitation. Once
a dynamic model of the musculoskeletal system is formulated,
the next step is to ﬁnd a pattern of muscle excitations that pro-
duce a coordinated movement. Excitations may be found by
solving an optimization problem in which the objective of a
motor task is deﬁned (e.g., jumping as high as possible) or in
which the objective is to drive a dynamic model to “track” ex-
perimental motion data [69]. Simulations are generally evalu-
ated by how well they agree with experimentally measured kine-
matics, kinetics, and EMG patterns. Once a simulation is created
and its accuracy is tested, it can be analyzed to examine the con-
tributions a muscle makes to the motions of the body and the
consequences of a simulated treatment.
Determining a set of muscle excitations that produce a coor-
dinated movement is one of the major challenges in creating a
dynamic simulation. Historically, the computational cost of gen-
erating coordinated muscle-actuated simulations of movement
has been high, requiring days, weeks, or months of computer
time [23], [65], [70]. Recent breakthroughs in the application


----- Page 4 (native text) -----
DELP et al.: OPENSIM: OPEN-SOURCE SOFTWARE TO CREATE AND ANALYZE DYNAMIC SIMULATIONS OF MOVEMENT
1943
Fig. 3. Steps for generating a muscle-driven simulation of a subject’s motion with SimTrack. The inputs are a dynamic musculoskeletal model, experimental
kinematics (i.e., x-y-z trajectories of marker data, joint centers, and joint angles), and experimental reaction forces and moments obtained from a subject. In Step
1, the experimental kinematics are used to scale the musculoskeletal model to match the dimensions of the subject. In Step 2, an inverse kinematics (IK) problem
is solved to ﬁnd the model joint angles that best reproduce the experimental kinematics. In Step 3, a residual reduction algorithm (RRA) is used to reﬁne the
model kinematics so that they are more dynamically consistent with the experimental reaction forces and moments. In Step 4, a computed muscle control (CMC)
algorithm is used to ﬁnd a set of muscle excitations that will generate a forward dynamic simulation that closely tracks the motion of the subject.
of robotic control techniques to biomechanical simulation have
dramatically reduced the time needed to generate such simu-
lations [28], [71]. For example, the computed muscle control
technique determines muscle excitations that reproduce mea-
sured pedaling dynamics in just ten minutes [28]; this is over
two orders of magnitude faster than conventional dynamic op-
timization techniques. Thelen and Anderson extended this ap-
proach to compute muscle excitation patterns that drove a 21-de-
gree-of-freedom, 92-muscle model to track experimental gait
data of 10 healthy adults [25]. A simulation of a half-cycle
of gait was generated in approximately 30 minutes. The speed
of this technique makes it practical to generate subject-speciﬁc
simulations of a wide variety of movements.
SimTrack guides users through four steps to create a dy-
namic simulation (Fig. 3). As input, SimTrack takes a dynamic
model of the musculoskeletal system and experimentally-mea-
sured kinematics and reaction forces and moments. While
this approach is general, we will describe it in the context of
generating simulations of gait, since this is one of the most
challenging applications.
In Step 1, a dynamic musculoskeletal model (e.g., a SIMM
model [19]) is scaled to match the anthropometry of an indi-
vidual subject. The dimensions of each body segment in the
model are scaled based on relative distances between pairs of
markers obtained from a motion-capture system and the corre-
sponding virtual marker locations in the model (e.g., see blue
spheres in Fig. 2). The mass properties of the body segments are
scaled proportionally so that the total measured mass of the sub-
ject is reproduced. Muscle ﬁber lengths and tendon slack lengths
of the muscle-tendon actuators are scaled so that they each re-
main the same percentage of total actuator length.
In Step 2, an inverse kinematics (IK) problem is solved
to determine the model generalized coordinate values (joint
angles and translations) that best reproduce the raw marker
data obtained from motion capture. Step 2 is formulated as
a least-squares problem that minimizes the differences be-
tween the measured marker locations and the model’s virtual
marker locations, subject to joint constraints [72]. If the ex-
perimental kinematics includes a set of joint centers or joint
angles produced by motion-capture software, these may also
be included in the formulation. Therefore, for each frame in the
experimental kinematics, the inverse kinematics problem is to
minimize the weighted squared error
(1)
where
and
are the three-dimensional posi-
tions of the th marker or joint center for the subject and model,
and
are the values of the th joint angle for the
subject and model, and
and
are factors that allow markers
and joint angles to be weighted differently.
Due to experimental error and modeling assumptions,
measured ground reaction forces and moments are often dy-
namically inconsistent with the model kinematics. In Step 3,
a residual reduction algorithm (RRA) is applied to make the
model generalized coordinates (joint angles and translations)
computed in Step 2 more dynamically consistent with the
measured ground reaction forces and moments. From Newton’s
second law, the following equation relates the measured ground
reaction force and gravitational acceleration to the accelerations
of the body segments
(2)
where
is the measured ground reaction force minus the
body weight vector,
is the translational acceleration of the
center of mass of the th body segment,
is the mass of the
th body segment, and
is the residual force. An analo-
gous equation relates the ground reaction moment to the model
kinematics and the residual moment. In the absence of exper-
imental and modeling error, the residual force should be zero
(i.e.,
). In practice, this is never the case. Through
a combination of slight, controlled perturbations to the motion
trajectory, and small adjustments to the mass parameters of the
model, it is possible to reduce the residual forces and moments
required for dynamic consistency. To reduce the residual forces


----- Page 5 (native text) -----
1944
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 54, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2007
and moments, the residuals are computed and averaged over the
duration of the movement. Based on these averages, the algo-
rithm recommends changes in the model mass parameters, such
as the location of the center of mass of the trunk, that reduce the
average values of the residuals over the duration of the move-
ment. Following any adjustments to the mass parameters, a con-
trol problem is solved in which all degrees of freedom of the
model are actuated. In particular, the joints are actuated by ide-
alized joint moments, and, in addition, three residual forces and
three residual moments are applied to a chosen segment of the
model to control the six degrees of freedom between the model
and the ground (i.e., three translations and three rotations). If
no limits are placed on the residuals, the kinematics can be
tracked with little or no error. However, at the user’s discretion,
upper limits can be placed on the magnitudes of the residuals, in
which case the motion of the model is altered yielding a new set
of kinematics that are dynamically consistent with the limited
residuals. A performance criterion is used to distribute tracking
errors across the joint angles
(3)
where
is a factor weighting the relative importance of the th
joint, and
is the desired acceleration of the th degree
of freedom given by a proportional-derivative control law [28].
The values for the model degrees of freedom and mass proper-
ties output by the residual reduction algorithm are used as input
to Step 4.
In Step 4, computed muscle control (CMC) is used to gen-
erate a set of muscle excitations that produce a coordinated
muscle-driven simulation of the subject’s movement. Computed
muscle control uses a static optimization criterion to distribute
forces across synergistic muscles and proportional-derivative
control to generate a forward dynamic simulation that closely
tracks the kinematics derived in Step 3 [25]. Although a static
performance criterion is used, the full state equations repre-
senting the activation and contraction dynamics of the muscles
are incorporated into the forward dynamic simulation. Activa-
tion dynamics is modeled by relating the time rate of change
of muscle activation
to muscle activation
and excitation
(4)
where
and
are the time constants for activation
and deactivation. Musculotendon contraction dynamics is
described by a lumped-parameter model that accounts for the
force-length-velocity properties of muscle and the elastic prop-
erties of tendon. In particular, the time rate of change of muscle
length
is related to muscle length
, musculotendon
actuator length
, and muscle activation
(5)
where
is the force velocity relation for muscle. In our cur-
rent implementation, the force between the foot and the ground
is not modeled; rather, the measured ground reaction forces and
moments are applied directly to the foot. When analyzing a sim-
ulation, as described in the case study below, spring-damper el-
ements are introduced between the foot and the ground to allow
the reaction forces and moments to respond to perturbations
(e.g., altered muscle forces).
IV. CASE STUDY
We have generated dynamic simulations of individual sub-
jects with abnormal gait using computed muscle control [25]
to examine the causes of their abnormal walking pattern and to
simulate treatment options. This case study demonstrates how
simulations can provide insight into the causes of stiff-knee
gait, a condition in which swing-phase knee ﬂexion is sub-
stantially diminished. Reduced knee ﬂexion is often attributed
to excessive excitation of the rectus femoris during the swing
phase [73]. However, factors that limit knee ﬂexion velocity
just before swing, such as excessive force in vasti or rectus
femoris, or diminished force in iliopsoas or gastrocnemius,
may also reduce knee ﬂexion during swing [74]. Determining
which, if any, of these factors limit an individual’s knee ﬂexion
is challenging because current diagnostic methods cannot
evaluate how forces produced by the rectus femoris or other
muscles inﬂuence swing-phase knee motions.
There are several options for treatment of stiff-knee gait.
One option, botulinum toxin injection, theoretically decreases
the hip and knee moments generated by the rectus femoris. A
second option, rectus femoris transfer, theoretically decreases
the muscle’s knee extension moment while leaving its hip
ﬂexion moment intact. At present, the mechanisms responsible
for patients’ improvements in swing-phase knee ﬂexion fol-
lowing these treatments are not well understood. In this case
study, we generated and analyzed a dynamic simulation of a
subject with stiff-knee gait to determine the biomechanical
cause of his diminished knee ﬂexion and the potential conse-
quences of different treatment options (Fig. 4).
The subject was a 12-year-old male diagnosed with spastic
cerebral palsy. His left lower limb exhibited limited knee ﬂexion
during swing and abnormal activity of rectus femoris (preswing
and swing) and vasti (preswing). We represented the subject’s
musculoskeletal system by a scaled, 21-degree-of-freedom
linkage actuated by 92 muscles and generated a forward dy-
namic simulation of the subject’s gait. The simulated joint
angles reproduced the subject’s measured knee ﬂexion angle to
within 2 (Fig. 5, “simulated”).
We evaluated the contributions of rectus femoris, vasti, and
other muscles to knee ﬂexion by altering muscle excitations in
the simulation and computing the resulting changes in peak knee
ﬂexion. Analysis of the subject’s dynamic simulation suggested
that excessive activity of the knee extensors in preswing was
the major cause of his stiff-knee gait. Decreasing the excitation
of rectus femoris or vasti during preswing increased peak knee
ﬂexion substantially (Fig. 5, curves A and B). Decreasing the
excitation of rectus femoris in early swing had a negligible effect
on peak knee ﬂexion (Fig. 5, curve C).
We examined the potential biomechanical consequences
of botulinum toxin injection and rectus femoris transfer.
Botulinum toxin injection was simulated by decreasing the
excessive excitation of rectus femoris while leaving its passive


----- Page 6 (native text) -----
DELP et al.: OPENSIM: OPEN-SOURCE SOFTWARE TO CREATE AND ANALYZE DYNAMIC SIMULATIONS OF MOVEMENT
1945
Fig. 4. Simulation-based treatment planning for stiff-knee gait. Stiff-knee gait is characterized by insufﬁcient knee ﬂexion during the swing phase. A muscle-driven
simulation that reproduces an individual’s movement dynamics (left) can provide a scientiﬁc basis for planning treatments; for example, by predicting whether an
increase in knee ﬂexion is likely to result following botulinum toxin injection to reduce rectus femoris excitation (right-center) or rectus femoris transfer surgery
to change the muscle line of action (right).
Fig. 5. Knee ﬂexion trajectories for different quadriceps excitation levels. The
subject’s pre-operative measured knee angle is shown for comparison. Shaded
area is the average knee angle for unimpaired subjects 1 SD. Note that re-
ducing the excitations of the vasti (VAS) and rectus femoris (RF) in preswing
had a greater affect on knee motion than reducing excitation during swing.
force-length properties intact. Rectus femoris transfer was
simulated by transferring the muscle’s insertion in the model
to the iliotibial band, a common transfer site [75]. We assumed
that the pattern of rectus femoris excitation was not changed by
the surgery.
Peak knee ﬂexion increased following each of the simu-
lated treatments. Decreasing the excessive excitation of rectus
femoris in the model, simulating the effects of botulinum
toxin injection, increased knee ﬂexion by about 10
(Fig. 6,
curve A). Eliminating the excessive knee extension moment
of rectus femoris in preswing and swing while leaving the hip
moment intact, simulating a rectus femoris transfer, increased
the peak knee ﬂexion by about 30 (Fig. 6, curve B). This result
suggests that preserving the capacity of the rectus femoris to
generate a hip ﬂexion moment is important when attempting
to correct stiff-knee gait caused by rectus femoris overactivity.
This subject underwent a rectus femoris transfer as part of his
surgical treatment and achieved signiﬁcant improvement in
both knee ﬂexion velocity at toe-off and knee ﬂexion in swing.
The improvement in knee ﬂexion following a simulated tendon
Fig. 6. Knee ﬂexion trajectories for different simulated treatments. The sub-
ject’s pre- and post-operative measured knee angles are shownfor comparison.
Shaded area is the average knee angle for unimpaired subjects 1 SD.
transfer were similar to the subject’s actual improvements
following surgery (Fig. 6).
Simulations of normal walking (e.g., [23], [63], [70]) have
enabled investigators to identify the actions of muscles with a
level of speciﬁcity and certainty that surpasses insights gained
with experimental methods alone. Simulations of abnormal
walking offer similar potential, but are challenging to develop,
in part, because they require determination of muscle excita-
tions that generate the abnormal movement dynamics exhibited
by persons with movement disorders. The computed muscle
control method [28] provides a computationally efﬁcient means
to generate these simulations and is now available for use by
researchers around the world.
V. OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES FOR
BIOMECHANICAL SIMULATION
We believe simulations will advance movement science by fa-
cilitating interactions between modelers and experimentalists.
Modelers need experimentalists to acquire parameters used in
simulations and to test the accuracy of results derived from sim-
ulations. Experimentalists need modelers to provide a theoret-
ical framework within which to interpret experimental obser-


----- Page 7 (native text) -----
1946
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 54, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2007
vations, and to help gain perspective from the wealth of data
derived from biomechanical experiments. With access to open-
source software for developing and analyzing muscle-driven
simulations, biomechanics researchers are now in a position
to establish quantitative, cause-effect relationships between the
neuromuscular excitation patterns, muscle forces, external re-
action forces, and motions of the body that are observed in the
laboratory. Coupled with high-quality experimental measure-
ments, simulations will help elucidate how elements of the neu-
romusculoskeletal system interact to produce movement and,
we hope, improve the outcomes of treatments for persons with
movement disorders.
A variety of software packages have been used to create and
analyze models of the lower limb [17], [76], upper limb [21],
[55], cervical spine [20], lumbar spine [77], and other muscu-
loskeletal structures. Although these models are implemented in
different modeling packages, they include similar model param-
eters. One challenge for the ﬁeld is to deﬁne modeling standards
and promote interchange between modeling packages.
Another challenge for the ﬁeld is to demonstrate that the use
of simulations can improve treatment outcomes for individuals
with movement disorders. The potential to use subject-speciﬁc
simulations to better understand the causes of movement de-
viations and to assess treatment options is exciting, and the
case study above provides speciﬁc and relevant insights into
stiff-knee gait for one subject. Future studies, in which simula-
tions of many subjects are conducted, are needed to determine
if general principles for treatment planning can be elucidated
from the insights gained from analyzing simulations. Studies
that retrospectively compare predictions from subject-speciﬁc
simulations to the subjects’ actual outcomes are also needed
to evaluate whether existing musculoskeletal models are sufﬁ-
ciently accurate, and to establish the conditions under which the
results of simulations are applicable. The simulation environ-
ment we have created makes such large-scale studies possible,
though more development is needed to streamline the process
of creating and validating simulations of individuals with im-
pairments. Ultimately, prospective clinical trials are needed to
determine if simulations can improve treatment outcomes.
The ability to rapidly create coordinated muscle-driven sim-
ulations provides new research opportunities. Many previous
simulation studies include results from a single simulation. With
SimTrack it is possible to generate and analyze 3-D simulations
of many subjects, and to establish norms describing the muscle
functions for subjects with a range of sizes, strengths, and move-
ment patterns. It is also practical to perform sensitivity studies to
determine whether the conclusions drawn from a simulation are
sensitive to variations in model parameters. This is especially
valuable when a direct comparison with experimental data (e.g.,
muscle force trajectories) is not feasible. It is also possible, as
shown in the case study, to investigate how impairments, such
as abnormal muscle excitations, contribute to abnormal move-
ments in individual subjects (Fig. 5), and to explore the func-
tional consequences of treatments (Fig. 6).
The accuracy of a simulation depends on the ﬁdelity of the
underlying mathematical model of the neuromusculoskeletal
system. Many assumptions are made in the development of
musculoskeletal models, and some of these assumptions are
based on limited experimental evidence. To improve the accu-
racy of musculoskeletal models, more in vivo measurements
of musculoskeletal geometry and joint kinematics are needed
to understand how variations due to size, age, deformity, or
surgery inﬂuence the predictions of a model, and to determine
the conditions under which simulations based on a generic
model are applicable to individual subjects [79]. Experi-
ments that characterize the effects of pathology and surgery
on muscle force generation are needed to test assumptions
made in musculoskeletal models and to assess their impact on
movement. Advances in the neurosciences are needed to allow
development of simulations that incorporate representations
of sensory-motor control. Given that simulations include as-
sumptions and approximations, it is critically important that
each simulation be tested to establish its limitations. As more
investigators use simulations of musculoskeletal dynamics, it is
essential that each scientist test the accuracy of their simulations
in the context of their speciﬁc scientiﬁc study.
OpenSim provides new opportunities for collaboration and
peer review. The code that comprises OpenSim is being tested,
analyzed, and improved through a multi-institutional collabora-
tion. Users are encouraged to modify the code to suit their appli-
cations and to share their contributions with others. As a result,
simulation-based studies can now be reproduced and tested out-
side the laboratory where the simulation is ﬁrst developed. Such
rigorous tests are essential if biomechanical simulation is to be-
come more of a science and less of an art.
The development of a digital human (a computational model
of the human neuromusculoskeletal system with complexity
comparable to a human) is a grand challenge. If a general and
comprehensive model were available, then users could choose
how to simplify the model to address a particular scientiﬁc
question. The Physiome Project [78] outlines this challenge
and some of the important beneﬁts of its success. Future work
in this area is likely to involve musculoskeletal models that rep-
resent different temporal and spatial scales. The development
of software to unite such multiscale models poses additional
challenges.
To simulate whole-body movements such as walking or
running, motion-capture protocols that accurately describe pa-
tients’ joint axes, trunk motions, and foot motions are needed,
along with ground reaction force data from consecutive strides.
Conventional protocols for clinical motion analysis were not
designed with the intent of creating simulations, and they could
be improved. Developing simulations of movement highlights
the limitations of current motion capture data and demonstrates
the need for improved experimental protocols.
Muscle-driven simulations generate a wealth of data. Using
simulations to elucidate the principles that govern muscle coor-
dination and to achieve improved clinical outcomes, therefore,
requires tools that can help reveal insights from these data.
Developing and disseminating analysis and visualization tools
that provide new insights poses an important challenge for
advancing biomechanical simulation. Our goal is to provide a
platform on which the biomechanics community can build tools
that help uncover the principles that govern human movement
and design better treatments for individuals with physical
disabilities.


----- Page 8 (native text) -----
DELP et al.: OPENSIM: OPEN-SOURCE SOFTWARE TO CREATE AND ANALYZE DYNAMIC SIMULATIONS OF MOVEMENT
1947
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors thank R. Altman, T. Buchanan, S. Blemker,
B. J. Fregly, S. Goldberg, J. Higginson, M. Schwartz,
T. van den Bogert, W. Murray, K. Holzbaur, R. Kirsch,
R. Davoodi, P. Mitiguy, M. Liu, G. Loeb, S. Piazza, R. Neptune,
M. Pandy, P. Hunter, J. Reinbolt, J. Schmidt, M. Sherman, and
F. Zajac for contributions to the software and productive discus-
sions they have had on dynamic simulations of movement and
the OpenSim software. They also thank the staff of the Center
for Motion Analysis at the Connecticut Children’s Medical
Center for providing data used in the case study.
REFERENCES
[1] F. E. Zajac and M. E. Gordon, “Determining muscle’s force and action
in multi-articular movement,” Exercise Sports Sci. Rev., vol. 17, pp.
187–230, 1989.
[2] D. G. Thelen, E. S. Chumanov, M. A. Sherry, and B. C. Heiderscheit,
“Neuromusculoskeletal models provide insights into the mechanisms
and rehabilitation of hamstring strains,” Exercise Sports Sci. Rev., vol.
34, pp. 135–141, 2006.
[3] S. J. Piazza, “Muscle-driven forward dynamic simulations for the study
of normal and pathological gait,” J. Neuroeng. Rehab., vol. 3, pp. 5–5,
2006.
[4] M. G. Pandy, “Computer modeling and simulation of human move-
ment,” Ann. Rev. Biomed. Eng., vol. 3, pp. 245–273, 2001.
[5] F. E. Zajac, “Understanding muscle coordination of the human leg with
dynamical simulations,” J. Biomech., vol. 35, pp. 1011–1018, 2002.
[6] F. E. Zajac, R. R. Neptune, and S. A. Kautz, “Biomechanics and muscle
coordination of human walking—Part II: Lessons from dynamical sim-
ulations and clinical implications,” Gait Posture, vol. 17, pp. 1–17,
2003.
[7] J. W. Fernandez and M. G. Pandy, “Integrating modelling and experi-
ments to assess dynamic musculoskeletal function in humans,” Exper-
imental Physiolog., vol. 91, pp. 371–382, 2006.
[8] T. S. Buchanan, D. G. Lloyd, K. Manal, and T. F. Besier, “Neuro-
musculoskeletal modeling: Estimation of muscle forces and joint mo-
ments and movements from measurements of neural command,” J.
Appl. Biomech., vol. 20, pp. 367–395, 2004.
[9] E. J. Cheng, I. E. Brown, and G. E. Loeb, “Virtual muscle: A compu-
tational approach to understanding the effects of muscle properties on
motor control,” J. Neurosci. Methods, vol. 101, pp. 117–130, 2000.
[10] M. M. Forcinito, M. M. Epstein, and W. W. Herzog, “Can a rheological
muscle model predict force depression/enhancement?,” J. Biomech.,
vol. 31, pp. 1093–1099, 1998.
[11] L. J. Bhargava, M. G. Pandy, and F. C. Anderson, “A phenomenolog-
ical model for estimating metabolic energy consumption in muscle con-
traction,” J. Biomech., vol. 37, pp. 81–88, 2004.
[12] B. J. Fregly, Y. Bei, and M. E. Sylvester, “Experimental evaluation
of an elastic foundation model to predict contact pressures in knee re-
placements,” J. Biomech., vol. 36, pp. 1659–1668, 2003.
[13] P. G. Kry and D. K. Pai, “Interaction capture and synthesis,” ACM
Trans. Graphics, vol. 25, pp. 872–880, 2006.
[14] B. A. Garner and M. G. Pandy, “The obstacle-set method for repre-
senting muscle paths in musculoskeletal models,” Comput. Methods
Biomech. Biodmed. Eng., vol. 3, pp. 1–30, 2000.
[15] L. L. Menegaldo, D. T. Fleury, and H. I. Weber, “Moment arms and
musculotendon lengths estimation for a three-dimensional lower-limb
model,” J. Biomech., vol. 37, pp. 1447–1453, 2004.
[16] F. Gao, M. Damsgaard, J. Rasmussen, and S. T. Christensen, “Com-
putational method for muscle-path representation in musculoskeletal
models,” Biolog. Cybern., vol. 87, pp. 199–210, 2002.
[17] S. L. Delp, J. P. Loan, M. G. Hoy, F. E. Zajac, E. L. Topp, and J. M.
Rosen, “An interactive graphics-based model of the lower extremity
to study orthopaedic surgical procedures,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 37, no. 8, pp. 757–767, Aug. 1990.
[18] S. L. Delp and J. P. Loan, “A graphics-based software system to
develop and analyze models of musculoskeletal structures,” Comput.
Biol. Med., vol. 25, pp. 21–34, 1995.
[19] S. L. Delp and J. P. Loan, “A computational framework for simulating
and analyzing human and animal movement,” IEEE Comput. Sci. Eng.,
vol. 2, no. 5, pp. 46–55, Sep./Oct. 2000.
[20] A. N. Vasavada, S. Li, and S. L. Delp, “Inﬂuence of muscle morphom-
etry and moment arms on the moment-generating capacity of human
neck muscles,” Spine, vol. 23, pp. 412–422, 1998.
[21] K. R. Holzbaur, W. M. Murray, and S. L. Delp, “A model of the upper
extremity for simulating musculoskeletal surgery and analyzing neu-
romuscular control,” Annals of Biomedical Engineering, vol. 33, pp.
829–840, 2005.
[22] J. R. Hutchinson, F. C. Anderson, S. S. Blemker, and S. L. Delp, “Anal-
ysis of hindlimb muscle moment arms in Tyrannosaurus rex using a
three-dimensional musculoskeletal computer model: Implications for
stance, gait, and speed,” Paleobiology, vol. 31, pp. 676–701, 2005.
[23] R. R. Neptune, S. A. Kautz, and F. E. Zajac, “Contributions of the
individual ankle plantar ﬂexors to support, forward progression and
swing initiation during walking,” J. Biomech., vol. 34, pp. 1387–1398,
2001.
[24] I. Jonkers, C. Stewart, and A. Spaepen, “The study of muscle action
during single support and swing phase of gait: Clinical relevance of for-
ward simulation techniques,” Gait Posture, vol. 17, pp. 97–105, 2003.
[25] D. G. Thelen and F. C. Anderson, “Using computed muscle control to
generate forward dynamic simulations of human walking from experi-
mental data,” J. Biomech., vol. 39, pp. 1107–1115, 2006.
[26] C. C. Raasch and F. E. Zajac, “Locomotor strategy for pedaling:
Muscle groups and biomechanical functions,” J. Neurophysiolog., vol.
82, pp. 515–525, 1999.
[27] R. R. Neptune and M. L. Hull, “A theoretical analysis of preferred
pedaling rate selection in endurance cycling,” J. Biomech., vol. 32, pp.
409–415, 1999.
[28] D. G. Thelen, F. C. Anderson, and S. L. Delp, “Generating forward
dynamic simulations of movement using computed muscle control,” J.
Biomech., vol. 36, pp. 321–328, 2003.
[29] D. G. Thelen, E. S. Chumanov, D. M. Hoerth, T. M. Best, S. C.
Swanson, L. Li, M. Young, and B. C. Heiderscheit, “Hamstring
muscle kinematics during treadmill sprinting,” Medicine Sci. Sports
Exercise, vol. 37, pp. 108–114, 2005.
[30] K. Sasaki and R. R. Neptune, “Muscle mechanical work and elastic
energy utilization during walking and running near the preferred gait
transition speed,” Gait Posture, vol. 23, pp. 383–390, 2006.
[31] S. J. Piazza and S. L. Delp, “Three-dimensional dynamic simulation
of total knee replacement motion during a step-up task,” J. Biomech.
Eng., vol. 123, pp. 599–606, 2001.
[32] S. L. Delp and F. E. Zajac, “Force- and moment-generating capacity of
lower-extremity muscles before and after tendon lengthening,” Clinical
Orthopaed. Related Res., vol. 284, pp. 247–259, 1992.
[33] S. L. Delp, K. Statler, and N. C. Carroll, “Preserving plantar ﬂexion
strength after surgical treatment for contracture of the triceps surae: A
computer simulation study,” J. Orthopaed. Res., vol. 13, pp. 96–104,
1995.
[34] A. Erdemir and S. J. Piazza, “Changes in foot loading following plantar
fasciotomy: A computer modeling study,” J. Biomech. Eng., vol. 126,
pp. 237–243, 2004.
[35] S. L. Delp, D. A. Ringwelski, and N. C. Carroll, “Transfer of the rectus
femoris: Effects of transfer site on moment arms about the knee and
hip,” J. Biomech., vol. 27, pp. 1201–1211, 1994.
[36] A. M. Herrmann and S. L. Delp, “Moment arm and force-generating
capacity of the extensor carpi ulnaris after transfer to the extensor carpi
radialis brevis,” Journal of Hand Surgery—American Volume, vol. 24,
pp. 1083–1090, 1999.
[37] K. R. Saul, W. M. Murray, V. R. Hentz, and S. L. Delp, “Biomechanics
of the Steindler ﬂexorplasty surgery: A computer simulation study,” J.
Hand Surgery, vol. 28A, pp. 979–986, 2003.
[38] W. M. Murray, A. M. Bryden, K. L. Kilgore, and M. W. Keith,
“The inﬂuence of elbow position on the range of motion of the wrist
following transfer of the brachioradialis to the extensor carpi radialis
brevis tendon,” J. Bone Joint. Surgery, vol. 84A, pp. 2203–2210, 2002.
[39] S. L. Delp, E. E. Bleck, F. E. Zajac, and G. Bollini, “Biomechan-
ical analysis of the Chiari pelvic osteotomy: Preserving hip abductor
strength,” Clinical Orthopaed. Related Res., vol. 254, pp. 189–198,
1990.
[40] S. A. Free and S. L. Delp, “Trochanteric transfer in total hip replace-
ment: Effects on the moment arms and force-generating capacities of
the hip abductors,” J. Orthopaed. Res., vol. 14, pp. 245–250, 1996.
[41] D. J. Schmidt, A. S. Arnold, N. C. Carroll, and S. L. Delp, “Length
changes of the hamstrings and adductors resulting from derotational
osteotomies of the femur,” J. Orthopaed. Res., vol. 17, pp. 279–285,
1999.
[42] S. L. Delp and W. Maloney, “Effects of hip center location on the
moment-generating capacity of the muscles,” J. Biomech., vol. 26, pp.
485–499, 1993.


----- Page 9 (native text) -----
1948
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 54, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2007
[43] S. L. Delp, A. V. Komattu, and R. L. Wixson, “Superior displacement
of the hip in total joint replacement: Effects of prosthetic neck length,
neck-stem angle, and anteversion angle on the moment-generating ca-
pacity of the muscles,” J. Orthopaed. Res., vol. 12, pp. 860–870, 1994.
[44] S. L. Delp, R. L. Wixson, A. V. Komattu, and J. H. Kocmond, “How
superior placement of the joint center in hip arthroplasty affects the
abductor muscles,” Clinical Orthopaed. Related Res., vol. 328, pp.
137–146, 1996.
[45] A. S. Arnold, D. J. Asakawa, and S. L. Delp, “Do the hamstrings and
adductors contribute to excessive internal rotation of the hip in persons
with cerebral palsy?,” Gait Posture, vol. 11, pp. 181–190, 2000.
[46] A. S. Arnold and S. L. Delp, “Rotational moment arms of the me-
dial hamstrings and adductors vary with femoral geometry and limb
position: Implications for the treatment of internally-rotated gait,” J.
Biomech., vol. 34, pp. 437–447, 2001.
[47] S. L. Delp, A. S. Arnold, R. A. Speers, and C. A. Moore, “Hamstrings
and psoas lengths during normal and crouch gait: Implications for
muscle-tendon surgery,” J. Orthopaed. Res., vol. 14, pp. 144–151,
1996.
[48] S. A. Kimmel and M. H. Schwartz, “A baseline of dynamic muscle
function during gait,” Gait Posture, vol. 23, pp. 211–221, 2006.
[49] L. M. Schutte, S. W. Hayden, and J. R. Gage, “Lengths of hamstrings
and psoas muscles during crouch gait: Effects of femoral anteversion,”
J. Orthopaed. Res., vol. 15, pp. 615–621, 1997.
[50] A. S. Arnold, M. Q. Liu, M. H. Schwartz, S. Ounpuu, and S. L. Delp,
“The role of estimating muscle-tendon lengths and velocities of the
hamstrings in the evaluation and treatment of crouch gait,” Gait Pos-
ture, vol. 23, pp. 273–281, 2006.
[51] A. S. Arnold, M. Q. Liu, M. H. Schwartz, S. Ounpuu, L. S. Dias, and
S. L. Delp, “Do the hamstrings operate at increased muscle-tendon
lengths and velocities after surgical lengthening?,” J. Biomech., vol.
39, pp. 1498–1506, 2006.
[52] I. Jonkers, C. Stewart, K. Desloovere, G. Molenaers, and A. Spaepen,
“Musculo-tendon length and lengthening velocity of rectus femoris in
stiff knee gait,” Gait Posture, vol. 23, pp. 222–229, 2006.
[53] A. J. Wilkenfeld, M. L. Audu, and R. J. Triolo, “Feasibility of func-
tional electrical stimulation for control of seated posture after spinal
cord injury: A simulation study,” J. Rehab. Res. Dev., vol. 43, pp.
139–152, 2006.
[54] R. F. Kirsch, A. M. Acosta, F. C. van der Helm, R. J. Rotteveel, and L.
A. Cash, “Model-based development of neuroprostheses for restoring
proximal arm function,” J. Rehab. Res. Dev., vol. 38, pp. 619–626,
2001.
[55] R. Davoodi, I. E. Brown, and G. E. Loeb, “Advanced modeling envi-
ronment for developing and testing FES control systems,” Med. Eng.
Phys., vol. 25, pp. 3–9, 2003.
[56] L. M. Schutte, M. M. Rodgers, and F. E. Zajac, “Improving the efﬁ-
cacy of electrical stimulation-induced leg cycle ergometry: An analysis
based on a dynamic musculoskeletal model,” IEEE Trans. Rehab. Eng.,
vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 109–125, Jun. 1993.
[57] R. R. Neptune and S. A. Kautz, “Knee joint loading in forward versus
backward pedaling: Implications for rehabilitation strategies,” Clinical
Biomech., vol. 15, pp. 528–535, 2000.
[58] T. F. Besier, G. E. Gold, G. S. Beaupre, and S. L. Delp, “A modeling
framework to estimate patellofemoral joint cartilage stress in vivo,”
Medicine Sci. Sport Exercise, vol. 37, pp. 1924–1930, 2005.
[59] D. G. Lloyd and T. F. Besier, “An EMG-driven musculoskeletal model
to estimate muscle forces and knee joint moments in vivo,” J. Biomech.,
vol. 36, pp. 765–776, 2003.
[60] S. McLean, X. Huang, A. Su, and A. J. Van den Bogert, “Sagittal plane
biomechanics cannot injure the ACL during sidestep cutting,” Clinical
Biomech., vol. 19, pp. 828–838, 2004.
[61] I. C. Wright, R. R. Neptune, A. J. van den Bogert, and B. M. Nigg, “The
effects of ankle compliance and ﬂexibility on ankle sprains,” Medicine
Sci. Sport Exercise, vol. 32, pp. 260–265, 2000.
[62] I. C. Wright, R. R. Neptune, A. J. van den Bogert, and B. M. Nigg,
“The inﬂuence of foot positioning on ankle sprains,” J. Biomech., vol.
33, pp. 513–519, 2000.
[63] S. J. Piazza and S. L. Delp, “The inﬂuence of muscles on knee ﬂexion
during the swing phase of gait,” J. Biomech., vol. 29, pp. 723–733,
1996.
[64] D. C. Kerrigan, R. S. Roth, and P. O. Riley, “The modelling of adult
spastic paretic stiff-legged gait swing period based on actual kinematic
data,” Gait Posture, vol. 7, pp. 117–124, 1998.
[65] J. S. Higginson, F. E. Zajac, R. R. Neptune, S. A. Kautz, and S. L.
Delp, “Muscle contributions to support during gait in an individual with
post-stroke hemiparesis,” J. Biomech., vol. 39, pp. 1769–1777, 2006.
[66] W. J. Kargo, F. Nelson, and L. C. Rome, “Jumping in frogs: Assessing
the design of the skeletal system by anatomically realistic modeling
and forward dynamic simulation,” J. Experiment. Biol., vol. 205, pp.
1683–1702, 2002.
[67] W. J. Kargo and L. C. Rome, “Functional morphology of proximal
hindlimb muscles in the frog Rana pipiens,” J. Experiment. Biol., vol.
205, pp. 1987–2004, 2002.
[68] R. J. Full and A. N. Ahn, “Static forces and moments generated in the
insect leg: Comparison of a three-dimensional musculo-skeletal com-
puter model with experimental measurements,” J. Experiment. Biol.,
vol. 198, pp. 1285–1298, 1995.
[69] R. R. Neptune and M. L. Hull, “Evaluation of performance criteria
for simulation of submaximal steady-state cycling using a forward dy-
namic model,” J. Biomech. Eng., vol. 120, pp. 334–341, 1998.
[70] F. C. Anderson and M. G. Pandy, “Dynamic optimization of human
walking,” J. Biomech. Eng., vol. 123, pp. 381–390, 2001.
[71] A. Seth and M. G. Pandy, “A neuromusculoskeletal tracking method
for estimating individual muscle forces in human movement,” J.
Biomech., vol. 40, pp. 356–366, 2007.
[72] T. W. Lu and J. J. O’Connor, “Bone position estimation from skin
marker coordinates using global optimization with joint constraints,”
J. Biomech., vol. 32, pp. 129–134, 1999.
[73] J. Perry, “Distal rectus femoris transfer,” Develop. Med. Child Neu-
rolog., vol. 29, pp. 153–158, 1987.
[74] S. R. Goldberg, F. C. Anderson, M. G. Pandy, and S. L. Delp, “Muscles
that inﬂuence knee ﬂexion velocity in double support: Implications for
stiff-knee gait,” J. Biomech., vol. 37, pp. 1189–1196, 2004.
[75] J. R. Gage, J. Perry, R. R. Hicks, S. Koop, and J. R. Werntz, “Rectus
femoris transfer to improve knee function of children with cerebral
palsy,” Develop. Med. Child Neurolog., vol. 29, pp. 159–166, 1987.
[76] T. M. Kepple, K. L. Siegel, and S. J. Stanhope, “Relative contributions
of the lower extremity joint moments to forward progression and sup-
port during gait,” Gait Posture, vol. 6, pp. 1–8, 1997.
[77] M. deZee, L. Hansen, C. Wong, J. Rasmussen, and E. B. Simonsen, “A
generic detailed rigid-body lumbar spine model,” J. Biomech., vol. 40,
pp. 1219–1227, 2006.
[78] P. J. Hunter and T. K. Borg, “Integration from proteins to organs: The
Physiome Project,” Nature Rev. Molec. Cell Biol., vol. 4, pp. 237–243,
2003.
[79] S. Van Sint Jan, “Introducing anatomical and physiological accuracy
in computerized anthropometry for increasing the clinical usefulness
of modeling systems,” Critical Rev. Phys. Rehab. Med., vol. 17, pp.
249–274, 2005.
Scott L. Delp received the B.S. degree in mechan-
ical engineering (summa cum laude) from Colorado
State University, Fort Collins, in 1983, and the M.S.
and Ph.D. degrees in mechanical engineering from
Stanford University, Stanford, CA, in 1986 and 1990,
respectively.
He worked in Hewlett Packard’s graphics work-
station group after receiving his Bachelor’s degree.
In 1990, he joined the faculty of Northwestern Uni-
versity, where he was jointly appointed in the De-
partments of Biomedical Engineering and Physical
Medicine and Rehabilitation. He returned to Stanford University in 1999, where
he served as Chairman of the Biomechanical Engineering Division in the Me-
chanical Engineering Department. He is Co-Director of Stanford’s Center for
Biomedical Computation; this center recently became an NIH National Center
for Physics-Based Simulation of Biological Structures. In 2002, he became the
founding Chairman of Stanford’s Bioengineering Department. His work draws
on computational mechanics, biomedical imaging, and neuromuscular biology
to improve treatments for individuals with physical disabilities. He led the de-
velopment of a software system that enables modeling and simulation of com-
plex human and animal movements; this software is now used at hundreds of
research centers around the world. Computer models that he and his colleagues
have developed have helped provide a scientiﬁc basis to better treat movement
disorders resulting from osteoarthritis, cerebral palsy, and stroke. He has pub-
lished over 200 scientiﬁc articles and conference papers on these topics.
Prof. Delp has received numerous awards for his work, including a National
Young Investigator Award from the National Science Foundation, Faculty Fel-
lowships from the Baxter Foundation and Powell Foundation, and a Technology
Reinvestment Award for which he was honored at the White House with former
President Clinton. At Stanford, he has received the Dana Adams Grifﬁn Award,
and was recently appointed as the Charles Lee Powell Professor.


----- Page 10 (native text) -----
DELP et al.: OPENSIM: OPEN-SOURCE SOFTWARE TO CREATE AND ANALYZE DYNAMIC SIMULATIONS OF MOVEMENT
1949
Frank C. Anderson received the B.A. degree in
physics from Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore,
MD, in 1987, and the M.A. degree in kinesiology,
and Ph.D. degree in mechanical engineering both
from the University of Texas at Austin in 1992 and
1999, respectively.
He is currently a Senior Research Engineer in the
Neuromuscular Biomechanics Lab in the Department
of Bioengineering at Stanford University, Stanford,
California. Prior to his appointment at Stanford, he
worked in industry as a software engineer at Wesson
International, Inc., where he focused on real-time graphics for air trafﬁc control
simulation, and at Subsurface Computer Modeling, Inc., where he developed
applications for mapping geological structures. His current interests are in de-
veloping modeling, simulation, and control approaches for investigating how the
elements of the neuromusculoskeletal system interact to produce movement. He
is applying these approaches to quantify muscle function in normal and patho-
logical gait.
Dr. Anderson is a member of the American Society of Biomechanics, In-
ternational Society of Biomechanics, and ACM SIGGRAPH. He has received
several awards for his research, including the 1999 American Society of
Biomechanics Young Scientist Award for Outstanding Pre-Doctoral Research,
the 2001 Gait and Clinical Movement Analysis Society Best Paper Award, and
the 2002 Richard Skalak Best Paper Award awarded by the Bioengineering
Division of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers for the best paper
of 2001 published in the Journal of Biomedical Engineering.
Allison S. Arnold received the B.S. and M.S.
degrees in mechanical engineering from the Mass-
achusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA,
in 1990 and 1992, respectively, and the Ph.D. de-
gree in biomedical engineering from Northwestern
University, Evanston, IL in 1999.
In 2000, she became a Research Associate in the
Biomechanical Engineering Division, Mechanical
Engineering Department, at Stanford University.
She transferred to the Bioengineering Department in
2006. Her research involves the use of biomechanical
modeling and simulation to study human movement, with a particular focus
on the treatment of walking abnormalities in persons with neuromuscular
disorders. Previously, she has conducted research at several academic labs,
clinical centers, and sports venues, including the Newman Laboratory for
Biomechanics and Human Rehabilitation at MIT (1989–92); the Biomechanics
Laboratory, Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Warren
Grant Magnusen Clinical Center, at the NIH in Bethesda, MD (1990); the
U.S. Olympic Training Center in Colorado Springs, CO (1991–92); and the
Sensory-Motor Performance Program at the Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago
(1994–1999).
Dr. Arnold is a member of Tau Beta Pi, the International Society of Biome-
chanics (ISB), the American Society of Biomechanics (ASB), and the Gait and
Clinical Movement Analysis Society (GCMAS).
Peter Loan received B.S. degrees in mechanical
engineering and philosophy from the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology (Cambridge, MA) in 1986,
and the M.S. degrees in mechanical engineering
and computer science from Stanford University,
Stanford, CA, in 1989.
He is currently a Senior Software Engineer in the
MusculoGraphics division of Motion Analysis Cor-
poration (Chicago, IL), where he develops software
tools for motion capture applications. He is also a
Software Engineering Consultant at Stanford Univer-
sity (Stanford, CA), where he is involved in the design and implementation of
OpenSim. Prior to these positions, he was President and co-founder of Mus-
culoGraphics, Inc., where he was involved in various biomechanical modeling
projects, such as a computer-assisted knee replacement system and a 3-D haptic
simulation of gunshot wound debridement.
Ayman Habib was born in Alexandria, Egypt. He
received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in computer
science and automatic control from the School of
Engineering, Alexandria University, Alexandria,
Egypt (1987, 1991) and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees
in computer science (computer aided geometric
design) from Rice University, Houston, TX, in 1995
and 1996, respectively.
He has been working as a Research Software
Developer for the Neuromuscular Biomechanics
Lab, Stanford University, Stanford, CA since Feb-
ruary 2004 primarily on OpenSim development. Before joining Stanford, he
served as a Principal Software Engineer then as a Software Group Leader
with Parametric Technology Corporation, where he led the development of
several simulation products (1996–2003). His primary interest is in software
development methodology, understanding muscle function in various activities,
contact modeling and geometric modeling.
Dr. Habib received an Achievement Award for Software Development from
Parametric Technology Corp. He also received the Rice University Fellowship
1991–1995 and graduated magna cum laude.
Chand T. John received the B.S. degrees in com-
puter science and pure mathematics with Honors
(summa cum laude) from the University of Texas,
Austin, in 2003, and the M.S. degree in computer
science from Stanford University, Stanford, CA in
2007. He is working toward the Ph.D. degree in
computer science at Stanford University, Stanford,
CA.
He is also an NIH Predoctoral Fellow at Stanford.
His past areas of research include simulation of cloud
formation, computer-aided geometric design, hybrid
systems, mesh segmentation, and recursive shape description. He has helped de-
velop free, open-source software for developing musculoskeletal models from
biomedical images. He is interested in developing novel algorithms for mod-
eling and simulating movement control for biomechanics, computer graphics,
and robotics.
Mr. John is a member of the American Association for the Advancement of
Science sponsored by the AAAS/Science Program for Excellence in Science.
He was a Dean’s Honored Graduate in computer science at the University of
Texas, Austin.
Eran Guendelman received the B.Math degrees in
computer science and pure mathematics from the
University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Canada, in 2001,
and the Ph.D. degree in computer science from
Stanford University, Stanford, CA, in 2006.
He is a Distinguished Postdoctoral Fellow at the
NIH Center for Physics-Based Simulation of Biolog-
ical Structures located at Stanford University, Stan-
ford, CA, where he is developing tools for modeling,
simulating, and analyzing the neuromusculoskeletal
system. From 2003 to 2005, he consulted at Indus-
trial Light + Magic, San Rafael, CA, where he developed algorithms for ﬂuid
and solid simulation and helped integrate these into a visual effects production
pipeline. His research interests include physically-based simulation, computa-
tional solid and ﬂuid mechanics, and computer graphics.
Dr. Guendelman is a member of the Association for Computing Machinery’s
Special Interest Group for Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques.


----- Page 11 (native text) -----
1950
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING, VOL. 54, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2007
Darryl G. Thelen received the B.S. degree in
mechanical engineering from Michigan State Uni-
versity, East Lansing, MI, in 1987 and the M.S.E.
and Ph.D. degrees in mechanical engineering from
the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, in 1988
and 1992, respectively.
He worked as a Post-Doctoral Fellow at the
University of Michigan from 1992 to 1994, as an
Assistant Professor of Engineering at Hope College,
Holland, MI, from 1994 to 2000, as a Visiting
Faculty Member at Stanford University from 2000
to 2001, and as a Principal Engineer at Honda Fundamental Research Lab-
oratories, Mountain View, CA, from 2001 to 2002. Since 2002, he has been
on the faculty of the Department of Mechanical Engineering at the University
of Wisconsin-Madison, where he is currently an Associate Professor. His
research interests include computational biomechanics, simulation and control
of human locomotion, and dynamic imaging of musculotendon mechanics.
Clinical applications include rehabilitation following muscle injury and the
treatment of gait impairments associated with aging and disease.
Dr. Thelen was awarded a Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER)
Award by the National Science Foundation. He has been a member of the Amer-
ican Society of Mechanical Engineers since 1992 and of the American Society
of Biomechanics since 1995.
