

----- Page 1 (native) -----
A Threat in the Air 
How Stereotypes Shape Intellectual Identity and Performance 
Claude M. Steele 
Stanford University 
A general theory of domain identification is used to de- 
scribe achievement barriers still faced by women in ad- 
vanced quantitative areas and by African Americans in 
school. The theory assumes that sustained school success 
requires identification with school and its subdomains; 
that societal pressures on these groups (e.g., economic 
disadvantage, gender roles) can frustrate this identifica- 
tion; and that in school domains where these groups are 
negatively stereotyped, those who have become domain 
identified face the further barrier of stereotype threat, 
the threat that others' judgments or their own actions 
will negatively stereotype them in the domain. Research 
shows that this threat dramatically depresses the stan- 
dardized test performance of women and African Ameri- 
cans who are in the academic vanguard of their groups 
(offering a new interpretation of group differences in 
standardized test performance), that it causes disidenti- 
fication with school, and that practices that reduce this 
threat can reduce these negative effects. 
F 
rom an observer's standpoint, the situations of a 
boy and a girl in a math classroom or of a Black 
student and a White student in any classroom are 
essentially the same. The teacher is the same; the text- 
books are the same; and in better classrooms, these stu- 
dents are treated the same. Is it possible, then, that they 
could still experience the cl~sroom differently, so differ- 
ently in fact as to significantly affect their performance 
and achievement there? This is the central question of 
this article, and in seeking an answer, it has both a practi- 
cal and a theoretical focus. The practical focus is on the 
perhaps obvious need to better understand the processes 
that can hamper a group's school performance and on 
what can be done to improve that performance. The theo- 
retical focus is on how societal stereotypes about groups 
can influence the intellectual functioning and identity de- 
velopment of individual group members. To show the 
generality of these processes and their relevance to im- 
portant outcomes, this theory is applied to two groups: 
African Americans, who must contend with negative ste- 
reotypes about their abilities in many scholastic domains, 
and women, who must do so primarily in math and the 
physical sciences. In trying to understand the schooling 
outcomes of these two groups, the theory has a distinct 
perspective, that of viewing people, in Sartre's (1946/ 
1965) words, as "first of all beings in a situation" such 
that if one wants to understand them, one "must inquire 
first into the situation surrounding [them]" (p. 60). 
The theory begins with an assumption: that to sus- 
tain school success one must be identified with school 
achievement in the sense of its being a part of one's 
self-definition, a personal identity to which one is self- 
evaluatively accountable. This accountability--that good 
self-feelings depend in some part on good achievement-- 
translates into sustained achievement motivation. For 
such an identification to form, this reasoning continues, 
one must perceive good prospects in the domain, that is, 
that one has the interests, skills, resources, and opportuni- 
ties to prosper there, as well as that one belongs there, 
in the sense of being accepted and valued in the domain. 
If this relationship to schooling does not form or gets 
broken, achievement may suffer. Thus, in trying to under- 
stand what imperils achievement among women and Afri- 
can Americans, this logic points to a basic question: What 
in the experience of these groups might frustrate their 
identification with all or certain aspects of school 
achievement? 
One must surely turn first to social structure: limits 
on educational access that have been imposed on these 
groups by socioeconomic disadvantage, segregating so- 
cial practices, and restrictive cultural orientations, limits 
of both historical and ongoing effect. By diminishing 
one's educational prospects, these limitations (e.g., inad- 
equate resources, few role models, preparational disad- 
vantages) should make it more difficult to identify with 
academic domains. To continue in math, for example, a 
woman might have to buck the low expectations of teach- 
ers, family, and societal gender roles in which math is 
seen as unfeminine as well as anticipate spending her 
entire professional life in a male-dominated world. These 
Editor's note. Cheryl B. Travis served as action editor for this article. 
Author's note. The research reported in this article was supported by 
National Institutes of Health Grant MH51977, Russell Sage Foundation 
Grant 879.304, and Spencer Foundation and James S. McDonnell Foun- 
dation postdoctoral fellowships. Completion of the research was aided 
by the Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences. 
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to 
Claude M. Steele, Department of Psychology, Jordan Hall, Building 
420, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305. Electronic mail may be 
sent via Internet to steele@psych.stanford.edu. 
June 1997 
• American Psychologist 
Copyright 1997 by the American Psychological Association, Inc. 0003-066X/97/$2.00 
Vol. 52, No. 6, 613-629 
613

----- Page 2 (native) -----
Claude M. 
Steele 
Copyright by L A. 
Cicero, Stanford News 
Service, 
realities, imposed on her by societal structure, could so 
reduce her sense of good prospects in math as to make 
identifying with it difficult. 
But this article focuses on a further barrier, one that 
has its effect on the already identified, those members of 
these groups who, having survived structural obstacles, 
have achieved identification with the domain (of the pres- 
ent groups, school-identified African Americans and 
math-identified women). It is the social-psychological 
threat that arises when one is in a situation or doing 
something for which a negative stereotype about one's 
group applies. This predicament threatens one with being 
negatively stereotyped, with being judged or treated ste- 
reotypically, or with the prospect of conforming to the 
stereotype. Called stereotype threat, it is a situational 
threat--a threat in the air--that, in general form, can 
affect the members of any group about whom a negative 
stereotype exists (e.g., skateboarders, older adults, White 
men, gang members). Where bad stereotypes about these 
groups apply, members of these groups can fear being 
reduced to that stereotype. And for those who identify 
with the domain to which the stereotype is relevant, this 
predicament can be self-threatening. 
Negative stereotypes about women and African 
Americans bear on important academic abilities. Thus, 
for members of these groups who are identified with 
domains in which these stereotypes apply, the threat of 
these stereotypes can be sharply felt and, in several ways, 
hampers their achievement. 
First, if the threat is experienced in the midst of 
a domain performance--classroom presentation or test- 
taking, for example--the emotional reaction it causes 
could directly interfere with performance. My colleagues 
and I (Spencer, Steele, & Quinn, 1997; C. M. Steele & 
Aronson, 1995) have tested this possibility with women 
taking standardized math tests and African Americans 
taking standardized verbal tests. Second, when this threat 
becomes chronic in a situation, as for the woman who 
spends considerable time in a competitive, male-oriented 
math environment, it can pressure disidentification, a re- 
conceptualization of the self and of one's values so as 
to remove the domain as a self-identity, as a basis of 
self-evaluation. Disidentification offers the retreat of not 
caring about the domain in relation to the self. But as it 
protects in this way, it can undermine sustained motiva- 
tion in the domain, an adaptation that can be costly when 
the domain is as important as schooling. 
Stereotype threat is especially frustrating because, 
at each level of schooling, it affects the vanguard of these 
groups, those with the skills and self-confidence to have 
identified with the domain. Ironically, their susceptibility 
to this threat derives not from internal doubts about their 
ability (e.g., their internalization of the stereotype) but 
from their identification with the domain and the resulting 
concern they have about being stereotyped in it. (This 
argument has the hopeful implication that to improve the 
domain performance of these students, one should focus 
on the feasible task of rifting this situational threat rather 
than on altering their internal psychology.) Yet, as school- 
ing progresses and the obstacles of structure and stereo- 
type threat take their cumulative toU, more of this van- 
guard will likely be pressured into the ranks of the un- 
identified. These students, by not caring about the domain 
vis-a-vis the self, are likely to underperform in it regard- 
less of whether they are stereotype threatened there. Thus, 
although the identified among these groups are likely to 
underperform only under stereotype threat, the unidenti- 
fied (casualties of sociocultural disadvantage or prior in- 
ternalization of stereotype threat) are likely to underper- 
form and not persist in the domain even when stereotype 
threat has been removed. 
In these ways, then, the present analysis sees social 
structure and stereotypes as shaping the academic identi- 
fies and performance outcomes of large segments of soci- 
ety. But first, for the two groups under consideration, 
what are these outcomes? 
As is much discussed, these outcomes are in a crisis 
state for African Americans. Although Black students 
begin school with standardized test scores that are not 
too far behind those of their White counterparts, almost 
immediately a gap begins to appear (e.g., Alexander & 
Entwistle, 1988; Burton & Jones, 1982; Coleman et al., 
1966) that, by the sixth grade in most school districts, is 
two full grade levels (Gerard, 1983). There have been 
encouraging increases in the number of African Ameri- 
cans completing high school or its equivalence in recent 
years: 77% for Black students versus 83% for White 
students (American Council on Education, 1995-1996). 
And there have been modest advances in the number 
of African American high school graduates enrolling in 
college, although these have not been as substantial as 
in other groups (American Council on Education, 1995- 
1996). Perhaps most discouraging has been the high drop- 
out rate for African American college students: Those 
who do not finish college within six years is 62%, corn- 
614 
June 1997 • American Psychologist

----- Page 3 (native) -----
pared with a national dropout rate of 41% (American 
Council on Education, 1995-1996). And there is evi- 
dence of lower grade performance among those who do 
graduate of, on average, two thirds of a letter grade lower 
than those of other graduating students (Nettles, 1988). 
On predominantly White campuses, Black students are 
also underrepresented in math and the natural sciences. 
Although historically Black colleges and universities now 
enroll only 17% of the nation's Black college students, 
they produce 42% of all Black BS degrees in natural 
science (Culotta & Gibbons, 1992). At the graduate level, 
although Black women have recently shown modest gains 
in PhDs received, the number awarded to Black men has 
declined over the past decade more than for any other 
subgroup in society (American Council on Education, 
1995-1996). 
Women clearly thrive in many areas of schooling. 
But in math, engineering, and the physical sciences, they 
often endure lesser outcomes than men. In a meta- 
analysis involving over 3 million participants, Hyde, Fen- 
nema, and Lamon (1990), for example, found that 
through elementary and middle school, there are virtually 
no differences between boys and girls in performance on 
standardized math tests but that a trend toward men doing 
better steadily increases from high school (SD = .29) 
through college (SD = :41) and into adulthood (SD = 
.59). And, as their college careers begin, women leave 
these fields at a rate two and a half times that of men 
(Hewitt & Seymour, 1991). Although White women con- 
stitute 43% of the U.S. population, they earn only 22% 
of the BS degrees and 13% of the PhDs and occupy only 
10% of the jobs in physical science, math, and engi- 
neering, where they earn only 75% of the salary paid to 
men (Hewitt & Seymour, 1991). 
These inequities have compelled explanations rang- 
ing from the sociocultural to the genetic. In the case 
of African Americans, for example, past and ongoing 
socioeconomic disadvantage, cultural orientations (e.g., 
Ogbu, 1986), and genetic differences (e.g., Herrnstein & 
Murray, 1994; Jensen, 1969) have all been proposed as 
factors that, through singular and accumulated effect, 
could undermine their performance. In the case of wom- 
en's performance in math and the physical sciences, there 
are parallel arguments: structural and cultural gender role 
constraints that shunt women away from these areas; 
culturally rooted expectations (e.g., Eccles, 1987; Eccles- 
Parsons et al., 1983); and, again, genetic limitations (Ben- 
bow & Stanley, 1980, 1983). But, like crumbs along the 
forest floor, several findings lead away from these analy- 
ses as fully sufficient. 
For one thing, minority student achievement gaps 
persist even in the middle and upper socioeconomic 
classes. Using data from the Coleman report (Coleman 
et al., 1966) and a more recent College Board study of 
Scholastic Assessment Test (SAT) scores, Miller (1995, 
1996) found that the gaps in academic performance 
(grades as well as standardized test scores) between 
Whites and non-Asian minorities (e.g., African Ameri- 
cans, Hispanics, and Native Americans) were as large, or 
larger, in the upper and middle classes (as measured by 
parental education and occupation) than in the lower 
classes. Group differences in socioeconomic status 
(SES), then, cannot fully explain group differences in 
academic performance. 
Another point is that these differences are not even 
fully explained by group differences in skills. This is 
shown in the well-known overprediction or underperfor- 
mance phenomenon of the test bias literature. Overpre- 
diction occurs when, at each level of performance on a 
test of preparation for some level of schooling (e.g, the 
SAT), students from one group wind up achieving less-- 
getting lower college grades, for example--than other 
students with the same beginning scores. In this sense, 
the test scores of the low-performing group overpredict 
how well they will actually achieve, or, stated another 
way, the low-performing group underperforms in relation 
to the test's prediction. But the point here is that because 
the students at each test-score level have comparable ini- 
tial skills, the lower eventual performance of one group 
must be due to something other than skill deficits they 
brought with them. 
In the case of African Americans, overprediction 
across the academic spectrum has been so reliably ob- 
served as to be almost a lawful phenomenon in American 
society (e.g., Jensen, 1980; Vars & Bowen, 1997). Per- 
haps the most extensive single demonstration of it comes 
from a recent Educational Testing Service study (Ramist, 
Lewis, & McCamley-Jenkins, 1994) that examined the 
predictiveness of the SAT on 38 representative college 
and university campuses. As is typically the case, the 
study found that the predictive validity to the SAT--its 
correlation with subsequent grades--was as good for 
African American, Hispanic, and Native American stu- 
dents as for White and Asian students. But for the three 
non-Asian minority groups, there was sizable overpre- 
diction (underperformance) in virtually all academic 
areas. That is, at each level of preparation as measured 
by the SAT, something further depressed the grades of 
these groups once they arrived on campus. 
As important, the same study found evidence of SAT 
overprediction for female students (i.e., women per- 
forming less well than men at comparable SAT levels) 
in technical and physical science courses such as engi- 
neering, economics, and computer science but not in non- 
technical areas such as English. It is interesting though 
that women in this study were not overpredicted in math 
per se, a seeming exception to this pattern. The overpre- 
diction of women's college math performance has gener- 
ally been unreliable, with some studies showing it (e.g., 
Benbow & Arjmand, 1990; Levin & Wyckoff, 1988; 
Lovely, 1987; Ware, Steckler, & Leserman, 1985) and 
others not (e.g., Adelman, 1991; DeBoer, 1984; Ware & 
Dill, 1986). However, a recent study (Strenta, Elliott, 
Adair, Scott, & Mailer, 1993) involving over 5,000 stu- 
dents at four prestigious northeastern colleges identified a 
pattern of effects that suggests why these different results 
June 1997 • American Psychologist 
615

----- Page 4 (native) -----
occur: 
Underperformance reliably occurred among 
women who were talented in math and science and who, 
perhaps for that reason, took courses in these areas that 
were intended for majors, whereas it did not occur among 
women with less math and science preparation who took 
courses in these areas intended for nonmajors. Thus, 
women may be reliably overpredicted in math and the 
physical sciences, just as Black students are more gener- 
ally, but only when the curriculum is more advanced and 
only among women who are more identified with the 
domain. Among this vanguard, though, something other 
than skill deficits depresses their performance. What are 
these further processes? 
oS•ial 
and StemO~rpe Structure as 
stacles to Achievement Identification 
The proposed answer is that at least one of these pro- 
cesses is a set of social psychological phenomena that 
obstructs these groups' identification with domains of 
schooling. 1 I turn first to school identification. 
Academic Identificalion 
As noted, this analysis assumes that sustained school 
achievement depends, most centrally, on identifying with 
school, that is, forming a relationship between oneself 
and the domains of schooling such that one's self-regard 
significantly depends on achievement in those domains. 
Extrinsic rewards such as better career outcomes, per- 
sonal security, parental exhortation, and so on, can also 
motivate school achievement. But it is presumed that sus- 
taining motivation through the ebb and flow of these other 
rewards requires school identification. How, then, is this 
identification formed? 
Not a great deal is known about the process. But 
several models (e.g., Schlenker & Weigold, 1989; C. M. 
Steele, 1988; Tesser, 1988) share an implicit reasoning, 
the first assumption of which is that people need positive 
self-regard, a self-perception of " adaptive and moral ade- 
quacy" (C. M. Steele, 1988, p. 289). Then, the argument 
goes, identification with a given domain of life depends, 
in large part, on the self-evaluative prospects it offers. 
James (1890/1950) described the development of the self 
as a process of picking from the many, often incompati- 
ble, possible selves, those "on which to stake one's salva- 
tion" (p. 310). This choice and the assessment of pros- 
pects that goes into it are, of course, multifaceted: Are 
the rewards of the domain attractive or important? Is an 
adequate opportunity structure available? Do I have the 
requisite skills, talents, and interests? Have others like 
me succeeded in the domain? Will I be seen as belonging 
in the domain? Will I be prejudiced against in the do- 
main? Can I envision wanting what this domain has to 
offer? and so on. Some of these assessments undergird 
a sense of efficacy in the domain (e.g., Bandura, 1977, 
1986). Others have to do with the rewards, importance, 
and attractiveness of the domain itself. And still others 
have to do with the feasibility and receptiveness of the 
domain. The point here is that students tacitly assess their 
prospects in school and its subdomains, and, roughly 
speaking, their identifications follow these assessments: 
increasing when they are favorable and decreasing when 
they are unfavorable. As for the two groups under consid- 
eration, then, this analysis suggests that something sys- 
tematically downgrades their assessments of, and thus 
their identification with, critical domains of schooling. 
Threats to Academic IdentificaHon 
Structural and cultural threats. 
Both groups 
have endured and continue to endure sociocultural influ- 
ences that could have such effects. Among the most repli- 
cable facts in the schooling literature is that SES is 
strongly related to school success and cognitive perfor- 
mance (e.g., Coleman et al., 1966; Miller, 1996). And 
because African Americans have long been dispropor- 
tionately represented in lower socioeconomic classes, this 
factor surely contributes to their achievement patterns in 
school, both through the material limitations associated 
with lower SES (poor schools, lack of resources for 
school persistence, etc.) and through the ability of these 
limitations, by downgrading school-related prospects, to 
undermine identification with school. And beyond socio- 
economic structure, there are cultural patterns within 
these groups or in the relation between these groups and 
the larger society that may also frustrate their identifica- 
tion with school or some part of it, for example, Ogbu's 
(1986) notion of a lower-class Black culture that is "op- 
positional" to school achievement or traditional feminine 
gender roles that eschew math-related fields (e.g., Eccles- 
Parsons et al., 1983; Linn, 1994). 
$~reo~ fhreat. Beyond these threats, waiting 
for those in these groups who have identified with school, 
is yet another threat to their identification, more subtle 
perhaps but nonetheless profound: that of stereotype 
threat. I define it as follows: the event of a negative 
stereotype about a group to which one belongs becoming 
self-relevant, usually as a plausible interpretation for 
something one is doing, for an experience one is having, 
or for a situation one is in, that has relevance to one's 
self-definition. It happens when one is in the field of 
the stereotype, what Cross (1991) called a "spotlight 
anxiety" (p. 195), such that one can be judged or treated 
in terms of a racial stereotype. Many analysts have re- 
ferred to this predicament and the pressure it causes (e.g., 
Allport, 1954; Carter, 1991; Cose, 1993; Goffman, 1963; 
Howard & Hammond, 1985; E.E. Jones et al., 1984; 
Sartre, 1946/1965; C.M. Steele, 1975; C. M. Steele & 
Other factors may also contribute. For example, there are persis- 
tent reports of women and minorities being treated differently in the 
classroom and in other aspects of schooling (e.g., Hewitt & Seymour, 
1991). This treatment includes both the "chilly-climate" sins of omis- 
sion-the failure to call on them in class or to recognize and encourage 
their talents, and so on--and, in the case of low-income minorities, 
sins of commission--disproportionate expulsion from school, assign- 
ment to special education classes, and administration or corporal pun- 
ishment ("National Coalition of Advocates for Students Report," 1988). 
616 
June 1997 • American Psychologist

----- Page 5 (native) -----
Aronson, 1995; S. Steele, 1990). The present definition 
stresses that for a negative stereotype to be threatening, 
it must be self-relevant. Then, the situational contingency 
it establishes--the possibility of conforming to the ste- 
reotype or of being treated and judged in terms of it-- 
becomes self-threatening. It means that one could be lim- 
ited or diminished in a domain that is self-definitional. 
For students from groups in which abilities are negatively 
stereotyped in all or some school domains and yet who 
remain identified with those domains, this threat may be 
keenly felt, felt enough, I argue, to become a further 
barrier to their identification with the domain. 
There is, however, a more standard explanation of 
how negative stereotypes affect their targets. Beginning 
with Freud (as cited in Brill, 1938) in psychology and 
Cooley (1956) and Mead (1934) in sociology, treatises 
on the experience of oppression have depicted a fairly 
standard sequence of events: Through long exposure to 
negative stereotypes about their group, members of preju- 
diced-against groups often internalize the stereotypes, 
and the resulting sense of inadequacy becomes part of 
their personality (e,g., Allport, 1954; Bettelheim, 1943; 
Clark, 1965; Grief & Coobs, 1968; Erikson, 1956; Fanon, 
1952/1967; Kardiner & Ovesey, 1951; Lewin, 1941). 
In recent years, the tone of this argument has con- 
structively lightened, replacing the notion of a broad self- 
hatred with the idea of an inferiority anxiety or low ex- 
pectations and suggesting how situational factors contrib- 
ute to this experience. S. Steele's (1990) essays on racial 
vulnerability (i.e., a vulnerability of both Blacks and 
Whites that stems, in part, from the situational pressures 
of reputations about their groups) offered an example. 
This work depicts the workings of this anxiety among 
African Americans in an interconnected set of ideas: inte- 
gration shock that, like Goffman (1963), points to set- 
tings that integrate Blacks and Whites as particularly 
anxiety arousing; objective correlatives or race-related 
situational cues that can trigger this anxiety; and the in- 
herent sense of risk, stemming from an internalized infe- 
riority anxiety and from a myth of inferiority pervading 
integrated settings, of being judged inferior or of con- 
firming one's own feared inferiority. Howard and Ham- 
mond (1985) earlier made this argument specifically in 
relation to the school achievement of Black students. 
They argued that once "rumors of inferiority" (stereo- 
types; p. 18) about Black students' abilities pervade the 
environment--through, for example, national debates 
over the genetic basis of racial differences in IQ--they 
can intimidate Black students; become internalized by 
them; and, in turn, lead to a low sense of self-efficacy, 
demotivation, and underperformance in school. Analo- 
gous arguments have been applied to women interested 
in math-related areas (cf. Eccles-Parsons et al., 1983). 
These models recognize the situational influence of 
negative stereotypes (e.g., Allport, 1954; Howard & 
Hammond, 1985; S. Steele, 1990) but most often describe 
it as a process in which the stereotype, or more precisely 
the possibility of being stereotyped, triggers an internal- 
ized inferiority doubt or low expectancy. And because 
this anxiety is born of a socialization presumed to influ- 
ence all members of the stereotyped group, virtually all 
members of the group are presumed to have this anxiety, 
to one degree or another. 
Stereotype threat, in contrast, refers to the strictly 
situational threat of negative stereotypes, the threat that 
does not depend on cuing an internalized anxiety or ex- 
pectancy. It is cued by the mere recognition that a nega- 
tive group stereotype could apply to oneself in a given 
situation. How threatening this recognition becomes de- 
pends on the person's identification with the stereotype- 
relevant domain. For the domain identified, the situational 
relevance of the stereotype is threatening because it 
threatens diminishment in a domain that is self-defini- 
tional. For the less domain identified, this recognition is 
less threatening or not threatening at all, because it threat- 
ens something that is less self-definitional. 
Stereotype threat, then, as a situational pressure "in 
the air" so to speak, affects only a subportion of the 
stereotyped group and, in the area of schooling, probably 
affects confident students more than unconfident ones. 
Recall that to be identified with schooling in general, or 
math in particular, one must have confidence in one's 
domain-related abilities, enough to perceive good pros- 
pects in the domain. This means that stereotype threat 
should have its greatest effect on the better, more confi- 
dent students in stereotyped groups, those who have not 
internalized the group stereotype to the point of doubting 
their own ability and have thus remained identified with 
the domain--those who are in the academic vanguard 
of their group. 2 
Several general features of stereotype threat follow: 
1. Stereotype threat is a general threat not tied to 
the psychology of particular stigmatized groups. It affects 
the members of any group about whom there exists some 
generally known negative stereotype (e.g., a grandfather 
who fears that any faltering of memory will confirm or 
expose him to stereotypes about the aged). Stereotype 
threat can be thought of as a subtype of the threat posed 
by negative reputations in general. 
2. That which turns stereotype threat on and off, the 
controlling "mechanism" so to speak, is a particular 
concurrence: whether a negative stereotype about one's 
group becomes relevant to interpreting oneself or one's 
behavior in an identified-with setting. When such a set- 
2 The point is not that negative stereotypes are never internalized as 
low self-expectancies and self-doubts. It is that in such internalization, 
disidentification is the more primary adaptation. That is, once the stereo- 
type-relevant domain (e.g., math) is dropped as a self-definition, the 
negative stereotype (e.g., that women are limited in math) can be ac- 
cepted as more self-descriptive (i.e., internalized) without it much af- 
fecting one's self-regard (as for the woman who, not caring about math, 
says she is lousy at it). But this internalization is probably resisted 
(e.g., Crocker & Major, 1989) until disidentification makes it less self- 
threatening. Once this has happened, the person is likely to avoid the 
domain because of both disinterest and low confidence regardless of 
whether stereotype threat is present. 
June 1997 • American Psychologist 
617

----- Page 6 (native) -----
ting integrates stereotyped and nonstereotyped people, it 
may make the stereotype, as a dimension of difference, 
more salient and thus more strongly felt (e,g., Frable, 
Blackstone, & Sherbaum, 1990; Goffman, 1963; Kleck & 
Strenta, 1980; Sartre, 1946/1965; S. Steele, 1990). But 
such integration is neither necessary nor sufficient for 
this threat to occur. It can occur even when the person is 
alone, as for a woman taking an important math test 
alone in a cubicle but under the threat of confirming a 
stereotyped limitation of ability. And, in integrated set- 
tings, it need not occur. Reducing the interpretive rele- 
vance of a stereotype in the setting, say in a classroom 
or on a standardized test, may reduce this threat and its 
detrimental effects even when the setting is integrated. 3 
3. This mechanism also explains the variabilities of 
stereotype threat: the fact that the type and degree of this 
threat vary from group to group and, for any group, 
across settings. For example, the type and degree of ste- 
reotype threat experienced by White men, Black people, 
and people who are overweight differ considerably, bear- 
ing on sensitivity and fairness in the first group, on school 
performance in the second, and on self-control in the 
third. Moreover; for any of these groups, this threat will 
vary across settings (e.g., Goffman, 1963; S. Steele, 
1990). For example, women may reduce their stereotype 
threat substantially by moving across the hall from math 
to English class. The explanation of this model is straight- 
forward: Different groups experience different forms and 
degrees of stereotype threat because the stereotypes about 
them differ in content, in scope, and in the situations to 
which they apply. 
4. To experience stereotype threat, one need not be- 
lieve the stereotype nor even be worried that it is true of 
oneself. The well-known African American social psy- 
chologist James M. Jones (1997) wrote, 
When I go to the ATM machine and a woman is making a 
transaction, I think about whether she will fear I may rob her. 
Since I have no such intention, how do I put her at ease? Maybe 
I can't . . . and maybe she has no such expectation. But it 
goes through my mind. (p. 262) 
Jones felt stereotype threat in this situation even though 
he did not believe that the stereotype characterized him. 
Of course, this made it no less a life-shaping force. One's 
daily life can be filled with recurrent situations in which 
this threat pressures adaptive responses. 
5. The effort to overcome stereotype threat by dis- 
proving the stereotype--for example, by outperforming 
it in the case of academic workwcan be daunting. Be- 
cause these stereotypes are widely disseminated through- 
out society, a personal exemption from them earned in 
one setting does not generalize to a new setting where 
either one's reputation is not known or where it has to 
be renegotiated against a new challenge. Thus, even when 
the stereotype can be disproven, the need to do so can 
seem Sisyphean, everlastingly recurrent. And in some 
critical situations, it may not be disprovable. The stereo- 
types considered in this work allege group-based limita- 
tions of ability that are often reinforced by the structural 
reality of increasingly small group representations at 
more advanced levels of the schooling domain. Thus, for 
group members working at these advanced levels, no 
amount of success up to that point can disprove the ste- 
reotype's relevance to their next, more advanced perfor- 
mance. For the advanced female math student who has 
been brilliant up to that point, any frustration she has at 
the frontier of her skills could confirm the gender-based 
limitation alleged in the stereotype, making this frontier, 
because she is so invested in it, a more threatening place 
than it is for the nonstereotyped. Thus, the work of dispel- 
ling stereotype threat through .performance probably in- 
creases with the difficulty of work in the domain, and 
whatever exemption is gained has to be rewon at the next 
new proving ground. 
Empirical Support for a Theory of 
Stereotype Threat and Disidentificafion 
In testing these ideas, the research of my colleagues and 
I has had two foci: The first is on intellectual performance 
in the domain in which negative group stereotypes apply. 
Here, the analysis has two testable implications. One is 
that for domain-identified students, stereotype threat may 
interfere with their domain-related intellectual perfor- 
mance. Analysts have long argued that behaving in a 
situation in which one is at risk of confirming a negative 
stereotype about one's group, or of being seen or treated 
stereotypically, causes emotional distress and pressure 
(e.g., Cross, 1991; Fanon, 1952/1967; Goffman, 1963; 
Howard & Hammond, 1985; Sartre, 1946/1965; C.M. 
Steele & Aronson, 1995; S. Steele, 1990). The argument 
here is that for those who identify with the domain 
enough to experience this threat, the pressure it causes 
may undermine their domain performance. Disruptive 
pressures such as evaluation apprehension, test anxiety, 
choking, and token status have long been shown to disrupt 
performance through a variety of mediating mechanisms: 
interfering anxiety, reticence to respond, distracting 
thoughts, self-consciousness, and so on (Baumeister & 
Showers, 1984; Geen, 1991; Lord & Saenz, 1985; Sara- 
son, 1980; Wine, 1971). The assumption of this model 
is that stereotype threat is another such interfering pres- 
sure. The other testable implication is that reducing this 
threat in the performance setting, by reducing its interfer- 
ing pressure, should improve the performance of other- 
wise stereotype-threatened students. 
The second research focus is the model's implica- 
a As a process of social devaluation, stereotype threat is both a 
subform of stigmatization and something more general. It is that form 
of stigmatization that is mediated by collectively held, devaluing group 
stereotypes. This means that it does not include stigmatization that 
derives from nonstereotyped features such as a facial disfigurement or, 
for example, what Goffman (1963) called abominations of the body. 
Stereotype threat is a situational predicament. And, in this sense, it is 
also more general than stigmatization. It is a threat that can befall 
anyone about whom a negative reputation or group stereotype exists. 
618 
June 1997 • American Psychologist

----- Page 7 (native) -----
tion that stereotype threat, and the anticipation of having 
to contend with it unceasingly in school or some domain 
of schooling, should deter members of these groups 
from identifying with these domains, and, for group 
members already identified, it should pressure their 
disidentification. 4 
Stereotype Threaf and Intellectual Performance 
Steven Spencer, Diane Quinn, and I (Spencer et al., 1997) 
first tested the effect of stereotype threat on intellectual 
performance by testing its effect on the standardized math 
test performance of women who were strong in math. 
The stereotype threat of women performing 
moth. 
At base, of course, the stereotype threat that 
women experience in math-performance settings derives 
from a negative stereotype about their math ability that is 
disseminated throughout society. But whether this threat 
impaired their performance, we reasoned, would depend 
on two things. First, the performance would have to be 
construed so that any faltering would imply the limitation 
of ability alleged in the stereotype. This means that the 
performance would have to be difficult enough so that 
faltering at it would imply having reached an ability limit 
but not so difficult as to be nondiagnostic of ability. And 
second, as has been much emphasized, the women in 
question would have to be identified with math, so that 
faltering and its stereotype-confirming implication would 
threaten something they care about, their belongingness 
and acceptance in a domain they identify with. Of course, 
men too (at least those of equal skill and identification 
with math) could be threatened in this situation; faltering 
would reflect on their ability too. But their faltering 
would not carry the extra threat of confirming a stereo- 
typed limitation in math ability or of causing them to be 
seen that way. Thus, the threat that women experience, 
through the interfering pressure it causes, should worsen 
their performance in comparison to equally qualified 
men. Interestingly, though, these otherwise confident 
women should perform equally as well as equally quali- 
fied men when this situational threat is lessened. 
To explore these questions, Spencer, Quinn, and I 
(Spencer et al., 1997) designed a basic research para- 
digm: We recruited female and male students, mostly 
college sophomores, who were both good at math and 
strongly identified with it in the sense of seeing them- 
selves as strong math students and seeing math as im- 
portant to their self-definition. We then gave them a very 
difficult math test one at a time. The items were taken 
from the advanced math General Records Examination 
(GRE) and we assumed would frustrate the skills of these 
students without totally exceeding them. As expected, 
and presumably reflecting the impairing effects of stereo- 
type threat, women significantly underperformed in rela- 
tion to equally qualified men on this difficult math test. 
But more important, in another condition of this experi- 
ment in which the test was an advanced literature test 
rather than a math test and in which participants had 
been selected and matched for their strong literature skills 
and identification, women performed just as well as 
equally qualified men. This happened, we reasoned, be- 
cause women are not stereotype threatened in this area. 
A second experiment replicated women' s underper- 
formance on the difficult math test and showed that it 
did not happen when the test was easier, that is when the 
items, taken from the regular quantitative section of the 
GRE, were more within the skills of these strong math 
students. The lack of performance frustration on this eas- 
ier test, presumably, reduced women's stereotype threat 
by making the stereotype less relevant as an interpretation 
of their performance. 
Stereolype threat versus genes. 
So went our 
interpretation. But an alternative was possible: The bio- 
logical limits of women's math ability do not emerge 
until the material tested is difficult. It is this very pattern 
of evidence that Benbow and Stanley (1980, 1983) used 
to suggest a genetic limitation in women's math ability. 
Thus, the first two experiments reproduced the gender 
effects on math performance reported in the literature: 
that women underperform primarily in math and mainly 
when the material is difficult. But they fall short of estab- 
lishing our interpretation. 
To do this, we would need to give women and men 
a difficult math test (one capable of producing women's 
underperformance) but then experimentally vary stereo- 
type threat, that is, vary how much women were at risk 
of confirming the stereotype while taking the test. A third 
experiment did this by varying how the test (the same 
difficult one used in the earlier experiments) was repre- 
sented. Participants were told either that the test generally 
showed gender differences, implying that the stereotype 
of women's limitations in math was relevant to interpre- 
ting their own frustration, or that it showed no gender 
differences, implying that the gender stereotype was not 
relevant to their performance and thus could not be con- 
firmed by it on this particular test. The no-gender-differ- 
ences representation did not challenge the validity of the 
stereotype; it simply eliminated the risk that the stereo- 
type could be fulfilled on this test. In the gender-differ- 
ences condition, we expected women (still stereotype 
threatened) to underperform in relation to equally quali- 
fied men, but in the no-gender-differences condition, we 
expected women (with stereotype threat reduced) to per- 
form equal to such men. The genetic interpretation, of 
course, predicts that women will underperform on this 
difficult test regardless of how it is represented. 
In dramatic support of our reasoning, women per- 
formed worse than men when they were told that the test 
produced gender differences, which replicated women's 
4 Moreover, a protective avoidance of identification can become a 
group norm. In reaction to a shared sense of threat in school, for 
example, it can become a shared reaction that is transmitted to group 
members as the normative relation to school. Both research (e.g., Ogbu, 
1986; Solomon, 1992) and the media have documented this reaction in 
minority students from inner-city high schools to Harvard University's 
campus. Thus, disidentification can be sustained by normative pressure 
from the in-group as well as by stereotype threat in the setting. 
June 1997 • American Psychologist 
619

----- Page 8 (native) -----
Figure ! 
Mean Performance on a Difficult Math Test as a 
Function of Gender and Test Characterization 
30 
g~ 
~2o 
i ,o 
o'J 
Gender- 
No-gender- 
difference 
difference 
Test characterization 
I 
I 
I 
underperformance observed in the earlier experiments, 
but they performed equal to men when the test was repre- 
sented as insensitive to gender differences, even though, 
of course, the same difficult "ability" test was used in 
both conditions (see Figure 1). Genetic limitation did not 
cap the performance of women in these experiments. A 
fourth experiment showed that reducing stereotype threat 
(through the no-gender-differences treatment) raised 
women's performance to that of equally qualified men, 
even when participants' specific performance expectan- 
cies were set low, that is, when participants were led to 
expect poor test performance. Also, a fifth experiment 
(that again replicated the treatment effects of the third 
experiment) found that participants' posttreatment anxi- 
ety, not their expectancies or efficacy, predicted their per- 
formance. Thus, the disruptive effect of stereotype threat 
was mediated more by the self-evaluative anxiety it 
caused than by its lowering of performance expectations 
or self-efficacy. 
In~rnal or $1~llonal threat. 
These findings 
make an important theoretical and practical point: The 
gender-differences conditions (including those in which 
the possibility of gender differences was left to inference 
rather than stated directly) did not impair women's per- 
formance by triggering doubts they had about their math 
ability. For one thing, these women had no special doubts 
of this sort; they were selected for being very good at 
math and for reporting high confidence in their ability. 
Nor was this doubt a factor in their test performance. 
Recall that the math test was represented as an ability 
test in all conditions of these experiments. This means 
that in the no-gender-differences conditions, women were 
still at risk of showing their own math ability to be 
weak--the same risk that men had in these conditions. 
Under this risk (when their own math ability was on 
the line), they performed just as well as men. Whatever 
performance-impairing anxiety they had, it was no 
greater than that of equally qualified men. Thus, the gen- 
der-differences conditions (the normal condition under 
which people take these tests) could not have impaired 
their performance by triggering some greater internalized 
anxiety that women have about their own math ability-- 
an anxiety acquired, for example, through prior socializa- 
tion. Rather, this condition had its effect through situa- 
tional pressure. It set up an interpretive frame such that 
any performance frustration signaled the possible gender- 
based ability limitation alleged in the stereotype. For 
these women, this signal challenged their belongingness 
in a domain they cared about and, as a possibly newly 
met limit to their ability, could not be disproven by their 
prior achievements, thus its interfering threat. 
The stereotype threat of African Amer/cons on 
standardized tests. 
Joshua Aronson and I (C. M. 
Steele & Aronson, 1995) examined these processes 
among African American students. In these studies, Black 
and White Stanford University students took a test com- 
posed of the most difficult items on the verbal GRE exam. 
Because the participants were students admitted to a 
highly selective university, we assumed that they were 
identified with the verbal skills represented on standard- 
ized tests. The first study varied whether or not the stereo- 
type about Black persons' intellectual ability was relevant 
to their performance by varying whether the test was 
presented as ability-diagnostic, that is, as a test of intel- 
lectual ability, or as ability-nondiagnostic, that is, as a 
laboratory problem-solving task unrelated to ability and 
thus to the stereotype about ability. Analysis of covari- 
ance was used to remove the influence of participants' 
initial skills, measured by their verbal SAT scores, on 
their test performance. This done, the results showed 
strong evidence of stereotype threat: Black participants 
greatly underperformed White participants in the diag- 
nostic condition but equaled them in the nondiagnostic 
condition (see Figure 2). A second experiment produced 
the same pattern of results with an even more slight ma- 
nipulation of stereotype threat: whether or not partici- 
pants recorded their race on a demographic questionnaire 
just before taking the test (described as nondiagnostic in 
all conditions). Salience of the racial stereotype alone 
was enough to depress the performance of identified 
Black students (see Figure 3). 
The ¢ognltive mediation of stereolype threat. 
Stereotype threat, then, can impair the standardized test 
performance of domain-identified students; this effect 
generalizes to several ability-stereotyped groups, and its 
mediation seems to involve anxiety more than expectan- 
cies. But do these manipulations cause a specific state of 
stereotype threat, that is, a sensed threat specifically 
about being stereotyped or fitting the stereotype? To ad- 
dress this question, Aronson and I (C. M. Steele & Aron- 
son, 1995) tested two things: whether manipulating ste- 
reotype threat actually activates the racial stereotype in 
620 
June 1997 • American Psychologist

----- Page 9 (native) -----
the thinking and information processing of stereotype- 
threatened test takers and whether it produces in them a 
specific motivation to avoid being seen stereotypically. 
Again, Black and White participants were run in either 
an ability-diagnostic or ability-nondiagnostic condition, 
except that just after the condition instructions and com- 
pletion of the sample test items (so that participants could 
see how difficult the items were) and just before partici- 
pants expected to take the test, they completed measures 
of stereotype activation and avoidance. The stereotype- 
activation measure asked them to complete 80 word frag- 
ments, 10 of which we knew from pretesting could be 
completed with, among other words, words symbolic of 
African American stereotypes (e,g., _ _ce [race], la__ 
[lazy], or _ _or [poor]) and 5 of which could be com- 
pleted with, among other words, words signifying self- 
doubts (e.g., 1o__ _ [loser], du__ [dumb], or sha_ __ 
[shame]). The measure of participants' motivation to 
avoid being seen stereotypically simply asked them how 
much they preferred various types of music, activities, 
sports, and personality traits, some of which a pretest 
sample had rated as stereotypic of African Americans. 5 
If expecting to take a difficult ability-diagnostic test 
is enough to activate the racial stereotype in the thinking 
of Black participants and to motivate them to avoid being 
stereotyped, then these participants, more than those in 
the other conditions, should show more stereotype and 
self-doubt word completions and fewer preferences for 
things that are African American. This is precisely what 
happened. Black participants in the diagnostic condition 
completed more word fragments with stereotype- and 
self-doubt-related words and had fewer preferences for 
things related to African American experience (e.g., jazz, 
basketball, hip-hop) than Black participants in the nondi- 
agnostic condition or White participants in either condi- 
I 
II 
I 
I 
tion, all of whom were essentially the same (see Figure 
4). Also, as a last item before participants expected to 
begin the test, they were given the option of recording 
their race, a measure we thought might further tap into 
an apprehension about being Viewed stere0typicaUy. In- 
terestingly, then, all of the Black participants in the nondi- 
agnostic condition and all of the White participants in 
both conditions listed their race, whereas only 25% of 
the Black participants in the diagnostic condition did so. 
Selbreie¢iion or selbpre~nto~ ? A troubling 
implication of the earlier mentioned internalization mod- 
els (e.g., Allport, 1954; Bettelheim, 1943; Clark, 1965; 
Grier & Coobs, 1968; Erikson, 1956; Fan0n, 1952/1967; 
Kardiner & Ovesey, 1951) is that negative stereotypes 
about one's group eventually become internalized and 
cause rejection of one's own group, even of oneself-- 
self-hating preferences. The famous finding of Clark and 
Clark (1939) that Black children preferred White dolls 
over Black dolls has been interpreted this way. The pref- 
erences of Black participants in the diagnostic condition 
fit this pattern; with negative stereotypes about their 
group cognitively activated, they valued things that were 
African American less than any other group. But the full 
set of results suggests a different interpretation. In those 
conditions in which Black participants did not have to 
worry about tripping a stereotypic perception of them- 
selves, they valued things that were African American 
more strongly than did other participants. Thus, rather 
than reflecting self- or own-group rejection, their devalu- 
ing of things that were African American in the diagnostic 
s Participants did not actually take the test in this experiment , as 
completing these measures would likely have activated the stereotype 
in all conditions. 
June 1997 • American Psychologist 
621

----- Page 10 (native) -----
I 
I I 
I 
I 
I 
II 
condition was apparently a strategic self-presentation 
aimed at cracking the stereotypic lens through which they 
could be seen. So it could be, then, in the general case, 
rather than reflecting real self-concepts, behavior that 
appears group rejecting or self-rejecting may reflect situ- 
ation-bound, self-presentational strategies. 
Stereotype threat and domain identification. 
Not being identified with a domain, our (C. M. Steele & 
Aronson, 1995) theory reasons, means that one's experi- 
ence of stereotype threat in the domain is less self-threat- 
ening. Although we have yet to complete a satisfactory 
test of this prediction, partially completed experiments 
and pretests show that stereotype threat has very little, 
if any, effect on participants not identified with the do- 
main of relevance. Most typically, these participants give 
up and underperform on the difficult test regardless of 
whether they are under stereotype threat. Although not 
yet constituting a complete test of this implication of the 
theory, these data do emphasize that the above results 
generalize only to domain-identified students. 
grouSp•ncesthnmt 
and Jte .
i
n
~
 
of 
in slandordized test perfer- 
mance. 
Inherent to the science of quantifying human 
intelligence is the unsavory possibility of ranking societal 
groups as to their aggregated intelligence. It is from this 
comer of psychology that the greatest controversy has 
arisen, a controversy that has lasted throughout this cen- 
tury and that is less about the fact of these group differ- 
ences than about their interpretation (of. Hermstein & 
Murray, 1994; Kamin, 1974). To the set of possible 
causes for these group differences, our (C. M. Steele & 
Aronson, 1995) findings add a new one: the differential 
impact of stereotype threat on groups in the testing situa- 
tion itself. Thus, stereotype threat may be a possible 
source of bias in standardized tests, a bias that arises not 
from item content but from group differences in the threat 
that societal stereotypes attach to test performance. Of 
course, not every member of an ability-stereotyped group 
is going to be affected by stereotype threat every time 
they take a test. As our research has shown, the experi- 
ence of success as one takes the test can dispel the rele- 
vance of the stereotype. Nonetheless, among the most 
identified test takers in the stereotype-threatened group 
those in its academic vanguard who have the greatest 
confidence and skills mthis threat can substantially de- 
press performance on more difficult parts of the exam. 
And this depression could contribute significantly to the 
group's underperformance in comparison with nonste- 
reotype-threatened groups. 6 
Reaction of Disidenlification 
Stereotype threat is assumed to have an abiding effect 
on school achievement-,an effect beyond its impairment 
of immediate performancemby preventing or breaking 
a person's identification with school, in particular, those 
domains of schooling in which the stereotype applies. 
This reasoning has several implications for which empiri- 
cal evidence can be brought to bear: the resilience of 
self-esteem to stigmatization; the relationship between 
stigmatized status and school achievement; and, among 
ability-stigmatized people, the relationship between their 
school performance and self-esteem. 
Seif-esteem's resilience to sligmallzation. 
In a 
recent review, Croc~r and Major (1989) were able to 
6 Those who are less domain identified in the stereotype-threatened 
group may also underp~orm on standardized tests. Because they care 
less about the domain it represents, they may be undermotivated or they 
may withdraw effort in the face of frustration. And for all of the reasons 
I have discussed, the greater portion of the stereotype-threatened group 
may be academically unidentified. This fact too, then, may contribute 
to the group's overall weaker performance on these tests in comparison 
with nonstereotype-threateneXt groups. 
622 
June 1997 • American Psychologist

----- Page 11 (native) -----
make a strong case for the lack of something that common 
sense suggests should exist: a negative effect of stigmatiza- 
tion on self-esteem. Following the logic of the internaliza- 
tion models described above and viewing stigmatization 
as, among other things, an assault to self-esteem, one might 
expect that people who are stigmatized would have lower 
self-esteem than people who are not. Yet, as Crocker and 
Major reported, when the self-esteem of stigmatized 
groups (e.g., Blacks, Chicanos, the facially disfigured, 
obese people, etc.) is actually measured, one finds that 
their self-esteem is as high as that of the nonstigmatized. 
Crocker and Major (1989) offered the intriguing ar- 
gument that stigma itself offers esteem-protective strate- 
gies. For example, the stigmatized can blame their fail- 
ures on the prejudice of out-group members, they can 
limit their self-evaluative social comparisons to the in- 
group of other stigmatized people, and they can devalue 
the domains in which they feel devalued. Other models 
have also described esteem-saving adaptations to stigma. 
For example, models that assume internalization of ste- 
reotype-related anxieties often posit compensatory per- 
sonality traits (e.g., grandiosity) that protect self-esteem 
but leave one poorly adapted to the mainstream (e.g., 
Allport, 1954; Clark, 1965; Grief & Coobs, 1968; Kar- 
diner & Ovesey, 1951; S. Steele, 1990). In the present 
reasoning, stigmatization stems from stereotype threat 
in specific domains. Thus, it adds to the list of stigma 
adaptations the possibility of simple domain disidentifi- 
cation, the rescuing of self-esteem by rendering as self- 
evaluatively irrelevant the domain in which the stereotype 
applies. Herein may lie a significant source of the self- 
esteem resilience shown in stigmatized groups. This idea 
also implies that once domain disidentification is 
achieved, the pressure for adaptations of attribution and 
personality may be reduced. 
A univenml connection befween stlgnm'zatlon 
and poor school achievement. 
If disidentification 
with school, and the resulting underachievement, can be 
a reaction to ability-stigmatizing stereotypes in society, 
then it might be expected that ability stigmatization 
would be associated with poor school performance wher- 
ever it occurs in the world. Finding such a relationship 
would not definitively prove the present theory; the direc- 
tion of causality could be quarreled with, as could the 
mediation of such a relationship. Still, it would be sug- 
gestive, and, in that respect, Ogbu (1986) reported an 
interesting fact: Among the caste-like minorities in indus- 
trial and nonindustrial nations throughout the world (e.g., 
the Maoris of New Zealand, the Baraku of Japan, the 
Harijans of India, the Oriental Jews of Israel, and the 
West Indians of Great Britain), there exists the same 
15-point IQ gap between them and the nonstigmatized 
members of their society as exists between Black and 
White Americans. These groups also suffer poorer school 
performance, higher dropout rates, and related behavior 
problems. Moreover; these gaps appear even when the 
stigmatized and nonstigmatized are of the same race, as 
in the case of the Baraku and other Japanese. What these 
groups share that is capable of explaining their deficits 
is a caste-like status that, through stereotypes in their 
societies, stigmatizes their intellectual abilities--sowing 
the seeds, I suggest, of their school disidentification. 
The disassociation of selF-esteem and school 
achievement. If the poor school achievement of abil- 
ity-stigmatized groups is mediated by disidentification, 
then it might be expected that among the ability stigma- 
tized, there would be a disassociation between school 
outcomes and overall self-esteem. Several kinds of evi- 
dence suggest this process among African Americans. 
First, there is the persistent finding that although Black 
students underperform in relation to White students on 
school outcomes from grades to standardized tests (e.g., 
Demo & Parker, 1987; Simmons, Brown, Bush, & Blyth, 
1978; C. M. Steele, 1992), their global self-esteem is as 
high or higher than that of White students (e.g., Porter & 
Washington, 1979; Rosenberg, 1979; Wylie, 1979). For 
both of these facts to be true, some portion of Black 
students must have acquired an imperviousness to poor 
school performance. 
Several further studies suggest that this impervi- 
ousness is rooted in disidentification. In a study of deseg- 
regated schools in Champaign, Illinois, Hare and Costen- 
ell (1985) measured students' school achievement; over- 
all self-esteem; and self-esteem in the specific domains 
of home life, school, and peer-group relations. Like oth- 
ers, they found that although Black students perfor!ned 
less well than White students, they still had comparable 
levels of overall self-esteem. Their domain-specific mea- 
sures suggested why: Although Black students were 
lower than White students in school and home-life self- 
esteem, Blacks slightly exceeded Whites in peer-group 
self-esteem. Here then, perhaps, was the source of their 
overall self-regard: disidentification with domains in 
which their evaluative prospects were poor (in this case, 
school and home life) and identifcation with domains in 
which their prospects were better (i.e., their peers). 
A recent study suggests that this may be a not un- 
common phenomenon. Analyzing data available from the 
National Educational Longitudinal Survey (National 
Center for Educational Statistics, 1992; a nationally rep- 
resentative longitudinal survey begun in 1988), Osborne 
(1994) found that from the 8th through 10th grades, 
Black students had lower achievement and somewhat 
higher self-esteem than White students, which replicated 
the general pattern of findings described above. But more 
than this, he found evidence of increasing Black students' 
disidentification over this period: The correlation be- 
tween their school achievement and self-esteem for this 
period decreased significantly more for Black than for 
White students. Also, using a scale measure of school 
disidentification, Major, Spencer; Schmadei; Wolfe, and 
Crocker (in press) found that Black students were more 
disidentified than White students in several college sam- 
pies and that for disidentified students of both races, 
negative feedback about an intellectual task had less ef- 
fect on their self-esteem than it did for identified students. 
June 1997 • American Psychologist 
623

----- Page 12 (native) -----
Major et al. further showed that when racial stereotypes 
were primed, neither negative nor positive feedback af- 
fected Black students' self-esteem, whereas the self-es- 
teem of White students followed the direction of the 
feedback. Ability stigmatization of the sort experienced 
by African Americans, then, can be associated with a 
protective "disconnect" between performance and self- 
regard, a disconnect of the sort that is consistent with 
disidentification theory. 
Can stereotype threat directly cause this disconnect? 
To test this question, Kirsten Stoutemeyer and I varied 
the strength of stereotype threat that female test takers 
(Stanford students) were under by varying whether soci- 
etal differences between women and men in math perfor- 
mance were attributed to small but stable differences in 
innate ability (suggesting an inherent, gender-based limit 
in math ability) or to social causes such as sex-role pre- 
scriptions and discrimination (suggesting no inherent, 
gender-based limit in math ability). We then measured 
their identificaion with math and math-related careers, 
either before or after they took a difficult math test. Re- 
gardless of when identification was measured, women 
under stronger stereotype threat disidentified with math 
and math-related careers more than women under weaker 
stereotype threat. Although domain identification has sev- 
eral determinants, these findings suggest that stereotype 
threat is an important one of them. 
"Wise" Schooling: Practice and Policy 
As a different diagnosis, the present analysis comes to a 
different prescription: The schooling of stereotype-threat- 
ened groups may be improved through situational 
changes (analogous to those manipulated in our experi- 
ments) that reduce the stereotype threat these students 
might otherwise be under. As noted, psychological diag- 
noses have more typically ascribed the problems of these 
students to internal processes ranging from genes to inter- 
nalized stereotypes. On the face of it, at least, internal 
states are more difficult to modify than situational factors. 
Thus, the hope of the present analysis, encouraged by our 
research, is that these problems might be more tractable 
through the situational design of schooling, in particular, 
design that secures these students in the belief that they 
will not be held under the suspicion of negative stereo- 
types about their group. Schooling that does this, I have 
called wise, a term borrowed from Irving Goffman 
(1963), who borrowed it from gay men and lesbians of 
the 1950s. They used it to designate heterosexuals who 
understood their full humanity despite the stigma attached 
to their sexual orientation: family and friends, usually, 
who knew the person beneath the stigma. So it must 
be, I argue, for the effective schooling of stereotype- 
threatened groups. 
Although "wisedom" may be necessary for the ef- 
fective schooling of such students, it may not always 
be sufficient. The chief distinction made in this analysis 
(between those of these groups who are identified with 
the relevant school domain and those who are not) raises 
a caution. As noted, stereotype threat is not keenly felt by 
those who identify little with the stereotype-threatening 
domain. Thus, although reducing this threat in the domain 
may be necessary to encourage their identification, it may 
not be sufficient to build an identification that is not there. 
For this to occur, more far-reaching strategies that develop 
the building blocks of domain identification may be re- 
quired: better skills, greater domain self-efficacy, feelings 
of social and cultural comfort in the domain, a lack of 
social pressure to disidentify, and so on. 
But for the identified of these groups, who are quite 
numerous on college campuses, the news may be better 
than is typically appreciated. For these students, feasible 
changes in the conditions of schooling that make threaten- 
ing stereotypes tess applicable to their behavior (i.e., wis- 
dom) may be enough. They are already identified with 
the relevant domain, they have skills and confidence in 
the domain, and they have survived other barriers to iden- 
tification. Their remaining problem is stereotype threat. 
Reducing that problem, then, may be enough to bring 
their performance on par with that of nonstereotyped 
persons in the domain. 
This distinction raises an important and often over- 
looked issue in the design of schooling for stereotype- 
threatened students, that of triage, the issue of rendering 
onto the right students the right intervention. Mistakes 
can easily be made. For example, applying a strategy to 
school-identified students (on the basis of their member- 
ship in a stereotype-threatened group) that assumes weak 
identification, poor skills, and little confidence could 
backfire. It could increase stereotype threat and underper- 
formance by signaling that their abilities are held under 
suspicion because of their group membership. But the 
opposite mistake could be made by applying a strategy 
that assumes strong identification, skills, and confidence 
to those who are actually unidentified with the relevant 
domain. Merely reducing stereotype threat may not ac- 
complish much when the more primary need of these 
students is to gain the interests, resources, skills, confi- 
dences, and values that are needed to identify with the 
domain. 
Some wise strategies, then, may work for both iden- 
tified and unidentified students from these groups, but 
others may have to be appropriately targeted to be effec- 
tive. I offer some examples of both types. 
For both domain-identified and domain-unidentified 
students: 
1. Optimistic teacher-student relationships. The 
prevailing stereotypes make it plausible for ability- 
stigmatized students to worry that people in their school- 
ing environment will doubt their abilities. Thus, one wise 
strategy, seemingly suitable for all students, is to discredit 
this assumption through the authority of potential- 
affirming adult relationships. The Comer (1988) Schools 
Project has used this strategy with great success at the 
elementary school level, and Johnides, von Hippel, Ler- 
ner, and Nagda (1992) have used it in designing a men- 
toring program for incoming minority and other students 
624 
June 1997 • American Psychologist

----- Page 13 (native) -----
at the University of Michigan. In analogous laboratory 
experiments, Geoffrey Cohen, Lee Ross, and I (Cohen, 
Steele, & Ross, 1997) found that critical feedback to 
African American students was strongly motivating when 
it was coupled with optimism about their potential. 
2. Challenge over remediation. Giving challenging 
work to students conveys respect for their potential and 
thus shows them that they are not regarded through the 
lens of an ability-demeaning stereotype. Uric Treisman 
(1985) used this strategy explicitly in designing his suc- 
cessful group-study workshops in math for college-aged 
women and minorities. Taking students where they are 
skillwise, all students can be given challenging work at 
a challenging, not overwhelming, pace, especially in the 
context of supportive adult-student relationships. In con- 
trast, remedial work reinforces in these students the pos- 
sibility that they are being viewed stereotypicaUy. And 
this, by increasing stereotype threat in the domain, can 
undermine their performance. 
3. Stressing the expandability of intelligence. The 
threat of negative-ability stereotypes is that one could 
confirm or be seen as having a fixed limitation inherent 
to one's group. To the extent that schooling can stress 
what Carol Dweck (1986) called the incremental nature 
of human intelligencemits expandability in response to 
experience and training--it should help to deflect this 
meanest implication of the stereotype. Aronson (1996) 
recently found, for example, that having African Ameri- 
can college students repeatedly advocate the expandabil- 
ity of intelligence to their elementary school tutees sig- 
nificantly improved their own grades. 
For domain-identified students: 
1. Affirming domain belongingness. Negative-ability 
stereotypes raise the threat that one does not belong in 
the domain. They cast doubt on the extent of one's abili- 
ties, on how well one will be accepted, on one's social 
compatibility with the domain, and so on. Thus, for stu- 
dents whose primary barrier to school identification is 
stereotype threat, direct affirmation of their belong- 
ingness in the domain may be effective. But it is im- 
portant to base this affirmation on the students' intellec- 
tual potential. Affirming social belonging alone, for those 
under the threat of an ability stereotype, could be taken 
as begging the question. 
2. Valuing multiple perspectives. This refers to strat- 
egies that explicitly value a variety of approaches to both 
academic substance and the larger academic culture in 
which that substance is considered. Making such a value 
public tells stereotype-threatened students that this is an 
environment in which the stereotype is less likely to be 
used. 
3. Role models. People from the stereotype-threat- 
ened group who have been successful in the domain carry 
the message that stereotype threat is not an insurmount- 
able barrier there. 
For domain-unidentified students: 
1. Nonjudgmental responsiveness. Research by Lep- 
per, Woolverton, Mumme, and Gurtner (1993) has identi- 
fled a distinct strategy that expert tutors use with espe- 
cially poor students: little direct praise, Socratic direction 
of students' work, and minimal attention to right and 
wrong answers. For students weakly identified with the 
domain, who are threatened by a poor reputation and 
who probably hold internalized doubts about their ability, 
this Socratic strategy has the wisedom of securing a safe 
teacher-student relationship in which there is little cost 
of failure and the gradual building of domain efficacy 
from small gains. 
2. Building self-efficacy. Based on Bandura's (1977, 
1986) theory of self-efficacy, this strategy attempts to 
build the student's sense of competence and self-efficacy 
in the schooling domain. Howard and Hammond (1985) 
have developed a powerful implementation of this strat- 
egy for African American and other minority students, 
especially in inner-city public schools. 
Existence Proof: A Wise Schooling 
Intervention 
Providing a definitive test of wise schooling theory will 
require, of course, an extensive research program. But 
as a first step, something might be learned from what 
Urie Treisman (1985) called an existence proof, in this 
case, a demonstration that an intervention derived from 
the theory could stop or reverse a tenacious negative 
trajectory in the school performance of stereotype-threat- 
ened students. Such an intervention would of necessity 
confound things: different wise practices as well as other 
practices and structures, peculiar to that setting, that 
could also affect academic outcomes. It could not stand 
as a test of the psychological theory per se. But if a 
particular architecture of wise strategies succeeded, it 
would encourage their applicability to the real-world 
schooling of these students. 
With this rationale, my colleagues and I (Steven 
Spencer, Richard Nisbett, Mary Hummel, David Schoem, 
Kent Harber, Ken Carter)implemented a freshman-year 
program at the University of Michigan aimed at the un- 
derachievement and low retention rates of African Ameri- 
can students. Each year, the program included approxi- 
mately 250 freshmen in the ethnic proportions of the 
larger campus but with an oversampling of approximately 
20% Black students and 20% non-Black minority stu- 
dents (i.e., Asian, Hispanic, and Native American students 
as a single group). Program students were randomly se- 
lected from the students admitted to Michigan and then 
recruited by phone to participate. All program partici- 
pants lived together in the wing of a large, 1,200-student 
dormitory throughout their freshman year. 
In this context, we implemented several wise strate- 
gies. The program was presented as a transition program 
aimed at helping students maximize the advantages of 
university life. We also recruited students honorifically; 
they were told that, as Michigan admittees, they had 
survived a very competitive selection process and that 
our program was designed to help them maximize their 
strong potential. These practices represented the program 
June 1997 • American Psychologist 
625

----- Page 14 (native) -----
as nonremediational and represented the university as 
having acknowledged their intellectual potential and as 
having high expectations for them--all things that signal 
the irrelevance of negative group stereotypes. Once the 
students were in the program, these expectations were 
reinforced by their being offered a "challenge" work- 
shop, modeled on those developed by Treisman (1985) 
for calculus, in either freshman calculus, chemistry, phys- 
ics, or writing. These were taken on a voluntary basis in 
the dormitory. Students also participated in small weekly 
discussion groups, centered on brief readings, that al- 
lowed discussion of adjustment-relevant social and even 
personal issues. This activity has the wisdom of letting 
students knowthat they, or other members of their group, 
are not the only ones with concerns about adjusting to 
university life--an insight that can deflect the relevance 
of negative group stereotypes. These formal program 
components lasted for the first 10 weeks of the school 
year, and, as voluntary activities, approximately half of 
the students regularly participated in either one or both 
of them. 
The first-semester grades averaged over the first two 
years of this ongoing project give a reliable picture of 
the program's initial impact. To show the size of the 
program's effect on students at different levels of prepa- 
ration, Figure 5 graphs first-semester grades, using re- 
gression lines, for the different student groups as a func- 
tion of standardized test scores on entry into the univer- 
sity (they are presented as standard deviation units in this 
figure to provide a common scale for students who took 
either the SAT or American College Test exam). The first 
thing to notice is the two essentially parallel lines for 
White and Black students outside of any program at 
Michigan. They replicate the standard overprediction- 
underperformance of Black students alluded to earlier, 
and it is against this pattern that the effects of the program 
can be evaluated. Looking first at the line for White 
students in our program, there is a modest tendency for 
these students to do better than the White control students 
(i.e., those outside the program), but given our accumula- 
tion of n throughout these first two years, this difference 
is not significant. It is the results for Black students in our 
program (but who were not also in the campus minority 
program) that are most promising. Their line is consider- 
ably above that for Black control students (i.e., Black 
students outside any program) and, even with the modest 
sample size (n = 27), is significantly higher than this 
control line in the top one third of the standardized test 
distribution, t = 2.72, p < .05. It is important that this 
group of Black students showed almost no underperfor- 
mance; in the top two thirds of the test distribution, they 
had essentially the same grades as White students. We 
also know from follow-up data that their higher grade 
performance continued at least through their sophomore 
year and that as long as four years later; only one of them 
had dropped out. 
Theoretically just as important, is the bottom line 
in Figure 5, depicting the results for Black students in 
a large minority remediation program. Despite getting 
considerable attention, they performed worse than the 
other groups at nearly every level of preparation. The 
difference between Black students in the minority pro- 
gram and Black students not in any program becomes 
significant at 1.76 standard deviations below the mean 
for test performance and is significant from that point 
on, ps < .05. Also, by the beginning of their junior year, 
Figure 5 
First-Semester Grade Point Average {GPA) as a Function of Progrom and Race Controlling For High School GPA 
3.5 
• Black participants in 21st 
century and not in remedial 
program (n = 27) 
---I--Black participants in 21st 
_< 
century and in remedial 
3 
m 
program (n = 35) 
--~-Black participants in 
i 
In remexmu program 
.conte~.. ~ 
control and not 
(n = 313) 
- 
X Black participants in 
contemporary control and in 
remedial program (n = 459) 
2.5 
X White participants in 21st 
century program (n = 288) 
~White 
participants in 
contemporary control group 
(n = 6,515) 
2 
I 
-2 
0 
2 
Test score in standard deviation units 
626 
June 1997 • American Psychologist

----- Page 15 (native) -----
25% of these students had failed to register, and among 
those who entered with test scores in the top one third of 
the test distribution, this figure was 40%. Some selection 
factor possibly contributed to this. Despite our having 
controlled for test scores and high school grade point 
averages in these analyses, some portion of these students 
may have been assigned to this program because they 
evidenced other risk factors. Still, these results suggest 
that the good intentions of the minority-remediation 
framework for schooling African American students can 
backfire by, in our terms, institutionalizing the racial ste- 
reotype by which they are already threatened. 
Although these findings are preliminary and we do 
not know that they were mediated as our theory claims, 
they are a step toward an existence proof; they show that 
wise practices can reduce Black students' underachieve- 
ment in a real-school context and, as important, that un- 
wise practice~ seem to worsen it. 
Conclusion 
In social psychology, we know that as observers looking 
at a person or group, we tend to stress internal, disposi- 
tional causes of their behavior, whereas when we take 
the perspective of the actor, now facing the circumstances 
they face, we stress more situational causes (e.g., E. E. 
Jones & Nisbett, 1972; Ross, 1977). If there is a system 
to the present research, it is that of taking the actor's 
perspective in trying to understand the intellectual perfor- 
mance of African American and female students. It is this 
perspective that brings to light the broadly encompassing 
condition of having these groups' identification with do- 
mains of schooling threatened by societal stereotypes. 
This is a threat that in the short run can depress their 
intellectual performance and, over the long run, under- 
mine the identity itself, a predicament of serious conse- 
quence. But it is a predicament--something in the inter- 
action between a group's social identity and its social 
psychological context, rather than something essential to 
the group itself. Predicaments can be treated, intervened 
on, and it is in this respect that I hope the perspective 
taken in this analysis and the early evidence offer 
encouragement. 
REFERENCES 
Adelman, C. (1991). Women at thirty-something: Paradoxes of attuin- 
merit. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education, Office of 
Research and Development. 
Alexander, K. L., & Entwistle, D. R. (1988). Achievement in the first 
two years of school: Patterns and processes. Monographs of the 
Society for Research in Child Development, 53(2). 
Allport, G. (1954). The nature of prejudice. New York: Doubleday. 
American Council on Education. (1995-1996). Minorities in higher 
education. Washington, DC: Office of Minority Concerns. 
Aronson, J. (1996). Advocating the malleability of intelligence as an 
intervention to increase college grade performance. Unpublished 
manuscript, University of Texas. 
Bandura, A. (1977); Self-efficacy: Toward a unifying theory of behavior 
change. Psychological Review, 84, 191-215. 
Bandura, A. (1986). Social foundations of action: A social-cognitive 
theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. 
Baumeister, R. E, & Showers, C.J. (1984). A review of paradoxical 
performance effects: Choking under pressure in sports and mental 
tests. European Journal of Social Psychology, 16, 361-383. 
Benhow, C.P., & Arjmand, O. (1990). Predictions of high academic 
achievement in mathematics and science by mathematically talented 
students: A longitudinal study. Journal of Educational Psychology, 
82, 430-441. 
Benhow, C. P., & Stanley, J. C. (1980). Sex differences in mathematical 
ability: Fact or artifact? Science, 210, 1262-1264. 
Benhow, C. P., & Stanley, J. C. (1983). Sex differences in mathematical 
reasoning ability: More facts. Science, 222, 1029-1031. 
Bettelheim, B. (1943). Individual and mass behavior in extreme situa- 
tions. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 38, 417-452. 
Brill, A. A. (Ed.). (1938). The basic writings of Sigmund Freud. New 
York: Random House. 
Burton, N.W., & Jones, L.V. (1982). Recent trends in achievement 
levels of Black and White youth. Educational Researcher, 11, 10- 
17. 
Carter, S. (1991). Reflections of an affirmative action baby. New York: 
Basic Books. 
Clark, K. B. (1%5). Dark ghetto: Dilemmas of social power. New York: 
Harper & Row. 
Clark, K. B., & Clark, M. K. (1939). The development of consciousness 
of self and the emergence of racial identification of Negro school 
children. Journal of Social Psychology, 10, 591-599. 
Cohen, G., Steele, C. M., & Ross, L. (1997). Giving feedback across 
the racial divide: Overcoming the effects of stereotypes. Unpublished 
manuscript, Stanford University. 
Coleman, J. S., Campbell, E. Q., Hobson, C. J., MePartland, J., Mood, 
A. M., Weinfield, E D., & York, R. L. (1966). Equality of educational 
opportunity. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office. 
Comer, J. (1988, November). Educating poor minority children. Scien- 
tific American, 259, 42. 
Cooley, C. H. (1956). Human nature and the social order. New York: 
Free Press. 
Cose, E. (1993). The rage of a privileged class. New York: Harper 
Collins. 
Crocker, J., & Major, B. (1989). Social stigma and self-esteem: The 
self-protective properties of stigma. Psychological Review, 96, 608- 
630. 
Cross, W. E., Jr. (1991). Shades of black: Diversity in African-American 
identity. Philadelphia: Temple University Press. 
Culotta, E., & Gibbons, A. (Eds.). (1992, November 13). Minorities in 
science lSpecial section]. Science, 258, 1176-1232. 
DeBoer, G. (1984). A study of gender effects in science and mathematics 
course-taking behavior among students who graduated from college 
in the late 1970's. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 21, 95- 
103. 
Demo, D. H., & Parker, K. D. (1987). Academic achievement and self- 
esteem among Black and White college students. Journal of Social 
Psychology, 4, 345-355. 
Dweck, C. (1986). Motivational processes affecting learning. American 
Psychologist, 41, 1040-1048. 
Eccles, J. S. (1987). Gender roles and women's achievement-related 
decisions. Psychology of Women Quarterly, 11, 135-172. 
Eccles-Parsons, J. S., Adler, T. E, Futterman, R., Golf, S. B., Kaczala, 
C.M., Meece, J.L., & Midgley, C. (1983). Expectations, values, 
and academic behaviors. In J. T Spence (Ed.), Achievement and 
achievement motivation (pp. 75-146). New York: Freeman. 
Erikson, E. (1956). The problem of ego-identity. Journal of the Ameri- 
can Analytical Association, 4, 56-121. 
Fanon, E (1967). Black skins, white masks. New York: Grove Press. 
(Original work published 1952) 
Frable, D., Blackstone, T, & Sherbanm, C. (1990). Marginal and mind- 
ful: Deviants in social interaction. Journal of Personality and Social 
Behavior, 59, 140-149. 
Geen, R. G. (1991). Social motivation. Annual Review of Psychology, 
42, 377-399. 
Gerard, H. (1983). School desegregation: The social science role. Amer- 
ican Psychologist, 38, 869-878. 
June 1997 • American Psychologist 
627

----- Page 16 (native) -----
Goffman, E. (1963). Stigma: Notes on the management of spoiled 
identity. New York: Touchstone. 
Grief, W.H., & Coobs, P.M. (1968). Black rage. New York: Basic 
Books. 
Hare, B. R., & Costenell,. L. A. (1985). No place to run, no place to 
hide: Comparative status and future prospects of Black boys. In 
M. B. Spencer, G. K. Brookius, & W. Allen (Eds.), Beginnings: The 
social and affective development of Black children (pp. 201-214). 
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Herrnstein, R.A., & Murray, C. (1994). The bell curve. New York: 
Grove Press. 
Hewitt, N.M., & Seymour, E. (1991). Factors contributing to high 
attrition rates among science and engineering undergraduate ma- 
jors. Unpublished report to the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation. 
Howard, J., & Hammond, R. (1985, September 9). Rumors of inferior- 
ity. New Republic, 72, 18-23. 
Hyde, J. S., Fennema, E., & Lamon, S.J. (1990). Gender differences 
in mathematics performance: A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulle- 
tin, 107, 139-155. 
James, W. (1950). The principles of psychology (Vol. 1). New York: 
Dover. (Original work published 1890) 
Jensen, A.R. (1969). How much can we boost IQ and scholastic 
achievement? Harvard Educational Review, 39, 1-123. 
Jensen, A. R. (1980). Bias in mental testing. New York: Free Press. 
Johnides, J., yon Hippel, W., Lerner, J. S., & Nagda, B. (1992, August). 
Evaluation of minority retention programs: The undergraduate re- 
search opportunities program at the University of Michigan. Paper 
presented at the 100th Annual Convention of the American Psycho- 
logical Association, Washington, DC. 
Jones, E.E., Farina, A., Hastoff, A. H., Markus, H, Miller, O.T., & 
Scott, R. A. (1984). Social stigma: The psychology of marked rela- 
tionsh~os. New York: Freeman. 
Jones, E. E., & Nisbett, R. E. (1972). The actor and the observer: Diver- 
gent perceptions of the causes of behavior. In E: E. Jones, D.E. 
Kanouse, H. H. Kelley, R, E. Nisbett, S. Valius, & B. Weiner (Eds.), 
Auribution: Perceiving the causes of behavior (pp. 79-94). Morris- 
town, NJ: General Learning Press. 
Jones, J.M. (1997). Prejudice and racism (2nd ed.). New York: 
McGraw-Hill. 
Kamin, L. (1974). The science and politics of LQ. Hillsdale, NJ: 
Erlbaum. 
Kardiner, A., & Ovesey, L. (1951). The mark of oppression: Explora- 
tions in the personality of the American Negro. New York: Norton. 
Kleck, R. E., & Strenta, A. (1980). Perceptions of the impact of nega- 
tively valued physical characteristics on social interactions. Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 39, 861-873. 
Lepper, M. R., Woolverton, M,, Mumme, D. L., & Gurtner, J.-L. (1993). 
Motivational techniques of expert human tutors: Lessons for the 
design of computer-based tutors. In S. P. Lajoie & S. J. Derry (Eds.), 
Computers as cognitive tools (pp. 75-104). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbanm. 
Levin, J., & Wyckoff, J. (1988). Effective advising: Identifying students 
most likely to persist and succeed in engineering. Engineering Educa- 
tion, 78, 178-182. 
Lewin, K. (1941). Resolving social conflict. New York: Harper & Row. 
Linn, M.C. (1994). The tyranny of the mean: Gender and expectations. 
Notices of the American Mathematical Society, 41, 766-769. 
Lord, C. G., & Saenz, D. S. (1985). Memory deficits and memory sur- 
feits: Differential cognitive consequences of tokenism for tokens and 
observers. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 49, 918- 
926. 
Lovely, R. (1987, February). Selection of undergraduate majors by high 
ability students: Sex difference and attrition of science majors. Paper 
presented at the annual meeting of the Association for the Study of 
Higher Education, San Diego, CA. 
Major, B., Spencel; S., Schmader, T., Wolfe, C., & Crocker, J. (in press). 
Coping with negative stereotypes about intellectual performance: The 
role of psychological disengagement. Personality and Social Psy- 
chology Bulletin. 
Mead, G.H. (1934). Mind, self, and society. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press. 
Miller, L. S. (1995). An American imperative: Accelerating minor- 
ity educational advancement. New Haven, CT: Yale University 
Press. 
Miller, L.S. (1996, March): Promoting high academic achievement 
among non-Asian minorities. Paper presented at the Princeton Uni- 
versity Conference on Higher Education, Princeton, NJ. 
National Center for Educational StatisticS. 0992). National Educa- 
tional Longitudinal Study of 1988: First follow-up. Student compo- 
nent data file user's manual Washington, DC: U.S. Department of 
Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement. 
National Coalition of Advocates for Students Report. (1988, December 
12). The Ann Arbor News, pp. A1, A4. 
Nettles, M. T. (1988). Toward undergraduate student equality in Ameri- 
can higher education. New York: Greenwood. 
Ogbu, J. (1986). The consequences of the American caste system. In 
U. Neisser fEd.), The school achievement of minority children: New 
perspectives(pp. 19-56). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaiam. 
Osborne, J. (1994). Academics, self-esteem, and race: A look at the 
underlying assumption of the disidentifieation hypothesis. Personal- 
ity and Social Psychology Bulletin, 21, 449-455. 
Porter, J.R., & Washington, R.E. (1979). Black identity and self- 
esteem: A review of the studies of Black self-concept, 1968-1978. 
Annual Review of Sociology, 5, 53-74. 
Ramist, L., Lewis, C., & McCamley-Jenkins, L. (1994). Student group 
differences in predicting college grades: Sex, language, and ethnic 
groups (College Board Report No: 93-1, ETS No. 94.27). New York: 
College Entrance Examination Board. 
Rosenberg, M. (1979). Conceiving self.' New York: Basic Books. 
Ross, L. (1977). The intuitive psychologist and his shortcomings: Dis- 
tortions in the attribution process. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances 
in experimental social psychology (VOI. 10, pp. 337-384). New York: 
Academic Press. 
Sarason, I. G. (1980). Introduction to the study of test anxiety. In I. G. 
Sarason fed.), Test anxiety: Theory, research; and applications (pp. 
57-78). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Sartre, J. P. (1965). Anti-Semite and Jew. New York: Schocken Books. 
(Original work published 1946) 
Schienker, B, R., & Weigold, M. E (1989). Goals and the self-identifi- 
cation process: Constructing desired identities. In L. A. Pervin (Ed.), 
Goals concepts in personality and social psychology (pp. 243 -290). 
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbanm. 
Simmons, R. G., Brown, L, Bush, D. M., & Blyth, D. A. (1978). Self- 
esteem and achievement of Black and White adolescents. Social 
Problems, 26, 86-96. 
Solomon, R.P. (1992). Forging a separatist culture. Albany: State 
University of New York Press. 
Spencez; S., Steele, C. M., '& Quinn, D. (1997). Under suspicion of 
inability: Stereotype threat and women's math performance. Manu- 
script submitted for publication. 
Steele, C. M. (1975). Name-calling and compliance. Journal of Person- 
ality and Social Psychology, 31, 361-369. 
Steele, C.M. (1988). The psychology of self-affirmation: Sustaining 
the integrity of the self. In L. Berkowitz fed.), Advances in experi- 
mental social psychology (Vol. 21, pp. 261-302). New York: Aca- 
demic Press. 
Steele, C. M. (1992, April). Race and the schooling of Black Americans, 
The Atlantic Monthly, pp. 68-78. 
Steele, C. M., & Arouson, J. (!995). Stereotype threat and the intellec- 
tual test performance of African Americans. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 69, 797-811. 
Steele, S. (1990). The content of our character. New York: St. Martin's 
Press. 
Strenta, A.C., Elliott, R., Adair, R., Scott, J., & Mailer, M. (1993). 
Choosing and leaving science in highly selective institutions. Unpub- 
lished report to the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation. 
Tesser, A. (1988). Toward a self-evaluation maintenance model of 
social behavior. In L. Berkowitz fed.), Advances in experimental 
social psychology (Vol. 21, pp. 181-227). New York: Academic 
Press. 
628 
June 1997 • American Psychologist

----- Page 17 (native) -----
Treisman, U. (1985). A study of mathematics performance of Black 
students at the University of .California, Berkeley. Unpublished 
report. 
Vars, E E., & Bowen, W. G. (1997). SAT scores, race, and academic 
performance: New evidence from academically successful colleges. 
Unpublished manuscript. 
Ware, N. C., & Dill, D. (1986, March). Persistence in science among 
mathematically able male and female college students with pre- 
college plans for a scientific majbr. Paper presented at the annual 
meeting of the American Educational Research Association, San 
Francisco. 
Ware, N.C., Steckler, N.A., & Leserman, J. (1985). Undergraduate 
women: Who chooses a science major? Journal of Higher Education, 
56, 73-84. 
Wine, L 0971). Test anxiety and direction of attention. Psychological 
Bulletin, 76, 92-104. 
Wylie, R. (1979). The self-concept (Vol. 2). Lincoln: University of 
Nebraska Press. 
June 1997 • American Psychologist 
629