

----- Page 1 (native text) -----
produced sound recommendations on
all stages of
medical training, which were largely ignored by the
commission. More recently it has been progressively
starved of resources, so that meetings have become
infrequent and work has been seriously hampered.
The commission
is now proposing to give to the
Committee of Senior Officials in Public Health, which
is composed of officials from health ministries most of
whom are not doctors, the task ofupdating the medical
directives. The commission's lack of interest in the
Advisory Committee on Medical Training, combined
with the weakness of the non-statutory alternatives,
suggests that harmonisation of medical training is as
unlikely as it is misconceived.
Conclusion
It is ironic that the only instance of change in post-
graduate training programmes which can be attributed
directly to European intervention has been brought
about in Britain, a country whose training standards
have always been among the highest. Hospital Doctors:
Training for the Future (the Calman report)6 was the
response to an allegation by the European Commission
that, by awarding two different specialist certificates at
two different levels of experience, the United King-
dom was in breach of the medical directives. It is an
attempt to force into a continental mould a system of
training which had evolved to serve the United King-
dom's rather unusual health care system.
If the Calman report succeeds
in reducing the
duration of specialist training it will have achieved a
goal that long antedated it. Like previous initiatives, it
is likely to be frustrated by the well proved inability of
government, health authorities, and the medical pro-
fession to generate the 30% increase in consultant
numbers that implementation demands.7 The report
will, however, make it much more difficult for British
trainees
to
obtain
part
of their
training
abroad;
virtually impossible for trainees from Europe to obtain
training leading to specialist status in Britain; and very
likely that trainees will spend considerable periods
marking time in posts that are not recognised for
training at all, ifthey are not unemployed.
It is time for some reappraisal of harmonisation-
what it is, what its objectives are, and its desirability,
feasibility, and cost. The meddlesome and self per-
petuating enthusiasm of a plethora of committees,
boards,
associations,
colleges, and working groups
needs to be tempered by a realisation that diversity is
not only inevitable but desirable.
Funding: No additional funding.
Conflict of interest: None.
1 Union Europeenne des Medecins Specialistes. Charter on training of specialists in
the European Community. Brussels: UEMS, 1992. (Doc D9367.)
2 Union Europeenne des Medecins Specialistes. Compendium medical specialist
training in the EC. Brussels: UEMS, 1992.
3 Advisory Committee on Medical Training. Second report and recommendations on
the training of specialists.
Brussels: Commission of the European Com-
munities, 1983.
4 Brearley S, Beuzart S, Gredal J, Suntinger A, Gentleman D. Permanent
Working Group of European Junior Hospital Doctors. Policy statement on
postgraduate medical training. Med Educ 1989;23:339-47.
5 Union Europeenne des Medecins Specialistes. Charter on continuing medical
education of specialists in the European Union. Brussels: UEMS, 1994. (Doc
D9426.)
6 Working Group on Specialist Medical Training. Hospital doctors: training for the
future. London: Department ofHealth, 1993. (Chairman K Calman.)
7 Brearley S. The failure of consultant expansion. BMJ 1994;309:1245-6.
(Accepted I May 1995)
'P
This is thefifth in a series ofseven
articles describing non-
quantitative techniques and
showing their value in health
research
Glasgow University Media
Group, Department of
Sociology, University of
Glasgow, Glasgow
G12 8LF
Jenny Kitzinger, research
fellow
BMJ 1995;311:299-302
Qualitative Research
Introducing focus groups
Jenny Kitzinger
This paper introduces focus group methodology,
gives advice on group composition, running the
groups, and analysing the results. Focus groups have
advantages for researchers in the field of health and
medicine: they do not discriminate against people
who cannot read or write and they can encourage
participation from people reluctant to be interviewed
on their own or who feel they have nothing to say.
Rationale and uses offocus groups
Focus groups are a form of group interview that
capitalises on communication between research parti-
cipants in order to generate data. Although group
interviews
are often used simply
as
a quick and
convenient way to collect data from several people
simultaneously,
focus
groups
explicitly
use group
interaction as part of the method. This means that
instead of the researcher asking each person to respond
to a question in turn, people are encouraged to talk to
one another: asking questions, exchanging anecdotes
and commenting on each others' experiences and
points of view.' The method is particularly useful for
exploring people's knowledge and experiences and can
be used to examine not only what people think but how
they think and why they think that way.
Focus groups were originally used within communi-
cation studies to explore the
effects of films and
television programmes,2 and are a popular method for
assessing health education messages and examining
public understandings of illness and of health be-
haviours.7 They are widely used to examine people's
experiences of disease and of health services.89 and are
an effective technique for exploring the attitudes and
needs of staff.'01
The idea behind the focus group method is that
group processes can help people to explore and clarify
their views in ways that would be less easily accessible
in a one to one interview. Group discussion is particu-
larly appropriate when the interviewer has a series of
open ended questions and wishes to encourage re-
search participants to explore the issues of importance
to them, in their own vocabulary, generating their own
questions and pursuing their own priorities. When
group
dynamics work well
the
participants work
alongside the researcher, taking the research in new
and often unexpected directions.
Group work also helps researchers tap into the many
different forms of communication that people use in
day to day interaction, including jokes, anecdotes,
teasing, and arguing. Gaining access to such variety of
communication is useful because people's knowledge
and attitudes are not entirely encapsulated in reasoned
responses
to
direct
questions.
Everyday forms of
communication may tell us as much, ifnot more, about
what people know or experience. In this sense focus
groups reach the parts that other methods cannot
reach, revealing dimensions of understanding that
BMJ
voLuME 311
29jULY1995
299


----- Page 2 (native text) -----
often remain untapped by more conventional data
collection techniques.
Tapping into such interpersonal communication is
also important because this can highlight (sub)cultural
values
or
group
norms.
Through
analysing
the
operation of humour,
consensus, and dissent and
examining different types of narrative used within the
group, the researcher can identify shared and common
knowledge.'2 This makes focus groups a data collection
technique particularly sensitive to cultural variables-
which is why
it is
so often used in cross cultural
research and work with ethnic minorities. It also makes
them
useful
in
studies
examining why
different
sections of the population make differential use of
health services.'3'4 For similar reasons focus groups
are
useful
for
studying dominant
cultural
values
(for example, exposing dominant narratives about
sexuality") and for examining work place cultures-
the
ways
in which,
for example,
staff cope with
working with terminally ill patients or deal with the
stresses of an accident and emergency department.
The downside of such group dynamics is that the
articulation of group norms may silence individual
voices of dissent. The
presence of other research
participants also compromises the confidentiality of
the research session. For example, in group discussion
with old people in long term residential care I found
that
some
residents
tried
to
prevent
others from
criticising staff-becoming
agitated and
repeatedly
interrupting with cries of "you can't complain"; "the
staff couldn't possibly be nicer." On the one hand,
such interactions highlighted certain aspects of these
people's experiences. In this
case,
it showed some
residents' fear of being "punished" by staff for, in the
words of one woman, "being cheeky." On the other
hand, such group dynamics raise ethical issues (especi-
ally when the work is with "captive" populations) and
may
limit the
usefulness
of the
data
for
certain
purposes
(Scottish
Health
Feedback,
unpublished
report).
However, it should not be assumed that groups are,
by
definition,
inhibiting
relative
to
the
supposed
privacy of an interview situation or that focus groups
are inappropriate when researching sensitive topics.
Quite the opposite may be true. Group work can
actively facilitate the discussion oftaboo topics because
the less inhibited members of the group break the ice
for shyer participants. Participants can also provide
mutual support in expressing feelings that are common
to their group but which they consider to deviate from
mainstream culture (or the assumed culture of the
researcher). This is particularly important when re-
searching. stigmatised
or
taboo
experiences
(for
example, bereavement or sexual violence).
Focus group methods are also popular with those
conducting action research and those concerned to
"empower" research participants because the partici-
pants can become an active part of the process of
analysis.
Indeed,
group
participants
may
actually
develop particular perspectives
as a consequence of
talking with other people who have similar experiences.
For example, group dynamics can allow for a shift from
personal,
self blaming
psychological
explanations
("I'm stupid not to have understood what the doctor
was telling me"; "I should have been stronger-I
should have asked the right questions")
to the ex-
ploration of structural solutions
("If we've
all felt
confused about what we've been told maybe having a
leaflet would help, or what about being able to take
away a tape recording ofthe consultation?").
Some researchers have also noted that group dis-
cussions can generate more critical comments than
interviews.16
For
example,
Geis
et
al,
in
their
study of the lovers of people with AIDS, found that
there were more angry comments about the medical
community in the
group
discussions than in the
individual interviews: "perhaps the synergism of the
group 'kept the anger going' and allowed each partici-
pant to reinforce another's vented feelings of frustra-
tion and rage."'7 A method that facilitates the expres-
sion of criticism and the exploration of different types
of solutions is invaluable if the aim of research is to
improve services. Such a method is especially appro-
priate when working with particular disempowered
patient populations who are often reluctant to give
negative feedback or may feel that any problems result
from their own inadequacies.'9
Conducting a focus group study
SAMPLING AND GROUP COMPOSrITON
Focus group studies can consist of anything between
half a dozen to over fifty groups, depending on the aims
of the project and the resources available. Most studies
involve just a few groups, and some combine this
method with other data collection techniques. Focus
group discussion of a questionnaire is ideal for testing
the phrasing of questions and is also useful in explain-
ing or exploring survey results.'920
Although it may be possible to work with a repre-
sentative sample of a small population, most focus
group studies use a theoretical sampling model (ex-
plained earlier in this series21) whereby participants are
selected to reflect a range of the total study population
or to test particular hypotheses. Imaginative sampling
is crucial. Most people now recognise class or ethnicity
as important variables, and it is also worth considering
other variables. For example, when exploring women's
experiences of maternity care or cervical smears it may
be advisable to include groups of lesbians or women
who were sexually abused as children.22
Most researchers recommend aiming for homo-
geneity within each group in order to capitalise on
people's shared experiences. However, it can also be
advantageous to bring together a diverse group (for
example, from a range of professions)
to maximise
exploration of different perspectives within a group
setting. However, it is important to be aware of how
hierarchy within the group may affect the data (a
nursing auxiliary, for example, is likely to be inhibited
by the presence of a consultant from the same hospital).
The
groups
can be
"naturally
occurring"
(for
example, people who work together) or may be drawn
together
specifically
for
the
research.
Using
pre-
existing groups allows observation of fragments of
interactions that approximate to naturally occurring
data (such as might have been collected by participant
observation). An additional advantage is that friends
and colleagues can relate each other's comments to
incidents
in
their
shared
daily
lives.
They
may
challenge each other on contradictions between what
they profess to believe and how they actually behave
(for example, "how about that time you didn't use a
glove while taking blood from a patient?").
It would be naive to assume that group data are by
BMJ
VOLUME 311
29JuLY1995
Some potential sampling advantages with
focus groups
* Do not discriminate against people who cannot
read or write
* Can encourage participation from those who are
reluctant to be interviewed on their own (such as those
intimidated by the fornality and isolation of a one to
one interview)
* Can encourage contributions from people who feel
they
have
nothing
to
say
or who
are
deemed
"unresponsive patients" (but engage in the discussion
generated by other group members)


----- Page 3 (native text) -----
definition "natural" in the sense that such interactions
would have occurred without the group being con-
vened for thi,s purpose. Rather than assuming that
sessions
inevitably
reflect
everyday
interactions
(although sometimes they will), the group should be
used to encourage people to engage with one another,
formulate their ideas, and draw out the cognitive
structures which previously have not been articulated.
Finally, it is important to consider the appropriate-
ness of group work for different study populations and
to think about how to overcome potential difficulties.
Group work can facilitate collecting information from
people who cannot read or write. The "safety in
numbers factor" may also encourage the participation
of those who are wary of an interviewer or who are
anxious about talking.2' However, group work can
compound difficulties in communication if each person
has
a
different
disability.
In
the
study
assessing
residential care for the elderly, I conducted a focus
group that included one person who had impaired
hearing, another with senile dementia, and a third with
partial paralysis affecting her speech. This severely
restricted interaction between research participants
and confirmed some of the staff's predictions about the
limitations of group work with this population. How-
ever, such problems could be resolved by thinking
more carefully about the composition of the group, and
sometimes group participants could help to translate
for each other. It should also be noted that some of the
old people who might have been unable to sustain a one
to one interview were able to take part in the group,
contributing intermittently. Even some residents who
staff had suggested should be excluded from the
research because they were "unresponsive" eventually
responded to the lively conversations generated by
their coresidents and were able to contribute their
point of view. Communication difficulties should not
rule out' group work, but must be considered as a
factor.
RUNNING THE GROUPS
Sessions should be relaxed: a comfortable setting,
refreshments, and sitting round in a circle will help to
establish the right atmosphere. The ideal group size is
between four and eight people. Sessions may last one to
two hours (or extend into a whole afternoon or a series
of meetings). The facilitator should explain that the
aim of focus groups is to encourage people to talk to
each other rather than to address themselves to the
researcher. The researcher may take a back seat at first,
allowing for a type of "structured eavesdropping."24
Later on in the session, however, the researcher can
adopt a more interventionist style: urging debate to
continue beyond the stage
it might otherwise have
ended and encouraging the group to discuss the
inconsistencies both between participants and within
their own thinking. Disagreements within groups can
be used to encourage participants to elucidate their
point of view and to clarify why they think as they do.
Differences between individual one off interviews have
to be analysed by the researchers through armchair
theorising;
differences between members of focus
groups should be explored in situ with the help of the
research participants.
The facilitator may also use
a range of group
exercises. A common exercise consists of presenting
the group with a series of statements on large cards.
The group members are asked collectively to sort these
cards into different piles depending on, for example,
their degree of agreement or disagreement with that
point of view or the importance they assign to that
particular aspect of service. For example, I have used
such cards to explore public understandings of HIV
transmission
(placing statements about "types" of
people into different risk categories), old people's
experiences of residential care (assigning degrees of
importance to different statements about the quality of
their care), and midwives' views of their professional
responsibilities (placing a series of statements about
midwives' roles along an agree-disagree continuum).
Such exercises eQcourage participants to concentrate
on one another (rather than on the group facilitator)
and force them to explain their different perspectives.
The final layout of the cards is less important than the
discussion that it generates.25 Researchers may also use
such exercises as a way of checking out their own
assessment of what has emerged from the group. In
this case it is best to take along a series of blank cards
and fill them out only towards the end of the session,
using statements generated during the course of the
discussion. Finally,
it may be beneficial to present
research participants with a brief questionnaire, or the
opportunity to speak to the researcher privately, giving
each one the opportunity to record private comments
after the group session has been completed.
Ideally
the
group
discussions
should
be
tape
recorded and transcribed. If this is not possible then it
is vital to take careful notes and researchers may find it
useful to involve the group in recording key issues on a
flip chart.
ANALYSIS AND WRITING UP
Analysing focus groups
is basically the same as
analysing any other qualitative self report data.2' 26 At
the very
least, the researcher draws together and
compares discussions of similar themes and examines
how these relate to the variables within the sample
population. In general, it is not appropriate to give
percentages in reports of focus group data, and it is
important to try to distinguish between individual
opinions expressed in spite ofthe group from the actual
group consensus. As in all qualitative analysis, deviant
case analysis is important-that is, attention must be
given to minority opinions and examples that do not fit
with the researcher's overall theory.
The only distinct feature of working with focus
group data is the need to indicate the impact of the
group dynamic and analyse the sessions in ways that
take full advantage of the interaction between research
Tapping into interpersonal communication can hi
values orgroup norms
BMJ
VOLUME 311
29JuLY1995
301


----- Page 4 (native text) -----
participants. In coding the script of a group discussion,
it is worth using special categories for certain types of
narrative, such as jokes and anecdotes, and types of
interaction, such as "questions," "deferring to the
opinion of others,"
"censorship,"
or "changes of
mind." A focus group research report that is true to its
data should also usually include at least some illustra-
tions of the talk between participants, rather than
simply presenting isolated quotations taken out of
context.
Conclusion
This paper has presented the factors to consider
when designing or evaluating a focus group study. In
particular, it has drawn attention to the overt exploit-
ation and exploration of interactions in focus group
discussion. Interaction between participants can be
used to achieve seven main aims:
* To highlight the respondents' attitudes, priorities,
language, and framework ofunderstanding;
* To encourage research participants to generate and
explore their own questions and develop their own
analysis ofcommon experiences;
* To encourage a variety of communication from
participants-tapping into a wide range and form of
understanding;
* To help
to
identify group norms and
cultural
values;
* To provide insight into the operation of group social
processes in the articulation ofknowledge (for example,
through the examination of what information is cen-
sured or muted within the group);
* To encourage open conversation about embarrass-
ing subjects and to permit the expression ofcriticism;
* Generally to facilitate the expression of ideas and
experiences that might be left underdeveloped in an
interview and to illuminate the research participants'
perspectives through the debate within the group.
Group data are neither more nor less authentic than
data collected by other methods, but focus groups can
be the most appropriate method for researching par-
ticular types of question. Direct observation may be
more appropriate for studies of social roles and formal
organisations27 but focus groups are particularly suited
to the study of attitudes and experiences. Interviews
may be more appropriate for tapping into individual
biographies,27 but focus groups are more suitable for
examining how knowledge, and more importantly,
ideas, develop and operate within a given cultural
context.
Questionnaires
are more
appropriate
for
obtaining quantitative information and explaining how
many people hold a certain (pre-defined) opinion;
focus groups are better for exploring exactly how those
opinions
are constructed. Thus while
surveys
re-
peatedly identify gaps between health knowledge and
health behaviour, only qualitative methods, such as
focus groups, can actually fill these gaps and explain
why these occur.
Focus groups are not an easy option. The data they
generate can be as cumbersome as they are complex.
Yet the method is basically straightforward and need
not be intimidating for either the researcher or the
researched. Perhaps the very best way of working out
whether or not focus groups might be appropriate in
any particular study is to try them out in practice.
Further reading
Morgan D. Focus groups as qualitative research. London: Sage,
1988.
Kreuger R. Focus groups: a practical guide for applied research.
London: Sage, 1988.
1 Kitzinger J. The methodology of focus groups: the importance of interactions
between research participants.
Sociology of Heakh and Illness
1994;16;
103-21.
2 Merton R, Fisk M, Kendall P. 7he focused interview: a report of the bureau of
applied social research. New York: Columbia University, 1956.
3 Basch C. Focus group interview: an under-utilised research technique for
improving theory and
practice
in
health
education.
Health Education
Quarterly 1987;14:41 1-8.
4 Kitzinger
J.
Understanding AIDS:
researching
audience
perceptions
of
acquired immune deficiency syndrome. In Eldridge
J, ed.
Getting the
message: news, truth andpower. London: Routdedge, 1993:271-305.
5 Ritchie JE, Herscovitch F, Norfor JB. Beliefs of blue collar workers regarding
coronary riskbehaviours. Health Education Research 1994;9:95-103.
6 Duke SS, Gordon-Sosby K, Reynolds KD, Gram IT. A study of breast cancer
detection practices and beliefs in black women attending public health
clinics. Health Education Research 1994;9:331-42.
7 Khan M, Manderson L. Focus groups in tropical diseases research. Health
Polcy and Planning 1992;7:56-66.
8 Murray S, Tapson J, Turnbull L, McCallum J, Uttle A. Ustening to local
voices: adapting rapid appraisal to assess health and social needs in general
practice. BMJ 1994;308:698-700.
9 Gregory S, McKie L. The smear test: listening to women's views. Nursing
Standard 1991;5:32-6.
10 Brown J, Lent B, Sas G. Identifying and treating wife abuse. Journal of Family
Practice 1993;36:185-91.
11 Denning JD, Verschelden C. Using the focus group in assessing training
needs: empowering child welfare workers. Child Welfare 1993;72:569-79.
12 Hughes D, Dumont K. Using focus groups to facilitate culturally anchored
research. American Journal ofCommunity Psychology 1993;21:775-806.
13 Zimmerman M, Haffey J, Crane E, Szumowski D, Alvarez F, Bhiromrut P, et
al. Assessing the acceptability of NORPLANT implants in four countries:
findings from focus group research. Studies in Family Planning 1990;21:
92-103.
14 Naish J, Brown J, Denton, B. Intercultural consultations: investigation of
factors that deter non-English speaking women from attending their general
practitioners for cervical screening. BMJ 1994;309:1126-8.
15 Barker G, Rich S. Influences on adolescent sexuality in Nigeria and Kenya:
findings from recent focus-group discussions. Studies in Family Planning
1992;23:199-210.
16 Watts M, Ebbutt D. More than the sum of the parts: research methods in
group interviewing. British Educational Research Journal 1987;13:25-34.
17 Geis S, Fuller R, Rush J. Lovers of AIDS victims: psychosocial stresses and
counsellingneeds. Death Studies 1986;10:43-53.
18 DiMatteo M, Kahn K, Berry S. Narratives of birth and the postpartum:
an analysis of the focus group responses of new mothers. Birthl993;20:
204.
19 Kitzinger J. Focus groups: method or madness?. In Boulton M, ed. Challenge
and innovation: methodological advances
in social research on HIVIAIDS.
London: Taylor and Francis, 1994:159-75.
20 O'Brien
K.
Improving
survey
questionnaires through
focus
groups.
In
Morgan D, ed. Successful focus groups: advancing the state of the art. London:
Sage, 1993:105-18.
21 Mays N, Pope C. Rigour and qualitative research. BMJ 1995;311:109-12.
22 Kitzinger J. Recalling the pain: incest survivors' experiences of obstetrics and
gynaecology. Nursing Times 1990;86:3840.
23 Lederman L. High apprehensives talk about communication apprehension
and
its
effects on
their behaviour.
Communication
Quarterly
1983;31:
233-37.
24 Powney J. Structured eavesdropping.
Research Intelligence (Journal of the
British Educational Research Foundation) 1988;28:10-2.
25 Kitzinger
J.
Audience
understanding AIDS:
a
discussion
of methods.
Sociology ofHealth and Illness 1990;12:319-35.
26 Britten N. Qualitative interviews in medical research. BMJ 1995;311:251-3.
27 Mays N, Pope C. Observational methods in health
care settings. BMJ
1995;311:1824.
302
BMJ
VOLUME 311
29JuLY 1995
