

----- Page 1 (native) -----
CORRESPONDENCE
Open Access
Using the framework method for the analysis of
qualitative data in multi-disciplinary health
research
Nicola K Gale1*, Gemma Heath2, Elaine Cameron3, Sabina Rashid4 and Sabi Redwood2
Abstract
Background: The Framework Method is becoming an increasingly popular approach to the management and analysis
of qualitative data in health research. However, there is confusion about its potential application and limitations.
Discussion: The article discusses when it is appropriate to adopt the Framework Method and explains the procedure
for using it in multi-disciplinary health research teams, or those that involve clinicians, patients and lay people. The
stages of the method are illustrated using examples from a published study.
Summary: Used effectively, with the leadership of an experienced qualitative researcher, the Framework Method is a
systematic and flexible approach to analysing qualitative data and is appropriate for use in research teams even where
not all members have previous experience of conducting qualitative research.
Keywords: Qualitative research, Qualitative content analysis, Multi-disciplinary research
The Framework Method for the management and analysis
of qualitative data has been used since the 1980s [1]. The
method originated in large-scale social policy research but
is becoming an increasingly popular approach in medical
and health research; however, there is some confusion
about its potential application and limitations. In this
article we discuss when it is appropriate to use the
Framework Method and how it compares to other
qualitative analysis methods. In particular, we explore
how it can be used in multi-disciplinary health research
teams. Multi-disciplinary and mixed methods studies are
becoming increasingly commonplace in applied health
research. As well as disciplines familiar with qualitative
research, such as nursing, psychology and sociology, teams
often include epidemiologists, health economists, manage-
ment scientists and others. Furthermore, applied health
research often has clinical representation and, increasingly,
patient and public involvement [2]. We argue that while
leadership is undoubtedly required from an experienced
qualitative methodologist, non-specialists from the wider
team can and should be involved in the analysis process.
We then present a step-by-step guide to the application of
the Framework Method, illustrated using a worked
example (See Additional File 1) from a published
study [3] to illustrate the main stages of the process.
Technical terms are included in the glossary (below).
Finally, we discuss the strengths and limitations of
the approach.
Glossary of key terms used in the Framework
Method
Analytical framework: A set of codes organised into
categories that have been jointly developed by researchers
involved in analysis that can be used to manage and
organise the data. The framework creates a new structure
for the data (rather than the full original accounts given
by participants) that is helpful to summarize/reduce the
data in a way that can support answering the research
questions.
Analytic memo: A written investigation of a particular
concept, theme or problem, reflecting on emerging
issues in the data that captures the analytic process
(see Additional file 1, Section 7).
Categories: During the analysis process, codes are
grouped into clusters around similar and interrelated ideas
or concepts. Categories and codes are usually arranged in
* Correspondence: n.gale@bham.ac.uk
1Health Services Management Centre, University of Birmingham, Park House,
40 Edgbaston Park Road, Birmingham B15 2RT, UK
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2013 Gale et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
Gale et al. BMC Medical Research Methodology 2013, 13:117
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2288/13/117

----- Page 2 (native) -----
a tree diagram structure in the analytical framework.
While categories are closely and explicitly linked to the
raw data, developing categories is a way to start the
process of abstraction of the data (i.e. towards the general
rather than the specific or anecdotal).
Charting: Entering summarized data into the Framework
Method matrix (see Additional File 1, Section 6).
Code: A descriptive or conceptual label that is assigned
to excerpts of raw data in a process called ‘coding’
(see Additional File 1, Section 3).
Data: Qualitative data usually needs to be in textual form
before analysis.
These texts can either be elicited texts
(written specifically for the research, such as food diaries),
or extant texts (pre-existing texts, such as meeting
minutes, policy documents or weblogs), or can be produced
by transcribing interview or focus group data, or creating
‘field’ notes while conducting participant-observation or
observing objects or social situations.
Indexing:
The systematic application of codes from
the agreed analytical framework to the whole dataset
(see Additional File 1, Section 5).
Matrix: A spreadsheet contains numerous cells into
which summarized data are entered by codes (columns)
and cases (rows) (see Additional File 1, Section 6).
Themes: Interpretive concepts or propositions that
describe or explain aspects of the data, which are the
final output of the analysis of the whole dataset. Themes
are articulated and developed by interrogating data
categories through comparison between and within
cases.
Usually
a
number
of
categories
would
fall
under each theme or sub-theme [3].
Transcript: A written verbatim (word-for-word) account
of a verbal interaction, such as an interview or conversation.
Background
The Framework Method sits within a broad family of
analysis methods often termed thematic analysis or
qualitative content analysis. These approaches identify
commonalities and differences in qualitative data, before
focusing on relationships between different parts of
the data, thereby seeking to draw descriptive and/or
explanatory conclusions clustered around themes. The
Framework Method was developed by researchers,
Jane Ritchie and Liz Spencer, from the Qualitative Research
Unit at the National Centre for Social Research in the
United Kingdom in the late 1980s for use in large-scale
policy research [1]. It is now used widely in other areas,
including health research [3-12]. Its defining feature is the
matrix output: rows (cases), columns (codes) and ‘cells’ of
summarised data, providing a structure into which the
researcher can systematically reduce the data, in order
to analyse it by case and by code [1]. Most often a
‘case’ is an individual interviewee, but this can be
adapted to other units of analysis, such as predefined
groups or organisations. While in-depth analyses of key
themes can take place across the whole data set, the views
of each research participant remain connected to other
aspects of their account within the matrix so that the
context of the individual’s views is not lost. Comparing
and contrasting data is vital to qualitative analysis and the
ability to compare with ease data across cases as well as
within individual cases is built into the structure and
process of the Framework Method.
The Framework Method provides clear steps to follow
and produces highly structured outputs of summarised
data. It is therefore useful where multiple researchers are
working on a project, particularly in multi-disciplinary
research teams were not all members have experience
of qualitative data analysis, and for managing large
data sets where obtaining a holistic, descriptive overview
of the entire data set is desirable. However, caution is
recommended before selecting the method as it is not a
suitable tool for analysing all types of qualitative data or
for answering all qualitative research questions, nor is it
an ‘easy’ version of qualitative research for quantitative
researchers. Importantly, the Framework Method cannot
accommodate highly heterogeneous data, i.e. data must
cover similar topics or key issues so that it is possible to
categorize it. Individual interviewees may, of course, have
very different views or experiences in relation to each
topic, which can then be compared and contrasted. The
Framework Method is most commonly used for the
thematic analysis of semi-structured interview transcripts,
which is what we focus on in this article, although it could,
in principle, be adapted for other types of textual data
[13], including documents, such as meeting minutes or
diaries [12], or field notes from observations [10].
For quantitative researchers working with qualitative
colleagues or when exploring qualitative research for the
first time, the nature of the Framework Method is seductive
because its methodical processes and ‘spreadsheet’
approach seem more closely aligned to the quantitative
paradigm [14]. Although the Framework Method is a highly
systematic method of categorizing and organizing what
may seem like unwieldy qualitative data, it is not a panacea
for problematic issues commonly associated with qualita-
tive data analysis such as how to make analytic choices and
make interpretive strategies visible and auditable. Qualita-
tive research skills are required to appropriately interpret
the matrix, and facilitate the generation of descriptions,
categories, explanations and typologies. Moreover, reflexiv-
ity, rigour and quality are issues that are requisite in the
Framework Method just as they are in other qualitative
methods. It is therefore essential that studies using the
Framework Method for analysis are overseen by an experi-
enced qualitative researcher, though this does not preclude
those new to qualitative research from contributing to the
analysis as part of a wider research team.
Gale et al. BMC Medical Research Methodology 2013, 13:117
Page 2 of 8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2288/13/117

----- Page 3 (native) -----
There are a number of approaches to qualitative data
analysis, including those that pay close attention to language
and how it is being used in social interaction such as
discourse analysis [15] and ethnomethodology [16]; those
that are concerned with experience, meaning and language
such as phenomenology [17,18] and narrative methods [19];
and those that seek to develop theory derived from data
through a set of procedures and interconnected stages such
as Grounded Theory [20,21]. Many of these approaches are
associated with specific disciplines and are underpinned by
philosophical ideas which shape the process of analysis [22].
The Framework Method, however, is not aligned with
a particular epistemological, philosophical, or theoretical
approach. Rather it is a flexible tool that can be adapted
for use with many qualitative approaches that aim to
generate themes.
The development of themes is a common feature of
qualitative data analysis, involving the systematic search
for patterns to generate full descriptions capable of
shedding light on the phenomenon under investigation. In
particular, many qualitative approaches use the ‘constant
comparative method’, developed as part of Grounded
Theory, which involves making systematic comparisons
across cases to refine each theme [21,23]. Unlike Grounded
Theory, the Framework Method is not necessarily con-
cerned with generating social theory, but can greatly
facilitate constant comparative techniques through the
review of data across the matrix.
Perhaps because the Framework Method is so obviously
systematic, it has often, as other commentators have noted,
been conflated with a deductive approach to qualitative
analysis [13,14]. However, the tool itself has no allegiance
to either inductive or deductive thematic analysis; where
the research sits along this inductive-deductive continuum
depends on the research question. A question such as,‘Can
patients give an accurate biomedical account of the
onset of their cardiovascular disease?’ is essentially a
yes/no question (although it may be nuanced by the extent
of their account or by appropriate use of terminology) and
so requires a deductive approach to both data collection
and analysis (e.g. structured or semi-structured interviews
and directed qualitative content analysis [24]). Similarly, a
deductive approach may be taken if basing analysis on a
pre-existing theory, such as behaviour change theories, for
example in the case of a research question such as ‘How
does the Theory of Planned Behaviour help explain GP
prescribing?’ [11]. However, a research question such as,
‘How do people construct accounts of the onset of their
cardiovascular disease?’ would require a more inductive
approach that allows for the unexpected, and permits more
socially-located responses [25] from interviewees that may
include matters of cultural beliefs, habits of food prepar-
ation, concepts of ‘fate’, or links to other important events
in their lives, such as grief, which cannot be predicted by
the researcher in advance (e.g. an interviewee-led open
ended interview and grounded theory [20]). In all these
cases, it may be appropriate to use the Framework Method
to manage the data. The difference would become
apparent in how themes are selected: in the deductive
approach, themes and codes are pre-selected based on
previous literature, previous theories or the specifics
of the research question; whereas in the inductive
approach, themes are generated from the data though
open (unrestricted) coding, followed by refinement of
themes. In many cases, a combined approach is appropriate
when the project has some specific issues to explore, but
also aims to leave space to discover other unexpected
aspects of the participants’ experience or the way they
assign meaning to phenomena. In sum, the Framework
Method can be adapted for use with deductive, inductive, or
combined types of qualitative analysis. However, there are
some research questions where analysing data by case and
theme is not appropriate and so the Framework Method
should be avoided. For instance, depending on the research
question, life history data might be better analysed using
narrative analysis [19]; recorded consultations between
patients and their healthcare practitioners using conversa-
tion analysis [26]; and documentary data, such as resources
for pregnant women, using discourse analysis [27].
It is not within the scope of this paper to consider
study design or data collection in any depth, but before
moving on to describe the Framework Method analysis
process, it is worth taking a step back to consider briefly
what needs to happen before analysis begins. The selection
of analysis method should have been considered at the
proposal stage of the research and should fit with the
research questions and overall aims of the study. Many
qualitative studies, particularly ones using inductive ana-
lysis, are emergent in nature; this can be a challenge and
the researchers can only provide an “imaginative rehearsal”
of what is to come [28]. In mixed methods studies, the role
of the qualitative component within the wider goals of the
project must also be considered. In the data collection
stage, resources must be allocated for properly trained
researchers to conduct the qualitative interviewing because
it is a highly skilled activity. In some cases, a research team
may decide that they would like to use lay people, patients
or peers to do the interviews [29-32] and in this case they
must be properly trained and mentored which requires
time and resources. At this early stage it is also useful to
consider whether the team will use Computer Assisted
Qualitative Data Analysis Software (CAQDAS), which can
assist with data management and analysis.
As any form of qualitative or quantitative analysis is
not a purely technical process, but influenced by the
characteristics of the researchers and their disciplinary
paradigms, critical reflection throughout the research
process is paramount, including in the design of the
Gale et al. BMC Medical Research Methodology 2013, 13:117
Page 3 of 8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2288/13/117

----- Page 4 (native) -----
study, the construction or collection of data, and the
analysis. All members of the team should keep a research
diary, where they record reflexive notes, impressions of the
data and thoughts about analysis throughout the process.
Experienced qualitative researchers become more skilled at
sifting through data and analysing it in a rigorous and
reflexive way. They cannot be too attached to certainty, but
must remain flexible and adaptive throughout the research
in order to generate rich and nuanced findings that
embrace and explain the complexity of real social life and
can be applied to complex social issues. It is important to
remember when using the Framework Method that, unlike
quantitative research where data collection and data ana-
lysis are strictly sequential and mutually exclusive stages of
the research process, in qualitative analysis there is, to a
greater or lesser extent depending on the project, ongoing
interplay between data collection, analysis, and theory
development. For example, new ideas or insights from
participants may suggest potentially fruitful lines of enquiry,
or close analysis might reveal subtle inconsistencies in an
account which require further exploration.
Procedure for analysis
Stage 1: Transcription
A good quality audio recording and, ideally, a verbatim
(word for word) transcription of the interview is needed.
For Framework Method analysis, it is not necessarily
important to include the conventions of dialogue transcrip-
tions which can be difficult to read (e.g. pauses or two
people talking simultaneously), because the content is what
is of primary interest. Transcripts should have large margins
and adequate line spacing for later coding and making
notes. The process of transcription is a good opportunity to
become immersed in the data and is to be strongly encour-
aged for new researchers. However, in some projects, the
decision may be made that it is a better use of resources to
outsource this task to a professional transcriber.
Stage 2: Familiarisation with the interview
Becoming familiar with the whole interview using the audio
recording and/or transcript and any contextual or reflective
notes that were recorded by the interviewer is a vital stage
in interpretation. It can also be helpful to re-listen to all or
parts of the audio recording. In multi-disciplinary or large
research projects, those involved in analysing the data may
be different from those who conducted or transcribed the
interviews, which makes this stage particularly important.
One margin can be used to record any analytical notes,
thoughts or impressions.
Stage 3: Coding
After familiarization, the researcher carefully reads the
transcript line by line, applying a paraphrase or label
(a ‘code’) that describes what they have interpreted in
the passage as important. In more inductive studies,
at this stage ‘open coding’ takes place, i.e. coding anything
that might be relevant from as many different perspectives
as possible. Codes could refer to substantive things
(e.g. particular behaviours, incidents or structures), values
(e.g. those that inform or underpin certain statements,
such as a belief in evidence-based medicine or in patient
choice), emotions (e.g. sorrow, frustration, love) and more
impressionistic/methodological elements (e.g. interviewee
found something difficult to explain, interviewee became
emotional, interviewer felt uncomfortable) [33]. In purely
deductive studies, the codes may have been pre-defined
(e.g. by an existing theory, or specific areas of interest
to the project) so this stage may not be strictly necessary
and you could just move straight onto indexing, although
it is generally helpful even if you are taking a broadly
deductive approach to do some open coding on at least a
few of the transcripts to ensure important aspects of the
data are not missed. Coding aims to classify all of the data
so that it can be compared systematically with other parts
of the data set. At least two researchers (or at least one
from each discipline or speciality in a multi-disciplinary
research team) should independently code the first few
transcripts, if feasible. Patients, public involvement repre-
sentatives or clinicians can also be productively involved
at this stage, because they can offer alternative viewpoints
thus ensuring that one particular perspective does not
dominate. It is vital in inductive coding to look out for the
unexpected and not to just code in a literal, descriptive
way so the involvement of people from different perspec-
tives can aid greatly in this. As well as getting a holistic
impression of what was said, coding line-by-line can often
alert the researcher to consider that which may ordinarily
remain invisible because it is not clearly expressed or does
not ‘fit’ with the rest of the account. In this way the devel-
oping analysis is challenged; to reconcile and explain
anomalies in the data can make the analysis stronger.
Coding can also be done digitally using CAQDAS, which
is a useful way to keep track automatically of new codes.
However, some researchers prefer to do the early stages of
coding with a paper and pen, and only start to use
CAQDAS once they reach Stage 5 (see below).
Stage 4: Developing a working analytical framework
After coding the first few transcripts, all researchers
involved should meet to compare the labels they have
applied and agree on a set of codes to apply to all subse-
quent transcripts. Codes can be grouped together into
categories (using a tree diagram if helpful), which are
then clearly defined. This forms a working analytical
framework. It is likely that several iterations of the ana-
lytical framework will be required before no additional
codes emerge. It is always worth having an ‘other’ code
under each category to avoid ignoring data that does not
Gale et al. BMC Medical Research Methodology 2013, 13:117
Page 4 of 8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2288/13/117

----- Page 5 (native) -----
fit; the analytical framework is never ‘final’ until the last
transcript has been coded.
Stage 5: Applying the analytical framework
The working analytical framework is then applied by
indexing subsequent transcripts using the existing categor-
ies and codes. Each code is usually assigned a number or
abbreviation for easy identification (and so the full names
of the codes do not have to be written out each time) and
written directly onto the transcripts. Computer Assisted
Qualitative Data Analysis Software (CAQDAS) is particu-
larly useful at this stage because it can speed up the process
and ensures that, at later stages, data is easily retrievable. It
is worth noting that unlike software for statistical analyses,
which actually carries out the calculations with the correct
instruction, putting the data into a qualitative analysis soft-
ware package does not analyse the data; it is simply an ef-
fective way of storing and organising the data so that they
are accessible for the analysis process.
Stage 6: Charting data into the framework matrix
Qualitative data are voluminous (an hour of interview
can generate 15–30 pages of text) and being able to
manage and summarize (reduce) data is a vital aspect of
the analysis process. A spreadsheet is used to generate a
matrix and the data are ‘charted’ into the matrix.
Charting involves summarizing the data by category
from each transcript. Good charting requires an ability
to strike a balance between reducing the data on the one
hand and retaining the original meanings and ‘feel’ of
the interviewees’ words on the other. The chart should
include references to interesting or illustrative quotations.
These can be tagged automatically if you are using CAQDAS
to manage your data (N-Vivo version 9 onwards has the
capability to generate framework matrices), or otherwise a
capital ‘Q’, an (anonymized) transcript number, page and
line reference will suffice. It is helpful in multi-disciplinary
teams to compare and contrast styles of summarizing in
the early stages of the analysis process to ensure con-
sistency within the team. Any abbreviations used should be
agreed by the team. Once members of the team are familiar
with the analytical framework and well practised at coding
and charting, on average, it will take about half a day per
hour-long transcript to reach this stage. In the early stages,
it takes much longer.
Stage 7: Interpreting the data
It is useful throughout the research to have a separate
note book or computer file to note down impressions,
ideas and early interpretations of the data. It may be
worth breaking off at any stage to explore an interesting
idea, concept or potential theme by writing an analytic
memo [20,21] to then discuss with other members of
the research team, including lay and clinical members.
Gradually, characteristics of and differences between the
data are identified, perhaps generating typologies, interro-
gating theoretical concepts (either prior concepts or ones
emerging from the data) or mapping connections between
categories to explore relationships and/or causality. If the
data are rich enough, the findings generated through this
process can go beyond description of particular cases to
explanation of, for example, reasons for the emergence of a
phenomena, predicting how an organisation or other social
actor is likely to instigate or respond to a situation, or iden-
tifying areas that are not functioning well within an organ-
isation or system. It is worth noting that this stage often
takes longer than anticipated and that any project plan
should ensure that sufficient time is allocated to meetings
and individual researcher time to conduct interpretation
and writing up of findings (see Additional file 1, Section 7).
Discussion
The Framework Method has been developed and used
successfully in research for over 25 years, and has recently
become a popular analysis method in qualitative health
research. The issue of how to assess quality in qualitative
research has been highly debated [20,34-40], but ensuring
rigour and transparency in analysis is a vital component.
There are, of course, many ways to do this but in the
Framework Method the following are helpful:
 Summarizing the data during charting, as well as
being a practical way to reduce the data, means that
all members of a multi-disciplinary team, including
lay, clinical and (quantitative) academic members
can engage with the data and offer their perspectives
during the analysis process without necessarily
needing to read all the transcripts or be involved in
the more technical parts of analysis.
 Charting also ensures that researchers pay close
attention to describing the data using each
participant’s own subjective frames and expressions in
the first instance, before moving onto interpretation.
 The summarized data is kept within the wider
context of each case, thereby encouraging thick
description that pays attention to complex layers of
meaning and understanding [38].
 The matrix structure is visually straightforward and
can facilitate recognition of patterns in the data by
any member of the research team, including through
drawing attention to contradictory data, deviant
cases or empty cells.
 The systematic procedure (described in this article)
makes it easy to follow, even for multi-disciplinary
teams and/or with large data sets.
 It is flexible enough that non-interview data (such as
field notes taken during the interview or reflexive
considerations) can be included in the matrix.
Gale et al. BMC Medical Research Methodology 2013, 13:117
Page 5 of 8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2288/13/117

----- Page 6 (native) -----
 It is not aligned with a particular epistemological
viewpoint or theoretical approach and therefore can
be adapted for use in inductive or deductive analysis
or a combination of the two (e.g. using pre-existing
theoretical constructs deductively, then revising the
theory with inductive aspects; or using an inductive
approach to identify themes in the data, before
returning to the literature and using theories
deductively to help further explain certain themes).
 It is easy to identify relevant data extracts to
illustrate themes and to check whether there is
sufficient evidence for a proposed theme.
 Finally, there is a clear audit trail from original raw
data to final themes, including the illustrative
quotes.
There are also a number of potential pitfalls to this
approach:
 The systematic approach and matrix format, as we
noted in the background, is intuitively appealing to
those trained quantitatively but the ‘spreadsheet’
look perhaps further increases the temptation for
those without an in-depth understanding of
qualitative research to attempt to quantify
qualitative data (e.g. “13 out of 20 participants said
X). This kind of statement is clearly meaningless
because the sampling in qualitative research is not
designed to be representative of a wider population,
but purposive to capture diversity around a
phenomenon [41].
 Like all qualitative analysis methods, the Framework
Method is time consuming and resource-intensive.
When involving multiple stakeholders and disciplines
in the analysis and interpretation of the data, as is
good practice in applied health research, the time
needed is extended. This time needs to be factored
into the project proposal at the pre-funding stage.
 There is a high training component to successfully
using the method in a new multi-disciplinary team.
Depending on their role in the analysis, members of
the research team may have to learn how to code,
index, and chart data, to think reflexively about how
their identities and experience affect the analysis
process, and/or they may have to learn about the
methods of generalisation (i.e. analytic generalisation
and transferability, rather than statistical
generalisation [41]) to help to interpret legitimately
the meaning and significance of the data.
While the Framework Method is amenable to the
participation of non-experts in data analysis, it is critical
to the successful use of the method that an experienced
qualitative researcher leads the project (even if the overall
lead for a large mixed methods study is a different person).
The qualitative lead would ideally be joined by other re-
searchers with at least some prior training in or experi-
ence of qualitative analysis. The responsibilities of the lead
qualitative researcher are: to contribute to study design,
project timelines and resource planning; to mentor junior
qualitative researchers; to train clinical, lay and other
(non-qualitative) academics to contribute as appropriate
to the analysis process; to facilitate analysis meetings in a
way that encourages critical and reflexive engagement
with the data and other team members; and finally to lead
the write-up of the study.
Conclusion
We have argued that Framework Method studies can be
conducted by multi-disciplinary research teams that
include, for example, healthcare professionals, psycholo-
gists, sociologists, economists, and lay people/service
users. The inclusion of so many different perspectives
means that decision-making in the analysis process can
be very time consuming and resource-intensive. It may
require extensive, reflexive and critical dialogue about
how the ideas expressed by interviewees and identified
in the transcript are related to pre-existing concepts and
theories from each discipline, and to the real ‘problems’
in the health system that the project is addressing. This
kind of team effort is, however, an excellent forum for
driving forward interdisciplinary collaboration, as well as
clinical and lay involvement in research, to ensure that ‘the
whole is greater than the sum of the parts’, by enhancing
the credibility and relevance of the findings.
The Framework Method is appropriate for thematic
analysis of textual data, particularly interview transcripts,
where it is important to be able to compare and contrast
data by themes across many cases, while also situating
each perspective in context by retaining the connection
to other aspects of each individual’s account. Experienced
qualitative researchers should lead and facilitate all aspects
of the analysis, although the Framework Method’s system-
atic approach makes it suitable for involving all members
of a multi-disciplinary team. An open, critical and reflexive
approach from all team members is essential for rigorous
qualitative analysis.
Acceptance of the complexity of real life health systems
and the existence of multiple perspectives on health issues
is necessary to produce high quality qualitative research.
If done well, qualitative studies can shed explanatory
and predictive light on important phenomena, relate
constructively to quantitative parts of a larger study,
and contribute to the improvement of health services
and development of health policy. The Framework
Method, when selected and implemented appropriately,
can be a suitable tool for achieving these aims through
producing credible and relevant findings.
Gale et al. BMC Medical Research Methodology 2013, 13:117
Page 6 of 8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2288/13/117

----- Page 7 (native) -----
Summary
 The Framework Method is an excellent tool for
supporting thematic (qualitative content) analysis
because it provides a systematic model for managing
and mapping the data.
 The Framework Method is most suitable for analysis
of interview data, where it is desirable to generate
themes by making comparisons within and between
cases.
 The management of large data sets is facilitated by the
Framework Method as its matrix form provides an
intuitively structured overview of summarised data.
 The clear, step-by-step process of the Framework
Method makes it is suitable for interdisciplinary and
collaborative projects.
 The use of the method should be led and facilitated
by an experienced qualitative researcher.
Additional files
Additional file 1: Illustrative Example of the use of the Framework
Method.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions
All authors were involved in the development of the concept of the article
and drafting the article. NG wrote the first draft of the article, GH and EC
prepared the text and figures related to the illustrative example, SRa did the
literature search to identify if there were any similar articles currently
available and contributed to drafting of the article, and SRe contributed to
drafting of the article and the illustrative example. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.
Acknowledgments
All authors were funded by the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR)
through the Collaborations for Leadership in Applied Health Research and
Care for Birmingham and Black Country (CLAHRC-BBC) programme. The
views in this publication expressed are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the NHS, the NIHR or the Department of Health.
Author details
1Health Services Management Centre, University of Birmingham, Park House,
40 Edgbaston Park Road, Birmingham B15 2RT, UK. 2School of Health and
Population Sciences, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham B15
2TT, UK. 3School of Life and Health Sciences, Aston University, Aston Triangle,
Birmingham B4 7ET, UK. 4East and North Hertfordshire NHS Trust, Lister
hospital, Coreys Mill Lane, Stevenage SG1 4AB, UK.
Received: 17 December 2012 Accepted: 6 September 2013
Published: 18 September 2013
References
1.
Ritchie J, Lewis J: Qualitative research practice: a guide for social science
students and researchers. London: Sage; 2003.
2.
Ives J, Damery S, Redwod S: PPI, paradoxes and Plato: who's sailing the ship?
J Med Ethics 2013, 39(3):181–185.
3.
Heath G, Cameron E, Cummins C, Greenfield S, Pattison H, Kelly D,
Redwood S: Paediatric ‘care closer to home’: stake-holder views and
barriers to implementation. Health Place 2012, 18(5):1068–1073.
4.
Elkington H, White P, Addington-Hall J, Higgs R, Petternari C: The last year
of life of COPD: a qualitative study of symptoms and services. Respir Med
2004, 98(5):439–445.
5.
Murtagh J, Dixey R, Rudolf M: A qualitative investigation into the levers
and barriers to weight loss in children: opinions of obese children.
Archives Dis Child 2006, 91(11):920–923.
6.
Barnard M, Webster S, O’Connor W, Jones A, Donmall M: The drug treatment
outcomes research study (DTORS): qualitative study. London: Home Office; 2009.
7.
Ayatollahi H, Bath PA, Goodacre S: Factors influencing the use of IT in the
emergency department: a qualitative study. Health Inform J 2010,
16(3):189–200.
8.
Sheard L, Prout H, Dowding D, Noble S, Watt I, Maraveyas A, Johnson M:
Barriers to the diagnosis and treatment of venous thromboembolism in
advanced cancer patients: a qualitative study. Palliative Med 2012,
27(2):339–348.
9.
Ellis J, Wagland R, Tishelman C, Williams ML, Bailey CD, Haines J, Caress A,
Lorigan P, Smith JA, Booton R, et al: Considerations in developing and
delivering a nonpharmacological intervention for symptom
management in lung cancer: the views of patients and informal
caregivers. J Pain Symptom Manag (0) 2012, 44(6):831–842.
10.
Gale N, Sultan H: Telehealth as ‘peace of mind’: embodiment, emotions
and the home as the primary health space for people with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disorder. Health place 2013, 21:140–147.
11.
Rashidian A, Eccles MP, Russell I: Falling on stony ground? A qualitative
study of implementation of clinical guidelines’ prescribing
recommendations in primary care. Health policy 2008, 85(2):148–161.
12.
Jones RK: The unsolicited diary as a qualitative research tool for
advanced research capacity in the field of health and illness. Qualitative
Health Res 2000, 10(4):555–567.
13.
Pope C, Ziebland S, Mays N: Analysing qualitative data. British Med J 2000,
320:114–116.
14.
Pope C, Mays N: Critical reflections on the rise of qualitative research.
British Med J 2009, 339:737–739.
15.
Fairclough N: Critical discourse analysis: the critical study of language.
London: Longman; 2010.
16.
Garfinkel H: Ethnomethodology’s program. Soc Psychol Quarter 1996, 59(1):5–21.
17.
Merleau-Ponty M: The phenomenology of perception. London: Routledge and
Kegan Paul; 1962.
18.
Svenaeus F: The phenomenology of health and illness. In Handbook of
phenomenology and medicine. Netherlands: Springer; 2001:87–108.
19.
Reissmann CK: Narrative methods for the human sciences. London: Sage; 2008.
20.
Charmaz K: Constructing grounded theory: a practical guide through
qualitative analysis. London: Sage; 2006.
21.
Glaser A, Strauss AL: The discovery of grounded theory. Chicago: Aldine; 1967.
22.
Crotty M: The foundations of social research: meaning and perspective in the
research process. London: Sage; 1998.
23.
Boeije H: A purposeful approach to the constant comparative method in
the analysis of qualitative interviews. Qual Quant 2002, 36(4):391–409.
24.
Hsieh H-F, Shannon SE: Three approaches to qualitative content analysis.
Qual Health Res 2005, 15(9):1277–1288.
25.
Redwood S, Gale NK, Greenfield S: ‘You give us rangoli, we give you talk’:
using an art-based activity to elicit data from a seldom heard group.
BMC Med Res Methodol 2012, 12(1):7.
26.
Mishler EG: The struggle between the voice of medicine and the voice of
the lifeworld. In The sociology of health and illness: critical perspectives. Thirdth
edition. Edited by Conrad P, Kern R. New York: St Martins Press; 1990.
27.
Hodges BD, Kuper A, Reeves S: Discourse analysis. British Med J 2008,
337:570–572.
28.
Sandelowski M, Barroso J: Writing the proposal for a qualitative research
methodology project. Qual Health Res 2003, 13(6):781–820.
29.
Ellins J: It’s better together: involving older people in research. HSMC
Newsletter Focus Serv Users Publ 2010, 16(1):4.
30.
Phillimore J, Goodson L, Hennessy D, Ergun E: Empowering Birmingham’s
migrant and refugee community organisations: making a difference. York:
Joseph Rowntree Foundation; 2009.
31.
Leamy M, Clough R: How older people became researchers. York: Joseph
Rowntree Foundation; 2006.
32.
Glasby J, Miller R, Ellins J, Durose J, Davidson D, McIver S, Littlechild R,
Tanner D, Snelling I, Spence K: Understanding and improving transitions of
older people: a user and carer centred approach, Final report NIHR service
delivery and organisation programme. London: The Stationery Office; 2012.
Gale et al. BMC Medical Research Methodology 2013, 13:117
Page 7 of 8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2288/13/117

----- Page 8 (native) -----
33.
Saldaña J: The coding manual for qualitative researchers. London: Sage; 2009.
34.
Lincoln YS: Emerging criteria for quality in qualitative and interpretive
research. Qual Inquiry 1995, 1(3):275–289.
35.
Mays N, Pope C: Qualitative research in health care: assessing quality in
qualitative research. BMJ British Med J 2000, 320(7226):50.
36.
Seale C: Quality in qualitative research. Qual Inquiry 1999, 5(4):465–478.
37.
Dingwall R, Murphy E, Watson P, Greatbatch D, Parker S: Catching goldfish:
quality in qualitative research. J Health serv Res Policy 1998, 3(3):167–172.
38.
Popay J, Rogers A, Williams G: Rationale and standards for the systematic
review of qualitative literature in health services research. Qual Health
Res 1998, 8(3):341–351.
39.
Morse JM, Barrett M, Mayan M, Olson K, Spiers J: Verification strategies for
establishing reliability and validity in qualitative research. Int J Qual
Methods 2008, 1(2):13–22.
40.
Smith JA: Reflecting on the development of interpretative
phenomenological analysis and its contribution to qualitative research in
psychology. Qual Res Psychol 2004, 1(1):39–54.
41.
Polit DF, Beck CT: Generalization in quantitative and qualitative research:
Myths and strategies. Int J Nurs Studies 2010, 47(11):1451–1458.
doi:10.1186/1471-2288-13-117
Cite this article as: Gale et al.: Using the framework method for the
analysis of qualitative data in multi-disciplinary health research. BMC
Medical Research Methodology 2013 13:117.
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submit
Gale et al. BMC Medical Research Methodology 2013, 13:117
Page 8 of 8
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2288/13/117