

----- Page 1 (native text) -----
Social Conditions as Fundamental Causes of Disease* 
BRUCE G. LINK 
Columbia University 
and New York State Psychiatric 
Institute 
JO PHELAN 
University 
of California, 
Los Angeles 
Journal 
of Health and Social Behavior 1995, (Extra Issue):80-94 
Over the last several decades, epidemiological studies have been enormously 
successful in identifying 
risk factors for major diseases. However, most of this 
research has focused attention 
on risk factors that are relatively 
proximal causes of 
disease such as diet, cholesterol level, exercise and the like. We question the 
emphasis on such individually-based 
risk factors and argue that greater attention 
must be paid to basic social conditions if health reform is to have its maximum 
effect 
in the time ahead. There are two reasons for this claim. First we argue that 
individually-based 
risk factors must be contextualized, 
by examining what puts 
people at risk of risks, if we are to craft effective 
interventions 
and improve the 
nation's health. Second, we argue that social factors such as socioeconomic status 
and social support are likely 'fundamental 
causes" of disease that, because they 
embody access to important 
resources, affect multiple disease outcomes through 
multiple mechanisms, 
and consequently 
maintain an association with disease even 
when intervening mechanisms change. Without careful attention to these 
possibilities, we run the risk of imposing individually-based 
intervention 
strategies 
that are ineffective 
and of missing opportunities 
to adopt broad-based societal 
interventions 
that could produce substantial health benefits 
for our citizens. 
Epidemiology has been enormously successful in heightening 
public awareness of risk 
factors for disease. Research findings are frequently 
and prominently 
publicized in the mass 
media and in rapidly proliferating 
university-based 
health newsletters. Moreover, there is 
evidence that the message has been received and that many people have at least attempted 
to 
quit smoking, include more exercise in their daily routine, and implement 
a healthier 
diet. 
With few exceptions, however, the new findings 
generated within the field of epidemiology 
have focused on risk factors that are relatively proximate "causes" of disease, such as diet, 
cholesterol, hypertension, 
electromagnetic 
fields, lack of exercise, and so on. Social factors, 
which tend to be more distal causes of disease, have received far less attention. 
' This focus on 
more proximate 
links in the causal chain may be viewed by many, not as a limitation 
or bias, 
but as the rightful 
progression 
of science from identifying 
correlations 
to understanding 
causal 
relationships (e.g., Potter 1992). In fact, some in the so-called "modem" school of 
epidemiology (e.g., Rothman 1986) have explicitly argued that social conditions such as 
socioeconomic status are mere proxies for true causes lying closer to disease in the causal 
chain. 
This focus on proximate risk factors, potentially controllable at the individual level, 
resonates with the value and belief systems of Western culture that emphasize both the ability 
of the individual to control his or her personal fate and the importance 
of doing so (Becker 
* We thank 
Bernice 
Pescosolido, 
Sharon Schwartz, 
and Sarah Rosenfield 
for helpful 
comments. 
This 
work was supported 
in part by NIMH grants 
MH46101 and MH13043. Address 
communications 
to Bruce 
G. Link, Epidemiology 
of Mental Disorders, 
100 Haven Avenue, Apartment 
31D, New York, NY 
10032. 
80 
This content downloaded from 129.2.61.92 on Fri, 17 Apr 2015 14:07:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


----- Page 2 (native text) -----
FUNDAMENTAL CAUSES OF DISEASE 
81 
1993). This affinity 
between cultural values and the focus of contemporary 
epidemiology 
undoubtedly contributes to the level of public interest in epidemiological findings, and 
probably influences 
funding 
priorities 
as well. Thus modem epidemiology 
and cultural values 
conspire to focus attention 
on proximate, 
individually-based 
risk factors and away from social 
conditions as causes of disease. 
This is not to say that the role of social factors in disease causation has been neglected in all 
quarters. Medical sociologists and social epidemiologists have kept alive classical 
epidemiology's (e.g., Susser, Watson, and Hopper 1985) concern with social conditions and 
have made major strides toward documenting 
and understanding 
the connections between 
social factors and disease. However, we believe there are conceptual pitfalls that sometimes 
lead medical sociologists and social epidemiologists 
themselves to unwittingly 
reinforce 
the 
emphasis on proximate, 
individual-level 
risk factors. One of these pitfalls is that, in the process 
of elucidating 
the mechanisms 
connecting 
social conditions 
to health and illness-an important 
and desirable activity-we may, over time, lose interest 
in and come to neglect the importance 
of the social condition whose effect on health we originally sought to explain. Also, our 
tendency to focus on the connection of social conditions to single diseases via single 
mechanisms at single points in time neglects the multifaceted 
and dynamic processes through 
which social factors may affect health and, consequently, may result in an incomplete 
understanding 
and an underestimation 
of the influence of social factors on health. 
Our purposes here are to highlight 
the accomplishments 
of medical sociologists and social 
epidemiologists 
in advancing our understanding 
of social conditions as causes of disease, to 
underscore the critical importance of continued work in this direction, and to offer two 
conceptual frameworks 
that we hope will facilitate 
and enhance this research. First, we discuss 
the importance 
of "contextualizing" 
risk factors--that 
is, attempting 
to understand 
how people 
come to be exposed to individually-based 
risk factors such as poor diet, cholesterol, lack of 
exercise, or high blood pressure-so that we can design more effective 
interventions. 
Second, 
we introduce 
the notion that some social conditions may be "fundamental 
causes" of disease. 
A fundamental 
cause involves access to resources, resources that help individuals avoid 
diseases and their negative consequences through 
a variety of mechanisms. Thus, even if one 
effectively 
modifies intervening 
mechanisms or eradicates some diseases, an association 
between a fundamental 
cause and disease will reemerge. As such, fundamental 
causes can defy 
efforts 
to eliminate their effects when attempts 
to do so focus solely on the mechanisms that 
happen to link them to disease in a particular situation. We conclude by discussing the 
implications 
of these ideas for research and social policy. 
EVIDENCE LINKING SOCIAL CONDITIONS TO DISEASE 
We begin with a brief review of the evidence concerning the connection between social 
conditions and illness. For the purposes of this paper, we define social conditions as factors 
that involve a person's relationships to other people. These include everything from 
relationships 
with intimates 
to positions occupied within the social and economic structures 
of 
society. Thus, in addition to factors like race, socioeconomic status, and gender, we include 
stressful 
life events of a social nature (e.g., the death of a loved one, loss of a job, or crime 
victimization), 
as well as stress-process 
variables such as social support. 
Forty years of medical sociology have uncovered numerous 
examples of the social patterning 
of disease. Most obvious is the ubiquitous and often strong association between health and 
socioeconomic status. Lower SES is associated with lower life expectancy, higher overall 
mortality 
rates and higher rates of infant and perinatal mortality 
(Buck 1981; Dutton 1986; 
Illsley and Mullen 1985; Adler et al. 1994; Pappas et al. 1993). Moreover, low SES is 
associated with each of the 14 major cause-of-death categories in the International 
Classification 
of Diseases (Illsley and Mullen 1985), as well as many other health outcomes, 
including major mental disorders (Dohrenwend et al. 1980; Kessler et al. 1994). Other 
examples of the social patterning 
of disease are plentiful. 
Males have higher mortality 
rates at 
all ages (Walsh and Feldman 1981), as well as higher rates of coronary heart disease (Syme 
and Guralnik 1987), chronic respiratory 
diseases (Colley 1985) and ulcers (Gazzard and Lance 
This content downloaded from 129.2.61.92 on Fri, 17 Apr 2015 14:07:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


----- Page 3 (native text) -----
82 
JOURNAL OF HEALTH AND SOCIAL BEHAVIOR 
1982). There are pronounced gender differences 
in rates of various forms of cancer (Prout, 
Colton, and Smith 1987) and mental disorder (Dohrenwend et al. 1980; Kessler et al. 1994). 
African Americans have higher rates of overall mortality 
and infant mortality 
(Dutton 1986; 
Miller 1987), renal failure (Challah and Wing 1985), and stroke (Pedoe 1982a) than do Whites, 
but lower rates of coronary heart disease (Pedoe 1982b); cancer rates also differ 
by race and 
ethnicity 
(Prout et al. 1987). Both physical and mental disorders vary with marital status and 
population density (Kelsey 1993; Benenson 1987; Robins et al. 1984), and certain religious 
groups such as Mormons and Seventh Day Adventists 
have lower risks of some types of cancer 
(Saracci 1985). 
In addition, the tremendous growth and success of the stress paradigm have added 
considerably to the evidence for an association between social conditions and disease 
(Dohrenwend and Dohrenwend 1981; Pearlin et al. 1981; Turner and Marino 1994; Turner, 
Wheaton, and Lloyd 1995). Stressful life events have been linked to heart disease, diabetes, 
cancers, stroke, fetal death, major depression, and low birth weight in offspring 
(Miller 1987; 
Brown and Harris 1989; Shrout et al. 1989). Research has also extended to the domains of 
social support (Berkman and Syme 1979; House, Landis, and Umberson 1988; Thoits 1982; 
Turner 1981; Turner, Grindstaff, 
and Phillips 1990; Turner and Marino 1994) and coping 
(Pearlin and Schooler 1978), which have been shown to be associated with health and 
well-being in their own right. 
The evidence reviewed to this point clearly establishes a strong and pervasive association 
between social conditions and disease. But medical sociologists and social epidemiologists 
have taken the field considerably beyond a description of the social patterning 
of disease. 
Important 
advances in establishing 
a causal role for social factors have focused on two major 
issues-the direction of causation between social conditions and health and the mechanisms 
that explain observed associations. In what follows we present prominent 
examples of work on 
these two issues. 
Concerning the issue of causal direction, important 
controversies 
surround some of the 
relationships 
between social conditions and health. For example, does low SES cause poor 
health, or does poor health cause downward mobility? Does social support reduce morbidity 
and mortality, 
or does illness restrict social interaction 
and thereby lead to social-support 
deficits? Social epidemiologists 
have used three general strategies 
to address these questions. 
One approach uses quasi-experimental 
strategies which involve locating conditions under 
which alternative explanations make different 
predictions about observable facts. This 
approach is exemplified by Dohrenwend's (1966) quasi-experiment 
designed to test social 
selection and social causation explanations 
for the association between SES and specific mental 
disorders. The two explanations make different 
predictions about rates of disorder in 
advantaged and disadvantaged 
ethnic groups, when socioeconomic status is held constant. The 
recent culmination of Dohrenwend's work on this problem, based on a large-scale 
epidemiological 
study in Israel (Dohrenwend et al. 1992), concluded that social causation was 
stronger 
than social selection in producing the inverse association of SES to major depression 
in women, and substance abuse and antisocial personality 
in men. For schizophrenia, 
however, 
the evidence was more supportive 
of the social-selection 
explanation. 
In the second strategy, 
medical sociologists and social epidemiologists 
identify 
social risk 
factors that cannot reasonably be conceived as having been caused by an individual's illness 
condition. Exemplifying 
this strategy 
is a study by Hamilton and colleagues (1990) concerning 
the effects of plant closings on auto-workers' mental health. The investigators 
compared 
workers who were laid off because of a plant closing, workers who anticipated 
being laid off, 
and workers whose plant was not closing, and found that those laid off were more likely to 
experience negative mental-health 
consequences-particularly 
if they were minorities 
and of 
low SES. Since the illness condition of the workers cannot be thought 
of as having caused the 
plant closing, the differences 
between the groups studied are more clearly interpretable 
as the 
effects 
of social conditions on health. This strategy 
was also employed by Fenwick and Tausig 
(1994) in a study that used the Census-based unemployment 
rate for an individual's occupation 
in a longitudinal 
design to show that when unemployment 
is higher, workers' job satisfaction, 
decision-making 
latitude, and well-being are lower. Again, since workers' health cannot cause 
the aggregate unemployment 
rate, the results are more readily interpretable 
as demonstrating 
This content downloaded from 129.2.61.92 on Fri, 17 Apr 2015 14:07:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


----- Page 4 (native text) -----
FUNDAMENTAL CAUSES OF DISEASE 
83 
the influence of social conditions on health-related 
outcomes. Finally, studies of stressful 
circumstance 
have used this strategy 
by identifying 
"fateful" life events that are unlikely to 
have been caused by an individual's behavior (e.g., death of spouse, plant closing). Thus when 
Shrout et al. (1989) found the odds of developing major depression 
to be more than three times 
as high among people experiencing 
a recent fateful 
life event, the association was more clearly 
interpretable 
as an effect of social conditions. 
The third strategy 
adopted by social epidemiologists 
to clarify causal direction 
involves the 
use of longitudinal 
designs. When such designs can clearly place the emergence 
of an illness or 
an illness exacerbation 
before or after the social condition under study, a great deal can be 
learned about the direction 
of cause between the two. Unfortunately, 
some longitudinal 
studies 
do not allow clear inferences 
about time order and therefore 
do not provide the definitive 
evidence about causality that is sometimes 
attributed 
to them (see Link and Shrout 1992). Still, 
some notable studies have identified 
social conditions 
that clearly predate health outcomes and 
show that the social conditions predict morbidity 
and mortality 
even when competing risk 
factors are held constant. 
For example, Berkman and Syme (1979) used baseline data on social 
networks, 
collected in 1965, to predict mortality 
during the subsequent 
nine years. They found 
a near doubling of risk for mortality 
among those low on a social-network 
index as compared 
to those high on the index. Although 
this study controlled 
for many competing 
risks (smoking, 
obesity, physical activity, 
etc.), it did not include measures derived from a physical exam. A 
subsequent study by House, Landis, and Umberson (1988) did include a baseline physical 
exam and controlled for blood pressure, cholesterol levels, and other biomedical variables. 
These investigators 
found associations between social relationships 
and mortality 
that were 
similar to those reported 
by Berkman and Syme. This line of work has continued to become 
more and more refined. For example, in a recent longitudinal 
study, Berkman and colleagues 
(1992) have shown that a measure of perceived support collected before the occurrence of a 
heart attack predicts survival following the heart attack net of an impressive array of 
biomedical and psychosocial control variables. Other social variables have also been 
effectively 
studied with longitudinal 
designs. For example, Catalano and colleagues (1993) 
related job layoffs 
to the emergence 
or reemergence 
of alcohol abuse, and Lin and Ensel (1989) 
and Ensel and Lin (1991) showed that stressful 
circumstances 
predicted 
subsequent 
health and 
mental-health 
outcomes. 
Thus, while medical sociologists and social epidemiologists 
have not denied the possibility 
that illness affects 
social conditions 
(Johnson 1991), they have, at the same time, demonstrated 
a substantial 
causal role for social conditions as causes of illness. 
Research identifying 
the mechanisms 
linking social conditions 
to disease has also done much 
to move social epidemiology 
beyond the description 
of social patterns 
of disease. Consider, for 
example, the job-stress model of Karasek and colleagues that provides evidence for one 
mechanism 
linking SES to coronary 
heart disease among men. These investigators 
have shown 
that "job strain," characterized 
by a combination of high job demands and low decision 
latitude, is more common in lower status jobs and is associated with coronary heart disease 
(Karasek et al. 1988; Schnall et al. 1990) and elevated levels of ambulatory 
blood pressure 
both on and off the job (Schnall et al. 1992). Another example is the work of Mirowsky and 
Ross (1989), who elucidate the mechanisms 
that might account for social patterns 
of distress. 
They present evidence showing that alienation and perceived control over life circumstances 
underlie many social conditions that put people at risk for elevated levels of psychological 
distress. Consider as a final example a study by Rosenfield (1989) that sought to understand 
mechanisms 
producing gender differences 
in symptoms 
of depression and anxiety. Rosenfield 
shows that women have higher symptoms 
of depression and anxiety. This work shows that 
women have higher symptom 
levels than men when they are overloaded by work and family 
demands or when they experience low power as a consequence of being out of the labor 
market. Moreover, the common mechanism underlying 
low power and role overload is a 
decreased sense of personal control, which is in turn related to symptoms 
of anxiety and 
depression. 
Link and Dohrenwend (1989) explicitly advocate the approach of elucidating mechanisms 
because of its value in clarifying 
the relative merit of competing 
explanations 
for social patterns 
of disease. The rationale is that alternative 
explanations for these patterns, such as social 
This content downloaded from 129.2.61.92 on Fri, 17 Apr 2015 14:07:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


----- Page 5 (native text) -----
84 
JOURNAL OF HEALTH AND SOCIAL BEHAVIOR 
causation and social selection, frequently 
imply different 
intervening 
mechanisms. Thus, 
evidence about which intervening 
mechanisms account for the association can help answer 
questions concerning 
causal direction 
and other competing 
explanations. Moreover, if causal 
links between distal factors (e.g., SES) and more proximal factors (e.g., occupational stress, 
diet) can be drawn, as Karasek et al. (1988), Mirowsky and Ross (1989), Rosenfield (1989), 
and others (Lennon 1987; Pearlin et al. 1981; Link, Lennon, and Dohrenwend 1993; 
Umberson, Wortman, 
and Kessler 1992) have done, it becomes increasingly 
clear that social 
conditions 
are causes exerting 
indirect 
effects 
on disease outcomes, rather 
than mere proxies as 
Rothman (1986) and others might claim. 
But are there unintended 
and undesirable 
consequences of an approach that focuses on inter- 
vening mechanisms? 
We believe there are. Despite the obvious benefits 
of such an approach, it 
is possible that in its enactment, 
one may inadvertently 
contribute 
to the focus on factors 
that are 
closer to disease in the causal chain. The intervening 
mechanism 
becomes the new and exciting 
"next step," while the social conditions 
become the old, passe "starting 
point." 
The evolution 
of the stress paradigm 
is a good example of such an inadvertent 
downgrading 
of 
the issue which provided the initial impetus for research. The social causation/social 
selection 
controversy 
concerning 
the association 
between 
socioeconomic 
status 
and mental 
disorder 
spawned 
an interest 
in stressful 
life events as a direct operationalization 
of the adversity 
that might be 
experienced 
in lower SES contexts (Dohrenwend 
and Dohrenwend 1969, 1981). When a con- 
sistent 
but modest association between stressful 
events and illness was identified 
(see Rabkin and 
Struening 
1976), investigators 
elaborated the model to consider social support and coping as 
potential 
modifiers. 
Now researchers 
are invested 
in understanding 
the mechanisms 
linking 
these 
factors 
with disease. Also, research 
on the biological consequences 
of stress (e.g., immune status 
and elevated catecholamines) 
is seen as an exciting 
new development 
(e.g., Cohen, Tyrrell, 
and 
Smith 1991). In general, interest 
has followed the most recent step in the progression 
toward 
disease outcomes, 
while concern with the earlier foci has dissipated 
to a point where some express 
disinterest 
in factors such as the causation/selection 
issue and the role of stressful 
life events in 
causing illness (but see Pearlin 1989; Dohrenwend 1990; Angermeyer 
and Klusman [1987] for 
dissenting 
views). Indeed Angermeyer 
and Klusman (1987) documented 
a sharp decline in the 
number of publications 
focused on social class and mental disorder 
in the period from 1966 to 
1985, while the number 
of articles 
on stress and psychiatric 
disorders 
increased 
rapidly 
during 
the 
same period. To the extent that interest 
in mechanisms 
increases at the expense of more funda- 
mental social conditions, 
medical sociologists may unwittingly 
contribute 
to the emphasis on 
individual 
factors 
and play into the hands of those who argue that social factors 
have only a modest 
role in disease causation. 
To this point, we have described 
two characterizations 
of social conditions 
as causes of disease 
that either advertently 
or inadvertently 
downplay their importance. 
One of these is the outright 
declaration 
that social factors are only proxies for true causes. This position is demonstrably 
unwarranted 
given the achievements 
of medical sociology and social epidemiology 
over the past 
few decades. The other characterization, 
which may be partially 
constructed 
by medical sociol- 
ogists and social epidemiologists 
themselves, 
is the view that social factors 
serve as starting 
points 
whose main function 
is to point the direction 
to more proximal 
risk factors. 
We take sharp issue 
with both of these characterizations. 
In the next two sections, we develop two concepts that 
illustrate 
the critical importance 
of social factors 
in disease causation, provide conceptual 
frame- 
works for future 
research 
in this area, and point to the problems 
that may ensue if the role of social 
conditions 
is neglected 
by researchers 
and policymakers. 
These are the ideas of "contextualizing 
risk factors" and "fundamental 
causes." 
CONTEXTUALIZING RISK FACTORS 
We suggest that medical sociologists and social epidemiologists need to counter the 
trajectory 
of modem epidemiology toward identifying 
risk factors that are increasingly 
proximate 
to disease-ones for which "biological plausibility" can be argued. One way they 
can do this is by "contextualizing" 
individually-based 
risk factors. By this we mean that 
investigators 
must (1) use an interpretive 
framework 
to understand 
why people come to be 
This content downloaded from 129.2.61.92 on Fri, 17 Apr 2015 14:07:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


----- Page 6 (native text) -----
FUNDAMENTAL CAUSES OF DISEASE 
85 
exposed to risk or protective factors and (2) determine 
the social conditions under which 
individual risk factors are related to disease. We present examples that illustrate 
both these 
principles. 
First, an important 
strategy for reducing the threat of AIDS is to educate the public 
concerning the steps they must take as individuals to reduce their risk of contracting 
or 
infecting 
others with the HIV virus. Clearly, however, some people are better able to take 
advantage of this information 
than others. By contextualizing 
risk factors 
for AIDS, we may be 
able to understand 
why some people cannot avoid the risk. For example, homeless or other 
extremely 
poor women who turn to prostitution 
as a survival strategy 
may not have the options 
or resources that would enable them to refuse to engage in risky sexual behaviors, no matter 
how well informed 
they may be about the risks they face. This example suggests that medical 
sociologists and social epidemiologists 
need to contextualize 
risk factors by asking what it is 
about people's life circumstances 
that shapes their exposure to such risk factors as unprotected 
sexual intercourse, 
poor diet, a sedentary 
lifestyle, 
or a stressful 
home life. 
Our second example concerns the increasing attention 
being paid to the public health 
problem posed by contamination 
of meat, poultry, and eggs with E. coli and salmonella 
bacteria. The public has been warned to rinse and cook meat and poultry thoroughly 
and to 
carefully wash hands, knives, cutting boards, and so on. Because some follow these safety 
guidelines more assiduously than others, one can imagine a risk profile of individual behaviors 
that might 
predict bacterial infection. 
These precautions 
are only necessary, 
however, when the 
food that reaches the marketplace is contaminated. 
Government 
actions in the 1980s that 
reduced the number of government 
inspectors 
and deregulated 
the meat-processing 
industry 
have created the need for vigilance on the part of individuals. While the current 
approach to the 
problem focuses on the individual, it can readily be seen that economic and political forces 
shape individuals' exposure to this risk. This example suggests that medical sociologists and 
social epidemiologists 
need to contextualize 
by asking under what social conditions 
individual 
risk factors lead to disease and whether there are any social conditions under which the 
individual-level 
risk factors would have no effect at all on disease outcome. 
While the importance 
of contextualizing 
risk factors may seem obvious, if we take a hard 
look at even some of the most influential 
areas of research in medical sociology, we will find 
that much more of this kind of contextualizing 
is needed. Consider again the stress paradigm. 
While there are hundreds 
if not thousands of studies relating stressful 
circumstances 
to health 
outcomes, until the recent efforts 
of Turner and colleagues (Turner and Marino 1994; Turner, 
Wheaton, and Lloyd 1995), there was very little even descriptive 
data about the social origins 
of stressful 
circumstances 
(but see Smith 1992; Goldberg and Comstock 1980). 
Why is it so important 
that we strive to contextualize 
risk factors? 
One reason is that efforts 
to reduce risk by changing behavior may be hopelessly ineffective 
if there is no clear 
understanding 
of the process that leads to exposure. For example, there are powerful social, 
cultural, and economic factors shaping the diet of poor people in the United States. 
Consequently, 
providing 
information 
about healthy diet to poor people and exhorting 
them to 
follow nutritional 
guidelines is unlikely 
to have much impact. Without 
an understanding 
of the 
context that leads to risk, the responsibility 
for reducing the risk is left with the individual, and 
nothing 
is done to alter the more fundamental 
factors that put people at risk of risks. 
This line of thinking 
suggests that medical sociologists 
and social epidemiologists 
should turn 
on its head the now-popular 
tendency 
to examine risk factors 
that are ever closer to disease in a 
causal chain. Rather, it suggests that it is just as important 
to face the other direction 
and search 
for the factors that put people at risk of risks. It exhorts 
researchers 
both to explore the social 
origins of risks and to ask whether 
individually-based 
risk factors are context-dependent 
in the 
sense of influencing 
health outcomes only within 
the context 
of a specific set of social conditions. 
FUNDAMENTAL CAUSES 
In addition to the obvious need to contextualize 
risk factors, medical sociologists and social 
epidemiologists 
need to take as their task the identification 
and thorough 
consideration 
of social 
conditions that are what we term "fundamental causes" of disease. We call them 
This content downloaded from 129.2.61.92 on Fri, 17 Apr 2015 14:07:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


----- Page 7 (native text) -----
86 
JOURNAL OF HEALTH AND SOCIAL BEHAVIOR 
"fundamental" 
causes because, as we shall see, the health effects 
of causes of this sort cannot 
be eliminated 
by addressing 
the mechanisms 
that appear to link them to disease. The possibility 
that some social conditions have this fundamental 
quality with regard to health was first 
presented by House and colleagues in a discussion of potential reasons for the persistent 
association between SES and disease (House et al. 1990, 1994). We elaborate upon these ideas 
to build our concept of fundamental 
social causes of disease. 
The Case of SES and Disease. The idea that social conditions might influence health was 
forcefully 
asserted by nineteenth-century 
physicians 
who founded the field of social medicine. 
Virchow (1848), for example, declared that "medicine is a social science." And, of course, it 
was in part the strong association between indicators 
of poverty 
and health that supported 
this 
claim. The reasons for the powerful association were also thought 
to be apparent, 
residing in 
the dire housing, sanitation, 
and work conditions of poor people at the time (Rosen 1979). 
With tremendous 
medical advances and extensive public health initiatives, 
the incidence of 
such diseases as diphtheria, measles, typhoid fever, tuberculosis, and syphilis declined 
dramatically. 
In addition, in modern welfare states, poor people's access to care increased 
substantially. 
By the 1960s, many of the factors that had been identified 
as linking SES to 
disease had been addressed, and one might have expected the association to wane and perhaps 
disappear altogether. 
Indeed, this is exactly the conclusion that Charles Kadushin reached in a 
1964 article in Sociological Inquiry (Kadushin 1964). Startled that social scientists had not 
recognized the demise of the SES gradient 
in health, Kadushin reminded 
his readers that most 
of the mechanisms 
thought 
to produce SES differences 
in health in the United States had been 
addressed and that "as countries advance in their standard of living, as public sanitation 
improves, 
as mass immunization 
proceeds, and as Dr. Spock becomes even more widely read, 
the gross factors which intervene 
between social class and exposure to disease will become 
more and more equal for all social classes" (1964:75). As a result, Kadushin declared, 
Americans from the lower classes are no more likely to develop disease than those from the 
middle or upper classes. 
Of course, Kadushin's prediction 
turned out to be dramatically 
incorrect 
as indicated by 
studies (cited above) documenting 
an enduring or even an increasing (Pappas et al. 1993) 
association between SES and many disease outcomes. But what was wrong with Kadushin's 
reasoning? Hadn't he engaged in logic that most of us not only accept but take for granted? 
Having implicitly 
drawn the path model with SES as the distal factor that is linked to disease 
by more proximal risk factors, and having observed that the proximal risk factors in the model 
had been largely eliminated as causal agents, he concluded that the SES-disease association 
should have disappeared. But it didn't. 
On the face of it, the reason Kadushin's 1964 prediction 
turned out to be wrong is readily 
apparent when one compares the intervening 
risk factors he considered to the intervening 
risk 
factors identified 
by Adler and colleagues in their 1994 review of socioeconomic status and 
health. The "gross" risk factors of sanitation 
and immunization 
that Kadushin mentioned 
are 
replaced in the Adler and colleagues' review by risk factors 
that include smoking, 
exercise, and 
diet, among others. Further, 
the evidence suggests that several of the risk factors 
mentioned 
by 
Adler and colleagues were not important 
intervening 
mechanisms when Kadushin wrote. 
Before the 1960s, for example, there was no evidence that rates of smoking were higher among 
lower SES individuals. Rather, the association emerged during the 1960s because people of 
higher socioeconomic status were likely to start smoking and more likely to quit if they had 
started 
(Ernster 1988; Novotny et al. 1988). Similar changes have occurred in other risk-related 
behaviors. For example, in considering 
the strong evidence that declines in coronary heart 
disease have been greatest among people of higher socioeconomic status, Beaglehole (1990) 
pointed to the fact that higher SES individuals 
have been better informed 
about and more able 
to implement 
changes in health behaviors like smoking, exercise, and diet. The result has been 
a widening of the gap in rates of heart disease between the rich and the poor (Beaglehole 
1990). Thus studies of the association between SES and disease over the past several decades 
reveal an important 
fact-the risk factors mediating 
the association have changed. As some 
risk factors were eradicated, others emerged or were newly discovered. As new risk factors 
became apparent, 
people of higher SES were more favorably 
situated to know about the risks 
and to have the resources that allowed them to engage in protective 
efforts 
to avoid them. 
This content downloaded from 129.2.61.92 on Fri, 17 Apr 2015 14:07:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


----- Page 8 (native text) -----
FUNDAMENTAL CAUSES OF DISEASE 
87 
From one vantage point, this account of the association between SES and disease might be 
seen as a curious story in the history of social epidemiology-an instance in which unique 
historical 
events pulled the rug out from under an otherwise 
reasonable hypothesis 
put forward 
by Kadushin in 1964. Far more likely, however, is the possibility that the effect of SES on 
disease has endured-despite radical changes in intervening 
risk factors-because a deeper 
sociological process is at work. If so, what happened over the past several decades will 
continue to happen and if, at this particular 
point in time, we presume that an understanding 
of 
the SES-disease association lies in tracing 
the mechanisms 
that currently 
appear to link the two, 
time will prove to be as wrong as Kadushin was. This will occur, we argue, because SES is a 
fundamental 
cause of disease. 
Fundamental 
Social Causes of Disease. Our discussion of SES to this point has focused on 
its persistent 
association with disease despite changes in intervening 
mechanisms. However, 
we have not yet explicitly 
indicated why SES, or any fundamental 
cause, might maintain 
this 
kind of enduring 
relationship 
with disease. 
The reason for such persistent 
associations, and the essential feature of fundamental 
social 
causes, is that they involve access to resources that can be used to avoid risks or to minimize 
the consequences of disease once it occurs. We define resources broadly to include money, 
knowledge, power, prestige, 
and the kinds of interpersonal 
resources embodied in the concepts 
of social support and social network. Variables like SES, social networks, 
and stigmatization 
are used by medical sociologists and social epidemiologists 
to directly 
assess these resources2 
and are therefore 
especially obvious as potential 
fundamental 
causes. However, other variables 
examined by medical sociologists and social epidemiologists, such as race/ethnicity 
and 
gender, are so closely tied to resources like money, power, prestige, and/or social 
connectedness 
that they should be considered as potential fundamental 
causes of disease as 
well. 
An additional condition that must obtain for fundamental 
causes to emerge is change over 
time in the diseases afflicting 
humans, the risks for those diseases, knowledge about risks, or 
the effectiveness 
of treatments 
for diseases. If no new diseases emerged (such as AIDS), no 
new risks developed (such as pollutants), 
no new knowledge about risks emerged (as about 
cigarette 
smoking in the 1950s and 1960s), and no new treatments 
were developed (such as 
heart transplants), 
the concept of fundamental 
social causes would not apply. In such a static 
system, as risk factors 
known to intervene 
between a social cause and disease are blocked, the 
association between the social cause and disease would decline in lockstep. But, of course, this 
is nothing 
like the situation 
humans have ever confronted 
with regard to health. In the context 
of a dynamic system with changes in diseases, risks, knowledge of risks, and treatments, 
fundamental 
causes are likely to emerge. The reason is that resources like knowledge, money, 
power, prestige, and social connectedness 
are transportable 
from one situation 
to another, 
and 
as health-related 
situations 
change, those who command the most resources are best able to 
avoid risks, diseases, and the consequences of disease. Thus, no matter 
what the current 
profile 
of diseases and known risks happens to be, those who are best positioned with regard to 
important 
social and economic resources will be less afflicted 
by disease. 
The foregoing 
reasoning suggests two further 
attributes 
of fundamental 
causes. Because a 
fundamental 
cause involves access to broadly serviceable resources, it influences 
(1) multiple 
risk factors and (2) multiple disease outcomes. This is an important 
observation, 
because it 
alerts us to the possibility 
that the association between a fundamental 
cause and disease can be 
preserved 
through 
changes either in the mechanisms 
or in the outcomes. The idea that multiple 
mechanisms 
may contribute 
to a persistent 
association between a cause and an effect comes 
from sociologist Stanley Lieberson. Lieberson (1985) proposed that some causes, which he 
called "basic causes," have enduring 
effects 
on a dependent 
variable because, when the effect 
of one mechanism declines, the effect of another emerges or becomes more prominent. 
We 
have already described the example of the changing role of mechanisms like smoking, 
exercise, and diet in relation to the association between socioeconomic status and disease. 
While these variables were no doubt always linked to disease, their connection to 
socioeconomic status changed when knowledge about their importance in health became 
available. We take the idea that a cause can affect multiple health outcomes from social 
epidemiologist 
John Cassel. Cassel (1976) points out that some social factors make individuals 
This content downloaded from 129.2.61.92 on Fri, 17 Apr 2015 14:07:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


----- Page 9 (native text) -----
88 
JOURNAL OF HEALTH AND SOCIAL BEHAVIOR 
vulnerable, 
not to a specific disease, but to a wide array of diseases. As a result, investigations 
of the relationship 
of such social factors to specific manifestations 
of disease are of limited 
utility. 
Since only one manifestation 
of the social cause is measured in such studies, the full 
impact of the social cause goes unrecorded 
(also see Aneshensel 1992; Aneshensal, Rutter, 
and 
Lachenbruch 1991; Cullen 1984). However, in addition to underestimating 
the full impact of 
social causes at any given time, a narrow focus on one disease at a time misses the possibility 
that changes in particular disease outcomes can lead to enduring associations between 
fundamental 
causes and disease overall. When health surveillance 
or immunization 
systems 
fail 
and old diseases begin to reemerge (TB, measles) or when new diseases enter a population 
(AIDS), they do so in the context of existing social conditions 
that are ripe environments 
for 
producing mechanisms that link fundamental 
social causes to new or reemerging 
diseases. 
Thus, for example, before 1980, SES was linked to the intravenous 
use of drugs, which in turn 
had negative health consequences. But with the emergence of AIDS, this SES-linked risk 
factor came to have an even more potent effect on health. Indeed, AIDS will likely become a 
significant 
contributor 
to SES differentials 
in mortality 
in the time ahead due to the rapid 
spread of infection 
in low-income areas (Brunswick 
et al. 1993). Similarly, 
the reemergence 
of 
drug-resistant 
tuberculosis 
is striking 
poor inner-city 
populations to a far greater 
extent than it 
is higher-status 
suburban areas. 
In sum, a fundamental 
social cause of disease involves resources that determine 
the extent to 
which people are able to avoid risks for morbidity 
and mortality.3 
Because resources are 
important 
determinants 
of risk factors, fundamental 
causes are linked to multiple disease 
outcomes through 
multiple risk-factor 
mechanisms. Moreover, because social and economic 
resources can be used in different 
ways in different 
situations, 
fundamental 
social causes have 
effects on disease even when the profile of risk factors changes radically. It follows that the 
effect of a fundamental 
cause cannot be explained by the risk factors that happen to link it to 
disease at any given time. 
Research Implications. All too frequently, 
even those of us who believe that social 
conditions 
are important 
for health are lulled into thinking 
that the best way to understand 
and 
ultimately 
address the effects 
of social conditions 
is to identify 
the intervening 
links. Indeed, it 
is precisely this reasoning that Adler and colleagues use to assert that psychologists 
have an 
important 
role to play in addressing the SES-disease association-the risk factors they 
identified 
were individually-based 
behaviors that psychologists 
are well-equipped to address. 
But the concept of a fundamental 
cause sensitizes us to the possibility 
that fundamental 
social 
causes cannot be fully understood 
by tracing the mechanisms that appear to link them to 
disease. To be sure, a focus on mechanisms can help identify 
variables more proximal to 
health, and if such risks are addressed, the health of the public can be improved. However, in 
the context of a dynamic system in which risk factors, knowledge of risk factors, treatments, 
and patterns 
of disease are changing, the association between a fundamental 
social cause and 
disease will endure because the resources it entails are transportable 
to new situations. 
If one 
genuinely 
wants to alter the effects 
of a fundamental 
cause, one must address the fundamental 
cause itself. 
There are two implications of this reasoning. First, medical sociologists and social 
epidemiologists 
need to be careful in interpreting 
and communicating 
the meaning of research 
involving 
social factors, intervening 
mechanisms, 
and disease. Specifically, 
if the social factor 
is a fundamental 
cause, one cannot claim to have accounted for its effects by having 
"explained" its association with the inclusion of intervening 
variables in a path or regression 
model. Second, to understand 
associations between fundamental 
causes and disease, medical 
sociologists 
need to examine the broader determinants 
of the resources that fundamental 
causes 
entail. This distinctly 
sociological enterprise 
will link medical sociologists to the broader 
discipline in a productive 
way as we seek to understand 
how general resources like knowledge, 
money, power, prestige, and social connections are transformed 
into the health-related 
resources that generate patterns 
of morbidity 
and mortality. 
This content downloaded from 129.2.61.92 on Fri, 17 Apr 2015 14:07:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


----- Page 10 (native text) -----
FUNDAMENTAL CAUSES OF DISEASE 
89 
POLICY IMPLICATIONS 
Mechanic and Aiken (1986) argue that, rather than leading to specific policies, the main 
contribution 
of social science research to social change is through its influence on the way 
policymakers 
and the general public think about social and health problems. This paper aims to 
make such a contribution 
by drawing attention 
to the progress made by medical sociologists 
and social epidemiologists 
in recent years and by offering 
the concepts of "contextualizing 
risk 
factors" and "fundamental 
causes." 
On its own, the focus on individually-based 
risk factors that has dominated much 
population-based 
medical research in recent years is inadequate.4 To be sure, this focus is a 
compelling attention-getter, 
since the findings it generates are highly relevant to any given 
individual. They can lead to "personal policy" changes such as a reduction 
in fat intake, a little 
exercise, or an aspirin a day-actions that individual people can control personally. But those 
who craft policy for populations 
can be led astray if their purview is narrowly 
limited to a focus 
on individually-based 
risk factors. This paper reveals two reasons why this is so. First, without 
understanding 
the social conditions that expose people to individually-based 
risk factors, 
interventions 
will fail more often than they should. This will occur because interventions 
will 
be targeted 
to behaviors that are resistant 
to change for unrecognized 
reasons. The consequence 
will be that lives and money are wasted, and the American public will lose confidence in our 
ability to implement 
changes that really improve health. Second, some social conditions are 
fundamental 
causes of disease and as such cannot be effectively 
addressed by readjusting 
the 
individually-based 
mechanisms 
that appear to link them to disease in a given context. If we 
wish to alter the effects of these potent determinants 
of disease, we must do so by directly 
intervening 
in ways that change the social conditions 
themselves. 
The issues addressed in this paper suggest three general criteria 
that policymakers 
should use 
in evaluating whether 
to commit funds to a proposed health intervention: 
(1) Consistent 
with the idea of contextualizing 
risk factors, 
policymakers 
should require that 
all interventions 
seeking to change individual risk profiles contain an analysis of factors that 
put people at risk of risks. This will avoid the enactment 
of interventions 
aimed at changing 
behaviors that are powerfully 
influenced 
by factors left untouched 
by the intervention. 
If the 
evidence is to come from studies that involve the experimental 
manipulation 
of a risk factor, 
policymakers should require confirmation 
that the intervention 
works outside of the 
experimental 
context. The reason for this is that, by experimentally 
manipulating 
the risk factor 
(e.g., diet or exercise), the researchers 
have removed from consideration 
the social factors 
that 
determine 
exposure to the risk factor in the natural environment. 
Outside the experimental 
context, 
the factors 
that put people at risk of risks may dominate, 
resulting 
in the intervention's 
ultimate 
failure. 
(2) Consistent 
with the concept of fundamental 
causes, health policymakers 
should consider 
whether 
a proposed intervention 
will have an impact on just one disease or whether, 
because of 
its influence on a fundamental 
cause, it will affect many diseases. An intervention 
that has 
even a modest impact on many diseases may be far more important 
than one that has a 
relatively 
strong impact on just one. 
(3) Health policymakers 
concerned with broad social conditions 
as causes of disease should 
regard with skepticism interventions 
that focus only on intervening 
variables but claim to 
address the broader social condition. Even an "effective" intervention 
that addresses the 
identified 
risk factor will, in the long run, fail to eliminate the effect of a fundamental 
social 
condition. In a changing state of affairs, 
the resources that accrue to the more advantaged 
allow 
them to regain the health advantage that may have been dented temporarily 
by the intervention. 
If one wishes to address fundamental 
social causes, the intervention 
must address inequality 
in the resources that fundamental 
causes entail. Many people and some medical sociologists 
believe that this is impractical-even to think about-because, for them, inequality 
is so firmly 
entrenched 
that nothing 
much can be done about it. Believing this, the only reasonable thing to 
do is to focus on more proximal individually-based 
risk factors, even if doing so has little 
long-run 
bearing on the association between fundamental 
social causes and disease. 
But this reasoning is shortsighted. 
There are many policies that have a direct bearing on the 
extent of inequality 
in our society and thus on the extent to which people from different 
social 
This content downloaded from 129.2.61.92 on Fri, 17 Apr 2015 14:07:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


----- Page 11 (native text) -----
90 
JOURNAL OF HEALTH AND SOCIAL BEHAVIOR 
circumstances 
have access to health-related 
resources. To be sure, these policies are rarely 
discussed with reference 
to their health implications. Still, policies relevant to fundamental 
causes of disease form a major part of the national agenda, whether 
this involves the minimum 
wage, housing for homeless people, capital-gains 
taxes, parenting 
leave, head-start 
programs, 
or other initiatives 
of this type. Such policy initiatives 
often lie outside the realm of influence 
and expertise of health policy experts. Yet if fundamental 
causes are potent determinants 
of 
disease, the potential health impact of these broad policies needs to be thoroughly 
understood-a task that medical sociologists and social epidemiologists 
should take up more 
thoroughly 
than they have. Ideally, a research-based "health impact statement" should 
accompany such plans, and health experts should be trained in the skills needed to produce 
such a statement. 
CONCLUSION 
The dominant focus in epidemiology and perhaps the American culture in general is on 
individually-based 
risk factors that lie relatively 
close to disease in a causal chain. But this 
focus overlooks important 
sociological processes and, as a result, could lead us to actions that 
limit our ability to improve the nation's health. We have focused on two concepts- 
contextualizing 
risk factors 
and fundamental 
causes-that direct our attention 
to precisely those 
factors 
that are left unexamined 
in the currently 
dominant 
orientation 
to research on risk factors 
for disease. If future 
research by medical sociologists and social epidemiologists 
increases our 
understanding 
of the processes implied by these concepts, we will be better positioned as a 
society to further 
improve the nation's health. 
NOTES 
1. Using the American Journal of Epidemiology as an indication of the current emphasis of 
epidemiological research, we. reviewed the 240 articles published between November of 1992 and 
1993. Excluding methodological reports (N=44) and studies focused exclusively on descriptive 
epidemiology 
(N = 15), we found that only 13.3 percent (24/181) of the articles focused on risk factors 
that could be construed 
as social in nature. Moreover, because many of these articles examined race, 
ethnicity 
or gender, without 
explicit reference 
to the social aspects of these characteristics, 
our figure 
of 13.3% should be considered an upper-bound 
estimate of the journal's focus on social factors. 
2. We include stigmatization 
because it is so closely tied to the prestige system (Goode 1978). Prestige, 
or the general standing that an individual holds in the eyes of others, is an important 
resource that is 
likely to have many implications 
for health-either indirectly 
through 
resources like money, power, or 
social connections, 
or more directly 
through 
what a person and/or 
those around him/her 
believe he/she 
deserves from the social environment. 
Stigmatization 
is important 
because it involves the denial of the 
benefits 
of prestige. 
3. We focus here on fundamental 
social causes of disease. It is possible to conceive of fundamental 
psychological or biological causes as well. For example, at the psychological level, one might 
consider a mastery 
orientation 
to be a resource that would be linked to many mechanisms 
and thus to 
many diseases. Similarly, at the biological level, the immune system might be conceptualized as a 
resource that would influence 
many specific mechanisms 
and thus many disease outcomes. In either of 
these cases, the association between the fundamental 
cause (mastery 
or immune system) and disease 
outcomes would likely endure even if the specific mechanisms were to change. Our main point 
regarding 
social factors 
as fundamental 
causes is not that fundamental 
causes should be taken seriously 
because they are often social, but rather 
that social conditions 
need to be taken seriously because they 
are often fundamental 
causes. 
4. In addition to the factors we consider here, it is important 
to recall that this individually-based 
risk 
factor approach can also have deleterious effects 
by shifting 
an excessive portion of the blame to the 
individual. When research focuses attention 
on individually-based 
causes of disease, the onus is often 
taken off broader-based conditions. Morbidity and mortality 
due to tobacco is attributed 
to an 
individually-based 
bad habit rather than to a heavily advertised, government-subsidized, 
highly 
profitable 
killer industry. 
This content downloaded from 129.2.61.92 on Fri, 17 Apr 2015 14:07:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


----- Page 12 (native text) -----
FUNDAMENTAL CAUSES OF DISEASE 
91 
REFERENCES 
Adler, Nancy E., Thomas Boyce, Margaret A. Chesney, Sheldon Cohen, Susan Folkman, Robert L. 
Kahn, and S. Leonard Syme. 1994. "Socioeconomic Status and Health: The Challenge of the 
Gradient." American Psychologist 
49:15-24. 
Aneshensel, Carol S. 1992. "Social Stress: Theory and Research." Annual Review of Sociology 
18: 15-38. 
Aneshensel, Carol, Carolyn Rutter, and Peter Lachenbruch. 1991. "Social Structure, 
Stress and Mental 
Health." American Sociological Review 56:166-78. 
Angermeyer, Matthias and Dietrich Klusman. 1987. "From Social Class to Social Stress: New 
Developments in Psychiatric 
Epidemiology." Pp. 2-13 in From Social Class to Social Stress: New 
Developments 
in Psychiatric 
Epidemiology 
edited by M. Angermeyer. 
New York: Springer-Verlag. 
Beaglehole, Robert. 1990. "International 
Trends in Coronary Heart Disease Mortality, 
Morbidity, 
and 
Risk Factors." Epidemiologic Reviews 12:1-16. 
Becker, Marshall H. 1993. "A Medical Sociologist Looks at Health Promotion." Journal of Health and 
Social Behavior 34:1-6. 
Benenson, Abram S. 1987. "Infectious Diseases." Pp. 207-26 in Epidemiology and Health Policy, 
edited by S. Levine and A. Lilienfeld. New York: Tavistock. 
Berkman, Lisa and Leonard Syme. 1979. "Social Networks, Host Resistance, and Mortality: A 
Nine-Year Follow-Up Study of Alameda County Residents." American Journal of Epidemiology 
109:186-204. 
Berkman, Lisa, Linda Leo-Summers, and Ralph Horwitz. 1992. "Emotional Support and Survival after 
Myocardial Infarction: 
A Prospective, Population-Based Study of the Elderly." Annals of Internal 
Medicine 117:1003-9. 
Brunswick, Ann, Angela Aidala, Jay Dobkin, Joyce Howard, Stephen Titus, and Jane Banaszak-Hall. 
1993. "HIV-1 Seroprevalence 
and Risk Behaviors in an Urban African American Community 
Cohort." 
American Journal of Public Health 83:1390-94. 
Buck, Carol W. 1981. "Prenatal and Perinatal Causes of Early Death and Defect." Pp. 149-66 in 
Preventive 
and Community 
Medicine, 2d ed., edited by D.W. Clark and B. MacMahon. Boston, MA: 
Little, Brown, and Company. 
Cassel, John. 1976. "The Contribution 
of the Social Environment 
to Host Resistance." American Journal 
of Epidemiology 104:107-23. 
Catalano, Ralph, David Dooley, Georjeana Wilson, and Richard Hough. 1993. "Job Loss and Alcohol 
Abuse: A Test Using Data from the Epidemiologic Catchment 
Area Project." Journal of Health and 
Social Behavior 34:215-25. 
Challah, Sabri and Anthony J. Wing. 1985. "The Epidemiology of Genito-Urinary 
Disease. " Pp. 
181-202 in Oxford Textbook of Public Health, edited by W.W. Holland, R. Detels, and G. Knox. 
Oxford, England: Oxford University 
Press. 
Cohen, Sheldon, David Tyrrell, and Andrew Smith. 1991. "Psychological Stress and Susceptibility 
to the 
Common Cold." The New England Journal of Medicine 325:606-12. 
Colley, J.R.T. 1985. "Respiratory 
System." Pp. 145-66 in Oxford Textbook 
of Public Health, edited by 
W.W. Holland, R. Detels, and G. Knox. Oxford, England: Oxford University 
Press. 
Cullen, Francis T. 1984. Rethinking 
Crime and Deviance Theory: The Emergence of a Structuring 
Tradition. Totowa, NJ: Rowan and Allenheld. 
Dohrenwend, Bruce P. 1966. "Social Status and Psychological Disorder: An Issue of Substance and an 
Issue of Method." American Sociological Review 31:14-34. 
. 1990. "Socioeconomic Status and Psychiatric Disorders: Are the Issues Still Compelling?" 
Social Psychiatry 
and Psychiatric 
Epidemiology 
25:41-47. 
Dohrenwend Bruce P. and Barbara S. Dohrenwend. 1969. Social Status and Psychological Disorder. 
New York: Wiley. 
. 1981. "Part 2. Hypotheses About Stress Processes Linking Social Class to Various Types of 
Psychopathology." 
American Journal of Community 
Psychology 9:146-59. 
Dohrenwend, Bruce P., Barabara S. Dohrenwend, Madelyn Gould, Bruce Link, Richard Neugebauer, 
and Robin Wunsch-Hitzig. 
1980. Mental Illness in the United States: Epidemiological Estimates. New 
York: Praeger. 
Dohrenwend, Bruce P., Itzhak Levav, Patrick Shrout, Sharon Schwartz, Guedalia Naveh, Bruce Link, 
Andrew Skodal, and Ann Stueve. 1992. "Socioeconomic Status and Psychiatric Disorders: The 
Causation Selection Issue." Science 255:946-51. 
Dutton, Diana B. 1986. "Social Class, Health, and Illness." Pp. 31-62 in Applications 
of Social Science 
to Clinical Medicine and Health Policy, edited by L. Aiken and D. Mechanic. New Brunswick, NJ: 
Rutgers University 
Press. 
This content downloaded from 129.2.61.92 on Fri, 17 Apr 2015 14:07:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


----- Page 13 (native text) -----
92 
JOURNAL OF HEALTH AND SOCIAL BEHAVIOR 
Ensel, Walter and Nan Lin. 1991. "The Stress Paradigm and Psychological Distress." The Journal of 
Health and Social Behavior 32:321-41. 
Ernster, Virginia L. 1988. "Trends in Smoking, Cancer Risk, and Cigarette Promotion." Cancer 
62:1702-12. 
Fenwick, Rudy and Mark Tausig. 1994. "The Macroeconomic Context of Job Stress. " Journal of Health 
and Social Behavior 35:266-82. 
Gazzard, B.G. and P. Lance. 1982. "Peptic Ulceration." Pp. 211-19 in Epidemiology 
of Diseases, edited 
by D.L. Miller and R.D.T. Farmer. Oxford, England: Blackwell Scientific Publications. 
Goldberg, Evelyn L. and George W. Comstock. 1980. "Epidemiology of Life Events: Frequency in 
General Populations." American Journal of Epidemiology 111:736-52. 
Goode, William. 1978. The Celebration of Heroes: Prestige as a Control System. Berkeley, CA: 
University 
of California Press. 
Hamilton, V. Lee, Clifford 
Broman, William Hoffman, and Deborah Renner. 1990. "Hard Times and 
Vulnerable People: Initial Effects of Plant Closings On Autoworkers' Mental Health." Journal of 
Health and Social Behavior 31:123-40. 
House, James S., Karl R. Landis, and Debra Umberson. 1988. "Social Relationships and Health." 
Science 241:540-45. 
House, James S., James M. Lepkowski, Ann M. Kinney, Richard P. Mero, Ronald C. Kessler, and A. 
Regula Herzog. 1994. "The Social Stratification 
of Aging and Health." Journal of Health and Social 
Behavior 35:213-34. 
House, James S., Ronald C. Kessler, A. Regula Herzog, Richard P. Mero, Ann M. Kinney, and Martha 
J. Breslow. 1990. "Age, Socioeconoimic Status, and Health." The Milbank Memorial Fund 
68:383-411. 
Illsley, Raymond. and Ken Mullen. 1985. "The Health Needs of Disadvantaged Client Groups." Pp. 
389-402 in Oxford Textbook of Public Health, edited by W.W. Holland, R. Detels, and G. Knox. 
Oxford, England: Oxford University 
Press. 
Johnson, Timothy. 1991. "Mental Health, Social Relations, and Social Selection: A Longitudinal 
Analysis." Journal of Health and Social Behavior 32:408-23. 
Kadushin, Charles. 1964. "Social Class and the Experience of Ill Health." Sociological Inquiry 
35:67-80. 
Karasek, Robert, Tores Theorell, Joseph Schwartz, Peter Schnall, Carl Pieper, and John Michela. 1988. 
"Job Characteristics 
in Relation to the Prevalence of Myocardial Infarction in the U.S. Health 
Examination Survey (HES) and the Health and Nutrition 
Examination Survey (HANES)." American 
Journal of Public Health 78:910-18. 
Kelsey, Jennifer L. 1993. "Breast Cancer Epidemiology: Summary and Future Directions." 
Epidemiological Reviews 15:256-63. 
Kessler, Ronald, Katherine McGonagle, Shanyang Zhao, Christopher 
Nelson, Michael Hughes, Susan 
Eshleman, Hans-Ulrich 
Wittchen, 
and Kenneth Kendler. 1994. "Lifetime and 12-Month 
Prevalence of 
DSM-III-R Psychiatric 
Disorders in the United States: Results from the National Comorbidity 
Survey." 
Archives of General Psychiatry 
51:8-19. 
Lennon, Mary Clare. 1987. "Sex Differences in Distress: The Impact of Gender and Work Roles." 
Journal of Health and Social Behavior 28:290-305. 
Lieberson, Stanley. 1985. Making it Count: The Improvement 
of Social Research and Theory. Berkeley, 
CA: University 
of California Press. 
Lin, Nan and Walter Ensel. 1989. "Life Stress and Health: Stressors and Resources." American 
Sociological Review 54:382-99. 
Link, Bruce, and Bruce Dohrenwend. 1989. "The Epidemiology of Mental Disorders." Pp. 102-27 in 
The Handbook of Medical Sociology, 4th ed., edited by H. Freeman and S. Levine. Englewood Cliffs, 
NJ: Prentice Hall. 
Link, Bruce and Patrick Shrout. 1992. "Spurious Associations in Longitudinal 
Research." Research in 
Community 
and Mental Health 7:301-21. 
Link, Bruce, Mary Clare Lennon, and Bruce Dohrenwend. 1993. "Socioeconomic Status and 
Depression: The Role of Occupations Involving Direction, Control, and Planning." American Journal 
of Sociology 98:1351-87. 
Mechanic, David and Linda H. Aiken. 1986. "Social Science, Medicine, and Health Policy." Pp. 1-9 in 
Applications of Social Science to Clinical Medicine and Health Policy, edited by L. Aiken and D. 
Mechanic. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University 
Press. 
Miller, C. Arden. 1987. "Child Health." Pp. 15-54 in Epidemiology and Health Policy, edited by S. 
Levine and A. Lilienfeld. New York: Tavistock. 
Mirowsky, 
John and Catherine E. Ross. 1989. The Social Causes of Psychological Distress. New York: 
Aldine de Gruyter. 
This content downloaded from 129.2.61.92 on Fri, 17 Apr 2015 14:07:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


----- Page 14 (native text) -----
FUNDAMENTAL CAUSES OF DISEASE 
93 
Novotny, 
Thomas E., Kenneth E. Warner, Juliette 
S. Kendrick, and Patrick Remington. 1988. "Smoking 
by Blacks and Whites: Socioeconomic and Demographic Differences." American Journal of Public 
Health 78:1187-89. 
Pappas, Gregory, Susan Queen, Wilbur Hadden, and Gail Fisher. 1993. "The Increasing Disparity in 
Mortality Between Socioeconomic Groups in the United States." The New England Journal of 
Medicine 329:103-109. 
Pearlin, Leonard. 1989. "The Sociological Study of Stress." Journal of Health and Social Behavior 
30:241-56. 
Pearlin, Leonard and Carmi Schooler. 1978. "The Structure 
of Coping." Journal of Health and Social 
Behavior 19:2-21. 
Pearlin, Leonard, Morton Lieberman, Elizabeth Menaghan, and Joseph T. Mullen. 1981. "The Stress 
Process." Journal of Health and Social Behavior 22:337-56. 
Pedoe, H. Tunstall. 1982a. "Stroke." Pp. 136-45 in Epidemiology of Diseases, edited by D.L. Miller 
and R.D.T. Farmer. Oxford, England: Blackwell Scientific Publications. 
. 1982b. "Coronary Heart Disease." Pp. 103-21 in Epidemiology of Diseases, edited by D.L. 
Miller and R.D.T. Farmer. Oxford, England: Blackwell Scientific Publications. 
Potter, John D. 1992. "Reconciling the Epidemiology, Physiology, and Molecular Biology of Colon 
Cancer." Journal of the American Medical Association 268:1573-77. 
Prout, Marianne N., Theodore Colton, and Robert A. Smith. 1987. "Cancer Epidemiology and Health 
Policy." Pp. 117-56 in Epidemiology 
and Health Policy, edited by S. Levine and A. Lilienfeld. New 
York: Tavistock. 
Rabkin, Judith 
and Elmer Struening. 1976. "Life Events, Stress, and Illness." Science 194:1013-20. 
Robins, Lee, John E. Helzer, Myrna M. Weissman, Helen Orvaschel, Ernest Gruenberg, 
Jack D. Burke, 
and Darrel A. Regier. 1984. "Lifetime Prevalence of Specific Psychiatric 
Disorders in Three Sites." 
Archives of General Psychiatry 
41:949-58. 
Rosen, George. 1979. "The Evolution of Social Medicine." Pp. 23-50 in The Handbook of Medical 
Sociology, 3d ed., edited by H. Freeman, S. Levine, and L. Reeder. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice 
Hall. 
Rosenfield, Sarah. 1989. "The Effects of Women's Employment: 
Personal Control and Sex Differences 
in Mental Health." Journal of Health and Social Behavior 30:77-91. 
Rothman, Kenneth. 1986. Modern Epidemiology. Boston, MA: Little, Brown, and Company. 
Saracci, Rodolfo. 1985. "Neoplasms." Pp. 112-29 in Oxford Textbook of Public Health, edited by 
W.W. Holland, R. Detels, and G. Knox. Oxford, England: Oxford University 
Press. 
Schnall, Peter, Carl Pieper, Joseph Schwartz, Robert Karasek, Y. Schlussel, R. Devereux, M. Alderman, 
Katherine Warren, and Thomas Pikering. 1990. "The Relationship Between 'Job Strain,' Workplace 
Diastolic Blood Pressure, and Left Ventricular Mass Index." Journal of the American Medical 
Association 263:1929-35. 
Schnall, Peter, Joseph Schwartz, Paul Landsbergis, Katherine Warren, and Thomas Pickering. 1992. 
"Relation Between Job Strain, Alcohol, and Ambulatory 
Blood Pressure." Hypertension 
19:488-94. 
Shrout, Patrick, Bruce Link, Bruce Dohrenwend, Andrew Skodal, Ann Stueve, and Jerold Mirotznik. 
1989. "Characterizing 
Life Events as Risk Factors for Depression." Journal of Abnormal Psychology 
98:460-67. 
Smith, Tom W. 1992. "A Life Events Approach to Developing an Index of Societal Well-Being." Social 
Science Research 21:353-79. 
Susser, Mervyn, William Watson, and Kim Hopper. 1985. Sociology in Medicine. New York: Oxford 
University 
Press. 
Syme, S. Leonard and Jack M. Guralnik. 1987. "Epidemiology and Health Policy: Coronary Heart 
Disease." Pp. 85-116 in Epidemiology 
and Health Policy, edited by S. Levine and A. Lilienfeld. New 
York: Tavistock. 
Turner, R. Jay and Franco Marino. 1994. "Social Support and Social Structure: A Descriptive 
Epidemiology." Journal of Health and Social Behavior 35:193-212. 
Turner, R. Jay, Blair Wheaton, and Donald Lloyd. 1995. "The Epidemiology of Social Stress." 
American Sociological Review 60:104-25. 
Umberson, Debra, Camille Wortman, and Ronald Kessler. 1992. "Widowhood and Depression: 
Explaining Long-Term Gender Differences 
in Vulnerability." 
Journal of Health and Social Behavior 
33:10-24. 
Virchow, Rudolf. 1848. "The Public Health Service" (in German). Medizinische Reform 5:21-22. 
Walsh, Joyce K. and Joseph G. Feldman. 1981. "Health of the U.S. Population." Pp. 583-602 in 
Preventive 
and Community 
Medicine, 2d ed., edited by D.W. Clark and B. MacMahon. Boston, MA: 
Little, Brown, and Company. 
This content downloaded from 129.2.61.92 on Fri, 17 Apr 2015 14:07:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions


----- Page 15 (native text) -----
94 
JOURNAL OF HEALTH AND SOCIAL BEHAVIOR 
Bruce G. Link is associate professor 
of public health at Columbia University 
and research scientist at 
New York State Psychiatric 
Institute. 
His interests 
lie in understanding 
the sources of particular 
types of 
inequality, its legitimation, 
and its consequences as these bear on the social patterning 
of health and 
illness. This interest 
is reflected 
in his work on the association between socioeconomic status and major 
mental disorders and the possible role that occupational conditions may play in this association, research 
on the health and well-being of homeless people, and research on the social and economic adversities 
engendered 
by the stigma of mental illness. 
Jo Phelan is assistant professor 
of sociology at the University 
of California, Los Angeles. Her research 
interests 
include homelessness, social stigma, the impact of social conditions on health and illness, and 
attitudes 
concerning 
inequality and its legitimacy. 
This content downloaded from 129.2.61.92 on Fri, 17 Apr 2015 14:07:21 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
