

----- Page 1 (native text) -----
1 Earlier versions of this article have been presented to the Faculty of Political and
Social Sciences of the University of Antwerp, the Department of Politics of the Univer-
sity of Reading and at the workshop ‘Populism and Democracy’ at the University of 
Nottingham. I want to thank all participants for their comments. In addition, I want to
thank Hans-Georg Betz, Dani Filc and Peter Mair for their valuable comments on earlier
versions. Special thanks go to Jan Jagers, whose intellectual input has been crucial in the
ﬁnal revisions. Finally, I am grateful for the generous ﬁnancial support from the British
Academy and the Carnegie Trust for the Universities of Scotland.
2 Pierre-André Taguieff, ‘Political Science Confronts Populism: From a Concep-
tual Mirage to a Real Problem’, Telos, 103 (1995), p. 43.
3 Ibid., p. 9.
4 Erwin K. Scheuch and Hans-Dieter Klingemann, ‘Theorie des Rechtsradikalis-
mus in westlichen Industriegesellschaften’, Hamburger Jahrbuch für Wirtschafts- und
Sozialpolitik, 12 (1967), pp. 11–19. While they used this terminology for right-wing 
radicalism, recent authors have also applied it to right-wing populism. See, most 
notably, Hans-Georg Betz, Radical Right-Wing Populism in Western Europe, Basingstoke,
Macmillan, 1994.
Cas Mudde1
The Populist Zeitgeist
Populism seems to become stronger the more intellectuals criticize it.2
SINCE THE 1980S THE RISE OF SO-CALLED ‘POPULIST PARTIES’ HAS GIVEN
rise to thousands of books, articles, columns and editorials. Most of
them are of an alarming nature, as these ‘new populists’ are gener-
ally seen as a threat to liberal democracy. Though authors are not
always sure what exactly characterizes these parties, they do agree
that parties like the Austrian Freedom Party (FPÖ), the French
National Front (FN), or the Dutch List Pim Fortuyn (LPF) are ‘pop-
ulist’. Another point on which most commentators agree is that 
‘populism is understood as a pathological form, pseudo- and post-
democratic, produced by the corruption of democratic ideals.’3
German scholars in particular consider right-wing populists, in line
with the theory of Erwin K. Scheuch and Hans-Dieter Klingemann,
to be a ‘normal pathology’ of western democracies.4
© Government and Opposition Ltd 2004
Published by Blackwell Publishing, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK and 350 Main
Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1477-7053.2004.00135.x Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 2 (native text) -----
542
GOVERNMENT AND OPPOSITION
The aim of this article is to make a threefold contribution to 
the current debate on populism in liberal democracies. First, a clear
and new deﬁnition of populism is presented. Second, the normal-
pathology thesis is rejected; instead it is argued that today populist
discourse has become mainstream in the politics of western demo-
cracies. Indeed, one can even speak of a populist Zeitgeist.5 Third, it
is argued that the explanations of and reactions to the current 
populist Zeitgeist are seriously ﬂawed and might actually strengthen
rather than weaken it.
DEFINING THE UNDEFINABLE
In the public debate there are two dominant interpretations of the
term populism, both are highly charged and negative. In the ﬁrst,
populism refers to the politics of the Stammtisch (the pub), i.e. a
highly emotional and simplistic discourse that is directed at the ‘gut
feelings’ of the people. In more prosaic terminology, ‘(p)opulists aim
to crush the Gordian knots of modern politics with the sword of
alleged simple solutions.’6 Though this deﬁnition seems to have
instinctive value, it is highly problematic to put into operation in
empirical studies. When is something ‘emotional’ rather than
‘rational’, or ‘simplistic’ rather than ‘serious’? Moreover, sloganesque
politics constitute the core of political campaigning, left, right and
centre.
In the second meaning, populism is used to describe opportunis-
tic policies with the aim of (quickly) pleasing the people/voters –
and so ‘buying’ their support – rather than looking (rationally) 
for the ‘best option’. Examples are lowering taxes just before elec-
tions, or promising ﬁnancial advantages to all people without any
© Government and Opposition Ltd 2004
5 I limit my discussion here to party politics, though it is important to also point
to the increasing prominence of populist arguments in the media and in the social
sciences. On media populism, see Gianpietro Mazzoleni et al. (eds), The Media and
Neo-Populism: A Contemporary Comparative Analysis, Westport, VA, Praeger, 2003; on
populism in political science, see Hans Daalder, ‘A Crisis of Party?’, Scandinavian 
Political Studies, 15: 4 (1992), pp. 269–88.
6 Harald Bergsdorf, ‘Rhetorik des Populismus am Beispiel rechtsextremer und
rechtspopulistischer Parteien wie der “Republikaner”, der FPÖ und des “Front
National”’, Zeitschrift für Parlamentsfragen, 31: 3 (2000), p. 624.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1477-7053.2004.00135.x Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 3 (native text) -----
additional costs. But who decides whether policies are ‘sound’ or
‘honest’, rather than ‘populist’ or ‘opportunistic’? As Ralf 
Dahrendorf perceptively noted, ‘the one’s populism, is the other
one’s democracy, and vice versa.’7
Despite the fact that both interpretations of populism are wide-
spread, and seem to have some intrinsic value, they do not go to the
core of what is generally considered as populism in the academic lit-
erature. In fact, both phenomena are better covered by other terms:
demagogy and opportunism, respectively. While conceptual clarity
and deﬁnitional consensus are not much closer within the academic
community, most deﬁnitions of populism have at least two points of
reference in common: ‘the elite’ and ‘the people’.8 In other words,
populism says something about the relationship between ‘the elite’
and ‘the people’. John B. Judis and Ruy Teixeira have summarized
this key relationship clearly and forcefully: ‘the people versus the
powerful’.9 But this still leaves the question of what populism is: an
ideology, a syndrome, a political movement or a political style?10
I deﬁne populism as an ideology that considers society to be ultimately
separated into two homogeneous and antagonistic groups, ‘the pure people’
versus ‘the corrupt elite’, and which argues that politics should be an expres-
sion of the volonté générale (general will) of the people.11 Populism, so
deﬁned, has two opposites: elitism and pluralism. Elitism is pop-
ulism’s mirror-image: it shares its Manichean worldview, but wants
politics to be an expression of the views of the moral elite, instead 
THE POPULIST ZEITGEIST
543
© Government and Opposition Ltd 2004
7 Ralf Dahrendorf, ‘Acht Anmerkungen zum Populismus’, Transit. Europäische
Revue, 25 (2003), p. 156.
8 See, inter alia, Werner W. Ernst, ‘Zu einer Theorie des Populismus’, in Anton
Pelinka (ed.), Populismus in Österreich, Vienna, Junius, 1987, pp. 10–25; Margaret
Canovan, Populism, London, Junction, 1981.
9 John B. Judis and Ruy Teixeira, The Emerging Democratic Majority, New York, 
Scribner, 2002.
10 See on the ﬁrst three, respectively, the contributions by Donald MacRae, Peter
Wiles, and Kenneth Minogue in Ghi a Ionescu and Ernest Gellner (eds), Populism. Its
Meanings and National Characteristics, London, Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1969. On the
latter see, inter alia, Pierre-André Taguieff, L’illusion populiste, Paris, Berg International,
2002; Armin Pfahl-Traughber, Volkes Stimme? Rechtspopulismus in Europa, Bonn, Dietz,
1994.
11 This deﬁnition is the result of continuous and stimulating debates with Jan
Jagers; see also his forthcoming PhD, provisionally entitled ‘De Stem van het Volk?
Een Onderzoek naar Populistische Retoriek bÿ de Vlaamse Politieke Partÿen’ (Uni-
versity of Antwerp).
t¸
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1477-7053.2004.00135.x Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 4 (native text) -----
544
GOVERNMENT AND OPPOSITION
of the amoral people.12 Pluralism, on the other hand, rejects 
the homogeneity of both populism and elitism, seeing society as a
heterogeneous collection of groups and individuals with often fun-
damentally different views and wishes.
Though populism is a distinct ideology, it does not possess ‘the
same level of intellectual reﬁnement and consistency’ as, for example,
socialism or liberalism.13 Populism is only a ‘thin-centred ideology’,
exhibiting ‘a restricted core attached to a narrower range of political
concepts’.14 The core concept of populism is obviously ‘the people’; in
a sense, even the concept of ‘the elite’ takes its identity from it (being
its opposite, its nemesis). As a thin-centred ideology, populism can be
easily combined with very different (thin and full) other ideologies,
including communism, ecologism, nationalism or socialism.15
Populism is moralistic rather than programmatic.16 Essential to the
discourse of the populist is the normative distinction between ‘the
elite’ and ‘the people’, not the empirical difference in behaviour or
attitudes. Populism presents a Manichean outlook, in which there are
only friends and foes. Opponents are not just people with different
priorities and values, they are evil! Consequently, compromise is
impossible, as it ‘corrupts’ the purity.17
Contrary to other deﬁnitions,18 populism is here not deﬁned on
the basis of a special type of organization, i.e. charismatic leadership,
© Government and Opposition Ltd 2004
12 However, according to many negative accounts of populism, ‘Élitism seems to
be the hidden logic of populism’, Nadia Urbinati, ‘Democracy and Populism’, Con-
stellations, 5: 1 (1998), p. 113.
13 A. E. van Niekerk, Populisme en Politieke Ontwikkeling in Latijns-Amerika, 
Rotterdam, Universitaire Pers Rotterdam, 1972, p. 37.
14 Michael Freeden, ‘Is Nationalism a Distinct Ideology?’, Political Studies, 46: 4
(1998), p. 750.
15 Cf. Frank Decker, Parteien unter Druck. Der neue Rechtspopulismus in den westlichen
Demokratien, Opladen, Westdeutscher, 2000; Paul Taggart, Populism, Buckingham,
Open University Press, 2000; Taguieff, ‘Political Science Confronts Populism’, op. cit.,
pp. 9–43.
16 Peter Wiles, ‘A Syndrome, Not a Doctrine: Some Elementary Theses on 
Populism’, in Ionescu and Gellner, Populism. Its Meanings and National Characteristics,
op. cit., p. 167.
17 Note, ironically, the similarity with much of the anti-right-wing populist dis-
course, which opposes in biological terms any compromise or cooperation because
‘the populist virus’ will ‘contaminate’ the democratic ‘body’.
18 See, inter alia, Kurt Weyland, ‘Clarifying a Contested Concept. Populism in the
Study of Latin American Politics’, Comparative Politics, 34: 1 (2001), pp. 1–22; Taggart, 
Populism, op. cit.; van Niekerk, Populisme en Politieke Ontwikkeling in Latijns-Amerika, op. cit.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1477-7053.2004.00135.x Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 5 (native text) -----
or as a special style of communication, i.e. without intermediaries.
While charismatic leadership and direct communication between the
leader and ‘the people’ are common among populists, these features
facilitate rather than deﬁne populism. Indeed, the current success of
populist actors cannot be separated from the general trend towards
strong party leaders and more direct communication between party
leadership and party supporters, which has developed over the past
decades.19
It is important to note that although this deﬁnition is broad, and
open to many usages, this does not mean that all political actors are
(at every time) populist. Despite the move towards a more catch-all
proﬁle, the ideological programmes of most mainstream parties still
accept the pluralist worldview of liberal democracy. In fact, many of
the quintessential contemporary ‘populists’ do not always use a pop-
ulist discourse. For example, the Flemish Block (VB), which now
claims to say what the people think, initially referred to the people
as the ‘intellectual proletariat’,20 while the late Pim Fortuyn openly
acknowledged that his lifestyle and some of his views were far too
progressive for his supporters, i.e. ‘the people’.
A lot has been written about the vagueness of the term ‘the
people’ in the usage of populists. Some commentators have argued
that the term is nothing more than a rhetorical tool that does not
truly refer to any existing group of people. Others have given a class
interpretation to it, arguing that populists mean not all the people
but only a certain class segment.21 Paul Taggart rightfully rejects the
class interpretation, and tries to clarify the use of the term ‘the
people’ by introducing an alternative term, ‘the heartland’. Accord-
ing to him, the heartland is a place ‘in which, in the populist 
imagination, a virtuous and uniﬁed population resides’.22
THE POPULIST ZEITGEIST
545
© Government and Opposition Ltd 2004
19 On this development, which takes place in virtually all political parties (populist
or not), see Klaus von Beyme, ‘Party Leadership and Change in Party Systems: Towards
a Postmodern Party State?’, Government and Opposition, 31: 2 (1996), pp. 135–59.
20 See Cas Mudde, The Ideology of the Extreme Right, Manchester, Manchester 
University Press, 2000, p. 112.
21 E.g. Torcuato S. Di Tella, ‘Populism into the Twenty-First Century’, Government
and Opposition, 32: 2, 1997, pp. 187–200; Peter Worsley, ‘Populism’, in Joel Krieger
(ed.), The Oxford Companion to Politics of the World, Oxford, Oxford University Press,
1993, pp. 730–1; Ernesto Laclau, Politics and Ideology in Marxist Theory, London, New
Left Books, 1977.
22 Taggart, Populism, op. cit., p. 95.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1477-7053.2004.00135.x Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 6 (native text) -----
546
GOVERNMENT AND OPPOSITION
The concept of the heartland helps to emphasize that the people
in the populist propaganda are neither real nor all-inclusive, but are
in fact a mythical and constructed sub-set of the whole population.
In other words, the people of the populists are an ‘imagined com-
munity’, much like the nation of the nationalists.23 At the same time,
the notion of the heartland does not overcome the main problem of
the people, its vagueness. It is as unclear, and has consequently been
used differently from populist to populist, even within one country.
For example, for the British Conservatives the British heartland used
to be ‘Middle England’, while the extreme right British National
Party refers to ‘the native British people’.
What is often clearer is who and what populists are against. In liberal
democratic systems, where political parties are the main actors in the
process of representation, it comes as no surprise that in the propa-
ganda of populists, anti-party sentiments play a prominent role.24 In an
often implicitly Rousseauian fashion, populists argue that political
parties corrupt the link between leaders and supporters, create artiﬁ-
cial divisions within the homogeneous people, and put their own inter-
ests above those of the people. However, as populists are reformist
rather than revolutionary,25 they do not oppose political parties per se.
Rather, they oppose the established parties, call for (or claim to be) a
new kind of party; i.e. they express populist anti-party sentiments
rather than extremist anti-party sentiments.26
To clarify the concept further, let’s brieﬂy look at various misun-
derstandings about populism. Although populists can be emancipa-
tory, they do not want to change the people themselves, but rather
their status within the political system. Populists (claim to) speak in
the name of the ‘oppressed people’, and they want to emancipate
them by making them aware of their oppression. However, they 
do not want to change their values or their ‘way of life.’ This is 
© Government and Opposition Ltd 2004
23 On the latter, see Benedict Anderson, Imagined Communities. Reﬂections on the
Origins and Spread of Nationalism, London, Verso, 1983.
24 Cf. Susan Scarrow and Thomas Poguntke (eds), European Journal of Political
Research, 29: 3 (1996), special issue on anti-party sentiments.
25 Cf. Taggart, Populism, op. cit. The fact that populists, like Northern League
leader Umberto Bossi, claim to strive for ‘a revolution’ does not take away the fact
that they look, at best, for radical changes within the existing democratic system.
26 For a discussion of anti-party sentiments within national populist parties, and
the distinction between populist and extremist anti-party sentiments, see Cas Mudde,
‘The Paradox of the Anti-Party Party: Insights from the Extreme Right’, Party Politics,
2: 2 (1996), pp. 265–76.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1477-7053.2004.00135.x Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 7 (native text) -----
fundamentally different from, for example, the (early) socialists, who
want(ed) to ‘uplift the workers’ by re-educating them, thereby 
liberating them from their ‘false consciousness’. For populists, on the
other hand, the consciousness of the people, generally referred to as
common sense, is the basis of all good (politics).
Populism is not necessarily opposed to technocratic measures,
particularly if they can help to do away with (established) politicians.
Indeed, one of the most successful populist movements, Social Credit
in Canada, argued for a largely technocratic regime. In their view,
‘the people should be consulted about the broad parameters of
policy while experts should produce mechanisms to bring this policy
about.’27 What is central to this view is that the experts do not alter
the wishes of the people; they should just ensure that the people’s
wishes are implemented in the best possible way. This trust in
‘experts’, and the simultaneous distrust of politicians, can also be
found in the ideas of contemporary populists, most notably Silvio
Berlusconi and Pim Fortuyn.
Finally, some popular views in the literature need nuance rather
than rejection. Firstly, various authors have argued that populism is
‘reluctantly political’.28 I believe that this statement needs further
qualiﬁcation to be fully accurate. If one looks at certain populist
actors, such as Filip Dewinter (VB) or Jörg Haider (FPÖ), one cannot
seriously argue that they are reluctantly political. They don’t even
necessarily claim this themselves. Rather, the heartland of the populist
leaders is reluctantly political (see below).
Secondly, much of the literature argues that populism is a phe-
nomenon of (social) crises. With respect to the recent ‘populist
movement’, the alleged crisis is the result of the transformation to a
post-industrial society, as well as the inadequate way in which social
democracy has tried to deal with it.29 Perhaps crisis is too harsh a
term, but the populist heartland becomes active only when there are
special circumstances: most notably, the combination of persisting
political resentment, a (perceived) serious challenge to ‘our way of
life’, and the presence of an attractive populist leader. However, what
sets the populist heartland apart from other protest-prone groups is
THE POPULIST ZEITGEIST
547
© Government and Opposition Ltd 2004
27 Taggart, Populism, op. cit., p. 68.
28 Ibid., p. 3.
29 René Cuperus, ‘The Populist Deﬁciency of European Social Democracy’, Inter-
nationale Politik und Gesellschaft, 3 (2003), pp. 83–109; Michael Ehrke, Rechtspopulismus
in Europa: die Meuterei der Besitzstandswahrer, Bonn, FES Library, 2002.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1477-7053.2004.00135.x Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 8 (native text) -----
548
GOVERNMENT AND OPPOSITION
their reactiveness; they generally have to be mobilized by a populist
actor, rather than taking the initiative themselves.
In the following analysis I will focus primarily on the populist Zeit-
geist that has been characteristic of liberal democracies since the
early 1990s. Examples will be drawn mostly from political parties in
Western Europe, and at times also from Australia, New Zealand and
North America.30
CONTEMPORARY POPULISM
Obviously, the phenomenon of populism is hardly new to politics in
liberal democracies. Indeed, the US People’s Party of the late nine-
teenth century is considered to be one of the deﬁning populist
movements. Even in post-war Europe there have been various pop-
ulist phenomena: most notably the Italian Common Man’s Front of
Guglielmo Giannini (late 1940s), the French Union for the Defence
of Merchants and Artisan of Pierre Poujade (late 1950s), the Dutch
Farmers Party of ‘Boer (Farmer) Koekoek’ (1960s), or the Danish
Progress Party of Mogens Glistrup (1970s).
While all these parties are generally categorized at the right of the
political spectrum – though they are far from identical in ideologi-
cal terms – in the period between the late 1960s and the early 1980s
the populist critique came mainly from the (new) left. The main
actors were the militant students in 1968, the New Left and New
Social Movements in the 1970s, and the Green or New Politics parties
in the early 1980s. In classic populist fashion, the early Greens
despised politics and ‘the political elite’. In all ways – ideological,
organizational, and participatory – they presented themselves as the
exact opposites of the established parties. At the same time, Green
parties represented the people as a whole, often championing the
common sense and decent values of ‘the people’.31
© Government and Opposition Ltd 2004
30 Eastern Europe, on the other hand, will feature only scarcely in this article.
Though similar forms of populism are prevalent in the eastern part of Europe too,
discussing their speciﬁc roots and solutions would obscure more than it would
enlighten. For a discussion of populism in Eastern Europe, see Cas Mudde, ‘In Name
of the Peasantry, the Proletariat, and the People: Populisms in Eastern Europe’, East
European Politics and Societies, 15: 1 (2001), pp. 33–53.
31 See Paul Taggart, The New Populism and the New Politics. New Protest Parties 
in Sweden in a Comparative Perspective, Basingstoke, Macmillan, pp. 24–5; Patrick 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1477-7053.2004.00135.x Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 9 (native text) -----
Today, populism is again mainly associated with the (radical) right.
The most noted examples of contemporary populists in academic
and media articles are radical right parties like Jörg Haider’s FPÖ,
Jean-Marie Le Pen’s FN, or Pauline Hanson’s One Nation.32 Increas-
ingly, non-radical right parties are also included in the category of
‘right-wing populism’, most notably Silvio Berlusconi’s Forza Italia or
Pim Fortuyn’s LPF.33 This is not entirely illogical, because of the
right’s focus on the nation and the radical right’s nationalism. The
step from ‘the nation’ to ‘the people’ is easily taken, and the dis-
tinction between the two is often far from clear.34
However, populism can also be found on the (radical) left.35 One
of the most (in)famous left-wing populists in post-war Europe is the
French former businessman Bernard Tapie, who had a scandal-
ridden political career in both the mainstream Socialist Party and 
the outsider Radical Party. Left-wing populism is generally strongest
among outsider parties, such as the (East) German Party of Demo-
cratic Socialism, the Scottish Socialist Party, or the Dutch Socialist
Party.36 These left-wing populist parties combine a democratic social-
ist ideology with a strong populist discourse. They present themselves
THE POPULIST ZEITGEIST
549
© Government and Opposition Ltd 2004
Hassenteufel, ‘Structures de représentation et “appel au peuple”. Le populisme en
Autriche’, Politix, 14: 2 (1991), pp. 95–101.
32 See, inter alia, Hans-Georg Betz and Stefan Immerfall (eds), The New Politics of
the Right. Neo-Populist Parties and Movements in Established Democracies, New York, St
Martin’s Press, 1998; Pfahl-Traughber, Volkes Stimme? Rechtspopulismus in Europa, op. cit.
33 Cf. Reinhard Heinisch, ‘Success in Opposition – Failure in Government:
Explaining the Performance of Right-Wing Populist Parties in Public Ofﬁce’, West
European Politics, 26: 3 (2003), pp. 91–130; Michael Jungwirth (ed.), Haider, Le Pen &
Co. Europas Rechtspopulisten, Graz, Styria, 2002; Decker, Parteien unter Druck, op. cit.
34 On the link between nationalism and populism, and the concept of ‘national
populism,’ see Taguieff, ‘Political Science Confronts Populism’, op. cit., pp. 9–43;
Angus Stewart, ‘The Social Roots’, in Ionescu and Gellner, Populism. Its Meanings and
National Characteristics, op. cit., pp. 183–5.
35 Indeed, Simon Clarke has argued that Marxism–Leninism is essentially populist,
while Ernesto Laclau called socialism ‘the highest form of populism’. See Simon
Clarke, ‘Was Lenin a Marxist? The Populist Roots of Marxism-Leninism’, in Werner
Bonefeld and Sergio Tischler (eds), What is to Be Done? Leninism, Anti-Leninist Marxism
and the Question of Revolution Today, Aldershot, Ashgate, 2002, pp. 44–75; Ernesto
Laclau, Politics and Ideology in Marxist Theory: Capitalism–Fascism–Populism, London, New
Left Books, 1977, p. 196.
36 See Cas Mudde, ‘Extremist Movements’, in Paul Heywood et al. (eds), Develop-
ments in West European Politics 2, Basingstoke, Palgrave, 2002, pp. 135–48; also Amir
Abedi, Anti-Political Establishment Parties, London, Routledge, 2004.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1477-7053.2004.00135.x Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 10 (native text) -----
550
GOVERNMENT AND OPPOSITION
no longer as the vanguard of the proletariat, but as the vox populi
(voice of the people).
In the United States populism has deep roots in mainstream pol-
itics, going back to the nineteenth century.37 While populism has tra-
ditionally been associated most strongly with the Democratic Party,
Republicans have been known to use it as well. In the last decades
various observers have claimed the importance of populism in both
the victory and the defeat of American presidential candidates,
ranging from Reagan to Clinton and from Bush Jr to Gore.38 In addi-
tion, various third-party candidates have run successful populist cam-
paigns, most recently Ross Perot, Ralph Nader and Pat Buchanan.
While populism has been less prominent in mainstream politics
in Western Europe, the last decade or so has seen a signiﬁcant
change in this. Various mainstream opposition parties have chal-
lenged the government using familiar populist arguments. For
example, during the 2001 UK parliamentary election campaign, Tory
leader William Hague referred to the New Labour leadership as ‘the
condescending liberal elite’. He also frequently used the term ‘met-
ropolitan’, arguing that the New Labour elite in London was com-
pletely out of touch with the feelings and concerns of the English
people in the country (i.e. ‘Middle England’).39 This is similar to the
classic populist distinction between the corrupt, metropolitan, urban
elite and the pure, indigenous, rural people.40
That populism is neither reserved for the right-wing nor for the
opposition can be seen, among other places, in Great Britain. As
Peter Mair has forcefully argued, Tony Blair’s New Labour has been
© Government and Opposition Ltd 2004
37 See, inter alia, Alan Ware, ‘The United States: Populism as Political Strategy’, 
in Yves Mény and Yves Surel (eds), Democracies and the Populist Challenge, Basingstoke,
Palgrave, 2002, pp. 101–19; John Gerring, Party Ideologies in America, 1828–1996, 
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1998; Michael Kazin, The Populist Persuasion:
An American History, New York, Basic Books, 1995.
38 For example, Terri Bimes, ‘Ronald Reagan and the New Conservative Populism’,
paper presented at the annual APSA meeting, Boston, 29 August–1 September 2002;
Judis and Teixeira, The Emerging Democratic Majority, op. cit.; Scott D. Wells et al., ‘Al
Gore and Election 2000: Populist Discourse and Strategies’, paper presented at the
annual APSA meeting, Boston, 29 August–1 September 2002.
39 See 
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/special_report/1999/02/99/e-cyclopedia/
1070504.stm.
40 See, for example, Miklós Lackó, ‘Populism in Hungary: Yesterday and Today’,
in Joseph Held (ed.), Populism in Eastern Europe. Racism, Nationalism, and Society,
Boulder, CO, East European Monographs, pp. 107–28.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1477-7053.2004.00135.x Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 11 (native text) -----
a champion of mainstream populism, both before and after taking
power.41 Indeed, an interesting example of the broad and varied use
of populism can be found in the struggle between the Labour 
government and the Countryside Alliance. Both use strong populist
rhetoric: While the Alliance argues, similarly to former Tory leader
Hague, that the Labour government are an alien(ated) elite that
threatens the way of life of the (real) English people, Labour pres-
ents itself as the champion of the (true) English people against the
privileges of the (upper class) elite.
Another prime exponent of left-wing government populism is
Steve Stevaert, former vice-premier of Flanders and current leader
of the Flemish Socialist Party. After having been criticized for his
‘gratis politics’ by Flemish-nationalist leader Geert Bourgeois, who
quoted an American legal scholar in support, Stevaert answered: ‘I
understand that Geert Bourgeois likes to support his standpoints by
authority arguments, but I rather base myself upon the wisdom of
the people.’42 His party colleague Frank Vandenbroucke, then min-
ister of social affairs and pensions, even openly called for a ‘left-wing
populism with foundations.’43
In conclusion then, at least since the early 1990s populism has
become a regular feature of politics in western democracies. While
populism is still mostly used by outsider or challenger parties, main-
stream politicians, both in government and in opposition, have been
using it as well – generally in an attempt to counter the populist chal-
lengers. Indeed, leading left-wing (vice) prime ministers, like Tony
Blair or Steve Stevaert, have voiced some of the most pure examples
of contemporary populism. This raises the question why western
democracies are faced with this populist Zeitgeist now.
THE POPULIST ZEITGEIST
551
© Government and Opposition Ltd 2004
41 See Peter Mair, ‘Populist Democracy vs. Party Democracy’, in Mény and Surel,
Democracies and the Populist Challenge, op. cit., pp. 81–98; Peter Mair, ‘Partyless Demo-
cracy and the “Paradox” of New Labour’, New Left Review, 2 (2000), pp. 21–35.
42 De Standaard, 2 December 2002.
43 De Morgen, 21 May 2002. Similarly, René Cuperus, senior research fellow at 
the scientiﬁc bureau of the Dutch Labour Party, argues that ‘social democracy should
dare to be more “populist” in a leftist way.’ See Cuperus, ‘The Populist Deﬁciency of
European Social Democracy’, op. cit., p. 108.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1477-7053.2004.00135.x Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 12 (native text) -----
552
GOVERNMENT AND OPPOSITION
THE CAUSES OF THE CURRENT POPULIST ZEITGEIST
In ﬁnding the answer to the question of why so many people support
populist ideas and politicians today, a ﬁrst avenue to take is so obvious
that it is often ignored: ‘we should not a priori dismiss the charges
anti-political establishment actors formulate.’44 Maybe the arguments
of the populists are true and that could explain why they are so 
successful.
First of all, are the elites today more corrupt than they were before
the 1990s? Obviously, this is a difﬁcult question to answer, given that
corruption is not just a contentious concept, it is also by deﬁnition a
shady affair on which it is hard to get reliable, comparative data.
According to most experts, ‘the existence of party-related corruption
is hardly new. . . . What may be new, however, is the likelihood that a
scandal will be produced once the evidence of corruption has been
exposed.’45
Secondly, is it true that ‘the people’ and ‘the elite’ today stand
further apart than they used to do in the past? According to Klaus
von Beyme, ‘(t)here are many tendencies in modern democracies
which strengthen the separation of a political class from its basis,
such as public ﬁnancing of parties, monopolization of political activ-
ities, the co-operation of government and opposition.’46 It is par-
ticularly the latter aspect, i.e. the process of cartelization within
European party systems, that has received a lot of attention from both
academics and populists.47
© Government and Opposition Ltd 2004
44 Andreas Schedler, ‘Anti-Political-Establishment Parties’, Party Politics, 2: 3
(1996), p. 297.
45 Paul Heywood et al., ‘Political Corruption, Democracy, and Governance in
Western Europe’, in Heywood et al., Developments in West European Politics 2, op. cit.,
pp. 196–7. See also F. F. Ridley and Alan Doig (eds), Sleaze: Politicians, Private Interests
& Public Reaction, Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1995.
46 See Klaus von Beyme, ‘The Concept of Political Class: A New Dimension of
Research on Elites?’, West European Politics, 19: 1 (1996), p. 84.
47 For the original thesis, see Richard S. Katz and Peter Mair, ‘Changing Models
of Party Organization and Party Democracy: The Emergence of the Cartel Party’, Party
Politics, 1: 1 (1995), pp. 5–28. For an overview of the debate, see Ludger Helms, ‘Die
“Kartellparteien”-These und ihre Kritiker’, Politische Vierteljahresschrift, 42: 4 (2001), 
pp. 698–708.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1477-7053.2004.00135.x Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 13 (native text) -----
It is also true that ‘politicians of all parties have become more
similar sociologically (middle class) and politically (moderate).’48 At
the same time, this can be said of the electorate too, though to a
somewhat lesser extent. So, while accepting the continued social
biases of legislative elites, it seems unlikely that the ‘social distance’
between the bulk of the elites and the bulk of the citizens has
increased signiﬁcantly over the past decades.49 In conclusion, though
there is certainly some truth to the claims of the populists, perceptions
seem to be more important than facts.
This change in perception is undoubtedly closely related to the
changed role of the media in western democracies. Even if we only
limit ourselves to the post-war period, we can note signiﬁcant changes
in the importance, role and range of the media. In short, more impor-
tant than the actual increase in sleaze and corruption in politics, is the
different way in which politics is reported upon in the media (i.e. a
focus on the negative and sensationalist elements of news). There are
two main reasons for the change in the way (much of) the media
report upon politics today: independence and commercialization.50
Traditionally, most of the western media were tightly controlled by
political parties; often newspapers were part of the individual sub-
cultures. This already changed somewhat with the introduction of
radio and, most notably, television – even though in many countries
the established parties originally held a tight grip on public broad-
casting. Since the late 1960s most media have gained increasing if
not total independence from political parties. At the same time,
public media (most notably television) has been challenged by
private media, which has led to a struggle for readers and viewers
and, consequently, a focus on the more extreme and scandalous
aspects of politics (not just by the ‘tabloid media’). This development
not only strengthened anti-elite sentiments within the population, it
also provided the perfect stage for populist actors, who found not
THE POPULIST ZEITGEIST
553
© Government and Opposition Ltd 2004
48 Richard S. Katz, ‘Party Organizations and Finance’, in Lawrence LeDuc et al.
(eds), Comparing Democracies. Elections and Voting in Global Perspective, Thousand Oaks,
Sage, 1996, p. 132.
49 Cf. Pippa Norris, ‘Legislative Recruitment’, in LeDuc et al., Comparing Democra-
cies, op. cit., pp. 184–215.
50 See, inter alia, Joseph N. Cappella and Kathleen Hall Jamieson, Spiral of Cyni-
cism. The Press and the Public Good, New York, Oxford University Press, 1997; Holli A.
Semetko, ‘The Media’, in LeDuc et al., Comparing Democracies, op. cit., pp. 254–79.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1477-7053.2004.00135.x Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 14 (native text) -----
554
GOVERNMENT AND OPPOSITION
just a receptive audience, but also a highly receptive medium.51 As
one commentator noted with reference to the Austrian case: ‘Haider
needed the media and they needed him.’52
More positively, and perhaps paradoxically, another reason why
people have become more receptive to populism is that they have
become better educated and more emancipated.53 As a consequence
of the egalitarianism of the 1960s, citizens today expect more from
politicians, and feel more competent to judge their actions.54 This
‘cognitive mobilization’55 has led citizens to stop accepting that the
elites think for them, and to no longer blindly swallow what the elites
tell them.
This also explains why contemporary populists proﬁt so much
from their role as taboo breakers and ﬁghters against political cor-
rectness.56 Political correctness and taboos are hardly new phenom-
ena in liberal democracies, although one might argue that they have
been more strictly enforced in recent years (most notably with ref-
erence to ‘racism’). But because of the emancipation of the citizens,
they have become contentious issues.
© Government and Opposition Ltd 2004
51 On the relationship between the media and populism, see, most notably, 
Mazzoleni et al., The Media and Neo-Populism: A Contemporary Comparative Analysis, op. cit.
On the particular role of the new media, see Barrie Axford and Richard Huggins, ‘Anti-
Politics or the Triumph of Postmodern Populism in Promotional Cultures’, Telematics
and Informatics, 15: 3 (1998), pp. 181–202.
52 Charles E. Ritterband, ‘Kärtner Chamäleon. Jörg Haiders Auf- und Abstieg in
Österreich’, Internationale Politik, 4 (2003), p. 28. Complete symbiosis between pop-
ulism and the media has been achieved in Italy. See Paul Statham, ‘Berlusconi, the
Media, and the New Right in Italy’, Press/Politics, 1: 1 (1996), pp. 87–105.
53 In the words of Klaus von Beyme: ‘The universalization of education has dimin-
ished the distance between the political elite and the average educational experience
of the elector.’ von Beyme, ‘Party Leadership and Change in Party Systems: Towards
a Postmodern Party State?’, op. cit., p. 146.
54 See, inter alia, Susan J. Pharr and Robert D. Putnam (eds), Disaffected Democra-
cies. What’s Troubling the Trilateral Democracies, Princeton, Princeton University Press,
2000; Pippa Norris (ed.), Critical Citizens. Global Support for Democratic Governance,
Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1999.
55 Russell J. Dalton, Citizen Politics: Public Opinion and Political Parties in Advanced
Industrial Democracies, Chatham, Chatham House, 1996.
56 Cf. Hajo Funke and Lars Rensmann, ‘Wir sind so frei. Zum rechtspopulistischen
Kurswechsel der FDP’, Blätter für deutsche und internationale Politik, 7 (2002), pp. 822–8;
Kees van Kersbergen, ‘Is Nederland een democratie?’, De Helling, 15: 3 (2002), 
pp. 23–5.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1477-7053.2004.00135.x Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 15 (native text) -----
For decades, authors have noted a development towards apoliti-
cal or non-ideological politics in western democracies.57 This devel-
opment has been most pronounced in the former consociational
democracies (e.g. Austria, Belgium, Switzerland), which have given
rise to some of the strongest populist challenge(r)s. As these coun-
tries have become largely depillarized since the late 1960s, they trans-
formed into ‘depoliticized democracies’,58 in which administration
has replaced politics (in modern parlance: governance instead of
government). Not surprisingly, it is here that the populist call for the
‘repoliticization of the public realm’59 and their role as taboo breaker
have found the most receptive audience.
Finally, there are a variety of broad developments that have altered
societies and politics in western democracies, and often beyond,
which have also had an effect on the fate of populism. As these are
well-documented, I will only shortly note their relationship to pop-
ulism. First, the development toward a post-industrial society has
dealigned many voters, increased the importance of divisions, and
thereby created space for new, less ideological parties.60 Secondly, the
end of the cold war has changed the political relationships both
within and towards liberal democracies. Most importantly, democracy
has lost its arch-enemy, to which it was always compared favourably,
and ‘real existing democracies’ are now being increasingly compared
unfavourably to the theoretical models. Thirdly, globalization,
whether actual or perceived, has become presented as a serious lim-
itation to the power of national elites.61 Moreover, while mainstream
THE POPULIST ZEITGEIST
555
© Government and Opposition Ltd 2004
57 For example, John Clayton Thomas, ‘Ideological Trends in Western Political
Parties’, in Peter H. Merkl (ed.), Western European Party Systems, New York, Free Press,
1980, pp. 348–66; Mostefa Rejai (ed.), Decline of Ideology?, Chicago, Aldine/Atherton,
1971.
58 Arend Lijphart, The Politics of Accommodation: Pluralism and Democracy in the Nether-
lands, Berkeley, University of California Press, 1968.
59 Lothar Probst, ‘Die Erzeugung “vorwärtsgerichteter Unruhe”. Überlegungen
zum Charisma von Jörg Haider’, Vorgänge, 41: 4 (2002), p. 39.
60 See, inter alia, Herbert Kitschelt (in collaboration with Anthony McGann), The
Radical Right in Western Europe. A Comparative Analysis, Ann Arbor, University of Michi-
gan Press, 1995; Russell J. Dalton et al. (eds), Electoral Change in Advanced Industrial
Democracies, Princeton, Princeton University Press, 1994.
61 For example, Mark Blyth, ‘Globalization and the Limits of Democratic Choice.
Social Democracy and the Rise of Political Cartelization’, Internationale Politik und
Gesellschaft, 3 (2003), pp. 60–82; Philippe C. Schmitter, ‘The Future of Democracy:
Could It Be a Matter of Scale?’, Social Research, 66: 3 (1999), pp. 933–58.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1477-7053.2004.00135.x Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 16 (native text) -----
556
GOVERNMENT AND OPPOSITION
politicians tend to explain the negative economic developments as
inevitable consequences of globalization on the one hand, they also
claim the positive economic conditions as the results of their own
economic policies, on the other. They thereby weaken their main
argument against the populist challenge, i.e. that a complete
‘primacy of politics’ is unrealistic.
Several of these factors combined, most notably the changed role
of the media and the emancipation of the citizens, have also led to
a demystiﬁcation of the ‘political ofﬁce’. More and more citizens
think they have a good understanding of what politicians do, and
think they can do it better. While this does not necessarily mean that
many people also actually want to do it better, by actively participat-
ing in various aspects of political life (see below), it does mean that
the relationship between the elites and the citizens has changed sig-
niﬁcantly, and possibly irrevocably, over the past decades.
Max Weber has famously distinguished three types of authority:
traditional, legal and charismatic.62 Liberal democracies have over-
come the traditional type – with the notable exception of constitu-
tional monarchies – and real, i.e. legal, authority is meant to be based
on competence. Indeed, it was on the basis of their presumed com-
petence that politicians (most notably ministers) used to be held in
quite high esteem in western democracies.
The emancipation of the citizens, as well as other factors men-
tioned above, has undermined the elite’s competence, or at least the
citizens’ perception of it,63 and thereby also their (legal) authority.
Consequently, more space for the third type of authority emerges:
charisma. And while charismatic leadership is not the same as pop-
ulist leadership, there are important similarities, and it should not
be surprising that populists will be among the main winners of this
shift to charismatic authority (see also below).64
© Government and Opposition Ltd 2004
62 Max Weber, Politik als Beruf, Berlin, Duncker & Humblot, 8th edn, 1987.
63 On the importance of expertise and the changing relationship between elites
and citizens in this respect, see Cuperus, ‘The Populist Deﬁciency of European Social
Democracy’, op. cit., pp. 83–109; Milo Anstadt, ‘Vrijheid der onvolwassenen’, De Groene
Amsterdammer, 126: 49 (2002), pp. 30–3.
64 On right-wing populism and charismatic leadership, see Roger Eatwell, ‘The
Rebirth of Right-Wing Charisma? The Cases of Jean-Marie Le Pen and Vladimir 
Zhirinovsky’, Totalitarian Movements and Political Religions, 3: 3 (2002), pp. 1–23; Ami
Pedahzur and Avraham Brichta, ‘The Institutionalization of Extreme Right-Wing
Charismatic Parties’, Party Politics, 8: 1 (2002), pp. 31–49.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1477-7053.2004.00135.x Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 17 (native text) -----
REACTIONS TO THE POPULIST CHALLENGE
Much of the academic and political reactions to the populist chal-
lenges have involved calls for ‘more’ or ‘real’ democracy. Just look 
at the burgeoning literature on all kinds of more or less new types
of democracy, such as deliberative democracy, digital democracy, 
e-democracy.65 At the political level, the following statement by
Romano Prodi, the EU Commission president, is exemplary: ‘People
want a much more participatory, ‘hands on’ democracy. They . . .
[want to be] fully involved in setting goals, making policy and eval-
uating progress. And they are right.’66
At a conference on democratic disillusion in Paris, on 11 October
2002, Philippe Schmitter pointed to the schizophrenia among the
elites of the established parties, who try to both close and open the
political system. Indeed, one sees a combination of cartelization, i.e.
closing of the party system by cooptation of challengers, and demo-
cratization, e.g. the opening of the political system through the in-
troduction of elements of direct democracy (e.g. referendums) or
e-governance.
However, ‘deliberative democracy’ or a ‘participation revolution’
were the answers to the populist demands of the New Left, the New
Social Movements, and the Green and New Politics parties. But there
is a fundamental difference between these populists and the current
populist Zeitgeist. This can best be illustrated by the heartland, i.e.
the interpretation of the people, that the populists refer to. The 
populism of the New Left referred to an active, self-conﬁdent, well-
educated, progressive people. In sharp contrast, the current pop-
ulism is the rebellion of the ‘silent majority’. The heartland of
populists like Berlusconi or Haider is the hard-working, slightly con-
servative, law-abiding citizen, who, in silence but with growing anger,
sees his world being ‘perverted’ by progressives, criminals, and aliens.
In short, the contemporary populist revolt is in many ways the
opposite to that of 1968 and further. While the populists of the ‘silent
THE POPULIST ZEITGEIST
557
© Government and Opposition Ltd 2004
65 Among many more, see Barry N. Hague and Brian D. Loader (eds), Digital
Democracy: Discourse and Decision Making in the Information Age, London, Routledge,
1999; Jon Elster, Deliberative Democracy, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1998;
Ian Budge, The New Challenge of Direct Democracy, Cambridge, Polity, 1996.
66 Romano Prodi, ‘Shaping the New Europe’, speech to the European Parliament,
Strasbourg, 15 February 2000; available at: http://www.ecnais.org/html/pages/
Bulletin/Prodi.htm.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1477-7053.2004.00135.x Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 18 (native text) -----
558
GOVERNMENT AND OPPOSITION
revolution’ wanted more participation and less leadership, the pop-
ulists of the ‘silent counter-revolution’ want more leadership and less
participation.67 As Robert Dahl has argued
. . . it is an all too common mistake to . . . see democracy simply as a matter
of political participation, and to assume that if some people in democratic
countries say they value democracy it must be because they receive enjoy-
ment or satisfaction from actually participating in political life. And if it turns
out that they do not particularly enjoy participating in political life and do
not engage much in it, then it might seem to follow that they do not care
much about democracy.68
The current heartland of the populists does support democracy, but
they do not want to be bothered with politics all the time. Indeed,
‘nearly a half-century of surveys provides overwhelming evidence that
citizens do not put much value on actually participating themselves
in political life.’69 True, they want to be heard in the case of funda-
mental decisions, but ﬁrst and foremost they want leadership. They
want politicians who know (rather than ‘listen to’) the people, and
who make their wishes come true.
The heartland of contemporary populism is thus focused prima-
rily on the output and not on the input of democracy. What they
demand is responsive government, i.e. a government that implements
policies that are in line with their wishes. However, they want the
politicians to come up with these policies without bothering them,
i.e. without much participation from them.
In contrast to popular misperceptions, the populist voters do not
strongly favour any form of participatory democracy, be it delibera-
tive or plebiscitary. Indeed, one of the few empirical analyses into the
democratic views of supporters of populist parties concludes: ‘sup-
porters of populist parties . . . are not systematically supportive of
© Government and Opposition Ltd 2004
67 See, respectively Roland Inglehart, The Silent Revolution: Changing Values and
Political Styles among Western Publics, Princeton, Princeton University Press, 1977; Piero
Ignazi, ‘The Silent Counter-Revolution. Hypotheses on the Emergence of Extreme
Right-Wing Parties in Europe’, European Journal of Political Research, 22: 1–2 (1992), 
pp. 3–34.
68 Robert Dahl, ‘A Democratic Paradox’, Political Science Quarterly, 115: 1 (2000),
p. 38.
69 Ibid.; see also John R. Hibbing and Elizabeth Theiss-Morse, Stealth Democracy.
Americans’ Beliefs About How Government Should Work, Cambridge, Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 2002.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1477-7053.2004.00135.x Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 19 (native text) -----
expanding democratic processes.’70 Indeed, one could argue that
populists (both leaders and followers) support referendums mainly
as an instrument to overcome the power of ‘the elite’. They see it as
the only possibility left to ensure that the wishes of ‘the people’ are
reﬂected in the government’s policies.
But the current ‘plebiscitary transformation of democracy’71 does
not only fail to solve the perceived crisis of democracy, i.e. the pop-
ulist challenge, it can actually strengthen it. By using a similar,
popular democratic discourse to justify the changes, the critique 
of the populist actors is legitimized.72 More importantly, these 
actions raise the expectations of the populist heartland. And when
these expectations are not met, which has been the case in most
instances,73 the populist protest will be even stronger. Consequently,
dissatisﬁed voters will prefer the original over the copy, as Le Pen has
famously remarked, given that the copy has already proved to be
untrustworthy.
Another misperception is that populist voters resent the estab-
lishment because they are different. Populism is neither about 
class, except perhaps the rejection of the ‘political class’,74 nor about
social representation or paritary democracy. Supporters of populist
parties do not want to be ruled by ‘the man in the street’ in socio-
demographic terms. Just look at the ﬂamboyant individuals that lead
most of these movements; one can hardly say that Pim Fortuyn was
THE POPULIST ZEITGEIST
559
© Government and Opposition Ltd 2004
70 Shaun Bowler et al., ‘Populist Parties and Support for Direct Democracy’, paper
presented at the Australasian Political Studies Association Conference, Hobart, 
Tasmania, 29 September–1 October 2003, p. 36.
71 Frank Decker in ‘Konjunkturen des Populismus. “Blätter”-Gespräch mit Frank
Decker’, Blätter für deutsche und internationale Politik, 10 (2002), p. 1185.
72 Cf. Yves Mény and Yves Surel, ‘The Constitutive Ambiguity of Populism’ in Mény
and Surel, Democracies and the Populist Challenge, op. cit., pp. 1–21; Margaret Canovan,
‘Taking Politics to the People: Populism as the Ideology of Democracy’ in Mény and
Surel, Democracies and the Populist Challenge, op. cit., pp. 25–44; Darin David Barney and
David Laylock, ‘Right-Populists and Plebiscitary Politics in Canada’, Party Politics, 5: 3
(1999), pp. 317–39.
73 On the contradictory results of democratization of candidate selection in politi-
cal parties, for example, see Paul Pennings and Reuven Y. Hazan (eds), Party Politics, 7:
3 (2001), special issue. On the problematic relationship between party democracy and
direct democracy, Scarrow and Seyd, Party Politics, 5: 3 (1999) special issue.
74 See von Beyme, ‘The Concept of Political Class’, op. cit., pp. 68–87; Schedler,
‘Anti-Political-Establishment Parties’, op. cit., pp. 291–312.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1477-7053.2004.00135.x Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 20 (native text) -----
560
GOVERNMENT AND OPPOSITION
an average Dutch citizen!75 What the populist supporter wants is the
problems of ‘the common man’ to be solved, according to their own
values (often referred to as ‘common sense’), and they accept that
this will have to be done by a remarkable leader. Or, in the words of
Paul Taggart, populism ‘requires the most extraordinary individuals
to lead the most ordinary of people’.76 Incidentally, it is in this excep-
tional character of the leader of some, but deﬁnitely not all, populist
movements that charismatic leadership plays a role.77
Interestingly, the populist leader is not necessarily a true outsider.
People like Berlusconi, Fortuyn, or Haider were, already before their
political career took off, well connected with sections within the eco-
nomic and political elites, without being truly part of them. But
rather than a ‘counter-elite’,78 which better ﬁts the textbook populist,
they would be best described as outsider-elites: connected to the elites,
but not part of them.
Many observers have noted that populism is inherent to repre-
sentative democracy; after all, do populists not juxtapose ‘the pure
people’ against ‘the corrupt elite’?79 As argued above, I disagree with
this view, and believe that both the populist masses and the populist
elites support ‘true’ representation. In other words, they reject
neither representation per se, nor the lack of social representation.
What they oppose is being represented by an ‘alien’ elite, whose poli-
cies do not reﬂect their own wishes and concerns.80
© Government and Opposition Ltd 2004
75 There are many historic examples of populist leaders who came from completely
different social circles from the people they claimed to lead. The most striking
example were the narodniki, who were young urban intellectuals defending the virtues
of the Russian peasantry. See Andrzej Walicki, ‘Eastern Europe’, in Ionescu and
Gellner, Populism. Its Meanings and National Characteristics, op. cit., pp. 62–96.
76 Taggart, Populism, op. cit., p. 1.
77 See Sandra Seubert, ‘Paradoxien des Charisma. Max Weber und die Politik des
Vertrauens’, Zeitschrift für Politikwissenschaft, 12: 3 (2002), pp. 1123–48; Ron van
Dooren, Messengers from the Promised Land. An Interactive Theory of Charisma, Leiden,
DSWO-Press, 1994.
78 C. Wright Mills, The Power Elite, New York, Oxford University Press, 1957.
79 See, inter alia, Yves Mény and Yves Surel, Par le people, pour le people. Le populisme
et les démocraties, Paris, Fayard, 2000; Taggart, Populism, op. cit.; Urbinati, ‘Democracy
and Populism’, op. cit., pp. 110–24.
80 For a more philosophical and elaborate argumentation about the compatibility
of populism and representative democracy, see Benjamín Arditi, ‘Populism as a
Spectre of Democracy: A Response to Canovan’, Political Studies, 52: 1 (2004), pp.
135–43.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1477-7053.2004.00135.x Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 21 (native text) -----
In the populist mind, the elite are the henchmen of ‘special inter-
ests’. Historically, these powerful, shady forces were bankers and
international ﬁnanciers (often alleged to be Jewish). But in contem-
porary populism a ‘new class’ has been identiﬁed, that of the 
‘progressives’ and the ‘politically correct’. This ‘new class theory’
originated within North American neo-conservative circles of the
1980s.81 In the following decades populists from all ideological 
persuasions would attack the dictatorship of the progressives, or in 
Fortuynist terms ‘the Church of the Left’.
Rather than representative democracy, populism is inherently
hostile to the idea and institutions of liberal democracy or constitu-
tional democracy.82 Populism is one form of what Fareed Zakaria83
has recently popularized as ‘illiberal democracy’, but which could
also be called democratic extremism. Despite all democratic rheto-
ric, liberal democracy is a complex compromise of popular demo-
cracy and liberal elitism, which is therefore only partly democratic.
As Margaret Canovan has brilliantly argued, populism is a biting cri-
tique of the democratic limitations within liberal democracies.84 In
its extremist interpretation of majoritarian democracy, it rejects all
limitations on the expression of the general will, most notably the
constitutional protection of minorities and the independence (from
politics, and therefore from democratic control) of key state institu-
tions (e.g. the judiciary, the central bank).85
To a large extent, populism draws its strength from the confused
and often opportunistic democratic promises of the political elites.
In this age of egalitarianism the defence of the elitist aspects of liberal
democracy becomes more and more like political suicide. Conse-
quently, politicians left, right and centre are emphasizing almost
exclusively the importance of the popular aspects, i.e. the democratic
THE POPULIST ZEITGEIST
561
© Government and Opposition Ltd 2004
81 On the origins of ‘new class theory’, and the contemporary populist interpre-
tations of it, see Barry Hindess and Marian Sawer (eds), Us and Them: Anti-Elitism in
Australia, Bentley, API Network, 2004.
82 Cf. Tjitske Akkerman, ‘Populism and Democracy’, Acta Politica, 38: 2 (2003), pp.
147–59; Mény and Surel, ‘The Constitutive Ambiguity of Populism’, op. cit., pp. 1–21.
83 Fareed Zakaria, The Future of Freedom: Illiberal Democracy at Home and Abroad, New
York: W. W. Norton, 2003.
84 Margaret Canovan, ‘Trust the People! Populism and the Two Faces of Demo-
cracy’, Political Studies, 47: 1 (1999), pp. 2–16.
85 For an insight into populism-in-practice, see Michael Braun, ‘Populismus an 
der Macht. Das Phänomen Berlusconi’, Internationale Politik und Gesellschaft, 3 (2003),
pp. 110–33.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1477-7053.2004.00135.x Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 22 (native text) -----
562
GOVERNMENT AND OPPOSITION
side. Typical are the debates about the (alleged) ‘gap between the
citizen and politics’ (note the homogeneous categorizations) or the
‘democratic deﬁcit’ in the European Union.
In most countries these debates started among the political elites,
without any indication that the masses were much concerned about
them. However, after years of reading and hearing about dysfunc-
tional national and supranational democracies, more and more
people have become both sensitized to the problem, and convinced
that things can and should be better. The problem is, can they be
‘better’ (i.e. more democratic) within the system of liberal demo-
cracy? As soon as more radical demands are made, the answer from
the mainstream politicians is often that they are not feasible because
of constitutional provisions or international commitments. Thus, a
vicious circle is created, which can only be broken by either giving
in to the populists, and creating a more populist (and less liberal!)
democratic system, or by resisting them, and instead explaining and
defending the democratic limitations of the liberal democratic
system.
CONCLUSION
The aim of this article has been to make a threefold contribution to
the current debate on populism in liberal democracies. The ﬁrst con-
tribution has been a clear and original deﬁnition of populism, which
can also be employed in empirical research. I have deﬁned populism
as an ideology that considers society to be ultimately separated into two homo-
geneous and antagonistic groups, ‘the pure people’ versus ‘the corrupt elite’,
and which argues that politics should be an expression of the volonté
générale (general will) of the people.
Secondly, the normal-pathology thesis was rejected, and instead it
was shown that populist discourse has become mainstream in the pol-
itics of contemporary western democracies. I have called this the pop-
ulist Zeitgeist. True, most mainstream parties mainly use populist
rhetoric, but some also call for populist amendments to the liberal
democratic system (most notably through the introduction of
plebiscitary instruments).
Thirdly, I have argued that the explanations of and the reactions
to the current populist Zeitgeist are seriously ﬂawed. Much of the
recently proposed solutions have been inspired by the populist 
© Government and Opposition Ltd 2004
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1477-7053.2004.00135.x Published online by Cambridge University Press


----- Page 23 (native text) -----
critique of the New Left in the 1970s and 1980s, which differs fun-
damentally from that of the 1990s (in supply and demand). In sharp
contrast to the earlier period, contemporary populists favour output
over input and leadership over participation. Consequently, these
reactions are not just ﬂawed, they can become counter-productive,
i.e. strengthening the populist challenge rather than weakening it.
So, are politics in liberal democracies destined to stay populist for
ever? Hardly! True, there are some structural tensions within liberal
democracy upon which populists can feed. But populism is also
episodic;86 not just the individual movements, but the whole
dynamic. When explicitly populist outsider groups gain prominence,
parts of the establishment will react by a combined strategy of exclu-
sion and inclusion; while trying to exclude the populist actor(s) from
political power, they will include populist themes and rhetoric to try
and ﬁght off the challenge. This dynamic will bring about a populist
Zeitgeist, like the one we are facing today, which will dissipate as soon
as the populist challenger seems to be over its top.
However, because of the structural changes, and the consequent
move away from legal authority and toward charismatic authority, as
well as the demystiﬁcation of politics in Western liberal democracies,
populism will be a more regular feature of future democratic poli-
tics, erupting whenever signiﬁcant sections of ‘the silent majority’
feels that ‘the elite’ no longer represents them.
THE POPULIST ZEITGEIST
563
© Government and Opposition Ltd 2004
86 Taggart, Populism, op. cit., p. 1.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1477-7053.2004.00135.x Published online by Cambridge University Press
