

----- Page 1 (native) -----
http://phg.sagepub.com
Progress in Human Geography 
DOI: 10.1191/030913200701540465 
 2000; 24; 347 
Prog Hum Geogr
W. Neil Adger 
 
Social and ecological resilience: are they related?
http://phg.sagepub.com/cgi/content/abstract/24/3/347
 
The online version of this article can be found at:
 
Published by:
http://www.sagepublications.com
 
can be found at:
Progress in Human Geography 
Additional services and information for 
 
http://phg.sagepub.com/cgi/alerts
 
Email Alerts:
 
http://phg.sagepub.com/subscriptions
 
Subscriptions:
 
http://www.sagepub.com/journalsReprints.nav
Reprints: 
 
http://www.sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
Permissions: 
 
http://phg.sagepub.com/cgi/content/refs/24/3/347
 
Citations
 at Yale University Library on March 17, 2010 
http://phg.sagepub.com
Downloaded from

----- Page 2 (native) -----
Social and ecological resilience:
are they related?
W. Neil Adger
School of Environmental Sciences and CSERGE, University of East Anglia, Norwich
NR4 7TJ, UK
Abstract: This article defines social resilience as the ability of groups or communities to cope
with external stresses and disturbances as a result of social, political and environmental change.
This definition highlights social resilience in relation to the concept of ecological resilience which
is a characteristic of ecosystems to maintain themselves in the face of disturbance. There is a clear
link between social and ecological resilience, particularly for social groups or communities that
are dependent on ecological and environmental resources for their livelihoods. But it is not clear
whether resilient ecosystems enable resilient communities in such situations. This article
examines whether resilience is a useful characteristic for describing the social and economic
situation of social groups and explores potential links between social resilience and ecological
resilience. The origins of this interdisciplinary study in human ecology, ecological economics
and rural sociology are reviewed, and a study of the impacts of ecological change on a resource-
dependent community in contemporary coastal Vietnam in terms of the resilience of its institu-
tions is outlined.
Key words: cultural geography, ecological resilience, human ecology, resource dependency,
sustainable development.
I
Introduction
The concept of resilience is widely used in ecology but its meaning and measurement
are contested. This article argues that it is important to learn from this debate and to
explore social resilience, both as an analogy of how societies work, drawing on the
ecological concept, and through exploring the direct relationship between the two
phenomena of social and ecological resilience. Social resilience is an important
component of the circumstances under which individuals and social groups adapt to
environmental change. Ecological and social resilience may be linked through the
dependence on ecosystems of communities and their economic activities. The question
is, then, whether societies dependent on resources and ecosystems are themselves less
resilient. In addition, this analysis allows consideration of whether institutions
Progress in Human Geography 24,3 (2000) pp. 347–364
© Arnold 2000
0309–1325(00)PH285RA
 at Yale University Library on March 17, 2010 
http://phg.sagepub.com
Downloaded from

----- Page 3 (native) -----
348
Social and ecological resilience: are they related?
themselves are resilient to change. Institutions in this case are defined in the broadest
sense to include habitualized behaviour and rules and norms that govern society, as
well as the more usual notion of formal institutions with memberships, constituencies
and stakeholders. This broad definition is important because institutional structures
such as property rights, govern the use of natural resources creating incentives for
sustainable or unsustainable use. Hence they are a central component linking social and
ecological resilience.
The article illustrates these themes through a review of the emerging ideas at the
interface of ecology, ecological economics and rural sociology. It also presents an
exploration of these themes by examining mangrove conversion in one site in northern
Vietnam. Market liberalization and the privatization of mangroves in this case reduce
ecosystem as well as social resilience. This loss of resilience is associated with negative
impacts on livelihoods and, in the context of the institutions of common property
management, collective institutional resilience is also undermined.
There is a long history of examining the resilience of ecological systems and their
persistence in the face of human intervention. Evidence on the history of human use of
ecosystems suggests an inevitable decline in ecosystem resilience with technological
lock-in and reductions in diversity (Holling and Sanderson, 1996). Yet the concept of
resilience has not effectively been brought across the disciplinary divide to examine the
meaning of resilience of a community or a society as a whole. Is resilience a relevant
term for describing communities? Is there a link between social resilience and ecological
resilience? And do institutions exhibit resilience?
In addition to these issues, the concept of resilience is clearly related to other config-
urations of environment society relationships such as vulnerability and criticality, some
of which have an explicit spatial dimension to these social processes. Analysis of vul-
nerability as a social phenomenon also has a long tradition within cultural geography
and the critical questions of food security and famine (Watts and Bohle, 1993). It is
related to the study of criticality (a concept applied spatially at different scales) and to
security (Kasperson et al., 1996).
Social vulnerability is the exposure of groups of people or individuals to stress as a
result of the impacts of environmental change. Stress, in the social sense, encompasses
disruption to groups’ or individuals’ livelihoods and forced adaptation to the changing
physical environment. Social vulnerability in general encompasses disruption to
livelihoods and loss of security. For vulnerable groups such stresses are often pervasive
and related to the underlying economic and social situation, both of lack of income and
resources, but also to war, civil strife and other factors (see Chambers, 1989). For natural
ecosystems, vulnerability can occur when individuals or communities of species are
stressed, and where thresholds of potentially irreversible changes are experienced
through environmental changes. Social vulnerability to environmental change and
other causes of vulnerability can be observed at different scales and in relation to a
range of phenomena such as human-induced risks or natural hazards (Klein et al., 1998;
Adger, 1999). Resilience increases the capacity to cope with stress and is hence a loose
antonym for vulnerability.
The concept of criticality is distinct from vulnerability. Environmental criticality
‘refers to situations in which the extent or rate of environmental degradation precludes
the continuation of current use systems or levels of human well being, given feasible
adaptations and societal capabilities to respond’ (Kasperson et al., 1995: 25). Thus
 at Yale University Library on March 17, 2010 
http://phg.sagepub.com
Downloaded from

----- Page 4 (native) -----
criticality is a state of an area or region which incorporates various attributes including
environmental degradation and some aspects of human adaptation (Kasperson et al.,
1995: 8). The concept of environmental criticality is therefore applied to geographical
areas or to resource systems. A region may exhibit criticality without the people living
there necessarily being vulnerable to environmental change if, for example, the
criticality is related to some other aspect of resource use such as ecosystem fragility.
Analysis of vulnerability of different social groups and the institutional architecture
which determines resilience in the context of environmental change is an emerging
research issue (Adger and Kelly, 1999). There is a critical need that such a concept of
social resilience is sensitive to the institutional context, yet is able to be observed in a
meaningful manner. Social resilience has economic, spatial and social dimensions and
hence its observation and appraisal require interdisciplinary understanding and
analysis at various scales. But it is important to note that, because of its institutional
context, social resilience is defined at the community level rather than being a
phenomenon pertaining to individuals. Hence it is related to the social capital of
societies and communities.
II
Defining resilience
The resilience of an ecological system relates to the functioning of the system, rather
than the stability of its component populations, or even the ability to maintain a steady
ecological state (Pimm, 1984; Holling et al., 1995; Perrings 1996; Gunderson et al., 1997).
Resilience in ecological systems is not easily observed, and there seems at present to be
no agreed relationship, for example, between the diversity of ecosystems and their
resilience (Pimm, 1984; Naemm et al., 1994; Tilman, 1997). Thus many tropical terrestrial
ecosystems have stable and diverse populations but are relatively low in resilience,
while similar ecosystems in temperate regions with apparently low diversity can
exhibit greater resilience. Coastal and estuarine ecosystems are typically of low species
diversity since they experience periodic physical changes and have a high degree of
organism mobility. Yet Costanza et al., (1995) argue that such ecosystems are highly
resilient because of their high levels of functional diversity.
Resilience can be defined in many ways. It is the buffer capacity or the ability of a
system to absorb perturbations, or the magnitude of disturbance that can be absorbed
before a system changes its structure by changing the variables and processes that
control behaviour (Holling et al., 1995). By contrast other definitions of resilience
emphasize the speed of recovery from a disturbance, highlighting the difference
between resilience and resistance, where the latter is the extent to which disturbance is
actually translated into impact (see Figure 1). It is important to note that these
definitions, shown for a population in the graphical representations in Figure 1, are
most relevant at the ecosystem scale. It is argued by many ecologists that resilience is
the key to biodiversity conservation and that diversity itself enhances resilience,
stability and ecosystem functioning (Schulze and Mooney, 1993; Mooney and Ehrlich,
1997; Tilman 1997). Ecological economists also argue that resilience is the key to sus-
tainability in the wider sense (e.g., Common, 1995). Certainly resilience is related to
stability, but it is not clear whether this characteristic is always desirable, for example,
in evolutionary terms.
W. Neil Adger
349
 at Yale University Library on March 17, 2010 
http://phg.sagepub.com
Downloaded from

----- Page 5 (native) -----
350
Social and ecological resilience: are they related?
Variability in ecological systems is in some ways inherently predictable, but in other
ways is always surprising (Holling, 1986). Holling’s ‘theory of surprise’ is based on the
notion of discontinuities and on the nature of ecological systems. More recently Holling
(1995) has intimated that the philosophical basis of managing the environment is
determined by the world-views of nature where people managing resources conceive
of the environment as either benign, balanced or, indeed, resilient and able to
reorganize itself (also Gunderson et al., 1997). Whichever view is adopted of how
ecological systems work, surprises are still inherent in the system. Kates and Clark
(1996) have suggested that human intervention inevitably leads to surprises which
confound social expectations while not being unpredictable from a scientific viewpoint;
which are generally harmful to social resilience and human welfare but also create
windows of opportunity in environmental management.
What, then, is meant by social resilience? First, social and ecological systems are
themselves linked, in ways which Norgaard (1994) and others have likened to
synergistic and coevolutionary relationships. Thus the resilience of social systems is
related in some (still undefined) way to the resilience of the ecological systems on which
social systems depend. This is most clearly exhibited within social systems that are
dependent on a single ecosystem or single resource. Simply taking the concept of
resilience from the ecological sciences and applying it to social systems assumes that
there are no essential differences in behaviour and structure between socialized institu-
tions and ecological systems. This is clearly contested in the social sciences. Rather, the
parallels between ecosystem resilience and social resilience have been hinted at in
several disciplines, including human geography, human ecology and ecological
economics (Zimmerer, 1994; Gunderson et al., 1997; Levin et al., 1998). They have been
tested empirically in the context of land degradation (Blaikie and Brookfield, 1987), in
the context of agricultural systems (Bayliss-Smith, 1991; Cuc and Rambo, 1993) and
coastal livelihood systems (Peluso et al., 1994).
Figure 1
Ecological resilience. There is no precise definition of
resilience. Two alternatives appear to be (left) the disturbance which
can be absorbed before the dynamic equilibrium is change completely
(following Holling) and (right) the rate of recovery from a disturbance
 at Yale University Library on March 17, 2010 
http://phg.sagepub.com
Downloaded from

----- Page 6 (native) -----
In reality, seeking to analyse the resilience of social systems by using analogies from
the ecological systems is akin to endogenizing the role of social institutions in the wider
environment (Pritchard et al., 1998). There are two elements in examining the applica-
bility of social resilience in terms of the physical environment. First there is the issue of
dependency of social systems on the environment itself – are communities and institu-
tions which are directly dependent on natural resources themselves linked to the
resilience of the ecosystem? In other words, are there direct linkages between ecological
and social resilience? In this sphere research in the areas of human ecology is relevant.
The second issue concerns the resilience of institutions. As already stated, institutions
are taken here in the widest sense to incorporate both modes of socialized behaviour as
well as more formal structures of governance or law. Institutions it would appear can
be persistent, sustainable and resilient depending on a range of parameters, including
legitimacy (O’Riordan et al., 1998); agenda setting and the selecting of environmental
risks which resonate with the institutions’ agenda (Cantor and Rayner, 1994); and the
maintenance of social capital. Thus the resilience of institutions is based on their
historical evolution and their inclusivity or exclusivity, and hence how effective they are
in oiling the wheels of society. Indeed the social capital of communities is taken here to
mean the existence of integrating features of social organization such as trust norms
and networks (e.g., Pelling, 1998). The cultural context of institutional adaptation, and
indeed the differing conceptions of human–environment interactions within different
knowledge systems, are central to the resilience of institutions. These cultural contexts
and local technical knowledge tend to be overlooked in considering equity and
economic efficiency of sustainable use of natural resources, as argued by Gadgil et al.,
(1993), Blaikie et al., (1997) and Brown (1997), for example. Hence the resilience of insti-
tutions is not simply a matter of the economic relations between them but is
determined, as with social capital, by their inclusivity and degree of trust (reviewed in
Harriss and de Renzio, 1997).
In determining the parallels between social and ecological resilience, potential
indicators for the concept are discussed below, focusing on the links between social
stability (of populations within social systems) and resource dependency. Resource
dependency is defined by the reliance on a narrow range of resources leading to social
and economic stresses within livelihood systems. So, for example, the dependence of
certain economies on mineral resources is defined by the extent to which they are reliant
on their mineral production; are open to vagaries of world markets in these
commodities; and are inclined to experience boom and bust cycles because of the nature
of the commodity markets they are locked into. For example, Auty (1997; 1998) argues
that resource endowment and dependency explain some of the constraints on social
capital development and the ultimate destiny of resource-dependent societies such as
those heavily dependent on oil revenues. The preoccupation with capturing the benefits
of resource endowments during boom times in such countries impedes the creation of
economic linkages, land reform and diverse development. In other words, dependency
brings with it its own set of problems in the economic and social sphere. 
Stresses and variability associated with resource dependency are manifest in
instability and increased variance in income and risk of failure of particular sources.
Social instability is manifest through various social indicators such as the impacts of
population displacement. Resource dependency, in this sense, demonstrates the coevo-
lutionary nature of the social and natural systems being examined, with social and
W. Neil Adger
351
 at Yale University Library on March 17, 2010 
http://phg.sagepub.com
Downloaded from

----- Page 7 (native) -----
352
Social and ecological resilience: are they related?
economic systems themselves being more or less ‘resilient’ to external physical as well
as social stresses.
An example of the resilience of institutions can be found in the ability of institutions
of common property management to cope with external pressures and stress. Social
capital, ecological resilience and social resilience are all tested when upheaval and
stress are placed on institutions. Commonly managed coastal resources are being
degraded throughout the world through the breakdown of property rights or inappro-
priate privatization (see Berkes and Folke, 1998). Nowhere is this clearer than in coastal
resources, such as fisheries, coastal communities and agriculture, or forest-dependent
communities, as discussed in the examples below.
III
Resource dependency and social resilience
The concept of dependency stems from a rural sociological perspective on communities
and their interaction with risky resources, primarily in a north American context (e.g.,
Machlis and Force, 1988; Machlis et al., 1990; Freudenburg, 1992), but also increasingly
in the context of coastal communities (e.g., Peluso et al., 1994; Bailey and Pomeroy,
1996). Under this concept of dependency, the promotion of specialization in economic
activities has negative consequences in terms of risk for individuals within
communities and for communities themselves. Social resilience is therefore observed by
examining positive and negative aspects of social exclusion, marginalization and social
capital. 
Resource dependency relates to communities and individuals whose social order,
livelihood and stability are a direct function of their resource production and localized
economy (Machlis et al., 1990). There are a number of elements by which the conse-
quences of dependency can be observed: income stability, and social stability and
migration. The dependency of individuals within a resource system does not
necessarily depend on reliance on a single crop or fish stock, but in some circumstances
on dependence on an integrated ecosystem. This is particularly the case with coastal
resources, as argued by Bailey and Pomeroy (1996: 195) in the context of coastal regions
of Asia: ‘fishing communities are best understood as dependent not on a single resource
but on a whole ecosystem. This expanded understanding of tropical coastal resources is
the key to stability for households and communities in South East Asia’s coastal zones’. 
As an example of the links between ecosystem and social resilience, the demand for
diverse and resilient resources partially determines location for settlement. Differential
concentrations of population across a landscape reflect the differing levels of
comparative advantage in economic, political and social parameters of each site.
Communities dependent on a single underground mineral resource are however
severely constrained in their ability to adapt (Freudenburg, 1992), partly because
subsoil resources appear to be randomly distributed across geographical areas. By
contrast, coastal resources are attractive regions for economic growth and support an
increasing proportion of the world’s population because they are inherently diverse,
allow multiple social and economic niches and hence are resilient compared to areas
dependent on a single resource. Again in the context of southeast Asia, Bailey and
Pomeroy (1996: 195) regard social systems dependent on coastal resources as inherently
resilient, despite their dependency on a single ecosystem: ‘coastal fishing communities
 at Yale University Library on March 17, 2010 
http://phg.sagepub.com
Downloaded from

----- Page 8 (native) -----
in southeast Asia are resource dependent, but not in the pathological sense of the term.
The complexity of tropical coastal resource systems significantly reduces vulnerability
to sudden economic misfortune and to community instability’.
Such complexity and vulnerability in the southeast Asian context depend on a host
of complex institutional arrangements. Local level property rights associated with
coastal resources, for example, are complex mixes of state, private and regulated and
unregulated commons, often nested within each other and all changing and evolving
over time (Walters, 1994; Adger and Luttrell, 2000). Vulnerability and resilience must
then be contextualized by these social and institutional factors. 
Coastal communities can be dependent to a greater or lesser degree on coastal
resources for their livelihood. These resources in themselves may be diverse and
incorporate tourism, fishing other extractive uses and transport. It is often argued that
coastal ecosystems themselves are either more resilient or more stable, and therefore
coastal communities are more resilient. But the economy is still reliant on a single
coastal system. If an oil spill affects a tourism beach then it will also affect fishing stocks
and have other ecological impacts. In the Straits of Malacca in peninsular Malaysia,
research by Dow (1999) has shown that those parts of a coastal community directly and
entirely dependent on fishing can experience major impacts from such extraordinary
events as oil spills. If the pollution stress is frequent and severe the fishing communities
have to cope with events which become ‘normal’ in their livelihood system (Dow, 1999).
But as Costanza and colleagues (1995) point out, the resilience of coastal and estuarine
systems may be high because of the diversity of functions which they perform, such as
rapid self-regulating and regenerating functions. Both the speed of recovery and the
buffer capacity of coastal seas following severe oil spills continually confound
ecologists. The resilience of coastal communities to hazard may therefore be enhanced
by the regenerating and absorptive capacity of the coastal ecosystems themselves.
Market variability is a key issue in the context of communities dependent on mineral
resources. But many resource-dependent communities in both agricultural and coastal
areas, particularly in the developing world, are partially buffered from such market
variability by their persistent subsistence activities. The resilience of such communities
can therefore be affected in both positive and negative ways by market integration.
Bayliss-Smith (1991: 7) attempts to demonstrate systematically the importance of
market integration, of the ‘modern agricultural economy’, in affecting the vulnerability
of both the physical ecosystems and society in the New Guinea Highlands. He finds
that vulnerability is socially differentiated. On the one hand market integration has
provided some groups with the opportunity for diversification of crops and hence has
contributed to drought-proofing their livelihoods. By contrast participants in rural
settlement schemes are more vulnerable to food insecurity due to their reliance on cash
crops, many of which are ecologically inappropriate and hence doubly insecure. At the
same time in Papua New Guinea, the social trends associated with market integration
are influencing the stability and resilience of mountainous and wetland ecosystems.
Bayliss-Smith (1991: 10) concludes that ‘the weakening of the connection [between food
security and environment] is perhaps the most insidious and threatening effect of
“development”, even though so far in the New Guinea Highlands case the effects on
food security at least have generally been positive’.
In contrast with this overall conclusion for the Papua New Guinea example,
monoculture cash crops have been argued to contribute to the undermining of many
W. Neil Adger
353
 at Yale University Library on March 17, 2010 
http://phg.sagepub.com
Downloaded from

----- Page 9 (native) -----
354
Social and ecological resilience: are they related?
traditional systems of coping with natural hazards. For example, when the cash-
integrated coconut economy has been decimated by hurricane in Samoa, the reciprocal
institutions of the ‘moral economy’ become even further stressed (Paulson, 1993). For
other forest-based communities in southeast Asia research demonstrates that
commercial logging and other market activities can reduce the resilience of such
communities (King, 1996), particularly when rapid market integration is exacerbated by
low levels of social capital and infrastructure. The fate of transmigrants in Papua New
Guinea alluded to above, as well as in Malaysia and Indonesia, demonstrates this vul-
nerability (Sage, 1996; Parnwell and King, 1998).
In summary the direct dependence of communities on ecosystems is an influence on
their social resilience and ability to cope with shocks, particularly in the context of food
security and coping with hazards. Resilience can be undermined by high variability (or
disturbance in ecological terms) in the market system or environmental system.
Resilience therefore depends on the diversity of the ecosystem as well as the institu-
tional rules which govern the social systems.
IV
Observing social resilience
Given this complex relationship between social resilience and dependency on natural
resources, a set of key parameters for observing social resilience can be developed.
Social resilience is institutionally determined, in the sense that institutions permeate all
social systems and institutions fundamentally determine the economic system in terms
of its structure and distribution of assets. Social resilience can therefore be examined
through proxy indicators, such as institutional change and economic structure, and
through demographic change, each of which are discussed briefly below.
1
Economic factors, institutions and resilience indicators
One key factor of the economic aspects of resilience is in the nature of economic growth
and the stability and distribution of income among populations. Dependency on a narrow
range of natural resources can increase the variance of income and hence decreases its
stability. This generally occurs for a number of reasons. First, resource dependency can
be risky for commercialized activities due both to the boom and bust nature of markets for
the outputs from resource use as well as to technological innovation threatening the
sustainability of economic activity, particularly in an era of globalization. For example,
Freudenburg (1992) shows that communities in the USA dependent on a single mineral
resource are often encouraged to diversify and avoid cyclical swings in their economies
associated with falling terms of trade for many minerals. But they are least able to
undertake such action. As alluded to above, technology, the distribution of mineral
resources across the landscape and labour mobility and training all contribute to this
rigidity and dependency.
Secondly, environmental variability can increase the risk of being dependent on
particular resources, through the incidence of extreme events in nature, such as drought
or flood, or from the impact of pests and diseases on agricultural systems. The
variability of global rice production, for example, has risen dramatically in the period
 at Yale University Library on March 17, 2010 
http://phg.sagepub.com
Downloaded from

----- Page 10 (native) -----
since the ‘green revolution’ which has decreased the genetic base of the world’s planted
rice crop, hence making production more reliant on a single variety and increasing
variance (Hazell, 1985). The impact of such trends in agricultural-dependent
communities is argued to be increasing vulnerability associated with this variability
(Conway and Barbier, 1988).
A further aspect of social resilience is therefore stability, particularly of livelihoods.
The insecurity of economic well-being, as measured through variance of income
sources, for example, is often argued to be not as important as growth in these income
sources when economies are stable. But much contemporary economic theory and
policy is increasingly based on the premise that economic growth itself is dependent on
institutions and social infrastructure (Ruttan, 1999). The stability of social systems in
themselves can be a contributing factor to induced innovation and technological
development. Further, it is argued that sustained economic growth is dependent on
capturing positive externalities from investment in human capital (Hayami and Ruttan,
1985; Stern, 1995). Both these sources of economic growth (human capital and techno-
logical development) are encouraged by stable social and economic circumstances. 
Further, there is increasing evidence that sustained economic growth is also
promoted by the equitable distribution of assets within populations, due to various
economic linkages. These linkages include the arguments made by Keynsian
economists that equitable wealth enhances aggregate demand within the economy
(Kim, 1997), and further evidence that the economic productivity of the workforce is
jeopardized by the consequences of large-scale inequality (Persson and Tabellini, 1994).
Other elements of resilience at the community level can be observed through proxies,
such as formal sector employment, recorded crime rates, and by demographic factors
(Machlis et al., 1990) or other culturally defined variables. These indicators allow
examination of links to changes in production of the resources on which communities
are ‘dependent’. But at the individual level, choices in livelihoods and social
investments are more likely to be observed through income and other variables such as
migration, which indicate stability at the household level. So, for example, Machlis and
colleagues (1990) find correlations at the community level between social variables and
resource production for forestry and mining resource-dependent communities in Idaho,
as shown in Figure 2. Yet they conclude that it is equally important to examine ‘coping
strategies employed both by communities and individual members to mitigate the
influence of production systems on the social order’ (Machlis et al., 1990: 421).
2
Demographic change and resilience indicators
Mobility and migration are a further set of important indicators of resilience. However,
resilience or changes in resilience cannot simply be inferred from the presence or
absence of migrants in any area or community; the degree of labour mobility; or an
increase or decrease in total population over time. Significant population movement
can be evidence of instability, or could be a component of enhanced stability and
resilience, depending on the type of migration. Migration and circular mobility occur for
a plethora of reasons. Displacement migration may be caused by a deleterious state of
affairs in the home locality (such as loss of assets) and often has negative impacts on
social infrastructure in both sending and receiving areas. 
W. Neil Adger
355
 at Yale University Library on March 17, 2010 
http://phg.sagepub.com
Downloaded from

----- Page 11 (native) -----
356
Social and ecological resilience: are they related?
Where migration is circular in nature and stimulated by the demand to move caused
by attractive circumstances elsewhere, often in urban areas, the resource flows
associated with remittances can often enhance resilience. Migration, whether circular or
in the form of displacement, has both economic and social dimensions. Neoclassical
economics generally models the migration decision as individual decisions or as
intertemporal family contracts for risk spreading and adaptation (Ruitenbeek, 1996;
Figure 2
Resource dependency and social impacts in Wallace and
Orinofo, Idaho. The fate of community resilience in Wallace (upper
panel) would appear to be related to gold prices: the number of
marriages in the town plotted against gold price. Similarly for Orinofo
(lower panel), the volatile timber harvest directly affects the only major
employment source in the town
Source: Machlis et al. 1990
 at Yale University Library on March 17, 2010 
http://phg.sagepub.com
Downloaded from

----- Page 12 (native) -----
W. Neil Adger
357
Crook, 1997). The impacts of migration strategies on the use of natural resources, and
environment, in both net immigration and net emigration areas have been highlighted
as a major research not well documented to date (O’Lear, 1997; Pebley, 1998; Adger and
O’Riordan, 2000). The most important aspect of population movement in the context of
indicators of stability and resource dependency is that of migration as a strategy for risk
spreading at the household level and the relationship of such migration to resource
dependency. 
Circular and seasonal migration are therefore important aspects of social stability. In
many parts of the agrarian world seasonal migration contributes to livelihood security
and resilience at the household level through remittances providing opportunities for
diversification and reduction of resource dependency. There is evidence to suggest that
remittance income tends to be invested in capital, both human and physical, rather than
used for immediate consumption (Crook, 1997). In other words, remittance income is
used to provide for long-term economic growth through investment in education or in
agricultural capital. Thus much circular migration reinforces the asset and wealth dis-
tribution in agrarian societies, rather than being a redistributive mechanism (e.g., Stark
et al., 1986).
But in the face of significant external stress population displacement is often an
indicator of the breakdown of social resilience. In the literature on food security, for
example, displacement and coping strategies represent an extreme manifestation of
vulnerability (Watts and Bohle, 1993). Coping strategies are actions taken by
households when faced with extreme food insecurity which might be caused by diverse
factors, from climatic extremes to wars. They are, in effect, short-term adjustments and
adaptations to extreme events, are usually involuntary and almost invariably lead to a
different subsequent state of vulnerability to future famine situations. 
Such coping strategies are postulated by Corbett (1988), in the context of African
evidence, to be strategies primarily concerned with maintaining the future income-
generating capacity of the household (as the decision-making unit) intact, rather than
maintaining current consumption. Evidence from Rajasthan in India presented by
Jodha (1975) confirms that the objectives of farmers’ adjustment mechanisms in the face
of food insecurity are to protect the assets and the sources of future income, rather than
current consumption, thereby providing further evidence of the stages of coping.
Interventions in such situations based on increasing consumption may ‘prove self
defeating and contribute to the process of pauperization initiated and accentuated by
recurrent droughts’ (Jodha, 1975: 1619). 
In summary, resilience, in both its social and ecological manifestations, is an
important aspect of the sustainability of development and resource utilization. Each of
these social and ecological aspects has several empirical indicators, but no single
indicator captures the totality of resilience. Social resilience can be examined, for
example, by reference to economic, demographic and institutional variables in both
temporal and spatial fashions. These themes are taken up in the following section in the
context of coastal resources. The case study example also demonstrates the opera-
tionalization of the analysis of social resilience characteristics of ecosystem change,
acknowledging the difficulty in analysing resilience at different scales.
 at Yale University Library on March 17, 2010 
http://phg.sagepub.com
Downloaded from

----- Page 13 (native) -----
358
Social and ecological resilience: are they related?
V
Mangrove conversion and the resilience of institutions in Vietnam
Throughout the tropics, mangroves are being converted to other uses, often at the
expense of local users. These intertidal forests provide multiple benefits from fisheries
through to coastal protection (see Barbier and Strand, 1998; Field et al., 1998; Tri et al.,
1998) and hence the resilience of these coastal ecosystems and the communities which
depend on them is directly intertwined. There are multiple causes of mangrove loss,
from conversion for agriculture to human settlement as well as degradation through
pollution (Farnsworth and Ellison, 1997), with each of these causes of mangrove
conversion being related to property rights issues and the institutions of management.
Traditional management systems for common pool resources are often undermined
by privatization and government policies, driven by the idea that private resources give
increasing returns compared to open access. However, even in situations of rapid
change, there are usually incipient property rights and rules which evolve to meet local
resource user needs: hence all coastal resources have some type of common
management, and the open access situation is very unusual (Ostrom et al., 1999). If
social institutions are resilient, then is it possible to observe whether the impact of
‘disturbance’ on them results in a similar state or leads to a completely new situation?
In Vietnam the global trends in mangrove conversion outlined above are also
observed. Vietnam has moved rapidly in the past decade from central planning to a
market-orientated economy through divesting the state of responsibility for production
and through privatizing much of its land, marine and other resources. Results from a
study involving ecosystem changes from agriculture to aquaculture in one region in
northern Vietnam (based on Adger et al., 2000) demonstrate that such decisions take
place within the political economy of local resource use, specifically the changes to
property rights and the imposition of external stress on local livelihood systems.
Conversion affects the resilience of the livelihood system dependent on the mangrove
resource: this can be investigated empirically through examination of property rights
and the dynamics of inequality and income sources. 
Given the complex set of state and collective institutions which manage mangroves,
it would seem that some parts of this institutional system may be more resilient than
others in the face of change. The major changes in Vietnam include a policy known his-
torically as ‘New Economic Zones’ (Thrift and Forbes, 1986) combined with the present-
day ascendancy of private property. These two policy contexts combined result in reset-
tlement, aquaculture and agricultural conversion of mangroves in Quang Ninh
Province in northern Vietnam (see also Sinh, 1998). The conversion of part of a
mangrove forest for agriculture and aquaculture purposes in Quang Ninh demonstrates
the potential impacts of conversion of mangroves when rights to the mangrove area are
overturned by state decree and conversion takes place at the expense of local
inhabitants.
Economic analysis of such a situation demonstrates one element of social resilience
by examining the impacts on two distinct stakeholder groups: agricultural settlers and
present extractive users. Adger et al., (2000) demonstrate that there is no economic case
for conversion, based on the distribution of costs and benefits, since the poorer
households are more dependent on mangroves and the richer households benefit from
conversion.
But what of the impact of mangrove loss on social resilience? The resilience of the
 at Yale University Library on March 17, 2010 
http://phg.sagepub.com
Downloaded from

----- Page 14 (native) -----
W. Neil Adger
359
communities dependent on the Quang Ninh mangroves is clearly affected by their loss.
The ability of the community to maintain sustainable common property management
of the remaining mangrove and fishing areas is undermined by the changes in property
rights and changes in inequality brought about by externally driven enclosure and
conversion. The prerequisites for common property management to be successful (e.g.,
Ostrom, 1990) include a reliance on the resource involved within the livelihood system
and a relatively homogeneous distribution of benefits within the user group. Thus
resilient common property management is enhanced through the users co-operating on
the basis of relatively equitable share of the benefits of use and the critical role of
the resource in their livelihood stability. The land converted to agriculture in Quang
Ninh is allocated by central government to farmers from outside the province as part
of the New Economic Zones strategy. In terms of the stability of income sources and the
perceived legitimization of the imposed property rights changes, resilience of the
existing local social systems would appear to be undermined.
The mangrove resources are important in the overall livelihood system of the coastal
communities, representing 11% of total consumption at the household level of
marketed and nonmarketed economic activity (Adger et al., 2000). This dependence on
coastal resources demonstrates one aspect of resource dependency leading to low
resilience at the household level: when the resource disappears the impact on
household livelihood security can be significant. However, the resilience at the
community level is also affected by such changes. Research among the households most
affected by conversion shows that due to the loss of part of the mangrove resource,
there is enhanced conflict over remaining resources (Table 1), leading to nonco-
operative exploitation of the mangrove fisheries. In addition, conversion to agriculture
and aquaculture in this case increases income inequality within the population, thereby
reducing the likelihood of co-operative action within a heterogeneous community.
This study of reduction in social resilience when mangroves are lost shows that the
necessary conditions for the persistence of common property management are
undermined by the process of conversion in this case. The ‘disturbance’ of the
institution undermined the social capital of collective management and resulted in a
breakdown of collective action for the remaining resource. This is demonstrated in this
study in Vietnam but also elsewhere – commentators from Central America to the
Philippines and Scandinavia have highlighted the negative social and ecological
impacts of aquaculture and mariculture (Folke and Kautsky, 1992; Kelly, 1996). 
Part of this story from Vietnam is related to the ecological resilience of the system.
Aquaculture relies on a narrow range of commercial species prone to pests. In addition
conversion of mangroves to aquaculture ponds actually increases the risk of inundation
and coastal flooding. This means that its higher returns for a smaller number of users
occur with less regularity and higher variance. In effect those entrepreneurs engaged in
aquaculture act with implicit high discounting of the future: they often abandon their
ponds after less than a decade. 
Thus the links between ecological and social resilience can be demonstrated. Social
institutions are subject to external pressures and shocks associated with both political
and economic change. The ability to absorb these changes depends on social capital but
also on the role of surprises and the characteristics of the resource system. In the case
of the privatization of the Vietnam mangroves the returns to aquaculture are much
greater than the alternatives of extraction of resources from the mangroves, mainly for
 at Yale University Library on March 17, 2010 
http://phg.sagepub.com
Downloaded from

----- Page 15 (native) -----
360
Social and ecological resilience: are they related?
subsistence. The distribution of these high financial returns from nonresilient
aquaculture has caused changes in the social organization for managing the remaining
mangroves: the common management has broken down and there is increasing
encroachment on to remaining mangrove areas as poorer households are squeezed out.
The interaction of the management of the coastal resources with the social system
forms a direct coevolving link between ecological and social resilience. The external
social driver, in this case land reclamation policy, directly results in ecosystem change
which feeds back to the productivity of the economic activity and the institutional
structures which manage them. The resilience of the management system governing
extraction of fish from remaining mangroves is dependent on the resilience of the
mangrove and fish stocks themselves to withstand increased fishing pressure. Further
aspects of social resilience could be examined through the indirect impact on migration
and changes in the livelihood system, and resulting disturbance to the natural resource
system.
VI
Conclusions
The examination of the resilience of institutions in the face of mangrove conversion in
the section above has highlighted important constraints in observing social resilience.
First, the study of interaction between mangroves and the communities dependent on
them suggests that mangrove conversion and agricultural privatization have had
Table 1
A comparison of resource dependency and aspects of resilience of settlers
and mangrove extractive users, Quang Ninh Province, Vietnam
Present extractive users
Agricultural settlers
Mangrove dependency
> 13% of livelihood
Low dependency on
sources dependent on
mangroves. Implementing
mangroves*
mangrove conversion to
aquaculture with higher
risk
Assets
Leased agricultural
Leased agricultural land and
holdings of 20–50 year
aquaculture plots (> 5
leases under the 1993 Land
ha for aquaculture). Also
Law (mean 0.42 ha)*
20–50 year leases
Property rights and social
Household land allocation
Exclusively private
institutions
has led to effective
holdings. Isolated from
privatization of mangroves.
existing social institutions
Breakdown of common
of settlements
pool resource management
in remaining mangrove
since partial conversion
Note
* imputed income and land areas based on representative household survey (n = 141).
Source: Adger et al. (2000).
 at Yale University Library on March 17, 2010 
http://phg.sagepub.com
Downloaded from

----- Page 16 (native) -----
negative impacts on local-level social resilience through undermining common
property institutions. Resilience is one of the most critical elements in the overall
resource management issue, yet this aspect is not easily assessed.
This article argues that social resilience is defined as the ability of communities to
withstand external shocks to their social infrastructure. This is particularly apposite for
resource-dependent communities where they are subject to external stresses and
shocks, both in the form of environmental variability (such as agricultural pests or the
impacts of climatic extremes), as well as in the form of social, economic and political
upheaval (associated with the variability of world markets for primary commodities, or
with rapid changes in property laws or state interventions). It is indeterminate whether
communities dependent on coastal resources, as have been discussed above, are
themselves inherently more resilient, despite the undoubted diversity of these social
and economic systems, and the ecological resilience of these areas. The centrality of
social resilience to sustainable development remains a critical question.
The issues of resilience and vulnerability are likely to become more important in the
framing of resource management questions in the future. They provide a bridge
between the analysis of institutions and economies with the natural resources in which
they ultimately depend. In policy terms these are also useful since both ecological
stability and resilience are perceived as desirable social goals for many issues, from
nature conservation through to climate change. It is argued by ecologists that resilience
in natural systems provides the capacity to cope with surprises and large-scale changes
– this is precisely what will allow innovation, coping with change and social learning
in social institutions.
Acknowledgements
Support by the UK Economic and Social Research Council, Global Environmental
Change Programme (Award no. L320253240) is gratefully acknowledged. An earlier
version of this article was presented at ‘Global change science in the coastal zone’, Third
Open Science Meeting of Land Ocean Interface in the Coastal Zone (LOICZ-IGBP),
Noordwijkerhout, The Netherlands, 10–13 October 1997. Thanks are due to Tim Bayliss-
Smith, Katrina Brown, Mick Kelly, Laure Ledoux, Cecilia Luttrell, Tim O’Riordan and
an anonymous referee for discussions and for helpful comments on earlier versions.
Errors and opinions remain my own responsibility.
W. Neil Adger
361
References
Adger, W.N. 1999: Social vulnerability to climate
change and extremes in coastal Vietnam. World
Development 27, 249–69.
Adger, W.N. and Kelly, P.M. 1990: Social vulner-
ability to climate change and the architecture
of entitlements. Mitigation and Adaptation
Strategies for Global Change 5, 4253–66.
Adger, W.N., Kelly, P.M., Ninh, N.H. and Thanh,
N.C. 2000 Property rights, institutions and
resource management: coastal resources under
the transition. In Adger, W.N., Kelly, P.M. and
Ninh, N.H., editors, Living with environmental
change: social vulnerability, adaptation and
resilience in Vietnam, London: Routledge, in
press. 
Adger, W.N. and Luttrell, C. 2000: Property
rights and the utilization of wetlands. Ecological
Economics in press.
Adger, W.N. and O’Riordan, T. 2000: Population,
adaptation and resilience. In O’Riordan, T.,
 at Yale University Library on March 17, 2010 
http://phg.sagepub.com
Downloaded from

----- Page 17 (native) -----
362
Social and ecological resilience: are they related?
editor, Environmental science for environmental
management, (2nd edn), London: Longman,
149–70.
Auty, R.M. 1997: Natural resource endowment,
the state and development strategy. Journal of
International Development 9, 651–63.
––––– 1998: Social sustainability in mineral-driven
development. 
Journal 
of 
International
Development 10, 487–500.
Bailey, C. and Pomeroy, C. 1996: Resource
dependency and development options in
coastal south east Asia. Society and Natural
Resources 9, 191–99. 
Barbier, E.B. and Strand, I. 1998: Valuing
mangrove fishery linkages: a case study of
Campeche, Mexico. Environmental and Resource
Economics 12, 151–66. 
Bayliss-Smith, T. 1991: Food security and agri-
cultural sustainability in the New Guinea
Highlands: vulnerable people, vulnerable
places. IDS Bulletin 22, 5–11.
Berkes, F. and Folke, C. 1998: Linking social and
ecological systems for resilience and sustain-
ability. In Berkes, F. and Folke, C., editors,
Linking social and ecological systems, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1–25.
Blaikie, P.M. and Brookfield, H. 1987: Land
degradation and society. London: Methuen.
Blaikie, P., Brown, K., Dixon, P., Sillitoe, P.,
Stocking, M. and Tang, L. 1997: Knowledge in
action: local knowledge as a development
resource and barriers to its incorporation in
natural resource research and development.
Agricultural Systems 55, 217–37.
Brown, K. 1997: Sustainable utilization: a grand
illusion? In Auty, R. and Brown, K., editors,
Approaches to sustainable development. London:
Pinter, 83–99.
Cantor, R. and Rayner, S. 1994: Changing
perceptions of vulnerability. In Socolow, R.,
Andrews, C., Berkhout, F. and Thomas, V.,
editors, Industrial ecology and global change,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
69–83. 
Chambers, R. 1989: Vulnerability, coping and
policy. IDS Bulletin 20, 1–7. 
Common, M. 1995: Sustainability and policy: limits
to economics. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Conway, G.R. and Barbier, E.B. 1988: After the
green revolution: sustainable and equitable
agricultural development. Futures 20, 651–70.
Corbett, J. 1988: Famine and household coping
strategies. World Development 16, 1099–112.
Costanza, R., Kemp, M. and Boynton, W. 1995:
Scale and biodiversity in estuarine ecosystems.
In Perrings, C., Mäler, K.G., Folke, C., Holling,
C.S. and Jansson, B.O., editors, Biodiversity loss:
economic and ecological issues, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 84–125.
Crook, N. 1997: Principles of population and
development. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cuc, L.T. and Rambo, A.T., editors, 1993: Too
many people, too little land: the human ecology of a
wet rice growing village in the Red River delta of
Vietnam. Occasional Paper 15. Honolulu, HA:
East-West Center.
Dow, K. 1999: The extraordinary and the
everyday in explanations of vulnerability to oil
spill. Geographical Review, in press.
Farnsworth, E.J. and Ellison, A.E. 1997: The
global conservation status of mangroves. Ambio
26, 328–34.
Field, C.B., Osborn, J.G., Hoffman, L.L.,
Polsenberg, J.F., Ackerley, D.D., Berry, J.A.,
Björkman, O., Held, A., Matson, P.A. and
Mooney, H.A. 1998: Mangrove biodiversity
and ecosystem function. Global Ecology and
Biogeography Letters 7, 3–14.
Folke, C. and Kautsky, N. 1992: Aquaculture with
its environment: prospects for sustainability.
Ocean and Coastal Management 17, 5–24.
Freudenburg, W.R. 1992: Addictive economies:
extractive industries and vulnerable localities
in a changing world economy. Rural Sociology
57, 305–32. 
Gadgil, M., Berkes, F. and Folke, C. 1993:
Indigenous knowledge for biodiversity conser-
vation. Ambio 22, 151–56.
Gunderson, L.H., Holling, C.S., Pritchard, L. and
Peterson, G.D. 1997: Resilience in ecosystems,
institutions and societies. Discussion Paper 95.
Stockholm: Beijer International Institute of
Ecological Economics.
Harriss, J. and de Renzio, P. 1997: Missing link or
analytically missing? The concept of social
capital. A bibliographic essay. Journal of
International Development 9, 919–37.
Hayami, Y. and Ruttan, V.W. 1985: Agricultural
development: an international perspective (2nd
edn). Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University
Press.
Hazell, P.B.R. 1985: Sources of increased
variability in world cereal production since the
1960s. Journal of Agricultural Economics 36,
145–59. 
Holling, C.S. 1986: The resilience of terrestrial
ecosystems: local surprise and global change.
 at Yale University Library on March 17, 2010 
http://phg.sagepub.com
Downloaded from

----- Page 18 (native) -----
W. Neil Adger
363
In Clark, W.C. and Munn, R.E., editors,
Sustainable 
development 
of 
the 
biosphere,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
292–317.
––––– 1995: What barriers? What bridges? In
Gunderson, L., Holling, C.S. and Light, S.S.,
editors, Barriers and bridges to the renewal of
ecosystems and institutions, New York: Columbia
University Press, 14–36.
Holling, C.S. and Sanderson, S. 1996: Dynamics
of (dis)harmony in ecological and social
systems. In Hanna, S.S., Folke, C. and Mäler,
K.G., editors, Rights to nature, Washington DC:
Island Press, 57–85.
Holling, C.S., Schindler, D.W., Walker, B.W.
and Roughgarden, J. 1995: Biodiversity in the
functioning of ecosystems: an ecological
synthesis. In Perrings, C., Mäler, K.G., Folke, C.,
Holling, C.S. and Jansson, B.O., editors,
Biodiversity loss: economic and ecological issues,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
44–83.
Jodha, N.S. 1975: Famine and famine policies:
some empirical evidence. Economic and Political
Weekly 10, 1609–23.
Kasperson, J.X., Kasperson, R.E. and Turner, B.L.
1996: Regions at risk: exploring environmental
criticality. Environment 38(10), 4–15, 26–29. 
Kasperson, R.E., Kasperson, J.X., Turner, B.L.,
Dow, K. and Meyer, W.B. 1995: Critical envi-
ronmental regions: concepts, distinctions and
issues. In Kasperson, J.X., Kasperson, R.E. and
Turner, B.L., editors, Regions at risk: comparisons
of threatened environments, Tokyo: United
Nations University Press, 1–41.
Kates, 
R.W. 
and
Clark, 
W.C. 
1996:
Environmental surprise: expecting the un-
expected. Environment 38, 6–11, 28–34.
Kelly, P.F. 1996: Blue Revolution or red herring?
Fish farming and development discourse in the
Philippines. Asia Pacific Viewpoint 37, 39–57.
Kim, K.S. 1997: Income distribution and poverty:
an 
interregional 
comparison. 
World
Development 25, 1909–24.
King, V.T. 1996: Environmental change in
Malaysian Borneo: fire, drought and rain. In
Parnwell, M.J.G. and Bryant, R.L., editors,
Environmental change in south east Asia: people,
politics and sustainable development, London:
Routledge, 165–89.
Klein, R.J.T., Smit, M.J., Goosen, H. and
Hulsbergen, C.H. 1998: Resilience and vulner-
ability: coastal dynamics or Dutch dikes?
Geographical Journal 164, 259–68.
Levin, S., Barrett, S., Aniyar, S., Baumol, W.,
Bliss, C., Bolin, B., Dasgupta, P., Ehrlich, P.,
Folke, C., Gren, I.M., Holling, C.S., Jansson,
A.M., Jansson, B.O., Mäler, K.G., Martin, D.,
Perrings, C. and
Sheshinski, E. 1998:
Resilience in natural and socio-economic
systems. 
Environment 
and 
Development
Economics 3, 222–35.
Machlis, G.E. and Force, J.E. 1988: Community
stability and timber dependent communities.
Rural Sociology 53, 221–34.
Machlis, G.E., Force, J.E. and Burch, W.R. 1990:
Timber, minerals and social change: an
exploratory test of two resource dependent
communities. Rural Sociology 55, 411–24. 
Mooney, H.A. and Ehrlich, P.R. 1997: Ecosystem
services: a fragmentary history. In Daily, G.,
editor, Nature’s services: societal dependence on
natural ecosystems. Washington DC: Island
Press, 11–19.
Naemm, S., Thompson, L.J., Lawler, S.P.,
Lawton, J.H. and
Woodfin, R.M. 1994:
Declining biodiversity can alter the per-
formance of ecosystems. Nature 368, 734–37.
Norgaard, R.B. 1994: Development betrayed: the end
of progress and a coevolutionary revisioning of the
future. London: Routledge. 
O’Lear, S. 1997: Migration and the environment:
a review of recent literature. Social Science
Quarterly 78, 606–18.
O’Riordan, T., Cooper, C.L., Jordan, A., Rayner,
S., Richards, K.R., Runci, P. and Yoffe, S. 1998:
Institutional frameworks for political action. In
Rayner, S. and Malone, E., editors, Human choice
and climate change. Volume 1. The societal
framework, Washington, DC: Battelle Press,
345–439. 
Ostrom, E. 1990: Governing the commons.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ostrom, E., Burger, J., Field, C.B., Norgaard, R.B.
and
Policansky, D. 1999: Revisiting the
commons: local lessons, global challenges.
Science 284, 278–82.
Parnwell, 
M.J.G. 
and
King, 
V.T. 
1998:
Environmental 
changes 
and 
population
movements: the Iban of Sarawak. In King, V.T.,
editor, Environmental challenges in south east
Asia. London: Curzon, 137–68.
Paulson, D.D. 1993: Hurricane hazard in western
Samoa. Geographical Review 83, 43–53.
Pebley, A.R. 1998: Demography and the
environment. Demography 35, 377–89.
Pelling, M. 1998: Participation, social capital and
 at Yale University Library on March 17, 2010 
http://phg.sagepub.com
Downloaded from

----- Page 19 (native) -----
364
Social and ecological resilience: are they related?
vulnerability to urban flooding in Guyana.
Journal of International Development 10, 469–86.
Peluso, N.L., Humphrey, C.R. and Fortmann, L.P.
1994: The rock, the beach and the tidal pool:
people and poverty in natural resource
dependent areas. Society and Natural Resources
7, 23–38. 
Perrings, C. 1996: Ecological resilience in the sus-
tainability of economic development. In
Faucheux, S., Pearce, D. and Proops, J., editors,
Models of sustainable development, Cheltenham:
Edward Elgar, 231–52.
Persson, T. and Tabellini, G. 1994: Is inequality
harmful for growth? American Economic Review
84, 600–21.
Pimm, S.L. 1984: The complexity and stability of
ecosystems. Nature 307, 321–26.
Pritchard Jr., L., Colding, J., Berkes, F., Svedin,
U. and Folke, C. 1998: The problem of fit between
ecosystems and institutions. IHDP Working Paper
2. Bonn: International Human Dimensions
Program.
Ruitenbeek, H. J. 1996: Distribution of ecological
entitlements: 
implications 
for 
economic
security and population movement. Ecological
Economics 17, 49–64.
Ruttan, V.W. 1999: The new growth theory and
development economics: a survey. Journal of
Development Studies 35, 1–26.
Sage, C.L. 1996: The search for sustainable
livelihoods in Indonesian transmigration
settlements. In Parnwell, M.J.G. and Bryant,
R.L., editors, Environmental change in south east
Asia: people, politics and sustainable development,
London: Routledge, 97–122.
Schulze, E.-D. and Mooney, H.A., editors, 1993:
Biodiversity and ecosystem function. Berlin:
Springer Verlag.
Sinh, B.T. 1998: Environmental policy and
conflicting interests: coal mining, tourism and
livelihoods in Quang Ninh Province. In Hirsch,
P. and Warren, C., editors, The politics of
environment in south east Asia, London:
Routledge, 159–77.
Stark, O., Taylor, J.E. and Yitzhaki, S. 1986:
Remittances and inequality. Economic Journal
96, 722–40.
Stern, N. 1995: Growth theories, old and new and the
role of agriculture in economic development.
Economic and Social Development Paper 136.
Rome: FAO.
Thrift, N. and Forbes, D. 1986: The price of war:
urbanization in Vietnam 1954–85. London: Allen
& Unwin.
Tilman, D. 1997: Biodiversity and ecosystem
functioning. In Daily, G.C., editor, Nature’s
services: societal dependence on natural ecosystems,
Washington, DC: Island Press, 93–112.
Tri, N.H., Adger, W.N. and Kelly, P.M. 1998:
Natural resource management in mitigating
climate impacts: mangrove restoration in
Vietnam. Global Environmental Change 8, 49–61.
Walters, J.S. 1994: Coastal common property
regimes in southeast Asia. In Borgese, E.M.,
Ginsburg, N. and Morgan, J.R., editors, Ocean
yearbook 11, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press, 304–27. 
Watts, M.J. and Bohle, H.G. 1993: The space of
vulnerability: the causal structure of hunger
and famine. Progress in Human Geography 17,
43–67.
Zimmerer, K.S. 1994: Human geography and the
new ecology: the prospect and promise of
integration. Annals of the Association of American
Geographers 84, 108–25.
 at Yale University Library on March 17, 2010 
http://phg.sagepub.com
Downloaded from