

----- Page 1 (native) -----
Expert Panel on Integrated Guidelines for
Cardiovascular Health and Risk Reduction in Children
and Adolescents: Summary Report
1. INTRODUCTION
Atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (CVD) remains the leading cause
of death in North Americans, but manifest disease in childhood and ado-
lescence is rare. By contrast, risk factors and risk behaviors that acceler-
ate the development of atherosclerosis begin in childhood, and there is
increasingevidencethatriskreductiondelaysprogressiontowardclinical
disease. In response, the former director of the National Heart, Lung, and
BloodInstitute(NHLBI),DrElizabethNabel,initiateddevelopmentofcardio-
vascular health guidelines for pediatric care providers based on a formal
evidence review of the science with an integrated format addressing all
themajorcardiovascularriskfactorssimultaneously.Anexpertpanelwas
appointed to develop the guidelines in the fall of 2006.
Thegoaloftheexpertpanelwastodevelopcomprehensiveevidence-based
guidelinesthataddresstheknownriskfactorsforCVD(Table1-1)toassist
all primary pediatric care providers in both the promotion of cardio-
vascular health and the identiﬁcation and management of speciﬁc risk
factors from infancy into young adult life. An innovative approach was
needed, because a focus on cardiovascular risk reduction in children
and adolescents addresses a disease process (atherosclerosis) in
which the clinical end point of manifest CVD is remote. The recommen-
dations, therefore, need to address 2 different goals: the prevention of
risk-factor development (primordial prevention) and the prevention of
future CVD by effective management of identiﬁed risk factors (primary
prevention).
The evidence review also required an innovative approach. Most sys-
tematic evidence reviews include 1 or, at most, a small number of ﬁnite
questions that address the impact of speciﬁc interventions on speciﬁc
health outcomes, and a rigorous literature review often results in only
a handful of in-scope articles for inclusion. Typically, evidence is limited
to randomized controlled trials (RCTs), systematic reviews, and meta-
analyses published over a deﬁned time period. There is a deﬁned for-
mat for abstracting studies, grading the evidence, and presenting of
results. The results of the review lead to the conclusions, independent
of interpretation.
By contrast, given the scope of the charge to the expert panel, this
evidence review needed to address a broad array of questions con-
cerning the development, progression, and management of multiple
risk factors extending from birth through 21 years of age, including
studies with follow-up into later adult life. The time frame extended
back to 1985, 5 years before the review for the last NHLBI guideline
addressing lipids in children published in 1992.1 This evidence is
largely available in the form of epidemiologic observational studies
EXPERT PANEL ON INTEGRATED GUIDELINES FOR
CARDIOVASCULAR HEALTH AND RISK REDUCTION IN
CHILDREN AND ADOLESCENTS
ABBREVIATIONS
CVD—cardiovascular disease
NHLBI—National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute
RCT—randomized controlled trial
PDAY—Pathobiological Determinants of Atherosclerosis in
Youth
BP—blood pressure
HDL—high-density lipoprotein
DM—diabetes mellitus
CIMT—carotid intima-media thickness
LDL—low-density lipoprotein
T1DM—type 1 diabetes mellitus
T2DM—type 2 diabetes mellitus
TC—total cholesterol
AAP—American Academy of Pediatrics
DGA—Dietary Guidelines for Americans
NCEP—National Cholesterol Education Program
DASH—Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension
CHILD—Cardiovascular Health Integrated Lifestyle Die
FLP—fasting lipid proﬁle
CDC—Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
AMA—American Medical Association
MCHB—Maternal and Child Health Bureau
FDA—Food and Drug Administration
AHA—American Heart Association
www.pediatrics.org/cgi/doi/10.1542/peds.2009-2107C
doi:10.1542/peds.2009-2107C
Accepted for publication Sep 8, 2011
Address correspondence to Janet M. de Jesus, MS, RD, 31
Center Dr, Building 31, Room 4A17, MSC 2480, Bethesda, MD
20892. E-mail: dejesusjm@nhlbi.nih.gov
PEDIATRICS (ISSN Numbers: Print, 0031-4005; Online, 1098-4275).
Copyright © 2011 by the American Academy of Pediatrics
FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE: Dr Daniels has served as a consultant
for Abbott Laboratories, Merck, and Schering-Plough and has
received funding/grant support for research from the National
Institutes of Health (NIH); Dr Gidding has served as a consultant
for Merck and Schering-Plough and has received funding/grant
support for research from GlaxoSmithKline; Dr Gillman has
given invited talks for Nestle Nutrition Institute and Danone and
has received funding/grant support for research from Mead
Johnson, Sanoﬁ-Aventis, and the NIH; Dr Gottesman has served
on the Health Advisory Board, Child Development Council of
Franklin County, was a consultant to Early Head Start for Region
5B, has written for iVillage and taught classes through Garrison
(Continued on last page)
SUPPLEMENT ARTICLES
PEDIATRICS Volume 128, Supplement 5, December 2011
S213

----- Page 2 (native) -----
(rather than RCTs) that, therefore,
must be included in the review. In ad-
dition, the review required critical ap-
praisal of the body of evidence that ad-
dresses the impact of managing risk
factors in childhood on the develop-
ment and progression of atherosclero-
sis. Because of known gaps in the evi-
dence base relating risk factors and
risk reduction in childhood to clinical
events in adult life, the review must in-
clude the available evidence that justi-
ﬁes evaluation and treatment of risk
factors in childhood. The process of
identifying, assembling, and organiz-
ing the evidence was extensive, the re-
view process was complex, and the
conclusions could only be developed
by interpretation of the body of evi-
dence. Even with inclusion of every rel-
evant study from the evidence review,
there were important areas in which
the evidence was inadequate. When
this occurred, recommendations were
made on the basis of a consensus of
the expert panel. The schema used in
grading the evidence appears in Ta-
bles 1-2 and 1-3; expert consensus
opinions are identiﬁed as grade D.
The NHLBI expert panel integrated
guidelines for cardiovascular health
and risk reduction in children and ad-
olescents contain recommendations
based on the evidence review and are
directed toward all primary pediatric
care providers: pediatricians, family
practitioners, nurses and nurse prac-
titioners, physician assistants, and
registered dietitians. The full report
contains complete background infor-
mation on the state of the science,
methodology of the evidence review
and the guideline-development pro-
cess, summaries of the evidence re-
views according to risk factor, discus-
sion of the expert panel’s rationale for
recommendations, and 1000 cita-
tions from the published literature and
is
available
at
www.nhlbi.nih.gov/
guidelines/cvd_ped/index.htm.
The
complete evidence tables will be avail-
able as a direct link from that site. This
summary report presents the expert
panel’s recommendations for patient
care relative to cardiovascular health
and risk-factor detection and manage-
ment with only the references cited in
the text provided. It begins with a state-
of-the-science synopsis of the evi-
dence, which indicates that athero-
sclerosis begins in childhood, and the
extent of atherosclerosis is linked di-
rectly to the presence and intensity of
known risk factors. This is followed by
a cardiovascular health schedule (Sec-
tion 3), which summarizes the expert
panel’s age-based recommendations
according to risk factor in a 1-page pe-
riodic table. Risk factor speciﬁc sec-
tions follow, with the graded conclu-
sions of the evidence review, normative
tables, and age-speciﬁc recommenda-
tions. These recommendations are often
accompanied by supportive actions,
which represent expert consensus sug-
gestions from the panel provided to sup-
port implementation of the recommen-
dations. The summary report will be
released simultaneously with online
availability of the full report with refer-
ences for each section and the evidence
tables at www.nhlbi.nih.gov/guidelines/
cvd_ped/index.htm.
It is the hope of the NHLBI and the expert
panel that these recommendations will be
usefulforallthosewhoprovidecardiovas-
cular health care to children.
2. STATE OF THE SCIENCE:
CARDIOVASCULAR RISK FACTORS
AND THE DEVELOPMENT OF
ATHEROSCLEROSIS IN CHILDHOOD
Atherosclerosis begins in youth, and this
process, from its earliest phases, is re-
latedtothepresenceandintensityofthe
known
cardiovascular
risk
factors
shown in Table 1-1. Clinical events such
as myocardial infarction, stroke, pe-
ripheral arterial disease, and rup-
tured aortic aneurysm are the culmi-
nation of the lifelong vascular process
of atherosclerosis. Pathologically, the
process begins with the accumulation
of abnormal lipids in the vascular in-
tima, a reversible stage, progresses to
an advanced stage in which a core of
extracellular lipid is covered by a ﬁbro-
muscular cap, and culminates in
thrombosis, vascular rupture, or acute
ischemic syndromes.
Evidence Linking Risk Factors in
Childhood to Atherosclerosis at
Autopsy
Atherosclerosis at a young age was
ﬁrst identiﬁed in Korean and Vietnam
TABLE 1-1 Evaluated Risk Factors
Family history
Age
Gender
Nutrition/diet
Physical inactivity
Tobacco exposure
BP
Lipid levels
Overweight/obesity
Diabetes mellitus
Predisposing conditions
Metabolic syndrome
Inﬂammatory markers
Perinatal factors
TABLE 1-2 Evidence Grading System: Quality Grades
Grade
Evidence
A
Well-designed RCTs or diagnostic studies performed on a population similar to the guideline’s
target population
B
RCTs or diagnostic studies with minor limitations; genetic natural history studies;
overwhelmingly consistent evidence from observational studies
C
Observational studies (case-control and cohort design)
D
Expert opinion, case reports, or reasoning from ﬁrst principles (bench research or animal
studies)
Adapted from American Academy of Pediatrics, Steering Committee on Quality Improvement and Management. Pediatrics.
2004;114(3):874–877.
S214
EXPERT PANEL

----- Page 3 (native) -----
War casualties. Two major contempo-
rary studies, the Pathobiological De-
terminants of Atherosclerosis in Youth
(PDAY) study2 and the Bogalusa Heart
Study,3 subsequently evaluated the ex-
tent of atherosclerosis in children, ad-
olescents, and young adults who died
accidentally. The Bogalusa study3 mea-
sured
cardiovascular
risk
factors
(lipid levels, blood pressure [BP], BMI,
and tobacco use) as part of a compre-
hensive school-based epidemiologic
study in a biracial community. These
results were related to atherosclero-
sis measured at autopsy after acciden-
tal death. Strong correlations were
shown between the presence and in-
tensity of risk factors and the extent
and severity of atherosclerosis. In the
PDAY study,2 risk factors and surro-
gate measures of risk factors were
measured after death in 15- to 34-year
olds who died accidentally of external
causes. Strong relationships were
found between atherosclerotic sever-
ity
and
extent,
and
age,
non–
high-density lipoprotein (HDL) choles-
terol, HDL cholesterol, hypertension
(determined by renal artery thick-
ness), tobacco use (thiocyanate con-
centration), diabetes mellitus (DM)
(glycohemoglobin), and (in men) obe-
sity. There was a striking increase in
both severity and extent as age and the
number of risk factors increased. By
contrast, the absence of risk factors
was shown to be associated with a vir-
tual absence of advanced atheroscle-
rotic lesions, even in the oldest sub-
jects in the study.
Evidence Linking Risk Factors in
Childhood to Atherosclerosis
Assessed Noninvasively
Over the last decade, measures of sub-
clinical atherosclerosis have devel-
oped, including the demonstration of
coronary calcium on electron beam
computed tomography imaging, in-
creased carotid intima-media thick-
ness (CIMT) assessed with ultrasound,
endothelial dysfunction (reduced arte-
rial dilation) with brachial ultrasound
imaging, and increased left ventricular
mass with cardiac ultrasound. These
measures have been assessed in
young people with severe abnormali-
ties of individual risk factors:
●In adolescents with a marked eleva-
tion of low-density lipoprotein (LDL)
cholesterol level caused by familial
heterozygous hypercholesterolemia,
abnormal levels of coronary calcium,
increased CIMT, and impaired endo-
thelial function have been found.
●Children with hypertension have
been shown to have increased CIMT,
increased left ventricular mass, and
eccentric left ventricular geometry.
●Children with type 1 DM (T1DM) have
signiﬁcantly abnormal endothelial
function and, in some studies, in-
creased CIMT.
●Children and young adults with a
family history of myocardial infarc-
tion have increased CIMT, higher
prevalence of coronary calcium,
and endothelial dysfunction.
●Endothelial dysfunction has been
shown by ultrasound and plethys-
mography in association with ciga-
rette smoking (passive and active)
TABLE 1-3 Evidence Grading System: Strength of Recommendations
Statement Type
Deﬁnition
Implication
Strong recommendation
The expert panel believes that the beneﬁts of the recommended approach
clearly exceed the harms and that the quality of the supporting
evidence is excellent (grade A or B). In some clearly deﬁned
circumstances, strong recommendations may be made on the basis of
lesser evidence when high-quality evidence is impossible to obtain and
the anticipated beneﬁts clearly outweigh the harms.
Clinicians should follow a strong recommendation
unless a clear and compelling rationale for an
alternative approach is present.
Recommendation
The expert panel feels that the beneﬁts exceed the harms but that the
quality of the evidence is not as strong (grade B or C). In some clearly
deﬁned circumstances, recommendations may be made on the basis of
lesser evidence when high-quality evidence is impossible to obtain and
when the anticipated beneﬁts clearly outweigh the harms.
Clinicians should generally follow a
recommendation but remain alert to new
information and sensitive to patient
preferences.
Optional
Either the quality of the evidence that exists is suspect (grade D) or well-
performed studies (grade A, B, or C) have found little clear advantage
to one approach versus another.
Clinicians should be ﬂexible in their decision-
making regarding appropriate practice,
although they may set boundaries on
alternatives; patient and family preference
should have a substantial inﬂuencing role.
No recommendation
There is both a lack of pertinent evidence (grade D) and an unclear
balance between beneﬁts and harms.
Clinicians should not be constrained in their
decision-making and be alert to new published
evidence that clariﬁes the balance of beneﬁt
versus harm; patient and family preference
should have a substantial inﬂuencing role.
Adapted from American Academy of Pediatrics, Steering Committee on Quality Improvement and Management. Pediatrics. 2004;114(3):874–877.
SUPPLEMENT ARTICLES
PEDIATRICS Volume 128, Supplement 5, December 2011
S215

----- Page 4 (native) -----
and obesity. In obese children, im-
provement in endothelial function
occurs with regular exercise.
●Left ventricular hypertrophy at lev-
els associated with excess mortality
in adults has been found in children
with severe obesity.
Four longitudinal studies have found re-
lationships of risk factors measured in
youth (speciﬁcally LDL cholesterol, non-
HDL cholesterol and serum apolipopro-
teins, obesity, hypertension, tobacco
use, and DM) with measures of subclini-
cal atherosclerosis in adulthood. In
many of these studies, risk factors mea-
sured in childhood and adolescence
were better predictors of the severity of
adultatherosclerosisthanwereriskfac-
torsmeasuredatthetimeofthesubclin-
ical atherosclerosis study.
Evidence Linking Risk Factors in
Childhood to Clinical CVD
The most important evidence relating
risk in youth to clinical CVD is the ob-
served association of risk factors for
atherosclerosis to clinically manifest
cardiovascular conditions. Genetic dis-
orders related to high cholesterol are
the biological model for risk-factor im-
pact on the atherosclerotic process.
With homozygous hypercholesterol-
emia, in which LDL cholesterol levels
exceed 800 mg/dL beginning in infancy,
coronary events begin in the ﬁrst de-
cade of life and life span is severely
shortened. With heterozygous hyper-
cholesterolemia, in which LDL choles-
terol levels are minimally 160 mg/dL
and typically 200 mg/dL and total
cholesterol (TC) levels exceed 250
mg/dL beginning in infancy, 50% of
men and 25% of women experience
clinical coronary events by the age of
50. By contrast, genetic traits associ-
ated with low cholesterol are associ-
ated with longer life expectancy. In the
PDAY study,2 every 30 mg/dL increase
in non-HDL cholesterol level was asso-
ciated with a visible incremental in-
crease in the extent and severity of
atherosclerosis.
In
natural-history
studies of DM, early CVD mortality is so
consistently observed that the pres-
ence of DM is considered evidence of
vascular disease in adults. Consonant
with this evidence, in 15- to 19-year
olds in the PDAY study, the presence of
hyperglycemia was associated with
the demonstration of advanced ath-
erosclerotic lesions of the coronary
arteries. In the PDAY study, there was
also a strong relationship between ab-
dominal aortic atherosclerosis and to-
bacco use. Finally, in a 25-year follow-
up, the presence of the metabolic
syndrome risk-factor cluster in child-
hood predicted clinical CVD in adult
subjects at 30 to 48 years of age.4
The Impact of Racial/Ethnic
Background and Socioeconomic
Status in Childhood on the
Development of Atherosclerosis
CVD has been observed in diverse geo-
graphic areas and all racial and ethnic
backgrounds.
Cross-sectional
re-
search in children has found differ-
ences according to race and ethnicity
and according to geography for preva-
lence of cardiovascular risk factors;
these differences are often partially
explained by differences in socioeco-
nomic status. No group within the
United States is without a signiﬁcant
prevalence of risk. Several longitudi-
nal cohort studies referenced exten-
sively in this report (Bogalusa Heart
Study,3 the PDAY study,2 and the Coro-
nary Artery Risk Development in Young
Adults [CARDIA] study5) have included
racially diverse populations, and other
studies have been conducted outside
the United States. However, longitudi-
nal data on Hispanic, Native American,
and Asian children are lacking. Clini-
cally important differences in preva-
lence of risk factors exist according to
race and gender, particularly with re-
gard to tobacco-use rates, obesity
prevalence, hypertension, and dyslipi-
demia. Low socioeconomic status in
and of itself confers substantial risk.
However, evidence is not adequate for
the recommendations provided in this
report to be speciﬁc to racial or ethnic
groups or socioeconomic status.
The Impact of Risk-Factor
Clustering in Childhood on the
Development of Atherosclerosis
From a population standpoint, cluster-
ing of multiple risk factors is the most
common association with premature
atherosclerosis. The pathologic stud-
ies reviewed above clearly showed
that the presence of multiple risk fac-
tors is associated with striking evi-
dence of an accelerated atheroscle-
rotic
process.
Among
the
most
prevalent multiple-risk combinations
are the use of tobacco with 1 other risk
factor and the development of obesity,
which is often associated with insulin
resistance, elevated triglyceride lev-
els, reduced HDL cholesterol levels,
and elevated BP, a combination known
in adults as the metabolic syndrome.
There is ample evidence from both
cross-sectional and longitudinal stud-
ies that the increasing prevalence of
obesity in childhood is associated with
the same obesity-related risk-factor
clustering seen in adults and that it
continues into adult life. This high-risk
combination is among the reasons
that the current obesity epidemic with
its relationship to future CVD and DM is
considered one of the most important
public health challenges in contempo-
rary society. One other prevalent
multiple-risk combination is the asso-
ciation of low cardiorespiratory ﬁt-
ness (identiﬁed in 33.6% of adoles-
cents in the National Health and
Nutrition Examination Surveys [NHANES]
from 1999 to 20026) with overweight
and obesity, elevated TC level and sys-
tolic BP, and a reduced HDL cholesterol
level.
S216
EXPERT PANEL

----- Page 5 (native) -----
Risk-Factor Tracking From
Childhood Into Adult Life
Tracking studies from childhood to
adulthood have been performed for all
the major risk factors.
●Obesity tracks more strongly than
any other risk factor; among many
reports from studies that have dem-
onstrated this fact, one of the most
recent is from the Bogalusa study,7
in which 2000 children were fol-
lowed from initial evaluation at 5 to
14 years of age to adult follow-up at
a mean age of 27 years. On the basis
of BMI percentiles derived from the
study population, 84% of those with
a BMI in the 95th to 99th percentile
as children were obese as adults,
and all of those with a BMI at the
99th percentile were obese in
adulthood. Increased correlation is
seen with increasing age at which
the elevated BMI occurs.
●For cholesterol and BP, tracking
correlation coefﬁcients in the range
of 0.4 have been reported consis-
tently from many studies, correlat-
ing these measures in children 5 to
10 years of age with results 20 to 30
years later. These data suggest that
having cholesterol or BP levels in
the upper portion of the pediatric
distribution makes having them as
adult risk factors likely but not cer-
tain. Those who develop obesity
have been shown to be more likely
to develop hypertension or dyslipi-
demia as adults.
●Tracking data on physical ﬁtness
are more limited. Physical activity
levels do track but not as strongly
as other risk factors.
●By its addictive nature, tobacco use
persists into adulthood, although
50% of those who have ever
smoked eventually quit.
●T1DM is a lifelong condition.
●The insulin resistance of T2DM can be
alleviated by exercise, weight loss, and
bariatricsurgery,butthelong-termout-
come of those with T2DM diagnosed in
childhood is not known.
●As already discussed, risk-factor
clusters such as those seen with
obesity and the metabolic syndrome
have been shown to track from
childhood into adulthood.
CVD Prevention Beginning in Youth
The rationale for these guidelines
comes from the following evidence.
●Atherosclerosis, the pathologic ba-
sis for clinical CVD, originates in
childhood.
●Risk factors for the development of
atherosclerosis can be identiﬁed in
childhood.
●Development and progression of
atherosclerosis clearly relates to
the number and intensity of cardio-
vascular risk factors, which begin in
childhood.
●Risk factors track from childhood
into adult life.
●Interventions exist for the manage-
ment of identiﬁed risk factors.
The evidence for the ﬁrst 4 bullet
points is reviewed in this section, and
the evidence surrounding interven-
tions for identiﬁed risk factors is ad-
dressed in the risk-factor–speciﬁc
sections of the guideline to follow.
It is important to distinguish between
the goals of prevention at a young age
and those at older ages in which ath-
erosclerosis is well established, mor-
bidity may already exist, and the pro-
cess is only minimally reversible. At a
young age, there have historically been
2 goals of prevention: (1) prevent the
development of risk factors (primor-
dial prevention); and (2) recognize and
manage those children and adoles-
cents who are at increased risk as a
result of the presence of identiﬁed risk
factors (primary prevention). It is well
established that a population that en-
ters adulthood with lower risk will
have less atherosclerosis and will col-
lectively have lower CVD rates. This
concept is supported by research that
has found that (1) societies with low
levels of cardiovascular risk factors
have low CVD rates and that changes
in risk in those societies are associ-
ated with a change in CVD rates, (2)
in adults, control of risk factors
leads to a decline in morbidity and
mortality from CVD, and (3) those
without childhood risk have minimal
atherosclerosis at 30 to 34 years of
age, absence of subclinical athero-
sclerosis as young adults, extended
life expectancy, and a better quality
of life free from CVD.
The Pathway to Recommending
Clinical Practice-Based Prevention
The most direct means of establishing
evidence for active CVD prevention be-
ginning at a young age would be to ran-
domly
assign
young
people
with
deﬁned risks to treatment of cardio-
vascular risk factors or to no treat-
ment and follow both groups over
sufﬁcient time to determine if cardio-
vascular events are prevented without
undue increase in morbidity arising
from treatment. This direct approach
is intellectually attractive, because
atherosclerosis prevention would be-
gin at the earliest stage of the disease
process and thereby maximize the
beneﬁt. However, this approach is as
unachievable as it is attractive, pri-
marily because such studies would be
extremely expensive and would be sev-
eral decades in duration, a time period
in which changes in environment and
medical practice would diminish the
relevance of the results.
The recognition that evidence from
this direct pathway is unlikely to be
achieved requires an alternative step-
wise approach in which segments of
an evidence chain are linked in a man-
ner that serves as a sufﬁciently rigor-
ous proxy for the causal inference of a
SUPPLEMENT ARTICLES
PEDIATRICS Volume 128, Supplement 5, December 2011
S217

----- Page 6 (native) -----
clinical trial. The evidence reviewed in
this section provides the critical ratio-
nale for cardiovascular prevention be-
ginning in childhood: atherosclerosis
begins in youth; the atherosclerotic
process relates to risk factors that can
be identiﬁed in childhood; and the
presence of these risk factors in a
given child predicts an adult with risk
if no intervention occurs. The remain-
ing evidence links pertain to the dem-
onstration that interventions to lower
risk will have a health beneﬁt and that
the risk and cost of interventions to
improve risk are outweighed by the re-
duction in CVD morbidity and mortal-
ity. These issues are captured in the
evidence reviews of each risk factor.
The recommendations reﬂect a com-
plex decision process that integrates
the strength of the evidence with
knowledge of the natural history of
atherosclerotic vascular disease, esti-
mates of intervention risk, and the phy-
sician’s responsibility to provide both
health education and effective disease
treatment. These recommendations
for those caring for children will be
most effective when complemented by
a broader public health strategy.
The Childhood Medical Ofﬁce Visit
as the Setting for Cardiovascular
Health Management
One cornerstone of pediatric care is
placing clinical recommendations in a
developmental context. Those who
make
pediatric
recommendations
must consider not only the relation of
age to disease expression but the abil-
ity of the patient and family to under-
stand and implement medical advice.
For each risk factor, recommenda-
tions must be speciﬁc to age and devel-
opmental stage. The Bright Futures
concept of the American Academy of
Pediatrics8 (AAP) is used to provide a
framework for these guidelines with
cardiovascular risk-reduction recom-
mendations for each age group.
This document provides recommenda-
tions for preventing the development
of risk factors and optimizing cardio-
vascular health, beginning in infancy,
that are based on the results of the
evidence review. Pediatric care provid-
ers (pediatricians, family practitio-
ners, nurses, nurse practitioners,
physician assistants, registered dieti-
tians) are ideally positioned to rein-
force cardiovascular health behaviors
as part of routine care. The guideline
also offers speciﬁc guidance on pri-
mary prevention with age-speciﬁc,
evidence-based recommendations for
individual risk-factor detection. Man-
agement algorithms provide staged
care recommendations for risk reduc-
tion within the pediatric care setting
and identify risk-factor levels that re-
quire specialist referral. The guide-
lines also identify speciﬁc medical con-
ditions such as DM and chronic kidney
disease that are associated with in-
creased risk for accelerated athero-
sclerosis.
Recommendations
for
ongoing cardiovascular health man-
agement for children and adolescents
with these diagnoses are provided.
A cornerstone of pediatric care is the
provision of health education. In the US
health care system, physicians and
nurses are perceived as credible mes-
sengers for health information. The
childhood health maintenance visit
provides an ideal context for effective
delivery of the cardiovascular health
message. Pediatric care providers
provide an effective team educated to
initiate behavior change to diminish
risk of CVD and promote lifelong car-
diovascular health in their patients
from infancy into young adult life.
3. CARDIOVASCULAR HEALTH
SCHEDULE (p. S219)
4. FAMILY HISTORY OF EARLY
ATHEROSCLEROTIC CVD
A family history of CVD represents the
net effect of shared genetic, biochemi-
cal, behavioral, and environmental
components. In adults, epidemiologic
studies have found that a family his-
tory of premature coronary heart dis-
ease in a ﬁrst-degree relative (heart
attack, treated angina, percutaneous
coronary catheter interventional pro-
cedure, coronary artery bypass sur-
gery, stroke, or sudden cardiac death
in a male parent or sibling before the
age of 55 years or a female parent or
sibling before the age of 65 years) is an
important independent risk factor for
future CVD. The process of atheroscle-
rosis is complex and involves many ge-
netic loci and multiple environmental
and personal risk factors. Nonethe-
less, the presence of a positive paren-
tal history has been consistently found
to signiﬁcantly increase baseline risk
for CVD. The risk for CVD in offspring is
strongly inversely related to the age of
the parent at the time of the index
event. The association of a positive
family history with increased cardio-
vascular risk has been conﬁrmed for
men, women, and siblings and in dif-
ferent racial and ethnic groups. The ev-
idence review identiﬁed all RCTs, sys-
tematic reviews, meta-analyses, and
observational studies that addressed
family history of premature athero-
sclerotic disease and the development
and progression of atherosclerosis
from childhood into young adult life.
Conclusions and Grading of the
Evidence Review for the Role of
Family History in Cardiovascular
Health
●
Evidence from observational stud-
ies strongly supports inclusion of a
positive family history of early coro-
nary heart disease in identifying
children at risk for accelerated ath-
erosclerosis and for the presence of
an abnormal risk proﬁle (grade B).
●For adults, a positive family history
is deﬁned as a parent and/or sibling
with a history of treated angina,
S218
EXPERT PANEL

----- Page 7 (native) -----
3. INTEGRATED CARDIOVASCULAR HEALTH SCHEDULE
Risk Factor
Age
Birth to 12 mo
1–4 y
5–9 y
9–11 y
12–17 y
18–21 y
Family
history of
early CVD
—
At 3 y, evaluate family history for
early CVD: parents, grand-
parents, aunts/uncles, men
55 y old, women 65 y old;
review with parents and refer
as needed; positive family
history identiﬁes children for
intensive CVD RF attention
Update at each nonurgent health
encounter
Reevaluate family history for early
CVD in parents, grandparents,
aunts/uncles, men 55 y old,
women 65 y old
Update at each nonurgent health
encounter
Repeat family-history evaluation with
patient
Tobacco
exposure
Advise smoke-free home;
offer smoking-cessation
assistance or referral
to parents
Continue active antismoking
advice with parents; offer
smoking-cessation assistance
and referral as needed
Obtain smoke exposure history
from child Begin active
antismoking advice with child
Assess smoking status of child;
active antismoking counseling
or referral as needed
Continue active antismoking
counseling with patient; offer
smoking-cessation assistance or
referral as needed
Reinforce strong antismoking message;
offer smoking-cessation assistance or
referral as needed
Nutrition/diet
Support breastfeeding as
optimal to 12 mo of age
if possible; add formula
if breastfeeding
decreases or stops
before 12 mo of age
At age 12–24 mo, may change to
cow’s milk with 2%
percentage of fat decided by
family and pediatric care
provider; after 2 y of age,
fat-free milk for all; juice 4
oz/d; transition to CHILD-1
diet by the age of 2 y
Reinforce CHILD-1 diet messages
Reinforce CHILD-1 diet messages
as needed
Obtain diet information from child
and use to reinforce healthy diet
and limitations and provide
counseling as needed
Review healthy diet with patient
Growth,
overweight/
obesity
Review family history for
obesity; discuss weight-
for-height tracking,
growth chart, and
healthy diet
Chart height/weight/BMI;
classify weight-by BMI from
age 2 y; review with parent
Chart height/weight/BMI and
review with parent; BMI 
85th percentile, crossing
percentiles: Intensify diet/
activity focus for 6 mo; if no
change: RD referral, manage
per obesity algorithms
Chart height/weight/BMI and
review with parent and child;
BMI  85th percentile,
crossing percentiles: Intensify
diet/activity focus for 6 mo; if
no change: RD referral,
manage per obesity
algorithms; BMI  95th
percentile: manage per obesity
algorithms
Chart height/weight/BMI and review
with child and parent; BMI 85th
percentile, crossing percentiles:
intensify diet/activity focus for 6
mo; if no change: RD referral,
manage per obesity algorithms;
BMI  95th percentile, manage
per obesity algorithms
Review height/weight/BMI and norms for
health with patient; BMI  85th
percentile, crossing percentiles:
intensify diet/activity focus for 6 mo;
if no change: RD referral, manage per
obesity algorithms; BMI  95th
percentile, manage per obesity
algorithms
BMI  95th percentile, manage
per obesity algorithms
Lipids
No routine lipid screening
Obtain FLP only if family history
for CVD is positive, parent has
dyslipidemia, child has any
other RFs or high-risk
condition
Obtain FLP only if family history
for CVD is positive, parent
has dyslipidemia, child has
any other RFs or high-risk
condition
Obtain universal lipid screen with
nonfasting non-HDL  TC 
HDL, or FLP: manage per lipid
algorithms as needed
Obtain FLP if family history newly
positive, parent has
dyslipidemia, child has any other
RFs or high-risk condition;
manage per lipid algorithms as
needed
Measure 1 nonfasting non–HDL or FLP in
all: review with patient; manage with
lipid algorithms per ATP as needed
BP
Measure BP in infants with
renal/urologic/cardiac
diagnosis or history of
neonatal ICU
Measure BP annually in all from
the age of 3 y; chart for age/
gender/height percentile and
review with parent
Check BP annually and chart for
age/gender/height: review
with parent; workup and/or
management per BP
algorithm as needed
Check BP annually and chart for
age/gender/height: review with
parent, workup and/or
management per BP algorithm
as needed
Check BP annually and chart for
age/gender/height: review with
adolescent and parent, workup
and/or management per BP
algorithm as needed
Measure BP: review with patient;
evaluate and treat per JNC guidelines
Physical
activity
Encourage parents to
model routine activity;
no screen time before
the age of 2 y
Encourage active play; limit
sedentary/screen time to 2
h/d; no TV in bedroom
Recommend MVPA of 1 h/d;
limit screen/sedentary time
to 2 h/d
Obtain activity history from child:
recommend MVPA of 1 h/d
and screen/sedentary time of
2 h/d
Use activity history with adolescent
to reinforce MVPA of 1 h/d and
leisure screen time of 2 h/d
Discuss lifelong activity, sedentary time
limits with patient
Diabetes
—
—
—
Measure fasting glucose level per
ADA guidelines; refer to
endocrinologist as needed
Measure fasting glucose level per
ADA guidelines; refer to
endocrinologist as needed
Obtain fasting glucose level if indicated;
refer to endocrinologist as needed
All algorithms and guidelines in this schedule are included in this summary report. RF indicates risk factor; RD, registered dietitian; ATP, Adult Treatment Panel III (“Third Report of the Expert Panel on Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood
Cholesterol in Adults”); JNC, Joint National Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure; MVPA, moderate-to-vigorous physical activity; ADA, American Diabetes Association.
The full and summary reports of the Expert Panel on Integrated Guidelines for Cardiovascular Health and Risk Reduction in Children and Adolescents can also be found on the NHLBI Web site (www.nhlbi.nih.gov).
SUPPLEMENT ARTICLES
PEDIATRICS Volume 128, Supplement 5, December 2011
S219

----- Page 8 (native) -----
myocardial infarction, percutane-
ous coronary catheter interven-
tional procedure, coronary artery
bypass grafting, stroke, or sudden
cardiac death before 55 years in
men or 65 years in women. Because
the parents and siblings of children
and adolescents are usually young
themselves, it was the panel con-
sensus that when evaluating family
history of a child, history should
also be ascertained for the occur-
rence of CVD in grandparents,
aunts, and uncles, although the evi-
dence supporting this recommen-
dation is insufﬁcient to date (grade
D).
●Identiﬁcation of a positive family
history for cardiovascular disease
and/or cardiovascular risk fac-
tors should lead to evaluation of
all family members, especially
parents, for cardiovascular risk
factors (grade B).
●Family history evolves as a child ma-
tures, so regular updates are a nec-
essary part of routine pediatric
care (grade D).
●Education about the importance of
accurate
and
complete
family
health information should be part of
routine care for children and ado-
lescents. As genetic sophistication
increases, linking family history to
speciﬁc genetic abnormalities will
provide important new knowledge
about the atherosclerotic process
(grade D).
Recommendations for the use of fam-
ily history in cardiovascular health
promotion are listed in Table 4-1.
5. NUTRITION AND DIET
The 2010 Dietary Guidelines for Ameri-
cans (DGA)8 include important recom-
mendations for the population aged 2
years and older. In 1992, the National
Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP)
Pediatric Panel report1 provided di-
etary recommendations for all chil-
dren as part of a population-based ap-
proach to reducing cardiovascular
risk. Evidence relative to diet and the
development of atherosclerosis in
childhood and adolescence was identi-
ﬁed by the evidence review for this
guideline and, collectively, provides
the rationale for new dietary preven-
tion efforts initiated early in life.
This new pediatric cardiovascular
guideline not only builds on the recom-
mendations for achieving nutrient ad-
equacy in growing children as stated
in the 2010 DGA but also adds evidence
regarding the efﬁcacy of speciﬁc di-
etary changes in reducing cardiovas-
cular risk from the current evidence
review for use by pediatric care pro-
viders in the care of their patients. Be-
cause the focus of these guidelines is
on cardiovascular risk reduction, the
evidence review speciﬁcally evaluated
dietary fatty acid and energy compo-
nents as major contributors to hyper-
cholesterolemia and obesity, as well
as dietary composition and micronu-
trients as they affect hypertension.
New evidence from multiple dietary tri-
als that addressed cardiovascular risk
reduction in children has provided
important
information
for
these
recommendations.
Conclusions and Grading of the
Evidence Review for Diet and
Nutrition in Cardiovascular Risk
Reduction
The expert panel concluded that there
is strong and consistent evidence that
good nutrition beginning at birth has
profound health beneﬁts and the po-
tential to decrease future risk for CVD.
The expert panel accepts the 2010 DGA8
as containing appropriate recommen-
dations for diet and nutrition in chil-
dren aged 2 years and older. The rec-
ommendations in these guidelines are
intended for pediatric care providers
to use with their patients to address
cardiovascular risk reduction. The
conclusions of the expert panel’s re-
view of the entire body of evidence in a
speciﬁc nutrition area with grades are
summarized. Where the evidence is in-
adequate yet nutrition guidance is
needed, recommendations for pediat-
ric care providers are based on a con-
sensus of the expert panel (grade D).
The age- and evidence-based recom-
mendations of the expert panel follow.
In accordance with the Surgeon Gen-
eral’sOfﬁce,theWorldHealthOrgani-
zation, the AAP, and the American
Academy of Family Physicians, exclu-
sive breastfeeding is recommended
for the ﬁrst 6 months of life. Contin-
ued breastfeeding is recommended
to at least 12 months of age with the
addition of complementary foods. If
breastfeeding per se is not possible,
feeding human milk by bottle is sec-
ond best, and formula-feeding is the
third choice.
●Long-term follow-up studies have
found that subjects who were breast-
fed have sustained cardiovascular
health beneﬁts, including lower cho-
lesterol levels, lower BMI, reduced
prevalence of type 2 DM, and lower
CIMT in adulthood (grade B).
●Ongoing nutrition counseling has
been effective in assisting children
and families to adopt and sustain
recommended diets for both nutri-
ent adequacy and reducing cardio-
vascular risk (grade A).
●Within appropriate age- and gender-
based requirements for growth and
nutrition, in normal children and in
children with hypercholesterolemia
intake of total fat can be safely lim-
ited to 30% of total calories, satu-
rated fat intake limited to 7% to 10%
of calories, and dietary cholesterol
limited to 300 mg/day. Under the
guidance of qualiﬁed nutritionists,
this dietary composition has been
shown to result in lower TC and LDL
S220
EXPERT PANEL

----- Page 9 (native) -----
cholesterol levels, less obesity, and
less insulin resistance (grade A).
Under similar conditions and with
ongoing follow-up, these levels of fat
intake might have similar effects
starting in infancy (grade B). Fats
are important to infant diets be-
cause of their role in brain and cog-
nitive development. Fat intake for in-
fants younger than 12 months
should not be restricted without
medical indication.
●The remaining 20% of fat intake
should comprise a combination of
monosaturated
and
polyunsatu-
rated fats (grade D). Intake of trans
fats should be limited as much as
possible (grade D).
●For adults, the current NCEP guide-
lines9 recommend that adults con-
sume 25% to 35% of calories from
fat. The 2010 DGA supports the Insti-
tute of Medicine recommendations
for 30% to 40% of calories from fat
for ages 1 to 3 years, 25% to 35% of
calories from fat for ages 4 to 18
years, and 20% to 35% of calories
from fat for adults. For growing chil-
dren, milk provides essential nutri-
ents, including protein, calcium,
magnesium, and vitamin D, that are
not readily available elsewhere in
the diet. Consumption of fat-free
milk in childhood after 2 years of
age and through adolescence opti-
mizes these beneﬁts without com-
promising nutrient quality while
avoiding excess saturated fat and
calorie intake (grade A). Between
the ages of 1 and 2 years, as chil-
dren transition from breast milk or
formula, reduced-fat milk (ranging
from 2% milk to fat-free milk) can be
used on the basis of the child’s
growth, appetite, intake of other
nutrient-dense
foods,
intake
of
other sources of fat, and risk for
obesity and CVD. Milk with reduced
fat should be used only in the con-
text of an overall diet that supplies
30% of calories from fat. Dietary in-
tervention should be tailored to
each speciﬁc child’s needs.
●Optimal intakes of total protein and
total carbohydrate in children were
not speciﬁcally addressed, but with
a recommended total fat intake of
30% of energy, the expert panel rec-
ommends that the remaining 70% of
calories include 15% to 20% from
protein and 50% to 55% from carbo-
hydrate sources (no grade). These
recommended ranges fall within
the acceptable macronutrient dis-
tribution range speciﬁed by the
2010 DGA: 10% to 30% of calories
from protein and 45% to 65% of cal-
ories from carbohydrate for chil-
dren aged 4 to 18 years.
●Sodium intake was not addressed by
theevidencereviewforthissectionon
nutrition and diet. From the evidence
review for the “High BP” section,
lower sodium intake is associated
with lower systolic and diastolic BP in
infants, children, and adolescents.
●Plant-based foods are important low-
calorie sources of nutrients including
vitamins and ﬁber in the diets of chil-
dren; increasing access to fruits and
vegetables has been shown to in-
crease their intake (grade A). How-
ever, increasing fruit and vegetable
intake is an ongoing challenge.
●Reduced intake of sugar-sweetened
beverages is associated with de-
creased obesity measures (grade B).
Speciﬁc information about fruit juice
intake is too limited for an evidence-
based recommendation. Recommen-
dations for intake of 100% fruit juice
by infants was made by a consensus
of the expert panel (grade D) and are
in agreement with those of the AAP.
●Per the 2010 DGA, energy intake
should not exceed energy needed
for adequate growth and physical
activity. Calorie intake needs to
match growth demands and physi-
cal activity needs (grade A). Esti-
mated calorie requirements ac-
cording to gender and age group at
3 levels of physical activity from the
dietary guidelines are shown in Ta-
ble 5-2. For children of normal
weight whose activity is minimal,
most calories are needed to meet nu-
tritional requirements, which leaves
only 5% to 15% of calorie intake
from extra calories. These calories
can be derived from fat or sugar
added to nutrient-dense foods to al-
lowtheirconsumptionassweets,des-
serts, or snack foods (grade D).
●Dietary ﬁber intake is inversely as-
sociated with energy density and in-
creased levels of body fat and is pos-
itively
associated
with
nutrient
density (grade B); a daily total di-
etary ﬁber intake from food sources
of at least age plus 5 g for young
children up to 14 g/1000 kcal for
older children and adolescents is
recommended (grade D).
●The expert panel supports the 2008
AAP recommendation for vitamin D
supplementation with 400 IU/day for
all infants and children.10 No other
vitamin, mineral, or dietary supple-
ments are recommended (grade D).
The new recommended daily allow-
ance for vitamin D for those aged 1
to 70 years is 600 IU/day.
●Use of dietary patterns modeled on
those shown to be beneﬁcial for
adults (eg, Dietary Approaches to
Stop Hypertension [DASH] pattern)
is a promising approach to improv-
ing nutrition and decreasing cardio-
vascular risk (grade B).
●All diet recommendations must be
interpreted for each child and fam-
ily to address individual diet pat-
terns and patient sensitivities such
as lactose intolerance and food al-
lergies (grade D).
Graded,
age-speciﬁc
recommenda-
tions for pediatric care providers to
SUPPLEMENT ARTICLES
PEDIATRICS Volume 128, Supplement 5, December 2011
S221

----- Page 10 (native) -----
use
in
optimizing
cardiovascular
health in their patients are summa-
rized in Table 5-1. The Cardiovascular
Health
Integrated
Lifestyle
Diet
(CHILD-1) is the ﬁrst stage in dietary
change for children with identiﬁed dys-
lipidemia, overweight and obesity,
risk-factor clustering, and high-risk
medical conditions that might ulti-
mately require more intensive dietary
change. CHILD-1 is also the recom-
mended diet for children with a posi-
tive family history of early cardiovas-
cular disease, dyslipidemia, obesity,
primary hypertension, DM, or expo-
sure to smoking in the home. Any di-
etary modiﬁcation must provide nutri-
ents and calories needed for optimal
growth and development (Table 5-2).
Recommended intakes are adequately
met by a DASH-style eating plan, which
emphasizes fat-free/low-fat dairy and
increased intake of fruits and vegeta-
bles. This diet has been modiﬁed for
use in children aged 4 years and older
on the basis of daily energy needs ac-
cording to food group and is shown in
Table 5-3 as an example of a heart-
healthy eating plan using CHILD-1
recommendations.
6. PHYSICAL ACTIVITY
Physical activity is any bodily move-
ment produced by contraction of skel-
etal muscle that increases energy ex-
penditure above a basal level. Physical
activity can be focused on strengthen-
ing muscles, bones, and joints, but be-
cause these guidelines address car-
diovascular
health,
the
evidence
review concentrated on aerobic activ-
ity and on the opposite of activity: sed-
entary behavior. There is strong evi-
dence for beneﬁcial effects of physical
activity and disadvantageous effects of
a sedentary lifestyle on the overall
health of children and adolescents
across a broad array of domains. Our
review focused on the effects of activ-
ity on cardiovascular health, because
physical inactivity has been identiﬁed
as an independent risk factor for cor-
onary heart disease in adults. Over the
last several decades, there has been a
steady decrease in the amount of time
that children spend being physically
active and an accompanying increase
in time spent in sedentary activities. The
evidence review identiﬁed many studies
inyouthranginginagefrom4to21years
that strongly linked increased time
spent in sedentary activities with re-
duced overall activity levels, disadvanta-
geous lipid proﬁles, higher systolic BP,
higherlevelsofobesity,andhigherlevels
of all the obesity-related cardiovascular
risk factors including hypertension, in-
sulin resistance, and type 2 DM.
Conclusions and Grading of the
Evidence Review for Physical
Activity
The expert panel felt that the evidence
strongly supports the role of physical
activity in optimizing cardiovascular
health in children and adolescents.
●There is reasonably good evidence
that physical activity patterns estab-
lished in childhood are carried for-
ward into adulthood (grade C).
●There is strong evidence that in-
creases
in
moderate-to-vigorous
physical activity are associated with
lower systolic and diastolic BP, de-
creased measures of body fat, de-
creased BMI, improved ﬁtness mea-
sures, lower TC level, lower LDL
cholesterol level, lower triglyceride
level, higher HDL cholesterol level,
and decreased insulin resistance in
childhood and adolescence (grade
A).
●There is limited but strong and con-
sistent evidence that physical exer-
cise interventions improve subclini-
cal measures of atherosclerosis
(grade B).
●Physical activity patterns, dietary
choices, and smoking behaviors
cluster together (grade C).
TABLE 4-1 Evidence-Based Recommendations for Use of Family History in Cardiovascular
Health Promotion
Birth to 18 y Take detailed family history of CVD at initial encounter and/or at 3,
9–11, and 18 ya
Grade B
Recommend
If positive family history identiﬁed, evaluate patient for other
cardiovascular risk factors, including dyslipidemia, hypertension,
DM, obesity, history of smoking, and sedentary lifestyle
If positive family history and/or cardiovascular risk factors identiﬁed,
evaluate family, especially parents, for cardiovascular risk factors
Grade B
Recommend
Update family history at each nonurgent health encounter
Grade D
Recommend
Use family history to stratify risk for CVD risk as risk proﬁle evolves
Grade D
Recommend
Supportive action: educate parents about the importance of family
history in estimating future health risks for all family members
18 to 21 y
Review family history of heart disease with young adult patient
Grade B
Strongly recommend
Supportive action: educate patient about family/personal risk for
early heart disease, including the need for evaluation for all
cardiovascular risk factors
Grades reﬂect the ﬁndings of the evidence review; recommendation levels reﬂect the consensus opinion of the expert
panel; and supportive actions represent expert consensus suggestions from the expert panel provided to support
implementation of the recommendations (they are not graded).
a “Family” includes parent, grandparent, aunt, uncle, or sibling with heart attack, treated angina, coronary artery bypass
graft/stent/angioplasty, stroke, or sudden cardiac death at 55 y in males and 65 y in females.
S222
EXPERT PANEL

----- Page 11 (native) -----
TABLE 5-1 Evidence-Based Recommendations for Diet and Nutrition: CHILD-1
Birth to 6 mo
Infants should be exclusively breastfed (no supplemental formula or other foods) until the age of 6 moa
Grade B
Strongly recommend
6 to 12 mo
Continue breastfeeding until at least 12 mo of age while gradually adding solids; transition to iron-
fortiﬁed formula until 12 mo if reducing breastfeedinga
Grade B
Strongly recommend
Fat intake in infants 12 mo of age should not be restricted without medical indication
Grade D
Recommend
Limit other drinks to 100% fruit juice (4 oz/d); no sweetened beverages; encourage water
Grade D
recommend
12 to 24 mo
Transition to reduced-fatb (2% to fat-free) unﬂavored cow’s milkc (see supportive actions)
Grade B
Recommend
Limit/avoid sugar-sweetened beverage intake; encourage water
Grade B
Strongly recommend
Transition to table food with:
Total fat 30% of daily kcal/EERd
Grade B
Recommend
Saturated fat 8%–10% of daily kcal/EER
Grade B
Recommend
Avoid trans fat as much as possible
Grade D
Strongly recommend
Monounsaturated and polyunsaturated fat up to 20% of daily kcal/EER
Grade D
recommend
Cholesterol  300 mg/d
Grade B
Strongly recommend
Supportive actions
The fat content of cow’s milk to introduce at 12–24 mo of age should be decided together by parents
and health care providers on the basis of the child’s growth, appetite, intake of other nutrient-dense
foods, intake of other sources of fat, and potential risk for obesity and CVD
100% fruit juice (from a cup), no more than 4 oz/d
Limit sodium intake
Consider DASH-type diet rich in fruits, vegetables, whole grains, and low-fat/fat-free milk and milk
products and lower in sugar (Table 5-3)
2 to 10 y
Primary beverage: fat-free unﬂavored milk
Grade A
Strongly recommend
Limit/avoid sugar-sweetened beverages; encourage water
Grade B
Recommend
Fat content:
Total fat 25%–30% of daily kcal/EER
Grade A
Strongly recommend
Saturated fat 8%–10% of daily kcal/EER
Grade A
Strongly recommend
Avoid trans fats as much as possible
Grade D, recommend
Monounsaturated and polyunsaturated fat up to 20% of daily kcal/EER
Grade D
Recommend
Cholesterol  300 mg/d
Grade A
Strongly Recommend
Encourage high dietary ﬁber intake from foodse
Grade B
recommend
Supportive actions:
Teach portions based on EER for age/gender/age (Table 5-2)
Encourage moderately increased energy intake during periods of rapid growth and/or regular
moderate-to-vigorous physical activity
Encourage dietary ﬁber from foods: age  5 g/de
Limit naturally sweetened juice (no added sugar) to 4 oz/d
Limit sodium intake
Support DASH-style eating plan (Table 5-3)
11 to 21 y
Primary beverage: fat-free unﬂavored milk
Grade A
Strongly recommend
Limit/avoid sugar-sweetened beverages; encourage water
Grade B
Recommend
SUPPLEMENT ARTICLES
PEDIATRICS Volume 128, Supplement 5, December 2011
S223

----- Page 12 (native) -----
●There is no evidence of harm asso-
ciated with increased physical activ-
ity or limitation of sedentary activity
in healthy children (grade A).
●There is strong evidence that physi-
cal activity should be promoted in
schools (grade A).
There is less speciﬁc information on
the type and amount of physical exer-
cise required for optimum cardiovas-
cular health. Reported activity inter-
ventions ranged from 20 to 60 minutes,
2 to 5 times per week in children aged
3 to 17 years and included a wide vari-
ety of dynamic and isometric exer-
cises.
Extrapolating
from
these
interventions, which occurred in su-
pervised settings, to the real world of
childhood and adolescence, the ex-
pert panel recommends at least 1
hour of moderate-to-vigorous activ-
ity every day of the week for children
older than 5 years (Table 6-1). In
agreement with the “Physical Activity
Guidelines Advisory Committee Re-
TABLE 5-2 Estimated Calorie Needs per Day by Age, Gender, and Physical Activity Levela
Gender
Age
(Years)
Calorie Requirements (kcals) by Activity Levelb
Sedentary
Moderately
Active
Active
Child
2–3
1000–1200
1000–1400c
1000–1400c
Femaled
4–8
1200–1400
1400–1600
1400–1800
9–13
1400–1600
1600–2000
1800–2200
14–18
1800
2000
2400
19–30
1800–2000
2000–2200
2400
Male
4–8
1200–1400
1400–1600
1600–2000
9–13
1600–2000
1800–2200
2000–2600
14–18
2000–2400
2400–2800
2800–3200
19–30
2400–2600
2600–2800
3000
Estimated amounts of calories needed to maintain caloric balance for various gender and age groups at three different
levels of physical activity. The estimates are rounded to the nearest 200 calories. An individual’s calorie needs may be higher
or lower than these average estimates.
a Based on Estimated Energy Requirements (EER) equations, using reference heights (average) and reference weights
(health) for each age/gender group. For children and adolescents, reference height and weight vary. For adults, the
reference man is 5 feet 10 inches tall and weighs 154 pounds. The reference woman is 5 feet 4 inches tall and weighs 126
pounds. EER equations are from the Institute of Medicine. Dietary Reference Intakes for Energy, Carbohydrate, Fiber, Fat,
Fatty Acids, Cholesterol, Protein, and Amino Acids. Washington (DC): The National Academies Press; 2002.
b Sedentary means a lifestyle that includes only the light physical activity associated with typical day-to-day life. Moderately
active means a lifestyle that includes physical activity equivalent to walking 1.5 to 3 miles per day at 3 to 4 miles per hour,
in addition to the light physical activity associated with typical day-to-day life. Active means a lifestyle that includes physical
activity equivalent to walking 3 miles per day at 3 to 4 miles per hour, in addition to the light physical activity associated
with typical day-to-day life.
c The calorie ranges shown are to accommodate needs of different ages within the group. For children and adolescents,
more calories are needed at older ages. For adults, fewer calories are needed at older ages.
d Estimates for females do not include women who are pregnant or breastfeeding.
Reproduced with permission from Institute of Medicine. Dietary Reference Intakes for Energy, Carbohydrate, Fiber, Fat,
Fatty Acids, Cholesterol, Protein, and Amino Acids. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2002:175–182.
TABLE 5-1 Continued
Fat content:
Total fat 25%–30% of daily kcal/EERd
Grade A
Strongly recommend
Saturated fat 8%–10% of daily kcal/EER
Grade A
Strongly recommend
Avoid trans fat as much as possible
Grade D
Recommend
Monounsaturated and polyunsaturated fat up to 20% of daily kcal/EER
Grade D
Recommend
Cholesterol  300 mg/d
Grade A
Strongly recommend
Encourage high dietary ﬁber intake from foodse
Grade B
Recommend
Supportive actions:
Teach portions based on EER for age/gender/activity (Table 5-2)
Encourage moderately increased energy intake during periods of rapid growth and/or regular
moderate-to-vigorous physical activity
Advocate dietary ﬁber: goal of 14 g/1000 kcale
Limit naturally sweetened juice (no added sugar) to 4–6 oz/d
Limit sodium intake
Encourage healthy eating habits: breakfast every day, eating meals as a family, limiting fast-food meals
Support DASH-style eating plan (Table 5-3)
Grades reﬂect the ﬁndings of the evidence review; recommendation levels reﬂect the consensus opinion of the expert panel. Supportive actions represent expert consensus suggestions
from the expert panel provided to support implementation of the recommendations; they are not graded. EER indicates estimated energy requirement.
a Infants who cannot be fed directly at the breast should be fed expressed milk. Infants for whom expressed milk is not available should be fed iron-fortiﬁed infant formula.
b For toddlers 12 to 24 mo of age with a family history of obesity, heart disease, or high cholesterol, parents should discuss transition to reduced-fat milk with pediatric care provider after
12 months of age.
c Continued breastfeeding is still appropriate and nutritionally superior to cow’s milk. Reduced-fat milk should be used only in the context of an overall diet that supplies 30% of calories from fat.
d Estimated energy requirements per day for age/gender (Table 5-2).
e Naturally ﬁber-rich foods are recommended (fruits, vegetables, whole grains); ﬁber supplements are not advised. Limit reﬁned carbohydrates (sugars, white rice, and white bread).
S224
EXPERT PANEL

----- Page 13 (native) -----
TABLE 5-3 DASH Eating Plan: Servings per Day According to Food Group and Total Energy Intake
Food Group
No. of Servings
Serving Size
Examples and Notes
Signiﬁcance of Each
Food Group to the
DASH Eating Plan
1200
cal
1400
cal
1600
cal
1800
cal
2000
cal
2600
cal
Grainsa
4–5/d
5–6/d
6/d
6/d
6–8/d
10–11/d 1 slice bread; 1 oz dry
cerealb; 1⁄2 cup
cooked rice, pasta,
or cerealb
Whole-wheat bread and rolls,
whole-wheat pasta,
English mufﬁn, pita bread,
bagel, cereals, grits,
oatmeal, brown rice,
unsalted pretzels and
popcorn
Major sources of energy
and ﬁber
Vegetables
3–4/d
3–4/d
3–4/d
4–5/d
4–5/d
5–6/d 1 cup raw leafy
vegetable; 1⁄2 cup
cut-up raw or
cooked vegetable;
1⁄2 cup vegetable
juice
Broccoli, carrots, collards,
green beans, green peas,
kale, lima beans, potatoes,
spinach, squash, sweet
potatoes, tomatoes
Rich sources of
potassium,
magnesium, and ﬁber
Fruits
3–4/d
4/d
4/d
4–5/d
4–5/d
5–6/d 1 medium fruit; 1⁄4 cup
dried fruit; 1⁄2 cup
fresh, frozen, or
canned fruit; 1⁄2 cup
fruit juice
Apples, apricots, bananas,
dates, grapes, oranges,
grapefruit, grapefruit
juice, mangoes, melons,
peaches, pineapples,
raisins, strawberries,
tangerines
Important sources of
potassium,
magnesium, and ﬁber
Fat-free or low-
fat milk and
milk products
2–3/d
2–3/d
2–3/d
2–3/d
2–3/d
3/d 1 cup milk or yogurt;
11⁄2 oz cheese
Fat-free milk or buttermilk,
fat-free, low-fat, or
reduced-fat cheese, fat-
free/low-fat regular or
frozen yogurt
Major sources of
calcium and protein
Lean meats,
poultry, and
ﬁsh
3/d
3–4/d
3–4/d
6/d
6/d
6/d 1 oz cooked meats,
poultry, or ﬁsh; 1
eggc
Select only lean; trim away
visible fats; broil, roast, or
poach; remove skin from
poultry
Rich sources of protein
and magnesium
Nuts, seeds, and
legumes
3/wk
3/wk
3–4/wk
4/wk
4–5/wk
1/d
1⁄3 cup or 11⁄2 oz nuts;
2 tbsp peanut
butter; 2 tbsp or 1⁄2
oz seeds; 1⁄2 cup
cooked legumes
(dry beans and
peas)
Almonds, ﬁlberts, mixed nuts,
peanuts, walnuts,
sunﬂower seeds, peanut
butter, kidney beans,
lentils, split peas
Rich sources of energy,
magnesium, protein,
and ﬁber
Fats and oilsd
1/d
1/d
2/d
2–3/d
2–3/d
3/d 1 tsp soft margarine;
1 tsp vegetable oil;
1 tbsp mayonnaise;
2 tbsp salad
dressing
Soft margarine, vegetable oil
(such as canola, corn,
olive, or safﬂower), low-fat
mayonnaise, light salad
dressing
The DASH study had 27%
of calories as fat,
including fat in or
added to foods
Sweets and
added sugars
3/wk
3/wk
3/wk
5/wk
5/wk
2/d 1 tbsp sugar; 1 tbsp
jelly or jam; 1⁄2 cup
sorbet, gelatin; 1
cup lemonade
Fruit-ﬂavored gelatin, fruit
punch, hard candy, jelly,
maple syrup, sorbet and
ices, sugar
Sweets should be low in
fat
Table 5-2 provides estimated energy requirements according to age, gender, and activity level for use with this table. The FDA and the Environmental Protection Agency advise women of
childbearing age who may become pregnant, pregnant women, nursing mothers, and young children to avoid some types of ﬁsh and shellﬁsh and eat ﬁsh and shellﬁsh that are low in
mercury. For more information, call the FDA’s food information line toll free at 1-888-SAFEFOOD or visit www.cfsan.fda.gov/~dms/admehg3.html.
a Whole grains are recommended for most grain servings as a good source of ﬁber and nutrients.
b Serving sizes vary between a 1⁄2 and 11⁄4 cups, depending on cereal type. Check the product’s nutrition-facts label.
c Because eggs are high in cholesterol, limit egg yolk intake to no more than 4 per week; 2 egg whites have the same protein content as 1 oz of meat.
d Fat content changes serving amount for fats and oils. For example, 1 tbsp of regular salad dressing  1 serving; 1 tbsp of low-fat dressing  1⁄2 serving; 1 tbsp fat-free dressing  0 servings.
SUPPLEMENT ARTICLES
PEDIATRICS Volume 128, Supplement 5, December 2011
S225

----- Page 14 (native) -----
port, 2008”11 from the Department of
Health and Human Services, the ex-
pert panel recommends that activity
be vigorous on 3 days/week (www.
health.gov/paguidelines). In working
with children and families, the expert
panel
suggested
that
moderate-to-
vigorous activity could be compared
with jogging or playing baseball and that
vigorous physical activity could be com-
pared with running, playing singles ten-
nis, or playing soccer. Similarly, reduc-
ing sedentary time is convincingly
associatedwithafavorablecardiovascu-
lar proﬁle, and the expert panel agreed
with the AAP recommendation for limit-
ingleisurescreentimeto2hours/day.
7. TOBACCO EXPOSURE
Tobacco dependence is responsible for
4 million deaths worldwide annually,
and in utero exposure to tobacco prod-
ucts, involuntary tobacco smoke expo-
sure (secondhand smoke), and tobacco
use directly impair health in fetuses, in-
fants, children, and adolescents. On the
basis of an analysis of published causes
of death, tobacco use is the leading ac-
tual cause of death in the United States.
The evidence that cigarette use is harm-
ful and addictive is unequivocal. In child-
hood, nicotine is highly addicting;
symptoms of tobacco dependence
have been found after brief intermit-
tent use. Cigarette use among high
school students declined from 1997 to
2003. Rates were stable from 2003 to
2007 with 20% of high school stu-
dents reporting daily smoking. From a
public health standpoint, the need to
reduce tobacco exposure is compel-
ling, and a role for pediatric health
care providers is essential.
A clinical practice guideline update
from the US Public Health Service pub-
lished in May 200812 systematically re-
viewed almost 9000 publications and
concluded that smoking prevention
and cessation interventions are effec-
tive in adults. These same methods
should be safely applicable in child-
hood and adolescence, because behav-
ioral interventions to alter smoking be-
haviors have little if any morbidity and
because morbidity with pharmaco-
logic treatment is limited. Physicians
who care for children are well posi-
tioned to provide prevention and treat-
ment interventions for their patients.
Youth interventions must target par-
ents as well as children, because pa-
rental smoking is both a risk factor for
child smoking and provides second-
hand smoke exposure to fetuses and
children. The evidence review as-
sessed prevention and treatment in-
terventions in each of these areas.
Conclusions and Grading of the
Evidence on Preventing Tobacco
Exposure
Among all the known risk factors for
CVD, the dichotomy between known ben-
eﬁts of risk elimination and the paucity
of evidence for effective interventions to
achieve risk reduction in pediatric care
provider settings is greatest for tobacco
exposure. The quality of the evidence re-
garding the harm of smoking and the
beneﬁtsofavoidingpassivesmokeexpo-
sure, smoking prevention, and smoking
cessation is uniformly grade A. That evi-
dence grades in the recommendations
are less than grade A reﬂects the lack of
existing evidence on interventions that
impactsmokingbehaviorsinspeciﬁcpe-
diatricagegroupsasopposedtothecol-
lective evidence.
●Good-quality interventions in pediatric
caresettingstodecreasechildren’sen-
vironmental smoke exposure have had
mixed results (grade B).
●Intervention
studies
to
prevent
smoking initiation have had moder-
ate success, although long-term re-
sults are limited (grade B).
●Practice-based interventions to achieve
smoking cessation in adolescents have
had moderate success with limited
long-term follow-up (grade B).
●School-based
smoking-prevention
programs have been moderately
successful with limited long-term
follow-up (grade B).
Although the evidence base for effec-
tive ofﬁce-based approaches to to-
bacco interventions is moderate and
mixed, the evidence that cigarette use
is harmful and addictive is unequivo-
cal. The need to reduce tobacco expo-
sure is so compelling that a role for
pediatric health care providers is es-
sential. The lack of harm associated
with such interventions and the impor-
tance of communicating the message
of risk associated with tobacco pro-
vides the rationale for “strongly rec-
ommend” despite the lack of conclu-
sive
evidence
that
ofﬁce-based
interventions reliably reduce tobacco
initiation or smoking cessation. Physi-
cians and nurses who care for chil-
dren are well positioned to provide in-
tervention to patients who smoke. The
expert panel feels that such providers
should routinely identify patients who
smoke by using the medical history
(Table 7-1). Patients should be explic-
itly informed about the addictive and
adverse health effects of tobacco use.
By using the 5 A’s (ask, advise, assess,
assist, and arrange), providers can as-
sess readiness to quit and assist in
providing
resources
to
support
smoking-cessation efforts. Informa-
tion about telephone quit lines (eg,
1-800-QUIT-NOW), community cessation
programs,
and
pharmacotherapy
should also be made available.
As described, practice-based interven-
tions
to
decrease
environmental
smoke exposure have had mixed re-
sults. Nonetheless, the expert panel
believes that pediatric care providers
should identify parents and other
caregivers who smoke and explicitly
recommend that children not be ex-
posed to tobacco smoke in the home,
in automobiles, or in any other space
where exposure can occur. For the
S226
EXPERT PANEL

----- Page 15 (native) -----
parent who smokes, information pro-
vided should include statements about
health beneﬁts to the individual, child,
and/or fetus and referral to smoking-
cessation care providers.
8. HIGH BP
In 2004, an NHLBI task force published
“The Fourth Report on the Diagnosis,
Evaluation, and Treatment of High
Blood Pressure in Children and Adoles-
cents.”13 This report included a com-
plete review of the current evidence on
this subject and detailed recommen-
dations for managing BP throughout
childhood.
These
recommendations
were used as the basis for these guide-
lines, considered complete until 2003
when the review for the report ended.
Therefore, this evidence review for BP
for these guidelines was limited to stud-
ies published between January 1, 2003,
and June 30, 2007, with the addition of
selected studies through June 30, 2008,
identiﬁed by the expert panel as having
met all the criteria for inclusion. Repeat-
ing the review performed by the task
force was not felt to be necessary, given
the short time since publication of that
report, or a judicious use of the re-
sources available for development of
these guidelines. Recommendations re-
gardingBPareallgradedasexpertopin-
ion(gradeD),becausetheyarebasedon
theexpertconsensusconclusionsofthis
NHLBI task force.
Conclusions of the Evidence-Review
Update for High BP (2003–2008)
●The evidence review for the deﬁned
time period resulted in no major
changes in the approach to BP eval-
uation and management.
●According to epidemiologic surveys
of children and adolescents over
the past 20 years, BP levels have
been increasing, and the prevalence
of hypertension and prehyperten-
sion are also increasing, explained
partially by the rise in obesity rates.
TABLE 6-1 Evidence-Based Activity Recommendations for Cardiovascular Health
Newborn to
12 mo
Parents should create an environment that promotes and models
physical activity and limits sedentary time
Grade D
Recommend
Supportive actions:
Discourage TV viewing altogether
1 to 4 y
Allow unlimited active playtime in safe, supportive environments
Grade D
Recommend
Limit sedentary time, especially TV/video
Grade D
Recommend
Supportive actions:
Limit total media time to no more than 1-2 hours of quality
programming per day
For children 2 y old, discourage TV viewing altogether
No TV in child’s bedroom
Encourage family activity at least once per week
Counsel routine activity for parents as role models for children
5 to 10 y
Moderate-to-vigorous physical activity every daya
Grade A
Strongly recommend
Limit daily leisure screen time (TV/video/computer)
Grade B
Strongly recommend
Supportive actions:
Prescribe moderate-to-vigorous activity 1 h/da with vigorous-
intensity physical activity 3 d/wkb
Limit total media time to no more than 1–2 h/d of quality
programming
No TV in child’s bedroom
Take activity and screen-time history from child once per year
Match physical activity recommendations with energy intake
Recommend appropriate safety equipment relative to each
sport
Support recommendations for daily physical education in
schools
11 to 17 y
Moderate-to-vigorous physical activity every daya
Grade A
Strongly recommend
Limit leisure time TV/video/computer use
Grade B
Strongly recommend
Supportive actions:
Encourage adolescents to aim for 1 h/d of moderate-to-vigorous
daily activitya with vigorous intense physical activityb 3 d/wk
Encourage no TV in bedroom
Limit total media time to no more than 1–2 h/d of quality
programming
Match activity recommendations with energy intake
Take activity and screen-time history from adolescent at health
supervision visits
Encourage involvement in year-round physical activities
Support continued family activity once per week and/or family
support of adolescent’s physical activity program
Endorse appropriate safety equipment relative to each sport
18 to 21 y
Moderate-to-vigorous physical activity every daya
Grade A
Strongly recommend
Limit leisure time TV/video/computer
Grade B
Strongly recommend
Supportive actions:
Support goal of 1 h/d of moderate-to-vigorous activity with
vigorous intense physical activity 3 d/wk
Recommend that combined leisure screen time not exceed 2 h/d
Activity and screen-time history at health supervision visits
Encourage involvement in year-round, lifelong physical activities
Grades reﬂect the ﬁndings of the evidence review; recommendation levels reﬂect the consensus opinion of the expert
panel; and supportive actions represent expert consensus suggestions from the expert panel provided to support
implementation of the recommendations (they are not graded).
a Examples of moderate-to-vigorous physical activities are jogging and playing baseball.
b Examples of vigorous physical activities are running, playing singles tennis, and playing soccer.
SUPPLEMENT ARTICLES
PEDIATRICS Volume 128, Supplement 5, December 2011
S227

----- Page 16 (native) -----
●Prehypertension progresses to hy-
pertension at a rate of 7% per
year; hypertension persists in al-
most one-third of boys and one-
fourth of girls on 2-year longitudinal
follow-up.
●Breastfeeding and supplementation
of formula with polyunsaturated
fatty acids in infancy are both asso-
ciated with lower BP at follow-up.
●A DASH-style diet, which is rich in
fruits, vegetables, low-fat or fat-free
dairy products, whole grains, ﬁsh,
poultry, beans, seeds, and nuts and
lower in sweets and added sugars,
fats, and red meats than the typical
American diet, is associated with
lower BP. The CHILD-1 combined
with the DASH eating plan described
in “Diet and Nutrition” is an appro-
priate diet for children that meets
the DASH study and 2010 DGA nutri-
ent goals.
●Lower dietary sodium intake is as-
sociated with lower BP levels in in-
fants, children, and adolescents.
●Losartan, amlodipine, felodipine, fosi-
nopril, lisinopril, metoprolol, and val-
sartancanbeaddedtothelistofmed-
ications that are tolerated over short
periodsandcanreduceBPinchildren
from ages 6 to 17 years but are pre-
dominantly effective in adolescents.
For black children, greater doses of
fosinopril might be needed for effec-
tive BP control. Medications are
shown in Table 8-5.
●In 1 study of small-for-gestational-
age infants, a nutrient-enriched diet
that promoted rapid weight gain was
associated
with
higher
BP
on
follow-up in late childhood. This po-
tential risk should be considered
when such diets are selected in the
clinical setting.
●In another study, transcendental
meditation effectively lowered BP in
nonhypertensive adolescents.
Recommendations
In “The Fourth Report on the Diagnosis,
Evaluation, and Treatment of High
Blood Pressure in Children and Adoles-
cents,”13 an NHLBI task force provided
an algorithm and ﬂow diagram to as-
sist clinicians in identifying hyperten-
sion in children. For these guidelines,
the task force’s recommendations are
stratiﬁed here to provide an age-
appropriate approach congruent with
other risk-factor recommendations in
other sections, and this is also re-
ﬂected in a series of revised algo-
rithms (Table 8-1 and Figs 8-1 and 8-2).
Conditions
under
which
children
younger than 3 years should have BP
measured are shown in Table 8-2. The
BP norms for age, gender, and height
TABLE 7-1 Evidence-Based Recommendations to Prevent Tobacco Exposure
Prenatal
Obtain smoking history from mothers; provide explicit smoking-cessation message before
and during pregnancy
Grade A
Strongly recommend
Supportive actions:
Identify resources to support maternal smoking-cessation efforts.
Advocate for school and community-based smoke-free interventions
See “Perinatal Factors” section
0 to 4 y
Smoke-free home environment
Grade B
Strongly recommend
Reinforce this message at every encounter, including urgent visits for respiratory problems
Grade C
Recommend
Supportive actions:
Provide information about health beneﬁts of a smoke-free home to parents and children
Advocate for school- and community-based smoke-free interventions
5 to 10 y
Obtain smoke-exposure history from child, including personal history of tobacco use
Grade C
Recommend
Counsel patients strongly about not smoking, including providing explicit information about
the addictive and adverse health effects of smoking
Grade C
Recommend
11 to 21 y
Obtain personal smoking history at every nonurgent health encounter
Grade B
Strongly recommend
Explicitly recommend against smoking
Grade B
Strongly recommend
Provide speciﬁc smoking-cessation guidance
Grade B
Strongly recommend
Supportive actions:
Use 5 A questions to assess readiness to quit
Establish your health care practice as a resource for smoking cessation
Provide quit-line phone number
Identify community cessation resources
Provide information about pharmacotherapy for cessation
Advocate for school and community-based smoke-free interventions
Grades reﬂect the ﬁndings of the evidence review; recommendation levels reﬂect the consensus opinion of the expert panel; and supportive actions represent expert consensus
suggestions from the expert panel provided to support implementation of the recommendations (they are not graded).
S228
EXPERT PANEL

----- Page 17 (native) -----
are shown in Tables 8-3 and 8-4 and
were taken directly from the NHLBI
task force’s report. Age-speciﬁc per-
centiles of BP measurements from
birth to 12 months are provided in the
“Report of the Fourth Task Force on
Blood Pressure Control in Children.”
For all age groups the assessment of
left ventricular mass by echocardiog-
raphy is recommended as the best
method of assessing hypertensive tar-
get organ disease; this testing should
be performed for patients with stage 2
hypertension and those with persis-
tent stage 1 hypertension. Elevated left
ventricular mass might be useful in es-
tablishing the need for pharmacologic
treatment of hypertension. In Table 8-5,
the medications used to achieve BP
control in children and adolescents
are listed. At present, there are no data
to support the use of speciﬁc antihy-
pertensive agents for speciﬁc age
groups.
9. LIPIDS AND LIPOPROTEINS
Since the last NHLBI guidelines for lipid
management in children and adoles-
cents were published in 1992,1 both the
knowledge base surrounding dyslipi-
demia in childhood and the clinical pic-
ture have changed. A series of critical
observational studies have found a
clear correlation between lipoprotein
disorders and the onset and severity of
atherosclerosis in children, adoles-
cents, and young adults. A major in-
crease in the prevalence of obesity has
led to a much larger population of chil-
dren with dyslipidemia. At the time of
the original guidelines, the focus was
almost exclusively on identiﬁcation of
children with an elevated LDL choles-
terol level. Since then, the predomi-
nant dyslipidemic pattern in childhood
is a combined pattern associated with
obesity, moderate-to-severe elevation
in triglyceride level, normal-to-mild
elevation in LDL cholesterol level,
and a reduced HDL cholesterol level.
Both
dyslipidemic
patterns
have
been shown to be associated with ini-
tiation and progression of athero-
sclerotic lesions in children and ad-
olescents
as
demonstrated
by
pathology and imaging studies. Iden-
tiﬁcation of children with dyslipi-
demias, which place them at in-
creased risk for accelerated early
atherosclerosis, must include a com-
prehensive assessment of serum
lipid and lipoprotein levels.
The evidence review for lipids and lipo-
proteins addressed the association
TABLE 8-1 Age-Speciﬁc Recommendations for BP Measurement and Diagnosis of
Hypertension
Birth to 3 y
No routine BP measurement
Measure BP if history () for neonatal complications, congenital heart disease, urinary/
renal abnormality, solid-organ transplant, malignancy, drug prescription, or
condition known to raise BP or increase intracranial pressure (Table 8-2)
If BP 90th percentile by oscillometry, conﬁrm by auscultation ¡ If BP conﬁrmed 90th
percentile, initiate evaluation for etiology and treatment per algorithm (Figure
8-2)
3 to 11 y
Annual BP measurement in all, interpreted for age/gender/height per Tables 8-3 and 8-4
If BP 90th percentile, repeat in 1 y
If BP 90th percentile:
Repeat BP  2 by auscultation
Average replicate measurements and reevaluate BP category (Fig 8-1)
If BP conﬁrmed 90th percentile, 95th percentile  prehypertension (HTN):
Recommend weight management if indicated
Repeat BP in 6 mo
If BP 95th percentile, 99th percentile  5 mm Hg:
Repeat BP in 1–2 wk, average all BP measurements and reevaluate BP category (Fig
8-1)
If BP conﬁrmed 95th percentile, 99th percentile  5 mm Hg  stage 1 HTN:
Basic work-up per Fig 8-2
If BP 99th percentile  5 mm Hg
Repeat BP by auscultation  3 at that visit, average all BP measurements and
reevaluate BP category
If BP conﬁrmed 99th percentile  5 mm Hg  stage 2 HTN:
Refer to pediatric HTN expert within 1 wk OR
Begin BP treatment and initiate basic work-up, per Fig 8-2
12 to 17 y
Annual BP measurement in all, interpreted for age/gender/height per Tables 8-3 and 8-4
If BP 90th percentile, counsel on CHILD-1 diet, activity recommendations, and repeat BP
in 1 y
If BP 90th percentile or 120/80 mm Hg:
Repeat BP  2 by auscultation
Average replicate measurements and reevaluate BP category (Fig 8-1)
If BP conﬁrmed 90th percentile,  95th percentile or 120/80  pre-HTN:
CHILD-1 diet, activity recommendations, weight management if indicated
Repeat BP in 6 mo
If BP 95th percentile, 99th percentile  5 mm Hg
Repeat BP in 1–2 wk, average all BP measurements and reevaluate BP category (Fig
8-1)
If BP conﬁrmed 95th percentile, 99th percentile  5 mm Hg  stage 1 HTN:
Basic workup per Fig 2
If BP 99th percentile  5 mm Hg:
Repeat BP by auscultation  3 at that visit, average all BP measurements and
reevaluate BP category
If BP conﬁrmed 99th percentile  5 mm Hg  stage 2 HTN:
Refer to pediatric HTN expert within 1 wk OR
Begin BP treatment and initiate work-up per Fig 8-2
18 to 21 y
Measure BP at all health care visits
BP 120/80 to 139/89  pre-HTN
BP 140/90 to 159/99  stage 1 HTN
BP 160/100  stage 2 HTN
BP recommendations are based on the NHLBI’s “The Fourth Report on the Diagnosis, Evaluation and Treatment of High Blood
Pressure in Children and Adolescents” with the evidence review updated from 2003. Recommendations are all graded as
expert opinion (grade D) because they are based on the expert consensus conclusions of the Fourth Report.
SUPPLEMENT ARTICLES
PEDIATRICS Volume 128, Supplement 5, December 2011
S229

----- Page 18 (native) -----
between dyslipidemia and atheroscle-
rosis in childhood, lipid assessment in
childhood and adolescence with tables
of normative results provided, the dys-
lipidemias, dietary treatment of dyslip-
idemia, and medication therapy.
Conclusions and Grading of the
Evidence Review for Lipid
Assessment in Childhood and
Adolescence
●Combined evidence from autopsy
studies, vascular studies, and co-
hort studies strongly indicates that
abnormal lipid levels in childhood
are associated with increased evi-
dence of atherosclerosis (grade B).
●The evidence review supports the
concept that early identiﬁcation and
control of dyslipidemia throughout
youth and into adulthood will sub-
stantially reduce clinical CVD risk
beginning in young adult life. Pre-
liminary evidence in children with
heterozygous familial hypercholes-
terolemia with markedly elevated
LDL cholesterol levels indicates that
earlier treatment is associated with
reduced subclinical evidence of ath-
erosclerosis (grade B).
●Multiple prospective screening co-
hort studies have demonstrated the
normal lipid and lipoprotein distri-
butions in childhood, adolescence,
and young adult life (Tables 9-1 and
9-2) (grade B). Cohort studies have
also
demonstrated
signiﬁcant
tracking of elevated lipid levels from
childhood into adulthood. Lipid and
lipoprotein results in childhood are
predictive of future adult lipopro-
tein proﬁles; the strongest statisti-
cal correlation occurs between re-
sults in late childhood and in the
third and fourth decades of life
(grade B).
●TC and LDL cholesterol levels de-
crease as much as 10% to 20% or
moreduringpuberty(gradeB).Onthe
basisofthisnormalpatternofchange
in lipid and lipoprotein levels with
growth and maturation, 10 years of
age (range: 9–11 years) is a stable
time for lipid assessment in children
(grade D). For most children, this age
range will precede the onset of
puberty.
●Signiﬁcant evidence exists to indicate
thatusingfamilyhistoryofpremature
CVD or cholesterol disorders as the
primary factor in determining lipid
screening for children misses 30%
to 60% of children with dyslipidemias,
and accurate and reliable measures
of family history are not available
(grade B). In the absence of a clinical
or historic marker, identiﬁcation of
children with lipid disorders that pre-
dispose them to accelerated athero-
sclerosis requires universal lipid as-
sessment (grade B).
●Non-HDL cholesterol level has been
identiﬁed as a signiﬁcant predictor
of the presence of atherosclerosis,
as powerful as any other lipoprotein
cholesterol measure in children
and adolescents. For both children
and adults, non-HDL cholesterol
level seems to be more predictive of
persistent dyslipidemia and, there-
fore, atherosclerosis and future
events than TC, LDL cholesterol, or
HDL cholesterol levels alone. A ma-
jor advantage of non-HDL choles-
terol is that it can be accurately cal-
culated in a nonfasting state and is
therefore practical to obtain in clin-
ical practice. The expert panel felt
that non-HDL cholesterol should be
added as a screening tool for iden-
tiﬁcation of a dyslipidemic state in
childhood (grade B).
●In terms of other lipid measure-
ments, (1) most but not all studies
have found that measurement of
apolipoprotein B and apolipopro-
tein A-1 for universal screening pro-
vides no additional advantage over
measuring non-HDL cholesterol, LDL
cholesterol, and HDL cholesterol lev-
els, (2) measurement of lipopro-
tein(a) is useful in the assessment
of children with both hemorrhagic
and ischemic stroke, (3) in offspring
of a parent with premature CVD and
no other identiﬁable risk factors, el-
evations of apolipoprotein B, apoli-
poprotein A-1, and lipoprotein(a)
have been noted, and (4) measure-
ment of lipoprotein subclasses and
their sizes by advanced lipoprotein
testing has not been found to have
sufﬁcient clinical utility in children
at this time (grade B).
●Obesity is commonly associated
with a combined dyslipidemia pat-
tern with mild elevation in TC and
LDL cholesterol levels, moderate-to-
severe
elevation
in
triglyceride
level, and a low HDL cholesterol
level. This is the most common dys-
lipidemic pattern seen in childhood,
and lipid assessment in overweight
and obese children identiﬁes an im-
portant proportion of those with
TABLE 8-2 Conditions Under Which Children <3 Years Old Should Have BP Measured
History of prematurity, very low birth weight, or other neonatal complication requiring intensive care
Congenital heart disease (repaired or unrepaired)
Recurrent urinary tract infections, hematuria, or proteinuria
Known renal disease or urologic malformations
Family history of congenital renal disease
Solid-organ transplant
Malignancy or bone marrow transplant
Treatment with drugs known to raise BP
Other systemic illnesses associated with hypertension (neuroﬁbromatosis, tuberous sclerosis, etc)
Evidence of increased intracranial pressure
Reproduced with permission from High Blood Pressure Education Program Working Group on High Blood Pressure in
Children and Adolescents. Pediatrics. 2004;114(2 suppl 4th report):556.
S230
EXPERT PANEL

----- Page 19 (native) -----
signiﬁcant
lipid
abnormalities
(grade B).
●Dyslipidemias can be acquired ge-
netically but also secondary to spe-
ciﬁc conditions such as DM, ne-
phrotic syndrome, chronic renal
disease, postorthotopic heart trans-
plant, history of Kawasaki disease
with persistent coronary involve-
ment, chronic inﬂammatory dis-
ease, hypothyroidism, and other
causes, as outlined in Table 9-3.
There is impressive evidence for
accelerated atherosclerosis both
clinically and as assessed with
noninvasive methods in some of
these conditions, which have been
designated accordingly as special
risk diagnoses for accelerated
atherosclerosis
(Table
9-7);
management of these conditions
is described in “DM and Other
Conditions Predisposing to the De-
velopment of Accelerated Athero-
sclerosis.” Lipid evaluation for
these patients contributes to risk
assessment and identiﬁes an im-
portant proportion of those with
dyslipidemia (grade B).
●The complete phenotypic expres-
sion of some inherited disorders
such as familial combined hyperlip-
idemia may be delayed until adult-
hood.
Therefore,
evaluation
of
children and adolescents from high-
risk families with familial combined
hyperlipidemia (Table 9-4) should
begin in childhood and continue
through adulthood (per NCEP adult
treatment guidelines) and will lead
to early detection of those with ab-
normalities (grade B).
Age-speciﬁc
recommendations
for
lipid assessment are outlined in Table
9-5. Speciﬁc management for children
with identiﬁed dyslipidemia is outlined
in the algorithms in Figs 9-1 and 9-2.
Deﬁnitions of the risk factors and spe-
cial risk conditions for use with the
recommendations and in the algo-
TABLE 8-3 BP Norms for Boys by Age and Height Percentile
Age,
y
BP %ile
SBP, mm Hg
DBP, mm Hg
Percentile of Height
Percentile of Height
5th 10th 25th 50th 75th
90th
95th
5th
10th
25th
50th
75th
90th
95th
1
50th
80
81
83
85
87
88
89
34
35
36
37
38
39
39
90th
94
95
97
99
100
102
103
49
50
51
52
53
53
54
95th
98
99
101
103
104
106
106
54
54
55
56
57
58
58
99th
105
106
108
110
112
113
114
61
62
63
64
65
66
66
2
50th
84
85
87
88
90
92
92
39
40
41
42
43
44
44
90th
97
99
100
102
104
105
106
54
55
56
57
58
58
59
95th
101
102
104
106
108
109
110
59
59
60
61
62
63
63
99th
109
110
111
113
115
117
117
66
67
68
69
70
71
71
3
50th
86
87
89
91
93
94
95
44
44
45
46
47
48
48
90th
100
101
103
105
107
108
109
59
59
60
61
62
63
63
95th
104
105
107
109
110
112
113
63
63
64
65
66
67
67
99th
111
112
114
116
118
119
120
71
71
72
73
74
75
75
4
50th
88
89
91
93
95
96
97
47
48
49
50
51
51
52
90th
102
103
105
107
109
110
111
62
63
64
65
66
66
67
95th
106
107
109
111
112
114
115
66
67
68
69
70
71
71
99th
113
114
116
118
120
121
122
74
75
76
77
78
78
79
5
50th
90
91
93
95
96
98
98
50
51
52
53
54
55
55
90th
104
105
106
108
110
111
112
65
66
67
68
69
69
70
95th
108
109
110
112
114
115
116
69
70
71
72
73
74
74
99th
115
116
118
120
121
123
123
77
78
79
80
81
81
82
6
50th
91
92
94
96
98
99
100
53
53
54
55
56
57
57
90th
105
106
108
110
111
113
113
68
68
69
70
71
72
72
95th
109
110
112
114
115
117
117
72
72
73
74
75
76
76
99th
116
117
119
121
123
124
125
80
80
81
82
83
84
84
7
50th
92
94
95
97
99
100
101
55
55
56
57
58
59
59
90th
106
107
109
111
113
114
115
70
70
71
72
73
74
74
95th
110
111
113
115
117
118
119
74
74
75
76
77
78
78
99th
117
118
120
122
124
125
126
82
82
83
84
85
86
86
8
50th
94
95
97
99
100
102
102
56
57
58
59
60
60
61
90th
107
109
110
112
114
115
116
71
72
72
73
74
75
76
95th
111
112
114
116
118
119
120
75
76
77
78
79
79
80
99th
119
120
122
123
125
127
127
83
84
85
86
87
87
88
9
50th
95
96
98
100
102
103
104
57
58
59
60
61
61
62
90th
109
110
112
114
115
117
118
72
73
74
75
76
76
77
95th
113
114
116
118
119
121
121
76
77
78
79
80
81
81
99th
120
121
123
125
127
128
129
84
85
86
87
88
88
89
10
50th
97
98
100
102
103
105
106
58
59
60
61
61
62
63
90th
111
112
114
115
117
119
119
73
73
74
75
76
77
78
95th
115
116
117
119
121
122
123
77
78
79
80
81
81
82
99th
122
123
125
127
128
130
130
85
86
86
88
88
89
90
11
50th
99
100
102
104
105
107
107
59
59
60
61
62
63
63
90th
113
114
115
117
119
120
121
74
74
75
76
77
78
78
95th
117
118
119
121
123
124
125
78
78
79
80
81
82
82
99th
124
125
127
129
130
132
132
86
86
87
88
89
90
90
12
50th
101
102
104
106
108
109
110
59
60
61
62
63
63
64
90th
115
116
118
120
121
123
123
74
75
75
76
77
78
79
95th
119
120
122
123
125
127
127
78
79
80
81
82
82
83
99th
126
127
129
131
133
134
135
86
87
88
89
90
90
91
13
50th
104
105
106
108
110
111
112
60
60
61
62
63
64
64
90th
117
118
120
122
124
125
126
75
75
76
77
78
79
79
95th
121
122
124
126
128
129
130
79
79
80
81
82
83
83
99th
128
130
131
133
135
136
137
87
87
88
89
90
91
91
14
50th
106
107
109
111
113
114
115
60
61
62
63
64
65
65
90th
120
121
123
125
126
128
128
75
76
77
78
79
79
80
95th
124
125
127
128
130
132
132
80
80
81
82
83
84
84
99th
131
132
134
136
138
139
140
87
88
89
90
91
92
92
15
50th
109
110
112
113
115
117
117
61
62
63
64
65
66
66
90th
122
124
125
127
129
130
131
76
77
78
79
80
80
81
95th
126
127
129
131
133
134
135
81
81
82
83
84
85
85
99th
134
135
136
138
140
142
142
88
89
90
91
92
93
93
16
50th
111
112
114
116
118
119
120
63
63
64
65
66
67
67
90th
125
126
128
130
131
133
134
78
78
79
80
81
82
82
95th
129
130
132
134
135
137
137
82
83
83
84
85
86
87
99th
136
137
139
141
143
144
145
90
90
91
92
93
94
94
17
50th
114
115
116
118
120
121
122
65
66
66
67
68
69
70
90th
127
128
130
132
134
135
136
80
80
81
82
83
84
84
95th
131
132
134
136
138
139
140
84
85
86
87
87
88
89
99th
139
140
141
143
145
146
147
92
93
93
94
95
96
97
The 90th percentile is 1.28 SD, the 95th percentile is 1.645 SD, and the 99th percentile is 2.326 SD over the mean.
Reproduced with permission from High Blood Pressure Education Program Working Group on High Blood Pressure in
Children and Adolescents. Pediatrics. 2004;114(2 suppl 4th report):558.
SUPPLEMENT ARTICLES
PEDIATRICS Volume 128, Supplement 5, December 2011
S231

----- Page 20 (native) -----
rithms appear in Tables 9-6 and 9-7.
The ﬁrst step proposed for manage-
ment of children with identiﬁed lipid
abnormalities is a focused interven-
tion on diet and physical activity.
Conclusions and Grading of the
Evidence Review for Dietary
Management of Dyslipidemia
●A diet with total fat at 25% to 30%
of calories, saturated fat at 10%
of calories, and cholesterol intake
at 300 mg/day, as recommended
by the original NCEP Pediatric
Panel,1 has been shown to safely
and effectively reduce the levels of
TC and LDL cholesterol in healthy
children (grade A). There is some
evidence that this is also the case
when the diet begins in infancy
and is sustained throughout child-
hood and into adolescence (grade
B). The CHILD-1, described in “Nu-
trition
and
Diet,”
has
this
composition.
●In children with identiﬁed hyper-
cholesterolemia and an elevated
LDL cholesterol level, a more strin-
gent diet with saturated fat at
7% of calories and dietary cho-
lesterol limited to 200 mg/day has
been shown to be safe and mod-
estly effective in lowering the LDL
cholesterol level (grade A) (CHILD-
2–LDL; Table 9-8).
●The use of dietary adjuncts such
as plant sterol or stanol esters up
to 20 g/day can safely enhance LDL
cholesterol–lowering effects short-
term in children with familial hy-
percholesterolemia
(grade
A).
However, long-term studies on the
safety and effectiveness of plant
sterol and stanol esters have not
been completed. Their use, there-
fore, is usually reserved for chil-
dren with primary elevations of
their LDL cholesterol level who do
not achieve LDL cholesterol goals
with dietary treatment alone. Such
an approach might lower the LDL
cholesterol level sufﬁciently to
avoid the necessity of drug treat-
ment. Food products that contain
plant stanol esters, such as some
margarines,
are
marketed
di-
rectly to the general public. In 2
short-term trials, they have been
shown to be safe and have mini-
mal
LDL-lowering
effects
in
healthy children (grade B).
FIGURE 8-1
BP measurement and categorization. HT indicates height; WT, weight; HTN, hypertension; %ile, percentile. a See Table 8-2; b see “Nutrition and Diet”Table
5-1; c see “Physical Activity”; c see “Overweight and Obesity.” Adapted from High Blood Pressure Education Program Working Group on High Blood Pressure
in Children and Adolescents. Pediatrics. 2004;114(2 suppl 4th report):555–576.
S232
EXPERT PANEL

----- Page 21 (native) -----
●Evidence for the use of other dietary
supplements is insufﬁcient for any
recommendation (no grade).
●In children with an elevated triglyc-
eride level, reduction of simple car-
bohydrate intake and weight loss
are associated with decreased tri-
glyceride levels (grade B). Reduc-
tion of simple carbohydrate intake
needs to be associated with in-
creased intake of complex carbohy-
drates and reduced saturated-fat
intake. When triglyceride elevation
is associated with obesity, de-
creased calorie intake and in-
creased activity levels are of para-
mount importance. The CHILD-2–TG
(shown in Table 9-8) is recom-
mended as the primary diet therapy
in this setting.
●A behavioral approach that engages
the child and family delivered by a
registered dietitian has been shown
to be the most consistently effective
approach
for
achieving
dietary
change (grade B).
The approach to management of dys-
lipidemias is staged, as in the original
NCEP Pediatric Panel recommenda-
tions.1 For all children with identiﬁed
dyslipidemia in whom the response
to
a
low-fat/low-saturated-fat/low-
cholesterol diet has not been evalu-
ated, the CHILD-1 (described in “Nutri-
tion and Diet”) is recommended as the
ﬁrst step; implementation should be
guided
by
a
registered
dietitian.
For obese children with identiﬁed
dyslipidemia, additional age- and BMI-
speciﬁc
recommendations
that
address calorie restriction and in-
creased activity appear in “Overweight
and Obesity.” If, after a 3-month trial of
the
CHILD-1/lifestyle
management,
fasting-lipid-proﬁle (FLP) ﬁndings ex-
ceed the therapeutic goals listed in Ta-
bles 9-1 and 9-2, then the lipid
parameter-speciﬁc diet changes out-
lined in Table 9-8 are recommended.
Dyslipidemia management is also out-
FIGURE 8-2
BP management according to category. HTN indicates hypertension; CV, cardiovascular; Hx, history; PEx, physical examination; CBC, complete blood
count; U/A, urinalysis; U/S, ultrasound; Ped, pediatric; LVH, left ventricular hypertrophy; Q, every; Rx, prescription; 2°, secondary; W/U, workup; TOD, target
organ damage; s/p, status post; CKD, chronic kidney disease; %ile, percentile. a Workup for target organ damage/left ventricular hypertrophy if obese or
positive for other cardiovascular risk factors; b see “Nutrition and Diet”; c see “Physical Activity”; d see “Overweight and Obesity.” Adapted from High Blood
Pressure Education Program Working Group on High Blood Pressure in Children and Adolescents. Pediatrics. 2004;114(2 suppl 4th report):555–576.
SUPPLEMENT ARTICLES
PEDIATRICS Volume 128, Supplement 5, December 2011
S233

----- Page 22 (native) -----
lined in the algorithms in Figs 9-1 and
9-2.
Conclusions and Grading of the
Evidence Review for Use of
Medication to Treat Dyslipidemia
When medication is recommended,
it should always be in the context
of the complete cardiovascular
risk proﬁle of the patient and in
consultation with the patient and
the family. Note that, in the follow-
ing section, values given are in mg/
dL; to convert to SI units, divide the
results for TC, LDL cholesterol, HDL
cholesterol, and non-HDL cholesterol
by 38.6; for triglycerides, divide by
88.6.
●Decisions regarding the need for
medication
therapy
should
be
based on the average of results
from at least 2 FLPs obtained at
least 2 weeks but no more than 3
months apart (grade C) (Fig 9-1).
●The cut points used to deﬁne the
level at which drug therapy should
be considered from the 1992 NCEP
pediatric guidelines1 have been
used as the basis for multiple drug
safety and efﬁcacy trials in dyslipi-
demic children (grade B):
●LDL cholesterol  190 mg/dL af-
ter a 6-month trial of lifestyle
management (CHILD-1 ¡ CHILD-
2–LDL) for children aged 10 years
or older.
●LDL
cholesterol
160
to
189
mg/dL after a 6-month trial of
lifestyle/diet
management
(CHILD-1 ¡ CHILD-2–LDL) in a
child aged 10 years or older
with a positive family history of
premature CVD/events in ﬁrst-
degree relatives (Table 9-6) or
at least 1 high-level risk factor
or risk condition or at least 2
moderate-level risk factors or
risk conditions (Tables 9-6, 9-7,
and 9-12; Fig 9-1).
TABLE 8-4 BP Norms for Girls by Age and Height Percentile
Age,
y
BP %ile
SBP, mm Hg
DBP, mm Hg
Percentile of Height
Percentile of Height
5th
10th
25th
50th
75th
90th
95th
5th
10th
25th
50th
75th
90th
95th
1
50th
83
84
85
86
88
89
90
38
39
39
40
41
41
42
90th
97
97
98
100
101
102
103
52
53
53
54
55
55
56
95th
100
101
102
104
105
106
107
56
57
57
58
59
59
60
99th
108
108
109
111
112
113
114
64
64
65
65
66
67
67
2
50th
85
85
87
88
89
91
91
43
44
44
45
46
46
47
90th
98
99
100
101
103
104
105
57
58
58
59
60
61
61
95th
102
103
104
105
107
108
109
61
62
62
63
64
65
65
99th
109
110
111
112
114
115
116
69
69
70
70
71
72
72
3
50th
86
87
88
89
91
92
93
47
48
48
49
50
50
51
90th
100
100
102
103
104
106
106
61
62
62
63
64
64
65
95th
104
104
105
107
108
109
110
65
66
66
67
68
68
69
99th
111
111
113
114
115
116
117
73
73
74
74
75
76
76
4
50th
88
88
90
91
92
94
94
50
50
51
52
52
53
54
90th
101
102
103
104
106
107
108
64
64
65
66
67
67
68
95th
105
106
107
108
110
111
112
68
68
69
70
71
71
72
99th
112
113
114
115
117
118
119
76
76
76
77
78
79
79
5
50th
89
90
91
93
94
95
96
52
53
53
54
55
55
56
90th
103
103
105
106
107
109
109
66
67
67
68
69
69
70
95th
107
107
108
110
111
112
113
70
71
71
72
73
73
74
99th
114
114
116
117
118
120
120
78
78
79
79
80
81
81
6
50th
91
92
93
94
96
97
98
54
54
55
56
56
57
58
90th
104
105
106
108
109
110
111
68
68
69
70
70
71
72
95th
108
109
110
111
113
114
115
72
72
73
74
74
75
76
99th
115
116
117
119
120
121
122
80
80
80
81
82
83
83
7
50th
93
93
95
96
97
99
99
55
56
56
57
58
58
59
90th
106
107
108
109
111
112
113
69
70
70
71
72
72
73
95th
110
111
112
113
115
116
116
73
74
74
75
76
76
77
99th
117
118
119
120
122
123
124
81
81
82
82
83
84
84
8
50th
95
95
96
98
99
100
101
57
57
57
58
59
60
60
90th
108
109
110
111
113
114
114
71
71
71
72
73
74
74
95th
112
112
114
115
116
118
118
75
75
75
76
77
78
78
99th
119
120
121
122
123
125
125
82
82
83
83
84
85
86
9
50th
96
97
98
100
101
102
103
58
58
58
59
60
61
61
90th
110
110
112
113
114
116
116
72
72
72
73
74
75
75
95th
114
114
115
117
118
119
120
76
76
76
77
78
79
79
99th
121
121
123
124
125
127
127
83
83
84
84
85
86
87
10
50th
98
99
100
102
103
104
105
59
59
59
60
61
62
62
90th
112
112
114
115
116
118
118
73
73
73
74
75
76
76
95th
116
116
117
119
120
121
122
77
77
77
78
79
80
80
99th
123
123
125
126
127
129
129
84
84
85
86
86
87
88
11
50th
100
101
102
103
105
106
107
60
60
60
61
62
63
63
90th
114
114
116
117
118
119
120
74
74
74
75
76
77
77
95th
118
118
119
121
122
123
124
78
78
78
79
80
81
81
99th
125
125
126
128
129
130
131
85
85
86
87
87
88
89
12
50th
102
103
104
105
107
108
109
61
61
61
62
63
64
64
90th
116
116
117
119
120
121
122
75
75
75
76
77
78
78
95th
119
120
121
123
124
125
126
79
79
79
80
81
82
82
99th
127
127
128
130
131
132
133
86
86
87
88
88
89
90
13
50th
104
105
106
107
109
110
110
62
62
62
63
64
65
65
90th
117
118
119
121
122
123
124
76
76
76
77
78
79
79
95th
121
122
123
124
126
127
128
80
80
80
81
82
83
83
99th
128
129
130
132
133
134
135
87
87
88
89
89
90
91
14
50th
106
106
107
109
110
111
112
63
63
63
64
65
66
66
90th
119
120
121
122
124
125
125
77
77
77
78
79
80
80
95th
123
123
125
126
127
129
129
81
81
81
82
83
84
84
99th
130
131
132
133
135
136
136
88
88
89
90
90
91
92
15
50th
107
108
109
110
111
113
113
64
64
64
65
66
67
67
90th
120
121
122
123
125
126
127
78
78
78
79
80
81
81
95th
124
125
126
127
129
130
131
82
82
82
83
84
85
85
99th
131
132
133
134
136
137
138
89
89
90
91
91
92
93
16
50th
108
108
110
111
112
114
114
64
64
65
66
66
67
68
90th
121
122
123
124
126
127
128
78
78
79
80
81
81
82
95th
125
126
127
128
130
131
132
82
82
83
84
85
85
86
99th
132
133
134
135
137
138
139
90
90
90
91
92
93
93
17
50th
108
109
110
111
113
114
115
64
65
65
66
67
67
68
90th
122
122
123
125
126
127
128
78
79
79
80
81
81
82
95th
125
126
127
129
130
131
132
82
83
83
84
85
85
86
99th
133
133
134
136
137
138
139
90
90
91
91
92
93
93
The 90th percentile is 1.28 SD, the 95th percentile is 1.645 SD, and the 99th percentile is 2.326 SD over the mean.
Reproduced with permission from High Blood Pressure Education Program Working Group on High Blood Pressure in
Children and Adolescents. Pediatrics. 2004;114(2 suppl 4th report):559.
S234
EXPERT PANEL

----- Page 23 (native) -----
TABLE 8-5 Antihypertensive Medications With Pediatric Experience
Class
Drug
Initial Dosea
Maximal Dose
Dosing
Interval
Evidenceb FDAc
Commentsd
ACE inhibitors
Benazepril
0.2 mg/kg per d up to
10 mg/d
0.6 mg/kg per d up
to 40 mg/d
QD
RCT
Yes
1. All ACE inhibitors are contraindicated
in pregnancy; women of childbearing
age should use reliable contraception
Captopril
0.3–0.5 mg/kg per
dose (12 mo)
6 mg/kg per d
TID
RCT, CS
No
2. Check serum potassium and creatinine
periodically to monitor for
hyperkalemia and azotemia
3. Cough and angioedema are reportedly
less common with newer members of
this class than with captopril
Fosinoprile
Children 50 kg:
5–10 mg/d
40 mg/d
QD
RCT
Yes
4. Benazepril, enalapril, and lisinopril
labels contain information on the
preparation of a suspension; captopril
may also be compounded into a
suspension
Lisinoprile
0.07 mg/kg per d up
to 5 mg/d
0.6 mg/kg per d up
to 40 mg/d
QD
RCT
Yes
5. FDA approval for ACE inhibitors with
pediatric labeling is limited to children
6 y of age and to children with
creatinine clearance rate of 30 mL/
min per 1.73 m2
Quinapril
5–10 mg/d
80 mg/d
QD
RCT, EO
No
6. Initial dose of fosinopril of 0.1 mg/kg
per d may be effective, although black
patients might require a higher dose
ARBs
Irbesartan
6–12 y: 75–150 mg/d;
13 y: 150–300
mg/d
300 mg/d
QD
CS
Yes
1. All ARBs are contraindicated in
pregnancy; women of childbearing age
should use reliable contraception
Losartane
0.7 mg/kg per d up to
50 mg/d
1.4 mg/kg per d up
to 100 mg/d
QD–BID
RCT
Yes
2. Check serum potassium and creatinine
levels periodically to monitor for
hyperkalemia and azotemia
Valsartane
5–10 mg/d; 0.4 mg/kg
per d
40–80 mg/d; 3.4
mg/kg per d
QD
RCT
No
3. Losartan label contains information on
the preparation of a suspension
4. FDA approval for ARBs is limited to
children 6 y of age and to children
with creatinine clearance rate of 30
mL/min per 1.73 m2
- and
-antagonist
Labetalol
1–3 mg/kg per d
10–12 mg/kg per d
up to 1200 mg/d
BID
CS, EO
No
1. Asthma and overt heart failure are
relative contraindications
2. Heart rate is dose-limiting
3. May impair athletic performance in
athletes
4. Should not be used in insulin-
dependent diabetic patients
-antagonists
Atenolol
0.5–1 mg/kg per d
2 mg/kg per d up
to 100 mg/d
QD–BID
CS
No
1. Noncardioselective agents
(propranolol) are contraindicated in
asthma and heart failure
Bisoprolol/
hydrochlorothiazide
2.5–6.25 mg/d
10/6.25 mg/d
QD
RCT
No
2. Heart rate is dose-limiting
Metoprolole
Children 6 y: 1 mg/
kg per d (12.5–50
mg/d)
2 mg/kg per d up
to 200 mg/d
BID
CS
Yesf
3. May impair athletic performance in
athletes
Propranolol
1–2 mg/kg per d
4 mg/kg per d up
to 640 mg/d
BID–TID
RCT, EO
Yes
4. Should not be used in insulin-
dependent diabetic patients
5. A sustained-release, once-daily
formulation of propranolol is available
Calcium-channel
blockers
Amlodipinee
Children 6–17 y: 2.5
mg/d
5 mg/d
QD
RCT
Yes
1. Amlodipine and isradipine can be
compounded into stable
extemporaneous suspensions
Felodipine
2.5 mg/d
10 mg/d
QD
RCT, EO
No
2. Felodipine and extended-release
nifedipine tablets must be swallowed
whole
SUPPLEMENT ARTICLES
PEDIATRICS Volume 128, Supplement 5, December 2011
S235

----- Page 24 (native) -----
TABLE 8-5 Continued
Class
Drug
Initial Dosea
Maximal Dose
Dosing
Interval
Evidenceb FDAc
Commentsd
Isradipine
0.15–0.2 mg/kg per d
0.8 mg/kg per d up
to 20 mg/d
TID–QID
CS, EO
No
3. Isradipine is available in both
immediate- and sustained-release
formulations; sustained release form
is dosed QD or BID
Extended-release
nifedipine
0.25–0.5 mg/kg per d
3 mg/kg per d up
to 120 mg/d
QD–BID
CS, EO
No
4. May cause tachycardia
5. Doses up to 10 mg of amlodipine have
been evaluated in children
6. Contraindicated for children 1 y of
age
Central -agonist
Clonidine
Children 12 y: 0.2
mg/d
2.4 mg/d
BID
EO
Yes
1. May cause dry mouth and/or sedation
2. Transdermal preparation is available
3. Sudden cessation of therapy can lead
to severe rebound hypertension
Diuretics
Hydrochlorothiazide
1 mg/kg per d
3 mg/kg per d up
to 50 mg/d
QD
EO
Yes
1. All patients treated with diuretics
should have their electrolytes
monitored shortly after initiating
therapy and periodically thereafter
Chlorthalidone
0.3 mg/kg per d
2 mg/kg per d up
to 50 mg/d
QD
EO
No
2. Useful as add-on therapy in patients
being treated with drugs from other
drug classes
Furosemide
0.5–2.0 mg/kg per
dose
6 mg/kg per d
QD–BID
EO
No
3. Potassium-sparing diuretics
(spironolactone, triamterene,
amiloride) may cause severe
hyperkalemia, especially if given with
an ACE inhibitor or ARB
Spironolactone
1 mg/kg per d
3.3 mg/kg per d up
to 100 mg/d
QD–BID
EO
No
4. Furosemide is labeled only for
treatment of edema but may be useful
as add-on therapy in children with
resistant hypertension, particularly in
children with renal disease
Triamterene
1–2 mg/kg per d
3–4 mg/kg per d
up to 300 mg/d
BID
EO
No
5. Chlorthalidone may precipitate
azotemia in patients with renal
diseases and should be used with
caution in those with severe renal
impairment
Amiloride
0.4–0.625 mg/kg per
d
20 mg/d
QD
EO
No
Peripheral
-antagonists
Doxazosin
1 mg/d
4 mg/d
QD
EO
No
1. May cause ﬁrst-dose hypotension
Prazosin
0.05–0.1 mg/kg per
day
0.5 mg/kg per d
TID
EO
No
Terazosin
1 mg/d
20 mg/d
QD
EO
No
Vasodilators
Hydralazine
0.75 mg/kg per d
7.5 mg/kg per d up
to 200 mg/d
QID
EO
Yes
1. Tachycardia and ﬂuid retention are
common adverse effects
Minoxidil
Children 12 y: 0.2
mg/kg per d;
Children 12 y: 50
mg/d; children
QD–TID
CS, EO
Yes
2. Hydralazine can cause a lupus-like
syndrome in slow acetylators
children 12 y: 5
mg/d
12 y: 100
mg/d
3. Prolonged use of minoxidil can cause
hypertrichosis
4. Minoxidil is usually reserved for
patients with hypertension that is
resistant to multiple drugs
ACE indicates angiotensin-converting enzyme; QD, every day; BID, 2 times daily; TID, 3 times daily; QID, 4 times daily; CS, case series; EO, expert opinion; ARB, angiotensin-receptor blocker.
a The maximal recommended adult dose should not be exceeded in routine clinical practice.
b Level of evidence on which recommendations are based.
c FDA-approved pediatric labeling information is available for treatment of hypertension. Recommended doses for agents with FDA-approved pediatric labels contained in this table are the
doses contained in the approved labels. Even when pediatric labeling information is not available, the FDA-approved label should be consulted for additional safety information.
d Comments apply to all members of each drug class except where otherwise stated.
e Indicates drug added since “The Fourth Report on the Diagnosis, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure in Children and Adolescents” (2004).
f Study did not reach the primary end point (dose response for reduction in systolic BP). Some prespeciﬁed secondary end points demonstrated effectiveness.
Adapted from High Blood Pressure Education Program Working Group on High Blood Pressure in Children and Adolescents. Pediatrics. 2004;114(2 suppl 4th report):555–576.
S236
EXPERT PANEL

----- Page 25 (native) -----
●LDL cholesterol 130 to 190 mg/dL in
a child aged 10 years or older with
a negative family history of prema-
ture CVD in ﬁrst-degree relatives
and no high- or moderate-level risk
factor or risk condition: manage-
ment should continue to focus on
lifestylechanges(CHILD-1¡CHILD-
2–LDL) based on lipid-proﬁle ﬁnd-
ings (Fig 9-1) plus weight manage-
ment if the BMI is at the 85th
percentile.
●The goal of LDL-lowering therapy
in childhood and adolescence is
to decrease the LDL cholesterol
level to the 95th percentile
(130 mg/dL).
●Children with homozygous familial
hypercholesterolemia and extremely
elevated LDL cholesterol levels (500
mg/dL) have undergone effective LDL-
lowering therapy with biweekly LDL
apheresis under the care of lipid spe-
cialists in academic medical centers
(grade C).
●Multiple cohort studies have found
that the beneﬁts of LDL-lowering
therapy in children at high risk for
accelerated atherosclerosis (such
as those with chronic kidney dis-
ease, T1DM or T2DM, Kawasaki dis-
ease with coronary aneurysms,
or post–cardiac transplantation)
should be considered for initiation
of medication therapy (grade C)
(see “DM and Other Conditions Pre-
disposing to the Development of Ac-
celerated Atherosclerosis”).
●Bile acid sequestrants are medica-
tions that bind bile salts within the
intestinal lumen and prevent their
enterohepatic reuptake in the ter-
minal ileum, which results in a de-
pletion of bile salts in the liver and
signals for increased production.
Because bile salts are synthesized
from intracellular cholesterol in the
liver, the intracellular pool of cho-
lesterol becomes depleted, which
signals increased production of LDL
TABLE 9-1 Acceptable, Borderline-High, and High Plasma Lipid, Lipoprotein, and
Apolipoprotein Concentrations for Children and Adolescents
Category
Low, mg/dLa
Acceptable, mg/dL
Borderline-High, mg/dL
High, mg/dLa
TC
—
170
170–199
200
LDL cholesterol
—
110
110–129
130
Non-HDL cholesterol
—
120
120–144
145
Apolipoprotein B
—
90
90–109
110
Triglycerides
0–9 y
—
75
75–99
100
10–19 y
—
90
90–129
130
HDL cholesterol
40
45
40–45
—
Apolipoprotein A-1
115
120
115–120
—
Values for plasma lipid and lipoprotein levels are from the NCEP Expert Panel on Cholesterol Levels in Children. Non-HDL
cholesterol values from the Bogalusa Heart Study are equivalent to the NCEP Pediatric Panel cut points for LDL cholesterol.
Values for plasma apolipoprotein B and apolipoprotein A-1 are from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey
III. Note that values shown are in mg/dL; to convert to SI units, divide the results for TC, LDL cholesterol, HDL cholesterol, and
non-HDL cholesterol by 38.6; for triglycerides, divide by 88.6.
a Low cut points for HDL cholesterol and apolipoprotein A-1 represent approximately the 10th percentile. The cut points for
high and borderline-high represent approximately the 95th and 75th percentiles, respectively.
TABLE 9-2 Recommended Cut Points for Lipid and Lipoprotein Levels in Young Adults
Category
Low, mg/dL
Borderline-Low,
mg/dL
Acceptable,
mg/dL
Borderline-High,
mg/dL
High, mg/dL
TC
—
—
190
190–224
225
LDL cholesterol
—
—
120
120–159
160
Non-HDL cholesterol
—
—
150
150–189
190
Triglycerides
—
—
115
115–149
150
HDL cholesterol
40
40–44
45
—
—
Values provided are from the Lipid Research Clinics Prevalence Study. The cut points for TC, LDL cholesterol, and non-HDL
cholesterol represent the 95th percentile for 20- to 24-year-old subjects and are not identical with the cut points used in the
most recent NHLBI adult guidelines, Adult Treatment Panel III (“Third Report of the Expert Panel on Detection, Evaluation, and
Treatment of High Blood Cholesterol in Adults”), which are derived from combined data on adults of all ages. The age-speciﬁc
cut points given here are provided for pediatric care providers to use in managing this young adult age group. For TC, LDL
cholesterol, and non-HDL cholesterol, borderline-high values are between the 75th and 94th percentiles, whereas accept-
able value are at the 75th percentile. The high triglyceride cut point represents approximately the 90th percentile;
borderline-high values are between the 75th and 89th percentiles, and acceptable values are at the 75th percentile. The
low HDL cholesterol cut point represents approximately the 25th percentile; borderline-low values are between the 26th and
50th percentiles, and acceptable values are at the 50th percentile.
TABLE 9-3 Causes of Secondary
Dyslipidemia
Exogenous
Alcohol
Drug therapy: corticosteroids
Isoretinoin
-blockers
Some oral contraceptives
Select chemotherapeutic agents
Select antiretroviral agents
Endocrine/metabolic
Hypothyroidism/hypopituitarism
T1DM and T2DM
Pregnancy
Polycystic ovary syndrome
Lipodystrophy
Acute intermittent porphyria
Renal
Chronic renal disease
Hemolytic uremic syndrome
Nephrotic syndrome
Infectious
Acute viral/bacterial infectiona
HIV
Hepatitis
Hepatic
Obstructive liver disease/cholestatic conditions
Biliary cirrhosis
Alagille syndrome
Inﬂammatory disease
Systemic lupus erythematosis
Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis
Storage disease
Glycogen-storage disease
Gaucher disease
Cystine-storage disease
Juvenile Tay-Sachs disease
Niemann-Pick disease
Other
Kawasaki disease
Anorexia nervosa
Post–solid organ transplantation
Childhood cancer survivor
Progeria
Idiopathic hypercalcemia
Klinefelter syndrome
Werner syndrome
a Delay measurement until 3 weeks after infection.
SUPPLEMENT ARTICLES
PEDIATRICS Volume 128, Supplement 5, December 2011
S237

----- Page 26 (native) -----
receptors and increased clearance
of circulating LDL cholesterol to re-
plenish the intracellular cholesterol
pool for increased production of
bile salts. Studies of bile acid se-
questrants in children and adoles-
cents aged 6 to 18 years with LDL
cholesterol levels from 131 to 190
mg/dL have resulted in TC reduction
of 7% to 17% and reduction of LDL
cholesterol of 10% to 20%, some-
times with a modest elevation in tri-
glyceride level. Bile acid seques-
trants commonly cause adverse
gastrointestinal effects that can sig-
niﬁcantly affect compliance. How-
ever, they are safe and moderately
effective (grade A).
●Statin medications inhibit hydroxy-
methylglutaryl coenzyme A reduc-
tase, which is a rate-limiting enzyme
in
the
endogenous
cholesterol-
synthesis pathway. This inhibition re-
sultsinadecreaseintheintracellular
pool of cholesterol, which signals up-
regulation of LDL receptors and in-
creased clearance of circulating LDL
cholesterol. As a group, statins have
beenshowntoreduceLDLcholesterol
in children and adolescents with
marked LDL cholesterol elevation or
familial hypercholesterolemia (de-
ﬁned as elevated LDL cholesterol in
the child in conjunction with a family
history of elevated LDL cholesterol
and/or atherosclerosis or CAD) when
used from 8 weeks to 2 years for chil-
drenaged8to18years.ThelowerLDL
cholesterol level for eligibility into the
statin trials was 190 or 160
mg/dLwith2additionalriskfactors
after a trial period on diet. Trial sub-
jects
were
monitored
carefully
throughout treatment; adverse ef-
fects on growth, development, or sex-
ual maturation were not seen, and
adverse-event proﬁles and efﬁcacy
were similar to those in studies of
adults (grade A).
●Adverse effects from statins are
rare at standard doses but include
myopathy and hepatic enzyme eleva-
tion.Inameta-analysisofstatinusein
children, evidence of hepatic enzyme
elevation and muscle toxicity did not
differ between the statin and placebo
groups.Routinemonitoringofhepatic
enzymes and clinical assessment for
muscle toxicity are strongly recom-
mended for children and adolescents
onstatintherapy(Table9-12).Therisk
of adverse events increases with use
of higher doses and interacting
drugs; the latter occurs primarily
with drugs that are metabolized by
the cytochrome P-450 system, which
is the primary mode of metabolism
for the majority of statins. Drugs that
potentially interact with statins in-
clude
ﬁbrates,
azole
antifungal
agents, macrolide antibiotics, antiar-
rhythmic agents, and protease inhibi-
tors (grade A).
●Bile acid–binding sequestrants may
be used in combination with a statin
for patients who fail to meet LDL cho-
lesterol target levels with either med-
ication alone. One pediatric study as-
sessedthiscombinationandfoundno
increase in adverse effects. The efﬁ-
cacyofthe2agentstogetherseemsto
be additive (grade B).
●There is limited published experience
in children of use of niacin and ﬁ-
brates, which have been useful in
treating adult patients with combined
dyslipidemias. Efﬁcacy and safety
dataarelimited,andnodataareavail-
ableregardingnewerformulations.In
adults, cholesterol absorption inhibi-
tors have been advocated as an ad-
junct to statin therapy for patients
who do not reach LDL cholesterol
therapeutic targets. Because their ac-
tion is independent of and comple-
mentarytothatofstatins,theLDLcho-
lesterol–lowering effect is additive.
No pediatric studies of monotherapy
withcholesterolabsorptioninhibitors
had been published during the time
period for this evidence review. The
useofniacin,ﬁbrates,andcholesterol
absorption inhibitors should be insti-
tuted only in consultation with a lipid
specialist (grade C).
●Medication therapy is rarely needed
for children with elevated triglycer-
ide levels that respond well to
weight loss and lifestyle changes
(grade B) (Fig 9-2; Table 9-8). When
triglyceride levels exceed 500 mg/
dL, patients are at risk for pancre-
TABLE 9-4 Summary of Major Lipid Disorders in Children and Adolescents
Primary Lipid Disorders
Lipid/Lipoprotein Abnormality
Familial hypercholesterolemia
Homozygous
11 LDL cholesterol
Heterozygous
1 LDL cholesterola
Familial defective apolipoprotein B
1 LDL cholesterol
Familial combined hyperlipidemiaa
Type IIa
1 LDL cholesterol
Type IV
1 VLDL cholesterol, 1 triglycerides
Type IIb
1 LDL cholesterol, 1 VLDL cholesterol, 1
triglycerides
Types IIb and IV
2 HDL cholesterol (often)
Polygenic hypercholesterolemia
1 LDL cholesterol
Familial hypertriglyceridemia (200–1000 mg/dL)
1 VLDL cholesterol, 1 triglycerides
Severe hypertriglyceridemia (1000 mg/dL)
1 chylomicrons, 1 VLDL cholesterol, 11
triglycerides
Familial hypoalphalipoproteinemia
2 HDL cholesterol
Dysbetalipoproteinemia (TC: 250–500 mg/dL;
triglycerides: 250–600 mg/dL)
1 IDL cholesterol, 1 chylomicron remnants
1 indicates increased; 2, decreased; IDL indicates intermediate-density lipoprotein; VLDL, very low density lipoprotein.
a These are the 2 lipid and lipoprotein disorders seen most frequently in childhood and adolescence; familial combined
hyperlipidemia most often manifests with obesity.
S238
EXPERT PANEL

----- Page 27 (native) -----
TABLE 9-5 Evidence-Based Recommendations for Lipid Assessment
Birth to 2 y
No lipid screening
Grade C
Recommend
2 to 8 y
No routine lipid screening
Grade B
Recommend
Measure fasting lipid proﬁle twice,a average results if:
Parent, grandparent, aunt/uncle, or sibling with
Grade B
MI, angina, stroke, CABG/stent/angioplasty at 55 y in males, 65 y in females
Strongly recommend
Parent with TC  240 mg/dL or known dyslipidemia
Grade B
Parent with TC  240 mg/dL or known dyslipidemia
Strongly recommend
Child has diabetes, hypertension, BMI  95th percentile or smokes cigarettes
Grade B
Strongly recommend
Child has a moderate- or high-risk medical condition (Table 5-2)
Grade B
Strongly recommend
Use Table 9-1 for interpretation of results, algorithms in Figs 9-1 and 9-2 for management.
9 to 11 y
Universal screening
Grade B
Strongly recommend
Non-FLP: Calculate non–HDL cholesterol:
Non–HDL cholesterol  TC  HDL cholesterol
If non-HDL  145 mg/dL  HDL  40 mg/dLb:
Obtain FLP twice,a average results
OR
FLP:
If LDL cholesterol  130 mg/dL  non-HDL cholesterol  145 mg/dL  HDL cholesterol  40 mg/dL  triglycerides  100 mg/dL
if 10 y, 130 mg/dL if 10 y:
Repeat FLP, average results
Use Table 9-1 for interpretation of results, algorithms in Figs 9-1 and 9-2 for management.
12 to 16 y
No routine screeningc
Grade B
Recommend
Measure FLP twice,a average results, if new knowledge of:
Parent, grandparent with MI, angina, stroke, CABG/stent/angioplasty, sudden death at 55 y in male, 65 y in female
Grade B
Strongly recommend
Parent with TC  240 mg/dL or known dyslipidemia
Grade B
Strongly recommend
Patient has diabetes, hypertension, BMI  85th percentile or smokes cigarettes
Grade B
Strongly recommend
Patient has a moderate- or high-risk medical condition (Table 5-2)
Grade B
Strongly recommend
Use Table 9-1 for interpretation of results, algorithms in Figs 9-1 and 9-2 for management.
17 to 21 y
Universal screening once in this time period:
Grade B
Recommend
Non-FLP: Calculate non–HDL cholesterol:
Non–HDL cholesterol  TC  HDL cholesterol*
17–19 y:
If non–HDL cholesterol 145 mg/dL  HDL cholesterol  40 mg/dLb
Measure FLP twice,a average results
OR
FLP:
If LDL cholesterol  130 mg/dL  non–HDL cholesterol  145 mg/dL  HDL cholesterol  40 mg/dL  triglycerides  130 mg/dL
Repeat FLP, average results
Use Table 9-1 for interpretation of results, algorithms in Figs 9-1 and 9-2 for management.
20–21 y:
Non–HDL cholesterol  190 mg/dL  HDL cholesterol  40 mg/dL
Measure FLP twice, average results
OR
FLP:
If LDL cholesterol  160 mg/dL  non–HDL cholesterol  190 mg/dL  HDL cholesterol  40 mg/dL  triglycerides  150 mg/dL
Repeat FLP, average results
Use Table 9-2 for interpretation of results, Adult Treatment Panel (ATP III) algorithm for management.
Grades reﬂect the ﬁndings of the evidence review, recommendation levels reﬂect the consensus opinion of the expert panel. Note that the values given are in mg/dL. To convert to SI units,
divide the results for TC, LDL cholesterol, HDL cholesterol, and non-HDL cholesterol by 38.6; for triglycerides, divide by 88.6. MI indicates myocardial infarction; CABG, coronary artery bypass
graft; ATP III, Adult Treatment Panel III.
a Interval between FLP measurements: after 2 weeks but within 3 months.
b Use Table 9-1 for interpretation of results; use lipid algorithms in Figs 9-1 and 9.2 for management of results.
c Disregard triglyceride and LDL cholesterol levels in nonfasting sample.
d Lipid screening is not recommended for those aged 12 to 16 years because of signiﬁcantly decreased sensitivity and speciﬁcity for predicting adult LDL cholesterol levels and signiﬁcantly
increased false-negative results in this age group. Selective screening is recommended for those with the clinical indications outlined.
e Use Table 9-1 for interpretation of results of 7- to 19-year-olds and lipid algorithms in Figs 9-1 and 9-2 for management. Use Table 17 for interpretation of results of 20- to 21-year-olds and
ATP III algorithms for management.
SUPPLEMENT ARTICLES
PEDIATRICS Volume 128, Supplement 5, December 2011
S239

----- Page 28 (native) -----
atitis and require care in consulta-
tion with a lipid specialist (grade B).
In adults, use of -3 ﬁsh oil has been
shown to lower the triglyceride level
by 30% to 40% and to raise the HDL
level by 6% to 17%. Experience with
ﬁsh oil in children has been limited to
small case series, and no safety con-
cerns identiﬁed; there have been no
RCTs of ﬁsh oil in children (grade D).
Age-Based Recommendations for
Medication Therapy of Children
with Dyslipidemia
The age-speciﬁc recommendations for
pharmacologic management of
dyslipidemia are summarized in Table
9-9. Children Younger Than 10 Years
●Children younger than 10 years
should not be treated with a medica-
tion unless they have a severe pri-
mary hyperlipidemia or a high-risk
condition that is associated with seri-
ous medical morbidity (homozygous
hypercholesterolemia/LDL choles-
terol level of 400 mg/dL; primary
hypertriglyceridemia with a tri-
glyceride level of 500 mg/dL; ev-
ident CVD in the ﬁrst 2 decades of
life;
post–cardiac
transplanta-
tion) (grade C).
Children Aged 10 to 21 Years
●Decisions regarding the need for
medication
therapy
should
be
based on the average of results
from at least 2 FLPs obtained at
least 2 weeks but no more than 3
months apart (grade C) (Fig 9-1).
●Children with an average LDL cho-
lesterol level of 250 mg/dL or av-
erage triglyceride level of 500
mg/dL should be referred directly to
a lipid specialist (grade B).
●Children with lipid abnormalities
should have a detailed family history
taken and be assessed for causes of
hyperlipidemia, additional risk fac-
tors, and risk conditions (grade C)
(Tables 9-3, 9-6, and 9-7).
●Children with lipid abnormalities
(other than an LDL cholesterol level
of 250 mg/dL or triglyceride level
of 500 mg/dL) should be managed
initially for 3 to 6 months with diet
changes (CHILD-1 ¡ CHILD-2–LDL or
CHILD-2–TG) (Table 9-8) on the basis
of speciﬁc lipid proﬁle ﬁndings (Figs
9-1 and 9-2); if the BMI is at the
85th percentile, add increased
physical activity, reduced screen
time, and calorie restriction. As-
sessment for associated secondary
causes (Table 9-3), additional risk
factors, or high-risk conditions (Ta-
bles 9-6 and 9-7) is recommended.
Children at high risk who are un-
likely to achieve lipid targets with
this strategy alone (severe primary
dyslipidemia, post–cardiac trans-
plantation) should concomitantly be
considered for initiation of medica-
tion therapy (grade C) (see “DM and
Other Conditions Predisposing to
the Development of Accelerated
Atherosclerosis”).
Treatment for children with severe el-
evation of LDL cholesterol is based on
assessment of lipid levels and associ-
ated risk factors or risk conditions (Ta-
bles 9-6 and 9-7; Figs 9-1 and 9-2):
●Children with an average LDL cho-
lesterol level of 250 mg/dL should
be referred directly to a lipid spe-
cialist (grade B).
●If the LDL cholesterol level remains
190 mg/dL after a 6-month trial of
lifestyle/diet management (CHILD-1
¡ CHILD-2–LDL) for children aged
10 years and older, statin therapy
should be considered (grade A) (Fig
9-1; Table 9-11 and 9-12).
●If the LDL cholesterol level remains
130 to 190 mg/dL in a child aged
10 years or older with a negative
family history of premature CVD in
ﬁrst-degree relatives and no high-
or moderate-level risk factor or risk
condition (Tables 9-6 and 9-7), man-
TABLE 9-6 Risk-Factor Deﬁnitions for Dyslipidemia Algorithms
Positive family history: myocardial infarction, angina, coronary artery bypass graft/stent/angioplasty,
sudden cardiac death in parent, grandparent, aunt, or uncle at 55 y for males, 65 y for females
High-level RFs
Hypertension that requires drug therapy (BP  99th percentile  5 mm Hg)
Current cigarette smoker
BMI at the 97th percentile
Presence of high-risk conditions (Table 9-7)
(DM is also a high-level RF, but it is classiﬁed here as a high-risk condition to correspond with Adult
Treatment Panel III recommendations for adults that DM be considered a CVD equivalent.)
Moderate-level RFs
Hypertension that does not require drug therapy
BMI at the 95th percentile, 97th percentile
HDL cholesterol  40 mg/dL
Presence of moderate-risk conditions (Table 9-7)
RF indicates risk factor.
TABLE 9-7 Special Risk Conditions
High risk
T1DM and T2DM
Chronic kidney disease/end-stage renal disease/post–renal transplant
Post–orthotopic heart transplant
Kawasaki disease with current aneurysms
Moderate risk
Kawasaki disease with regressed coronary aneurysms
Chronic inﬂammatory disease (systemic lupus erythematosus, juvenile rheumatoid arthritis)
HIV infection
Nephrotic syndrome
S240
EXPERT PANEL

----- Page 29 (native) -----
agement should continue to be fo-
cused on diet changes (CHILD-2–
LDL) on the basis of lipid proﬁle
ﬁndings (Fig 9-1) plus weight man-
agement if BMI is at the 85th per-
centile. Pharmacologic therapy is
not generally indicated, but treat-
ment with bile acid sequestrants
might be considered, the latter in
consultation with a lipid specialist
(grade B).
●If the LDL cholesterol level remains
160 to 189 mg/dL after a trial of
lifestyle/diet management (CHILD-1
¡ CHILD-2–LDL) in a child aged 10
years or older with a positive family
history of premature CVD/events in
ﬁrst-degree relatives (Table 9-6) or
at least 1 high-level risk factor or
risk
condition
or
at
least
2
moderate-level risk factors or risk
conditions (Tables 9-6 and 9-7), then
statin therapy should be considered
(grade B) (Fig 3; Table 27).
●If the LDL cholesterol level remains
130 to 159 mg/dL after a trial of
lifestyle/diet management (CHILD-1
¡ CHILD-2–LDL) in a child aged 10
years or older with at least 2 high-
level risk factors or risk conditions
or at least 1 high-level risk factor or
risk condition together with at least
2 moderate-level risk factors or risk
conditions (Tables 21 and 22), then
statin therapy should be considered
(grade C) (Fig 9-1; Table 9-12).
●For children aged 8 or 9 years with
an LDL cholesterol level persistently
190 mg/dL after a trial of lifestyle/
diet management (CHILD-1 ¡ CHILD-
2–LDL), together with multiple ﬁrst-
degree
family
members
with
premature CVD/events, or the pres-
ence of at least 1 high-level risk fac-
tor or risk condition or the presence
of at least 2 moderate-level risk fac-
tors or risk conditions (Fig 9-1) (Ta-
bles 9-6 and 9-7), statin therapy
might be considered (grade B) (Ta-
ble 9-12)).
●Statin use should begin with the
lowest available dose given once
daily. If LDL cholesterol target levels
are not achieved with at least 3
months of compliant use, then the
dose may be increased by 1 incre-
ment (usually 10 mg). If LDL choles-
terol target levels are still not
achieved with at least 3 months of
compliant use, then the dose may be
further increased by 1 increment.
The risk and effectiveness of dose
escalation have been explored in
several of the clinical trials of st-
atins in children, and no additional
safety issues have been identiﬁed
(grade B). Alternatively, a second
agent such as a bile acid seques-
trant or cholesterol absorption in-
hibitor may be added under the di-
rection of a lipid specialist (grade B)
(Table 9-12).
●Children taking a statin should have
routine
clinical
monitoring
for
symptoms of muscle toxicity and as-
sessment of hepatic transaminases
and creatine kinase (grade A) (Ta-
ble 9-12).
●Pediatric care providers should be
on the alert for, and children and
their families should be counseled
about, potential medication interac-
tions (grade D) (Table 9-12).
LDL-C > 190 mg/dL
 Initiate statin therapy
(Tables 9-1 and 9-12)
Exclude secondary causes.
Evaluate for other RFs.
Start CHILD-1 
CHILD-2–LDL (Table 9-8) + lifestyle change x 6 moc
FLP 
FLP x 2a, average 
LDL-C > 130, < 250 mg/dL **
 Target LDL-C
TG > 100, < 500 mg/dL, < 10 y     Target TG
> 130, < 500 mg/dL, 10-19 y   
(see TG algorithm, Figure 9-2)    
LDL-C > 250 mg/dL
 Consult lipid 
specialist
TG > 500 mg/dL,
 Consult lipid 
specialist
LDL-C < 130 mg/dL
 Continue CHILD-2–LDL
 Repeat FLP every 12 mo
LDL-C > 130 to -189 mg/dL
FHx (-)
No other RFs
 Continue CHILD-2–LDL,
Follow every 6 mo with FLP,   
FHx/RF update
LDL-C > 160 to -189 mg/dL
FHx (+) or
1 high-level RF or
> 2 moderate-level RFs
 Initiate statin therapy
(Tables 9-11 and 9-12)
LDL-C > 130 to -159 mg/dL +
2 high-level RFs or
1 high-level + > 2 moderate-
level RFs OR clinical CVD
 Initiate statin therapy
(Tables 9-11 and 9-12)
Follow with FLPs, related chemistries per Table 9-12
 LDL-C still > 130 mg/dL, TG < 200 mg/dL, refer to lipid specialist for addition of 
second lipid-lowering agent; monitor per Table 9-12
 In high LDL-C patients, if non–HDL-C > 145 mg/dL after effective LDL-C treatment,
 Target TG (Fig 9-2)
LDL-C > 130, < 250 mg/dLb
 Target LDL-C
TG > 100, < 500 mg/dL, < 10 y     Target TG
> 130, < 500 mg/dL, 10–19 y   
(see TG algorithm, Fig 9-2)
FIGURE 9-1
Dyslipidemia algorithm: target LDL cholesterol. Values given are in mg/dL. To convert to SI units,
divide results for TC, LDL cholesterol, HDL cholesterol, and non-HDL cholesterol by 38.6; for triglycer-
ides, divide by 88.6. TG indicates triglycerides; C, cholesterol; RF, risk factor; FHx, family history; a
Obtain FLPs at least 2 weeks but no more than 3 months apart. b Per Table 9-9, use of drug therapy is
limited to children aged 10 years and older with deﬁned risk proﬁles. c In a child with an LDL
cholesterol level of 190 mg/dL and other risk factors, a trial of the CHILD-2–LDL may be abbreviated.
SUPPLEMENT ARTICLES
PEDIATRICS Volume 128, Supplement 5, December 2011
S241

----- Page 30 (native) -----
●Females taking a statin should be
counseled about risks associated
with pregnancy and appropriate
contraception strategies if indi-
cated. Use of oral contraceptives in
combination with statins is not con-
traindicated (grade D) (Table 9-12).
Children with elevated triglyceride or
non-HDL cholesterol after control of
LDL cholesterol are managed on the
basis of lipid levels (Fig 9-2):
●Children with average fasting tri-
glyceride levels of 500 mg/dL or
any single measurement of 1000
mg/dL related to a primary hypertri-
glyceridemia should be treated in
conjunction with a lipid specialist;
the CHILD-2–TG (Table 9-8) should be
started, and use of ﬁsh oil, ﬁbrate,
or niacin to prevent pancreatitis
should be considered (grade D) (Fig
9-2) (Tables 9-10 and 9-11).
●Children with fasting triglyceride
levels of 200 to 499 mg/dL after a
trial of lifestyle/diet management
with CHILD-1 ¡ CHILD-2–TG (Table
9-8) should have non-HDL recalcu-
lated and be managed to a goal
level
of
145
mg/dL
(grade
D).
●Children with fasting triglyceride
levels of 200 to 499 mg/dL, non-
HDL levels of 145 mg/dL, after a
trial of lifestyle/diet management
with CHILD-1 ¡ CHILD-2–TG (Table
9-8) and increased ﬁsh intake, may
be considered for ﬁsh-oil supple-
mentation (grade D) (Table 9-10).
●Children aged 10 years or older with
non-HDL cholesterol levels of 145
mg/dL after the LDL cholesterol goal
has been achieved may be consid-
ered for further intensiﬁcation of
statin therapy or additional therapy
with a ﬁbrate or niacin in conjunc-
tion with referral to a lipid specialist
(grade D) (Fig 9-1) (Tables 9-10 and
9-11).
●Children with severe or complex
mixed dyslipidemias, particularly
when multiple medications are be-
ing considered, should be re-
ferred for consultation with a lipid
specialist (grade D) (Figs 9-1 and
9-2).
10. OVERWEIGHT AND OBESITY
The dramatic increases in childhood
overweight and obesity in the United
States since 1980 are an important
public health focus. Despite efforts
over the last decade to prevent and
control obesity, recent reports from
the National Health and Nutrition Ex-
amination Survey14 show sustained
high prevalence; 17% of children and
adolescents have a BMI at the 95th
percentile for age and gender. The
presence of obesity in childhood and
adolescence is associated with in-
creased evidence of atherosclerosis
at autopsy and of subclinical mea-
sures of atherosclerosis on vascular
imaging. Because of its strong asso-
ciation with many of the other estab-
lished risk factors for cardiovascu-
lar disease, obesity is even more
powerfully correlated with athero-
sclerosis; this association has been
shown for BP, dyslipidemia, and insu-
lin resistance in each of the major
pediatric epidemiologic studies. Of
all the risk factors, obesity tracks
most strongly from childhood into
adult life. Improvement in weight sta-
tus and decrease in body fatness
have been shown to be associated
with improvement in all the obesity-
related risk factors and in subclini-
cal vascular changes. Higher BMI
during childhood is directly associ-
ated with increased coronary heart
disease in adult life. Extrapolation
from current data suggests that ad-
FLP
LDL-C > 130, < 250 mg/dL **             Target LDL-C
(see LDL algorithm, Figure 9-1)
TG > 100, < 500 mg/dL, < 10 y          Target TG 
> 130, < 500 mg/dL, 10-19 y  
TARGET TGs --> Cardiovascular Health Integrated 
Lifestyle Diet (CHILD 1)  CHILD 2 TG diet (Table 9–
needed × 6 months
TG < 100 mg/dL <10 y,
< 130 mg/dL, 10–19 y
 Continue CHILD-2–TG
+ lifestyle change
 Reassess q 12 mo
TG > 100, < 200 mg/dL, <10 y
> 130, < 200 mg/dL, 10–19y
 Intensify CHILD-2–TG + WT loss
 Increase dietary fish contentb
 Repeat FLP in 6 mo
TG > 200–499 mg/dL
 If LDL-C target achieved and non-HDL 
> 145 mg/dL  lipid specialist for drug
therapy (statin±fibrate±nicotinic acid)
 Consider ω-3 fish-oil therapy
FLP x 2a, average results
TG > 500 mg/dL,
 Consult lipid 
specialist
LDL-C > 250 mg/dL
 Consult lipid 
specialist
TARGET TGs  CHILD-1  CHILD-2–TG diet (Table 9-8) +
lifestyle modification with WT-loss goal as needed × 6 mo
LDL-C > 130, < 250 mg/dL
 Target LDL-C
(see LDL algorithm, Fig 9-1)
TG > 100, < 500 mg/dL, < 10 y          Target TG 
> 130, < 500 mg/dL, 10–19 y
FIGURE 9-2
Dyslipidemia algorithm: target triglycerides. Values given are in mg/dL. To convert to SI units, divide
results for TC, LDL cholesterol, HDL cholesterol, and non-HDL cholesterol by 38.6; for triglycerides,
divide by 88.6. C indicates cholesterol; a Obtain FLPs at least 2 weeks but no more than 3 months
apart. b The FDA and the Environmental Protection Agency advise women of childbearing age who
may become pregnant, pregnant women, nursing mothers, and young children to avoid some
types of ﬁsh and shellﬁsh and to eat ﬁsh and shellﬁsh that are lower in mercury. For more in-
formation,
call
the
FDA’s
food
information
line
toll-free
at
1-888-SAFEFOOD
or
visit
www.cfsan.fda.gov/~dms/admehg3.html.
S242
EXPERT PANEL

----- Page 31 (native) -----
olescent obesity will likely increase
adult coronary heart disease by 5%
to 16% over the next 25 years with
100 000 excess cases of coronary
heart disease attributable to in-
creased obesity in childhood. The
evidence review included RCTs, sys-
tematic reviews, meta-analyses, and
observational studies that assessed
the prevention and treatment of
overweight and obesity in childhood
and adolescence.
Identiﬁcation of Overweight and
Obese Children and Adolescents
To identify overweight and obesity in
children living in the United States, BMI
percentile distributions relative to
gender and age on the Centers for Dis-
ease Control and Prevention (CDC)
2000 growth charts15 are now the pre-
ferred reference. The CDC growth
charts were not developed as a health-
related standard. Instead, the growth
charts present percentiles of the BMI
distribution derived from measure-
ments taken during several National
Health and Nutrition Examination Sur-
veys as points of reference. Although
the charts were published in 2000, they
include selected data from the 1963
through 1980 surveys and, thus, are
not representative of the US popula-
tion in 2000. These BMI percentile
growth charts provide the best refer-
ence data available for describing nor-
mal growth in US children. They are,
however, a screening tool and not an
instrument for the diagnosis of over-
weight and obesity.
An expert committee jointly convened
by the American Medical Association
(AMA), the CDC, and the Maternal and
Child Health Bureau (MCHB) of the
Health Resources and Services Admin-
istration (US Department of Health and
Human Services)16 recently recom-
mended that BMI be used to assess
weight-for-height relationships in chil-
dren. This conclusion was reached be-
cause BMI can be easily calculated
from height and weight, correlates
strongly with direct measures of body
fat (especially at higher BMI values),
associates only weakly with height,
and identiﬁes those with the highest
body fat correctly with acceptable ac-
curacy, particularly above the 85th BMI
percentile. Pediatric care providers
need a feasible standard for identify-
ing overweight and obesity in their
patients, because parents recognize
a child’s overweight status in fewer
than half of the cases. The AMA/CDC/
MCHB expert committee16 deﬁned a
BMI at the 95th percentile as obese
and a BMI between the 85th and 94th
percentiles as overweight; children
in the latter BMI category have a
great deal of variation with respect
to prediction of future risk. The ex-
pert panel for these guidelines con-
cluded that BMI is a sufﬁcient mea-
sure for screening children and
TABLE 9-8 Evidence-Based Recommendations for Dietary Management of Elevated LDL
Cholesterol, Non-HDL Cholesterol, and Triglyceride Levels
2 to 21 y
Elevated LDL cholesterol: CHILD-2–LDL
Refer to a registered dietitian for family medical nutrition therapy
Grade B
Strongly
recommend
25%–30% of calories from fat, 7% from saturated fat, 10%
from monounsaturated fat; 200 mg/d of cholesterol;
avoid trans fats as much as possible
Grade A
Recommend
Supportive actions:
Plant sterol esters and/or plant stanol estersa up to 2 g/d as
replacement for usual fat sources can be used after 2 y of
age in children with familial hypercholesterolemia
Plant stanol esters as part of a regular diet are marketed
directly to the public; short-term studies have found no
harmful effects in healthy children
The water-soluble ﬁber psyllium can be added to a low-fat, low-
saturated-fat diet as cereal enriched with psyllium at a
dose of 6 g/d for children 2–12 y of age and 12 g/d for
those 12 y of age
As for all children, 1 h/d of moderate-to-vigorous physical
activity and 2 h/d of sedentary screen time are
recommended.
Elevated triglycerides or non-HDL cholesterol: CHILD-2–TG
Refer to a registered dietitian for family medical nutrition
therapyb
Grade B
Strongly
recommend
25%–30% of calories from fat, 7% from saturated fat, 10%
from monounsaturated fat; 200 mg/d of cholesterol;
avoid trans fats as much as possible
Grade A
Recommend
Decrease sugar intake
Grade B
Recommend
Replace simple with complex carbohydrates
No sugar-sweetened beverages
Increase dietary ﬁsh to increase -3 fatty acidsc
Grade D
Recommend
Grades reﬂect the ﬁndings of the evidence review; recommendation levels reﬂect the consensus opinion of the expert
panel; and supportive actions represent expert consensus suggestions from the expert panel provided to support
implementation of the recommendations (they are not graded). Values given are in mg/dL. To convert to SI units, divide the
results for TC, LDL cholesterol, HDL cholesterol, and non-HDL cholesterol by 38.6; for triglycerides, divide by 88.6.
a Can be found added to some foods, such as some margarines.
b If the child is obese, nutrition therapy should include calorie restriction, and increased activity (beyond that recommended
for all children) should be prescribed. See “Overweight and Obesity” for additional age-speciﬁc recommendations.
c The FDA and the Environmental Protection Agency advise women of childbearing age who may become pregnant, pregnant
women, nursing mothers, and young children to avoid some types of ﬁsh and shellﬁsh and eat ﬁsh and shellﬁsh that are low
in mercury. For more information, call the FDA’s food information line toll-free at 1-888-SAFEFOOD or visit
www.cfsan.fda.gov/~dms/admehg3.html.
SUPPLEMENT ARTICLES
PEDIATRICS Volume 128, Supplement 5, December 2011
S243

----- Page 32 (native) -----
adolescents to identify those who
need evaluation for cardiovascular
risk factors associated with body ad-
iposity. The expert panel also con-
cluded that the scientiﬁc evidence
linking elevated BMI to cardiovascu-
lar risk factors and morbidity is
strong and well supported.
The expert panel therefore recom-
mends that children and adolescents
aged 2 to 18 years with a BMI at the
95th percentile be described as
“obese” and identiﬁed as needing as-
sessment for cardiovascular risk fac-
tors. For children with a BMI that falls
between the 85th and 95th percen-
tiles, the term “overweight” should
be used, and the position of the
child’s BMI on the growth chart
should be used to express concern
regarding weight-for-height dispro-
portion. It is important to follow the
pattern of growth over time by using
these cut points to identify children
TABLE 9-9 Evidence-Based Recommendations for Pharmacologic Treatment of Dyslipidemia
Birth to 10
y
Pharmacologic treatment is limited to children with severe primary hyperlipidemia (homozygous familial
hypercholesterolemia, primary hypertriglyceridemia [triglycerides  500 mg/dL]), a high-risk condition
(Tables 9-6 and 9-7), or evident cardiovascular disease, all under the care of a lipid specialist
Grade C
Recommend
10 to 21 y
Detailed family history and RF assessment required before initiation of drug therapya (high- to moderate-level RFs
and RCs are listed in Tables 9-6 and 9-7)
Grade C
Strongly recommend
LDL cholesterol
If average LDL cholesterol  250 mg/dLa, consult lipid specialist
Grade B
Strongly recommend
If average LDL cholesterol  130–250 mg/dL, or non-HDL  145 mg/dL:
Refer to dietitian for medical nutrition therapy with CHILD-1 ¡ CHILD-2–LDL (Table 9-8) for 6 mo; repeat
FLP
Grade A
Strongly recommend
Repeat FLP
LDL cholesterol  130 mg/dL, continue CHILD-2–LDL, reevaluate in 12 mo
Grade A
Strongly recommend
LDL cholesterol  190 mg/dL,b consider initiation of statin therapy per Tables 9-11 and 9-12
Grade A
Strongly recommend
LDL cholesterol  130–189 mg/dL, negative family history, no other RF or RC, continue CHILD-2–LDL,
reevaluate every 6 mo
Grade B
Recommend
LDL cholesterol  160–189 mg/dL  positive family history or 1 high-level RF/RC or 2 moderate-level
RFs/RCs, consider statin therapy per Tables 9-11 and 9-12
Grade B
Recommend
LDL cholesterol  130–159 mg/dL  2 high-level RFs/RCs or 1 high-level  2 moderate-level RFs/RCs,
consider statin therapy per Tables 9-11 and 9-12
Grade B
Recommend
Children on statin therapy should be counseled and carefully monitored per Table 9-12
Grade A
Strongly recommend
10 to 21 y
Detailed family history and RF/RC assessment required before initiation of drug therapya (high- and moderate-
level RFs/RCs in Tables 9-6 and 9-7c)
Grade C
Strongly recommend
Triglycerides
If average triglycerides  500 mg/dL, consult lipid specialist
Grade B
Recommend
If average triglycerides  100 mg/dL in a child aged 10 y, 130 mg/dL in a child aged 10–19 y, or 500
mg/dL:
Refer to dietitian for medical nutrition therapy with CHILD-1 ¡ CHILD-2–TG (Table 9-8) for 6 mo
Grade B
Strongly recommend
Repeat FLP
Triglycerides  100 (130) mg/dL, continue CHILD-2–TG, monitor every 6–12 mo
Grade B
Strongly recommend
Triglycerides  100 (130) mg/dL, reconsult dietitian for intensiﬁed CHILD-2–TG diet counseling
Grade C
Recommend
Triglycerides  200–499 mg/dL, non-HDL  145 mg/dL, consider ﬁsh oil  consult lipid specialist
Grade D
Recommend
Non-HDL cholesterol
Children aged 10 y with non-HDL cholesterol  145 mg/dL after LDL cholesterol goal is achieved may be
considered for additional treatment with statins, ﬁbrates, or niacin in conjunction with a lipid specialist
consultation
Grade D
Optional
Grades reﬂect the ﬁndings of the evidence review, and recommendation levels reﬂect the consensus opinion of the expert panel. When medication is recommended, it should always be
in the context of the complete cardiovascular risk proﬁle of the patient and in consultation with the patient and the family. Values given are in mg/dL. To convert to SI units, divide the results
for TC, LDL cholesterol, HDL cholesterol, and non-HDL cholesterol by 38.6; for triglycerides, divide by 88.6. RF indicates risk factor; RC, risk condition.
a Consideration of drug therapy is based on the average of 2 FLPs, obtained at least 2 weeks but no more than 3 months apart.
b If average LDL cholesterol  190 mg/dL after CHILD-2–LDL and child is 8 to 9 years old with a positive family history or 1 high-level risk factor/risk condition or 2 moderate-level risk
factors/risk conditions, statin therapy may be considered.
c If the child is obese, nutrition therapy should include calorie restriction and increased activity beyond that recommended for all children. See “Overweight and Obesity” for additional
age-speciﬁc recommendations.
S244
EXPERT PANEL

----- Page 33 (native) -----
who require more frequent follow-up
and further assessment rather than
to assign a diagnosis. Some might
feel that “obese” is an unacceptable
term for children and parents, so as
with all health conditions, the practi-
tioner is encouraged to use descrip-
tive terminology that is appropriate
for each child and family and to pro-
TABLE 9-10 Medications for Managing Hyperlipidemia
Type of
Medication
Mechanism of Action
Major Effects
Examples
Adverse Reactions
FDA Approval in Youths (as of
This Writing)
HMG-CoA reductase
inhibitors
(statins)
Inhibits cholesterol synthesis
in hepatic cells; decreases
cholesterol pool, resulting
in upregulation of LDL
receptors
Mainly lowers LDL
cholesterol; some
decrease in
triglycerides and
modest increase in
HDL cholesterol
Atorvastatin, ﬂuvastatin,
lovastatin,
pravastatin,
rosuvastatin,
simvastatin
Raised hepatic enzymes,
raised creatine kinase,
myopathy possibly
progressing to
rhabdomyolysis
All statins listed are approved as
an adjunct to diet to lower LDL
cholesterol in adolescent boys
and postmenarcheal girls aged
10–18 y (8 y for pravastatin)
with heFH and LDL cholesterol
190 mg/dL, or 160 mg/dL
with family history of
premature CVD and 2 CVD
risk factors in the pediatric
patient
Bile acid
sequestrants
Binds intestinal bile acids,
interrupting enterohepatic
recirculation; more
cholesterol converted into
bile acids; decreases
hepatic cholesterol pool;
upregulates LDL receptors
Lowers LDL cholesterol;
small increase in
HDL cholesterol;
raises triglycerides
Cholestyramine,
colestipol,
colesevelam
Limited to gastrointestinal
tract: gas, bloating,
constipation, cramps
No pediatric indication listed for
cholestyramine or colestipol;
colesevelam indicated as
monotherapy or with statin for
LDL cholesterol reduction in
boys and postmenarcheal girls
aged 10–17 y with family history
after diet trial if LDL cholesterol
 190 mg/dL or if LDL
cholesterol  160 mg/dL with
family history of premature CVD
or 2 CVD risk factors in the
pediatric patient
Cholesterol
absorption
inhibitors
Inhibits intestinal absorption
of cholesterol and plant
sterols; decreases hepatic
cholesterol pool;
upregulates LDL receptors
Mainly lowers LDL
cholesterol; some
decrease in
triglycerides and
small increase in
HDL cholesterol
Ezetimibe
Myopathy, gastrointestinal
upset, headache
Not approved
Fibric acid
derivatives
Agonist for PPAR- nuclear
receptors that upregulate
LPL and downregulate
apolipoprotein C-III, both
increasing degradation of
VLDL cholesterol and
triglycerides; hepatic
synthesis of VLDL
cholesterol may also be
decreased
Mainly lowers
triglycerides and
raises HDL
cholesterol; little
effect on LDL
cholesterol
Fenoﬁbrate, gemﬁbrozil Dyspepsia, constipation,
myositis, anemia
Not approved
Nicotinic acid
(extended
release)
Inhibits release of FFA from
adipose tissue; decreases
VLDL and LDL cholesterol
production and HDL
cholesterol degradation
Lowers triglycerides
and LDL cholesterol
and raises HDL
cholesterol; can
decrease
lipoprotein(a)
Niacin, extended release Flushing, hepatic toxicity,
can increase fasting
blood glucose, uric
acid; can cause
hyperacidity
Use not recommended in
children 2 y old
-3 ﬁsh oil
Decreases hepatic FA and
triglycerides synthesis
while enhancing FA
degradation/oxidation,
with subsequent reduced
VLDL cholesterol release
Lowers triglycerides;
raises HDL
cholesterol; increases
LDL cholesterol and
LDL cholesterol
particle size
-3 acid ethyl esters
Occasional adverse
gastrointestinal effects
but no adverse effect
on glucose levels or
muscle or liver
enzymes or bleeding
Only 1 ﬁsh-oil preparation is
FDA-approved for adults, but
many generic ﬁsh-oil capsules
are commercially available
HMG-CoA indicates hydroxymethylglutaryl coenzyme A; heFH, heterozygous hypercholesterolemia; PPAR-, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor; LPL, lipoprotein lipase; VLDL, very low
density lipoprotein; FFA, free fatty acid; FA, fatty acid.
Adapted from McCrindle BW, Urbina EM, Dennison BA, et al; American Heart Association Atherosclerosis, Hypertension, and Obesity in Youth Committee; American Heart Association, Council
of Cardiovascular Disease in the Young; American Heart Association, Council on Cardiovascular Nursing. Circulation. 2007;115(14):1948–1967.
SUPPLEMENT ARTICLES
PEDIATRICS Volume 128, Supplement 5, December 2011
S245

----- Page 34 (native) -----
TABLE 9-11 Clinical Trials of Lipid-Lowering Medication Therapy in Children and Adolescents
Study Authors, Type,
and Duration
Medication
No. of Subjects, Gender, Condition
Daily Dose
Effect on Lipid Proﬁle, %
TC
LDL
Cholesterol
HDL
Cholesterol
Triglycerides
Bile acid–binding resins
Tonstad et al, RCT, 1 y
Cholestyramine
72, male and female, FH (LDL  190 mg/dL
without family history of premature
CVD or LDL  160 with family history
after 1-y diet; ages 6–11 y)
8 g
12
17
8
NA
McCrindle et al, RCT
crossover, 2  8
wk
Cholestyramine
40, male and female, FH (1 parent with FH;
LDL cholesterol  131 mg/dL; on diet;
ages 10–18 y)
8 g
7 to 11
10 to 15
2 to 4
6 to 9
Tonstad et al, RCT, 8
wk; open label,
44–52 wk
Colestipol
66, male and female, FH (TC  239 mg/dL
and triglycerides  115 mg/dL; ages
10–16 y)
2–12 g
17
20
7
13
McCrindle et al, RCT
crossover, 2  18
wk
Colestipol
36, male and female, FH/FCHL (LDL  160
mg/dL after 6 mo of diet counseling;
ages 8–18 y)
10 g
7
10
2
12
Stein et al , RCT, 8 wk;
open label, 18 wk
Colesevelam
191, male and female, FH (LDL  190 mg/
dL or LDL  plus 2 additional risk
factors after 6 mo of diet counseling;
ages 10–17 y
1.87 g
3
6
5
6
3.75 g
7
13
8
5
HMG-CoA reductase
inhibitors (statins)
McCrindle et al, RCT;
open label, 26 wk
Atorvastatin
187, male and female, FH/severe
hyperlipidemia (LDL cholesterol  190
mg/dL or LDL cholesterol  160 mg/dL
with family history; triglycerides  400
mg/dL; ages 10 – 17 y)
10–20 mg
30
40
6
13
Van der Graaf et al,
open label, 2 y
Fluvastatin
85, male and female, FH (LDL cholesterol
 190 mg/dL or LDL cholesterol  160
mg/dL and 1 risk factor or LDL
receptor mutation; ages 10–16 y)
80 mg
27
34
5
5
Lambert et al, RCT, 8
wk
Lovastatin
69, male, FH (LDL cholesterol  95th
percentile, family history of
atherosclerosis and hyperlipidemia; on
diet; mean age: 13 y)
10 mg
17
21
9
18
20 mg
19
24
2
9
30 mg
21
27
11
3
40 mg
29
36
3
9
Stein et al, RCT, 48 wk
Lovastatin
132, male, FH (LDL 189–503 mg/dL 
family history of high LDL; or 220–503
mg/dL  family history of CAD death;
AHA diet 4 mo; ages 10–17 y)
10 mg
13
17
4
4
20 mg
19
24
4
8
40 mg
21
27
5
6
Clauss et al, RCT, 24
wk
Lovastatin
54, female, FH (family history of FH; LDL
160–400 mg/dL and triglycerides  350
mg/dL; 4-wk diet placebo run-in and
20-wk treatment; ages 10–17 y,
postmenarcheal)
40 mg
22
27
3
23
Knipscheer et al, RCT,
12 wk
Pravastatin
72, male and female, FH (family history
hypercholesterolemia or premature
atherosclerosis; LDL  95th percentile;
diet for 8 wk; ages 8–16 y)
5 mg
18
23
4
2
10 mg
17
24
6
7
20 mg
25
33
11
3
Wiegman et al, RCT, 2
y
Pravastatin
214, male and female, FH (LDL cholesterol
 155 mg/dL and triglycerides  350
mg/dL; diet for 3 mo; ages 8–18 y)
20–40 mg
19
24
6
17
Rodenburg et al,
open-label, 2-y RCT;
4.5-y open-label
follow-up
Pravastatin
186, male and female, FH (LDL cholesterol
 154 mg/dL and triglycerides  154
mg/dL; diet for 3 mo; ages 8–18 y)
20 mg (ages
14 y) or
40 mg
(ages 
14 y)
23
29
3
2
de Jongh et al, RCT,
48 wk
Simvastatin
173, male and female, FH (LDL cholesterol
 158–397 mg/dL; ages 10–17 y)
10–40 mg
31
41
3
9
de Jongh et al, RCT,
28 wk
Simvastatin
50, male and female, FH (LDL cholesterol
 95th percentile, family history of
hyperlipidemia, or LDL receptor
mutation; ages 9–18 y)
40 mg
30
40
5
17
S246
EXPERT PANEL

----- Page 35 (native) -----
vide a thorough explanation and dis-
cussion. Each patient and family
should be considered on an individ-
ual basis in deciding how best to con-
vey the seriousness of this issue and
to develop management plans.
Conclusions of the Evidence Review on
Prevention of Overweight and Obesity
With Diet or Combined Diet and
Physical Activity Interventions
The expert panel concluded that there
is good evidence that the dietary be-
havior of children can safely be im-
proved with interventions that result
in lower saturated fat intake, reduced
intake of sweetened beverages, and in-
creased fruit and vegetable consump-
tion. In a small number of studies,
these changes were associated with
lower BMI. No evidence that diets of
this kind are harmful was identiﬁed.
Most studies also had speciﬁc inter-
ventions aimed at changing physical
activity behaviors, so it is difﬁcult to
separate beneﬁts related to diet
change alone. Although calorie bal-
ance is generally seen as a key issue
for weight control, intervention stud-
ies that addressed both diet and phys-
ical activity had mixed results, per-
haps because most of them offered
relatively weak interventions at the
community level rather than targeting
individual at-risk youths.
The guideline recommendations for
diet and nutrition for children at ele-
vated cardiovascular risk (CHILD-1)
(Table 5-1; “Nutrition and Diet”) specif-
ically address optimizing the diet in
each of these areas as well as increas-
ing intake of whole grains and match-
ing energy intake to growth and
expenditure. For healthy children, im-
plementation of the CHILD-1 dietary
recommendations with monitoring of
BMI and dietary intake over time
should be all that is needed from a nu-
tritional standpoint to prevent obesity.
No additional recommendations are
indicated on the basis of this evidence
review.
TABLE 9-11 Continued
Study Authors, Type,
and Duration
Medication
No. of Subjects, Gender, Condition
Daily Dose
Effect on Lipid Proﬁle, %
TC
LDL
Cholesterol
HDL
Cholesterol
Triglycerides
Avis et al, RCT, 12 wk;
then, 40-wk open-
label follow-up
Rosuvastatin
177, male and female, FH (LDL cholesterol 
190 mg/dL or LDL cholesterol  160 mg/
dL plus positive family history of early
CVD or 2 other risk factors for CVD)
5 mg
30
38
4
13
10 mg
34
45
10
15
20 mg
39
50
9
16
Other agents
Wheeler et al, RCT, 26
wk
Bezaﬁbrate
14, male and female, FH (TC  269 mg/dL,
normal triglycerides  family history
of FH or premature CAD; ages 4–15 y)
10–20 mg
22
NC
15
23
Colletti et al, open
label, 1–19 mo
Niacin
21, male and female, FH (mean LDL 
243  45 mg/dL on low-fat diet; mean
triglycerides  87  39 mg/dL; ages
4–14 y)
500–2200
mg
13
17
4
13
McCrindle et al, RCT
crossover, 2  18
wk
Pravastatin and
colestipol
36, male and female, FH/FCHL (LDL  160
mg/dL  family history of FH or
premature CAD; triglycerides  177
mg/dL in 10 of the 36; ages 10–18 y)
Pravastatin,
10 mg
(with
colestipol,
5g)
13
17
4
8
van der Graaf et al,
RCT, 6 and 27 wk;
open label to 53
wk
Simvastatin and
ezetimibe
248, male and female, FH (LDL  159 mg/
dL  genotype-conﬁrmed FH or 
parental genotype-conﬁrmed FH or 
parental LDL  210 mg/dL or 
tendinous xanthomas or LDL  189
mg/dL  family history of
hypercholesterolemia; ages 10–17 y)
Simvastatin
10–40 mg
(with
ezetimibe,
10 mg)
38
49
7
17
Addendum
Goldberg et al, -3
fatty acid review in
adults; no RCTs in
children
-3 ﬁsh oils (1 g
per capsule)a
—
1–4 g/d
NC
17 to 31
6 to 17
30 to 40
FH indicates heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia; NA, not available; FCHL, familial combined hyperlipidemia; HMG-CoA, hydroxymethylglutaryl coenzyme A; CAD, coronary artery
disease; NC, not calculated.
a There is only one FDA-approved ﬁsh-oil preparation, but there are many generic forms of ﬁsh-oil capsules that are commercially available. The University of Wisconsin maintains a
preventive cardiology patient education Web site (www.heartdecision.org). The ﬁsh-oil section includes information about the content of various preparations. The Web site is updated every
6 months (www.heartdecision.org/chdrisk/v_hd/patient_edu_docs/Fish_Oil_11-2007.pdf).
Adapted from McCrindle BW, Urbina EM, Dennison BA, et al; American Heart Association Atherosclerosis, Hypertension, and Obesity in Youth Committee; American Heart Association, Council
of Cardiovascular Disease in the Young; American Heart Association, Council on Cardiovascular Nursing. Circulation. 2007;115(14):1948–1967.
SUPPLEMENT ARTICLES
PEDIATRICS Volume 128, Supplement 5, December 2011
S247

----- Page 36 (native) -----
Conclusions of the Evidence
Review on Prevention of
Overweight and Obesity With
Physical Activity
A moderate number of RCTs have eval-
uated the effect of interventions that
addressed
only
physical
activity
and/or sedentary behavior on preven-
tion of overweight and obesity. In a
small number of these studies, the in-
tervention was effective. It should be
noted that these successful interven-
tions often addressed reduction in
sedentary behavior rather than at-
tempts to increase physical activity. In
a majority of the studies there was no
signiﬁcant difference in body-size mea-
sures. Sample sizes were often small,
and follow-up was often short (fre-
quently 6 months). It is suggested
that gender-speciﬁc programs might
be more successful in changing activity
behavior. Overall, the expert panel con-
cluded that on the basis of the evidence
review, increasing activity in isolation
is of little beneﬁt in preventing obesity.
By contrast, the review suggests that
reducing sedentary behavior might be
beneﬁcial in preventing the develop-
ment of obesity. The activity recom-
mendations in the guideline speciﬁ-
cally
address
limiting
sedentary
behavior and increasing physical ac-
tivity in all children. Guidance on
amounts and intensity of physical ac-
tivity and limitations on sedentary
screen time are provided in the recom-
mendations in “Physical Activity.” On
the basis of this evidence review, no
additional speciﬁc recommendations
addressing physical activity in pre-
venting obesity are indicated.
TABLE 9-12 Recommendations for Use of 3-Hydroxy-3-Methylglutaryl-Coenzyme A Reductase Inhibitors (Statins) in Children and Adolescents
Patient selection
1. Use algorithm (Fig 9-1) and risk-factor categories (Tables 9-6 and 9-7) to select statin therapy for patients.
2. Include preferences of patient and family in decision-making.
3. In general, do not start treatment with statins before the age of 10 y (patients with high-risk family history, high-risk conditions, or multiple risk factors
[Tables 9-6 and 9-7] might be considered for medication initiation at age 10 y).
4. Precaution/contraindication with potentially interactive medications (cyclosporine, niacin, ﬁbric acid derivatives, erythromycin, azole antifungal agents,
nefazodone, many HIV protease inhibitors); check for potential interaction with all current medications at baseline.
5. Conduct baseline hepatic panel and CK before initiating treatment.
Initiation and titration
1. Choice of particular statin is a matter of preference. Clinicians are encouraged to develop familiarity and experience with one of the statins, including
dosage regimen and potential drug-drug interactions.
2. Start with the lowest dose once daily, usually at bedtime. Atorvastatin and rosuvastatin can be taken in the morning or evening because of their long
half-lives.
3. Measure baseline CK, ALT, and AST.
4. Instruct the patient to report all potential adverse effects, especially muscle cramps, weakness, asthenia, and more diffuse symptoms suggestive of
myopathy.
5. Advise female patients about concerns with pregnancy and the need for appropriate contraception.
6. Advise about potential future medication interactions, especially cyclosporine, niacin, ﬁbric acid derivatives, erythromycin, azole antifungal agents,
nefazodone, and HIV protease inhibitors.
Check for potential interaction whenever any new medication is initiated.
1. Whenever potential myopathy symptoms are present, stop medication and assess CK; determine relation to recent physical activity. The threshold for
worrisome level of CK is 10 times above the upper limit of reported normal, considering the impact of physical activity. Monitor the patient for resolution
of myopathy symptoms and any associated increase in CK level. Consideration can be given to restarting the medication once symptoms and laboratory
abnormalities have resolved.
2. After 4 wk, measure FLP, ALT, and AST and compare with laboratory-speciﬁc reported normal values.
The threshold for worrisome levels of ALT or AST is 3 times the upper limit of reported normal.
Target levels for LDL cholesterol: minimal, 130 mg/dL; ideal, 110 mg/dL.
3. If target LDL cholesterol levels are achieved and there are no potential myopathy symptoms or laboratory abnormalities, continue therapy and recheck FLP,
ALT, and AST in 8 wk and then in 3 mo.
4. If laboratory abnormalities are noted or symptoms are reported, temporarily withhold the medication and repeat the blood work in 2 wk. When
abnormalities resolve, the medication may be restarted with close monitoring.
5. If target LDL cholesterol levels are not achieved, increase the dose by 1 increment (usually 10 mg) and repeat the blood work in 4 wk. If target LDL
cholesterol levels are still not achieved, dose may be further increased by 1 increment, or another agent (bile acid sequestrant or cholesterol absorption
inhibitor) may be added under the direction of a lipid specialist.
Maintenance monitoring
1. Monitor growth (height, weight, and BMI relative to normal growth charts), sexual maturation, and development.
2. Whenever potential myopathy symptoms present, stop medication and assess CK.
3. Monitor FLP, ALT, and AST every 3–4 mo in the ﬁrst year, every 6 mo in the second year and beyond, and whenever clinically indicated.
4. Monitor and encourage compliance with lipid-lowering dietary and medication therapy. Serially assess and counsel for other risk factors such as weight
gain, smoking, and inactivity.
5. Counsel adolescent girls about statin contraindications in pregnancy and the need for abstinence or use of appropriate contraceptive measures. Use of oral
contraceptives is not contraindicated if medically appropriate. Seek referral to an adolescent medicine or gynecologic specialist as appropriate.
CK indicates creatine kinase; ALT, alanine aminotransferase; AST, aspartate aminotransferase.
S248
EXPERT PANEL

----- Page 37 (native) -----
Summary of the Evidence Review
of Children at Increased Risk for
Overweight and Obesity
Certain populations of children who
are of normal weight are at risk for
developing overweight and obesity as
they grow older. Observational studies
have identiﬁed risk factors that put
these children at greater risk; how-
ever, research is lacking regarding an
appropriate intervention. Despite that
fact, epidemiologic associations sug-
gest that primary care providers
should be alert to increasing BMI
trends and excessive weight gain be-
yond what is anticipated for height in-
crease when dealing with these chil-
dren and consider intervention before
the child becomes overweight.
Observational studies have identiﬁed
sample populations that are at special
risk for obesity:
●children with a BMI between the
85th and 95th percentiles;
●children in whom there is a positive
family history of obesity in 1 or both
parents;
●early onset of increasing weight be-
yond that appropriate for increase in
height, which can be identiﬁed early
(beginning in the ﬁrst year of life);
●excessive increase in weight during
adolescence, particularly in black
girls; and
●children who have been very active
and then become inactive or adoles-
cents who are inactive in general
(an example would be a child who
previously participated in organized
sports and has stopped, particu-
larly in adolescence).
No RCTs that addressed these popula-
tions were identiﬁed. Despite this fact,
the expert panel believes that lifestyle
recommendations with a goal of pre-
vention of excessive weight gain are
needed for normal-weight children
with characteristics consistent with
special risk for development of over-
weight and obesity. The diet and activ-
ity recommendations proposed for
children at elevated cardiovascular
risk (“Nutrition and Diet”; “Physical Ac-
tivity”) should be vigorously reinforced
in these children. In any child, the de-
velopment of a BMI between the 85th
and 95th percentile should be taken as
a sign that increased attention to diet
and activity as well as BMI-speciﬁc
follow-up is indicated.
Conclusions and Grading of the
Evidence Review on Treatment of
Obesity
●There is good evidence for the effec-
tiveness of combined weight-loss
programs that included behavior-
change counseling, negative energy
balance through diet, and increased
physical activity in addressing obe-
sity in children older than 6 years
with a BMI at the 95th percentile
and no comorbidities (grade A).
However, such programs have been
effective primarily in a comprehen-
sive weight-loss program or in re-
search settings; only a small number
have been shown to be effective in pri-
mary care settings.
●No data were identiﬁed on weight-
loss programs for children younger
than 6 years.
●No single negative-energy diet plan
was identiﬁed from the evidence re-
view. Dietary plans should be deter-
mined for each child on the basis of
baseline body size, energy require-
ments for growth, and physical activity
level (grade D).
●Increasing dietary ﬁber from corn
bran, wheat ﬂour, wheat bran, oat
ﬂakes, corn germ meal, or gluco-
mannan does not signiﬁcantly im-
prove weight loss (grade A).
●Various diets, including low-glycemic-
load diets, low-carbohydrate diets, ﬁ-
ber
supplements,
and
protein-
sparing modiﬁed fasts, have not
beenadequatelystudiedastotheiref-
fects on obesity in children and
adolescents.
●For children aged 6 to 12 years:
●Family-based programs in re-
search settings that addressed
both diet and activity have been
shown to be effective at initiating
and sustaining weight loss over a
follow-up of 10 years (grade A).
●The greatest weight loss is achieved
whenparentsarethefocusofthein-
tervention (grade A).
●For adolescents:
●Comprehensive programs in re-
search settings were effective at
achieving weight loss in the
short-term (grade A).
●The greatest weight change was
achieved when the adolescent
was the primary focus of the in-
tervention (grade B).
●Behavior-change programs that
involved peers resulted in more
sustained weight loss (grade B).
●In overweight and obese youth, the
combination of diet and a speciﬁc
physical activity intervention that
reduced sedentary activity and/or
increased physical activity was uni-
versally more effective at achieving
decreases in weight and BMI as well
as decreases in body fat compared
with an isolated diet intervention:
●In both children and adolescents,
exercise training improved weight
loss and body composition (de-
creasing fat mass and reducing
visceral fat), decreased insulin re-
sistance, reduced BP, normalized
dyslipidemia, and normalized sub-
clinical measures of atherosclero-
sis (grade A).
●In children aged 7 to 12 years, re-
duction in sedentary activity inde-
pendent of increasing physical
activity produced weight loss
(grade B). In this age group, re-
ductions in sedentary activity
SUPPLEMENT ARTICLES
PEDIATRICS Volume 128, Supplement 5, December 2011
S249

----- Page 38 (native) -----
were effectively accomplished by
rewarding
children
for
time
spent being physically active with
TV-viewing time (grade B).
●Girls did not respond as well as
boys to combined treatments
that both reduced sedentary be-
haviors and increased physical
activity (grade B).
●For adolescents with or without sig-
niﬁcant comorbidities and a BMI at
the 95th percentile and for ado-
lescents with a BMI of 35 who
have failed to lose weight in a com-
prehensive lifestyle weight-loss pro-
TABLE 10-1 Evidence-Based Recommendations for Management of Overweight and Obesity
Birth to 24 mo
No weight-for-height–speciﬁc recommendations
CHILD-1 diet is recommended for pediatric care providers to use with their child and adolescent patients to reduce
cardiovascular risk
2 to 5 y
Identify children at high risk for obesity because of parental obesity and excessive BMI increase
Grade B
Recommend
Focused CHILD-1 diet and physical activity education
BMI percentile stable: reinforce current program, follow-up in 6 mo
Increasing BMI percentile: RD counseling for energy-balanced diet, intensify physical activity change; 6-mo follow-up
BMI  85th–95th percentile
Excess weight-gain prevention with parents as focus for energy-balanced diet; reinforce physical activity
recommendations for 6 mo
Grade D
Recommend
Improvement in BMI percentile: continue current program
Increasing BMI percentile: RD counseling for energy-balanced diet; intensify physical activity recommendations;
6-mo follow-up
BMI  95th percentile
Speciﬁc assessment for comorbiditiesa
Grade B
Strongly recommend
Family-based weight-gain prevention with parents as focus; RD counseling and follow-up for energy-balanced diet;
MVPA prescription; limit sedentary screen time; 3-mo follow-up
Grade B Recommend
6 to 11 y
Identify children at increased risk for obesity because of parental obesity, change in physical activity  excessive gain in
BMI for focused CHILD-1 diet/physical activity education
Grade B
Recommend
BMI percentile stable: reinforce current program, 6-mo follow-up
Increasing BMI percentile: RD counseling for energy-balanced CHILD-1 diet, intensiﬁed physical activity, 3 mo follow-up
BMI  85th–95th percentile
Excessive weight-gain prevention with parents as focus for energy-balanced diet; reinforce physical activity
recommendations, 6-mo follow-up
Grade D
Recommend
Stable/improving BMI percentile: reinforce current program, 6-mo follow-up
Increasing BMI percentile: RD counseling for energy-balanced CHILD-1 diet, intensiﬁed physical activity
recommendations, 3-mo follow-up
BMI  95th percentile
Speciﬁc assessment for comorbiditiesa
Grade B
Strongly recommend
BMI  95th percentile with no comorbidities
Ofﬁce-based weight-loss plan: family-centered program with parents as focus for behavior modiﬁcation, ()
energy-balanced diet, counseling by RD, prescription for increased MVPA, decreased sedentary time for 6 mo
Grade A
Strongly recommend
Improvement in BMI percentile/comorbidities: continue current plan
No improvement in BMI percentile: refer to comprehensive multidisciplinary lifestyle weight-loss program
BMI  95th percentile with comorbidities, BMI  97th percentile, or progressive rise in BMI despite therapy
Grade A
Strongly recommend
Refer to comprehensive multidisciplinary weight-loss program for intensive management for 6 mo
Improvement in BMI percentile: continue current program
No improvement in BMI percentile: consider referral to another comprehensive multidisciplinary weight-loss program
12 to 21 y
Identify adolescents at increased risk for obesity because of parental obesity, change in physical activity  excess gain
in BMI for focused diet/physical activity education for 6 mo
Grade B
Recommend
BMI/BMI percentile stable: reinforce current program, 6-mo follow-up
Increasing BMI/BMI percentile: RD counseling for energy-balanced CHILD-1 diet, intensiﬁed physical activity for 3 mo
BMI  85th–95th percentile
Excess weight-gain prevention with adolescent as change agent for energy-balanced CHILD-1 diet, reinforced physical
activity recommendations for 6 mo
Grade B
Recommend
Improvement in BMI percentile: continue current program
Increasing BMI percentile: RD counseling for energy-balanced weight-control diet, intensiﬁed physical activity, 3-mo
follow-up
BMI  95th percentile
Speciﬁc assessment for comorbiditiesa
Grade B
Strongly recommend
BMI  95th percentile with no comorbidities
Ofﬁce-based weight-loss plan: family-centered with adolescent as change agent for behavior-modiﬁcation
counseling, RD counseling for () energy-balanced diet, prescription for increased MVPA, decreased
sedentary time for 6 mo
Grade B
Strongly recommend
Improvement in BMI/BMI percentile: continue current program
No improvement in BMI/BMI percentile: refer to comprehensive multidisciplinary weight-loss program with peers
No improvement in BMI/BMI percentile: consider initiation of medication (orlistat) under care of experienced
clinician for 6–12 mo
BMI  95th percentile with comorbidities or BMI  35
Refer to comprehensive lifestyle weight-loss program for intensive management for 6–12 mo
Grade A
Strongly recommend
Improvement in BMI/BMI percentile: continue current program
No improvement in BMI/BMI percentile: consider initiation of orlistat under care of experienced clinician for 6–12 mo
If BMI is far above 35 and comorbidities unresponsive to lifestyle therapy for 1 y, consider bariatric
surgery/referral to center with experience/expertise in procedures
Grades reﬂect the ﬁndings of the evidence review, and recommendation levels reﬂect the consensus opinion of the expert panel. RD indicates registered dietitian; MVPA, moderate-to-
vigorous physical activity.
a Comorbidities: hypertension, dyslipidemia, and T2DM.
S250
EXPERT PANEL

----- Page 39 (native) -----
gram, addition of medication under
the care of a physician experienced
in managing weight loss with medi-
cation can be safe and effective in
achieving weight loss with follow-up
of 4 to 12 months. However, long-
term safety and efﬁcacy data are
not available:
●In adolescents with severe obe-
sity and insulin resistance, the
addition of metformin to a com-
prehensive lifestyle weight-loss
program improved fasting insu-
lin levels and signiﬁcantly re-
duced weight and BMI (grade B).
(Metformin is currently approved
by the US Food and Drug Adminis-
tration [FDA] for pediatric pa-
tients aged 10 years or older with
T2DM but is not approved for
weight loss for either children or
adults.)
●For obese adolescents older than
12 years, the addition of orlistat
to
a
comprehensive
lifestyle
weight-loss program improved
weight loss and BMI (grade A);
however, use of this medication
had a high rate of adverse gastro-
intestinal effects. (Orlistat [under
the trade name Xenical (Roche
Pharmaceuticals, Nutley, NJ)] is
approved by the FDA for weight
loss in pediatric patients 12 years
of age and older in conjunction
with a reduced-calorie diet. In Au-
gust 2009, the FDA released an
early communication about an
ongoing safety review regarding
reports of liver-related adverse
events in some patients taking
orlistat. In May 2010, the orlistat
labeling was updated to incorpo-
rate safety information pertain-
ing to the occurrence of rare
postmarketing cases of severe
liver injury, including hepatic fail-
ure that resulted in liver trans-
plant or death.)
●Dropout rates are substantial for all
weight-treatment programs.
●No studies deﬁning an appropriate
rate for weight loss in any age group
were identiﬁed by the guidelines ev-
idence review. The 2010 DGA8 recom-
mends slowing weight gain while
allowing normal growth and devel-
opment. For those with a BMI at the
95th percentile without comor-
bidities, both the AMA/CDC/MCHB ex-
pert committee and the AAP16 recom-
mend weight maintenance resulting
in decreasing BMI as age increases.
With a BMI at the 95th percentile
with comorbidities, the AMA/CDC/
MCHBexpertcommitteeandtheAAP16
recommend gradual weight loss not
to exceed 1 lb/month in children aged
2 to 11 years or 2 lb/week in adoles-
cents (no grade).
●For adolescents with a BMI far
above 35 and associated comorbidi-
ties, bariatric surgery on a research
protocol in conjunction with a com-
prehensive lifestyle weight-loss pro-
gram improved weight loss, BMI,
and other outcomes such as insulin
resistance, glucose tolerance, and
cardiovascular measures in small
case series (grade D).
The recommendations for manage-
ment of overweight and obesity are
listed in Table 10-1.
11. DM AND OTHER CONDITIONS
PREDISPOSING TO THE
DEVELOPMENT OF ACCELERATED
ATHEROSCLEROSIS
DM is an established risk factor for
early CVD. Metabolically, DM is charac-
terized by hyperglycemia caused by
defects in insulin secretion (T1DM)
and insulin function and/or secretion
(T2DM). Both T1DM and T2DM are asso-
ciated with vascular disease. Results
of autopsy and noninvasive imaging
studies suggest that the extent of vas-
cular involvement reﬂects the dura-
tion of the disease and the severity of
the chronic metabolic derangement.
The epidemiologies of the 2 types differ
signiﬁcantly. T1DM presents at a
younger age; 25% of patients are diag-
nosed between the ages of 5 and 10
years and another 40% between the
ages of 10 and 15 years. If not treated
adequately, the degree of hyperglyce-
mia is severe, and patients are highly
symptomatic. By contrast, with T2DM,
the majority of patients present in
adult life, but a small and growing
number present in adolescence, and
most are relatively asymptomatic with
only mild-to-moderate hyperglycemia
in combination with obesity. Regard-
less of these differences, children with
DM, type 1 or 2, are at signiﬁcantly in-
creased risk for accelerated athero-
sclerosis and early CVD.
In certain other pediatric disease
states, the process of atherosclerosis
is dramatically accelerated with clini-
cal coronary events occurring in child-
hood and very early adult life. These
conditions were the subject of a recent
guideline from the American Heart As-
sociation (AHA).17 The expert panel
elected to use the AHA guideline as a
template for developing recommenda-
tions for children with conditions such
as DM that predispose them to very ac-
celerated atherosclerosis, because
the evidence review identiﬁed only a
small number of studies that ad-
dressed these conditions in an RCT.
Conclusions of the Evidence
Review for DM and Other
Predisposing Conditions
Children with DM, T1DM or T2DM, repre-
sent the prototype of the child at special
risk for accelerated atherosclerosis and
earlyclinicalCVD.Tomaximizeidentiﬁca-
tion of T2DM in childhood and adoles-
cence, the screening algorithm from the
American Diabetes Association18 is rec-
ommended for screening in all children
(Table 11-1).
Limited high-quality studies that ad-
SUPPLEMENT ARTICLES
PEDIATRICS Volume 128, Supplement 5, December 2011
S251

----- Page 40 (native) -----
dressed cardiovascular risk reduction
in children with conditions predispos-
ing them to accelerated atherosclero-
sis were found, so the expert panel
elected to modify the recommenda-
tions of an expert pediatric panel con-
vened by the AHA that published its
recommendations for risk-factor man-
agement in 2006; these recommenda-
tions have been endorsed by the AAP
and are included in the guideline data-
base for these guidelines.17
The authors of the AHA statement rec-
ommended speciﬁc risk identiﬁcation
and management stratiﬁed according
to risk on the basis of deﬁned other
conditions that parallel the recom-
mendations for adults with DM or
other CVD equivalents. For those in the
high-risk category (Table 11-2), the dis-
ease process has been associated
with clinical coronary disease before
30 years of age. For those in the
moderate-risk category, the disease
process has been shown to be associ-
ated with pathologic, physiologic, or
subclinical evidence of accelerated
atherosclerosis.
The expert panel believes that these
recommendations should be used for
the management of children and ado-
lescents with DM and other predispos-
ing conditions as outlined in the algo-
rithm in Fig 11-1 and in Tables 11-2 and
11-3. With the growing evidence of vas-
cular disease in children with T2DM,
the expert panel felt that it was pru-
dent to include both T1DM and T2DM in
the high-risk category. With increasing
evidence of vascular dysfunction in
children with HIV infection and ne-
phrotic syndrome, these 2 conditions
have been added to the selected dis-
ease settings in the moderate-risk cat-
egory. Patients in the high-risk cate-
gory require intensive management
with more aggressive goals for ther-
apy than those in the moderate-risk
category, as outlined in the algorithm.
12. RISK-FACTOR CLUSTERING AND
THE METABOLIC SYNDROME
Traditional cardiovascular risk factors
such as obesity, hypertension, and dys-
lipidemia demonstrate clustering in
youth. Risk behaviors such as smok-
ing, suboptimal diet, and sedentary be-
havior also demonstrate clustering, as
do advantageous diet and exercise
habits. Becoming obese increases the
prevalence of the risk-factor cluster in
adults called the metabolic syndrome.
The metabolic syndrome is deﬁned as
3ofthefollowingriskfactors:elevated
waist circumference, triglyceride levels,
BP, and/or fasting glucose level and re-
ducedHDLcholesterollevel.IntheUnited
States,themetabolicsyndromeissaidto
affect between 34% and 39% of adults,
including7%ofmenand6%ofwomenin
the 20- to 30-year-old age group. The ex-
pertpanelreviewedalltheRCTs,system-
atic reviews, meta-analyses, and obser-
vational studies that addressed the
childhood association between the risk-
factor cluster known as the metabolic
syndrome and the development of ath-
erosclerosis, and the identiﬁcation and
management of the cluster in children
and adolescents.
There is a lack of consensus on how to
deﬁne metabolic syndrome in youth,
which has led to widely varying esti-
mates of its frequency. A recent analysis
ofNationalHealthandNutritionExamina-
tion Survey data from 1999 to 200219
TABLE 11-1 American Diabetes Association (ADA) Screening Recommendations for Type 2
DM in Childhood
Criteria:
●Overweight, deﬁned by:
–BMI  85th percentile for age and gender, or
–Weight for height  85th percentile, or
–Weight  120% of ideal for height
Plus any two of the following risk factors:
●Family history of type 2 DM in ﬁrst- or second-degree relative
●Race/ethnicity (Native American, African-American, Latino, Asian-American, Paciﬁc Islander)
●Signs of insulin resistance or conditions associated with insulin resistance (acanthosis nigricans,
hypertension, dyslipidemia, or polycystic ovary syndrome)
Screening procedure:
Age of initiation:
10 y, or at onset of puberty, if puberty occurs at a younger age
Frequency:
Every 2 y
Test:
Fasting plasma glucose
Reproduced with permission from American Diabetes Association. Diabetes Care. 2000;23(3):386.
TABLE 11-2 Special Risk Pediatric Conditions: Stratiﬁcation by Risk Category
High risk
Manifest coronary artery disease at 30 y of age: clinical evidence
T1DM or T2DM
Chronic kidney disease/end-stage renal disease/post–renal transplant
Post–orthotopic heart transplantation
Kawasaki disease with current coronary aneurysms
Moderate risk
Accelerated atherosclerosis: pathophysiologic evidence
Kawasaki disease with regressed coronary aneurysms
Chronic inﬂammatory disease (systemic lupus erythematosus, juvenile rheumatoid arthritis)
HIV infection
Nephrotic syndrome
Adapted from Kavey RE, Allada V, Daniels SR, et al; American Heart Association, Expert Panel on Population and Prevention
Science; American Heart Association, Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the Young; American Heart Association, Council
on Epidemiology and Prevention; American Heart Association, Council on Nutrition, Physical Activity and Metabolism;
American Heart Association, Council on High Blood Pressure Research; American Heart Association, Council on Cardiovas-
cular Nursing; American Heart Association, Council on the Kidney in Heart Disease; Interdisciplinary Working Group on
Quality of Care and Outcomes Research. Circulation. 2006;114(24):2710–2738.
S252
EXPERT PANEL

----- Page 41 (native) -----
yielded prevalence estimates for all
teens from 2.0% to 9.4% and for obese
teensfrom12.4%to44.2%.Regardlessof
the deﬁnition used, the prevalence of the
metabolic syndrome risk-factor cluster
is higher in older (12- to 14-year-old)
compared with younger (8- to 11-year-
old) children. The speciﬁc etiology of
metabolic syndrome is unknown; how-
ever, it is most likely caused by the ex-
pression of various genotypes modiﬁed
byenvironmentalinteractionsandmedi-
ated through abdominal obesity and in-
sulin resistance. Longitudinal studies of
cohorts in which the metabolic syn-
drome cluster was present in childhood
identiﬁedanincreasedincidenceofboth
T2DM and clinical cardiovascular events
over a follow-up period of 25 years.4 A
strong association between obesity with
or without elevated insulin levels and/or
hypertensioninearlychildhoodandsub-
sequent development of the metabolic
syndromeconstellationinadulthoodhas
Directions: Step 1: Risk stratification by disease process (Table 11-2).  
Step 2: Assess all cardiovascular risk factors. If there are >2 comorbidities,  
  move tier II patient to tier I for subsequent management.  
Step 3: Tier-specific treatment goals/cut points defined.  
Step 4: Initial therapy: For tier I, initial management is therapeutic lifestyle  
       change PLUS disease-specific management (Table 11-3). For tier II, initial  
    management is therapeutic lifestyle change.  
Yes 
Tier I: High Risk
 
T1DM and T2DM 
 
Chronic kidney disease/end stage 
renal disease/ post–kidney transplant   
 
Post–heart transplant 
 
Kawasaki disease with current 
coronary artery aneurysms 
Intensive lifestyle management  
CHILD-1a, Activity Rxb  
 Weight loss as neededc 
Tier II: Moderate Risk
    BMI ≤ 90%ile for age/gender 
    BP  ≤ 95%ile for age/gender/HT%ile 
    Lipids (mg/dL): LDL-C ≤ 130, 
TG < 130, non–HDL-C < 140 
    FG < 100 mg/dL, HgbA1c < 7% 
CV RISK FACTORS/ COMORBIDITIES
 
Family history of early CVD in expanded first-degree pedigree (♂ ≤55 y;
♀≤65 y)
 
FLP
 
Smoking history  
 
BP (3 separate occasions), interpreted for age/gender/HT percentile (%ile)
 
HT, WT, BMI  
 
FG
 
Diet, physical activity/exercise history
Tier II: Moderate Risk
 
Kawasaki disease with regressed 
coronary aneurysms 
 
Chronic inflammatory disease 
 
HIV 
 
Nephrotic syndrome 
Condition-specific 
management – Table 11-3
If goals not met, consider
medication per risk-specific 
guideline recommendations 
PLUS
Intensive lifestyle management  
CHILD-1a, Activity Rxb  
 WT loss as neededc 
Tier 1: High Risk
 
BMI < 85th%ile for age/gender. 
 
BP  < 90th %ile for age/gender/HT%ile  
 
Lipids (mg/dL): LDL-C < 100,  
            TG < 90, non–HDL-C < 120 
 
FG < 100 mg/dL, HgbA1c < 7%   
No 
Step 1. 
RISK
STRATIFICATION
BY DISEASE 
PROCESS
Step 2. 
ASSESS
CV RFs
(> 2 RFs 
Move to tier 1)
Step 3.
 TIER-
SPECIFIC CUT 
POINTS/
TREATMENT
GOALS
Step 4: 
LIFESTYLE 
CHANGE 
Step 5: 
DRUG
THERAPY 
FIGURE 11-1
Risk stratiﬁcation and management for children with conditions predisposing to accelerated atherosclerosis and early CVD. CV indicates
cardiovascular; RF, risk factor; HT, height; WT, weight; TG, triglycerides; %ile, percentile; C, cholesterol; FG, fasting glucose; Rx, recommendation. a See
“Nutrition and Diet”; b see “Physical Activity”; c see “Overweight and Obesity.” Adapted from Kavey RE, Allada V, Daniels SR, et al; American Heart Association,
Expert Panel on Population and Prevention Science; American Heart Association, Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the Young; American Heart
Association, Council on Epidemiology and Prevention; American Heart Association, Council on Nutrition, Physical Activity and Metabolism; American Heart
Association, Council on High Blood Pressure Research; American Heart Association, Council on Cardiovascular Nursing; American Heart Association, Council
on the Kidney in Heart Disease; Interdisciplinary Working Group on Quality of Care and Outcomes Research. Circulation. 2006;114(24):2710–2738.
SUPPLEMENT ARTICLES
PEDIATRICS Volume 128, Supplement 5, December 2011
S253

----- Page 42 (native) -----
been consistently demonstrated. Treat-
ment of cardiovascular risk-factor clus-
tering in youth has not been thoroughly
evaluated, but maintenance of low levels
of cardiovascular risk factors starting in
childhood is associated with a lower
prevalence of CVD and increased longev-
ity in adult life.
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR
MANAGEMENT OF RISK-FACTOR
CLUSTERING AND THE METABOLIC
SYNDROME
The metabolic-syndrome concept is im-
portant, because it identiﬁes a common
multiple cardiovascular-risk phenotype
in pediatrics. However, the absence of a
deﬁned etiology, the lack of consensus
on deﬁnition, and the paucity of high-
level evidence addressing management
in childhood led the expert panel to con-
clude that the metabolic syndrome
should not be considered as a separate
risk factor in childhood and adoles-
cence. Prevention of obesity is the most
important strategy for lowering the
prevalence of metabolic syndrome in
adults, and this seems strongly applica-
ble in childhood (see “Overweight and
Obesity”). Given the strong relationship
of obesity and physical inactivity to the
metabolic syndrome and insulin resis-
tance,theexpertpanelmakesthefollow-
ing recommendations. Because of the
paucity of evidence available, the recom-
mendations are a consensus of the ex-
pert panel (grade D).
●The presence of any combination of
multiple risk factors should prompt in-
tensiﬁcation of therapy with an empha-
sis on lifestyle modiﬁcation to address
individual metabolic syndrome risk-
factor levels.
●The presence of obesity should
prompt speciﬁc evaluation for all
other cardiovascular risk factors in-
cluding family history of premature
CVD,
hypertension,
dyslipidemia,
DM, and tobacco exposure.
●The coexistence of obesity with any
other major cardiovascular risk fac-
tor should be recognized by clini-
cians as a setting in which:
●intensive weight reduction should
be undertaken per the recommen-
dations in “Overweight and Obe-
sity,” along with management of
identiﬁed risk factors including ini-
tiation of pharmacologic therapy,
per the risk-factor–speciﬁc sec-
tionsintheseguidelines(“HighBP”;
“Lipids and Lipoproteins”; “DM and
Other Conditions Predisposing to
the Development of Accelerated
Atherosclerosis”; “Tobacco Expo-
sure”); and
●prompt evaluation for DM, liver-
function abnormalities, left ven-
tricular hypertrophy, and sleep
apnea should be undertaken.
These recommendations are supported
by the knowledge that cardiovascu-
lar morbidity has a continuous rela-
tionship across the risk-distribution
spectrum and that a youth with multi-
ple borderline risk factors might, in
fact, have risk equivalent to a person
with extreme abnormality of a single
major risk factor. A presentation such
as this should lead to intense nutrition
and exercise management with close
follow-up, and if lifestyle intervention
is unsuccessful, consideration should
be given to endocrine referral. Table
12-1 provides deﬁnitions of component
risk-factor levels for evaluating chil-
TABLE 11-3 Condition-Speciﬁc Treatment Recommendations for High-Risk Conditions
Rigorous age-appropriate education in diet, activity, smoking cessation for all
Speciﬁc therapy as needed to achieve BP, LDL cholesterol, glucose, and HbA1c goals indicated for each
tier, as outlined in algorithm; timing individualized for each patient and diagnosis
DM regardless of type:
For T1DM, intensive glucose management per endocrinologist with frequent glucose monitoring/insulin
titration to maintain optimal plasma glucose and HbA1c levels for age
For T2DM, intensive weight management and glucose control in consultation with an endocrinologist as
needed to maintain optimal plasma glucose and HbA1c levels for age
Assess BMI and fasting lipid levels: step 4 lifestyle management of weight and lipid levels for 6 mo
If LDL goals are not achieved, consider statin therapy if age is 10 y to achieve tier 1 treatment goals
for LDL cholesterol
Initial BP  90th percentile: step 4 lifestyle management plus no added salt, increased activity for 6 mo
If BP is consistently at the 95th percentile for age/gender/height, initiate angiotensin-converting
enzyme inhibitor therapy with a BP goal of 90th percentile for gender/height or 120/80 mm Hg,
whichever is lower
Chronic kidney disease/end-stage renal disease/post–renal transplant:
Optimization of renal-failure management with dialysis/transplantation per nephrology
Assess BMI, BP, and lipid and FG levels: step 4 lifestyle management for 6 mo
If LDL goals are not achieved, consider statin therapy if age is 10 y to achieve tier 1 treatment goals
for LDL cholesterol
If BP is consistently at the 95th percentile for age/gender/height, initiate angiotensin-converting
enzyme inhibitor therapy with a BP goal of 90th percentile for gender/height or 120/80 mm Hg,
whichever is lower
After heart transplantation:
Optimization of antirejection therapy, treatment for cytomegalovirus infection, routine evaluation by
angiography/perfusion imaging per transplant physician
Assess BMI, BP, and lipid and FG levels: initiate step 5 therapy, including statins, immediately for all
patients aged 1 y to achieve tier 1 treatment goals
Kawasaki disease with current coronary aneurysms:
Antithrombotic therapy, activity restriction, ongoing myocardial perfusion evaluation per cardiologist
Assess BMI, BP, and lipid and FG levels: step 4 lifestyle management for 6 mo
If goals are not achieved, consider pharmacologic therapy for LDL cholesterol and BP if age is 10 y to
achieve tier 1 treatment goals
FG indicates fasting glucose.
Adapted from Kavey RE, Allada V, Daniels SR, et al; American Heart Association, Expert Panel on Population and Prevention
Science; American Heart Association, Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the Young; American Heart Association, Council
on Epidemiology and Prevention; American Heart Association, Council on Nutrition, Physical Activity and Metabolism;
American Heart Association, Council on High Blood Pressure Research; American Heart Association, Council on Cardiovas-
cular Nursing; American Heart Association, Council on the Kidney in Heart Disease; Interdisciplinary Working Group on
Quality of Care and Outcomes Research. Circulation. 2006;114(24):2710–2738.
S254
EXPERT PANEL

----- Page 43 (native) -----
dren with multiple cardiovascular risk
factors.
13. PERINATAL FACTORS
Increasing evidence links prenatal expo-
sures to adverse health outcomes. Peri-
natal risk reduction is an area in which
pediatric care providers can potentially
be effective, because they are often the
only physicians whom a mother sees be-
tween pregnancies. The expert panel
identiﬁed 3 potential areas for consider-
ation: maternal obesity; choice of neona-
tal feeding method; and maternal smok-
ing cessation. Maternal obesity is
associated with gestational DM, higher
birth weight, childhood obesity mea-
sured by increased BMI, and increased
risk of the metabolic syndrome and
T2DM in offspring. However, the expert
panel could not identify any prepreg-
nancy or postpartum studies that ad-
dressed maternal obesity in a pediatric
care setting, and more general ap-
proaches to preventing or treating obe-
sity in women of reproductive age are
beyond the scope of this report. A de-
tailed discussion of childhood obesity it-
self is the subject of “Overweight and
Obesity.” With regard to choice of neona-
tal feeding method, the cardiovascular
advantages of breastfeeding as the pri-
mary source of nutrition for infants are
emphasized in “Nutrition and Diet.”
Therefore, the evidence review for this
section is focused on maternal smoking
cessation.
Conclusions and Grading of the
Evidence Review on Maternal
Smoking Cessation
●The expert panel found that strong
evidence supports a beneﬁt for in-
terventions directed at maternal
smoking cessation during pregnancy
(grade A). Weaker evidence suggests
that these interventions do not pre-
vent relapse after delivery. Trials of
cessation in the postpartum period,
whichwouldbethemostapplicableto
pediatricproviders,havebeenlimited
in number and suggest that for ma-
ternal smoking cessation to be sus-
tained, speciﬁc continued support in
the pediatric care setting is required.
●No smoking-cessation interventions
have resulted in any reported ad-
verse effects related to the interven-
tions (no grade).
●The expert panel believes that pediat-
ric care providers can play a role in
helping mothers to remain smoke-
free or to quit smoking in the inter-
pregnancy interval. For most women,
this interval will extend to the early
ﬁrst trimester of any subsequent
pregnancy. The pediatric well-child
schedule calls for 10 visits in the
ﬁrst 2 years of life, and mothers at-
tend most of those visits, so the pedi-
atric care provider usually sees
women in this period more than any
other health care professional. Pedi-
atric care providers often have a sus-
tained relationship with the mother
and her infant, and many already ad-
vocate for parental smoking cessa-
tion in their efforts to promote a
smoke-free environment for chil-
dren. Pediatric providers and/or
their staff need to be trained to ei-
ther deliver or refer to a long-term
maternal smoking-cessation pro-
gram (no grade).
Recommendations for maternal smok-
ing cessation are listed in Table 13-1.
TABLE 12-1 Metabolic Syndrome Component Levels for Evaluation of Children With Multiple
Cardiovascular Risk Factors
Risk Factor
Cut Point
Reference
Obesity, percentile
BMI
85th to 95th
CDC growth charts
Waist circumference
90th to 95th
NHANES
BP, percentile
90th to 95th
“The Fourth Report on the Diagnosis,
Evaluation and Treatment of High
Blood Pressure in Children and
Adolescents”
Dyslipidemia, mg/dL
See “Lipids and Lipoproteins” for
normative values
HDL cholesterol
40 to 45
Triglycerides
0–9 y
75 to 100
10 y
90 to 130
Non-HDL cholesterol
120 to 144
Glycemia, mg/dL
ADA screening recommendations
Fasting glucose
100 to 126
Fasting insulin
Elevated fasting insulin level, above
normal for gender, race, and
pubertal status, is considered
evidence of insulin resistance
NHANES indicates National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey; ADA, American Diabetes Association.
TABLE 13-1 Evidence-Based Recommendations for Maternal Smoking Cessation
Smoking-cessation guidance during pregnancy is strongly advised
Grade A, strongly recommend
Supportive action:
Pediatric care providers should be provided with appropriate
training and materials to deliver, or refer to, a smoking-
cessation program in the postpartum period for all smoking
women of childbearing age
This intervention should be directly linked to ongoing smoke-
free home recommendations directed at all young mothers and
fathers as described in the “Tobacco Exposure” section
Grades reﬂect the ﬁndings of the evidence review; recommendation levels reﬂect the consensus opinion of the expert
panel; and supportive actions represent expert consensus suggestions from the expert panel provided to support
implementation of the recommendations (they are not graded).
SUPPLEMENT ARTICLES
PEDIATRICS Volume 128, Supplement 5, December 2011
S255

----- Page 44 (native) -----
REFERENCES
1. NCEP Expert Panel of Blood Cholesterol Levels
in Children and Adolescents. National Choles-
terol Education Program (NCEP): highlights of
the report of the Expert Panel on Blood Cho-
lesterol Levels in Children and Adolescents.
Pediatrics. 1992;89(3):495–501
2. Strong JP, Malcom GT, McMahan CA, et al;
Prevalence and extent of atherosclerosis in
adolescents and young adults: implications
for prevention from the Pathobiological De-
terminants of Atherosclerosis in Youth
Study. JAMA. 1999;281(3):495–501
3. Berenson GS, Srinivasan SR, Bao W, New-
man WP III, Tracy RE, Wattigney WA. Associ-
ation between multiple cardiovascular risk
factors and atherosclerosis in children and
young adults. The Bogalusa Heart Study. N
Engl J Med. 1998;338(23):1650–1656
4. MorrisonJA,FriedmanLA,Gray-McGuireC.Met-
abolicsyndromeinchildhoodpredictsadultcar-
diovascular disease 25 years later: the Prince-
ton Lipid Research Clinics Follow-up Study.
Pediatrics. 2007;120(2):340–345
5. McMahan CA, Gidding SS, Malcolm GT, et al.
Pathobiological Determinants of Atherosclero-
sis in Youth (PDAY) Research Group. Compari-
sonofcoronaryheartdiseaseriskfactorsinau-
topsied young adults from the PDAY Study with
living young adults from the CARDIA study. Car-
diovasc Pathol. 2007;16(3):151–158
6. Carnethon MR, Gulati M. Prevalence and
cardiovascular disease correlates of low
cardiorespiratory ﬁtness in adolescents
and adults. JAMA. 2005;294(23):2981–2988
7. Freedman DS, Mei Z, Srinivasan SR, Berenson
GS,DietzWH.Cardiovascularriskfactorsandex-
cess adiposity among overweight children and
adolescents: the Bogalusa Heart Study. J Pedi-
atr. 2007;150(1):12–17
8. US Department of Agriculture; US Depart-
ment of Health and Human Services. Dietary
Guidelines for Americans, 2010. 7th ed.
Washington, DC: US Government Printing
Ofﬁce; 2011
9. Expert Panel on Detection, Evaluation, and
Treatment of High Blood Cholesterol in
Adults. Executive summary of the Third Re-
port of the National Cholesterol Education
Program (NCEP) Expert Panel on Detection,
Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood
Cholesterol in Adults (Adult Treatment
Panel III). JAMA. 2001;285(19):2486–2497
10. Abrams SA. Dietary guidelines for calcium
and vitamin D: a new era. Pediatrics. 2011;
127(3):566–568
11. US Department of Health and Human Ser-
vices. 2008 physical activity guidelines for
Americans. Available at: www.health.gov/
paguidelinesAccessed November 2, 2011
12. US Department of Health and Human Ser-
vices. Treating tobacco use and
dependence: 2008 update. Available at:
www.ahrq.gov/path/tobacco.htm#
Accessed November 2, 2011
13. High Blood Pressure Education Program
Working Group on High Blood Pressure in
Children and Adolescents. The fourth report
on the diagnosis, evaluation, and treatment
of high blood pressure in children and ado-
lescents. Pediatrics. 2004;114(2 suppl 4th
Report):555–576
14. Ogden CL, Carroll MD, Flegal KM. Prevalence of
highbodymassindexinUSchildrenandadoles-
cents, 2007–2008. JAMA. 2010;303(3):242–249
15. Kuczmarski RJ, Ogden CL, Grummer-Strawn
LM, et al. CDC growth charts: United States.
Adv Data. 2000;314: 1–27
16. Barlow SE; Expert Committee. Expert com-
mittee recommendations regarding the
prevention, assessment, and treatment of
child and adolescent overweight and
obesity: summary report. Pediatrics. 2007;
120(suppl 4):S164–S192
17. Kavey RE, Allada V, Daniels SR, et al; American
Heart Association Expert Panel on Population
andPreventionScience;AmericanHeartAsso-
ciation Council on Cardiovascular Disease in
the Young; American Heart Association Coun-
cil on Epidemiology and Prevention; American
Heart Association Council on Nutrition, Physi-
cal Activity and Metabolism; American Heart
Association Council on High Blood Pressure
Research; American Heart Association Coun-
cil on Cardiovascular Nursing; American
Heart Association Council on the Kidney in
Heart Disease; Interdisciplinary Working
Group on Quality of Care and Outcomes Re-
search.Cardiovascularriskreductioninhigh-
risk pediatric patients: a scientiﬁc statement
from the American Heart Association Expert
Panel on Population and Prevention Science;
the Councils on Cardiovascular Disease in the
Young, Epidemiology and Prevention, Nutri-
tion, Physical Activity and Metabolism, High
Blood Pressure Research, Cardiovascular
Nursing, and the Kidney in Heart Disease; and
theInterdisciplinaryWorkingGrouponQuality
of Care and Outcomes Research: endorsed by
the American Academy of Pediatrics. Circula-
tion. 2006;114(24):2710–2738
18. Type 2 diabetes in children and adoles-
cents. Diabetes Care. 2000;23(3):381–389
19. Cook S; Auinger P; Li C; Ford ES. Metabolic
syndrome rates in United States adoles-
cents, from the National Health and Nutri-
tion Examination Survey, 1999–2002. J Pedi-
atr. 2008;152(2):165–170
(Continued from ﬁrst page)
Associates for the State of Ohio, Bureau of Early Intervention Services and Help Me Grow program, and has received funding/grant support for research from the
NIH; Dr Kwiterovich has served as a consultant or advisory board member for Merck, Schering-Plough, Pﬁzer, Sankyo, LipoScience, and Astra Zeneca, has served
on speaker’s bureaus for Merck, Schering-Plough, Pﬁzer, Sankyo, Kos, and Astra Zeneca, and has received funding/grant support for research from Pﬁzer,
Merck, GlaxoSmithKline, Sankyo, and Schering-Plough; Dr McBride has served as a consultant or advisory board member for Bristol-Myers Squibb and Merck
and has served on speaker’s bureaus for Kos, Merck, and Pﬁzer but declares no relevant relationships since July 2007; Dr McCrindle has been a consultant for
Abbott, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Daichii Sankyo, and Roche, owns stock in CellAegis and reports funding/grant support for research from Astra Zeneca, Sankyo,
Merck, Schering-Plough, and the NIH; Dr Urbina reports funding/grant support for research from Merck, Schering-Plough, Sankyo, and the NIH; and Dr VanHorn
has provided advice to Chartwells School Food Service and has received funding/grant support for research from General Mills and the NIH. Drs Benuck,
Christakis, Dennison, O’Donnell, Rocchini, and Washington have indicated they have no ﬁnancial relationships relevant to this article to disclose.
Funded by the National Institutes of Health (NIH).
S256
EXPERT PANEL