

----- Page 1 (native) -----
Public Health Nutrition: 14(12A), 2274–2284
doi:10.1017/S1368980011002515
Mediterranean diet pyramid today. Science and cultural
updates
Anna Bach-Faig1, Elliot M Berry2, Denis Lairon3, Joan Reguant1, Antonia Trichopoulou4,
Sandro Dernini5,6, F Xavier Medina7, Maurizio Battino8, Rekia Belahsen9,
Gemma Miranda1 and Lluı´s Serra-Majem1,10,* on behalf of the Mediterranean Diet
Foundation Expert Group
1Mediterranean Diet Foundation, Barcelona, Spain: 2Department of Human Nutrition and Metabolism, Braun
School of Public Health, Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical School, Jerusalem, Israel: 3Research Unit 1025
Inserm/1260 Inra/‘‘Human Nutrition and Lipids: Bioavailability, Metabolism and Regulations’’, Faculte´ de
Me´decine, Universite´ de la Me´diterrane´e, Marseille, France: 4Hellenic Health Foundation, Athens, Greece:
5Forum on Mediterranean Food Cultures, Rome, Italy: 6Interuniversity International Center for Mediterranean
Food Cultures Studies (CIISCAM), Sapienza University of Rome, Italy: 7Department of Food Systems,
Culture and Society, Faculty of Health Sciences, Universitat Oberta de Catalunya (UOC), Barcelona, Spain:
8Department of Biochemistry, Universita` Politecnica delle Marche, Ancona, Italy: 9Department of Biology,
Faculty of Sciences, Chouaı¨b Doukkali University, El Jadida, Morocco: 10Department of Clinical Sciences,
University of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, PO Box 550, 35080, Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain
Submitted 13 May 2011: Accepted 7 September 2011
Abstract
Objective: To present the Mediterranean diet (MD) pyramid: a lifestyle for today.
Design: A new graphic representation has been conceived as a simpliﬁed main
frame to be adapted to the different nutritional and socio-economic contexts of
the Mediterranean region. This review gathers updated recommendations con-
sidering the lifestyle, dietary, sociocultural, environmental and health challenges
that the current Mediterranean populations are facing.
Setting and Subjects: Mediterranean region and its populations.
Results: Many innovations have arisen since previous graphical representations
of the MD. First, the concept of composition of the ‘main meals’ is introduced
to reinforce the plant-based core of the dietary pattern. Second, frugality
and moderation is emphasised because of the major public health challenge of
obesity. Third, qualitative cultural and lifestyle elements are taken into account,
such as conviviality, culinary activities, physical activity and adequate rest,
along with proportion and frequency recommendations of food consumption.
These innovations are made without omitting other items associated with the
production, selection, processing and consumption of foods, such as seasonality,
biodiversity, and traditional, local and eco-friendly products.
Conclusions: Adopting a healthy lifestyle and preserving cultural elements should
be considered in order to acquire all the beneﬁts from the MD and preserve this
cultural heritage. Considering the acknowledgment of the MD as an Intangible
Cultural Heritage of Humanity by UNESCO (2010), and taking into account its
contribution to health and general well-being, we hope to contribute to a much
better adherence to this healthy dietary pattern and its way of life with this new
graphic representation.
Keywords
Mediterranean diet
Pyramid
Adult
Dietary pattern
Lifestyle
Culture
Health
The traditional Mediterranean diet (MD) is the heritage of
millennia of exchanges of people, cultures and foods of
all countries around the Mediterranean basin. It has been
the basis of food habits during the twentieth century in all
countries of the region, originally based on Mediterranean
agricultural and rural models. However, the traditional
MD is now progressively eroding due to the widespread
dissemination of the Western-type economy, urban and
technology-driven culture, as well as the globalisation of
food production and consumption, related to the homo-
genisation of food behaviours in the modern era.
Since the Seven Countries Study in the 1950s, we know
which foods were more or less frequently consumed in the
Mediterranean area(1), a pattern followed mainly by poor
rural societies(2). This led to deﬁning the MD as a dietary
pattern rich in plant foods (cereals, fruits, vegetables,
*Corresponding author: Email lserra@dcc.ulpgc.es
r The Authors 2011
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1368980011002515 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 2 (native) -----
legumes, tree nuts, seeds and olives), with olive oil as the
principal source of added fat, along with high to moderate
intakes of ﬁsh and seafood, moderate consumption of eggs,
poultry and dairy products (cheese and yoghurt), low
consumption of red meat and a moderate intake of alcohol
(mainly wine during meals).
The pioneer Seven Countries Study and numerous and
increasing recent epidemiological studies have estab-
lished the health beneﬁts associated with the adherence
to the Mediterranean diet pattern (MDP), mainly in rela-
tion to reducing the risk of developing the metabolic
syndrome, type 2 diabetes, CVD and some neuro-
degenerative diseases and cancers(3–6).
This healthy, traditional MDP has been popularised since
1995 using the world famous pyramid representation that
graphically highlights the food groups to be consumed
daily, weekly or less frequently(7). In addition, in 1995, an
index or score was introduced to evaluate the adherence
to the MDP, allowing the study of its associated health
effects(8). Within the scientiﬁc community, there is a con-
sensus on what constitutes the traditional MDP, mentioned
above, but issues have been raised about the need to update
the present recommendations considering the new lifestyle,
dietary, sociocultural, environmental and health challenges
the current generations of different countries and sectors of
the population are facing, especially low-income groups in
which the prevalence of CVD has risen along with the shift
from the traditional MD. The following issues, among
others, arise and need to be addressed: (i) consumption of
fresh, minimally processed, local and seasonal foodstuffs;
(ii) the balance between energy-dense and nutrient-dense
foods in relation to reduced energy expenditure and the
obesity epidemic; (iii) availability, sustainability, accessibility
and cost of recommended foods; (iv) adaptation to various
geographical, socio-economic and cultural contexts; and
(v) understanding the MD as an intangible space for
creativity and intercultural dialogue and a common cultural
heritage shared by all Mediterranean populations(9).
The incorporation of food consumption as a basic area in
Anthropology and Sociology after the 1930s – after the
pioneering works of Audrey Richards and Margaret Mead –
has brought light to the study of nutrition understood also as
a social and cultural process in permanent ﬂux(10). Food
represents much more than a pure act of survival for human
evolution; eating is a social and cultural phenomenon, while
nutrition is a physiological and health issue(11).
After the recognition of the MD as an Intangible
Cultural Heritage of Humanity by UNESCO in 2010(12,13),
considering the worldwide interest in the MDP and taking
as a framework all the mentioned aspects, scientists pre-
sent a consensual renewed communication tool for the
general public, health professionals and stakeholders. This
is a new pyramid with which scientists hope to contribute
to a much better adherence to this healthy dietary pattern
and its way of life in the Mediterranean area and other
countries in the near future.
Consensus on a new pictorial representation of
the Mediterranean diet pyramid
The Mediterranean Diet Foundation together with the
Forum on Mediterranean Food Cultures initiated the dia-
logue and process of gathering scientiﬁc opinion among
international experts to develop a consensus position on a
new revised MD pyramid representation (Fig. 1). The new
revised MD and food lifestyle pyramid (as a schema) arises
from the internal dialogues among scientiﬁc experts of the
Mediterranean Diet Foundation’s International Scientiﬁc
Committee and further discussions from a meeting held
in the framework of the III CIISCAM Conference ‘The
Mediterranean Diet today, a model of sustainable diet’ in
Parma (Italy; Fig. 1).
This pyramid results from the aforementioned scientiﬁc
consensus among experts and is based upon the latest
research in the ﬁeld of nutrition and health, scientiﬁc
evidence around the healthiness of the MD dietary pattern
and its role in the prevention of many chronic diseases
by large epidemiological studies published in hundreds
of peer-reviewed scientiﬁc journal articles during recent
decades(3,4).
The ﬁnal design of the MD pyramid today (Fig. 2) and
a brief complementary text for the general public (Fig. 3)
have been developed by the gathered opinions of the
Mediterranean Diet Foundation Expert Group that includes
the Mediterranean Diet Foundation’s International Scientiﬁc
Committee expertise, the in situ discussions by a repre-
sentative group of members that met within the Barcelona
VIII International Congress on the Mediterranean diet
(Fig. 1), and several other experts who provided support on
the design, editing and translation to ten different languages
(English, French, Italian, Spanish, Catalan, Basque, Galician,
Greek, Portuguese and Arabic; see acknowledgements).
Thus, the main purpose of this initiative is to foster
dialogue among scientists and experts in public health
nutrition,
food
sciences,
metabolism,
anthropology,
sociology, biology, agriculture and environmental and
cultural heritage in order to obtain a common repre-
sentation of the MDP in the Mediterranean area, meant for
non-proﬁt use and promotion without restrictions.
The Mediterranean diet pyramid: a lifestyle
for today
The pyramid reﬂects the changing process that the MD is
undergoing within the Mediterranean societies. This new
graphic representation (Fig. 2) was conceived as a sim-
pliﬁed main frame pyramid, to be adapted to the speciﬁc
realities of different countries (e.g. portion sizes) and
variations in the dietary pattern related to the various
geographical, socio-economic and cultural contexts of the
Mediterranean region. These guidelines (2010 edition)
might be periodically updated according to new con-
sensus and suggestions.
Mediterranean diet pyramid today
2275
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1368980011002515 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 3 (native) -----
By expressing the goals in terms of foods and referring
to a dietary pattern based on a cultural model, the new
pyramid may contribute to a higher compliance among the
general population. In order to preserve the Intangible
Cultural Heritage, adapting the cultural speciﬁcity of each
food practice to its socio-economic and environmental
context is necessary. Thus, the pyramid is developed as a
tool to help us adopt a healthier and sustainable lifestyle.
The recommendations target the healthy adult popu-
lation (18–65 years old) and should be adapted to the
special needs of children, pregnant women and those
suffering from health conditions.
Mediterranean diet pattern
The new MD pyramid provides key elements for the
selection of foods, both quantitative and qualitative,
indicating the relative proportions and consumption
frequency of servings of the main food groups that
constitute the MDP. The pattern includes all food groups,
and it is just a question of variety of food and culinary
techniques, along with adequate frequencies and quanti-
ties in the daily diet that make it healthy or unhealthy. A
wide variety of foods in the diet minimises the possibility
of deﬁciencies of a particular nutrient. In fact, a higher
adherence to the MDP has been associated with a better
Spanish
MDF Scientific Committee debate
Position paper
3rd CIISCAM Conference (Parma, 2009)
First proposal
(as a schema)
MDF Scientific Committee, Forum of Mediterranean food cultures and other
scientific and expert organisations debate
Barcelona VIII International Congress on the Mediterranean Diet 2010
(meeting and preliminary draft presentation)
Second proposal (pictorial representation and brief
complementary text for the general public)
Graphic design and
text development
Simplified main frame for all Mediterranean populations
(2010 edition)
Expert group
Greek
French
Italian
Moroccan
Country/Region specific adaptation
(e.g. portion sizes, local ingredients, etc.)
Middle East
MDF Expert Group
Others
Fig. 1 The process in the development of the new modern Mediterranean diet pyramid (MDF, Mediterranean Diet Foundation;
CIISCAM, International Inter-University Center for Mediterranean Food Culture Studies)
2276
A Bach-Faig et al.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1368980011002515 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 4 (native) -----
nutrient proﬁle, with a lower prevalence of individuals
showing inadequate intakes of micronutrients in com-
parison to other patterns such as the Western pattern(14).
Plant-origin foods are situated at the base of the
pyramid. They provide key nutrients, ﬁbre and protective
substances that contribute to general well-being, satiety
and the maintenance of a balanced diet, and thus should
be consumed in high proportions and frequency. This
MD core, based on plant-origin foods, is responsible for
the prevention of many chronic diseases and for weight
control(4,15).
The graphic representation follows the previous pat-
tern: at the base, food items that should sustain the diet
and provide the highest energy intake, and at the upper
levels, foods to be eaten in moderate amounts such as
those of animal origin and/or rich in sugars and fats that
should be eaten in moderation and some of them left for
special occasions. Meals have an essential role in the
MD(16), and thus the importance of the meal and its
composition is emphasized in the new representation. A
balanced composition of the main meals should include
fruits, vegetables and cereals, complemented in a lower
contribution to daily energy intake with other plant foods,
dairy products and protein sources.
The pyramid establishes dietary daily, weekly and
occasional guidelines in order to follow a healthy and
balanced diet.
Every day
> Main meals should contain three basic elements, which
can also be found throughout the day:
– Cereals: one or two servings per meal in the form of
bread, pasta, rice, couscous and others. Preferably
whole grain, since processing normally removes ﬁbre
and some valuable nutrients (Mg, Fe, vitamins, etc.)(17).
– Vegetables: two or more servings per meal. In order
to ensure vitamin and mineral daily intakes, at least
one of the servings should be consumed raw (one
meal/d)(18).
– Fruit: one or two servings per meal, as the most
frequently chosen dessert. The concept of ‘variety in
colours and textures’ is highlighted, in the case of
fruit and vegetables, in order to ensure a wide variety
of antioxidants and protective compounds(19).
> A daily intake of 1?5–2 l of water (equivalent to six to
eight glasses) should be guaranteed. Proper hydration is
essential to maintaining the corporal water equilibrium,
Mediterranean diet pyramid: a lifestyle for today
guidelines for adult population
Serving size based on frugality
and local habits
Wine in moderation
and respecting social beliefs
Weekly
Sweets ≤ 2 s
© 2010 Fundacion dieta mediterranea the use and promotion 
of this pyramid is recommended without any restriction
Olive oil
Bread/pasta/rice/couscous/
Other cereals 1–2 s
(preferably whole grain)
Herbs/spices/garlic/onions
(less added salt)
Variety of flavours
Water and herbal
infusions
Biodiversity and seasonality
Traditional, local
and eco-friendly products
Culinary activities
Eggs 2–4 s
Legumes ≥ 2 s
Red meet < 2 s
Processed meat ≤ 1 s
Potatoes ≤ 3 s
Regular physical activity
Adequate rest
Conviviality
2010 edition
s = Serving
White meat 2 s
Fish/seafood ≥ 2 s
Dairy 2 s
(preferably low fat)
Olives/nuts/seeds 1–2 s
Fruits 1–2 │vegetables ≥ 2 s
Variety of colour/textures
(cooked/raw)
Every day
Every main
meal
Fig. 2 (colour online) Mediterranean diet pyramid: a lifestyle for today
Mediterranean diet pyramid today
2277
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1368980011002515 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 5 (native) -----
The Mediterranean diet pyramid has adapted to the new way of life
The new model takes into account qualitative and quantitative elements for the selection of foods
The pyramid establishes dietary daily, weekly and occasional guidelines in order to follow a healthy and balanced diet.
Every day:  
The three main meals should contain three basic elements, which can also be found throughout the day: 
Fruit. One or two servings per meal. Should be chosen as the most frequent dessert. 
–
–
–
–
–
Weekly: 
–
–
The traditional Mediterranean diet (MD) pyramid has evolved to adopt the new way of life. As an initiative of the Mediterranean 
Diet Foundation and with the collaboration of numerous international entities, a wide range of experts in nutrition, anthropology, 
sociology and agriculture have reached a consensus in a new richer design with the incorporation of qualitative elements. 
The new pyramid follows the previous pattern: at the base, foods that should sustain the diet, and at theupper levels, foods 
to be eaten in moderate amounts. Moreover, social and cultural elements characteristic of the Mediterranean way of life are 
incorporated in the graphic design. So, it is not just about prioritising some food groups from others, but also paying 
attention to the way of selecting, cooking and eating. It also reflects the composition and number of servings per meals. 
The Mediterranean diet health benefits and protective effect against chronic diseases have been well established by the scientific 
community. This new pyramid includes all the food groups; it is in the proportions and the frequencies that relies a healthy or 
unhealthy diet. This food consumption pattern is addressed to a healthy adult population and should be adapted to the specific 
needs of children, pregnant women and other health conditions.
Plant-based foods are situated at the base of the pyramid. They provide key nutrients and protective substances that contribute to 
the general well-being and contribute to maintain a balanced diet, therefore, should be consumed in high proportions and frequency. 
Foods situated in the upper levels such as from animal origin, rich in sugars and in fats  should be eaten in moderation and left for 
special occasions.
Cereals. One or two servings per meal in the form of bread, pasta, rice, couscous and others. Preferably whole grain, 
since some valuable nutrients (magnesium, phosphorus, etc.) and fibre can be lost during processing. 
Vegetables. Present at lunch and dinner; or more than two servings per meal, at least one of the serving should be raw. 
A variety of colours and textures provide a diversity of antioxidants and protective compounds. 
A daily intake of 1.5–2.0 liter of water should be guarantied. A good hydration is essential to maintain the corporal water 
equilibrium, although needs may vary among people because of age, physical activity, personal circumstances and weather 
conditions. As well as water, non-sugar rich herbal infusions and broths (with low fat and salt content) may complete the 
requirements.
Dairy products. Prefer it in the form of low fat yoghurt, cheese and other fermented dairy products. They contribute to bone 
health, but can also be an important source of saturated fat. 
Olive oil is located at the centre of the pyramid; should be the principal source of dietary lipids because of its high nutritional 
quality (especially extra virgin). Its unique composition gives it a high resistance to cooking temperatures and should be used 
for cooking as well as dressings (one tablespoon per person).
Spices, herbs, garlic and onions  are a good way to introduce a variety of flavours and palatability to dishes and contribute 
to the reduction of salt addition. Olives, nuts and seeds are good sources of healthy lipids, proteins, vitamins, minerals and 
fibre. A reasonable consumption of olives, nuts and seeds (such as a handful) make for a healthy snack choice.
Respecting religious and social beliefs, a moderate consumption of wine and other fermented beverages (one glass per 
day for women and two glasses per day for men, as a generic reference) during meals is recommended. 
A variety of plant and animal origin proteins should be consumed. Mediterranean traditional dishes do not usually have animal 
origin protein foods as the main ingredient but as a tasty source. 
Fish (two or more servings), white meat (two servings) and eggs (two to four servings) are good sources of animal protein. 
Fish and shellfish are also a good source of healthy proteins and lipids. 
Consumption of red meat (less than two servings, preferably lean cuts) and processed meats (less than one serving) should 
be in smaller quantity and frequency.
Fig. 3 (colour online) The Mediterranean diet pyramid’s brief complementary text for the general public
2278
A Bach-Faig et al.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1368980011002515 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 6 (native) -----
–
Occasionally: 
Moderation: Portion sizes should be based on frugality, adapting energy needs to urban and modern sedentary lifestyles.
Rest: Resting is also part of a healthy and balanced lifestyle. 
Fundación Dieta Mediterránea
Hellenic Health Foundation
International Commission
on the Anthropology of Food
and Nutrition 
Forum on Mediterranean Food Cultures
Hebrew University
Università Politecnica delle Marche
The combination of legumes (more than two servings) and cereals are a healthy protein and lipid source. Potatoes are
also included in this group, as they are a part of many traditional recipes with meat and fish (three or less servings per 
week, preferably fresh potatoes). 
In the vertex of the pyramid are represented the sugary and unhealthy fats rich foods (the sweets). Sugar, candies, pastries 
and beverages such as sweetened fruit juices and soft drinks, should be consumed in small amounts and left for special 
occasions. 
Together with the proportion and frequency recommendations of consumption, the incorporation of lifestyle and cultural 
elements is one of the innovations of the pyramid. Adopting a healthy lifestyle and preserving the cultural elements should 
also be considered in order to acquire all the benefits from the Mediterranean diet. These elements are: 
Socialisation: The aspect of conviviality is important for the social and cultural value of the meal, beyond nutritional aspects. 
Cooking, sitting around the table and sharing food in company of family and friends is a social support and gives a  sense of 
community.
Cooking: Make cooking an important activity taking the proper time and space. Cooking can be relaxing, fun and can be done 
with family, friends and the loved ones. 
Seasonality, biodiversity, eco-friendliness, traditional and local food products are presented at the bottom of the 
pyramid to highlight how the new revised modern Mediterranean diet is compatible with the development of a sustainable diet 
model for the present and future Mediterranean generations. The preference for seasonal, fresh and minimally processed 
foods maximises the content of protective nutrients and substances in the diet. 
Activity: Regular practice of moderate physical activity (at least 30 min throughout the day) as a basic complement to the 
diet for balancing energy intake, for healthy body weight maintenance and for many other health benefits. Walking, taking the 
stairs  v.  the lift, housework,  etc., are simple and easy ways of doing exercise. Practising leisure activities outdoors and
preferably with others makes it more enjoyable and strengthens the sense of community. 
This pyramid is the result of an international consensus and is based on the latest scientific evidence on nutrition and health 
published in hundreds of scientific articles in the last decades. It contributes to the harmonisation of educational tools used in 
the promotion of the Mediterranean diet and responds to the need for a common framework among the Mediterranean area; 
to be adapted to the specific realities of each country and region. The use and promotion of this pyramid is recommended 
without any restrictions and has been translated and is available in English, Spanish, Catalan, Galician, Basque, French, 
Arabic, Italian, Portuguese and Greek.
The supporting entities of the new design of the Mediterranean diet pyramid are: 
Fig. 3 (Continued)
Mediterranean diet pyramid today
2279
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1368980011002515 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 7 (native) -----
although needs may vary among people due to age,
physical activity, personal circumstances and weather
conditions. It should be consumed freely, bottled or
from the tap, when hygienic circumstances allow it. In
addition to water, sugar-free herbal infusions and tea, and
low-sodium and low-fat broths may help to complete the
requirements.
> Dairy products should be present in moderate amounts
(two servings per day), with a preference for low-fat
dairy, traditionally in the form of yoghurt, cheese and
other fermented dairy products. Although their richness
in Ca is important for bone and heart health, dairy
products can be a major source of saturated fat(20).
> Olive oil is located at the centre of the pyramid; it
should be the principal source of dietary lipids because
of its high nutritional quality (especially extra virgin
olive oil). Its unique composition gives it a high
resistance to elevated temperatures, and it is recom-
mended for both cooking(21) and dressings. Olive oil
has been reported to be inversely associated with some
cancers and is known to positively affect blood lipids
and cardiovascular systems(22–26). This may be related
to its high content of monounsaturated oleic acids and
abundance of antioxidant compounds, which are
primarily present in virgin olive oil(27). Traditionally,
vegetables and other plant foods are cooked with olive
oil, thus amplifying their nutritional value.
> Olives, nuts and seeds are good sources of healthy
lipids, proteins, vitamins, minerals and ﬁbre(28). A reason-
able consumption of olives, nuts and seeds (such as a
handful) make for a healthy snack choice.
> Spices, herbs, garlic and onions are a good way to
introduce a variety of ﬂavours and palatability to dishes
and allow for a reduction in salt use, as salt is one of
the main contributing factors to the development of
hypertension among predisposed individuals(29). Herbs
and spices are good sources of micronutrients and
antioxidant compounds and also contribute to the
regional identities of Mediterranean dishes.
> Respecting religious and social beliefs, a moderate
consumption of wine and other fermented beverages
during meals (one glass per day for women and two
glasses per day for men, as a generic reference) is
present in the MDP(30–32).
Weekly
Consumption of a variety of plant- and animal-origin
proteins is
recommended. Traditional Mediterranean
dishes do not usually have animal-origin protein foods as
the main ingredient but rather as a source of ﬂavour.
> Fish and shellﬁsh (two or more servings), white meat
(two servings) and eggs (two to four servings) are good
sources of animal protein. Fish, white meat (poultry,
turkey, rabbit, etc.) and eggs provide high-quality
protein. Fish and shellﬁsh are a good source of healthy
protein and lipids. Varied consumption (of oily ﬁsh,
lean ﬁsh and shellﬁsh) is recommended. Fish (espe-
cially those high in lipids) and shellﬁsh consumption
has been reported to reduce the risk of CHD and they
have anti-inﬂammatory properties due to their content
of long chain n-3 PUFA(33,34). White meat is also a good
Federation of European Societies 
Prevención con Dieta Mediterránea
International Union of Nutritional
Sciences
Federation of African Nutrition Nutrition Societies
Centre International de Hautes Études Agronomiques
Méditerranéennes
Centro Interuniversitario
Internazionales di Studi sulle Culture Alimentari
Mediterranee 
Fig. 3 (Continued)
2280
A Bach-Faig et al.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1368980011002515 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 8 (native) -----
source of lean protein without the high levels of
saturated fat found in some red meat cuts. Egg consump-
tion, including those used in cooking as well as baking,
should be between two and four times per week.
> Consumption of red meat (less than two servings,
preferably lean cuts) and processed meats (less than one
serving) should be small in both quantity and frequency as
the intake of such meats has been consistently associated
with some chronic diseases (cancers and CHD)(35,36).
> The combination of legumes (more than two servings)
and cereals is a healthy plant protein and lipid source
that should be considered as a meat alternative(37,38).
> Potatoes are also included on the weekly level (three or
fewer servings per week, preferably fresh), as they are a
part of many traditional recipes with meat and ﬁsh. They
should be consumed in moderation(39) as they have a high
glycaemic index(40) and are most commonly prepared fried.
Occasionally
In the top vertex of the pyramid are the foods rich in
sugars and unhealthy fats (sweets). Sugar, candies, pas-
tries and beverages such as sweetened fruit juices and soft
drinks should be consumed in small amounts and set
aside for special occasions. These foods are energy dense
and are likely to contribute to weight gain(39). Simple
sugars, which are abundant in sweets, pastries, fruit juices
and soft drinks, have been associated with an increased
occurrence of tooth decay(36).
Cultural and lifestyle elements
Along with recommendations regarding the proportion
and frequency of food consumption, the incorporation of
cultural and lifestyle elements is one of the innovations of
the pyramid. Adopting a healthy lifestyle and preserving
cultural elements should also be considered in order to
acquire all the beneﬁts from the MD and to preserve this
cultural heritage. These concepts represented outside of
the pyramid, but at its base, are as follows.
Moderation
Serving sizes should be based on frugality and moderation,
to adapt the urban and modern lifestyles to energy needs.
This aspect is emphasised due to the major public health
challenge of obesity. The portion sizes of the foods repre-
sented at the bottom should be larger and consumed fre-
quently as they provide satiety along with moderate amounts
of energy, and those foods at the upper levels should be
consumed in smaller amounts and less frequently due to
their high fat and simple sugar contents. Serving sizes should
reﬂect autochthonous peculiarities and local habits, thus
adapting to the speciﬁc realities of each country and region.
Socialisation
The conviviality aspect is important for the social and
cultural value of the meal beyond nutritional aspects.
In this sense, several factors related to food (understood
as a social fact) must be kept in mind, such as culinary
activities, knowledge transmitted from generation to
generation and time devoted to meals related to the daily
pace of life. All these aspects contribute to generating or
strengthening sociability, communication and the identity
of communities. Sharing food in the company of family
and friends around the table represents social support
and a sense of community(41). The pleasure associated
with the conviviality of meals may positively affect food
behaviours, and in return, health status(42).
Culinary activities
The development of culinary activities such as cooking,
making crafts, the organisation of domestic space and
other techniques associated with food is basic for the
social reproduction of the identity of each particular
culture(10). Thus, devoting enough time and space for
such culinary activities is stressed, giving account to their
role in everyday meals, celebrations and religious festivals
in every culture.
Physical activity
Regular practice of moderate physical activity (at least 30min
throughout the day) serves as a basic complement to the
diet by balancing energy intake, maintaining healthy body
weight and providing many other health beneﬁts(36). Physical
activity not only involves sports such as football, dancing,
jogging, cycling, etc. but also walking, taking the stairs v. the
lift, housework, gardening, etc. Practising leisure activities
outdoors(43), and preferably with others, makes them more
enjoyable and strengthens the sense of community.
Adequate rest
Resting during the day (nap) as well as adequate night
sleep is also part of a healthy and balanced lifestyle.
Scientiﬁc evidence has shown that a short rest after eating
is a healthy and traditional Mediterranean habit that helps
promote a balanced lifestyle(44). An after-meal nap is an
increasingly widespread habit in Mediterranean countries
and throughout Europe.
Seasonality
The preference for seasonal, fresh and minimally pro-
cessed foods may in most cases maximise the content of
protective nutrients and substances in the diet. Currently
and due to the modern lifestyle, the consumption of fresh
foods is being substituted by other processed foods.
However, progress in modern technology minimises
nutrient loss and offers healthy alternatives(45). Especially
in the case of fresh products, several factors inﬂuence
their nutritional value: the growing methods used, the
speciﬁc variety chosen, ripeness when harvested, post-
harvest handling, storage, extent and type of processing,
and the distance transported(46). Thus, all the decisions
and practices along the food system – from seed to table –
affect the nutrient content of foods.
Mediterranean diet pyramid today
2281
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1368980011002515 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 9 (native) -----
Traditional, local, eco-friendly and biodiverse products
Taking into account the traditional, local, eco-friendly and
biodiverse products whenever possible contributes to the
preservation of Mediterranean landscapes and sea. The
MD should be understood not only as a set of foods but
also a cultural model incorporating the whole food chain:
the way foods are selected, produced, processed and
distributed to the consumers(13,47). Moreover, the MD, as a
plant-centred dietary pattern, further contributes to the
preservation of the environment, as it implies a reduction
in animal consumption and therefore production com-
pared to Western patterns and, consequently, lowered
demands on soil, water and energy resources(48,49). All
these items express the sustainable character of the MD in
an increasingly globalised world(47,50,51).
The MD is an example of a sustainable pattern in which
agricultural biodiversity plays an important role(47,51). The
variety both among and within species contributes to
differences in appearance and taste, as well as micro-
nutrient and phytochemical content(46). However, when
making varietal decisions, durability (for instance, to
withstand long-distance transport) is sometimes being
prioritised over taste and nutritional quality(52). The large
number of endemic species and landscape diversiﬁcation
(cultivated areas, grassland or forest and land use changes
over time) that contribute to the biodiversity of the terri-
tories bordering the Mediterranean make this area a hot
spot of global diversity(53). In this sense, agricultural
biodiversity provides food variety of plant and animal
food products from wild and domesticated sources(54)
that foster the nutritional guidelines(55).
The consumption of local and eco-friendly foods has
been associated with health and environmental pre-
servation in several ways(50). First, although there is still
no unanimous international consensus on the differences
in nutrient content between eco-friendly and conven-
tional products(56), some literature surveys of nutritional
and sanitary aspects of eco-friendly (organic) foods(57,58)
have reported some higher nutrient contents and mar-
ginal pesticide residue contaminations. Second, locally
grown and harvested foods are normally given more time
to ripen. Third, local food products normally have less
distance to travel, thus promoting energy saving and
reducing pollution, having a lower contribution to climate
change and greenhouse gas emissions if compared to
long-travelling food products(59). Moreover, by buying
local foods, farmers are encouraged to diversify their
crops and decrease their vulnerability to pests(50). Finally,
the consumption of local foods contributes to improving
local economies(60).
Traditional
knowledge
and
practices
developed
through daily observation, interaction within rural commu-
nities, transfer production, procurement and consumption
techniques and activities are locally transmitted from genera-
tion to generation(11). All those elements ensure positive,
responsible, sustainable and healthy behaviours(48,50,55)
while reproducing the Intangible Cultural Heritage of the
Mediterranean Diet(13). The modernisation process, includ-
ing sociocultural changes and new technologies, has trans-
formed food production and threatens sustainable orders of
life, such as local foodstuffs and environmental biodiversity.
Thus, countries, communities and cultures that maintain
their own traditional food systems are better able to con-
serve local food specialities with a corresponding diversity
of crop varieties and animal breeds(50,61).
Conclusions
This pyramid is the result of an international consensus
and is based on the latest scientiﬁc evidence on nutrition
and health published in hundreds of scientiﬁc articles in
recent decades. It contributes to the harmonisation of
educational tools used in the promotion of the MD and
responds to the need for a common framework in the
Mediterranean area, to be adapted to each country’s and
region’s speciﬁc realities. The use and promotion of this
pyramid is recommended without any restrictions, and the
material is available in English, Spanish, Catalan, Galician,
Basque, French, Arabic, Italian, Portuguese and Greek.
The ‘Mediterranean diet pyramid: a lifestyle for today’
summarises and updates the traditional MD of those
areas of the Mediterranean basin that have evolved
with modernisation. It is a shared and dynamic cultural
heritage that was recognised by UNESCO in 2010. Taking
into account its contribution to health and general well-
being, we hope to contribute to a much better adherence
to this healthy dietary pattern and its way of life with this
new graphic representation.
Acknowledgements
The present study was supported by the Mediterranean
Diet Foundation, the Spanish Government (Ministerio de
Medio Ambiente y Medio Rural y Marino), Interuniversity
International Center for Mediterranean Food Cultures Stu-
dies (CIISCAM), Fundacio´n Patrimonio Comunal Olivarero,
Universita` Degli Studi di Parma, Istituto Nazionale di
Riverca per gli Alimenti e la Nutrizione (INRAN). The
authors have no conﬂict of interest to declare. The authors
contributed as follows: A.B.F., E.M.B., D.L., J.R., A.T., S.D.,
X.F.M., M.B., R.B. and L.S.M.: conceived and designed the
study and revised the manuscript; A.B.F.: conducted the
literature review and wrote the manuscript; G.M.: further
developed some concepts, identiﬁed additional references
and edited the subsequent drafts of the manuscript; L.S.M.:
coordinated the study. All authors have seen and approved
the content and contributed to the work. The Mediterra-
nean Diet Foundation Expert Group contributed intellec-
tually and scientiﬁcally to the project. The authors thank the
members of the Mediterranean Diet Foundation Expert
Group (Lluı´s Serra-Majem (Chair, Las Palmas de Gran
2282
A Bach-Faig et al.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1368980011002515 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 10 (native) -----
Canaria and Barcelona, Spain), Joan Reguant (Andorra
la Vella, Andorra), Anna Bach-Faig (Barcelona, Spain),
Antonia Trichopoulou (Athens, Greece), Denis Lairon
(Marseille, France), Elliot Berry (Jerusalem, Israel), Sandro
Dernini (Rome, Italy), Francesc Xavier Medina (Barcelona,
Spain), Maurizio Battino (Ancona, Italy), Javier Aranceta
(Bilbao, Spain), Tola Atinmo (Ibadan, Nigeria), Juan Miguel
Barros (Santiago de Compostela, Spain), Rekia Belahsen
(El Jadida, Morocco), Sabah Benjelloun (Rabat, Morocco),
Isabel
Bertomeu-Galindo
(Barcelona,
Spain),
Barbara
Burlingame (Rome, Italy), Marc Caballero-Bartolı´ (Barcelona,
Spain),
Carmen
Clape´s-Badrinas
(Barcelona,
Spain),
Sandrine Couto (Porto, Portugal), Ibrahim Elmadfa (Vienna,
Austria), Ramo´n Estruch (Barcelona, Spain), Amanda Faig
(Toronto, Canada), Flaminio Fidanza (Perugia, Italy), Silvia
Franceschi (Lyon, France), Joseph Hautvast (Wageningen,
Holland), Elisabeth Helsing (Oslo, Norway), Diana Julia`-
Llobet (Barcelona, Spain), Carlo La Vecchia (Milano, Italy),
Aicha Lemtouni (Rabat, Morocco), Abel Marine´ (Barcelona,
Spain), Miguel A. Martı´nez-Gonza´lez (Pamplona, Spain),
Gemma Miranda (Barcelona, Spain), Ridha Mokni (Tunis,
Tunisia), Francisco Mombiela (Paı´s, France), Idoia Noain
(Ordizia, Spain), Biel Obrador (Barcelona, Spain), Gu¨lden
Pekcan (Ankara, Turkey), Suzanne Piscopo (Msida, Malta),
Blanca Raido´-Quintana (Barcelona, Spain), Emilio Ros
(Barcelona,
Spain),
Sara
Sa´ez-Almendros
(Barcelona,
Spain), Jordi Salas-Salvado´ (Reus, Spain), Francisco Sensat
(Barcelona, Spain), Dimitrios Trichopoulos (Boston, United
States), Josep Antoni Tur (Palma de Mallorca, Spain), Maria
Daniel Vaz da Almeida (Porto, Portugal) and Walter
C. Willett (Boston, MA, USA)) and the 2009 CIISCAM
Conference experts (Marie Joseph Amiot-Carlin (Marseille,
France), Anna Bach-Faig (Barcelona, Spain), Rekia Belahsen
(El Jadida, Morocco), Alfonsina Bellio (Cosenza, Italy),
Elliot Berry (Jerusalem, Israel), Barbara Burlingame (Rome,
Italy), Carlo Cannella (Rome, Italy), Roberto Capone
(Bari, Italy), Davide Cassi (Parma, Italy), Sandro Dernini
(Rome, Italy), Lorenzo M. Donini (Rome, Italy), Cosimo
Lacirignola (Bari, Italy), Denis Lairon (Marseille, France),
Giuseppe Maiani (Rome, Italy), Mario Mancini (Naples,
Italy), Francesc Xavier Medina (Barcelona, Spain), Nicolo
Merendino (Viterbo, Italy), Martine Padilla (Montpellier,
France), Stefano Padulosi (Rome, Italy), Lluı´s Serra-Majem
(Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain), Antonia Trichopoulou
(Athens, Greece)) for their contributions.
References
1.
Keys A, Menotti A, Karvonen MJ et al. (1986) The diet and
15-year death rate in the Seven Countries Study. Am J
Epidemiol 124, 903–915.
2.
Trichopoulou A (2004) Traditional Mediterranean diet and
longevity in the elderly: a review. Public Health Nutr 7,
943–947.
3.
Serra-Majem L, Roman B & Estruch R (2006) Scientiﬁc
evidence of interventions using the Mediterranean diet: a
systematic review. Nutr Rev 64, Suppl. 1, S27–S47.
4.
SoﬁF, Cesari F, Abbate R et al. (2008) Adherence to
Mediterranean diet and health status: meta-analysis. BMJ
337, a1344.
5.
Benetou V, Trichopoulou A, Orfanos P et al. (2008) Greek
EPIC cohort. Conformity to traditional Mediterranean diet
and cancer incidence: the Greek EPIC cohort. Br J Cancer
99, 191–195.
6.
Meydani M (2005) A Mediterranean-style diet and meta-
bolic syndrome. Nutr Rev 63, 312–314.
7.
Willett
WC,
Sacks
F,
Trichopoulou
A
et
al.
(1995)
Mediterranean diet pyramid: a cultural model for healthy
eating. Am J Clin Nutr 61, Suppl. 6, 1402S–1406S.
8.
Trichopoulou A, Ocurrı´s-Blazos A, Wahlqvist ML et al. (1995)
Diet and overall survival in elderly people. BMJ 311, 1457–1460.
9.
Reguant-Aleix J, Arbore R, Bach-Faig A et al. (2009)
Mediterranean diet: an intangible cultural heritage. Public
Health Nutr 12, 1591–1594.
10.
Heine P (1994) Middle Eastern food. The anthropologists’
perspective. In La alimentacio´n en las culturas isla´micas,
pp. 159–167 [M Marı´n and D Saines, editors]. Madrid:
Agencia Espan˜ola de Cooperacio´n Internacional.
11.
Contreras J (1993) Antropologı´a de la alimentacio´n, p. 9.
Madrid: Ediciones de la Universidad Complutense.
12.
UNESCO (2003) Convention for the Safeguarding of the
Intangible
Cultural
Heritage.
http://www.unesco.org/
culture/ich/doc/src/01852-EN-pdf (accessed April 2011).
13.
UNESCO (2010) Representative List of the Intangible
Cultural Heritage of Humanity. http://www.unesco.org/
culture/ich/en/RL/00394 (accessed April 2011).
14.
Serra-Majem L, Bes-Rastrollo M, Roma´n-Vin˜as B et al.
(2009) Dietary patterns and nutritional adequacy in a
Mediterranean country. Br J Nutr 101, Suppl. 2, S21–S28.
15.
Buckland G, Bach-Faig A & Serra-Majem L (2008) Obesity and
the Mediterranean diet: a systematic review of observational
and intervention studies. Obes Rev 9, 582–593.
16.
Centro internacional de altos estudios agrono´micos medi-
terra´neos (editors) (2008) Evolucio´n del consumo y de la
alimentacio´n. In Terramed: el futuro del sector agro-
alimentario en el mediterra´neo, pp. 157–180. Madrid:
Ministerio de Medio Ambiente y Medio Rural y Marino.
17.
Slavin J (2004) Whole grains and human health. Nutr Res
Rev 17, 99–110.
18.
Tang L, Zirpoli GR, Guru K et al. (2008) Consumption of
raw cruciferous vegetables is inversely associated with
bladder cancer risk. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 17,
938–944.
19.
Khoo HE, Prasad KN, Kong KW et al. (2001) Carotenoids
and their isomers: color pigments in fruits and vegetables.
Molecules 16, 1710–1738.
20.
Ascherio A (2002) Epidemiological studies on dietary fats and
coronary heart disease. Am J Med 113, Suppl. 9B, 9S–12S.
21.
Casal S, Malheiro R & Sendas A (2010) Olive oil stability
under deep-frying conditions. Food Chem Toxicol 48,
2972–2979.
22.
Bertuzzi M, Tavani A, Negri E et al. (2002) Olive oil
consumption and risk of non-fatal myocardial infarction in
Italy. Int J Epidemiol 31, 1274–1277.
23.
Pe´rez-Jime´nez F, Lista JD, Pe´rez-Martı´nez P et al. (2006)
Olive oil and haemostasis: a review on its healthy effects.
Public Health Nutr 9, 1083–1088.
24.
La Vecchia C (2009) Association between Mediterranean
dietary patterns and cancer risk: review. Nutr Rev 67,
Suppl. 1, S126–S129.
25.
Castan˜er O, Fito´ M, Lo´pez-Sabater MC et al. (2011) The
effect of olive oil polyphenols on antibodies against
oxidized LDL. A randomized clinical trial. Clin Nutr
(Epublication ahead of print version).
26.
Pelucchi C, Bosetti C, Negri E et al. (2011) Olive oil and
cancer risk: an update of epidemiological ﬁndings through
2010. Curr Pharm Des 17, 805–812.
Mediterranean diet pyramid today
2283
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1368980011002515 Published online by Cambridge University Press

----- Page 11 (native) -----
27.
Corona G, Spencer JP & Dessı` MA (2009) Extra virgin
olive oil phenolics: absorption, metabolism, and biological
activities in the GI tract: review. Toxicol Ind Health 25,
285–293.
28.
Sabate´ J, Ros E & Salas-Salvado´ J (2006) Nuts: nutrition and
health outcomes. Preface. Br J Nutr 96, Suppl. 2, S1– S2.
29.
World Health Organization (2004) Global Strategy on
Diet, Physical Activity and Health. The Fifty-seventh World
Health Assembly, Resolution WHA57. Geneva: WHO;
available at http://www.who.int/gb/ebwha/pdf_ﬁles/WHA57/
A57_R17-en.pdf
30.
Mink PJ, Scrafford CG, Barraj LM et al. (2007) Flavonoid
intake and cardiovascular disease mortality: a prospective
study in postmenopausal women. Am J Clin Nutr 85,
895–909.
31.
Pasten C & Grenett H (2006) Wine, ﬁbrinolysis and health.
Rev Med Chil 134, 1040–1048.
32.
Vilavalur R, Otani H, Singal PK et al. (2006) Signiﬁcance of
wine and resveratrol in cardiovascular disease: French
paradox revisited. Exp Clin Cardiol 11, 217–225.
33.
Kris-Etherton PM, Harris WS & Appel LJ (2002) American
Heart Association. Nutrition Committee. Fish consumption,
ﬁsh oil, omega-3 fatty acids, and cardiovascular disease.
Circulation 106, 2747–2757.
34.
Simopoulos AP (2006) Evolutionary aspects of diet, the
omega-6/omega 3-ratio and genetic variation. Biomed
Pharmacother 60, 502–507.
35.
Micha R, Wallace SK & Mozaffarian D (2010) Red and
processed meat consumption and risk of incident coronary
heart disease, stroke, and diabetes mellitus: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Circulation 121, 2271–2283.
36.
World Health Organization (2003) Diet, Nutrition and the
Prevention of Chronic Diseases. Joint WHO/FAO Expert
Consultation. WHO Technical Report Series no. 916.
Geneva: WHO.
37.
Rochfort S & Panozzo J (2007) Phytochemicals for health,
the role of pulses. J Agric Food Chem 55, 7981–7994.
38.
Bazzano L, He J, Ogden L et al. (2001) Legume consump-
tion and risk of coronary heart disease in US men and
women: NHANES I Epidemiologic Follow-up Study. Arch
Int Med 161, 2573–2578.
39.
Mozaffarian D, Hao T, Rimm EB et al. (2011) Changes in
diet and lifestyle and long-term weight gain in women
and men. New Engl J Med 364, 2392–2404.
40.
Willett W, Manson J & Liu S (2002) Glycemic index,
glycemic load, and risk of type 2 diabetes. Am J Clin Nutr
76, Suppl. 1, 274S–280S.
41.
Medina FX (1996) Dieta y comportamientos alimentarios en
el contexto mediterra´neo. In La alimentacio´n mediterra´nea.
Historia, cultura, nutricio´n, p. 42 [FX Medina, editor].
Barcelona: Icaria.
42.
De Garine I (1993) La dieta mediterra´nea en el conjunto de
los sistemas alimentarios. In Antropologı´a de la alimenta-
cio´n: ensayos sobre la dieta mediterra´nea, pp. 9–26
[I Gonza´lez Turmo and P Romero Solı´s, editors]. Sevilla:
Junta de Andalucı´a, Fundacio´n Machado.
43.
Thompson J, Boddy K, Stein K et al. (2011) Does participating
in physical activity in outdoor natural environments have a
greater effect on physical and mental wellbeing than physical
activity indoors? A systematic review. Environ Sci Technol 45,
1761–1772.
44.
Ficca G, Axelsson J, Mollicone DJ et al. (2010) Naps,
cognition and performance. Sleep Med Rev 14, 249–258.
45.
Sizer F & Whitney E (2000) Food Safety and Food
technology.
In
Nutrition
concepts
and
controversies,
pp. 507–545 [A Williams, J Wood and C Winter, editors].
Belmont: Wadsworth, Thomson Learning.
46.
Harvard Medical School, Center for Health and the
Global Environment (2010) Healthy and sustainable food.
http://chge.med.harvard.edu/programs/food/nutrition.html
(accessed May 2011).
47.
Serra-Majem L (2010) Nutricio´n comunitaria y sostenibili-
dad: concepto y evidencias. Revista Espan˜ola de Nutricio´n
Comunitaria 16, 35–40.
48.
Gussow JD (1995) Mediterranean diets: are they environmen-
tally responsible? Am J Clin Nutr 61, Suppl. 6, 1383S–1389S.
49.
Stehfest E, Bouwman L, Van Vuuren DP et al. (2009) Climate
beneﬁts of changing diet. Climatic Change 95, 83–102.
50.
Food and Agricultural Organization (2010) Biodiversity
in Sustainable Diets. Technical Workshop Report. Rome:
FAO; available at http://www.fao.org/ag/humannutrition/
24994-064a7cf9328fbe211363424ba7796919a.pdf
51.
Gussow JD & Clancy KL (1986) Dietary guidelines for
sustainability. J Nutr Educ 18, 1–5.
52.
Goldman IL, Kader AA & Heintz C (1999) Inﬂuence of
production, handling, and storage on Phytonutrient content
of food. Nutr Rev 57, 9 Pt 2, S46–S52.
53.
Myers N, Mittermeier RA, Mittermeier CG et al. (2000)
Biodiversity hotspots for conservation priorities. Nature 24,
853–858.
54.
Trichopoulou A, Vasilopoulou E, Hollman P et al. (2000)
Nutritional composition and ﬂavonoid content of edible
wild greens and green pies: a potential rich source of
antioxidant nutrients in the Mediterranean diet. Food Chem
70, 319–323.
55.
Johns T & Sthapit BR (2004) Biocultural diversity in the
sustainability of developing-country food systems. Food
Nutr Bull 25, 143–155.
56.
Dangour AD, Dodhia SK, Hayter A et al. (2009) Nutritional
quality of organic foods: a systematic review. Am J Clin
Nutr 90, 680–685.
57.
Food Standards Agency (2009) Comparison of Composition
(Nutrients and Other Substances) of Organically and
Conventionally Produced Foodstuffs: A Systematic Review
of Available Literature. London, UK: FSA; available at
http://www.food.gov.uk
58.
Lairon D (2010) Nutritional quality and safety of organic
food. A review. Agron Sustain Dev 30, 33–41.
59.
Carlsson-Kanyama A & Gonza´lez AD (2009) Potential
contributions of food consumption patterns to climate
change. Am J Clin Nutr 89, Suppl. 5, 1704S–1709S.
60.
Horrigan
L,
Lawrence
RS &
Walker
P
(2002)
How
sustainable agriculture can address the environmental
and human health harms of industrial agriculture. Environ
Health Perspect 110, 445–456.
61.
Burlingame B & Dernini S (2011) Sustainable diets: the
Mediterranean diet as an example. Public Health Nutr 14,
Suppl. 1, 2285–2287.
2284
A Bach-Faig et al.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1368980011002515 Published online by Cambridge University Press