

----- Page 1 (native) -----
Physical Activity, Fitness, Cognitive Function, and Academic 
Achievement in Children: A Systematic Review
Joseph E. Donnelly, Ed.D, FACSM [Co-Chair], Charles H. Hillman, Ph.D. [Co-Chair], Darla 
Castelli, Ph.D., Jennifer L. Etnier, Ph.D., FACSM, Sarah Lee, Ph.D., Phillip Tomporowski, 
Ph.D., FACSM, Kate Lambourne, Ph.D., and Amanda N. Szabo-Reed, Ph.D.
Abstract
Background—The relation among physical activity (PA), fitness, cognitive function, and 
academic achievement in children is receiving considerable attention. The utility of PA to improve 
cognition and academic achievement is promising but uncertain; thus, this position stand will 
provide clarity from the available science.
Objective—To answer the following questions: (1) among children aged 5-13, do PA and 
physical fitness influence cognition, learning, brain structure, and brain function? (2) among 
children aged 5-13, do PA, physical education, and sports programs influence standardized 
achievement test performance and concentration/attention?
Study Eligibility Criteria—Primary source articles published in English in peer-reviewed 
journals. Articles that presented data on, PA, fitness or physical education (PE)/sport participation 
and cognition, learning, brain function/structure, academic achievement, or concentration/attention 
were included.
Data Sources—Two separate searches were performed to identify studies that focused on (1) 
cognition, learning, brain structure, and brain function; and (2) standardized achievement test 
performance and concentration/attention. PubMed, ERIC, PsychInfo, SportDiscus, Scopus, Web 
of Science, Academic Search Premier, and Embase were searched (January 1990- September 
2014) for studies that met inclusion criteria. Sixty-four met inclusion criteria for the first search 
(cognition/learning/brain) and 73 studies met inclusion criteria for the second search (academic 
achievement/concentration).
Study appraisal and synthesis methods—Articles were grouped by study design as cross-
sectional, longitudinal, acute, or intervention trials. Considerable heterogeneity existed for several 
important study parameters, therefore results were synthesized and presented by study design.
Results—A majority of the research supports the view that physical fitness, single bouts of PA, 
and PA interventions benefit children's cognitive functioning. Limited evidence was available 
concerning the effects of PA on learning, with only one cross-sectional study meeting the inclusion 
criteria. Evidence indicates that PA has a relation to areas of the brain that support complex 
cognitive processes during laboratory tasks. While favorable results have been obtained from 
cross-sectional and longitudinal studies related to academic achievement, the results obtained from 
This pronouncement was reviewed by the American College of Sports Medicine Pronouncements Committee and by John Best, Ph.D.; 
Dawn P. Coe, Ph.D., FACSM; Steven E. Gaskill, Ph.D., FACSM; J. Carson Smith, Ph.D. FACSM; and Tuija Tammelin, Ph.D.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2016 June ; 48(6): 1197–1222. doi:10.1249/MSS.0000000000000901.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 2 (native) -----
controlled experiments evaluating the benefits of PA on academic performance are mixed and 
additional, well-designed studies are needed.
Limitations—Limitations in evidence meeting inclusion criteria for this review include a lack of 
randomized controlled trials, limited studies that are adequately powered, lack of information on 
participant characteristics, failure to blind for outcome measures, proximity of PA to measurement 
outcomes, and lack of accountability for known confounders. Therefore, many studies were ranked 
as high risk for bias due to multiple design limitations.
Conclusions—The present systematic review found evidence to suggest that there are positive 
associations among PA, fitness, cognition, and academic achievement. However, the findings are 
inconsistent and the effects of numerous elements of PA on cognition remain to be explored, such 
as type, amount, frequency, and timing. Many questions remain regarding how to best incorporate 
PA within schools, such as activity breaks versus active lessons in relation to improved academic 
achievement. Regardless, the literature suggests no indication that increases in PA negatively affect 
cognition or academic achievement and PA is important for growth and development and general 
health. Based on the evidence available, the authors concluded that PA has a positive influence on 
cognition as well as brain structure and function; however, more research is necessary to determine 
mechanisms and long-term impact as well as strategies to translate laboratory findings to the 
school environment. Therefore the Evidence Category rating is B. The literature suggests that PA 
and PE have a neutral effect on academic achievement. Thus, due to the limitations in the literature 
and the current information available, the Evidence Category rating for academic achievement is 
C.
Keywords
Physical activity; fitness; cognitive function; academic achievement; children
Introduction
Contemporary educational organizations propose that children's experiences in sport and 
physical education (PE) contribute to the mental acuity, skills, and strategies that are 
important for navigating challenges faced across the life span (5). The perceived importance 
of PE and its contribution to children's academic success has varied considerably over the 
history of the modern educational system (153). Over the past decade, mandates of the 
federal No Child Left Behind Act have placed major emphasis on children's standardized 
test performance, and, as a consequence, have led to reductions of children's opportunities to 
engage in physical activities during the school day (90). Physical activity (PA) proponents 
have long argued for the necessity of school-affiliated PA, suggesting that the time spent in 
PA would benefit health and might contribute to academic performance (156). Several lines 
of research address the PA-cognition relation; results obtained from these studies fuel 
discussions concerning the role of PA in children's cognition and academic success. For the 
purposes of this review, the terms that will be used throughout are defined below:
•
Physical activity: Any bodily movement produced by skeletal muscles that requires 
energy expenditure.
Donnelly et al.
Page 2
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 3 (native) -----
•
Exercise: A subset of PA that is planned, structured, and repetitive and has the 
improvement or maintenance of physical fitness as a final or an intermediate 
objective
•
Fitness: A physiological state of well-being that reduces the risk of hypokinetic 
disease; a basis for participation in sports; and good health which enables one to 
complete the tasks of daily living. Components include cardio-respiratory 
endurance, muscle strength endurance, flexibility, and body composition.
•
Cognition: The set of mental processes that contribute to perception, memory, 
intellect, and action.
•
Academic achievement: The extent to which a student, teacher or institution has 
achieved their educational goals, commonly measured by examinations or 
continuous assessment (i.e., grades, excluded from this review).
•
Executive function: A set of cognitive operations underlying the selection, 
scheduling, coordination, and monitoring of complex, goal-directed processes 
involved in perception, memory, and action.
•
Learning: The act of acquiring new, or modifying and reinforcing, existing 
knowledge, behaviors, skills, values, or preferences and may involve synthesizing 
different types of information. This is often assessed through recall tasks.
Advances in neuroscience have resulted in substantial progress in linking PA to cognitive 
performance as well as to brain structure and function. The initial evidence for the direct 
effects of exercise on brain was obtained from research conducted with animals. Bouts of 
exercise elicit a cascade of neurological changes in the hippocampus that have been linked to 
memory consolidation and skilled actions in rodents (75). Considerable animal research led 
to the neurogenic-reserve hypothesis (95), which proposes that PA in early life optimizes 
brain networks involved in memory and also creates a reserve of precursor cells that 
influence individuals' learning capabilities throughout the life span. The relationship 
between fitness and cognitive vitality was likely first established in children (35), however, 
the evidence for the benefits of exercise on human cognition has been most fully developed 
in research with older adults. Several of these experiments clearly demonstrated that routine 
exercise alters specific brain structures and functions and the changes were associated with 
older adults' cognitive performance (40, 41, 101), particularly on tests requiring greater 
amounts of executive functions (EF), which describes a subset of goal-directed cognitive 
operations underlying perception, memory, and action, and are organized along three 
interrelated component processes: working memory, response inhibition, and mental 
flexibility (55, 113). The EF hypothesis proposes that exercise has the potential to induce 
vascularization, neural growth, and alter synaptic transmission in ways that alter thinking, 
decision making, and behavior in those regions of the brain tied to EF, in particular the 
prefrontal cortices (97).
More recently, the EF hypothesis has been extended to children (55). Laboratory-based tests 
have revealed a stage-like emergence of the components of EF (10, 55) and neuroscientists 
have linked behavioral test performance to brain development (18). The consensus is that 
Donnelly et al.
Page 3
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 4 (native) -----
EFs are crucial for children's adaptive behavior (1, 12) and serve as the capstone for social 
behaviors expressed across the life span (55).
These ‘late maturing’ EFs are thought to broadly underpin learning and cognition and are 
associated with academic achievement. Measurements of EF in preschool predict 
achievement on mathematics and literacy in kindergarten (13). Similarly, working memory 
ability correlates with math and reading scores among children age 5 to 6 (4) and age 11 to 
12 (146), and predicts achievement in mathematics and science in adolescents (74). 
Additionally, subtests of standardized tests of academic achievement benefit from processing 
speed and decision-making ability, which are related to physical fitness and PA. Classroom-
based PA programs have been shown to be effective in improving on-task behavior during 
instruction time (111). This increase in on-task behavior subsequently correlates with EF 
which sub serves self-regulation and behavioral inhibition, and the ability to inhibit off-task 
behavior in service of attending to classroom material that is a prerequisite for successful 
learning (87). Therefore, cognitive skills appear to affect learning and academic achievement 
in school, as well as classroom behavior.
The objective of this systematic review was to address the following questions: (1) among 
children aged 5-13, do PA and physical fitness influence cognition, learning, brain structure, 
and brain function? and (2) among children aged 5-13, do PA, PE, and sports programs 
influence standardized achievement test performance and concentration/attention? This 
review updates and expands previous position stands (41, 43, 126) by the inclusion of recent 
cognitive neuroscience studies. Further, it informs researchers and stakeholders of the 
salubrious benefits of routine PA and its role in contemporary models of public health (6, 
106).
Methods
This systematic review was performed and reported in accordance with the Preferred 
Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis (PRISMA) guidelines (105, 
114). (See Table, Supplemental Digital Content 1, PRISMA 2009 checklist)
Eligibility Criteria
Primary source articles published in English in peer-reviewed journals were eligible for 
inclusion in this systematic review if data were presented on the relation among PA levels, 
fitness, PE or sport participation, and cognitive function or academic achievement. Specific 
eligibility criteria included the following: Types of studies: Cross-sectional, acute, 
longitudinal, and intervention studies (both non-randomized and randomized). Types of 
participants: Elementary-aged children (age 5-13 years). Studies that include data on older 
students were not disqualified if data could be interpreted for the eligible age range. This age 
range was selected to narrow the focus on children as the onset of puberty results in both 
physical and cognitive changes that differentiate adolescents from children. Types of 
outcome measures: For the search relative to question 1, studies were included if cognitive 
function, learning, brain structure (i.e., magnetic resonance imaging), or brain function (i.e., 
electroencephalography, functional magnetic resonance imaging) were assessed. For the 
search relative to question 2, studies were included if the outcomes included a standardized 
Donnelly et al.
Page 4
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 5 (native) -----
test or a measure of concentration/attention. Grades were not included as an outcome 
measure due to their subjective nature and because they are not standardized across teachers. 
Exclusion criteria: Articles were excluded if they did not meet inclusion criteria or did not 
include findings related to the inclusion criteria (i.e., measured PA, but failed to compare 
with academic achievement or cognitive function).
Information Sources
Studies were identified by searching electronic databases, related article reference lists, and 
consulting with experts in the field. The search was applied to PubMed and adapted for 
Embase, Education Resources Information Center (ERIC), PsychInfo, SportDiscus, Scopus, 
Web of Science, and Academic Search Premier (1990-September 2014). The last search was 
conducted on [May 1st, 2015]. The search was developed as a collaborative effort of the 
research team in consultation with a University of Connecticut reference librarian and 
conducted by co-authors (KL and AS). No attempts were made to contact study investigators 
or sponsors to acquire any information missing from the published article.
Search Strategy
Search terms were defined through group discussion among the research team and were used 
in each database (Embase, ERIC, PsychInfo, SportDiscus, Scopus, Web of Science, and 
Academic Search Premier) to identify potential articles with abstracts for review. The search 
terms are be found in Supplemental Digital Content 2 (see Document, Supplemental Digital 
Content 2, Cognitive function search) . Additional search filters were applied to eliminate 
case reports and studies involving participants with physical or developmental disabilities. 
Separate searches were run for the publication dates 2012-present, removing the filters. The 
purpose of these searches was to locate pre-indexed citations, which would not come up 
when filters were activated.
Study Selection
Retrieved abstracts were independently assessed for eligibility for inclusion in the review by 
two co-authors and coded as “yes”, “no”, or “maybe.” The co-authors who participated in 
eligibility assessments were trained regarding study inclusion/exclusion criteria and 
completed practice eligibility assessments on 50 test abstracts prior to actual coding. 
Eligibility assessments on the practice abstracts were reviewed by the primary author (JED) 
and any coding problems were discussed. Disagreements regarding eligibility for inclusion 
were resolved via development of consensus among all co-authors. Full text articles for 
abstracts coded as “yes” or “maybe” were retrieved and reviewed by the same two co-
authors prior to inclusion in the review. A Microsoft Excel spreadsheet was developed to 
track eligibility status.
Data Collection
Extracted data were entered into the University of Kansas secure REDCap database 
(Research Electronic Data Capture, Version 4.14.5) (80). A REDCap data extraction form 
was developed, pilot tested, and revised accordingly. Relevant data were extracted from each 
manuscript by one co-author and the coding was verified by a second co-author. 
Donnelly et al.
Page 5
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 6 (native) -----
Disagreements were resolved by discussion among these co-authors. Data extracted from 
each article included basic study information (design, sample size, groups compared, PA 
groups/intervention(s), participant characteristics (age, gender, body mass index (BMI), 
minority status), PA/fitness assessment method, cognition or academic achievement 
assessment method, and results.
Study Quality and Risk of Bias
Study quality was assessed using checklist criteria developed by Downs and Black (59). The 
checklist is used for assessing the quality of both non-randomized and randomized 
intervention trials. The checklist includes items concerning the quality of reporting (9 
items), internal validity (bias, 7 items, and confounding, 6 items), external validity (3 items), 
and power (1 item). Power was assessed using the following criteria, “Did the study have 
sufficient power to detect a clinically important effect where the probability value for a 
difference being due to chance is less than 5% (i.e., if the treatment effect, was noticeable in 
daily life).” Answers were scored 0 or 1, except for one item in the reporting subscale, 
which scored 0 to 2 and the single item on power, which was scored 0 to 5. A co-author 
(JED) resolved any discrepancies in quality coding. Studies were not excluded based on 
quality. Detailed comments on study quality according to the checklist criteria have been 
included throughout the manuscript.
Synthesis of Results
Articles were grouped by dependent variable (e.g., cognitive function/brain structure/brain 
function or academic achievement) and then by study design: cross-sectional, acute, 
longitudinal, and intervention trials (non-randomized and randomized). Considerable 
heterogeneity existed within study groups for several important study parameters. These 
parameters included the following: (1) participant characteristics (e.g., age, gender, BMI); 
(2) PA or fitness assessment methods (e.g., questionnaires, time spent in PE, 
FITNESSGRAM™); (3) cognitive assessment measures (e.g., reaction time, flanker task, 
Cognitive Assessment System); and (4) academic achievement assessment methods (e.g., 
state administered tests, individualized achievement tests). For each question, the results are 
presented in a consistent manner. Each question begins with a general overview of the 
findings, followed by a description of all studies organized by design (cross-sectional 
studies, longitudinal studies, acute studies, and intervention based studies such as cohort and 
randomized controlled trials). Each section concludes with a quality assessment of the body 
of literature as a whole and a summary of the findings. The details for each study, including 
design, participant characteristics and sample size, measures, methods, and results are 
presented in the corresponding tables.
Strength of the overall body of evidence presented in the Position Stand is summarized via 
evidence statements and evidence category ratings adapted from the National Institutes of 
Health and National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute (see Table 1)(124). As an example, a 
recommendation with an evidence category of A, indicates that the recommendation is 
supported by the strongest evidence and that the treatment is useful and effective, while an 
evidence category of C indicates that evidence primarily comes from outcomes of 
uncontrolled or non-randomized trials or from observational studies. An evidence summary 
Donnelly et al.
Page 6
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 7 (native) -----
statement and evidence category rating have been presented for each of the two questions 
addressed by this review.
Results
Question 1: Physical Activity, Fitness, Cognition, Learning, and Brain Structure/Function
The potential benefits of PA on cognitive performance, learning, brain structure, and brain 
function for children are important to understand because these effects may be the 
foundation upon which more global improvements in academic achievement are attained. 
Although the extant literature in this area is relatively modest, the early work was meta-
analytically reviewed on two occasions. In 1997, Etnier et al. (69) reported that in studies 
testing the effects of acute PA on cognitive performance with children (6-13 years), a small 
positive effect was observed (Hedge's g = 0.36). In a 2003 meta-analysis focused exclusively 
on children ages 6-13 years, Sibley and Etnier (143) reported a similar overall effect size 
(Hedge's g=0.32) for 44 studies using a variety of designs (including both chronic and acute 
PA paradigms).
Since 2003, there has been a gradual increase in annual publications that report on the 
relationship between PA and cognitive performance by children (e.g., 1 in 2005 and 2007, 6 
in 2010, and 12 in 2012). This time period has also seen considerable growth in the field of 
kinesiological neuroscience, as researchers have recognized the importance of including 
both mechanistic and behavioral measures in studies on PA and cognitive performance in 
children. Despite still lagging behind the research on PA and cognition and brain in adult 
populations, this burgeoning literature has shed light on the influence of PA on cognition, 
brain structure, and brain function among school-aged children, with approximately 25% of 
the literature employing randomized trials.
Although considerable effort will be necessary to fully elucidate our understanding of the 
relation of PA and aerobic fitness to cognition and brain, emerging evidence suggests a 
favorable relationship among these constructs. This section will describe the benefits 
observed in the literature by detailing the relationship of PA and aerobic fitness to cognition, 
learning, brain structure, and brain function. The initial database search plus hand searching 
identified 3,192 unique records, of which 3,090 were excluded based on review of title and 
abstract. Full-text articles for the remaining 102 citations were reviewed, of which 38 
articles did not satisfy the inclusion criteria and were excluded. Thus, 64 studies published 
since 1990 were included in the review (Figure 1). Of these, only a relatively small number 
of studies have included measures of brain structure and function (n = 22). This smaller 
number is perhaps not surprising given that the first neuroimaging investigation into the 
association of childhood fitness with brain function and cognition occurred only one decade 
ago (83). This section will describe the benefits observed in the literature that has examined 
the following question: Among children aged 5-13, does PA and physical fitness influence 
cognition, learning, and brain structure/function?
Research examining the relationship among PA or aerobic fitness and cognitive 
performance, learning, brain structure, and brain function includes studies testing the 
relation among PA participation and/or fitness using cross-sectional (n=25), longitudinal 
Donnelly et al.
Page 7
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 8 (native) -----
(n=4), and cohort (n=3) designs, studies testing the effects of a single session of PA (i.e. 
acute, n=16), or randomized controlled trials (RCT) (n=16) testing the effects of a chronic 
PA program.
Physical Activity, Fitness, Cognition and Learning
A detailed description of studies examining the relationship among PA or aerobic fitness and 
cognitive performance/learning are included in Table 2 (see Online Content, Table 2: Studies 
examining the relationship between physical activity or aerobic fitness and cognitive 
performance).
Cross-Sectional Studies—Results from the 11 cross-sectional studies generally support 
beneficial relationships among physical activity or aerobic fitness and cognitive performance 
with significant positive relationships being reported in all of the studies except two (26, 
115) in which non-significant trends for a positive relationship were described. The sample 
size in these studies has ranged from 24 to 224 children among the ages of 6 and 13 years 
old (with a mean age of 9 or 10 in 75% of the studies). Fitness has most often been 
measured using a shuttle-run task (often the PACER) (7, 16, 82, 83, 91, 140, 141) or a 
graded exercise test (24-27, 29, 50, 60, 96, 129-131, 161, 167). In addition to the large 
number of studies assessing fitness, there is one study that assessed PA objectively using 
accelerometry (148) and one study that assessed sport participation in addition to their 
measure of fitness (7). With regard to the statistical analyses, fitness or activity has either 
been maintained as a continuous variable (7, 16, 50, 60, 91, 96, 118, 140, 141, 148), has 
been used to categorize participants as low- or high-fit, with this judgment typically based 
upon normative PACER data (82, 83) or normative VO2max data (24-27, 29, 129-131, 161, 
167), or participants have been identified as athletes or non-athletes (7). When researchers 
have categorized participants as low- or high-fit, the average difference in VO2max among 
the groups is 14.75 ml/kg/min (SD=4.76, n=13) and the average difference in the number of 
laps in a shuttle run task is 18.40 laps (SD=0.28, n=2), indicating that there are substantial 
fitness differences among the groups.
These studies have included behavioral measures of cognitive performance in isolation (7, 
16, 27, 29, 50, 60, 91, 96, 115, 130, 131, 140, 141, 148, 167) or in combination with 
measures of brain function (82, 83, 118, 129, 161, 168) or brain structure (24-26). In studies 
that include only behavioral measures of cognitive performance, a wide variety of cognitive 
outcomes have been assessed including processing speed (7, 115, 167), EF (16, 50, 130, 
140, 141, 148, 167), memory (27, 60, 115, 131), learning (131), attention (16, 50, 96, 115, 
148), crystallized and fluid intelligence , and a novel street crossing/virtual reality task (29). 
In studies that also incorporated measures of brain function, their use has been almost 
exclusively during tasks that measure EF with a particular focus on inhibition (25, 26, 82, 
118, 129, 161), which is particularly well suited for the inclusion of assessments of event-
related brain potentials (ERPs; electroencephalographic measures that reflect neural activity 
in response to, or in preparation for a stimulus or response).
Most of the studies in this area present their findings after consideration of potential 
confounding variables that may have offered competing explanations for the results because 
Donnelly et al.
Page 8
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 9 (native) -----
of their relationship to fitness and cognitive performance. These potential confounders 
included sex, pubertal stage, socio-economic status, percent body fat, BMI, age, grade, and 
intelligence quotient (IQ). Specifically, in studies comparing high-fit and low-fit groups, 
potential confounding variables were assessed and either: (1) data were reported to confirm 
that the two fitness groups were statistically equivalent on these variables or that the 
potential confounders were not predictive of cognitive performance (24-26, 83, 129-131, 
161, 167); or (2) potential confounders were included as covariates in the analyses (27, 82, 
118). In studies testing fitness as a continuous variable (16, 50, 60, 91, 118, 140, 141, 148), 
potential confounders were consistently considered and statistically controlled, and positive 
relationships were observed between fitness and cognitive performance in seven of the eight 
studies. Specific findings were as follows: Buck et al. (16) statistically controlled for age, 
BMI, and IQ and reported that fitness was predictive of cognitive performance as assessed 
with the Stroop color, word, and color-word tasks; Jacob et al. (91) controlled for sex and 
BMI and found that fitness was predictive of comprehension and block design performance; 
Davis and Cooper (50) controlled for race, gender, and education level of the primary 
caregiver and reported that fitness was predictive of planning scores on the Cognitive 
Assessment System (CAS); and Scudder and colleagues reported that fitness predicted 
reaction time on the flanker task (140, 141) and performance on the spatial n-back (a 
measure of working memory) (141) after controlling for grade, sex, household income, and 
BMI. Drollette et al. (60) consistently found that girls preformed poorer on measures of 
working memory as compared to boys when controlling for SES and fitness in three distinct 
data sets. Syväoja and colleagues (148) controlled for gender, parental education, and 
remedial education and demonstrated that moderate-to-vigorous PA has a positive 
association with attention. These studies suggest that fitness and PA are correlated with 
cognitive outcomes independent of most confounders.
While this body of literature is only able to provide correlational evidence, researchers using 
this design have generally taken precautions to control for potential confounders, hence 
lending additional credibility to their findings indicating that children with higher levels of 
fitness display significantly better cognitive performance compared to children with lower 
levels of fitness. The same association is true for those individuals that participate in higher 
levels of PA. Even with the inclusion of confounding variables, the directionality of these 
associations (i.e., that fitness influences cognition, but not vice versa) cannot be determined. 
Weaknesses in these studies according to Downs and Black criteria include lack of 
information about the following: estimates of random variability in the outcome data (22 of 
26 studies, 84%); actual probability values (4 of 26 studies, 15%); participants who were 
lost/excluded from the analysis (2 of 26 studies, 8%); or power (26 of 26 studies, 100%). 
Adjustments for confounding were not adequate (especially socioeconomic status, SES) or 
could not be determined in 6 of 26 (23%) of the studies. The primary outcome measures 
were not clearly described (e.g., researchers only reported significant values) in 4 of the 26 
studies (16%). Information about the time of day at which the cognitive measures were 
assessed was not provided in 22 of 26 studies (85%).
Longitudinal Studies—Two longitudinal studies met the inclusion criteria and had 
sample sizes 32 and 245 with a mean participant age of 10 and 5 years, respectively (28, 
Donnelly et al.
Page 9
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 10 (native) -----
122). The time during which participants were followed was nine months (122) and one year 
(28). The two studies evaluated baseline measures of fitness (measured by graded exercise 
test (28) or a shuttle test (122) and changes in flanker task performance (28) or spatial 
working memory and attention (122).
Researchers exploring the benefits of PA for older adults have frequently used longitudinal 
studies to enhance our understanding of the potential protective effects against age-related 
cognitive decline, mild cognitive impairment, and dementia (see 49, 77, 144 for reviews). 
However, in the literature with children, only two prospective studies have been published 
that report on the changes in cognitive performance observed over time relative to baseline 
measures of aerobic fitness. Chaddock et al. (28) categorized children as high (>70th 
percentile) or low (<30th percentile) fit based upon their VO2max and normative data at 
baseline and examined flanker task performance at baseline and one year later. At both time 
points, high-fit children were able to perform accurately on both compatible and 
incompatible task components as compared to the low-fit children who performed worse on 
the incompatible task component relative to the compatible task component. Additionally, 
reaction time data showed an interaction of fitness and time, indicating that low-fit children 
performed the task more slowly at the one-year follow-up as compared to baseline, while the 
high-fit children became faster over this same time period. The two fitness groups were not 
statistically different on relevant demographic variables that might potentially confound the 
results. Niederer et al. (122) presented data from 245 pre-school children (M=5.2 years) who 
were in the control condition in a larger RCT and showed that higher levels of baseline 
fitness were predictive of improvements in performance on an attention task nine months 
later after controlling for potential confounding variables; however, baseline fitness was not 
predictive of spatial working memory performance. Overall, these longitudinal studies 
indicate that higher fitness is associated with better cognitive performance across time.
Weaknesses in these studies according to Downs and Black criteria include lack of 
information about the following: whether results were obtained by data dredging (1 of 2 
studies, 50%); the length of follow-up being similar for all participants (2 of 2 studies, 50%); 
blinding of those measuring primary outcomes (2 of 2 studies, 100%); or power (2 of 2 
studies, 100%). Adjustment for confounding was not adequate in one (1 of 2 studies, 50%) 
of the studies. Information about the time of day at which the cognitive measures were 
assessed was not provided in either of the studies.
Acute Physical Activity Studies—Studies exploring the effects of acute PA on 
cognitive task performance have been conducted in both laboratory (n=8) and school (n=8) 
settings. Sample sizes have ranged from 20 to 1,274, with students ranging in age from six 
to 13 years. Findings from studies conducted in laboratory settings (n=9) are mixed, with 
three failing to definitively support (45, 62, 152) and six supporting (11, 31, 61, 66, 86, 160) 
beneficial effects on tasks that measure both speed and accuracy. All of the studies 
supporting beneficial effects used a version of the flankers test or a measure of choice 
reaction time for their cognitive measure. However, the nature of the observed benefits was 
mixed, with two studies showing benefits for speed (66, 160), three for accuracy (33, 61, 
86), and one with no benefits to speed or accuracy but an increase in the efficiency (i.e., 
decreased interference) of responses (11). It is difficult to explain why the observed benefits 
Donnelly et al.
Page 10
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 11 (native) -----
are different given that these studies have tended to use relatively similar designs 
(participants typically completing 15-30 min of aerobic PA at moderate intensity of 
∼60-70% heart rate max) and measures (simple and choice reaction time, flanker tasks). It is 
possible that these mixed findings reflect differences in the participants' cognitive strategies, 
however future research will be necessary to confirm this possible explanation. Regardless 
of the inconsistencies across study results, the overall findings support a beneficial relation 
between acute PA and cognitive performance.
The results from studies conducted in school settings are more consistent, with eight studies 
yielding significant positive results. Researchers have remained focused on moderate 
intensity PA, but used a broader range of PA durations (∼4 min to 42 min) and more varied 
approaches in PA mode (e.g., standard PE classes (127); team games (125); EF specific 
games and activities (92); aerobic circuit training (81, 125); running tasks (33, 44, 68); short 
activity breaks (110). These researchers have also focused on a more diverse array of 
cognitive domains including measures of EF (e.g., working memory, inhibition), attention, 
memory, and learning. The findings in some of these studies were similar to the laboratory 
studies in that they demonstrated task specificity. For example, Cooper et al. (44) found that 
acute PA benefited speed of performance on a working memory task but had no effect on the 
Stroop test, which measures EF, attention, and processing speed. Together with the evidence 
from laboratory studies, these findings suggest that the benefits of acute PA may be task 
specific and some evidence indicates that benefits are more consistently observed on 
measures that reflect higher order EF functions.
Weaknesses in these acute studies as determined by the Downs and Black checklist criteria 
include lack of reporting of the following items: participant characteristics (7 of 16 studies, 
43%); random variability in the main outcome data (7 of 16 studies, 43%); blinding of those 
measuring the main outcomes (15 of 16 studies, 93%); adequate adjustment for confounding 
in the analyses from which the main findings were drawn (8 of 16 studies, 50%); and power 
(14 of 16 studies, 87%). Authors did not report the time of day that measures were 
conducted or the precise acute intervention performed in 5 of the 16 studies (31%).
In sum, research exploring the effects of acute PA on cognitive performance by children is 
limited and the variability in methods makes it challenging to synthesize the results. Further, 
given the small overall effect size reported for children ages 6-13 years in a recent meta-
analytic review of the literature on acute PA and cognitive performance [Hedge's g= 0.36], it 
is not surprising that findings of individual empirical studies are heterogeneous (143). That 
being said, there was no evidence of deleterious effects and, in fact, evidence does show that 
beneficial effects can be observed for particular cognitive tasks under specific conditions and 
hence warrants future efforts to better understand how to maximize benefits from single 
sessions of PA.
Physical Activity Intervention Studies—Fourteen intervention studies met the 
inclusion criteria for the review, three of which used cohort designs to examine the impact of 
PA on intact groups (e.g., schools, pre-existing study arm, non-randomized) and eleven of 
which were RCTs.
Donnelly et al.
Page 11
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 12 (native) -----
Cohort Studies: Of the three studies conducted using cohort designs, all showed some 
support for cognitive benefits associated with greater or enhanced activity levels, where 
better performance was associated with greater participation in PA. Sample sizes ranged 
from 60 to 470 and the mean age of the participants ranged from 6 to 10 years. The length of 
the intervention ranged from 10 weeks to one school year. Interventions included enhanced 
(47, 71) or additional PE (135). Cognitive measures included the random number generation 
(RNG) task (47), a perceptual speed task (135), the CAS (71), the Cambridge 
Neuropsychological Test Battery (CANTAB)(71), and the Attention Network Test (ANT) 
(71).
The two studies that examined enhanced PE provided evidence for specific benefits that may 
be dependent upon body weight and the specific cognitive domain being assessed. Crova et 
al. (47) compared changes in performance on two scores from the RNG task between classes 
that were randomly assigned to a traditional PE program that met one time per week or to an 
enhanced PE program that received an additional two hours of skill training per week. 
Results showed that improvements in inhibition were moderated by weight status, such that 
overweight children in the enhanced PE program improved significantly while overweight 
children in the traditional PE program and lean children in both programs did not experience 
significant gains in performance. Fisher et al. (71) randomly assigned six schools to receive 
two one-hour sessions of traditional PE per week (control) or two one-hour sessions of more 
aerobically active PE per week (treatment) for 10 weeks and examined the impact on the 
CAS, the CANTAB, and the ANT. Results of this study are difficult to interpret because 
there were only minimal differences in minutes spent in moderate-to-vigorous PA among the 
groups. However, the results showed a significant interaction of group and time after 
adjustment for confounding variables, such that participants in the treatment condition had a 
significant decrease in working memory errors on the CANTAB while those in the control 
group had no change in performance. On all other measures, the interaction was not 
significant after controlling for confounding variables.
Reed et al. (135) examined additional PE by comparing performance on cognitive measures 
from the beginning (pretest) to the end (posttest) of a school year; students at an 
experimental school received 45 min of daily PE for the entire year while students in control 
schools received either 45 min of daily PE for one semester (middle school) or 45 min of PE 
one day per week for the entire year (elementary school). Results were reported separately 
for boys and girls, for elementary and middle school ages, and for fluid intelligence and 
perceptual speed (elementary school only). Boys in the experimental elementary and middle 
schools improved significantly on fluid intelligence measures while boys in the control 
schools did not significantly improve on these measures. Girls in the experimental middle 
school also demonstrated significant improvements in fluid intelligence and these gains were 
larger than the gains for girls in the control school. However, no gains in fluid intelligence 
were observed for girls in the experimental elementary school. Conversely, on a perceptual 
speed task, girls in the experimental elementary school improved significantly on all sections 
while control participants showed no change, and boys in both the control and experimental 
elementary school improved with no differences among the groups.
Donnelly et al.
Page 12
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 13 (native) -----
Clearly, the focus of these cohort studies has been on understanding how increases in the 
volume or nature of physical education classes impact changes in cognitive performance. 
This small body of literature provides limited evidence supporting that greater volume or 
enhanced forms of PA result in greater cognitive improvements. Although beneficial effects 
were limited to particular cognitive domains and were sometimes only seen in particular 
subgroups, it is important to point out that none of the studies demonstrated deleterious 
effects of physical education on cognition. That being said, enthusiasm for these results is 
limited by the threats to validity inherent in their quasi-experimental design.
Randomized Controlled Trials: The strongest evidence with regards to the effects of PA on 
cognitive outcomes comes from the 11 studies using RCT designs, which allow for 
conclusions to be drawn regarding cause and effect relationships. Relative to the question of 
whether chronic PA is causally linked to cognitive outcomes for children, only ten studies 
have clearly satisfied the first necessary requirement of an RCT by randomly assigning 
individual participants to conditions (30, 31, 51, 52, 85, 93, 98-100, 116). Multiple measures 
of cognition were measured in all ten studies and seven studies showed an improvement in at 
least one measure of cognition due to a PA intervention. The cognitive tests used in these ten 
studies included the CAS (51, 52, 98-100), the Sternberg task (93), a novel relational 
memory task (116), and the flanker task (30, 31, 85). Sample sizes ranged from 18 to 221, 
and the length of the intervention ranged from eight weeks to nine months. Researchers 
administered PA via an after-school program in nine of the studies using RCT designs (30, 
51, 52, 85, 93, 98-100, 116), and one study reported data from a program administered 
during the school day (31). Two of these studies report on data from the same RCT (51, 52), 
in which overweight children (8-11 years) were randomly assigned to a low dose (20-min) 
or high dose (40-min) of moderate-intensity PA or to an attention control condition for 8 
months (hereafter referred to as the Georgia trial). Four studies report on data from the 
FITKids trial (30, 85, 93, 116), in which 221 children (age seven to nine years) were 
randomly assigned to an after-school PA condition (two hrs/day, five days/week) or a waitlist 
control during the nine month school year. Three studies provide evidence relative to the 
SMART trial (98-100), an eight-month trial in which overweight children (8-11 years) were 
randomly assigned to an aerobic PA program or to an attention control condition for eight 
months. Overall, the results of studies using RCT designs have consistently demonstrated 
significant improvements in the treatment groups, particularly for executive function tasks.
In the studies reporting on data from the Georgia trial, performance on cognitive tasks was 
presented in one study for the first three cohorts (51) and in another for the entire sample of 
five cohorts (52). Results from the entire sample (n=170) showed that there was a significant 
benefit of PA to performance on the planning (i.e., EF) task, but effects were not observed 
for measures of attention, simultaneous processing, or successive processing. Further, there 
was significant support for a dose-response relationship between the amount of PA and 
performance on the measure of planning.
Several studies report on cognitive outcomes assessed relative to the FITKids trial, including 
three studies using various subsets of the larger sample. Relative to these manuscripts 
utilizing subsets from the FITKids trials, Kamijo et al. (93) observed significant 
improvements in response accuracy for the PA group (n=20) but not the waitlist control 
Donnelly et al.
Page 13
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 14 (native) -----
group (n=16) on a measure of working memory (a modified Sternberg task) (93) observed 
significant improvements in response accuracy for the PA group (n=20) but not the waitlist 
control group (n=16) on a measure of working memory (a modified Sternberg task). 
Similarly, Chaddock-Heyman et al. (30) reported significant gains in response speed and 
accuracy in the PA group for neutral trials and significant improvements in accuracy for 
incongruent trials on the flanker task, while the waitlist control group experienced no 
significant changes in performance from pretest to posttest. By contrast, Monti et al. (116) 
reported no significant differences in performance changes from pretest to posttest among 
groups on a relational memory task. In the study reporting on the full FITKids sample (85), 
children (n = 221) who received the daily PA intervention demonstrated selective 
improvements for executive function tasks that tapped inhibition and cognitive flexibility 
along with significant changes in brain function (described below). Specifically, with regard 
to the behavioral measures, the intervention group improved significantly more from pretest 
to posttest than did the waitlist control group on response accuracy for the inhibition task 
and for heterogeneous trials of the cognitive flexibility task. In addition, a significant dose-
response relationship was observed such that greater attendance in the after-school program 
was associated with greater improvements in executive control from pretest to posttest 
function from pretest to posttest (85).
With regard to the SMART trial, cognitive performance data were also reported in studies 
based upon subsets of the larger sample that agreed to participate in neuroimaging measures 
(i.e., magnetic resonance imaging, MRI, and functional magnetic resonance imaging, fMRI, 
a neuroimaging tool that measures brain structure (MRI) or indirectly measures brain 
function by detecting associated changes in blood flow (fMRI)). Krafft et al. (98) report on 
data from 43 participants and Krafft et al. (99) report on data from 18 participants. Results in 
both studies indicated that there were no significant interactions of group with time, 
suggesting that PA participation did not influence changes in cognitive performance as 
assessed using the CAS from pretest to posttest.
Literature Summary and Study Quality: Physical Activity, Fitness, Cognition and Learning
There were only two studies that reported having sufficient statistical power relative to their 
analysis of the effects of chronic PA for cognitive performance (52, 85). Importantly, results 
from these trials provide support for a significant effect of PA participation on select 
measures of cognitive performance with additional evidence of a dose-response relationship. 
Additional evidence supporting a causal link among PA and brain function or structure is 
reported in the Chang et al. study (31) and in publications related to the Georgia trial (52), 
the FITKids trial (30, 85, 93, 116), and the SMART trial (98-100, 138). Given that changes 
in brain function or structure may underlie changes in cognitive performance, this causal 
evidence is consistent with an expectation that PA and cognitive performance are themselves 
causally linked. These studies on PA and brain function and structure are described later in 
this manuscript. Clearly, this body of evidence is in its infancy and in need of substantial 
growth if firm conclusions are to be drawn regarding causal links between PA and cognitive 
outcomes.
Donnelly et al.
Page 14
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 15 (native) -----
Weaknesses in the intervention studies as determined by the Downs and Black checklist 
criteria include lack of description of the following: participant characteristics (12 of 23 
studies, 52%); interventions of interest (13 of 23 studies, 59%); distributions of principal 
confounders in each group of subjects to be compared (16 of 23 studies, 72%); adverse 
events (17 of 23 studies, 74%); characteristics of patients lost to follow-up (12 of 23 studies, 
52%); blinding of those measuring primary outcomes (11 of 23 studies, 48%); compliance 
with the intervention/s (16 of 23 studies, 72%); whether participants lost to follow-up were 
taken into account (18 of 23 studies, 78%); or power (12 of 23 studies, 52%). Adjustment 
for confounding was inadequate or could not be determined in 14 of 23 studies (60%). 
Information about the time of day at which the cognitive measures were assessed was not 
provided in 12 of 23 studies (52%).
Physical Activity, Fitness, and Brain Structure
Of studies assessing the impact of PA on the brain, investigations into the relation of PA and 
aerobic fitness to brain structure has received the least amount of attention in this field to 
date, with only five studies found in the extant literature (see Online Content, Table 3: 
Studies examining the relationship between physical activity or aerobic fitness and brain 
structure). Sample sizes have ranged from 18 to 55 children between the ages of 8 and 11 
years. Of these studies, three employed cross-sectional designs (24-26) and two were 
randomized controlled pilot investigations using subsets of children from the larger 
intervention (100, 138). Accordingly, the evidence-base is in desperate need of growth to 
improve our understanding of the relationship of PA to neural architecture during child 
development. However, the five studies conducted thus far provide a sound basis upon which 
the field can expand, based on study designs that have demonstrated selective benefits to 
neural structures that support specific aspects of cognition.
Cross-sectional Studies—Cross-sectional studies have investigated neural architecture 
by calculating the volume of specific structures within the brain. To date, two unique cross-
sectional studies have investigated the relation of aerobic fitness to subcortical structures that 
are critical for learning and memory. Specifically, Chaddock et al. (25, 26) used structural 
MRI (i.e., a neuroimaging approach to discriminate between grey matter, white matter, and 
cerbral spinal fluid in the brain) and observed that specific regions of the basal ganglia (i.e., 
regions of the dorsal striatum: caudate nucleus, putamen, globus pallidus), which support 
executive function, are larger in higher-fit relative to lower-fit children aged 9 to 10 years. 
However, other regions of the basal ganglia (i.e., nucleus accumbens), which support affect 
and reward, do not demonstrate similar fitness-related differences, suggesting that the 
relationship of fitness is selective to specific structures within the basal ganglia, rather than 
generalized throughout these subcortical structures. Interestingly, higher-fit children 
exhibited better behavioral performance during a task requiring the modulation of EF, and 
these fitness-performance findings were mediated by basal ganglia volume. Accordingly, the 
findings provided initial support that fitness is related to the volume of specific subcortical 
structures within the striatum, which support behavioral interactions during tasks that require 
the modulation of EF (26).
Donnelly et al.
Page 15
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 16 (native) -----
Additional research by the same group (24) demonstrated the relation of aerobic fitness to 
the hippocampus (i.e., a subcortical structure that is part of the limbic system and supports 
learning and memory) and relational memory in children aged 9-10 years. Relational 
memory refers to the ability to bind arbitrary items into cohesive entities and form lasting 
memories of these new associations (39). Chaddock et al. (24) observed that hippocampal 
volume was greater in higher-fit children, and further, that hippocampal volume mediated 
the relationship between fitness and relational memory performance. Such findings suggest 
that greater aerobic fitness may have a selective and disproportionate influence upon 
cognitive functions supported by specific subcortical structures, rather than a more global 
influence on brain structure and cognition.
Physical Activity Intervention Studies—Further evidence of the effects of PA on brain 
structure stems from two randomized controlled pilot studies (99, 138). These studies were 
conducted using subsamples from the SMART study that employed diffusion tensor imaging 
(DTI), which is an MRI technique that affords in vivo characterization of white matter 
microstructure based on the properties of diffusion. Specifically, in addition to the cognitive 
outcomes noted above, Krafft and colleagues (99, 138) used DTI to investigate structural 
integrity (i.e., axonal membrane structure, myelination) of the uncinate fasciculus, which is a 
white matter tract connecting the frontal and temporal cortices with projections between the 
hippocampus and amygdala and with the prefrontral cortex and the superior longitudinal 
fasciculus, which is a white matter tract connecting the frontal and parietal cortices to form 
part of the executive function network. It was found that children randomized to the PA 
intervention demonstrated greater white matter integrity in the uncinate fasciculus from 
baseline to posttest compared to children assigned to the attentional control group (138). 
With respect to the superior longitudinal fasciculus, the initial analysis failed to demonstrate 
a differential effect of PA participation on white matter integrity from baseline to posttest; 
however, an effect emerged when attendance in the after-school program was considered. 
Specifically, children randomized to the PA intervention demonstrated increased white 
matter integrity (i.e., fractional anisotropy or the degree of directionally dependent diffusion 
along the axon, and decreased radial diffusivity or diffusion perpendicular to axons) from 
baseline to posttest with greater attendance in the after-school program. No such effect was 
realized for the attentional control after-school program Together, these findings suggest that 
PA is related to brain structure via integrity of white matter tracts that are part of the neural 
network supporting EF (99, 138), and that such a relationship may be dependent upon the 
amount of PA participation (i.e., attendance) during an 8-month period (99).
Literature Summary and Study Quality: Physical Activity, Fitness and Brain Structure
Collectively, the data collected thus far point to a relationship among physical activity and 
aerobic fitness with specific brain structures that support executive function and memory. 
Such findings, while encouraging, are preliminary, but should serve to motivate future 
research using randomized controlled trials and larger sample sizes. Weaknesses in these 
studies as assessed by the Downs and Black criteria include lack of reporting of the 
following: blinding of those measuring primary outcomes (5 of 5 studies, 100%); whether 
participants lost to follow-up were taken into account (1 of 5 studies, 20%); or power (5 of 5 
studies, 100%). Adjustment for confounding was inadequate or could not be determined in 
Donnelly et al.
Page 16
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 17 (native) -----
both cross-sectional studies (2 of 5 studies, 40%). Information about the time of day at 
which the cognitive measures were assessed was not provided in 2 of 5 studies, or 40%.
Physical Activity, Fitness, and Brain Function
Samples in the 18 studies relating fitness and PA to brain function ranged from 22 to 221 
participants and consisted of children ages 6 to 11 years (with the mean age being 9 or 10 in 
76% of these studies). The cognitive tasks used included a modified flanker task (26, 31, 61, 
84, 86, 118, 129, 161), oddball task (83), anti-saccade task (50), CAS (98, 100), attentional 
blink task (168), online sentence processing task (139), arithmetic verification task , and a 
modified Sternberg task. Brain function was measured with electroencephalography in 12 
studies (31, 61, 82, 83, 85, 86, 93, 117, 118, 129, 139, 168) and with fMRI in the other 6 
studies (26, 30, 52, 98, 100, 161). A cross-sectional design was used in 9 studies, two used 
an acute design, and 7 were RCTs. In the cross-sectional studies (n=9), fitness was assessed 
using either VO2 max tests (26, 117, 118, 129, 139, 161, 168) or FITNESSGRAM (82, 83) 
(see Online Content, Table 4: Studies examining the relationship between physical activity 
or aerobic fitness and brain function).
Cross-Sectional Studies—Early cross-sectional work in this area first emerged 10 years 
ago (83) in a study using ERPs to examine differences in the deployment of attentional 
resources between higher- and lower-fit preadolescent children. ERPs are identified from 
time-locked electroencephalographic activity, which assess consistent neuroelectric 
responses to environmental stimuli and allow for inferences regarding cognitive processes 
that occur between stimulus engagement and response execution. Results from that seminal 
study indicated that high-fit children exhibited greater allocation of attentional resources and 
faster cognitive processing speed (as measured via the P3 component of the stimulus-locked 
ERP) along with better task performance relative to low-fit children (83). Since that time, a 
number of investigations have used cross-sectional designs to demonstrate a robust 
relationship between aerobic fitness and PA on aspects of the neuroelectric system during 
tasks involving attention (168), inhibition/interference control (82, 118, 129), cognitive 
flexibility (129), conflict monitoring/error detection (129), and language (139) and 
mathematical (117) processing. Additionally, robust observations of the transient effects of 
single bouts of PA on the neuroelectric system have also been noted in preadolescent 
children, with findings demonstrating short-term benefits to cognitive processes reflected in 
the P3 component (61, 82, 128), which is often associated with the allocation of attentional 
resources during the updating of working memory (128).
Physical Activity Intervention Studies—More recently, three publications (31, 85, 93) 
have described randomized trials that employed ERPs to understand the effects of PA 
interventions on pre-adolescent brain function and cognition. The findings from two of these 
studies indicated significantly improved brain function (i.e., the P3-ERP component) and 
behavioral performance following the FITKids intervention (85, 93). Importantly, these 
effects were selective to aspects of cognition that required extensive amounts of executive 
function, with no changes observed for task components requiring lesser amounts of 
executive function. In addition, the benefits of the PA intervention followed a dose-response 
relationship, as higher attendance rate was associated with larger changes in neural indices 
Donnelly et al.
Page 17
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 18 (native) -----
of attention allocation (i.e., P3 amplitude), faster cognitive processing speed (i.e., P3 
latency), and improved behavioral performance during the executive function tasks. Because 
significant differences were not observed for children randomized to the waitlist control, the 
findings indicated that a daily PA program enhances brain function underlying executive 
function.
Additional support for the effects of PA and aerobic fitness on neuroelectric indices of 
executive function comes from two other studies with pre-adolescent children, which have 
reported beneficial effects of PA interventions on brain function, and have extended the field 
to include neuroelectric indices of working memory and attentional inhibition using a 
coordinative PA intervention (31). However, it should be noted that the Chang et al. study 
failed to include a control group. Despite this limitation, the study provides corroborative 
evidence in this developing area of research.
fMRI investigations also support the beneficial effects of PA and aerobic fitness on brain 
function. To date, two correlational studies (26, 161) and four RCTs (30, 52, 98, 100) using 
this measure have been published. Despite a small literature base, the findings provide 
compelling evidence for the effects of PA and aerobic fitness on childhood brain function 
during executive function tasks. Specifically, the correlational studies used blood oxygen 
level-dependent (BOLD) fMRI to demonstrate that higher-fit children had increased 
recruitment and activation in frontal and parietal regions during tasks that modulated 
executive function (26, 161). That is, differences in fitness were related to differential 
activation of brain regions that underlie monitoring (anterior cingulate cortex) of 
adjustments in attentional control (middle and inferior frontal gyrus, precentral gyrus) in the 
presence of distracting information and response conflict (superior parietal cortex), as well 
as the preparation and execution of a motor response (supplementary motor area; (8)). 
Importantly, fitness-related differences in fMRI activation were increased during task 
conditions requiring greater amounts of EF.
RCTs have extended these initial correlational data and provided the necessary rigor to make 
suggestions about causal attributions. Specifically, Chaddock-Heyman et al. (30) conducted 
a randomized controlled pilot study using a subset (n = 23) of 8- to-9-year-old children from 
the FITKids intervention and showed decreases in fMRI activation in a region of the right 
anterior prefrontal cortex, along with within-group improvements in cognitive performance 
during task conditions requiring greater amounts of EF. Alternatively, children assigned to a 
waitlist control group did not demonstrate changes in brain activation from baseline to 
posttest. Further, at posttest, children in the FITKids intervention group exhibited no 
differences in anterior frontal brain activation and behavioral performance from a group of 
young adults (mean = 22.5 years) who served as a reference point, given that adult cognitive 
capacity together with the related brain activation is often characterized as the “mature” or 
“optimal” model of brain function (108). At posttest, children in the waitlist control group 
continued to exhibit greater amounts of activation in anterior prefrontal regions and poorer 
performance relative to the young adults. Such findings raise the possibility that childhood 
participation in PA may lead to more “optimal” recruitment of prefrontal brain areas that 
support executive function.
Donnelly et al.
Page 18
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 19 (native) -----
A second RCT included a subset of 20 children in the Georgia trial, who were assigned to 
either the PA intervention or the control condition (52). The results indicated that only the 
PA group exhibited increases in prefrontal cortex activity and decreases in parietal cortex 
activity from baseline to posttest during a task that modulated EF. Although performance 
was not reported for the subsample taking part in the fMRI portion of the study, increases in 
EF from baseline to posttest were observed for mathematical achievement for the full sample 
on a task conducted outside the MRI environment (52). Replication of these findings were 
published by the same group in the SMART study, demonstrating the robustness of the 
effect, with children receiving PA exhibiting adjustments in frontal and parietal brain 
activation following intervention, an effect not observed in the non-PA control group.
Literature Summary and Study Quality: Physical Activity, Fitness, and Brain Function
Overall, the findings support the benefits of daily PA on the neural network supporting 
executive function (52, 100). Also, emerging functional imaging findings have indicated that 
PA interventions may alter the resting state of specific neural networks (i.e., default mode, 
EF, motor), but not others (i.e., salience) in the absence of performing a task (98). Such 
findings indicate that PA interventions may improve brain function not only in response to 
environmental demands, but also while at rest.
Weaknesses in these studies as assessed by the Downs and Black criteria include lack of 
reporting about the following: adverse events (5 of 18 studies, 29%); characteristics of 
participants lost to follow up (3 of 7 of RCTs, 43%); blinding of those measuring primary 
outcomes (16 of 18 studies, 88%); accounting of participants lost to follow-up (4 of 18 
studies, 24%); or power (17 of 18 studies, 93%). Adjustment for confounding was 
inadequate or could not be determined in 5 of 18 studies (29%). Information about the time 
of day at which the cognitive measures were assessed was not provided in 9 of 18 studies 
(50%).
Overall Summary: Physical Activity, Fitness, Cognition, Learning, and Brain Structure and 
Function
The purpose of this section was to answer the following question: Among children aged 
5-13, do PA and physical fitness influence cognition, learning, brain structure, and brain 
function? Overall, the studies in which the relations among PA, cognition, brain structure, 
and brain function were examined have generally found promising results with no evidence 
of deleterious effects. Cross-sectional and cohort-based studies involving PA have provided 
positive support for the relationship between PA and cognitive function, with greater 
amounts or enhanced forms of PA being associated with greater improvements in cognitive 
function. There was only one study (131) examining the effects on learning with findings 
suggesting that fitness is associated with better retention. Acute PA studies also show a 
positive relationship between PA and cognition. Currently, there are only two published 
prospective studies that report on the changes in cognitive performance observed over time 
relative to baseline measures of aerobic fitness (28, 122). Even so, these studies support a 
positive relationship between PA and cognitive function in elementary school children. 
While only a relatively small number of studies using RCT designs exist in the literature to 
date, the findings are promising in that they provide a causal link among PA, cognition, and 
Donnelly et al.
Page 19
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 20 (native) -----
brain structure and function. Evidence Summary Statement: The literature suggests that PA 
has a positive influence on cognitive function as well as brain structure and function; 
however, more research is necessary to establish causality, determine mechanisms, and 
investigate long-term impact. Therefore, based on the current information available the 
Evidence Category rating is B.
Question 2: Physical Activity, Physical Education, Sports Programs, Academic 
Achievement, and Concentration/Attention
The potential benefits of PA on cognitive performance, learning, brain structure, and brain 
function may be the foundation upon which improvements in academic achievement are 
attained. The study of the associations between PA and academic success has grown 
exponentially in recent years, with well over 230 published articles addressing related topics 
among school-aged children (19). The summary of extensive scientific evidence has resulted 
in multiple national organizations (e.g., Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Institute 
of Medicine) endorsing and supporting PE and PA throughout the school day as a way to 
reduce health risk and possibly enhance academic achievement.
Few dispute that healthier children learn better (9), as educators and scientists alike 
understand the importance of physical, cognitive, and brain health among school-aged 
children (19). Participation in PA has been associated with academic success among 
elementary-aged children (23).
The purpose of this section is to summarize the findings of research on PA participation 
(including PE and sports programs), fitness, and academic success/concentration and 
classroom attention among elementary-aged schoolchildren. The initial database search plus 
hand searching identified 1,346 unique records, of which 1,235 were excluded based on 
review of title and abstract. Full-text articles for the remaining 111 citations were reviewed, 
of which 38 articles did not satisfy the inclusion criteria and were excluded. Thus, 73 
research articles published since 1990 met the inclusion criteria and were examined in this 
portion of the review (Figure 2). Studies that met the inclusion criteria focused on three 
different areas and will be presented according to these categories: (1) the relation between 
academic achievement and physical fitness (n=27); (2) studies of PA including the relation 
between PA levels and academic achievement and the effects of participation in acute PA 
and PA interventions on academic achievement (n=35); and (3) the relation between 
academic achievement and PE (n=12). Within these three topics, most of the articles that met 
inclusion criteria involved standardized tests of academic achievement, but 7 studies were 
also included that utilized tests of attention and concentration (2, 51, 71, 109-111, 151), as 
the ability to attend to material presented in the classroom is a prerequisite for learning and 
achievement. While studies of the effects of sports programs were a part of the search 
strategy and were reviewed, none met the inclusion criteria and as such this review does not 
include a section on this topic.
Other than an abundance of cross-sectional studies (n=37), the research designs were 
longitudinal studies (n =4), acute (n=12, which measured time on task or attention during or 
immediately following a single bout of PA) or interventional (including non-randomized 
trials and RCTs, n=20).
Donnelly et al.
Page 20
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 21 (native) -----
Physical Fitness and Academic Achievement
Twenty-seven studies focused on the relationship among physical fitness and academic 
achievement (see Online Content, Table 5: Studies examining the relationship between 
physical fitness and academic achievement). The majority of the studies (n = 24) were cross-
sectional and three were longitudinal studies.
Cross-Sectional Studies—The majority of the cross-sectional studies (n=20) supported 
the positive association of physical fitness to academic success. The sample sizes among 
these studies ranged from 46 participants to a review of 254,743 student records, and the 
majority of the studies focused on children in grades 3-8. The majority of the studies (62%, 
n=15) used the FITNESSGRAM® to assess fitness (14, 20, 34, 36, 38, 42, 63, 65, 78, 132, 
136, 159, 162, 164, 165), and the remaining eight studies used either the one-mile run test 
(70), a 20-m shuttle run (54), the EUROFIT (53, 163), the Presidential Youth Fitness Test 
(163), an 800-m run (70), or a graded exercise test (50, 117, 139). State or national tests 
were used to measure academic achievement in 57% (n=12) of the studies (14, 20, 34, 36, 
42, 53, 54, 132, 136, 159, 162-165), while the remaining studies used the Terra Nova (38, 
70), the Wide Range Achievement Test (139), the Woodcock-Johnson test (50), the Weschler 
Individual Achievement Test III (78), the National Curriculum Statement (63), or tests 
described as standardized but that were not specifically identified (102, 158).
Consistent positive associations were shown among the number of physical fitness tests 
passed on the FITNESSGRAM® and academic achievement scores within these studies 
(46). Further, several cross-sectional studies examined associations among the Healthy 
Fitness Zone (HFZ) designation from the FITNESSGRAM® and performance on academic 
achievement tests, and children in the HFZ also tended to score higher on tests of academic 
achievement (34, 164, 165). Research by Van Dusen and colleagues (159) showed 
significant, positive associations between FITNESSGRAM tests and academic performance 
after adjustment for socio-demographic variables. Fitness was also positively related to math 
and reading scores in a study by Davis and Cooper (50). The majority of these studies on 
relations of PA and fitness with academic achievement have used linear analytic models, 
thereby precluding the possibility that PA and fitness could have a differing, non-linear 
effect on achievement for those more or less active or fit. In contrast, Hansen et al. (78) 
evaluated both linear and nonlinear associations of PA and aerobic fitness with children's 
academic achievement among 687 2nd and 3rd grade students and showed that fitness had a 
significant quadratic association with both spelling and mathematics achievement, indicating 
that 22–28 laps on the PACER was the point at which the associated increase in achievement 
per lap plateaued for spelling and mathematics.
Although the findings from the cross-sectional studies were mainly positive, the effects were 
sometimes unclear and inconsistent. In some studies these relationships varied by gender 
(associations only significant for females, (70, 163)), the subject matter of the academic 
achievement (significant for mathematics, but not reading (53, 65, 70, 78) or vice-versa 
(139)). One potential explanation for inconsistencies in the research on the relation of PA, 
aerobic fitness, and academic achievement may be a lack of appropriate control variables 
such as SES. Researchers controlled for SES in only 55% of the cross-sectional studies 
Donnelly et al.
Page 21
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 22 (native) -----
included in this review. Additionally, it is not clear if or how researchers controlled for 
schools in these studies, and nesting effects could have influenced the differences in results.
Weaknesses in this body of literature as determined by the Downs and Black checklist 
criteria include lack of information about the following: participant characteristics (10 of 24 
studies, 42%); distributions of principal confounders (13 of 24 studies, 54%); and estimates 
of the random variability of the main outcomes (8 for 24 studies, or 33%). The main findings 
of the study were not clearly described in 7 of the 24 studies (29%). Actual probability 
values were not reported in 13 of 24 (54%) of these studies, and none of the studies reported 
on blinding of those measuring the main outcomes (though pre-existing data were used in 9 
of the 24 studies (38%)). In 9 of the 24 (38%) studies, there was either inadequate 
adjustment for confounding variables in the analyses from which the main findings were 
drawn or there was not enough information provided to make this determination. Finally, 
95% of the studies made no mention of statistical power.
Longitudinal Studies—Fitness was consistently associated with academic achievement 
across the three longitudinal studies (107, 150, 166). Sample sizes across the studies ranged 
from 757 to 1725, and the participants involved ranged from 2nd through 7th grade. All three 
studies used the FITNESSGRAM® to assess fitness level. One study used the WESTEST 
(166), one used a California standardized test in math and English , and one study used tests 
of literacy and numeracy designed by Australian government education authority and the 
Australian Curriculum, Assessment and Reporting Authority (150). The studies showed that 
students who increased their fitness or maintained fitness across time had higher academic 
achievement scores than students who did not achieve the Healthy Fitness Zone® (the 
gender- and age-specific fitness goals) on the physical fitness tests that are part of the 
FITNESSGRAM™ (107, 166), and that students and schools with higher fitness levels had 
achieved better literacy and numeracy scores (150). Interestingly, SES has been shown to 
moderate the relation between fitness and achievement; London et al.'s (107) study in 5th-7th 
graders showed that more advantaged students have a greater ability to maintain higher 
levels of academic achievement despite lower levels of fitness, whereas less advantaged 
students experience an even greater level of academic disadvantage when they are also 
physically unfit. Telford and colleagues concluded that associations were stronger between 
schools than among children in the schools, suggesting that differences in school cultures or 
support for fitness programming and achievement might play a more meaningful role in the 
associations than direct effects of fitness on academic achievement.
Overall, the findings across these longitudinal/observational studies were fairly consistent in 
showing that fitness was positively associated with academic achievement. However, the 
fitness measures used and the way that fitness test results were categorized differed across 
the studies. Measures of academic achievement also varied, from different standardized tests 
to specific scores on reading or writing. Furthermore, the way data were collected across 
these studies was not consistent. For example, FITNESSGRAM™ data were obtained by 
trained data collectors in some studies, but in others the data were collected by teachers. The 
small number of studies that have used a longitudinal study design makes it difficult to 
establish a conclusive statement, as few studies have specifically replicated the findings of 
previous research. Weaknesses in these longitudinal/observational studies as determined by 
Donnelly et al.
Page 22
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 23 (native) -----
the Downs and Black checklist criteria include lack of information about confounders (2 of 
the 3 studies, or 66%), blinding (3 studies, 100%), and power (3 studies, 100%). The studies 
also lacked adjustment for confounders such as SES (2 studies, 66%).
Literature Summary and Study Quality: Physical Fitness and Academic Achievement
The literature that has examined the relation between physical fitness and academic 
achievement in children demonstrates largely positive findings. However, there were 
inconsistencies within the findings, likely due to measurement approach. These studies had 
further limitations with regard to study quality and reporting. Many of the cross-sectional 
studies did not provide adequate information about participants and did not include exact 
statistical values or information about variability in the data. Further, large portions of both 
the cross-sectional and longitudinal studies did not adjust for important confounders such as 
SES, which has been shown to both predict academic achievement as well as moderate the 
relation between fitness and achievement. Hence, the failure to include appropriate 
moderators is a critical shortcoming of this literature.
Physical Activity and Academic Achievement
The relation between PA and academic achievement was examined in 32 studies using the 
following approaches: (1) cross-sectional comparisons of academic achievement scores 
among students with different PA levels (n=10); (2) investigation of the effects of single, 
acute bout of PA on tests of academic achievement, attention, or concentration (n=8); and 
(3) examination of academic achievement scores after implementation of a PA intervention 
(n=14; see Online Content, Table 6: Studies examining the relationship between physical 
activity and academic achievement).
Cross-Sectional Studies—The findings from 10 cross-sectional comparisons of PA and 
academic achievement are varied, with four studies that showed positive relations (15, 119, 
147, 169), three studies that showed positive relations in some academic areas but not others 
(79, 103, 123), two studies that showed no relation (48, 104), and one study that showed a 
negative relation (155). Sample sizes in these studies ranged from 55 to 4,755 children 
ranging from kindergarteners to 5th-graders. PA was measured by accelerometry (15, 79, 
103, 104) or by questionnaires administered to students (119, 123, 155, 169), parents (147), 
teachers (48), or school administrators (147). The majority of the studies used government-
mandated standardized tests (15, 79, 104, 119, 123, 155). Other studies used cognitive 
assessment (48), the Wechsler Individual Achievement Test III , a latent variable created 
utilizing standardized math and reading scores (147), or examination results from a test 
administered to elementary students in Hong Kong (169).
The four cross-sectional studies that found only positive associations between all measured 
PA and academic achievement variables varied widely in design. In a large nationally 
representative sample of grade-school children (15) that used an objective measure of PA 
(accelerometer) and controlled for SES factors, higher PA levels were associated with higher 
attainment on tests of English, math, and science. Stevens et al. (147) also controlled for 
SES factors but assessed PA via a questionnaire administered to parents, and found that 
higher PA levels were associated with higher math and reading scores in children from 
Donnelly et al.
Page 23
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 24 (native) -----
grades K-5. The other two studies both administered a PA questionnaire to the students and 
did not control for SES; one (119) showed positive relations among extra-curricular PA, 
math, and oral skills in 9- to 12-year-olds, and the other showed positive relations among 
habitual PA and achievement scores in 8- to-12-year-olds, though the academic areas tested 
were not specified in the study.
Of the three studies that found positive relations among PA and some academic areas but not 
others, two showed positive relations with math but not reading (103, 123) and one showed a 
positive relation with reading but not math (79). O'Dea et al. (123) examined PA data (7-day 
accelerometer) and SES predictors of math and reading scores and found PA predicted math 
scores but SES was a stronger predictor of literacy and numeracy scores. Lambourne et al. 
examined indirect and direct relations among PA (7-day accelerometer), fitness, and 
academic achievement in 2nd- and 3rd-graders and found that aerobic fitness positively 
moderated the relation between PA and math achievement, but that PA was not associated 
with reading or spelling. In contrast, Harrington et al. (79) assessed PA via accelerometer in 
low-income 3rd-graders and found positive associations between the number of bouts per 
day of PA and reading, but no associations with math scores. Based on the limited findings 
available it is challenging to conclude that PA has a positive influence on academic 
achievement, and further, it is unclear if PA improves all aspects of academic achievement or 
whether the effect is selective in nature.
One study that found no relation between PA and academic achievement used correlated 3-
day accelerometer data with English/language arts, math, science, and social studies scores 
in 4th- through 6th-graders. Similar to O'Dea et al. (123), SES was a stronger predictor of 
academic achievement than PA. Another study with a null relation (48) collected 
information about kindergarteners' time spent in recess from teachers, which did not 
correlate with students' reading scores. Finally, Trembley et al. (155) showed a weak, but 
negative relationship among PA measured by questionnaire and math and reading scores in 
6th-graders. Again, SES was a strong predictor of math and reading scores. Overall, it is 
difficult to draw conclusions from the cross-sectional studies performed to evaluate the 
relation between academic achievement and participation in PA, as studies have found 
inconsistent and even contradictory results. Similar to the cross-sectional studies of fitness 
and academic achievement, the differences in methodology, measurements used, and control 
for confounders varies widely, which may account for the inconsistent results.
Weaknesses in these cross-sectional studies as determined by the Downs and Black checklist 
criteria include lack of information about distributions of principal confounders (4 of 10, or 
40% of studies), blinding of those measuring the main outcomes (10 studies, 100%), and 
validity and reliability information for outcome measures (5 of 10 studies, 50%). Actual 
probability values were reported in 5 of the 10 (50%) studies, adequate adjustment for 
confounding was not performed in 3 of the 10 (30%) studies (and in one it could not be 
determined), and there was no mention of power in 6 of the 10 (60%) studies.
Acute Physical Activity Studies—Ten studies included in this review specifically 
examined the effects of acute bouts of PA on academic achievement or concentration/
attention. Four studies examined the immediate effects of physically active lessons in the 
Donnelly et al.
Page 24
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 25 (native) -----
classroom (76, 109-111), three studies utilized a within-subjects design to compare PA to 
rest conditions (64, 86, 112), and three studies examined academic achievement 
performance among groups assigned to different PA conditions (21, 22, 151). Sample sizes 
ranged from 20 to 177 participants who were in grades K-7. The outcome measures included 
time-on-task (76, 109, 111), the Wide-Range Achievement task (64, 86), the Woodcock-
Johnson Test of Concentration (21, 22), the d2 Test of Attention (110, 151), and a series of 
timed mathematical tests designed to measure concentration .
Immediate Effects of Physically Active Lessons in the Classroom: Three of the four 
studies (76, 109-111) that examined the effects of physically active classroom lessons on 
time-on-task (TOT) showed positive results. Mahar et al. measured TOT following sedentary 
lessons or Energizers, which are 10-minute classroom-based physical activities. From pre-
Energizers to post-Energizers, the mean percentage of on-task behavior increased by more 
than 8%. Ma et al. found that off-task behavior decreased in both 2nd and 4th graders 
following FUNtervals (4 minute high-intensity interval exercises) when compared to a no-
activity break. In a similar study, Ma et al. (110) examined the effects of FUNtervals on 
performance on the d2 test of attention and showed that 3rd-5th grade students made fewer 
errors on the d2 following FUNtervals when compared to rest. Finally, Greico et al. (76) 
measured TOT following a physically active academic lesson and an inactive control lesson. 
While TOT decreased significantly in the inactive control lesson condition from before to 
after the lesson, it did not increase significantly following the active lesson.
Other School-Based Physical Activity: Four school-based studies examined the effects of 
PA on concentration/attention, with one study that used a within-subjects design and three 
that used a between-subjects design (21, 22, 151). In the within-subjects study, McNaughten 
et al. (112) compared the effects of varying durations of physical exertion on concentration/
attention at different times of day and showed improvements in attention after the noon hour 
following PA that lasted 30 and 40 minutes (but there were no significant differences in 
mathematical performance after PA of any duration when performed prior to noon). All 
three studies that utilized between-subjects designs examined differences in concentration/
attention immediately following different PA conditions, with one finding no effect and two 
finding positive or mixed effects. Caterino and colleagues (21) administered the Woodcock-
Johnson Test of Concentration to 4th-graders immediately following different PA conditions 
(recess, classroom PA, rest) and found no differences among conditions. In a later study, 
Caterino et al. (22) compared concentration following a sedentary classroom activity or 
directed PA performed in the gymnasium and found a significant improvement in 
concentration scores for 4th-graders following PA (but no improvement following PA for 
2nd- or 3rd-graders). Tine et al. (151) administered the d2 Test of Concentration to 6th- 
through 7th-graders following PA or passive (movie) condition and students in the PA 
condition had higher selective attention scores than students in the movie condition. In 
summary, these studies provided inconsistent results (e.g., improvements in concentration in 
4th-graders following acute activity in one study but not another), improvements in 
concentration for older students (6th- through 7th-graders), and differential effects of on 
concentration following acute PA based on the time of day.
Donnelly et al.
Page 25
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 26 (native) -----
Laboratory Studies: Two laboratory-based studies used within-subjects designs to examine 
the impact of acute PA on academic achievement that showed positive effects on reading. 
Hillman et al. (86) compared a physically active condition (i.e., brisk walking on a treadmill) 
to an inactive condition (i.e., sitting) and found significant benefits for performance in 
reading but not math or spelling. Duncan (64) compared a rest condition to cycling at both 
moderate and vigorous intensities and found that spelling and reading were significantly 
higher after moderate intensity PA, while math scores were statistically significantly lower. 
The two laboratory-based studies reported that PA positively affects reading while the results 
for spelling and reading differed across these studies.
In summary, the studies of acute PA interventions have mixed results, likely owing to the 
differences in tasks administered, the nature of the task employed (i.e., the aspect of 
academic achievement assessed), and PA type. Only two of the eight studies focused on 
achievement scores, both agreed that acute PA had a positive impact on reading and 
disagreed with regard to the impact on math and spelling. Acute PA was shown to improve 
concentration/attention in three of the six studies that measured this construct, and an 
additional study found a positive impact for 4th-graders only. Overall, the evidence suggests 
that acute PA positively affected reading but not math, and no definite conclusions can be 
made with regard to the impact on concentration/attention due to mixed results. The 
generalizability of acute studies is limited due to the small number of studies as well as 
small sample sizes within the studies.
Furthermore, weaknesses in acute studies as determined by the Downs and Black checklist 
criteria include lack of reporting of the following: participant characteristics (7 of 10 studies, 
or 70% of studies); distributions of principal confounders (9 of 10 studies, or 90%); 
information about participants lost to follow-up (6 of 10 studies, or 60%); accounting for 
participants who were lost to follow-up in the analysis (8 of 10 studies, or 80%); blinding of 
those performing outcome measurements (9 of 10 studies, or 90%); compliance to the PA 
intervention (7 of 10 studies, or 70%); adjustment for confounding in the analysis (10 
studies, 100%); actual probability values (4 of 10 studies, or 40%); or statistical power (8 of 
10 studies, 80%).
Physical Activity Intervention Studies: This section will describe the 14 studies that 
examined a PA intervention, with five studies finding clear improvements (2, 32, 58, 72, 88), 
three studies finding improvements in some aspects of academic achievement or some 
students but not others (73, 120, 134), and six studies finding no improvements in academic 
achievement following PA (3, 51, 52, 67, 94, 142) (see Online Content, Table 7: Studies 
examining the relationship between physical education and academic achievement). These 
studies used either a randomized controlled design (32, 50, 51, 72, 134), a cluster 
randomized design (3, 58, 67, 88, 94), a cross-over with control design (73), or a control 
group comparison with no randomization (2, 120, 142). Sample sizes ranged from 29 to 546 
participants, with participants' grade ranging from 1st to 6th. The duration of the 
interventions ranged from 8 weeks to 3 years. The interventions attempted to increase 
participant PA with physically active classroom lessons (58, 67, 88, 120, 134), classroom PA 
breaks (3, 94), additional school PA (2, 73, 142), an after-school fitness program (51, 52), or 
specialized programs including a developmental movement program (72) and a yoga 
Donnelly et al.
Page 26
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 27 (native) -----
program delivered at school (32). Outcome measures used included government-mandated 
standardized tests (3, 73, 88, 94, 134, 142), the WIAT II (58), standardized reading and math 
speed tests , the Discovery Education Assessment (67), the Woodcock-Johnson Tests of 
Achievement III (52), the CAS (51), the Aptitude Test for School Beginners (72), Malin's 
Intelligence Scale for Indian Children (32), and the Bourdon Attention Test (2).
Physically Active Classroom Lessons: The five studies that measured academic 
achievement following implementation of physically active academic lessons reported mixed 
results. In a 3-year cluster randomized trial (58), significant improvements in reading, math, 
spelling, and composite scores were observed from baseline to 3 years. Erwin et al. (67) 
found that a 20-week intervention to provide 20+ minutes per day of physically active 
lessons resulted in significantly higher reading fluency and mathematics scores on a 
validated curriculum-based measure but no differences were seen on standardized test 
scores. In a 2-year study of a school-based PA program that included physically active 
academic lessons (HOPS = Healthier Options for Public Schoolchildren), Hollar et al. (88) 
found significantly higher math scores for intervention participants but no significant 
difference in reading. Furthermore, Reed et al. (134) integrated PA into elementary 
curriculum for four months and found significant improvements in social studies but no 
differences in math, language arts, or science. Mullender-Wijnsma et al. (120) compared 
performance on speeded tests of math and reading following 1 year of physically active 
academic lessons or a control condition and showed that math and reading scores improved 
in third graders when compared to controls but math scores of second graders were 
significantly lower than the controls. Thus, three out of the four studies (58, 67, 88) on 
physically active academic lessons showed improvements in mathematics scores. A fourth 
study showed no impact of active lessons on math scores but did show significant 
improvements in social studies scores (134), and a fifth study showed improvements in 3rd 
graders but not in 2nd graders .
Classroom Physical Activity Breaks: Neither of the two studies that examined the use of 
PA “breaks” in the classroom showed positive results on academic achievement. There were 
no differences in mathematics, reading, or language scores among children attending schools 
that received a 16-month intervention and children attending control schools (3). Similarly, 
no significant differences among the intervention (Activity Bursts in the Classroom or ABC 
for Fitness) and control groups were observed in reading or mathematics scores following an 
8-month intervention.
After-School Fitness Program: Two published studies reported results from the same study 
performed by Davis et al. (51, 52) on the effects of a 12-week fitness program on academic 
achievement as well as attention, showing positive and no effects, respectively. One of these 
studies reported on the impact of the program on scores on the Woodcock Johnson Tests of 
Achievement, and showed the dose-response benefits of PA on mathematics achievement but 
no effect on reading achievement (52). The other study reported on scores on the CAS, 
which includes an attention scale that requires focused, selective cognitive activity and 
resistance to distraction. The PA program had no impact on the scores on this subscale (51).
Donnelly et al.
Page 27
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 28 (native) -----
Additional School Physical Activity: Similar to the studies on physically active academic 
lessons, studies that examined additional PA throughout the day found favorable effects on 
mathematics achievement (2, 73, 142). In the Trois Rivières experiment, Shepard modified 
the curriculum of elementary students to incorporate one additional hour of PA per day and 
showed that these students scored higher on standardized math tests. However, the students 
in the experimental group had lower scores in English achievement. Gao et al. (73) 
incorporated extra PA in the school day for one year using the Dance Dance Revolution 
program and found greater improvements in mathematics scores but not reading scores. The 
final study in this category (2) examined the impact of a 12-week program that added sport 
activities three times per week on attention measured by the Bourdon Attention test. 
Children who engaged in physical activities had 83% higher attention levels than sedentary 
children.
Specialized programs: Two studies examined the impact of specialized PA programs on 
student achievement and both showed positive effects of PA. Fredericks et al. (72) 
implemented an 8-week developmental movement program and examined the impact on 
reading and mathematics scores on the Aptitude Test for School Beginners. The program 
resulted in significant improvement in both reading and mathematics scores. Chaya et al. 
(32) compared 12 months of yoga to regular PE classes, as the school would not allow a 
non-active comparison group. Both groups experienced improvements in comprehension, 
mathematics, and vocabulary scores measured using Malin's Intelligence Scale for Indian 
Children (MISIC), the Indian adaptation of the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children II.
Weaknesses in these intervention studies as determined by the Downs and Black checklist 
criteria include lack of reporting of the following: participant characteristics (8 of 14 studies, 
or 57% of studies); distributions of principal confounders in each group (12 of 14 studies, or 
86%); estimates of the random variability in the data for the main outcomes (4 of 14, or 
29%); information about participants lost to follow-up (13 of the 14 studies, or 93%); 
accounting for participant who were lost to follow up in the analysis (12 of 14 studies, or 
86%); blinding of those performing outcome measurements (11 of 14 studies, or 78%); and 
reliability of intervention compliance (10 of 14 studies, or 77%). Over half of the studies did 
not perform adequate adjustment for confounding in the analyses (7 of 14 studies, 50%), and 
43% (6 of 14 studies) either did not randomize participants/schools or did not provide any 
information about randomization. The majority of the studies made no mention of power (10 
of 14 studies, or 71%). Therefore, there is room for improvement in both study design and 
reporting in future interventions.
Literature Summary and Study Quality: Physical Activity and Academic Achievement
Overall, the studies in which interventions designed to increase participants' PA levels were 
implemented showed positive impacts on mathematics scores, with the exception of the 
studies that examined classroom PA breaks. Interestingly, the positive impact of PA on 
mathematics scores was evident across studies as short as eight weeks to studies as long as 
three years. Similarly, these interventions generally had a positive impact on reading, with 
four of the seven studies that measured reading finding a positive impact. Two of the three 
studies that showed no impact of PA on reading scores were studies that focused on 
Donnelly et al.
Page 28
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 29 (native) -----
classroom PA breaks. From this small subset of studies, it would appear that PA in the 
classroom has more impact when the PA is integrated into the curriculum rather than being 
implemented as a break from academic content, a finding that may warrant further 
investigation.
Many researchers have explored the relation between participation in PA and academic 
achievement through cross-sectional analyses or implementation of chronic or acute PA. The 
results of the cross-sectional studies are mixed, with no clear patterns among type or level of 
PA and specific subjects such as math, reading, or spelling, or the ability to concentrate or 
attend to a task. Inconsistencies are also likely due to large variation in the type of PA 
studied, the age of participants, the sample size, and the type of measure used to assess 
academic achievement or concentration/attention.
Physical Education and Academic Achievement
Twelve studies that examined the relation between physical education (PE) and academic 
achievement were included in this review and utilized the following designs: three cross-
sectional, two acute, one longitudinal, and six interventions (see Online Content, Table 6: 
Studies examining the relationship between physical activity and academic achievement). 
Due to the small number of studies of each design type, the Downs and Black checklist 
criteria was used to evaluate the quality of the PE studies together rather than by each type 
of design (see Literature Summary and Study Quality: PE and Academic Achievement 
section)
Cross-Sectional Studies—One of the three studies that examined cross-sectional 
associations between PE participation and academic achievement showed a positive relation. 
All three studies measured PE based on the amount of time that it was provided (e.g., time 
spent in PE, self-reported minutes of PE), and academic achievement was measured by state 
standardized tests (57, 154) or standardized t-scores from cognitive testing for the Early 
Childhood Longitudinal Survey Kindergarten Class of 1998-1999 (56). One examined PE 
time using student self-report in 2 schools with 311 participants (154), one administered a 
survey to 117 administrators (57), and one administered a survey to K-5th grade teachers but 
did not report the sample size (56). The participants ranged from K-7th grade. The study that 
measured PE level by questionnaire given to administrators found no relation among PE 
curriculum time and scores on a state Literacy and Numeracy Test (57), nor was any 
significant relation found in a study that measured PE level by teacher questionnaire (56). In 
the third study (154), students who received more hours of quality PE per school year scored 
higher in English and language arts but not mathematics. It is important to note that these 
studies relied on subjective estimates of time spent in PE measured by survey rather than 
more objective observation, which might have led to inconsistencies within the results. The 
only study to find positive results assessed PE participation by administering a survey to 
students rather than teachers or administrators.
Acute Physical Activity Studies—The influence of PE on attention was examined in 
two acute studies using within-subjects designs, neither of which found a positive impact of 
PE on attention. The sample sizes in these studies ranged from 39 to 96, and the participants 
Donnelly et al.
Page 29
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 30 (native) -----
in one study were in 4th grade and the second study did not report the age or grade of 
participants (133). Raviv and Low (133) administered the d2 Test of Attention before and 
after active or sedentary lessons, and found no influence of active lessons on attention. Pirrie 
et al. (127) administered the CAS to 4th grade students following a PE class or after sitting 
in the classroom and found that there was no difference on the attention scale between the 
two conditions. Overall, these studies did not provide evidence to support the notion that PE 
has a positive impact on concentration/attention.
Longitudinal Studies—The longitudinal, observational cohort study (17) on PE and 
academic achievement reported positive results for girls but not boys. The study used data 
from the Early Childhood Longitudinal Survey Kindergarten Class of 1998-1999 and a 
sample of 5,316 children observed for six years. Higher participation in PE led to a small but 
significant improvement in reading and math in girls.
Physical Activity Intervention Studies—Overall, the intervention studies that have 
investigated additional or enhanced PE did not show positive results, with only two of six 
finding any positive impact of a PE program on achievement scores. Three studies used 
cluster randomized designs (71, 137, 149), one used a cross-over design (37), one used a 
retrospective analysis (121), and one assigned classes to additional PA lessons or control but 
made no mention of randomization (145). The sample sizes in these studies ranged from 44 
to 754 and the participants ranged from 2nd to 6th grade. Four studies evaluated academic 
achievement and two evaluated attention as outcome measures. Academic achievement was 
measured by the Metropolitan Achievement Tests (137), the Terra Nova (37), Iowa Test of 
Basic Skills (121), or government-mandated tests of literacy and numeracy (149); attention 
was measured using the CAS (71) or the d2 test of attention (145). Interventions ranged in 
length from 10 weeks to 6 years.
The first cluster randomized trial was project SPARK (137), which examined the effects of a 
two-year, health-related fitness PE curriculum and professional development program on 
reading, math, language, and composite scores starting in 4th grade. Improvements were 
found in reading, though there were decreases in language scores and no effects on 
composite or math scores. Another cluster randomized study (71) compared 10 weeks of 
intense PE to a standard PE control group in 2nd-graders and found no significant between-
group differences in attention measured by the CAS. Similarly, Telford et al. (149) randomly 
assigned 13 schools to a specialist-taught PE condition and 16 schools to the common-
practice PE condition and followed 3rd-graders' achievement scores for two years. Math 
scores over the two years were significantly higher in the specialist-taught PE condition, but 
no differences were observed in reading or writing scores. Spitzer et al. (145) showed that 
extra PE lessons in 5th- and 6th-graders for four months did not lead to improvements in 
attention when compared to control. Finally, Coe et al. (37) randomized 6th-graders to 
receive PE during the first semester or the second semester of the school year and showed 
that academic achievement scores on the Terra Nova were not affected by the timing of the 
PE class. Overall, the results of interventions that increased time spent in PE did not show a 
positive impact on academic achievement and attention, with the exception of a retrospective 
study (121) that examined secular trends in academic performance following the 
Donnelly et al.
Page 30
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 31 (native) -----
implementation of Healthy Kids, Smart Kids, a six-year school-based PA and dietary 
program. The standardized test scores showed an upward trend beginning the year of the 
program implementation, and the length of time that the intervention had been implemented 
significantly predicted the test scores (which increased each year of the program). However, 
this cannot be attributed to changes in the PE curriculum alone, as there was also a nutrition 
component.
Literature Summary and Study Quality: Physical Education and Academic Achievement
Bearing in mind the limited number of PE studies that met inclusion criteria for this review, 
the studies that have examined relations between PE and academic achievement have 
generally found no association or null results. Two exceptions are two-year intervention 
studies that compared PE led by specialists to common-practice PE led by classroom 
teachers (137, 149). However, these studies had opposing findings, with one that showed 
improvements in math but not reading while the other found the reverse. Previous reviews of 
the literature have concluded that interrupting academic instruction time to provide PA 
through PE has no positive effect on achievement but also does no harm (156). However, the 
limitations in these studies preclude making any inferences about the relation between PA 
and academic achievement. On the whole these studies suffer from lack of controlled 
designs, reliance on self-report, no measurement of intervention fidelity, and lack of control 
for SES.
Weaknesses in the PE studies as determined by the Downs and Black checklist criteria 
include lack of reporting on the following: participant characteristics (7 of 12 studies, 58%); 
the intervention description (three of the seven intervention studies, or 43%); distributions of 
principal confounders (9 of 12 studies, or 75%); estimates of the random variability in the 
data (6 of 12 studies, or 50%); actual probability values (5 of 12 studies, or 42%); 
information about participants lost to follow-up (66% of relevant trials); accounting for 
participants who were lost to follow-up in the analysis (66%); blinding of those performing 
outcome measurements (12 studies, 100%); compliance to the PA intervention (85% of 
relevant trials); adjustment for confounding in the analysis (12 studies, 100%); actual 
probability values (10 of 12 studies, or 83%); randomization (38% of relevant trials); or 
statistical power (10 of 12 studies, 88%). The main findings were not clearly described in 4 
of the 12 (33%) studies.
Overall summary: Physical Activity, Physical Fitness, Physical Education, Academic 
Achievement, and Attention/Concentration
Perhaps the most striking feature for the outcomes of the studies reviewed is the mixed 
findings for most categories of investigation (e.g., cross-sectional, longitudinal, etc.). 
Although findings tend to be positive for a relationship between PA and academic 
achievement, not all findings were positive and the outcomes that were positive frequently 
varied among studies, whether the same study design or setting were present (e.g., cross-
sectional, intervention; laboratory or field). That is, some studies found positive associations 
between PA and math but not reading or spelling, while other studies found the opposite. 
Some studies found positive associations for PA and academic achievement for girls but not 
boys, etc. In the cases where negative associations were observed, it is not clear if this is 
Donnelly et al.
Page 31
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 32 (native) -----
actually an adverse effect. Attention, which is thought important for learning, did not show a 
strong improvement from increased PA and would benefit from further investigation. 
Attempts to increase PA in the context of PE were generally unsuccessful. Acute laboratory 
studies of PA and academic achievement and classroom studies that delivered physically 
active lessons appear to have the most consistent positive associations for increased 
academic achievement. Many limitations exist in the literature and are discussed in the 
summary of each section above. Evidence Summary Statement: Overall, the literature 
suggests that PA and PE have a neutral effect on academic achievement. Thus, due to the 
limitations in the literature and the current information available, the Evidence Category 
rating is C.
Discussion
Summary of Evidence
In this paper we systematically reviewed 137 (64 cognitive function, 73 Academic 
Achievement) studies that employed a variety of study designs including cross-sectional, 
acute/short-term, non-randomized, and randomized trials to address two interrelated 
questions: (1) Among children aged 5-13, are PA and physical fitness related to brain 
structure, brain function, cognition, and learning? (2) Among children aged 5-13, are fitness, 
PA, and PE related to standardized achievement test performance and attention/
concentration? Recently, researchers have proposed that children's cognitive functions (e.g., 
information processing, executive function, and memory) are related positively to level of 
physical fitness and/or PA participation; further, these adaptations, in turn, are hypothesized 
to underlie academic performance (89). If supported, these findings would have important 
implications for educators, health professionals, and researchers. Our results can be 
summarized as follows.
Cognitive Function
The bulk of the research findings support the view that physical fitness, single bouts of PA, 
and participation in PA interventions benefit children's mental functioning. Specifically, 
cross-sectional studies that are properly designed and employ adequate controls for potential 
confounding variables consistently reveal that physically fit children perform better on 
cognitive tests than less-fit children. Further, studies that have assessed children's brain 
structure and function consistently show fitness-related differences. Longitudinal and cohort 
studies, while limited in number and quality, suggest that higher levels of fitness or 
increased PA are predictive of better cognitive performance. While not uniform in methods 
or results, the evidence obtained from laboratory and school-based studies suggest that 
individual short-term bouts of PA selectively improve children's cognitive test performance, 
particularly when assessed in terms of speed and accuracy. Further, in several well-designed 
experiments, children's cognitive test performance was accompanied by a priori predicted 
changes of brain function (e.g., electroencephalography and fMRI). Few RCTs have been 
conducted; however, when reviewed closely they reveal that regular PA affects children's 
performance on specific mental tasks and modifies brain structure and function. Further, 
there is some evidence for a dose-response effect relation, with better cognitive performance 
as a function of the length of PA sessions and the frequency of attendance.
Donnelly et al.
Page 32
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 33 (native) -----
These conclusions should be cautiously interpreted as they are based on both data from 
cross-sectional, acute/short-term, non-randomized trials and from randomized trials with a 
high risk of one or more forms of bias. With few exceptions (e.g., (52, 84)), many of the 
studies conducted thus far employed small samples or correlational methodologies that 
cannot provide evidence on causation. As for brain structure, the field has only begun to 
scratch the surface in understanding effects of PA, due to the small number of neural 
structures and networks investigated thus far.
Future Research: Cognition/Brain—Relative to brain function, future research should 
provide proper control groups, as several studies included no-contact controls (e.g., (52, 84)) 
or failed to include a proper control group (e.g., (31)). In addition, properly powered sample 
sizes are needed to move many of the findings from randomized pilot studies to fully 
powered randomized controlled trials. These strategies are necessary for the field to advance 
in a manner that can inform public health. Lastly, future research must continue to aid our 
understanding of PA and aerobic fitness effects on brain structure and function using the 
most recent innovations in neuroimaging to gain a more complete understanding of the 
effects of PA on the entire brain rather than on isolated brain regions. Early attempts on this 
front have been made (98) and future research will need to follow up on these interesting 
findings. Although brain structure and function data are intriguing, our understanding of the 
relation of PA and aerobic fitness to childhood brain structure and function remains 
incomplete at this time.
Academic Achievement
PA-related changes in children's brain function and cognition (e.g., attention, information 
processing, executive function, and memory) have been implicated as cornerstones for gains 
in academic performance. Improvements in these processes, which are observed under 
laboratory conditions, are hypothesized to transfer to school and classroom conditions. 
While favorable results have been obtained from cross-sectional and longitudinal studies, the 
results obtained from controlled experiments evaluating the benefits of PA on academic 
performance are mixed. The lack of clear and consistent findings may be due to a variety of 
reasons. Analyses of cross-sectional data often fail to take into account the role of such 
moderators as SES, family roles, age, psychosocial variables, nutritional habits, and home 
environment. Problematic is that the measures of academic performance varied considerably 
across studies, utilizing several different standardized tests of academic achievement. Given 
that regular PA may result in specific, as opposed to global, effects on children's cognitive 
function, it is plausible that the methods of measuring academic performance may explain 
the lack of agreement among studies. Indeed, the results of studies employing standardized 
tests that focus on specific aspects of performance tend to be more informative than tests that 
are more global in nature. Many of the test items that comprise standardized tests of 
academic performance benefit from processing speed and rapid decision making, which are 
processes shown to be related to physical fitness and regular PA.
The wide variation in PA interventions also may help explain the ambiguity among the 
results of studies and controlled experiments reviewed here. PA interventions differed 
considerably, with some researchers focusing on methods intentionally designed to improve 
Donnelly et al.
Page 33
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 34 (native) -----
cardiorespiratory function and others who employed cognitively demanding skill-based 
games. Besides differences in the types of PA employed, such factors as frequency, intensity, 
and duration also varied considerably across the studies reviewed, which limited the 
conclusions drawn.
Future Research: Academics—There is little doubt that PA benefits children's health 
and well-being and the studies reviewed here suggest that it has a positive effect on cognitive 
functioning; however, the supposition that participation in PA will favorably impact the way 
that children think and learn in school settings has yet to be validated. Needed is theory-
based efficacy research, which identifies conditions that best promote improvements in 
children's cognitive functioning, and effectiveness research which evaluates the success of 
specific types of interventions in authentic school environments. Progress in these areas of 
research will benefit from the consistent selection of reliable and valid measures of PA and 
academic achievement. Additional RCTs will contribute to our understanding of both the 
relationship and the necessary dose of PA to improve academic achievement.
Limitations in the Available Literature
The literature on PA, fitness, cognitive function and academic achievement has grown 
rapidly; however, relative to other fields of scientific inquiry, it may be considered in its 
infancy. Existing literature is difficult to interpret due to the myriad methodologies 
employed and outcomes measured. Even when studies do have similar methodologies and 
outcome measures, findings frequently differ. For example, similar studies may differ in 
their findings for reaction time or other task performance measures. Studies of brain 
structure and function are limited by time constraints and expense (i.e., fMRI).
In a similar fashion, studies that include measures of academic achievement may find 
associations for PA or fitness for math and reading and a similar study may find associations 
for spelling and science but not math and reading. Although most studies provide design 
information for intended dose of PA, measures of fidelity for PA delivered are frequently 
absent or inadequately described. There is also not an abundance of RCTs, as most of the 
literature is cross-sectional or observational. Few studies are adequately powered, participant 
characteristics are lacking, blinding for outcome measures is rarely discussed, and proximity 
of PA to measurement outcomes is infrequently described. Many studies did not account for 
known confounders such as BMI and SES. Many studies were ranked as being at high risk 
for bias due to exhibiting multiple design limitations.
Future Research Suggestions to Address Specific Limitations—The challenges 
present within the currently available research help provide clear pathways for future 
research. Specifically, future research is needed to clearly establish the links among PA, 
cognition/brain/learning, and academic achievement. It is critical for future research to 
expand our understanding of mechanisms responsible for observed effects of PA on 
cognitive outcomes. The identification of mechanisms will help us to dramatically advance 
our appreciation for how to prescribe PA to optimally benefit cognition. In particular, we are 
sorely limited in our ability to provide specific direction with regards to the mode, duration, 
frequency, and intensity of exercise necessary to provide meaningful benefits for cognition.
Donnelly et al.
Page 34
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 35 (native) -----
An additional limitation is that we do not have a clear understanding of possible synergistic 
relationships among PA and cognition/brain/learning and academic achievement. For 
instance, how do changes in PA affect executive function and do improvements in executive 
function then impact PA behavior? In the future, researchers may explore whether the 
pathways underlying the relationship of PA to improved cognition and academic 
achievement is unidirectional or the extent to which cognitive skills can influence PA 
behaviors.
Researchers also need to clearly establish which tests, both cognitive and academic alike, are 
influenced by PA, PE, and changes in fitness as the literature to date is mixed. Longitudinal 
research and follow-up assessments for RCTs should be conducted to provide a better 
understanding of the longevity of PA effects on cognition and academic achievement. It is 
also important to consider consistency within measures of cognition and academic 
achievement as differences in findings have been noted based on assessment type, study 
type, and testing setting. In studies of cognition/brain/learning and academic achievement, 
appropriate control groups with levels of contact and social interaction similar to PA 
intervention groups have not typically been used; therefore, the level to which these 
variables have influenced study outcomes is not known and should be considered in future 
research. It should be noted that in many cases several publications are produced as a result 
of the same study or from the same set of researchers and could potentially exaggerate or 
bias some of the findings presented. Therefore, more replication and additional RCTs need 
to occur in order to improve the evidence available.
Finally, although the best evidence will come from RCTS, in cases where cross-sectional 
data are still collected, it is recommended that researchers study the entire range of fitness 
and/or PA scores. Literature has indicated that when the full range of scores are analyzed/
included the effects that were previously shown when using extreme group analysis 
disappear (157). Therefore, it is important that future research evaluate this possibility 
related to PA, fitness, cognition, and academic achievement.
Limitations of This Review
Limitations exist in the available evidence included in this review that restrict our ability to 
draw absolute conclusions. Additionally, we did not contact authors to obtain missing data 
or other information.
Public Health and Policy Implications
The primary responsibility of schools is to educate students and this is measured by various 
forms of academic achievement. Education to foster academic achievement traditionally 
occurs in a sedentary environment where the majority of learning takes place in a classroom 
where students sit and receive instruction. PA and fitness may impact learning and academic 
achievement in a positive fashion; however, the traditional way of achieving PA and fitness 
in school is PE class and this has been reduced in favor of classroom instruction and cannot 
compensate for the predominantly sedentary environment. New and innovative strategies are 
needed to provide adequate PA. Fortunately, PA can be provided in many before, during, and 
after school activities that do not compete for time spent on academic instruction. 
Donnelly et al.
Page 35
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 36 (native) -----
Furthermore, there are plausible biological models linking PA and fitness to improved 
cognitive control that in turn is linked to learning. Moreover, programs to increase PA at 
schools do not show interference with learning and academic achievement. Indeed, evidence 
accumulates showing predominantly positive increases in academic achievement in students 
that exhibit more rather than less PA. Increasing PA that is congruent with school health 
mandates and public policy initiatives can contribute to higher levels of PA and fitness in an 
effort to improve learning and academic achievement. Therefore, public policy initiatives are 
needed to support programs to increase PA that in turn will foster healthier children and an 
improved learning environment.
Conclusions
The present systematic review found evidence to suggest there are associations among PA, 
fitness, cognition, and academic achievement. Improvements in executive function are 
frequently associated with acute bouts of activity and fitness. Improvements in academic 
achievement are also found with acute activity. Delivery of physically active lessons 
generally results in improvements in academic achievement while attempts to increase 
activity in PE do not. As previously discussed, the available literature on this topic contains 
numerous methodological shortcomings and inconsistencies among studies that make 
synthesis difficult. To advance the literature on PA, cognition, and academic achievement in 
elementary school children, further studies are needed that use advanced technology (e.g., 
fMRI, EEG) to establish the anatomical and biological models to determine the biological 
basis for the observed effects on cognition and academic achievement, and long-term RCTs 
to determine if increased PA has a causal role in improvement of academic achievement. 
Numerous elements of PA remain to be explored such as type, amount, frequency, timing, 
and activity breaks versus active lessons in relation to improved cognition and academic 
achievement. Overall, the literature suggests that PA has a positive effect on cognition and 
academic achievement while attempts to increase PE has a neutral effect on academic 
achievement. Regardless of the effects of PA and PE on cognition and academic 
achievement, PA is widely acknowledged to contribute to the health and physical 
development of children and provides opportunities for fundamental motor skill acquisition. 
Changes in public policy are likely needed to systematically provide incentive and direction 
for increasing PA in elementary schools.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank Jill Livingston from the University of Connecticut Library for providing assistance with the 
literature searches associated with this systematic review. We also thank Dr. Margaret Bouvier of Meg Bouvier 
Medical Writing for her help in preparing this manuscript. Funding for Szabo-Reed was provided by 
F32DK103493.
The findings and conclusions in this report are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official 
position of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Donnelly et al.
Page 36
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 37 (native) -----
References
1. Lyon, G.; Krasnegor, N., editors. Attention, memory, and executive function. Baltimore, MD: Paul 
H. Brooks Publishing Co; 1996. 
2. Adsiz E, Dorak F, Ozsaker M, Vurgun N. The influence of physical activity on attention in Turkish 
children. HealthMed. 2012; 6(4):1384–9.
3. Ahamed Y, Macdonald H, Reed K, Naylor PJ, Liu-Ambrose T, McKay H. School-based physical 
activity does not compromise children's academic performance. Medicine and science in sports and 
exercise. 2007; 39(2):371–6. [PubMed: 17277603] 
4. Alloway TP, Alloway RG. Investigating the predictive roles of working memory and IQ in academic 
attainment. Journal of experimental child psychology. 2010; 106(1):20–9. [PubMed: 20018296] 
5. America SoHaPE. National standards & grade-level outcomes for K-12 physical education. 
Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics; 2014. 
6. Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development. The learning compact redefined: A call 
to action. Alexandria, VA: 2007. 
7. Ballester R, Huertas F, Yuste FJ, Llorens F, Sanabria D. The Relationship between Regular Sports 
Participation and Vigilance in Male and Female Adolescents. PLoS One. 2015; 10(4):e0123898. 
[PubMed: 25849873] 
8. Banich MT, Milham MP, Atchley RA, et al. Prefrontal regions play a predominant role in imposing 
an attentional ‘set’: evidence from fMRI. Brain research Cognitive brain research. 2000; 10(1-2):1–
9. [PubMed: 10978687] 
9. Basch CE. Physical Activity and the Achievement Gap Among Urban Minority Youth. Journal of 
School Health. 2011; 81(10):626–34. [PubMed: 21923875] 
10. Best JR. Effects of Physical Activity on Children's Executive Function: Contributions of 
Experimental Research on Aerobic Exercise. Developmental Review. 2010; 30(4):331–51. 
[PubMed: 21818169] 
11. Best JR. Exergaming immediately enhances children's executive function. Developmental 
psychology. 2012; 48(5):1501–10. [PubMed: 22148945] 
12. Blair C. School readiness. Integrating cognition and emotion in a neurobiological 
conceptualization of children's functioning at school entry. Am Psychol. 2002; 57(2):111–27. 
[PubMed: 11899554] 
13. Blair C, Razza RP. Relating effortful control, executive function, and false belief understanding to 
emerging math and literacy ability in kindergarten. Child development. 2007; 78(2):647–63. 
[PubMed: 17381795] 
14. Blom LC, Alvarez J, Zhang L, Kolbo J. Associations between Health-Related Physical Fitness, 
Academic Achievement and Selected Academic Behaviors of Elementary and Middle School 
Students in the State of Mississippi. ICHPER-SD Journal of Research. 2011; 6(1):13–9.
15. Booth JN, Leary SD, Joinson C, et al. Associations between objectively measured physical activity 
and academic attainment in adolescents from a UK cohort. British Journal of Sports Medicine. 
2014; 48(3):265–70. [PubMed: 24149097] 
16. Buck SM, Hillman CH, Castelli DM. The Relation of Aerobic Fitness to Stroop Task Perlormance 
in Preadolescent Children. Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise. 2008; 40(1):166–72. 
Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise. [PubMed: 18091008] 
17. Carlson SA, Fulton JE, Lee SM, et al. Physical education and academic achievement in elementary 
school: data from the early childhood longitudinal study. American Journal of Public Health. 2008; 
98(4):721–7. [PubMed: 18309127] 
18. Casey BJ, Galvan A, Hare TA. Changes in cerebral functional organization during cognitive 
development. Curr Opin Neurobiol. 2005; 15(2):239–44. [PubMed: 15831409] 
19. Castelli DM, Centeio EE, Beighle AE, Carson RL, Nicksic HM. Physical literacy and 
Comprehensive School Physical Activity Programs. Preventive Medicine. 2014; 66(0):95–100. 
[PubMed: 24937650] 
20. Castelli DM, Hillman CH, Buck SM, Erwin HE. Physical fitness and academic achievement in 
third- and fifth-grade students. Journal of Sport & Exercise Psychology. 2007; 29(2):239–52. 
[PubMed: 17568069] 
Donnelly et al.
Page 37
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 38 (native) -----
21. Caterino MC, Polak ED. The effects of three types of activity on the perfornmance of a test of 
concentration by fourth grade children. loza Jorrrnal of Health, Physical Education, Recreation 
atid Dance. 1994; 27(2):28–9.
22. Caterino MC, Polak ED. Effects of two types of activity on the performance of second-, third-, and 
fourth-grade students on a test of concentration. Percept Mot Skills. 1999; 89(1):245–8. [PubMed: 
10544425] 
23. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The association between school-based physical 
activity, including physical education, and academic performance. Atlanta, GA: U.S. Department 
of Health and Human Services; 2010. 
24. Chaddock L, Erickson KI, Prakash RS, et al. A neuroimaging investigation of the association 
between aerobic fitness, hippocampal volume, and memory performance in preadolescent children. 
Brain research. 2010; 1358:172–83. [PubMed: 20735996] 
25. Chaddock L, Erickson KI, Prakash RS, et al. Basal ganglia volume is associated with aerobic 
fitness in preadolescent children. Developmental neuroscience. 2010; 32(3):249–56. [PubMed: 
20693803] 
26. Chaddock L, Erickson KI, Prakash RS, et al. A functional MRI investigation of the association 
between childhood aerobic fitness and neurocognitive control. Biological psychology. 2012; 89(1):
260–8. [PubMed: 22061423] 
27. Chaddock L, Hillman CH, Buck SM, Cohen NJ. Aerobic Fitness and Executive Control of 
Relational Memory in Preadolescent Children. Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise. 2011; 
43(2):344–9. [PubMed: 20508533] 
28. Chaddock L, Hillman CH, Pontifex MB, Johnson CR, Raine LB, Kramer AF. Childhood aerobic 
fitness predicts cognitive performance one year later. Journal of sports sciences. 2012; 30(5):421–
30. [PubMed: 22260155] 
29. Chaddock L, Neider MB, Lutz A, Hillman CH, Kramer AF. Role of childhood aerobic fitness in 
successful street crossing. Medicine and science in sports and exercise. 2012; 44(4):749–53. 
[PubMed: 21986808] 
30. Chaddock-Heyman L, Erickson KI, Voss MW, et al. The effects of physical activity on functional 
MRI activation associated with cognitive control in children: a randomized controlled intervention. 
Frontiers in human neuroscience. 2013; 7:72. [PubMed: 23487583] 
31. Chang YK, Tsai YJ, Chen TT, Hung TM. The impacts of coordinative exercise on executive 
function in kindergarten children: an ERP study. Experimental brain research Experimentelle 
Hirnforschung Experimentation cerebrale. 2013; 225(2):187–96. [PubMed: 23239198] 
32. Chaya MS, Nagendra H, Selvam S, Kurpad A, Srinivasan K. Effect of Yoga on Cognitive Abilities 
In Schoolchildren from a Socioeconomically Disadvantaged Background: A Randomized 
Controlled Study. Journal of Alternative & Complementary Medicine. 2012; 18(12):1161–7. 
[PubMed: 22909321] 
33. Chen A-G, Yan J, Yin H-C, Pan C-Y, Chang Y-K. Effects of acute aerobic exercise on multiple 
aspects of executive function in preadolescent children. Psychology of Sport and Exercise. 2014; 
15(6):627–36.
34. Chomitz VR, Slining MM, McGowan RJ, Mitchell SE, Dawson GF, Hacker KA. Is there a 
relationship between physical fitness and academic achievement? Positive results from public 
school children in the northeastern United States. The Journal of school health. 2009; 79(1):30–7. 
[PubMed: 19149783] 
35. Clarke HH. Physical fitness benefits: A summary of research. Education. 1958; 78:460–466.
36. Coe DP, Peterson T, Blair C, Schutten MC, Peddie H. Physical fitness, academic achievement, and 
socioeconomic status in school-aged youth. The Journal of school health. 2013; 83(7):500–7. 
[PubMed: 23782093] 
37. Coe DP, Pivarnik JM, Womack CJ, Reeves MJ, Malina RM. Effect of physical education and 
activity levels on academic achievement in children. Medicine and science in sports and exercise. 
2006; 38(8):1515–9. [PubMed: 16888468] 
38. Coe DP, Pivarnik JM, Womack CJ, Reeves MJ, Malina RM. Health-related fitness and academic 
achievement in middle school students. The Journal of sports medicine and physical fitness. 2012; 
52(6):654–60. [PubMed: 23187329] 
Donnelly et al.
Page 38
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 39 (native) -----
39. Cohen, NJ.; Eichenbaum, H. Memory, Amnesia, and The Hippocampal System. Cambridge, MA: 
1993. 
40. Colcombe SJ, Erickson KI, Scalf PE, et al. Aerobic Exercise Training Increases Brain Volume in 
Aging Humans. Journals of Gerontology Series A: Biological Sciences & Medical Sciences. 2006; 
61A(11):1166–70.
41. Colcombe SJ, Kramer AF, Erickson KI, et al. Cardiovascular fitness, cortical plasticity, and aging. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2004; 101(9):
3316–21. [PubMed: 14978288] 
42. Colquitt G, Langdon J, Hires T, Pritchard T. The Relationship between Fitness and Academic 
Achievement in an Urban School Setting. / Povezanost IzmeÄ• u Fitnessa i Å kolskog Uspjeha U 
Gradskim Sredinama. Sport Scientific & Practical Aspects. 2011; 8(2):5–13.
43. Committee on Sports Medicine and Fitness and Committee on School Health. Physical fitness and 
activity in schools. Pediatrics. 2000; 105:1156–7. [PubMed: 10790480] 
44. Cooper SB, Bandelow S, Nute ML, Morris JG, Nevill ME. The effects of a mid-morning bout of 
exercise on adolescents' cognitive function. Mental Health and Physical Activity. 2012; 5(2):183–
90.
45. Cooper SB, Bandelow S, Nute ML, Morris JG, Nevill ME. Breakfast glycaemic index and 
exercise: Combined effects on adolescents' cognition. Physiology & Behavior. 2015; 139(0):104–
11. [PubMed: 25446221] 
46. Cottrell LA, Northrup K, Wittberg R. The Extended Relationship between Child Cardiovascular 
Risks and Academic Performance Measures. Obesity. 2007; 15(12):3170–7. [PubMed: 18198328] 
47. Crova C, Struzzolino I, Marchetti R, et al. Cognitively challenging physical activity benefits 
executive function in overweight children. Journal of sports sciences. 2014; 32(3):201–11. 
[PubMed: 24015968] 
48. Dagli UY. Recess and reading achievement of early childhood students in public schools. 
Education Policy Analysis Archives. 2012; 20:1–24.
49. Daviglus ML, Plassman BL, Pirzada A, et al. Risk factors and preventive interventions for 
Alzheimer disease: state of the science. Arch Neurol. 2011; 68(9):1185–90. [PubMed: 21555601] 
50. Davis CL, Cooper S. Fitness, fatness, cognition, behavior, and academic achievement among 
overweight children: Do cross-sectional associations correspond to exercise trial outcomes? 
Preventive medicine. 2011; 52:S65–S9. [PubMed: 21281668] 
51. Davis CL, Tomporowski PD, Boyle CA, et al. Effects of aerobic exercise on overweight children's 
cognitive functioning: a randomized controlled trial. Research quarterly for exercise and sport. 
2007; 78(5):510–9. [PubMed: 18274222] 
52. Davis CL, Tomporowski PD, McDowell JE, et al. Exercise improves executive function and 
achievement and alters brain activation in overweight children: A randomized, controlled trial. 
Health Psychology. 2011; 30(1):91–8. [PubMed: 21299297] 
53. de Greeff JW, Hartman E, Mullender-Wijnsma MJ, Bosker RJ, Doolaard S, Visscher C. Physical 
fitness and academic performance in primary school children with and without a social 
disadvantage. Health Educ Res. 2014; 29(5):853–60. [PubMed: 25092881] 
54. Desai IK, Kurpad AV, Chomitz VR, Thomas T. Aerobic Fitness, Micronutrient Status, and 
Academic Achievement in Indian School-Aged Children. PLoS ONE. 2015; 10(3):e0122487. 
[PubMed: 25806824] 
55. Diamond A. Executive functions. Annual review of psychology. 2013; 64:135–68.
56. Dills AK, Morgan HN, Rotthoff KW. Recess, Physical Education, and Elementary School Student 
Outcomes. Economics of Education Review. 2011; 30(5):889–900.
57. Dollman J, Boshoff K, Dodd G. The Relationship between Curriculum Time for Physical 
Education and Literacy and Numeracy Standards in South Australian Primary Schools. European 
Physical Education Review. 2006; 12(2):151–63.
58. Donnelly JE, Greene JL, Gibson CA, et al. Physical Activity Across the Curriculum (PAAC): a 
randomized controlled trial to promote physical activity and diminish overweight and obesity in 
elementary school children. Preventive medicine. 2009; 49(4):336–41. [PubMed: 19665037] 
Donnelly et al.
Page 39
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 40 (native) -----
59. Downs SH, Black N. The feasibility of creating a checklist for the assessment of the 
methodological quality both of randomised and non-randomised studies of health care 
interventions. J Epidemiol Community Health. 1998; 52(6):377–84. [PubMed: 9764259] 
60. Drollette ES, Scudder MR, Raine LB, et al. The sexual dimorphic association of cardiorespiratory 
fitness to working memory in children. Dev Sci. 2015
61. Drollette ES, Scudder MR, Raine LB, et al. Acute exercise facilitates brain function and cognition 
in children who need it most: an ERP study of individual differences in inhibitory control capacity. 
Developmental cognitive neuroscience. 2014; 7:53–64. [PubMed: 24309300] 
62. Drollette ES, Shishido T, Pontifex MB, Hillman CH. Maintenance of Cognitive Control during and 
after Walking in Preadolescent Children. Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise. 2012; 44(10):
2017–24. [PubMed: 22525770] 
63. Du Toit D, Pienaar AE, Truter L. Relationship between Physical Fitness and Academic 
Performance in South African Children. South African Journal for Research in Sport, Physical 
Education & Recreation (SAJR SPER). 2011; 33(3):23–35.
64. Duncan M, Johnson A. The effect of differing intensities of acute cycling on preadolescent 
academic achievement. European journal of sport science. 2013; 14(3):279–86. [PubMed: 
23724796] 
65. Edwards JU, Mauch L, Winkelman MR. Relationship of nutrition and physical activity behaviors 
and fitness measures to academic performance for sixth graders in a midwest city school district. 
The Journal of school health. 2011; 81(2):65–73. [PubMed: 21223273] 
66. Ellemberg D, Louis-Deschênes M. The effect of acute physical exercise on cognitive function 
during development. Psychology of Sport and Exercise. 2010; 11(2):122–6.
67. Erwin H, Fedewa A, Ahn S. Student academic performance outcomes of a classroom physical 
activity intervention: A pilot study. International Electronic Journal of Elementary Education. 
2013; 5(2):109–24.
68. Etnier JL, Labban JD, Piepmeier AT, David ME, Henning DA. Effects of an acute bout of exercise 
on memory in 6th-grade children. Pediatric Exercise Science. 2014; 26:250–8. [PubMed: 
25050827] 
69. Etnier JL, Salazar W, Landers DM, Petruzzello SJ, Han M, Nowell P. The influence of physical 
fitness and exercise upon cognitive functioning: A meta-analysis. Journal of Sport & Exercise 
Psychology. 1997; 19:249–77.
70. Eveland-Sayers BM, Farley RS, Fuller DK, Morgan DW, Caputo JL. Physical fitness and academic 
achievement in elementary school children. Journal of physical activity & health. 2009; 6(1):99–
104. [PubMed: 19211963] 
71. Fisher A, Boyle J, Paton J, et al. Effects of a physical education intervention on cognitive function 
in young children: randomized controlled pilot study. BMC Pediatrics. 2011; 11(1):97. [PubMed: 
22034850] 
72. Fredericks CR, Kokot SJ, Krog S. USING A DEVELOPMENTAL MOVEMENT PROGRAMME 
TO ENHANCE ACADEMIC SKILLS IN GRADE 1 LEARNERS. / Die gebruik van ‘n 
bewegingsontwikkelingsprogram om akademiese prestasies by graad 1 leerders te bevorder. South 
African Journal for Research in Sport, Physical Education & Recreation (SAJR SPER). 2006; 
28(1):29–42.
73. Gao Z, Hannan P, Xiang P, Stodden DF, Valdez VE. Video game-based exercise, Latino children's 
physical health, and academic achievement. American Journal of Preventive Medicine. 2013; 44(3 
Suppl 3):S240–6. [PubMed: 23415189] 
74. Gathercole SE, Pickering SJ, Knight C, Stegmann Z. Working memory skills and educational 
attainment: evidence from national curriculum assessments at 7 and 14 years of age. Applied 
Cognitive Psychology. 2004; 18(1):1–16.
75. Gomez-Pinilla F, Hillman C. The influence of exercise on cognitive abilities. Comprehensive 
Physiology. 2013; 3(1):403–28. [PubMed: 23720292] 
76. Grieco LA, Jowers EM, Bartholomew JB. Physically active academic lessons and time on task: the 
moderating effect of body mass index. Medicine and science in sports and exercise. 2009; 41(10):
1921–6. [PubMed: 19727020] 
Donnelly et al.
Page 40
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 41 (native) -----
77. Hamer M, Chida Y. Physical activity and risk of neurodegenerative disease: a systematic review of 
prospective evidence. Psychol Med. 2009; 39(1):3–11. [PubMed: 18570697] 
78. Hansen DM, Herrmann SD, Lambourne K, Lee J, Donnelly JE. Linear/nonlinear relations of 
activity and fitness with children's academic achievement. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2014; 46(12):
2279–85. [PubMed: 24781896] 
79. Harrington SA. Relationships of objectively measured physical activity and sleep with BMI and 
academic outcomes in 8-year-old children. Applied Nursing Research : ANR. 2013; 26(2):63–70. 
[PubMed: 23583266] 
80. Harris PA, Taylor R, Thielke R, Payne J, Gonzalez N, Conde JG. Research electronic data capture 
(REDCap)--a metadata-driven methodology and workflow process for providing translational 
research informatics support. J Biomed Inform. 2009; 42(2):377–81. [PubMed: 18929686] 
81. Hill L, Williams JHG, Aucott L, et al. Exercising attention within the classroom. Developmental 
medicine and child neurology. 2010; 52(10):929–34. [PubMed: 20370813] 
82. Hillman CH, Buck SM, Themanson JR, Pontifex MB, Castelli DM. Aerobic Fitness and Cognitive 
Development: Event-Related Brain Potential and Task Performance Indices of Executive Control 
in Preadolescent Children. Developmental psychology. 2009; 45(1):114–29. [PubMed: 19209995] 
83. Hillman CH, Castelli DM, Buck SM. Aerobic Fitness and Neurocognitive Function in Healthy 
Preadolescent Children. Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise. 2005; 37(11):1967–74. 
[PubMed: 16286868] 
84. Hillman CH, Pontifex MB, Castelli DM, et al. Effects of the FITKids randomized controlled trial 
on executive control and brain function in children. Pediatrics. in press. 
85. Hillman CH, Pontifex MB, Castelli DM, et al. Effects of the FITKids randomized controlled trial 
on executive control and brain function. Pediatrics. 2014; 134(4):e1063–71. [PubMed: 25266425] 
86. Hillman CH, Pontifex MB, Raine LB, Castelli DM, Hall EE, Kramer AF. The effect of acute 
treadmill walking on cognitive control and academic achievement in preadolescent children. 
Neuroscience. 2009; 159(3):1044–54. [PubMed: 19356688] 
87. Hofmann W, Schmeichel BJ, Baddeley AD. Executive functions and self-regulation. Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences. 16(3):174–80. [PubMed: 22336729] 
88. Hollar D, Messiah SE, Lopez-Mitnik G, Hollar TL, Almon M, Agatston AS. Effect of a two-year 
obesity prevention intervention on percentile changes in body mass index and academic 
performance in low-income elementary school children. Am J Public Health. 2010; 100(4):646–
53. [PubMed: 20167892] 
89. Howie EK, Pate RR. Physical activity and academic achievement in children: A historical 
perspective. Journal of Sport and Health Science. 2012; 1(3):160–9.
90. IOM. Educating the Student Body: Taking Physical Activity and Physical Education to School. 
Washington, DC: The National Academies Press; 2013. 
91. Jacob A, D'Souza CD, Sumithra S, Avadhani S, Subramanya CM, Srinivasan K. Aerobic Fitness 
and Cognitive Functions in Economically Underprivileged Children Aged 7-9 Years: A 
preliminary Study from South India. International Journal of Biomedical Science. 2011; 7(1):51–4. 
[PubMed: 23675220] 
92. Jäger K, Schmidt M, Conzelmann A, Roebers CM. Cognitive and physiological effects of an acute 
physical activity intervention in elementary school children. Frontiers in Psychology. 2014; 5
93. Kamijo K, Pontifex MB, O'Leary KC, et al. The Effects of an Afterschool Physical Activity 
Program on Working Memory in Preadolescent Children. Developmental Science. 2011; 14(5):
1046–58. [PubMed: 21884320] 
94. Katz DL, Cushman D, Reynolds J, et al. Putting physical activity where it fits in the school day: 
preliminary results of the ABC (Activity Bursts in the Classroom) for fitness program. Preventing 
chronic disease. 2010; 7(4)
95. Kempermann G. The neurogenic reserve hypothesis: what is adult hippocampal neurogenesis good 
for? Trends in neurosciences. 2008; 31(4):163–9. [PubMed: 18329110] 
96. Khan NA, Raine LB, Drollette ES, Scudder MR, Kramer AF, Hillman CH. Dietary fiber is 
positively associated with cognitive control among prepubertal children. The Journal of nutrition. 
2015; 145(1):143–9. [PubMed: 25527669] 
Donnelly et al.
Page 41
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 42 (native) -----
97. Kopp B. A simple hypothesis of executive function. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience. 2012; 
6:159. [PubMed: 22679423] 
98. Krafft CE, Pierce JE, Schwarz NF, et al. An eight month randomized controlled exercise 
intervention alters resting state synchrony in overweight children. Neuroscience. 2014; 256:445–
55. [PubMed: 24096138] 
99. Krafft CE, Schaeffer DJ, Schwarz NF, et al. Improved frontoparietal white matter integrity in 
overweight children is associated with attendance at an after-school exercise program. Dev 
Neurosci. 2014; 36(1):1–9. [PubMed: 24457421] 
100. Krafft CE, Schwarz NF, Chi L, et al. An 8-month randomized controlled exercise trial alters brain 
activation during cognitive tasks in overweight children. Obesity (Silver Spring, Md). 2014; 
22(1):232–42.
101. Kramer AF, Hahn S, Cohen NJ, et al. Ageing, fitness and neurocognitive function. Nature. 1999; 
400(6743):418–9. [PubMed: 10440369] 
102. Kuo-Ming W, Peng-Sheng W, Yi-Ching H. Physical fitness and academic achievement of 
elementary school students: A cross-sectional survey in Southern Taiwan. Journal of Physical 
Education and Sport. 2012; 12(3):302–9.
103. Lambourne K, Hansen DM, Szabo AN, Lee J, Herrmann SD, Donnelly JE. Indirect and direct 
relations between aerobic fitness, physical activity, and academic achievement in elementary 
school students. Mental Health and Physical Activity. 2013; 6(3):165–71. [PubMed: 25984236] 
104. LeBlanc MM, Martin CK, Han H, et al. Adiposity and physical activity are not related to 
academic achievement in school-aged children. Journal of developmental and behavioral 
pediatrics : JDBP. 2012; 33(6):486–94. [PubMed: 22617499] 
105. Liberati A, Altman DG, Tetzlaff J, et al. The PRISMA statement for reporting systematic reviews 
and meta-analyses of studies that evaluate health care interventions: explanation and elaboration. 
J Clin Epidemiol. 2009; 62:e1–e34. [PubMed: 19631507] 
106. Lohrmann DK. A complementary ecological model of the coordinated school health program. J 
Sch Health. 2010; 80(1):1–9. [PubMed: 20051084] 
107. London RA, Castrechini S. A longitudinal examination of the link between youth physical fitness 
and academic achievement. Journal of School Health. 2011; 81(7):400–8. [PubMed: 21668880] 
108. Luna B, Padmanabhan A, O'Hearn K. What has fMRI told us about the development of cognitive 
control through adolescence? Brain Cogn. 2010; 72(1):101–13. [PubMed: 19765880] 
109. Ma JK, Le Mare L, Gurd BJ. Classroom-based high-intensity interval activity improves off-task 
behaviour in primary school students. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab. 2014; 39(12):1332–7. [PubMed: 
25263695] 
110. Ma JK, Le Mare L, Gurd BJ. Four minutes of in-class high-intensity interval activity improves 
selective attention in 9- to 11-year olds. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab. 2015; 40(3):238–44. 
[PubMed: 25675352] 
111. Mahar MT, Murphy SK, Rowe DA, Golden J, Shields AT, Raedeke TD. Effects of a classroom-
based program on physical activity and on-task behavior. Medicine and science in sports and 
exercise. 2006; 38(12):2086–94. [PubMed: 17146314] 
112. McNaughten D, Gabbard C. Physical exertion and immediate mental performance of sixth-grade 
children. Percept Mot Skills. 1993; 77(3 Pt 2):1155–9. [PubMed: 8170764] 
113. Miyake A, Friedman NP, Emerson MJ, Witzki AH, Howerter A, Wager TD. The unity and 
diversity of executive functions and their contributions to complex “Frontal Lobe” tasks: a latent 
variable analysis. Cogn Psychol. 2000; 41(1):49–100. [PubMed: 10945922] 
114. Moher D, Hopewell S, Schulz KF, et al. CONSORT 2010 Explanation and Elaboration: Updated 
guidelines for reporting parallel group randomised trials. J Clin Epidemiol. 2010; 63(8):e1–37. 
[PubMed: 20346624] 
115. Mokgothu CJ, Gallagher JD. Effects of aerobic fitness on attention, memory and decision-making 
in children. International Journal of Body Composition Research. 2010; 8:37–44.
116. Monti JM, Hillman CH, Cohen NJ. Aerobic fitness enhances relational memory in preadolescent 
children: the FITKids randomized control trial. Hippocampus. 2012; 22(9):1876–82. [PubMed: 
22522428] 
Donnelly et al.
Page 42
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 43 (native) -----
117. Moore RD, Drollette ES, Scudder MR, Bharij A, Hillman CH. The influence of cardiorespiratory 
fitness on strategic, behavioral, and electrophysiological indices of arithmetic cognition in 
preadolescent children. Front Hum Neurosci. 2014; 8:258. [PubMed: 24829556] 
118. Moore RD, Wu CT, Pontifex MB, et al. Aerobic fitness and intra-individual variability of 
neurocognition in preadolescent children. Brain and cognition. 2013; 82(1):43–57. [PubMed: 
23511845] 
119. Morales J, GonzÃ¡lez L-Mn, Guerra M, Virgili C, Unnithan V. Physical activity, perceptual-motor 
performance, and academic learning in 9- to-16-years-old school children. International Journal 
of Sport Psychology. 2011; 42(4):401–15.
120. Mullender-Wijnsma MJ, Hartman E, de Greeff JW, Bosker RJ, Doolaard S, Visscher C. 
Improving academic performance of school-age children by physical activity in the classroom: 1-
year program evaluation. J Sch Health. 2015; 85(6):365–71. [PubMed: 25877433] 
121. Nansel TR, Huang TT, Rovner AJ, Sanders-Butler Y. Association of school performance 
indicators with implementation of the healthy kids, smart kids programme: case study. Public 
health nutrition. 2010; 13(1):116–22. [PubMed: 19454125] 
122. Niederer I, Kriemler S, Gut J, et al. Relationship of aerobic fitness and motor skills with memory 
and attention in preschoolers (Ballabeina): A cross-sectional and longitudinal study. BMC 
Pediatrics. 2011; 11
123. O'Dea JA, Mugridge AC. Nutritional quality of breakfast and physical activity independently 
predict the literacy and numeracy scores of children after adjusting for socioeconomic status. 
Health education research. 2012; 27(6):975–85. [PubMed: 22798563] 
124. Ofei F. Obesity - A Preventable Disease. Ghana Medical Journal. 2005; 39(3):98–101. [PubMed: 
17299552] 
125. Pesce C, Crova C, Cereatti L, Casella R, Bellucci M. Physical activity and mental performance in 
preadolescents: Effects of acute exercise on free-recall memory. Mental Health and Physical 
Activity. 2009; 2(1):16–22.
126. USDoHaH Services. , editor. Physical Activity Guidelines Advisory Committee. Physical activity 
guidelines advisory committee report. Washington, DC: 2008. 
127. Pirrie AM, Lodewyk KR. Investigating links between moderate-to-vigorous physical activity and 
cognitive performance in elementary school students. Mental Health and Physical Activity. 2012; 
5(1):93–8.
128. Polich J. Updating P300: An Integrative Theory of P3a and P3b. Clinical neurophysiology : 
official journal of the International Federation of Clinical Neurophysiology. 2007; 118(10):2128–
48. [PubMed: 17573239] 
129. Pontifex MB, Raine LB, Johnson CR, et al. Cardiorespiratory Fitness and the Flexible Modulation 
of Cognitive Control in Preadolescent Children. Journal of cognitive neuroscience. 2011; 23(6):
1332–45. [PubMed: 20521857] 
130. Pontifex MB, Scudder MR, Drollette ES, Hillman CH. Fit and vigilant: The relationship between 
poorer aerobic fitness and failures in sustained attention during preadolescence. 
Neuropsychology. 2012; 26(4):407–13. [PubMed: 22746307] 
131. Raine LB, Lee HK, Saliba BJ, Chaddock-Heyman L, Hillman CH, Kramer AF. The influence of 
childhood aerobic fitness on learning and memory. PloS one. 2013; 8(9):e72666. [PubMed: 
24039791] 
132. Rauner RR, Walters RW, Avery M, Wanser TJ. Evidence that aerobic fitness is more salient than 
weight status in predicting standardized math and reading outcomes in fourth- through eighth-
grade students. The Journal of pediatrics. 2013; 163(2):344–8. [PubMed: 23465408] 
133. Raviv S, Low M. Influence of physical activity on concentration among junior high-school 
students. Perceptual and motor skills. 1990; 70(1):67–74. [PubMed: 2326141] 
134. Reed JA, Einstein G, Hahn E, Hooker SP, Gross VP, Kravitz J. Examining the impact of 
integrating physical activity on fluid intelligence and academic performance in an elementary 
school setting: a preliminary investigation. Journal of physical activity & health. 2010; 7(3):343–
51. [PubMed: 20551490] 
Donnelly et al.
Page 43
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 44 (native) -----
135. Reed JA, Maslow AL, Long S, Hughey M. Examining the impact of 45 minutes of daily physical 
education on cognitive ability, fitness performance, and body composition of African American 
youth. Journal of physical activity & health. 2013; 10(2):185–97. [PubMed: 22820756] 
136. Roberts CK, Freed B, McCarthy WJ. Low aerobic fitness and obesity are associated with lower 
standardized test scores in children. The Journal of pediatrics. 2010; 156(5):711–8. 8.e1. 
[PubMed: 20097353] 
137. Sallis JF, McKenzie TL, Kolody B, Lewis M, Marshall S, Rosengard P. Effects of health-related 
physical education on academic achievement: project SPARK. Research quarterly for exercise 
and sport. 1999; 70(2):127–34. [PubMed: 10380244] 
138. Schaeffer DJ, Krafft CE, Schwarz NF, et al. An 8-month exercise intervention alters 
frontotemporal white matter integrity in overweight children. Psychophysiology. 2014; 51(8):
728–33. [PubMed: 24797659] 
139. Scudder MR, Federmeier KD, Raine LB, Direito A, Boyd JK, Hillman CH. The association 
between aerobic fitness and language processing in children: implications for academic 
achievement. Brain Cogn. 2014; 87:140–52. [PubMed: 24747513] 
140. Scudder MR, Khan NA, Drollette ES, et al. Cognitive Control in Preadolescent Children With 
Risk Factors for Metabolic Syndrome. Health Psychology. in press. 
141. Scudder MR, Lambourne K, Drollette ES, et al. Aerobic capacity and cognitive control in 
elementary school-age children. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2014; 46(5):1025–35. [PubMed: 
24743109] 
142. Shephard RJ. Habitual physical activity and academic performance. Nutrition reviews. 1996; 
54(4):S32–S6. [PubMed: 8700451] 
143. Sibley BA, Etnier JL. The relationship between physical activity and cognition in children: a 
meta-analysis. Pediatric Exercise Science. 2003; 15(3):243–56.
144. Sofi F, Valecchi D, Bacci D, et al. Physical activity and risk of cognitive decline: a meta-analysis 
of prospective studies. Journal of internal medicine. 2011; 269(1):107–17. [PubMed: 20831630] 
145. Spitzer US, Hollmann W. Experimental observations of the effects of physical exercise on 
attention, academic and prosocial performance in school settings. Trends in Neuroscience and 
Education. 2013; 2(1):1–6.
146. Clair-Thompson HL, Gathercole SE. Executive functions and achievements in school: Shifting, 
updating, inhibition, and working memory. Q J Exp Psychol (Hove). 2006; 59(4):745–59. 
[PubMed: 16707360] 
147. Stevens TA, To Y, Stevenson SJ, Lochbaum MR. The Importance of Physical Activity and 
Physical Education in the Prediction of Academic Achievement. Journal of Sport Behavior. 2008; 
31(4):368–88.
148. Syväoja HJ, Tammelin TH, Ahonen T, Kankaanpää A, Kantomaa MT. The Associations of 
Objectively Measured Physical Activity and Sedentary Time with Cognitive Functions in School-
Aged Children. PLoS ONE. 2014; 9(7):e103559. [PubMed: 25061820] 
149. Telford RD, Cunningham RB, Fitzgerald R, et al. Physical education, obesity, and academic 
achievement: a 2-year longitudinal investigation of Australian elementary school children. 
American Journal of Public Health. 2012; 102(2):368–74. [PubMed: 21940922] 
150. Telford RD, Cunningham RB, Telford RM, Abhayaratna WP. Schools with fitter children achieve 
better literacy and numeracy results: evidence of a school cultural effect. Pediatr Exerc Sci. 2012; 
24(1):45–57. [PubMed: 22433264] 
151. Tine MT, Butler AG. Acute Aerobic Exercise Impacts Selective Attention: An Exceptional Boost 
in Lower-Income Children. Educational Psychology. 2012; 32(7):821–34.
152. Tomporowski PD, Davis CL, Lambourne K, Gregoski M, Tkacz J. Task switching in overweight 
children: Effects of acute exercise and age. Journal of Sport & Exercise Psychology. 2008; 30(5):
497–511. [PubMed: 18971509] 
153. Tomporowski PD, Lambourne K, Okumura MS. Physical activity interventions and children's 
mental function: An introduction and overview. Preventive medicine. 2011; 52:S3–S9. [PubMed: 
21420981] 
154. Tremarche PV, Robinson EM, Graham LB. Physical Education and its Effect on Elementary 
Testing Results. Physical Educator. 2007; 64(2):58–64.
Donnelly et al.
Page 44
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 45 (native) -----
155. Tremblay MS, Inman JW, Willms JD. The relationship between physical activity, self-esteem, and 
academic achievement in 12-year-old children. Pediatric Exercise Science. 2000; 12(3):312–23.
156. Trudeau, Fo; Shephard, RJ. Physical education, school physical activity, school sports and 
academic performance. International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition & Physical Activity. 2008; 
5:1–12. [PubMed: 18182102] 
157. Unsworth N, Redick TS, McMillan BD, Hambrick DZ, Kane MJ, Engle RW. Is playing video 
games related to cognitive abilities? Psychol Sci. 2015; 26(6):759–74. [PubMed: 25896420] 
158. van der Niet AG, Hartman E, Smith J, Visscher C. Modeling relationships between physical 
fitness, executive functioning, and academic achievement in primary school children. Psychology 
of Sport and Exercise. 2014; 15(4):319–25.
159. Van Dusen DP, Kelder SH, Kohl HW, Ranjit N, Perry CL. Associations of Physical Fitness and 
Academic Performance Among Schoolchildren. Journal of School Health. 2011; 81(12):733–40. 
[PubMed: 22070504] 
160. Vazou S, Smiley-Oyen A. Moving and academic learning are not antagonists: acute effects on 
executive function and enjoyment. J Sport Exerc Psychol. 2014; 36(5):474–85. [PubMed: 
25356611] 
161. Voss MW, Chaddock L, Kim JS, et al. Aerobic fitness is associated with greater efficiency of the 
network underlying cognitive control in preadolescent children. Neuroscience. 2011; 199:166–
76. [PubMed: 22027235] 
162. Welk GJ, Jackson AW, Morrow JR Jr, Haskell WH, Meredith MD, Cooper KH. The association of 
health-related fitness with indicators of academic performance in Texas schools. Research 
quarterly for exercise and sport. 2010; 81(3 Suppl):S16–23. [PubMed: 21049834] 
163. Wingfield RJ, McNamara JPH, Janicke DM, Graziano PA. Is there a relationship between body 
mass index, fitness, and academic performance? mixed results from students in a southeastern 
united states elementary school. Current Issues in Education. 2011; 14(2):1–12.
164. Wittberg R, Cottrell LA, Davis CL, Northrup KL. Aerobic fitness thresholds associated with fifth 
grade academic achievement. American Journal of Health Education. 2010; 41(5):284–91.
165. Wittberg RA, Northrup KL, Cottrel L. Children's physical fitness and academic performance. 
American Journal of Health Education. 2009; 40(1):30–6.
166. Wittberg RA, Northrup KL, Cottrell LA. Children's aerobic fitness and academic achievement: a 
longitudinal examination of students during their fifth and seventh grade years. American Journal 
of Public Health. 2012; 102(12):2303–7. [PubMed: 22698045] 
167. Wu C-T, Pontifex MB, Raine LB, et al. Aerobic fitness and response variability in preadolescent 
children performing a cognitive control task. Neuropsychology. 2011; 25(3):333–41. [PubMed: 
21443340] 
168. Wu CT, Hillman CH. Aerobic fitness and the attentional blink in preadolescent children. 
Neuropsychology. 2013; 27(6):642–53. [PubMed: 24059445] 
169. Yu CCW, Chan S, Cheng F, Sung RYT, Hau K-T. Are Physical Activity and Academic 
Performance Compatible? Academic Achievement, Conduct, Physical Activity and Self-Esteem 
of Hong Kong Chinese Primary School Children. Educational Studies. 2006; 32(4):331–41.
Donnelly et al.
Page 45
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 46 (native) -----
Figure 1. Cognition search flow diagram using PRISMA guidelines
Donnelly et al.
Page 46
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 47 (native) -----
Figure 2. Academic Achievement search flow diagram using PRISMA guidelines
Donnelly et al.
Page 47
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 48 (native) -----
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Donnelly et al.
Page 48
Table 1
Evidence categories for ACSM Position Stands
Evidence Category
Sources of Evidence
Definition
A
Randomized controlled trials 
(rich body of data)
Evidence is from endpoints of well-designed RCTs (or trials that depart only 
minimally from randomization) that provide a consistent pattern of findings in the 
population for which the recommendation is made. Category A therefore requires 
substantial numbers of studies involving substantial numbers of participants
B
Randomized controlled trials 
(limited body of data)
Evidence is from endpoints of intervention studies that include only a limited 
number of RCTs, post-hoc or subgroup analysis of RCTs, or meta-analysis of 
RCTs. In general, Category B pertains when few randomized trials exist, they are 
small in size, and the trials results are somewhat inconsistent, or the trials were 
undertaken in a population that differs from the target population of the 
recommendation.
C
Nonrandomized trials or 
Observational studies
Evidence is from outcomes of uncontrolled or nonrandomized trials or from 
observational studies
D
Panel Consensus Judgment
Expert judgment is based on the panel's synthesis of evidence from experimental 
research described in the literature and/or derived from the consensus of panel 
members based on clinical experience or knowledge that does not meet the above-
listed criteria. This category is used only in cases where the provision of some 
guidance was deemed valuable but an adequately compelling clinical literature 
addressing the subject of the recommendation was deemed insufficient to justify 
placement in one of the other categories (A through C).
*National Institutes of Health and National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. (1998). Clinical guidelines on the identification, evaluation, and 
treatment of overweight and obesity in adults: the Evidence Report. Obesity Research, 6 (Suppl 2), 5, 51S-209S.
Med Sci Sports Exerc. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 June 01.