

----- Page 1 (native) -----
Research article
1494 
The Journal of Clinical Investigation      http://www.jci.org      Volume 116      Number 6      June 2006
MCP-1 contributes to macrophage  
infiltration into adipose tissue, insulin 
resistance, and hepatic steatosis in obesity
Hajime Kanda,1 Sanshiro Tateya,1 Yoshikazu Tamori,1 Ko Kotani,1 Ken-ichi Hiasa,2 Riko Kitazawa,3 
Sohei Kitazawa,3 Hitoshi Miyachi,4 Sakan Maeda,3 Kensuke Egashira,2 and Masato Kasuga1
1Department of Clinical Molecular Medicine, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe, Japan.  
2Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.  
3Department of Biomedical Informatics, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe, Japan. 4Laboratory for Animal Resources and  
Genetic Engineering, Center for Developmental Biology (CDB), Institute of Physical and Chemical Research (RIKEN), Kobe, Japan.
Adipocytes secrete a variety of bioactive molecules that affect the insulin sensitivity of other tissues. We now 
show that the abundance of monocyte chemoattractant protein–1 (MCP-1) mRNA in adipose tissue and the plasma 
concentration of MCP-1 were increased both in genetically obese diabetic (db/db) mice and in WT mice with 
obesity induced by a high-fat diet. Mice engineered to express an MCP-1 transgene in adipose tissue under the 
control of the aP2 gene promoter exhibited insulin resistance, macrophage infiltration into adipose tissue, 
and increased hepatic triglyceride content. Furthermore, insulin resistance, hepatic steatosis, and macrophage 
accumulation in adipose tissue induced by a high-fat diet were reduced extensively in MCP-1 homozygous KO 
mice compared with WT animals. Finally, acute expression of a dominant-negative mutant of MCP-1 ame-
liorated insulin resistance in db/db mice and in WT mice fed a high-fat diet. These findings suggest that an 
increase in MCP-1 expression in adipose tissue contributes to the macrophage infiltration into this tissue, 
insulin resistance, and hepatic steatosis associated with obesity in mice.
Introduction
Recent changes in human lifestyle have resulted in a marked increase 
in the incidence of obesity. Increased adiposity contributes to insu-
lin resistance, dyslipidemia, hyperglycemia, and hypertension (1, 2). 
These pathological features are collectively referred to as metabolic 
syndrome, with insulin resistance being especially important in the 
pathogenesis of this state. The molecular mechanisms that link obe-
sity and insulin resistance have thus been the subject of intensive 
investigation, although they remain incompletely understood.
Adipocytes are insulin-sensitive cells that take up glucose and 
store energy in the form of triglycerides, which are subsequently 
broken down to FFAs and glycerol in times of energy need. In addi-
tion to their storage function, adipocytes have recently been shown 
to be dynamic endocrine cells that produce and secrete various bio-
active molecules (known as adipokines or adipocytokines), some of 
which affect the insulin sensitivity of other tissues, including the 
liver, skeletal muscle, pancreatic islets (β cells), and central nervous 
system. TNF-α, leptin, plasminogen activator inhibitor–1, IL-6, 
resistin, and adiponectin have all been identified as adipokines (3). 
The insulin resistance that accompanies obesity is attributable, at 
least in part, to changes in the secretion of adipokines.
Monocyte chemoattractant protein–1 (MCP-1) is produced pre-
dominantly by macrophages and endothelial cells and is a potent 
chemotactic factor for monocytes (4–6). Expression of this pro-
inflammatory chemokine is increased in atherosclerotic lesions 
(7, 8), and inhibition of its expression or that of its receptor, CC 
chemokine receptor 2 (CCR2), reduces the extent of atheroma for-
mation in hypercholesterolemic mice (9, 10). These observations 
indicate that MCP-1 plays an important role in atherogenesis. In 
addition, the abundance of MCP-1 in both white adipose tissue 
and plasma is increased in obese mice (11), suggesting that MCP-1 
might also be an adipokine whose expression is increased in obesi-
ty. However, to our knowledge a role for MCP-1 in obesity-induced 
insulin resistance has not been previously demonstrated.
In addition to that of MCP-1, the expression of several inflam-
mation-related proteins, including TNF-α, IL-6, and plasminogen 
activator inhibitor–1, in adipose tissue is increased in association 
with obesity (11–14). Furthermore, recent studies have demon-
strated macrophage infiltration into adipose tissue of obese mice 
(15, 16). These observations suggest that adipose tissue in obesity 
is characterized by chronic low-grade inflammation that might 
contribute to the insulin resistance that accompanies this condi-
tion. We have now investigated the possible role of MCP-1 in obe-
sity-induced macrophage infiltration into adipose tissue and insu-
lin resistance by generating mice with a gain or loss of function 
of MCP-1. The data we present here demonstrate that an increase 
in MCP-1 expression in adipose tissue contributes to the macro-
phage infiltration into this tissue, insulin resistance, and hepatic 
steatosis associated with obesity in mice.
Results
Identification of MCP-1 as a secretory factor of adipocytes. Mice that lack the 
glucose transporter GLUT4 specifically in adipocytes manifest insu-
lin resistance in remote organs such as the liver and skeletal muscle 
(17), suggesting that adipocytes deficient in GLUT4-mediated glu-
cose uptake might secrete a factor (or factors) that induces insulin 
resistance in other organs. To identify such a factor, we performed 
Nonstandard abbreviations used: CCR, CC chemokine receptor; G6Pase, glucose-6-
phosphatase; MCP, monocyte chemoattractant protein; 7ND, MCP-1 mutant lacking 
the aminoterminal 7 amino acids; PEPCK, phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase; SVF, 
stromal-vascular fraction.
Conflict of interest: The authors have declared that no conflict of interest exists.
Citation for this article: J. Clin. Invest. 116:1494–1505 (2006). doi:10.1172/JCI26498.

----- Page 2 (native) -----
research article
 
The Journal of Clinical Investigation      http://www.jci.org      Volume 116      Number 6      June 2006	
1495
microarray analysis with total RNA isolated from 3T3-L1 adipocytes 
after culture with or without glucose for 36 hours, with refreshment 
of the medium every 6 hours to prevent glucose depletion in the 
glucose-containing medium. Of the approximately 12,000 genes 
represented on the array, 43 showed a marked increase in expression 
in the cells deprived of glucose (data not shown). Eight of these 43 
genes were predicted to encode secreted proteins on the basis of the 
presence of a signal peptide sequence. These 8 genes included those 
for MCP-1 and MCP-3, but the products of the remaining 6 genes 
were not known to play any role in glucose or lipid metabolism. 
Given that expression of the gene for MCP-1, but not for MCP-3, was 
substantially reduced after treatment of 3T3-L1 adipocytes for 36 
hours with the thiazolidinedione rosiglitazone (5 μM), we selected 
MCP-1 as the most promising candidate for a new adipokine that 
might induce insulin resistance. Retinol binding protein–4 (RBP4) 
was recently identified as an insulin resistance–inducing adipokine 
released from adipose tissue of adipocyte-specific GLUT4 KO mice 
(18). However, the RBP4 gene was not among the 43 genes whose 
expression level was shown by our microarray analysis to be signifi-
cantly increased in 3T3-L1 adipocytes in response to glucose depri-
vation, since RBP4 was not expressed in 3T3-L1 adipocytes.
Our microarray results were confirmed by Northern blot analy-
sis showing that the abundance of MCP-1 mRNA in 3T3-L1 adi-
pocytes was greatly increased by glucose deprivation (Figure 1A). 
The concentration of MCP-1 in the culture supernatants of 
3T3-L1 adipocytes was also increased significantly by glu-
cose deprivation (Figure 1B). The presence of MCP-1 mRNA in 
3T3-L1 adipocytes and the secretion of MCP-1 by these cells into 
the culture medium supported the notion that MCP-1 is an adi-
pokine. To examine the effect of hypoglycemia on MCP-1 secre-
tion in vivo, we measured the plasma concentration of MCP-1 in 
mice deprived of food for 24 hours. However, we did not detect a 
significant difference in this parameter between fasted mice and 
control mice. The plasma glucose level of the fasted mice was 
approximately 60 mg/dl, compared with a value of approximate-
ly 140 mg/dl for the control mice, suggesting that this level of 
hypoglycemia might not have been sufficient to increase MCP-1 
secretion from adipocytes in vivo.
Upregulation of MCP-1 expression in obese mice. We next examined 
the tissue distribution of MCP-1 mRNA in obese mice. Northern 
blot analysis of total RNA extracted from various tissues of geneti-
cally obese diabetic (db/db) or lean control (db/+m) mice revealed 
the presence of a substantial amount of MCP-1 mRNA in white 
and brown adipose tissue of the former animals but not in that 
of the latter (Figure 2A). The plasma concentration of MCP-1 in 
db/db mice was also about twice than of db/+m mice (Figure 2B). 
Similarly, MCP-1 gene expression was detected in white and brown 
adipose tissue of mice with obesity induced by a high-fat diet but 
not in that of control mice fed normal chow (Figure 2C). Again, the 
plasma concentration of MCP-1 in mice fed the high-fat diet was 
about twice that of the control animals (Figure 2D). Furthermore, 
we directly compared the mRNA expression of MCP-1 in white adi-
pose tissue on the same sheet in Northern blot analysis to avoid the 
difference of conditions in which Northern blot analysis was per-
formed and confirmed that MCP-1 mRNA was actually increased 
in white adipose tissue of obese mice (Supplemental Figure 1; sup-
plemental material available online with this article; doi:10.1172/
JCI26498DS1). These results indicate that obesity not only induces 
MCP-1 gene expression in adipose tissue but also increases the 
plasma concentration of this chemokine in mice. Our results are 
consistent with previous observations showing that the abundance 
of MCP-1 mRNA in adipose tissue and the plasma concentration of 
MCP-1 are increased in obese mice (11, 15, 16, 19, 20).
Histological analysis of white adipose tissue in obese mice. Obesity has 
been shown to be associated with a chronic low-grade inflamma-
tory response in adipose tissue that is characterized by macro-
phage infiltration (15, 16). We therefore next examined white adi-
pose tissue from db/db mice and from mice fed a high-fat diet by 
immunohistochemical analysis with a mAb to Mac3, a marker spe-
cific for mature macrophages. The antibody detected large multinu-
cleate cells (accumulated macrophages) in epididymal adipose tissue 
from db/db mice but not db/+m mice (Supplemental Figure 2A). 
Macrophages were also detected in the adipose tissue of mice with 
obesity induced by a high-fat diet but were only rarely present in 
that of mice fed normal chow (Supplemental Figure 2B). The macro-
phages detected in mice on the high-fat diet were mononucleate or 
oligonucleate; multinucleate giant cells similar to those apparent in 
db/db mice were rarely detected. We counted the number of infiltrat-
ed macrophages in adipose tissue by immunohistochemical stain-
ing and quantitated the degree of macrophage infiltration by calcu-
lating the ratio of infiltrated macrophages to total cells in adipose 
tissue (15). This analysis revealed that macrophage infiltration was 
actually increased significantly in both db/db mice (Supplemental 
Figure 2C) and mice fed the high-fat diet (Supplemental Figure 2D) 
compared with their respective controls. Furthermore, the degree of 
macrophage infiltration in adipose tissue was significantly greater 
in db/db mice than in mice fed the high-fat diet (17.7% versus 13.1%; 
Supplemental Figure 2, C and D). We also quantified the number 
of macrophages in the stromal-vascular fraction (SVF) of epididy-
mal tissue of obese mice by flow cytometry after labeling of the cells 
with antibodies to both CD11b (macrophage marker) and CD45 
(pan leukocyte marker). The percentage of double-positive cells 
(i.e., macrophages) in the SVF was significantly greater for db/db 
mice than for db/+m mice (17.1% versus 3.6%; Supplemental Figure 2E) 
as well as for mice fed a high-fat diet compared with those fed nor-
mal chow (12.9% versus 4.8%; Supplemental Figure 2F).
Northern blot analysis revealed that the upregulation of MCP-1 
mRNA in epididymal adipose tissue of db/db mice and mice fed 
Figure 1
Upregulation of MCP-1 expression in 3T3-L1 adipocytes by glucose 
deprivation. (A) Total RNA (15 μg) extracted from 3T3-L1 adipocytes 
cultured with or without glucose for 36 hours was subjected to North-
ern blot analysis with a probe specific for mouse MCP-1 mRNA. The 
region of the ethidium bromide–stained gel containing 28S rRNA is also 
shown. (B) The culture supernatants of 3T3-L1 adipocytes cultured 
with or without glucose for 36 hours were assayed for MCP-1. Data are 
mean ± SEM (n = 18). *P < 0.01 versus culture with glucose.

----- Page 3 (native) -----
research article
1496 
The Journal of Clinical Investigation      http://www.jci.org      Volume 116      Number 6      June 2006
a high-fat diet was apparent in both the adipocyte fraction and 
the SVF; it was more pronounced in the latter fraction in db/db 
mice (Figure 2E). Together these results thus suggested that the 
increased abundance of MCP-1 mRNA in the SVF of adipose tissue 
in obese mice is attributable to infiltrated macrophages.
Insulin resistance, macrophage infiltration into adipose tissue, and 
increased hepatic triglyceride content in transgenic mice that overexpress 
MCP-1 in adipocytes. We generated transgenic mice in which MCP-1 
is overexpressed in adipocytes in order to investigate the primary 
effects of increased MCP-1 expression in adipose tissue. The trans-
gene is composed of the mouse MCP-1 coding sequence under the 
control of the enhancer-promoter of the aP2 gene (21), which is 
active in brown and white adipocyte in vivo (22). We obtained 9 
lines of transgenic mice with this construct, 2 of which (MCP-1 
Tg-A and MCP-1 Tg-B) were characterized further.
Northern blot analysis confirmed that both the Tg-A (data 
not shown) and Tg-B (Figure 3A) lines expressed the transgene 
almost exclusively in adipose tissue. Furthermore, the plasma 
concentration of MCP-1 in MCP-1 Tg-B mice was increased 
approximately 3.9-fold compared with that in WT control ani-
mals (Figure 3B) and was approximately 1.6 times that of db/db 
mice or mice fed a high-fat diet (compare Figure 2, B and D, with 
Figure 3B). Given that the plasma concentration of MCP-1 in 
MCP-1 Tg-A mice was increased approximately 100-fold com-
pared with that in WT controls, we considered the MCP-1 Tg-B 
line to be a more acceptable model with which to examine the 
Figure 2
Tissue distribution of MCP-1 mRNA and plasma concentration of MCP-1 in obese mice. (A) Total RNA was extracted from the indicated tissues of 
8-week-old db/db or db/+m mice and subjected to Northern blot analysis with a probe specific for mouse MCP-1 mRNA. WAT, white adipose tis-
sue; BAT, brown adipose tissue. (B) Plasma concentration of MCP-1 in 11-week-old db/+m and db/db mice. Data are mean ± SEM (db/+m, n = 8; 
db/db, n = 11). *P < 0.05 versus db/+m. (C) Total RNA, extracted from the indicated tissues of 18-week-old C57BL/6J mice fed either a high-fat 
diet (HFD) or normal chow for 12 weeks, was subjected to Northern blot analysis with a probe specific for MCP-1 mRNA. (D) Plasma concentra-
tion of MCP-1 in 18-week-old C57BL/6J mice fed normal chow or the high-fat diet for 12 weeks. Data are mean ± SEM (normal chow, n = 11; 
high-fat diet, n = 9). *P < 0.05 versus normal chow. (E) Total RNA (15 μg), extracted from the SVF and adipocyte fraction (Adipo) of epididymal 
fat tissue from 11-week-old db/db mice or 18-week-old C57BL/6J mice fed a high-fat diet for 12 weeks, was subjected to Northern blot analysis 
with a probe specific for MCP-1 mRNA. The intensity of the band corresponding to MCP-1 mRNA in each fraction was quantitated and expressed 
relative to the value for the SVF of mice fed a high-fat diet. Data are mean ± SEM of values from 3 independent experiments (n = 3).

----- Page 4 (native) -----
research article
 
The Journal of Clinical Investigation      http://www.jci.org      Volume 116      Number 6      June 2006	
1497
pathological role of increased MCP-1 expression in obese mice. 
We performed subsequent analyses with MCP-1 Tg-B mice and 
WT littermates as controls. MCP-1 Tg-B mice were viable and 
appeared normal overall.
Adipose tissue weight and adipocyte size did not differ sig-
nificantly between MCP-1 Tg-B mice and WT controls (data not 
shown). Immunohistochemical analysis with the mAb to Mac3 
revealed macrophage infiltration in white adipose tissue of MCP-1 
Tg-B mice, whereas such infiltration was rarely detected in control 
animals (Figure 3, C and D). The macrophages detected in adipose 
tissue of MCP-1 Tg-B mice were mononucleate or oligonucleate, 
similar to those detected in mice fed a high-fat diet. Flow cyto-
metric analysis of macrophage infiltration into white adipose tis-
sue with anti-CD11b and anti-CD45 revealed that the percentage 
of double-positive cells was increased significantly in Tg-B mice 
(Figure 3E). Macrophage infiltration in other insulin-responsive 
tissues, such as liver or skeletal muscle, of Tg-B mice was not evi-
dent by immunohistochemical analysis with anti-Mac3 (data not 
shown). In addition, quantitative RT-PCR analysis showed that 
the amounts of the mRNAs for TNF-α, CD68 (macrosialin), and 
F4/80 (a specific marker of mature macrophages) were significant-
ly greater in the white adipose tissue of MCP-1 Tg-B mice than in 
that of control animals (Figure 3F), confirming the infiltration of 
macrophages into adipose tissue of the transgenic mice.
Figure 3
Generation and characterization of transgenic mice that overexpress MCP-1 in adipose tissue. (A) Northern blot analysis with an MCP-1 probe 
of total RNA isolated from various tissues of 11-week-old MCP-1 Tg-B mice. (B) Plasma concentration of MCP-1 in 13-week-old MCP-1 Tg-B 
and WT mice. Data are mean ± SEM (n = 7). (C) Immunohistochemical detection of Mac3 in epididymal adipose tissue of 11-week-old MCP-1 
Tg-B and WT mice. Macrophages are stained brown. Magnification, ×200 and ×400, as indicated. Scale bars: 50 μm. (D) Macrophage infiltra-
tion into epididymal fat tissue was quantitated in MCP-1 Tg-B (n = 7) and WT mice (n = 9) as the ratio of Mac3-positive cells to total cells. Data 
are mean ± SEM. (E) Quantitation by flow cytometry of the proportion of CD11b+CD45+ cells (macrophages) in the SVF of epididymal fat tissue 
from 14-week-old MCP-1 Tg-B (n = 7) and WT mice (n = 6). Data are mean ± SEM. (F) Quantitative RT-PCR analysis of total RNA isolated from 
epididymal fat tissue of 11-week-old MCP-1 Tg-B and WT mice for TNF-α, CD68, and F4/80 mRNAs. Data (mean ± SEM; n = 4) were normalized 
by the amount of 36B4 mRNA and expressed relative to the corresponding WT value. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01 versus WT.

----- Page 5 (native) -----
research article
1498 
The Journal of Clinical Investigation      http://www.jci.org      Volume 116      Number 6      June 2006
Body weight and food intake did not differ significantly 
between MCP-1 Tg-B mice and WT controls (Figure 4A). 
Although the plasma glucose levels of MCP-1 Tg-B and WT mice 
were similar in the fed state, in the fasted state the transgenic mice 
had significantly greater plasma glucose than did the control 
animals (Figure 4A). The serum FFA concentration was also sig-
nificantly increased in MCP-1 Tg-B mice compared with control 
mice. The plasma concentration of insulin and the serum con-
centrations of triglyceride, cholesterol, and adiponectin did not 
differ between the 2 genotypes (Figure 4A). The transgenic ani-
mals manifested both insulin resistance and glucose intolerance 
in insulin and glucose tolerance tests, respectively (Figure 4B). 
Hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamp analysis also revealed 
MCP-1 Tg-B mice to be insulin resistant: the glucose infusion 
rate was reduced by 54% in the transgenic mice compared with 
the WT controls (Figure 4C). The rate of glucose disappearance 
was reduced by 21%, basal hepatic glucose production was not 
significantly altered (P = 0.07), and hepatic glucose production 
during the clamp period was markedly increased in MCP-1 Tg-B 
mice compared with control mice. The ability of insulin to sup-
press basal hepatic glucose production was thus reduced in 
MCP-1 Tg-B mice compared with WT mice (20% versus 75% sup-
pression). These results were indicative of insulin resistance in 
both skeletal muscle and liver of MCP-1 Tg-B mice. In addition, 
the hepatic triglyceride content was increased significantly in 
MCP-1 Tg-B mice compared with WT mice (Figure 4D).
Figure 4
Metabolic characteristics of MCP-1 transgenic mice. (A) Metabolic parameters of 11-week-old MCP-1 Tg-B and WT mice. Data are means ± SEM 
(body weight, n = 5; food intake, n = 3 [WT], 4 [Tg-B]; plasma glucose, n = 9 [WT], 11 [Tg-B]; serum FFA, n = 9 [WT], 11 [Tg-B]; plasma insulin, n = 5; 
serum triglyceride, n = 4 [WT], 6 [Tg-B]; serum total cholesterol, n = 9 [WT], 11 [Tg-B]; serum adiponectin, n = 5). (B) Plasma glucose level during 
insulin (upper panel) and glucose (lower panel) tolerance tests in WT and MCP-1 Tg-B mice at 12 to 13 weeks of age. Data are mean ± SEM 
(n = 5). (C) Hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamp analysis in MCP-1 Tg-B (n = 5) and WT (n = 7) mice. Data are mean ± SEM. GIR, glucose 
infusion rate; Rd, rate of glucose disappearance; BHGP, basal hepatic glucose production; CHGP, hepatic glucose production during clamp. 
(D) Hepatic triglyceride content of 11-week-old MCP-1 Tg-B and WT mice. Data are mean ± SEM (n = 5). (E) Quantitation by Northern blot of 
the abundance of PEPCK, G6Pase, and SREBP-1c mRNAs in the liver of MCP-1 Tg-B and WT mice after hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamp 
analysis. Data (mean ± SEM; PEPCK and SREBP-1c, n = 5 [WT], 4 [Tg-B]; G6Pase, n = 5.) are expressed relative to the corresponding value 
for WT mice. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01 versus WT.

----- Page 6 (native) -----
research article
 
The Journal of Clinical Investigation      http://www.jci.org      Volume 116      Number 6      June 2006	
1499
To investigate the mechanism of hepatic insulin resistance and 
steatosis in MCP-1 Tg-B mice, we first examined expression of the 
genes for the gluconeogenic enzymes phosphoenolpyruvate carboxyki-
nase (PEPCK) and glucose-6-phosphatase (G6Pase) in the liver after the 
hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamp study. Both of these enzymes 
are important determinants of hepatic glucose production. North-
ern blot analysis revealed that after insulin infusion in the fasted 
mice, the abundance of PEPCK and G6Pase mRNAs was higher in 
the livers of MCP-1 Tg-B mice than in those of WT mice, although 
this effect was statistically significant only for G6Pase mRNA 
(Figure 4E). The amount of the mRNA for SREBP-1c, a transcrip-
tion factor that regulates the expression of genes important in lipid 
synthesis, was also significantly increased in the livers of MCP-1 
Tg-B mice compared with WT controls after the clamp (Figure 4E). 
Together, these results indicated that overexpression of MCP-1 in 
adipocytes results in an increase in the plasma MCP-1 concentra-
tion similar to that apparent in db/db mice or in mice with obesity 
induced by a high-fat diet and is sufficient to trigger macrophage 
infiltration into adipose tissue, insulin resistance, and an increase 
in hepatic triglyceride content without concomitant obesity.
Reduced ability of a high-fat diet to induce insulin resistance and hepat-
ic steatosis in MCP-1 KO mice. Given that the obesity-associated 
increase in MCP-1 expression was largely restricted to adipose tis-
sue (Figure 2, A and C), we next examined MCP-1 homozygous KO 
mice to investigate whether the upregulation of MCP-1 in adipose 
tissue contributes to obesity-induced insulin resistance. The body 
Figure 5
Characterization of adipose tissue of MCP-1 homozygous KO mice fed a high-fat diet. (A) Weight of various white and brown adipose tissues 
from the KO and WT mice fed a high-fat diet from 12 to 24 weeks of age. Data are mean ± SEM (n = 5). (B) Size distribution of adipocytes in 
epididymal fat tissue of mice fed a high-fat diet from 12 to 24 weeks of age. Data are means from analysis of 5 sections from each of 5 mice. (C) 
Immunohistochemical detection of Mac3 in epididymal adipose tissue of mice fed a high-fat diet from 12 to 24 weeks of age. Magnification, ×200 
and ×400, as indicated. Scale bars: 50 μm. (D) Macrophage infiltration into epididymal fat tissue. Data are mean ± SEM (WT, n = 8; KO, n = 6). 
(E) Quantitation by flow cytometry of the proportion of macrophages in the SVF of epididymal fat tissue from mice fed a high-fat diet from 12 to 
28 weeks of age. Data are mean ± SEM (WT, n = 4; KO, n = 6). (F) Abundance of macrophage-related protein mRNAs in epididymal fat tissue 
of mice fed a high-fat diet from 12 to 24 weeks of age. Data (mean ± SEM; n = 4) were normalized by the amount of 36B4 mRNA and expressed 
relative to the corresponding WT value. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01 versus WT.

----- Page 7 (native) -----
research article
1500 
The Journal of Clinical Investigation      http://www.jci.org      Volume 116      Number 6      June 2006
weight of MCP-1 homozygous KO mice fed normal chow did not 
differ significantly from that of WT control mice at 24 weeks of 
age (27.1 ± 0.82 g versus 27.6 ± 0.58 g, respectively; n = 5). Adipose 
tissue weight, adipocyte size, insulin tolerance, and glucose toler-
ance also did not differ significantly between the 2 groups of mice 
maintained on normal chow (data not shown). These data suggest 
that MCP-1 plays a minimal role in glucose metabolism and insu-
lin sensitivity in mice fed a normal diet.
We next characterized MCP-1 homozygous KO mice fed a high-
fat diet. Maintenance of WT mice on a high-fat diet from 12 to 24 
weeks of age resulted in an approximately 2-fold increase in the plas-
ma concentration of MCP-1 compared with WT mice fed normal 
chow (normal chow, 55 ± 13.7 pg/ml; high-fat diet, 98 ± 13.5 pg/ml; 
n = 7), similar to the results shown in Figure 2D. The mass of sub-
cutaneous adipose tissue, the epididymal fat pad, and the retro-
peritoneal fat pad tended to be smaller in MCP-1 KO mice than 
in WT mice on the high-fat diet (Figure 5A). Furthermore, the 
increase in adipocyte size induced by the high-fat diet was less 
pronounced in MCP-1 KO mice than in control mice (Figure 5B). 
Immunohistochemical analysis with the mAb to Mac3 also showed 
that the macrophage infiltration into adipose tissue induced by the 
high-fat diet was extensively reduced in MCP-1 KO mice (Figure 5, 
C and D). This finding was confirmed by flow cytometry (Figure 5E). 
The amounts of TNF-α, CD68, and F4/80 mRNAs in epididymal fat 
tissue were significantly smaller in MCP-1 KO mice on the high-
fat diet compared with those in WT controls (Figure 5F). These 
results suggest that MCP-1 is required for the macrophage infiltra-
tion into adipose tissue induced by a high-fat diet.
Body weight, food intake, and plasma glucose concentrations did 
not differ significantly between MCP-1 KO and WT mice maintained 
Figure 6
Metabolic characteristics of MCP-1 KO mice fed a high-fat diet. (A) Metabolic parameters of mice fed a high-fat diet from 12 to 24 weeks of age. Data 
are means ± SEM (body weight, n = 5 [WT], 9 [KO]; food intake, n = 4; plasma glucose, n = 5; serum FFA, n = 6 [WT], 5 [KO]; plasma insulin, n = 7 
[WT], 6 [KO]; serum triglyceride, n = 7 [WT], 6 [KO]; serum total cholesterol, n = 6 [WT], 5 [KO]; serum adiponectin, n = 7 [WT], 5 [KO]). (B) Plasma 
glucose level during insulin (upper panel) and glucose (lower panel) tolerance tests in mice fed a high-fat diet from 12 to 24 weeks of age. Data are 
mean ± SEM (n = 6). (C) Hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamp analysis in mice fed a high-fat diet from 12 to 28 weeks of age. Data are mean ± SEM 
(WT, n = 6; KO, n = 5). (D) Hepatic triglyceride content of mice fed a high-fat diet from 12 to 28 weeks of age. Data are mean ± SEM (n = 5). (E) 
Quantitation by Northern blot of the hepatic abundance of PEPCK, G6Pase, and SREBP-1c mRNAs in mice after hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic 
clamp analysis. Data (mean ± SEM; n = 5) were expressed relative to the corresponding WT value. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01 versus WT.

----- Page 8 (native) -----
research article
 
The Journal of Clinical Investigation      http://www.jci.org      Volume 116      Number 6      June 2006	
1501
on the high-fat diet for 12 weeks (Figure 6A). The serum FFA level was 
significantly decreased in MCP-1 KO mice on the high-fat diet com-
pared with that in WT mice (Figure 6A). The plasma insulin level in 
the fed state was significantly decreased and the serum adiponectin 
concentration was significantly increased in MCP-1 KO mice on the 
high-fat diet compared with those in WT controls (Figure 6A). The 
insulin resistance and glucose intolerance induced by the high-fat 
diet in WT mice were both ameliorated in MCP-1 KO mice, as revealed 
by insulin and glucose tolerance tests, respectively (Figure 6B). 
Hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamp analysis also showed that the 
glucose infusion rate was increased about 3-fold, both basal and 
clamp hepatic glucose production were significantly reduced, and 
the rate of glucose disappearance was unaltered in MCP-1 KO mice 
(Figure 6C). The MCP-1 KO animals were also protected from the 
hepatic steatosis apparent in WT mice fed the high-fat diet (Figure 6D). 
Again, we examined the hepatic expression of PEPCK, G6Pase, and 
SREBP-1c genes after the clamp study. The abundance of G6Pase and 
SREBP-1c mRNAs decreased significantly, and PEPCK mRNA tended 
to be reduced, in MCP-1 KO mice compared with control animals 
(Figure 6E), suggesting that MCP-1 regulates the hepatic expression 
of the corresponding genes either directly or indirectly. These results 
suggest that MCP-1 is important in the pathogenesis of the macro-
phage infiltration into adipose tissue, insulin resistance, and hepatic 
steatosis induced by a high-fat diet.
Effects of inhibition of endogenous MCP-1 function by expression of a 
dominant-negative mutant in vivo. MCP-1 homozygous KO mice lack 
MCP-1 throughout embryonic and adult life. To examine whether 
acute loss of MCP-1 function also results in a protective effect 
against obesity-induced insulin resistance, we inhibited MCP-1 
activity in vivo by inducing the expression of a dominant-negative 
MCP-1 mutant. A mutant of MCP-1 that lacks the aminoterminal 
7 amino acids was previously shown to act in a dominant-nega-
tive manner (23, 24). Expression of this mutant of human MCP-1, 
designated 7ND, was also shown to reduce the extents of both 
atherogenesis in hypercholesterolemic mice (25) and neointimal 
hyperplasia after periarterial injury in mice and monkeys (26).
Figure 7
Effects of expression of the MCP-1 mutant 7ND on insulin sensitivity in obese mice. (A) Insulin tolerance test in db/db mice determined insulin sen-
sitivity 21 days after transfection of 8-week-old animals with the 7ND vector (n = 10) or the corresponding empty plasmid as a control (Con, n = 6). 
(B) Insulin (left) and glucose (right) tolerance tests performed 21 days after transfection of 8-week-old db/+m mice with the 7ND vector (n = 8) or the 
corresponding empty plasmid (n = 7). (C) Insulin (left) and glucose (right) tolerance tests performed 21 days after transfection of 30-week-old C57BL/6J 
mice fed a high-fat diet since 6 weeks of age with either the 7ND expression vector or the corresponding empty plasmid. Data are mean ± SEM 
(insulin tolerance test, n = 4; glucose tolerance test, n = 5 [7ND], 7 [empty vector]). (D) Hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamp analysis of db/db 
mice performed 21 days after transfection of 8-week-old animals with the 7ND vector (n = 4) or the corresponding empty plasmid (n = 5). Data are 
mean ± SEM. (E) Appearance of the liver (left) and hepatic triglyceride content (n = 4, right) in db/db mice 21 days after injection of 8-week-old 
animals with the 7ND expression plasmid or the corresponding empty vector. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01 versus mice injected with the empty vector.

----- Page 9 (native) -----
research article
1502 
The Journal of Clinical Investigation      http://www.jci.org      Volume 116      Number 6      June 2006
An expression plasmid encoding the 7ND mutant or the corre-
sponding empty vector was injected into the femoral muscle of mice, 
and the muscle was then subjected to electric pulses from a generator. 
Muscle treated in this manner has been shown to express the 7ND 
protein and to secrete it into the bloodstream (25), and the plasma 
concentration of 7ND was found to be maintained for at least 21 
days after transfection (26). In db/db mice, the plasma concentra-
tion of 7ND, determined with an immunoassay specific for human 
MCP-1, was 1,140.2 ± 211.7 pg/ml and 211.7 ± 73.6 pg/ml (n = 6) on 
days 5 and 21 after transfection, respectively. The 7ND mutant was 
previously shown to form inactive heterodimers with endogenous 
mouse MCP-1 (24). Given that the plasma concentration of endog-
enous MCP-1 in db/db mice is approximately 80 pg/ml (Figure 2B), 
7ND likely inhibited endogenous MCP-1 function in these animals 
for at least 21 days after transfection. We thus performed metabolic 
assays in such mice 21 to 23 days after transfection.
Expression of 7ND in db/db mice did not affect body weight, 
food intake, plasma glucose or insulin levels in the fasting or fed 
state, or the serum adiponectin concentration (data not shown). In 
contrast, expression of 7ND ameliorated insulin resistance in db/db 
mice compared with db/db animals injected with the empty vector 
(Figure 7A). We did not perform a glucose tolerance test in db/db 
mice because of the high level of plasma glucose in these animals 
without glucose loading. Expression of 7ND affected neither insulin 
sensitivity nor glucose tolerance in db/+m mice (Figure 7B). We next 
examined the effects of 7ND expression in mice with high-fat diet–
induced obesity. Expression of 7ND resulted in a significant (~20%) 
decrease in the plasma glucose concentration of these animals in the 
fed state, but it had no effect on body weight, food intake, plasma 
insulin level in the fed state, fasting plasma glucose concentration, or 
serum adiponectin level (data not shown). Furthermore, expression 
of 7ND significantly increased both insulin sensitivity and glucose 
tolerance in mice with obesity induced by a high-fat diet (Figure 7C). 
Hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamp analysis also revealed that the 
glucose infusion rate was greatly increased and clamp hepatic glu-
cose production was significantly decreased in db/db mice express-
ing 7ND compared with db/db mice transfected with the empty vec-
tor (Figure 7D). These latter results for db/db mice expressing 7ND 
were similar to those obtained with MCP-1 KO mice fed a high-fat 
diet (Figure 6C), suggesting that increased production of MCP-1 
in obesity contributes to increased hepatic glucose production. In 
addition, 7ND expression reduced the hepatic triglyceride content 
of db/db mice by approximately 50% (Figure 7E). These results sug-
gest that inhibition of increased MCP-1 activity after the develop-
ment of obesity by expression of a dominant-negative mutant of 
MCP-1 ameliorated insulin resistance and hepatic steatosis.
Discussion
Previous studies have suggested that MCP-1 is an adipokine whose 
expression is increased in obese animals (11, 15, 16, 20). However, it 
has remained unclear whether MCP-1 contributes to development 
of the insulin resistance and hepatic steatosis associated with obe-
sity. We have now shown that expression of an MCP-1 transgene in 
adipose tissue under the control of the aP2 gene promoter was suf-
ficient to induce macrophage infiltration into adipose tissue, insu-
lin resistance, and increased hepatic triglyceride content in mice. 
Furthermore, disruption of the MCP-1 gene reduced the extents 
of macrophage accumulation in adipose tissue, insulin resistance, 
and hepatic steatosis associated with obesity. In addition, acute 
inhibition of MCP-1 by expression of a dominant-negative mutant 
also ameliorated insulin resistance and hepatic steatosis in obese 
mice. Our results indicate that the increased expression of MCP-1 
in adipose tissue that is associated with obesity plays an important 
role in the pathogenesis of insulin resistance, macrophage infiltra-
tion into adipose tissue, and hepatic steatosis.
We found that the MCP-1 gene is expressed in 3T3-L1 adipo-
cytes and in adipocytes of obese mice. Furthermore, macrophage 
infiltration was apparent in adipose tissue of transgenic mice that 
overexpress MCP-1 in adipocytes. In contrast, the macrophage 
accumulation in adipose tissue induced by feeding on a high-fat 
diet in normal mice was inhibited in MCP-1 homozygous KO 
mice. These results suggest that secretion of MCP-1 from adipo-
cytes directly triggers the recruitment of macrophages to adipose 
tissue. The infiltrated macrophages may in turn secrete a variety 
of chemokines and other cytokines that further promote a local 
inflammatory response and affect gene expression in adipocytes, 
resulting in systemic insulin resistance. However, given that 3 types 
of transgene controlled by the aP2 gene promoter were shown to be 
expressed in macrophages of mice (27), we cannot exclude the pos-
sibility that the MCP-1 transgene was expressed in macrophages of 
our MCP-1 Tg-B mice and that the MCP-1 produced by these cells 
contributed to the infiltration of macrophages into the adipose 
tissue of these animals. Nevertheless, the observation that MCP-1 
Tg-B mice manifest a similar phenotype to obese mice in terms 
of insulin sensitivity and hepatic steatosis suggests that MCP-1 
expression in adipose tissue plays an important role in the insulin 
resistance and hepatic steatosis associated with obesity.
During the preparation of this manuscript, a report was pub-
lished that high-fat feeding–induced obesity, adipose tissue mac-
rophage infiltration, adipose tissue inflammation, systemic insu-
lin resistance, and hepatic steatosis were decreased in CCR2 KO 
mice (28). These phenotypes of CCR2 KO mice were very similar to 
those of our MCP-1 KO mice, except for adipocyte size, which was 
larger in CCR2 KO mice than in controls in high-fat diet feeding. 
The reason for this difference in adipocyte size was not clear. Com-
plex and redundant interactions are known between chemokines 
and their receptors. CCR2 also recognizes MCP-2 (29), MCP-3 (30), 
and MCP-4 (31) as well as MCP-1. On the other hand, MCP-1 is the 
strongest ligand for CCR2 (32), although it also shows low affinity 
for CCR11 (33). The similar phenotypes obtained with MCP-1 and 
CCR2 KO mice suggest that the MCP-1–CCR2 pathway is actually 
important for obesity-induced insulin resistance and hepatic ste-
atosis among these redundant chemokine signaling pathways.
Our results obtained with MCP-1 transgenic mice, MCP-1 
homozygous KO mice fed a high-fat diet, and obese mice express-
ing a dominant-negative mutant of MCP-1 support the notion 
that MCP-1 is responsible for the hepatic insulin resistance and 
steatosis observed in MCP-1 transgenic mice and obese mice. The 
increased hepatic glucose production and steatosis apparent in 
these animals may be explained at least in part by the associated 
changes in hepatic mRNA levels both for PEPCK and G6Pase, key 
enzymes of gluconeogenesis, and for SREBP-1c, an important tran-
scription factor for lipid synthesis. Given that hepatic expression 
of MCP-1 and infiltration of macrophages into the liver were not 
detected in MCP-1 Tg-B mice and that the MCP-1 receptor CCR2 
is expressed in the liver (34), MCP-1 secreted from adipose tissue 
into the circulation of MCP-1 Tg-B mice may increase the hepatic 
expression of PEPCK, G6Pase, and SREBP-1c genes by interacting 
with CCR2 in the liver. Furthermore, given that hepatic steatosis is 
frequently associated with hepatic insulin resistance, the increase

----- Page 10 (native) -----
research article
 
The Journal of Clinical Investigation      http://www.jci.org      Volume 116      Number 6      June 2006	
1503
in the abundance of SREBP-1c mRNA in the liver may be respon-
sible for the increases in PEPCK and G6Pase gene expression. How-
ever, overexpression of SREBP-1c was previously found to suppress 
the hepatic expression of PEPCK and G6Pase genes both in vitro 
and in vivo (35), suggesting that MCP-1 may increase the abun-
dance of SREBP-1c mRNA and that of PEPCK and G6Pase mRNAs 
by independent mechanisms. The precise mechanisms by which 
MCP-1 induces hepatic insulin resistance and steatosis require fur-
ther investigation. Serum FFA levels were significantly increased in 
MCP-1 Tg-B mice and decreased in MCP-1 KO mice fed a high-fat 
diet compared with corresponding control animals. These changes 
in serum FFA level might also contribute to the associated changes 
in hepatic triglyceride content and insulin resistance (36).
Our results with various mouse models have shown that MCP-1 
links obesity to insulin resistance, hepatic steatosis, and macro-
phage infiltration into adipose tissue. Recent studies have also asso-
ciated MCP-1 with metabolic state in humans. The abundance of 
MCP-1 mRNA in subcutaneous adipose tissue was found to corre-
late significantly with both plasma MCP-1 and BMI, and the plasma 
MCP-1 level also correlated directly with BMI (37). In addition, the 
plasma concentration of MCP-1 was significantly associated with 
markers of the metabolic syndrome, including insulin resistance, 
type 2 diabetes, hypertension, obesity, waist/hip ratio, and increased 
serum triglyceride concentration (38). MCP-1 expression is higher 
in visceral than in subcutaneous human adipose tissue (39), and 
expression of a macrophage antigen in human subcutaneous adi-
pose tissue was significantly correlated with both BMI and adipo-
cyte size (15). These observations are consistent with the hypothesis 
that MCP-1 contributes both to the recruitment of macrophages 
to adipose tissue and to the development of insulin resistance in 
humans through a mechanism similar to that shown by the present 
study to be operative in mice. Furthermore, treatment with the insu-
lin-sensitizing agent rosiglitazone resulted in a reduction in plasma 
MCP-1 concentration in both obese nondiabetic and obese diabetic 
individuals (40). We have also shown that administration of tro-
glitazone to mice with obesity induced by a high-fat diet inhibited 
both the upregulation of MCP-1 gene expression in adipose tissue 
and the infiltration of macrophages into adipose tissue (H. Kanda, 
unpublished observations). Given that PPARγ is expressed in mature 
macrophages (41), it is possible that thiazolidinediones reduce the 
plasma concentration of MCP-1 by inhibiting MCP-1 expression in 
macrophages recruited to adipose tissue.
Obesity, especially visceral obesity, is an important feature of 
metabolic syndrome, which is also characterized by insulin resis-
tance, glucose intolerance, dyslipidemia, and hypertension. Our 
present data suggest that MCP-1 links obesity and insulin resis-
tance through induction of an inflammatory response in adipose 
tissue. We have shown that inhibition of MCP-1 function ame-
liorated both insulin resistance and hepatic steatosis as well as 
reduced the extent of macrophage infiltration into adipose tissue 
of obese mice. Our results thus suggest that MCP-1 plays an impor-
tant role in the pathogenesis of metabolic syndrome and that inhi-
bition of the interaction of MCP-1 with CCR2 might provide the 
basis for development of new therapies for this syndrome.
Methods
Oligonucleotide microarray analysis. 3T3-L1 adipocytes cultured for 10 days 
after the induction of differentiation were incubated for 36 hours in DMEM 
containing either glucose (450 mg/dl) or sucrose (840 mg/dl), with replen-
ishment of the medium every 6 hours. Alternatively, the cells were cultured 
for 36 hours in DMEM, some supplemented with 5 μM rosiglitazone. Total 
RNA was prepared from the cells with an RNeasy mini kit (Qiagen), and 
portions (10 μg) were used for the synthesis of biotin-labeled cRNA, which 
in turn was used to probe GeneChip mouse microarrays (MGU74.1; Affyme-
trix). After washing and staining, the arrays were scanned with a Hewlett 
Packard confocal laser scanner and visualized with Affymetrix GeneChip 3.1 
software. The results were analyzed with GeneChip Analysis Suite software 
(version 4.0; Affymetrix), and the fold differences in hybridization intensity 
between samples from cells cultured with or without glucose and with or 
without rosiglitazone were determined.
Experimental animals. C57BL/6J mice, C57BL/6N mice, db/db mice, and 
db/+m mice were obtained from CLEA Japan Inc., and MCP-1 KO mice 
were from The Jackson Laboratory. A high-fat diet (56% of calories from 
fat) was from Oriental Yeast Co. Ltd.
For generation of mice that overexpress MCP-1 in adipose tissue, the cod-
ing region of mouse MCP-1 cDNA was obtained by RT-PCR from total RNA 
extracted from epididymal adipose tissue of C57BL/6J mice, and its sequence 
was confirmed by sequencing of the PCR product. The intron of the rabbit 
β-globin gene and a polyadenylation signal from the human growth hor-
mone cDNA (both kindly provided by J. Miyazaki, Osaka University Gradu-
ate School of Medicine, Osaka, Japan) were ligated to the 5′ and 3′ flank-
ing regions of the MCP-1 coding sequence, respectively. The resulting DNA 
fragment was then positioned downstream of a 5.4-kb promoter-enhancer 
fragment of the mouse aP2 gene (kindly provided by B.M. Spiegelman, Dana-
Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA) (22). The fusion con-
struct composed of the mouse aP2 promoter-enhancer, rabbit β-globin intron, 
mouse MCP-1 coding sequence, and polyadenylation signal was injected into 
the pronucleus of fertilized C57BL/6N mouse eggs. The viable injected eggs 
were transferred to pseudopregnant CD-I female mice (Charles River Labo-
ratories). Transgenic founder mice were identified by Southern blot analysis 
of tail DNA with the mouse MCP-1 cDNA fragment as a probe.
For 7ND expression experiments, db/db and db/+m mice received the 
transgene at 8 weeks of age and were subjected to metabolic assays at 11 
weeks of age. C57BL/6J mice were fed with a high-fat diet from 6 weeks 
of age, received the transgene at 30 weeks, and were subjected to meta-
bolic assays at 33 weeks.
All mice were maintained under a 12-hour light, 12-hour dark cycle and had 
access to food and water ad libitum unless indicated otherwise. All studied 
mice were males. All experimental protocols with mice were approved by the 
animal ethics committee of Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine.
Transfection of skeletal muscle in situ. An expression plasmid for the domi-
nant-negative mutant of human MCP-1 (7ND) was constructed from 
pcDNA3 as described previously (24). Mice were anesthetized by injection 
of ketamine hydrochloride (30 mg/kg body mass i.p.), and femoral muscle 
of the left leg was exposed. Either pcDNA3-7ND or the corresponding 
empty vector (100 μg DNA in 50 μl 10 mM Tris-EDTA buffer, pH 8.0) was 
injected 4 times into the exposed femoral muscle with a 27-gauge needle. A 
pair of electrode needles (BEX) spaced 5 mm apart was then immediately 
inserted into the muscle bed on either side of the injection sites, and 3 
square-wave pulses (100 V for 100 ms) were applied with the use of an elec-
tric pulse generator (CUY21; BEX), first with one polarity and then with 
the opposite polarity. The wound was then closed. No inflammation was 
observed at the site of surgery in any animal.
Isolation of the SVF and adipocyte fraction of adipose tissue. Mouse epididymal 
fat pads were minced and digested for 30 minutes at 37°C with type 1 col-
lagenase (4 mg/ml; Worthington Biochemical Corp.) in DMEM containing 
5% FBS (pH 7.4). After the addition of 3 vol PBS containing 5% FBS and 
filtration of the digested tissue through a nylon mesh (100 μm), the filtrate 
was centrifuged at 200 g. The SVF and adipocyte fraction were obtained 
from the resulting pellet and supernatant, respectively (42).

----- Page 11 (native) -----
research article
1504 
The Journal of Clinical Investigation      http://www.jci.org      Volume 116      Number 6      June 2006
Isolation of total RNA, Northern blot analysis, and real-time PCR. Total RNA was 
extracted from various tissues with the use of TRIzol (Invitrogen Corp.), and 
portions (10–15 μg) of the isolated RNA were subjected to Northern blot 
analysis. The probe for mouse MCP-1 mRNA was obtained by RT-PCR from 
total RNA extracted from 3T3-L1 adipocytes. Probes for PEPCK, G6Pase, and 
SREBP-1 mRNAs were kindly provided by D.K. Granner (Vanderbilt Univer-
sity School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee, USA), H. Nakajima (Osaka 
Medical Center for Cancer and Cardiovascular Diseases, Osaka, Japan), and 
H. Shimano (University of Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan), respectively. All probes 
were labeled with 32P with the use of a Rediprime II random-primer labeling 
system (Amersham Biosciences). Autoradiograms of blots were visualized 
with a BAS2500 image analyzer (Fuji Photo Film Co. Ltd.). The SREBP-1 
probe reacts with both SREBP-1a and SREBP-1c mRNAs; however, given that 
SREBP-1c is the major SREBP-1 isoform in liver, the hepatic signal generated 
by this probe was assumed to reflect the abundance of SREBP-1c mRNA.
For real-time quantitative PCR analysis, cDNA synthesized from total 
RNA was analyzed in a Sequence Detector (model 7900; Applied Biosys-
tems) with specific primers and SYBR Green PCR Master reagents (PerkinEl-
mer). The relative abundance of mRNAs was calculated with 36B4 mRNA as 
the invariant control. The primers were as follows: mouse TNF-α, sense, 5′-
CCCACACCGTCAGCCGATTT-3′, antisense 5′-GTCTAAGTACTTGGGCA-
GATTGACC-3′; mouse F4/80, sense, 5′-CTTTGGCTATGGGCTTCCAGTC-
3′, antisense, 5′-GCAAGGAGGACAGAGTTTATCGTG-3′; mouse CD68, 
sense, 5′-CTTCCCACAGGCAGCACAG-3′, antisense, 5′-AATGATGAGAG-
GCAGCAAGAGG-3′; and mouse 36B4, sense, 5′-GAGGAATCAGATGAG-
GATATGGGA-3′, antisense, 5′-AAGCAGGCTGACTTGGTTGC-3′.
Flow cytometry. The SVF of mouse epididymal adipose tissue was pre-
pared as described above. Red blood cells present in this fraction were lysed 
with the use of Pharm Lyse (BD Biosciences), and the remaining cells were 
suspended in PBS containing 2 mM EDTA and exposed to FcBLOCK (BD 
Biosciences) for 20 minutes. The cells were then labeled with PE-conjugat-
ed antibodies to mouse CD11b (M1/70; BD Biosciences) and FITC-conju-
gated antibodies to mouse CD45 (BD Biosciences); dead cells were stained 
with 7-amino-actinomycin D (BD Biosciences). Live cells positive for both 
CD11b and CD45 (macrophages) were then quantitated by flow cytometry 
with a FACSCalibur analyzer (BD Biosciences) (42).
Analysis of metabolic parameters. The plasma concentration of mouse MCP-1 
or human 7ND was measured with Quantikine M mouse and human 
MCP-1 ELISA kits (R&D Systems). Plasma insulin concentration was mea-
sured with an insulin assay kit (Morinaga Institute of Biological Science). 
FFA, cholesterol, and triglyceride concentrations in serum were measured 
with NEFA-C, Cholesterol E, and Triglyceride E tests (Wako Pure Chemical 
Industries Inc.), respectively. Serum adiponectin level was measured with an 
adiponectin ELISA kit (Otsuka Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd.). For glucose toler-
ance tests, mice were deprived of food for 16–24 hours and then injected 
i.p. with glucose (2 g/kg body mass). For insulin tolerance tests, mice were 
injected i.p. with human regular insulin (0.6 U/kg for MCP-1 Tg mice, 
0.75 U/kg for MCP-1 KO, db/+m, and C57BL/6J mice fed a high-fat diet, 
and 3.5 U/kg for db/db mice; Eli Lilly and Co.). Blood samples were collected 
before and after injection, and plasma glucose concentration was measured 
with an Antisense II instrument (Bayer).
Hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamp. Hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamp 
analysis was performed as described previously (43), with minor modifi-
cations. In brief, 5–7 days before the clamp, mice were anesthetized with 
sodium pentobarbital (80–100 mg/kg i.p.), and a catheter was inserted into 
the right internal jugular vein for infusion. The analysis was performed 
under nonstressful conditions with conscious mice that had been deprived 
of food overnight for 8 hours (MCP-1 Tg-B and MCP-1 homozygous KO 
mice) or 16 hours (db/db mice). [3-3H]Glucose was infused for 2 hours at a 
rate of 0.05 μCi/min before initiation of the clamp, and a blood sample was 
collected at the end of this period to estimate basal glucose turnover. After 
a bolus injection of [3-3H]glucose (10 μCi; PerkinElmer) and the onset of 
subsequent continuous infusion of [3-3H]glucose (0.1 μCi/min), a hyperin-
sulinemic-euglycemic clamp was applied for 120 minutes with continuous 
infusion of insulin at a rate of 2.5 mU/kg/min (for MCP-1 Tg-B and MCP-1 
KO mice) or 18 mU/kg/min (for db/db mice). Plasma glucose concentra-
tion was monitored every 10 minutes, and 30% glucose was infused at a 
variable rate to maintain plasma glucose at basal concentrations. Blood 
samples were collected 80, 90, 100, 110, and 120 minutes after the onset of 
the clamp for determination of the plasma concentrations of [3-3H]glucose 
and 3H2O. The rates of glucose disposal and hepatic glucose production 
were calculated as described previously (43).
Measurement of hepatic triglyceride content. For determination of hepatic 
triglyceride content in MCP-1 Tg-B and MCP-1 homozygous KO mice, 
liver tissue (100–200 mg) was homogenized for 10 minutes in 4 ml iso-
propanol with a Polytron disrupter. The homogenate was centrifuged at 
2,000 g for 10 minutes, and 10 μl of the resulting supernatant were dried 
with a Speedvac System (Thermo Electron Corp.) (44). The dry residue was 
dissolved in 5 μl isopropanol, and its triglyceride content was measured 
with a Triglyceride E test (Wako Pure Chemical Industries Ltd.) (45). For 
db/db mice, liver fragments (50–100 mg) were subjected to extraction for 
16 hours at 4°C with 4 ml CHCl3/methanol (2:1, vol/vol). Two milliliters 
of 0.6% NaCl were added to the extract, and the mixture was centrifuged 
at 2,000 g for 20 minutes (46). The organic layer was collected and dried, 
and the residue was dissolved in isopropanol and assayed for triglyceride 
content with a Triglyceride E test. All values of tissue triglyceride content 
were corrected for liver weight.
Histological analysis. Adipose tissue was fixed for 24–48 hours with 10% 
paraformaldehyde at 4°C, dehydrated, embedded in paraffin, and cut into 
5-μm-thick sections at 50-μm intervals. The sections were mounted on 
glass slides, depleted of paraffin with xylene, and microwaved (500 W for 
5 min) in 0.01 M sodium citrate buffer (pH 6.0). After blocking of endoge-
nous biotin and avidin binding sites with a Biotin Blocking System (Dako) 
and blocking of Fc receptors with PBS containing 20% FBS, sections were 
subjected to immunohistochemical staining overnight at 4°C with a 1:100 
dilution of a mouse mAb to Mac3 (M3/84; BD Biosciences). Immune com-
plexes were detected with biotinylated secondary antibodies (BD Biosci-
ences), HRP-conjugated streptavidin (Dako), and the peroxidase substrate 
diaminobenzidine (Dako). After staining with hematoxylin (Muto Pure 
Chemicals), mounting solution (Matsunami Glass) and cover slips were 
added to the sections. Slides were observed with a light microscope. Macro-
phage infiltration in adipose tissue was quantitated by calculating the ratio 
of nuclei of Mac3-positive cells to total nuclei in 20 fields of 3 slides for 
each individual mice using 6–9 mice for each group (15, 28). Macrophage 
infiltration into liver and skeletal muscle was estimated by counting the 
number of Mac3-positive cells in 3 slides prepared from the central portion 
of each tissue obtained from 5–8 mice. Adipocyte size was measured with 
the use of MACSCOPE software (Mitani Sangyo Co. Ltd.).
Statistics. Data are presented as means ± SEM and were analyzed by 2-tailed 
Student’s t test. A P value < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by grants for the Intellectual Cluster 
Formation Project and the 21st Century COE Program “Center 
of Excellence for Signal Transduction Disease: Diabetes Melli-
tus as a Model” from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, 
Science, and Technology of Japan to M. Kasuga. We thank B.M. 
Spiegelman for the aP2 promoter-enhancer fragment; J. Miyazaki 
for the rabbit β-globin intron and polyadenylation signal from 
human growth hormone cDNA; D.K. Granner, H. Nakajima, and

----- Page 12 (native) -----
research article
 
The Journal of Clinical Investigation      http://www.jci.org      Volume 116      Number 6      June 2006	
1505
H. Shimano for the PEPCK, G6Pase, and SREBP-1 probes, respec-
tively; and N. Sakai for technical assistance.
Received for publication August 4, 2005, and accepted in revised 
form March 14, 2006.
Address correspondence to: Yoshikazu Tamori, Division of Dia-
betes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, Department of Clini-
cal Molecular Medicine, Kobe University Graduate School of 
Medicine, 7-5-1 Kusunoki-cho, Chuo-ku, Kobe 650-0017, Japan. 
Phone: 81-78-382-5861; Fax: 81-78-382-2080; E-mail: tamori@
med.kobe-u.ac.jp.
Ko Kotani’s present address is: Department of Internal Medicine, 
Kawasaki Medical School, Kurashiki, Japan.
Hajime Kanda and Sanshiro Tateya contributed equally to this 
work.
	 1.	Spiegelman, B.M., and Flier, J.S. 2001. Obesity and 
the regulation of energy balance. Cell. 104:531–543.
	 2.	Kahn, B.B., and Flier, J.S. 2001. Obesity and insulin 
resistance. J. Clin. Invest. 106:473–481.
	 3.	Ahima, R.S., and Flier, J.S. 2000. Adipose tissue 
as an endocrine organ. Trends Endocrinol. Metab. 
11:327–332.
	 4.	Yoshimura, T., et al. 1989. Purification and amino 
acid analysis of two human glioma-derived mono-
cyte chemoattractants. J. Exp. Med. 169:1449–1459.
	 5.	Matsushima, K., Larsen, C.G., DuBois, G.C., and 
Oppenheim, J.J. 1989. Purification and character-
ization of a novel monocyte chemotactic and acti-
vating factor produced by a human myelomono-
cytic cell line. J. Exp. Med. 169:1485–1490.
	 6.	Rollins, B.J. 1997. Chemokines. Blood. 90:909–928.
	 7.	Yla-Herttuala, S., et al. 1991. Expression of mono-
cyte chemoattractant protein 1 in macrophage-rich 
areas of human and rabbit atherosclerotic lesions. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 88:5252–5256.
	 8.	Takeya, M., Yoshimura, T., Leonard, E.J., and 
Takahashi, K. 1993. Detection of monocyte 
chemoattractant protein-1 in human atheroscle-
rotic lesions by an anti-monocyte chemoattractant 
protein-1 monoclonal antibody. Hum. Pathol. 
24:534–539.
	 9.	Gu, L., et al. 1998. Absence of monocyte chemo­
attractant protein-1 reduces atherosclerosis in low 
density lipoprotein receptor-deficient mice. Mol. 
Cell. 2:275–281.
	10.	Boring, M., Gosling, J., Cleary, M., and Charo, I.F. 
1998. Decreased lesion formation in CCR2–/– mice 
reveals a role for chemokines in the initiation of 
atherosclerosis. Nature. 394:894–897.
	 11.	Sartipy, P., and Loskutoff, D.J. 2003. Monocyte 
chemoattractant protein 1 in obesity and insulin resis-
tance. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 100:7265–7270.
	12.	Hotamisligil, G.S., Shargill, N.S., and Spiegelman, 
B.M. 1993. Adipose expression of tumor necrosis fac-
tor-α: direct role in obesity-linked insulin resistance. 
Science. 259:87–91.
	13.	Hotamisligil, G.S., Arner, P., Caro, J.F., Atkinson, 
R.L., and Spiegelman, B.M. 1995. Increased adi-
pose tissue expression of tumor necrosis factor-α 
in human obesity and insulin resistance. J. Clin. 
Invest. 95:2409–2415.
	14.	Fried, S.K., Bunkin, D.A., and Greenberg, A.S. 
1998. Omental and subcutaneous adipose tissues 
of obese subjects release interleukin-6: depot dif-
ference and regulation by glucocorticoid. J. Clin. 
Endocrinol. Metab. 83:847–850.
	15.	Weisberg, S.P., et al. 2003. Obesity is associated 
with macrophage accumulation in adipose tissue. 
J. Clin. Invest. 112:1796–1808. doi:10.1172/
JCI200319246.
	16.	Xu, A., et al. 2003. Chronic inflammation in fat plays 
a crucial role in the development of obesity-related 
insulin resistance. J. Clin. Invest. 112:1821–1830. 
doi:10.1172/JCI200319451.
	 17.	Abel, E.D., et al. 2001. Adipose-selective targeting of 
the GLUT4 gene impairs insulin action in muscle 
and liver. Nature. 409:729–733.
	18.	Yang, Q., et al. 2005. Serum retinol binding protein 
4 contributes to insulin resistance in obesity and 
type 2 diabetes. Nature. 436:356–362.
	19.	Fasshauer, M., et al. 2004. Monocyte 
chemoattractant protein 1 expression is stimu-
lated by growth hormone and interleukin-6 in 
3T3-L1 adipocytes. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 
317:598–604.
	 20.	Takahashi, K., et al. 2003. Adiposity elevates plasma 
MCP-1 levels leading to the increased CD11b-positive 
monocytes in mice. J. Biol. Chem. 278:46654–46660.
	21.	Coe, N.R., Simpson, M.A., and Bernlohr, D.A. 1999. 
Targeted disruption of the adipocyte lipid-binding 
protein (aP2 protein) gene impairs fat cell lipolysis 
and increases cellular fatty acid levels. J. Lipid Res. 
40:967–972.
	22.	Ross, S.R., et al. 1990. A fat-specific enhancer is 
the primary determinant of gene expression for 
adipocyte P2 in vivo. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
87:9590–9594.
	23.	Zhang, Y.J., Rutledge, B.J., and Rollins, B.J. 1994. 
Structure/activity analysis of human monocyte 
chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1) by mutagen-
esis. Identification of a mutated protein that inhib-
its MCP-1-mediated monocyte chemotaxis. J. Biol. 
Chem. 269:15918–15924.
	24.	Zhang, Y., and Rollins, B.J. 1995. A dominant 
negative inhibitor indicates that monocyte 
chemoattractant protein 1 functions as a dimer. 
Mol. Cell. Biol. 15:4851–4855.
	25.	Ni, W., et al. 2001. New anti–monocyte chemo­
attractant protein-1 gene therapy attenuates ath-
erosclerosis in apolipoprotein E–knockout mice. 
Circulation. 103:2096–2101.
	26.	Egashira, K., et al. 2002. Importance of monocyte 
chemoattractant protein-1 pathway in neointimal 
hyperplasia after periarterial injury in mice and 
monkeys. Circ. Res. 90:1167–1172.
	 27.	Makowski, L., et al. 2001. Lack of macrophage fatty-
acid-binding protein aP2 protects mice deficient in 
apolipoprotein E against atherosclerosis. Nat. Med. 
7:699–705.
	28.	Weisberg, S.P., et al. 2006. CCR2 modulates inflam-
matory and metabolic effects of high-fat feeding. 
J. Clin. Invest. 116:115–124. doi:10.1172/JCI24335.
	29.	Gong, X., et al. 1997. Monocyte chemotactic pro-
tein-2 (MCP-2) uses CCR1 and CCR2B as its func-
tional receptors. J. Biol. Chem. 272:11682–11685.
	30.	Combadiere, C., et al. 1995. Monocyte chemo­
attractant protein-3 is a functional ligand for 
CC chemokine receptors 1 and 2B. J. Biol. Chem. 
270:29671–29675.
	31.	Garcia-Zepeda, E.A., et al. 1996. Human monocyte 
chemoattractant protein (MCP)-4 is a novel CC 
chemokine with activities on monocytes, eosino-
phils, and basophils induced in allergic and nonal-
lergic inflammation that signals through the CC 
chemokine receptors (CCR)-2 and -3. J. Immunol. 
157:5613–5626.
	32.	Charo, I. F., et al. 1994. Molecular cloning and func-
tional expression of two monocyte chemoattractant 
protein 1 receptors reveals alternative splicing of the 
carboxyl-terminal tails. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
91:2752–2756.
	33.	Schweickart, V.L., Epp, A., Raport, C.J., and Gray, P.W. 
2000. CCR11 is a functional receptor for the mono-
cyte chemoattractant protein family of chemokines. 
J. Biol. Chem. 275:9550–9556.
	34.	Lu, D., et al. 2005. Cloning and functional charac-
terization of the rabbit C-C chemokine receptor 2. 
BMC Immunol. 6:15.
	35.	Yamamoto, T., et al. 2004. SREBP-1 interacts with 
hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 alpha and interferes 
with PGC-1 recruitment to suppress hepatic glu-
coneogenic genes. J. Biol. Chem. 279:12027–12035.
	36.	Lewis, G.F., Carpentier, A., Adeli, K., and Giacca, A. 
2002. Disordered fat storage and mobilization in the 
pathogenesis of insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes. 
Endocr. Rev. 23:201–229.
	 37.	Christiansen, T., Richelsen, B., and Bruun, J.M. 2005. 
Monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 is produced in 
isolated adipocytes, associated with adiposity and 
reduced after weight loss in morbid obese subjects. 
Int. J. Obes. Relat. Metab. Disord. 29:146–150.
	38.	Simeoni, E., et al. 2004. Association between 
the A–2518G polymorphism in the monocyte 
chemoattractant protein-1 gene and insulin resis-
tance and Type 2 diabetes mellitus. Diabetologia. 
47:1574–1580.
	39.	Bruun, J.M., Lihn, A.S., Pedersen, S.B., and 
Richelsen, B. 2005. Monocyte chemoattractant 
protein-1 release is higher in visceral than subcu-
taneous human adipose tissue (AT): implication of 
macrophages resident in the AT. J. Clin. Endocrinol. 
Metab. 90:2282–2289.
	40.	Mohanty, P., et al. 2004. Evidence for a potent antiin-
flammatory effect of rosiglitazone. J. Clin. Endocrinol. 
Metab. 89:2728–2735.
	41.	Chinetti, G., et al. 1998. Activation of prolifera-
tor-activated receptors α and γ induces apoptosis 
of human monocyte-derived macrophages. J. Biol. 
Chem. 273:25573–25580.
	42.	Curat, C.A., et al. 2004. From blood monocytes to 
adipose tissue-resident macrophages: induction of 
diapedesis by human mature adipocytes. Diabetes. 
53:1285–1292.
	43.	Kim, J.K., et al. 2001. Glucose toxicity and the devel-
opment of diabetes in mice with muscle-specific 
inactivation of GLUT4. J. Clin. Invest. 108:153–160. 
doi:10.1172/JCI200110294.
	44.	Burant, C.F., et al. 1997. Troglitazone action 
is independent of adipose tissue. J. Clin. Invest. 
100:2900–2908.
	45.	Tamori, Y., Masugi, J., Nishino, N., and Kasuga, M. 
2002. Role of peroxisome proliferator-activated 
receptor-gamma in maintenance of the charac-
teristics of mature 3T3-L1 adipocytes. Diabetes. 
51:2045–2055.
	46.	Nakamura, K., and Handa, S. 1984. Coomassie 
brilliant blue staining of lipids on thin-layer plates. 
Anal. Biochem. 142:406–410.