

----- Page 1 (native) -----
Final Draft 
of the original manuscript: 
 
 
 
 
Behl, M.; Razzaq, M.Y.; Lendlein, A.: 
Multifunctional Shape-memory Polymers 
In: Advanced Materials  ( 2010) Wiley 
 
DOI: 10.1002/adma.200904447

----- Page 2 (native) -----
1
DOI: 10.1002/adma.((please add manuscript number))  
 
Multifunctional Shape-memory Polymers 
 
By Marc Behl, Muhammad Yasar Razzaq, and Andreas Lendlein* 
 
 
[*] 
Prof. A. Lendlein, Corresponding-Author 
Center of Biomaterial Development, Institute of Polymer Research, GKSS Research Center 
Geesthacht 
Kantstr. 55, D-14513 Teltow, Germany 
Berlin-Brandenburg Center for Regenerative Therapies, D-13353 Berlin, Germany 
Fax: +49 3328 352452; E-mail: lendlein@gkss.de 
Dr. M. Behl, M.Y. Razzaq  
Center of Biomaterial Development, Institute of Polymer Research, GKSS Research Center 
Geesthacht 
Kantstr. 55, D-14513 Teltow, Germany 
 
Keywords: Shape-Memory Effect, Multifunctionality, Multimaterials, Polymer Networks, 
Hydrolytical Degradability, Drug Release

----- Page 3 (native) -----
2
 
1.  
Abstract 
 
The thermally-induced shape-memory effect (SME) is the capability of a material to change 
its shape in a predefined way in response to heat. In shape-memory polymers (SMP) this 
shape change is the entropy-driven recovery of a mechanical deformation, which was 
obtained before by application of external stress and was temporarily fixed by formation of 
physical crosslinks. The high technological significance of SMP becomes apparent in many 
established products (e.g. packaging materials, assembling devices, textiles and membranes) 
and the broad SMP development activities in the field of biomedical as well as aerospace 
applications (e.g. medical devices or morphing structures for aerospace vehicles). Inspired by 
the complex and diverse requirements of these applications fundamental research is aiming at 
multifunctional SMP, in which SME is combined with additional functions, is proceeding 
rapidly.  In this review different concepts for the creation of multifunctionality are derived from the 
various polymer network architectures of thermally-induced SMP.  Multimaterial systems, such as 
nanocomposites, are described as well as one component polymer systems, in which 
independent functions are integrated. Future challenges will be to transfer the concept of 
multifunctionality to other emerging shape-memory technologies like light-sensitive SMP, 
reversible shape changing effects or triple-shape polymers. 
 
2. 
Introduction 
 
Shape-memory polymers (SMP) can be deformed by application of external stress and fixed 
in a second, temporary shape.1-11 This temporary shape is stable until an appropriate stimulus 
is applied to the shaped body, which induces the recovery of the original shape. The 
movement occurring during recovery is predefined as it reverses the mechanical deformation, 
which leaded to the temporary shape (see Fig. 6 for an example of the macroscopic SME) and 
can be used for self-deploying sun-sails or antenna, morphing wing structures, heat-shrinkable 
packaging materials or wrinkle free fabrics.12-16 
So far, the most extensively investigated group of SMP were thermally-induced SMPs, which 
are triggered by heat. SME is induced when a certain switching temperature Tsw is exceeded. 
Enabling the shape-memory effect (SME) requires the combination of a suitable molecular 
polymer network architecture and morphology with a tailored processing and programming 
technology. The latter is named “dual-shape creation process” (DSCP). During DSCP 
thermally-induced SMP are deformed in the amorphous state to an elongation εm by 
application of external stress. When cooled below the thermal transition temperature Ttrans of

----- Page 4 (native) -----
3
switching domains, these domains solidify, forming physical crosslinks. As these additional 
crosslinks dominate the netpoints determining the permanent shape, they enable the 
temporary fixation of an elastic deformation, which can be recovered by reheating. 
In cyclic, stimuli-specific mechanical tests, which consist of the DSCP and the recovery of the 
original, permanent shape, shape-memory properties can be quantified. Different test 
protocols have been developed. DSCP as well as the recovery process can be performed under 
constant strain or constant stress conditions e.g. in a tensile tester equipped with a 
thermochamber. In strain-controlled DSCP the sample is deformed to εm and held constant at 
this deformation while the temporary crosslinks are formed during cooling. Afterwards the 
external stress is released. In the stress-controlled DSCP the sample is deformed to εm and is 
held constant at the stress σm obtained after reaching εm, while the sample is cooled for 
temporarily crosslinking. Furthermore, DSCP can be varied between cold stretching of the 
sample (T < Ttrans) or a temporary heating (T > Ttrans) and subsequent cooling. 
After DSCP the recovery process is conducted, which can be performed under constant strain 
or stress-free conditions.1, 17-19 The tensile stress σ as a function of temperature is determined 
in the recovery processes under constant strain, while the deformation ε as a function of 
temperature is measured in recovery processes under stress-free conditions. From each cycle 
consisting of DSCP and recovery, the SME is quantified by determining the shape fixity ratio 
(Rf) and the shape recovery ratio (Rr). Rf describes the ability of the switching domains to fix a 
mechanical deformation, while Rr is a measure for the ability of the material to memorize its 
permanent shape. Quantification of the thermally-induced SME includes the determination of 
the switching temperature Tsw from stress-free recovery as inflection point as well as the 
temperature Tσ,max at which maximum stress is developed from constant-strain experiments.20 
Besides triggering by heat,21-27 appropriate stimulation of SME was realized by light.28, 29 
Irradiation with IR-light30, application of electrical fields31, exposure of alternating magnetic 
fields32-34 or immersion in water35 enabled indirect actuation of the thermally-induced SME. 
Furthermore, SMP were developed, which generate high stresses.36, 37 The ability of complex 
movements was realized in triple-shape polymers allowing the thermally-stimulated 
predefined movement from a shape (A) to a shape (B) and from there to a third shape (C).38-40 
When DSCP and recovery process were conducted under constant stress a reversible change 
of shape could be obtained. 41, 42 In this manuscript we will focus on the thermally-induced 
SME.

----- Page 5 (native) -----
4
Often complex requirements for properties (e.g. elasticity and thermal properties) and 
functions in addition to SME need to be fulfilled to meet the application derived specific. An 
example is the application of SMP in intelligent implants. Implants, which can be inserted 
into the body in a compressed temporary shape through a small incision as required for 
minimally-invasive surgery, change to their application relevant shape when heated to body 
temperature. In this application spectrum shape-memory alloys were already shown to be 
successful.43, 44 A second surgery for explantation can be avoided when such materials are 
additionally hydrolytically degradable. For this purpose multifunctional SMP are required.45, 
46 When an on-demand remote actuation of the SME is desired, the SMP must be sensible to a 
stimuli not requiring direct contact. 
SMP are polymer networks, in which netpoints determine the permanent shape and being 
connected by chain segments. These chain segments must allow a certain orientation upon 
application of external stress to obtain the required deformability, which increases with 
growing length and flexibility of these chains. The netpoints can either be of physical or 
chemical nature. While covalent bonds can be realized by suitable crosslinking chemistry, 
physical crosslinking requires a polymer morphology consisting of at least two segregated 
domains. Here, the domain providing the highest thermal transition Tperm is acting as netpoints 
(hard domains) while the chain segments forming the domains with the second highest 
thermal transition Ttrans are acting as molecular switches (switching domains). By forming 
additional reversible crosslinks under conditions relevant for the particular application these 
molecular switches must be able to fix the deformed shape temporarily. In addition to 
switching domains, which fix the temporary shape by solidification, these switches can be 
functional groups, which are able to reversibly form and cleave covalent crosslinks based on a 
reversible chemical reaction.  
The shape recovery in SMP is driven by the entropy elasticity of the switching segments, 
which are forming the switching domains. In the amorphous, rubber-elastic state polymer 
chains display a random coil conformation, which is the state of highest entropy in accordance 
with the Boltzmann Equation.47 If a tensile stress is applied the polymer chains become 
oriented and loose entropy. When the external stress is released the sample recovers its 
original length, gaining back the entropy. The solidification of the switching domains 
prevents this immediate recovery of the polymer chains. Here, the entropy can only be 
regained when the switching domains are softened again. Although the underlying principle 
of entropy gain is known, complex theoretical models for a more detailed description of the 
processes occurring during SME are required.48-53

----- Page 6 (native) -----
5
polymer 
architectures 
for thermally-
induced SME 
A 
B 
multifunctional 
systems 
covalent 
network 
 
 
macromolecule 
multiblock 
copolymer 
 
 
one-component 
system 
multimaterial 
system 
(blends, IPN) 
 
 
 
multimaterial 
systems 
 
Figure 1: Different architectures for a) shape-memory polymers and b) multifunctional 
materials. 
 
Polymer networks having covalent crosslinks are examples for single molecules capable of a 
thermally-induced dual-shape effect SME (Fig. 1a top). Depending on the desired polymer 
network morphology as well as the synthesis strategy, netpoints of covalent SMP networks 
can be created during synthesis starting from low molecular weight (co)monomers or by post 
processing methods. Chemical crosslinking after polymer processing can be realized by 
polymer analogous reaction, e.g. induced by addition of radical initiators to polymers or by 
exposure to energy rich irradiation (γ-radiation, neutrons, e-beam).54-59 Crosslinking of linear 
or branched polymers as well as (co)polymerization / poly(co)condensation of one or several 
(co)monomers, whereby at least one has to be tri-functional, enables the creation of covalently 
crosslinked SMP from low molecular weight starting materials.60-65 
Polymer networks can be formed containing more than one type of chain segments, e.g. the 
horizontal and vertical polymer chains segments of the covalent polymer network (Fig.1A 
top) might be different. This enables the integration of several functions in the polymer 
network as each of the used chain segment types might contribute a specific function(s) to the 
material, e.g. segment chains can form the switching domains being essential for the 
thermally-induced SME, while other segment chains can enable the adjustment of the

----- Page 7 (native) -----
6
elasticity in the temporary shape. Besides a polymer network structure, linear or branched 
multifunctional molecules can be created, which actively change their shape on the molecular 
level by conformational changes. Such molecules can also be equipped with further functional 
groups resulting in multifunctionality. The conformational changes are obtained by 
integration of segments, which favor the folding of the macromolecule or which are capable 
to from helices under certain environmental conditions, as well as segments which can 
establish intermolecular hydrogen-bonds contributing to the elastic stabilization of the 
polymer chain when stress is applied.  
(Multi)block copolymers are thermoplastic SMP, in which different domains are formed as a 
result of phase separation resulting in a certain polymer morphology (Fig 1a middle). Here, 
the domains with the highest Ttrans provide the domains acting as netpoints, which determine 
the permanent shape, while the domains with the second highest Ttrans are acting as switching 
domains.    
Furthermore, SMP can be designed as multimaterial systems (Fig. 1a bottom). (Multi)block 
copolymer as well as the covalent polymer networks can be used as components forming 
multimaterial dual-shape polymers. The preparation of binary blends from two polymers by a 
physical process is an efficient method for the creation of multimaterial systems, in which the 
properties of the resulting binary polymer blends can be systematically varied. Often one 
blend component is a (multi)block copolymer providing the SMP matrix. The second blend 
component is used for the modification of the properties of one or both domains, e.g. by 
formation of a mixed amorphous phase whose Tg depends on the weight ratio of both 
components. 
The covalent polymer network approach to create multimaterials is applied in interpenetrating 
polymer networks (IPN). Here, two polymer networks not being covalently linked to each 
other. IPN can be obtained by two crosslinking processes occurring sequentially or both at the 
same time by using two different, not interfering chemical reactions forming the two different 
networks.66, 67 Each polymer network provides permanent netpoints contributing to the 
permanent shape. 
Besides the change of shape, several other properties of the SMP are changing during SME. 
On the one hand property changes are occurring directly related to the thermal transition. 
These changes occur also in the case when the SMP was not programmed. An example is the 
change in permeability when the phase transition occurs. While below Ttrans the switching 
segments are stiff, preventing diffusion of low molecular weight molecules (e.g. water) 
through the polymer matrix, at T > Ttrans the polymer chains segments become flexible,

----- Page 8 (native) -----
7
enabling permeation of small molecules through the polymer matrix. This effect can be 
utilized for breathable thermosensitive fabrics.68 Another example is the change of enthalpy 
caused by melting or crystallization of switching segments at Ttrans = Tm, which can be utilized 
in phase change materials enabling compensation of small changes of the environmental 
temperature. 
On the other hand, property changes are caused by the change of the conformation of the 
switching segments from an oriented to a random coil conformation, when Ttrans is exceeded. 
Moreover, the mechanical properties change from an anisotropic characteristic to an isotropic 
behavior.64 In addition, when crystallizable switching segments were used for the fixation of 
the temporary shape, the SMP display a different behavior in the interaction with polarized 
light depending on the orientation of the crystallites.69, 70  
Driven by potential applications, such as intelligent implants or textiles, the question arises 
whether SME of polymers can be combined with different functions, which are not directly 
linked to SME. Examples of such functionality combinations are electrical-conductivity and 
SME, change of color and SME, or degradability and SME.71-73 Multifunctionality is the 
targeted combination of material functions which are not linked with each other.45 The 
development of such multifunctional materials is posing a highly interesting challenge for 
fundamental research. Several approaches have been explored for creating multifunctionality, 
involving one component polymer systems as well as multimaterial systems, e.g. combining 
two polymers or a polymer and inorganic (nano)particles (Fig. 1b).  An example for a single 
macromolecule, in which several functionalities have been integrated into the polymer 
structure are polymer networks, in which an additional functionality e.g. hydrolytical 
degradability was obtained by insertion of easily hydrolysable bonds (Fig. 1b top).74-76 
Multifunctional one component polymer systems were realized as multiblock copolymers, in 
which the additional functionality has been incorporated in one or both segments (Fig 1b 
middle).73, 77, 78 In multimaterial systems the additional functionality, e.g. electrical 
conductivity, results from the integration of an additional material (e.g. carbon nanotubes) in a 
polymer network or multiblock copolymer (Fig 1b bottom).9, 79, 80   
In this review suitable polymer network architectures capable of a thermally-induced SME are 
introduced. Here, we begin with covalent polymer networks, explain thermoplastic one 
component polymer systems and finally describe multimaterial systems consisting of at least 
two different components. The thermal and elastic properties will be elucidated with respect 
to the molecular architecture as well as the functions linked to property changes occurring at 
Ttrans including permeability, transparency, elastic properties, dielectric properties and

----- Page 9 (native) -----
8
enthalpy. After discussing multifunctionality as a general principle in material sciences, the 
concept of multifunctional SMP will be outlined. First multimaterial systems will be 
described and categorized and afterwards the concept of one component systems with 
multifunctionality explained. Finally, both concepts will be compared and suggestions for 
future developments as well as potential applications will be given.  
 
 
3. 
Thermally-induced One-way Dual-shape Effect in Polymers 
3.1 Polymer Network Architectures 
In the following, suitable polymer network architectures capable of thermally-induced SME 
will be presented beginning with covalent polymer networks as single molecule systems, 
followed by thermoplastic (multi)block copolymers as example of one component SMP from 
several molecules of the same type and finally multimaterial systems with SME. Details of 
properties from covalent SMP can be found in recent reviews.3, 4, 7 
 
Various types of thermal transitions Ttrans associated to the switching domains are suitable as 
switching transition. The reversible solidification of the switching domains can be related to a 
melting transition (Ttrans = Tm), a liquid crystalline transition (Ttrans = TLC) or a glass transition 
(Ttrans = Tg). While in most cases melting and liquid crystalline phase transitions are assigned 
to relatively small temperature intervals the glass transition often covers a broad temperature 
interval. Liquid crystalline transitions can cover a temperature interval between 1 and 5 K, 
melting transitions mostly extent over a temperature range between 15 and 20 K. 
Accordingly, thermally-induced SMP can be classified according to the different types of 
switching transition Ttrans.  
Furthermore, the location of the switching segment within the polymer network, e.g. 
contributing to the overall elasticity or as a side chain, has a significant influence on the SME.

----- Page 10 (native) -----
9
 
N-M-A 
N-M-C 
N-M-LC 
 
N-B-A-A 
N-B-A-C 
N-B-C-A 
N-B-A-LC 
N-G-C-C 
 
N-T-A-C 
 
Figure 2: Examples for polymer network architectures suitable for exhibiting a shape-
memory effect (molecular switches: red; netpoints: grey): A) polymer networks consisting of 
switching segments linked by covalent netpoints, B) AB-polymer network, C) polymer 
network having side chains as switching segments, D) multiphase polymer network consisting 
of ABA triblock chain segments linked by covalent netpoints. Nomenclature: N indicates 
SMP network, M: one phase SMP network, B: biphasic SMP network, G: biphasic SMP 
network with grafted switching segments, T: biphasic SMP network obtained from triblock 
copolymers. Last one/two letter indicates thermal transition of phase(s):  A glassy/amorphous, 
C crystalline, LC liquid crystalline phase. 
 
Four different examples of polymer network architectures with covalent netpoints suitable 
to exhibit a SME are displayed in Fig. 2. The polymer network in Fig. 2A comprises one kind 
of switching segment and netpoints. Such a material consists in its temporary as well as in its 
permanent shape of only one phase in case Ttrans is a Tg.59, 81, 82  Amorphous SMP networks 
with Ttrans = Tg (Cat. N-M-A) from low molecular weight monomers could be obtained by 
copolymerization of styrene with divinylbenzene. In this model system the influence of the 
degree of crosslinking on the thermomechanical properties had been investigated.81 Tg 
increased from 55 °C to 81 °C with increasing the amount of the crosslinker from 0 to 4 wt%, 
accompanied with an increase of the gel content from 0% to 80%. In a copolymer network 
from styrene and benzo-cyclo-butene, in which the latter is crosslinking the styrene chains, Tg 
could be substantially increased to a value of 165 °C, and enabled SME of nanoindents.83  
When the switching segment is crystallizable or liquid crystalline, the amorphous polymer 
network will become semicrystalline upon cooling below Ttrans in its temporary shape and will 
consist of two different phases.58, 
76, 
84, 
85 The photopolymerization of poly(ε-
caprolactone)acrylate macromonomers having polyhedral oligosilsesquioxane (POSS) 
moieties located precisely in the middle of the network chains built polymer networks with 
Ttrans = Tm based on Tm of the oligo(ε-caprolactone) segments.86 In such polymer networks

----- Page 11 (native) -----
10
having a POSS content of 47 wt% a second rubbery plateau could be determined, which had 
been associated to the physical interactions of the POSS moieties.  
Main-chain smectic-C elastomers with Ttrans = TLC (Cat. N-M-LC) could be exemplarily 
obtained by the reaction of tetrafunctional silanes, forming the netpoints, with oligomeric 
silanes, which work as spacers and to whom two distinct benzoate-based mesogenic groups 
have been attached.87 These elastomers displayed a SME in contrast to other liquid crystalline 
elastomers, which displayed a shape-changing behavior. A comparison between SMP and 
shape-changing polymers has been recently given.2, 8 In shape-changing liquid crystalline 
elastomers, a macroscopic movement of the polymer is obtained by the alignment of the LC 
moieties. This molecular movement is amplified and converted into the macroscopic 
movement. In contrast, the SME in LC-elastomers is triggered by the thermal transition of the 
LC domains, which are acting as switching domains. Another subset of this SMP category 
(Fig. 2A) are polymer networks from crosslinked starlike hydroxytelecheles.63-65, 88, 89 Here, 
the hydroxytelecheles themselves are forming the netpoints. The chain segments of the 
starlike hydroxytelechelic oligomers are built by two arms from two different telechels linked 
by a junction unit. 
The polymer network architecture (Fig. 2B) consists of two different kinds of chain 
segments linked by netpoints. Both types of polymer chain segments connect two netpoints 
and in this way contribute to the overall elasticity of the polymer network.38, 40, 74, 76 If both 
kinds of network chains are immiscible, a multiphase polymer network will be formed by 
phase segregation. The nomenclature is N-B-X-Y, with N indicating SMP network, B 
biphasic polymer network and X/Y indicating the thermal transition of phase(s):  A 
glassy/amorphous, C crystalline, LC liquid crystalline phase. As an example, AB copolymer 
systems with Ttrans = Tm having two crystalline switching domains were synthesized by 
polycondensation 
of 
PCL 
diol 
and 
poly(ethylene 
glycol) 
(PEG) 
with 
4,4'-
(adipoyldioxy)dicinnamic acid as a chain extender. These photosensitive copolymers could be 
crosslinked by UV irradiation (λ > 280 nm) to show shape-memory properties (Cat. N-B-C-
C). Thermal analysis displayed one or two melting peaks associated to Tm,PCL or/and Tm,PEG 
depending on the mol% of each phase. In addition, Ttrans was shown to be a function of the 
mol% of PCL segment incorporated in the polymer network.90 In AB-polymer networks 
providing to amorphous phases (Cat. N-B-A-A) the required phase separation is a 
challenge.91 
In addition to the components of polymer network Fig.2A the polymer network architecture 
shown in Fig. 2C contains side chains having a dangling chain end.39, 60-62 Here, the side

----- Page 12 (native) -----
11
chains do not contribute to the overall elasticity of the polymer network, as they are only 
connected to one netpoint (Cat. N-G-C-C). The nomenclature is N-G-X-Y, with N indicating 
SMP network, G biphasic polymer network with grafted switching segments and X/Y 
indicating the thermal transition of phase(s). The overall elastic behavior is determined by the 
network chains linking two netpoints. If the physical netpoints formed during programming 
have sufficient strength to block the entropy driven elastic recovery, both segments will be 
able to act as switching segments and are capable to stabilize the temporary shape by 
aggregation and solidification. 
Polymer networks formed by ABA triblock chain segments are based on triblock copolymers, 
which were obtained by polymerizing the A blocks onto a block B, e.g. by ring-opening 
polymerization of lactones with a precursor for block B, having two telechelic groups. Here 
block B serves as a macroinitiator (Cat N-T-A-C). The nomenclature is N-T-X-Y, with N 
indicating SMP network, T biphasic polymer network obtained from triblock copolymers and 
X/Y indicating the thermal transition of phase(s). Finally, polymer networks can be formed by 
subsequent modification of the ABA triblocks with reactive groups capable of polymerization 
reaction.92   Depending on the miscibility of the different blocks a multiphase morphology can 
be achieved (Fig. 2D). If mixed phases are formed, these can act as switching domains in the 
same way as phases formed by only one segment type.92 
 
A 
B 
 
 
crystalline switching domains 
glassy/amorphous switching domains 
Cat  
T-C-C 
 
(T-C-A) 
  
Cat  
T-A-A 
 
(T-A-C) 
 
Figure 3: Categories of thermoplastic SMPs. A With crystalline hard domains and crystalline 
switching domains (T-C-C), B with amorphous hard domains and amorphous switching 
domains (T-A-A,). Nomenclature: T indicates thermoplastic SMP, A a glassy/amorphous, C a 
crystalline/liquid crystalline phase. 
 
Linear block copolymers are an important group of physically-crosslinked SMP. In contrast to 
covalent crosslinked SMP, their permanent shape can be altered by heating above Tperm with

----- Page 13 (native) -----
12
Tperm being a Tg, a Tm, or a TLC. A key requirement for such thermoplastic SMP is the 
formation of at least two segregated phases. Therefore, the different blocks of the copolymers 
have to be immiscible and of a minimum length in order to obtain a microscopic phase 
segregation. The switching segments provided by the domains could amorphous or crystalline 
phase as well, yielding the categories T-A-A,32 T-A-C,93, 94 T-C-A,95-100  and T-C-C,17, 73, 77, 
101-109 . The nomenclature is T-X-Y, in which T indicates a thermoplastic SMP, X the phase 
proving the switching domains and Y the phase providing the hard domains, with X/Y 
indicated as A a glassy/amorphous and C a crystalline/liquid crystalline phase. 
Thermoplastic SMP could be synthesized by direct coupling of pre-synthesized polymer 
blocks with a low molecular weight junction unit, by applying the prepolymer method, or by 
melt blending. When macrodiols are used as oligomeric building blocks, called precursors, 
diisocyanates, diacid dichlorides or phosgene are applied as low molecular weight junction 
unit.  
The prepolymer method enabled production of thermoplastic polyurethane elastomers on an 
industrial scale. Here, the reaction of hydroxytelechelic oligoesters or -ethers with an excess 
of a low molecular weight diisocyanate yielded isocyanate-terminated prepolymers. By 
addition of low molecular weight diols or diamines, so called chain extenders, these 
prepolymers were further coupled. In this way shape-memory polyurethanes (SMPU) or 
polyureas were obtained as phase-segregated block copolymers whereby the prepolymer 
segments are forming the switching domains. In addition, each polymer chain contained 
segments of high polarity containing a high concentration of urethane and urea bonds. They 
formed domains exhibiting a high thermal transition temperature due to their high 
intermolecular interaction. Therefore, these domains represented the hard domains. While the 
length of the hard segment blocks was adjusted by the ratio of the prepolymer to 
diisocyanate/chain extender the length of the switching segments resulted from their synthesis 
method and is determined in the first step. In addition, side chains can act in thermoplastic 
SMP as switching segments as well.110

----- Page 14 (native) -----
13
 
 
Category B-C-C 
Category N-I-C-C 
 
Figure 4: Multimaterial Systems Consisting of Several Different Molecules. A) Binary 
blends of multiblock copolymers forming a SMP (B-C-C), B) Interpenetrating polymer 
network (IPN) forming a SMP. Nomenclature: B: blend, C: crystalline phase providing Ttrans 
C: crystalline phase providing Tperm N: polymer network, I: interpenetrating network, C: 
crystalline phase providing Ttrans,1 C: crystalline phase providing Ttrans,2. 
 
Only a few examples of blends exhibiting SME have been reported so far although blends can 
be produced with high efficiency. The nomenclature will be denoted as B-X-Y with B 
indicating a blend, X phase providing Ttrans, Y phase providing Tperm, with X/Y having A a 
glassy/amorphous, C a crystalline/liquid crystalline phase. Most examples of binary SM-
blends utilized a thermoplastic SMP as one component. The second component was either a 
commodity polymer to lower the costs while pertaining a certain level of SME or a 
component to adjust Ttrans of the SMP by forming a mixed phase. An example is the blending 
of poly(vinyl chloride) with polyesterurethanes allowing the adjustment of Ttrans by obtaining 
a mixed Tg.111 Here, the poly(vinyl chloride) provided the hard domains by physical 
entanglements, which were enhanced by the hard segments of the polyesterurethane resulting 
in reduction of the hysteresis during shape recovery. The crystallization of the poly(ε-
caprolactone) segments of the polyesterurethane was hindered, these segments formed a 
mixed phase with poly(vinyl chloride). The resulting mixed amorphous phase acted as 
switching phase (Cat. B-A-C). In binary blends of shape-memory polyesterurethanes with 
phenoxy resins the polyurethane provided the hard domains, responsible for the fixation of the 
permanent shape. The domains of the polyurethane associated to a Tg acted as switching 
domains. The phenoxy resin displayed only one thermal transition, which was a glass 
transition. When a binary blend was formed, the soft segment of the polyurethanes and the 
phenoxy resin formed a mixed phase, whose Tg could be varied by the blend composition 
(Cat. B-A-C). Tsw of the blends could be varied by adjusting the blend composition in the range from 
-2 °C to 80 °C.111, 112

----- Page 15 (native) -----
14
Recently, a  binary polymer blend exhibiting a SME could be prepared, in which the segments 
providing the switching domains and the segments forming the hard domains were 
contributed by two different bend components and therefore not covalently connected to each 
other (Fig. 4A).78 As the switching segment and the hard segment were non-miscible, the 
same mediator segment type was incorporated in both multiblock copolymers to promote their 
miscibility (Cat. B-C-C). Tsw was shown to be almost independent from the blend 
composition, while the mechanical properties could be varied systematically over a broad 
range by the weight ratio of the two polymer components.  
Another type of multimaterial system capable of SME are interpenetrating networks (IPN) 
(see Fig. 4B). The nomenclature will be denoted as I-X-Y with I indicating a interpenetrating 
polymer network (IPN), X phase providing Ttrans,1, Y phase providing Ttrans,2, with X/Y having 
A a glassy/amorphous, C a crystalline/liquid crystalline phase. Such IPNs can be obtained 
simultaneous polymerization and polycondensation of low molecular weight monomers or 
macromonomers capable of netpoint formation. The generated netpoints of both polymer 
networks determine the permanent shape. Both switching segments are immiscible, both 
contribute to the switching domains. Depending on the weight ratio of the two IPN 
components and the resulting polymer network morphology, an IPN can be created, in which 
both polymer networks contribute to the overall elasticity. Nevertheless, the entanglements 
and the netpoint density of one polymer network influence the elasticity of the other. An 
example for an IPN synthesized in the reaction sequence polymerization and afterwards 
polyaddition reaction is synthesized from a blend of PEG dimethacrylate (PEG-DMA) with 
star-shaped poly[(rac-lacide)-co-glycolide] (Cat. I-C-A). First the PEG-DMA was 
photopolymerized and afterwards the polyesterurethane network was formed using 
isophorone diisocyanate.67 Ttrans could be adjusted between -23 °C and 63 °C and Rf and Rr 
were reported to be above 93%. 
 
4. 
Additional Functions Directly Linked with SME  
 
 
4.1 General Principle of Using Functions Being Linked to Each Other 
 
Besides the SME, the processes occurring during the shape change (phase transition, change 
in conformation of switching segments) cause changes in other macroscopic properties, e.g. 
permeability, elastic performance, transparency to light or change in enthalpy. The changes in 
properties occurring in a SMP can differ depending of the type of Ttrans, which can be a Tg, a 
Tm or a TLC. The change of these additional functionalities needs to be considered when

----- Page 16 (native) -----
15
selecting SMP for a specific application. But vice versa, depending on the intended 
application, Ttrans can be selected in a way that the requirements for such additional 
functionalities will be met. In the following we will describe the changes occurring at Ttrans 
including permeability, transparency, elastic properties, dielectricity and enthalpy.  
 
4.2 Change in Permeability 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Water vapor permeability of two polyester polyurethanes with Ttrans = Tg = 25 °C 
(TSPU(a)) or Ttrans = Tm = 50 °C (TSPU(b)) as a function of temperature.113 
 
It was demonstrated for polyurethanes of category T-A-A (Ttrans = Tg) that the temperature 
dependency of diffusion properties could be controlled by the choice of the switching segment 
building block.114 Thermoplasts having soft segment building blocks of a more hydrophobic 
character such as poly(butylene adipate) or poly(tetramethyleneoxide) displayed a lower 
diffusion rate for water. In contrast, in thermoplasts built from more hydrophilic building 
blocks such as poly(propylene oxide) or poly(ethylene oxide) the diffusion rate for water was 
considerably higher. Furthermore, in such amorphous polyurethanes the diffusion rate above 
Tg of the switching segment providing domains (T > Ttrans) is sufficiently higher compared to 
the diffusion rate below Ttrans. When Ttrans is selected to be around body temperature, this 
effect can be used to control the diffusion of water vapor in breathable fabrics. When a person 
behaves in a more passive way, heat and water vapor are only generated in a moderate way. In 
this situation the ambient temperature remains below Ttrans of the fabric preventing the person 
from cooling out. When the person is more actively, more heat as well as water vapor are 
generated. In this situation the generated heat increases the ambient temperature T > Ttrans so 
that the vapor can evaporate through the garment. By the choice of Ttrans of the switching

----- Page 17 (native) -----
16
segment the permeability can be controlled as shown in Fig. 5.113 In thermoplastic SMPs of 
type T-C-A (Ttrans = Tm) the differences in diffusion behavior are even more pronounced, as 
the crystalline domains are preventing diffusion more effectively.113  
In thermoplastic SMPs of type T-C-C (Ttrans = Tm) the situation differs as the hard segments 
forming domains remain crystalline, when the polymer is heated above Ttrans. In a 
polyesterurethane, in which poly(ε-caprolactone) provided the switching domains and the 
polyurethane from a diisocyante and butane diol built the hard domains, it was demonstrated 
by time resolved FT-IR that water first penetrated into the switching domains while forming 
hydrogen bonds with the C=O groups.115 Afterwards hydrogen bonds between the C=O 
groups of the hard domains were formed. In the last step, hydrogen bonds between the C=O 
groups and the N-H groups were formed. The additional free volume obtained by the 
diffusion of water would lower Tg and influences in this way the elastic properties. 
The opposite direction of the effect was demonstrated for commercially available 
polyurethanes 35, 116, 117 and its composites with carbon nanotubes 118 by lowering Tg below 
environmental temperature. In this way the SME could be actuated indirectly. In all cases the 
temporary shape has been programmed by conventional DSCP for thermally-induced SMP. A 
shape recovery could be obtained, when the materials were immersed into water whereas 
moisture diffused into the polymer sample and acted as plasticizer. In the polymers and 
composites based on polyurethanes the Tg was lowered from 35 °C to a temperature below 
ambient temperature. The lowering of the glass transition temperature depended on the 
moisture uptake, which was a function of immersion time. In time dependent immersion 
studies, a lowering of Tg between 0 and 35 K was realized, accompanied with a water uptake 
between 0 and 4.5 wt%. Because of this low solvent uptake, the SMP differs substantially 
from SMP hydrogels.8 
 
4.3 Change in Transparency 
 
In single molecule SMPs with Ttrans = Tm or TLC (categories N-M-C, N-M-LC, N-B-C, N-B-
A-LC, N-T-A-C) and one component materials with SME (thermoplasts of category T-A-C) 
the thermally-induced SMP is accompanied with a tremendous change of optical properties in 
terms of transparency. In such materials only the domains contributing to the fixation of the 
temporary shape are crystallizable. While the domains are crystalline at T < Ttrans and in this 
way scattering the light leading to opaqueness, these domains become amorphous at T > Ttrans. 
Fig.6 visualizes the change in transparency during SME.

----- Page 18 (native) -----
17
a) 
b) 
 
 
Figure 6: Photo series demonstrating the change of transparency for two different poly(ε-
caprolactone) based SMP. At T < Ttrans the materials are in their temporary shape. When the 
thermally-induced SME is triggered by heating to T > Ttrans the SMPs recover their permanent 
shape. a) Covalent polymer network from poly(ε-caprolactone)dimethacrylate (category N-
M-C). At T < Ttrans the material is opaque as the crystalline domains fixing the temporary 
shape are scattering. When heated to T > Ttrans the crystalline domains are molten and the 
material is transparent. b) In contrast, in one component SMP, a multiblock copolymer form 
poly(ε-caprolactone) and polypentadecadolactone (category T-C-C) materials remains opaque 
as the hard domains forming segments maintain their crystallinity.

----- Page 19 (native) -----
18
4.4 Change in Elastic Properties 
 
As the E modulus is correlated with the flexibility of the polymer chain segments, the 
solidification or the softening of the chain segments reduces or increases flexibility, resulting 
in stiffer or softer materials. The extent to which this effect is pronounced depends on the 
SMP 
architecture. 
Consequently, 
the 
change 
in 
the 
elastic 
properties 
during 
softening/solidification of the switching domains need to discussed. Furthermore, it has to be 
asked if εb is influenced by the conformation of the switching segments. Lastly, the kinetics of 
the softening of the switching domains need to be considered for a temporal description of the 
change in elastic properties.  
In covalent polymer networks with a one-phase architecture and in AB-polymer networks 
with Ttrans provided by the second phase (categories N-M-A, N-M-C, N-M-LC and N-B-A-
C), a tremendous decrease of E modulus can be determined, accompanied by a decrease in εb. 
In contrast, in covalently crosslinked SMP with an AB-polymer network architecture with 
Ttrans provided by the first phase (category N-B-C-A), as well as in thermoplastic SMP of all 
categories (T-A-A, T-A-C, T-C-A, T-C-C, B-C-C), the decrease in the elastic properties is 
less pronounced, because in the covalent SMP networks the second phase and in the 
thermoplastic SMP the required hard segment forming domains provide mechanical strength. 
Nevertheless, as in these SMPs the polymer chain segments associated to Ttrans do not 
contribute the elasticity in the same way after exceeding Ttrans, εb decreases as well but with a 
lower extent compared to N-M-A, N-M-C, N-M-LC systems.  
The influence of the switching segments conformation was investigated in covalent polymer 
networks with Ttrans = Tg after applying a predeformation. Here, it was demonstrated that εb of 
pre-strain samples decreased, while the overall elongation at break εb,tot, summarizing the pre-
strain and the determined εb remained almost constant.64 
Besides programming, the kinetics of the softening of the switching domains influences the 
recovery process of polymer networks as the thermal transition of the switching domains can 
extend over a narrower or broader temperature interval.

----- Page 20 (native) -----
19
20
30
40
50
0
20
40
60
80
100
ε [%]
T [°C]
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
v [%] z K
-1
a)
 
 
0
5
10
15
20
T [°C]
ε [%]
-2,0
-1,6
-1,2
-0,8
-0,4
0,0
 
v [%] z K
-1
b)
50
60
70
 
Figure 7: Influence of polymer network architecture on recovery of ε as a function of 
temperature. a)  ˙̅ ˙ ˙̅ Recovery of strain ε of a covalently crosslinked SMP network based on 
poly[(ε-caprolactone)-co-glycolide]dimethacrylate (N-M-C) at a heating rate of 2 K·min-1; 
____ First derivation of ε of poly[(ε-caprolactone)-co-glycolide]dimethacrylate network.76 b) --
-- Recovery of strain ε of a  covalently crosslinked SMP  based on oligo[(L-lactide)-ran-
glycolide] (N-M-A) at a heating rate of 3 K·min-1; ____ First derivation of ε of polymer 
network from oligo[(L-lactide)-ran-glycolide].75 
 
In Fig. 7 the characteristic strain ε during shape recovery of covalently crosslinked one phase 
SMP networks (Cat. N-M-C and N-M-A) with Ttrans = Tm (Fig. 7a) and Ttrans = Tg (Fig. 7b) 
are presented. In general, the graphs of both systems are looking similar. Nevertheless, the 
differences of both systems become obvious when the first derivative of strain is considered. 
The first derivative of strain for SMP networks with Ttrans = Tm (Cat. N-M-C) displays a sharp 
peak (Fig. 7a). In contrast, the first derivative of strain for SMP networks with Ttrans = Tg 
exhibits a broader peak (Fig. 7b). Furthermore, in such SMP with Ttrans = Tg the width of the 
peak can be influenced by the heating rate: the faster the heating rate is the broader the peak 
becomes. Consequently, these clearly visible differences in the thermomechanical properties

----- Page 21 (native) -----
20
of the polymer systems reflect in the SME of such systems. An example are polymer 
networks with Tsw = Tg. In such polymer networks the temperature range of the strain 
recovery can be influenced by the heating rate. With lower heating rates the strain recovery 
starts and ends at lower temperatures, and the temperature intervals during recovery get 
smaller with decreasing heating rates.75  
 
 
4.5 Change in Color Indirectly Caused by Change in Orientation of Polymer Chain Segments 
 
A reorientation of the polymer chain segments occurs when the thermally-induced SMP is 
heated above Ttrans. In the temporary shape the polymer chain segments are in oriented 
configuration due to the applied deformation. When heated above Ttrans the polymer chain 
segment obtain their entropically favored random coil conformation. An interesting function 
of the material could be created, if this conformational change would be visible 
macroscopically. Visualization and amplification was obtained by incorporating fluorescent, 
oligo(p-phenylene vinylene) dye particles, whose absorption spectrum was in the wavelength 
range of visible light, into a semicrystalline, covalently crosslinked SMP matrix via guest 
diffusion.72 The SMP was prepared by crosslinking poly(cyclooctene) in a free radical 
process.41, 59 Swelling of the cross-linked PCO with a solution of the dye at 50 °C yielded in 
PCO/dye blends. The thermal analysis suggested that the dye molecules did not exert a 
remarkable influence on the morphology and the thermal transitions of the polymer. The dye's 
color change was caused by a reversible aggregation-deaggregation of the dye molecules that 
occurs at Ttrans of the SMP. Exposure of these phase-separated blends to T > Tm of the PCO 
lead to dissolution of the dye molecules, and therefore caused a pronounced change of their 
absorption and fluorescence color. The optical changes were reversible; i.e., the aggregate 
absorption and emission were restored upon cooling below Tm. In thermo-mechanical 
investigations during deformation at Thigh = 75 °C (Fig. 8a) the sample (1.5 mg mL-1 
PCO/dye) exhibited green (monomer) fluorescence due to complete dispersion of the dye 
molecules above Tm of PCO. Upon cooling and fixing, Tlow = 5 °C, the color of the sample 
changed from green (monomer) to orange (excimer) fluorescence (Figure 8b), indicating that 
the large free volume (low crystallinity, Xc = 28%) and low Tg (-50 °C) allowed for the self-
assembly of dye molecules into nano-scale aggregates regardless of the limited diffusion of 
dye molecules in a highly stressed environment.41 The temporarily fixed shape formed by 
removal of the applied stress could be recovered to the original permanent shape by heating to 
75 °C, whereby the fluorescence color changed to green (Fig. 8c) again, indicating the

----- Page 22 (native) -----
21
molecularly dispersed state of the dye in the PCO network. The color was dictated by the 
phase behavior, independent of the mechanical state of the SMP. Such color changing SMP 
systems could have technological applications exploiting the unique photomechanical 
behavior as system having the ability to monitor a stress change, or enabling SMPs whose 
repeated transitions can be easily monitored even when the shape change is small.72  
                                 
 
Figure 8: Photographs of the SME of a 1.5 mg mL-1 PCO/dye  sample (illuminated with 365 
nm UV light) during (a) deformation (75 °C, 600 kPa), (b) cooling/fixing (5 °C, 600 kPa), (c) 
unloading (5 °C, 4 kPa), and (d) recovery (75 °C, 4 kPa). 
 
4.6 Change in Dielectric Properties 
As dry polymers are generally poor conductors of electricity, they can be regarded as 
insulators. The application of an electric field on polymers having groups, which act as 
permanent dipoles, will result in alignment of the dipoles along the field. The favored random 
orientation of the dipoles can be regained when the electric field is released. In polymers the 
dipoles are usually a part of the whole polymer chain segment resulting in a fractional 
resistance of the dipoles. Consequently, a time gap between the release of the electric field 
and the recovery of the original random orientation occurs. A sinusoidally varying voltage for

----- Page 23 (native) -----
22
the generation of an alternating electrical field is applied in dielectric thermal analysis 
(DETA).   
 
 
Figure 9: Dielectric constant as a function of temperature for a polymer (w = const). Light 
grey, contribution from the electrons, middle grey contribution from pendant groups, dark 
grey, contribution from the polymer backbone, black contribution from crystalline dipoles. 
taken from 119 
 
During the application of the field the electrons within the atoms of the polymer try to move 
towards the positive charge, while the nuclei try to move towards the negative charge, 
resulting in distorted orbitals as the electrons can not leave the vicinity of the nuclei. As the 
electrons have a low mass, their movements is not affected by the frequency and the 
temperature, in contrast to the nuclei. As polymers have high masses, their mobility as well as 
the mobility of the dipoles is strictly hindered. In amorphous polymers, in which the polar 
structures are located in pendant groups, heating will gain mobility with increasing 
temperature so that an increased dielectric constant is also expected. But the increasing 
temperature results in an increased Brownian motion, allowing more random motion. Both 
facts are equalizing each other, so that the dielectric constant is almost constant, until another 
from of mobility becomes available. When the system is further heated, the polymer backbone 
is able to gain mobility at Tg, thus the dielectric constant will increase. Again, after this step, 
the dielectric constant will remain almost constant again because increase in dielectric 
constant and increase in Brownian motion will flatten each other. As electron motion is 
independent from the polymer structure, the contribution of the electrons will be the same of 
structural identical polymers for the amorphous and the crystalline part. An expected 
contribution of crystalline polymer from a dipolar structure is neglectable, as the electrons of 
the crystalline part are not free to move. However, once a whole lamellar of the crystalline 
Tm
dielectric constant 
T 
Tg

----- Page 24 (native) -----
23
domains has sufficient mobility and is able to rotate, the dielectric constant will increase 
further. This is the case at Tm, assuming no bulky pendants or branchings are preventing 
rotation.  In conclusion, crystalline SMP with Ttrans = Tm have a higher dielectric constant 
compared to SMP with Ttrans = Tg, while the overall change of the dielectric constant is higher 
in case of Ttrans = Tg compared to Ttrans = Tm. 
 
 
4.7 Change in Enthalpy 
 
In SMP with Ttrans = Tm the SME is accompanied by a phase transition. When in a material a 
phase transition occurs, a significant change in enthalpy occurs. Water is a very abundant 
example for such a phase transition, which crystallizes at 0 °C, changing from liquid to the 
solid phase. During this crystallization a latent heat of 335 kJ.kg-1 is spread to the 
environment, while during cooling in the liquid state from 42 °C to 41 °C a sensible heat of 4 
kJ.kg-1 is dissipated to the environment. During melting and heating this heat flux is reversed. 
During this crystallization as well as melting the temperature of the “water” remains constant.  
Materials, in which the difference in enthalpy occurring at Tm respectively Tcryst can be 
utilized, involve alloys, hydrated inorganic salt, linear long chain hydrocarbons such as 
paraffin, polyethylene glycol and fatty acids (capric, lauric, palmitic and stearic acids). A 
certain requirement of this utilization is a large heat of fusion as well as a small temperature 
range between the solidification point and the Tm. 
In alloys the change in enthalpy can be utilized in various optical data storage systems such as 
CD-R, DVD-RAM or Blueray discs and nonvolatilve memories.120, 121 These alloys display 
two remarkable features: On the one hand, they show a very fast crystallization behavior and 
on the other hand a property contrast between the amorphous and the crystalline state.122 In 
the crystalline state they provide a high reflectivity and a low resistance, while in the 
amorphous state they owe low reflectivity and high resistivity.123 When the alloy is cooled 
below Tm, the crystallization tendency increases with decreasing temperature while ate the 
same the atomic mobility decreases, hindering crystallization. Thus the ideal temperature for 
crystallization is between Tg and Tm. This can be used for optical or electrical data storage by 
pulsing the material in the amorphous state with a low energy laser or current pulse so the 
material crystallizes. When the crystalline material is pulsed with a short high energy laser or 
current the amorphous state can be regained. The resulting differences between the reflectivity 
of the crystalline state and the amorphous state as well as between the current states can be

----- Page 25 (native) -----
24
used for storing information digitally. Recently, multifunctional alloys combining the large 
difference in enthalpy and magnetism were reported.124 
In organic substances the differences in enthalpy at Ttrans were mostly investigated for usage in 
energy storage systems. Although their energy storage capability is lower compared to alloys 
and other inorganic systems, they offer the advantage of a better availability and 
processability. While the usage of liquid paraffin embedded in silicone pillows, which 
crystallizes upon kinking a metal plate, as used in pocket warmers, is a fairly trivial but quite 
comfort application of utilizing the change in enthalpy, more sophisticated applications 
involve intelligent thermal insulation materials for buildings or textiles. The idea of materials 
displaying a large difference in enthalpy used as thermal insulation material in a building is 
that energy during the temperature change from night to day is stored in the material 
performing the enthalpy transition, which is a part of the insulation, while the room climate is 
kept constant for a longer time and thus reduces the need of extra cooling by air conditioning. 
During the temperature change from day to night the stored energy is released, thus the need 
for extra heating is reduced. As in this way the energy consumption for the air condition 
cooling as well as for the central heating, which both are mostly powered by fossil sources, 
can be reduced, a contribution to the saving of the limited resources can be made. In textiles 
the change in enthalpy can be used in a similar way. Here, the body climate is to be controlled 
during activities such as sports, providing comfort to the wearer.68 
Materials, in which the difference in enthalpy is utilized, are named phase-changing materials 
or phase-change materials. While the terminus “phase-change material” refers usually to 
alloys 125 showing the phase-changing properties accompanied by change in reflectivity and 
resistivity, the terminus phase-changing materials (PCM) is more general. The presented 
application of PCM require creation of multimaterial systems, as these application demands 
other functionalities such as scratch or wear resistance, which can not be met by the PCM. For 
organic PCM processing in fibers126, coatings127, multi-layers or microcapsules128, 129 had 
been successfully demonstrated. Furthermore, PCM of organic substances display a limited 
heat-conductivity.130 The application of the PCM capability with the SME feature in textiles 
would enable wrinkle free fabrics, which are able to control the body climate. In this way 
multifunctional materials would be obtained. 
 
5. 
Multifunctionality of Shape-memory Polymers 
 
5.1 Multifunctional Materials

----- Page 26 (native) -----
25
First examples of multifunctional materials have their origin in the field of metallic alloys.131 
Here, the multifunctionality refers to the aspect, that the alloy itself provides a structure, 
which is the basic functionality and to which additional functions might be added by 
incorporating further components.132 While similar results could also be obtained by 
macroscopic organization of structural materials incorporating different functions by 
processing techniques such as coating,133 the development is driven by the motivation that a 
higher functional integration can be obtained and in this way a cost reduction could be 
achieved. In general, such multifunctional materials are realized as composites134 or hybrid 
structures135 of several distinct material phases, in which each phase contributes a different 
but necessary function.  
Typical functions are strength136, elasticity, degradability, electrical-conductivity137-140 or –
insulation138, thermal conductivity136, 140 or protection, energy storage, magnetism137 or 
magnetic shielding, radiation protection141, light emission139, self-healing, or actuation142. The 
multifunctional character of such composite materials might be even enhanced, if a 
hierarchical organization of the functions would be obtained by an organization of the 
structured composites in layers, in which each sublayer contributes with its 
multifunctionality.143  
Beyond the integration as multimaterial system or on the morphological level in single 
component materials, the final goal of multifunctional materials are materials that are truly 
integrated even on the molecular level.144 “When it is a question of multifunctionality, nature 
always makes use of ‘giant molecules’, when single molecules have to be used for very 
different functions as structural complexity affords functional specifity” according to 
Ringsdorf.145 In nature, in a singular system viability and stability, surface recognition and 
specific local interaction, function dependent structural regulation and self-replication can be 
combined. Furthermore, in enzymes as an example of multifunctional macromolecules, it is 
an important characteristic of a multifunctional material that the functions have to be 
independent.146 Functions such as specific local interaction can be mimicked in 
multifunctional polymers by application of synthetic chemistry.147, 148 Such multifunctional 
polymers could be created by the targeted polymerization of specific monomeric precusors149 
or combination of suitable building blocks in blockcopolymers148, 150. Besides multifunctional 
materials realized in a multimaterial approach, functions which could be implemented on the 
molecular level were non-linear diffraction151, conductivity152, ionic transport153, or actuation1, 
154. Additionally, the entry of the molecular level enables functions such as paramagnetism,

----- Page 27 (native) -----
26
insulating properties, and infrared (IR) transparency to be changed simultaneously as atomic 
spin-relaxation processes get involved.155  
In chemistry the term functionality is also correlated to a reactive group so that 
multifunctionality is often referred to polymers having several different or several of the same 
reactive groups in one molecule.156 Such reactive groups are an example for a functionality on 
the molecular level. When such polymers having several of the same reactive groups are able 
to react with ligands, presenting a multiple acceptor unit, the polymers are also name 
multivalent. Here, multifunctionality differs from the understanding of material sciences, in 
which a functionality origins from the bulk material. Thus, the hierarchical organization of 
different reactive groups in different subunits, each responsible for a certain function, enables 
multifunctional materials.157-159 Finally, not every function, which is integrated in a polymer, 
might be required for each application, therefore multifunctional polymers cover the aspect of 
universality, so that they contribute only with the relevant functions to the specific 
application.160 
As all actively moving polymers, serve as structural polymers and in addition provide the 
capability of actuation upon stimulation they can be referred to be multifunctional. 
Nevertheless, according to our understanding, SMPs having multifunctionality provide one or 
several functionalities in addition to the structural function and the SME. Therefore, 
multifunctional SMP can be obtained by addition of independent functions such as electrical 
conductivity, thermal conductivity or hydrolytical degradability. Multifunctionality can be 
obtained by the integration of various functions in multimaterial systems on the nano- or 
micro level, such as in composites, multifibers, or multilayer constructs, as well as single 
material systems combining the different functions on the molecular level, such as enzymes, 
polymeric prodrugs or actively moving polymers (shape-memory effect, shape-changing 
capability). 
In this chapter the various aspects of multifunctional SMP will be discussed with a focus on 
the additionally added functions besides SME. Following at first the concept of alloys, 
multifunctional SMP by multimaterial approaches will be presented. Afterwards, SMP in 
which the different functionalities are combined on the molecular level will be introduced, 
beginning covalent polymer networks proceeded by thermoplastic multiblock copolymers. 
Finally, SMP obtained by a combination of a multimaterial and an integration of 
functionalities on the molecular level will be described (Fig. 1).

----- Page 28 (native) -----
27
 
5.2 Multifunctional SMP by Multimaterial Approaches 
 
The application of the multi-material approach offers opportunities for combination of 
functions by processing of different components into a single body structure with the 
advantage that no new material needs to be synthesized.136, 140, 161-163 Since polymer 
composites are built up from discrete phases consisting of a polymer matrix with other 
domains, they are particularly suited for exploitation towards multifunctionality.164, 165 Using 
the multi-material approach, new functions such as unique electrical, magnetic properties as 
well as radio-opacity and bio-functionality can be added to SMP by incorporating small 
amount of active fillers in polymer matrix. In most cases the pure SMP can be thermally-
actuated by increasing the environmental temperature (direct heating). Mixing SMP with 
magnetically or electrically active fillers, extended the range of suitable stimuli. Composites 
from SMPs and carbon fillers, such as carbon black (CB) or carbon nanotubes (CNTs) can be 
actuated through an electric field.31, 166 Owing to their unique properties, especially CNTs are 
promising for various applications such field-effect transistors or solar cells.167-169 Similarily 
the SMP composites (SMC) containing a small amount of magnetic particles, such as iron 
oxide or nickel zinc ferrite can be inductively actuated by applying an alternating magnetic 
field.32, 33 The latter approach has the advantage for potential applications in wireless/remote 
operation. Also incorporation of small amounts of filler to SMP lead to an improvement in 
material properties, such as modulus, strength, heat resistance etc.18, 170 Functionalized with 
drugs, SMP can work as efficient drug delivery systems. Drug loaded SMP stents can be 
implanted by minimally invasive surgery and will lead to an improved strain recovery 
capacity for larger devices in smaller delivery instrumentations. Also an improved biological 
tolerance could be expected when using biocompatible SMP materials. 171, 172 Such 
combinations of the shape-memory function with other material functionalizations are 
expected to open new application fields of SMPs. Different functions resulting from adding 
functional fillers to SMP-matrices are discussed below. 
 
5.2.1 Magnetic sensitivity  
SMPs with magnetic functionality obtained by incorporating magnetic particles in a SMP 
matrix are another emerging class of multifunctional materials. The magnetic particles 
improved the mechanical properties and also enabled the induction of the SME in an 
alternating magnetic field.173 In general, the incorporated magnetic particles consisted of

----- Page 29 (native) -----
28
iron/ironoxide, nickel, or cobalt compounds and could generate heat in an alternating 
magnetic field by hysteresis losses, eddy current losses and/or other relaxational losses 
depending on the nature and size of the particle.174 Nano-sized particles can generate a 
sufficient amount of heat required for induced SME at high magnetization frequency. Thus 
the remote actuation of SMPs was demonstrated by incorporation of silica coated magnetite 
nanoparticles in thermoplastic SMP.32 The thermoplastic material consisted of an aliphatic 
polyetherurethane (TFX) from methylene bis(p-cyclohexyl isocyanate), butanediol and 
polytetrahydrofuran. In Fig. 10 the magnetically induced uncoiling of a corkscrew-like spiral 
of a composite from TFX and 10 wt% magnetic nanoparticles is shown exemplarily. 
Similarly, incorporation of magnetite nanoparticles into polymer networks obtained by 
thermal polymerization of poly(ε-caprolactone) dimethacrylates enabled the realization of this 
strategy of indirect heating for polymer networks based SMP nanocomposites.175  Recently, 
the remote activation of methacrylate-based SMP networks with varying amount of magnetite 
nanoparticles was reported. 175  
 
  
 
Figure 10: Magnetically-induced shape-memory effect of thermoplastic composite consisting 
of Fe(III)oxide nanoparticles in a silica matrix and polyetherurethanes. Taken from 32 
Certain ferromagnetic particles with an appropriate diameter generate heat by only hysteresis 
loss mechanism and enable an innate thermoregulation caused by the Curie temperature (TC). 
These ferromagnetic particles are able to heat a material up to TC (i.e.; the ferromagnetic 
material becomes paramagnetic and loses its ability to generate heat via a hysteresis loss 
mechanism).33, 176 By selecting a ferromagnetic particle material with a TC within safe medical 
limits, the danger of over heating in vivo applications can be eliminated. TC of nickel zinc 
ferrite magnetic particles (Ni1-xZnxFe2O4) (III) can be varied in a wide range. TC decreases 
from approximately 370 °C to 150 °C by increasing zinc substitution (x) from 0.4 to 0.75.33, 
177 A prototype of a therapeutic device having a complex shape was prepared from Ni Zn 
ferrite particles (10 wt%) embedded in a SMPU matrix.33 The first prototype was a flower-
shaped endovascular thrombectomy device that can be used for stroke treatment. The second

----- Page 30 (native) -----
29
prototype device was an expandable SMPU foam device for potential application in aneurysm 
embolization. Both devices are presented in their collapsed and deployed forms in Fig. 11.  
          
 
Figure 11: Collapsed and actuated SMPU composite (10 wt% NiZn ferrite) for: a) flower 
shaped device; and b) foam device (taken from 33) 
 
5.2.2 Radio-frequency (RF) Sensitivity  
SMC functionalized with the sensitivity to radio-frequency (RF) can be developed by the 
dispersion magnetoelectroelastic (MEE) particles into a SMP matrix. MEE materials are a 
class of adaptive materials that exhibit coupling between elastic strain, and magnetic and 
electric potential. This coupling leads to significant interactions between the elastic, electric, 
and magnetic fields. For example, as a MEE material undergoes elastic deformation, some of 
the induced strain energy is converted into electrostatic and/or magnetic potential. 
Conversely, immersing a MEE material in an electromagnetic field can cause some of the 
field energy to be converted into strain, producing a finite strain in the material.178 
 
RF-energy induced shape change in epoxy-based thermoset SMPs, filled with MEE particles  
(diameter 38 to 106 μm) was reported. The thermoset obtained by curing of epoxy groups at 
room temperature served as SMP matrix. This SMP is characterized by a Tg of 59 °C (Cat. N-

----- Page 31 (native) -----
30
M-A).178 The MEE particles consisted of a near single crystal of terbium, iron, and 
dysprosium-d of nominal composition Tb0.3Dy0.7Fe1.92.178  The RF-energy-induced thermal 
response of the epoxy-based thermoset SMP cylinders containing 0.0, 10.0, and 15.0 vol.% 
MEE particles were measured to determine the effect of particle loading level on energy 
coupling efficiency. Maximum temperatures of approximately 30 ºC, 65 ºC, and 100°C were 
recorded for specimens containing 0.0, 10.0, and 15.0 vol% MEE particles, respectively by 
exposure to an RF frequency of 1.4 MHz.   The RF actuation of SME in the epoxy-based 
SMC with 10 wt% of MEE particles is illustrated in Fig. 12. The transition from a bent 
(temporary shape) to the flat beam (permanent) occurred in approximately 90 s by RF 
excitation (1.4 MHz and 14 W). 
 
Figure 12: Series of photographs demonstrating the shape-recovery of thermoset SMP beam 
with 10 vol% MEE particle content. Taken from 178 
 
5.2.3 IR sensitivity  
The IR-light possesses wide emission spectra and unique heating effect in a non-contact 
manner, therefore actuating SMP materials with IR-light could realize the applications of 
SMP.179 In a laser-activated polyurethane medical device feasibility of this concept has been 
demonstrated successfully.180-182 As the required energy was quite high in such devices, heat 
transfer between the heat source and the SMP needed to be enhanced. Functionalization of 
SMP with the capability of a higher heat transfer was realized by the incorporation of 
conductive fillers, such as conductive ceramics, carbon black, and carbon nanotubes.183, 184 
The incorporation of particles also influenced the mechanical properties: incorporation of 
microscale particles resulted in increased stiffness and recoverable strain levels185, 186 and 
could be further enhanced by the incorporation of  nanoscale particles.187

----- Page 32 (native) -----
31
 
Figure 13: Comparison of the stress recovery before (left) and after (right) remote actuation 
by infrared irradiation. Neat polymer (M) bends and does not recover. In contrast, a 0.57 
vol.% (1 wt.%) CNT nanocomposite (PCN) (20 mm × 4 mm × 0.4 mm, deformed 300%) 
contracts and exerts ~ 19 J to lift a 60 g weight (moving bottom clamp) 3.3 cm with ~588 N 
of force on exposure to infrared irradiation (arrow indicates moving direction). Taken from 71 
To achieve an enhanced photothermal effect, the molecular structure of the particles has to be 
considered. Polesterurethanes  reinforced with CNTs or CB of similar size displayed an 
increased Rf.71 The CB reinforced materials actuated by IR-radiation provided between 20% 
and 30% of the stress achieved by heat actuation while almost 100% could be observed for 
CNT SMP nanocomposites (SMC-CNT). This effect had been attributed to a synergism 
between the anisotropic CNTs and the crystallizing polyurethane switching segments. By 
exposing to near-IR radiation, the SMC-CNT deformed to 300% exerted ~ 19 J to lift a 60 g 
weight more than 3 cm (Fig. 13). In contrast, the heating efficiency of CB reinforced polymer 
by exposure to IR-radiation was much less and the necessary exposure time and power 
required was greater than for SMC-CNT.71  
5.2.4 Radio-opacity 
SMP materials could be used in a variety of different medical devices and diagnostic products 
as deployable elements of implants from vascular grafts to components of cardiac pacemakers 
and artificial hearts.171 In most of these medical applications proper device placement inside 
the human body is a prerequisite. Imaging techniques like X-ray allow physicians to monitor 
the location and as well as proper function of implants non-invasively.171, 172, 188 A certain 
requirement is radio-opacity of the implant, which can be easily achieved in the case of 
metallic implants. In contrast, most polymeric materials are translucent for X-rays.  The most 
common technique for functionalization of SMPs with X-ray contrast properties is the 
incorporation of radio-dense fillers such as heavy element oxides or salts.  For instance, bone 
cement, used in orthopedic surgery for fixation of hip and knee prostheses, is made radio-

----- Page 33 (native) -----
32
opaque through addition of zirconium oxide (ZrO2), barium sulfate (BaSO4) or tantalum 
(Ta).189, 190 High loading filler fractions are often required to achieve good X-ray visibility, 
with filler fractions between 40 and 60 wt% not being uncommon.  
 
 
Figure 14: Fluoroscopic image of 3 vol% tantalum-filled SMP coils with varying diameter 
immersed under 50 cc’s of water. The three coils had coil diameters of 10 mm, and wire 
diameters of 0.25 (uppermost), 0.45 (lower left), and 0.088 mm (lower right). Taken from188 
 
SMC containing 3 vol% (50 wt%) of Tantalum powder, have been developed to exhibit the 
function of radio-opacity in combination with SME. Furthermore, these radio-opaque SMC 
might be suitable materials to be used as coil implants for treatment of intracranial aneurysm. 
X-ray diffractometer tests showed that tantalum filler increased the radio-opacity of the 
material, although in medical imaging X-rays of lower energy would be used. Fig. 14 shows 
an X-ray image of the tantalum filled SMP coils. When the SMC were actuated in an 
aneurysm model, the SMC coils deployed demonstrating that typical hemodynamic forces did 
not hinder the shape-recovery process. The SMP coils were stable inside the aneurysm dome 
and did not compact or migrate within the cavity.188  
Similarly radio-opaque SMC have been fabricated by co-extrusion of biomedical grade 
polyether urethane (PEU) and barium sulfate (BaSO4) micro-particles. It was demonstrated

----- Page 34 (native) -----
33
that BaSO4 particles improved the mechanical properties of the PEU without disturbing the 
SME. 191 
5.2.5 Electrical conductivity  
 Incorporation of electrically conductive materials such as conducting polymers, carbon black, 
carbon nanotubes, carbon nanofibers etc enabled electrically conductive SMP.9, 31, 71, 166, 192, 193 
The fillers significantly reduced the electric resistivity and resulted in conductive SMPs.  
Furthermore, when an appropriate current is applied, joule heating occurred and was used for 
the actuation of the SME indirectly. An important group among these multifunctional SMPs 
are composites from SMPs and CNTs. Low concentrations of CNTs can significantly enhance 
the mechanical and thermal properties, impart unique electrical and magnetic properties as 
well as improve the shape-memory behavior of the polymer matrix.192, 194, 195 CNTs have an 
anisotropic nature enabling a percolative behavior at low volume fractions in the SMP matrix. 
Possible applications of such SMC-CNTs are electroactive actuators for controlling 
microaerial vehicles.196 However, CNTs are strongly affected by van der Waal’s forces, which 
give rise to the formation of aggregates and then makes dispersion of CNTs in polymer matrix 
difficult. The compatibility and interfacial adhesion as well as homogenous distribution of 
CNTs in a polymer matrix could be achieved by surface modification in nitric acid and 
sulfuric acid mixture.31 Generally, inclusion of CNTs in SMPs, such as thermoplastic 
elastomers can significantly modify polymer behavior, impart new or enhance characteristic 
properties from the associative networking of the nanoelements.  
The impact of CNTs (average diameter 100 nm; length > 10 μm) on the thermal, mechanical 
and electrical behavior of thermoplastic SMPU (Cat T-A-C)  was investigated.71 The SME for 
this SMC was actuated thermally, optically and electrically. The Joule heating caused by the 
finite resistivity of the nanocomposite enabled current induced actuation.  By applying electric 
current, the CNT nanocomposites (16.7 wt. % CNT) deformed to 100% exerted ~ 6 J to lift a 
60 g weight 1 cm as shown in figure 15. The resistivity of the nanocomposite was directly 
related to the concentration of CNT, its aspect ratio and orientation distribution (which was 
dependent on deformation history).197 The critical concentration of the CNT was also a 
function of the percolation threshold (φc ~0.5–1.0 vol%).71 Rf and the recovery of constraint 
stress of a nanocomposite with 2.9 vol% (5 wt%) CNT was higher than pristine SMPU or 
SMPU filled with 20 wt% of carbon black (CB).

----- Page 35 (native) -----
34
 
Figure 15: Electrically stimulated stress recovery of 10.2 vol.% (16.7 wt%) CNT 
nanocomposite (20 mm × 4 mm × 0.4 mm, deformed 100%), exerting ~ 6 J to lift a 60 g mass 
1 cm. To maintain sufficient Joule heating, the current was increased with increased recovery, 
as CNT nanocomposites are piezoresistive. (taken from ref. 71) 
The enhanced recovery characteristics were thought to be associated with the synergism 
between the anisotropic CNTs and the crystallizing switching segments of the polymer. The 
extent of CNT orientation in the direction of deformation (tube axis parallel with applied 
stress) increased with increasing CNT concentration. In conjunction, the polymer crystallite 
fraction was a function of CNT concentration. The addition of CNTs also slightly increased 
initial polymer crystallinity by serving as heterogeneous nucleation sites.198 Simultaneous X-
ray diffraction–deformation experiments revealed a complex interplay between crystallization 
of switching segments, their alignment and the orientation of CNTs during elongation.71 On 
removal of the stress, the CNT alignment relaxed and the partial crystallinity remained 
constant. Heating the constrained composite resulted in melting of the crystallites without 
substantial change in CNT alignment.  
For improving particle-matrix interaction in SMC surface modified multi-walled CNTs 
(MWCNTs), with 10-20 nm diameter and 20 μm length were incorporated in a SMPU 
matrix.31 The effects of surface modified MWCNTs on the mechanical and electrical 
properties of the SMC were discussed. The composites (SMP-MWCNTs) made with surface 
modified MWCNTs displayed improved mechanical properties, and the modulus and stress at 
100% elongation increased with increasing surface modified MWCNT content. Nevertheless, 
the surface modification decreased the electrical conductivity of the nanotubes. This was 
attributed to the fact that the acid treatment of the surface lead to an increase in the numbers 
of defects in the lattice structure of carbon-carbon bonds. The electrical conductivity was in 
the order of 10-3 S·cm-1 for a composite with 5 wt% modified-MWNT. A high voltage of 60 V 
was required to heat the SMC-MWCNTs above the Tsw.199, 200 A sample, having a permanent 
shape of a rectangular strip was deformed and fixed into a helix-like temporary shape. The 
original permanent shape of the sample was recovered almost completely within 10 sec when

----- Page 36 (native) -----
35
an electric field of more than 40 V was applied.31 The SMC with untreated MWCNT resulted 
in higher temperatures than that of the composite with modified MWCNT under application 
of a voltage level.  A homogenous distribution of MWCNT in SMPU could be reached by 
mixing the MWCNT with the prepolymer mixture prior to the addition of butane diol acting 
as chain extender. In general, this procedure, called in-situ polymerization, provides a good 
opportunity of interaction between the polymer chains and nanofillers. Highly conductive 
SMPU actuators were developed by application of in situ polymerization of SMPU in the 
presence of surface modified MWCNT.196.194 
SMC with the additional functionality of electrical conductivity and in which the conductive 
filler is  polymeric, had been achieved by the use of conductive polypyrrole (PPy) as a coating 
layer of SMPU.201 The presence of PPy increased the electric conductivity of the composites 
and a percolation threshold at 10 wt% loading of PPy layer was achieved. The electrical 
conductivity was increased from 0.053 to 0.09 S.cm-1 as the percolation threshold was 
reached.  At 20 wt% loading of PPy under a 40 V electric potential, 85% to 90% strain 
recovery rate was achieved in 20-30 s with bending mode. In case of lower loading, the 
sample took higher time to recover original shape. This was explained by the combination of 
increased switching segment crystallinity, tensile strength, and elongation at break at lower 
PPy content and the loss of the integrity of the PPy network during deformation. The effect of 
incorporating a combination of MWCNTs and/or PPy to SMPU was also investigated.202 The 
highest electrical conductivity (0.098 S cm-1) and the highest shape recovery rate (90 to 96%) 
were achieved for the samples containing 2.5 wt% PPy (coating layer) and 2.5 wt% of 
dispersed MWCNTs within the SMPU matrix. The conductivity of this composite was high 
enough to enable an electroactive shape recovery by heating above Tsw of 40-48 °C due to 
melting of PCL switching segment domain in PU.  
In SMPU composites of  carbon nanofibers (CNF), oxidized carbon nanofibers (ox-CNF), and 
CB the influence of the type of particle fillers on the resistive heating of nanocomposites was 
explored.203, 204 SMPU composites with crystalline switching segments were synthesized in a 
low-shear chaotic mixer and in an internal mixer. The switching segment crystallinity was 
reduced in the presence of CNF and ox-CNF. For the CNF/SMPU composites prepared in the 
chaotic mixer, the electrical percolation occurred at 4 wt% with electrical conductivity of  ~ 
10-5 S cm-1, while the composites prepared in a Brabender internal mixer remained insulators 
(σ ~ 10-11 S cm-1) at up to 7 wt% CNF. The resistivity of composites of CNF and ox-CNF 
showed weak dependence on strain, while that of the composites of CB increased by several

----- Page 37 (native) -----
36
orders of magnitude with imposed tensile strain. Resistive heating induced heating was 
demonstrated in CNF/SMPU composite with 5 wt% filler content at an applied voltage of 300 
V.   
The combination of CB nanoparticles and short carbon fibers in a styrene based thermoset 
SMP created a highly conductive SMC. Using 5 wt% CB and 2 wt% short carbon fibers, an 
impressive electrical conductivity of 2.3 S cm-1 was reported.79 A typical example of 
electrically induced SME for nanocomposites with 5 and 2 wt% CB and SCF, respectively is 
shown in Fig. 17. Only 50 sec are required to reach a complete recovery from the temporary 
to the permanent shape by heating the sample up to 65 °C upon application of an electric 
field. The shape transition at 25 V was documented with a digital camera (Fig. 16).205 Rr was 
dependent on the magnitude of the applied voltage and the electrical resistivity of the 
composites. 
 
Figure 16: Series of photographs showing the macroscopic SME of SMP/CB/SCF composite 
containing 5 wt% CB and 2 wt% SCF. The permanent shape is a plane stripe and the 
temporary shape was fixed as right-angled shape. Taken from ref. 205 
 
In addition, such partially conductive SMC were investigated by the dispersion of micron 
sized nickel particles (3 -7 μm) in a commercially available SMPU (Diaplex MS-5510). The 
Ni particles dispersed in SMPU solution were able to align in the form of conductive chains 
under a weak static magnetic field (0.03 T) before curing. The electric conductivity of the 
SMPU was proposed to be significantly improved in the chain direction of the Ni particles, 
which could be more suitable for joule heat induced shape-recovery at low electrical voltage. 
Joule heating of samples containing 10 vol% Ni raised the specimen temperature above Tg 
inducing strain recovery (bending mode) in 90 s. Instead of using only Ni particles, small 
amount of Ni particles forming chains inside polymers with randomly distributed CB were

----- Page 38 (native) -----
37
also proposed.206 The aligned Ni chains served as conductive channels to bridge CB 
aggregates. Consequently the electrical conductivity was significantly increased while 
keeping the other properties constant.  
 
Figure 17: Resistivity vs volume fraction of CB with/without 0.5 vol% of Ni. Red symbol, 
right after fabrication; blue symbol, one month later. The inset Fig. illustrates how the 
resistance was measured. Taken from ref. 206 
The effect of CB concentration on the resistivity of SMPU/CB/Ni (aligned or chained) and 
SMP/CB/Ni (random, without alignment by magnetic field), as well as SMPU/CB is 
demonstrated in Fig. 17. Obviously, the random distribution of Ni (0.5 vol%) slightly reduced 
the resistivity of the composites. The aligned Ni obtained the chain shape in the magnetic 
field, reduced the electrical resistivity by a factor of ten. This remarkable reduction in the 
electrical resistivity was the result of the conductive chains, which served as conductive 
channels to bridge those small isolated CB aggregations. The reduction in resistivity was 
dramatic with low concentration of CB and then decreased in its magnitude with increasing 
the concentration of CB. SME induced by Joule heating demonstrated that for SMPU/CB/Ni 
(chained) composite with approximately 10 vol.% CB and 0.5 wt.% Ni, a temperature of 80 
°C was reached, which was much higher than the Tg of switching domain of the SMPU, so 
that almost full recovery was observed within 120 sec. The temperature of SMPU/CB sample 
was the lowest; about 45 °C only, slightly higher than the Tg of the switching segment of 
SMPU, hence, the shape recovery was small. For sample SMP/CB/Ni (random), the 
temperature reaches around 65 °C and the shape recovery was not completed after 120 sec.

----- Page 39 (native) -----
38
 
5.3 Multifunctional SMP by Integration of Functionalities in one-component materials 
 
In the multimaterial systems presented so far, typically one component contributed one 
function, e.g. SME by the matrix polymer and radio opacity by the inorganic particles; a 
concept, which followed the approach of multifunctional metallic alloys. The high variability 
in the chemical structure of macromolecules raises the question if several functionalities can 
be integrated on the molecular level, e.g. a SMP obtained by the chemical coupling of 
semiconducting, polymeric building blocks. 
As explained in chapter 1, the research field of multifunctional materials is frequently 
motivated by the requirements of certain applications. In biomedical applications the SME 
can be used to insert a bulky implant or instrument in a compressed temporary shape 
minimally invasively in the body. The question arising immediately is how to get the implant 
removed again as it is necessary in many cases. A suitable method is the disintegration of the 
hydrolytic degradation resulting in soluble degradation products, which can be metabolized 
and/or excreted. As the SMP material itself needs to be degradable, the function SME and 
biodegradation have to be integrated on the molecular level. Furthermore, the material needs 
to be non-toxic, compatible to the surrounding tissue and no toxic degradation products 
should be released.207-217 
 
Functionalization of SMP with hydrolytically degradability requires incorporation of 
hydrolytically cleavable groups into the polymer chain segments of the SMP. This could be 
achieved by the usage of either hydrolytically degradable polymeric building blocks as chain 
segments into the polymer networks or in thermoplasts, or the incorporation of easily 
hydrolyzable bonds into the chain segments as weak links.218, 219 An example for the latter 
was the ring-opening polymerization of ε-caprolactone with digylcolide.  
Two different hydrolytic degradation mechanisms have to be considered in hydrolytically 
degradable polymers: surface or bulk degradation. In polymers showing surface degradation 
the cleavage of the hydrolyzable bonds is faster than the diffusion of water into the polymer 
matrix. In contrast, bulk degrading polymers are initially swollen in water followed by 
hydrolytic chain cleavage. This process of bulk degradation of polymer networks can be 
subdivided into three steps: swelling and induction period (1), reduction of molecular weight 
accompanied by reduction of mechanical strength (2), and mass loss (3).64, 220

----- Page 40 (native) -----
39
 
Figure 18: Tensile tests of amorphous polymer hydrolytically degradable SMP networks at 
room temperature, 37 °C and 70 °C in air and water. 
 
A key requirement for the investigation of hydrolytically degradable SMP is an accurate 
determination of the SMP network composition.221, 222 The influence of swelling on the 
mechanical properties of degradable SMP was investigated in urethane networks based on 
poly[(L-lactide)-co-glycolide] with Ttrans = Tg (Cat. N-M-A). In tensile tests (Fig. 18), the dry 
material exhibited a yield point in the stress–strain curves at T < Tg. An E modulus of 685 
MPa and an εb of 195% were determined. At T > Tg, the dry network showed rubber-elasticity 
with εb = 505% and no yield point. Tensile tests of pre-incubated samples having an initial 
water uptake of 0.5 – 1% revealed elastic behavior with a lower E modulus and a higher εb 
compared to dry samples. In stress-controlled DSCP Rf and Rr was determined for dry and 
aqueous environment. Values of Rf of typically more than 90% were obtained, whereby Rf,H2O 
was higher than Rf,air. In contrast, Rr,H2O was significantly lower in aqueous environment 
compared to the dry state, in which Rr,air 100%. Additionally, Tsw was clearly reduced in 
water.  
In phosphate buffer solution at pH 7.0 and 37 °C the degradation behavior of different SMP 
networks was investigated. In Fig. 19a the mass loss as a function of time (72 weeks) of 
polymer 
networks 
from 
oligo-(ε-caprolactone)dimethacrylate, 
from 
poly(ε-
caprolactone)dimethacrylate 
and 
n-butyl 
acrylate, 
and 
oligo-[(ε-caprolactone)-co-
glycolide]dimethacrylate with different glycolide content is depicted, representing SMP 
according categories N-M-C and N-B-A-C, as well as N-M-C with a higher amount of 
hydrolysable groups.76 In all these SMP networks, hydrolysis of the ester bonds in the main 
drives the hydrolytic degradation. SMP from oligo(ε-caprolactone)dimethacrylate and from 
poly(ε-caprolactone)dimethacrylate copolymerized with n-butyl acrylate displayed mass 
losses of only 10 % during 72 weeks. The number of easily hydrolyzable bonds was

----- Page 41 (native) -----
40
substantially increased by the introduction of glycolide units in the copolyester segment. 
Consequently, an accelerated mass loss was determined. In case of polymer networks from 
oligo-[(ε-caprolactone)-co-glycolide]dimethacrylate  with a glycolide content of 9 wt% an 
induction period of 20 weeks can be observed. After 53 weeks a total mass loss of 15% was 
detected. When the glycolide content was increased to 13 wt% an induction of 20 weeks was 
determined as well. In contrast to the system with only 9 wt% of glyocolide, after 58 weeks a 
total mass loss of 60% was observed. Furthermore, polymer networks with a glycolide content 
≥ 14 wt% displayed a decrease in crystallinity of the polymer network. This should result in 
an additional acceleration of degradation, as water penetrates faster into amorphous than in 
crystalline parts.76 
Hydrolytic degradation of amorphous SMP with Ttrans = Tg were investigated in 
copolyesterurethane networks based on oligo[(rac-lactide)-co-glycolide]. Within 100 to 150 
days the polymer networks were degraded up to > 90% (Fig. 19b).64 In the degradation 
experiments the copolyesterurethane networks from oligomeric telechelics having Mn around 
10 k showed an induction period of 120 days. When the crosslink density of such networks 
was increased by creating oligomers with Mn = 1 kD an induction period of 100 days was 
determined. In these copolyesterurethane networks with Mn of the oligomers = 1 kD the 
densely crosslinking prevented a fast diffusion of water into the core of the network. The 
copolyesterurethane network with Mn of the oligomers = 5 kD exhibited an induction period 
of 50 days.  
Besides covalent polymer networks as hydrolytically degradable SMP thermoplastic SMP 
with tailored degradability had been prepared and were investigated for their degradation 
properties.73, 77, 223-225 Prominent examples were polyesterurethane multiblock copolymers 
having poly(ε-caprolactone) segments providing the switching domains and poly(p-
dioxanone) or polydepsipeptide segments providing the hard domains.

----- Page 42 (native) -----
41
0
75
150 225 300 375 450
20
40
60
80
100
 
 
 
 
μrel [%]
td [d]
a)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
20
40
60
80
100
 
td [d]
μrel  [%]
b)
 
Figure 19: a) Hydrolytic degradation of polymer networks from ε-caprolactone based on 
different 
acrylate 
networks 
(○: 
poly(ε-caprolactone)dimethacrylate, 
¡: 
poly(ε-
caprolactone)dimethacrylate 
and 
n-butyl 
acrylate, 
U: 
poly[(ε-caprolactone)-co-
glycolide]dimethacrylate (9 wt%), :  poly[(ε-caprolactone)-co-glycolide]dimethacrylate (13 
wt%));  b) hydrolytic degradation of copolyesterurethane networks (Mn of macrotetraoles: 
▲:1 kD, : 5 kD, ●: 10 kD)   
a) Permission requested from American Chemical Society, USA; 
b) Permission requested from Wiley InterScience, UK 
 
5.3 
 Multifunctional SMP by Combinations of Multimaterial and Molecular Integration 
Approaches 
 
Following the two concepts introduced above, it is quite understandable that the number 
functionalities could be further increased, by combinations of multimaterial and molecular 
integration approaches. As the number functionalities, which might interfere with each other 
should increase with the number functionalities, this approach is promising. Multifunctional 
SMPs based on this combined approach were realized as hydrolytically degradable SMPs 
containing magnetic particles or drugs. In the following we will describe these two examples,

----- Page 43 (native) -----
42
whereby we will focus on the interaction between the newly obtained functionality and the 
SMC. 
 
The magnetic sensitivity and biodegradability can be combined together in SMC by using a 
biodegradable SMP as matrix material along with magnetite nanoparticles as filler. Magnetite 
nanoparticles are typically used as a biomedical material because of their favorable 
biocompatibility and availability. A biodegradable multiblock copolymer (PDC), with poly(p-
dioxanone) as the hard segment and poly(ε-caprolactone) as the switching segment can be 
used as SMP (Cat. T-C-C) matrix in these magneto-active SMC. PDC had a crystallizable 
switching segment and had been developed for medical applications. Ttrans of PDC is Tm 
associated to PCL-domains, which is only slightly higher than body temperature to avoid any 
damage to surrounding tissue when heated to induce the SME.32 Similarly, another family of 
magneto-active and biodegradable SMC can be produced by using crosslinked poly(ε-
caprolactone)  (Cat. N-M-C) as matrix material with integrated magnetic nanoparticles.175 
PCL represents favorable biocompatibility, non-toxicity and drug permeability and had been 
recommended for clinical applications. The in vitro degradation of SMC consisting of 
crosslinked poly(ε-caprolactone) and Fe3O4 nanoparticles had been recently studied.226 
Changes in mechanical properties, molecular weight and gel fraction were used to trace 
degradation behavior of the specimens. A decreasing tendency in recovery ratio with 
degradation time was observed for all the samples. Also an increase in degradation rate was 
observed with the addition of Fe3O4 in composites because of the hydrophilicity of the 
nanoparticles.  On the basis of degradation results, the authors also proposed a mechanism of 
PCL degradation to illustrate the effect of degradation on shape-memory.226  
 
The aim to develop a drug loaded, degradable stent (Fig. 20) or anchorable drug release 
system stimulated the design of a multi material system based on a degradable SMP matrix.227 
SMP networks with Ttrans = Tg (Cat. N-M-A) and Ttrans = Tm (Cat. N-M-C) were selected as 
matrices, whereby three different SMP network architectures were realized based on i) 
oligo[(ε-caprolactone)-co-glycolide]dimethacrylate  (CG-DMA) telechelics, which were 
crosslinked by photopolymerization (Cat. N-M-C),228, 
229 ii) star-shaped oligo[(ε-
caprolactone)-co-glycolide]tetroles (oCG)  (Cat. N-M-C) or oligo[(rac-lactide)-co-
glycolide]tetroles (oLG) (Cat. N-M-A) crosslinked by low molecular weight aliphatic 
diisocyanates,230, 231 and iii) branched oligo(ε-caprolactone)octols (oCl) crosslinked by low 
molecular weight aliphatic diisocyanates (Cat. N-M-C).70

----- Page 44 (native) -----
43
When drugs were incorporated in SMPs of Cat N-M-C based on CG-DMA with varying 
polymer chain segment length, SME actuated in air was not influenced by drug loading, and a 
quantitative shape recovery was obtained. When the experiments were conducted in an 
aqueous environment, a small change in Tsw was observed. In SMP with smaller Mn drug 
incorporation (by swelling) led to a decrease of Rf from 86 to 76%, while drug incorporation 
(in situ) resulted in a Rf of only 62%. In contrast, Rr values were not influenced by drug 
loading. This different behavior had been attributed to changes in the crystallization behavior 
of the switching segments, thereby reducing Rf. In branched oCl networks a similar behavior 
was observed, although less pronounced, as the polymer chain segment length was higher. In 
SMPs with drug loadings of 10 wt% a decrease of Rr was determined for networks with a 
degree of polymerization of 10 and 20. In contrast, Rf increased slightly for networks with a 
degree of polymerization of 10 and decreased when degree of polymerization was 20. SMPs 
of this class with a higher drug loading were too brittle for a determination of SMC. A similar 
trend 
could 
be 
observed 
in 
SMPs 
based 
on 
oligo[(ε-caprolactone)-co-
glycolide]dimethacrylate.   
In general, it was demonstrated for the above mentioned material system that the three 
specified requirements, e.g., i) the incorporation of drugs independent of their hydrophilicity 
did not influence the SMC, ii) a diffusion-controlled release could be enabled, which was 
independent from the biodegradation, and iii) the programming and shape recovery process, 
which the device experienced during minimally invasive implantation did not change the drug 
release, can be fulfilled. For details about the relationship between drug loading and 
degradation as well as drug release before and after actuation of the SME, the interested 
reader is kindly referred to recent review.232

----- Page 45 (native) -----
44
 
 
Figure 20: 
Illustration of the principle of an SMP urether stent from oCG-DMA derived 
network. Permission requested from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA 
 
 
6. 
Conclusion and Outlook 
 
The thermally-induced SME of polymers has been explained as macroscopic effect and the 
molecular mechanism as well as the related morphological changes were discussed. Suitable 
polymer network architectures were presented, starting from single macromolecule systems 
over one-component SMPs up to multimaterial SMP systems, such as blends and 
interpenetrating networks. Examples polymers were given for each class and their synthesis is 
briefly described. As the SME is mainly based on the polymer network architecture and the 
related morphology, a variety of (co)monomers can be used as starting materials in the 
synthesis of SMP and on this way broad spectrum of material properties can be realized for 
SMP.   
In addition to the tailoring of elastic and thermal properties applications often require the 
SME to be combined with additional functions, such as electric conductivity, stimuli-sensitive

----- Page 46 (native) -----
45
permeability or certain magnetic properties. Two approaches have to be distinguished when 
several functions are combined in one material: the functions can be dependent on each other 
or independent. 
A combination of functions depending on each other is obtained when conformational or 
morphological changes occurring during the shape-memory effect form the basis for the 
additional function(s). These changes involve the phase transition of the switching domains 
and the change in the conformation of the switching segments from an oriented to a random 
coil conformation. A prominent example is the combination of water vapor diffusability in 
combination with SME, which is broadly applied in breathable and wrinkle-free fabrics. 
Multifunctinality as a combination of functions being independent from each other can be 
achieved by the formation of multimaterials systems. In this approach each material 
component contributes a certain function. Multifunctional SMP could be obtained by 
combining a SMP matrix material with different particulate fillers. The prepared 
(nano)composites are an interesting versatile and low-cost approach for the generation of 
multifunctional SMP, as realized for the combination of electric conductivity and SME.  
Multifunctionality could even be integrated in one component materials by combining SME 
with hydrolytic degradability. For this purpose easy hydrolysable chemical bonds were 
incorporated in polymer networks and thermoplastic SMP. By controlling number und 
distribution of these weak links in the material the degradation rate could be adjusted 
independently from the shape-memory properties. The integration of different functions in a 
one component system is a scientific challenge and will also stay a fascinating topic of 
fundamental research in the near future. An example could be the integration of electric 
conductivity by suitable polymer building blocks. 
Furthermore the concepts for creating multifunctionality could be transferred to recently 
achieved novel shape-memory capabilities such as light-sensitive SMP, polymer having a 
reversible shape changing capability or triple-shape polymers.

----- Page 47 (native) -----
46
7. 
References 
 
[1] 
A. Lendlein, S. Kelch, Angewandte Chemie-International Edition 2002, 41, 2034. 
[2] 
M. Behl, A. Lendlein, Soft Matter 2007, 3, 58. 
[3] 
C. Liu, H. Qin, P. T. Mather, Journal of Materials Chemistry 2007, 17, 1543. 
[4] 
M. Behl, A. Lendlein, Materials Today 2007, 10, 20. 
[5] 
S. Mondal, Mini-Reviews in Organic Chemistry 2009, 6, 114. 
[6] 
P. T. Mather, X. F. Luo, I. A. Rousseau, Annual Review of Materials Research 2009, 39, 445. 
[7] 
D. Ratna, J. Karger-Kocsis, Journal of Materials Science 2008, 43, 254. 
[8] 
M. Behl, J. Zotzmann, A. Lendlein, in Advances in Polymer Science,  2009, DOI: 
10.1007/12_2009_26. 
[9] 
Y. J. Liu, H. B. Lv, X. Lan, J. S. Leng, S. Y. Du, Composites Science and Technology 2009, 69, 
2064. 
[10] 
I. S. Gunes, S. C. Jana, Journal of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology 2008, 8, 1616. 
[11] 
Q. H. Meng, J. L. Hu, Composites Part a-Applied Science and Manufacturing 2009, 40, 1661. 
[12] 
M. S. Lake, C. S. Hazelton, T. W. Murphey, D. Murphy, "Development of Coilable Longerons 
Using Elastic Memory Composite Material", presented at 43rd Structures, Structural Dynamics, and 
Materials Conference, edited by, Denver, Colorado,  2002 
[13] 
S. C. Arzberger, N. A. Munshi, M. S. Lake, R. Barrett, M. L. Tupper, P. N. Keller, W. Francis, D. 
Campbell, K. Gall, in National Space Missile and Materials Symposium, Seattle, WA 2004. 
[14] 
R. Vaia, J. Baur, Science 2008, 319, 420. 
[15] 
J. Hu, Shape memory polymers and textiles, Woodhead Publishing Limited, Cambridge; 
England 2007. 
[16] 
X. X. Liu, J. L. Hu, K. M. Babu, S. Y. Wang, Textile Research Journal 2008, 78, 1048. 
[17] 
B. K. Kim, S. Y. Lee, M. Xu, Polymer 1996, 37, 5781. 
[18] 
K. Gall, M. L. Dunn, Y. P. Liu, D. Finch, M. Lake, N. A. Munshi, Acta Materialia 2002, 50, 5115. 
[19] 
Y. P. Liu, K. Gall, M. L. Dunn, P. McCluskey, Smart Materials & Structures 2003, 12, 947. 
[20] 
W. Wagermaier, K. Kratz, M. Heuchel, A. Lendlein, in Advances in Polymer Science,  2009, 
DOI: 10.1007/12_2009_25. 
[21] 
H. Tobushi, S. Hayashi, S. Kojima, Jsme International Journal Series I-Solid Mechanics Strength 
of Materials 1992, 35, 296. 
[22] 
S. Hayashi, Properties and Applications of Polyurethane-Series Shape Memory Polymer,  1993. 
[23] 
V. Skakalova, V. Lukes, M. Breza, Macromolecular Chemistry and Physics 1997, 198, 3161. 
[24] 
F. K. Li, Y. Chen, W. Zhu, X. Zhang, M. Xu, Polymer 1998, 39, 6929. 
[25] 
F. K. Li, W. Zhu, X. Zhang, C. T. Zhao, M. Xu, Chinese Journal of Polymer Science 1998, 16, 155. 
[26] 
J. R. Lin, L. W. Chen, Journal Of Applied Polymer Science 1998, 69, 1563. 
[27] 
J. R. Lin, L. W. Chen, Journal Of Applied Polymer Science 1998, 69, 1575. 
[28] 
A. Lendlein, H. Y. Jiang, O. Jünger, R. Langer, Nature 2005, 434, 879. 
[29] 
H. Y. Jiang, S. Kelch, A. Lendlein, Advanced Materials 2006, 18, 1471. 
[30] 
H. Koerner, W. D. Liu, M. Alexander, P. Mirau, H. Dowty, R. A. Vaia, Polymer 2005, 46, 4405. 
[31] 
J. W. Cho, J. W. Kim, Y. C. Jung, N. S. Goo, Macromolecular Rapid Communications 2005, 26, 
412. 
[32] 
R. Mohr, K. Kratz, T. Weigel, M. Lucka-Gabor, M. Moneke, A. Lendlein, Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 2006, 103, 3540. 
[33] 
P. R. Buckley, G. H. McKinley, T. S. Wilson, W. Small, W. J. Benett, J. P. Bearinger, M. W. 
McElfresh, D. J. Maitland, Ieee Transactions On Biomedical Engineering 2006, 53, 2075. 
[34] 
T. Weigel, R. Mohr, A. Lendlein, Smart Materials & Structures 2009, 18. 
[35] 
B. Yang, W. M. Huang, C. Li, C. M. Lee, L. Li, Smart Materials & Structures 2004, 13, 191. 
[36] 
T. Xie, X. Xiao, Chemistry of Materials 2008, 20, 2866. 
[37] 
T. Xie, I. A. Rousseau, Polymer 2009, 50, 1852. 
[38] 
I. Bellin, S. Kelch, R. Langer, A. Lendlein, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of 
the United States of America 2006, 103, 18043.

----- Page 48 (native) -----
47
[39] 
I. Bellin, S. Kelch, A. Lendlein, Journal of Materials Chemistry 2007, 17, 2885. 
[40] 
M. Behl, I. Bellin, S. Kelch, A. Lendlein, Advanced Functional Materials 2009, 19, 102. 
[41] 
T. Chung, A. Rorno-Uribe, P. T. Mather, Macromolecules 2008, 41, 184. 
[42] 
H. Qin, P. T. Mather, Macromolecules 2009, 42, 273. 
[43] 
T. Duerig, A. Pelton, D. Stockel, Materials Science and Engineering a-Structural Materials 
Properties Microstructure and Processing 1999, 275, 149. 
[44] 
D. Mantovani, Jom-Journal of the Minerals Metals & Materials Society 2000, 52, 36. 
[45] 
A. Lendlein, S. Kelch, Functionally Graded Materials Viii 2005, 492-493, 219. 
[46] 
D. Rickert, A. Lendlein, I. Peters, M. A. Moses, R. P. Franke, European Archives of Oto-Rhino-
Laryngology 2006, 263, 215. 
[47] 
P. J. Flory, in Principles of Polymer Chemistry, Cornell University Press, Ithaka 1969, 432. 
[48] 
J. Morshedian, H. A. Khonakdar, S. Rasouli, Macromolecular Theory and Simulations 2005, 14, 
428. 
[49] 
Y. P. Liu, K. Gall, M. L. Dunn, A. R. Greenberg, J. Diani, International Journal of Plasticity 2006, 
22, 279. 
[50] 
J. Diani, Y. P. Liu, K. Gall, Polymer Engineering and Science 2006, 46, 486. 
[51] 
G. Barot, I. J. Rao, Zeitschrift Fur Angewandte Mathematik Und Physik 2006, 57, 652. 
[52] 
T. D. Nguyen, H. Jerry Qi, F. Castro, K. N. Long, Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 
2008, 56, 2792. 
[53] 
H. J. Qi, T. D. Nguyen, F. Castroa, C. M. Yakacki, R. ShandaSa, Journal of the Mechanics and 
Physics of Solids 2008, 56, 1730. 
[54] 
G. Kleinhans, W. Starkl, K. Nuffer, Kunststoffe 1984, 74, 445. 
[55] 
G. Kleinhans, F. Heidenhain, Kunststoffe 1986, 76, 1069. 
[56] 
G. Zhu, G. Liang, Q. Xu, Q. Yu, Journal Of Applied Polymer Science 2003, 90, 1589. 
[57] 
G. M. Zhu, S. G. Xu, J. H. Wang, L. B. Zhang, Radiation Physics and Chemistry 2006, 75, 443. 
[58] 
F. K. Li, W. Zhu, X. Zhang, C. T. Zhao, M. Xu, Journal of Applied Polymer Science 1999, 71, 
1063. 
[59] 
C. D. Liu, S. B. Chun, P. T. Mather, L. Zheng, E. H. Haley, E. B. Coughlin, Macromolecules 2002, 
35, 9868. 
[60] 
Y. Kagami, J. P. Gong, Y. Osada, Macromolecular Rapid Communications 1996, 17, 539. 
[61] 
E. J. Goethals, W. Reyntjens, S. Lievens, Macromolecular Symposia 1998, 132, 57. 
[62] 
W. G. Reyntjens, F. E. Du Prez, E. J. Goethals, Macromolecular Rapid Communications 1999, 
20, 251. 
[63] 
S. H. Lee, J. W. Kim, B. K. Kim, Smart Materials & Structures 2004, 13, 1345. 
[64] 
A. Alteheld, Y. K. Feng, S. Kelch, A. Lendlein, Angewandte Chemie-International Edition 2005, 
44, 1188. 
[65] 
A. Lendlein, J. Zotzmann, Y. K. Feng, A. Alteheld, S. Kelch, Biomacromolecules 2009, 10, 975. 
[66] 
G. Q. Liu, X. B. Ding, Y. P. Cao, Z. H. Zheng, Y. X. Peng, Macromolecular Rapid Communications 
2005, 26, 649. 
[67] 
S. F. Zhang, Y. K. Feng, L. Zhang, J. F. Sun, X. K. Xu, Y. S. Xu, Journal of Polymer Science Part a-
Polymer Chemistry 2007, 45, 768. 
[68] 
S. Mondal, Applied Thermal Engineering 2008, 28, 1536. 
[69] 
M. T. Wang, L. D. Zhang, Journal Of Polymer Science Part B-Polymer Physics 1999, 37, 101. 
[70] 
K. Nagahama, Y. Ueda, T. Ouchi, Y. Ohya, Biomacromolecules 2009, 10, 1789. 
[71] 
H. Koerner, G. Price, N. A. Pearce, M. Alexander, R. A. Vaia, Nature Materials 2004, 3, 115. 
[72] 
J. Kunzelman, T. Chung, P. T. Mather, C. Weder, Journal Of Materials Chemistry 2008, 18, 
1082. 
[73] 
A. Lendlein, R. Langer, Science 2002, 296, 1673. 
[74] 
A. Lendlein, A. M. Schmidt, R. Langer, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America 2001, 98, 842. 
[75] 
N. Y. Choi, A. Lendlein, Soft Matter 2007, 3, 901. 
[76] 
S. Kelch, S. Steuer, A. M. Schmidt, A. Lendlein, Biomacromolecules 2007, 8, 1018.

----- Page 49 (native) -----
48
[77] 
Y. K. Feng, M. Behl, S. Kelch, A. Lendlein, Macromolecular Bioscience 2009, 9, 45. 
[78] 
M. Behl, U. Ridder, Y. Feng, S. Kelch, A. Lendlein, Soft Matter 2009, 5, 676. 
[79] 
J. S. Leng, H. B. Lv, Y. J. Liu, S. Y. Du, Applied Physics Letters 2007, 91. 
[80] 
H. B. Lv, J. S. Leng, S. Y. Du, Behavior And Mechanics Of Multifunctional And Composite 
Materials 2008 2008, 6929, L9291. 
[81] 
D. Zhang, X. Lan, Y. Liu, J. Leng, Proceedings of SPIE-The International Society for Optical 
Engineering 2007, 6526, 65262W/1. 
[82] 
E. Wornyo, K. Gall, F. Yang, W. King, Polymer 2007, 48, 3213. 
[83] 
T. Altebaeumer, B. Gotsmann, H. Pozidis, A. Knoll, U. Duerig, Nano Letters 2008, 8, 4398. 
[84] 
A. Lendlein, A. M. Schmidt, M. Schroeter, R. Langer, Journal of Polymer Science Part a-
Polymer Chemistry 2005, 43, 1369. 
[85] 
C. Liu, P. T. Mather, Journal Of Applied Medical Polymers 2002, 6, 47. 
[86] 
K. M. Lee, P. T. Knight, T. Chung, P. T. Mather, Macromolecules 2008, 41, 4730. 
[87] 
I. A. Rousseau, P. T. Mather, Journal Of The American Chemical Society 2003, 125, 15300. 
[88] 
J. Zotzmann, A. Alteheld, M. Behl, A. Lendlein, Journal of Materials Science-Materials in 
Medicine 2009, 20, 1815. 
[89] 
Y. C. Chung, T. K. Cho, B. C. Chun, Journal of Applied Polymer Science 2009, 112, 2800. 
[90] 
M. Nagata, I. Kitazima, Colloid And Polymer Science 2006, 284, 380. 
[91] 
S. Kelch, N. Y. Choi, Z. Wang, A. Lendlein, Advanced Engineering Materials 2008, 10, 494. 
[92] 
N. Y. Choi, S. Kelch, A. Lendlein, Advanced Engineering Materials 2006, 8, 439. 
[93] 
K. Sakurai, Y. Shirakawa, T. Kashiwagi, T. Takahashi, Polymer 1994, 35, 4238. 
[94] 
K. Sakurai, H. Tanaka, N. Ogawa, T. Takahashi, Journal of Macromolecular Science-Physics 
1997, 36, 703. 
[95] 
C. C. Min, W. J. Cui, J. Z. Bei, S. G. Wang, Polymers for Advanced Technologies 2005, 16, 608. 
[96] 
P. T. Mather, H. G. Jeon, A. Romo-Uribe, T. S. Haddad, J. D. Lichtenhan, Macromolecules 
1999, 32, 1194. 
[97] 
H. G. Jeon, P. T. Mather, T. S. Haddad, Polymer International 2000, 49, 453. 
[98] 
D. Perez-Foullerat, S. Hild, A. Mucke, B. Rieger, Macromolecular Chemistry and Physics 2004, 
205, 374. 
[99] 
S. Xu, M. Zhang, Journal of Applied Polymer Science 2007, 104, 3818. 
[100] 
B. C. Chun, T. K. Cho, Y.-C. Chung, European Polymer Journal 2006, 42, 3367. 
[101] 
L. T. J. Korley, B. D. Pate, E. L. Thomas, P. T. Hammond, Polymer 2006, 47, 3073. 
[102] 
B. S. Lee, B. C. Chun, Y. C. Chung, K. I. Sul, J. W. Cho, Macromolecules 2001, 34, 6431. 
[103] 
J. W. Cho, Y. C. Jung, Y. C. Chung, B. C. Chun, Journal of Applied Polymer Science 2004, 93, 
2410. 
[104] 
K. Kratz, U. Voigt, W. Wagermaier, A. Lendlein, "Shape-memory properties of multiblock 
copolymers consisting of poly(ω-pentadecalactone) hard segments and crystallizable poly(ε-
caprolactone) switching segments", Mater. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc. Volume 1140, Warrendale, PA, 
2009, edited by V. P. Shastri, A. Lendlein, L.-S. Liu, A. Mikos, S. Mitragotri,  2008.1140-HH03-01 
[105] 
W. Wang, P. Ping, X. Chen, X. Jing, Journal of Applied Polymer Science 2007, 104, 4182. 
[106] 
X. L. Luo, X. Y. Zhang, M. T. Wang, D. H. Ma, M. Xu, F. K. Li, Journal of Applied Polymer 
Science 1997, 64, 2433. 
[107] 
X. Y. Ni, X. H. Sun, Journal of Applied Polymer Science 2006, 100, 879. 
[108] 
F. K. Li, J. N. Hou, W. Zhu, X. Zhang, M. Xu, X. L. Luo, D. Z. Ma, B. K. Kim, Journal of Applied 
Polymer Science 1996, 62, 631. 
[109] 
H. M. Jeong, B. K. Kim, Y. J. Choi, Polymer 2000, 41, 1849. 
[110] 
C. C. Tsai, C. C. Chang, C. S. Yu, S. A. Dai, T. M. Wu, W. C. Su, C. N. Chen, F. M. C. Chen, R. J. 
Jeng, Journal of Materials Chemistry 2009, 19, 8484. 
[111] 
H. M. Jeong, B. K. Ahn, B. K. Kim, European Polymer Journal 2001, 37, 2245. 
[112] 
R. S. Ward, J. S. Riffle, United States of America Patent, 1996. 
[113] 
Y. Chen, Y. Liu, H. Fan, H. Li, B. Shi, H. Zhou, B. Peng, Journal of Membrane Science 2007, 287, 
192.

----- Page 50 (native) -----
49
[114] 
N. S. Schneider, L. V. Dusablon, E. W. Snell, R. A. Prosser, L. A. Spano, Polym. Prepr., Amer. 
Chem. Soc., Div. Polym. Chem. 1968, 9, 1481. 
[115] 
W. Wang, Y. Jin, Z. Su, The Journal of Physical Chemistry B 2009. 
[116] 
W. M. Huang, B. Yang, L. An, C. Li, Y. S. Chan, Applied Physics Letters 2005, 86. 
[117] 
B. Yang, W. M. Huang, C. Li, L. Li, Polymer 2006, 47, 1348. 
[118] 
B. Yang, W. M. Huang, C. Li, J. H. Chor, European Polymer Journal 2005, 41, 1123. 
[119] 
C. A. Daniels, Polymers: Structure and Properties, CRC Press, London 1989. 
[120] 
M. Wuttig, N. Yamada, Nature Materials 2007, 6, 824. 
[121] 
S. Raoux, W. WeÅ‚nic, D. Ielmini, Chemical Reviews 2009. 
[122] 
D. Lencer, M. Salinga, B. Grabowski, T. Hickel, J. Neugebauer, M. Wuttig, Nature Materials 
2008, 7, 972. 
[123] 
C. Steimer, V. Coulet, W. Welnic, H. Dieker, R. Detemple, C. Bichara, B. Beuneu, J. P. Gaspard, 
M. Wuttig, Advanced Materials 2008, 20, 4535. 
[124] 
W. D. Song, L. P. Shi, X. S. Miao, C. T. Chong, Advanced Materials 2008, 20, 2394. 
[125] 
W. Welnic, M. Wuttig, Materials Today 2008, 11, 20. 
[126] 
X. X. Zhang, X. C. Wang, H. Zhang, J. J. Niu, R. B. Yin, Indian Journal of Fibre & Textile Research 
2003, 28, 265. 
[127] 
J. L. Zuckerman, B. T. Perry, R. J. Pushaw, D. M. Wyner, Application: WO 
WO Patent 95-US7467, 9534609, 1995. 
[128] 
N. Sarier, E. Onder, Thermochimica Acta 2007, 452, 149. 
[129] 
E. Onder, N. Sarier, E. Cimen, Thermochimica Acta 2008, 467, 63. 
[130] 
P. Lamberg, Applied Energy 2004, 77, 131. 
[131] 
F. Muecklich, H. Janocha, Z. Metallkd. 1996, 87, 357. 
[132] 
T. Saito, T. Furuta, J.-H. Hwang, S. Kuramoto, K. Nishino, N. Suzuki, R. Chen, A. Yamada, K. Ito, 
Y. Seno, T. Nonaka, H. Ikehata, N. Nagasako, C. Iwamoto, Y. Ikuhara, T. Sakuma, Science 2003, 300, 
464. 
[133] 
H. Lee, S. M. Dellatore, W. M. Miller, P. B. Messersmith, Science 2007, 318, 426. 
[134] 
L. Schadler, Nat Mater 2007, 6, 257. 
[135] 
D. C. Luís, A. S. F. Rute, B. Verónica de Zea, J. L. R. Sidney, Advanced Materials 2009, 21, 509. 
[136] 
V. P. Veedu, A. Cao, X. Li, K. Ma, C. Soldano, S. Kar, P. M. Ajayan, M. N. Ghasemi-Nejhad, Nat 
Mater 2006, 5, 457. 
[137] 
E. Coronado, J. R. Galan-Mascaros, C. J. Gomez-Garcia, V. Laukhin, Nature 2000, 408, 447. 
[138] 
A. F. Abouraddy, M. Bayindir, G. Benoit, S. D. Hart, K. Kuriki, N. Orf, O. Shapira, F. Sorin, B. 
Temelkuran, Y. Fink, Nat Mater 2007, 6, 336. 
[139] 
D. Kan, T. Terashima, R. Kanda, A. Masuno, K. Tanaka, S. Chu, H. Kan, A. Ishizumi, Y. 
Kanemitsu, Y. Shimakawa, M. Takano, Nat Mater 2005, 4, 816. 
[140] 
S. Torquato, S. Hyun, A. Donev, Physical Review Letters 2002, 89, 266601. 
[141] 
K. Ueki, A. Ohashi, Y. Anayama,  1992, 130. 
[142] 
L. M. Schetky, Intell. Mater. 2008, 317. 
[143] 
A. C. Balazs, T. Emrick, T. P. Russell, Science 2006, 314, 1107. 
[144] 
B. K. Yap, R. Xia, M. Campoy-Quiles, P. N. Stavrinou, D. D. C. Bradley, Nat Mater 2008, 7, 376. 
[145] 
G. Leo, R. Helmut, S. Hans, Angewandte Chemie International Edition in English 1981, 20, 
305. 
[146] 
C. Khosla, P. B. Harbury, Nature 2001, 409, 247. 
[147] 
M. T. Tse, Nat Rev Drug Discov 2007, 6, 784. 
[148] 
E. P. Holowka, V. Z. Sun, D. T. Kamei, T. J. Deming, Nat Mater 2007, 6, 52. 
[149] 
J. B. Lee, Y. H. Roh, S. H. Um, H. Funabashi, W. Cheng, J. J. Cha, P. Kiatwuthinon, D. A. Muller, 
D. Luo, Nat Nano 2009, 4, 430. 
[150] 
L. Hartmann, H. G. Börner, Advanced Materials 2009, 21, 3425. 
[151] 
W. Li, A. Gharavi, Q. Wang, L. Yu, Advanced Materials 1998, 10, 927. 
[152] 
G. R. Whittell, I. Manners, Advanced Materials 2007, 19, 3439.

----- Page 51 (native) -----
50
[153] 
J. S. Wilson, M. J. Frampton, J. J. Michels, L. Sardone, G. Marletta, R. H. Friend, P. Samorì, H. L. 
Anderson, F. Cacialli, Advanced Materials 2005, 17, 2659. 
[154] 
R. Zentel, Advanced Materials 1989, 1, 321. 
[155] 
M. E. Itkis, X. Chi, A. W. Cordes, R. C. Haddon, Science 2002, 296, 1443. 
[156] 
K. Matyjaszewski, N. V. Tsarevsky, Nat Chem 2009, 1, 276. 
[157] 
S. I. Stupp, V. LeBonheur, K. Walker, L. S. Li, K. E. Huggins, M. Keser, A. Amstutz, Science 1997, 
276, 384. 
[158] 
T. Ihor, M. Sergiy, Advanced Materials 2009, 21, 241. 
[159] 
C. Marcelo, Q. Mohiuddin Abdul, S. Sunil Kumar, H. Rainer, Advanced Materials 2009, 9999, 
NA. 
[160] 
M. Berggren, D. Nilsson, N. D. Robinson, Nat Mater 2007, 6, 3. 
[161] 
A. T. Ponomarenko, O. Figovsky, V. G. Shevchenko, Multi-Functional Materials And 
Structures, Pts 1 And 2 2008, 47-50, 81. 
[162] 
J. Chen, R. Ramasubramaniam, C. Xue, H. Liu, Advanced Functional Materials 2006, 16, 114. 
[163] 
P. T. Curtis, Advanced Performance Materials 1996, 3, 279. 
[164] 
J. W. Lee, D. L. Hart, E. T. Shinn, A. J. Cooley, E. L. White, P. W. MacDowell, E. Schomburg, G. 
A. Slenski, A. N. Watkins, R. L. Yang, Materials for Space Applications 2005, 851, 177. 
[165] 
E. G. Vlakh, E. F. Panarin, T. B. Tennikova, K. Suck, C. Kasper, Journal Of Biomedical Materials 
Research Part A 2005, 75A, 333. 
[166] 
J. S. Leng, X. Lan, Y. J. Liu, S. Y. Du, Smart Materials & Structures 2009, 18. 
[167] 
L. Zhou, C. Gao, D. Zhu, W. Xu, F. F. Chen, A. Palkar, L. Echegoyen, E. S.-W. Kong, Chem.--Eur. 
J. 2009, 15, 1389. 
[168] 
Y. Shi, C. Tu, Q. Zhu, H. Qian, J. Ren, C. Liu, X. Zhu, D. Yan, E. S.-W. Kong, P. He, 
Nanotechnology 2008, 19, 445609/1. 
[169] 
C. Chen, Y. Lu, E. S. Kong, Y. Zhang, S.-T. Lee, Small 2008, 4, 1313. 
[170] 
K. Gall, M. L. Dunn, Y. P. Liu, G. Stefanic, D. Balzar, Applied Physics Letters 2004, 85, 290. 
[171] 
W. Sokolowski, A. Metcalfe, S. Hayashi, L. Yahia, J. Raymond, Biomedical Materials 2007, 2, 
S23. 
[172] 
H. M. Wache, D. J. Tartakowska, A. Hentrich, M. H. Wagner, Journal Of Materials Science-
Materials In Medicine 2003, 14, 109. 
[173] 
M. Y. Razzaq, M. Anhalt, L. Frormann, B. Weidenfeller, Materials Science and Engineering a-
Structural Materials Properties Microstructure and Processing 2007, 471, 57. 
[174] 
M. Y. Razzaq, M. Anhalt, L. Frormann, B. Weidenfeller, Materials Science and Engineering a-
Structural Materials Properties Microstructure and Processing 2007, 444, 227. 
[175] 
M. Y. Razzaq, M. Behl, K. Kratz, A. Lendlein, "Controlled Actuation of Shape-Memory 
Nanocomposites by Application of an Alternating Magnetic Field", Mater. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc. 
Volume 1140, Warrendale, PA, 2009, edited by V. P. Shastri, A. Lendlein, L.-S. Liu, A. Mikos, S. 
Mitragotri,  2008.1140-HH05-07 
[176] 
S. Conti, M. Lenz, M. Rumpf, Materials Science And Engineering A-Structural Materials 
Properties Microstructure And Processing 2008, 481, 351. 
[177] 
X. K. Zhang, Y. F. Li, J. Q. Xiao, E. D. Wetzel, Journal Of Applied Physics 2003, 93, 7124. 
[178] 
C. S. Hazelton, S. C. Arzberger, M. S. Lake, N. A. Munshi, J. Adv. Mater. (Covina, CA, U. S.) 
2007, 39, 35. 
[179] 
J. S. Leng, X. L. Wu, Y. J. Liu, Journal Of Applied Polymer Science 2009, 114, 2455. 
[180] 
D. J. Maitland, T. Wilson, M. Metzger, D. L. Schumann, Biomedical Nanotechnology 
Architectures And Applications 2002, 4626, 394. 
[181] 
D. J. Maitland, T. Wilson, D. L. Schumann, G. Baer, 2002 Ieee/Leos Annual Meeting 
Conference Proceedings, Vols 1 And 2 2002, 359. 
[182] 
W. Small, M. F. Metzger, T. S. Wilson, D. J. Maitland, Ieee Journal Of Selected Topics In 
Quantum Electronics 2005, 11, 892. 
[183] 
C. Liu, P. T. Mather, ANTEC ... conference proceedings   2004, 3, 3080.

----- Page 52 (native) -----
51
[184] 
M. J. Biercuk, M. C. Llaguno, M. Radosavljevic, J. K. Hyun, A. T. Johnson, J. E. Fischer, Applied 
Physics Letters 2002, 80, 2767. 
[185] 
C. Liang, C. A. Rogers, E. Malafeew, Journal Of Intelligent Material Systems And Structures 
1997, 8, 380. 
[186] 
K. Gall, M. Mikulas, N. A. Munshi, F. Beavers, M. Tupper, Journal Of Intelligent Material 
Systems And Structures 2000, 11, 877. 
[187] 
S. J. Ash Benjamin J. , Rogers Diana F. ,Schadler Linda S. , Siegel Richard W. ,, A. T. Benicewicz 
Brian C. , Mat. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc. 2001, 661, KK2.10.1. 
[188] 
J. M. Hampikian, B. C. Heaton, F. C. Tong, Z. Q. Zhang, C. P. Wong, Materials Science & 
Engineering C-Biomimetic and Supramolecular Systems 2006, 26, 1373. 
[189] 
M. A. B. Kruft, A. Benzina, R. Blezer, L. H. Koole, Biomaterials 1996, 17, 1803. 
[190] 
S. M. Shaolian, E. Shaoulian, M. R. Henson, S. Moaddeb, Application: US 
US Patent 2006-361196, 2006212113, 2006. 
[191] 
K. k. Cui Jing, Lendlein Andreas, Mater. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc. 2009, 1190, 1190. 
[192] 
H. J. Yoo, Y. C. Jung, N. G. Sahoo, J. W. Cho, Journal Of Macromolecular Science Part B-Physics 
2006, 45, 441. 
[193] 
G. A. Jimenez, S. C. Jana, Polymer Engineering And Science 2009, 49, 2020. 
[194] 
Q. H. Meng, J. L. Hu, Y. Zhu, Journal Of Applied Polymer Science 2007, 106, 837. 
[195] 
S. Mondal, J. L. Hu, Iranian Polymer Journal 2006, 15, 135. 
[196] 
I. H. Paik, N. S. Goo, Y. C. Jung, J. W. Cho, Smart Materials & Structures 2006, 15, 1476. 
[197] 
M. Taya, W. J. Kim, K. Ono, Mechanics Of Materials 1998, 28, 53. 
[198] 
B. P. Grady, F. Pompeo, R. L. Shambaugh, D. E. Resasco, Journal Of Physical Chemistry B 2002, 
106, 5852. 
[199] 
J. C. Grunlan, A. R. Mehrabi, M. V. Bannon, J. L. Bahr, Advanced Materials 2004, 16, 150. 
[200] 
A. Allaoui, S. Bai, H. M. Cheng, J. B. Bai, Composites Science And Technology 2002, 62, 1993. 
[201] 
N. G. Sahoo, Y. C. Jung, N. S. Goo, J. W. Cho, Macromolecular Materials And Engineering 
2005, 290, 1049. 
[202] 
N. G. Sahoo, Y. C. Jung, H. J. Yoo, J. W. Cho, Composites Science And Technology 2007, 67, 
1920. 
[203] 
I. S. Gunes, G. A. Jimenez, S. C. Jana, Carbon 2009, 47, 981. 
[204] 
I. S. Gunes, G. A. Jimenez, S. C. Jana, Materials And Devices For Smart Systems Iii 2009, 1129, 
155. 
[205] 
J. S. Leng, H. B. Lv, Y. J. Liu, S. Y. Du, Journal Of Applied Physics 2008, 104. 
[206] 
J. S. Leng, W. M. Huang, X. Lan, Y. J. Liu, S. Y. Du, Applied Physics Letters 2008, 92. 
[207] 
E. Binzen, A. Lendlein, S. Kelch, D. Rickert, R. P. Franke, Clinical Hemorheology and 
Microcirculation 2004, 30, 283. 
[208] 
E. Binzen, D. Rickert, S. Kelch, R. Fuhrmann, Clinical Hemorheology and Microcirculation 
2003, 28, 183. 
[209] 
B. Hiebl, D. Rickert, R. Fuhrmann, F. Jung, A. Lendlein, R. P. Franke, "Tissue Integration of Two 
Different Shape-Memory Polymers with Poly(ε-Caprolactone) Switching Segment in Rats", Mater. 
Res. Soc. Symp. Proc. Volume 1140, Warrendale, PA, 2009, edited by V. P. Shastri, A. Lendlein, L.-S. 
Liu, A. Mikos, S. Mitragotri,  2008.1140-HH10-04 
[210] 
D. Rickert, R. P. Franke, C. A. Fernandez, S. Kilroy, L. Yan, M. A. Moses, Clinical Hemorheology 
and Microcirculation 2007, 36, 47. 
[211] 
D. Rickert, R. P. Franke, A. Lendlein, S. Kelch, M. A. Moses, J Biomed Mater Res A 2007, 83, 
558. 
[212] 
D. Rickert, A. Lendlein, S. Kelch, R. P. Franke, M. A. Moses, Biomedizinische Technik 2005, 50, 
92. 
[213] 
D. Rickert, A. Lendlein, S. Kelch, M. A. Moses, R. P. Franke, Clinical Hemorheology and 
Microcirculation 2005, 32, 117. 
[214] 
D. Rickert, A. Lendlein, A. M. Schmidt, S. Kelch, W. Roehlke, R. Fuhrmann, R. P. Franke, 
Journal of Biomedical Materials Research Part B-Applied Biomaterials 2003, 67B, 722.

----- Page 53 (native) -----
52
[215] 
D. Rickert, M. A. Moses, A. Lendlein, S. Kelch, R. P. Franke, Clinical Hemorheology and 
Microcirculation 2003, 28, 175. 
[216] 
D. Rickert, M. O. Scheithauer, S. Coskun, S. Kelch, A. Lendlein, R. P. Franke, Clinical 
Hemorheology and Microcirculation 2007, 36, 301. 
[217] 
D. Rickert, M. O. Scheithauer, S. Coskun, A. Lendlein, S. Kelch, R. P. Franke, Biomedizinische 
Technik 2006, 51, 116. 
[218] 
A. Lendlein, M. Colussi, P. Neuenschwander, U. W. Suter, Macromolecular Chemistry and 
Physics 2001, 202, 2702. 
[219] 
A. Lendlein, P. Neuenschwander, U. W. Suter, Macromolecular Chemistry and Physics 2000, 
201, 1067. 
[220] 
C. G. Pitt, M. M. Gratzl, G. L. Kimmel, J. Surles, A. Schindler, Biomaterials 1981, 2, 215. 
[221] 
M. Bertmer, A. Buda, I. Blomenkamp-Hofges, S. Kelch, A. Lendlein, Macromolecules 2005, 38, 
3793. 
[222] 
M. Bertmer, A. Buda, I. Blomenkamp-Höfges, S. Kelch, A. Lendlein, Macromolecular Symposia 
2005, 230, 110. 
[223] 
L. L. Liu, W. Cai, Materials Letters 2009, 63, 1656. 
[224] 
F. Migneco, Y. C. Huang, R. K. Birla, S. J. Hollister, Biomaterials 2009, 30, 6479. 
[225] 
T. Pretsch, I. Jakob, W. Müller, Polymer Degradation and Stability 2009, 94, 61. 
[226] 
X. J. Yu, S. B. Zhou, X. T. Zheng, Y. Xiao, T. Guo, Journal Of Physical Chemistry C 2009, 113, 
17630. 
[227] 
D. A. Olson, S. E. A. Gratton, J. M. DeSimone, V. V. Sheares, Journal of the American Chemical 
Society 2006, 128, 13625. 
[228] 
A. T. Neffe, B. D. Hanh, S. Steuer, A. Lendlein, Advanced Materials 2009, 21, 3394  
[229] 
A. T. Neffe, B. D. Hanh, S. Steuer, C. Wischke, A. Lendlein, "Thermomechanical Properties and 
Shape-Memory Capability of Drug Loaded Semi-Crystalline Polyestermethacrylate Networks", Mater. 
Res. Soc. Symp. Proc. Volume 1190, Warrendale, PA, 2009, edited by V. P. S. A. Lendlein, K. Gall 
2009.1190-NN06-02 
[230] 
C. Wischke, A. T. Neffe, S. Steuer, A. Lendlein, Journal of Controlled Release 2009, 138, 243. 
[231] 
C. Wischke, A. T. Neffe, S. Steuer, A. Lendlein, "Amorphous Polymer Networks Combining 
Three Functionalities - Shape-Memory, Biodegradability, and Drug Release", presented at Active 
Polymers., Mater. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc. Volume 1190, Warrendale, PA, 2009, edited by,  2009.1190-
NN11-34 
[232] 
C. Wischke, A. T. Neffe, A. Lendlein, in Advances in Polymer Science,  2009, DOI: 
10.1007/12_2009_29.

----- Page 54 (native) -----
53
Figure captions: 
Figure 1: Different architectures for a) shape-memory polymers and b) multifunctional 
materials. 
 
Figure 2: Examples for polymer network architectures suitable for exhibiting a shape-
memory effect (molecular switches: red; netpoints: grey): A) polymer networks consisting of 
switching segments linked by covalent netpoints, B) AB-polymer network, C) polymer 
network having side chains as switching segments, D) multiphase polymer network consisting 
of ABA triblock chain segments linked by covalent netpoints. Nomenclature: N indicates 
SMP network, M: one phase SMP network, B: biphasic SMP network, G: biphasic SMP 
network with grafted switching segments, T: biphasic SMP network obtained from triblock 
copolymers. Last one/two letter indicates thermal transition of phase(s):  A glassy/amorphous, 
C crystalline, LC liquid crystalline phase. 
 
Figure 3: Categories of thermoplastic SMPs. A With crystalline hard domains and amorphous 
or crystalline switching domains (T-A-C, T-C-C), B with amorphous hard domains and 
amorphous or crystalline switching domains (T-A-A, T-C-A). Nomenclature: T indicates 
thermoplastic SMP, A a glassy/amorphous, C a crystalline/liquid crystalline phase. 
 
Figure 4: Multimaterial Systems Consisting of Several Different Molecules. A) Binary 
blends of multiblock copolymers forming a SMP (B-C-C), B) Interpenetrating polymer 
network (IPN) forming a SMP. Nomenclature: B: blend, C: crystalline phase providing Ttrans 
C: crystalline phase providing Tperm N: polymer network, I: interpenetrating network, C: 
crystalline phase providing Ttrans,1 C: crystalline phase providing Ttrans,2. 
 
Figure 5. Water vapor permeability of two polyester polyurethanes with Ttrans = Tg = 25 °C 
(TSPU(a)) or Ttrans = Tm = 50 °C (TSPU(b)) as a function of temperature.113 
 
Figure 6: Photo series demonstrating the change of transparency for two different poly(ε-
caprolactone) based SMP. At T < Ttrans the materials are in their temporary shape. When the 
thermally-induced SME is triggered by heating to T > Ttrans the SMPs recover their permanent 
shape. a) Covalent polymer network from poly(ε-caprolactone)dimethacrylate (category N-
M-C). At T < Ttrans the material is opaque as the crystalline domains fixing the temporary 
shape are scattering. When heated to T > Ttrans the crystalline domains are molten and the 
material is transparent. b) In contrast, in one component SMP, a multiblock copolymer form 
poly(ε-caprolactone) and polypentadecadolactone (category T-C-C) materials remains opaque 
as the hard domains forming segments maintain their crystallinity. 
 
Figure 7: Influence of polymer network architecture on recovery of ε as a function of 
temperature. a)  ˙̅ ˙ ˙̅ Recovery of strain ε of a covalently crosslinked SMP network based on 
poly[(ε-caprolactone)-co-glycolide]dimethacrylate (N-M-C) at a heating rate of 2 K·min-1; 
____ First derivation of ε of poly[(ε-caprolactone)-co-glycolide]dimethacrylate network.76 b) --
-- Recovery of strain ε of a  covalently crosslinked SMP  based on oligo[(L-lactide)-ran-
glycolide] (N-M-A) at a heating rate of 3 K·min-1; ____ First derivation of ε of polymer 
network from oligo[(L-lactide)-ran-glycolide].75 
 
Figure 8: Photographs of the SME of a 1.5 mg mL-1 PCO/dye  sample (illuminated with 365 
nm UV light) during (a) deformation (75 °C, 600 kPa), (b) cooling/fixing (5 °C, 600 kPa), (c) 
unloading (5 °C, 4 kPa), and (d) recovery (75 °C, 4 kPa).

----- Page 55 (native) -----
54
Figure 9: Dielectric constant as a function of temperature for a polymer (w = const). Light 
grey, contribution from the electrons, middle grey contribution from pendant groups, dark 
grey, contribution from the polymer backbone, black contribution from crystalline dipoles. 
 
Figure 10: Magnetically-induced shape-memory effect of thermoplastic composite consisting 
of Fe(III)oxide nanoparticles in a silica matrix and polyetherurethanes. Taken from 32 
Figure 11: Collapsed and actuated SMPU composite (10 wt% NiZn ferrite) for: a) flower 
shaped device; and b) foam device (taken from 33) 
Figure 12: Series of photographs demonstrating the shape-recovery of thermoset SMP beam 
with 10 vol.% MEE particle content. Taken from 178 
Figure 13: Comparison of the stress recovery before (left) and after (right) remote actuation 
by infrared irradiation. Neat polymer (M) bends and does not recover. In contrast, a 0.57 
vol.% (1 wt.%) CNT nanocomposite (PCN) (20 mm × 4 mm × 0.4 mm, deformed 300%) 
contracts and exerts ~ 19 J to lift a 60 g weight (moving bottom clamp) 3.3 cm with ~588 N 
of force on exposure to infrared irradiation (arrow indicates moving direction). Taken from 71 
Figure 14: Fluoroscopic image of 3 vol% tantalum-filled SMP coils with varying diameter 
immersed under 50 cc’s of water. The three coils had coil diameters of 10 mm, and wire 
diameters of 0.25 (uppermost), 0.45 (lower left), and 0.088 mm (lower right). Taken from188 
Figure 15: Electrically stimulated stress recovery of 10.2 vol.% (16.7 wt%) CNT 
nanocomposite (20 mm × 4 mm × 0.4 mm, deformed 100%), exerting ~ 6 J to lift a 60 g mass 
1 cm. To maintain sufficient Joule heating, the current was increased with increased recovery, 
as CNT nanocomposites are piezoresistive. (taken from ref. 71) 
Figure 16: Series of photographs showing the macroscopic SME of SMP/CB/SCF composite 
containing 5 wt% CB and 2 wt% SCF. The permanent shape is a plane stripe and the 
temporary shape was fixed as right-angled shape. Taken from ref. 205 
Figure 17: Resistivity vs volume fraction of CB with/without 0.5 vol% of Ni. Red symbol, 
right after fabrication; blue symbol, one month later. The inset Fig. illustrates how the 
resistance was measured. Taken from ref. 206 
Figure 18: Tensile tests of amorphous polymer hydrolytically degradable SMP networks at 
room temperature, 37 °C and 70 °C in air and water. 
 
Figure 19: a) Hydrolytic degradation of polymer networks from ε-caprolactone based on 
different 
acrylate 
networks 
(○: 
poly(ε-caprolactone)dimethacrylate, 
¡: 
poly(ε-
caprolactone)dimethacrylate 
and 
n-butyl 
acrylate, 
U: 
poly[(ε-caprolactone)-co-
glycolide]dimethacrylate (9 wt%), :  poly[(ε-caprolactone)-co-glycolide]dimethacrylate (13 
wt%));  b) hydrolytic degradation of copolyesterurethane networks (Mn of macrotetraoles: 
▲:1 kD, : 5 kD, ●: 10 kD)   
a) Permission requested from American Chemical Society, USA;

----- Page 56 (native) -----
55
b) Permission requested from Wiley InterScience, UK 
 
Figure 20: 
Illustration of the principle of an SMP urether stent from oCG-DMA derived 
network. Permission requested from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA

----- Page 57 (native) -----
56
Figure 1 
polymer 
architectures 
for thermally-
induced SME 
A 
B 
multifunctional 
systems 
covalent 
network 
 
 
macromolecule 
multiblock 
copolymer 
 
 
one-component 
system 
multimaterial 
system 
(blends, IPN) 
 
 
 
multimaterial 
systems 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2

----- Page 58 (native) -----
57
 
N-M-A 
N-M-C 
N-M-LC 
 
N-B-A-A 
N-B-A-C 
N-B-C-A 
N-B-A-LC 
N-G-C-C 
 
N-T-A-C 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3

----- Page 59 (native) -----
58
 
 
Cat  
T-C-C 
 
T-C-A   
Cat  
T-A-A 
 
T-A-C 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4

----- Page 60 (native) -----
59
Category B-C-C 
Category N-I-C-C

----- Page 61 (native) -----
60
Figure 5

----- Page 62 (native) -----
61
Figure 6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7

----- Page 63 (native) -----
62
 
 
20
30
40
50
0
20
40
60
80
100
ε [%]
T [°C]
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
v [%] z K
-1
a)
 
 
0
5
10
15
20
T [°C]
ε [%]
-2,0
-1,6
-1,2
-0,8
-0,4
0,0
 
v [%] z K
-1
b)
50
60
70

----- Page 64 (native) -----
63
Figure 8

----- Page 65 (native) -----
64
Figure 9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tm
dielectric constant 
T 
Tg

----- Page 66 (native) -----
65
 
Figure 10

----- Page 67 (native) -----
66
 
Figure 11

----- Page 68 (native) -----
67
 
 
Figure 12

----- Page 69 (native) -----
68
 
 
 
Figure 13 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 14

----- Page 70 (native) -----
69

----- Page 71 (native) -----
70
 
 
Figure 15

----- Page 72 (native) -----
71
 
 
 
 
Figure 16

----- Page 73 (native) -----
72
 
 
Figure 17

----- Page 74 (native) -----
73
 
 
Figure 18

----- Page 75 (native) -----
74
 
 
 
Figure 19 
0
75
150 225 300 375 450
20
40
60
80
100
 
 
 
 
μrel [%]
td [d]
a)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
20
40
60
80
100
 
 
td [d]
μrel  [%]
b)

----- Page 76 (native) -----
75
 
Figure 20