

----- Page 1 (native) -----
JOURNAL OF THE EXPERIMENTAL ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR
ON THE ORIGINS OF NAMING AND OTHER SYMBOLIC BEHAVIOR
PAULINE J. HORNE AND C. FERGUS LOWE
UNIVERSITY OF WALES
We identify naming as the basic unit of verbal behavior, describe the conditions under which it is
learned, and outline its crucial role in the development of stimulus classes and, hence, of symbolic
behavior. Drawing upon B. F. Skinner's functional analysis and the theoretical work of G. H. Mead
and L. S. Vygotsky, we chart how a child, through learning listener behavior and then echoic re-
sponding, learns bidirectional relations between classes of objects or events and his or her own
speaker-listener behavior, thus acquiring naming-a higher order behavioral relation. Once estab-
lished, the bidirectionality incorporated in naming extends across behavior classes such as those
identified by Skinner as the mand, tact, and intraverbal so that each becomes a variant of the name
relation. We indicate how our account informs the specification of rule-governed behavior and pro-
vides the basis for an experimental analysis of symbolic behavior. Furthermore, because naming is
both evoked by, and itself evokes, classes of events it brings about new or emergent behavior such as
that reported in studies of stimulus equivalence. This account is supported by data from a wide range
of match-to-sample studies that also provide evidence that stimulus equivalence in humans is not a
unitary phenomenon but the outcome of a number of different types of naming behavior.
Key words: naming, verbal behavior, language, symbolic behavior, stimulus equivalence, listener
behavior, rule governance, speech for self, consciousness, match to sample, children
Within behavior analysis in recent years
there has been an upsurge of interest in the
study of human behavior in general and,
more particularly, in those complex behavior-
al phenomena that many previously consid-
ered to be the exclusive concern of cognitive
psychology. Language,
or verbal behavior,
and its interactions with other behavior are
now at the center of a great deal of research,
and it is increasingly evident that behavior an-
alysts wish to reclaim the high ground of be-
havioral complexity and deal with issues such
as word meaning, semantic relations, and
symbolic behavior
(e.g., Catania, 1992, pp.
152-156; Dugdale & Lowe, 1990; Hayes &
Hayes, 1992; Lowe, 1983; Sidman, 1990,
1992). But to specify, let alone account for,
word meaning and symbolic behavior is not
at all straightforward. As Premack (1990) has
We are grateful to A. Charles Catania for his excellent
advice and encouragement and to T. R. Miles for his
helpful comments on an earlier version of the paper. We
are indebted to Neil Browning for his work in the pro-
duction of the figures and to Sue Peet andJudith Brooke
for their efforts in the preparation of the manuscript. We
are particularly indebted to Pat Lowe for her inspiration
and editorial skill in making our verbal productions
meaningful. Many of the arguments in this paper were
first presented at the May 1994 meeting of the Associa-
tion for Behavior Analysis in Atlanta.
Correspondence and requests for reprints should be
addressed
to either Pauline Horne or Fergus Lowe,
School of Psychology, University of Wales, Bangor, Gwy-
nedd, LL57 2DG, United Kingdom.
observed, it has proved to be enormously dif-
ficult for the various approaches within psy-
chology and other disciplines to define what
a word or a name is and how naming differs
from other forms of behavior (see Quine,
1960; Terrace, 1985). Within cognitive psy-
chology, for example, Harnad (1990) has not-
ed that a flaw in the dominant paradigm, in
which "the mind is a symbolic system and
cognition is symbol manipulation" (p. 336;
see also Fodor, 1975), is that it has a "symbol
grounding problem" (p. 335; see also Searle,
1980): That is, there is no way of relating the
symbols in the system to the real world. In
the absence of such a relation, the "symbols"
cannot symbolize or mean anything-a seri-
ous flaw by any account.
The central aims of the present paper are
thus ambitious. They are (a) to specify the
basic unit of verbal behavior, or language,
which we identify as the name relation, and
(b)
to show how
this behavioral
unit
is
learned and comes to symbolize objects and
events in the real world (cf. Harnad, 1990).
Our account builds upon that of Skinner's
Verbal Behavior (1957), although Skinner,
while acknowledging that names differ from
tacts, did not himself use naming as a techni-
cal term. The term now features prominently
in the behavior-analytic literature, but sel-
dom, if ever, in the context of any behavioral
specification of what it is. We aim not only to
185
1996, 659 185-241
NUMBER I (JANUARY)

----- Page 2 (native) -----
PAULINEJ. HORNE and C. FERGUS LOWE
provide a behavioral specification that will
help to standardize use of the term in the
literature, but also to present a functional
analysis of how naming comes about from
early infancy onwards, and then, once it is
established, how it affects, and is in turn af-
fected by, other behavior.
There are problems inherent in using the
term naming, laden as it is with connotations
from existing usage in behavior analysis, oth-
er science areas (e.g., psycholinguistics, de-
velopmental psychology, cognitive psycholo-
gy) and, of course, everyday life itself. But
there are also considerable advantages. An ef-
fective
behavioral
specification of naming
and how it comes about would, if generally
accepted, not only advance behavior analysis
but might also foster productive interaction
with scientists from other traditions who, al-
though they may frequently refer to naming,
nevertheless are constrained by the lack of a
fundamental and specific behavioral under-
pinning to its usage. Thus, although we are
mindful that our readers will need to hear
naming as we specify it and will have to ignore
misleading connotations from other contexts,
we have nevertheless chosen the term name
to indicate the basic verbal unit.
In recent times many of the innovative
ideas within behavior analysis about how ver-
bal behavior should be characterized have
come from researchers working in the area
of what has been termed stimulus equivalence.
To understand how this research relates to
linguistic issues it may be helpful to consider
some pioneering work by Murray Sidman,
who used "symbolic" match-to-sample pro-
cedures to teach conditional discriminations
to youths with mental retardation (Sidman,
1971; Sidman & Cresson, 1973). The general
procedure
is illustrated in Figure
1 which
shows that subjects first learned to select (or
demonstrated that they were already able to
select) a particular comparison stimulus (e.g.,
picture of a car) upon hearing a dictated
word (e.g., "car"). This performance, which
was repeated for many spoken word-picture
relations, is shown as an AB relation in Figure
2. Subjects were next taught (upper right of
Figure 1) to select printed words (e.g., CAR)
upon hearing the corresponding spoken
words (e.g., "car"), shown as AC in Figure 2.
Establishing such conditional relations with
match-to-sample procedures was not of
course new and had previously been dem-
onstrated with many animal species, but Sid-
man and colleagues found when further test-
ing their subjects that entirely new untrained
behavioral relations emerged; these relations
were not predicted by known laws of learn-
ing. Thus, when presented with the printed
words (e.g., CAR; lower left, Figure 1), sub-
jects selected the corresponding picture (e.g.,
of a car) and when presented with the picture
they selected the corresponding printed word
(lower right, Figure 1). These emergent re-
lations are shown in Figure 2 as CB and BC,
respectively. Following the establishment of
40 trained relations (20 AB and 20 AC), 40
new relations (CB and BC) were present
when tested. Sidman has described the emer-
gent performances (CB and BC) as equiva-
lence relations and has argued that these results
show that stimulus equivalence had been estab-
lished between the three stimulus members
of each class (i.e., the auditory name stimu-
lus, the corresponding printed word, and the
corresponding picture). Over the two de-
cades that have passed since these studies,
their findings have been replicated and ex-
tended with human subjects of varying ages
and with differing stimulus modalities and
types
of match-to-sample procedures
(see
Saunders & Green, 1992; Sidman, 1994).
Describing these behavioral outcomes of
match-to-sample procedures
as stimulus
equivalence had very important implications
for subsequent research in this area. In two
key papers, Sidman and colleagues (Sidman
et al., 1982; Sidman & Tailby, 1982) argued
that the concept of equivalence as used in
mathematics could be
applied
to
perfor-
mance on conditional discrimination tasks in
ways that would bring methodological rigor
to the definition and identification of "be-
havioral" equivalence. The three defining
characteristics of mathematical equivalence
(i.e., reflexivity, symmetry, and transitivity)
were, accordingly, borrowed and applied to
behavioral relations. Thus, according to the
theorists who have been most influential in
this area, the property of reflexivity (e.g., A =
A) is inferred from match-to-sample perfor-
mance when subjects show generalized iden-
tity matching; symmetry is inferred when, hav-
ing trained subjects to select Stimulus B upon
presentation of Stimulus A (i.e., an A-B rela-
tion), the subjects proceed without further
186

----- Page 3 (native) -----
NAMING AMD OTHER SYMBOLIC BEHAVIOR
TRAINING
I~
~
I
-
IU~
TEST
Fig. 1.
An example of a match-to-sample procedure (see Sidman, 1971). This shows a five-key response panel;
during training (top) the sample stimuli are dictated words and the comparison stimuli are visual stimuli (pictures
or words). At the start of each trial, the sample (e.g., the dictated word "car") is presented via tape recorder; touching
the center key then brings on the comparison stimuli on the outer keys. Reinforcers are delivered for selecting the
stimulus that corresponds to the sample (e.g., the picture of a car or the printed word CAR). In test trials (bottom)
the printed words (e.g., CAR) or the picture (e.g., of a car) are presented as samples. Stimulus equivalence is
demonstrated when, in the absence of reinforcement, the corresponding comparison picture is selected when the
printed word is the sample, and vice versa.
training to select A when presented with B
(i.e., B-A); transitivity is inferred when, having
established A-B and a second relation B-C,
subjects proceed without further training to
select C when presented with A. When sub-
jects show evidence of meeting all three cri-
teria with a given set of stimuli (e.g., A, B,
and C in the above example), then it is con-
cluded that all of the behavioral relations
among the stimuli, even those that have been
trained, are in fact equivalence relations and
that the stimuli concerned form an equiva-
lence class.
The introduction of the mathematically
based concept of equivalence brought togeth-
er these different behavioral relations under
a common name and gave rise to the notion
that there was a unitary psychological phe-
nomenon called stimulus equivalence that
could be assayed using match-to-sample pro-
cedures. In addition, what had been a num-
ber of different dependent variable measures
on match-to-sample tasks were now viewed as
measuring a single determining variable-
namely equivalence-that purportedly gives
rise to a range of linguistic phenomena that
have puzzled psychologists, psycholinguists,
and philosophers for many years. Thus, Sid-
man, for example, has argued that stimulus
equivalence is a linguistic prerequisite (Sid-
187

----- Page 4 (native) -----
PAULINEJ. HORNE and C. FERGUS LOWE
B
picures
AB
1
/14T
FZ
{
I
I
dictatedIl
A
BCOIDCB
name
I
4*11
words
c
Key:
.
Trained
I '4'''
"Emergent"
Fig.
2.
A schematic representation of Sidman's
(1971) equivalence paradigm. The arrows point from
sample to comparison stimuli. The solid arrows represent
conditional relations (AB and AC) that were explicitly
taught. Broken arrows represent conditional relations
(BC and CB) that were tested for after the others had
been explicitly taught.
man, 1986, p. 226), and is a determining vari-
able that accounts "both for what people say
and for their reactions to what other people
say. In particular the existence of equivalence
relations can account for such utterances as
'meaning,' 'symbol,' 'referent,' and 'rule-gov-
erned' " (Sidman, 1992, p. 20).
Hayes and colleagues, although adopting a
different theoretical stance from that of Sid-
man, have similarly acknowledged the impor-
tance of the phenomenon and have main-
tained that stimulus equivalence "transforms
nonlinguistic conditional discriminations into
semantic process" (Wulfert & Hayes, 1988, p.
126) and is "a kind of working empirical
model of semantic relations"
(Hayes &
Hayes, 1992, p. 1387). Still others have pro-
posed that equivalence classes define symbol-
ic behavior and that the stimulus equivalence
paradigm provides the basis for an experi-
mental analysis of symbolic behavior (e.g., Ca-
tania, 1992, p. 156; Dugdale & Lowe, 1990, p.
115).
If these propositions-namely, that stimu-
lus equivalence is a key variable that trans-
forms nonlinguistic into linguistic behavior,
that it is the test of whether relations are se-
mantic, and that it is, indeed, the defining
property of symbolic behavior itself-were to
be accepted, then this would have major re-
percussions for attempts to explain language.
This, of course, would include Skinner's ac-
count of verbal and rule-governed behavior,
which does not incorporate the construct of
stimulus equivalence. For those wishing to
study linguistic or verbal behavior, what is at
issue here
is a specification of the subject
matter itself. When can we say of an utter-
ance, for example, that it is not simply an in-
stance of operant behavior but that it also has
properties that enable us to say that it is a
"word" or "name" and that it has "mean-
ing"? For some (e.g., Hayes & Hayes, 1989,
p. 182), Skinner's definition of verbal behav-
ior as behavior reinforced through the me-
diation of other persons in accordance with
the practices of the verbal community is too
broad and fails to distinguish it from any oth-
er learned social behavior; for these critics it
is equivalence that provides the true touch-
stone enabling us to specify when behavior is
verbal. Because it lacked an appreciation of
stimulus equivalence, Skinner's theory of ver-
bal behavior, they argue, ignored such issues
as meaning, understanding, and reference
and, ultimately, failed to grasp the essential
nature of verbal behavior (Hayes & Hayes,
1989, p. 154, 1992, p. 1392). Furthermore,
both Sidman and Hayes maintain that the ab-
sence of the concept of equivalence from
Skinner's account undermines his attempt to
distinguish between contingency-shaped and
rule-governed behavior, a distinction many
would see as one of the most important ad-
vances in the analysis of human behavior (De-
vany, Hayes, & Nelson, 1986, p. 255; Hayes &
Hayes, 1992, p. 1392; Sidman, 1990, pp. 106-
107, 1992, pp. 21-22; Zettde & Hayes, 1982).
Can
it be then, as the "equivalence cri-
tique" might suggest, that Skinner's theory of
verbal and rule-governed behavior is a case
of "Hamlet without the Prince"? Before the
critique and the proposed solutions can be
adequately assessed, however, it is necessary
to examine the notion of stimulus equiva-
lence itself and emerging problems in the lit-
erature concerning its definition (Hayes,
1989; Pilgrim & Galizio, 1995; Saunders &
188

----- Page 5 (native) -----
NAMIVNG AAM OTHER SYMBOLIC BEHAVIOR
Green, 1992) and its origins (Catania, Horne,
& Lowe, 1989; Dugdale & Lowe, 1990; Hayes
& Hayes, 1992; Sidman, 1994). There are also
a number of related issues including the fact
that humans, at least those with some verbal
skills, readily pass tests of stimulus equiva-
lence whereas there are few, if any, clear dem-
onstrations of stimulus equivalence in other
animal species (Dugdale & Lowe, 1990; Hayes
& Hayes, 1992; Sidman et al., 1982).
Attempts to deal with these issues have
come from three main theoretical perspec-
tives. According to Sidman and colleagues,
stimulus equivalence is an unanalyzable prim-
itive function that, Sidman suggests, we may
simply have to accept as a biological "given"
(Sidman, 1990). In order to overcome what
they see as the shortcomings of Sidman's ac-
count, Hayes and colleagues (Hayes, 1986;
Hayes & Hayes, 1989) have introduced rela-
tionalframe theory, which views equivalence as
one of several relations arising from a history
of arbitrarily applicable relational respond-
ing. Lowe (1986)' has put forward a third
view according to which success on match-to-
sample tests of stimulus equivalence is attrib-
utable in large part to subjects' naming and
other verbal behavior, thus explaining the
lack of success of nonverbal organisms on
these tests (see also Dugdale & Lowe, 1990;
Lowe, Horne, & Higson, 1987). Critics of this
latter approach, however, have rightly ob-
served that if naming is a prerequisite for
passing tests of equivalence, one is left with
the problem of accounting for how naming
itself comes about and how it gives rise to
what appear to be emergent or derived stim-
ulus relations (Catania et al., 1989; Hayes,
1994; Hayes & Hayes, 1992; Sidman, 1990,
1992). In what follows we shall attempt to
show how naming, although differing from
other forms of operant or classically condi-
tioned responding, arises out of particular re-
lations between such behavior and the envi-
ronment. We shall also address how naming
can enable human subjects to succeed on
match-to-sample
tests
for
stimulus
equiva-
lence and how these tests may be passed with
several types of naming behavior, giving rise
1 Lowe, C. F. (1986, May). The role of verbal behavior in
the emergence of equivalence classes. Paper presented at the
annual meeting of the Association for Behavior Analysis,
Milwaukee.
to not one but a variety of psychological
"equivalences."
Our general approach owes much to Skin-
ner's Verbal Behavior (1957) but attempts to
extend that account in a number of ways.
Central to our analysis is an emphasis on lis-
tener behavior and a conceptualization of the
individual as a speaker-listener within the same
skin. This early involvement of the young
child as a listener, first to others' utterances
and then, even more important, to his or her
own, is an aspect of verbal behavior that is to
a large extent not addressed in Skinner's
book, at least in his account of the basic ver-
bal classes (see Hayes & Hayes, 1989). As he
himself observed, "Most of my book ... was
about the speaker. It contained ... little di-
rect discussion of listening" (Skinner, 1989,
p. 36). Indeed, insofar as his definition of ver-
bal behavior as "being effective only through
the mediation of other persons" is taken lit-
erally, then the effects of what the speaker
says upon his or her own behavior as a listen-
er, in the absence of any other person, could
be deemed nonverbal behavior! (but see also
Skinner, 1989, pp. 46-47). Certainly, in all of
his writings on verbal behavior Skinner says
comparatively litfie about speaker-listener re-
lations and particularly of how they come
about. In what follows we shall attempt to
provide such an account and will argue that
it is only through an analysis of both speaker
and listener behavior that we can establish
what counts as an instance of a name, how
the latter comes to have meaning and, in
short, what constitutes linguistic or verbal be-
havior distinguishable from other forms of
conditioned responding.
To illustrate our general approach and to
indicate how speaker-listener relations can ac-
count for a range of emergent behavior in-
cluding stimulus equivalence, consider the
different behavioral relations embodied in
the concepts of the tact and the name. Skinner
(1957) defined the tact relation as "a verbal
operant in which a response of a given form
is evoked (or at least strengthened) by a par-
ticular object or event," this correspondence
between the object (e.g., a car) and the par-
ticular form of responding
(e.g., saying
"car") being established by generalized re-
inforcement from the verbal community (pp.
81-82). Although
tacting
is
sometimes
viewed, erroneously, as being the same as
189

----- Page 6 (native) -----
PAUL7NEJ. HORNE and C. FERGUS LOWE
CAR
Fig. 3.
The tact relation (Skinner, 19
a response of a given form (e.g., saying
in the presence of a particular object (
a car). According to Skinner's account
that evokes the response (e.g., "car") is
ed (e.g., the printed word CAR) then,
the verbal relation is a textualrather thar
this distinction is not easy to sustain be
ture may also be drawn or printed). WE
ure, the picture and printed word both
vocal response (i.e., "car"), this is terme
aklnce.
naming, it does not, as define
any form of listener behavior o
the speaker, and cannot, by itsel
"emergent" behavior. For exari
shows what would have occurre'
jects in the studies by Sidman (1
man and Cresson (1973) tacted
each of the experimenter-design
classes. Each of the stimuli (e.g
car and the printed word CAR)
criminative for a common resF
instance, the utterance "car"), z
is termed functional equivalence (
1966; Sidman, 1986). But, given
tional nature of the tact relati
no grounds for assuming that th
rise to bidirectional relations
equivalence (i.e., that if given t
a car, the subject would select ti
and vice versa). Neither tacting
al equivalence in and of itself sh
to stimulus equivalence.
The name relation, on the
which we describe in detail in
tion, involves the speaker respo
tener to his or her own speakin
it is learned by the young chi
circular relation (shown in Figu:
includes, for example, seeing ar
2 For purposes of illustration here al
the paper, we shall take as an example
child without sensory impairment whc
guage.
picture of a car), saying ("car"), hearing her
own utterance (/car/)3 and seeing or other-
wise attending to the object again. When, like
66car 99
the subjects in the Sidman studies, individuals
car
with naming skills are trained on match-to-
sample procedures to select first a picture
(e.g., of a car) and later the corresponding
printed word (CAR) upon hearing the name
)57) occurs when
(Icarl) spoken by the experimenter, this pro-
"car") is evoked
vides ideal conditions for them to learn the
e.g., a picture of
name themselves for both the picture and the
t, if the stimulus
printed word. When, as shown in Figure 4
written or prlnt-
(bottom), the picture is then presented as a
attacty(pathough
sample, the subject either overfly or coverdy
cause, e.g., a pic-
says the name, the hearing of which is dis-
ien, as in the fig-
criminative for orienting to and selecting ei-
ievoke the same
ther the printed word or the picture from
dfunctional equiv-
among the comparisons, whichever is pre-
sented, and vice versa when the sample is the
printed word. Thus subjects may succeed in
d, encompass
passing tests of stimulus equivalence by using
in the part of
a common nane for the stimuli in each class.
If account for
We shall show that other naming strategies,
Iple, Figure 3
in particular, such as relating the stimuli by
idhad the sub-
means of intraverbal naming, may also be suc-
I971) and Sid-
cessful in establishing equivalence classes.
the stimuliiin
Our perspective, although grounded
in
ated stimulus
Skinner's analysis of verbal behavior, is also
picture of a
informed by accounts of naming and lan-
would be dis-
guage development provided by L. S. Vygot-
)onse (in this
sky and by the social behaviorist G. H. Mead
a relation that
(see Blackman, 1991). Our exposition of the
(Goldiamond,
genesis of ontogenetically early forms of lin-
the unidirec-
guistic behavior, including the behavioral pre-
on, there are
cursors of naming as well as naming itself,
is should give
draws heavily upon, and is underpinned by, a
and stimulus
great deal of empirical research from the re-
the picture of
cent literature on language development in
he word CAR
young children. In dealing with normal lan-
nor function-
guage development over the first 2 years of
tould give rise
life up to the point when intraverbal strings
of a few names have been learned, we aim
other hand,
not to provide an exhaustive description but
the next sec-
to show the critical steps necessary to bring
nding as a lise-
about the name relation. It is also important
g. Naming, as
to note that what we are proposing, with re-
id,2 iS thus a
spect both to the order in which these forms
re 4, top) that
of behavior occur and the conditions that in-
i object (e.g.,
fluence them, is an hypothesis that, although
based on a range of existing findings, re-
nd in the rest of
e a young female
) is learning lan-
3 To distinguish spoken from heard utterances we shall
indicate the former as, for example, "car" and the latter
as /car/.

----- Page 7 (native) -----
NAMING AAD OTHER SYMBOLIC BEHAVIOR
says /
hears
66car99
Icarl
sees
~~~~~9
Jf
says
hears
66 car99
lcarl
sees
CAR
says
hears
66 car99
Icar
V
~~sees
F
L_ CAR
Fig. 4.
Schematic representation of the name relation and the role of common naming in auditory-vsual match
to sample. The name relation involves speakers responding as listeners to their own speaking and is shown here (e.g.,
top left) as a circular relation between seeing an object (picture of a car), saying ("car"), hearing their own utterance
(Icarl), and seeing or otherwise orienting to the object again. During training on match to sample (cf. Sidman,
1971), shown in the upper displays, when the subject hears the auditory sample stimulus (Icarl), she echoes it (saying
"car") in the presence of the corresponding visual comparison (picture of a car or printed word CAR), and a
common name is thereby established. During subsequent visual-visual test trials (bottom), seeing either the picture
of a car or the printed word CAR as the sample evokes the saying of "car" and the hearing of Icarl, which in turn
occasions selecting either the corresponding picture or printed word, whichever is available as comparison.
quires further detailed empirical validation.
We shall also show how the present analysis
informs a range of issues concerning rule-
governed and what has been termed symbolic
behavior. A secondary aim of the paper is to
show how naming skills can account for the
success of subjects on tests of stimulus equiv-
alence and in a manner that may render the-
ories of equivalence, and, indeed, the con-
struct itself, redundant.
THE DEVELOPMENT OF
VERBAL BEHAVIOR
In attempting to show how naming devel-
ops from earlier, prelinguistic behavior, we
shall relate our account to some of the basic
verbal classes identified by Skinner (1957), in
particular the tact, echoic, intraverbal, and
mand. Skinner defined these classes within
the framework of the three-term contingency
(i.e., discriminative stimulus, response, rein-

----- Page 8 (native) -----
PAULINEJ. HORNE and C. FERGUS LOWE
forcer) but argued that one of the main dis-
tinguishing features of verbal behavior was
that, with the exception of the mand, it was
free of specific reinforcing consequences. For
example, a child's saying "cat" in the pres-
ence of a cat could be reinforced by any of a
variety of reinforcers (e.g., the caregiver say-
ing "yes it is a cat," "clever girl," etc.). The
behavioral modalities were also unspecified
in his account; individuals may learn verbal
behavior regardless of whether they are able
to hear, see, or speak. Although for purposes
of illustration the present paper focuses upon
the development of verbal behavior in a child
who is without sensory handicap, the main
principles of our account apply also to people
who are deaf, blind, or have other sensory
impairments, because other responding apart
from vocalizing
(e.g., manual signing) can
function as speaker behavior (e.g., Hall & Sund-
berg, 1987). Again for explanatory purposes
we have focused upon behavioral interactions
between the child and her primary caregiv-
ers, although we recognize that others (e.g.,
siblings, friends, relatives) will also form part
of the child's verbal community.
Listener Behavior
There is an extensive literature that shows
how, before they learn to speak, children
learn to listen, as illustrated, for example, by
a caregiver saying to a child, "give me the
cup" and the child doing so. Such behavior,
which has been termed
listener behavior by
Skinner (1957, p. 357), arises when the verbal
community, of whom we will take the caregiv-
er to be representative, establishes a corre-
spondence between a vocal or other conven-
tional stimulus produced by a speaker and
behavior evoked in the listener. It includes
classically conditioned behavior such as "re-
sponses of glands and smooth muscles, me-
diated by the autonomic nervous system, es-
pecially emotional reactions ... [as well as]
... complex skeletal behavior with which the
individual operates upon [the] environment"
(Skinner, 1957, p. 34). However, according to
Skinner's definition of verbal behavior, listen-
er behavior is not verbal except "when the
listener ... [is] ... to some extent speaking"
(1989, p. 36). Consequendly, this phase of the
child's development is given littde considera-
tion in his account. In the present analysis,
however, we consider the learning of listener
behavior to be a crucial precursor to the de-
velopment of linguistic
behavior and
will
therefore describe it in some detail.
The conditions under which listener be-
havior is established in the young child nor-
mally include the following: (a) The caregiver
or others produce a vocal stimulus, usually an
object name, in the presence of the object
and the child; (b) concurrendy, using social
reinforcement, caregivers teach the child how
to perform conventional behavior in relation
to the object; (c) rather than her speech sim-
ply accompanying the child's behavior, the
caregiver's vocal stimulus increasingly pre-
cedes and becomes discriminative for the
child's performance
of this
object-related
conventional behavior. These conditions are
met through a series of behavioral interac-
tions between caregiver and infant, as illus-
trated below.
Discriminating the speech
of others.
If the
speech of others is to provide effective con-
trolling stimuli for the behavior of the young
child, it is essential that this speech and its
component parts (i.e., individual words) be
discriminated by the child. This process be-
gins very early in life. Molfese (1977), for ex-
ample, reported that when speech sounds are
presented to the human neonate, neural ac-
tivity is greater in the
left cerebral hemi-
sphere than in the right; when, on the other
hand, music is presented, the converse pat-
tern of activity occurs. A number of studies
using operant procedures have also shown
that in the first few days the human infant not
only discriminates speech sounds from other
sounds but also learns to discriminate the
speech sounds of her native language from
those of other languages (Mehler et al., 1988;
Morse, 1972). Studies have also shown that at
this early stage, speech sounds are more re-
inforcing for the child's behavior than are
nonspeech sounds (Butterfield & Siperstein,
1972), and that her mother's speech is more
reinforcing than that of a stranger (DeCasper
& Fifer, 1980). Although young infants can
discriminate a range of phonetic contrasts
made in natural languages, by around 12
months old their discriminative success be-
comes more confined to the subset of speech
sounds within their native language (Aslin, Pi-
soni, & Jusczyk, 1983; Eilers, Wilson, &
Moore, 1977; Eimas, 1974a, 1974b, 1975; see
Gerken, 1994, for recent review).

----- Page 9 (native) -----
NAMING AND OTHER SYMBOLIC BEHAVIOR
There is a great deal of evidence that shows
that children's learning to discriminate oth-
ers' speech is aided by the particular ways in
which caregivers speak to them (see Richelle,
1993). In general, caregivers (a) speak slowly
(Snow & Ferguson,
1977);
(b)
use single
names for objects and actions, which are em-
bedded, if at all, in a simplified syntax (e.g.,
"give mummy car"; see Cross, 1977; Newport,
Gleitman, & Gleitman,
1977);
(c)
repeat
names and simple instructions many times
(Snow, 1977); and (d) often accentuate single
names and grammatical boundaries by speak-
ing with a higher pitch and more exaggerated
intonational patterns than when addressing
older children and adults (Cooper & Paccia-
Cooper, 1980; Mehler, Bertoncini, Barriere,
&Jassik-Gerschenfeld, 1978; Stern, Spieker, &
MacKain, 1982). These adaptations of adult
verbal behavior, which simplify speech stimuli
and make them more
salient to children
(similar in some respects to stimulus fading
procedures used in operant discrimination
studies),
are widespread
crosscultural
fea-
tures of caregivers' speech (Fernald, 1992).
In addition, operant techniques have shown
that in the case of 4-month-old infants,
"motherese"
is a more effective reinforcer
than other forms of adult speech (Fernald,
1985).
If listener behavior to the speech of others
is to become fully established, however, it is
necessary notjust for speech stimuli to be dis-
criminated
(i.e., controlling differential re-
sponding of some sort) but when a particular
verbal stimulus is heard (e.g., /where's mama?/)
it should be discriminative for conventional
object- or event-related behavior (e.g., look-
ing at mama). There are a number of ways in
which such behavior is brought about.
Caregivers observe what the child is looking at
before they name it. Several studies have shown
that caregivers often first observe which ob-
ject or event an infant is already looking at
or otherwise engaged with before they speak
about it and reinforce the infant's attention
to it (Collis, 1977; Collis & Schaffer, 1975;
Cross, 1977; Harris, Jones, Brookes, & Grant,
1986; Harris, Jones, & Grant, 1983; Leung &
Rheingold,
1981; Masur,
1982; Murphy,
1978). Tomasello and Farrar (1986)
have
found that when caregivers make such obser-
vations of the child's behavior prior to speak-
ing, it enhances the child's subsequent learn-
ing of listener behavior.
Caregivers indicate the object or event that they
name. Caregivers also often look at, point to,
and otherwise indicate
(e.g., by shaking a
rattle) the object or event that they are nam-
ing. By the time they are about 9 months old,
human infants learn to discriminate the be-
havior of the caregiver and to orient toward
the object or event at which the caregiver is
looking or pointing; this is learned first for
objects that are close at hand and later for
objects that are at some distance
(Butter-
worth & Cochran, 1980; Butterworth & Grov-
er, 1988; Lempers, 1976; Messer, 1978). Stud-
ies by Baldwin (1991) have shown that the
learning of this skill of "joint regard" increas-
es the likelihood that the name produced by
the caregiver will in turn become discrimi-
native for the child's looking only at the ob-
ject at which the caregiver is looking or point-
ing rather than at other stimuli.
The child points at objects and events. After she
has learned to follow the point gestures of
others, the child herself begins to point to
objects and is socially reinforced for doing so
(Foster,
1979; Lempers,
Flavell, &
Flavell,
1977; Leung & Rheingold, 1981; Masur, 1982;
Murphy, 1978; Murphy & Messer, 1977; Ninio
& Bruner, 1978). Initially, she learns to point
to a particular object, then to the caregiver
and to the object again; later she learns to
point to an object while at the same time
looking at the caregiver (Bates, Camaioni, &
Volterra, 1975; Masur, 1983). Her pointing at
objects is, in turn, discriminative for caregiv-
ers' naming of them, which also reinforces
the child's behavior. Further naming oppor-
tunities are provided when the young child
picks up or gives objects to caregivers, a com-
mon behavior in infancy
(Bates, Benigni,
Bretherton, Camaioni, & Volterra, 1979; Bru-
ner, 1977; Foster, 1979; Gray, 1978).
Caregivers model conventional behavior. In ad-
dition to pointing at objects when they name
them, caregivers also pick them up and mod-
el conventional ways of behaving toward
them and reinforce the infant's imitative be-
havior (Kaye, 1982, pp. 70-83). Infants di-
rectly imitate many of these types of modeled
behavior even when the opportunity to imi-
tate is deferred (Meltzoff, 1988; Poulson &
Kymissis, 1988); thus, generalized imitation
enables learning of conventional behavior to
193

----- Page 10 (native) -----
PAULINEJ. HORNE and C. FERGUS LOWE
proceed rapidly. If there are kinds of behav-
ior that the child is initially unable to imitate,
these may be manually prompted and shaped
by caregivers
(Kaye,
1982, pp. 80-82; see
Skinner, 1953, pp. 119-122).
From this point onwards, the child's reac-
tions to objects and events become increas-
ingly conditioned by her verbal community.
Whereas previously she may have investigated
quite disparate objects (e.g., a toy truck or a
shoe)
in very similar ways
(e.g., grasping,
transferring them from hand to hand, raising
them to her mouth), between 12 and 18
months of age her actions become differen-
tiated and specific to particular objects (Fen-
son, Kagan, Kearsley, & Zelazo, 1976; Hutt,
1967). For example, whenever she now sees
a toy truck she may load it with bricks and
push it along, and when she sees shoes, she
may put them on and march up and down in
them, and so on. Increasingly, therefore, ob-
jects come to occasion particular sequences
of socially conditioned behavior, many of
which are destined to come under the con-
trol of the caregiver's utterances during the
establishment of listener relations (Gelman &
Baillargeon, 1983; Nelson, 1973; Ricciuti,
1965; Starkey, 1981; Sugarman, 1982).
Caregivers reinforce conventional listener behav-
ior to vocal stimuli. When the child has learned
to respond to objects in conventional ways,
such as pointing at them, picking them up,
and giving them to others, the caregiver may,
for example, ask her to "bring shoe" and
may model appropriate behavior by pointing
to, reaching for, and picking up the shoe.
When the child, imitating the caregiver's ac-
tions, reliably brings the shoe in response to
"bring shoe," the caregiver begins to fade his
or her own point-and-reach gestures while re-
inforcing the child's correct responses by say-
ing "clever girl," putting the shoe on the
child's foot, and so on. Eventually, when the
caregiver simply says, "bring shoe," the child
reliably fetches it and this behavior is rein-
forced. At this stage the caregiver's vocal stim-
ulus has gained discriminative control of the
child's shoe fetching: The child has acquired
listener behavior.
An illustration oflistener behavior: Figure 5 pre-
sents an example of listener behavior in the
young child; this is the first one of the three
main behavioral relations that together make
up the name relation depicted in Figure 4.
Figure 5 shows what happens when a caregiver
sees a shoe (START 1), points to it, and says
to the child, "where's shoe?" (with an empha-
sis on "shoe"); this request generates for the
infant the auditory stimulus /where's shoe?/,
which
is a discriminative stimulus
(SD)
for
looking at or otherwise orienting (R0) to the
shoe; this behavior is, in turn, discriminative
for pointing to the shoe (Rx). The child may
show additional forms of conventional listener
behavior (e.g., putting the shoe on her foot,
handing it to the caregiver, etc.) that also pro-
vide reinforcing consequences for her orient-
ing to the shoe. The caregiver responds by say-
ing "good girl," which serves to selectively
reinforce
(SR)
the child's listener behavior
that corresponds with the caregiver's request.
It is also possible that the caregiver's request
may come to serve as a conditioned stimulus
(CS) that elicits a range of classically condi-
tioned responses (CRs). As Skinner (1953) ob-
served, a child may "see X not only when X
is present, but when any stimulus which has
frequently accompanied X is present. The din-
ner bell not only makes our mouth water, it
makes us see food. In the Pavlovian formula
we simply substitute 'seeing food' for 'salivat-
ing' " (p. 266). In addition, it should be noted
that Skinner (1953, pp. 270-276, 1957, p. 158)
speculated that there may also be operant vi-
sualizing or "seeing" of objects when they are
not present. An experimental demonstration
of conditioned "hearing" of stimuli when they
are not present is provided in a study by Hef-
ferline and Perera (1963).
This listener behavior sequence, beginning
at START 1, may be repeated many times un-
til "where's shoe?" alone, without the care-
giver pointing, occasions the child's orienting
to the shoe. Eventually, the sequence may
also begin with the child's behavior rather
than the caregiver's. For instance, when the
child next sees a shoe (START 2), she may
immediately point to it, and when the care-
giver sees the child's point gesture, he or she
may initiate the caregiver-speaker/child-listen-
er behavior sequence (from START 1). Ini-
tially,
the
listener behavior occasioned by
caregivers' speech may also be partly con-
trolled by other contextual stimuli. So, when
asked "where's your shoe?" the infant may
point at her shoe when it is in her mother's
hand but not when it is on the floor. How-
ever, with repetition in different contexts,
194

----- Page 11 (native) -----
NAMING AMD OTHER SYMBOLIC BEHAVIOR
Fig. 5.
A schematic account of how listener behavior (solid arrows) is learned by the child during interactions
with her caregiver (broken arrows). The sequence begins (START 1) when the caregiver points to and names a shoe,
saying "where's shoe?" (with an emphasis on "shoe"). When the child hears Ishoel, this occasions (SD) listener
behavior, including orienting (R0) and other conventional responding to the shoe such as pointing to it, putting it
on, and so forth (Rx). Hearing /shoe/ may also serve as a conditioned stimulus (CS) evoking conditioned responding
(CRs) such as visualizing a shoe. The caregiver reinforces (SR) the child's conventional listener behavior to "where's
shoe?" by saying "good girl." A similar sequence may also come to be initiated by the child first seeing the shoe
(START 2) and pointing to it (see text). The black arrow constitutes the listener element of the name relation
depicted in Figure 4.
"where's your shoe?" acquires generalized
control over the infant's pointing at the shoe
regardless of the shoe's location or the par-
ticular speaker
(Bates et
al.,
1975; Luria,
1982, pp. 46-47; Reich, 1976; Snyder, Bates,
& Bretherton, 1981). Similarly she learns to
respond to the utterance "where's shoe?" (or
just "shoe" alone) spoken by any of a variety
of speakers, each of whom produces sounds
ofvarying pitch and ofvarying phonetic char-
acteristics (see Luria, 1982).
Listener behavior and stimulus classes. Al-
though Figure 5 depicts one particular shoe,
in practice caregivers will use the term shoe for
a variety of shoes and illustrations of shoes. So
when asked "where's the shoe?" the infant
may come to point at any shoe in her vicinity
irrespective of its color or size, or whether it
be her own shoe, a sports shoe, a sandal, a
picture of a shoe in a magazine, or perhaps
even a horseshoe. If she overextends the stim-
ulus class by pointing to a sock she may be
told, "no, not shoe, sock," the usual social
praise being withheld; conversely, if the care-
giver notices that she underextends the class
by not pointing to an item the culture would
call a "shoe," that item may be indicated to
her and named as such (but see Huttenlocher
& Smiley, 1987). Thus, as shown in Figure 6,
the infant learns when she hears /shoe/ to ori-
ent not just to a particular shoe (left) but to
a class of objects (right), membership of the
class being established by her caregivers who
name each of the different exemplars "shoe."
195

----- Page 12 (native) -----
PAULINEJ. HORNE and C. FERGUS LOWE
hears
Ishoel
sees
A
sees
Fig. 6.
In learning listener behavior, the child learns
when she hears /where's shoe?/ to orient not just to one
particular shoe (left) but to a class of objects which her
verbal community names "shoe" (right).
In this manner the child begins to learn a se-
ries of relations, shared with others in her ver-
bal community, between auditory stimuli pro-
duced by others and her own responding to
classes of stimuli. It is these particular stimulus
classes that she will later learn to name (Har-
ris, Yeeles, Chasin, & Oakley, 1995).
Extension of the listener repertoire. There are
more rapid ways of extending listener behav-
ior than that shown in Figure 5. Once the
child learns to orient to a shoe when she
hears /where's the shoe?!, to a cup when she
hears /where's the cup?/, and so on for a variety
of objects, the first part of the caregiver's ver-
bal stimulus, /where's the
... / comes to oc-
casion a particular form of orienting behavior
(e.g., pointing), whereas the second part de-
termines the object to which orienting oc-
curs. The caregiver may now add other forms
of listener behavior to the child's repertoire
by, for example, teaching the child to pick up
a shoe in response to her instruction "pick
up shoe" and to pick up a spoon in response
to her instruction "pick up spoon." Then,
when the caregiver
says for the
first time
"pick up cup," the child may pick up the cup,
because the listener behavior of picking up
has generalized to other objects to which the
child has already learned orienting listener
behavior (Huttenlocher, 1974; Skinner, 1953,
pp. 93-95, 1957, p. 189). This ensures rapid
generalization to all objects that feature in
the child's existing listener repertoire and
further develops the child's instruction-fol-
lowing repertoire.
In the course of these early developments,
the child's listening to vocal stimuli becomes
increasingly consonant with that of her verbal
community. When others utter a given word
or set of words, she orients to a culturally es-
tablished class of objects or events and emits
a culturally defined
set of responses.
Al-
though it has been shown that other species
(e.g., dolphins, parrots, chimpanzees, sea li-
ons) can be taught to perform at least some
of these listener skills (Herman, Richards, &
Wolz,
1984; Pepperberg,
1983,
1987;
Pre-
mack, 1970; Savage-Rumbaugh, 1986; Schus-
terman & Krieger, 1984), unless humans in-
tervene, nonhuman animals do not naturally
exist in the environmental or social contexts
that might enable them to do so.
Although the child's listener achievements
are, we maintain, a vital stepping stone in the
acquisition of verbal behavior, what distin-
guishes and delimits this stage of develop-
ment is that it is others' speaking that deter-
mines when and where her listener behavior
occurs. We shall next examine how she pro-
gresses from being a listener to the verbal
productions of others to becoming a speaker-
listener in her own right.
Echoic Behavior
Vocal precursors of echoic behavior Although
human infants show a wide range of vocali-
zations, including the universal consonant-
vowel "babbling" patterns (Dale, 1976), vocal
approximations to conventional verbal behav-
ior are not generally acquired until around
the end of the first year (Locke, 1980; Oller,
Wieman, Doyle, & Ross, 1976). Using social
reinforcement, several studies have shown op-
erant conditioning of young infants' vocali-
zations
(e.g., Rheingold, Gewirtz, & Ross,
1959; Weisberg, 1963), and Routh (1969) has
demonstrated selective reinforcement of both
consonant sounds and vowel sounds in in-
fants ranging from 2 to 7 months old. In ob-
servational studies it has been found that in-
fants' babbling matches the tonal qualities

----- Page 13 (native) -----
NAMING AND OTHER SYMBOLIC BEHAVIOR
produced by their own verbal community
(Weir, 1966), occurs at a higher pitch to
mothers as opposed to fathers (Lieberman,
1967), and converges upon a subset of the
sounds that in combination form words used
by their particular linguistic community. 011-
er and Eilers (1988) have shown that infants
with severe hearing difficulties, on the other
hand, show very delayed onset of this conso-
nant-vowel babbling; they also reported that
the one entirely deaf child in their study nev-
er produced such utterances. Taken together,
these results indicate that both the onset and
form
of infants'
babbling
are dependent
upon exposure to the speech sounds of their
verbal community. Raising the operant level
of such vocalizations is an important step to-
wards the acquisition of speech, given that
the particular syllables produced by infants'
babbling tend to be the same ones used in
early naming (Vihman, 1986, p. 448).
Learning to echo. According to Skinner, the
early productive repertoire of verbal behavior
consists of separate classes of functional re-
lations. The echoic (Skinner, 1957, p. 55; see
Catania, in press) is one of the earliest and
most basic of these, and involves the repro-
duction of the verbal productions of others.
That is, infants gradually learn to move their
vocal musculature in such a way as to partially
or completely reproduce or "echo" a heard
verbal stimulus;
this
occurs, for example,
when caregivers say a given word and rein-
force vocalizations of the infant that approx-
imate the sound of that word. Poulson, Kym-
issis, Reeve, Andreatos, and Reeve
(1991)
have demonstrated vocal imitation in 9- to 13-
month-old infants who were praised when
they produced an utterance that matched
(i.e., approximated)
that of an adult vocal
model. In addition, they found that some
generalized echoic behavior occurred; after
learning a set of reinforced echoic relations,
the infants imitated novel vocal stimuli in the
absence of response-contingent social rein-
forcers. Other studies have indicated that
children imitate caregivers' speech a great
deal, particularly in the early stages of lan-
guage learning (Clark, 1977; Moerk, 1992;
Ryan, 1973; Slobin, 1968), and, in addition,
that caregivers imitate their children's utter-
ances (Kaye, 1982; Moerk, 1983).
The kind of interaction that gives rise to
echoic behavior is represented in Figure 7.
Because, unlike Skinner's account, listener
behavior is central to our analysis of echoic
behavior, we have in this and subsequent il-
lustrations attempted to show how the child's
own speaker and listener behavior may inter-
act. This enables us to show how the second
link of the name relation (see Figure 4) (i.e.,
the relation between the child making an ut-
terance and her hearing of it) is established.
In Figure 7, we have also indicated contextual
stimuli (e.g., a shoe and the child's pointing
to the shoe) that occasion the caregiver's ini-
tial verbal response because such contextual
stimuli, although not invariably present in all
instances, are a common feature of echoic in-
teractions between
the
caregiver and
the
young child (Harris, Jones, & Grant, 1984).
In Figure 7, the caregiver, seeing the shoe,
says to the child while pointing to the shoe,
"say shoe, shoe," with vocal emphasis upon
the word "shoe." This generates an auditory
stimulus to which the child responds by ech-
oing "shoe" (Rv), or some approximation to
it (e.g., "oo"), a correspondence that is re-
inforced by the caregiver saying "clever girl,"
smiling, and so on. This relation constitutes
the echoic as described by Skinner. But, given
that the child has already acquired listener
behavior of the kind described in Figure 5,
when the caregiver says "shoe" the resulting
stimulus /shoe/ will also occasion the child's
listener behavior with respect to the shoe
(e.g., looking at or orienting to the shoe). In
addition, the child's echoic utterance of
"shoe" generates an auditory stimulus that is
also functionally equivalent to the caregiver's
/shoe/ and so may initiate both the listener
behavior and further utterances of "shoe"
(i.e., self-echoic utterance); this may in turn
lead to yet further repetitions of the echoic
sequence. At this point the child becomes a
speaker-listener with respect to her own ver-
bal stimulus /shoe/.
Maintenance of echoic behavior In her exten-
sive study of the verbal behavior of infants
and their caregivers, Nelson (1973, p. 47) has
observed that a striking characteristic of child
talk is the high frequency of what we have
described here as echoic and self-echoic be-
havior; she also notes that the functional con-
sequences of the behavior have been little an-
alyzed. The evidence suggests that caregivers'
behavior can be an important source of re-
inforcement that establishes and maintains a
197

----- Page 14 (native) -----
PAULINEJ. HORNE and C. FERGUS LOWE
Fig. 7.
A schematic account of how echoic behavior is learned by a child who has already acquired listener
behavior to /shoe/. The caregiver (START 1) points to a shoe and says to the child "say shoe, shoe." Hearing /shoe/,
the child herself says "shoe" or some approximation to it (Rv), which is reinforced (SR) by the caregiver saying
"clever girl" and so on. Thereafter, hearing caregivers say "shoe" becomes discriminative (SD) for her echoing
response "shoe." The echoic relation is thus established. But given that the child has previously learned listener
behavior to /shoe/, she now both echoes and responds as a listener to her own vocal stimulus (solid arrows) as well
as to her caregiver's. The sequence may also be initiated by the child (START 2) first seeing the shoe. The black
arrows constitute two of the three main elements of the name relation depicted in Figure 4.
generalized imitative repertoire, although
much more research is required to demon-
strate the magnitude and scope of these re-
inforcing effects (Kaye, 1982; Moerk, 1992;
Poulson et al., 1991). Skinner (1957, p. 164)
has suggested that the child may also be "au-
tomatically" reinforced when she duplicates
the sounds of others. For example, the
sounds and words uttered by parents may
function as potent classically conditioned
stimuli that have strong emotional effects on
the child so that when she hears her own rep-
lication of these vocal patterns she generates
stimuli that have similarly strong reinforcing
consequences. Echoic behavior can also pro-
vide other consequences. Thus, for example,
the child's repeated echoing of the sound
/cat/ may sustain her listener behavior of
looking for the cat; this may then be followed
by the positive consequences of her crawling
or toddling after it and stroking it (see Skin-
ner, 1957, pp. 57-58).
Covert echoic behavior. For the echoic to be
established as a functional class, the infant's
echoic responses must initially occur overtly
if they are to be reinforced by the verbal com-
munity. However, it is possible that what be-
gins as an overt echoic may come to be emit-
ted
at
the
covert
level
and
become
increasingly abbreviated in form; this may
arise particularly in the case of repetition or
self-echoing (see Clark, 1977, p. 342; Skinner,
1957, pp. 76, 141-146). Such covert echoics
may occasion listener behavior that, as is the
case with overt echoics, will have a range of
reinforcing consequences. Once the child has
learned generalized echoic behavior (Poul-
son
et
al.,
1991)
and
to emit previously
learned overt echoics covertly, new echoics

----- Page 15 (native) -----
NAMING AAD OTHER SYMBOLIC BEHAVIOR
says
her
"&shoe'
Ishoel
sees
AA
A
A
Fig. 8.
When the child learns to echo a word spoken
by her caregivers (e.g., "shoe"), her own auditory stim-
ulus Ishoel comes to occasion her looking notjust at one
particular shoe but at any object so named by her care-
givers for which she has already acquired listener behav-
ior.
may be acquired solely at the covert level of
responding.
From listening to others to listening to oneself:
Although the child can function as a speaker-
listener only when her speaking is initiated by
others' vocalizations, once she echoes and
reechoes those stimuli this may help, even if
only briefly, to sustain her listener behavior.
This is perhaps the earliest approximation to
self-instructional behavior.
Figure 8 shows that when the child echoes
"shoe," the resulting stimulation occasions
her looking not just at a single object but at
exemplars of the class of stimuli for which she
has already acquired listener behavior (see
Figure 6). When her caregiver says "shoe,"
the child now also says "shoe" in the pres-
ence of shoes. Although it might appear that
she is able to "name" the object present dur-
ing social interactions of the kind we have de-
scribed
in Figure
6, her echoic
response
("shoe") occurs in response, not to the shoe
itself, but to another person saying "shoe."
However, as we shall next describe, the echoic
relation serves to set the conditions for the
object itself to enter into direct control of the
child's verbal behavior, thereby occasioning
naming.
Naming
As indicated in Figure 7, echoic interac-
tions often begin when caregivers talk about,
and point to, objects the child is looking at,
pointing to, or playing with (Harris, 1987; To-
masello, Mannle, & Kruger, 1986; Tomasello
& Todd, 1983; Whitehurst & Vasta, 1975).
The conditions exist, therefore, for these ob-
jects to enter into functional control of the
child's verbal behavior, and this establishes
new kinds of verbal relations. One of these,
described by Skinner (1957, p. 83)
as the
most important verbal operant, is the tact, in
which a response of a given form is evoked
by a particular object or event. For example,
if a caregiver presents a child with a ball and
the child says "ball," the caregiver reinforces
this correspondence in a variety of ways such
as smiling, praising (e.g., saying "good girl"),
and repeating the
child's utterance
(e.g.,
"yes! it's a ball"; see Moerk, 1977, pp. 224-
235). We have attempted to illustrate in Fig-
ure 9 how, in the course of repeated echoic
interactions of the sort depicted in Figure 7,
the tact comes about; importantly for the
present account, this also enables us to show
how the final link of the name relation, the
"closing of the circle," is established. In the
presence of the child, the caregiver (START
1) points to the shoe and says "shoe"; the
caregiver's verbal stimulus /shoe/ occasions
the child's looking at the shoe and repeating
to herself "shoe," with the result that the
sight of the shoe becomes a frequent ante-
cedent for the utterance "shoe"; this estab-
lishes the object (shoe) as a discriminative
stimulus for the child's own future utterance
of "shoe." From this point onwards, when
the child sees the shoe (START 2), it alone,
without need for the caregiver's speaking, oc-
casions the verbal response "shoe" and its at-
tendant listener behavior. It is at this stage
that we can say the child has learned to name
the shoe. Eventually the shoe may also be
"seen' or visualized when it is not present
(i.e., conditioned seeing), and this condi-
tioned visual stimulus may also give rise to the
utterance "shoe" (cf. Huttenlocher & Smiley,
199

----- Page 16 (native) -----
PAULINEJ. HORNE and C. FERGUS LOWE
Fig. 9.
A schematic account of how naming is learned by a child who has already learned both to echo and to
listen to the auditory stimulus /shoe/. The sequence begins (START 1) when the caregiver points to a shoe and says
"shoe." The auditory stimulus /shoe/ now occasions the child's looking at the shoe while she echoes and reechoes
"shoe." In this way the sight of the shoe becomes a frequent antecedent and then discriminative stimulus (SD) for
her saying "shoe." Thereafter, when the child (START 2) sees the shoe, it alone occasions her saying "shoe" (Rv).
This provides the final link of the name relation depicted in Figure 4-naming is now established. The shoe may in
addition be visualized (CRs) when it is not present (such conditioned seeing being evoked by a reliably accompanying
object, e.g., a sock); the resultant stimulation (SD) may also occasion (gray dotted line) the utterance "shoe" (see
text) .
1987); this relation is indicated by a gray dot-
ted line in Figure 9.
One part of the total relation described in
Figure 9-namely, the relation between the
shoe as a discriminative stimulus and the ver-
bal response "shoe" (supported by the gen-
eralized reinforcement from caregivers)-is
sufficient to meet the criterion for Skinner's
tact relation. Although it may be the case, as
with the echoic, that tacting can occur with-
out conventional listener behavior, we have
shown in the previous sections that the most
likely way for a tact-like relation to come
about is via previously established echoic and
listener relations. This means that when a
child sees an object and makes a tact re-
sponse, a verbal stimulus is thus generated
that occasions her immediate seeing again or
reorienting to that object. As shown in Figure
9, when the child sees an object such as a
shoe, she says "shoe," hears herself say /shoe/,
and in response to that stimulus sees the shoe
and otherwise engages with it again. This se-
quence may be repeated many times. As Fig-
ure 10 shows, however, hearing herself say
/shoe/ may occasion her looking not just at a
particular shoe but at any of the other shoes
or pictures of shoes in that listener behavior
class (see also Figures 6 and 8). Thus, naming
involves the establishment of bidirectional or
closed loop relations between a class of ob-
jects and events and the speaker-listener be-
havior they occasion.
This fusion of conventional speaker and lis-
tener functions establishes a qualitatively new
bidirectional relation in the child's behavior-
al repertoire. From this point on, she does
not simply respond to an auditory stimulus
originating from others as in preverbal listen-
er behavior, nor does she simply echo vocal
200

----- Page 17 (native) -----
NAMING AND OTHER SYMBOLIC BEHAVIOR
says
hears
"6shoe"
/s,
<
~~sees
8008n
!hoel
Fig. 10.
When the child now sees a shoe to which she
has previously oriented as a listener, this evokes the re-
sponse "shoe" and, hearing her own auditory stimulus /
shoel, she orients to any of the shoes in her listener be-
havior class that are present. She may once again say
"shoe" and again orient to a shoe exemplar and so on.
Naming may thus be evoked initially either by seeing a
shoe or by hearing /shoe/, and may be reevoked either
by seeing a shoe again or via the self-echoic relation (gray
arrow). In this manner bidirectional relations are estab-
lished between a class of objects and the speaker-listener
behavior they occasion.
stimuli, nor does she simply vocalize when
she sees an object, as the definition of the tact
relation might suggest. Naming has proper-
ties and effects on the rest of behavior that
go far beyond those of tacting, echoing, or
listener behavior on their own. As Skinner
(1957, pp. 82, 88) acknowledges, we cannot
say of a tact that it, for example, represents or
reminds us of the stimulus; refers to it; stands
for or substitutes for it; specifies or means it. In
sum, the tact relation between a stimulus and
a response is unidirectional and nonsymbolic.
On the other hand,
as we shall attempt to
show, the name relation as outlined here has
all of these defining characteristics of sym-
bolic behavior (Sinha, 1988).
Indeed, there is evidence that casts doubt
on whether tacts, as opposed to names, fea-
ture very much in the child's early verbal rep-
ertoire. For example, studies by Huttenlocher
and Smiley (1987) and Harris et al. (1995)
have shown that once infants have learned to
make a verbal response of a given form in the
presence of a particular object (i.e., a relation
that formally resembles the tact), they almost
invariably also show appropriate listener be-
havior (e.g., if the child can say "dog" in the
presence of a dog, she will also respond ap-
propriately if asked "where's the dog?"). This
linkage at the single name stage between pro-
duction and comprehension in infant behav-
ior has been widely noted in the literature
(Bowerman, 1980; Gruendel, 1977; Rescorla,
1980). The evidence indicates, therefore, that
because listener behavior is so closely tied to
production, studies that explicitly measure in-
fant production repertoires are also provid-
ing an indirect measure of listener behavior
and thus of naming. This is further supported
by the evidence that, once the child learns to
be a speaker-listener with respect to a partic-
ular object, she is also able to name others in
the same stimulus class to which she has pre-
viously responded only as a listener (Harris et
al., 1995). This would also be expected from
our account. For example, we have shown
that before she learns to name shoes the
child acquires listener behavior in response
to others saying "shoe," which is directed to-
ward a variety of shoes and illustrations of
shoes; the shoes themselves also come to
evoke the same conventional behavior as that
occasioned by the vocal stimulus. Given re-
peated instances of the interactions depicted
in Figure 9, the conventional listener behav-
ior directed toward shoes, because
it fre-
quently precedes the vocal response, itself be-
comes discriminative for occasioning the
name. Thus, whenever she encounters any
one of the objects in the previously estab-
lished listener class, it occasions a particular
pattern of conventional behavior that is com-
mon to those objects, which in turn evokes
her utterance "shoe."
But this is only one means by which the
name relation continues to evolve over the
lifetime of the individual. For example, the
child may extend a name (e.g., "shoe") be-
yond the original stimulus to new stimuli that
either physically resemble it (e.g., boots) or
have reliably accompanied it in the past (e.g.,
socks). Extension of the name relation (e.g.,
"shoe") may also occur when a novel object
201

----- Page 18 (native) -----
PAULINEJ. HORNE and C. FERGUS LOWE
evokes behavior (e.g., putting her foot in a
box) that closely resembles listener behavior
already embodied in a name relation; the
common behavior evokes the name ("shoe")
in both instances, and the novel object is now
so named. The name relation may therefore
be extended on the basis of the common
function as well as common physical features
between a novel object and the original ref-
erent (Lewis, 1936, pp. 197-199).
Some extensions, as in the examples above,
involve idiosyncratic generalizations that are
at odds with the way the verbal community
uses a particular name. Idiosyncratic exten-
sions of this kind may be corrected by care-
givers. Thus in the case of overextension
(overgeneralization), the caregiver may, for
example, say "no, that's not a dog, that's a
cat." On the other hand, if the child says
"cup" only in response to seeing a particular
cup, the caregiver will point out other cup
exemplars and establish the name to those
also. In this way a balance is struck between
the child's tendency to idiosyncratically gen-
eralize the name on the basis of structural
and
functional properties
already encom-
passed by it on the one hand, and, on the
other, the continuing efforts of the verbal
community that keep the name relation with-
in the bounds of the socially shared (Vygot-
sky, 1934/1987, pp. 255-285).
Echoic behavior as a determinant of naming.
According to our account, the echoic reper-
toire constitutes a critical link in the devel-
opment of the name relation because it de-
termines whether a listener relation can
become a speaker-listener relation. It should
also be noted that in early word learning,
when the echoic repertoire is very limited, in-
fants can echo only those names (and then
only partially) that have a phonetic element
in common with their existing echoic reper-
toire (cf. Skinner, 1957, pp. 59-60). What the
child can echo will thus determine what she
can name. In support of this account, several
studies have shown that children's early ver-
bal productions that approximate caregivers'
names are heavily dependent upon the small
set of speech sounds they can already articu-
late either singly or in combination (Fergu-
son & Farwell, 1975; Ferguson,
Peizer, &
Weeks, 1973; Menn, 1976; Schwartz & Leon-
ard, 1982).
Because the vocal stimuli the child can
echo will determine what listener behavior
can become incorporated into name rela-
tions, listener skills (or comprehension)
should accordingly outpace naming skills un-
til the echoic repertoire
is well advanced.
This prediction is supported by many studies
that have shown
that,
initially,
children's
learning of listener behavior to words is much
faster than their production of those words
(Benedict, 1979), so that on average, by the
time 60 listener relations have been learned
the child has produced only 10 words (Ben-
edict,
1979;
Goldin-Meadow,
Seligman, &
Gelman, 1976; Greenfield & Smith, 1976, pp.
219-220; Snyder et al., 1981). Later, however,
as the naming and the echoic repertoires in-
crease, the discrepancy between listener and
production skills diminishes (Anisfeld, 1984,
p. 82).
The acquisition of an echoic repertoire
may also have an important bearing upon the
common phenomenon described in the lit-
erature as the naming explosion. This refers to
the very rapid acceleration in name acquisi-
tion that occurs after approximately the first
10 to 20 names have been learned, normally
when children are around 18 months old. Ac-
cording to the present account, it may not be
possible for many new names to be acquired
until a critical number of echoic relations,
with differing phonetic characteristics, have
been learned. As the number of these echoic
relations in the repertoire increases, the com-
binatorial possibilities for producing more
name utterances rises exponentially. A fur-
ther determinant of the name explosion is
considered in the next section.
Naming as a new higher order relation. In the
interactions between child and caregiver de-
scribed so far, we have noted that joint visual
attention to objects is often established by
means of cues provided by the caregiver such
as pointing or phrases such as "where's the
...
or "that is a ....." Although early name
relations may be learned piecemeal (see Fig-
ures 5, 7, and 9) with listener, echoic, and tact
components established separately, with rep-
etitions of the interactions shown in Figure 9
the cues of the caregiver's naming of and
pointing at a new object come to be sufficient
on their own to evoke the full sequence of
behavior that makes up the name relation.
Nelson and Bonvillian (1973), for example,
have reported that children 18 months and
202

----- Page 19 (native) -----
NAMING AND OTHER SYMBOLIC BEHAVIOR
older can learn new object names after an
adult has named the objects in their presence
only once or twice. Thus, the name relation
is established as a higher order behavioral relation
(see also Catania, in press) that short-circuits
earlier means of constructing it. As with the
echoic, higher order naming may become in-
creasingly covert and abbreviated in form and
may indeed be learned at the covert level of
responding, this being reinforced and main-
tained by a range of consequences (see Skin-
ner, 1957, pp. 141-146).
Maintenance of naming. Initially, the name
relation in young children is supported by
caregivers providing a range of generalized
reinforcers, such as smiling, praising, and re-
peating what the child has said. Studies have
shown that thereafter the frequency of exter-
nal reinforcers from caregivers and others
simply for correctly naming objects declines
markedly (Moerk, 1977, p. 265). However,
when the child names an object in the pres-
ence of a caregiver, she almost invariably
evokes the latter's attention both to herself
and to the object that she hasjust named and
with which she is engaged; this attention is a
rich source of reinforcement for the child's
naming, as is the joint activity with the named
object that often ensues (Prorok, 1980).
Important sources of reinforcement, how-
ever, are increasingly embodied within the
name relation itself. For example, the rein-
forcement provided by the conditioned stim-
uli, operant or Pavlovian, that naming pro-
duces and by the listener behavior that
naming occasions (together with
its conse-
quences) may be sufficient to maintain nam-
ing behavior at strength (see Skinner, 1957,
pp. 86, 163-166, 438-452). Thus a child who
emits the name "mama" in her mother's ab-
sence may "see" her, "hear" her, "smell" her
special
scent, and
"feel"
her comforting
touch. Naming that, via conditioning, gener-
ates such effects is reinforced because it does
so. The verbal stimulus may also serve as a
discriminative stimulus for a range of listener
behavior with a variety of consequences. For
example, the child's saying the word "mama"
may set the occasion for her to visually or oth-
erwise search the environment until she finds
her mother-a potent reinforcer for that
naming behavior. Once "mama"
is found
and held in attention, other behavior can be
initiated
(e.g., her mother may provide a
drink, a cuddle, or play) that may also serve
as a rich source of reinforcement that will
maintain the naming behavior that preceded
it (Huttenlocher & Smiley, 1987). These and
other effects of naming (see below) serve to
maintain it at high strength and begin to free
it to some extent from the direct reinforcing
practices of the verbal community. This does
not mean, of course, that the verbal com-
munity then ceases to play a decisive role. On
the contrary, caregivers and others continue
to exert a powerful influence on its further
development, maintenance, and generaliza-
tion (Harris, 1992; Moerk, 1983).
The development of naming. From the time
she first names an object or event, the child's
name relations continue to change and de-
velop throughout her life. For any particular
name, additional stimulus events come to oc-
casion her verbal utterance, and there are
concomitant changes in the listener behavior
that the utterance evokes. This is the means
by which socially shared listener behavior as
well as idiosyncratic listener behavior are es-
tablished (see Mead, 1934, pp. 135-226; Vy-
gotsky, 1934/1987, pp. 255-285). We have
tried to capture this process in Figure 11,
which shows what happens when a child, who
has previously learned to say "dog" only in
the presence of toy dogs and pictures in
books and to point to them upon hearing
"where's the dog?" encounters a real dog for
the first time. When the child first sees the
dog (A), the visual resemblance between the
previously seen objects and the real dog is
sufficient to evoke, via stimulus generaliza-
tion, the child's verbal response "dog" and
her pointing to the dog. She now sees a dog
that moves, and she hears the sounds of pant-
ing and whining that are characteristic of real
dogs. These new properties, as well as the
previously learned visual features, come to be
discriminative for her saying "dog" in future
encounters with dogs. Her saying "dog" gen-
erates the auditory stimulus Idogl that in turn
evokes conditioned visualization of previously
encountered pictures and toy dogs but also
now occasions visual reorientation to the real
dog that is present. As she repeats the name
"dog," further pairings of /dog/ with seeing
and hearing a real-life dog may result in the
verbal stimulus evoking thereafter not just
conditioned seeing but also conditioned
hearing of a dog (shown in B), each of which,
203

----- Page 20 (native) -----
PAULINEJ. HORNE and C. FERGUS LOWE
A
says
hears
D
rs~~
hers
Idogl
I
Mim
Fig. 11.
Ongoing multimodal development of the name relation: The child in this example has previously learned
to say "dog" when seeing pictures of dogs and toy dogs. She next learns to say "dog" also when she sees a real dog;
sees it move and hears it pant (A), touches its wet nose (B), pats its back, smells and feels its coat (C), and hears it
bark (D). The name relation may now be evoked by any one, or some combination of, these new stimuli. In addition
(as indicated by the inner gray arrows of name relations A, B, C and D), the auditory stimulus /dog/ comes to
occasion conditioned seeing, feeling, smelling, and hearing of dogs, which may, in turn, evoke saying "dog" and so
on.
even in the absence of a real dog, may later
set the occasion for further emissions of the
name. Similarly, when the child touches the
dog's wet nose (B), pats its back, smells and
feels its coat (C), and then hears it bark (D),
each of these new events join the previously
encountered stimuli as potential discrimina-
tive stimuli for the emission of the verbal re-
sponse "dog" in the future. In addition, the
auditory stimulus Idog! will henceforth give
rise to new listener behavior including, for
example, touching, patting, and stroking, as
well as conditioned seeing, feeling, smelling,
and hearing of dogs and properties of dogs.
Figure 12 shows in detail how the child's
name relation, "dog," alters in the course of
her interactions with the real dog. This name
relation will continue to develop in the
course of further encounters with other
breeds of dogs, other features of individual
dogs, and other illustrations of dogs. And on
each new occasion the name "dog"
is ut-
tered, it will carry with it the generalized lis-
tener behavior, including affective respond-
ing, accumulated from previous encounters
with
dogs,
listener behavior
that
itself
is
changed by each further encounter with dogs
or any of their attributes and the conse-
quences of these interactions. Thus, the stim-
ulus /dog/ comes to evoke a myriad of sights,
sounds, tactile sensations, and smells of dogs
and conditioned affective responding.
Naming and functional stimulus classes. The
verbal community instructs the child not only
which objects with similar appearance have
the same name but also assigns common class
names to objects that, although they may
have
little
in common
physically,
serve a
shared cultural function, that is, are function-
ally equivalent (Mead, 1934, pp. 83-85;
Brown, 1958, p. 85). The name "chair," for
instance, is used in this culture for a range of
objects that are of varied shape, color, and
size and made of differing materials. Having
learned to use "chair" in the single case of
her bouncing chair, the child may not extend
the name to other chairs until the conven-
tional class is established by caregivers who
204

----- Page 21 (native) -----
NAMING AND OTHER SYMBOLIC BEHAVIOR
says
hears
"dog99
Idogl
sees
OOther listener
behavior to dog
hears
pointsto
feels!
touches nose
sesent
amt
smells
bends:tdsopwan
strokes back
cuddles
Fig. 12.
Schematic representation of changes in the
name relation across modalities resulting from the inter-
actions depicted in Figure 11. When the child now sees,
hears, feels, or smells a dog, she may say "dog." When
in turn she hears her auditory stimulus /dog/ she may
orient to a dog, and point to it, touch its nose, pat it, and
so on. In addition, the auditory stimulus /dog/ may evoke
(lower gray arrow) conditioned seeing, hearing, feeling,
and smelling of dogs (CRs). The echoic relation between
her own auditory stimulus Idogl and her saying "dog"
(upper gray arrow) may reevoke this conditioned
re-
sponding and occasion further revolutions of the name
relation as a whole.
point
to other
"chairs," naming them
as
such. The child's acquisition of the name of
a conventional stimulus class such as "chair"
confers major functional benefits. For exam-
ple, having been taught to sit on what care-
givers call a "chair," the child adopts the cul-
tural function of chairs in general when she
adopts the name and extends
it, together
with associated listener behavior, to new ex-
emplars. So when told that a new and unusu-
al object is a "chair," the child will immedi-
ately be able to respond (i.e., by sitting on it)
in a way that is both conventionally accept-
able and intrinsically reinforcing. These cul-
turally defined functions thus become for her
an integral part of her listener behavior to
the name "chair." Indeed, when she
sees
someone sitting on an object or finds that she
can sit comfortably on it, she may declare that
it is a "chair." It should be noted that this
extension of the name has not been directly
trained or reinforced but occurs "spontane-
ously" via common listener behavior (i.e., sit-
ting) that gives rise to the verbal response
"chair." In this way there is a blending of cul-
tural and personal factors to further extend
the stimulus class that bears the common
name.
At a later stage, the child may, for example,
be taught the name "furniture" for her var-
ious items of doll furniture for which she al-
ready has other names (e.g., "chairs," "ta-
bles," "beds," etc.). Although at one level of
classification chairs are objects that people or
dolls sit on, at another more general level
chairs are furniture items to be arranged and
rearranged with other such items and moved
from room to room or from house to house
and so on. When the child calls chairs "fur-
niture," she moves to a more general level of
functional equivalence. In this way, naming,
incorporating as
it does bidirectional rela-
tions between a single verbal response and a
class of objects or events, can establish and
maintain more than one level of functional
equivalence.
Naming and emergent behaviotr The fact that
names relate to classes of objects has pro-
found implications for the development of
new or untrained behavior. Figure 13 (left)
shows, for example, a child who has learned
to use the name "furniture" for a range of
items of doll furniture and who, in addition,
has been shown how to put some of these
items (e.g., chairs and chests of drawers), but
not others, into a toy van. If now, as shown in
Figure 13 (right), the caregiver instructs her
to "put the furniture into the van," she may
scan the toys repeating to herself "furniture"
and extend to
all the furniture items the
same listener behavior that has been estab-
lished previouslyjust for the chairs and chests
of drawers; that is, she will put all the furni-
ture and notjust the latter items into the van.
There is thus no need for the caregiver to
reinforce the target behavior with each indi-
vidual object; it is sufficient to establish it with
some of the exemplars and then use the
name "furniture" to effect gpneralization to
the remaining items in the furniture class. We
have here, in other words, new responding
directed at all of these additional items; the
child treats each in a similar way, that is, as if
205
D
41U

----- Page 22 (native) -----
PAULINEJ. HORNE and C. FERGUS LOWE
says
7eo>
hears
ufiurniture"
Ifumiturel
sees
says
hears
"furnirtre"
Ifurniturel
sees
KeO
-
LooT
at dbet
-uu3'o PhIs In vwa(ttslned)
4,-
ftommftw)k*
Fig. 13.
Schematic representation of how naming brings about new behavior. A child is taught to name individual
items of dolls' furniture (e.g., a chair, chest of drawers, lamp, television) as "furniture." Independently of this she is
trained to load some of them (e.g., chair and chest of drawers) into a toy van (left). Subsequently, when instructed
to "put the furniture in the van," she may show the untrained behavior of putting the lamp and television into the
van (right).
each were functionally equivalent. Other con-
ventional behavior pertaining to the
class
"furniture" may be rapidly learned in the
same manner. This brings us to the question
of how naming can give rise to emergent or
derived relations, such as those observed in
studies of stimulus equivalence.
If taught a common name for members of
a class of physically different stimuli, a child
may, when presented with a single exemplar
of the class, select other class members with-
out having ever previously been directly
trained
to do so
(see Eikeseth & Smith,
1992). For example, a child may be taught to
name as "two" pairs of objects (e.g., two dots,
two apples, etc.) and, independently, to name
and select as "two" the numeral 2. When, as
part of a matching game, she is subsequently
shown a pair of objects on one page of a book
and asked to "pick the one that goes with
them," she may be able, without further
training, to select the numeral 2 from an ad-
jacent page illustrating different numerals.
According to our account, as shown in Figure
14, this comes about because the pair of ob-
jects occasions her saying "two" which in
turn evokes the previously established listener
behavior of selecting the numeral 2. In a sim-
ilar manner, when later shown the numeral 2
on the sample page, she may be able to select
the pair configuration from among groups of
differing numbers of objects on the compar-
ison page. Later she may learn that the print-
ed word TWO is also named "two" and when
then presented with TWO may match it var-
iously to the numeral 2 or to two objects, in
appropriate choice contexts.
Thus, as shown in Figure 14, by teaching
the child to use the common name "two" for
each of the three stimuli, up to six new be-
havioral relations may emerge, apparently
spontaneously, but in fact through the listen-
er behavior engendered by the name. Evi-
dence that new behavioral relations can be
established in this manner comes from a
study by Eikeseth and Smith (1992) with au-
tistic children (see pp. 224-225), although
further research is needed to provide a sys-

----- Page 23 (native) -----
NAMING AND OTHER SYMBOLIC BEHAVIOR
says
hears
"two"
Itwol
sees
Fig. 14.
When a child is taught to name as "two" the
numeral 2, two dots, and the printed word TWO (solid
arrows), up to six new behavioral relations (broken ar-
rows) may result. Whichever of these stimuli is presented
to her she will say "two" and hear Itwol; this will evoke
her orienting towards and selecting from the available
comparison stimuli any one or more of those stimuli that
she has previously named "two."
tematic investigation of this kind of emergent
behavior. There are many other possible ex-
amples of such stimulus classes, the child
learning in a similar way the interchangeabil-
ity in some contexts of particular object class-
es (e.g., dog), particular spoken words (e.g.,
"dog"), and particular arrangements of
printed letters (e.g., DOG). Any of these stim-
uli may occasion the same name so that the
same listener behavior (e.g., selecting) may
be directed towards other members of the
same stimulus class. Such behavior has been
termed stimulus equivalence, and we have
shown how one very basic form of naming-
that is, common naming-can bring it about.
We shall address others below.
Towards a definition of naming. According to
our account, naming is a higher order bidi-
rectional behavioral relation that combines
conventional speaker and listener functions
so that the presence of either one presup-
poses the other. Thus, when higher order
naming skills have been established, even if
caregivers ostensibly teach the child only con-
ventional listener behavior (e.g., orienting to
and picking up a shoe in response to the ut-
terance "where's shoe?"), she will neverthe-
less also exhibit the corresponding speaker
behavior (saying "shoe" in response to see-
ing the shoe). Likewise, when only speaker
behavior is ostensibly taught (e.g., when the
caregiver points to a dog and says "dog," the
child repeats the utterance and learns to say
"dog" herselfwhen she sees it), the child also
acquires listener behavior (so that when next
asked "where's dog?" she orients and points
to it). Second, we have shown that once the
higher order name relation has been learned
by the child, there may be no need for the
verbal community to provide reinforcement
to establish appropriate speaker and listener
behavior; it may be sufficient, for example,
for caregivers merely to point to and utter the
name of a novel object for the full name re-
lation, incorporating both speaker and listen-
er behavior, to be established. A third crucial
feature of a name is that it is used by the
verbal community, and hence the child, not
for a particular stimulus but for conventional
classes of objects and events. A child learns
to say "shoe" when she sees one of many
kinds of shoe, from any of a multitude of per-
spectives, in any of a multitude of contexts.
As a consequence, new
listener behavior
trained with just one or two members of the
named class may come to be occasioned by
any one or all of the others, and training a
common name for a number of different ob-
jects results in the child's treating them in-
terchangeably in some contexts.
To summarize, we can now define naming
as a higher order bidirectional behavioral re-
lation that (a) combines conventional speak-
er and listener behavior within the individual,
(b) does not require reinforcement of both
speaker and listener behavior for each new
name to be established, and (c) relates to
classes of objects and events. This definition
has clear implications for attempts to deter-
mine experimentally whether or not subjects
can name. One possible test would involve
the training of speaker behavior in relation
to a novel stimulus and then testing for the
presence of conventional listener behavior.
This could, for example, be achieved as fol-
lows. First it would be necessary to ensure
that conventional listener behavior had been

----- Page 24 (native) -----
PAULIJNEJ. HORNE and C. FERGUS LOWE
established with other stimuli (e.g., looking
or pointing at the correct object when the
caregiver says "where's X?"). The caregiver
would then point to a novel object (e.g., a toy
giraffe), say "giraffe," and reinforce the sub-
ject's saying "giraffe" when the latter was pre-
sented; other vocal responses could be estab-
lished with other novel objects in a similar
fashion. The test for naming would consist of
presenting all the objects together and asking
the subject, "where's the giraffe?" If the sub-
ject had learned the name, as distinct from
mere speaker behavior or tacting, she should
proceed to show the conventional listener be-
havior of looking, or pointing, at the toy gi-
raffe.
A more demanding test would be to follow
a similar procedure to that outlined above
but, when the caregiver named the objects in
the presence of the subject, provide no rein-
forcement. Given that the higher order name
relation had already been learned by the sub-
ject with other objects and events, this pro-
cedure might nevertheless be sufficient to es-
tablish
both
conventional
speaker and
listener behavior for novel objects and events.
A yet more stringent test would be one that
capitalized upon the fact that naming is con-
cerned with stimulus classes. Having taught
either conventional speaker or listener be-
havior in the presence of a given stimulus
(e.g., a shoe) in the manner outlined above,
either with or without reinforcement,
it
should be possible, if naming has been estab-
lished, to extend it to other physically differ-
ent exemplars of shoe by the caregiver simply
pointing to each of them and saying "shoe,"
with the subject's correct speaker behavior
being reinforced throughout. The same
could be done for other object classes
(clothes, furniture, toys). If the subject has
learned the name "shoe," then, in the pres-
ence of exemplars of shoes among other ob-
jects, when the caregiver presents one of the
shoes saying "see this, where are the others?"
the child should be able, via her own overt
or covert utterance of the name, to select oth-
ers in the class. This final part of the test,
involving as it would the presentation of a
sample and the requirement that the subject
choose the appropriate comparison stimuli,
bears a close resemblance to match-to-sample
tests for stimulus equivalence. The principal
difference lies in the training given. Unlike
match to sample, in the naming procedure
stimuli from the same class are not presented
together but are presented as individual ex-
emplars named individually by the experi-
menter. In the procedure we have outlined
here, the subject's speaker behavior would be
reinforced during
training, but even
this
might not be necessary.
These naming tests, like tests of stimulus
equivalence, all involve what might be termed
emergent or derived relations. That is, we direct
reinforcement or training at speaker relations
alone but obtain new or additional listener
relations. In the case of the stimulus class
tests, we confine training to a set of object-
word relations but get many new kinds of ob-
ject-object listener behavior. In both cases, in-
sofar
as the new behavior has not been
explicitly reinforced during the testing pro-
cedures, it might be said that it is emergent
or derived. These terms are most often used,
however, to describe behavior for which the
controlling variables are unknown (see Mead,
1934, p. 198); hence, they frequently occur
in the literature on stimulus equivalence. Our
account of the emergent phenomena in the
above cases, on the other hand, shows that
they all involve learned behavior and rela-
tions that are established through naming. Al-
though naming is responsible for bringing
into the repertoire a great many new behav-
ioral relations,
it is itself learned behavior,
and
its
operations
can
be
understood
through behavior analysis. To the extent that
we can give an account of naming and its ef-
fects on other behavior, the concepts of emer-
gent and derived may in this context become
redundant.
Naming through other modalities. The present
account, although based upon behavioral in-
teractions between caregivers and children
who are not sensory impaired, should also be
applicable to those who do have sensory im-
pairments (e.g., those who are deaf or blind).
In order to learn the name relation, such
children require a sensory modality through
which they may learn (a) to discriminate ar-
bitrary but conventional stimuli provided by
their verbal community (which might, in the
case of deaf children be manual signing, or
in the case of blind children, speech), (b)
some of the conventional functions of objects
and to perform these forms of behavior in
response to the corresponding conventional
208

----- Page 25 (native) -----
NAMING AND OTHER SYMBOLIC BEHAVIOR
stimuli (i.e., listener behavior), and (c) to re-
produce (echo) those stimuli themselves
(e.g., by signing or speaking) while respond-
ing to the corresponding objects. In this way
these children can learn to emit arbitrary but
conventional behavior that evokes their own
conventional listener behavior as well as that
of others in
their verbal community who
share the same conventions. Under such con-
ditions, naming should be effectively estab-
lished. Indeed the evidence shows that young
children who are deaf or blind learn to sign
or speak, respectively, and thus to name, at
rates similar to those of children without sen-
sory impairment (Folven & Bonvillian, 1991;
Mulford, 1988; Pettito, 1992).
Intraverbal Naming
The effectiveness of naming in bringing
about new or emergent behavior is greadly en-
hanced as soon as the child begins to use
names not just singly but in combination.
Once children
at around
the age
of 18
months have acquired a repertoire of, on av-
erage, 50 approximations to single conven-
tional verbal responses they begin to combine
these, initially to form response pairs (Anis-
feld, 1984). For example, the caregiver may
often repeat the words "big teddy" to the
child and the child may echo these words; in
this way, the verbal stimulus /big/ comes to
reliably occasion the child saying "teddy."
When the caregiver says "big ... .?" the child
says "teddy" and is praised by the caregiver
for doing so (Goodwin, 1985; Greenfield,
Reilly, Leaper, & Baker, 1985; Harris, 1987).
This form of verbal behavior has been
termed the intraverbal by Skinner (1957, p.
71) and it is characterized by a relation in
which, like the echoic, a verbal stimulus is the
occasion on which a particular verbal
re-
sponse receives generalized reinforcement.
However, we propose that, as in the case of
the echoic and the tact, the intraverbal can
exist in two forms, one with and one without
conventional listener behavior. There is in-
deed evidence
(a)
that children do learn
from their caregivers sequences of vocal ut-
terances or "words" (e.g., simple repetitions
of adult speech such as nursery rhymes) that
are initially devoid of conventional listener
behavior, and (b) that this may be important
for the subsequent development of intraver-
bal naming (Clark, 1977; Moerk, 1977, p.
244; Skinner, 1957, p. 56; Slobin, 1968; White-
hurst & Vasta, 1975). However, in what
follows we shall focus upon intraverbal rela-
tions between names.
Bidirectional relations
between names. With
self-echoic repetition, which is a common fea-
ture of children's verbal play (Moerk, 1992),
the relation between the individual name
components in an intraverbal
is easily re-
versed (Clark, 1977). Thus, the child's repe-
tition of the intraverbal "knife fork" yields
"knife fork knife fork knife fork" and, be-
cause "fork" frequently precedes "knife,"
the child may come to say "fork knife." Clark
and van Buren (1973, p. 85), for example,
report that a 2-year-old child learned in this
fashion to make the following utterances:
"towel wet towel," "noisy man noisy," "back
pin back," and "soap want it soap." The in-
traverbal relation is therefore not a rigid uni-
directional sequence of behavioral compo-
nents but may be bidirectional. If additional
terms are added to the sequence, then many
new combinations may emerge. For example,
if the child comes to self-echo "fork spoon"
in addition to "fork knife," then when she
next responds to the stimulus /fork/, it may
be to say either "spoon" or "knife," because
both have in the past regularly followed this
stimulus (cf. Skinner, 1957, pp. 71-76). With
still further echoic repetitions, the end result
may be sequences such as "fork knife spoon"
or "fork spoon knife" and so on. Thus many
possible combinations of the constituent
terms of an intraverbal may be produced by
the child and, depending in part upon their
proximity to conventional usage, some of
these may be reinforced by the verbal com-
munity.
How intraverbals can reflect conjunctions of ob-
jects and events. The child learns intraverbal
behavior not only through echoing the verbal
behavior of caregivers and others but also
through naming successively two or more
items, or properties of items, or events that
tend to coexist in her environment (Skinner,
1957, p. 75). A child who has learned to
name a fork and a spoon individually may
also come
to
say "spoon fork"
or
"fork
spoon" when she regularly sees the spoon
and fork together at meal times. With self-
echoic repetition the two names may become
bidirectionally related so that when either is
emitted it occasions the other. For example,
209

----- Page 26 (native) -----
PAULlNEJ HORNE and C. FERGUS LOWE
upon
seeing a spoon
the
child may
say
"spoon fork" and, in the absence of the fork,
search for it (Skinner, 1957, pp. 75-76). This
type of intraverbal relation has particular rel-
evance for studies of stimulus equivalence
(see pp. 218-221, Intraverbal Naming and Stim-
ulus Equivalence).
Interchange of listener behavior across intraver-
bal names. Irrespective of how intraverbals are
acquired, their emergence heralds important
new developments in name relations. As we
have already shown, a name becomes increas-
ingly generalized in terms of the stimuli that
occasion it and the listener behavior it sets in
train, and included among these stimuli that
occasion it may now be the verbal stimulation
arising from another name with which it has
been intraverbally related. The complexity of
the relation between words within intraverbal
sequences has been recognized by Skinner as
follows: "Many different [verbal] responses
are brought under the control of a given
stimulus word, and many different stimulus
words are placed in control of a single [ver-
bal] response" (1957, p. 74). What is not ac-
knowledged in this passage, however, is that
when names are reliably linked within an in-
traverbal sequence, listener behavior of any
one of the name relations will be increasingly
evoked by the other name relations and vice
versa. Thereafter, each name that has been
intraverbally linked, when it occurs alone may
now contain some of the listener behavior of
the others. This effect is illustrated in the ex-
ample of a child who, after having touched
hot objects (e.g., a radiator and a cup of tea),
is taught to say "hot" by her caregiver. When
the child sees these objects, she says "hot,"
which in turn occasions avoidance behavior
and elicits other emotional reactions. If the
child has previously learned the name "ket-
tie," the caregiver saying "hot kettle" can ex-
tend the child's listener behavior to the word
hot to this other potentially hazardous item.
The child, when she next sees a kettle, re-
peats "hot ketfie," and the listener behavior
already established to "hot" (avoidance and
conditioned emotional responses) occurs at
the same time as she says the word "kettle,"
which in turn comes to evoke similar listener
behavior. From this point on when the child
sees a ketfie, either with a caregiver present
or on her own, it may occasion not only "ket-
tde" but also, intraverbally, "hot" and its at-
tendant listener behavior.
Similarly,
if the
child already has learned the names "fire,"
"cooker," and "poker," the caregiver can go
on to teach her "hot fire," "hot cooker," and
"hot poker," all of which extend the listener
behavior to the name "hot" and also to the
names "fire," "cooker," and "poker." There
is thus no need for the child to learn from
experience how all of these objects can harm
her, because the listener behavior established
to just one of them occasions avoidance of all
the rest. This intraverbal means of transfer-
ring listener behavior and establishing func-
tional equivalence between physically differ-
ent stimuli has considerable reinforcing
consequences both for the child herself and
for the caregiver.
In the above example, the word kettle in its
intraverbal context (i.e., "hot kettie") evokes
listener behavior (e.g., avoidance and condi-
tioned emotional responses)
additional
to
that occurring when it is used on its own. On
the other hand, "hot kettie" also eliminates
some of the listener behavior that "kettie"
alone might evoke (e.g., touching and play-
ing with it). Because individual names be-
come increasingly generalized and extended
to cover ever greater numbers of objects, the
verbal community combines names in this
manner to specify listener behavior more pre-
cisely (see Vygotsky, 1934/1987, p. 276).
Naming and Manding
Thus far the present account has not ex-
plicitly dealt with manding, a class of verbal
behavior that features prominentiy in Skin-
ner's account. Skinner (1957) describes the
mand relation as "a verbal operant in which
the response is reinforced by a characteristic
consequence and is therefore under the func-
tional control of relevant conditions of de-
privation or aversive stimulation"
(pp. 35-
36). For example, a hungry infant may learn
to say "milk" when this vocal behavior is re-
inforced by her caregiver giving her milk.
However, just as was the case for echoic be-
havior, tacting, and intraverbals, we propose
that manding may exist either with or without
the speaker's own listener behavior to the vo-
cal stimulus produced.
Within Skinner's broad definition of verbal
behavior, it is true that some of the child's
earliest verbal behavior might be classified as
mands. For example, the child, when she is
210

----- Page 27 (native) -----
NAMING AAM OTHER SYMBOLIC BEHAVIOR
hungry, points to a specific object such as
milk, or she cries and makes other noises un-
til the caregiver responds by giving her milk
(Skinner, 1957, p. 465). However, numerous
studies have shown that in the course of
learning
to produce speech that approxi-
mates that of the verbal community, children
generally learn to name objects and events
before they learn to mand them (e.g., Anis-
feld, 1984, p. 92; Halliday, 1975; Lewis, 1936,
pp. 158-159; Nelson, 1973; Terrace, 1985; see
also pp. 201-202). When manding comes
about it does so generally via naming, that is,
names are first established and then are func-
tionally extended to mand objects and events.
For example, while reaching toward her bot-
tie of milk the thirsty child may utter the
name "milk," and this may be reinforced by
caregivers giving her some milk and not, as
previously, simply saying "yes it is milk" or
"good girl" and so on
(Skinner, 1957, p.
189). In this way naming rapidly becomes
multifunctional so that the child is now able
to mand any object or event that she can
name. Thus most mand relations (i.e., what
we shall term name-manding) observed in hu-
man verbal behavior incorporate naming,
with all of the speaker-listener functions and
bidirectionality thereby entailed (Huttenloch-
er & Smiley, 1987). As Skinner (1957) has ob-
served, "It is possible that all mands which
are reinforced by the production of objects
or other states of affairs may be interpreted
as manding the behavior of the listener and
tacting [we would say naming] the object or
state of affairs to be produced" (p. 189).
Some experimental work (Lamarre & Hol-
land, 1985; Lee, 1981) has suggested that
manding and tacting are functionally inde-
pendent. However, these were studies con-
ducted with children considerably older than
those who are the focus of this paper, and
they employed complex propositions as ver-
bal stimuli (e.g., "where do you want me to
put the object?") and as responses (e.g., "on
the
left"). Whatever the relation between
what these authors call manding and tacting
under such conditions, for present purposes
it is important to recognize that once naming
of an object is established, then, after direct
training on only a few mand relations, name-
manding often follows. Thus Lamarre and
Holland (1985) acknowledge that "in natural
settings it often seems that when a speaker
acquires a tact the corresponding mand ap-
pears collaterally" (p. 16). Skinner (1957, p.
188) gives the example of a child in a toy
store who is unable to identify a toy and is
told that it is "a doodler" (in our terms the
toy has been named doodler). The child im-
mediately says, "buy me a doodler." Evidence
that names are incorporated in name-mand-
ing in this manner comes from observational
studies with young children (Huttenlocher &
Smiley, 1987; Moerk, 1992, p. 167) and ex-
perimental studies with a 4-year-old boy who
had language difficulties (Salzinger, Feldman,
Cowan, & Salzinger, 1965) and deaf students
who used signing (Hall & Sundberg, 1987).
Speech for Others and Speech for Self
There are two main contexts in which nam-
ing occurs. In one the child has as listener
both herself and one or more others; speech
in this context is termed social speech or speech
for others. The second context exists when the
only audience entering into the control of
the behavior is the speaker herself as her own
listener; this is termed inner speech or speechfor
self (Diaz, 1992; Goodman, 1981; Goudena,
1992; Skinner, 1957, pp. 438-452; Sokolov,
1972; Vygotsky, 1934/1987, p. 257; Wertsch,
1979a, 1979b; Zivin, 1979). We consider
speech for self here because of its importance
in our later account of such issues as rule-
governed behavior, thinking, and equiva-
lence, particularly because many of the verbal
determinants of these phenomena may occur
at the covert level out of the easy access of
experimenters and, perhaps, even of subjects
themselves.
Although it has often been asserted that
differences in the forms of speech that occur
in these two contexts do not arise until later
in childhood
(i.e., around 3 to 7 years of
age), Furrow (1984a)
has shown they are
present in the verbal behavior of children as
young as 2 years old. In his study, Furrow de-
fined speech for others as any utterance that
was accompanied by the child making eye
contact with the caregiver, or that occurred
in the preceding or following 2 s of making
eye contact. Speech for self was defined as
utterances that did not meet the eye-contact
criterion and were not accompanied by other
social interactions with the caregiver. Among
several differences observed,
it was found
that the child's name-manding of the behav-

----- Page 28 (native) -----
PAULINEJ HORNE and C. FERGUS LOWE
ior of caregivers occurred more frequently in
speech for others, whereas in speech for self
there was a higher incidence of self-manding
(that is name-manding of her own behavior;
see Skinner,
1957,
p. 440) and otherwise
naming her own activities. In a second study
(Furrow, 1984b) found that speech for self
was quieter and of lower and less variable
pitch than was speech for others.
Why these differences exist between speech
for self and speech for others is an issue that
has not yet been fully resolved, but our ac-
count indicates that the consequences of the
two types of verbal behavior differ from the
outset and, as name learning proceeds, are
responsible for progressively differentiating
the two. When the child first names objects
or events, both she and her caregiver listen
to her utterance and respond to it in partic-
ular ways. But when, in the absence of any
stimulation from
the
caregiver,
the
child
names objects and events it sets in train a very
different kind of verbal relationship in which
the sole listener of her verbal productions is
herself. And she
is a very special listener.
Whereas
in
social speech
the
child must
speak in a form that is effective for the other
listener, in speech for self, there is no need,
for example, to speak loudly, to pronounce
words fully, or even to emit as many words
(see Vygotsky, 1934/1987, pp. 266-280).
Thus, for example, in the presence of her
mother and father, the child may make eye
contact with her father and say "daddy push
car," which is followed by her father pushing
the car. But when the child is alone or when
caregivers are not interacting with her, she
may look at the same car and say quietly
"push ... push." Because she is already look-
ing at the car, "push" alone is sufficient to
occasion her own behavior of pushing the
car. As Skinner has observed, speech for self,
whether overt or covert, shows "very little in-
traverbal chaining ...
[in our example,
"push"] ... because it is intimately connect-
ed with concurrent nonverbal behavior [e.g.,
looking at the car]. The chaining is from ver-
bal to nonverbal and back again ... [and is]
... closer to productive verbal thinking for
this reason" (1957, p. 445).
As this quote indicates, Skinner was aware
of many of the unique features of speech for
self. He also recognized
its central impor-
tance in the development of what he de-
scribed as verbal thinking. For example, in
describing the special characteristics of the
speaker who is his or her own listener, he
writes,
He speaks the same language or languages
and has had the same verbal and nonverbal
experience as his listener. He is subject to the
same deprivations and aversive stimulations,
and these vary from day to day or from mo-
ment to moment in the same way. As listener
he is ready for his own behavior as speaker at
just the right time and is optimally prepared
to "understand" what he has said. Very little
time is lost in transmission and the behavior
may acquire subtle dimensions. It is not sur-
prising, then, that verbal self-stimulation has
been regarded as possessing special properties
and has even been identified with thinking.
(1957, pp. 438-439)
The transfer of listener behavior between
names that we have already described for in-
traverbal behavior is greadly enhanced and
further developed in speech for self. With in-
creases in her naming repertoire, the child
can now emit a stream of names, overtly or
coverdy, independently of any further stimu-
lation outside the skin other than the object
or event that occasioned the first name. To
this extent the child's behavior becomes less
a function of current environmental stimuli
and more a function of the chain or stream
of verbal generalizations that is her speech
for self. With the development, in addition to
naming, of other types of words and of com-
plex forms of word ordering (syntax), the
child's speech
is further transformed, but
that is another story and one that lies outside
the confines of the present paper.
The Origins of Rule-Governed Behavior
and Verbal Control
The present account has implications for
the distinction drawn by Skinner (1969, p.
147) between contingency-shaped and rule-
governed behavior (Catania, in press; Cerutti,
1989; Hineline & Wanchisen, 1989; Zettle &
Hayes, 1982). Although contingency-shaped
behavior is embraced by the three-term con-
tingency (i.e., discriminative stimulus, re-
sponse and reinforcer), Skinner's definition
of rule-governed behavior as that which is un-
der the control of "prior contingency-speci-
fying stimuli" is more problematic. As a num-
ber of authors have observed (Hayes &
212

----- Page 29 (native) -----
NAMING AND OTHER SYMBOLIC BEHAVIOR
Hayes, 1992; Sidman, 1990, 1992; Stemmer,
1992, p. 76), Skinner did not make clear what
he meant by "specifying" and how stimuli
come to have such a function. The present
account helps to clarify this problem because
naming is, of course, the principal means by
which behavior and
its consequences are
specified. Names are the basic components of
verbal rules and, hence, it is only through an
analysis of the name relation that the effects
of rules on behavior can be understood. As
we show in the next part of the paper, the
absence of such an analysis is a serious flaw
in theories that use the construct of equiva-
lence in an attempt to put right the deficien-
cies in Skinner's account.
We shall not attempt a detailed analysis of
complex rule-governed behavior as it occurs
in adults, but will indicate how the earliest
forms of such a relation come about in
young children. Take, for example, a child
who from birth has had among her toys a
plastic bowl. Initially she responds to this
stimulus in ways much like any other non-
verbal organism would; her seeing it may, for
example, set the occasion for her chewing it,
handling it, hitting it on the ground, and so
on. Having been previously taught the name
"boat" and shown how toy boats function
(e.g., how
they
float,
sink, and
can be
pushed along with toy passengers etc.), if she
is now told that the plastic bowl is a boat,
her behavior toward the bowl may be trans-
formed as she applies to it many if not all of
the kinds of listener behavior she has ac-
quired before with toy boats. Her new be-
havior of floating the bowl in water, pushing
it along, and so on may never have been re-
inforced in the past but is controlled by the
name relation (i.e., the verbal stimulus) that
the bowl now evokes.
(If her caregiver
named the bowl a "hat," then her behavior
toward it would be very different.) Behavior
that, like this, is under the control of name
relations may be termed verbally controlled be-
havior (cf. Mead, 1934, p. 108).
With the development of naming, particu-
larly in intraverbal behavior and speech for
self, verbal control becomes increasingly
more complex and pervasive. When the child
says, for example, "push boat" or, while look-
ing at the boat, just "push," such naming en-
ters into the control of her own behavior (see
pp. 211-212, Speech for Others ... .). What is of
central importance, however, in drawing a
distinction with contingency-shaped behavior
is not that names specify contingencies (they
may or may not do so), but that they specify
the subject's own listener behavior toward
particular objects and events. This is the crit-
ical feature of verbal control, which suggests
that the counter term to contingency shaped
should not be rule governed but verbally con-
trolled.
Naming and Symbolic Behavior
We shall next very briefly outline how an
analysis of naming such as this provides an
approach to dealing with some of the com-
plex issues in human language research. The
aim is to extend our terminology in ways that
will do justice to the complexity of the phe-
nomena and can be shared by others in the
scientific community, while at the same time
maintaining the conceptual rigor of behavior
analysis.
Verbal understanding. As we have shown, the
child begins as a listener to the utterances of
others, but the critical development occurs
with the advent of naming when she produc-
es her own utterances and responds to them
as she has done to those of her caregivers,
that is, in a socially shared manner (cf. Mead,
1934, pp. 89-90, 190-191; Vygotsky, 1934/
1987, p. 163). In this sense the child now un-
derstands her own words. In addition, howev-
er, it is increasingly the case that this listener
behavior, or understanding, evokes further
speaking. Through continuing social inter-
actions, her verbal understanding progres-
sively converges upon the way the verbal com-
munity
conventionally
categorizes
and
otherwise responds to everyday objects and
events (see Skinner, 1957, p. 278).
Verbal communication. Because, for each of
the child's name relations, the class of stim-
ulus events and the listener behavior to which
it applies have been largely established by the
caregiver, they are also part of the caregiver's
corresponding name relation. This provides
the basis for
verbal communication between
child and caregiver. Thus, when either the
child or the caregiver says "pat dog," their
mutual response will be to orient to any one
of the class of objects which they both name
as "dog" (to the exclusion of other objects)
and to engage in the further shared behavior
of patting it. Clearly, although these words
213

----- Page 30 (native) -----
PAULINEJ. HORNE and C. FERGUS LOWE
may be occasioned by some stimulus events
and evoke some listener behavior that they
do not fully share, it is the stimulus class cat-
egories and listener behavior that they do
have in common that makes verbal commu-
nication possible. It also provides the basis for
caregivers to extend membership of the class-
es embodied within the child's name relation
and so to develop the child's verbal commu-
nication. Given that caregivers' orienting and
other listener behavior are shared with many
others in their verbal community, the child is
now also well placed to begin to communi-
cate with the community at large.
Verbal meaning. A basic and central feature
of naming is that it relates to classes of stimuli
(Mead, 1934, p. 88; Vygotsky, 1934/1987, p.
249); this, of course, is why the study of nam-
ing has such importance for the literature on
stimulus equivalence and vice versa. Mead
(1934, pp. 84-85) has maintained that when
we name a stimulus, we in fact re-cognize it as
an exemplar of a class and react to it in all of
the ways we have learned, through the cul-
ture, as appropriate for that class of events;
in this way we recognize each object as an
instance of a universal.
Similarly, Skinner
(1957) has argued that "the verbal response
chair is as abstract as red. It is not controlled
by any single stimulus" (p. 110). According
to Vygotsky (1934/1987, p. 285), it is this
"generalized reflection of reality" that is the
distinguishing feature of word meaning. In
the present account, this is achieved through
the circular relation between the stimulus
class, the utterance, and the class of listener
behavior, these being inextricably linked in
the name relation. That is, when humans be-
come speaker-listeners and name, they mean.
For each naming event, the initiating stim-
uli may occur in any modality, but the listener
behavior that follows may produce stimula-
tion involving all the modalities that have pre-
viously been engaged, as part of the name
relation, with the class of objects or events
named. For example, seeing a sign or picture
or smelling her caregiver's baking may occa-
sion for the child the spoken word "cake,"
which in turn may evoke in the child visions
of cakes based upon all of the multifaceted
views of cakes she has previously had; at the
same time she may feel the crumbling texture
as she touches cake and taste the sweetness
as she bites into it. Such stimulation may, in
turn, give rise to a range of sensations and
emotional
activity that reinforces naming.
Thus, when the child names, she not only
makes an utterance but also at the same time
brings into being other behavior, either full-
blown or incipient, overt or covert, all of
which is bound up with the word.
The circular relation between, for example,
seeing, saying and hearing, and seeing again
with all of the attendant listener behavior and
its consequences is what maintains the flow
of listener behavior. As we have shown above,
during each occurrence of naming, listener
behavior changes and, in turn, alters the
name relation
itself; the name relation
is
therefore not so much circular as a spiral of
development that grows in content with each
occurrence or revolution.
Verbal thinking. It may be argued that think-
ing is simply behavior and is thus common to
all animal species (see Skinner, 1957, p. 449).
However, according to the present account
the name relation represents a very special
kind of behavior, with very special accom-
plishments and effects upon the rest of the
behavioral system, that may be termed verbal
thinking. In the final chapter of Verbal Behav-
ior Skinner (1957) describes the special prop-
erties of speaker-listener effects in speech for
self that he also argues should be character-
ized as verbal thinking. We have attempted to
demonstrate how naming is instrumental in
bringing this about. We have also tried to
show how, with the development of intraver-
bal behavior and speech for self, verbal think-
ing becomes a complex interaction between
sometimes barely articulated words and the
multimodal and crossmodal equivalences (cf.
Bush, 1993) produced by their related listen-
er behavior.
Reference and representation. It may be said
that the name re-fers to a class of objects or
events, because in a sense that is close to the
derivation of this word, the namer is carried
back via listener behavior to what is named
(i.e., the referent). Similarly, it can be said
that the name re-presents, standsfor, substitutes
for, or
specifies the referent, because when
naming occurs it may evoke in the namer and
other listeners seeing or visualizing of the
stimulus class to which the referent belongs
and other related listener behavior. As we
have shown, such representation occurs not
214

----- Page 31 (native) -----
NAMING AND OTHER SYMBOLIC BEHAVIOR
only when the referent is present but also
when it is absent.
Verbal consciousness. There is also a sense in
which it might be said that naming enables
us to have representations or to have thoughts of
objects or events. When the child learns to
produce her own verbal stimulus, such stim-
ulation controls the occurrence of her own
listener behavior, although whether she does
so will, of course, be determined by the con-
sequences of such behavior. Thus, whether or
not the object itself is present, the child,
through naming, can, for example, visualize
it, hear it, touch it. (This in turn has pro-
found effects upon the range of stimuli and
listener behavior that will be related to the
vocalization.) By reengaging the object within
the ongoing name relation she might be said
to hold it in consciousness. What she in fact
holds or sustains is, of course, the class of
stimuli produced by her own listener behav-
ior. Clearly, organisms without naming skills
cannot have this type of consciousness (see
Mead, 1934, p. 95; Skinner, 1969, p. 233).
Before naming has been established, the
child's listener behavior is dependent upon
real-time stimulation from the environment,
the effects of which may be fleeting. On the
other hand, the stream of stimulation pro-
duced by the child's naming is to a large ex-
tent free of the spatial and temporal con-
straints that beset the real-life stimuli that are
re-presented. For example, even if not able at
a given moment to experience directly a
cake, dog, her mother (or even a match-to-
sample stimulus), the child may, nevertheless,
through naming, visualize or imagine them.
Therefore, when the child learns to name,
this determines not only what she brings to
consciousness but when she does so. In this
sense speaker-listener effects have "the magic
we expect to find in a thought process"
(Skinner, 1957, p. 447). Being freed of real-
time constraints in this manner, the child can
now re-call or re-member objects, that is, keep-
ing close to the derivations of these terms,
use naming to "call back" or "call to mind"
the listener behavior related to those objects
(Mead, 1934, pp. 90-100).
Symbolic behavior. As we have shown, names
can be said to refer to, represent, stand for,
substitute for, specify, and recall classes of ar-
bitrary but conventionally related objects and
events. In this sense, naming is symbolic be-
havior (see Sinha, 1988). Once naming rela-
tions are established in the child's repertoire,
a major step has been taken in transforming
what is essentially a biologically based behav-
ioral system, governed by unilinear three-
term contingency relations, to one of much
greater complexity in which bidirectional, so-
cially shared relations between stimulus class-
es and behavior predominate, and objects
and events are represented or held in con-
sciousness in a way that transcends the spatial
and temporal constraints that govern their
occurrence in the real world. The name re-
lation is the behavioral unit upon which this
transformation is based.
APPLICATION OF THE NAMING
ACCOUNT TO STIMULUS
EQUIVALENCE
In the previous sections we have described
how, via naming, the child's behavior that has
been established with a single stimulus comes
to generalize to stimuli that are physically
very different and how, within particular con-
texts, she comes to respond to sets of differ-
ent objects and events as interchangeable. It
is phenomena of this kind that are the central
focus of the literature on stimulus equiva-
lence. But according to our account, the
"emergent" behavior that occurs in these cir-
cumstances, although indeed not directly re-
inforced or trained, is simply a consequence
of different stimuli being part of the same
name relation. Might it not be the case then
that humans' success on match-to-sample
tests of stimulus equivalence is also directly
attributable to the ways in which they name
the stimuli?
Common Naming and Stimulus Equivalence
We will consider the operation of naming
within the context of the two types of match-
to-sample procedures commonly used to
study stimulus equivalence: auditory-visual
and visual-visual procedures.
Auditory-visual procedures. Many of the ex-
perimental studies of stimulus equivalence
have used auditory-visual match-to-sample
procedures, in which each stimulus class in-
cludes a dictated word (e.g., Green, 1990; Sid-
man, 1971; Sidman & Cresson, 1973; Sidman,
Cresson, & Willson-Morris,
1974; Sidman,
Kirk, & Willson-Morris, 1985; Sidman & Tail-
215

----- Page 32 (native) -----
PAULINEJ. HORNE and C. FERGUS LOWE
by,
1982; Sidman, Willson-Morris, & Kirk,
1986). For example, in Sidman's (1971) early
study (see Figures 1 and 2) the sample stimuli
were dictated words and the comparison stim-
uli were either pictures or printed words. As
we have already shown, in such conditions
subjects may echo the dictated words and, in
so doing, learn to use the dictated word (e.g.,
"car") as their name both for the picture and
the printed word. In support of this analysis,
it should be noted that in the Sidman (1971)
study, although the matching procedure did
not require subjects to name the stimuli, all
emitted the "correct" class names when pre-
sented with the pictures and the printed
words. Clearly, although it might not be the
experimenter's intention, these procedures
are often effective means of establishing com-
mon names and, hence, for achieving success
on equivalence tests (see pp. 206-207). Al-
though since Sidman's (1971) experiment
several studies have investigated equivalence
classes using auditory-visual match-to-sample
procedures, often using complex stimulus ar-
rangements, the basic account of the role of
naming illustrated in Figure 4 applies in prin-
ciple to all of this research.
Naming tests in auditory-visual procedures. It
is, of course, difficult when, as in these pro-
cedures, the experimenter provides the right
conditions for common naming to be estab-
lished, to argue that naming does not have a
critical role to play in subjects' success on the
tests for equivalence. Yet this is what a num-
ber of investigators contend. Their evidence
is based almost exclusively on the finding that
in postexperimental naming tests presented
to subjects after completion of the match-to-
sample procedures, some individuals do not
reliably produce common names for the stim-
uli in the same class (Green, 1990; Sidman et
al.,
1985,
1986; Sidman &
Tailby,
1982).
There
are, however, major problems with
conclusions based on such evidence; these
are considered below.
Visual-visual procedures. Other studies have
used visual-visual procedures, which one
might think would avoid some of the diffi-
culties that are inherent in auditory-visual
matching, especially if the stimuli used are
abstract forms for which there are no existing
conventional names
(see,
e.g., Figure
15,
from Saunders & Green, 1992). In fact, how-
ever, stimulus arrays, or parts thereof, may
Class 1
A1
B1
Cl
Class 2
A2
B2
C2
D2
Fig. 15.
An example of stimulus sets used in studies
of visual-visual match to sample where Al, Bi, Cl, Dl
and A2, B2, C2, D2 are the experimenter-defined stim-
ulus Classes
1 and 2, respectively
(after Saunders &
Green, 1992, p. 229).
nevertheless occasion naming. That is, faced
with novel "abstract" stimuli, the subject may
search for features to which she can give a
common name
(see Wulfert, Dougher, &
Greenway, 1991). In the Class 1 stimuli of Fig-
ure 15, for example, some subjects may "see"
the Cl stimulus as resembling the letter R,
which may occasion the verbal response "R"
and related listener behavior; this may lead
the subject to look for an R in other stimuli,
particularly those that, when paired with Cl
(as sample and comparison in the matching
task), produce reinforcement. Thus one can
"see" an approximation to R in the Dl and
Bi stimuli and, if rotated, a lower case r in
all four Class
1
stimuli. Similarly one can
"see" a C or loop feature in the Class 2 stim-
uli. Clearly, the identification of a common
feature in these stimuli is determined notjust
by their formal characteristics but by means
of the class of listener behavior evoked dur-
ing naming. For example, the name "R"
evokes listener behavior not only to upper
case but also to lower case exemplars and can
thus embrace figures that show some resem-
blance to both. The subject's naming of the
stimuli thus transforms the task from arbi-
trary to nonarbitrary match to sample.
216

----- Page 33 (native) -----
NAMING AND OTHER SYMBOLIC BEHAVIOR
Of course, just as identifying a nameable
feature that can then be seen in other mem-
bers of the class can help a subject to perform
successfully on a matching task, so too a
name that does not conform to class bound-
aries may actively impede successful perfor-
mance. For example, in a study of equiva-
lence formation
in
six
4-
to
5-year-old
children, Dugdale and Lowe (1990) found
that when a common name was given for
stimuli in each of two classes (named "omni"
and "delta," respectively), for most subjects
this facilitated both their learning of the base-
line relations and, subsequently, their passing
of equivalence tests. But for some subjects
emergence of successful performance was de-
layed by their already having well-established
names for some of the stimuli (e.g., "green"
and "red" for green and red stimuli, respec-
tively). In such cases existing individual stim-
ulus names may prevent or delay the acqui-
sition
of
the
new
experimenter-given
common name. It follows that these "inter-
fering" names must be attenuated or alter-
native verbal behavior devised in order to en-
sure
success
on
the
equivalence
task
(Dugdale & Lowe, 1990; cf. Bentall, Dickins,
& Fox, 1993). It should also be noted, how-
ever, that because reinforcers are normally
only contingent upon correct sample-com-
parison selections during baseline match-to-
sample training, of the many names occa-
sioned by stimulus features, only those that
evoke listener behavior congruent with the
stimulus class as specified by the experiment-
er will lead to responding that will be rein-
forced.
Whether or not naming is established in
ways that facilitate the passing of equivalence
tests is dependent on the particular training
procedure
used.
Insofar
as auditory-visual
procedures have many of the characteristics
of everyday naming (i.e., a word is spoken by
the experimenter immediately prior to each
of many presentations of a stimulus), then
common naming should be established more
easily with this method than with visual-visual
procedures. In the latter procedure, rather
than the experimenter providing the names
at the outset, names are produced, over the
course of the experiment and through inter-
action with the reinforcement contingencies,
by the subjects themselves. According to this
account, subjects on auditory-visual proce-
dures should generally take less time to learn
the baseline relations and be more successful
on equivalence tests than subjects on visual-
visual procedures. This result is just what is
found in match-to-sample studies that have
compared the two procedures (Green, 1990;
Lipkens, Hayes, & Hayes, 1993; Sidman et al.,
1986).
Naming tests in equivalence procedures. When
subjects in studies of visual-visual match-to-
sample have been presented with naming
tests, they may have names for individual
stimuli, but frequently they do not report a
common name for each stimulus class; this
observation has been interpreted as provid-
ing further support for the view that naming
is not necessary for the formation of stimulus
equivalence (Green, 1990; Lazar, Davis-Lang,
& Sanchez, 1984; Sidman et al., 1986). How-
ever, the central difficulty that besets almost
all studies, both auditory-visual and visual-vi-
sual, that purport to show that naming is not
involved in successful performance on equiv-
alence tasks is that they have not attempted
to record subjects' naming behavior in the
course of match-to-sample experiments but
instead have relied upon postexperimental
naming tests in which the subject is usually
provided with one of the stimuli and is asked,
for example, "What is it?" (Sidman et al.,
1985)
or "What is the name for this?"
(Green,
1990). The names evoked under
these conditions, however, may not corre-
spond with the verbal responses of the subject
during the experiment itself. This is shown in
studies conducted by Lowe and colleagues
(see Dugdale & Lowe, 1990): In two separate
experiments, one with mentally handicapped
adults (Hird & Lowe, 19854; see also Hird,
1989) and the other with children aged 2 to
5 years old (Lowe & Beasty, 1987; see also
Beasty, 1987), all verbalizations made by sub-
jects during training and testing on match-to-
sample tasks were recorded. Although for
some individuals there was close correspon-
dence between the names they produced on
a postexperimental naming test and those
they uttered spontaneously in the course of
the experiment, for others the experimen-
4Hird, J., & Lowe, C. F. (1985, April). The role of lan-
guage in the emergence ofequivalence relations I: Evidencefrom
studies with mentally handicapped people. Paper presented at
the annual conference of the Experimental Analysis of
Behaviour Group, York, United Kingdom.
217

----- Page 34 (native) -----
PAULINEJ. HORNE and C. FERGUS LOWE
ter's questions prompted very different
names or even analytical descriptions of the
stimuli of a kind not previously vocalized in
the course of the experiment. The weakness
of naming tests as evidence has also been
highlighted
by Stoddard and
Mcllvane
(1986):
Do these data [from naming tests] lay to rest
the question of response mediation as the crit-
ical basis for stimulus equivalence? Probably
not.... Some examples may serve to illustrate
the difficulty of this research question. Sup-
pose a given subject characterizes all the stim-
uli in the entirely visual classes with a common
descriptive
adjectival term,
like "rounded,"
"pointed" or "pointing that way," perhaps de-
rived from primary stimulus generalization ...
Alternately, suppose a common
descriptive
term, such as "Set 1" vs. "Set 2," was applied,
as we do in talking about stimuli within classes.
When asked the question, "What is it?" in re-
lation to a given stimulus, perhaps the sub-
ject's verbal conditioning history had not pre-
pared him or her to use descriptive terms as
labels, leading to "I don't know"
[its name]
responses on the naming test. Would other
methods of testing have evoked the descrip-
tions? (p. 157)
But given that researchers record subjects'
verbal reports and find evidence that some
subjects do not use a common name or com-
mon description for all members of a stimu-
lus class, would thisjustify the conclusion that
naming is not necessary for the formation of
equivalence classes? Some (Green, 1990; La-
zar et al., 1984; Sidman et al., 1985, 1986; but
see also Sidman, 1994, pp. 113, 305-307)
have assumed this to be the case, but there
are many other ways, apart from common
naming, in which names might serve to bring
about success on equivalence tests (see pp.
221-222, Other Verbal Behavior ...). One such
is intraverbal naming.
Intraverbal Naming and Stimulus
Equivalence
How intraverbal naming can enable chil-
dren to pass tests of equivalence is shown in
the Lowe and Beasty (1987) study (see Beasty,
1987; Dugdale & Lowe, 1990), which record-
ed the spontaneous verbalizations of children
aged 2 to 5 years old while they performed
on a visual-visual match-to-sample task (see
Figure 16). In the first training phase the chil-
dren were taught to match a vertical line sam-
ple to a green, rather than a red, comparison
(AlBI relation) and a horizontal line sample
to the red, rather than the green, comparison
stimulus (A2B2). In the second training
phase they were taught to match a vertical
line sample to a triangle, rather than cross,
comparison stimulus (AlCI) and a horizontal
line sample to the cross (A2C2). Equivalence
tests were then presented to assess whether
the subjects could match green to triangle
(BICI) and triangle to green (CIBI) and
match red to cross (B2C2) and cross to red
(C2B2). Tests of symmetry were also per-
formed to determine whether they could also
match green to vertical line (Bi to Al) and
red to horizontal line (B2 to A2) and match
triangle to vertical line (Cl to Al) and cross
to horizontal line (C2 to A2).
Of the 29 subjects of differing ages who
participated, 17 passed the tests of equiva-
lence following training on the AB and AC
relations, success being related to age (see
pp. 224, 225). Recordings of subjects' spon-
taneous verbal behavior showed the follow-
ing: (a) During the training sessions, all sub-
jects
named
individual
stimuli
as,
for
example, "up," "down," "cross," "triangle, "
"green," and "red" (for the vertical line, hor-
izontal line, cross, triangle, green and red
stimuli, respectively).
(b) All of those chil-
dren who were successful in the equivalence
tests had previously, during training, intra-
verbally named the correct sample-compari-
son pairs: On AlBI trials, for instance, some
of the children, when presented with the ver-
tical stimulus as sample and the green stim-
ulus as one of the comparisons, responded
"up green," and on AlCI trials they said, in
the presence of the vertical and triangle, "up
triangle"; similarly, when presented with the
horizontal stimulus, they said "down red" or
"down cross" (see Figure 16). (c) Some sub-
jects, when presented during baseline
ses-
sions with one of the stimuli in a particular
class, responded by naming all three class
members despite the fact that only two of
these were present at the time. This also oc-
curred during baseline and
test
trials
in
equivalence test sessions; for example, when
presented with the vertical line (Al), 1 child
responded "up green, up hat" (where her
name for the vertical Al stimulus was "up,"
for the Bi green stimulus "green," and for
the Cl
triangle stimulus
"hat"); another
218

----- Page 35 (native) -----
NAMING AMD OTHER SYMBOLIC BEHAVIOR
B1
B2
I
BC ICB
A 2
AC
C1
II
I
I
BC
*CB
I
I
'I
I.
C2
|Key:
*
Trained
R = Red
m'-
m
m
_
Tested
G = Green
Fig. 16.
The equivalence paradigm employed by Lowe and Beasty (1987). The arrows point from samples to
corresponding comparison stimuli. Solid arrows indicate trained relations (AB and AC), and broken arrows depict
relations assessed during testing (BA, CA, BC, and CB). The experimenter-defined stimulus Classes 1 and 2 are shown
in the left and right displays, respectively.
child, when presented with the red stimulus
(B2), said "down red cross," naming A2, B2,
and C2, respectively.
How intraverbal naming of the
correct
sample-comparison stimulus pairs could give
rise to success on the equivalence tests follows
from our general account. In the course of
training on the match-to-sample procedure
employed in the Lowe and Beasty (1987)
study and most others on equivalence, the
subject is likely to name the stimuli, either
overfly or coverdy, when she sees them. Thus,
as shown in Figure 17, when presented with
the vertical stimulus as sample the child, like
some of the subjects in the Lowe and Beasty
study, may name it "up" and then press that
response panel. When the green and red
comparison stimuli then appear, she may ini-
tially name them both by saying "green red."
If she then selects the red stimulus in
re-
sponse to her last saying "red," no reinforcer
will be forthcoming and the probability of
saying "red" and selecting red in the pres-
ence of the vertical stimulus will decline. If,
however, on this or a subsequent trial with the
vertical sample she says "green" and then se-
lects the green key, this behavior will be re-
inforced and
the
probability of saying
"green" and selecting the green key in the
presence of the vertical will increase. As the
child learns the AB relations, she will thus in-
creasingly tend to name successful sequences
of responding to stimuli (e.g., "up green" or
"down red"). (This is a process similar to that
discussed on
pp. 209-210, How intraverbals
... . and by Skinner, 1957, pp. 75-76, where
the child comes to say "spoon fork" when
regularly seeing both together.) In this case
AB
A1[
AC
219

----- Page 36 (native) -----
PAULINEJ HORNE and C. FERGUS LOWE
Key:
G = Green
R = Red
Fig. 17.
Subjects' intraverbal naming of the stimuli in the Lowe and Beasty (1987) study. In learning baseline
relations (AB and AC) the subject simultaneously learns bidirectional intraverbal name relations "up" +
"green,"
"up" <-+ "triangle," "triangle" +-+ "green" (left) and "down" *4 "red," "down" *-> "cross," "red" e-* "cross" (right)
between the stimuli (gray arrows). When the subject names any stimulus presented as sample, intraverbal naming of
its other two class members is evoked; this, in turn, occasions selection of whichever of the two is presented as the
comparison in that particular trial. Thus, through intraverbal naming, stimuli within a class become interchangeable
in the context of match to sample.
the child continues to name the correct sam-
ple-comparison stimulus pairs because this
behavior controls correct responding on the
match-to-sample task (i.e., enables the child
to "remember" what goes with what) and is
thus reinforced through the experimental
contingencies. As was frequenfly observed in
the Lowe and Beasty study, the child may self-
echoically repeat "up green up green up
green," which establishes a bidirectional re-
lation not only between the verbal responses
"up" and "green," but also between their re-
lated listener behavior of responding on the
vertical and green keys. So, as shown in Fig-
ure 17, upon testing for the symmetrical Bi-
Al relation, the child, seeing the green stim-
ulus (BI) as a sample for the first time, says
"green"; the resultant verbal stimulus /green/
occasions intraverbally her saying "up" and
hearing /up/ and then in turn selecting the
vertical stimulus (Al). Similar relations will
obtain when testing for symmetry between
B2-A2 (i.e., red and horizontal stimuli). (It is
also, of course, possible at this stage that oth-
er verbal behavior, e.g., "green goes with up"
or "up goes with green," may be involved; see
below.)
Intraverbally produced bidirectional rela-
tions between A and C stimuli may emerge in
a fashion similar to those for A and B. At the
start of training on AC relations the child,
when presented with the A stimulus (e.g., the
vertical), may continue for some time with AB
verbalizations (e.g., "up green") but because
B stimuli (e.g., green) never follow the A sam-
ple in these trials and only AC responding is
reinforced, the child learns when given the A
sample (e.g., vertical) to select the C stimuli
(e.g., triangle) and at the same time to name
intraverbally the correct AC stimulus pairs
(e.g., "up triangle"). When AB and AC trials
are then mixed with equal probability, as is
220

----- Page 37 (native) -----
NAMING AM\) OTHER SYMBOLIC BEHAVIOR
standard practice in these procedures, each
sample (A) name will intraverbally give rise
to two different names of comparison stimuli
(B and C) including their related listener be-
havior. Thus, as shown in Figure 17, when the
vertical stimulus (Al) is the sample, the child
may say "up green up triangle" or "up tri-
angle up green"; because the vertical stimu-
lus occasions "green" and "triangle" with
similar probabilities, /up/ may also give rise
to "green triangle," yielding now in response
to the vertical sample the three-name intra-
verbal "up green triangle" (or "up triangle
green"); intraverbal sequences of just this
kind were articulated by subjects in the stud-
ies by Lowe and Beasty (1987) and Hird and
Lowe (1985). With self-echoic repetition of
these sequences, any of the A, B and C stim-
ulus names may come to occasion the other
two. At this point an intraverbal "equiva-
lence" class has been formed, wherein the
names that the subject has applied to the ex-
perimental stimuli in each class become in-
terchangeable. This leads directly to success
on formal
tests of equivalence within the
matching paradigm. Figure 17 shows, for ex-
ample, that on CB test trials, when the child
for the first time sees the triangle (Cl) as a
sample, she names it "triangle," which in-
traverbally occasions her saying "up" and
"green." Having pressed the sample,
the
green (Bi) and red (B2) keys appear as com-
parison stimuli: Hearing herself say /green/,
she orients to and selects the green, rather
than the red, key. Similar relations should
hold between BI-Ci, C2-B2, and B2-C2
names and respective stimulus selection.
Such behavior is taken to indicate that sub-
jects have formed stimulus equivalence.
From intraverbal to common naming. There is,
however, another verbal route that may de-
velop in the course of learning these condi-
tional relations. For example, if on Al-Bi and
Al-Cl
trials a subject names the stimulus
pairs "up-green" and "up-triangle," respec-
tively, then because "up" (the name of the
nodal stimulus) is common, both the intra-
verbal name pairs may contract to the com-
mon name "up." This is particularly likely to
happen with repeated presentations of Al-BI
and Al-Cl trials. Thus, as depicted in Figure
18, whenever not only the vertical stimulus
but also the green or the triangle stimulus are
presented all three may be named "up," a
common naming strategy recorded for some
of the subjects in the Lowe and Beasty (1987)
study. Similarly, the horizontal, red, and cross
stimuli may each occasion "down." As was
shown earlier (see Figure 14), common nam-
ing brings with it novel behavior, in this case
selecting the other within-class stimuli when-
ever one member of the class is presented as
the sample, thus meeting all of the test cri-
teria for stimulus equivalence.
Other Verbal Behavior and
Stimulus Equivalence
So far we have shown how two particular
forms of verbal behavior-common naming
and
intraverbal naming-can bring about
success on tests of equivalence. But there are
other possibilities. For example, the young
children in the Lowe and Beasty (1987) study
produced a variety of descriptions of the stim-
ulus relations as they performed the task
(e.g.,
"green means up,"
"green
is up,"
"green is the same as the triangle," "what
does red go with?" "they [pointing to the ver-
tical and triangle] are both green"). Similar
findings have been reported by Wulfert et al.
(1991) who, in an interesting methodological
departure for equivalence research, used a
"think aloud" procedure modeled upon Er-
icsson and Simon's (1980) protocol analysis.
The results of their
first experiment with
adult humans showed that subjects who
formed equivalence classes described the re-
lations among the stimuli in each class: They
named and linked the stimuli with phrases
such as "circle goes with the open triangle,"
which also occurred in more telegraphic in-
traverbal form (e.g., "circle triangle"), as in
the Lowe and Beasty study. In addition, on
equivalence test trials the successful subjects
explicitly named the nodal stimulus (i.e., the
sample
stimulus
that during
training was
common to all of the stimulus pairings within
each class). As the study progressed, 2 of the
subjects ceased to utter the names for the in-
dividual stimulus relations in each class and
instead used a common "category" name.
Those subjects who did not show equivalence
did not describe the relation between stimuli
within each experimenter-defined class but
instead verbally linked together stimuli from
different classes on the grounds that they be-
longed together as a compound (e.g., "To-
gether they look like a person with a hat") or
221

----- Page 38 (native) -----
PAULINEJ. HORNE and C. FERGUS LOWE
66 up99
/Up/
up
Iiil
B1
I,
,1
1
,,
A
, 1
I .
I C1
I L,
1L
_
"down"'
Idownl
Key:
Trained
G = Green
- - - - -
Untrained
R = Red
Fig. 18.
When a subject comes to emit the common name "up" in relation to each Class 1 stimulus (left) and
"down" in relation to each Class 2 stimulus (right), new relations between stimulus class members result (broken
arrows), thereby fulfilling the criteria for stimulus equivalence.
referred to across-class common physical fea-
tures of the stimuli, thus cutting across the
stimulus class groupings as specified by the
experimenter. This study, like that of Lowe
and Beasty, shows how both intraverbal nam-
ing of the stimulus-comparison
pairs and
common naming can determine perfor-
mance on these tests.
Naming tests, naming, and stimulus equiva-
lence. It follows from the foregoing that if ev-
idence were to be found that subjects in any
given equivalence experiment did not have
common names for stimuli in the same class,
that would not, in itself, justify the conclusion
that naming in some form is not necessary
for success on these tasks. What the present
analysis shows is that once language is estab-
lished there may be, in addition to common
naming, a large, possibly infinite, number of
ways in which naming can enter into subjects'
choices of stimuli such that they conform to
psychologists'
criteria for
stimulus equiva-
lence. If the supposed absence of common
naming of stimuli within the experimenter-
defined classes is the only developed argu-
ment against the naming hypothesis, it must
be concluded that the latter is far from being
disproved.
Key Tests of the Naming Hypothesis
A major virtue of the naming hypothesis of
stimulus equivalence is that it gives rise to sev-
eral clear predictions that are open to exper-
imental disconfirmation. Fortunately, a num-
ber of them have already been submitted to
experimental test:
Because they are lacking in naming skills, non-
human organisms will generally fail tests of stim-
ulus equivalence. There is no theoretical basis
within current accounts of nonverbal animal
learning for assuming that stimulus equiva-
lence,
at
least
as conventionally assessed,
222

----- Page 39 (native) -----
NAMING AND OTHER SYMBOLIC BEHAVIOR
should ever arise (Catania, 1992, p. 156). For
example, the three-term contingency, which
is central to Skinner's (1938) account of op-
erant conditioning, specifies a relation link-
ing a discriminative stimulus, a response, and
a reinforcer, such that in the presence of the
stimulus the response is reinforced. The op-
erant literature shows that such discrimina-
tive functions may take many forms and be
of considerable complexity, but characteristi-
cally the direction of the relation between the
discriminative stimulus and response is one
way. Thus if standard match-to-sample pro-
cedures are used to establish contingencies
with an animal subject (e.g., a pigeon) such
that in the presence of a green key (the sam-
ple) a response on another key, a vertical line
(correct comparison stimulus), is reinforced,
then when the green stimulus is presented we
would expect the probability of responding
on the vertical stimulus to increase. There are
no theoretical grounds, however, to expect
that when we present the vertical as sample
the animal will respond with high probability
on the green comparison key. Indeed, it may
be the very effectiveness of the three-term
contingency that in part precludes animal
species, other than humans, from success on
equivalence tests; if organisms are locked into
such unidirectional relations there is no op-
portunity or mechanism by which reversals
can occur. On the other hand, most humans
are, through naming, freed of the temporal
and spatial constraints that govern discrimi-
native control of animal behavior because
they produce their own stimuli (e.g., names)
that form reversible and other links between
their behavior and stimuli in the environ-
ment.
Numerous experimental
studies support
this view and have shown that nonhuman an-
imals may learn conditional discriminations
readily, but without this resulting in stimulus
equivalence. Despite concerted efforts, stud-
ies to date have failed to demonstrate equiv-
alence with pigeons, cebus monkeys, rhesus
monkeys, baboons, and chimpanzees
(see
D'Amato, Salmon, Loukas, & Tomie, 1985;
Dugdale & Lowe, 1990; Hogan & Zentall,
1977; Holmes, 1979; Kendall, 1983; Lipkens,
Kop, & Matthijs, 1988; Rodewald, 1974; Sid-
man et al., 1982). Although some investiga-
tors have claimed to find equivalence with an-
imal subjects (McIntire, Cleary, & Thompson,
1987; Vaughan, 1988), others have argued
that their data do not meet the necessary cri-
teria for equivalence (see Dugdale & Lowe,
1990; Hayes, 1989; Saunders, 1989).
Recently, Schusterman and Kastak (1993),
using a novel match-to-sample procedure, re-
ported that a sea lion succeeded in passing
tests of stimulus equivalence. Having first de-
vised
30
potential three-member
stimulus
classes they designated 12 of these for train-
ing of symmetric and transitive relations and
reserved 18 classes for equivalence tests. They
trained AB and BC relations with all 30 class-
es and used the following procedure to train
symmetry and transitivity on the selected 12:
(a) AB training followed by BA ("symmetry")
testing and training, (b) BC training followed
by CB ("symmetry") testing and training, (c)
AC ("transitivity") testing and training, and
(d) CA ("symmetry") testing and training.
The sea lion was then tested for CA (equiva-
lence) on the 18 reserved stimulus classes,
correct
responding
being
reinforced
throughout. Taking the first test trial for each
stimulus class, performance was correct on 16
out of the 18 trials, which was significantly
better than chance.
There are a number of distinctive features
of this study that might throw light upon the
sea lion's success where other animal species
have failed. First, on all trials, the sample and
comparison stimuli were simultaneously visi-
ble to the sea lion before it was released to
respond to one of the comparison locations.
Second, no sample response was required,
the only response requirement being orien-
tation to the left or right of release location
such that the sea lion's nose broke the plane
formed by the front of the correct compari-
son stimulus. Third, the incorrect compari-
son stimuli were randomly assigned and so
differed from trial to trial, minimizing any
build-up of CS- or negative discriminative
stimulus control by particular comparison
stimuli. Fourth, training was given on a subset
of "symmetry" and "transitivity" relations;
correct responding, including that on test tri-
als, was reinforced throughout the study.
Whether these
or other features might
have brought about success on CA tests is dif-
ficult to assess on the basis of the limited pro-
cedural information available, but one possi-
bility is that in combination they provided the
conditions
to
establish each stimulus pair
223

----- Page 40 (native) -----
PAULINEJ. HORNE and C. FERGUS LOWE
(e.g., within the AB and BC classes) as a com-
pound stimulus that evoked (a) swaying or
moving back and forth (which is food-related
behavior in sea lions) across the two stimulus
elements of the compound until the plane in
front of the outer element was broken and
the fish reinforcer delivered, and (b) as train-
ing progressed, the response of moving to the
outer stimulus element (comparison) of the
compound. During "symmetry" (BA and CB)
training, with continuous reinforcement for
correct responding, these effects of stimulus
pairs operating
as compounds should be
strengthened. On the basis of studies that
have demonstrated "associative transitivity"
in match to sample (D'Amato et al. 1985;
Steirn, Jackson-Smith, & Zentall, 1991; see
Zentall & Urcuioli, 1993), such that when AB
and BC are trained, the AC relation is present
upon testing, it might be expected that the
sea lion would pass the test of AC transitivity;
this was indeed found. But given that the AC
stimulus elements also come to function as a
compound and that, whether presented as
AC or CA, the animal moves towards the out-
er element of that compound (as described
above), this may be sufficient to account for
successful performance on the continually re-
inforced CA (equivalence) test trials.
This account is, of course, highly specula-
tive and needs to be submitted to experimen-
tal test. Indeed, the study itself remains to be
replicated. Until then it may not be possible
to determine whether Schusterman and Kas-
tak's procedure constitutes a demonstration
of learned higher order generalized equiva-
lence
(Boelens, 1994)
or whether simpler
learning principles such as those outlined
above apply. It should also be noted, however,
that if a particular nonhuman animal in a
particular match-to-sample context ever did
succeed in passing tests of stimulus equiva-
lence, it would not mean that the functional
determinants of the behavior would be the
same as those which enable verbally compe-
tent humans to succeed on these tasks. To
assume the determinants were the same
would be an example of a formalistic fallacy
(Skinner, 1969). This and related issues are
discussed on page 233.
Humans who are lacking the prerequisite nam-
ing skills will generally fail tests of stimulus equiv-
alence. One of the most fruitful ways to test
this prediction is with young children who
have not yet learned to name or in whom
naming skills are not yet well established. Un-
fortunately, not very much research on stim-
ulus equivalence has been conducted with
very young children, but studies that do exist
point to a close correlation between the de-
velopment of language and success on equiv-
alence tasks. For example, a study by Devany
et al. (1986; but see also Augustson & Dough-
er, 1992) tested for stimulus equivalence in
three groups of subjects: normal 2-year-old
children,
2-
to
4-year-old mentally handi-
capped children with functional spontaneous
speech and signing, and 2- to 4-year-old men-
tally handicapped children with no functional
verbal skills. Both of the first two groups (i.e.,
normal and mentally handicapped with lan-
guage) passed the equivalence tests, whereas
the mentally handicapped subjects who had
no language failed. In a study of normal and
hearing-impaired
children,
Barnes,
Mc-
Cullogh, and Keenan (1990) have reported a
similar relation between verbal ability and
success on tests of equivalence.
Because language development over the
first few years of life in young children is cor-
related with chronological age, we would ex-
pect, according to the present account, to ob-
serve more failure on equivalence tests by
children in the younger age ranges and more
success by those who are older and have ac-
quired better naming skills. This was investi-
gated in the study by Lowe and Beasty (1987;
see above), whose subjects were
in three
different age groups: 4 to 5, 3 to 4, and 2 to
3 years old. Following standard training on
the baseline conditional discriminations, (a)
all 10 of the 4- to 5-year-old children passed
tests of equivalence, (b) half of the 12 sub-
jects aged 3 to 4 years old succeeded, and (c)
only 1 out of 7 of the 2- to 3-year-old subjects
passed (see next section).
Teaching subjects particular name relations for
the stimuli used in match-to-sample procedures may
be a powerful determinant of subsequent perfor-
mance on equivalence tests. Dugdale and Lowe
(1990) have reported that when normal 4- to
5-year-old children who fail tests of equiva-
lence are subsequently taught a common
name (e.g., "omni" or "delta") for the stim-
uli in each experimenter-defined class, they
then go on to pass the tests. A common nam-
ing intervention has also been used by Eike-
seth and Smith (1992) in their investigation
224

----- Page 41 (native) -----
NAMING AND OTHER SYMBOLIC BEHAVIOR
of visual-visual equivalence in 4 autistic chil-
dren. The subjects' ages ranged from 3.5 to
5.5 years but all showed evidence of deficits
in language skills compared to normal chil-
dren. Having learned the baseline condition-
al
discriminations,
all
4
children
initially
failed the tests of equivalence; when common
naming of the stimuli in each class was then
introduced, 2 of the subjects passed and a 3rd
performed at well above chance levels. The
4th subject, Rory, was the only one to per-
form at chance levels on the tests and also
had the lowest level of language development
in the group, as indicated by both expressive
and receptive measures. In another phase of
the experiment and outside the match-to-
sample format, the same 4 subjects were
taught names for entirely new stimuli. On
subsequent match-to-sample tests, 3 subjects
demonstrated
emergent
relations between
the stimuli that had been assigned a common
name, thus meeting the criteria that would
normally be set for equivalence with match-
to-sample procedures, except that in this case
none of the baseline conditional relations
had been trained with these stimuli prior to
testing. In this phase, Rory was again the one
with whom the procedure was least success-
ful; however, when the procedure for teach-
ing him names was modified, emergent rela-
tions were also facilitated in this subject. This
second phase is a good experimental dem-
onstration of a phenomenon that occurs dur-
ing normal language development in chil-
dren (see pp. 205-207, Naming and emergent
behavior), and the study as a whole shows that
common naming can be a powerful interven-
tion in bringing about equivalence even in
autistic children.
Saunders, Saunders, Williams, and Sprad-
lin (1993) presented evidence showing that,
for subjects with mild retardation, match-to-
sample training involving four pairs of sample
and one pair of comparison stimuli (compar-
ison as node) was much more successful in
yielding
stimulus equivalence
than
proce-
dures with four pairs of comparison stimuli
and one pair of samples (sample as node).
Success on the comparison-as-node proce-
dure, however, was shown to rely heavily upon
the subjects being given verbal instructions
and names for the stimuli. Subjects who were
not provided with names had a much higher
failure rate than those given names; when
subjects in the nonnaming group, who had
initially failed the equivalence tests, were sub-
sequently instructed to name the stimuli, they
also went on to pass the tests. Saunders et al.
recognize that naming instructions have an
important role in bringing about these effects
and suggest that the comparison-as-node pro-
cedure results in "anticipatory naming of the
correct comparison for each sample. Thus,
every sample within a class would control a
common naming response" (p. 732).
The question, however, is how this com-
mon naming has its effects: Saunders et al.
(1993; see also Eikeseth & Smith, 1992) sug-
gest that when different stimuli evoke the
same name, this brings about a functional
stimulus class that then somehow results in
equivalence class formation. However, as we
have already shown in the first section of this
paper, to establish a common response to dif-
ferent stimuli and thus a functional class is
not sufficient to yield stimulus equivalence.
To provide an explanation of the latter, in-
cluding the findings of the study by Saunders
et al., requires an account of naming not sim-
ply as speaking but as speaker-listener behav-
ior, with all of the bidirectional effects there-
by entailed.
Evidence that interventions based upon in-
traverbal naming can be very effective deter-
minants of outcomes on equivalence
tests
comes from the Lowe and Beasty (1987)
study in which the 12 children who initially
failed the equivalence tests were subsequently
taught to name the sample-comparison stim-
ulus pairs. On AlBI baseline trials (see p.
218) they were taught to say "up-green," on
AlCl trials "up triangle," on A2B2 "down
red," and on A2C2 "down cross." Teaching
this intraverbal naming, which was similar to
that spontaneously produced by the children
who had passed the equivalence tests, led to
11 of the 12 children passing the BC and CB
tests. The one 2-year-old child who failed the
tests was also the only child who failed to
learn the sample-comparison names in the
time available.
As well as leading to success, some verbal
interventions may also lead to failure on
equivalence tests. In a study of match-to-sam-
ple performance in normal adults Dickins,
Bentall, and Smith (1993) first taught base-
line relations, after which subjects in one
group were taught intraverbal names that
225

----- Page 42 (native) -----
PAULINEJ. HORNE and C. FERGUS LOWE
linked stimuli across rather than within ex-
perimenter-defined classes and subjects in a
second group were
taught intraverbal
se-
quences unrelated to on-task stimuli. The
group of subjects taught across-class intra-
verbal sequences were much less successful
on subsequent tests of stimulus equivalence
than were control-group subjects. This study
shows that intraverbal naming can work for
or against success on tests of stimulus equiv-
alence depending on whether or not the in-
traverbal sequences that are formed before
such testing are congruent with experiment-
er-defined classes.
In a recent paper, Mandell and Sheen
(1994) set out explicitly to test the naming
hypothesis, reasoning that if naming is an im-
portant determinant of stimulus class forma-
tion, then whether or not the stimuli in
match-to-sample
procedures
are
easily
nameable should be predictive of perfor-
mance on equivalence tests; the more name-
able the stimuli, the more likely it should be
that subjects would be successful. In a visual-
visual match-to-sample study with normal
adults, subjects saw three kinds of sample
stimuli that varied in pronounceability:
(a)
phonologically correct pseudowords (e.g.,
SNAMB), (b) phonologically incorrect words
(e.g., NSJBN),
or
(c)
punctuation marks
(e.g., +]*' !I). Subjects in the group that was
exposed to the pronounceable stimuli dem-
onstrated equivalence class formation more
quickly and with fewer errors than did other
subjects. Also, some of the subjects who were
not provided with sample stimuli that were
easily pronounceable nevertheless found oth-
er more idiosyncratic means of naming the
stimuli (e.g., naming HCKTR as "HECTOR"
or naming just the first letter of each non-
phonological word). In a second study, sub-
jects were pretrained to apply names to non-
phonological
words.
As
a
result,
their
subsequent match-to-sample performance,
particularly the development of stimulus
equivalence classes, was considerably en-
hanced compared to the performance of sub-
jects without such pretraining.
Overview. The studies reviewed above show
that interventions that train common nam-
ing, intraverbal naming, or other naming be-
havior to relate the experimental stimuli are
very effective in determining success on
equivalence tasks. They also show that, to en-
sure success, it is not sufficient for subjects
simply to have naming skills (they might all
have these) but more specifically, their stim-
ulus class naming must be congruent with the
experimenter-defined classes. The present ac-
count of match-to-sample performance not
only makes sense of the data from equiva-
lence studies but is also consistent with a wid-
er literature that shows many differences be-
tween behavioral relations in humans and
nonhumans that are attributable to the role
of language (Bentall, Lowe, & Beasty, 1985;
Catania, Matthews, & Shimoff, 1982; Hayes &
Hayes, 1992; Horne & Lowe, 1993; Le Fran-
cois, Chase, &Joyce, 1988; Lowe, 1979, 1983,
1989).
It has been suggested (Hayes, 1994; Hayes
& Hayes, 1992; Sidman, 1994) that using lan-
guage or naming to explain findings from
match-to-sample studies is reminiscent of me-
diational
models
prominent
in
earlier
decades. Mediated generalization theory
(Cofer & Foley, 1942) was used to deal with
a set of behavioral effects that were also
termed
equivalence, although they did not
conform exactly with the definition of that
term put forward by Sidman, and were stud-
ied by a different methodology, usually
paired-associate learning (Jenkins, 1963; Jen-
kins & Palermo, 1964; Sidman, 1994). This
was an associative account that used the par-
adigm of Pavlovian conditioning, particularly
higher order conditioning, to make infer-
ences about Pavlovian conditioned responses
that supposedly mediated stimulus presenta-
tions,
enabling
symmetry,
transitivity, and
equivalence to emerge. It was essentially a
stimulus-response chaining model, and like
any such account it had great difficulty in
dealing with the kinds of stimulus-stimulus re-
versals termed symmetry. Consequently, its ad-
vocates had to appeal to backward condition-
ing (Ekstrand, 1966), normally a very weak
effect if it exists at all, and chaining to explain
what were very reliable and robust phenom-
ena (Jenkins, 1963). Clearly, the present ac-
count has little in common with traditional
mediated
generalization
theory;
it
is
not
based on classical conditioning nor does it in-
volve appeals to backward conditioning,
chaining,
or any of the other
associative
mechanisms of that theory. Indeed the pri-
mary role of naming should not be viewed as
mediating the establishment of stimulus class-
226

----- Page 43 (native) -----
NAMING AND OTHER SYMBOLIC BEHAVIOR
es: Naming
is stimulus-classifying behavior
(see pp. 207-208, 213-215, Verbal communica-
tion, Verbal meaning). But the history of me-
diated generalization
is an interesting one
that has implications for current theories of
equivalence, to which we shall return below.
In addition to generating falsifiable predic-
tions, any explanation of stimulus equiva-
lence should be able to account for the ex-
isting
experimental
data.
The
naming
hypothesis succeeds on both these counts, al-
though it remains, of course, open to exper-
imental disconfirmation. We shall next con-
sider alternative explanations of equivalence
put forward by Sidman and by Hayes and col-
leagues.5 In what follows we oudine briefly
the main features of these two accounts and
subject them to critical but, we hope, con-
structive scrutiny, the aim being to further de-
bate. We apologize in advance for any errors
or misconceptions in our appraisal; undoubt-
edly, if there are any such, they will be clari-
fied in the commentaries to this article. We
later discuss features that are common to all
three accounts and suggest ways in which fur-
ther experimental work might help
to
achieve greater agreement between them.
Sidman 's Theory of Equivalence
According to Sidman, equivalence (like re-
inforcement, discrimination, etc.) represents
a primitive function not derivable from other
behavioral processes (Sidman, 1992, p. 22).
In his recent book (Sidman, 1994), he de-
scribes in some detail the conditions that give
rise to equivalence relations and, departing
from his earlier view (e.g., Sidman, 1986) that
equivalence is established by four-term con-
tingencies, concludes that three-term, or per-
haps even two-term, contingencies could suf-
fice.
Whereas
his
earlier
account
was
concerned with stimulus-stimulus relations,
he now proposes that as a result of their par-
ticipation in reinforcement contingencies,
both stimuli (whether discriminative, condi-
tional, or reinforcing) and responses become
members of an equivalence relation. Thus,
within the event pairs that define the equiv-
alence relation, the distinction between stim-
5We are grateful to Murray Sidman and to Steve Hayes
for their very helpful and constructive comments on
some of the descriptive material on their accounts pre-
sented here. Any remaining errors of interpretation are
entirely our responsibility.
ulus and response loses significance; indeed,
as he puts
it, "Equivalence relations have
their own defining characteristics, none re-
quiring the stimulus/response dichotomy"
(1994, p. 386).
It is important to note that, for Sidman,
Strictly speaking, reinforcement contingencies
do not create equivalence relations; rather,
they create prerequisites, or the potential, for
demonstrating the properties that define an
equivalence relation. Additional factors, like
the test conditions, contextual control, and a
subject's behavioral history will help deter-
mine whether and how that potential is real-
ized. ... An equivalence relation, therefore,
has no existence as a thing, it is not actually
established, formed, or created. It does not exist,
either in theory or in reality. It is defined by
the emergence of new-and predictable-an-
alytic units of behavior from previously dem-
onstrated units. (1994, pp. 387-388).
Because responses as well as stimuli enter into
equivalence relations, functions possessed by
any one element of a reinforcement contin-
gency giving rise to equivalence will also be
possessed by other elements within it (1994,
p. 392). Thus, discriminative stimuli will func-
tion as reinforcers, and reinforcers will func-
tion as discriminative stimuli. Whereas behav-
ior analysts, including Sidman himself, have
previously viewed conditioned reinforcement
as a basic nonderived stimulus function, ac-
cording to
this account conditioned
rein-
forcement is derived from equivalence rela-
tions (1994, pp. 391-393). Sidman proposes,
furthermore, that the prerequisites for an
equivalence relation may also arise during
Pavlovian or respondent conditioning.
In-
deed, he suggests that Pavlovian conditioning
may itself be a derived phenomenon that aris-
es from the establishment of equivalence re-
lations between pairs of stimulus events in
conditioning procedures (1994, pp. 403-
404). Thus, a stimulus paired with an uncon-
ditioned stimulus may become a conditioned
stimulus by virtue of the participation of both
in an equivalence relation.
To establish which particular stimulus class-
es will arise from particular reinforcement
contingencies is not, however, a straightfor-
ward matter. For example, according to Sid-
man, because responses and reinforcers both
enter into equivalence relations, during train-
ing of the conditional relations AlBI and
227

----- Page 44 (native) -----
2PAULINEJ. HORNE and C. FERGUS LOWE
A2B2 one large equivalence
class
(i.e.,
A1B1A2B2) must emerge if a common rein-
forcer, a defined response
(e.g., key press-
ing), or both are employed throughout the
procedure (Sidman, 1994, p. 408). The prob-
lem then is to account for what appears to
be, as Sidman himself acknowledges, "an im-
mense gulf between theory and data" (1994,
p. 410), that is, that most studies (at least with
human subjects) repeatedly fail to show this
merging of classes but show instead "success"
on experimenter-defined tests of equivalence.
Sidman's explanation is that the incompati-
bility between the reinforcement contingen-
cies and the formation of an overarching
equivalence class causes the "selective drop-
ping out" of common elements, that is, the
response and reinforcer from the prerequi-
site class (1994, p. 411). Similarly, given that
the experimental context can enter into
equivalence relations and is common to all of
the other experimenter-defined stimulus
classes, it likewise should condense all of the
classes into one, but in fact does not. Here,
Sidman maintains that because this would
wipe out differential control by discriminative
stimuli in each three-term unit and by con-
ditional stimuli in each four-term unit, the
subject would be unable to meet the terms of
the contingency and because the contingency
"calls for differential control"
(i.e., what is
termed
class intersection in set theory)
this
takes priority over the formation of the over-
arching stimulus class
(i.e., class union) so
that the context also drops out of the equiv-
alence relations (1994, p. 530). He also ar-
gues that these overarching stimulus classes
may be prevented from forming in the first
place by the employment of different rein-
forcers and defined responses for each con-
ditional relation (1994, p. 413).
Having subjects name the stimuli within
each conditional relation may, in Sidman's
view, be another way of either preventing or
breaking down all-inclusive equivalence rela-
tions. Thus, in the example given above, if
subjects name each of the Al and Bi stimuli
as "X" and the A2 and B2 stimuli as "Y," this
should result in the establishment of the
AlBl and A2B2 equivalence relations be-
cause, according
to Sidman, the different
naming responses "X" and "Y," like any oth-
er differentiated response, facilitate class in-
tersection (1994, p. 414).
Sidman also acknowledges that verbal rules
can establish equivalence relations, although
rules are not always necessary (1994, p. 509)
and, in any case, he believes that appealing
to rule following as an explanation begs the
question as to where rules come from in the
first place (Sidman, 1992, pp. 21-22). Ac-
cording to his account, it is the formation of
equivalence
relations
that makes rule-gov-
erned behavior possible. He maintains that
when naming or more complex verbaliza-
tions such as rules become members of an
equivalence class, they become indistinguish-
able from other stimulus and response events
and, as such, do not have a special mediating
function. This, he believes, allows one to dis-
pense entirely with the notion of verbal me-
diation of equivalence relations (Sidman,
1994, pp. 510-511).
In Sidman's view, because equivalence is an
evolutionary given for which verbal skills are
not necessary, it may occur in a range of an-
imal species, although its generality remains
to be established (1994, p. 390). Indeed, he
suggests that "species differences need not be
absolute but may depend on the ethological
validity of the stimuli and functions being ex-
amined" (1994, p. 164). Failures to demon-
strate equivalence with nonhumans may, he
believes, be due to features of the standard
conditional discrimination procedure em-
ployed in equivalence studies (1994, pp. 166-
175).
Like many theoretical accounlts, Sidman's
has evolved to accommodate empirical find-
ings that do not fit easily with his initial for-
mulations. The result, described in great de-
tail in his 1994 book, is an extraordinarily
ambitious revision of existing behavioral the-
ory in which the notion of equivalence be-
comes a core explanatory construct from
which is derived, not only success on match-
to-sample tests, transfer of function, and lin-
guistic achievements, but also a range of what
have hitherto been regarded as basic learning
phenomena including conditioned reinforce-
ment and Pavlovian conditioning. The critical
tests for any grand theory such as this, how-
ever, are (a) how it relates to empirical data
and (b) whether it is internally consistent. We
contend that Sidman's theory has problems
on both counts, only some of which we will
deal with here.
If equivalence is a given, why is it rarely, if
228

----- Page 45 (native) -----
NAMING AND OTHER SYMBOLIC BEHAVIOR
ever, found in nonverbal animals? On the one
hand, Sidman
professes not
to know for
which animal species equivalence is a given
but, on the other, his view that conditioned
reinforcement and
Pavlovian
conditioning
are derivatives of equivalence implies that
species that show evidence of such condition-
ing processes should also show equivalence.
This, of course, would apply to a vast range
of animal species, but for none of them, apart
from humans, do we have reliable evidence
of equivalence.
Nevertheless, for Sidman, equivalence is a
given for the human species at least. But the
empirical data show that success on equiva-
lence tests is strongly related to the develop-
ment of linguistic skills; children lacking the
necessary level of verbal skill fail these tests.
We have difficulty seeing how developmental
differences like these can be explained by a
theory that assumes equivalence as a given
for Homo sapiens in general.
In view of the developmental data, it is par-
adoxical that, as an explanation of why some
adult human subjects fail tests of equivalence,
Sidman has suggested that because equiva-
lence
is
a
primitive
stimulus function,
it
emerges first in early childhood and is only
later broken down or circumscribed by verbal
rules (1992, p. 22). Once again there are no
experimental data to support this surmise; on
the contrary, the available evidence indicates
that equivalence is absent early in human de-
velopment but is facilitated by later language
learning. A further paradox, of course, is that
the domain most free of verbal rules, namely
nonhuman animal behavior,
is just where
equivalence is most difficult to obtain.
Sidman's general treatment of verbal rules
appears to contain further inconsistencies. At
times he maintains that, when they are mem-
bers of an equivalence class, verbal rules are
no different in function from other responses
and stimuli and thus have no special media-
tional role (1994, pp. 510-511), whereas at
other times he seems to ascribe a special role
to verbal repertoires. For example, in criticiz-
ing Hayes' relational frame theory he writes,
"I find it difficult to see how a common re-
sponse
(equivalencing?)
to exemplars that
have nothing in common except the relation
could arise in the absence of a highly com-
plex verbal repertoire" (p. 556). But he does
not explain how such a "complex verbal rep-
ertoire" would enable subjects to behave in
that way. Nevertheless, whatever his precise
explanation of verbal rules and their relation
to equivalence, one can conclude from Sid-
man's account that there are at least two
kinds of equivalence, namely, that which aris-
es directdy from experience with contingen-
cies
(i.e., contingency generated) and that
which is established by verbal rules or names
(i.e., rule governed or verbally controlled;
Sidman, 1992, pp. 21-22, 1994, pp. 305-306;
see also Pilgrim & Galizio, 1995). We will re-
turn to this distinction later.
Not only does it appear that equivalence is
not a given for all nonhuman species or even
for all individual humans, but for any partic-
ular human it does not appear to be a given
at all times during testing. As several studies
have shown (see Sidman, 1994, p. 273), it is
often the case that subjects initially fail to pass
tests of equivalence but, as testing continues,
performance indicative of equivalence rela-
tions emerges. Sidman suggests that this de-
layed emergence is due to interference from
other equivalence relations established out-
side of, or even within, the experimental set-
ting:
A well-designed test will arrange test trials so
that the experimentally established equiva-
lence class provides the only basis for classifi-
cation that remains possible-that "works"on
every trial. Thus, the grounds for relating the
sample and a comparison may vary from one
test trial to the next until finally, the subject
hits on a consistent basis-the experimentally
established equivalence relation that remains
possible from trial to trial. (1994, p. 512)
But if, as is often the convention, testing takes
place in the absence of reinforcement or em-
pirical feedback of any kind, how is it that
subjects can have a "classification" that can
"work" or can vary their responses until they
"hit on a consistent basis"?
(see Pilgrim,
Chambers, & Galizio, 1995). This is just the
kind of behavior we would expect in organ-
isms that are able to name the stimulus pairs
or formulate rules for responding to them
that they can then proceed to combine and
recombine until they formulate a consistent
rule for responding on all of the test trials
229

----- Page 46 (native) -----
PAULINEJ HORNE and C. FERGUS LOWE
(or, as Saunders & Saunders, 1995,6 have sug-
gested, until the experimenter ceases to pre-
sent the test trials). Certainly, it is not clear
from Sidman's account how a nonverbal or-
ganism or an organism behaving nonverbally
could engage in behavior of this kind.
One of the most radical features of Sid-
man's new account of the relations between
events in an equivalence class is the removal
of the distinction between responses, includ-
ing naming and verbal rules, on the one
hand, and stimuli, both discriminative and re-
inforcing, on the other. This innovation was
prompted,
in
part, by experimental
data
showing that equivalence class membership
can include reinforcing stimuli (see Mc-
Ilvane, Dube, Klederas, de Rose, & Stoddard,
1992). In our view, however, it gives rise to
serious and far-reaching conceptual and em-
pirical problems. At the most basic level, re-
moval of the stimulus-response dichotomy ap-
pears
to remove
a distinction between
behavior and environment upon which be-
havior analysis, as well as many other sciences,
are founded. It might be countered that, be-
cause most of behavior analysis is based upon
the study of the behavior of nonhuman spe-
cies under contingencies of reinforcement
that do not give rise to equivalence relations
in those species, this issue does not arise ex-
cept in the case of species for which equiva-
lence is a given (i.e., humans). But to argue
thus would be to severely limit the generality
of Sidman's theory, and difficulties vis-a-vis
human behavior, particularly human lan-
guage, would remain. These difficulties will
be considered in detail below, following our
appraisal of Hayes' account of equivalence.
In summary, what began as a description of
novel behavioral relationships on match-to-
sample tasks has now evolved into a very gen-
eral theory that embraces most aspects of be-
havior analysis. It appears to us, however, that
as the scope of the theory has extended, the
theory has become increasingly removed
from empirical foundations. Equivalence has
become a behavioral primitive that is not
found where we should most readily expect
it, namely, in nonhuman animals and human
6Saunders, R. R., & Saunders,J. M. (1995, April). The
roles of generalised conditional responding and chance in the
emergence of equivalence-indicative performances. Paper pre-
sented at the annual meeting of the Experimental Anal-
ysis of Behaviour Group, London.
infants. The very experiments that gave rise
to the concept of equivalence now constitute
problem cases or exceptions to the general
rule that it is overarching classes, composed
of all the experimental stimuli that should
emerge,
rather than
the experimenter-de-
fined classes. Sidman's explanation offered
for this paradox, including his hypotheses
about common
reinforcers and responses
"dropping out" and competition between
the three-term unit and the overarching class,
seems to us to be vague with respect to the
behavioral principles involved and lacking
empirical support. For a behavioral primitive,
from which so many other behavioral phe-
nomena are supposedly derived, true equiv-
alence is remarkably elusive.
Hayes' Theory of Equivalence
Hayes' relational frame theory has been
oudlined in several papers (e.g., Hayes, 1991,
1994; Hayes & Hayes, 1989, 1992), so only a
brief summary will be presented here. A ma-
jor distinguishing feature of Hayes' view, in
common with the present account but in con-
trast to that of Sidman, is that it explains suc-
cess on equivalence tests in terms of the prior
learning history of the subject. For Hayes,
this involves a history of what is termed arbi-
trarily applicable relational responding, which en-
tails "responding to one event in terms of the
other based on contextual cues to do so. It is
a pattern of the mutual transformation of
stimulus functions" (Lipkens et al., 1993, p.
204). The theory is based upon a few core
ideas. Given that human and nonhuman spe-
cies can learn to respond to nonarbitrary re-
lations between stimuli, it is argued that per-
haps some species can learn to respond to
relations between stimuli when these
rela-
tions are not defined by the physical form of
the stimuli but by contextual cues. Because
only contextual cues are required, such rela-
tional responding is held to be arbitrarily ap-
plicable to any event. An analogy is drawn
with the findings of the literature on gener-
alized imitation (e.g., Gewirtz & Stingle,
1968) that indicates that organisms can learn
overarching behavioral classes. The action of
relating arbitrary stimuli in equivalence tasks,
it is proposed, may be a similarly learned
overarching class of instrumental behavior,
which Hayes (1992, p. 110) terms equivalenc-
ing.

----- Page 47 (native) -----
NAMING AAD OTHER SYMBOLIC BEHAVIOR
Arbitrarily applicable relational responding
has three primary properties. The first of
these
is mutual entailment and involves re-
sponding to one event in terms of the other,
and vice versa. So if A is better than B, it is
mutually entailed that B is worse than A. Mu-
tual entailment is the generic case of what is
termed symmetry in the equivalence literature
(Hayes, 1994, p. 11) in which A is the same
as B and, through mutual entailment, B is the
same as A. The particular relation (e.g., same-
ness, opposition, distinction, etc.) between
events
is controlled by contextual stimuli.
The second is combinatorial mutual entailment,
according to which if A is related in a partic-
ular way to B and B is also related to C, then
(in addition to the mutual entailment of re-
lations between A and B and B and C) a com-
binatorial derived relation
is mutually en-
tailed between A and C. Combinatorial
entailment is the generic case of what are
termed transitivity and equivalence in the
equivalence literature (see Hayes, 1994, p.
11). The third property is transformation of
stimulus function, which specifies that in a giv-
en context, if A is related (e.g., by opposi-
tion) to B and, in addition, A is given a non-
relational stimulus function, then this will
result in a derived nonrelational stimulus
function for B, in accord with the specified
relation. The nonrelational functions of A
that are derived for B will also be under con-
textual control.
The term relational frame (or framing rela-
tionally) refers to arbitrarily applicable rela-
tional responding that shows the three qual-
ities
oudlined
above. According
to Hayes
(1994, p. 28), one such frame, that is, the
frame of coordination or sameness, establishes
equivalence classes.
What is the history ?Although the theory pro-
poses that subjects require a history of ex-
amples of reinforced relational responding in
order to abstract a relational frame and show
equivalence,
precisely what
this history
should be is not clear. Hayes (1989, p. 391)
argues that one possible approach with non-
humans may be "to provide an extensive re-
inforced history with symmetrical relations"
after which equivalence might emerge. On
the other hand, Hayes and Hayes (1989, p.
174) propose that "a child given only a his-
tory of arbitrary matching-to-sample that re-
inforced symmetry, reflexivity and transitivity,
could derive the frame of coordination and
show equivalence classes." And yet again,
Hayes (1991, p. 25) claims that equivalence
emerges because "mutual entailment, com-
binatorial entailment, and transfer of func-
tion are directly trained." This latter view is
elaborated by Hayes and Wilson (in press),
who suggest that this might involve, with dif-
ferent combinations of stimulus pairs, the di-
rect reinforcement of symmetry, transitivity,
and equivalence, they also suggest that rein-
forcing symmetry might be enough to give
rise
to equivalence but that "some small
amount of training in combinatorial entail-
ment
will probably
also be needed."
Al-
though Hayes (1994) favors the last of these
three possibilities, the theory itself does not
indicate why one rather than another of these
histories would be sufficient to yield a frame
of coordination (i.e., equivalence).
How does the history work? This difficulty aris-
es from the fact that the theory does not
clearly specify what are the behavioral prin-
ciples that govern the establishment of rela-
tional frames. An example of the kind of his-
tory that should bring about symmetry or
mutual entailment is held to be one in which
an organism is presented with sample-com-
parison stimuli such that the A -> B relation
is reinforced, and then the reversal B -* A,
then C -> D and D -4 C, and so on. At some
point,
it is argued, the organism, when
trained on X -* Y, will show the derived re-
lation Y -* X; thus generalized symmetrical
responding has been established. Apart from
characterizing this behavior as an overarch-
ing response class that occurs in the presence
of contextual cues (as is, of course, true of all
operant behavior), and appealing to an anal-
ogy with generalized imitation, Hayes pro-
vides no further description or functional
analysis of the behavior involved. The prob-
lem with the imitation analogy is that imita-
tion does not have any of the defining fea-
tures of relational framing (see Skinner,
1953, pp. 119-122) and hence does not clar-
ify the behavioral principles involved in ab-
stracting a frame of coordination or sameness
from a history of reinforced reversals of stim-
ulus pairs. This is not, of course, to assert that
success on tests of equivalence cannot ever be
brought about by histories of relational re-
sponding which do not involve naming, but
merely that, were such a phenomenon ever
231

----- Page 48 (native) -----
PAULINEJ. HORNE and C. FERGUS LOWE
to be convincingly demonstrated in a manner
that ruled out known behavioral principles,
relational frame theory could provide little by
way of explanation
(see Sidman,
1994,
p.
557).
Naming as the paradigm case? In all of Hayes'
writings, the only specific example of a his-
tory that is given from real life to account for
the
initial establishment of any relational
frame is for the frame of coordination. This
example is described in a number of papers
(Hayes, 1991; Hayes & Hayes, 1989, 1992;
Lipkens et al., 1993; Steele & Hayes, 1991)
and interestingly, from our perspective,
it
concerns the acquisition of naming in young
children. The account runs as follows: When
the young child is presented with an object
(Object A) and asked "what's that?" correct
responses (i.e., the child saying "A") are re-
inforced (with smiles, etc.). This establishes
the Object A -e Name A relation. However,
the child is also often asked "where's A?" and
presented with several objects, including A.
When the child selectively orients or points
to A, a social reinforcer is again given, there-
by training the relation Name A -* Object A.
Following repeated
learning of object
-o
name and name
-> object relations for dif-
ferent object-name pairs, when a new Object
X -
Name X relation is trained, the Name
X -
Object X relation emerges or is derived.
Similarly, when a new Name Y -
Object Y
relation (i.e., hears /where's Y?/ -
orients to
Y) is trained, the Object Y -> Name Y relation
(i.e., sees Y -
says "Y' in response to "what's
that?") emerges. Such symmetrical respond-
ing, it is held, occurs in particular contexts,
the context here being naming indicated by
cues such as "what's that?" "In short, with
enough instances of directly trained symmet-
rical responding, symmetrical responding
may emerge with respect to novel stimuli in
that context. That is, the extensive training
history may be brought to bear by a given
context and provide a basis for generalized
symmetrical responding"
(Hayes & Hayes,
1989, p. 168).
Although we would clearly not doubt the
importance of naming in bringing about suc-
cess on tests of symmetry and equivalence,
this example is problematic for the relational
frame account.
First, there
is the general
problem to which we have already alluded,
namely, how one can account for derived re-
lations solely on the basis of reinforced rever-
sals of stimulus relations. Second, in this par-
ticular case, consider what happens when,
after a history of naming acquisition, a new
Name Z -* Object Z relation is trained: The
child hears /Z/ -*
orients to and sees Z
(trained); the child sees Z
-> says "Z"
(emerges). However, according to relational
frame theory and the notion of generalized
symmetrical responding, what should emerge
when the child sees Z is her hearing /Z/, not
saying "Z." How the child comes to say "Z"
when she sees the object and what happens
to the predicted hearing /Z/ response are un-
avoidable questions here. To deal with these
problems, Hayes and colleagues (Lipkens et
al., 1993, p. 216; Steele & Hayes, 1991, p.
553) have proposed that when presented with
the object and asked "what's that?" the child
first hears /Z/, thereby conforming to what
would be expected from relational frame the-
ory, and then utters the name "Z." It follows
from this account that when a child sees an
object and emits its name (i.e., that part of
the name relation that Skinner described as
the tact), the utterance is not controlled by
the object itself but by a hypothesized hearing
response that precedes it. No rationale is pre-
sented to support this notion of children
hearing names before they can utter them; it
certainly does not feature in Skinner's ac-
count of verbal behavior, nor, as far as we are
aware, is there any evidence in the develop-
mental literature that this occurs. It is true
that children hear their own utterances, a be-
havior that features prominently in our ac-
count of naming acquisition, but this occurs,
of course, after they have spoken and not be-
fore, as the relational frame account requires.
Third, although the above example shows
that naming acquisition cannot be described
as mutual entailment, neither does it involve
combinatorial mutual entailment; on both
these grounds naming fails to meet the cri-
teria for participation in a relational frame.
There thus appears to be a major inconsisten-
cy at the heart of the account: Either the his-
tory involved in naming acquisition is suffi-
cient for the child
to derive a relational
frame, in which case combinatorial entail-
ment
(i.e., transitivity)
is not necessary for
framing (see Boelens, 1994), or naming, as
described, is not in the frame of coordination
nor indeed in any other frame.
232

----- Page 49 (native) -----
NAMING AND OTHER SYMBOLIC BEHAVIOR
Far from providing a clear demonstration
of how generalized symmetry is established,
the paradigm case of naming serves only to
raise further questions about the theoretical
coherence and applicability of relational
frame theory. It leaves unanswered questions
about which specific learning histories give
rise not only to mutual entailment but also
the frame of coordination and equivalence it-
self. Indeed, nowhere is an example given of
a history that might establish in young chil-
dren or nonverbal animals any other relation-
al frame, such as opposition or comparison,
nor are there empirical data from these sub-
jects that might support such hypotheses.
It is, of course, always a possibility that oth-
er histories, perhaps either provided to non-
verbal organisms or not involving naming,
might give rise to generalized symmetrical re-
sponding and hence to success on match-to-
sample tests of symmetry and equivalence.
This has indeed been claimed by Schuster-
man and Kastak (1993) in a study of a sea
lion (but see above). On the other hand, ac-
cording to relational frame theory, one might
expect success in nonhuman animals (a) that
are very closely related to the human species
and (b) that have very extensive histories of
reinforced reversals of relations between stim-
uli. Dugdale and Lowe (1990) tested this hy-
pothesis with 2 "language-trained" chimpan-
zees, Sherman and Austin, that had had more
extensive learning histories, including histo-
ries of reinforced reversals, than almost any
other nonhuman animal (for details of their
learning histories, see Rumbaugh, 1977; Sav-
age-Rumbaugh, 1986). An extensive program
of controlled experimentation was carried
out using a visual-visual match-to-sample task
similar to that employed by Lowe and Beasty
(1987). In spite of hundreds of training and
test trials, including blocks of reinforced test
trials, neither of the 2 chimpanzees showed
any evidence of success on tests for symmetry.
In any case, if a pigeon, a chimp, or a sea
lion were to pass such tests for symmetry or
equivalence, what would it tell us about (a)
how they passed the test (i.e., the behavioral
principles involved), (b) whether such prin-
ciples also govern the performance of hu-
mans who pass equivalence
tests, and
(c)
what, if anything, this has to do with language
and naming. Within the Hayes account there
is an acknowledgment that naming and ver-
bal rules can help to form relational networks
and equivalence, although this is in turn ex-
plained "on the basis of names as contextual
cues for relational responses, and on the basis
of derived relations formed to the names
themselves" (Hayes, 1994, pp. 19-20). Thus,
as was the case with Sidman's account, we
may conclude that relational frame theory
also allows for at least two basic kinds of
equivalence
(i.e., one directly contingency
generated, the second rule governed or oth-
erwise verbally controlled). If contingency-
generated equivalence and related phenom-
ena were ever reliably found in any nonverbal
species, perhaps after a history of reinforced
" reflexivity," "symmetry,"
" transitivity, "
"equivalence," or some combination of any
or all of these, then, as Boelens (1994) has
suggested, the concepts of generalized sym-
metry, generalized transitivity, or generalized
equivalence might be invoked by way of ex-
planation. This notion of generalization
would at least be more parsimonious than the
complex theoretical constructions of relation-
al frame theory, although in order to go be-
yond mere redescription of the behavioral
data,
it would itself require explanation in
terms of known or novel behavioral princi-
ples.
However, until such phenomena are relia-
bly found (if they ever are) with other spe-
cies, we are left with the findings from human
subjects who pass tests of equivalence. We
have shown in the early part of this paper
how, in learning to name, humans learn to
respond to arbitrary classes of stimuli. Simple
name relations, more complex name se-
quences, or verbal rules are all sufficient to
enable subjects to pass match-to-sample tests
of equivalence. Is any other concept or prin-
ciple needed to account for such behavior in
humans? Has there ever been an instance of
equivalence in humans that has been directly
contingency generated? Until there
is evi-
dence of the latter, it would certainly be more
parsimonious to adopt the naming account
rather than one that must invoke the several
conceptual layers of relational frame theory
to explain performance on match-to-sample
tests.
Equivalence, Relational Frames, and
Language
According to the Hayes account, relational
frames are the defining characteristic of ver-
233

----- Page 50 (native) -----
PAULINEJ. HORNE and C. FERGUS LOW%E
bal events (Hayes, 1994, p. 12). Wulfert and
Hayes (1988) maintain that the symmetrical
relations among stimuli established by fram-
ing provide the basis for what they term ref-
erential meaning. They write, "The word is a
symbol for the referent and the referent is
the meaning of the word because both are
members of the same equivalence class. In
this sense, stimulus equivalence transforms
nonlinguistic conditional discriminations into
semantic process" (p. 126). Similarly, Sidman
has argued that stimulus equivalence is "a lin-
guistic prerequisite" (1986, p. 226) and that
"words are equivalent to their 'referents'"
(Sidman et al., 1986, p. 2). He observes, "By
reacting to a word as to an equivalent stimu-
lus-the meaning of the word-a person can
behave adaptively in an environment without
having previously been exposed to it" (1986,
p. 236). As both Hayes and Sidman have rec-
ognized here, the basis for any conception of
reference or meaning is the relation of words
or names to objects and events, and clearly
both accounts assume that this relation is cap-
tured by the notion of equivalence. This is a
questionable assumption.
Symmetry and naming. First we shall consider
whether the relation between a name and the
object named
(i.e., the referent)
is one of
symmetry. The example given by Hayes of
naming acquisition in the young child, which
we have considered in some detail above, pro-
vides excellent evidence to the contrary. This
interaction, although indeed typical of what
happens as relations are established between
children's utterances and their other behav-
ior and objects in the environment, cannot
be described as an example of symmetry. It
is, however, consistent with the account of
naming provided in the first part of this pa-
per. The problem is to explain the fact that,
having been taught to look at Object Z when
she hears /Z/, the child says "Z" when she
next sees the object. We propose that any ac-
count of how this novel utterance occurs
must recognize, as the Hayes view of symme-
try does not, the role of echoic behavior and
the importance of the child learning to echo
the utterances of others when asked, for ex-
ample, "where's the 'Z'?" If the child echoes
"Z" when she hears /Z/ in the presence of
Object Z, then seeing the object will come
directdy to control her saying "Z." The new
relation-sees Object
Z,
says "Z"-has
emerged (see pp. 199-209, Naming).
Indeed, although we have concentrated so
far on the acquisition of naming in child-
hood, at any level of analysis the assumption
that the relation between names and objects
is symmetrical (Dugdale & Lowe, 1990)
seems, upon scrutiny, to be without founda-
tion. We might say that "X" refers to or is the
name ofObject X. But we cannot, as true sym-
metry would demand, say the reverse, that is
that Object X refers to or is the name of "X."
Thus, for example, although the name
"chair" refers to a class of objects with par-
ticular features, these objects either singly or
in groups do not refer to the name "chair."
In brief, the relation between a name and
that which it names is fundamentally asym-
metrical.
Sameness, meaning, and naming. The view
that equivalence incorporates the concept of
sameness may have helped to give rise to the
notion that equivalence is a linguistic prereq-
uisite. This
is certainly clear in relational
frame theory, in which the most fundamental
frame is held to be that of coordination or
sameness, which is said to be abstracted by
the child from early language training of the
kind described above and which enables new
name relations to emerge. Similarly, Sidman
has proposed that "sameness is a prerequisite
for equivalence. Therefore ... it is also a pre-
requisite for the emergence of simple mean-
ings, vocabularies, or 'semantic correspon-
dences'" (1986, p. 227). Further pursuing
this notion, Sidman argues that subjects who
show equivalence between particular words
(e.g., "Route 128" on a map) and objects
(e.g., the road on which they are driving)
might be expected to treat them as the same
(e.g., by driving their car onto the words).
This does not happen, he argues, only be-
cause we learn to circumscribe or inhibit the
primitive stimulus function of equivalence
that would otherwise impel us to show such
behavior. We really would, for example, eat
the word "bread," did we not learn through
experience or through rules that words, even
when "equivalent" to foods, are not edible.
Thus, it is assumed in both the Sidman and
Hayes accounts
(a)
that sameness can de-
scribe the relation between certain names
and objects and also (b) that it is a prereq-
uisite for successful performance on match-
234

----- Page 51 (native) -----
NAMING AND OTHER SYMBOLIC BEHAVIOR
to-sample tests. But a name is never the same
as the object named. To say of a chair that it
is "furniture" does not entail that "furni-
ture" is a chair or that furniture is the same as
a chair. Similarly, to also call tables "furni-
ture" does not entail that chairs and tables
are the same. Although different objects with
a common name (e.g., "chair") may be treat-
ed in the same manner or given a similar
function (e.g., by being sat upon), as Skinner
(1957, p. 87) observed, we do not behave to-
ward the name as we do toward the named
object or event. We do not sit on the printed
word CHAIR when we see it, nor can we sit
on the spoken word "chair." Pace Sidman, it
stretches credibility to maintain that we have
primitive tendencies to do so. To argue that
"the referent is the meaning of the word"
(Wulfert & Hayes, 1988, p. 126) or that "a
computer is a 'computer'" (Hayes & Hayes,
1989, p. 169)
is thus to fundamentally mis-
construe word meaning and reference; any
particular referent, such as a particular com-
puter, is just one of an indefinite range of
objects to which the name "computer" ap-
plies. To even claim that that class of objects
"is the meaning" of the word "computer" is
laden with further logical and conceptual
problems (Hunter, 1974; Ryle, 1949; Skinner,
1957, pp. 86-89).
We believe that the account of naming ac-
quisition presented in the early part of this
essay avoids many of these pitfalls. It does not
view names as being the same as the objects
or events named or as being equal to them,
nor does it consider that objects are part of
names or even part of the meaning of names.
Naming is behavior and, like any other be-
havior, it occurs in relation to objects and
events but it is not to be confused with them.
To blur this distinction or, indeed, to remove
it entirely (see Sidman, 1994, p. 386)
is to
introduce myriad problems. We have already
shown how the young child learns a name
(e.g., "furniture") that relates to a class of
objects (e.g., chairs, tables, etc.) that are phys-
ically disparate. The child's use of the con-
ventional name "furniture" for each of these
objects establishes the conventional stimulus
class and governs her use of each class mem-
ber (e.g., the placing of it in a dolls' house).
It is this behavior, or as Wittgenstein would
have it, the use of naming in "the actions into
which it is woven" (Wittgenstein, 1953, p. 5,
1972, p. 170), that gives rise to what equiva-
lence researchers and others have termed se-
mantic relations, referential meaning, and vocab-
ularies (see pp. 213-215, Naming and Symbolic
Behavior).
Sameness and equivalence. As for sameness
being a prerequisite for equivalence, if a sub-
ject, using the common name "furniture" on
a match-to-sample task, is shown to have es-
tablished an equivalence class of chairs, ta-
bles, and chests of drawers (or their pictures),
this clearly does not mean that the relation
formed was one of sameness. Nor, of course,
does it mean that because they were in an
equivalence relation, the chair was the name
of a table or that either was the name of a
chest of drawers. To take an example from
the experimental literature, when stimuli
within experimenter-defined classes in match-
to-sample experiments are abstract shapes
(e.g., a triangle, a green square, and a vertical
line), there is no reason to assume that any
of the visual stimuli themselves are treated by
the subject as being the same as, or indeed
the name of, any other stimulus; intraverbal
naming (e.g., "up-green-triangle") or verbal
rules (e.g., "goes with") that have nothing to
do with the concept of sameness may be op-
erating.
Further experimental evidence that sub-
jects do not invariably treat stimuli within an
equivalence class as the same or equally sub-
stitutable comes from studies conducted by
Fields and colleagues (Adams, Fields, & Ver-
have, 1993; Fields, Adams, & Verhave, 1993).
These have shown that such stimuli can oc-
casion very different kinds of behavior (e.g.,
as indicated by reaction-time measures, errors
in test trials, transfer of novel responding
within the
class, and within-class stimulus
preferences) depending upon their distance
from the nodal stimulus and the direction of
training of the stimulus relations. Thus, al-
though according to the logico-mathematical
criteria of stimulus equivalence, stimuli may
appear to be related to each other on the
basis of equality (Sidman, 1990), more de-
tailed analysis of behavior reveals substantial
differences in subjects' responses to them
(Fields et al., 1993).
In defense of Sidman's account, it should
be noted that, in his critique of relational
frame theory (Sidman, 1994, p. 559), he has
argued that equality is only one example of

----- Page 52 (native) -----
PAULINEJ HORNE and C. FERGUS LOWE
an equivalence relation. Equivalence, he
maintains here, is more general and includes
relations such as "is parallel to" and "is con-
gruent to" (for triangles in a plane) and "has
the same teacher as." This view, however, rais-
es further questions, namely, (a) how can it
be reconciled with the position that sameness
is a "prerequisite for equivalence" (Sidman,
1986, p. 227), and (b) given that it is not the
formal characteristics of the stimuli that de-
termine
performance on
the
equivalence
test, how does a nonverbal organism or an
organism behaving nonverbally acquire such
relations as "has the same teacher as"?
Equivalence and rule-governed
behavior Ac-
cording to both Sidman and Hayes, rule-gov-
erned behavior is based upon equivalence re-
lations, and this, they believe, deals with one
of the shortcomings of Skinner's account,
that is, that it does not provide a behavioral
specification of how rules "specify" contin-
gencies. As Sidman has observed, "If equiva-
lence gives rise to rules, then for a rule to
specify a contingency may simply mean that
the rule and the contingency are members of
an equivalence class" (1990, p. 106; see De-
vany et al., 1986; Hayes & Hayes, 1992). What
is not clear from either the Sidman or Hayes
accounts, however, is how rules and contin-
gencies can be members of the same equiva-
lence class or how such a relation could come
about. For, in the same way that we have dem-
onstrated that names and objects are not sym-
metrically related, it can be shown that the
relation between rules and contingencies is
not one of either symmetry or equivalence.
Under
certain
circumstances verbal
rules,
perhaps acquired by instructions from others,
govern behavior but this behavior does not
govern the verbal rules. Indeed, although
there may be an interaction, it is a well-estab-
lished finding that rules can be remarkably
insensitive to the consequences of the behav-
ior they govern (Catania et al., 1982; Lowe,
1979, 1983). It makes sense to talk, as Skinner
does, of rules that describe or specify contin-
gencies but not of contingencies that specify
or describe rules. Thus, it is not the case that
rules are the "same as" or "equal to" contin-
gencies, or, as Sidman (1994) would have it,
that the distinction between rules and contin-
gencies, like that between other responses
and stimuli, breaks down if both participate
in an equivalence class (p. 386). There is, on
the contrary, a great deal of experimental ev-
idence showing major differences between
contingency-shaped and rule-governed be-
havior (Lowe, 1979, 1983)
that is entirely
consistent with Skinner's observation that
If cognitive psychologists were correct in say-
ing that rules are
in the contingencies,
it
would not matter whether we learned them
from the contingencies or from the rule-in
other words, from acquaintance or descrip-
tion. The results, however, are obviously dif-
ferent. ... There is a difference because rules
never fully describe the contingencies they are
designed to replace. There is also a difference
in the states of the body felt. (1989, pp. 43-
44)
So once again, there is the danger that the
notion of equivalence may mask rather than
clarify crucial behavioral distinctions. In us-
ing the terms describe and specify for the rela-
tion of rules to contingencies, Skinner may
have been closer to the mark than his critics
were. Nevertheless, it must be conceded that
these terms do require more precise behav-
ioral specification, and it is this that we have
aimed to achieve here. Certainly, little prog-
ress will be made in understanding how rules
come to govern behavior until we understand
the role of the verbal units of which rules are
composed, how they come into being and
how, either individually or in combination,
they affect other behavior. This has so far not
been attempted in the equivalence literature
and although we have attempted to lay the
foundations for such an understanding, there
is clearly much more to be done before a
comprehensive analysis can be provided.
Summary. From the evidence presented in
this section there are a number of conclu-
sions that can be drawn on the relation be-
tween equivalence and language. (a) The re-
lation between name and objects is not one
of symmetry or equivalence. The fact that
subjects pass match-to-sample tests cannot be
taken to indicate that sameness is involved in
their behavior; nor can we assume that the
members of an equivalence
class are the
names of other members, or refer to, sym-
bolize, or mean them. Although match-to-
sample performance and the construct of
equivalence cannot provide a model for lin-
guistic behavior it may, however, be diagnos-
tic of its effects, that is, success on symmetry

----- Page 53 (native) -----
NAMING AM) OTHER SYMBOLIC BEHAVIOR
and equivalence tests may be a good indicator
that the subject has acquired naming.
The Construct of Stimulus Equivalence:
Do We Need It?
Problems with the unitary concept of equiva-
lence. We have shown that success on match-
to-sample tests, and thus, according to its op-
erational definition, stimulus equivalence,
can be established by several different behav-
ioral routes, including common naming, in-
traverbal naming, and more complex verbal
rules such as "A goes with B," "A is the same
as B," and so on. It has also been suggested,
as a theoretical possibility, that there might
be a type of equivalence that is directly con-
tingency generated. But these various paths
to success represent very different behavioral
processes that, although they may yield the
common outcome of correct performance on
a particular match-to-sample configuration,
may have
other
differing behavioral
out-
comes including, we predict, different per-
formances on tests of stimulus class exten-
sion. Evidence to this effect comes from a
study by Bentall
et
al.
(1993), who have
shown that adults taught a common name for
stimuli later related in a match-to-sample task
showed no reaction-time differences to the
stimuli on baseline, symmetry, transitivity, and
equivalence
trials. When, however, subjects
were taught individual stimulus names rather
than common names, they showed longer re-
action times on the transitivity and equiva-
lence trials than on the symmetry and base-
line
trials.
These
results
indicate
that
although, where meeting the mathematical
criteria for equivalence is concerned, the be-
havior of subjects with common naming may
differ little from that of those with intraverbal
or other strategies, when other measures such
as reaction times are recorded, there is evi-
dence of behavioral differences (Adams et al.,
1993; Fields et al., 1993).
Different verbal repertoires can have the
common function of generating success on
equivalence tests, and it is easy to see how this
fact could have given rise to usage of a com-
mon term, stimulus equivalence, to describe
this success and to a belief in a correspond-
ingly new phenomenon. What has not until
now been appreciated, however, is that suc-
cess on stimulus equivalence tests may be a
secondary and indirect outcome of more var-
ied and fundamental verbal processes. Most
researchers in this area, although ostensibly
investigating the "new" phenomenon of stim-
ulus equivalence, may in fact have been study-
ing naming and other forms of verbal behav-
ior, but under a different name. Their
tendency to ignore the possible role of sub-
jects' verbal behavior and hence not even to
record it (but see Dugdale & Lowe, 1990;
Saunders & Spradlin, 1990; Wulfert et al.,
1991) may have led many researchers to over-
look significant variables that influence test
outcome. This seems to be a good example
of what Skinner (1969) has termed the for-
malisticfallacy (see also Vygotsky, 1978, p. 62),
whereby an undue emphasis is placed upon
the formal characteristics of behavior (e.g.,
success on equivalence tests) at the expense
of an analysis of controlling relations (e.g.,
the role of verbal stimuli).
Whether or not subjects succeed on equiv-
alence tests is not a matter of a straightfor-
ward logical or mathematical relation but
rather of a behavioral process that varies with
a number of factors. These include whether
the subject produces names in ways that will
generate stimulus class categories in line with
those specified by the experimenter. And this
in turn, as we have seen, is determined by a
variety of other factors including whether the
procedure is audio-visual or visual-visual,
whether names are provided directly by the
experimenter or generated by prior history
of stimulus
classification,
and,
of course,
whether the names thus generated control
the appropriate listener behavior of pressing
the corresponding response keys. If we are
interested in establishing the determinants of
human match-to-sample performance, future
research should explore these relations in de-
tail.
Given, as other investigators have also sug-
gested, that the existing mathematical ap-
proach to defining equivalence is problem-
atic (Pilgrim & Galizio, 1995; Saunders et al.,
1993; Saunders & Green, 1992), as are at-
tempts to characterize it in terms of simple
notions such as sameness, one way forward
might be to create a new definition. We sug-
gest, however, that the flight to logico-math-
ematical models is a diversion from the cen-
tral task of conducting a functional analysis
of the conditions that give rise to success on
matching tests so that these definitional issues
237

----- Page 54 (native) -----
PAULINEJ. HORNE and C. FERGUS LOWE
can be resolved, including the question of
whether a definition of stimulus equivalence
is required at all. If success on tests of stim-
ulus equivalence is indeed a by-product or
secondary outcome of naming and other ver-
bal processes, the very notion of a "general-
ized concept of equivalence" (Johnson & Sid-
man, 1993, p. 346) begins to evaporate. As
we have shown, we do not need it to account
for the success of human subjects on match-
to-sample tests or to account for the range of
other emergent behavior that occurs during
early language development in the child. In-
deed, the arbitrary match-to-sample proce-
dure itself (as distinct from identity match-
ing), particularly visual-visual matching, is a
highly artificial set of circumstances of a sort
infrequently,
if ever, encountered by most
children and thus
is an odd experimental
paradigm upon which to base a general un-
derstanding of new or derived relations or
language itself.
Are theories of equivalence necessary? As we
have attempted to show, arbitrary stimulus
classes, upon which the concept of stimulus
equivalence is based, are a fundamental as-
pect of the name relation, hence the rele-
vance of equivalence research for the analysis
of verbal behavior. But is the notion of stim-
ulus equivalence a helpful explanatory device
or does it introduce conceptual confusion?
Stimulus equivalence, as originally defined,
describes a set of behavioral relations on
match-to-sample tasks. To label these behav-
ioral outcomes as equivalence, symmetry, or re-
lational frames
and
then
to
use
these
constructs to account for the behavior from
which they were derived together with a
range of other linguistic and transfer-of-func-
tion phenomena requires justification. One
negative effect may be that, in erecting an
elaborate set of abstractions upon this limited
behavioral base, a false sense of security is cre-
ated and it is concluded that language acqui-
sition, verbal rules and, of course,
derived
stimulus
classes themselves have been
ex-
plained.
A more serious difficulty arises, however,
when theoretical constructs introduce con-
ceptual confusion and impede research.
Again we have indicated how some constructs
in the equivalence literature might have this
effect. For example, in order to account for
naming, are any or all of the following con-
structs from relational frame theory required:
arbitrarily applicable relational responding,
relational frames, the frame of coordination,
mutual entailment, combinatorial mutual en-
tailment,
transformation of stimulus func-
tion, and equivalence? Or are any or all of
the Sidman hypotheses required? His theory
also views naming as being derived from the
construct of equivalence but in an even more
complex manner, with much of the theoreti-
cal effort (see Sidman, 1994, pp. 389, 554)
invested in explanations of why equivalence
does not occur rather than in a functional
analysis of how both
it and naming come
about.
As Skinner (1950) pointed out, another
problem with some kinds of theory is that
when the theory is overthrown, much of the
associated research
is discarded. This has
happened once before with a research enter-
prise that was based on the notion of equiv-
alence and that also claimed that equivalence
was at the center of linguistic behavior (Jen-
kins, 1965). The search for the key to equiv-
alence failed then, the theory faded away, and
the research seems, indeed, to have been
largely forgotten. This time around, should
not our research enterprise deal directly with
verbal behavior itself unmediated by the con-
struct of equivalence? Verbal behavior will
not fade away.
To study naming directly entails, as we have
indicated, the experimental investigation,
from birth, of how the young child learns the
individual behavioral relations that in com-
bination bring about naming. This approach
would certainly be more parsimonious; it is
also in the best tradition of behavior analysis.
Such a study would enable researchers to
come to terms with the full complexity of the
phenomenon, both in terms of the condi-
tions that give rise to it and the interactions
between multisensory stimulation and multi-
modal responding that it entails, including
emotional behavior and the effects of classi-
cal conditioning. Such complexity cannot be
encompassed by the logico-mathematical ab-
stractions of equivalence.
It is researchers' recognition of the impor-
tance of emergent behavior that has been re-
sponsible for much of the interest in stimulus
equivalence. The present account suggests
that their work on the latter should now lead
to examination of the variables that are re-
238

----- Page 55 (native) -----
NAMING AMD OTHER SYMBOLIC BEHAVIOR
sponsible for bringing about "new" behavior
and the direct study of language acquisition
and its effects on other behavior. In switching
the focus of research from what may appear
to many to be an arcane phenomenon called
stimulus equivalence to phenomena such as
naming and its relation to categorization, we
can make common ground with other re-
searchers both in psychology and other dis-
ciplines who themselves recognize these lat-
ter areas of inquiry as valid and important.
Furthermore, we are likely to enhance the
practical applications of research in the field.
Instead of assuming that emergent behavior
comes about as a result of an innate unana-
lyzable stimulus relation best revealed in the
match-to-sample paradigm, practitioners will
advance towards understanding how lan-
guage itself emerges and how it can be used
to foster the development of stimulus classes
and, hence, an almost infinite range of new
behavior.
Reconciling the Different Accounts
Although in the foregoing we have stressed
the differences between our account and
those of Sidman and Hayes,
all three ac-
counts share common ground. First, there is
the recognition that it is important to estab-
lish how subjects, without having been direct-
ly trained to do so, can in some contexts treat
structurally different stimuli as if they were
interchangeable, that
is, as members of a
stimulus class. Second, there is the conviction
that the phenomena studied are closely
bound up with linguistic behavior. In view of
these central similarities, might not the dif-
fering accounts be reconciled in order to ad-
vance a common research agenda for the fu-
ture?
Perhaps one way of achieving
this
reconciliation would be
to recognize that
there might be at least two ways that a subject
could achieve success on an equivalence test,
that is, by way of either directly contingency-
generated behavior or rule-governed or ver-
bally controlled behavior. The principles un-
derlying the former might not be clear, but
it would be an empirical question as to wheth-
er it does or does not occur. If it could not
be found (e.g., in nonverbal species or non-
verbal infants)
then perhaps
all three
ac-
counts would have to accept that we must
deal with a verbally driven phenomenon. The
question then would become how to account
for the verbal behavior.
This focus would help to remove some of
the other incompatibilities. For example, one
aspect of Sidman's
(1994)
recent account
that seems most likely to be contentious and
difficult to reconcile with our view is the no-
tion that basic learning phenomena, such as
Pavlovian conditioning and conditioned re-
inforcement, are derived from stimulus equiv-
alence. But if equivalence is verbally driven
and occurs only in humans, then the notion
that naming enters into the establishment of
classical conditioning effects and conditioned
reinforcement would not be at all problem-
atic; indeed, there is considerable experimen-
tal evidence to support such a view
(e.g.,
Sokolov, 1972). That said, we would, never-
theless, have to maintain that these condi-
tioning phenomena are not invariably de-
rived from naming or equivalence but,
indeed, are among the true behavioral prim-
itives that give rise to verbal behavior and
stimulus classes in humans.
Shifting the emphasis to verbal behavior
should also help to establish a greater com-
patibility between the Hayes account and our
own. Both accounts assume that the phenom-
ena of interest come about as a result of a
learning history, which even in the Hayes ac-
count is recognized as "lying largely in the
context of language training" (Steele &
Hayes, 1991, p. 20). Relational frame theory
sees the repeated reinforcement of relations
between stimulus pairs and their reversals as
sufficient, whereas we maintain that, in ad-
dition to the stimuli presented, what the child
says, what she hears, and the listener behavior
thus engendered are all critical elements in
acquisition of the crucial repertoire. Thus,
the accounts are similar in their general em-
phasis on learning history, although they car-
ry different implications for how naming
should be taught and how it enters into re-
lations with other behavior. Nevertheless, it
should be possible to submit the different hy-
potheses to experimental test on this issue so
that a common basis could be established
from which to move forward. If, of course, it
was found that very young infants, prior to
experiencing either of the kinds of history
proposed in this or in the Hayes account,
could readily form equivalence classes, which
in turn facilitated acquisition of naming, then
239

----- Page 56 (native) -----
PAULINEJ. HORNE and C. FERGUS LOWE
both the present account and that of Hayes
would need to be revised in line with Sid-
man's theory. We have reviewed the existing
evidence bearing on these issues in earlier
sections, and the reader can judge according-
ly, but much of the critical experimentation
remains to be done.
CONCLUSION
The starting point for the present paper
has been Skinner's account of verbal behav-
ior, which, although central to his thinking,
has not had nearly the impact or recognition
within psychology and other disciplines that
many, including the present authors, main-
tain that
it deserves (Andresen,
1990;
Ri-
chelle,
1993). Much of the important re-
search on
children's language
acquisition
conducted in recent years, for example,
makes extensive use of operant methods and
experimental techniques but ironically draws
little from Skinner's interpretation of verbal
behavior. Part of the aim of the present paper
is to add to Skinner's exposition in ways that
will demonstrate the merits of a behavioral
perspective. Although we have concentrated
upon how naming, the most basic verbal unit,
comes about during the first 2 years of life,
our approach and method could be extended
to account for the full range of linguistic be-
havior.
Our main contribution, we believe, has
been to add to Skinner's description of speak-
er behavior an account of the speaker as lis-
tener. As we have tried to show, the fusion of
speaker and listener behavior within the in-
dividual has profound and far-reaching con-
sequences, transforming the basic verbal re-
lations identified by Skinner
(i.e., the tact,
mand, and intraverbal) so that each becomes
a variant of the basic name relation. The re-
sult is the creation, within each name, of bi-
directional or closed-loop relations between a
class of sometimes physically very different
objects or events and the speaker-listener be-
havior it occasions. The name relation is both
the focal point of this achievement, where all
these events are brought together, and at the
same time the means of further dynamic in-
terchange between them, giving rise to the
range of emergent and symbolic behavior we
have
described, including what has been
termed verbal thinking, reference, meaning, rule
governance, and human consciousness. Referring
to the special accomplishments of verbal be-
havior, Skinner (1957) says that the speaker
is "a locus-a place in which a number of
variables come together in a unique conflu-
ence to yield an equally unique achievement"
(p. 313). We would add that it is only when
the speaker becomes a speaker-listener and
can name that this unique achievement is re-
alized.
An effective behavioral theory of language
acquisition should be of benefit not just out-
side the behavior-analytic tradition but also
within, because, as some have argued (e.g.,
Richelle, 1993), the topic, centrally important
though it is, has so far not received adequate
attention from behavior analysts themselves.
As we have stressed, the account presented
here is a theoretical one, and the particular
behavioral relations we have oudlined, begin-
ning with listener behavior and moving on to
the echoic and finally naming, appear to us
to provide the necessary behavioral condi-
tions for the acquisition of naming. But this
account, together with a range of related is-
sues, needs to be experimentally validated. To
do so requires a systematic program of devel-
opmental behavioral research.
There are a number of issues that such re-
search should address. For example, we have
indicated the primacy of listener behavior in
the naming acquisition sequence (at least un-
til the establishment of higher order name
relations); this indeed appears to be generally
true for young children who have no sensory
impairment, but there is evidence that chil-
dren who do have sensory impairments (i.e.,
who are deaf or blind) may often learn speak-
er behavior before they learn the correspond-
ing listener behavior relating to particular ob-
jects and events (Mulford, 1988; Pettito,
1992). Whatever the particular sequence of
acquisition, we maintain that for naming to
occur it is necessary for conventional listener
and speaker repertoires to combine, and we
have proposed that it is echoic responding,
either overt or covert, in the presence of ob-
jects or events that is critical in bringing this
about. However, this possibility remains to be
empirically validated. Even in the case of chil-
dren without sensory impairments, it may be
informative in this regard to investigate forms
of naming other than speaking, such as sign-
ing or other coding responses (see Lowen-
240

----- Page 57 (native) -----
NAMING AND OTHER SYMBOLIC BEHAVIOR
kron, 1984, 1988, 1989; Sundberg & Sund-
berg, 1990).
It is also necessary to investigate the role
of reinforcement provided by the verbal com-
munity in establishing and maintaining these
behavioral relations. The related issue of co-
vert behavior and stimuli, including reinforc-
ing stimuli, and the development of a covert
verbal repertoire also require detailed
re-
search because, as Skinner (1957, pp. 434-
438) has observed, such repertoires consti-
tute so much of what is called human think-
ing. There are, however, complex method-
ological
issues that must be dealt with
if
covert events are to be studied effectively in
behavioral research (Lowe, 1983), not least in
the study of stimulus equivalence. There are,
in addition, many issues concerning the role
of naming in bringing about stimulus classes
and functional transfer of behavior across
stimulus classes. Because theories of stimulus
equivalence that are not based on naming
have hitherto been dominant within behavior
analysis, research on the pivotal role of nam-
ing in such behavior has hardly begun.
The present account also has implications
for attempts to teach language to nonhuman
animals and to establish clear criteria against
which such efforts can be assessed. It indi-
cates that the central focus of such training
should be upon establishing in the subjects a
fusion of listener and speaker repertoires
such as
is established in the young child.
Clearly, the more that can be learned about
the conditions that bring about this latter de-
velopment, the better equipped will be the
researchers who embark upon these projects.
The critical tests of whether success in estab-
lishing naming has been achieved are those
that we have already outlined. To date there
is no convincing evidence that any nonhu-
man animal has passed tests of this kind.
The importance of studying verbal behav-
ior was made clear by Skinner (1987) who
wrote, "The human species took a crucial
step forward when its vocal musculature came
under operant control in the production of
speech sounds. Indeed, it is possible that all
the distinctive achievements of the species
can be traced to that one genetic change" (p.
79). In our attempt to advance this study we
have focused upon the earliest forms of ver-
bal behavior, showing how children learn to
name objects and events. In so doing, our ac-
count provides the prerequisite basis for an
analysis of other more elaborate verbal forms,
including complex propositions, sentences,
and grammar. We have also furnished a the-
oretical basis for understanding a range of in-
teractions between verbal and nonverbal be-
havior that are of great practical import,
heretofore studied under the various guises
of rule-governed
behavior, verbal
control,
correspondence training, and stimulus equiv-
alence (see Lowe, 1979, 1983; Lowe et al.,
1987). An understanding of the role of nam-
ing and other verbal behavior within all these
domains represents an exciting challenge for
future research.
241