

----- Page 1 (native) -----
December 2016  |  Volume 3  |  Article 74
1
Opinion
published: 19 December 2016
doi: 10.3389/frobt.2016.00074
Frontiers in Robotics and AI  |  www.frontiersin.org
Edited by: 
Massimo Bergamasco, 
Sant’Anna School of Advanced 
Studies, Italy
Reviewed by: 
Daniel Thalmann, 
Nanyang Technological University, 
Singapore
*Correspondence:
Mel Slater 
melslater@ub.edu
Specialty section: 
This article was submitted to 
Virtual Environments, 
a section of the journal 
Frontiers in Robotics and AI
Received: 17 October 2016
Accepted: 15 November 2016
Published: 19 December 2016
Citation: 
Slater M and Sanchez-Vives MV 
(2016) Enhancing Our Lives with 
Immersive Virtual Reality. 
Front. Robot. AI 3:74. 
doi: 10.3389/frobt.2016.00074
Enhancing Our Lives with Immersive 
Virtual Reality
Mel Slater1,2,3* and Maria V. Sanchez-Vives1,2,4
1Event Lab, Department of Clinical Psychology and Psychobiology, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 2 Institució 
Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Barcelona, Spain, 3 Department of Computer Science, University College 
London, London, UK, 4 Institut d’investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Barcelona, Spain
Keywords: virtual reality, presence, immersion, place illusion, plausibility, moral dilemmas, embodiment, 
immersive journalism
SUMMARY
Virtual reality (VR) started about 50  years ago in a form we would recognize today [stereo 
­head-mounted display (HMD), head tracking, computer graphics generated images] – although the 
hardware was completely different. In the 1980s and 1990s, VR emerged again based on a ­different 
generation of hardware (e.g., CRT displays rather than vector refresh, electromagnetic tracking 
instead of mechanical). This reached the attention of the public, and VR was hailed by many engi-
neers, scientists, celebrities, and business people as the beginning of a new era, when VR would 
soon change the world for the better. Then, VR disappeared from public view and was rumored to 
be “dead.” In the intervening 25 years a huge amount of research has nevertheless been carried out 
across a vast range of applications – from medicine to business, from psychotherapy to industry, from 
sports to travel. Scientists, engineers, and people working in industry carried on with their research 
and applications using and exploring different forms of VR, not knowing that actually the topic had 
already passed away.
The purpose of this article is to survey a range of VR applications where there is some evidence for, 
or at least debate about, its utility, mainly based on publications in peer-reviewed journals. Of course 
not every type of application has been covered, nor every scientific paper (about 186,000 papers in 
Google Scholar): in particular, in this review we have not covered applications in psychological or 
medical rehabilitation. The objective is that the reader becomes aware of what has been accomplished 
in VR, where the evidence is weaker or stronger, and what can be done. We start in Section 1 with an 
outline of what VR is and the major conceptual framework used to understand what happens when 
people experience it – the concept of “presence.” In Section 2, we review some areas where VR has 
been used in science – mostly psychology and neuroscience, the area of scientific visualization, and 
some remarks about its use in education and surgical training. In Section 3, we discuss how VR has 
been used in sports and exercise. In Section 4, we survey applications in social psychology and related 
areas – how VR has been used to throw light on some social phenomena, and how it can be used to 
tackle experimentally areas that cannot be studied experimentally in real life. We conclude with how 
it has been used in the preservation of and access to cultural heritage. In Section 5, we present the 
domain of moral behavior, including an example of how it might be used to train professionals such 
as medical doctors when confronting serious dilemmas with patients. In Section 6, we consider how 
VR has been and might be used in various aspects of travel, collaboration, and industry. In Section 
7, we consider mainly the use of VR in news presentation and also discuss different types of VR. In 
the concluding Section 8, we briefly consider new ideas that have recently emerged – an impossible 
task since during the short time we have written this page even newer ideas have emerged! And, we 
conclude with some general considerations and speculations.
Throughout and wherever possible we have stressed novel applications and approaches and how 
the real power of VR is not necessarily to produce a faithful reproduction of “reality” but rather that

----- Page 2 (native) -----
2
Slater and Sanchez-Vives
Enhancing Our Lives with VR
Frontiers in Robotics and AI  |  www.frontiersin.org
December 2016  |  Volume 3  |  Article 74
it offers the possibility to step outside of the normal bounds of 
reality and realize goals in a totally new and unexpected way. We 
hope that our article will provoke readers to think as paradigm 
changers, and advance VR to realize different worlds that might 
have a positive impact on the lives of millions of people world-
wide, and maybe even help a little in saving the planet.
1. VIRTUAL REALITY – FOUNDATIONS
1.1. Introduction – Now Is the Time
“It’s a very interesting kind of reality. It’s absolutely as 
shared as the physical world. Some people say that, 
well, the physical world isn’t all that real. It’s a consensus 
world. But the thing is, however real the physical world 
is – which we never can really know – the virtual world 
is exactly as real, and achieves the same status. But at the 
same time it also has this infinity of possibility that you 
don’t have in the physical world: in the physical world, 
you can’t suddenly turn this building into a tulip; it’s just 
impossible. But in the virtual world you can …. [Virtual 
reality] gives us this sense of being able to be who we 
are without limitation; for our imagination to become 
objective and shared with other people.” Jaron Lanier, 
SIGGRAPH Panel 1989, Virtual Environments and 
Interactivity: Windows to the Future.
Although said more than 25  years ago by the person who 
coined the term “virtual reality” (VR) this statement about the 
excitement and potentiality that was apparently just around 
the corner in the late 1980s really does apply today. The dream at 
the time was a VR that would be available cheaply on a mass scale 
worldwide. The expectation and hope was very high. As Timothy 
Leary said in the following year’s SIGGRAPH Panel, imagining 
a time when the cost of an HMD and body-tracking equipment 
would be at low-end consumer level, “… suddenly the barriers of 
class and linguistics and education and nationality are gone. The 
kid in the inner city can slip on the telepresence hardware and talk 
to young people in China or Russia. And have flirtations with kids 
in Japan. In other words, to me there is something wonderfully 
democratic about cyberspace. If it’s virtual you can be anyone, 
you can be anything this time around. We are getting close to a 
place where that is feasible.” Unfortunately, the feasibility was not 
there, or at least not realizable at that time or anywhere near it. 
Now though the possibility is real, and for whatever reason now 
is the time.
During the past 25 years when VR was supposed to have “died”1 
masses of research into both the development of the technology 
and its application in a vast array of areas has been continuing. 
Scott Fisher, one of the VR pioneers in a 1989 essay reported 
in Packer and Jordan (2002) set out a number of applications: 
telepresence, where VR provides an interface through which 
1 http://www.technologyreview.com/view/421293/whatever-happened-to-
virtual-reality/ though see also http://science.nasa.gov/science-news/science-at-
nasa/2004/21jun_vr/ from NASA Ames, 2004.
the participant operates in a distant place embodied in a robot 
located there; data visualization; applications in architectural 
visualization; medicine including surgical simulation; education 
and entertainment; remote collaboration. These were all applica-
tions that were being worked on at the time. In this article, we 
set out how VR has been used in these and in a variety of other 
applications, applications that have already shown results that 
may be of significant benefit for individuals and society. With VR 
available on a mass scale, the potential for these benefits to have 
significant impact is now all the greater. However, as Jaron Lanier 
also said in the 1990 panel “… there’s really a serious danger of 
expectations being raised too high.” This remains true today, but 
we can have slightly less caution since research in the intervening 
quarter of a century has demonstrated results that stand on a 
reasonably solid scientific basis.
For an overview of a range of applications of VR (not all con-
sidered in this article), see the paper by one of the pioneers of VR, 
Frederick Brooks (1999), with an updated discussion by Slater 
(2014). What follows is not meant to be a survey of all possible 
results in all possible applications. We have selected areas that we 
believe are particularly important for demonstrating how VR has 
been and might be used to improve the lives of people, and to 
help overcome some societal problems, or at the very least help in 
scientific understanding of problems and contribute toward solu-
tions. Readers might find that their favorite topic, research result, 
or paper has not been mentioned. This is because we have focused 
on illustrative results and developments rather than attempting to 
be comprehensive. Indeed, to write comprehensively about every 
section in this article would require something like the whole 
article length devoted to it. Even so without trying to be compre-
hensive, we have found it necessary to cite many references. We 
have concentrated on scientific papers in peer-reviewed journals. 
Immersive VR has shown an extremely impressive array of appli-
cations over the years, but what is important now, given the lesson 
of what happened in its first phase, is that we emphasize results 
that have some level of scientific support. The scope of this article 
is on the uses of VR; we are not presenting techniques, methods, 
interfaces, algorithms, or any of the technical side, except where 
this is relevant to explain a particular application or results.
Our thesis is similar to that presented in the quote from Jaron 
Lanier above: VR offers us a way to simulate reality. We do not 
say that it is “exactly as real” as physical reality but that VR best 
operates in the space that is just below what might be called the 
“reality horizon.” If a virtual knife stabs you, you are not going to 
be physically injured but nevertheless might feel stress, anxiety, 
and even pain. If a virtual human unexpectedly kisses you, you 
may blush with embarrassment, and your heart start pounding, 
but it will be a virtual kiss only. On the other hand, as Lanier 
said, the real power of VR is to go beyond what is real, it is more 
than simulation, it is also creation, allowing us to step out of the 
bounds of reality and experience paradigms that are otherwise 
impossible.
Virtual reality is “reality” that is “virtual.” This means that, in 
principle, anything that can happen in reality can be programed 
to happen but “virtually,” a point that we return to in Chapter 
8, since, for example, this is not the case with touch and force 
feedback. Therefore, writing about the potentialities inherent in

----- Page 3 (native) -----
3
Slater and Sanchez-Vives
Enhancing Our Lives with VR
Frontiers in Robotics and AI  |  www.frontiersin.org
December 2016  |  Volume 3  |  Article 74
VR is a difficult task – since it encompasses what can be done in 
physical reality (for good or evil). But even more, since it is VR, 
we emphasize that we can break out of the bounds of reality and 
accomplish things that cannot be done in physical reality. Herein 
lies its real power. With VR we can, for example, simulate and 
improve traditional physiotherapy by making it more interesting 
for the patient by changing their apparent location and activity 
to something more interesting than just what they are actually 
doing. In reality, a machine might be helping someone to move 
their legs for physiotherapy, but with VR they can be given the 
illusion that rather than just moving their legs for therapy they 
might be playing soccer in the World Cup. This type of approach 
augments current practices. But, VR can go way beyond this and 
introduce radical paradigm shifts.
In VR we are currently still at the stage similar to that of the 
transition between theater and movies as pointed out by Pausch 
et al. (1996). Movies were originally just another way to show 
theater. It took a while before moviemakers developed a new 
grammar, ways of presenting a story unique to this medium. So, 
the same will be true of VR. Nowadays, a computer game in VR 
is just a traditional computer game – but displayed in a different 
medium. Eventually there will be a paradigm shift, one that we 
cannot know at the time of writing. Putting this another way, VR 
is revolutionary, even though it has taken 50 years to get from 
the initial idea in the lab to becoming a mass consumer product. 
How this product might develop and change the world in which 
we live remains unknown. In this article, we try to set out some 
of what has been done with VR and to some extent what might 
be done. We address positive uses of VR, while recognizing from 
the outset that there will be, like with any technology, uses that are 
morally repugnant. For example, vehicles can do serious damage 
when used improperly, even though their designed purpose is to 
transport people or facilitate commercial activity.
1.2. Essential Concepts
The idea of immersive VR in the form that we think of it today 
was foreshadowed by Ivan Sutherland in 1965 (Sutherland, 1965) 
and then realized with the “Sword of Damocles” HMD described 
in a paper published 3 years later (Sutherland, 1968).2 This was 
not the first ever HMD – see, for example, a collection of pictures 
compiled by Stephen R. Ellis of NASA Ames, which includes one 
dating back to 1613.3 Nor was this the first ever virtual environ-
ment system – see the multisensory Sensorama system by Morton 
Heilig,4 or Myron Krueger’s pioneering work on Artificial Reality 
(Krueger et al., 1985; Krueger, 1991), or the years of work on flight 
simulators (Page, 2000). However, it was the first that, although 
using almost totally different technology than available today, 
introduced (and implemented) the concepts that make up a VR 
system. An HMD delivers two computer-generated images, one 
for each eye. The 2D images are computed and rendered with 
appropriate perspective with respect to the position of each eye 
in the three-dimensionally described virtual scene. Together, the 
2 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NtwZXGprxag&feature=youtu.be
3 http://humansystems.arc.nasa.gov/groups/acd/projects/hmd_dev.php
4 http://www.mortonheilig.com/InventorVR.html
images therefore form a stereo pair. The two small displays are 
placed in front of the corresponding eye, with some optics that 
enables the user to see the images. The displays are mounted in a 
frame, which additionally has a mechanism to continually capture 
the position and orientation of the user’s head, and therefore gaze 
direction (assuming that the eyes are looking straight ahead). 
Hence, as the head of the user moves, turns, or looks up and down, 
this information is transmitted to the computer that recomputes 
the images and sends the resulting signals to the displays. From 
the point of view of the users, it is as if they are in an alternate 
life-sized environment, since wherever they look, in whichever 
direction, they see this surrounding computer-generated world 
in 3D stereo with movement and motion parallax. (The same can 
be done with specialized sound.) In fact, from this point on we 
drop the term “user” and refer to the “participant.” VR is different 
from other forms of human–computer interface since the human 
participates in the virtual world rather than uses it.
In the 1980s, NASA Ames developed the VIEW system 
(Virtual Interface Environment Workstation) described by Fisher 
et  al. (1987).5 This was a full VR system with all components 
recognizable today: head-tracked wide field-of-view relatively 
light weight HMD, audio, tracking of the body, tracked gloves 
that allowed participants to interact with virtual objects, tactile 
and force feedback (haptics), and where the VR could be linked 
to a telerobotics system (Section 6.4).
Also in the 1980s a company VPL led by Jaron Lanier became 
a driving force of VR developments constructing the Eyephone 
HMD, tracked data gloves6 for interaction, whole body track-
ing, and reality built for two (Blanchard et al., 1990).7 They also 
developed a visual programming language that made it possible 
to build virtual environments with limited programming. It was a 
goal for people to be able to construct their virtual realities, while 
in VR, and immediately share these with multiple people. It was 
probably through the work of VPL that the idea of VR became 
widely publicized.
The degree of excitement, creativity, speculation, visions of a 
positive future, belief in the near-term mass availability of VR 
cannot be overemphasized. Indeed, the ideas and realizations that 
were around in the late 1980s and early 1990s can be read anew 
today and have a new freshness – and are especially important 
because what was hoped for then (VR for the mass of people at 
low cost) is now becoming a reality. Readers are urged to read 
the proceedings of two panels that occurred at the SIGGRAPH 
conference in 1989 (Conn et al., 1989) and 1990 (Barlow et al., 
1990) to get an idea of the excitement and promise of the heady 
days of early VR.
Head-mounted display technology puts the displays close to 
the eyes. Another type of immersive VR system was developed 
by Cruz-Neira et  al. (1992) referred to as a CAVE™ system 
(Cruz-Neira et al., 1993). Here, images are back-projected onto 
the walls of an approximately 3 m cubed room (front projected 
onto the floor by a projector mounted on the ceiling above the 
5 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3L0N7CKvOBA
6 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fs3AhNr5o6o
7 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ACeoMNux_AU

----- Page 4 (native) -----
4
Slater and Sanchez-Vives
Enhancing Our Lives with VR
Frontiers in Robotics and AI  |  www.frontiersin.org
December 2016  |  Volume 3  |  Article 74
open topped cuboid). Typically, three walls and the floor are 
screens. The images are projected interlaced at, e.g., 90 frames 
per second, 45 showing left eye images and the others the right 
eye images. Lightweight shutter glasses alternately have one eye 
lens opaque and the other transparent, in sync with the projected 
images. The brain fuses the two into one overall 3D stereo scene. 
Through head tracking mounted on the glasses, the image is 
correctly perspective computed for the head position, direction, 
and orientation of the participant. More than one person can 
be in the Cave simultaneously, and wearing the stereo shutter 
glasses, but the perspective is only correct for the one wearing the 
head-tracked glasses. Hence, such Cave-like systems, like HMDs 
deliver a surrounding 3D world. Of course, such a system has 
been far more expensive than an HMD system, both in terms 
of the space required and the cost (high powered projectors, a 
multiprocessor computer system, complex software for lock-step 
stereo rendering across all the displays, equipment maintenance). 
Moreover, as the promise of HMD driven VR diminished in the 
1990s through the failure to develop high quality displays at low 
enough cost, and with acceptable ergonomics (such as weight), 
Cave-like systems came to be used as an alternative. However, 
unlike HMDs, each Cave was typically tailor-made to order (it 
depended on available space apart from anything else) and never 
became a mass product. Caves became one of the mainstays of 
VR research and applications from the late 1990s and through the 
2000s until recently. The applications we discuss below include 
both HMD and Cave systems.
Conceptually, a minimal VR system places a participant into 
a surrounding 3D world that is delivered to a display system by 
a computer. At the very least, the participant’s head is tracked 
so that image and auditory updates depend on head-position 
and orientation. The computer graphics of the system delivers 
perspective-projected images individually to each eye, and the 
resulting scenario should be seen with correct parallax. Ideally, 
there should be a means whereby participants can effect changes 
in the virtual world. This may be accomplished by 3D tracked 
data gloves, or a handheld device such as a Wand (which is like 
a mouse or joystick but tracked in 3D space). Note that this says 
nothing about how the world is rendered. Even with the wire 
frame (lines only) images portrayed in Sutherland (1968), Ivan 
Sutherland noted that “An observer fairly quickly accommodates 
to the idea of being inside the displayed room and can view 
whatever portion of the room he wishes by turning his head ….
Observers capable of stereo vision uniformly remark on the real-
ism of the resulting images.”
1.3. Immersion and Presence
Consciousness of our immediate surroundings necessarily 
depends on the data picked up by our sensory systems – vision, 
sound, touch, force, taste, and smell. This is not to say that we 
simply reproduce the sensory inputs in our brains – far from it, 
perception is an active process that combines bottom-up process-
ing of the sensory inputs with top-down processing (including 
prior experience, expectations, and beliefs) based on our previ-
ously existing model of the world. After a few seconds of walking 
into a room we think that we “know” it. In reality, eye scanning 
data show that we have foveated on a very small number of key 
points in the room, and then our eye scan paths tend to follow 
repeated patterns between them (Noton and Stark, 1971). The 
key points are determined by our prior model of what a room 
is. We have “seen” a small proportion of what there is to see; yet, 
our perceptual system has inferred a full model of the room in 
which we are located. In fact it has been argued that our model 
of the scene around us tends to drive our eye movements rather 
than eye movements leading to our perceptual model of the scene 
(Chernyak and Stark, 2001). It was argued by Stark (1995) that this 
is the reason why VR works, even in spite of relatively simplistic 
or even poor rendering of the surroundings. VR offers enough 
cues for our perceptual system to hypothesize “this is a room” 
and then based on an existing internal model infer a model of 
this particular room using a perceptual fill-in mechanism. Recall 
the quote from Sutherland above how people accommodated to 
and remarked on the realism of the wire frame rendered scene 
displayed in the “Sword of Damocles” HMD.
The technical goal of VR is to replace real sense perceptions 
by the computer-generated ones derived from a mathematical 
database describing a 3D scene, animations of objects within the 
scene – represented as transformations over sets of mathematical 
objects – including changes caused by the intervention of the 
participant. If sensory perceptions are indeed effectively substi-
tuted then the brain has no alternative but to infer its perceptual 
model from its actual stream of sensory data – i.e., the VR. Hence, 
consciousness is transformed to consciousness of the virtual 
scenario rather than the real one – in spite of the participant’s 
sure knowledge that this is not real.
Effective substitution of real sensory data is an ideal. In prac-
tice, it depends on several factors, not least of which is – which 
sensory systems are included? Typically, vision, and often audi-
tory, more rarely touch, more rarely force feedback, more rarely 
still smell, and almost unknown taste.8 If we consider the typical 
VR system, it is primarily centered around vision, may have 
sound, and may have some element of tactile feedback. However, 
even vision alone is often enough for numerous applications, 
since anyway for many people it is perceptually dominant. So, 
participants in a VR typically encounter a situation where their 
visual system places them on say a roller coaster, but all other 
sense perceptions are from the surrounding physical environ-
ment. Nevertheless, they may scream and react as if they are on 
the roller coaster even while talking to a friend in reality standing 
nearby.
Factors that are critical for effective sensory substitution have 
been known for several years (Heeter, 1992; Held and Durlach, 
1992; Loomis, 1992; Sheridan, 1992, 1996; Steuer, 1992; Zeltzer, 
1992; Barfield and Hendrix, 1995; Ellis, 1996; Slater and Wilbur, 
1997): such as wide field-of-view vision, stereo, head tracking, low-
latency from head move to display, high-resolution displays, and 
of course the more sensory systems that are substituted the better. 
However, these types of technical factors (and there are others) 
are for one purpose – to afford the participant to perceive using 
natural sensorimotor contingencies (O’Regan and Noë, 2001a,b; 
Noë, 2004). What this means is that in order to perceive we use 
8 Though see Project Nourished: http://www.projectnourished.com

----- Page 5 (native) -----
5
Slater and Sanchez-Vives
Enhancing Our Lives with VR
Frontiers in Robotics and AI  |  www.frontiersin.org
December 2016  |  Volume 3  |  Article 74
our bodies in a natural way. We turn our head, move our eyes, bend 
down, look under, look over, look around, reach out, touch, push, 
pull, and doing all or some subset of these things simultaneously. 
Perception is a whole body action. Hence, the primary technological 
goal of VR is to realize perception through such natural sensorimotor 
contingencies to the best extent possible, and of course this continu-
ally comes up against limitations. For example, if while wearing an 
HMD or in a Cave we look very closely at an object, eventually we 
will see pixels. Or, in most existing VR systems, if we touch some 
arbitrary virtual object we will not feel it.
By an immersive VR system we mean one that delivers the 
ability to perceive through natural sensorimotor contingencies. 
This is entirely determined by the technology. Whether you can 
turn around 360°, all the while seeing a very low-latency con-
tinuous update of your visual field in correspondence with your 
gaze direction, is completely a function of the extent to which the 
system can do this. We can classify systems in this way as being 
more or less immersive. We say that system A is more immersive 
than system B if A can be used to simulate the perception afforded 
by B but not vice versa. Hence, in this sense an HMD is “more 
immersive” than a Cave, since there is something that can be rep-
resented in an HMD that cannot be represented in a Cave (even 
a six-sided Cave): the virtual representation of the participant’s 
body. In a Cave when you look down toward yourself you will 
see your real body. In an HMD with head tracking you can see a 
virtual body substituting your own (if this has been programed). 
Moreover, the virtual body can be designed to look like the real 
one, or not, and certainly with body tracking can be programed 
to move with real body movements and so on. So, in this way an 
HMD-based system can (in an ideal sense) be set up to simulate 
a Cave, but not vice versa.
Immersion describes the technical capabilities of a system, it is 
the physics of the system. A subjective correlate of immersion is 
presence. If a participant in a VR perceives by using her body in a 
natural way, then the simplest inference for her brain’s perceptual 
system to make is that what is being perceived is the participant’s 
actual surroundings. This gives rise to the subjective illusion that 
is referred to in the literature as presence – the illusion of “being 
there” in the environment depicted by the VR displays – in spite 
of the fact that you know for sure that you are not actually there. 
This specific feeling of “being there” has also been referred to as 
“place illusion” (PI) (to distinguish it from the multiple alterna-
tive meanings that have been attributed to the term “presence”) 
(Slater, 2009). It was coined by Marvin Minsky (1980) to describe 
the similar feeling that can arise when embodying a remote 
robotic device in a teleoperator system.
Place illusion can occur in a static environment where nothing 
happens – just looking around a stereo-displayed scenario, for 
example, where nothing is changing. When there are events in 
the environment, events that respond to you, that correlate with 
your actions, and refer to you personally, then provided that the 
environment is sufficiently credible (i.e., meets the expectations 
of how objects and people are expected to behave in the type of 
setting depicted), this will give rise to a further and independent 
illusion that we refer to as “Plausibility” (Psi) that the events are 
really happening. Again, this is an illusion in spite of the sure 
knowledge that nothing real is happening. A virtual human 
approaches and smiles at you, and you find yourself smiling back, 
even though too late you may say to yourself – why did I smile 
back, there is no one there?
The real-time update of sensory perception as a result of 
movement (e.g., head turning) gives rise to the sense of “being 
there” – the illusory sensation of being in the computer-generated 
environment (Sanchez-Vives and Slater, 2005). The dynamic 
changes following events caused by or to the participants can give 
rise to the illusion that the events are really happening – “plau-
sibility” (Slater, 2009). With a technically good VR system (wide 
field-of-view high-resolution stereo display, with low-latency 
head tracking at a minimum), the “being there” aspect is essen-
tially determined for all but a few moments during an experience 
(Slater and Steed, 2000). Psi is much harder to attain, often requir-
ing specific domain knowledge (e.g., the virtual representation 
of a doctor’s surgery for the purposes of training had better be 
according to their expectations if doctors are to accept it). In this 
article, we use PI to refer to the illusion of being there, whereas 
presence refers to both PI and Psi. Following Sanchez-Vives and 
Slater (2005), the behavioral correlate of “presence” is that par-
ticipants behave in VR as they would do in similar circumstances 
in reality. For a more formal treatment of PI, Psi, and presence, 
including experimental results, see Slater et al. (2010a).9 These 
issues are taken up again in Chapter 8.
This fundamental aspect of VR to deliver experience that gives 
rise to illusory sense of place and an illusory sense of reality is 
what distinguishes it fundamentally from all other types of media. 
It is true that in response to a fire in a movie scene, the viewers’ 
hearts might start racing, with feelings of fear and discomfort. 
But, they will not run out of the cinema for fear of the fire. In 
VR, about 10% did run out when confronted by a virtual fire 
even though the fire did not look realistic (Spanlang et al., 2007). 
In a movie that includes a fight between two strangers in a bar, 
audience members will not intervene to stop the fight. In VR, 
they do – under the right circumstances – specifically when the 
victim shares some social identity with the participant (Slater 
et al., 2013), which itself is remarkable because obviously there is 
no one real there with whom to share social identity.
So, VR is a powerful tool for the achievement of authentic 
experience – even if what is depicted might be wholly imaginary 
and fantastic. In a scenario with dinosaurs such as that shown 
in “Back to Dinosaur Island – Jurassic World with Oculus 
Rift,”10 of course participants know that the situation is not real. 
Nevertheless, they would typically have the illusion of being there 
and have the illusory sensation that the dinosaur’s actions are 
really happening.
Evidence over the past 25–30 years shows that PI and Psi can 
occur even in quite low-level systems. This is because VR relies on 
the brain “filling in” detail in response to the apparent situation, 
so that just like in physical reality people find themselves respond-
ing with physiological and reflex actions before they consciously 
reason out the situation – in this case that in fact nothing real 
is happening. That reasoning or high-level cognitive processing 
9 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QEKxyhSPiVg
10 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lmHEQRVJzBI

----- Page 6 (native) -----
6
Slater and Sanchez-Vives
Enhancing Our Lives with VR
Frontiers in Robotics and AI  |  www.frontiersin.org
December 2016  |  Volume 3  |  Article 74
occurs more slowly, after the autonomic bodily responses have 
already occurred. For example, put someone next to a virtual 
precipice and their heart will start pounding (Meehan et al., 2002), 
even though eventually of course they can say to themselves that 
it is not really there. VR effectively relies on this duality – between 
very rapid brain activation that causes the body to respond (by 
the body responding, we include autonomous responses and 
thoughts that are generated in response to an apparent situation) 
and the slower cognitive process that reasons things out, which 
is of course a vital mechanism for survival, and occurs normally 
in physical reality.
Since VR evokes realistic responses in people, it is fundamen-
tally a “reality simulator.” By this we mean that participants can 
be placed in a scenario that depicts potentially real events, with 
the likelihood that they would act and respond quite realistically. 
This can obviously be exploited for many applications including 
rehearsal for the actual events, planning, training, knowledge dis-
semination, and so on. However, VR is also an unreality simulator! 
The events that it depicts may be ones that are highly unlikely to 
happen or cannot happen because they violate fundamental laws 
of physics, such as defying the laws of gravity. In VR, the physi-
cal laws can be simulated to the limit that computational power 
supports, or they can be changed or violated. Similarly, social 
conventions can be violated. A person might one day participate 
in a world that has never existed, such as Pandora from James 
Cameron’s movie Avatar.11 But still, provided some fundamental 
principles are adhered to, giving rise to the illusions of being in 
the virtual place where real events are taking place – participants 
can nevertheless demonstrate realistic responses. At the simplest 
level your heart is likely to race equally being faced with a realistic 
depiction of a precipice (something that could happen) or being 
chased by otherworld monsters. In this way, VR dramatically 
extends the range of human experiences way beyond anything 
that is likely to be encountered in physical reality. Hence, the 
amazing capability of VR not just as a reality simulator but as 
an unreality simulator that can paradoxically give rise to realistic 
behavior.
In this article, we will outline some of the applications that 
have been developed that show the positive use of VR for the 
potential benefit of society and individuals – how VR can be used 
to enhance well-being across a vast range of aspects of life. VR as 
a reality simulator has its uses in various forms of training, for 
education, for travel, some of which are discussed in the sections 
below. Moreover, VR as an unreality simulator can be used for 
many different types of entertainment – that extend from passive 
to active. It should also be noted that VR as an unreality simulator 
can also be used to solve “real” problems – as we will indicate 
later.
In each of the sections below, we will tackle a different domain 
of application. We will show in each section what has been done 
at the time of writing and give some indication of the degree 
to which it has been successful (i.e., its scientific validation). 
Additionally, where relevant, we will discuss ideas and proposals 
indicating what could be done in this domain.
11 http://www.avatarmovie.com/index.html
2. SCIENCE, EDUCATION, AND TRAINING
2.1. Psychology and Neuroscience
2.1.1. The Virtual Body
In Franz Kafka’s Metamorphosis,12 Gregor Samsa woke up one 
morning lying in bed and found himself transformed into a 
horrible insect-like creature. The body felt like his own, but he 
had to learn how to move himself in new ways, and of course it 
had an impact on his attitudes and behaviors and those of oth-
ers who saw him. Using VR, it has been shown to be possible 
to actually experiment with these types of body transformations, 
though rather more pleasant ones, and in the early days at the 
VPL company, there was experimentation by Jaron Lanier with 
embodiment in a virtual lobster body.
The question of how the brain represents the body is funda-
mental in cognitive neuroscience. How does the brain distinguish 
that this object is “my” hand and part of my body, but that object, 
a cup, is not part of my body, or that other object is your hand 
and not part of me? Common sense would have us believe that 
our own internal body representation is stable, something that 
changes only slowly through time, but experiments have shown 
that it is quite easy to shift the illusion of body ownership to objects 
that are not part of the body at all, or to a radically transformed 
body, so that our body representation is highly malleable.
A classic and very simple experiment to show this is called the 
rubber hand illusion (RHI) presented by Botvinick and Cohen 
(1998) in a one page Nature paper in 1998, which has had an 
enormous impact on the field (over 1800 citations – Google 
Scholar – at the time of writing). It has led to a vast literature that 
exploits these illusions to understand how the brain represents 
the body. Recent reviews are provided in Blanke (2012); Ehrsson 
(2012); and Blanke et al. (2015). In the RHI, the subject sits by 
a table onto which a rubber hand is placed in an anatomically 
plausible position, and approximately parallel to the subject’s cor-
responding real hand. The real hand is hidden behind a partition. 
The experimenter sitting opposite the subject taps and strokes 
the seen rubber hand and the hidden real hand synchronously in 
time and as far as possible at the same locations on the two hands. 
From the subject’s point of view, there is a rubber hand seen on 
the table in front, and arranged so that it could be the subject’s 
own hand, and this hand is seen to be tactilely stimulated. But, 
corresponding to the seen stimulation, there is actually felt stimu-
lation on the real hand. The brain’s perceptual system resolves this 
conflict by integrating the two separate but synchronous inputs 
into one, resulting in the perceptual and proprioceptive illusion 
that the rubber hand is the subject’s hand.13,14 This feeling, just 
like PI or Psi, is impossible to describe – it has to be experienced. 
If the visual and tactile stimulation are asynchronous, then the 
illusion does not occur, or occurs to a much lesser extent. To elicit 
a behavioral measure of the illusion, the idea of “proprioceptive 
drift” was introduced in Botvinick and Cohen (1998). Before the 
stimulation, participants with eyes closed had to point to their 
12 http://www.gutenberg.org/files/5200/5200-h/5200-h.htm
13 https://youtu.be/x5-TPXIzKuI
14 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TCQbygjG0RU

----- Page 7 (native) -----
7
Slater and Sanchez-Vives
Enhancing Our Lives with VR
Frontiers in Robotics and AI  |  www.frontiersin.org
December 2016  |  Volume 3  |  Article 74
hand under the table on which their arm was resting. After the 
stimulation, participants were again asked to repeat the pointing 
procedure. The distance between the post- and pre-measures is 
called the proprioceptive drift, where greater values indicate that 
participants pointed more toward the rubber hand after than 
before. Indeed, it was found that the drift was on the average 
positive for those in the synchronous condition and zero for those 
in the asynchronous.
Armel and Ramachandran (2003) went on to show that sub-
jects also respond physiologically to a threat to the rubber hand. 
They argued that our internal body representation is updated 
moment to moment based on the stimulus contingencies received. 
Synchronous multisensory perception leading to the hypothesis 
that a rubber hand might be our real hand is taken on by the brain 
that very quickly generates the corresponding illusion as a way to 
resolve the contradiction between the seen and felt synchronous 
stimulation. There are limitations, such as the rubber hand need-
ing to look like a human hand, its position must be plausible, and 
so on, but the fundamental result that we can have strong feelings 
of ownership over an object that we know for certain is not part 
of our body is clearly demonstrated by this illusion.
Lenggenhager et  al. (2007)15 and Ehrsson (2007)16 went on 
to show how similar multisensory techniques could be used to 
induce out-of-body illusions. Each of these used an HMD via 
which subjects saw a distant body. The HMD received video 
signals from cameras pointing toward the body. In the case of 
Lenggenhager et al. (2007), the distant body was a manikin with 
its back to the subject. The manikin was seen to be stroked on the 
back, which was felt on the subject’s back through synchronous 
stimulation by the experimenter. Subjects then had the strange 
illusion of being located at or drawn toward the manikin body to 
their front. In the case of Ehrsson (2007), the video cameras were 
pointed to the back of the subject’s own seated body. So from the 
perspective of the subject, they saw their own body from behind 
themselves. The experimenter synchronously stroked the subject’s 
real chest (out-of-sight) and visibly made similar strokes under 
the cameras. From the point of view of the subjects, they saw and 
felt stroking toward themselves (since their viewpoint was that 
of the stereo cameras), but they were apparently located behind 
their real body. Here, the visual and tactile information cohered 
to generate the illusion of being behind their own body. When the 
space under the camera was attacked with a hammer, participants 
responded physiologically (since the hammer would seem to be 
coming toward the illusory location of their chest). When the 
visual and tactile stimulation was asynchronous neither the illu-
sion nor the physiological response occurred to the same extent.
Following this, a form of VR to study body ownership with 
respect to the whole body (full body ownership) was achieved 
by Petkova and Ehrsson (2008) through the use of video cameras 
mounted on top of a manikin that fed a stereo HMD worn by 
the participant, so that when participants looked down toward 
their real body, they would see the manikin body instead of their 
own. This was accompanied by visuotactile synchrony, induced 
15 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4PQAc_Z2OfQ
16 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ee4-grU_6vs
by applying tactile stimulation to the real body synchronized 
with a corresponding visual stimulation to the manikin body. 
The result was subjective illusion of ownership over the manikin 
body, demonstrated also by a physiological response when a knife 
threatened that body. The illusion diminished when visuotactile 
asynchrony was applied.
The use of VR to transform the body was first realized by 
Jaron Lanier, in the late 1980s. The importance of this work for 
cognitive neuroscience was not realized at the time, and it was 
never published scientifically, although see Lanier (2006) and it 
is referred to in Lanier (2010). Lanier used the term “homuncular 
flexibility” to refer to the finding that the brain can adapt to dif-
ferent body configurations and learn how to manipulate such an 
alien body – for example, manipulating end-effectors of a body 
representation as a lobster by learning to use muscles in the stom-
ach, or though combinations of different muscle activations. The 
extreme flexibility of the body representation had been studied 
in the 1980s by Lackner (1988). It was found that applying vibra-
tions of around 100 Hz to a muscle tendon on the biceps leads 
the forearm to move in flexion, but if the movement is resisted, 
then there will be an illusion of movement of the forearm in the 
opposite direction (extension). Now suppose that both hands are 
holding the waist and such muscle spindle vibrations are applied. 
There is an illusion that both arms are extending, but since the 
hands are attached to the waist this is impossible. The way that 
the brain resolves this is to give the illusion of an expanding 
waistline! By vibrating on the other side of the muscle tendons 
the arms can be given the illusion of flexing – which will result in a 
shrinking waist illusion. Ehrsson et al. (2005) used these illusions 
with brain imaging to capture brain activation changes associated 
with these radical changes in the body. Tidoni et al. (2015) used 
these vibratory techniques in conjunction with VR as part of a 
developing program for the rehabilitation of disabled patients. 
This followed earlier work by Leonardis et al. (2012) who used 
such vibrations to induce illusory movements but in conjunction 
with a brain–computer interface (BCI) motor-imagery paradigm, 
i.e., the participant imagines moving their arm, feels their arm 
moving through application of the vibrations technique, and 
then sees the corresponding virtual arm move. This was part of 
an Embodiment Station (discussed in Section 6.5).
Regarding non-human body configurations Ehrsson (2009) 
and Guterstam et al. (2011) showed, for example, that using the 
multisensory techniques associated with the RHI, it is possible to 
give participants the illusion of owning additional arms. Regarding 
body shape, Kilteni et al. (2012)17 showed that it is possible to 
have an illusion of ownership over an asymmetric human body, 
where one arm is three times as long as another, and where the 
participant responds by automatically withdrawing the arm when 
there is a threat to the distant hand. This illusion had first been 
implemented and experienced at VPL in the 1980s, although not 
published. Steptoe et al. (2013) showed how humans could adapt 
to having a tail, through embodiment using a Cave-like system, 
but seeing the virtual body from behind. Participants learned 
how to use the tail in order to avoid harm to the body. More 
17 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EyujFtuFWvo

----- Page 8 (native) -----
8
Slater and Sanchez-Vives
Enhancing Our Lives with VR
Frontiers in Robotics and AI  |  www.frontiersin.org
December 2016  |  Volume 3  |  Article 74
recently, Won et al. (2015a) have continued to study homuncular 
flexibility, showing that people can learn to control virtual bodies 
through mappings that are different from the usual ones. Some 
implications of this across a range of fields have been discussed 
in Won et al. (2015b).
Returning to the RHI, Ijsselsteijn et al. (2006) found that an 
illusion of ownership can be attained over a 2D projection of an 
arm on a table top when the visuotactile synchronous stimula-
tion is applied as in the RHI. Although the subjective illusion 
was reported, the proprioceptive drift effect did not occur. Using 
VR, Slater et al. (2008) showed that a virtual arm could be felt as 
owned by participants when seen to be stroked synchronously 
with the corresponding hidden real arm. This was achieved by 
a virtual arm being displayed on a powerwall as projecting (in 
stereo) out of the real shoulders of participants. A tracked wand 
was used to tap and stroke the participant’s hidden real hand, 
which was shown on the display as a virtual ball tapping the 
virtual hand. This was done synchronously in which case the full 
illusion of ownership occurred including proprioceptive drift, or 
asynchronously, which typically did not result in the illusion.
In the full body illusion setup of Petkova and Ehrsson (2008), 
there was no head tracking so that participants had to be looking 
down in a fixed orientation toward their body, in order to see the 
manikin body as substituting their real body. Slater et al. (2010b) 
carried out the first study of full body ownership using VR where 
participants saw a virtual body that was spatially coincident with 
their own and which they saw through a wide field-of-view stereo 
and head-tracked Fakespace Wide5 HMD.18 Hence, when they 
looked down toward themselves they saw a virtual body that 
substituted their actual (hidden) body and from the viewpoint 
of the eyes of that virtual body (coincident with their own). We 
refer to this as first-person perspective (1PP). The experiment 
also included visuotactile synchrony (they felt their arm being 
stroked in synchrony with seeing their corresponding virtual arm 
stroked) or visuotactile asynchrony. There was also a condition 
where the virtual body was seen from a third-person perspective 
(3PP) (i.e., the virtual body was not spatially coincident with the 
real body, but to the left of the participant’s location). In this setup, 
it was found that 1PP was clearly the dominant factor, although 
visuotactile synchrony had some contribution. Remarkably, the 
illusion occurred in spite of the fact that all the participants were 
adult males but were embodied in a young female body.19 The 
difference between the results of Petkova and Ehrsson (2008) and 
Slater et al. (2010b) was taken up by Maselli and Slater (2013). The 
vital importance of 1PP for body ownership was also emphasized 
by Petkova et al. (2011) and considered further by Maselli and 
Slater (2014).
One of the major advantages of VR in this context compared 
to using rubber hands or manikin bodies is that virtual limbs or 
the whole virtual body can be moved. Sanchez-Vives et al. (2010) 
exploited this to show that the illusion of ownership over a virtual 
arm can be induced by synchrony between real and virtual hand 
movements (visuomotor synchrony). Participants wearing a data 
18 http://www.fakespacelabs.com/Wide5.html
19 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3wg14z5O9Ug
glove that tracked the movements of their hand and fingers saw 
a virtual hand (projected in stereo 3D on a powerwall) move 
in synchrony or asynchrony with their real hand movements. 
This resulted in an illusion of ownership just as with visuotactile 
stimulation.
The same can be done for the body as a whole. Through real-
time motion capture, mapped onto the virtual body, when the 
person moves their real body they would see the virtual body 
move correspondingly. Participants can see their virtual body 
moving by directly looking toward themselves and in virtual 
mirror reflections (and shadows) (Slater et al., 2010a). Kokkinara 
and Slater (2014) showed in later work that when there is a 1PP 
view of the virtual body then visuomotor synchrony is the more 
powerful inducer of the body ownership illusion than visuotactile 
synchrony.
We use the term virtual embodiment (or just embodiment) 
to refer to the process of replacing a person’s body by a virtual 
one. This requires the stereo HMD with wide field-of-view (so 
that the person can actually see their virtual body), with head 
tracking, at the minimum. Additional multisensory correlations 
such as visuotactile and visuomotor synchrony may be included. 
A technical setup to achieve this is described in Spanlang et al. 
(2014). Virtual embodiment may give rise under the right multi-
sensory conditions (such as 1PP, visuotactile, and/or visuomotor 
synchrony) to the illusion of body ownership, which is a perceptual 
illusion that the virtual body feels as if it is the person’s own body 
(even though it may look nothing like their real body).
There has been a lot of work on building virtual embodiment 
technology (Spanlang et al., 2013, 2014), studying the conditions 
that can lead to such body ownership illusions (Slater et  al., 
2008, 2009, 2010b; Sanchez-Vives et  al., 2010; Borland et  al., 
2013; González-Franco et al., 2013; Llobera et al., 2013; Maselli 
and Slater, 2013, 2014; Pomes and Slater, 2013; Blom et al., 2014; 
Kokkinara and Slater, 2014) and exploring the effects of distor-
tions away from the normal form of a person’s actual body (Slater 
et al., 2010b; Normand et al., 2011; Kilteni et al., 2012; Steptoe 
et al., 2013). There have also been studies on how illusions of body 
ownership might result in various changes to the real body.
For example, it had previously been shown that the RHI leads 
to a cooling of the real hand (Moseley et al., 2008) – though see 
also Rohde et al. (2013) – as well as an increase in its histamine 
reactivity (Barnsley et al., 2011). Cooling of several points on the 
body has also been reported in a 3PP full body illusion (Salomon 
et al., 2013). There is also evidence using VR suggesting that the 
1PP full body ownership illusion can result in changes in tem-
perature sensitivity (Llobera et al., 2013). It has also been shown 
that when in the full body illusion the virtual hand is attacked 
that there is an electrical brain response (EEG) that corresponds 
to what would be expected to occur when a real hand is attacked 
(González-Franco et  al., 2013). Banakou and Slater (2014) 
showed that embodiment in a virtual body that is perceived from 
1PP and that moves synchronously with the real body can result 
in illusory agency over an act of speaking. The virtual body was 
seen directly and in a virtual mirror. Participants spent a few 
minutes simply moving with the virtual body moving synchro-
nously with their movements in the experimental condition or 
asynchronously in another. At some moment, the virtual body

----- Page 9 (native) -----
9
Slater and Sanchez-Vives
Enhancing Our Lives with VR
Frontiers in Robotics and AI  |  www.frontiersin.org
December 2016  |  Volume 3  |  Article 74
unexpectedly uttered some words (45 in total) with appropriate 
lip sync. Those in the visuomotor synchronous condition later 
reported a subjective illusion of agency over the speaking – as 
if they had been the ones who had been speaking rather than 
only the virtual body. Moreover, when participants were asked 
to speak after this exposure, the fundamental frequency of their 
own voice shifted toward that of the higher frequency voice of the 
virtual body. Thus embodiment resulted in the preparation of a 
new motor plan for speaking, which was exhibited by participants 
in the synchronous condition changing the way that they spoke 
after compared to before the experiment. This did not happen for 
those in the asynchronous condition.
Thus, VR offers a very powerful tool for the neuroscience of 
body representation. For a recent review of this field, see Blanke 
et al. (2015). It can be used to do effectively and relatively simply 
what is impossible by any other means – instantly produce an illu-
sion of change to a person’s body. In the next section, we consider 
some of the consequences of changing representations of the self.
2.1.2. Changing the Body Can Change the Self
“… one of the fundamental differences between virtual 
reality and other forms of user-interface is that you’re 
really present in it, your body is represented and you can 
react with it as you, … And the fact that you’re in it, and 
that you define yourself is really fascinating. Oftentimes, 
being able to change your own definition is actually part 
of a practical application. Like in the world we did last 
year, where an architect was designing a day care center 
and could change himself into a child and use it with a 
child’s body and run faster and have different propor-
tions and all that.” Jaron Lanier (Barlow et al., 1990).
This quote is another illustration that much of what is being 
discussed today was already thought of and even implemented in 
the heady days of early VR. If VR can endow someone with a dif-
ferent body, what consequences does this have? We have already 
mentioned above that ownership over a rubber hand can lead to 
physiological responses, and there is some evidence that points 
to the possibility that the experimental real arm can experience 
(very small) drops in temperature, and that the same can occur 
over different parts of the body in a virtual whole body illusion, 
or that in the virtual arm illusion that there may be a change in 
temperature sensitivity. But, are there higher-level changes to 
attitudes, behaviors, even cognition?
Yee and Bailenson (2007) introduced a paradigm called 
the “Proteus Effect,” where it was argued that the digital self-
representation of a person could influence their attitudes and 
behaviors in online and virtual environments. Essentially, the 
personality or type of body or the actions associated with the digi-
tal representation would influence the actual real-time behaviors 
of participant, both in the VR and later outside it. In their 2007 
paper, they showed that being embodied in an avatar that had 
a face that was judged as more attractive than their actual one 
led participants to move closer to someone else displayed in a 
collaborative virtual environment than those participants whose 
avatar face was judged less attractive. Similarly, being embodied 
in taller avatars led to more aggressive behaviors in a negotiation 
task than being embodied in shorter avatars. These results also 
carried over to representations in online communities (Yee et al., 
2009). Groom et al. (2009) embodied White or Black people in a 
Black or White virtual body, in the context of a scenario in which 
they were in an interview applying for a job. The embodiment 
was through an HMD with head tracking, with the body seen in 
a mirror, and lasted for just over 1 min. Using a racial Implicit 
Association Test (IAT) (Greenwald et al., 1998), they found after 
the exposure there was greater bias in favor of White for those 
embodied in the Black virtual body. This difference did not occur 
when participants simply imagined being in a White or Black body. 
Hershfield et al. (2011) studied the effect of embodiment in aged 
versions of themselves on their savings behavior. They embodied 
people in a virtual body that either had a representation of their 
own faces, or their faces aged by about 20 years. The virtual body 
was shown in a virtual mirror. They found some modest evidence 
in favor of the hypothesis that being confronted with their future 
selves influenced their behavior toward greater savings for the 
future. See also the example concerned with fostering exercise 
(Fox and Bailenson, 2009) in Section 3.1.2.
The theoretical basis of Proteus Effect (Yee and Bailenson, 
2007) is Self-Perception Theory [e.g., Bem (1972)], which sug-
gests that people infer their attitudes by observing their own 
behaviors and the context in which these occur, and almost all 
the examples above do put people into behavioral situations. It 
has been also been argued that attitudinal and behavioral cor-
relates of transformed body ownership can be explained as people 
behaving according to how others would expect someone with 
that type of body to behave (Yee and Bailenson, 2007). Essentially, 
this comes down to stereotyping. For example, in the case of the 
racial bias study of Groom et al. (2009), participants were put 
into precisely a situation that is known to be one where there is 
implicit bias against Black people compared to White.
In an experiment by Kilteni et al. (2013), people were embod-
ied either in a dark-skinned casually dressed (Jimi Hendrix-like) 
body or in a light-skinned virtual body. The body moved with 
visuomotor synchrony, but also there was synchronous visuotac-
tile feedback through a drumming task, so that participants saw 
their virtual hands hit a virtual hand drum that was coincident 
in space with a real hand drum. Hence, when they hit the virtual 
drum they would also feel it.20 In this experiment, those embodied 
in the dark-skinned casual body expressed significantly greater 
body movement while drumming than those embodied in the 
light-skinned body that was wearing a formal suit. This result 
occurred, in the view of the stereotype theory, because there is 
greater expectation that people who look more like Jimi Hendrix 
would be more bodily expressive. However, self-perception 
theory and stereotyping cannot account for attitudinal changes 
that have been observed in experiments where only the body 
changes, and there are no particular behavioral demands within 
the study. These results are better explained within the multi-
sensory perception framework based on the research that has 
stemmed from the RHI.
20 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ydzSgLim5Y4

----- Page 10 (native) -----
10
Slater and Sanchez-Vives
Enhancing Our Lives with VR
Frontiers in Robotics and AI  |  www.frontiersin.org
December 2016  |  Volume 3  |  Article 74
Peck et al. (2013) carried out a racial bias study where partici-
pants were embodied for 12 min in either a Black body, a White 
one, a purple one, or no body at all. The body moved synchro-
nously with real body movements of the participants through 
real-time motion capture and was seen directly by looking toward 
the self with the head-tracked HMD and in a mirror.21 Those in 
the “no body” condition saw a mirror reflection of a Black body, 
but which moved asynchronously to their own movements. 
A racial IAT was applied some days before the experience and 
then immediately after. It was found that average implicit racial 
bias significantly decreased only for those who had the Black 
embodiment. During the 12 min of exposure, the participant did 
not have any task except to move and to look toward themselves 
and in the mirror while doing so. The only events that occurred 
were that 12 virtual characters walked by, 6 of them Black and 
the others White. It is likely that the results are different from 
Groom et al. (2009) because of the much longer exposure time, 
the full body synchronous movement, and the fact that there was 
no task, so that this was only based on body ownership through 
multisensory perception. Given the contrary earlier result of 
Groom et al. (2009), it was hard to believe that just 12 min of this 
experience could apparently reduce implicit racial bias. However, 
independently it was shown by Maister et al. (2013) that the RHI 
over a black rubber hand also leads to a reduction of implicit 
racial bias in light-skinned people. For a review of this area of 
research see Maister et  al. (2015). Recent results demonstrate 
that the decrease in implicit bias lasts for at least 1 week after the 
exposure (Banakou et al., 2016).
van der Hoort et al. (2011) showed using the multisensory 
techniques of Petkova and Ehrsson (2008) that when average 
sized adults have an illusion of body ownership over smaller or 
larger manikin bodies that this results in changes in their percep-
tion of object sizes (in a small body objects seem to be larger, but 
smaller in a large body). Banakou et al. (2013) reproduced this 
result in immersive VR.22 They showed that the illusion of body 
ownership of adults over small body leads to overestimation of 
object sizes. However, if the form of the body represented that of a 
(4-year-old) child then the size overestimation was approximately 
double that compared to when the form of the body was an adult 
body but shrunk down to the same size as the child. Moreover, in 
the child embodiment case, there were changes in implicit atti-
tudes about the self toward being child-like substantially beyond 
changes induced by the illusion of ownership of the adult-shaped 
body of the same size. In other words, only the form of the body 
(child-like compared to adult-like) has this effect.
The child and racial bias studies relied on an IAT – e.g., 
Greenwald et al. (1998) – a reaction time measure where par-
ticipants have to quickly associate between two target concepts 
(e.g., Black and White people) and an attribute (e.g., Positive and 
Negative). When the concept and attributes must be simultane-
ously selected (e.g., when deciding if a stimulus matches White or 
Black but where each is also associated with Positive or Negative), 
then a faster choice in pairing say Black and Negative and White 
and Positive, compared to Black and Positive with White and 
21 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HliN3iOX090
22 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8Oy83OVgbSM
Negative, would indicate an implicit racial bias. Such implicit bias 
is found notwithstanding the explicit attitudes of people, which 
may not be discriminatory, there being a dissociation between 
implicit and explicit bias (Greenwald and Krieger, 2006). Indeed, 
in the explicit racial attitudes test in Peck et al. (2013) there was no 
evidence of explicit racial bias – although there was implicit racial 
bias shown in the preexperiment IAT. When it comes to discrimi-
natory behavior, the IAT results have better predictive power in 
social interaction than explicit measures (Greenwald et al., 2009) 
– for example, with respect to eye contact, proxemics, and hiring 
practice (Ziegert and Hanges, 2005; Rooth, 2010). Even though 
the use and interpretation of the IAT may be controversial, there 
is evidence supporting its explanatory and predictive power (Jost 
et al., 2009).
With respect to embodiment in a child body, it is known 
that perception from the perspective of a smaller body results 
in size overestimations (van der Hoort et al., 2011), and indeed 
this occurred for both the adult and child conditions in Banakou 
et al. (2013). However, this does not explain why the overestima-
tion in the child condition was almost double that of the adult 
condition. Since we have all been children it is possible that 
the brain relies on autobiographical memory thus making the 
world appear larger, and more rapidly finds associations between 
the self and child-like categories. However, with respect to the 
racial bias study (Peck et al., 2013), none of the participants had 
ever had dark skin, and yet 12 min of exposure was enough to 
significantly change their IAT score away from indications of 
bias. How is this possible? Our answer suggests that the body 
ownership and agency over the virtual body is more than a 
superficial illusion, and that it goes beyond the perceptual to 
influence cognitive processing. It was argued in Banakou et al. 
(2013); Llobera et  al. (2013) that a fundamental mechanism 
may be through the postulated “cortical body matrix” (Moseley 
et  al., 2012), which maintains a multisensory representation 
of the space immediately around the body in a body-centered 
reference frame. The system is responsible for homeostatic 
regulation of the body, and for dynamically reconstructing 
the body representation moment to moment based on current 
multisensory information. It was argued that if, as seems likely, 
such a system exists, it then operates globally in a hierarchical 
top-down fashion, so that attribution of the whole body to the 
self leads to attribution of the body parts to the self. Moreover, 
it was proposed that it also maintains an overall consistency 
between the multifaceted aspects of self (personality, attitudes, 
and behaviors) and the body representation. We can view IAT 
changes as direct evidence of this – changing the body apparently 
leads to changes in implicit attitudes. We can say that as well 
as body ownership over a different body leading to changes in 
implicit attitudes, the documented changes in implicit attitudes 
are a very strong signal that in fact there has been a change in 
body ownership. A further study also hints at the likelihood that 
a change in body ownership can also result in cognitive changes 
(Osimo et al., 2015), where it was shown that swapping bodies 
with (virtual) Sigmund Freud led to an improvement in mood 
after a self-counseling process.23
23 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sn-UNGcbi2Q

----- Page 11 (native) -----
11
Slater and Sanchez-Vives
Enhancing Our Lives with VR
Frontiers in Robotics and AI  |  www.frontiersin.org
December 2016  |  Volume 3  |  Article 74
The use of embodiment and the transformative power that it 
seems to have is fundamental feature that separates immersive 
VR from other types of system, and recent scientific results do 
back up the statement by Jaron Lanier in the quote at the head of 
this section, said a quarter of a century ago.
2.1.3. Spatial Representation and Navigation
Virtual reality is especially suitable for the study of spatial repre-
sentation and spatial navigation. This at the core of the use of VR: 
to break down the walls of our room, to transport us to another 
space, a space that we can explore with or without moving (see 
Section 6). Spatial navigation is useful for a number of areas and 
purposes: for learning to navigate a certain model space such as a 
foreign city to be visited, for rehabilitation of spatial abilities after 
a neurological disorder or brain injury that affected this func-
tion, for neuroscience research (to understand the basis of spatial 
cognition, memory, and sensory processing), for city design, or 
to treat post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) associated with a 
space, among others.
We may want to move around the city of Paris and to become 
oriented before we travel to the real city. Or we do not plan to 
go, and we just want to visit virtual Paris. First of all, how do we 
move around the city? We can move with a joystick. This allows 
us to navigate easily from our couch, for example. However, this 
method may not be optimal if we are planning to internalize, to 
“learn” the spatial map of Paris, which is better achieved if we 
move our bodies, since this then enhances theta frequencies in 
the hippocampus (Kahana et al., 1999). We can also navigate by 
walking-in-place (Slater et al., 1995; Usoh et al., 1999). Another 
technique for moving through distances that are greater than the 
physical space in which the participant can move is called “redi-
rected walking,” where, for example, the system takes advantage 
of participant head turns to rotate the environment more than the 
head turn – in this way giving people the impression that they had 
walked in a long straight line when in reality they had walked in 
a curve or vice versa (Razzaque et al., 2001, 2002), research that is 
ongoing, e.g., Suma et al. (2015). Or, we could eventually navigate 
by thought alone if the VR is connected to a BCI (Pfurtscheller 
et  al., 2006). This is an excellent possibility for patients who 
are completely immobilized since they can feel the freedom of 
navigating by thought, an experience very positively evaluated by 
users (Friedman et al., 2007; Leeb et al., 2007) (see Section 6.5).
Understanding the brain mechanisms that underlie the gen-
eration of internal maps of the external world, the storage (or 
memory) of these maps, and their use in the form of navigation 
strategies is an important field in neuroscience (notice that the 
Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine 2014 was shared, one-half 
awarded to John O’Keefe, the other half jointly to May-Britt 
Moser and Edvard I. Moser “for their discoveries of cells that 
constitute a positioning system in the brain,” known as “place 
cells” and “grid cells”). Many of the associated studies have been 
carried out in rodents that were navigating in laboratory mazes. 
But, how can we study navigation in humans? VR navigation has 
been found to provide a consistent sensitive method for the study 
of hippocampal function (Gould et al., 2007). The hippocampus 
is the main brain structure supporting spatial representation, 
a structure that is larger than average in London taxi drivers, 
who are famous for learning the map of London in great detail 
(Maguire et al., 2000). Virtual cities have been used to determine, 
for example, that we activate different parts of the brain when we 
do wayfinding versus route following (Hartley et al., 2003), and to 
identify spatial cognition deficits in disorders such as depression 
(Gould et al., 2007) or Alzheimer (Cushman et al., 2008).
Even though the brain processes underlying spatial navigation 
in rodents used to be studied in real mazes, in recent years VR 
for rodents has also become a valuable tool in basic research 
in neuroscience. This technique allows navigation of virtual 
spaces while the animals walk in place on a rotating ball, such 
that their head is stable and their brain can be visualized while 
they do spatial tasks (Harvey et al., 2009). Even more recent VR 
systems for rodents allow 2D navigation including head rotations, 
resulting in the activation of all the same brain mechanisms that 
had been identified for freely moving animals, while the animals 
remain static and walking-in-place (Aronov and Tank, 2014). 
This approach allows detailed observation of specific brain cells 
during navigation.
Since navigation in virtual space can activate the same brain 
mechanisms as navigation in the real world, spatial “presence” 
can be successfully generated (Brotons-Mas et al., 2006; Wirth 
et al., 2007). The illusory sensation of spatial presence allows the 
recreation of all the sensations associated with a particular place 
by using VR, which is useful in order to treat PTSD associated 
with a space. This has been widely used with soldiers that had 
been in Iraq and Afghanistan (Rizzo et al., 2010). Virtual spaces 
such as virtual Iraq, and in particular virtual navigation, have also 
been used for assessment and rehabilitation following traumatic 
brain injury, a lesion also frequent in soldiers (Reger et al., 2009). 
Assessment tasks and training tasks for rehabilitation often go 
hand in hand, and thus retraining in topographical orientation, 
wayfinding, and spatial navigation in VR is often used in cognitive 
rehabilitation following traumatic brain injury, neurological dis-
orders (Bertella et al., 2001; Koenig et al., 2009; Kober et al., 2013). 
Furthermore, it has been proposed that sustained experiential 
demands on spatial ability carried out in VR protect hippocampal 
integrity against age-related decline (Lovden et al., 2012).
Virtual reality can be used to study the strategies that humans 
use for spatial navigation, which reveals the underlying geometry 
of cognitive maps. These maps could have a Euclidean structure 
preserving metrics and angles or a topological graph structure. To 
study this, experiments in the VENLab24 (Rothman and Warren, 
2006; Schnapp and Warren, 2007) included a large area that 
allowed tracked displacements while in VR. A virtual environ-
ment representing a virtual hedge maze allowed identification of 
the location of certain landmarks. By creating two “wormholes” 
that rotate and/or translate a walker between remote places in the 
virtual hedge maze, they made the space non-Euclidean, in order 
to explore the navigational strategies used by different subjects. 
This is a good example of how VR can be used in this domain to 
achieve things that are impossible in reality.
The study of navigation and wayfinding in VR has a long 
history. A good starting point for those interested in following 
24 http://www.cog.brown.edu/research/ven_lab/research.html

----- Page 12 (native) -----
12
Slater and Sanchez-Vives
Enhancing Our Lives with VR
Frontiers in Robotics and AI  |  www.frontiersin.org
December 2016  |  Volume 3  |  Article 74
this up is the special issue of the journal Presence – Teleoperators 
and Virtual Environments, edited by Darken et al. (1998). There 
is a difference between techniques for navigating effectively 
within a virtual environment, and the extent to which learning 
wayfinding through a space in a virtual environment transfers 
to real-world knowledge. Darken and Goerger (1999) pointed 
out that while the use of VR seems to produce the best results 
in terms of acquiring spatial knowledge of a terrain, when it 
comes to actual performance VR training often does not transfer, 
and can even make the situation worse. The authors, based on a 
number of studies, concluded that using specific VR techniques 
(e.g., a virtual compass) and relying on specific virtual imagery 
during the learning process does not transfer well to real-world 
wayfinding. However, those who use the VR to rehearse what they 
will later do in reality, to make a plan, without relying on detailed 
cues but rather transferring their experience into more abstract 
spatial knowledge do a lot better. Ruddle et al. (1999) carried out 
a direct comparison between navigation on a desktop system 
compared to a head-tracked HMD. They found that although 
there were no differences in task performance between the two 
systems in the sense of measuring the distance traveled, the HMD 
users stopped more frequently to look around the scene and were 
able to better estimate straight line paths between waypoints. 
On the other hand, those using the desktop system seemed to 
develop a kind of tunnel vision. This difference between the 
two illustrates that in immersive VR there is generation of the 
types of kinesthetic and proprioceptive cues, i.e., body-centered 
perception – contributing to what we referred to earlier as natural 
sensorimotor contingencies for perception – that improve the 
chance of transfer of knowledge to real-world task behavior. 
Ruddle and Lessels (2009) carried out a further study where they 
compared navigation task performance in a virtual environment 
under three different conditions: (1) a desktop interface, (2) an 
HMD that was tethered, so that although participants could look 
around, they could not walk, and (3) a wide area tracking system 
that allowed participants to really walk. They found that in both 
their reported experiments (which differ in rendering style of the 
environment) that those who were able to really walk outper-
formed the other two groups. See also Ruddle et al. (2011b). In 
fact, it was later found that walking (in this case enabled through 
an omnidirectional treadmill) clearly resulted in improved cogni-
tive maps of the space compared to other methods (Ruddle et al., 
2011a, 2013) as predicted by Brotons-Mas et al. (2006). In this 
context, it is worth noting that when comparing presence in a 
virtual environment through a head-tracked HMD, using (1) 
point-and-click techniques, (2) walking-in-place where the body 
moves somewhat like walking but not actually walking, and (3) 
real walking using wide area tracking, Usoh et al. (1999) found 
that subjectively reported PI (the component of presence referring 
to the sense of “being there”) was greater for both types of walking 
compared to the point-and-click technique. On some presence 
measures, real walking was preferred to walking-in-place, and as 
would be expected, real walking was the most efficient form of 
navigation.
A recent study by Sauzéon et al. (2015) used a powerwall-
based VR system to test the effect on episodic memory of a 
virtual apartment. Participants had two methods for navigation 
through the apartment, either passively watching or using a joy-
stick to actively explore. It was found that episodic memory was 
superior in the active condition. A similar setup using a virtual 
model of the city of Tübingen was shown to be advantageous 
in helping stroke patients to recover some wayfinding ability 
(Claessen et al., 2015).
In a very famous experiment in 1963, Held and Hein (1963) 
took 10 pairs of neonatal kittens and arranged that 1 navigated 
an environment by actively moving around it, but the second 
was carried along passively in a basket by movements of the 
first. They found that the kittens that were passively moved 
around, although in principle subject to the same visual stimuli 
as the active ones, developed significant visual-motor deficits. 
The authors concluded that “self produced movement with its 
concurrent visual feedback is necessary for the development of 
visually-guided behavior.” A similar observation was obtained 
in rats while walking versus being driven in a toy car (Terrazas 
et al., 2005), while simultaneous brain recordings were obtained, 
and the spatial information carried per neuronal spikes in place 
cells was found to be smaller in the passive navigation. This type 
of finding fits very well with findings in human studies in virtual 
environments. The conclusion from these studies is that simply 
putting someone in a VR in order to learn a particular environ-
ment can be effective provided that the form of locomotion 
includes active control by the participant. Concomitant with our 
views that the most important factor behind PI is the affordance 
by the system of perception through natural sensorimotor con-
tingencies, the more that the whole body can be involved in the 
process of locomotion, the better the result in transfer to the real 
world, and the formation of cognitive maps.
This is an important and vitally important area of research, 
and above, we have scratched the surface. As VR becomes used 
on a mass scale, one of its most frequent uses will probably be for 
virtual travel. If people simply use VR to observe an environment 
then the form of interface for navigation does not matter much – 
other than adhering to excellent user interface principles suitable 
for VR: of greater interest are the sights and sounds encountered. 
However, if people want to use it for rehearsal, to learn about 
how to get from A to B, then they had better use a form of body-
centered interface, at least equivalent to walking-in-place, but 
preferably one of the new generation of treadmill interfaces that 
are currently in development.
2.2. Scientific and Data Visualization
Immersive VR visualization and interaction with data is relevant 
for scientific evaluation and also in the fields of training and 
education. It also allows an active interaction with the represen-
tations, e.g., in drug design (see below). We can walk through 
brains25,26 or molecules, and we can fly through galaxies. The 
requirements and level of interaction will vary depending on 
whether this “walk” is for professional use, for students, or for the 
general public. Immersion in the data could take place alone or in 
a shared environment, where we explore and evaluate with others. 
25 http://www0.cs.ucl.ac.uk/research/equator/projects/escience/
26 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tFtpmOBt7jY

----- Page 13 (native) -----
13
Slater and Sanchez-Vives
Enhancing Our Lives with VR
Frontiers in Robotics and AI  |  www.frontiersin.org
December 2016  |  Volume 3  |  Article 74
The data could be static, or we could be immersed in dynamic 
processes. The data should be viewable in multiscale form.
Three-dimensional representation of real or modeled data 
is important for understanding data and for decision-making 
following this understanding, a relevant topic for a number of 
fields, especially at this time of exponentially growing datasets. 
Even when most of the analysis tools are computer-run algo-
rithms, human vision is highly sensitive to patterns, trends, and 
anomalies (van Dam et al., 2002). There is a substantial difference 
between looking at 3D data representations on a screen and being 
immersed in the data, navigating through it, interacting with it 
with our own body, and exploring it from the outside and the 
inside. It is logical to expect that when VR commercial systems 
are pervasive, there will be a trend for currently used 3D data 
representations on a flat screen to be visualized in immersive 
media. This, along with the body-tracking systems, will allow a 
more natural interaction with the data. The extent to which this 
interaction with data goes further than the “cool” effect and adds 
real value to the comprehension, evaluation, and subsequent 
decisions taken as a result is an important issue to explore. It is 
also important to identify ways to maximally exploit the potential 
of this data immersion capability.
Specific examples of VR for data visualization include molecu-
lar visualization and chemical design. In a recently described 
system called the “Molecular Rift,” the immersive 3D visualiza-
tion of molecules is combined with interaction with molecules 
based on gesture-recognition (Norrby et al., 2015). In this ver-
sion, participants were immersed into protein–ligand complexes. 
The system was evaluated by groups with experience in medical 
chemistry and drug design, and the study was focused on the 
improvement of the user-interaction with the molecules based 
on gestures and not in the evaluation of improved performance 
of drug design or specific tasks. Out of 14 users, all of them found 
the system potentially useful for drug design, and they enjoyed 
using it, while none experienced motion sickness.
A more specific task in interaction with molecules was tested by 
Leinen et al. (2015). In this study, a task of manipulating nanom-
eter-sized molecular compounds on surfaces was tested under 
usual scanning probe microscopy versus immersive visualization 
through an Oculus Rift HMD. The hand-controlled manipulation 
for extracting a molecule from a surface was improved by the 
visual feedback provided by immersive VR visualization: prees-
tablished 3D trajectories were followed with higher precision, and 
deviations from them were better controlled than in immersive 
than in non-immersive systems (Leinen et al., 2015).
Moving from the nanoscale to the microscale, a specific task 
consisting of the evaluation of the spatial distribution of glyco-
gen granules in astrocytes (glial cells, a type of brain cells) was 
evaluated in an immersive environment in a Cave-like system 
(Cali et al., 2015). A section of the hippocampus of 226 μm3 at a 
voxel resolution of 6 nm was 3D reconstructed based on electron 
microscopy image stacks. A set of procedures and software was 
developed to allow such immersive reconstruction. The distribu-
tion of glycogen granules initially appeared to have a random 
distribution, but they were discovered to be grouped into clusters 
of various sizes with particular spatial relationships to specific 
tissue features. The authors found the immersive evaluation of the 
3D structure to be pivotal to identify such non-random distribu-
tion (Cali et al., 2015). The use of an interactive VR room also 
allowed multiple users to share and discuss the evaluation of the 
cellular details. In this study there were, however, no comparisons 
between task performance across different display media.
A comparison across three different media – 3D reconstruc-
tions rendered on (1) a monoscopic desktop display, (2) a stereo-
scopic visual display on a computer screen (fishtank), and (3) a 
Cave-like system – was carried out by Prabhat et al. (2008). In this 
study, confocal images of Drosophila data: the egg chamber, the 
brain, and the gut, were evaluated by subjects who had to describe 
or quantify specific features mostly related to spatial distribution 
or colocalization and geometrical relationships. A more immer-
sive environment was preferred qualitatively by subjects, and task 
performance was also superior.
Immersive VR is of great value for surgery training, an aspect 
that is developed in Section 2.4 where specific examples are 
described. Visualization of the human body from an immersive 
perspective can provide medical students an unprecedented 
understanding of anatomy, being able to explore the organs from 
micro to macro scales. Furthermore, immersive dynamic models 
of body processes in physiological and pathological conditions 
would result in an experience of “immersive medicine.”
Large-scale coordinated efforts to understand the brain 
are under way in projects such as the European Human Brain 
Project27,28 and BRAIN29 Initiative of the United States. These 
projects are generating detailed multiscale and multidimensional 
information about the brain. Immersive VR will have a role in the 
visualization of these brain reconstructions or of the simulations 
built based on the experimental data. The Blue Brain Project 
(predecessor of the Human Brain Project) has already generated 
a full digital reconstruction of a rat slice of somatosensory cortex 
with 31,000 neurons based on real neurons, and 37 million syn-
apses (Markram et al., 2015). This simulation generates patterns 
of neuronal activity that reproduce those generated in the brain 
and is amenable of immersive exploration into the structure and 
function of the brain.
Considering now a larger spatial scale, astronomical visualiza-
tion in immersive VR has also been explored, both for profes-
sional and educational purposes (Schaaff et  al., 2015). These 
authors represented high-resolution simulations of re-ionization 
of an Isolated Milky Way-M31 Galaxy Pair, with various different 
representations. It is interesting for education that information 
can be added to the immersive displays.
There is an exciting perspective in the scientific and data visu-
alization area that will open new doors to our understanding. It 
will be important to evaluate the extent to which immersion and 
interaction with data results in a more thorough, intuitive, and 
profound understanding of structures and processes. But in any 
event, once this route is open, visualization of 3D models on a flat 
screen will feel like watching Star Wars on a small black and white 
TV (see Presentation S1 in Supplementary Material).
27 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_UFOSHZ22q4
28 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ldXEuUVkDuw
29 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_N-BAv3Hz8k

----- Page 14 (native) -----
14
Slater and Sanchez-Vives
Enhancing Our Lives with VR
Frontiers in Robotics and AI  |  www.frontiersin.org
December 2016  |  Volume 3  |  Article 74
2.3. Education
Isaac Asimov’s novels Fantastic Voyage (1966),30 based on the 
movie of the same name,31 and Fantastic Voyage II: Destination 
Brain (1987)32 portrayed a situation with humans shrunk to 
microscopic scale entering into the body of a patient. VR and 
the detailed human body scans that now exist make this possible 
(of course in virtual reality). McGhee et  al. (2015) have used 
the “fantastic voyage” approach to support education of stroke 
patients about their condition by allowing them to move through 
a brain representation using the Oculus Rift HMD.
The area of application of VR in education is vast. For recent 
reviews, see Abulrub et al. (2011), Mikropoulos and Natsis (2011), 
Merchant et  al. (2014), and Freina and Ott (2015). There are 
several reasons why VR is an excellent tool for education. First, it 
can change the abstract into the tangible. This could be especially 
powerful in the teaching of mathematics. For example, Hwang and 
Hu (2013) suggest that the use of a collaborative virtual environ-
ment has advantages for students learning geometrical concepts 
compared to traditional paper and pencil learning. However, it is 
not completely clear which type of VR system was used, although 
it appears to be of the desktop variety. Kaufmann et al. (2000) 
describe an HMD-based augmented reality system that provides 
a learning environment for spatial abilities including concepts 
from vector algebra. They provide anecdotal evidence for the 
effectiveness of the method. Roussou (2009) reviews the teaching 
of mathematics in VR using a “virtual playground”33,34 and in 
particular describes an experiment on learning how to compare 
fractions by 50 children of between 8 and 12 years in a Cave-like 
system (Roussou et al., 2006). In a between-groups experiment, 
there were three conditions – children who learned using active 
exploration of the scenario (n = 17), those who used the virtual 
playground but who learned by passively observing a friendly 
virtual robot (n = 14), and another group who did not use VR 
but rather a Lego-based method (n = 19). Quantitative analysis of 
the results found no advantage to any system. A detailed qualita-
tive analysis, however, suggested that the passive VR condition 
tended to foster a reflective process among the children, and great 
enjoyment in interacting with the robot, associated with better 
understanding.
The second advantage of VR in education is, notwithstanding 
the results of the virtual playground experiment, that it supports 
“doing” rather than just observing. One example of this is surgical 
training (see Section 2.4), for example, one review emphasizes 
how VR is increasingly used in neurosurgery training (Alaraj 
et al., 2011), ideally in conjunction with a haptic interface (Müns 
et al., 2014). Indeed, a European consensus program for endo-
scopic surgery VR training has been designed and agreed (van 
Dongen et al., 2011). For an example in engineering learning see 
Ewert et al. (2014).
The third advantage is that it can substitute methods that are 
desirable but practically infeasible even if possible in reality. For 
30 http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/83539.Fantastic_Voyage
31 http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0060397/
32 http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/83545.Fantastic_Voyage_II
33 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PLqlTaT3Bgk
34 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UxUZIHAJ2H4
example, if a class needs to learn about Niagara Falls 1  week, 
the Grand Canyon the next, and Stonehenge35 the week after, it 
is infeasible for the class to visit all of those places. Yet, virtual 
visits are entirely possible, and such environments have been 
under construction (Lin et al., 2013) including the idea of virtual 
field trips (Çaliskan, 2011). It has certainly been suggested that 
immersive VR will change the nature of field trips,36 and although 
there have been plenty of inventive demonstrations37,38,39 it seems 
that as yet there have been no studies of the effectiveness of this, 
although perhaps it is so obviously advantageous that formal 
studies may be unnecessary.
The fourth advantage of VR in education involves breaking 
the bounds of reality as part of exploration. For example, chang-
ing how activities such as juggling would be if there was a small 
change in gravity, or how it would be to ride on a light beam, 
a universe where the speed of light were different. These ideas 
were envisaged and implemented for VR by Dede et al. (1997); 
however, there has been no more recent follow-up, which could 
now occur given greater availability of VR equipment.
In this article, we have emphasized that the real power of 
VR is that it enables approaches that go beyond reality in a very 
fundamental way – more than just exploring strange physics. 
An example of this in the field of education was provided by 
Bailenson et al. (2008), concerned with the delivery of teaching 
rather than the content. In a collaborative virtual environment, it 
is possible to arrange the virtual classroom so that every student 
is at the center of attention of the teacher, and where the teacher 
has feedback about which students are not receiving enough eye 
gaze contact. Additionally, virtual colearners who could be either 
model students or distracting students can influence learning, 
and the results overall showed that these techniques do improve 
educational outcomes. Bailenson and Beall (2006) referred to this 
type of technique as “transformed social interaction.”
Overall, for the reasons we have given, and no doubt oth-
ers, VR is an extremely promising tool for the enhancement of 
learning, education, and training. We have not mentioned other 
possibilities such as music or dance, or various dexterous skills, 
but for these areas VR has clearly great potential.
2.4. Surgical Training
Within the area of VR for training, surgical training has been 
a thoroughly investigated field (Alaraj et al., 2011). The use of 
simulations in surgical planning, training, and teaching is highly 
necessary. To give an illustrative example of why VR is necessary 
for surgery: interventional cardiology has currently no other 
satisfactory training strategy than learning on patients (Gallagher 
et al., 2005). It seems that acquiring such training on a virtual 
human body would be a better option.
In the training of medical students and in particular of sur-
geons, there is a relevant potential role for VR as a tool to learn 
anatomy through virtual 3D models. Even though there are 
35 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iiGzNGlnYJ4
36 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sSRzeGkhUic
37 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iK3GsAcwKaI
38 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JEsV5rqbVNQ
39 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mlYJdZeA9w4

----- Page 15 (native) -----
15
Slater and Sanchez-Vives
Enhancing Our Lives with VR
Frontiers in Robotics and AI  |  www.frontiersin.org
December 2016  |  Volume 3  |  Article 74
studies trying to evaluate how useful VR can be to improve the 
learning of anatomy (Nicholson et al., 2006; Seixas-Mikelus et al., 
2010; Codd and Choudhury, 2011) – including studies proposing 
that VR could replace the use of corpses in medical school – fully 
immersive and interactive systems have hardly been used up to 
now. Most of the 3D models used so far are for screen displays. 
Still, even the visualization of non-immersive 3D body models 
to study anatomy yields good results for learning, and therefore 
this is an area that should expand in the future, integrating fully 
immersive systems and different forms of manipulation and 
interaction of the trainees with the body models.
One of the first publications of VR in the field of surgery was on 
VR-hepatic surgery training, and the words “Surgical simulation 
and virtual reality: the coming revolution” were on the title of both 
the article (Marescaux et al., 1998) and the editorial (Krummel, 
1998) in the Annals of Surgery nearly 20 years ago. However, the 
revolution has not happened yet, although the field is now ready 
for this possibility.
Surgical training in VR requires a combination of haptic 
devices and visual displays. Haptic devices transmit forces 
consisting of both the forces exerted by the surgeon and a simu-
lation of the forces and resistances of the various body tissues. 
A critical question is whether the skills acquired in a virtual 
training are successfully transferred to the real world of surgery. 
Seymour et al. (2002), in a highly cited article, provides one of 
the first demonstrations that this is the case. The performance 
of laparoscopic cholecystectomy gallbladder dissection was 
found to be 29% faster for VR-trained versus classically trained 
surgeons, while errors were six times less likely to occur in the 
VR-trained group. The system used though (Minimally Invasive 
Surgical Trainer-Virtual Reality – MIST VR system – Mentice 
AB, Gothenburg, Sweden), was a 2D representation on a screen 
of a haptic system used for simulated surgery. These results are 
likely to improve with a more immersive system. To illustrate the 
value given to surgical training in VR, an FDA panel voted in 
August 2004 to make VR simulation of carotid stent placement an 
important component of training. In the same month, the Society 
for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, the Society 
for Vascular Medicine and Biology, and the Society for Vascular 
Surgery all publicly endorsed the use of VR simulation in carotid 
stent training (Gallagher and Cates, 2004).
The most common uses so far of VR for surgical training have 
been those of laparoscopic procedures (Seymour et  al., 2002), 
carotid artery stenting (Gallagher and Cates, 2004; Dawson, 
2006), and ophthalmology [Eyes Surgical, based on Jonas et al. 
(2003)]. In general terms, a large number of studies – out of which 
only a few seminal ones are cited here – coincide in finding posi-
tive results of VR training.
Most of the systems mentioned above concentrate on the 
local surgical procedure, e.g., how to place a stent or dissect 
the gallbladder. However, the reality in a surgery room is more 
complex, and the surgery may need to be performed in situations 
where the patient’s physiological variables are not stable, or there 
can be a hemorrhage, or even a fire in the surgical theater. The 
response of the surgical team to these situations will be critical 
for the well-being of the patient, and immersive VR should be 
an optimal frame for such training. VR can embed the specific 
surgical procedure, for example, the placement of the carotid 
stent, into various contexts and under a number of emergency 
situations. In this way, during training, not only the contents but 
also the skills and the experience of being in a surgery room for 
many years can be transmitted to the trainees, which can include 
not only surgeons but all the sanitary personnel, each in their 
specialized roles.
There is a huge explosion of research in the effectiveness of 
VR-based training for surgery including meta-analyses and 
reviews (Al-Kadi et al., 2012; Zendejas et al., 2013; Lorello et al., 
2014), transfer of training (Buckley et al., 2014; Connolly et al., 
2014), and many specialized applications (Arora et  al., 2014; 
Jensen et al., 2014; Singh et al., 2014). This is likely to be a field 
that expands considerably.
3. PHYSICAL TRAINING AND 
IMPROVEMENT
Here, we broadly address issues relating to physical training and 
improvement through sports and exercise, an area of growing 
interest to professional sports.
3.1. Sports
In the 1990 SIGGRAPH Panel (Barlow et al., 1990), Jaron Lanier 
mentioned the idea of being able to play table tennis (ping-pong) 
with a remote player using networked VR. Of course this is 
now possible40 and is certain to be readily available in the near 
future. For example, a version has been implemented using two 
powerwall displays plus tracking for each player (Li et al., 2010). 
However, the opponent need not be a remote player in a shared 
VR but may be a virtual character. Immersive VR, at least with 
hand tracking if not full body tracking, has ideal characteristics 
for playing table tennis or other competitive sports, with the pos-
sible advantage of not having to spend time traveling to the gym.
There are several areas where VR can provide useful advantage 
for sport activities. First, for leisure and entertainment reasons 
– such as the table tennis example above. Second, for learning, 
training, and rehearsal. To the extent that VR supports natural 
sensorimotor contingencies at high enough precision, it could be 
used for these purposes. However, here it would be important 
to carry out rigorous studies to check in case small differences 
between the VR version and the real version might lead to poor 
skills transfer, or incorrect learning. For example, learning to spin 
or slam in table tennis requires very fine motor control depending 
on vision, proprioception, vestibular feedback, tactile feedback, 
force feedback, even the movement of air, and the sound of the 
ball hitting the table and the bat. Hence, to build a virtual table 
tennis that is useful for skill acquisition or improvement must 
take into account all of these factors, or the critical ones if these 
are known. On the other hand, virtual table tennis could be 
thought of as a game in its own right and nothing much to do 
with the real thing. In this case, virtual table tennis would fall 
under the first category – entertainment and leisure. Additionally, 
as we will see in Section 6.3 in the context of acting rehearsal, 
40 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m4Oeu4SLCgY

----- Page 16 (native) -----
16
Slater and Sanchez-Vives
Enhancing Our Lives with VR
Frontiers in Robotics and AI  |  www.frontiersin.org
December 2016  |  Volume 3  |  Article 74
although VR misses fine detailed facial expression that is criti-
cal for successful acting, it is nevertheless useful for that aspect 
of rehearsal known as “blocking,” which is concerned more 
with overall spatial configuration of the actors in the scenario. 
Similarly, even without being able to reproduce all the fine detail 
necessary for the transfer of training skills to reality, VR may be 
useful in team sports to plan overall strategy and tactics. A third 
utility of VR in sports is for rehabilitation following injury. We 
will briefly consider some of these areas.
In a comprehensive review of VR for training in ball sports 
Miles et al. (2012) analyze eight challenges: effective transfer of 
training, the types of skills best learned in VR, the technologies 
that result in the best quantifiable performance measures, ste-
reoscopic displays have both advantages and disadvantages (e.g., 
vision is not the same as in real life) – under which conditions 
should they be used?, the role of fidelity – to what extent and 
under what conditions is it important?, what kind of feedback 
should be delivered to the learner, how and when is feedback 
appropriate?, the effectiveness of teaching motor skills in the 
inevitable presence of latency and inaccuracies of representa-
tion, and finally, cost. The review points out several inevitable 
hurdles that must be overcome. For example, in training for field 
games such as American Football or soccer, the area of play is 
huge compared to the effective space in which someone in a VR 
system can typically move. A play on a field may involve running 
25 m, whereas the effective area of tracking is say 2 m around 
a spot where the participant in VR must stand. Clearly, using a 
Wand to navigate or even a treadmill may miss critical aspects of 
the play (see also Section 2.1.3 for a brief discussion of different 
methods of moving through a large virtual environment). The 
paper reports many such pitfalls that need to be overcome and 
points out that studies have been inconclusive and therefore, 
there is the need for more research.
Craig (2013) reviews how VR might be used to understand 
perception and action in sport. She argues that VR offers some 
clear advantages for this and gives a number of examples where 
it has been successful, as well as pointing out problems. However, 
she wonders why if it is successful it has not been widely used 
in training up to now, but where there is reliance on alternatives 
such as video. She points out that one problem has been cost, 
though this is likely to be ameliorated in the near term. A second 
problem is to effectively and differentially meet the needs of 
players and coaches, pointing out how VR action replays could 
be seen from many different viewpoints, including those of the 
player and of the coach so that different relevant learning would 
be possible. Another advantage of VR would be to train players 
to notice deceptive movements in opponents, by directing atten-
tion to specific moves or body parts that signal such intentions. 
However, she points out as mentioned above how it is critical to 
provide appropriate cues to avoid mislearning.
Ruffaldi et al. (2011) examined the theoretical requirements 
for successful training transfer in the context of rowing and 
described a haptic-enabled VR system with a single large screen 
for visual feedback. Rauter et al. (2013) described a different VR 
simulator for rowing. This was a Cave-like system enhanced with 
auditory and haptic capabilities, an earlier version described in 
von Zitzewitz et al. (2008). Their study, carried out with eight 
participants, compared skill acquisition between conventional 
training on water, with training in the simulator. Examining 
the differences between the two they concluded that both with 
respect to questionnaire and biomechanical responses that the 
methods were similar enough for the simulator to be used as 
a complementary training tool, since there was sufficient and 
appropriate transfer of training using this method. Wellner et al. 
(2010b) described an experiment where 10 participants took part 
in simulated rowing. The novelty was that they added a virtual 
audience to test the idea that the presence of an audience would 
encourage the rowers in a competitive situation. They did not find 
a notable outcome in this regard, only the relatively high degree 
of presence felt by the participants. On similar lines, Wellner et al. 
(2010a) examined whether the presence of virtual competitors 
in a rowing competition would boost performance. No definite 
results were found, but according to the authors, the study had 
some flaws, and in any case the sample size was small (n = 10). 
In spite of null results, it is important to note how VR affords the 
possibility to experiment with such factors that would be possible, 
but logistically very difficult to do in reality.
Another example of this use of VR that is logistically very 
difficult to do otherwise is for spectators to attend sports matches 
when they cannot physically attend (e.g., someone in the US who 
is a fan of English soccer). Instead, they can view them, as if they 
were there – and have the excitement of seeing the game life-
sized, first hand, and among a crowd of enthusiasts. Kalivarapu 
et al. (2015) implemented a system to display American Football 
in a high-resolution, six-sided, Cave-like system and also in an 
Oculus DK2 HMD. They carried out a study with 60 participants 
who were divided into three conditions: Cave (n = 20), HMD 
(n = 20), and video (n = 20), where the game and associated 
events were shown on video. They concluded that the Cave and 
HMD experiences gave the participants greater opportunity to 
interact (i.e., view from different vantage points) compared to the 
video. Participants nevertheless experienced a greater degree of 
realism in the Cave, perhaps not surprising because of its greater 
resolution (and several orders of magnitude greater cost). On 
the whole, the HMD and Cave produced similar results across 
a number of aspects of presence. There is a growing interest in 
the use of VR for sports viewing and other events, mainly using 
360° video. See also the “Wear the Rose” system that gives fans 
the chance to experience rugby games first hand,41,42,43,44 and an 
example of its use in American Football.45
There have been many other applications of VR in sports – 
impossible to cover all of them here – for example, a baseball 
simulator,46 for handball goalkeeping (Bideau et al., 2003; Vignais 
et  al., 2009), skiing (Solina et  al., 2008), detecting deceptive 
41 http://www.o2.co.uk/sponsorship/rugby/wear-the-rose
42 http://news.sky.com/story/1222817/oculus-rift-headset-may-help- 
sports-training
43 http://www.telegraph.co.uk/technology/news/10621480/Virtual-reality-
headset-recreates-England-rugby-squad-training-experience.html
44 http://www.telegraph.co.uk/technology/technology-topics/10681570/Virtual-
reality-training-session-with-England-rugby-squad.html 
45 http://bleacherreport.com/articles/2563010-stanfords-new-virtual-reality-
system-is-changing-sports-forever
46 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hXOQsXFcWnk

----- Page 17 (native) -----
17
Slater and Sanchez-Vives
Enhancing Our Lives with VR
Frontiers in Robotics and AI  |  www.frontiersin.org
December 2016  |  Volume 3  |  Article 74
­movements in rugby (Brault et  al., 2009; Bideau et  al., 2010), 
and pistol shooting47 (Argelaguet Sanz et  al., 2015), among 
others. A special issue of Presence – Teleoperators and Virtual 
Environments was devoted to VR and sports (Vignais et  al., 
2009; Multon et al., 2011), which would be a good starting point 
for readers wishing to follow up this topic in more detail (see 
Presentation S2 in Supplementary Material).
3.2. Exercise
It is well known that aerobic exercise is extremely good for us, 
especially as we age. A meta study of research relating to older 
adults carried out by Colcombe and Kramer (2003) showed that 
there is a clear benefit for certain cognitive functions. A more 
recent survey by Sommer and Kahn (2015) again showed the 
benefits of exercise for cognition for a variety of conditions. Yu 
et al. (2015) showed its utility for Alzheimer patients and Tiozzo 
et al. (2015) for stroke patients. However, repetitive exercise with 
aerobic benefits can be boring; indeed, Hagberg et  al. (2009) 
found in a study that enjoyment is important in increasing physi-
cal exercise.
Virtual reality opens up the possibility of radically altering 
how we engage in exercise. Instead of just being on a stepping 
machine watching a simple 2D representation of a terrain, we can 
be walking up an incline on the Great Wall of China, or walking 
up the steps in a huge auditorium where we are excitedly going to 
watch a sports game, or even walking up steps to a fantasy castle 
in a science fiction scenario. Instead of just riding an exercise 
bike, we can be cycling through the landscape of Mars.48,49,50
One use of VR for exercising would be an extension of 
approaches that have already been tested, normally referred to as 
“exergaming.” This involves, for example, connecting an exercise 
bike to a display, so that the actions of the rider affect what is dis-
played, e.g., faster pedaling leads to corresponding depiction of 
increased optic flow on the display. Moreover, other motivational 
factors can be introduced such as virtual competitors (as we saw 
in the rowing example above). Anderson-Hanley et  al. (2011) 
carried out a study with n = 14 older adults using a cybercycle 
(an exercise bike with a screen in front) and competitive avatars as 
in a race.51 Their evidence suggested that this social factor tended 
to increase participants’ effort. Finkelstein and Suma (2011) used 
a three-walled stereoscopic display and upper body tracking of 
participants who had to dodge virtual planets flying toward them. 
Their experiment included n = 30 participants who played for 
15 min. They found that the method produces increased heart 
rate (i.e., is aerobic) and motivates children and adults to exercise. 
Mestre et al. (2011) had n = 12 participants in an experiment that 
used an exerbike (with a large screen) where they compared video 
feedback with video and music feedback. They found that the addi-
tion of music was beneficial both psychologically (for motivation 
47 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RM9IT_N6jFE
48 https://archive.org/details/SciterianTechnologiesMars3D_CahokiaPanorama-
VirtualReality
49 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xDqYz5pKA_o
50 An online search of “Oculus” and “Mars” will find many “prototype” examples of 
people experimenting with rendering and walking through a Mars terrain in VR.
51 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sKz0FVIeEFI
and pleasure) and behaviorally. Anderson-Hanley et al. (2012) 
carried out a formal clinical trial where they used “cybercycling,” 
as above, stationary cycling tied to a screen display, with older 
people (n = 102). They were interested in testing among other 
things whether such cycling would improve executive function. 
They found that cognitive function was improved among the 
cybercyclers, and that it was likely that it would help to prevent 
cognitive decline compared to traditional exercise. Overall, while 
there has been significant work in this area, a systematic review 
carried out by Bleakley et al. (2013) found that although these 
types of approach are safe and effective, that that there is limited 
high quality evidence currently available.
It is one thing to be cycling or walking on a treadmill or 
exercise steps while looking at a screen, since this is anyway the 
case with most exercise machines even though the display may 
be very simplistic. Since the exerciser is not actually moving 
through space, looking at a screen should be harmless. However, 
it is not obvious that the same activities could be safely or suc-
cessfully carried while people are wearing an HMD, which not 
only obscures their vision of the real world but may also lead to 
a degree of nausea – which is all the more likely to occur while 
moving through virtual space. Shaw et  al. (2015b) discussed 
five major design challenges in this field. First, to overcome the 
problem of possible sickness; second, to have reliable tracking 
of the body; third to deal with health and safety aspects; fourth 
the choice of player visual perspective; and fifth, the problem of 
latency. They described a system that was designed to overcome 
these problems, that used an Oculus DK2 HMD, and which was 
evaluated in an experimental study (Shaw et al., 2015a). This had 
n = 24 participants (2 females, ages between 20 and 24). They 
compared three setups: a standard exercise bike with no feedback, 
the exercise bike with an external display, and the bike with the 
HMD. The fundamental findings were that on several measures 
(calories burned, distance traveled) the two feedback systems 
outperformed the bike only condition but did not differ from 
each other. The two systems with feedback were also evaluated 
as more enjoyable than the bike only, and the HMD was more 
enjoyable and was associated with greater motivation than the 
external display system. Only 4 out of 26 reported some minor 
symptoms of simulator sickness. As the authors pointed out, the 
study was limited, since the participants were almost all males, 
and with limited age range, and it is not known how well these 
results would generalize. Bolton et al. (2014) also described a sys-
tem that combined an Oculus Rift HMD52 with an exercise bike 
that was designed to reduce the possibility of motion sickness; 
however, no experimental results were given. There are several 
other applications without associated papers such as RiftRun53 
where participants run on the spot to virtually run through an 
environment.
Overall, as in other fields, there are promising but far from 
conclusive results, but irrespective of scientific studies it is highly 
likely that immersive VR will be combined with personal exercise 
systems, since the relatively low cost now makes this possible, and 
52 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Wy4Ku2iZjQM
53 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cN7W0VBi0jo

----- Page 18 (native) -----
18
Slater and Sanchez-Vives
Enhancing Our Lives with VR
Frontiers in Robotics and AI  |  www.frontiersin.org
December 2016  |  Volume 3  |  Article 74
some sports providers may decide that the “cool” factor makes 
such an enterprise worth the economic risk. Whether these are 
successful or not will obviously depend on consumer uptake.
Finally, as in other applications, we emphasize that VR allows 
us to go beyond what is possible in reality. Even cycling through 
Mars is just cycling. It is physically possible, if highly unlikely to be 
realized. Perhaps though there are fundamentally new paradigms 
that can really exploit the power of VR – the virtual unreality 
that we mentioned in the opening of this article. One approach 
is to use VR to implicitly motivate people toward greater exercise 
rather than as a means to carry out the exercise itself. Fox and 
Bailenson (2009) carried out a study where participants using a 
head-tracked HMD-based VR saw a virtual character from 3PP 
(i.e., across the room and looking toward them) with a face that 
was based on a photograph of their own face and that therefore 
had some likeness to themselves. Participants at various points 
were required to carry out physical exercises or not. While they 
did not carry out these exercises the body of their virtual dop-
pelganger became fatter, and while they did the exercises the 
virtual body became thinner. There were n = 22 participants in 
this reinforcement condition, n = 22 in another condition where 
the virtual body did not change, and n = 19 in another condition 
where there was just an empty virtual room with no character. 
The dependent variable was the amount of voluntary exercise that 
participants carried out in a final phase of the experiment (during 
which there was also positive and negative reinforcement). It was 
found that the greatest exercise was carried out by the group that 
had the positive and negative reinforcement. In order to check 
that it was the facial likeness that accounted for this result, a 
second experiment introduced another condition, which was that 
the face of the virtual body was that of someone else. Here, the 
result only occurred for the condition of the virtual doppelganger. 
Finally, it could be argued that the participants in the voluntary 
exercise phase only exercised to avoid the unpleasant sensation of 
seeing their virtual doppelganger “gaining weight.” A third study 
examined participants’ level of exercise during a 24-h period after 
the conclusion of the study, through a questionnaire returned 
online. The setup was that they saw their doppelganger exercis-
ing on a treadmill, or a virtual character that did not look like 
themselves exercising, or a condition where their doppelganger 
was not doing any exercise but just standing around. The results 
suggested that those who saw their virtual look-alike exercising 
did carry out significantly more exercise in the real world in a 
period after the experiment than the other two conditions.
A second approach might be to use VR to provide a surrogate 
for exercising, rather than providing a motivation to exercise 
physically in reality. Kokkinara et  al. (2016) illustrated what 
might be possible. Participants who were seated wearing an HMD 
and unmoving (except for their head) saw from 1PP their virtual 
body standing and carrying out walking movements across 
a field. They saw this when they looked down directly toward 
their legs that would be walking, and also in a shadow. In another 
condition they saw the body from a 3PP. After experiencing this 
virtual walking for a while they approached a hill, and the body 
walked up the hill. In the embodied 1PP condition participants 
had a high level of body ownership and agency over the walking, 
compared with the 3PP condition. More importantly, for this 
discussion, while walking up the hill participants had stronger 
skin conductance responses (more sweat) and greater mean heart 
rate in the embodied condition, compared to a period before the 
hill climbing, which did not occur for those in the 3PP. There were 
28 participants each of whom experienced both conditions (there 
was another factor, but it is not relevant to this discussion).
Although there are caveats for both of these studies, the 
important aspect for our present purpose is that they illustrate 
how VR might be used to break out of the boundaries of physical 
reality and achieve useful results through quite novel paradigms. 
Of course it must always be better to carry out actual physical 
exercise rather than relying on your virtual body to do it for you. 
Yet sometimes, for example, on a long flight, virtual exercise 
might be the only possibility. Indeed, in this context, it has been 
found that participants who perceive their virtual body from 1PP 
in a comfortable posture are more likely to feel actual comfort 
than those who see their body in an uncomfortable posture 
(Bergström et al., 2016).54 The point is that VR has the power to go 
beyond what we can do in physical reality, even in principle, and 
become a radically new medium with different ways of thinking 
and novel ways of accomplishing life-changing goals.
4. SOCIAL AND CULTURAL EXPERIENCES
There are many areas of social interaction between people where 
it is important to have good scientific understanding. What 
factors are involved in aggression of one group against another, 
or in various forms of discrimination? Which factors might be 
varied in order to decrease conflict, improve social harmony? 
It is problematic to carry out experimental studies in this area 
for reasons discussed below. However, immersive VR provides 
a powerful tool for the simulation of social scenarios, and due 
to its presence-inducing properties can be effectively used for 
laboratory-based controlled studies. Similarly, away from the 
domain of experiments, there are many aspects of our cultural 
heritage that people cannot experience – how an ancient site 
might have looked in its day, the experience of being in a Roman 
amphitheater as it might have been at the time, and so on. Again, 
VR offers the possibility of direct experience of such historical 
and cultural sites and events. In this section, we consider some 
examples of the application of VR in these fields, starting first 
with social psychology.
Loomis et al. (1999) pointed out how VR would be a useful 
tool for research in psychology and Blascovich et al. (2002) in 
social psychology. Here, the potential benefits are enormous. 
First, studies that are impossible in reality for practical or ethical 
reasons are possible in VR. Second, VR allows exact repetition 
of experimental conditions across all trials of an experiment. 
Moreover, virtual human characters programed to perform 
actions in a social scenario can do so multiple times. This is 
not possible with confederates or actors, who can become tired 
and also have to be paid. Although it is costly to produce a VR 
scenario, once it is done, it can be used over and over again. Also, 
the scenarios can be arbitrary rather than restricted to laboratory 
54 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P9OXRDc3flU

----- Page 19 (native) -----
19
Slater and Sanchez-Vives
Enhancing Our Lives with VR
Frontiers in Robotics and AI  |  www.frontiersin.org
December 2016  |  Volume 3  |  Article 74
settings. Rovira et al. (2009) pointed out how the use of VR in 
social science allows for both internal and ecological validity. 
The first refers to the possibility of valid experimental designs 
including issues such as repeatability across different trials and 
conditions, the precision at which outcomes can be measured, 
and so on. The second refers to generalizability. For example, in a 
study of the causes of violence, VR can place people in a situation 
of violence, which cannot be done in a real-life setting. This means 
that there is the possibility of generalization of results out of the 
laboratory to what may occur in reality. In particular, VR can be 
used to study extreme situations that are ethically and practically 
impossible in reality. This relies on presence – PI and Psi – leading 
to behavior in VR that is sufficiently similar to what would be 
expected in real-life behaviors under the approximately the same 
conditions. In the sections below, we briefly review examples of 
research in this area.
4.1. Proxemics
How do you feel when a stranger approaches you and stands very 
close? The answer may vary from culture to culture, but at least in 
the “Anglo-Saxon” world you are likely to back away. Proxemics is 
the study of interpersonal distances between people, discussed in 
depth by Hall (1969). He defined intimate, personal, social, and 
public distances that people maintain toward each other (and these 
distances may be culturally dependent). An interesting question 
is the extent to which these findings also occur in VR. If a virtual 
human character approaches and stands close to you, in principle 
this is irrelevant since nothing real is happening – there is no one 
there. Even if the character represents a physically remote actual 
person who is in the same shared virtual environment as you, 
they are not really in the same space as you, and therefore not 
close. We briefly consider proxemics behavior in VR because it 
is a straightforward but fundamental social behavior, and finding 
that the predictions of proxemics theory hold true for VR is a 
foundation for showing that VR could be useful for the study of 
social interaction.
There has not been a great deal of work on this topic that has 
exploited VR. Bailenson et al. (2001) showed that people tend 
to keep greater distances from virtual representations of people 
than cylinders in an immersive VR. This work was continued 
in Bailenson et al. (2003) where it was shown that participants 
maintain greater distances from virtual people when approach-
ing them from the front, than from the back, and also greater 
distances when there is mutual eye gaze. Participants also moved 
away when virtual characters approached them. Readers might be 
wondering – so what? This is obvious. It has to be remembered 
though that these are virtual characters, no real social interaction 
is taking place at all. Further studies have shown that proxemics 
behavior tends to operate in virtual environments (Guye-Vuilleme 
et al., 1999; Wilcox et al., 2006; Friedman et al., 2007).
McCall et al. (2009) showed that proxemics behavior can be 
used as a predictor of aggression. Proxemics distances of n = 47 
(mainly self-identified as White) participants were measured 
from two White or two Black virtual characters. Subsequently, 
participants engaged in a shooting game with those virtual char-
acters. It was found that there was a positive correlation between 
the distance maintained from the characters in the first phase and 
the degree of aggression exhibited toward them in the second 
phase but only for the condition where both virtual characters 
were Black.
Llobera et  al. (2010) examined proxemics in immersive 
VR by measuring how skin conductance response varied with 
the approach of one or multiple virtual characters toward the 
participant, to different interpersonal distances. This was to test 
the finding of McBride et al. (1965) of a relationship between 
proximity and heightened skin conductance. It was found that 
there was a greater skin conductance response as a function of the 
closeness to which the characters approached participants and 
the number of characters simultaneously approaching. However, 
it was found that there was no difference in these responses when 
cylinders were used instead of characters. It was suggested that 
skin conductance cannot differentiate between the arousal caused 
by characters breaking social distance norms and the arousal 
caused by fear of collision with a large object (the cylinder) mov-
ing close to the participants.
Kastanis and Slater (2012) showed how a reinforcement learn-
ing (RL) agent controlling the movements of a virtual character 
could essentially learn proxemics behavior in order to realize 
the goal of moving the participant to a specific location in the 
virtual environment. Participants in an immersive VR saw a male 
humanoid virtual character standing at a distance and facing 
them. Every so often the character would walk varying distances 
toward the participant, walk away from the participant, or wave 
for the participant to move closer to him.55 The RL behind the 
character gained a positive reward every time the participant 
stepped backwards toward a target position. The long run aim 
was to get the participant to move far back to this target, unknown 
to the participant herself. The RL eventually learned that if its 
character went very close to the participant, then the participant 
would step backwards. Moreover, if the character was far away 
then it sacrificed short-term reward by simply waiving toward 
the participant to come closer to itself, because then its moving 
forwards action would be effective in moving the participant 
backwards. Hence, the RL relied on presence (the participant 
moving back when approached too close – from the prediction 
of proxemics theory) and learned how to exploit this proxemics 
behavior to achieve its task. For all participants, the RL learned 
to get the participant back to the target within a short time. This 
method could not have worked unless proxemics occurred in 
the VR. Having shown that this is the case we move on to more 
complex social interaction.
4.2. Discrimination
Research suggests that VR can provide insights into discrimina-
tion by affording the opportunity for people to have simulated 
experiences of the world through another group’s perspective 
even if only briefly. For example, we saw earlier how simply 
placing White people in a Black body in a situation known to be 
associated with race discrimination led to an increase in implicit 
racial bias (Groom et al., 2009). On the other hand, virtual body 
representation has been shown to be effective with respect to 
55 https://youtu.be/D4KgWpta7YI

----- Page 20 (native) -----
20
Slater and Sanchez-Vives
Enhancing Our Lives with VR
Frontiers in Robotics and AI  |  www.frontiersin.org
December 2016  |  Volume 3  |  Article 74
racial bias, where White people embodied in a Black-skinned 
body show a reduction in implicit racial bias (Peck et al., 2013)56 
in a neutral social situation as we saw in Section 2.1.2.
More generally, the method of virtual embodiment has also 
been used to give adults the experience of being a child (Banakou 
et al., 2013), has been shown to affect motor behavior while play-
ing the drums (Kilteni et al., 2013), and has been used to give 
people the illusory sensation of having carried out an action that 
they had in fact not carried out (Banakou and Slater, 2014). Some 
of the work in the area of body representation applied to implicit 
bias is reviewed in Slater and Sanchez-Vives (2014) and Maister 
et al. (2015).
A further question is whether embodied experiences as an 
“outgroup” member will actually translate into different behavior 
toward members of the group. Although not in the context of 
discrimination there is some evidence from the work of Ahn 
et al. (2013) that this might be the case. They immersed people 
with normal vision into an HMD-delivered VR where they expe-
rienced certain types of color blindness. In three experiments 
(N = 44, N = 97, and N = 57), they compared the effects of per-
spective taking where participants simply imagined being color 
blind to a condition where the display actually made them color 
blind in the virtual environment. They found that indeed the VR 
experience did result in greater helping behavior of participants 
toward color blind people both within the experiment and in 
their behavior after the experiment (with a moderate effect size 
of the squared multiple correlation of around 10%). It illustrates 
how VR might be used to put people experientially in situations 
and how this may influence their behavior compared with only 
imaginal techniques.
4.3. Authoritarianism
Stanley Milgram carried out a number of experiments in the 
1960s designed to address the question of how events such as 
the Holocaust could have occurred (Milgram, 1974). He was 
interested in finding explanations of how ordinary people can be 
persuaded to carry out horrific acts. The type of experiments that 
he conducted involved experimental subjects giving apparently 
lethal electric shocks to strangers. These are a very famous experi-
ments that are as topical today as in the 1960s, and barely a week 
goes by when there is not some mention of it in news media,57 
or further research relating to it is reported.58 There were several 
different variants of the experiment that Milgram designed. 
Typically, the experimental subject, normally recruited from the 
local town (near Yale University) rather than from among psy-
chology students, were invited to the laboratory where he or she 
met another person, also supposedly recruited in the same way. 
The other person was in fact a confederate of the experimenter, 
an actor hired for the purpose, this being unknown to the subject. 
The experimenter invited the subject and the actor to draw lots 
56 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NrRRKZRGZbE (“Can virtual reality be 
used to tackle racism?” Report by Melissa Hogenboom, BBC Click).
57 E.g., http://nymag.com/scienceofus/2015/10/theres-a-new-film-about-the-milgram- 
experiment.html
58 In the period of January 1 to May 2, 2016 there were more than 100 articles 
published that reference the Milgram work.
to determine their respective roles in the experiment. It turned 
out that the subject was to play the role of Teacher, and the actor 
the role of Learner, but the outcome of this draw was fixed in 
advance. Then both the Teacher (subject) and Learner (actor) 
were taken to another room, where the Learner had electrodes 
placed on his body connected to an electric shock machine. It 
was explained that the idea was to examine how punishment 
might aid in learning. The Learner was to learn some word-pair 
associations, and whenever he gave a wrong answer he was to be 
shocked. The Learner, acting in a jovial manner, explained that he 
had a mild heart condition, and the experimenter assured both 
Learner and Teacher that “Although the shocks may be painful 
they are not dangerous.” There are online videos showing the 
original experiment.59
The Learner was left in the room, and the experimenter took 
the Teacher back into the main laboratory, closing the door to 
that room. He explained to the Teacher that he had to read out 
cues for the word-pair tests and whenever the Learner gave the 
wrong answer the Teacher should increase the voltage on a dial 
and administer an electric shock at that voltage. The voltages were 
labeled from 15 V (slight shock) to 375 V (danger: severe shock) 
to 450 V (marked “XXX”). During the course of the experiment, 
a tape was played giving the responses of the Learner. With the 
low voltage shocks there was no response. After a while though 
the Learner could be heard saying “ouch!” and as the voltage 
increased further he complained more and more vociferously, 
eventually saying that he had the heart condition and that his 
heart was starting to bother him. He shouted that he wanted 
to be let out of the experiment, and finally with the strongest 
shocks he became completely silent. If at any point the Teachers 
said that they felt uncomfortable or that they wanted to stop, the 
experimenter would say one of “The experiment requires that you 
continue,” “It is absolutely essential that you continue,” or “You 
have no other choice, you must go on” in a prescribed sequence. 
Participants generally found that the experience was extremely 
stressful, and even if they continued through to lethal voltages 
they were clearly very upset.
Prior to the experiment, Milgram had asked a number of 
psychologists about how many people would go all the way and 
administer even lethal voltages to the Learner. The view was that 
only a tiny minority of people, those with psychopathic tenden-
cies, would do so. In the version of the experiment described 
above, about 60% of subjects went all the way to administer the 
most lethal shocks. The results stunned the world since it appar-
ently showed that ordinary people could be led to administer 
severe pain to another at the behest of an authority figure. There 
is a wealth of data and analysis and a description of many differ-
ent versions of this experiment in Milgram (1974), but the basic 
conclusion was that people will tend to obey authority figures. 
Here, ordinary people were being asked to carry out actions in a 
lab in a prestigious institution (Yale University) and in the cause 
of science. They tended to obey even if they found that doing 
so was extremely uncomfortable. Although this is not the place 
for discussion of this interpretation, interested readers can find 
59 E.g., https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fCVlI-_4GZQ

----- Page 21 (native) -----
21
Slater and Sanchez-Vives
Enhancing Our Lives with VR
Frontiers in Robotics and AI  |  www.frontiersin.org
December 2016  |  Volume 3  |  Article 74
alternative explanations for the results in, for example, Burger 
(2009); Miller (2009); Haslam and Reicher (2012); and Reicher 
et al. (2012).
Participants in these experiments were deceived – they were 
led to believe that the Learner was really just another subject, a 
stranger, and that he was really receiving the electric shocks. The 
problem was not so much the stress, but that fact that participants 
were not informed about what might happen, were not aware 
that they may be faced with an extremely stressful situation, and 
were ordered to continue participating even after they had clearly 
expressed the desire to stop. These and other issues led to strong 
criticism from within the academic community that eventually 
led to a change in ethical standards – informed consent, the right 
to withdraw from an experiment at any moment without giving 
reasons, and care for the participants including debriefing. See 
also a discussion of these issues as they relate to VR in Madary 
and Metzinger (2016). Hence, these experiments on obedience, 
no matter how useful, cannot be carried out today for research 
purposes, no matter how valuable they might seem to be scien-
tifically. Yet, the questions addressed are fundamental since it 
appears that humans may be too ready to obey the authority of 
others even to the extent of committing horrific acts.
In 2006, a virtual reprise of one version of the Milgram 
experiments was carried out (Slater et  al., 2006), with full 
ethical approval. The approval was given because participants 
were warned in advance about possible stress, could leave the 
experiment whenever they wanted, and of course they knew 
for sure that no one in reality was being harmed because in this 
experiment the Learner was a (poorly rendered) virtual female 
character displayed in a Cave-like VR setting.60 The participants 
(Teachers) sat in the Cave system by a desk on which there was an 
electric shock machine. They saw the virtual Learner on the other 
side of a (virtual) partition, projected in stereo on the front wall 
of the Cave. They went through the same routine with the virtual 
Learner as in Milgram’s experiment, reading out cue words, and 
administering “electric shocks” to the virtual Learner whenever 
she answered with an incorrect wrong word-pair association. Just 
as in the original experiment, after a while she began to complain 
and demanded to be let out of the experiment, and eventually 
seemed to faint. However, if participants expressed a wish to 
stop, no argument against this was given, and they stopped 
immediately.
Even though carried out in VR, many of the same results as 
the original were obtained, though at a lower level of intensity of 
stress. There were n = 34 participants, 23 of whom saw and heard 
the virtual Learner throughout the experiment, and 11 who saw 
and spoke to her initially but then a curtain descended, and they 
only communicated with her through text once the question and 
answer session began. All those who communicated by text gave 
all of the shocks. However, 6 of the 23 who saw and heard the 
Learner withdrew from the experiment before giving all shocks. 
In other words, 74% continued to the end, in spite of the fact 
of feeling uncomfortable, as was shown by their physiological 
responses (skin conductance and electrocardiogram responses).
60 https://youtu.be/RjUNg3pkEag
In the paper, it was argued that the gap between reality and 
VR makes these types of experiments possible. Presence (PI and 
Psi) leads to participants tending to respond to virtual stimuli as if 
they were real. But, on the other hand, they know that it is not real, 
which can also dampen down their responses. In debriefing, when 
participants were asked why they did not stop even though they 
felt uncomfortable, a typical answer was “Since I kept remind-
ing myself that it wasn’t real.” From the original experiments of 
Stanley Milgram we know (at least for the 1960s around Yale in 
the US) how people actually responded. In VR, we see that they 
responded similarly, though not with the very strong and visible 
stress that many of the original participants displayed. Using VR, 
we can study these types of events, and how people respond to 
them, and construct predictive theory that may help us under-
stand how people might respond in reality. The predictions can 
then be tested against what happens in naturally occurring events 
and the theory examined for its viability. This type of approach 
can also be used to gather real-time data about brain activity of 
people when faced with such a situation (Cheetham et al., 2009).
4.4. Confronting Violence
You are in a bar or other public place and suddenly a violent 
argument breaks out between two other people there. It seems 
to be about something trivial. One man is clearly the perpetrator, 
and the victim is trying to calm down the situation, but his every 
attempt at conciliation is used by the perpetrator as a cue for 
greater belligerence. Eventually the perpetrator starts to physi-
cally assault the victim. What do you do? Suppose you are alone 
there? Suppose there are other people? Perhaps the victim shares 
some social identity with you, such as being a member of the same 
club or same ethnic group different to that of the aggressor. How 
do you respond? Do you try to intervene to stop the argument? 
Or walk away? How is your response influenced by these factors 
such as number of other bystanders or shared social identity with 
the victim or aggressor?
This area of research was initiated in the late 1960s provoked 
by a specific incident when apparently 38 bystanders observed a 
woman being murdered and did nothing to help.61 Latane and 
Darley (1968) introduced the notion of the “bystander effect,” 
which postulates that the more bystanders there are at an emer-
gency event such as this, the less likely it is that anyone would 
intervene, due to diffusion of responsibility, see also Darley and 
Latané (1968). However, other researchers have also suggested 
the importance of social identity as a factor, the perceived rela-
tionships between the people involved, for example, see Reicher 
et al. (2006); Hopkins et al. (2007); Manning et al. (2007); and 
Levine and Crowther (2008). There is a meta-analysis and review 
of the field by Fischer et al. (2011).
As pointed out by Rovira et al. (2009), one of the problems 
in this area of research is that for ethical and practical reasons 
it is not possible to actually carry out controlled experimental 
studies that depict a violent incident such as that described in 
61 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Murder_of_Kitty_Genovese. See also a recent 
New York Times article following the death in prison of the murderer http://www.
nytimes.com/2016/04/05/nyregion/winston-moseley-81-killer-of-kitty-genovese-
dies-in-prison.html?_r=0

----- Page 22 (native) -----
22
Slater and Sanchez-Vives
Enhancing Our Lives with VR
Frontiers in Robotics and AI  |  www.frontiersin.org
December 2016  |  Volume 3  |  Article 74
the opening paragraph of this section. This is very similar to 
the situation of the Obedience studies discussed above. Instead, 
researchers have to study surrogates such as the responses of 
people to someone falling (Latane and Rodin, 1969) or responses 
to an injured person laying on the ground (Levine et al., 2005). 
However, these are not violent emergencies so that it may not be 
valid to extrapolate results from such scenarios to what might 
happen in actual violent emergencies. In VR it is possible to set 
up simulated situations, where we know from presence research 
that people are likely to react realistically to the events portrayed. 
King et al. (2008) suggested the use of Second Life to provide 
a non-immersive simulation of the bystander situation and 
described a case study where a particular person was victim-
ized to examine how the presence of bystanders mediated the 
level of helping offered. It was concluded that one reason that 
people did not intervene was that they thought that this should 
be the responsibility of the Second Life monitors rather than the 
ordinary “citizens.” In another video-game setting, Kozlov and 
Johansen (2010) found that participants were less prone to help-
ing behavior in the presence of larger groups of virtual characters. 
A possible problem though with using video games is that they 
do not mobilize the body – there are no natural sensorimotor 
contingencies so that PI becomes something at best imaginal. In 
some applications this may not be important. However, when 
studying people’s responses to emergency situations it may be 
prudent to have whole body engagement, some illusion that 
the body itself is present and at risk. Garcia et al. (2002) showed 
that only imagining the presence of other bystanders results in a 
bystander effect to the extent that participants are less likely to 
help others after the end of the study if they had been primed 
to think about or being in a group than being alone. Hence, it 
might be the case that video games are mainly aids to imagination 
and that results obtained from video games might be the same 
as those from imagination. Indeed, a result from Stenico and 
Greitemeyer (2014) suggests that this might be the case. This is 
not to say that such results are invalid but that by themselves they 
are not convincing enough, and some experimental evidence is 
needed that does place participants into the midst of a violent 
emergency so that various factors influencing their responses can 
be investigated. But, as we have said this cannot be done both for 
practical and above all ethical reasons.
Slater et al. (2013) used immersive VR (a Cave-like system) to 
study the social identity hypothesis: that participants who share 
social identity with the victim are more likely to intervene to help 
than if they do not share social identity. The method to foster 
social identity with a virtual human character was through the 
use of soccer club affiliation. All of the n = 40 participants were 
fans of the English soccer team Arsenal. They were in a virtual bar 
where they had an initial conversation with a life-sized male vir-
tual character (V). This character was either an Arsenal supporter 
depicted through his shirt and his enthusiastic conversation about 
Arsenal (n = 20, “ingroup” condition), or a generic football fan, 
not a supporter of Arsenal (n = 20, “outgroup” condition). After 
a while of this conversation another character (P) – also wearing 
a generic soccer shirt but not Arsenal – butted in and started to 
attack V especially because of his support of Arsenal. This attack 
increased in ferocity until after about 2 min it became a physically 
violent attack.62 The main response variable was the number of 
times that the participant intervened on the side of V. It was 
found in accordance with social identity theory that those in the 
group where V was an enthusiastic Arsenal supporter intervened 
much more than those in the other group. There was a second 
factor, which was whether or not V occasionally looked toward 
the participant during the confrontation, but this had no effect. 
However, there was a positive correlation between the number of 
interventions and the extent to which participants believed that 
V was looking toward them for help – but only in the ingroup 
condition.
Since it is impossible to compare these results with any study 
in real life, of course their validity in the sense of how much they 
would generalize to real-life behavior cannot be known. However, 
experiments such as these generate data and concomitant theory, 
which can be compared in a predictive manner with what hap-
pens in real-life events. In fact, there is no other way to do this 
other than the use of actors – which as mentioned earlier can 
run into ethical and practical problems. Moreover, the knowledge 
gained from such experiments can be used also in the policy field, 
for example, providing advice to victims on how to maximize the 
chance that other people might intervene to help them, or of use 
to the emergency or security services on how to defuse such a 
situation.63 It is a way to provide evidence-based policy, and if the 
evidence is not generalizable to real situations then with proper 
monitoring, the policy will ultimately be changed.
4.5. Cultural Heritage
“In today’s interconnected world, culture’s power to 
transform societies is clear. Its diverse manifesta-
tions – from our cherished historic monuments and 
museums to traditional practices and contemporary 
art forms – enrich our everyday lives in countless ways. 
Heritage constitutes a source of identity and cohesion 
for communities disrupted by bewildering change and 
economic instability.” (Protecting Our Heritage and 
Fostering Creativity, UNESCO).64
The preservation of the cultural heritage of a society is 
considered as a fundamental human right, and there is a Hague 
Convention on the protection of cultural property in the event of 
armed conflict.65 As we have seen tragically in recent years, there 
has been massive and deliberate destruction of cultural herit-
age, two well-known examples being the Buddhas of Bamiyan66 
and the partial destruction of Palmyra.67 UNESCO maintains a 
country-by-country world heritage list.68
62 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yspbUFhzGC0 (experiment scenario – 
bleeped out swearing).
63 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=11NH0K23nEM (BBC TV report about 
bystander experiment).
64 http://en.unesco.org/themes/protecting-our-heritage-and-fostering-creativity
65 http://portal.unesco.org/en/ev.php-URL_ID=13637&URL_DO=DO_
TOPIC&URL_SECTION=201.html
66 http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/208
67 http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/23
68 http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/

----- Page 23 (native) -----
23
Slater and Sanchez-Vives
Enhancing Our Lives with VR
Frontiers in Robotics and AI  |  www.frontiersin.org
December 2016  |  Volume 3  |  Article 74
The ideal way to preserve cultural heritage is physical protec-
tion, preservation, and restoration of the sites. There has also been 
significant work over many years concerned with digital capture 
and visualization of such sites, which of course can be displayed 
in VR (Ch’ng, 2009; Rua and Alvito, 2011). The first and obvious 
application of VR in this field is to allow people all over the world 
to virtually visit such sites and interactively explore them. This is 
no different from virtual travel or tourism, except for the nature 
of the sight visited. This is also possible through museums that 
have VR installations. The second is digitization of sites for future 
generations, and especially those that are in danger of destruction 
either through factors such as environment change or conflict. 
The third type of application is to show how these sites might have 
looked fully restored in the past and under different conditions 
such as lighting conditions. For example, it is quite different to 
see the interior of a building or a cave with electric lighting than 
under the original conditions that the inhabitants of that time 
would have seen them – by candlelight or fire. The fourth is to see 
how sites, both cultural heritage and non-cultural heritage sites 
might look in the future, under different conditions such as under 
different global warming scenarios.
This is a massive field and mainly concerned with digitiza-
tion, computer vision, reconstruction, and computer graphics 
techniques. Here, we give a few examples of some of the virtual 
constructions that have been done and that potentially could be 
experienced immersively in VR.
An example of one type of application is described by 
Gaitatzes et  al. (2001) who show how museum visitors can 
walk through various ancient sites visualized in a Cave-like 
system, in particular through the ancient Greek city of Miletus.69 
Carrozzino and Bergamasco (2010) give various examples of 
museum installations.70,71 Interestingly, they speculate on a num-
ber of reasons why the use of VR in museum settings may not 
have been taken up so much recent years: (1) cost; (2) it requires 
a team to be able to do this; (3) lots of space is needed for the 
installation; (4) visitors do not want to wear VR equipment; (5) 
it is a single person experience; and (6) VR might be thought 
to be not serious enough to include in such august settings as 
museums. Apart possibly from the last issue, each of these prob-
lems is largely overcome with the advent of low-cost, high-quality 
HMDs with built-in head tracking. Of course it is still true that 
an interdisciplinary team is required to create the environments, 
although see Wojciechowski et al. (2004) and Dunn et al. (2012) 
for an example of how to do this. In particular, digital acquisition 
and rendering of cultural heritage sites requires a huge amount 
of data to be processed. An example of how this was handled for 
the site of the Monastery of Santa Maria de Ripoll in Catalonia, 
Spain, is presented in Besora et al. (2008) and Callieri et al. (2011) 
and an example of a user interface for virtually navigating this 
site in Andújar et al. (2012). A famous example of the virtual 
recreation of world heritage is the digitization and rendering 
of Michelangelo’s statue of David plus several statues and other 
69 http://www.tholos254.gr/projects/miletus/index-en.html. (This also links to a 
360° virtual tour).
70 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U00bmFyipNw
71 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DZx8NqjIgF4
artifacts of ancient Rome (Levoy et al., 2000). The David statue72 
required 2 billion polygons for its representation, and the software 
is available as freeware from Stanford.73
Sometimes a digital reconstruction is the only way to view a site. 
The ancient Egyptian temple of Kalabsha was physically moved 
in its location to preserve it from rising flood waters. Sundstedt 
et al. (2004) digitally reconstructed it to show it in its original site, 
and also how it may have looked two millennia earlier, including 
illuminating it with simulations of the type lighting that may 
have been used at that time. Gutierrez et al. (2008) describe a 
method for highly accurate illumination methods for heritage 
sites. Happa et al. (2010) review various examples of illuminating 
the past, together with descriptions of the methodology used.
Many examples of virtual cultural heritage in the past have 
been implemented for desktop or projection systems – though 
of course they could always be displayed immersively in HMDs. 
However, this raises other issues such as appropriate tracking, 
interfaces, and so on. A joystick for navigation, for example, is 
not always appropriate for an HMD (especially bearing in mind 
that movement without body action can sometimes be a cause of 
simulator sickness). Also a screen display has the advantage that 
typically it can be much higher resolution than what is possible 
in an HMD, where all the detailed lighting and detail rendering 
might not even be perceivable. Webel et al. (2013) describe their 
experience with a number of the newer technologies for display 
and tracking in the virtual construction of four different sites for 
display in a museum. They point out how traditional systems, 
such as tracking, requiring the wearing of devices, and expensive 
Caves are not always suitable for busy environments such as 
museums. However, low–cost, camera-based tracking systems 
do not require physical contact with visitors, and the use of the 
Oculus Rift HMD (in their application) allowed visitors to look 
around the virtual environment simply by turning their head 
rather than learning a joystick type of navigation method. In 
other words, these systems provide a natural means of interac-
tion. As the authors wrote: “With the Oculus Rift as a display 
and head-tracking device, the user’s immersion can be extremely 
increased. The natural camera control just by turning the head, 
like one would do in the real world, lets users control this aspect 
without even thinking about it. The combination with natural 
interaction inputs with the Kinect or the Leap Motion enables 
the user to directly interact with the virtual world.”
Kateros et  al. (2015) review the use of Oculus HMDs for 
cultural heritage and show how they were used in a number of 
applications and give insight into their ideas for preparing a user 
study. Casu et al. (2015) carried out such a study comparing the 
viewing of art masterpieces in the classroom through a non-
immersive multimedia white board display and the Oculus Rift. 
Their experiment had n = 23 students in a between-groups design 
(12 saw the non-immersive display) and found that the HMD 
method was superior across a range of subjective questionnaire-
based factors including motivation. Such studies, while useful, 
do not address the problem of the “wow factor,” i.e., using the 
72 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=e-l2BMStRcg
73 https://graphics.stanford.edu/software/scanview/

----- Page 24 (native) -----
24
Slater and Sanchez-Vives
Enhancing Our Lives with VR
Frontiers in Robotics and AI  |  www.frontiersin.org
December 2016  |  Volume 3  |  Article 74
HMD is novel, and it certainly provides a quite different experi-
ence than the multimedia white board. However, maybe once 
such systems become commonplace, the same results might not 
be obtained. There are no clear-cut answers, and it is not easy to 
establish criteria for the success or otherwise in comparing such 
systems (since there are many factors that vary between them). 
For example, Loizides et al. (2014) compared a powerwall with an 
Oculus Rift HMD for virtual visits to cultural heritage scenarios 
in Cyprus. They found that participants appreciated both types 
of display and especially the presence-inducing capabilities of 
the HMD. However, the HMD also led to greater nausea. As 
mentioned though, it is very difficult to make such comparisons 
because on the one hand the HMD had the natural interface for 
viewing (head tracking) but on the other hand much lower reso-
lution. Moreover, the price ratio between powerwall and HMD 
was (at that time) 40 to 1, a factor not reflected in the difference 
in participant evaluation.
Finally, it should be noted that cultural heritage is not only 
buildings and statues. There are rich traditions in societies that 
are passed down the generations that are certainly no less impor-
tant to preserve for the future – intangible heritage. An obvious 
example is folklore stories, but the medium for the ultimate 
representation of these for preservation through the generations 
is in written form. However, there are other examples, such as 
folk dances – which can be preserved through younger genera-
tions learning these from their elders – but this does not provide 
a form for others to experience. Aristidou et al. (2014) show how 
folk dancing can be digitally captured and represented.74 They 
concentrate on the technical aspects, but clearly such efforts can 
be portrayed immersively (see Presentation S3 in Supplementary 
Material).
5. MORAL BEHAVIOR
Sometimes in our professional and personal lives we are faced 
with problems that cannot be answered by any kind of evidence-
based scientific reasoning. The science can provide information, 
but it cannot determine what should be done. Imagine that there 
is a nuclear reactor providing power for millions of people, and 
that the science determines that in the next 10 years there is a 
5% chance that it will explode causing massive contamination. 
There are no resources to repair it and no alternatives. It can be 
decommissioned, and in the short to medium term this will cost 
many lives and great suffering. It can be left to run, with the cor-
responding risk. The science can determine the level of risk, but 
it cannot determine the action. In military or police action, there 
is the issue of “collateral damage.” Action to resolve one kind of 
threat that might save many lives may indeed cost many lives in its 
execution. The science can inform about relative risks and costs, 
but it cannot determine what is the right thing to do.
How people “should” and do make decisions under such 
conditions of moral uncertainty are subjects for study in moral 
philosophy and neuroscience. Normally, abstract situations are 
used for reasoning or gathering evidence about the responses of 
74 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iiuZznpHyPs&feature=youtu.be
people. A famous example is the “trolley problem,”75 where you 
have to make a choice between allowing a runaway trolley (or 
tram or train…) to run over and kill five unaware people in its 
path or diverting it to kill another person (Foot, 1967; Thomson, 
1976). What do you do? Suppose the trolley were running toward 
the one person, but there were five others on another track. Would 
you divert to the train to save the one but kill the five? According 
to survey evidence (Hauser et al., 2007), most people will choose 
the action that saves the greatest number – five rather than one.76 
Suppose to save the five, however, you have to push someone else 
onto the track to divert the train. In this case, few people will 
choose to take that action.
Philosophers distinguish between utilitarian and deontologi-
cal principles. The first states that it is best to take the action that 
maximizes the greatest good, i.e., is concerned with consequences 
(the end justifies the means). The second emphasizes rather that 
an action in itself must be ethical, based on universal maxims. 
For example, if it is wrong to steal then it is wrong to steal in 
any circumstances, irrespective of possible beneficial outcomes. 
See Hauser (2006) for an exposition of these various principles in 
the context of psychology and neuroscience. Although sacrificing 
one person to save five is the utilitarian solution, people also do 
act out of deontological principles – which is why few support 
actively pushing someone onto the track even though the out-
come is exactly the same in utilitarian terms. Moreover, choosing 
to take the action of diverting the train to save five rather than one 
has the same outcome as not choosing to divert the train when 
it is running toward one with five on another track (omission). 
However, omission could be argued to be both utilitarian (five are 
saved rather than one) and deontological (not personally taking 
an action that would kill).
These discussions have been going on for centuries. But, how 
can we know what people would actually do? As we saw in the 
example of the Stanley Milgram Obedience experiments (Section 
4.3) what people might say they would do and what they do actu-
ally do when faced with a situation are not necessarily the same. 
Below we give some examples where VR has been used, relying 
on its presence-inducing capabilities, to face people with such 
dilemmas and where their behavior can be observed. Of course, 
this does not solve the moral problem of what the “right” behavior 
should be, but rather can inform about what people actually do, 
and ultimately the factors and brain activity behind this.
5.1. Virtual Representations  
of Moral Dilemmas
Transforming a short verbal description of a scenario such as the 
trolley problem into VR is non-trivial. There are “five people” 
– which people? Gender? Age? Ethnicity? Social class? How do 
they look? What are they doing? Why are they there? There is a 
trolley or train – exactly how does it look? How fast is it going? 
What is the surrounding scenery? The experimental subject can 
75 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bOpf6KcWYyw (a cartoon exposition of the 
trolley problem).
76 http://www.moralsensetest.com/experiment/originaldilemmas.html (a survey at 
Harvard University).

----- Page 25 (native) -----
25
Slater and Sanchez-Vives
Enhancing Our Lives with VR
Frontiers in Robotics and AI  |  www.frontiersin.org
December 2016  |  Volume 3  |  Article 74
divert the train – exactly how? Which action needs to be taken? 
How can the designer be sure that the subject will even be look-
ing in the necessary direction? How can it be set up so that the 
subject sees the five and also sees the one? Doing something in 
VR means making it concrete and specific, obviously changing 
the scenario – which in one case is dependent on the imagination 
of the subject in response to a statement in a questionnaire, but in 
the other is there to be seen and heard.
Navarrete et al. (2012) implemented a version of the trolley 
problem, making all of the above choices but staying true to the 
story line, and they carried out an experiment where participants 
were faced with the choice between saving five or one.77 There 
were n = 293 participants who experienced the scenario in an 
HMD-based system (NVIS). This was a between-groups experi-
ment where one group experienced the action condition (they 
could act to save five) and the other group the omission condition 
(if they did not act five would be saved). Just over 90% of subjects 
chose the utilitarian solution in line with questionnaire-based 
results. However, those who had to actively save the five showed 
greater arousal (skin conductance levels) than those who could 
save the five by doing nothing. Moreover, the greater level of 
arousal was associated with a lower propensity to take the utili-
tarian outcome. This could indicate that following the utilitarian 
path leads to greater internal conflict within participants, but 
following it without simultaneously violating deontological 
principles is a less stressful choice. Ideally, in order to rule out the 
effect on arousal simply of carrying out the action there should be 
a condition that equalizes the level of physical action across the 
conditions. However, the important point is that such studies can 
be carried out at all.
Pan and Slater (2011) portrayed a dilemma equivalent to 
the trolley problem. Participants were taught how to control a 
platform that operated as an elevator in an art gallery. The gallery 
consisted of two floors, ground and upper level. Virtual characters 
entered and could ask to be taken to the upper level to view the 
paintings there or remained on the ground floor. At one point – in 
the Action condition – there were five characters on the upper 
level and one on the ground level. A seventh person entered and 
asked to be taken to the upper level. While still on the elevator, 
that character raised a gun and started to shoot toward all those 
on the upper level. The participant could leave the shooter there 
(risking the five) or bring the elevator down (risking the one). 
The Omission condition was similar except that at the critical 
moment there was one character upstairs and five downstairs. To 
avoid the problem that the types of people represented by the 
virtual visitors might influence the results they were portrayed 
as stick figures, so that characteristics such as those mentioned 
above – age, gender, etc. – could not be inferred. This was a 
between-groups experiment with 36 participants in 2 factors: the 
situation was portrayed in a 4-screen Cave-like system or on a 
single PC screen. The second factor was the Action and Omission 
conditions. Running such an experiment in VR really illustrates 
how different it is than telling people a story and asking for their 
response. For those in the Cave their fundamental reaction was 
77 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yk_hftGBHy4
confusion or panic illustrated by the fact that 61% of them carried 
out multiple actions in response to the shooting compared to 33% 
of those in the desktop condition. However, taking into account 
the final resting point of the platform, 89% of those in the Action 
condition in the Cave brought the lift down, whereas 22% did so 
in the Omission condition. For those in the desktop condition the 
equivalent proportions are 67 and 22%. The differences between 
Cave and desktop were not significant, although being a pilot 
experiment the sample sizes were small. This experiment was 
featured in a BBC Horizon documentary “Are You Born Good or 
Evil?” where people naïve to the experiment were filmed. More 
than the statistics, their reactions pointed to the fact that they 
did actually experience a genuine dilemma.78,79 A more sophis-
ticated version of this setup was repeated in an HMD-based 
study (Friedman et al., 2014) concerned with embodiment and 
time travel, where realistic virtual characters were portrayed. 
In terms of responses to the dilemma they were similar to the 
other studies. In these studies it has been found that people 
become more utilitarian in VR compared to what they will say 
in response to a questionnaire – i.e., they are more likely to adopt 
a decision depending on the outcome (saving five rather than 
one). In another study that used desktop VR the same was found. 
Specifically, subjects were more likely to make utilitarian deci-
sions in VR compared to the same scenario described textually. 
In other words, although participants judged it less acceptable to 
sacrifice one person to save five when this dilemma was presented 
verbally, when it came to their actual action in VR they were more 
likely to do so. There is therefore a division between what people 
will say they would do and what they would actually do faced 
with the situation. This illustrates what VR is useful for in these 
types of context.
Finally, Skulmowski et al. (2014) used a screen-based system 
to situate participants in a trolley that they could control and 
avoid colliding with people standing on branching tracks. They 
investigated a number of hypotheses relating to specific types of 
potential victims (male, female), the number balanced against 
each other (e.g., 10 people rather than 5 against 1, or 1 against 
1), ethnicity, altogether with 11 different hypotheses. They found 
that there were different response times depending on gender of 
the potential virtual victims, with a greater tendency to sacrifice 
males. In this study, arousal was estimated by measuring pupil 
dilation (see Presentation S4 in Supplementary Material).
5.2. Doctor/Patient Interaction
One area in which VR is likely to flourish in the coming years, 
as its cost comes down and it becomes more ubiquitous, is for 
the training of professionals. In many professions, people make 
fundamental ethical decisions – not so dramatic as the trolley 
problem, but nevertheless often very important. How does a 
lawyer act knowing for certain that a client has committed a hor-
rific crime? Does a health inspector close down a factory putting 
at risk hundreds of jobs or allow the factory to continue with 
unsanitary practices – when it is clear after several warnings that 
there will be no significant improvement? With limited resources 
78 http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p00k9drg
79 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M2aorOAY8o8

----- Page 26 (native) -----
26
Slater and Sanchez-Vives
Enhancing Our Lives with VR
Frontiers in Robotics and AI  |  www.frontiersin.org
December 2016  |  Volume 3  |  Article 74
should an agency responsible for deciding which medicinal drugs 
should be available on prescription go for the cheaper one that 
has been shown to have limited success, or the vastly superior 
one that is also vastly more expensive? Choosing the latter might 
disadvantage the greater number of people due to restrictions on 
other drugs, yet also save the lives of a few.
Sometimes, these issues are covered by law and sometimes not. 
We consider one example. How do medical professionals learn to 
interact with their patients in such circumstances? Of course they 
observe their supervisors and teachers, and they read and learn 
about this in medical school. However, there is no substitute for 
experience. But, experience requires that prior to interacting with 
patients the doctors have already learned to interact with patients. 
Hence, VR can provide training and many different scenarios that 
will help toward gaining experience (Cook et al., 2010).
The idea of using virtual patients has been very thoroughly 
studied for many years80 (Cendan and Lok, 2012). For example 
Kleinsmith et al. (2015) has investigated empathy training with 
virtual patients. Here, though we consider only ethical problems 
in dealing with patients – where contrary to medical advice a 
patient demands a certain medicine; the first time that a doctor 
confronts this problem with a patient would typically be with a 
real patient. A case in point is the overprescription of antibiot-
ics. This is a balance between the needs of society as a whole (to 
avoid enhanced bacterial resistance to antibiotics) and the needs 
of the individual. If a patient demands antibiotics but the medical 
evidence suggests that these would not be appropriate, does the 
doctor prescribe in order to have a quieter life, or perhaps avoid 
being sued should the decision ultimately have been a wrong one, 
or follow the higher principle that not prescribing unless clearly 
necessary may be the best thing to do for the greater good? Pan 
et  al. (2016) carried out an experiment with n  =  21 medical 
doctors (general practitioners; 9 being trainees with limited 
experience and the remainder with an average of about 6 years’ 
experience). The experiment was carried out using an Oculus 
DK2 through which each doctor had a consultation with a virtual 
mother and her daughter. The mother had a small cough, and the 
daughter demanded that the mother be given antibiotics because 
when faced with the same problem a year before, the antibiotics 
had cured the problem immediately. Since the medical indica-
tions were that this was probably a viral infection, the participants 
(GPs) resisted the demand for antibiotics, which unleashed a tor-
rent of complaints and anger from the virtual daughter.81 Finally 
8 out of the 9 trainees prescribed the antibiotics, whereas 7 out of 
the 12 experienced doctors did so. The results also suggested that 
for those in experienced group, the greater their reported level of 
presence the less the probability that they would administer the 
antibiotic. The use of this type and many other scenarios in the 
medical and other professions could be of great utility in training, 
and preparing people for situations that they are almost bound to 
face eventually. Just as airline pilots first learn on simulators so the 
same is likely to be true across a range of professions.
80 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=05jSp63-W7c&list=PLjjzAm1HXwJOFD6a
G9vCYHL4cFoYef6ya
81 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KhcnvdKbHrM&feature=youtu.be
6. TRAVEL, MEETINGS, AND INDUSTRY
6.1. Virtual Travel
Using VR, it is possible that you may not need to have physically 
gone to a place to say that you have visited it. Sitting in your home 
you can be navigating the streets and shopping in Hong Kong, 
ascending Mount Everest, visiting the Taj Mahal, exploring the 
Forbidden City in Beijing, or even the landscape of Mars. You 
can watch at first hand ceremonies and customs from Polynesia 
to Greenland.82 This is an obvious and long-discussed application. 
There are various possibilities: to visit a place virtually before 
going there, to visit the place instead of going there, to have a 
business meeting virtually with remote partners, meeting in a 
shared virtual environment, have a break on a beach in the middle 
of the day in winter during your coffee break in the office; the 
possibilities are limited only by imagination and what technology 
can deliver at the time (which of course is always changing).
This is far from a new idea. Already two decades ago people in 
the travel industry were considering the “virtual threat to travel 
and tourism” (Cheong, 1995), arguing that “the perceived threat 
of virtual reality becoming a substitute for travel is not unfounded 
and should not be ignored. Virtual reality offers numerous distinct 
advantages over the actual visitation of a tourist site … that could 
result in the eventual replacement of travel and tourism by virtual 
reality.” The advantages of VR suggested were (1) technology 
could eventually support “the perfect virtual experience” where 
the sun never stops shining (for one kind of holiday), or the snow 
is perfect (for another kind), there are no unruly (real) people 
around, and so on. (2) It is convenient – there is not the stress of 
traveling, it is significantly cheaper, there are no inconveniences. 
(3) Places could be visited that are not easily accessible (Mars 
is an extreme example). One could even travel in the past or to 
fantasy worlds. (4) People who are unable to travel because of 
illness or disability would easily be able to do so. (5) There are 
no risks – tropical diseases, accidents, and food poisoning. (6) 
There is no damage to the places visited. (7) Business travel could 
be simplified. However, Cheong (1995) goes on to discuss the 
reasons why this might not really be a threat – virtual immersion 
is not the same as really being there; it would be difficult in VR to 
engage in exchanges with the locals (like discussions in a market, 
learning to dance the Hula); there is a level of complexity and 
randomness in the real world that cannot be reproduced in VR; 
people might confuse reality and VR; and there would be prob-
lems with countries whose revenues depend greatly on tourism.
On the one hand, of course since 1995 tourism has not been 
replaced by VR (on the contrary – see the next section), but on the 
other hand, none of the objections above seem insurmountable 
(even revenue from tourism could be protected by some kind 
of royalty system). Moreover, as global warming becomes an 
increasingly serious prospect and threat, VR could provide a way 
of lessening some of the negative impact of travel. An article by 
Guttentag (2010) suggested that VR could be useful for tourism 
for planning, management, marketing, entertainment, education, 
82 See 
an 
example 
from 
Marriott 
https://travel-brilliantly.marriott.com/
our-innovations/oculus-get-teleported

----- Page 27 (native) -----
27
Slater and Sanchez-Vives
Enhancing Our Lives with VR
Frontiers in Robotics and AI  |  www.frontiersin.org
December 2016  |  Volume 3  |  Article 74
providing accessibility to inaccessible places such as archeologi-
cal sites (see Section 4.5) with consequent heritage preservation. 
However, Guttentag wondered whether VR could ever provide 
an alternative to real travel, emphasizing a point made in Cheong 
(1995) that VR may never be able to substitute basic sensory 
experiences – “the smell of ocean spray” or make virtual surfing 
feel like the real thing. In other words, at the end of the day will 
VR ever be technically up to the mark in providing a genuine 
substitute for the real experience?
In this section, we do not attempt to answer this question, 
since the answer cannot be known. Rather, we describe what has 
already been accomplished in this realm across a variety of appli-
cations that require some kind of travel. Perhaps, VR is not meant 
to be a substitute for real travel but just another form of travel, no 
less valid in its own terms than all that physically boarding the 
real aeroplane entails.
6.2. Remote Collaboration
The contribution of travel to the world economy is colossal. 
According to the World Travel and Tourism Council (WTTC, 
2015), travel and tourism generated $7.6 trillion in 2014, 
amounting to 10% of global GDP. It also accounted for 10% of all 
jobs (277 million), with the travel economy growing faster than 
other sectors such as health, financial services, and automotive. 
See also the extensive statistics produced by the World Tourism 
Organization UNWTO.83 On the other side, travel comes with 
significant costs (Reford and Leston, 2011). The first obvious 
one is the potentially disastrous impact on the planet’s environ-
ment (Zhou and Levy, 2007) including the negative impact on 
health of air pollutants – e.g., Curtis et al. (2006) and Kampa 
and Castanas (2008) – see, for example, a meta-analysis by 
Mustafić et al. (2012) that reports a clear relationship between 
many of the associated pollutants and the near-term risk of 
heart disease. A second problem is especially in regard to busi-
ness travel. In the US alone, $283B was spent on business travel 
in 2014.84 However, such travel can be disruptive both to the 
business and the personal life of the traveler (Gustafson, 2012) 
including contributing to family conflict and burnout (Jensen, 
2014). Nevertheless, for business (let alone personal and family 
relationships) face-to-face contact is thought to be essential. 
Even if face-to-face meetings can be substituted by one of the 
various forms of teleconferencing systems available, it has been 
suggested that these types of virtual meetings may even generate 
greater physical travel (Gustafson, 2012).
In an analysis of the relationship between air travel and the 
possibilities offered by videoconferencing in the past four decades 
Denstadli et al. (2013) did not find any clear picture and certainly 
not the case that videoconferencing might substitute air travel. 
Based on the analysis by Jones (2007), it is argued that face-
to-face meetings are important for completing projects across 
international sites, maintaining commitment to strategic plans 
and shared organizational culture, knowledge sharing, creativity, 
and new services. There are of course related issues such as trust, 
83 http://www2.unwto.org
84 https://www.ustravel.org/research/travel-industry-answer-sheet
using business meetings to get away from the office from time 
to time, taking the opportunity to meet friends or relatives in 
remote locations, and so on. Hence, face-to-face meetings seem 
to be essential, and interestingly it is precisely those who travel the 
most who engage in most videoconferencing meetings. Hence, 
there is a complex relationship between the two. Nevertheless, 
in the study of Denstadli et al. (2013) (n = 1413), of those who 
had access to videoconferencing tools one-third said that they 
believed that some air travel could be replaced by videoconfer-
encing. For example, probably some readers of this article would 
have experienced the situation of several hours of travel to attend 
or speak at a 1-h meeting and then to travel home shortly after-
ward – sometimes wondering what the point of it all might have 
been. Can VR be of benefit in this domain?
In this section, we briefly review the possibilities offered by 
immersive VR as a means for enabling remote communication and 
collaboration. We consider a virtual environment that is shared 
between multiple participants. Each participant is represented 
by a virtual body (an “avatar”) and can see the representations 
of the others. Ideally participants’ movements are tracked, they 
can move through the virtual environment, and can talk to one 
another. Hence, they are in a 3D stereo surrounding space along 
with others. Of course, there are several technical issues involved 
in how to realize such a system (Steed and Oliveira, 2009), such 
as how and where to distribute the computation (one master 
machine broadcasting to all the others or a distributed network?), 
how to keep the various participant environments synchronized 
with one another so that they are all able to perceive the same 
consistent environment etc., but these issues are not consid-
ered here. In its ideal form, such a system must be superior to 
videoconferencing – since for example, the latter cannot display 
spatial relationships, eye contact, and so on. However, an ideal 
form of a shared VR would require real-time full facial capture, 
eye tracking, real-time rendering of subtle emotional changes 
such as blushing and sweating, subtle facial muscle movements 
such as almost imperceptible eyebrow raising, the possibility of 
physical contact such as the ability to shake hands, or embrace, or 
even push, and so on. Such a system does not exist today, though 
it is one to strive for. Some of these capabilities might be realized 
with the type of VR referred to as 360° surround, but we defer 
the discussion of this to Section 7.2. In the following section, 
we review some of what has been achieved and what the likely 
prospects are.
6.3. Shared Virtual Environments
Probably, the first published work where more than one person 
could simultaneously inhabit the same virtual environment was 
presented by Blanchard et al. (1990). This was the VPL system that 
allowed two people each with their own HMD (Eye Phone) and 
data glove to be simultaneously copresent in a virtual environ-
ment. Over the next few years, there were many systems that pro-
vided this and typically extending to multiple participants rather 
than two (Greenhalgh and Benford, 1995; Frécon and Stenius, 
1998; Frecon et al., 2001), and today it is a matter of course that 
VR systems support this capability (Bierbaum et al., 2001; Tecchia 
et al., 2010), and VR development platforms of recent choice such 
as Unreal Engine or Unity3D are also multi-participant systems.

----- Page 28 (native) -----
28
Slater and Sanchez-Vives
Enhancing Our Lives with VR
Frontiers in Robotics and AI  |  www.frontiersin.org
December 2016  |  Volume 3  |  Article 74
So, the capability for virtual environments shared by multiple 
participants has been around for a long time, supported by many 
platforms, and realized in massive online systems such as Second 
Life, although typically non-immersively. The work by Apostolellis 
and Bowman (2014) is a good recent illustration of collaboration 
in a learning context that was realized with screen-based displays. 
The early days of research in this area, apart from the technical 
issues of how to build systems, concentrated on exploiting the 
capabilities of VR to improve remote collaboration beyond what 
might be possible even in face-to-face communications – for 
example, the type of work reported in Benford and Fahlén (1993) 
and Koleva et al. (2001). However, the primitive representations 
of people (very crude block-like characters) due to the relatively 
limited graphics and processing power at the time made this of 
interest only in a research context.
Later work concentrated on exploring social dynamics within 
shared virtual environments. For example, the research described 
in Tromp et  al. (1998); Steed et  al. (1999); Sadagic and Slater 
(2000) and Slater et al. (2000) had three-person groups carry out 
a task together although they were physically in different places 
(including even different countries). This also compared the group 
dynamics in VR to real encounters and found that the dynamics 
was greatly influenced by the computational power and type of 
immersion. For example, the group leader that would emerge in 
VR was the one with an HMD rather than those interacting with 
the others on screen, but this same person was less likely to be 
the leader when the group met for real. Also, people were quite 
respectful of each others’ avatars, notwithstanding their extreme 
simplicity – for example, avoiding collisions and apologizing 
when collisions invariably happened. Steed et al. (2003) carried 
this further by having pairs of people, one in London, UK, and the 
other in Gothenburg, Sweden, each in a Cave-like system spend 
around 3.5 h working together. Some of the pairs were friends, 
and some were strangers. They found that the partners could col-
laborate well on spatial tasks, where the avatars representing their 
whole bodies played an important role. However, on other nego-
tiation tasks, where facial expression would be quite important 
to gage the intentions of the other, the friends did better together 
than the strangers. A review of this type of avatar-mediated com-
munications can be found in Schroeder (2011).
Although during the 2000s the graphics power to display 
more realistic human avatars in real time and in large numbers 
became available, the type of “ideal” system mentioned earlier 
still was far from possible. Nevertheless, researchers began to 
address critical aspects of non-verbal communications that can 
make remote face-to-face interactions in virtual environments 
effective, such as shaking hands (Giannopoulos et al., 2011; Wang 
et al., 2011). Steptoe et al. (2008) introduced eye tracking as a 
way to determine the gaze of each individual avatar in virtual 
meetings between three remote participants (one in London, one 
in Salford, and the other in Reading, UK) each in a Cave-like 
system. Analysis suggested that participants automatically used 
gaze direction much as they would in a similar conversation in 
reality. This was followed up by Steptoe et al. (2010) who showed 
that eye tracking data that allowed avatars to be rendered showing 
gaze direction, blinking, and pupil size resulted in participants 
being able to better detect one another telling lies compared to 
a video conferencing system. This was between two participants 
in different physical places one using a Cave-like system and the 
other a power wall. Another recent idea for remote collaborative 
working is for each party to use a whiteboard, where they would 
see a silhouette of the remote person, like a shadow, on the white 
board. It was found that participants tended to act as if they 
were in the presence of the remote person (Pizarro et al., 2015). 
Although a lot of work on such avatar-mediated communication 
during this period took place using projection systems such as 
Caves, Dodds et al. (2011) used HMDs to embody two remote 
people in the same environment. They found that body tracking, 
in particular showing arm gestures, played an important role in 
bidirectional communication between the partners. When, for 
example, the gestures of the avatar of one of the partners were 
replaced by prerecorded animations then the communication 
was not as successful in task achievement.
A combination of HMD and Cave system was used for a case 
study of remote acting, where two actors rehearsed a short scene 
using a script from The Maltese Falcon movie85 (Normand et al., 
2012a). One actor was in Barcelona wearing a full motion capture 
suit and a wide field-of-view high-resolution HMD. The other 
actor was in a Cave in London and had some level of body track-
ing (arm gestures). The two were in the same virtual environment 
and could see and hear the avatars representing the other. A direc-
tor was in a separate room in London. He could see and hear the 
scenario on screen, and video of the director’s face was streamed 
in real time to both actors. Therefore, the director could com-
municate to the actors and tell them where to stand, what to say, 
how to improve their performance – generally act like a director.86 
The professional actor involved in London concluded that such 
a system could be used for remote acting rehearsal especially for 
aspects such as blocking concerned with spatial locations and 
movements of actors, lines of sight, and so on. This work was 
followed up by Steptoe et al. (2012) who used again an actor in 
Barcelona in VR who saw a virtual representation of the remote 
London scenario, and she was represented as a wall screen avatar 
with a spherical display to represent her head to the actor, and the 
director was in the Cave. See also Steed et al. (2012) for a descrip-
tion of the technology. Observers from the Royal Academy of 
Dramatic Art commented on the positive potential uses of such 
a system for rehearsal and blocking, which are the arrangements 
and lines-of-sights of actors at the different stages of a play. Of 
course, again the lack of facial expression shown on the avatars is 
a drawback in these types of system.
Another drawback is the lack of touch – if one participant 
touches the avatar of another then typically nothing would be 
felt. Bourdin et al. (2013) set up an application where two remote 
people wearing an HMD and body-tracking suit interacted with 
a third person (an experimenter) who was in a Cave, so that all 
three saw representations of one another in a shared virtual envi-
ronment. The experimenter had the task of persuading the other 
two to sing together. As part of the persuasion, she could touch 
the avatars of the two participants on the shoulder, upon which 
85 http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0033870/
86 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=c9bLWQhbJz0

----- Page 29 (native) -----
29
Slater and Sanchez-Vives
Enhancing Our Lives with VR
Frontiers in Robotics and AI  |  www.frontiersin.org
December 2016  |  Volume 3  |  Article 74
they could feel a vibration from a small actuator located on their 
shoulder. Thus touch was used as part of the persuasion.87 Earlier 
Bailenson et al. (2007) carried out experiments using haptic only 
virtual environments where they showed that touch helped in the 
communication of emotions between people, both with respect to 
recognizing emotions recorded as haptics earlier by others, and 
with respect to simultaneous communications between remote 
partners. Their paper also contains a review of the field and a 
theoretical model. Basdogan et al. (2000) using a haptic only envi-
ronment carried out a series of experiments, which also found 
that haptic feedback could impart critical information in remote 
communications. This work culminated in a “hands across the 
Atlantic” experiment where remote participants, one in London, 
UK, and the other in Cambridge, MA, USA, carried out joint 
tasks together such as lifting an object that they saw on screen 
and using haptics to help in the communication between them 
(Kim et al., 2004). Apart from describing the technological issues 
involved in setting up such a system, the results showed that the 
haptic feedback improved the sense of copresence, that is, that the 
remote participants felt that they were together.
6.4. Virtual Beaming
One obvious way to introduce haptics into remote VR-enabled 
communication is to actually use physical representations of 
people in the form of remotely controlled robots. This was envis-
aged and implemented in the very early days of VR. Fisher et al. 
(1987) described a telerobotic control system developed at NASA 
Ames (CA, USA), where the participant wearing a head-tracked 
HMD and other tracking, audio, and tactile feedback equipment 
received visual input from the cameras mounted on a remote 
robot. The robotic body essentially visually substituted the per-
son’s own body, therefore appearing to be colocated somewhat 
like the discussion of embodiment in Section 2.1.1. Recently, this 
idea of the symbiosis between a person in VR being represented 
remotely as a humanoid robot has seen some new applications 
as a particularly exciting form of remote collaboration where the 
participants are given physical form in the remote place. Here, the 
participant uses VR to perceive the remote location in full stereo 
with head- and body-tracking but is represented as a humanoid 
robot in the remote location. The humanoid robot moves as a 
function of the real-time body tracking of the participant, who 
can speak (through the robot) to local people in the remote 
location. It is a further and up-to-date realization of what was 
presented in Fisher et al. (1987) except now for the purposes of 
remote collaboration.
An example was shown in a BBC interview.88 The BBC 
interviewer in London (Technology Correspondent Rory Cellan-
Jones) interviewed a scientist in Barcelona who was fitted with a 
wide field-of-view head-tracked HMD and a body-tracking suit. 
She was represented as a humanoid robot that was in the same 
room as the journalist in London. Her movements captured by 
the motion capture suit were transmitted across the Internet to 
the robot and applied to it so that it moved almost synchronously 
87 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gc8ySZHZLC0
88 http://www.bbc.com/news/technology-18017745
and in correspondence with her. A Skype connection allowed 
her to speak through the robot, whose mouth opened and closed 
in sync with her speech. Cameras fitted as the eyes of the robot 
transmitted video back to the HMD, so that she saw the sur-
rounding London environment in stereo. Since the HMD head 
tracking data were transmitted and applied to the robot head, she 
could look around the room in London and converse with the 
BBC interviewer. The technology used was described in Spanlang 
et al. (2013). The same technology was used to beam journalist 
Nonny de la Peña from Los Angeles (CA, USA) to Barcelona. In 
Los Angeles, she wore the body-tracking suit and HMD. She was 
represented as the humanoid robot in Barcelona. Embodied as 
the robot, she conducted a debate between three students on the 
issue of Catalan independence from Spain and also interviewed a 
scientist about his research on HIV.89
The idea is reminiscent of “beaming” in Star Trek. Instead of 
a person being physically decomposed, transmitted to a remote 
place, and then recomposed there, a person in VR has their move-
ments and speech transmitted to the remote place and applied to a 
humanoid robot, and sensory data – vision, sound, and touch – is 
transmitted back from the robot’s sensory apparatus to the person, 
that is perceived in VR. The locals in the remote place interact 
with the robot that is embodied by the beamer. The beamer, how-
ever, through the VR becomes present in the remote place. This 
has also been used by journalist Nonny de la Peña to beam from 
London, UK, to Barcelona to interview neuroscientist Dr. Perla 
Kaliman about food for the brain.90 This journalism resulted in a 
news article about the results of the interview itself, rather than 
about the system used to realize it91 (Kishore et al., 2016).
The same kind of beaming setup has been used to create a 
shared environment between a small animal and a human. 
Normand et  al. (2012b) showed a human participant in VR 
interacting with a virtual human, which in fact was a tracked rat 
in a cage 12 km away. Simultaneously, the rat interacted with a rat-
sized robot, which in fact was moving determined by the tracked 
the movements of the remote human. Hence, each interacted 
with an entity at its own scale (the rat with a small robot, the 
human with a human-sized avatar), leading to interspecies com-
munication. This type of setup is of value in ethology. In an article 
on animal geography and related issues, Hodgetts and Lorimer 
(2015) wrote in reference to this work that “… it is claimed that 
the human and the rat were able to participate in a purportedly 
playful meeting of species that seems straight from the pages of 
science fiction. Such experiments in adjusting scale do little to 
shift power dynamics in interspecies communication. Nor does 
the lab maze create anything more than a novel environment for 
encounter. Yet the prospect of engaging with animal worlds in 
more embodied, interactive and exploratory ways opens new 
avenues for developing richer accounts of animal lifeworlds.”
The issue of non-verbal communications is critical for face-to-
face communications, and as we have mentioned above there are 
89 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FFaInCXi9Go (in Catalan and English).
90 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I58wF9f3_a0
91 The news article was published in Latino LA and focused solely on the substantive 
issue of food for the brain, rather than the system that was used for the interview: 
http://latinola.com/story.php?story=12654

----- Page 30 (native) -----
30
Slater and Sanchez-Vives
Enhancing Our Lives with VR
Frontiers in Robotics and AI  |  www.frontiersin.org
December 2016  |  Volume 3  |  Article 74
attempts to overcome this problem, for example, using eye track-
ing to animate the eyes of avatars. Telerobotics enables physical 
presence and to some extent the conveyance of body language, 
depending on the extent of body tracking and the capabilities of 
the robot; however, facial expression remains a problem, even 
though some robots can do this. Nevertheless, the subtle cues of 
which we are not consciously even aware in communication are 
not rendered. One way out of this problem has been explored 
through the combination of animatronics and “shader lamp” 
technology. Shader lamps project computer-generated images 
onto neutral objects so that observers would see the simple object 
as animated. In particular, an animated human face can be pro-
jected onto, for example, a spherical or egg-shaped object, thus 
making it appear as if the physical object were an animated face. 
Moreover, the face could be one that is captured by face-tracking 
or video from a remote person. Lincoln et al. (2009) proposed 
and implemented shader lamps for the faces of remote people 
projected onto animatronic puppets. The participant could be 
far away seeing the real surroundings of the puppet through a 
VR, and his or her face back-projected onto a shell, so that an 
observer of the puppet would see video of the real face of the 
distant person, and be able to interact with that person.92 Some 
research has suggested that this type of technology, where faces 
are displayed on physical objects, in this case a spherical display, 
can improve the aspects of trust in remote communications (Pan 
et al., 2014) (see Presentation S5 in Supplementary Material).
6.5. Interacting by Thought
The descriptions above of embodiment in remote robots through 
which social interaction can take place with distant people are 
reminiscent of movies such as Avatar (see text footnote 11) and 
Surrogates.93 The fundamental difference is that whereas in the 
systems above people move their remote robotic bodies through 
their own deliberate movement (realized through real-time 
motion capture), in the vision presented in these movies, the 
remote representation is moved through a brain interface. The 
participant only has to think or imagine moving the remote 
body, and it moves the corresponding cyborg or robot body 
(in the movies perfectly) just as if they were moving their own 
real body. To a limited extent, this has been achieved today. For 
example, Millan et al. (2004) were able to control a mobile robot 
through non-invasive brain recordings or BCIs. Leeb et al. (2006) 
described their research with a tetraplegic patient who was able 
to use a BCI to navigate through a virtual environment presented 
in a Cave. He triggered his movement entirely by the voluntary 
production or halting of a specified electrical brain signal (EEG 
pattern).94 The same motor-imagery paradigm was used for the 
voluntary control of an arm belonging to the participant’s virtual 
body (Perez-Marcos et  al., 2009), resulting in an illusion of 
ownership over the virtual arm. BCI was used in a telepresence 
application for disabled patients by Tonin et al. (2011), although 
the patients did not see the remote environment via VR but rather 
92 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eQLr83Co-GI
93 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UGwQ74cH5O0
94 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cu7ouYww1RA
video on a PC display. Nevertheless, this demonstrated the pos-
sibility. A survey of the use of BCI in VR and games was presented 
by Lécuyer et al. (2008).
Martens et al. (2012) demonstrated that a number of whole 
body tasks could be realized by a participant wearing an HMD 
embodied in a remote robot controlled through various BCI 
paradigms. Participants could pick and place objects, and engage 
in a game. This study also illustrated how the BCI could be used to 
recognize the intentions of the participant (for example, pick up 
a glass) and the robot would execute and complete the intention 
(since non-invasive BCI today simply does not permit the fine 
control necessary).
The lack of fine motor control results from the fact that most 
BCI systems use non-invasive scalp electrodes that therefore 
record brain signals of low spatial resolution. For patients who 
cannot otherwise move, acting in the world through the motor 
control of a robot is a possibility that may justify (invasive) brain 
implants. Small electrodes placed in the cortical tissue record 
the activity of groups of neurons with higher spatial resolution, 
allowing the control of finer movements. Wessberg et al. (2000) 
first showed that direct recording from the neurons in monkeys 
enables them to control quite sophisticated movements of a 
remote robot arm without using their own real arm. A similar 
approach has been used in people with tetraplegia that could suc-
cessfully control robotic arms through brain implants (Hochberg 
et al., 2006, 2012). Moreover, depending on what the actuators 
may encounter, feedback can be used to stimulate appropriate 
groups of neurons that cause different tactile sensations. This was 
realized in monkeys by O’Doherty et al. (2011) where they were 
able to move a virtual arm that touched virtual objects distin-
guished only by their texture. Such technology could be used to 
drive prostheses that replace missing limbs, or exoskeletons that 
move actual but paralyzed limbs, or virtual bodies experienced in 
immersive VR or remote physical robots or cyborgs.
The latter possibility is the vision of Avatar and Surrogates. In 
each case, people perceive through the senses of their remotely 
embodied cyborg or robot and act in the world through those 
bodies. In John Scalzi’s novel Lock In95 people suffering from 
“locked in syndrome” are present in the world through such robot 
embodiment. Although these are works of science fiction they are 
beginning now to be technically feasible and almost surely are 
going to be realized with the advance of neuroscience, VR, and 
robotic technology. For example, Kishore et al. (2014) showed 
how BCI could be used to embody people in a remote robot 
through which they could gesture and maintain a conversation 
with the people there.96,97
The “Embodiment Station” reported by Leonardis et al. (2014) 
was inspired by the setup in Surrogates. The Embodiment Station 
is a large chair that is a mobile platform that can induce force 
feedback (see text footnote 97 from minute 2:50). The participant 
is fitted with an HMD and has a multitude of physiological 
responses recorded and various different types of stimulation 
95 http://us.macmillan.com/lockin/johnscalzi
96 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iGurLgspQxA
97 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XUg990uZjEo

----- Page 31 (native) -----
31
Slater and Sanchez-Vives
Enhancing Our Lives with VR
Frontiers in Robotics and AI  |  www.frontiersin.org
December 2016  |  Volume 3  |  Article 74
applied to his or her body. The participant may be embodied in a 
virtual body or remote physical body.
People in Avatar are shut into a tubular structure that monitors 
their brain and provides feedback so that they become embodied 
into a remote genetically engineered cyborg body. Cohen et al. 
(2014b) [see also Cohen et al. (2012)] show how to use real-time 
fMRI to decode particular thoughts of participants so that they 
are able to embody a virtual character98 and control a remote robot 
thousands of kilometers away (Cohen et al., 2014a).99 Although of 
course the degree of control and the level of embodiment are gen-
erations away from what is depicted in Avatar, it is nevertheless a 
clear step along the road toward this vision (see Presentations S6 
and S7 in Supplementary Material).
6.6. Industrial Applications and Design
During the 25 years when VR was supposedly dead, or at best 
confined to University laboratories, industry was busy using it 
to develop products, inventing new methods of manufacturing, 
assembly and training, maintenance, and shopping. We briefly 
review some work in this area.
In a major review of the use of VR in car manufacture, Lawson 
et al. (2016) pointed out that VR can be used for design, avoiding 
the complex and expensive procedure of building physical mock-
ups. With a mockup, any small change can result in major new 
work. Of course, VR is far more flexible in this regard. VR is also 
used for virtual manufacturing, that is part of the preparation, 
planning, and risk assessment in the manufacturing process, and 
clearly also invaluable for training. VR can be used for learning 
the assembly and disassembly of parts. Data from an in-depth 
survey revealed that VR was being used for a number of aspects 
in the design, manufacture, and evaluation – to examine the look 
of the vehicle including product reviews with clients, motion cap-
ture of manufacturing procedures, reviews relating to ergonomic 
use of the vehicle.
There has been significant work on industrial assembly, training 
for maintenance and remote maintenance – for example, Gavish 
et al. (2011, 2015) and Seth et al. (2011). This is also enhanced by 
the possibility of mixed reality where a participant in a VR can 
see their own hands incorporated into the virtual environment 
(Tecchia et al., 2014; Sportillo et al., 2015).100 Immersive VR is also 
being used for automobile testing.101
In another context, Tiainen et al. (2014) found that customers 
were equally at home in evaluating furniture presented virtually 
as physically. Indeed, they made more suggestions for design 
improvements in evaluations of the virtual products. Customers 
designing aspects of the interior of automobiles is also being 
prototyped using HMD-based VR.102
Virtual reality has also been used in the clothing industry 
where powerful computer graphics-based cloth simulators are 
used to allow customers to virtually try on clothes on virtual 
representations of their own bodies (Hauswiesner et al., 2011; 
98 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PeujbA6p3mU
99 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pFzfHnzjdo4
100 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3Q3ZC124Qbc
101 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EP0olmaL4Xs
102 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TOx4q711dY8
Magnenat-Thalmann et al., 2011; Sun et al., 2015). Although not 
yet used in an immersive way, such systems are bound eventually 
to be a normal part of shopping – as we will have our own body 
representations, trying on clothing in the comfort of our homes 
without the inconvenience of traveling, queues, and fitting rooms 
would be a possible major application.
A final example is a highly innovative potential application in 
the food industry. Ruppert (2011) describes how VR is used to 
study the behavior of shoppers in response to different kinds of 
packaging and layout in supermarkets. It is suggested that where 
consumers want to buy healthier products that experimentation 
with different types of presentation could result in knowledge 
about how to best present such products so that they stand out 
for these types of consumer.
As argued by Lawson et al. (2016), VR can improve the pro-
totyping, production, evaluation processes in manufacture, it can 
also be part of the design process, and ultimately for marketing. 
It also offers the possibility of consumers being involved in design 
and even designing aspects of the products that they will buy. In 
fact, VR combined with 3D printing could totally revolutionize 
how products are designed, manufactured, and delivered, giv-
ing enormous new power and possibilities to consumers103 (see 
Presentations S8 and S9 in Supplementary Material).
7. NEWS AND ENTERTAINMENT
We have already mentioned the potential benefits of VR for travel, 
for visiting remote relatives, and so on. Moreover, the use of VR in 
games is obviously going to be a huge area of application and one 
of the driving forces of the industry.104,105 There is a clear role also 
for immersive movies, where the participant plays a role within 
the story, somewhere between a game and a movie. These are 
such obvious applications of VR we are not going to discuss them 
further here. The chances are that any person first learning of VR 
in 2016 will do so because of a game or movie. In this section, 
we therefore concentrate on a quite novel field that VR opens 
up, which is the immersive presentation of news. This is usually 
called “immersive journalism.” However, it is important to note 
that it is not the journalism that is immersive but the presentation 
of its results through immersive media, leading to the creation of 
a genuine new type of media for news reporting. We will consider 
the issues involved, including ethical issues, and finally discuss 
the differences between computer graphics-based VR and 360° 
video.
7.1. News and Immersive Journalism
The idea of immersive journalism is “the production of news in 
a form in which people can gain first-person experiences of the 
events or situation described in news stories” (de la Peña et al., 
2010). Let’s consider the main headlines (online) of the Los 
Angeles Times on January 23, 2016 and see what this might mean.
103 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6nHw4RsNJ3Q
104 http://www.cnet.com/news/virtual-reality-is-taking-over-the-video-game-
industry/
105 https://storystudio.oculus.com/en-us/henry/

----- Page 32 (native) -----
32
Slater and Sanchez-Vives
Enhancing Our Lives with VR
Frontiers in Robotics and AI  |  www.frontiersin.org
December 2016  |  Volume 3  |  Article 74
7.1.1. Los Angeles Times January 23, 2016
Los Angeles Times January 
23, 2016
Possible immersive journalism version
Lawmakers want to put Gov. Jerry 
Brown’s delta tunnels plan before 
voters (http://www.latimes.com/
politics/la-pol-sac-delta-tunnels-
legislation-20160122-story.html)
A VR scenario could place people in the 
area displaying how it looks now, and how 
it might look after the tunnels, illustrating 
several different and disputed points of 
view. It could place people in the home (real 
or hypothetical) of a family considered under 
threat of losing it. It could place people in 
the home of a family who would expect that 
the construction would offer work to their 
currently unemployed members
This is about disputes around 
two proposed tunnels under the 
Sacramento–San Joaquin delta
Millions awake to more snow as 
blizzard moves up the East Coast 
(http://www.latimes.com/nation/
nationnow/la-na-nn-snowstorm-
strands-motorists-kentucky-
20160123-story.html)
The VR scenario could place people at 
different sites, showing how they look in 
a normal winter, and what happened as 
a result of the blizzard. It could immerse 
people in residential areas, offices, and so 
on. Depending on the policy, it could depict 
how it might be to drive in such weather 
conditions
This is about the massive winter 
storm that hit the East Coast of 
the US during the same weekend
To celebrate an ‘irreplaceable’ 
music teacher, grieving students 
hold a playground party (http://
www.latimes.com/local/california/
la-me-0123-music-teacher-killed-
20160123-story.html)
The VR scenario could place people in the 
school, use extant material to reconstruct 
teaching episodes by the teacher. It could 
put people in a similar road race to illustrate 
the hazards of this type of activity
This is about the grief of students 
after a teacher was run down by 
an out of control vehicle believed 
to be in a road race
Wave of violence shakes Boyle 
Heights church community (http://
www.latimes.com/local/california/
la-me-church-robbery-20160123-
story.html)
The VR scenario could let people 
experience both the peaceful normal life 
of the church and using available video 
footage from installed cameras, reconstruct 
particular criminal episodes to let people 
experience these first hand, so that they 
can understand what happened, and to 
examine how they could improve safety 
measures. It could illustrate what might 
happen if the gates continued to be left 
open or the effect on church attendance 
and visits if they were locked
This is about a wave of violence that 
hit a particular church over the past 
year, including assaults, robberies, 
a hit-and-run death, car thefts, 
and so on. The church authorities 
were considering keeping the gates 
locked to stem the violence
Man is suspected of attacking his 
wife and killing 2 of his nephews in 
Arcadia (http://www.latimes.com/
local/california/la-me-0123-double-
slaying-20160123-story.html)
The scenario could be reconstructed and 
relived in VR, both for police investigative 
purposes and for powerful education 
around the theme of domestic violence (an 
example is discussed below)
What started as domestic violence 
ended as a double murder
Kicking it into ‘high gear,’ Academy 
president says Oscar changes 
are ‘the right thing to do’ (http://
www.latimes.com/entertainment/
envelope/la-et-mn-oscars-reform-
20160123-story.html)
Since this is reporting a decision there 
is no obvious VR representation. One 
possibility would be to illustrate how the 
Oscar ceremony might have been, or how 
Oscar ceremonies might be in future years 
if the changes are effective with respect to 
the goals. Also, journalists might think of 
“unexpected consequences” and portray 
those
This is about the 2016 Oscar 
nominees being all White, and the 
changes made by the Academy of 
Motion Picture Arts and Sciences to 
rectify this situation in future years
If we compare the report with the VR version we can see that 
they reflect quite different purposes. In each row, the left side 
is the reporting of “news” (“Newly received or noteworthy 
information, especially about recent events,” Oxford English 
Dictionary). There are masses of academic research studies and 
theories of what makes it into “The News” (as reported by news-
papers, radio, TV, and of course now myriad online outlets). 
Interested readers could read, for example, a classic analysis 
by Galtung and Ruge (1965) who identify a number of factors 
that influence what events typically get into the news, and a 
follow-up study by Harcup and O’Neill (2001) who examined 
the earlier theory in the light of a content analysis of stories in 
three British newspapers. The theory includes factors such as 
those events involving elite nations or persons are more like to 
be newsworthy than non-elites. For example, news in Western 
media is more likely to report on events in the USA, Europe, 
China, and Russia than in the Seychelles, except, for example, 
when events in other places directly affect those countries (e.g., 
events in the Middle East). The divorce of a movie star is far 
more likely to make it into the news than the divorce of your 
next-door neighbor (unless you happen to live next to a movie 
star). However, who decides what is important? This reflects 
another aspect of news, which is that there are not events just 
“out there” floating around, and they just happen and then are 
selected by journalists according to some criteria and then 
reported factually, but it is an active process where what is 
news is defined by journalists and multifarious interests and 
ideologies that make up particular media cultures (O’Neill and 
Harcup, 2008). For example, a President attends an important 
international event. If the President is a man, the reporting 
may focus on the event and its background. If the President 
is a woman, a great deal of attention may be instead paid to 
her clothing.106,107 News values can differ enormously between 
different organizations. What makes it into the equivalent of the 
left side of each row in the table above, and how it is reported, 
are not simply matters of fact.
Now considering the possible immersive VR versions there 
is quite a difference – the goal is not so much the presentation 
of “what happened” but to give people experiential, non-analytic 
insight into the events, to give them the illusion of being present 
in them. That presence may lead to another understanding of the 
events, perhaps an understanding that cannot be well expressed 
verbally or even in pictures. It reflects the fundamental capability 
of what you can experience in VR – to be there and to experience 
a situation from different perspectives. This is no more or less 
“objective” than news in traditional forms – what is selected, and 
how it is presented inevitably will reflect the interests, culture, 
political views of the journalists involved, and perhaps even more 
importantly their news organizations. There is no way around 
that, since what might be “news” is infinite, and something has 
to be selected.
106 http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/europe/germany/9427863/
Double-take-Angela-Merkel-steps-out-in-same-dress-she-wore-to-same-event-
four-years-ago.html
107 http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/2/10369810-aeaf-11e3-aaa6-00144feab7de.
html#slide0

----- Page 33 (native) -----
33
Slater and Sanchez-Vives
Enhancing Our Lives with VR
Frontiers in Robotics and AI  |  www.frontiersin.org
December 2016  |  Volume 3  |  Article 74
Moreover, how news in VR will be understood will also be 
actively shaped by the participant. Recall that in VR there are 
neither “users” nor “observers” but participants or consumer-
participants. Even if you are just an observer without the actual 
ability to intervene, presence in VR is such that you will likely 
have the perception that ongoing events could affect you. 
Hence, the consumer of a news story in one medium becomes 
a participant in the virtual story in the other, the “immersive 
journalism” that creates a scenario to represent aspects of the 
news story in VR. However, there is a difference. Let’s go back 
to the woman President attending an event. A VR rendition of 
this puts you in the scene in the 1PP of someone who attended 
and who was greeted by the President. She moves over to you, 
smiles, and says some words of greeting: to you. Assuming that 
the journalist had made every effort in visual reconstruction to 
be faithful to the original event, whether the clothes that the 
President is wearing stand out or not depend wholly on you, 
the perceiver. You may pay attention to them or not, you may 
see them as remarkable or not. If the journalist wanted to really 
point out to participants the clothing worn by the President, 
this is of course entirely possible in VR – whether openly or 
surreptitiously. However, if the goal is to try to be objective, then 
how certain aspects of the events are interpreted will depend 
more on the perceiver than on the designer. We will come back 
to some of these points later.
The first immersive journalism piece was developed in 2010 
in Barcelona, Spain, and directed by journalist Nonny de la 
Peña with the help of digital artist Peggy Weil. It followed on 
from the idea of their 2009 interactive Second Life piece that 
portrayed a virtual Guantánamo Bay prison.108 The immersive 
news story was displayed in a Wide5 HMD by Fakespace for 
the display (see text footnote 18) and incorporated body track-
ing. It established a pattern that was to be used by Nonny de 
la Peña in later productions, which was to use a mix of data 
from actual events combined with a computer graphics-based 
reconstruction. It relied on transcripts of the interrogation of 
Detainee 063, Mohammed Al Qahtani, at Guantánamo Bay 
Prison 2002–2003. The scenario was in a single cell-like room, 
and the participant was embodied in a virtual character wear-
ing an orange “jump-suit.” From a 1PP, the participant’s virtual 
body posture was shown in a stress position – one reportedly 
used for “harsh interrogations.” The participant could see the 
virtual body either directly looking toward his own body and 
in a virtual mirror. However, in fact the participant was seated 
comfortably in a chair. The participant would hear an interroga-
tion as if coming from a cell next door.109 A case study (de la 
Peña et al., 2010) with three participants was carried out who 
were interviewed after their experience. All reported that even 
though they were seated comfortably, they felt uncomfortable, 
even pain, from the posture of their virtual body. This result that 
the posture of the virtual body can actually influence feelings of 
comfort or discomfort of participants has recently found new 
evidence (Bergström et  al., 2016) (see text footnote 54). The 
three participants felt a foreboding that the interrogation in the 
108 http://www.immersivejournalism.com/gone-gitmo/
109 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_z8pSTMfGSo
next cell would soon shift to them. Although the participants 
had not been given any forewarning of the meaning of the 
event that they were to experience, one of them said: “During 
the experience I was kind of reminded of the news that I heard 
about the Guantánamo prisoners and how they feel and I really 
felt like if I were a prisoner in Iraq or some… war place and I 
was being interrogated.” It illustrates the difference between the 
left column (traditional reporting of news) and right column 
(news in VR) in the Table above. The left column might be a 
written piece about harsh interrogation methods, or a TV news 
piece illustrating aspects of this. But, on the right hand side 
there is experience. Of course, this is not the real experience, 
but may give participants insight into how some aspects of the 
situations depicted might have been.
“Hunger in Los Angeles”110 was a subsequent piece by Nonny 
de la Peña. This puts participants in a food line in Los Angeles 
where one of the people in the queue faints due to diabetes, and 
the various characters around react. It was based on an actual 
event and blended real sound recordings with computer graphics. 
The virtual characters in the food line were animated through 
the motion capture of actors. It was experienced by hundreds of 
people at the Sundance Film Festival in 2012. The 2014 World 
Economic Forum featured “Project Syria” by de la Peña, which 
depicted a bomb explosion in a Syrian town and its aftermath (see 
text footnote 110). This followed the same pattern of being based 
on an actual event and starting from video and audio from the real 
scenario. Further pieces on the same lines are “One Dark Night”111 
about the shooting of teenager Travyon Martin and “Kiya” about 
an incident of domestic violence and murder112 (recall the fifth 
item in the table above).
An alternative to using computer graphics to reconstruct 
events is the use of 360° video. A scenario is captured by using a 
special camera and subsequent software to patch video together 
to form a completely surrounding scene that can be displayed in 
an HMD. Due to head tracking, the viewer can look all around 
the scene, and depending on how it has been captured, it can 
also be displayed in stereo. We will return to the technology in 
Section 7.2. This is therefore an alternative way of displaying 
events immersively.
“Waves of Grace”113 by Gabo Arora (Senior Advisor and 
Filmmaker, United Nations) and Chris Milk (Vrse.works) use 
this technique to recreate the true story of a survivor of Ebola 
in Liberia. They also created “Clouds over Sidra,” a documentary 
about a child refugee in the Syrian war.114 Louis Jebb founder 
and Edward Miller head of visuals of Immersiv.ly use 360° video 
to create immersive news events. Some examples have been the 
coverage of unrest in Hong Kong115 and a 360° VR experience 
of the paintings of the artist Gretchen Andrew on a self-guided 
interactive tour of a computer-generated recreation of the De Re 
Galler in Los Angeles.116 The Des Moines Register working with 
110 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SSLG8auUZKc
111 http://www.emblematicgroup.com/#/one-dark-night/
112 http://www.emblematicgroup.com/#/kiya/
113 http://vrse.works/creators/chris-milk/work/waves-of-grace/
114 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FFnhMX6oR1Q
115 http://www.hongkongunrest.com/vr-player.html
116 http://virtualrealityderegallery.com

----- Page 34 (native) -----
34
Slater and Sanchez-Vives
Enhancing Our Lives with VR
Frontiers in Robotics and AI  |  www.frontiersin.org
December 2016  |  Volume 3  |  Article 74
Dan Pacheco produced a documentary that combined both 
computer graphics-generated VR and 360°, which can be viewed 
in an Oculus HMD that provided an in-depth study of the situ-
ation of farmers in Iowa, called “Harvest of Change.”117 The New 
York Times has started VR news based on 360°, using Google 
Cardboard as the means of display and has created a number of 
stories with this technology.118 The BBC is also experimenting 
with 360° HMD-based news,119 for example, providing experi-
ence of the refugee crisis.120
At the same time as the great enthusiasm of VR in this 
domain,121 there are also warnings about its ethics. For example, 
in an excellent and comprehensive article on potential problems, 
Tom Kent (Standards Editor, Associated Press and Columbia 
University) urges “an ethical reality check for virtual reality 
journalism.”122 The first point concerns the depiction of reality. 
For example, “Hunger in Los Angeles” was a reconstruction using 
computer graphics for the display. It was not the real thing. It is 
important for consumer-participants to always be made aware 
of this, and it should form part of the ethics code being devised 
by digital journalists.123 However, it is important to note that all 
journalistic reporting necessarily involves transformation and 
cannot possibly ever depict every aspect of reality. At the moment 
that the news camera focuses on the face of a politician, it of 
course misses everything else that is happening at the same time, 
some of which may change the meaning of the facial expression. 
Depicting any event with its infinite aspects and nuances in any 
media whatsoever necessarily involves a transformation. As we 
argued above, starting from what is selected to how it is portrayed 
involves myriads of choices. VR is no different in this regard. It 
can be argued that in VR a journalist could, for example, deliber-
ately change the facial expression of a protagonist from a friendly 
smile (as it was in reality) to an arrogant grin. This could happen 
deliberately or by accident. However, how different is this from 
taking a small sentence in a speech of a politician out of context, 
thus distorting its meaning away from that intended? The use of 
VR requires ethical standards no more or less than conventional 
news reporting.
Another point relates to 360° video-based pieces, where there 
is an issue of image integrity. Since the Associated Press does 
not allow manipulation of images should particularly disturbing 
parts of a scene on a battlefield or bomb site be left in or not? 
Again, this is nothing special for VR. Of course a 360° view is less 
selective than a single camera shot or normal video shot. There 
are conventions where images are “distorted” though – such as 
blurring the faces of vulnerable people in order to protect them. 
It is not clear why such conventions could not be applied in the 
117 http://www.desmoinesregister.com/pages/interactives/harvest-of-change/
118 http://www.nytimes.com/newsgraphics/2015/nytvr/
119 http://bbcnewslabs.co.uk/projects/360-video-and-vr/
120 http://www.bbc.co.uk/taster/projects/we-wait
121 http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/21/opinion/sundance-new-frontiers-
virtual-reality.html?hp&action=click&pgtype=Homepage&clickSource=st
ory-heading&module=mini-moth®ion=top-stories-below&WT.nav=top-
stories-below&_r=0 (NYT Feature “Where Virtual Reality Takes Us”).
122 https://medium.com/@tjrkent/an-ethical-reality-check-for-virtual-reality-
journalism-8e5230673507#.ftgz6i1v3
123 https://ethics.journalism.wisc.edu/resources/digital-media-ethics/
same way. This is nothing really to do with VR. As we argued in 
Section 1.1, VR is a media where conventional approaches will 
eventually be overtaken by a new paradigm. Today, shooting a 3D 
movie inevitably draws on the conventions of traditional movie 
making, so that problems of inclusion are paramount, since 360° 
in principle shows “everything.” New paradigms will eventually 
overcome this problem.
The third point is that there may be competing views of what 
happened in any event, so VR portraying one version may not 
reflect the diversity of views. This also has nothing to do with 
VR. In fact, VR may have an advantage that it is possible to relive 
a scenario from multiple points of view – from the viewpoints 
of different protagonists, which may sometimes even explain 
why they describe an event quite differently. The 1950 Japanese 
movie “Rashomon”124 received international acclaim for doing 
this – depicting a story from the multiple points of view of 
the characters involved. Another version was released in 1964 
called “The Outrage.”125 VR could excel in such multi-viewpoint 
recreations.
Tom Kent argues that since VR is excellent for producing 
empathy, and identification with characters who may be expe-
rienced as being physically close to consumer-participants, that 
journalists have a special responsibility to make sure that their 
piece is balanced. For example, if they have the goal of produc-
ing sympathy toward particular people or situations they could 
emphasize aspects that provoke empathy or leave out balancing 
information that could be inconvenient to their story. This is 
of course true but again it applies no less than to conventional 
media. It could be argued though that VR is particularly adept at 
raising emotions and therefore unwitting consumer-participants 
might be more easily manipulated. This may be true. For exam-
ple, we have seen in Section 2.1.2 how embodying White people 
in a Black body appears to reduce their implicit racial bias against 
Black people (Peck et al., 2013). However, we also saw in Section 
4.4 that in a fight between two virtual characters about soccer 
teams, only participants who supported the same team as the 
victim tended to try to intervene to stop the fight (Slater et al., 
2013). People did not change their behavior simply as a result 
of being near a virtual character that was attacked by another. 
In other words, people are not like sponges and just soak up 
whatever emotion is poured into them. In the racial bias example, 
participants were generally not explicitly biased, so in reducing 
their implicit (i.e., largely non-conscious) bias perhaps they were 
being helped toward realizing their own non-biased preferences. 
Imagine a VR scenario that placed a United States Democrat 
supporter into a Republican rally or an English vociferously anti-
European voter into the heart of the Brussels decision-making 
community. Are either of these likely to change their views as 
a result? Of course, research is needed on this issue, but people 
should not be considered as empty vessels ready to be filled by 
whatever propaganda comes along. At the end of the day if a 
journalist wants to present a particular viewpoint they will do so 
with whatever means they have, so that the critical requirement is 
124 http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0042876/
125 http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0058437/

----- Page 35 (native) -----
35
Slater and Sanchez-Vives
Enhancing Our Lives with VR
Frontiers in Robotics and AI  |  www.frontiersin.org
December 2016  |  Volume 3  |  Article 74
openness, information about potential distortions, and appropri-
ate ethical standards.
The final main point made in the article by Tom Kent is that 
the virtual environment is a circumscribed world, and of course 
the scenario is embedded in a wider world in which other related 
events may be happening. On the one side, the VR gives the 
impression to participants that they can freely go wherever they 
want, but of course the specific virtual environment has bounda-
ries outside of which nothing can be perceived. This is a problem 
of selection, applying no less to other news media. When you are 
reading a story in a newspaper is it the whole story? Of course 
not, and it never can be.
Arguments about the ethics of VR miss the point that it is not 
the only way or even the “best” way to deliver news (or indeed 
any story at all, whether supposedly real or fictional). Just as 
VR is not going to replace novels in the form of books, it is not 
going to replace traditional media. It is another medium, another 
method for the production and display of narrative, providing 
a different kind of “information,” providing a different kind of 
emotional engagement. These are not “better” or “worse” but 
just different. You can read about the refugee camp at Calais in 
France full of people wanting to enter the UK, or you can visit 
there virtually,126 or really go there. Each of these will provide 
quite different information and responses. One may give facts and 
figures and talk about policy and implications for the future of the 
European Union, another may show the physical and emotional 
plight of particular people in that camp. Visiting the camp virtu-
ally might lead someone already so inclined to do something to 
try to help the individuals concerned, but not necessarily result in 
a change in their political convictions about immigration. What is 
important is that all types of journalism follow ethical standards, 
and this applies no matter what the medium (see Presentation S10 
in Supplementary Material).
7.2. 360° and VR
There is some discussion about whether 360° video as has been 
used in some of the pieces described above is “really” VR. For 
example, Will Smith in an article in Wired127 argued that systems 
such as 360° video as might be seen through Google Cardboard 
should not be called “VR,” the main argument being that the 
relationship between head moves and image changes are more 
likely to lead to simulator sickness in 360°. However, this battle 
has already been lost. Mainstream media are already referring to 
360° video as VR, and that is not going to change.
In order to consider this question, we return to the concept of 
“immersion” discussed in Section 1.3. Immersion refers exclu-
sively to the technical affordances of a system. Different types of 
immersion may give rise to different types of subjective experi-
ence, but this is a different issue. One system is “more immersive” 
than another if the first can be used to simulate the second. This 
can classify all systems into what mathematicians call a “partial 
order.” It is partial because that not all pairs can be classified in 
126 http://www.fastcompany.com/3053219/fast-feed/virtual-reality-journalism- 
is-coming-to-the-associated-press
127 http://www.wired.com/2015/11/360-video-isnt-virtual-reality
this way – there may be two systems where neither can be used 
to simulate the other.128 Now, if we consider 360° VR as video 
captured in a real setting and displayed in a head-tracked HMD 
then that can, in principle, be entirely simulated by a computer 
graphics rendering of the same scene, but not vice versa. By a 
graphics rendering of the scene we mean one based on a computer 
model (the model ultimately describes all the geometry, material 
properties, lighting, and dynamics of objects in the scene). Since 
there is a model, participants can change their point of view to 
anywhere within the scene. For example, they can move close 
to any object and then circle around it while observing it. If the 
viewpoint is restricted to only a few specific points, where from 
those points the viewer can turn around and look 360° then this 
is equivalent to “360-degree” VR. However, 360° VR cannot allow 
participants the full range of movement through the scene, to be 
able to observe any object arbitrarily from any angle.
In normal vision based on natural sensorimotor contingen-
cies, when we see one object obscuring another, we can move our 
head and in principle see completely behind the obscuring object. 
This can be done with correct perspective and head movement 
parallax in graphics-based VR. This cannot be done, or to a very 
limited extent in 360° video. Graphics-based VR can be restricted 
to simulate the 360° simulation, but not vice  versa. Therefore, 
there is a fundamental technical difference that will always persist 
by definition between 360° and model-based VR. Model-based 
VR can simulate 360°, but not vice versa. Therefore, technically it 
has a greater immersion in this classification of systems.
Ultimately, this means that they are useful for different 
purposes. If the VR is meant to depict something up-close and 
personal, such as interaction with a virtual character where the 
participant and virtual character might be arbitrarily changing 
their positions in the space, then this cannot be accomplished by 
360°, since this type of parallax effect (e.g., just moving the head 
to see behind the character) just is not possible, unless every pos-
sible move that the participant was going to make was determined 
in advance and camera data made available for these possibilities. 
On the other hand, for a large-scale scene such as witnessing street 
protests as in Immersiv.ly’s Hong Kong protests mentioned above, 
then 360° is sufficient. Provided that the designers did not intend 
the possibility for a participant to move up close to any arbitrary 
protestor for one-on-one unplanned interaction then this is fine.
Therefore, we would conclude that model or graphics-based 
VR and 360° VR are different possibilities in the domain that 
is referred to as “virtual reality,” and designers and application 
builders will use the type of system that fits best with their goals. 
For close-up interaction, 360° will quickly break the natural 
sensorimotor contingencies that are necessary for the generation 
of presence. On the other hand, for large-scale scenes looking 
at objects far enough away, 360° is not only the simpler form of 
construction and rendering, but it is good enough in terms of 
sensorimotor contingencies. It is not either one or the other, both 
have their role. A major worry of Will Smith is that one would 
128 For example, we can say that coordinate (x, y) is “less than” (z, w) if x < z and 
y < w. This defines a partial order over the set of all such coordinates. (1, 2) is less 
than (3, 4), but there is no order between (1, 2) and (0, 3).

----- Page 36 (native) -----
36
Slater and Sanchez-Vives
Enhancing Our Lives with VR
Frontiers in Robotics and AI  |  www.frontiersin.org
December 2016  |  Volume 3  |  Article 74
be confused with the other, and that people with poor experi-
ences in 360° will therefore label “virtual reality” as poor. Sensible 
and careful use of both types of technology where they are most 
appropriate would avoid this possibility.
It should be noted that it is not the model-based solution in 
itself that is important here, but what it offers in terms of natural 
sensorimotor contingencies for perception. There will eventually 
be other solutions that are not model-based but offer the same. 
One likely solution will be based on light fields (Levoy and 
Hanrahan, 1996; Ng et al., 2005), which attempt to fully simulate 
the propagation of light through an environment, and therefore 
allow a viewer to dynamically move anywhere within a scene. The 
problem is that dynamic changes to objects, and especially chang-
ing lights, cannot easily be supported. Some recent developments 
for HMDs based on light field displays are discussed in Lanman 
and Luebke (2013).
8. CONCLUSION
8.1. Recent Novel Ideas and Applications
In this article, we have mainly reviewed developments in VR 
that have taken place since its origins in the 1980s, focusing on 
applications, and especially those with outcomes that have some 
level of research support. The field is changing extremely rapidly, 
and the inventiveness of people is amazing, with new ideas and 
projects emerging daily. Here, we briefly list some recent ideas 
that have caught our attention (as of May 2016). Mostly, these are 
ideas in progress, with no results, or maybe not even any level of 
implementation. They are presented in random order.
Mark Zuckerberg: Virtual Reality Might Be Coming to Your 
Baby Photos
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rACZOac1w8w
The idea that VR may be used to share photos immersively.
Dreams of Dali
http://thedali.org/dreams-of-dali/
A VR experience based on Dali’s 1935 painting Archeological 
Reminiscence of Millet’s “Angelus.”
Visualizing Big Data
http://www.mastersofpie.com/project/winners-of-the-big-data-
vr-challenge-set-by-epic-games-wellcome-trust/
How “big data” in particular a longitudinal social survey can be 
explored in HMD-based VR.
Topshop – London Fashion Week
https://www.inition.co.uk/case_study/
virtual-reality-catwalk-show-topshop/
Attend the show using VR.
A History of Cuban Dance
http://with.in/watch/a-history-of-cuban-dance/
A 360° VR documentary.
Second Life in VR
http://www.bizjournals.com/sanfrancisco/blog/tech-
flash/2016/01/second-life-second-act-virtual-reality-sansar.html
San Francisco Business Times reports “In virtual reality, Second 
Life prepares for its second act.”
Megadeth in VR
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PnQAz8jWAh0
A YouTube documentary about Megadeth bringing heavy metal 
to VR.
In the eyes of the Animal
http://www.sundance.org/projects/in-the-eyes-of-the-animal
A Sundance Festival winner showing views of how the world 
might look to various animals
Virtual Reality in Court
http://www.popsci.com/jurors-may-one-day-visit-crime-scenes-
using-forensic-holodecks
A Popular Science report “Scientists Want To Take Virtual 
Reality To Court – Jurors May One Day Visit Crime Scenes 
Using Forensic Holodecks.”
Project Nourished – A Gastronomical Virtual Reality 
Experience
http://www.projectnourished.com
“You can eat anything you want without regret.”
Curing Cataract Blindness
http://www.ndtv.com/world-news/virtual-reality-could-be-the-
next-big-thing-in-curing-cataract-blindness-1269591
NDTV report “Virtual Reality Could Be The Next Big Thing In 
Curing Cataract Blindness.”
Oculus Quill
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kPHWHJNTlkg
Drawing in VR.
Producer of Acclaimed “First” Sets Sights on Anne Frank VR 
Experience
http://www.roadtovr.com/producer-of-acclaimed-first-sets-
sights-on-anne-frank-vr-experience/
Plans for a historical VR reconstruction of aspects of the life of 
Anne Franke.
Step inside the Large Hadron Collider (360 video)—BBC News
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d_OeQxoKocU&index=1& 
list=PLS3XGZxi7cBXqnRTtKMU7Anm-R-kyhkyC
“A 360 tour of CERN that takes you deep inside the Large 
Hadron Collider—the world’s greatest physics experiment—
with BBC Click’s Spencer Kelly.”
And so on…
8.2. General Considerations
We have reviewed numerous applications of VR many of which 
were already envisioned or developed in its earlier forms in the 
1980–1990s and have been more extensively developed and 
tested in the last 25 years. In most cases, the societal reach has 
been restricted given that the VR systems used (in combination 
or not with robotics, tracking, etc.) were too costly to move 
out the research laboratories and reach consumers. There has

----- Page 37 (native) -----
37
Slater and Sanchez-Vives
Enhancing Our Lives with VR
Frontiers in Robotics and AI  |  www.frontiersin.org
December 2016  |  Volume 3  |  Article 74
nevertheless been significant testing and validation of potential 
applications in many different areas.
This article has shown that the applications of VR are very 
extensive and range across numerous domains of knowledge. 
This means that even though the most frequent use that the 
mass of people are going to experience as a consumer product 
will probably be for games and entertainment, all advances and 
developments in VR will also have an impact in more specialized 
research and professional fields. More affordable systems will 
facilitate not only the reach to final consumers but also to more 
developers and research groups, resulting in a much wider range 
of applications and generation of content for VR that will emerge 
in the near future.
Even though applications in psychology, medicine, education, 
or research will reach many, there are some sectors of the popu-
lation that may be also directly benefited from VR: those with 
reduced mobility for any reason, lesions, neurological disorders, 
or aging. To such people VR may provide a new space to move 
freely, interact, or work. This could be achieved by acting in VR 
through various means including motor action, BCIs, eye track-
ing, or physiological responses.
Finally, we also point out that since the use of VR in these 
many application realms should be evidence-based, that scien-
tific papers should adhere to the highest standards of rigor and 
reporting. In the hundreds of papers we have reviewed in the 
preparation of this article, there are many that do not even say 
what type of equipment was being used. The term “virtual reality” 
has been overused, when scientific papers are often simply talking 
about a PC display with a mouse, and the reader has to look very 
hard through the paper in order to discover that – if is stated at all.
8.3. Speculations – “I’ve seen things …”
“I’ve seen things you people wouldn’t believe; attack 
ships on fire off the shoulder of Orion. I watched 
C-beams glitter in the dark near the Tannhäuser Gate. 
All those moments will be lost, in time, like tears in 
rain. Time to die.” (Replicant Roy Batty, near the closing 
scene of the movie Blade Runner).129
In the introduction to this article, we defined our notion of 
“immersion” as the “physics” of a system – how well it can afford 
people real-world sensorimotor contingencies for perception 
and action. We pointed out that this also offers a way of ordering 
systems – where one system is “more immersive” than a second 
if the first can be used to simulate experiences on the second, but 
not vice versa. We used this classification, for example, to show 
that model-based VR is “more immersive” than 360° VR, so that 
these have different functionality and uses.
Yet, this raises a paradox. Immersive VR simulates experiences 
of physical reality. Does that mean that VR is more “immersive” 
than reality? Like any paradox, this helps us to understand the 
underlying concepts. There must always be some aspect of the VR 
that does not conform with reality. This is certain. Why? Because 
were it not the case then what the participant experiences would 
129 http://www.warnerbros.com/blade-runner
be his or her reality! This is not word play but rather illustrates a 
fundamental aspect of VR. The reader may respond – “Yes, but 
it is only a matter of time before the graphics, sound, tracking, 
haptics, etc. become so advanced that people will not be able to 
distinguish a VR experience from a real one, just like nowadays it 
is becoming difficult to distinguish pictures or videos that are pho-
tographs of real world scenes from those that are wholly generated 
by graphics.” However, in order for the VR to be indistinguishable 
from reality, the participant would have to not remember that they 
had “gone into” a VR system. Even if the devices become almost 
completely transparent and just a part of normal clothing, still 
the participant has to not know, in other words, has to forget that 
this is VR, has to forget pressing the button, or having the right 
thought in a BCI that commands: “Now put me into VR.” If it 
goes so far that they do not remember getting into VR and they 
consider that they are directly perceiving physical reality, then 
they are perceiving their own physical reality.
When we think of VR we are typically thinking about experi-
ences in the visual and auditory domains, rather than haptics (touch 
and force feedback). The field of haptics has excellent solutions 
for specific types of interaction, such as pushing a needle through 
soft tissue (as in medical applications), or using an exoskeleton to 
apply force feedback to an arm. However, unlike the visual and 
auditory fields, there is no generalized solution. By a generalized 
solution we mean a single device whereby participants in a VR 
can feel anything (just as a display can be ­programmed to display 
anything), for example, feel something when their virtual body 
accidentally brushes against a virtual wall or fall backwards when 
hit by a tidal wave of virtual water. As argued by Slater (2014), 
solutions to such issues may well have to go down the route of 
direct brain interfaces to solve such fundamental problems in a 
general way that can never be solved with external devices, which 
in the haptics domain always provide very specific stimuli. VR 
would become an applied branch of neuroscience in this view. 
Since as we and others have argued before our notion of reality is 
a constructed one, by activating the appropriate brain areas, our 
perception in this type of VR based on direct neural intervention 
would be indistinguishable from perception of “reality.” As the 
philosopher Thomas Metzinger has pointed out130 we are about 
to embark on an enormous process of new learning through 
mass availability of VR: “The real news, however, may be that the 
general public will gradually acquire a new and intuitive under-
standing of what their very own conscious experience really is 
and what it always has been” – that our conscious experience is 
one possible model – an interpretation – of the world.
Now, let us imagine the perfect VR system with perfect immer-
sion, so perfect that for most people it is completely indistinguish-
able from reality – it is their reality (recall that they must not 
remember that they “went into VR” and likewise they must not 
know when they “come out of VR”). Again seemingly paradoxi-
cally in such a situation the notion of presence vanishes. There is 
no sense of presence in physical reality. Presence is the feeling of 
being transported to another place. This is why our notion of “place 
illusion” as “being there” includes the rider “…in spite of the fact 
130 http://edge.org/response-detail/26699 Edge “Virtual Reality Goes Mainstream: 
A Complex Convolution.”

----- Page 38 (native) -----
38
Slater and Sanchez-Vives
Enhancing Our Lives with VR
Frontiers in Robotics and AI  |  www.frontiersin.org
December 2016  |  Volume 3  |  Article 74
that you know for sure that you are not actually there.” It contains 
an element of surprise: “I know I am at home wearing a HMD, but 
I feel as if I am in the Himalayas.” In physical reality, there is no 
perceptual surprise, no feeling “Wow! Look at that, it is amazing 
that I am here!” (except, for example, as a way of expressing good 
fortune at being in a fabulous place). We are just “here.” We do 
not comment on it or think about it from the perceptual point 
of view – only sometimes at the content of our perception – the 
scenery or surprising events. There is no special or remarkable 
feeling associated with being in a place. It is how things always 
are. The only time we might feel something unusual is when some 
aspect of our perception breaks – for example, through mental 
illness, hallucinogens, the aftermath of an injury – where we find 
ourselves outside of the reference frame of our normal perception. 
In the movie The Matrix,131 almost everyone was living in perfect 
immersion, perfect VR. They only became aware of “presence” (i.e., 
that their world was illusory) at moments when the system failed.
Hence, the illusion of presence actually represents the non-
perfection of immersion. On one side, as we improve immersion 
more and more through technical advances what this means in 
terms of “presence” is that the “wow” factor, the sensation of the 
difference between where we know ourselves to be, but where we 
feel ourselves to be, i.e., the level of illusion, will become stronger 
and stronger. The shock of putting on the HMD and seeing an 
alternate reality in high-resolution, all around, with fantastic 
vision, sound, haptics, smell, taste, and full body tracking will 
become overwhelming. But, on the other side, when immersion 
becomes perfect – to the point that we do not in any way distin-
guish between perception of reality and VR even to the extent of 
not knowing when we are perceiving from one rather than the 
other – then presence will disappear.
However, it is also possible that the surprise element of “pres-
ence” will disappear for another reason. Imagine the generation 
that grows up where VR is just as much part of their lives as cell 
phones are today. Although they will distinguish reality from VR, 
their illusion of presence may diminish because the surprise ele-
ment will disappear through acclimatization. Older generations 
today still marvel at being able to have real-time video connec-
tions at virtually zero added cost with people half way around the 
world, but a younger generation that is growing up with that find 
it completely unremarkable. So, this new generation that grows up 
with VR will of course have the illusion of “being there” in VR, but 
it will be nothing special, and therefore there will be all the more 
reason that they will tend to behave the same in VR as they do in 
reality in similar circumstances. It will be like: Now I am at home. 
Now I am at school. Now I am in place X in VR. They will become 
equivalent perceptually, cognitively, and behaviorally. But, just as 
kids learn “Don’t run in the school corridor,” “Don’t shout in the 
classroom,” so they will learn different forms of behavior that 
apply to different places in different modes of reality. VR will have 
its own customs, norms of behavior, and politeness. Today all we 
can say is that however we imagine this might be – it won’t be like 
that, since it will be the result of an unpredictable and complex 
product of technological advance and social evolution.
131 http://www.warnerbros.com/matrix
We have used the term “presence” slightly loosely here. Recall 
that there are two components: PI (resting as a necessary condition 
on sensorimotor contingencies) and Psi (the illusion that events 
are real). The latter is just as critical and maybe more difficult 
to get right in many applications. For example, in a real street 
we might avoid parking our car because we see a police officer 
standing nearby. On closer inspection we realize that the police 
officer is actually a manikin dummy. So we park. This is a failure 
of Psi of the dummy. In VR, we are enjoying talking to a very nice 
virtual person. Eventually, we realize that the virtual person is 
going through some repetitive actions and is not actually aware 
of what we are doing. We move away. This is a failure of Psi, even 
though our illusion of being in the place is intact. Both PI and Psi 
are critical components of successful VR applications.
Virtual reality, however, can deliver forms of Psi that have 
never existed in reality and yet still lead to the illusion of these 
happening. In Slater et al. (1996), we put people in a VR where 
they could play 3D chess (like in Star Trek). Not one person was 
shocked or made any comment about the fact that when they 
touched the chess pieces these would float in the virtual space to 
their next location. When asked about this one participant said: 
“Oh that’s just how things behave in this reality.” So Psi is a difficult 
concept. In some circumstances, expectations cannot be broken. 
In others VR can create new expectations that seem completely 
natural even though they could never happen in physical reality. 
This is something really worth understanding, and it is connected 
to our final point.
Virtual Reality encompasses virtual unreality. Almost all the 
applications we have reviewed, and a lot of what we see, translate 
something from reality into VR. A fear of heights application 
puts people … on a height. A fear of public speaking application 
puts people … in front of an audience. These are fine. However, 
maybe there are completely new ways to think about these types 
of applications that make use of the amazing power to put people 
outside of the bounds of reality and have a positive effect. Even 
though VR has been around for half a century, still not enough 
is known about it. The goal is to shape it to create moments that 
enhance the lives of people and maybe help secure the future of 
the planet.
And those moments need not be lost.132
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
All the authors listed have made substantial, direct, and intel-
lectual contribution to the work and approved it for publication.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Thanks to James Hairston of Oculus for his support of this work. 
In addition, the authors thank the following people who have 
provided images or video that appear in the Supplementary 
Presentations: Abderrahmane Kheddar, Aitor Rovira, Albert 
‘Skip’ Rizzo, Anatole Lécuyer, Angus Antley, Anthony Steed, 
132 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NoAzpa1x7jU&feature=youtu.be 
(“I’ve 
seen things …” Blade Runner).

----- Page 39 (native) -----
39
Slater and Sanchez-Vives
Enhancing Our Lives with VR
Frontiers in Robotics and AI  |  www.frontiersin.org
December 2016  |  Volume 3  |  Article 74
Antonio Frisoli, Barbara Rothbaum, Christoph Guger, Daniel 
Freeman, Doron Friedman, Emmanuele Tidoni, Ferran 
Argelaguet, Franck Multon, Franco Tecchia, Greg Welch, Henry 
Fuchs, Henry Markram, Hunter Hoffman, Jeremy Bailenson, 
Jordi Moyes Ardiaca, Larry Hodges, Louis Jebb, Lucia Valmaggia, 
Mark Huckvale, Nonny de la Peña, Pablo Bermell, Pere Brunet, 
Rafi Malach, Robert Riener, Salvatore Aglioti, Stephen Ellis, 
Sylvie Delacroix, Will Steptoe, Xueni (Sylvia) Pan, Yiorgos 
Chrysanthou, and Zillah Watson.
FUNDING
This work was funded by Oculus VR, LLC, a Facebook Company.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at 
http://journal.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/frobt.2016.00074/
full#supplementary-material.
REFERENCES
Abulrub, A.-H. G., Attridge, A. N., and Williams, M. (2011). “Virtual reality in 
engineering education: the future of creative learning,” in Global Engineering 
Education Conference (EDUCON), 2011 IEEE (Amman: IEEE), 751–757.
Ahn, S. J., Le, A. M. T., and Bailenson, J. (2013). The effect of embodied experiences 
on self-other merging, attitude, and helping behavior. Media Psychol. 16, 7–38. 
doi:10.1080/15213269.2012.755877 
Alaraj, A., Lemole, M. G., Finkle, J. H., Yudkowsky, R., Wallace, A., Luciano, C., 
et al. (2011). Virtual reality training in neurosurgery: review of current status 
and future applications. Surg. Neurol. Int. 2:52. doi:10.4103/2152-7806.80117 
Al-Kadi, A. S., Donnon, T., Paolucci, E. O., Mitchell, P., Debru, E., and Church, 
N. (2012). The effect of simulation in improving students’ performance in lap-
aroscopic surgery: a meta-analysis. Surg. Endosc. 26, 3215–3224. doi:10.1007/
s00464-012-2327-z 
Anderson-Hanley, C., Arciero, P. J., Brickman, A. M., Nimon, J. P., Okuma, 
N., Westen, S. C., et  al. (2012). Exergaming and older adult cognition: a 
cluster randomized clinical trial. Am. J. Prev. Med. 42, 109–119. doi:10.1016/ 
j.amepre.2011.10.016 
Anderson-Hanley, C., Snyder, A. L., Nimon, J. P., and Arciero, P. J. (2011). Social 
facilitation in virtual reality-enhanced exercise: competitiveness moderates 
exercise effort of older adults. Clin. Interv. Aging 6, 275. doi:10.2147/CIA. 
S25337 
Andújar, C., Chica, A., and Brunet, P. (2012). User-interface design for the Ripoll 
Monastery exhibition at the National Art Museum of Catalonia. Comput. 
Graph. 36, 28–37. doi:10.1016/j.cag.2011.10.005 
Apostolellis, P., and Bowman, D. A. (2014). “Evaluating the effects of orchestrated, 
game-based learning in virtual environments for informal education,” in 
Proceedings of the 11th Conference on Advances in Computer Entertainment 
Technology (Funchal: ACM), 4.
Argelaguet Sanz, F., Multon, F., and Lécuyer, A. (2015). A methodology for intro-
ducing competitive anxiety and pressure in VR sports training. Front. Robot. AI 
2:10. doi:10.3389/frobt.2015.00010 
Aristidou, A., Stavrakis, E., and Chrysanthou, Y. (2014). “Motion analysis for 
folk dance evaluation,” in GCH ‘14 Proceedings of the Eurographics Workshop 
on Graphics and Cultural Heritage (Darmstadt: ACM), 55–64.
Armel, K. C., and Ramachandran, V. S. (2003). Projecting sensations to external 
objects: evidence from skin conductance response. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B 270, 
1499–1506. doi:10.1098/rspb.2003.2364 
Aronov, D., and Tank, D. W. (2014). Engagement of neural circuits underlying 
2D spatial navigation in a rodent virtual reality system. Neuron 84, 442–456. 
doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2014.08.042 
Arora, A., Lau, L. Y., Awad, Z., Darzi, A., Singh, A., and Tolley, N. (2014). 
Virtual reality simulation training in otolaryngology. Int. J. Surg. 12, 87–94. 
doi:10.1016/j.ijsu.2013.11.007 
Bailenson, J. N., and Beall, A. C. (2006). “Transformed social interaction: exploring 
the digital plasticity of avatars,” in Avatars at Work and Play: Collaboration and 
Interaction in Shared Virtual Environments, Vol. 34 (Netherlands: Springer), 
1–16.
Bailenson, J. N., Blascovich, J., and Beall, A. C. (2001). Equilibrium theory revisited: 
mutual gaze and personal space in virtual environments. Presence 10, 583–598. 
doi:10.1162/105474601753272844 
Bailenson, J. N., Blascovich, J., Beall, A. C., and Loomis, J. (2003). Interpersonal 
distance in immersive virtual environments. Pers. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 29, 1–15. 
doi:10.1177/0146167203029007002 
Bailenson, J. N., Yee, N., Blascovich, J., Beall, A. C., Lundblad, N., and Jin, M. 
(2008). The use of immersive virtual reality in the learning sciences: digital 
transformations of teachers, students, and social context. J. Learn. Sci. 17, 
102–141. doi:10.1080/10508400701793141 
Bailenson, J. N., Yee, N., Brave, S., Merget, D., and Koslow, D. (2007). Virtual inter-
personal touch: expressing and recognizing emotions through haptic devices. 
Hum. Comput. Interact. 22, 325–353. doi:10.1080/07370020701493509
Banakou, D., Groten, R., and Slater, M. (2013). Illusory ownership of a vir-
tual child body causes overestimation of object sizes and implicit attitude 
changes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 110, 12846–12851. doi:10.1073/pnas. 
1306779110 
Banakou, D., Hanumanthu, P. D., and Slater, M. (2016). Virtual embodiment of white 
people in a black virtual body leads to a sustained reduction in their implicit 
racial bias. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 10:601. doi:10.3389/fnhum.2016.00601
Banakou, D., and Slater, M. (2014). Body ownership causes illusory self-attribution 
of speaking and influences subsequent real speaking. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 
U.S.A. 111, 17678–17683. doi:10.1073/pnas.1414936111 
Barfield, W., and Hendrix, C. (1995). The effect of update rate on the sense of 
presence within virtual environments. Virtual Real. 1, 3–16. doi:10.1007/
BF02009709 
Barlow, J., Dyson, E., Leary, T., Bricken, W., Robinett, W., Lanier, J., et al. (1990). 
“Hip, hype and hope – the three faces of virtual worlds (panel session),” in ACM 
SIGGRAPH 90 Panel Proceedings (Dallas, TX: ACM), 1001–1029.
Barnsley, N., McAuley, J. H., Mohan, R., Dey, A., Thomas, P., and Moseley, G. L. 
(2011). The rubber hand illusion increases histamine reactivity in the real arm. 
Curr. Biol. 23, R945–R946. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2011.10.039 
Basdogan, C., Ho, C.-H., Srinivasan, M. A., and Slater, M. (2000). “An experimental 
study on the role of touch in shared virtual environments,” in ACM Transactions 
on Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI) – Special issue on Human-Computer 
Interaction and Collaborative Virtual Environments TOCHI, Vol. 7 (New York, 
NY: ACM), 443–460. 
Bem, D. J. (1972). Self-perception theory. Adv. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 6, 1–62. 
doi:10.1016/S0065-2601(08)60024-6 
Benford, S., and Fahlén, L. (1993). “A spatial model of interaction in large virtual 
environments,” in Proceedings of the Third European Conference on Computer-
Supported Cooperative Work 13–17 September 1993, ECSCW’93 (Milan, Italy: 
Springer), 109–124.
Bergström, I., Kilteni, K., and Slater, M. (2016). First-person perspective virtual 
body posture influences stress: a virtual reality body ownership study. PLoS 
ONE 11:e0148060. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0148060 
Bertella, L., Marchi, S., and Riva, G. (2001). Virtual environment for topographical 
orientation (VETO): clinical rationale and technical characteristics. Presence 
10, 440–449. doi:10.1162/1054746011470280 
Besora, I., Brunet, P., Chica, A., and Moyés, J. (2008). “Real-time exploration of 
the virtual reconstruction of the entrance of the Ripoll monastery,” in CEIG 
2008 Conference Proceedings (Barcelona: Eurographics Association), 219–224.
Bideau, B., Kulpa, R., Ménardais, S., Fradet, L., Multon, F., Delamarche, P., et al. 
(2003). Real handball goalkeeper vs. virtual handball thrower. Presence 12, 
411–421. doi:10.1162/105474603322391631 
Bideau, B., Kulpa, R., Vignais, N., Brault, S., Multon, F., and Craig, C. (2010). Using 
virtual reality to analyze sports performance. Comput. Graph. Appl. 30, 14–21. 
doi:10.1109/MCG.2009.134 
Bierbaum, A., Just, C., Hartling, P., Meinert, K., Baker, A., and Cruz-Neira, C. 
(2001). “VR Juggler: a virtual platform for virtual reality application develop-
ment,” in IEEE Virtual Reality Proceedings (Yokohama: IEEE), 89–96.

----- Page 40 (native) -----
40
Slater and Sanchez-Vives
Enhancing Our Lives with VR
Frontiers in Robotics and AI  |  www.frontiersin.org
December 2016  |  Volume 3  |  Article 74
Blanchard, C., Burgess, S., Harvill, Y., Lanier, J., Lasko, A., Oberman, M., et al. 
(1990). Reality built for two: a virtual reality tool. ACM SIGGRAPH Comput. 
Graph. 24, 35–36. doi:10.1145/91394.91409 
Blanke, O. (2012). Multisensory brain mechanisms of bodily self-consciousness. 
Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 13, 556–571. doi:10.1038/nrn3292 
Blanke, O., Slater, M., and Serino, A. (2015). Behavioral, neural, and computational 
principles of bodily self-consciousness. Neuron 88, 145–166. doi:10.1016/ 
j.neuron.2015.09.029 
Blascovich, J., Loomis, J., Beall, A. C., Swinth, K., Hoyt, C., and Bailenson, J. N. (2002). 
Immersive virtual environment technology as a methodological tool for social 
psychology. Psychol. Inquiry 13, 103–124. doi:10.1207/S15327965PLI1302_01 
Bleakley, C. M., Charles, D., Porter-Armstrong, A., Mcneill, M. D., McDonough, S. 
M., and McCormack, B. (2013). Gaming for health a systematic review of the 
physical and cognitive effects of interactive computer games in older adults. 
J. Appl. Gerontol. 34, N166–N189. doi:10.1177/0733464812470747 
Blom, K. J., Arroyo-Palacios, J., and Slater, M. (2014). The effects of rotating the 
self out of the body in the full virtual body ownership illusion. Perception 43, 
275–294. doi:10.1068/p7618 
Bolton, J., Lambert, M., Lirette, D., and Unsworth, B. (2014). “PaperDude: a virtual 
reality cycling exergame,” in CHI’14 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (New York: ACM), 475–478.
Borland, D., Peck, T., and Slater, M. (2013). An evaluation of self-avatar eye move-
ment for virtual embodiment. IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph. 19, 591–596. 
doi:10.1109/TVCG.2013.24 
Botvinick, M., and Cohen, J. (1998). Rubber hands ‘feel’ touch that eyes see. Nature 
391, 756–756. doi:10.1038/35784 
Bourdin, P., Sanahuja, J. M. T., Moya, C. C., Haggard, P., and Slater, M. (2013). 
“Persuading people in a remote destination to sing by beaming there,” in 
Proceedings of the 19th ACM Symposium on Virtual Reality Software and 
Technology (Singapore: ACM), 123–132.
Brault, S., Bideau, B., Kulpa, R., and Craig, C. (2009). Detecting deceptive 
movement in 1 vs. 1 based on global body displacement of a rugby player. Int. 
J. Virtual Real. 8, 31–36. 
Brooks,  F. P. Jr. (1999). What’s real about virtual reality? Comput. Graph. Appl. 19, 
16–27. doi:10.1109/38.799723 
Brotons-Mas, J. R., O’Mara, S., and Sanchez-Vives, M. V. (2006). Neural 
processing of spatial information: what we know about place cells and 
what they can tell us about presence. Presence 15, 485–499. doi:10.1162/
pres.15.5.485 
Buckley, C. E., Kavanagh, D. O., Traynor, O., and Neary, P. C. (2014). Is the skillset 
obtained in surgical simulation transferable to the operating theatre? Am. 
J. Surg. 207, 146–157. doi:10.1016/j.amjsurg.2013.06.017 
Burger, J. M. (2009). Replicating Milgram – would people still obey today? Am. 
Psychol. 64, 1–11. doi:10.1037/a0010932 
Cali, C., Baghabra, J., Boges, D. J., Holst, G. R., Kreshuk, A., Hamprecht, F. A., 
et al. (2015). Three-dimensional immersive virtual reality for studying cellular 
compartments in 3D models from EM preparations of neural tissues. J. Comp. 
Neurol. 524, Sc1. doi:10.1002/cne.23935 
Çaliskan, O. (2011). Virtual field trips in education of earth and environmental 
sciences. Proc. Soc. Behav. Sci. 15, 3239–3243. doi:10.1016/j.sbspro.2011.04.278 
Callieri, M., Chica, A., Dellepiane, M., Besora, I., Corsini, M., Moyés, J., et al. 
(2011). Multiscale acquisition and presentation of very large artifacts: the case 
of portalada. J. Comput. Cult. Herit. 3, 1–20. doi:10.1145/1957825.1957827 
Carrozzino, M., and Bergamasco, M. (2010). Beyond virtual museums: experi-
encing immersive virtual reality in real museums. J. Cult. Herit. 11, 452–458. 
doi:10.1016/j.culher.2010.04.001 
Casu, A., Spano, L. D., Sorrentino, F., and Scateni, R. (2015). “RiftArt: bringing 
masterpieces in the classroom through immersive virtual reality,” in Smart 
Tools and Apps for Graphics-Eurographics Italian Chapter Conference. Verona: 
Eurographics Association.
Cendan, J., and Lok, B. (2012). The use of virtual patients in medical school curric-
ula. Adv. Physiol. Educ. 36, 48–53. doi:10.1152/advan.00054.2011 
Cheetham, M., Pedroni, A. F., Antley, A., Slater, M., and Jáncke, L. (2009). Virtual 
Milgram: empathic concern or personal distress? Evidence from functional 
MRI and dispositional measures. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 3:29. doi:10.3389/
neuro.09.029.2009 
Cheong, R. (1995). The virtual threat to travel and tourism. Tour. Manag. 16, 
417–422. doi:10.1016/0261-5177(95)00049-T 
Chernyak, D., and Stark, L. W. (2001). Top-down guided eye movements. IEEE 
Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. B Cybern. 31, 514–522. doi:10.1109/3477.938257 
Ch’ng, E. (2009). Experiential archaeology: is virtual time travel possible? J. Cult. 
Herit. 10, 458–470. doi:10.1016/j.culher.2009.02.001 
Claessen, M. H., Van Der Ham, I. J., Jagersma, E., and Visser-Meily, J. M. (2015). 
Navigation strategy training using virtual reality in six chronic stroke patients: a 
novel and explorative approach to the rehabilitation of navigation impairment. 
Neuropsychol. Rehabil. 26, 822–846. doi:10.1080/09602011.2015.1045910 
Codd, A. M., and Choudhury, B. (2011). Virtual reality anatomy: is it comparable 
with traditional methods in the teaching of human forearm musculoskeletal 
anatomy? Anat. Sci. Educ. 4, 119–125. doi:10.1002/ase.214 
Cohen, O., Druon, S., Lengagne, S., Mendelsohn, A., Malach, R., Kheddar, A., 
et al. (2012). “fMRI robotic embodiment: a pilot study,” in 5th International 
Conference on Biomedical Robotics and Biomechatronic (Rome: IEEE), 314–319.
Cohen, O., Druon, S., Lengagne, S., Mendelsohn, A., Malach, R., Kheddar, A., 
et  al. (2014a). fMRI-based robotic embodiment: controlling a humanoid 
robot by thought using real-time fMRI. Presence 23, 229–241. doi:10.1162/
PRES_a_00191 
Cohen, O., Koppel, M., Malach, R., and Friedman, D. (2014b). Controlling 
an avatar by thought using real-time fMRI. J. Neural Eng. 11, 035006. 
doi:10.1088/1741-2560/11/3/035006 
Colcombe, S., and Kramer, A. F. (2003). Fitness effects on the cognitive function 
of older adults a meta-analytic study. Psychol. Sci. 14, 125–130. doi:10.1111/ 
1467-9280.t01-1-01430 
Conn, C., Lanier, J., Minsky, M., Fisher, S., and Druin, A. (1989). “Virtual environ-
ments and interactivity: windows to the future,” in ACM SIGGRAPH Computer 
Graphics (Boston, MA: ACM), 7–18.
Connolly, M., Seligman, J., Kastenmeier, A., Goldblatt, M., and Gould, J. C. (2014). 
Validation of a virtual reality-based robotic surgical skills curriculum. Surg. 
Endosc. 28, 1691–1694. doi:10.1007/s00464-013-3373-x 
Cook, D. A., Erwin, P. J., and Triola, M. M. (2010). Computerized virtual patients 
in health professions education: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Acad. 
Med. 85, 1589–1602. doi:10.1097/ACM.0b013e3181edfe13 
Craig, C. (2013). Understanding perception and action in sport: how can virtual 
reality technology help? Sports Technol. 6, 161–169. doi:10.1080/19346182.20
13.855224 
Cruz-Neira, C., Sandin, D. J., and Defanti, T. A. (1993). “Surround-screen pro-
jection-based virtual reality: the design and implementation of the CAVE,” 
in SIGGRAPH ‘93 Proceedings of the 20th Annual Conference on Computer 
Graphics and Interactive Techniques (ACM), 135–142.
Cruz-Neira, C., Sandin, D. J., Defanti, T. A., Kenyon, R. V., and Hart, J. C. (1992). 
The CAVE: audio visual experience automatic virtual environment. Commun. 
ACM 35, 64–72. doi:10.1145/129888.129892 
Curtis, L., Rea, W., Smith-Willis, P., Fenyves, E., and Pan, Y. (2006). Adverse 
health effects of outdoor air pollutants. Environ. Int. 32, 815–830. doi:10.1016/ 
j.envint.2006.03.012 
Cushman, L. A., Stein, K., and Duffy, C. J. (2008). Detecting navigational deficits 
in cognitive aging and Alzheimer disease using virtual reality. Neurology 71, 
888–895. doi:10.1212/01.wnl.0000326262.67613.fe 
Darken, R., and Goerger, S. R. (1999). The transfer of strategies from virtual to 
real environments: an explanation for performance differences? Simul. Series 
31, 159–164. 
Darken, R. P., Allard, T., and Achille, L. B. (1998). Spatial orientation and way-
finding in large-scale virtual spaces: an introduction. Presence 7, 101–107. 
doi:10.1162/105474698565604 
Darley, J. M., and Latané, B. (1968). Bystander intervention in emergencies – 
diffusion of responsibility. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 8, 377–383. doi:10.1037/
h0025589 
Dawson, D. L. (2006). Training in carotid artery stenting: do carotid simulation 
systems really help? Vascular 14, 256–263. doi:10.2310/6670.2006.00045 
de la Peña, N., Weil, P., Llobera, J., Giannopoulos, E., Pomés, A., Spanlang, B., 
et al. (2010). Immersive journalism: immersive virtual reality for the first-per-
son experience of news. Presence 19, 291–301. doi:10.1162/PRES_a_00005 
Dede, C., Salzman, M., Loftin, R. B., and Ash, K. (1997). Using Virtual Reality Technology 
to Convey Abstract Scientific Concepts [Online]. Available at: http://citeseerx.ist.
psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.136.4289&rep=rep1&type=pdf
Denstadli, J. M., Gripsrud, M., Hjorthol, R., and Julsrud, T. E. (2013). 
Videoconferencing and business air travel: do new technologies produce new

----- Page 41 (native) -----
41
Slater and Sanchez-Vives
Enhancing Our Lives with VR
Frontiers in Robotics and AI  |  www.frontiersin.org
December 2016  |  Volume 3  |  Article 74
interaction patterns? Transport. Res. C Emerg. Technol. 29, 1–13. doi:10.1016/ 
j.trc.2012.12.009 
Dodds, T. J., Mohler, B. J., and Bülthoff, H. H. (2011). Talk to the virtual hands: 
self-animated avatars improve communication in head-mounted display virtual 
environments. PLoS ONE 6:e25759. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0025759 
Dunn, S., Woolford, K., Norman, S.-J., White, M., and Barker, L. (2012). “Motion 
in place: a case study of archaeological reconstruction using motion capture,” in 
Revive the Past: Proceedings of the 39th Conference in Computer Applications and 
Quantitative Methods in Archaeology (Southampton: Amsterdam University 
Press), 98–106.
Ehrsson, H. H. (2007). The experimental induction of out-of-body experiences. 
Science 317, 1048. doi:10.1126/science.1142175 
Ehrsson, H. H. (2009). How many arms make a pair? Perceptual illusion of having 
an additional limb. Perception 38, 310. doi:10.1068/p6304 
Ehrsson, H. H. (2012). “The concept of body ownership and its relation to 
multisensory integration,” in The New Handbook of Multisensory Processes, ed. 
B. E.Stein  (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press), 775–792.
Ehrsson, H. H., Kito, T., Sadato, N., Passingham, R. E., and Naito, E. (2005). Neural 
substrate of body size: illusory feeling of shrinking of the waist. PLoS Biol. 
3:e412. doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0030412 
Ellis, S. R. (1996). Presence of mind: a reaction to Thomas Sheridan’s “further 
musings on the psychophysics of presence”. Presence 5, 247–259. doi:10.1162/
pres.1996.5.2.247 
Ewert, D., Schuster, K., Johansson, D., Schilberg, D., and Jeschke, S. (2014). 
“Intensifying learner’s experience by incorporating the virtual theatre into 
engineering education,” in Automation, Communication and Cybernetics in 
Science and Engineering 2013/2014, eds S. Jeschke, I. Isenhardt, F. Hees, and K. 
Henning (Cham: Springer International Publishing), 255–267.
Finkelstein, S., and Suma, E. (2011). Astrojumper: motivating exercise with 
an immersive virtual reality exergame. Presence 20, 78–92. doi:10.1162/
pres_a_00036 
Fischer, P., Krueger, J. I., Greitemeyer, T., Vogrincic, C., Kastenmüller, A., Frey, 
D., et  al. (2011). The bystander-effect: a meta-analytic review on bystander 
intervention in dangerous and non-dangerous emergencies. Psychol. Bull. 137, 
517–537. doi:10.1037/a0023304 
Fisher, S. S., McGreevy, M., Humphries, J., and Robinett, W. (1987). “Virtual envi-
ronment display system,” in Proceedings of the 1986 Workshop on Interactive 3D 
Graphics (Chapel Hill, NC: ACM), 77–87.
Foot, P. (1967). The problem of abortion and the doctrine of the double effect. 
Oxford Rev. 5, 187. 
Fox, J., and Bailenson, J. N. (2009). Virtual self-modeling: the effects of vicarious 
reinforcement and identification on exercise behaviors. Media Psychol. 12, 
1–25. doi:10.1080/15213260802669474 
Frecon, E., Smith, G., Steed, A., Stenius, M., and Stahl, O. (2001). An overview of 
the COVEN platform. Presence 10, 109–127. doi:10.1162/105474601750182351 
Frécon, E., and Stenius, M. (1998). DIVE: a scaleable network architecture for dis-
tributed virtual environments. Distrib. Syst. Eng. 5, 91. doi:10.1088/0967-1846/ 
5/3/002 
Freina, L., and Ott, M. (2015). “A literature review on immersive virtual reality in 
education: state of the art and perspectives,” in Proceedings of eLearning and 
Software for Education (eLSE), 2015 April 23–24. Bucharest.
Friedman, D., Leeb, R., Guger, C., Steed, A., Pfurtscheller, G., and Slater, M. (2007). 
Navigating virtual reality by thought: what is it like? Presence 16, 100–110. 
doi:10.1162/pres.16.1.100 
Friedman, D., Pizarro, R., Or-Berkers, K., Neyret, S., Pan, X., and Slater, M. (2014). 
A method for generating an illusion of backwards time travel using immer-
sive virtual reality – an exploratory study. Front. Psychol. 5:943. doi:10.3389/
fpsyg.2014.00943 
Friedman, D., Steed, A., and Slater, M. (2007). “Spatial social behavior in second 
life,” in Intelligent Virtual Agents 7th International Conference, IVA 2007 
Paris, Fran, Vol. 4722, eds C. Pelachaud, J-C. Martin, E. André, G. Chollet, K. 
Karpouzis, and D. Pelé (Berlin Heidelberg: Springer), 252–263.
Gaitatzes, A., Christopoulos, D., and Roussou, M. (2001). “Reviving the past: 
cultural heritage meets virtual reality,” in Proceedings of the 2001 Conference 
on Virtual Reality, Archeology, and Cultural Heritage (Athens: ACM), 103–110.
Gallagher, A. G., and Cates, C. U. (2004). Approval of virtual reality training for 
carotid stenting: what this means for procedural-based medicine. JAMA 292, 
3024–3026. doi:10.1001/jama.292.24.3024 
Gallagher, A. G., Ritter, E. M., Champion, H., Higgins, G., Fried, M. P., Moses, G., 
et  al. (2005). Virtual reality simulation for the operating room: proficien-
cy-based training as a paradigm shift in surgical skills training. Ann. Surg. 241, 
364. doi:10.1097/01.sla.0000151982.85062.80 
Galtung, J., and Ruge, M. H. (1965). The structure of foreign news the presentation 
of the Congo, Cuba and Cyprus crises in four Norwegian newspapers. J. Peace 
Res. 2, 64–90. doi:10.1177/002234336500200104 
Garcia, S. M., Weaver, K., Moskowitz, G. B., and Darley, J. M. (2002). Crowded 
minds: the implicit bystander effect. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 83, 843. doi:10.1037/ 
0022-3514.83.4.843 
Gavish, N., Gutiérrez, T., Webel, S., Rodríguez, J., Peveri, M., Bockholt, U., et al. 
(2015). Evaluating virtual reality and augmented reality training for industrial 
maintenance and assembly tasks. Interact. Learn. Environ. 23, 778–798. 
doi:10.1080/10494820.2013.815221
Gavish, N., Gutierrez, T., Webel, S., Rodriguez, J., and Tecchia, F. (2011). “Design 
guidelines for the development of virtual reality and augmented reality training 
systems for maintenance and assembly tasks,” in BIO Web of Conferences (EDP 
Sciences), 00029. doi:10.1051/bioconf/20110100029
Giannopoulos, E., Wang, Z., Peer, A., Buss, M., and Slater, M. (2011). Comparison 
of people’s responses to real and virtual handshakes within a virtual environ-
ment. Brain Res. Bull. 85, 276–282. doi:10.1016/j.brainresbull.2010.11.012 
González-Franco, M., Peck, T. C., Rodríguez-Fornells, A., and Slater, M. (2013). 
A threat to a virtual hand elicits motor cortex activation. Exp. Brain Res. 232, 
875–887. doi:10.1007/s00221-013-3800-1 
Gould, N. F., Holmes, M. K., Fantie, B. D., Luckenbaugh, D. A., Pine, D. S., Gould, 
T. D., et al. (2007). Performance on a virtual reality spatial memory naviga-
tion task in depressed patients. Am. J. Psychiatry 164, 516–519. doi:10.1176/
ajp.2007.164.3.516 
Greenhalgh, C., and Benford, S. (1995). MASSIVE: a collaborative virtual envi-
ronment for teleconferencing. ACM Trans. Comput. Hum. Interact. 2, 239–261. 
doi:10.1145/210079.210088 
Greenwald, A. G., and Krieger, L. H. (2006). Implicit bias: scientific foundations. 
Calif. Law Rev. 94, 945–967. doi:10.2307/20439056 
Greenwald, A. G., McGhee, D. E., and Schwartz, J. L. K. (1998). Measuring indi-
vidual differences in implicit cognition: the implicit association test. J. Pers. Soc. 
Psychol. 74, 1464. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.74.6.1464 
Greenwald, A. G., Poehlman, T. A., Uhlmann, E. L., and Banaji, M. R. (2009). 
Understanding and using the Implicit Association Test: III. Meta-analysis of 
predictive validity. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 97, 17. doi:10.1037/a0015575 
Groom, V., Bailenson, J. N., and Nass, C. (2009). The influence of racial embodiment 
on racial bias in immersive virtual environments. Soc. Influence 4, 231–248. 
doi:10.1080/15534510802643750 
Gustafson, P. (2012). Managing business travel: developments and dilemmas 
in corporate travel management. Tour. Manag. 33, 276–284. doi:10.1016/ 
j.tourman.2011.03.006 
Guterstam, A., Petkova, V. I., and Ehrsson, H. H. (2011). The illusion of owning a 
third arm. PLoS ONE 6:e17208. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0017208 
Gutierrez, D., Sundstedt, V., Gomez, F., and Chalmers, A. (2008). Modeling 
light scattering for virtual heritage. J. Comput. Cult. Herit. 1, 8. doi:10.1145/ 
1434763.1434765 
Guttentag, D. A. (2010). Virtual reality: applications and implications for tourism. 
Tour. Manag. 31, 637–651. doi:10.1016/j.tourman.2009.07.003 
Guye-Vuilleme, A., Capin, T. K., Pandzic, S., Thalmann, N. M., and Thalmann, D. 
(1999). Nonverbal communication interface for collaborative virtual environ-
ments. Virtual Real. 4, 49–59. doi:10.1007/BF01434994 
Hagberg, L., Lindahl, B., Nyberg, L., and Hellénius, M. L. (2009). Importance of 
enjoyment when promoting physical exercise. Scand. J. Med. Sci. Sports 19, 
740–747. doi:10.1111/j.1600-0838.2008.00844.x 
Hall, E. T. (1969). The hidden dimension. New York: Anchor Books.
Happa, J., Mudge, M., Debattista, K., Artusi, A., Gonçalves, A., and Chalmers, 
A. (2010). Illuminating the past: state of the art. Virtual Real. 14, 155–182. 
doi:10.1007/s10055-010-0154-x 
Harcup, T., and O’Neill, D. (2001). What is news? Galtung and Ruge revisited. 
Journal. Stud. 2, 261–280. doi:10.1080/14616700118449 
Hartley, T., Maguire, E. A., Spiers, H. J., and Burgess, N. (2003). The well-worn 
route and the path less traveled: distinct neural bases of route following and 
wayfinding in humans. Neuron 37, 877–888. doi:10.1016/S0896-6273(03) 
00095-3

----- Page 42 (native) -----
42
Slater and Sanchez-Vives
Enhancing Our Lives with VR
Frontiers in Robotics and AI  |  www.frontiersin.org
December 2016  |  Volume 3  |  Article 74
Harvey, C. D., Collman, F., Dombeck, D. A., and Tank, D. W. (2009). Intracellular 
dynamics of hippocampal place cells during virtual navigation. Nature 461, 
941–946. doi:10.1038/nature08499 
Haslam, S. A., and Reicher, S. D. (2012). Contesting the “nature” of conformity: 
what Milgram and Zimbardo’s studies really show. PLoS Biol. 10:e1001426. 
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1001426 
Hauser, M., Cushman, F., Young, L., Kang-Xing Jin, R., and Mikhail, J. (2007). 
A dissociation between moral judgments and justifications. Mind Lang. 22, 
1–21. doi:10.1111/j.1468-0017.2006.00297.x 
Hauser, M. D. (2006). Moral Minds: How Nature Designed Our Universal Sense of 
Right and Wrong. New York, NY: Ecco/HarperCollins.
Hauswiesner, S., Straka, M., and Reitmayr, G. (2011). “Free viewpoint virtual 
try-on with commodity depth cameras,” in Proceedings of the 10th International 
Conference on Virtual Reality Continuum and Its Applications in Industry (New 
York, NY: ACM), 23–30.
Heeter, C. (1992). Being there: the subjective experience of presence. Presence 1, 
262–271. doi:10.1162/pres.1992.1.2.262 
Held, R., and Hein, A. (1963). Movement-produced stimulation in the develop-
ment of visually guided behavior. J. Comp. Physiol. Psychol. 56, 872. doi:10.1037/
h0040546 
Held, R. M., and Durlach, N. I. (1992). Telepresence. Presence 1, 109–112. 
doi:10.1162/pres.1992.1.1.109 
Hershfield, H. E., Goldstein, D. G., Sharpe, W. F., Fox, J., Yeykelis, L., Carstensen, L. 
L., et al. (2011). Increasing saving behavior through age-progressed renderings 
of the future self. J. Mark. Res. 48, S23–S37. doi:10.1509/jmkr.48.SPL.S23 
Hochberg, L. R., Bacher, D., Jarosiewicz, B., Masse, N. Y., Simeral, J. D., Vogel, 
J., et al. (2012). Reach and grasp by people with tetraplegia using a neurally 
controlled robotic arm. Nature 485, 372–375. doi:10.1038/nature11076 
Hochberg, L. R., Serruya, M. D., Friehs, G. M., Mukand, J. A., Saleh, M., Caplan, 
A. H., et al. (2006). Neuronal ensemble control of prosthetic devices by a human 
with tetraplegia. Nature 442, 164–171. doi:10.1038/nature04970 
Hodgetts, T., and Lorimer, J. (2015). Methodologies for animals’ geogra-
phies: cultures, communication and genomics. Cult. Geogr. 22, 285–295. 
doi:10.1177/1474474014525114
Hopkins, N., Reicher, S., Harrison, K., Cassidy, C., Bull, R., and Levine,  M. 
(2007). Helping to improve the group stereotype: on the strategic 
dimension of prosocial behavior. Pers. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 33, 776–788. 
doi:10.1177/0146167207301023 
Hwang, W.-Y., and Hu, S.-S. (2013). Analysis of peer learning behaviors using 
multiple representations in virtual reality and their impacts on geometry 
problem solving. Comput. Educ. 62, 308–319. doi:10.1016/j.compedu. 
2012.10.005 
Ijsselsteijn, W., De Kort, Y., and Haans, A. (2006). Is this my hand I see before me? 
The rubber hand illusion in reality, virtual reality and mixed reality. Presence 15, 
455–464. doi:10.1162/pres.15.4.455 
Jensen, K., Ringsted, C., Hansen, H. J., Petersen, R. H., and Konge, L. (2014). 
Simulation-based training for thoracoscopic lobectomy: a randomized con-
trolled trial. Surg. Endosc. 28, 1821–1829. doi:10.1007/s00464-013-3392-7 
Jensen, M. T. (2014). Exploring business travel with work – family conflict and 
the emotional exhaustion component of burnout as outcome variables: the 
job demands–resources perspective. Eur. J. Work Organ. Psychol. 23, 497–510. 
doi:10.1080/1359432X.2013.787183 
Jonas, J. B., Rabethge, S., and Bender, H. J. (2003). Computer-assisted training 
system for pars plana vitrectomy. Acta Ophthalmol. Scand. 81, 600–604. 
doi:10.1046/j.1395-3907.2003.0078.x 
Jones, A. (2007). More than ‘managing across borders?’ The complex role of 
face-to-face interaction in globalizing law firms. J. Econ. Geogr. 7, 223–246. 
doi:10.1093/jeg/lbm003 
Jost, J. T., Rudman, L. A., Blair, I. V., Carney, D. R., Dasgupta, N., Glaser, J., et al. 
(2009). The existence of implicit bias is beyond reasonable doubt: a refutation of 
ideological and methodological objections and executive summary of ten stud-
ies that no manager should ignore. Res. Organ. Behav. 29, 39–69. doi:10.1016/ 
j.riob.2009.10.001 
Kahana, M. J., Sekuler, R., Caplan, J. B., Kirschen, M., and Madsen, J. R. (1999). 
Human theta oscillations exhibit task dependence during virtual maze naviga-
tion. Nature 399, 781–784. doi:10.1038/21645 
Kalivarapu, V., Macallister, A., Hoover, M., Sridhar, S., Schlueter, J., Civitate, A., 
et al. (2015). “Game-day football visualization experience on dissimilar virtual 
reality platforms,” in Proc. SPIE 9392, The Engineering Reality of Virtual Reality 
2015 (San Francisco, CA: International Society for Optics and Photonics), 
939202–939214.
Kampa, M., and Castanas, E. (2008). Human health effects of air pollution. Environ. 
Pollut. 151, 362–367. doi:10.1016/j.envpol.2007.06.012 
Kastanis, I., and Slater, M. (2012). Reinforcement learning utilizes proxemics: an 
avatar learns to manipulate the position of people in immersive virtual reality. 
Trans. Appl. Percept. 9:3. doi:10.1145/2134203.2134206
Kateros, S., Georgiou, S., Papaefthymiou, M., Papagiannakis, G., and Tsioumas, M. 
(2015). A comparison of gamified, immersive VR curation methods for 
enhanced presence and human-computer interaction in digital humanities. Int. 
J. Herit. Digit. Era 4, 221–233. doi:10.1260/2047-4970.4.2.221 
Kaufmann, H., Schmalstieg, D., and Wagner, M. (2000). Construct3D: a virtual 
reality application for mathematics and geometry education. Educ. Inform. 
Technol. 5, 263–276. doi:10.1023/A:1012049406877 
Kilteni, K., Bergstrom, I., and Slater, M. (2013). Drumming in immersive virtual 
reality: the body shapes the way we play. IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph. 19, 
597–605. doi:10.1109/TVCG.2013.29 
Kilteni, K., Normand, J.-M., Sanchez-Vives, M. V., and Slater, M. (2012). Extending 
body space in immersive virtual reality: a very long arm illusion. PLoS ONE 
7:e40867. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0040867 
Kim, J., Kim, H., Tay, B. K., Muniyandi, M., Srinivasan, M. A., Jordon, J., et al. 
(2004). Transatlantic touch: a study of haptic collaboration over long distance. 
Presence 13, 328–337. doi:10.1162/1054746041422370 
King, T. J., Warren, I., and Palmer, D. (2008). “Would Kitty Genovese have been 
murdered in second life? Researching the “bystander effect” using online 
technologies,” in TASA 2008: Re-Imagining Sociology: The Annual Conference of 
the Australian Sociological Association (Melbourne: University of Melbourne), 
1–23.
Kishore, S., González-Franco, M., Hintemüller, C., Kapeller, C., Guger, C., Slater, 
M., et al. (2014). Comparison of SSVEP BCI and eye tracking for controlling 
a humanoid robot in a social environment. Presence 23, 242–252. doi:10.1162/
PRES_a_00192 
Kishore, S., Navarro, X., Dominguez, E., De La Peña, N., and Slater, M. (2016). 
Beaming into the news: a system for and case study of tele-immersive journal-
ism. IEEE Comput. Graph. Appl. doi:10.1109/MCG.2016.44 
Kleinsmith, A., Rivera-Gutierrez, D., Finney, G., Cendan, J., and Lok, B. (2015). 
Understanding empathy training with virtual patients. Comput. Human Behav. 
52, 151–158. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2015.05.033 
Kober, S. E., Wood, G., Hofer, D., Kreuzig, W., Kiefer, M., and Neuper, C. (2013). 
Virtual reality in neurologic rehabilitation of spatial disorientation. J. Neuroeng. 
Rehabil. 10, 17. doi:10.1186/1743-0003-10-17 
Koenig, S. T., Crucian, G. P., Dalrymple-Alford, J. C., and Dunser, A. (2009). 
Virtual reality rehabilitation of spatial abilities after brain damage. Stud. Health 
Technol. Inform. 144, 105–107. doi:10.3233/978-1-60750-017-9-105
Kokkinara, E., Kilteni, K., Blom, K. J., and Slater, M. (2016). First person perspec-
tive of seated participants over a walking virtual body leads to illusory agency 
over the walking. Sci. Rep. 6, 28879. doi:10.1038/srep28879 
Kokkinara, E., and Slater, M. (2014). Measuring the effects through time of the 
influence of visuomotor and visuotactile synchronous stimulation on a virtual 
body ownership illusion. Perception 43, 43–58. doi:10.1068/p7545 
Koleva, B., Taylor, I., Benford, S., Fraser, M., Greenhalgh, C., Schnadelbach, 
H., et  al. (2001). “Orchestrating a mixed reality performance,” in CHI ‘01 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(Seattle, WA), 38–45.
Kozlov, M. D., and Johansen, M. K. (2010). Real behavior in virtual environments: 
psychology experiments in a simple virtual-reality paradigm using video 
games. Cyberpsychol. Behav. Soc. Netw. 13, 711–714. doi:10.1089/cyber. 
2009.0310 
Krueger, M. W. (1991). Artificial Reality II. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley 
Professional.
Krueger, M. W., Gionfriddo, T., and Hinrichsen, K. (1985). “VIDEOPLACE – an 
artificial reality,” in ACM SIGCHI Bulletin (New York, NY: ACM), 35–40.
Krummel, T. M. (1998). Surgical simulation and virtual reality: the coming revolu-
tion. Ann. Surg. 228, 635–637. doi:10.1097/00000658-199811000-00002 
Lackner, J. R. (1988). Some proprioceptive influences on the perceptual repre-
sentation of body shape and orientation. Brain 111, 281–297. doi:10.1093/
brain/111.2.281

----- Page 43 (native) -----
43
Slater and Sanchez-Vives
Enhancing Our Lives with VR
Frontiers in Robotics and AI  |  www.frontiersin.org
December 2016  |  Volume 3  |  Article 74
Lanier, J. (2006). Homuncular flexibility. Edge 26, 2012. Available at: https://www.
edge.org/response-detail/11182
Lanier, J. (2010). You Are Not a Gadget: A Manifesto. New York: Random House.
Lanman, D., and Luebke, D. (2013). Near-eye light field displays. ACM Trans. 
Graph. 32, 220. doi:10.1145/2508363.2508366 
Latane, B., and Darley, J. M. (1968). Group inhibition of bystander intervention in 
emergencies. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 10, 215–221. doi:10.1037/h0026570 
Latane, B., and Rodin, J. (1969). A lady in distress: inhibiting effects of friends 
and strangers on bystander intervention. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 5, 189–202. 
doi:10.1016/0022-1031(69)90046-8 
Lawson, G., Salanitri, D., and Waterfield, B. (2016). Future directions for the 
development of virtual reality within an automotive manufacturer. Appl. Ergon. 
53, 323–330. doi:10.1016/j.apergo.2015.06.024 
Lécuyer, A., Lotte, F., Reilly, R. B., Leeb, R., Hirose, M., and Slater, M. (2008). Brain-
computer interfaces, virtual reality, and videogames. Computer 41, 66–72. 
doi:10.1109/MC.2008.410 
Leeb, R., Friedman, D., Muller-Putz, G. R., Scherer, R., Slater, M., and 
Pfurtscheller, G. (2007). Self-paced (asynchronous) BCI control of a wheelchair 
in virtual environments: a case study with a tetraplegic. Comput. Intell. Neurosci. 
2007:79642. doi:10.1155/2007/79642 
Leeb, R., Keinrath, C., Friedman, D., Guger, C., Scherer, R., Neuper, C., et al. (2006). 
Walking by thinking: the brainwaves are crucial, not the muscles! Presence 15, 
500–514. doi:10.1162/pres.15.5.500 
Leinen, P., Green, M. F., Esat, T., Wagner, C., Tautz, F. S., and Temirov, R. (2015). 
Virtual reality visual feedback for hand-controlled scanning probe microscopy 
manipulation of single molecules. Beilstein J. Nanotechnol. 6, 2148–2153. 
doi:10.3762/bjnano.6.220 
Lenggenhager, B., Tadi, T., Metzinger, T., and Blanke, O. (2007). Video ergo sum: 
manipulating bodily self-consciousness. Science 317, 1096–1099. doi:10.1126/
science.1143439 
Leonardis, D., Frisoli, A., Barsotti, M., Carrozzino, M., and Bergamasco, M. (2014). 
Multisensory feedback can enhance embodiment within an enriched virtual 
walking scenario. Presence 23, 253–266. doi:10.1162/PRES_a_00190 
Leonardis, D., Frisoli, A., Solazzi, M., and Bergamasco, M. (2012). “Illusory per-
ception of arm movement induced by visuo-proprioceptive sensory stimulation 
and controlled by motor imagery,” in Haptics Symposium (HAPTICS), 2012 
IEEE (Vancouver, BC: IEEE), 421–424.
Levine, M., and Crowther, S. (2008). The responsive bystander: how social group 
membership and group size can encourage as well as inhibit bystander interven-
tion. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 95, 1429–1439. doi:10.1037/a0012634 
Levine, M., Prosser, A., Evans, D., and Reicher, S. (2005). Identity and emergency 
intervention: how social group membership and inclusiveness of group 
boundaries shape helping behavior. Pers. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 31, 443–453. 
doi:10.1177/0146167204271651 
Levoy, M., and Hanrahan, P. (1996). “Light field rendering,” in Proceedings of the 
23rd Annual Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques (New 
York, NY: ACM), 31–42.
Levoy, M., Pulli, K., Curless, B., Rusinkiewicz, S., Koller, D., Pereira, L., et al. (2000). 
“The digital Michelangelo project: 3D scanning of large statues,” in Proceedings 
of the 27th Annual Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques 
(New Orleans: ACM Press/Addison-Wesley Publishing Co.), 131–144.
Li, Y., Shark, L.-K., Hobb, S. J., and Ingham, J. (2010). “Real-time immersive table 
tennis game for two players with motion tracking,” in Information Visualisation 
(IV), 2010 14th International Conference (New York, NY: IEEE), 500–505.
Lin, H., Chen, M., Lu, G., Zhu, Q., Gong, J., You, X., et al. (2013). Virtual Geographic 
Environments (VGEs): a new generation of geographic analysis tool. Earth Sci. 
Rev. 126, 74–84. doi:10.1016/j.earscirev.2013.08.001 
Lincoln, P., Welch, G., Nashel, A., Ilie, A., and Fuchs, H. (2009). “Animatronic 
shader lamps avatars,” in ISMAR 2009. 8th IEEE International Symposium on 
Mixed and Augmented Reality, 2009 (Orlando, FL), 27–33.
Llobera, J., Sanchez-Vives, M. V., and Slater, M. (2013). The relationship between 
virtual body ownership and temperature sensitivity. J. R. Soc. Interface 10, 
1742–5662. doi:10.1098/rsif.2013.0300 
Llobera, J., Spanlang, B., Ruffini, G., and Slater, M. (2010). Proxemics with multiple 
dynamic characters in an immersive virtual environment. ACM Trans. Appl. 
Percept. 8, 3. doi:10.1145/1857893.1857896 
Loizides, F., El Kater, A., Terlikas, C., Lanitis, A., and Michael, D. (2014). 
“Presenting Cypriot cultural heritage in virtual reality: a user evaluation,” in 
Digital Heritage. Progress in Cultural Heritage: Documentation, Preservation, 
and Protection (Limassol: Springer), 572–579.
Loomis, J. M. (1992). Distal attribution and presence. Presence 1, 113–119. 
doi:10.1162/pres.1992.1.1.113 
Loomis, J. M., Blascovich, J. J., and Beall, A. C. (1999). Immersive virtual environ-
ment technology as a basic research tool in psychology. Behav. Res. Methods 
Instrum. Comput. 31, 557–564. doi:10.3758/BF03200735 
Lorello, G., Cook, D., Johnson, R., and Brydges, R. (2014). Simulation-based train-
ing in anaesthesiology: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Br. J. Anaesth. 
112, 231–245. doi:10.1093/bja/aet414 
Lovden, M., Schaefer, S., Noack, H., Bodammer, N. C., Kuhn, S., Heinze, H. J., 
et  al. (2012). Spatial navigation training protects the hippocampus against 
­age-related changes during early and late adulthood. Neurobiol. Aging 33, 
e629–e620. doi:10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2011.02.013 
Madary, M., and Metzinger, T. (2016). Real virtuality: a code of ethical con-
duct recommendations for good scientific practice and the consumers of 
VR-technology. Front. Robot. AI 3:3. doi:10.3389/frobt.2016.00003 
Magnenat-Thalmann, N., Kevelham, B., Volino, P., Kasap, M., and Lyard, E. (2011). 
3d web-based virtual try on of physically simulated clothes. Comput. Aided Des. 
Appl. 8, 163–174. doi:10.3722/cadaps.2011.163-174 
Maguire, E. A., Gadian, D. G., Johnsrude, I. S., Good, C. D., Ashburner, J., 
Frackowiak, R. S., et  al. (2000). Navigation-related structural change in 
the hippocampi of taxi drivers. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 97, 4398–4403. 
doi:10.1073/pnas.070039597 
Maister, L., Sebanz, N., Knoblich, G., and Tsakiris, M. (2013). Experiencing own-
ership over a dark-skinned body reduces implicit racial bias. Cognition 128, 
170–178. doi:10.1016/j.cognition.2013.04.002 
Maister, L., Slater, M., Sanchez-Vives, M. V., and Tsakiris, M. (2015). Changing 
bodies changes minds: owning another body affects social cognition. Trends 
Cogn. Sci. 19, 6–12. doi:10.1016/j.tics.2014.11.001 
Manning, R., Levine, M., and Collins, A. (2007). The Kitty Genovese murder and 
the social psychology of helping: the parable of the 38 witnesses. Am. Psychol. 
62, 555. doi:10.1037/0003-066X.62.6.555 
Marescaux, J., Clement, J. M., Tassetti, V., Koehl, C., Cotin, S., Russier, Y., et al. 
(1998). Virtual reality applied to hepatic surgery simulation: the next revolu-
tion. Ann. Surg. 228, 627–634. doi:10.1097/00000658-199811000-00001 
Markram, H., Muller, E., Ramaswamy, S., Reimann, M. W., Abdellah, M., 
Sanchez,  C. A., et  al. (2015). Reconstruction and simulation of neocortical 
microcircuitry. Cell 163, 456–492. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2015.09.029 
Martens, N., Jenke, R., Abu-Alqumsan, M., Kapeller, C., Hintermüller, C., 
Guger, C., et al. (2012). “Towards robotic re-embodiment using a brain-and-
body-computer interface,” in Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2012 IEEE/
RSJ International Conference (Vilamoura-Algarve: IEEE), 5131–5132.
Maselli, A., and Slater, M. (2013). The building blocks of the full body ownership 
illusion. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 7:83. doi:10.3389/fnhum.2013.00083 
Maselli, A., and Slater, M. (2014). Sliding perspectives: dissociating ownership 
from self-location during full body illusions in virtual reality. Front. Hum. 
Neurosci. 8:693. doi:10.3389/fnhum.2014.00693 
McBride, G., King, M. G., and James, J. W. (1965). Social proximity effects on 
galvanic skin responses in adult humans. J. Psychol. 61, 153. doi:10.1080/ 
00223980.1965.10544805 
McCall, C., Blascovich, J., Young, A., and Persky, S. (2009). Proxemic 
behaviors as predictors of aggression towards Black (but not White) 
males in an immersive virtual environment. Soc. Influence 4, 138–154. 
doi:10.1080/15534510802517418 
McGhee, J., Thompson-Butel, A. G., Faux, S., Bou-Haidar, P., and Bailey, J. (2015). 
“The fantastic voyage: an arts-led approach to 3D virtual reality visualization 
of clinical stroke data,” in Proceedings of the 8th International Symposium on 
Visual Information Communication and Interaction (New York, NY: ACM), 
69–74.
Meehan, M., Insko, B., Whitton, M. C., and Brooks, F. P. (2002). “Physiological 
measures of presence in stressful virtual environments,” in SIGGRAPH ‘02 
Proceedings of the 29th Annual Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive 
Technique (San Antonio, TX), 645–652.
Merchant, Z., Goetz, E. T., Cifuentes, L., Keeney-Kennicutt, W., and Davis, T. J. 
(2014). Effectiveness of virtual reality-based instruction on students’ learning 
outcomes in K-12 and higher education: a meta-analysis. Comput. Educ. 70, 
29–40. doi:10.1016/j.compedu.2013.07.033

----- Page 44 (native) -----
44
Slater and Sanchez-Vives
Enhancing Our Lives with VR
Frontiers in Robotics and AI  |  www.frontiersin.org
December 2016  |  Volume 3  |  Article 74
Mestre, D., Dagonneau, V., and Mercier, C.-S. (2011). Does virtual reality enhance 
exercise performance, enjoyment, and dissociation? An exploratory study on a 
stationary bike apparatus. Presence 20, 1–14. doi:10.1162/pres_a_00031 
Mikropoulos, T. A., and Natsis, A. (2011). Educational virtual environments: a 
ten-year review of empirical research (1999–2009). Comput. Educ. 56, 769–780. 
doi:10.1016/j.compedu.2010.10.020 
Miles, H. C., Pop, S. R., Watt, S. J., Lawrence, G. P., and John, N. W. (2012). A review 
of virtual environments for training in ball sports. Comput. Graph. 36, 714–726. 
doi:10.1016/j.cag.2012.04.007 
Milgram, S. (1974). Obedience to Authority. Boston, MA: McGraw Hill.
Millan, J. R., Renkens, F., Mouriòo, J., and Gerstner, W. (2004). Noninvasive 
brain-actuated control of a mobile robot by human EEG. IEEE Trans. Biomed. 
Eng. 51, 1026–1033. doi:10.1109/TBME.2004.827086 
Miller, A. G. (2009). Reflections on “Replicating Milgram” (Burger, 2009). Am. 
Psychol. 64, 20–27. doi:10.1037/a0014407 
Minsky, M. (1980). Telepresence. Omni 45–52. Available at: http://web.media.mit.
edu/~minsky/papers/Telepresence.html
Moseley, G. L., Gallace, A., and Spence, C. (2012). Bodily illusions in health 
and ­disease: physiological and clinical perspectives and the concept of a 
cortical ‘body matrix’. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 36, 34–46. doi:10.1016/j.
neubiorev.2011.03.013 
Moseley, G. L., Olthof, N., Venema, A., Don, S., Wijers, M., Gallace, A., et  al. 
(2008). Psychologically induced cooling of a specific body part caused by the 
illusory ownership of an artificial counterpart. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 105, 
13169–13173. doi:10.1073/pnas.0803768105 
Multon, F., Kulpa, R., and Bideau, B. (2011). Special issue: virtual reality and sports 
guest editors’ introduction. Presence 20, iii–iv. doi:10.1162/pres_e_00029 
Müns, A., Meixensberger, J., and Lindner, D. (2014). Evaluation of a novel 
phantom-based neurosurgical training system. Surg. Neurol. Int. 5, 173. 
doi:10.4103/2152-7806.146346 
Mustafić, H., Jabre, P., Caussin, C., Murad, M. H., Escolano, S., Tafflet, M., et al. 
(2012). Main air pollutants and myocardial infarction: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis. JAMA 307, 713–721. doi:10.1001/jama.2012.126 
Navarrete, C. D., McDonald, M. M., Mott, M. L., and Asher, B. (2012). Virtual 
morality: emotion and action in a simulated three-dimensional “trolley prob-
lem”. Emotion 12, 364–370. doi:10.1037/a0025561 
Ng, R., Levoy, M., Brédif, M., Duval, G., Horowitz, M., and Hanrahan, P. (2005). 
Light field photography with a hand-held plenoptic camera. Stanford Tech 
Report CTSR 2005-02.
Nicholson, D. T., Chalk, C., Funnell, W. R., and Daniel, S. J. (2006). Can virtual 
reality improve anatomy education? A randomised controlled study of a 
computer-generated three-dimensional anatomical ear model. Med. Educ. 40, 
1081–1087. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2929.2006.02611.x 
Noë, A. (2004). Action in Perception. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Normand, J. M., Giannopoulos, E., Spanlang, B., and Slater, M. (2011). Multisensory 
stimulation can induce an illusion of larger belly size in immersive virtual 
reality. PLoS ONE 6:e16128. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0016128 
Normand, J.-M., Spanlang, B., Tecchia, F., Carrozzino, M., Swapp, D., and Slater, M. 
(2012a). Full body acting rehearsal in a networked virtual environment – a case 
study. Presence 21, 229–243. doi:10.1162/PRES_a_00089 
Normand, J. M., Sanchez-Vives, M. V., Waechter, C., Giannopoulos, E., 
Grosswindhager, B., Spanlang, B., et al. (2012b). Beaming into the rat world: 
enabling real-time interaction between rat and human each at their own scale. 
PLoS ONE 7:e48331. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0048331 
Norrby, M., Grebner, C., Eriksson, J., and Bostrom, J. (2015). Molecular rift: virtual 
reality for drug designers. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 55, 2475–2484. doi:10.1021/ 
acs.jcim.5b00544 
Noton, D., and Stark, L. (1971). Eye movements and visual perception. Sci. Am. 
224, 35–43. 
O’Doherty, J. E., Lebedev, M. A., Ifft, P. J., Zhuang, K. Z., Shokur, S., Bleuler, H., 
et al. (2011). Active tactile exploration using a brain-machine-brain interface. 
Nature 479, 228–231. doi:10.1038/nature10489 
O’Neill, D., and Harcup, T. (2008). “News values and selectivity,” in The Handbook 
of Journalism Studies (Routledge),  161–174. 
O’Regan, J. K., and Noë, A. (2001a). A sensorimotor account of vision and visual 
consciousness. Behav. Brain Sci. 24, 939–1031. doi:10.1017/S0140525X01000115 
O’Regan, J. K., and Noë, A. (2001b). What it is like to see: a sensorimotor 
theory of perceptual experience. Synthese 129, 79–103. doi:10.1023/ 
A:1012699224677 
Osimo, S. A., Pizarro, R., Spanlang, B., and Slater, M. (2015). Conversations 
between self and self as Sigmund Freud – a virtual body ownership paradigm 
for self counselling. Sci. Rep. 5, 13899. doi:10.1038/srep13899 
Packer, R., and Jordan, K. (2002). Multimedia: From Wagner to Virtual Reality. New 
York, NY: WW Norton & Company.
Page, R. L. (2000). “Brief history of flight simulation,” in SimTecT 2000 Proceedings 
(Sydney: Simulation Australia), 11–17.
Pan, X., and Slater, M. (2011). “Confronting a moral dilemma in virtual reality: a 
pilot study,” in BCS-HCI’11 Proceedings of the 25th BCS Conference on Human-
Computer Interaction (Newcastle-upon-Tyne: BCS), 46–51.
Pan, X., Slater, M., Beacco, A., Navarro, X., Swapp, D., Hale, J., et al. (2016). The 
responses of medical general practitioners to unreasonable patient demand for 
antibiotics – a study of medical ethics using immersive virtual reality. PLoS ONE 
11:e0146837. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0146837 
Pan, Y., Steptoe, W., and Steed, A. (2014). “Comparing flat and spherical displays 
in a trust scenario in avatar-mediated interaction,” in Proceedings of the 32nd 
Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (New York, 
NY: ACM), 1397–1406.
Pausch, R., Snoddy, J., Taylor, R., Watson, S., and Haseltine, E. (1996). “Disney’s 
Aladdin: first steps toward storytelling in virtual reality,” in Proceedings of the 
23rd Annual Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques (New 
Orleans: ACM), 193–203.
Peck, T. C., Seinfeld, S., Aglioti, S. M., and Slater, M. (2013). Putting yourself in the 
skin of a black avatar reduces implicit racial bias. Conscious. Cogn. 22, 779–787. 
doi:10.1016/j.concog.2013.04.016 
Perez-Marcos, D., Slater, M., and Sanchez-Vives, M. V. (2009). Inducing a virtual 
hand ownership illusion through a brain–computer interface. Neuroreport 20, 
589–594. doi:10.1097/WNR.0b013e32832a0a2a 
Petkova, V. I., and Ehrsson, H. H. (2008). If I were you: perceptual illusion of body 
swapping. PLoS ONE 3:e3832. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0003832 
Petkova, V. I., Khoshnevis, M., and Ehrsson, H. H. (2011). The perspective matters! 
Multisensory integration in ego-centric reference frames determines full-body 
ownership. Front. Psychol. 2:35. doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2011.00035 
Pfurtscheller, G., Leeb, R., Keinrath, C., Friedman, D., Neuper, C., Guger, C., 
et al. (2006). Walking from thought. Brain Res. 1071, 145–152. doi:10.1016/ 
j.brainres.2005.11.083 
Pizarro, R., Hall, M., Bermell-Garcia, P., and Gonzalez-Franco, M. (2015). 
“Augmenting remote presence for interactive dashboard collaborations,” in 
Proceedings of the 2015 International Conference on Interactive Tabletops & 
Surfaces (New York, NY: ACM), 235–240.
Pomes, A., and Slater, M. (2013). Drift and ownership towards a distant virtual 
body. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 7:908. doi:10.3389/fnhum.2013.00908 
Prabhat, Forsberg, A., Katzourin, M., Wharton, K., and Slater, M. (2008). 
A comparative study of Desktop, Fishtank, and Cave systems for the exploration 
of volume rendered confocal data sets. IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph. 14, 
551–563. doi:10.1109/TVCG.2007.70433 
Rauter, G., Sigrist, R., Koch, C., Crivelli, F., van Raai, M., Riener, R., et al. (2013). 
Transfer of Complex Skill Learning from Virtual to Real Rowing. PLoS ONE 
8:e82145. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0082145
Razzaque, S., Kohn, Z., and Whitton, M. C. (2001). “Redirected walking,” in 
Proceedings of Eurographics (Manchester: Eurographics Association), 289–294.
Razzaque, S., Swapp, D., Slater, M., Whitton, M. C., and Steed, A. (2002). “Redirected 
walking in place,” in Proceedings of the Workshop on Virtual Environments 2002 
(Barcelona: Eurographics Association), 123–130.
Reford, L., and Leston, J. (2011). WWF UK Policy Position Statement on Business 
Travel. Worldwide Wildlife Foundation. Available at: http://assets.wwf.org.uk/
downloads/business_travel_ps_0709.pdf
Reger, G. M., Gahm, G. A., Rizzo, A. A., Swanson, R., and Duma, S. (2009). 
Soldier evaluation of the virtual reality Iraq. Telemed. J. E. Health 15, 101–104. 
doi:10.1089/tmj.2008.0050 
Reicher, S., Cassidy, C., Wolpert, I., Hopkins, N., and Levine, M. (2006). Saving 
Bulgaria’s Jews: an analysis of social identity and the mobilisation of social 
solidarity. Eur. J. Soc. Psychol. 36, 49–72. doi:10.1002/ejsp.291 
Reicher, S. D., Haslam, S. A., and Smith, J. R. (2012). Working toward the 
experimenter reconceptualizing obedience within the Milgram paradigm 
as identification-based followership. Perspect. Psychol. Sci. 7, 315–324. 
doi:10.1177/1745691612448482 
Rizzo, A. S., Difede, J., Rothbaum, B. O., Reger, G., Spitalnick, J., Cukor, J., et al. 
(2010). Development and early evaluation of the virtual Iraq/Afghanistan

----- Page 45 (native) -----
45
Slater and Sanchez-Vives
Enhancing Our Lives with VR
Frontiers in Robotics and AI  |  www.frontiersin.org
December 2016  |  Volume 3  |  Article 74
exposure therapy system for combat-related PTSD. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1208, 
114–125. doi:10.1111/j.1749-6632.2010.05755.x 
Rohde, M., Wold, A., Karnath, H.-O., and Ernst, M. O. (2013). The human touch: 
skin temperature during the rubber hand illusion in manual and automated 
stroking procedures. PLoS ONE 8:e80688. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0080688 
Rooth, D.-O. (2010). Automatic associations and discrimination in hiring: real 
world evidence. Labour Econ. 17, 523–534. doi:10.1016/j.labeco.2009.04.005 
Rothman, D. B., and Warren, W. H. (2006). Wormholes in virtual reality and the 
geometry of cognitive maps. J. Vis. 6, 143–143. doi:10.1167/6.6.143 
Roussou, M. (2009). A VR playground for learning abstract mathematics concepts. 
IEEE Comput. Graph. Appl. 29, 82–85. doi:10.1109/MCG.2009.1 
Roussou, M., Oliver, M., and Slater, M. (2006). The virtual playground: an educa-
tional virtual reality environment for evaluating interactivity and conceptual 
learning. Virtual Real. 10, 227–240. doi:10.1007/s10055-006-0035-5 
Rovira, A., Swapp, D., Spanlang, B., and Slater, M. (2009). The use of virtual reality 
in the study of people’s responses to violent incidents. Front. Behav. Neurosci. 
3:59. doi:10.3389/neuro.08.059.2009
Rua, H., and Alvito, P. (2011). Living the past: 3D models, virtual reality and game 
engines as tools for supporting archaeology and the reconstruction of cultural 
heritage – the case-study of the Roman villa of Casal de Freiria. J. Archaeol. Sci. 
38, 3296–3308. doi:10.1016/j.jas.2011.07.015 
Ruddle, R. A., and Lessels, S. (2009). The benefits of using a walking interface 
to navigate virtual environments. ACM Trans. Comput. Hum. Interact. 16, 5. 
doi:10.1145/1502800.1502805 
Ruddle, R. A., Payne, S. J., and Jones, D. M. (1999). Navigating large-scale virtual 
environments: what differences occur between helmet-mounted and desk-top 
displays? Presence 8, 157–168. doi:10.1162/105474699566143 
Ruddle, R. A., Volkova, E., and Bülthoff, H. H. (2011a). Walking improves your 
cognitive map in environments that are large-scale and large in extent. ACM 
Trans. Comput. Hum. Interact. 18, 10. doi:10.1145/1970378.1970384 
Ruddle, R. A., Volkova, E., Mohler, B., and Bülthoff, H. H. (2011b). The effect of 
landmark and body-based sensory information on route knowledge. Mem. 
Cognit. 39, 686–699. doi:10.3758/s13421-010-0054-z 
Ruddle, R. A., Volkova, E., and Bülthoff, H. H. (2013). Learning to walk in virtual 
reality. ACM Trans. Appl. Percept. 10, 11. doi:10.1145/2465780.2465785 
Ruffaldi, E., Filippeschi, A., Avizzano, C. A., Bardy, B., Gopher, D., and Bergamasco, 
M. (2011). Feedback, affordances, and accelerators for training sports in virtual 
environments. Presence 20, 33–46. doi:10.1162/pres_a_00034 
Ruppert, B. (2011). New directions in the use of virtual reality for food shopping: 
marketing and education perspectives. J. Diabetes Sci. Technol. 5, 315–318. 
doi:10.1177/193229681100500217 
Sadagic, A., and Slater, M. (2000). Dynamic polygon visibility ordering for head-
slaved viewing in virtual environments. Comput. Graph. Forum 19, 111–122. 
doi:10.1111/1467-8659.00448 
Salomon, R., Lim, M., Pfeiffer, C., Gassert, R., and Blanke, O. (2013). Full body 
illusion is associated with widespread skin temperature reduction. Front. Behav. 
Neurosci. 7:65. doi:10.3389/fnbeh.2013.00065 
Sanchez-Vives, M. V., and Slater, M. (2005). From presence to consciousness 
through virtual reality. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 6, 332–339. doi:10.1038/nrn1651 
Sanchez-Vives, M. V., Spanlang, B., Frisoli, A., Bergamasco, M., and Slater, M. 
(2010). Virtual hand illusion induced by visuomotor correlations. PLoS ONE 
5:e10381. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0010381 
Sauzéon, H., Pala, P. A., Larrue, F., Wallet, G., Déjos, M., Zheng, X., et al. (2015). 
The use of virtual reality for episodic memory assessment. Exp. Psychol. 59, 
99–108. doi:10.1027/1618-3169/a000131
Schaaff, A., Berthier, J., Da Rocha, J., Deparis, N., Derriere, S., Gaultier, P., et al. 
(2015). “Astronomical data analysis software an systems XXIV (ADASS XXIV),” 
in Proceedings of a Conference held 5-9 October 2014 at Calgary, Alberta Canada, 
eds A. R. Taylor and E. Rosolowsky (San Francisco: Astronomical Society of the 
Pacific), 125–128.
Schnapp, B., and Warren, W. (2007). Wormholes in virtual reality: what spatial 
knowledge is learned for navigation? J. Vis. 7, 758–758. doi:10.1167/7.9.758 
Schroeder, R. (2011). “Comparing avatar and video representations,” in Reinventing 
Ourselves: Contemporary Concepts of Identity in Virtual Worlds (London: 
Springer Verlag), 235–251.
Seixas-Mikelus, S. A., Adal, A., Kesavadas, T., Baheti, A., Srimathveeravalli, G., 
Hussain, A., et al. (2010). Can image-based virtual reality help teach anatomy? 
J. Endourol. 24, 629–634. doi:10.1089/end.2009.0556 
Seth, A., Vance, J. M., and Oliver, J. H. (2011). Virtual reality for assembly methods 
prototyping: a review. Virtual Real. 15, 5–20. doi:10.1007/s10055-009-0153-y 
Seymour, N. E., Gallagher, A. G., Roman, S. A., O’Brien, M. K., Bansal, V. K., 
Andersen, D. K., et al. (2002). Virtual reality training improves operating room 
performance: results of a randomized, double-blinded study. Ann. Surg. 236, 
458–463; discussion 463–454. doi:10.1097/00000658-200210000-00008 
Shaw, L., Wünsche, B., Lutteroth, C., Marks, S., Buckley, J., and Corballis, P. (2015a). 
“Development and evaluation of an exercycle game using immersive technolo-
gies,” in Proceedings of the 8th Australasian Workshop on Health Informatics and 
Knowledge Management. University of Western Sydney.
Shaw, L. A., Wünsche, B. C., Lutteroth, C., Marks, S., and Callies, R. (2015b). 
“Challenges in virtual reality exergame design,” in Proceedings of the 16th 
Australasian User Interface Conference (AUIC 2015) (Sydney: Australian 
Computer Society Inc. (ACS)), 61–68.
Sheridan, T. B. (1992). Musings on telepresence and virtual presence. Presence 1, 
120–126. doi:10.1162/pres.1992.1.1.120 
Sheridan, T. B. (1996). Further musings on the psychophysics of presence. Presence 
5, 241–246. doi:10.1162/pres.1996.5.2.241 
Singh, S., Sedlack, R. E., and Cook, D. A. (2014). Effects of simulation-based 
training in gastrointestinal endoscopy: a systematic review and meta-anal-
ysis. Clin. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 12, 1611.e–1623.e. doi:10.1016/j.
cgh.2014.01.037 
Skulmowski, A., Bunge, A., Kaspar, K., and Pipa, G. (2014). Forced-choice 
decision-making in modified trolley dilemma situations: a virtual reality and 
eye tracking study. Front. Behav. Neurosci. 8:426. doi:10.3389/fnbeh.2014. 
00426 
Slater, M. (2009). Place illusion and plausibility can lead to realistic behaviour in 
immersive virtual environments. Philos. Trans. R Soc. Lond. 364, 3549–3557. 
doi:10.1098/rstb.2009.0138 
Slater, M. (2014). Grand challenges in virtual environments. Front. Robot. AI 
Virtual Environ. 1:3. doi:10.3389/frobt.2014.00003 
Slater, M., Antley, A., Davison, A., Swapp, D., Guger, C., Barker, C., et al. (2006). 
A virtual reprise of the Stanley Milgram obedience experiments. PLoS ONE 
1:e39. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0000039 
Slater, M., Linakis, V., Usoh, M., and Kooper, R. (1996). “Immersion, presence, 
and performance in virtual environments: an experiment with tri-dimensional 
chess,” in ACM Virtual Reality Software and Technology (VRST) (Hong Kong: 
ACM), 163–172.
Slater, M., Perez-Marcos, D., Ehrsson, H. H., and Sanchez-Vives, M. (2008). 
Towards a digital body: the virtual arm illusion. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 2:6. 
doi:10.3389/neuro.09.006.2008 
Slater, M., Perez-Marcos, D., Ehrsson, H. H., and Sanchez-Vives, M. V. (2009). 
Inducing illusory ownership of a virtual body. Front. Neurosci. 3:214–220. 
doi:10.3389/neuro.01.029.2009 
Slater, M., Rovira, A., Southern, R., Swapp, D., Zhang, J. J., Campbell, C., et al. 
(2013). Bystander responses to a violent incident in an immersive virtual 
environment. PLoS ONE 8:e52766. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0052766 
Slater, M., Sadagic, A., Usoh, M., and Schroeder, R. (2000). Small-group behavior 
in a virtual and real environment: a comparative study. Presence 9, 37–51. 
doi:10.1162/105474600566600 
Slater, M., and Sanchez-Vives, M. V. (2014). Transcending the self in immersive 
virtual reality. Computer 47, 24–30. doi:10.1109/MC.2014.198 
Slater, M., Spanlang, B., and Corominas, D. (2010a). Simulating virtual environ-
ments within virtual environments as the basis for a psychophysics of presence. 
ACM Trans. Graph. 29, 92. doi:10.1145/1778765.1778829 
Slater, M., Spanlang, B., Sanchez-Vives, M. V., and Blanke, O. (2010b). First person 
experience of body transfer in virtual reality. PLoS ONE 5:e10564. doi:10.1371/
journal.pone.0010564 
Slater, M., and Steed, A. (2000). A virtual presence counter. Presence 9, 413–434. 
doi:10.1162/105474600566925 
Slater, M., Usoh, M., and Steed, A. (1995). Taking steps: the influence of a walking 
technique on presence in virtual reality. ACM Trans. Comput. Hum. Interact. 2, 
201–219. doi:10.1145/210079.210084 
Slater, M., and Wilbur, S. (1997). A framework for immersive virtual environments 
(FIVE): speculations on the role of presence in virtual environments. Presence 
6, 603–616. doi:10.1162/pres.1997.6.6.603 
Solina, F., Batagelj, B., and Glamočanin, S. (2008). “Virtual skiing as an art installa-
tion,” in ELMAR, 2008. 50th International Symposium (Zadar: IEEE), 507–510.

----- Page 46 (native) -----
46
Slater and Sanchez-Vives
Enhancing Our Lives with VR
Frontiers in Robotics and AI  |  www.frontiersin.org
December 2016  |  Volume 3  |  Article 74
Sommer, I. E., and Kahn, R. S. (2015). The magic of movement; the potential of 
exercise to improve cognition. Schizophr. Bull. 41, 776–778. doi:10.1093/schbul/
sbv031
Spanlang, B., Fröhlich, T., Descalzo, F., Antley, A., and Slater, M. (2007). “The 
making of a presence experiment: responses to virtual fire,” in PRESENCE 2007 
– The 10th Annual International Workshop on Presence (Barcelona). Available 
at: 
http://astro.temple.edu/~lombard/ISPR/Proceedings/2007/Spanlang,%20
et%20al.pdf
Spanlang, B., Navarro, X., Normand, J.-M., Kishore, S., Pizarro, R., and Slater, M. 
(2013). “Real time whole body motion mapping for avatars and robots,” in 
Proceedings of the 19th ACM Symposium on Virtual Reality Software and 
Technology – VRST’13 (Singapore: ACM), 175–178.
Spanlang, B., Normand, J.-M., Borland, D., Kilteni, K., Giannopoulos, E., Pomes, A., 
et al. (2014). How to build an embodiment lab: achieving body representation 
illusions in virtual reality. Front. Robot. AI 1:9. doi:10.3389/frobt.2014. 
00009 
Sportillo, D., Avveduto, G., Tecchia, F., and Carrozzino, M. (2015). “Training 
in VR: a preliminary study on learning assembly/disassembly sequences,” in 
Augmented and Virtual Reality: Second International Conference, AVR 2015 
(Lecce: Springer), 332–343.
Stark, L. W. (1995). “How virtual reality works! The illusions of vision in real and 
virtual environments,” in Proc. SPIE 2411, Human Vision, Visual Processing, and 
Digital Display VI, Vol. 277 (San Jose, CA), 5–10.
Steed, A., and Oliveira, M. F. (2009). Networked Graphics: Building Networked 
Games and Virtual Environments. Burlington, MA: Elsevier.
Steed, A., Slater, M., Sadagic, A., Bullock, A., and Tromp, J. (1999). “Leadership 
and collaboration in shared virtual environments,” in Virtual Reality, 1999. 
Proceedings (Houston, TX: IEEE), 112–115.
Steed, A., Spante, M., Heldal, I., Axelsson, A.-S., and Schroeder, R. (2003). “Strangers 
and friends in caves: an exploratory study of collaboration in networked IPT 
systems for extended periods of time,” in Proceedings of the 2003 Symposium on 
Interactive 3D Graphics (Monterey, CA: ACM), 51–54.
Steed, A., Steptoe, W., Oyekoya, W., Pece, F., Weyrich, T., Kautz, J., et al. (2012). 
Beaming: an asymmetric telepresence system. IEEE Comput. Graph. Appl. 32, 
10–17. doi:10.1109/MCG.2012.110 
Stenico, C., and Greitemeyer, T. (2014). The others will help: the presence of 
multiple video game characters reduces helping after the game is over. J. Soc. 
Psychol. 154, 101–104. doi:10.1080/00224545.2013.864595 
Steptoe, W., Normand, J. M., Oyekoya, O., Pece, F., Giannopoulos, E., Tecchia, F., 
et al. (2012). Acting in collaborative multimodal mixed reality environments. 
Presence 21, 406–422. doi:10.1162/PRES_a_00109 
Steptoe, W., Steed, A., Rovira, A., and Rae, J. (2010). “Lie tracking: social presence, 
truth and deception in avatar-mediated telecommunication,” in Proceedings of 
the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (New York, 
NY: ACM), 1039–1048.
Steptoe, W., Steed, A., and Slater, M. (2013). Human tails: ownership and control 
of extended humanoid avatars. IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph 19, 583–590. 
doi:10.1109/TVCG.2013.32 
Steptoe, W., Wolff, R., Murgia, A., Guimaraes, E., Rae, J., Sharkey, P., et al. (2008). 
“Eye-tracking for avatar eye-gaze and interactional analysis in immersive 
collaborative virtual environments,” in Proceedings of the 2008 ACM 
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work (New York, NY: ACM), 
197–200.
Steuer, J. (1992). Defining virtual reality: dimensions determining telepresence. 
J. Commun. 42, 73–93. doi:10.1111/j.1460-2466.1992.tb00812.x 
Suma, E. A., Azmandian, M., Grechkin, T., Phan, T., and Bolas, M. (2015). “Making 
small spaces feel large: infinite walking in virtual reality,” in ACM SIGGRAPH 
2015 Emerging Technologies (New York, NY: ACM), 16.
Sun, Q., Mirhosseini, S., Gutenko, I., Park, J. H., Papadopoulos, C., Laha, B., et al. 
(2015). “Buyers satisfaction in a virtual fitting room scenario based on realism 
of avatar,” in 3D User Interfaces (3DUI), 2015 IEEE Symposium (Arles: IEEE), 
183–184.
Sundstedt, V., Chalmers, A., and Martinez, P. (2004). “High fidelity reconstruc-
tion of the ancient Egyptian temple of Kalabsha,” in Proceedings of the 3rd 
International Conference on Computer Graphics, Virtual Reality, Visualisation 
and Interaction in Africa (New York, NY: ACM), 107–113.
Sutherland, I. E. (1965). The ultimate display. Proc. IFIP Congr. 2, 
506–508. 
Sutherland, I. E. (1968). “A head-mounted three dimensional display,” in Proceedings 
of the December 9–11, 1968, Fall Joint Computer Conference, Part I (New York, 
NY: ACM), 757–764.
Tecchia, F., Avveduto, G., Brondi, R., Carrozzino, M., Bergamasco, M., and Alem, 
L. (2014). “I’m in VR!: using your own hands in a fully immersive MR system,” 
in Proceedings of the 20th ACM Symposium on Virtual Reality Software and 
Technology (New York, NY: ACM), 73–76.
Tecchia, F., Carrozzino, M., Bacinelli, S., Rossi, F., Vercelli, D., Marino, G., et al. 
(2010). A flexible framework for wide-spectrum VR development. Presence 19, 
302–312. doi:10.1162/PRES_a_00002 
Terrazas, A., Krause, M., Lipa, P., Gothard, K. M., Barnes, C. A., and McNaughton, 
B. L. (2005). Self-motion and the hippocampal spatial metric. J. Neurosci. 25, 
8085–8096. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0693-05.2005 
Thomson, J. J. (1976). Killing, letting die, and the trolley problem. Monist. 59, 
204–217. doi:10.5840/monist197659224 
Tiainen, T., Ellman, A., and Kaapu, T. (2014). Virtual prototypes reveal more 
development ideas: comparison between customers’ evaluation of virtual and 
physical prototypes: this paper argues that virtual prototypes are better than 
physical prototypes for consumers-involved product development. Virtual 
Phys. Prototyping 9, 169–180. doi:10.1080/17452759.2014.934573 
Tidoni, E., Fusco, G., Leonardis, D., Frisoli, A., Bergamasco, M., and Aglioti, S. 
M. (2015). Illusory movements induced by tendon vibration in right-and 
left-handed people. Exp. Brain Res. 233, 375–383. doi:10.1007/s00221-014- 
4121-8 
Tiozzo, E., Youbi, M., Dave, K., Perez-Pinzon, M., Rundek, T., Sacco, R. L., et al. 
(2015). Aerobic, resistance, and cognitive exercise training poststroke. Stroke 
46. doi:10.1161/STROKEAHA.114.006649 
Tonin, L., Carlson, T., Leeb, R., Del, R., and Millán, J. (2011). “Brain-controlled 
telepresence robot by motor-disabled people,” in Conference Proceedings: Annual 
International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society 
(Boston, MA: IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society), 4227–4230.
Tromp, J., Bullock, A., Steed, A., Sadagic, A., Slater, M., and Frecon, E. (1998). Small 
group behavior experiments in the Coven project. IEEE Comput. Graph. Appl. 
18, 53–63. doi:10.1109/38.734980 
Usoh, M., Arthur, K., Whitton, M. C., Bastos, R., Steed, A., Slater, M., et al. (1999). 
“Walking > walking-in-place > flying, in virtual environments,” in Proceedings 
of the 26th Annual Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques 
(SIGGRAPH). Los Angeles, CA: ACM.
van Dam, A., Laidlaw, D., and Simpson, R. (2002). Experiments in immersive virtual 
reality for scientific visualization. Comput. Graph. 26, 535–555. doi:10.1016/
S0097-8493(02)00113-9 
van der Hoort, B., Guterstam, A., and Ehrsson, H. H. (2011). Being Barbie: the 
size of one’s own body determines the perceived size of the world. PLoS ONE 
6:e20195. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0020195 
van Dongen, K. W., Ahlberg, G., Bonavina, L., Carter, F. J., Grantcharov, T. P., 
Hyltander, A., et al. (2011). European consensus on a competency-based virtual 
reality training program for basic endoscopic surgical psychomotor skills. Surg. 
Endosc. 25, 166–171. doi:10.1007/s00464-010-1151-6 
Vignais, N., Bideau, B., Craig, C., Brault, S., Multon, F., and Kulpa, R. (2009). 
Virtual environments for sport analysis: perception-action coupling in handball 
goalkeeping. Int. J. Virtual Real. 8, 43–48. 
von Zitzewitz, J., Wolf, P., Novaković, V., Wellner, M., Rauter, G., Brunschweiler, A., 
et  al. (2008). Real-time rowing simulator with multimodal feedback. Sports 
Technol. 1, 257–266. doi:10.1080/19346182.2008.9648483 
Wang, Z., Giannopoulos, E., Slater, M., Peer, A., and Buss, M. (2011). Handshake: 
realistic human-robot interaction in haptic enhanced virtual reality. Presence 
20, 371–392. doi:10.1162/PRES_a_00061 
Webel, S., Olbrich, M., Franke, T., and Keil, J. (2013). “Immersive experience of 
current and ancient reconstructed cultural attractions,” in Digital Heritage 
International Congress (DigitalHeritage), 2013 (Granada: IEEE), 395–398.
Wellner, M., Sigrist, R., and Riener, R. (2010a). Virtual competitors influence 
rowers. Presence 19, 313–330. doi:10.1162/PRES_a_00004 
Wellner, M., Sigrist, R., Von Zitzewitz, J., Wolf, P., and Riener, R. (2010b). 
Does a virtual audience influence rowing? Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng. P 224, 
117–128. doi:10.1243/17543371JSET33
Wessberg, J., Stambaugh, C. R., Kralik, J. D., Beck, P. D., Laubach, M., Chapin, J. K., 
et al. (2000). Real-time prediction of hand trajectory by ensembles of cortical 
neurons in primates. Nature 408, 361–365. doi:10.1038/35042582

----- Page 47 (native) -----
47
Slater and Sanchez-Vives
Enhancing Our Lives with VR
Frontiers in Robotics and AI  |  www.frontiersin.org
December 2016  |  Volume 3  |  Article 74
Wilcox, L. M., Allison, R. S., Elfassy, S., and Grelik, C. (2006). Personal space 
in virtual reality. ACM Trans. Appl. Percept. 3, 412–428. doi:10.1145/ 
1190036.1190041 
Wirth, W., Hartmann, T., BãCking, S., Vorderer, P., Klimmt, C., Schramm, H., et al. 
(2007). A process model of the formation of spatial presence experiences. Media 
Psychol. 9, 493–525. doi:10.1080/15213260701283079 
Wojciechowski, R., Walczak, K., White, M., and Cellary, W. (2004). “Building 
virtual and augmented reality museum exhibitions,” in Proceedings of the 
Ninth International Conference on 3D Web Technology (New York, NY: ACM), 
135–144.
Won, A. S., Bailenson, J., Lee, J., and Lanier, J. (2015a). Homuncular flexibility 
in virtual reality. J. Comput. Mediat. Commun. 20, 241–259. doi:10.1111/
jcc4.12107 
Won, A. S., Bailenson, J. N., and Lanier, J. (2015b). Homuncular flexibility: the 
human ability to inhabit nonhuman avatars. Emerg. Trends Soc. Behav. Sci. 
doi:10.1002/9781118900772.etrds0165 
WTTC. (2015). Travel and Tourism – Economic Impact 2015 – World. Available 
at: https://www.wttc.org/-/media/files/reports/economic impact research/
regional 2015/world2015.pdf
Yee, N., and Bailenson, J. N. (2007). The Proteus effect: the effect of trans-
formed self-representation on behavior. Hum. Commun. Res. 33, 271–290. 
doi:10.1111/j.1468-2958.2007.00299.x 
Yee, N., Bailenson, J. N., and Ducheneaut, N. (2009). The Proteus effect: implica-
tions of transformed digital self-representation on online and offline behavior. 
Communic. Res. 36, 285–312. doi:10.1177/0093650208330254 
Yu, F., Thomas, W., Nelson, N. W., Bronas, U. G., Dysken, M., and Wyman, J. F. 
(2015). Impact of 6-month aerobic exercise on Alzheimer’s symptoms. J. Appl. 
Gerontol. 34, 484–500. doi:10.1177/0733464813512895 
Zeltzer, D. (1992). Autonomy, interaction, and presence. Presence 1, 127–132. 
doi:10.1162/pres.1992.1.1.127 
Zendejas, B., Brydges, R., Hamstra, S. J., and Cook, D. A. (2013). State of 
the evidence on simulation-based training for laparoscopic surgery: 
a 
systematic 
review. 
Ann. 
Surg. 
257, 
586–593. 
doi:10.1097/SLA. 
0b013e318288c40b 
Zhou, Y., and Levy, J. I. (2007). Factors influencing the spatial extent of mobile 
source air pollution impacts: a meta-analysis. BMC Public Health 7:89. 
doi:10.1186/1471-2458-7-89 
Ziegert, J. C., and Hanges, P. J. (2005). Employment discrimination: the role of 
implicit attitudes, motivation, and a climate for racial bias. J. Appl. Psychol. 90, 
553. doi:10.1037/0021-9010.90.3.553 
Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors were approached by the company 
Facebook to write an article on potential applications of VR. After completion, 
the article was subject to a review by the Facebook legal team. There was neither 
implicit nor explicit encouragement to promote or favor any Facebook products 
or services. The authors were free to write about virtual reality as they wished. 
The work is a review of virtual reality in general and not related to any particular 
products, software, or services.
Copyright © 2016 Slater and Sanchez-Vives. This is an open-access article distributed 
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, 
distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original 
author(s) or licensor are credited and that the original publication in this journal 
is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or 
reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.