

----- Page 1 (native) -----
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1996). Computer support for knowledge-building communities. In T.
Koschmann (Ed.), CSCL: Theory and practice of an emerging paradigm (pp.249-268). Mahwah,
NJ:Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Chapter 10
Computer Support for Knowledge-Building Communities
Marlene Scardamalia
Carl Bereiter
Ontario Institute for Studies in Education of the University of Toronto
Nobody wants to use technology to recreate education as it is, yet there is not much to
distinguish what goes on in most computer-supported classrooms versus traditional
classrooms. Kay (1991) has suggested that the phenomenon of reframing innovations to
recreate the familiar is itself commonplace. Thus, one sees all manner of powerful
technology (Hypercard, CD-ROM, Lego Logo, and so forth) used to conduct shopworn
school activities: copying material from one resource into another (e.g., using Hypercard
to assemble sound and visual bites produced by others), and following step-by-step
procedures (e.g., creating Lego Logo machines by following steps in a manual). With
new technologies, student-generated collages and reproductions appear more inventive
and sophisticated-with impressive displays of sound, video, and typography-but from a
cognitive perspective, it is not clear what, if any, knowledge content has been processed
by the students.
In this chapter we offer a suggestion for how to escape the pattern of reinventing the
familiar with educational technology. Knowledge-building discourse is at the heart of the
superior education that we have in mind. We argue that the classroom needs to foster
transformational thought, both on the part of students and teachers, and that the best way
to do this is to replace classroom-bred discourse patterns with those having more
immediate and natural extensions to the real world; patterns whereby ideas are conceived,
responded to, reframed, and set in historical context. Our goal is to create communication
systems where the relations between what is said and what is written, between immediate
and broader audiences, and between what is created in the here-and-now and archived are
intimately related and are natural extensions of school-based activities, much as these
processes are intertwined and are natural extensions of activities conducted in scholarly
disciplines. Our efforts to create an enabling technology have led to the CSILE project-

----- Page 2 (native) -----
Computer Supported Intentional Learning Environments (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1991a;
Scardamalia et al., 1992). In this chapter, we focus on the educational ideas for
knowledge-building discourse—with some discussion, toward the end of this chapter, on
the technology.
The ideas represented in CSILE come from three lines of research and thought:
1. Intentional learning. Although a great deal of learning is unintentional, there are
important kinds of school learning that appear to not take place unless the student
is actively trying to achieve a cognitive objective—as distinct from simply trying
to do well on school tasks or activities (Bereiter & Scardamalia, 1989; Chan,
Burtis, Scardamalia, & Bereiter, 1992; Ng & Bereiter, 1991).
2. The process of expertise. Although expertise is usually gauged by performance,
there is a process aspect to expertise, which we hypothesize to consist of
reinvestment of mental resources that become available as a result of pattern
learning and automaticity, and more particularly their reinvestment in progressive
problem solving—addressing the problems of one-s domain at increasing levels of
complexity (Bereiter & Scardamalia, 1993; Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1991b).
Progressive problem solving not only characterizes people on their way to
becoming experts, but it also characterizes experts when they are working at the
edges of their competence. Among students, the process of expertise manifests
itself as intentional learning.
3. Restructuring schools as knowledge-building communities.  The process of
expertise is effortful and typically requires social support. By implication, the
same is true of intentional learning. Most social environments do not provide such
support. They are what we call first-order environments. Adaptation to the
environment involves learning, but the learning is asymptotic. One becomes an
old timer, comfortably integrated into a relatively stable system of routines (Lave
& Wenger, 1991). As we explain further in later sections, there is good reason to
characterize schools of both didactic and child-centered orientations as first-order
environments. In second-order environments, learning is not asymptotic, because
what one person does in adapting changes the environment so that others must
readapt. Competitive sports and businesses are examples of second-order
environments, where the accomplishments of participants keep raising the
standard that the others strive for. More relevant examples as far as education is
concerned are the sciences and other learned disciplines, where adaptation
involves making contributions to collective knowledge. Because this very activity
increases the collective knowledge, continued adaptation requires contributions
beyond what is already known, thus producing nonasymptotic learning. The idea

----- Page 3 (native) -----
of schools as knowledge-building communities is the idea of making them into
second-order environments on this model.
In this chapter we focus on the third point, restructuring schools, but in a way that
incorporates the other two points. Thus, the focus is on restructuring schools so that they
become the kinds of environments that support the process of expertise, in particular,
progressive problem solving as it applies to competence and understanding.
HOW SCHOOLS INHIBIT KNOWLEDGE BUILDING
Contemporary criticism of schools in the United States and Canada tends to be
dominated by acute problems on one hand (drop-outs, drugs, violence; etc.) and on the
other by comparisons with schools in other countries that score better on achievement
tests. These criticisms, in turn, lead to reform proposals that address the acute problems
or that advance means of bringing achievement up to European and Japanese standards. It
cannot be said that school reform is being approached with much optimism, except in
speeches by politicians-and with good reason. On the basis of demographic projections,
the acute problems can be expected to get worse; as for achievement, there is little
prospect of duplicating either the teaching force or the family support system that seems
responsible for the high achievement of other societies. Furthermore, there is no reason to
suppose that other nations will stand pat, waiting for us to catch up.
It has seemed to us that a more promising approach to school restructuring would
start by examining how schools limit knowledge-building potential-including the high-
achieving ones. By addressing fundamental shortcomings, it may be possible to do more
than struggle to catch up.
The conception of expertise as a process affords a viewpoint on schooling that reveals
certain drawbacks of a fundamental nature. Although schools are devoted to teaching
useful cognitive skills and formal knowledge, they are not designed to foster the
progressive problem solving that generates the vast informal knowledge that has been
found to characterize expert competence. Instead, the following seem to be true of
schools in general:
1. Schooling focuses on the individual student’s abilities, dispositions, and
prospects. Educators have failed to grasp the social structures and dynamics that
are required for progressive, communal knowledge building.
2. Schooling deals with only the visible parts of knowledge: formal knowledge and
demonstrable skills. Informal or tacit knowledge—both the kind that students
bring in with them and the kind that they will need in order to function

----- Page 4 (native) -----
expertly—is generally ignored in school curricula. The result, frequently, is inert
knowledge, unconnected to the knowledge that actually informs thought and
behavior.
3. The knowledge objectives that are pursued, limited as they may be, tend to be
made invisible to the students. The objectives are translated into tasks and
activities. The students’ attention, and often that of the teachers as well, is
concentrated on the activities and not on the objectives that gave rise to them.
4. Scope for the exercise of expertise – for progressive problem solving, in other
words—is generally available only to the teacher, and schooling provides no
mechanisms (such as those that exist in trade apprenticeships) for the teacher’s
expertise to be passed on to the students.
These defects are especially relevant to the development of experts and expertlike
learners. Schools have never been designed with a conception of expertise as a process
that can be fostered at all levels of development. They have all been built on a primitive
conception of knowledge that leaves out most of what is required to become an expert.
KNOWLEDGE BUILDING; A THIRD WAY
For the most part, educational technology has accommodated itself to the conventional
schizophrenia, in which didactic instruction and child-centered methods compete for
control of the educational mind. Thus, we have drill-and-practice, tutoring, and
instructional management programs on the one hand, and we have a variety of
exploratory and activity-centered programs on the other. The arguments for and against
didactic approaches and child-centered ones are so familiar that there is no reason to
review or criticize them here. Suffice it to say that any hope for technology to have a role
in restructuring education must take the form of searching for a third way—something
that is neither didactic nor activity-centered nor a mere compromise between the two
(which is what already exists in most schools).
In searching for a third viable form of schooling, educational thinkers have looked
outside the school for models. Thus, traditional apprenticeship has been examined as a
possible model, one that provides for a natural but highly goal-oriented kind of learning
(Collins, Brown, & Newman, 1989). The learned disciplines themselves show promise as
models for the redesign of schools. This notion makes most sense when considered in
light of the ideas we have been trying to advance about expertise—conceiving of it as
process of progressive problem solving and advancement beyond present limits of
competence. In the sciences, problem redefinition at increasingly high levels is the goal,
based on a fundamentally social process. Researchers benefit from the advances of

----- Page 5 (native) -----
others, with continual interplay of findings, not just among scientists working
concurrently, but from generation to generation.
There have been previous efforts to capture the character and spirit of scientific
inquiry in the classroom. Several elementary school science curriculum and social studies
curricula developed during the 1950s and early 1960s were of this kind (see Bruner,
1964). However, the emphasis was on students as individuals engaged in the processes of
scientific inquiry, rather than on the class as a collective engaged in the processes of a
scientific community.
In recent times, however, people have begun to attend more to the social processes of
research teams and laboratories, which have a character and a power quite different from
a mere aggregation of individual researchers. Whitehead (1925/1948) recognized this
decades ago, when he credited the German universities of the 19th century with having
discovered how to produce disciplined progress instead of having to wait for “the
occasional genius, or the occasional lucky thought” (p. 99). So successful have research
centers been that they have begun to be used as models for many other kinds of
enterprises—for management teams, sales teams, even secretarial staffs (Peters, 1987).
The restructuring of manufacturing processes around quality circles also owes something
to the research team as a model. Why, then, should the research center not also inform
school restructuring?
As we suggested earlier, by focusing on the individual student’s abilities and
dispositions, educators have failed to grasp the social structures and dynamics that are
required for progressive knowledge-building of the kind to which Whitehead referred. In
effect, they have remained fixed on a pre-19th-century model of science, dependent on
“the occasional genius, or the occasional lucky thought.” Their focal question has been,
“To what extent can a child be expected to act like a physicist, biologist, historian,
literary scholar, anthropologist, or whatever?” The answer to this question will
necessarily be equivocal. Of course, children are curious about the world, and thy can in
some fashion collect and evaluate evidence, venture explanations, test conjectures, and so
on. Thus they can be said to act like researchers. But it is doubtful how far these talents
can take them, and so there are perennial questions about how much discovery methods
can be relied on to develop students’ knowledge. Furthermore, fixing on the individual
talents, needs, and learning outcomes only suggests to didactic educators that research
skills and laboratory activities should be incorporated into the curriculum, and confirms
for child-centered educators the claim they have been making all along: that children’s
curiosity should be allowed to guide their activities. It does not suggest any new structure
for schooling.
More significant implications follow if the question is reformulated at the level of the
group rather than the individual: Can a classroom function as a knowledge-building

----- Page 6 (native) -----
community, similar to the knowledge-building communities that set the pace for their
fields? In an earlier era, it would have been possible to dismiss this idea as romantic.
Researchers are discovering or creating new knowledge; students are only learning what
is already known. By now, however, it is generally recognized that students construct
their knowledge. This is as true if they are learning from books and lectures as it is if they
are acquiring knowledge through inquiry. A further implication is that creating new
knowledge and learning existing knowledge are not very different, as far as psychological
processes are concerned. Thus, there is no patent reason why schooling cannot have the
dynamic character of scientific knowledge building. If there are insurmountable
obstacles, they are more likely to be of a social or attitudinal kinds than of a cognitive
kind.
The idea of restructuring schools as intellectual communities of some sort is very
much in the wind these days. Brown and Campione (1990) proposed communities of
learners and thinkers; Lipman (1988) proposed “community of inquiry” (p. 67). We
strongly prefer our own term, knowledge-building community. It suggests continuity with
the other knowledge-building communities that exist beyond the schools, and the term
building implies that the classroom community works to produce knowledge—a
collective product and not merely a summary report of what is in individual minds or a
collection of outputs from group work.
The idea of knowledge as a product, enjoying an existence independent of individual
knowers, presents epistemological difficulties with which educators are not accustomed
to contending. 1More familiarity, the problems of objectified knowledge are being
wrestled with in such contexts as technology transfer, institutional memory, and
intellectual property law. In science, it is clear that when we talk about Newton’s theory,
we are not merely talking about something once encoded in Newton’s brain but about
something that even today is discussed, tested, taught, applied, evaluated, and credited
with causal force. When we speak of schools as knowledge-building communities, we
mean schools where people are engaged in producing knowledge objects that, although
much more modest than Newton’s theory, also lend themselves to being discussed,
tested, and so forth without particular reference to the mental states of those involved,
and where the students see their main job as producing and improving such objects.
Restructuring schools as knowledge-building communities means, to our minds, getting
the community’s efforts directed toward social processes aimed at improving these
objects, with technology providing a particularly facilitative infrastructure.
                                                 
1 Popper (1972) addressed these problems with his work on objective knowledge and

----- Page 7 (native) -----
WHAT MAKES KNOWLEDGE-BUILDING COMMUNITIES WORK?
In trying to develop ideas of how to achieve knowledge-building communities in schools,
we first considered knowledge-building communities we are already familiar with;
namely those that exist in research-oriented universities and in research centers. These
have also been the focus of much recent research by sociologists of science.
According to Latour (1987) who, along with a number of other contemporary
sociologists, has studies the workings of scientific laboratories at first hand, the selfless
pursuit of knowledge is a story that is fabricated after some claim has achieved factual
status and is no longer controversial. Before that point, scientific practice is more like
politics, an effort to marshal support for one’s position. We should not expect school
students to act a great deal differently, and it seems likely that past efforts to bring
scientific inquiry into schools have suffered from promoting an idealistic model that is at
odds with reality. Protocol studies of students carrying on scientific discussions indeed
show frequent evidence that discussion is treated like a contest (Eichinger, Anderson,
Palincsar, & David, 1991). What the sociologists fail to explain is why science works as
well as it does, given the unseemly characteristics they have observed.
The problem of accounting for the success of knowledge-building communities is like
that of accounting for the performance of an old Swiss watch. On microscopic inspection,
the watch will be found to contain so many irregularities and imperfections that it will
seem unlikely that its readings could have much validity at all, and yet it keeps nearly
perfect time. And so with science as with watches, the major challenge is to explain how
they work so well, given their imperfections. If schools are to be transformed into
effective knowledge building communities, we need that kind of information.
Our own analysis is necessarily limited and impressionistic. We started by
considering the role of journals in the progress of learned disciplines. As it happens,
Latour (1987) devotes a significant part of his analysis to journals as well. The focus is
not on the journals themselves and the content, but on the whole journal publication
process, with its editor, editorial boards, reviewers, and contributors.
The imperfections of the journal process are well known and again lead to the
conclusion that such a flawed process could not possibly work advance knowledge.
Unreliability of judgment, bias, political maneuvering, conservatism, failure to detect
gross errors—all are familiar (see Peters, Ceci, 1982, and the whole journal issue devoted
to discussion of their experiment, in which previously published articles were slightly
disguised are resubmitted to the same journals). Nevertheless, discipline-based journals
manage to harness an enormous amount of energy and get it working towards collective
advance in knowledge, an so they surely hold a key to what makes knowledge-building
communities work.

----- Page 8 (native) -----
The fundamental point that distinguishes scholarly journals from other periodicals in
the requirement that the articles be contributions to knowledge—that is, that they
represent some advance over what is already known.  Peer review, usually pointed to as
the essential characteristic of scholarly journals, is subordinate to this criterion, a way of
ensuring that it is met. The knowledge-advance criterion, universal in scholarly journals,
is foreign to the writing students do in schools, even on into graduate school. “How could
it be otherwise?” one might ask, given the unlikelihood of a novice’s finding out
something that would advance a discipline. But it should be recognized that the
knowledge-advance criterion is always to some extent local. In psychology, for instance,
there are occasional articles suggesting the relevance to psychology of methods or
concepts that are already well known in some other file, such as economics or
information science. During the whole Cold War period, there were articles informing
American psychologists of the work of Soviet psychologists. Operationally speaking, an
article represents an advance in knowledge if it is so experienced by the peer reviewers.
By extension, then, if the reviewers were other students, a student contribution would
meet the knowledge-advance criterion if the student reviewers found that it advanced
their own knowledge. Thus there is no intrinsic reason why the knowledge-advance
criterion cannot be applied to student efforts. But to structure classroom activity so that a
peer review system could be fully functional would be a radical restructuring.
Creating the structures that make peer review of knowledge advances possible would
not be sufficient to make a viable knowledge-building community, however. There must
also be motivation to do the work that goes into the construction of collective knowledge.
Here, again, we may look to the journal process in scholarly disciplines for pointers.
There are strong material rewards motivating young academics to publish, but these do
not explain the sustained publication effort of established academics, nor the work that
does into reviewing manuscripts, which is often considerable and (being usually
anonymous) earns no rewards this side of heaven.
Some other motives that appear to figure in academic publishing are the desire for
recognition and respect from the people one regards as peers, the desire to have impact
(on conclusions being reached, on the development of the discipline, etc.), and the desire
to participate in significant discourse.
These motives have recognizable counterparts in school students. The problem I to
get them attached to knowledge-building activity. Recognition and respect from peers can
come from many sources, and contribution to the group’s collective knowledge is not
usually prominent among them. The same goes for having impact. And what students
find to be significant discourse—the kind they will get truly involved in, struggling for a
turn to speak, actually listening to and responding to what others say—will often deal
with issues closer to their personal lives than the issues arising from scholarly inquiry.

----- Page 9 (native) -----
Our focusing on journal publication may seem like a case of mistaking the wrapper
for the candy bar. What about research? What about curiosity? We do not mean to slight
either of these. Surely, scholarly disciplines would not exist without them. However,
these have received ample consideration in previous thinking about school learning. What
has been neglected until recently is the role of discourse and the role of motives other
than purely epistemic ones. Decades ago, Popper (1962) recognized argument and
criticism as the driving forces in the advancement of scientific knowledge, with research
having its impact through these discourse processes. But only in the last few years has
taking science (Lemke, 1990) begun to be recognized as a necessary adjunct to hands-on
investigation in school science. The use of inquiry methods in schools has been based on
a frequently disappointed confidence in the power of children’s natural curiosity. The
study of scholarly discourse, as embodied in the journal process, shows us how a wide
range of human motives (including curiosity, of course) are marshaled in the actual
progress of knowledge construction in the disciplines.
SPECIFICATIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE-BUILDING DISCOURSE
How does one characterize knowledge-building discourse and then recreate classroom
activity to support it? We could imitate at the surface level—for instance, by having
classes produce scholarly journals with peer review. In fact, the CSILE implementation
we describe later in this chapter has provisions for doing that. But it is not likely that
imitation of surface forms can produce the restructuring necessary to turn schools into
real knowledge-building communities. The whole journal process could easily be
degraded into just another form of schoolwork. That would happen if the essential point
were lost, that publications should embody contributions to collective knowledge.
There is plenty of discourse in schools, but it has little resemblance to the kind that
goes on in knowledge-building communities. Most of the oral discourse can be
characterized as recitation (Doyle, 1986). When there are discussions that could be
construed as building knowledge, they are generally led by the teacher. Socratic dialogue
is the model, which means that the teacher, playing Socrates, gives the discussion such
direction as it has and is therefore likely to be the only one whose goals have substantive
influence on the outcome. The students’ own goals may influence how successful the
discussion is, but mainly through influencing the extent of their cooperation. Transcripts
of classroom discussion indicate that it typically consists of a string of three-step units,
each unit being made up of the following conversational moves: teacher initiates, student
responds, teacher evaluates (Heap, 1985). Whatever this formula may represent, it surely
does not represent the pattern of discourse in a knowledge-building community.

----- Page 10 (native) -----
In order to begin defining characteristics of such discourse, we have drawn on
analogies with groups working at the forefront of their fields, and considered how new
knowledge media might not only support, but enhance, their work. At the same time, we
have kept the constraint in mind of defining characteristics applicable across the span
from kindergartens to advanced research institutes. The result, presented next, is what we
hope is the beginning of specifications for knowledge-building discourse to be enabled by
new knowledge media.
KNOWLEDGE-BUILDING DISCOURSE: THE CLASSROOM AND BEYOND
We have roughly divided characteristics for knowledge-building discourse into three
categories: (a) focus on problems and depth of understanding; (b) decentralized, open
knowledge environments for collective understanding; and (c) productive interaction
within broadly conceived knowledge building communities.
Focus on Problems and Depth of Understanding
In knowledge-building contexts, the focus is on problems rather than on categories of
knowledge or on topics. Explaining is the major challenge, with encouragement to
produce and advance theories through using them to explain increasingly diverse and
seemingly contrary ideas. Engagement is at the level of how things work, underlying
causes and principles, and interrelatedness of ideas explored over lengthy periods of time,
and returned to in new contexts.
Decentralized, Open Knowledge Building, With a Focus on Collective Knowledge
From the perspective of social interactions, the re is an expectation of constructive
response to one another’s work. Inquiry on all sides is driven by questions and desire for
understanding. Negotiating the terrain around ideas is marked by complex interactions
with others, using purposeful and constructive ways to engage busy people, to distribute
work among members, to sustain increasingly advanced inquiry, to monitor advances of
distant groups working in related areas, and to ensure the local group is indeed working at
the forefront of their collective understanding. There is also a great deal of opportunistic
work, oftentimes in small groups (as opposed to legislated schoolwork of the
conventional kinds, where students are working individually but all doing the same thing
or are subdivided in some arbitrary fashion).
In knowledge-building discourse, more knowledgeable others do not stand outside the
learning process (as teachers often do), but rather participate actively. Further, the

----- Page 11 (native) -----
knowledge of the most advanced participant does not circumscribe what is to be learned
or investigated. There are other sources of information, and participants aim to point the
way to other groups and resources that might prove helpful.
Less knowledgeable participants in the discourse play an important role, pointing out
what is difficult to understand and, in turn, inadequacies in explanations. To the extent
that novices can be engaged in pushing the discourse toward definition and clarification,
their role is as important as those more knowledgeable. In all, knowledge-building begets
knowledge-building: Important factors include the creating of a climate and desire to
advance understanding rather than to display individual brilliance (although individual
brilliance can certainly help in the collective effort), and opportunities more plentiful than
restricted communities allow.
The Broader Knowledge Community
Peer review for scientific publication exemplifies working with ideas in contexts broader
than one’s immediate working community. We have re-written this chapter in response to
reviewers who raised issues that had not been raised in more local review processes.
Additionally, the different reviewers brought different perspectives depending on their
areas of expertise. All of this has proved quite helpful in allowing us to address a broader
audience and to advance our own understanding in the process.
Earlier we made a distinction between first- and second-order environments. In first-
order environments, learning is asymptotic—one can become comfortably integrated into
a relatively stable system of routines. In second-order environments, learning is not
asymptotic because what one person does in adapting changes the environment so that
others must readapt. Adaptation itself involves contributions to collective knowledge.
Because this very activity increases the collective knowledge, continued adaptation
requires contributions beyond what is already known, thus producing non-asymptotic
learning. Working within the broader knowledge-building community places one in a
second-order environment, and accustoms participants to viewing ideas from the
perspective of multiple expertises and issues. (Such anticipation and writing to broader
audiences could not be more different from the normal pattern of school writing.)
We have barely begun the process of extending CSILE into a wide-area
configuration, and in turn dealing with the educational issues that will come about in the
process of having student discourses more broadly available.  We see potential for new
educational models of openness and decentralization powered by a communal database of
the sort that underlies CSILE (see next section). It is a logical extension of this communal
database to have all participants at all levels (including, but not limited to, student,
teacher, administrators, researchers, curriculum designers, and assessors) entering ideas

----- Page 12 (native) -----
into the same database. Thus, for example, if teachers are discussing students’ problems
in understanding a concept, students might be engaged along with them in the discussion.
Although openness is an important principle, it must also be recognized that knowledge
building requires private and directed discussions at times, so one of the many challenges
in coping with educational uses of a communal database is to interweave open and
private discourses, and to provide conditions for freedom from irrelevant, boring, or
otherwise unhelpful information.
With the advent of wide-area networks for schools, students will have access to all
manner of databases, CD-ROMs, video, microworlds, and so forth, as well as links to live
experts and more advanced students. The challenge we see for educational technology is
to preserve a central role for the students themselves, lest they be reduced to passivity by
the overwhelming amounts of authoritative external information available. The surest
way to keep the students in the central role, it would seem, is to ensure that contacts with
outside sources grow out of the local knowledge-building discourse and that the obtained
information is brought back into that discourse in ways consistent with the goals and
plans of the local group.
At this point, it is fanciful (but nonetheless exciting) to contemplate advantages of
having communal structures that span the whole of the school years, and that also
profitably engage those in research institutes and other knowledge-creation enterprises.
The fancifulness is not with the technology—recent developments make that by far the
easy part. The problems to be solved are educational. As the preceding discussion
indicates, it is the nature of the classroom discourse that determines whether the
classroom functions as a knowledge-building community rather than, say, a classroom
focused on pursuit on individual interests or on teacher-organized activities. In the next
section, we turn to the issue of CSILE as an enabling technology for knowledge-building
discourse.
HOW TECHNOLOGY CAN HELP REFRAME CLASSROOM DISCOURSE TO
SUPPORT KNOWLEDGE BUILDING
In this section we suggest means for reframing classroom discourse to support knowledge
building in ways extensible to out-of-school knowledge-advancing enterprises and
indicate how we are attempting to realize these through CSILE.
A Community Database at the Center of Classroom Discourse
CSILE’s community database is created by students. Users produce public access
material, not simply material to be turned in for grading, and do so in a context that

----- Page 13 (native) -----
engages others on their behalf. Although students can choose to keep material private, the
default option is public. Using networked microcomputers, a number of users (located
within or outside the school walls) can be simultaneously creating text or graphical notes
to add to the database, searching existing notes, commenting on other students’ notes, or
organizing notes into more complex informational structures. The community database
serves as an objectification of a group’s advancing knowledge, much like the
accumulating issues of a scholarly journal, but with additional facilities for reframing
ideas and placing them in new contexts. In local-area configurations, students’ writings
are available to classmates, not just to the teacher, and that gives them a feel for speaking
and being responsible to a broader audience.  In wide-area configurations, the audience is
expanded, and with that comes an increased need to address problems and represent
knowledge in ways that are comprehensible to people outside the immediate context.
CSILE is designed to frame students’ ideas in ways extensible to the broader knowledge-
building community, and concomitantly, to resist discourse frameworks only workable in
schools. Commitment to the notion that students can serve as legitimate partners in
knowledge building is reflected in the fact that they are placed centerfront in the
knowledge-creating process as authors of databases, not simply reviewers of databases
created by others.
The database, which is wholly created by students, consists of text and graphical
notes. Graphical notes can be used to create organizing frameworks. Anyone can add a
comment to a note or attach a graphic note subordinate to another graphic note, but only
authors can edit or delete notes. Authors are notified when a comment has been made on
one of their notes, and the notes of all participants are accessible through database search
procedures. This basic set of features represents the core functionality of a system in
which the construction of knowledge is a social activity. For an account of other features
that are available and envisioned, see Scardamalia and Bereiter (1992, 1993),
Scardamalia et al. (1992), and Scardamalia, Bereiter, McLean, Swallow, and Woodruff
(1989).
Focus on Problems and Depth of Understanding
Specially Designed Discourse Environments
We are creating note-writing environments so that surrounds convey and support
knowledge-building operations of the sort otherwise absent from student interchanges.
For example, a discussion note encourages students to frame their inquiry in light of a
problem rather than a topic, and their interactions in light of statements of theory and

----- Page 14 (native) -----
information needed to advance that theory. The note type also encourages commentary
(Hewitt, 1996).
Emphasis on Intentionality
Studies suggest that the hallmark of the intentional learner is the ability to diagnose
one’s own learning needs and to identify next steps. Accordingly, the CSILE approach is
to have students write statements of what they need to understand in order to make
conceptual advances, with others engaged in helpful support activity (offering references,
suggesting alternatives, and so forth). Additionally, CSILE places intentional overhead
on activities. For example, students do not simply link notes, they write justifications for
links they create. CSILE’s low-tech approach to diagnosis (students diagnose their own
needs and write and “INTU”—I need to understand—note) contrasts sharply with that of
intelligent tutoring systems. With intelligent tutoring systems, the intentionality resides in
the system’s own diagnostic and decision processes. The contrasting view, which we
have embodied in CSILE, is that an important part of education is for students themselves
to learn to carry out those diagnostic and decision processes.
Decentralized, Open Knowledge Building, With a Focus on Collective Knowledge
Reversing the “Teacher Initiates, Student Responds, Teacher Evaluates” Pattern
for Oral and Written Discourse
In recent years, educational computing has shifted strongly toward what is called a
distributed model. The idea seems to have two components. One is that information
should flow freely among participants, without having to pass through a central authority.
The other is that knowledge should be distributed across students, rather than each
student being expected to know the same things, thus making for more productive
exchanges between students (Brown et al., 1993; Pea, 1993; Resnick, 1996). CSILE is
designed to support a distributed model in both these senses, through the following
features:
Elimination of Turn-Taking Problems. Classroom discussions with 20 or 30
participants typically feature the teacher as leader, if only to mange the turn-taking. With
asynchronous discussion over a computer network, any participant can take a turn at any
time.

----- Page 15 (native) -----
Peer Commentary and Notification.  CSILE has facilities that encourage users to
comment on each other’s notes, and provides automatic notification to authors of the
availability of comments.
Entry Points for All Ages and Ability Levels.  When networks extend across
classroom boundaries, younger students question and challenge older ones. Less
language-proficient students can represent ideas graphically or copy and edit text from
other notes to express their own ideas. Less knowledgeable students can contribute
through their questions and their supportive comments. Although no medium is culturally
neutral, open systems like CSILE offer opportunity for culturally different students to
appropriate ideas in their own ways and for their own uses.
Maximizing the Interplay and Value of Different Communication Modes
CSILE-supported classrooms have as much opportunity for oral interchange as
students in other classrooms. Accordingly, CSILE-supported classrooms allow for the
immediacy, spontaneity, and ease of conversation, as well as the more reflective and
long-term benefits of written discourse. Additionally, different communication modes are
supported within CSILE. Students choose the mode appropriate to their talents, goals,
and problem at hand. As suggested earlier, CSILE’s goal is to increase the range of
expressive languages to include video, audio, and animation, as well as specially
designed contexts for mathematical, historical, geographical expression. This framework
has allowed us to maximize advantages of particular discourse modes, as well as to
encourage the following kinds of contributions unique to the written word:
Reflection.  Students using CSILE have frequently commented on the blessing of
having time to think rather than needing to respond under the pressures of oral discourse.
Publication/Review Process.  The system supports a publication process similar to
that of scholarly journals. Students produce notes of various kinds and frequently revise
them. When they think they have a note that makes a solid contribution to the knowledge
base in some area, they can mark it as a candidate for publication. They then must
complete a form that indicates, among other things, what they believe the distinctive
contribution of their note is. After a review process (typically by other students, with final
clearance by the teacher), the note becomes identified as published. Users searching the
database may, if they wish, restrict their search to published notes on the topic they
designate. At the end of the school year, a class can decide on a selection of notes to
remain in the database for the benefit of classes that come after them. Thus, as in the real

----- Page 16 (native) -----
world, each generation does not have to rediscover everything that the previous
generation found out, but can instead attempt to go beyond it.
Cumulative, Progressive Results.  Even when oral discourse proceeds optimally, it is
difficult for it to achieve cumulative, progressive results because of its transitory nature.
Hence the advantage for written discourse.
Independent Thought. Conversation tends to favor the ideas of the most vocal, and to
limit independent processing of material for all but the responder and most intentional
students. In CSILE, each student is responsible for contributing to the discourse.
Diverse Arrangements for Supporting Small-Group Interchanges
CSILE allows for small-group discussion, and additionally provides records that
bring those discussions to a broader audience (Scardamalia, Bereiter, & Lamon, 1994).
Increased and Diversified Response to Ideas
Under classroom conditions, written communication tends to be centered on the
teacher because of the practical difficulties in giving every student access and
opportunities to respond to what other students have written. Having documents available
through a computer network can solve these problems.
Next we provide two examples of CSILE use, both involving fifth- and sixth-grade
students, to give an idea of CSILE’s knowledge-building facilities. The first example is
not notable as an advance in subject-matter knowledge, but as an advance in
methodology, achieved by the students themselves and enabled by the technology. The
class was studying medieval history, one of the topics being castle defenses. In addition
to compiling text notes recording their findings and speculations on this topic, many
students availed themselves of CSILE’s graphics facilities to produce graphical notes
depicting their understanding of castle defenses. Two students, generally regarded as
below-average achievers, took a different tack. As they explained in a later interview,
they had examined the graphical notes of their classmates and were dissatisfied with
them. As one of them explained, with graphics you can show anything and you don’t
know if it would really work or not. Earlier in the year, they had used Interactive
Physics™ in conjunction with CSILE in work on lever problems in elementary physics.
Interactive Physics™ permits simulation of physical systems by assigning physical
properties to simple geometric figures. The two students decided to use Interactive
Physics™ to represent walls, draw bridges, portcullises, and attacking forces in ways that

----- Page 17 (native) -----
could actually be run as simulations to see how well they would work. Their CSILE notes
referred to these simulations, which other students could access. Soon other students took
up the simulation challenge, shifting the method of inquiry from graphically represented
speculation to simulation constrained by laws of physics.
Obviously the availability of simulation software was essential for this
methodological shift, but according to the students’ own report, another critical element
was dissatisfaction with the approach other students were taking. That dissatisfaction
would not likely have occurred in a classroom where students had no opportunity to
peruse one another’s work fairly extensively. Also, the innovation would not have caught
on, or would have done so only as a result of teacher endorsement, whereas in this case,
the students themselves took up the new approach, some of them extending it beyond
what its originators had done.
The second example illustrates more clearly the progressive character of knowledge-
building that CSILE is designed to support. This incident occurred spontaneously and
was not even known to the teacher until a researcher came upon it while exploring the
student-produced database in CSILE. In the course of work on a biology unit, one student
had entered a note reporting that sponges have three ways of reproducing. This fact
caught the fancy of other students who came upon the note through database searches,
and there followed a series of 12 notes and comments dealing with why nature would
have contrived to provide sponges with such an array of options. Plausible conjectures
were offered about the value of backup systems and the survival of a species unable to
defend itself. One student, however, kept raising the question in comments to others: If
three ways of reproducing are better than one, why don’t other animals have them too?
This is an illustration of progressive problem solving in the construction of knowledge.
The solution to the first problem—why three ways?—gives rise to a higher-level problem
that raises deeper issues about evolution. The answer that was finally proposed to the
second question drew upon an idea that has figured prominently in evolutionary theory of
recent decades: structural constraints on evolutionary possibilities. By going deeper into
the study of reproduction, a student came to the insight that it is because they are
structurally so simple that sponges are able to reproduce by budding and regeneration, in
addition to sexual reproduction. Higher animals are too complex for this. As the student
put it, “A stomach, lungs, a brain, and a heart, etc., could not grow on your finger if it
was cut off.”
Evaluations of CSILE to date indicate that CSILE students surpass students in
ordinary classrooms on measures of depth of learning and reflection, awareness of what
they have learned or need to learn, and in understanding of learning itself. Moreover,
individual achievement, as conventionally measured, does not suffer. In fact, students do
better on standardized tests in reading, language, and vocabulary (Scardamalia et al.,

----- Page 18 (native) -----
1992). What most impresses teachers and observers alike, however, is what the students
are able to do collectively.
We do not want to suggest that the technology by itself can bring about the
transformation of a school into a knowledge-building community. We already have
evidence that teacher strategies can make a major difference in the extent t which
students engage in collaborative knowledge-building (Bereiter & Scardamalia, 1992).
Neither do we want to claim that a knowledge-building community, meeting the
specifications set out previously, has actually been realized. Those specifications are
ideals to work toward. The most that can be claimed is that, in the progress made to date
in working toward those ideals, CSILE appears to provide a vital kind of support.
The computer technology that enables students to share knowledge with one another,
as in CSILE, is rapidly being extended to give students access to the great bodies of
information now being made available on the World Wide Web and on compact discs,
and also access to live experts. In principle, this greatly expanded access to knowledge
resources should be all to the good, but unless schools can be restructured into
communities that actually work to build their own knowledge from those resources, the
technology may be largely wasted.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This chapter is a revised version of an article previously published in the Journal of the
Learning Sciences by Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. The authors acknowledge the
generous support of Apple Computer, Inc., External Research Division, and the James S.
McDonnell Foundation. We are indebted to the students and teachers at Huron Public
School who contributed their time and talents to this project, and to the entire CSILE
team, without whose contributions the work reported here would not have been possible.
We are particularly grateful to reviewers Bill Clancey, Paul Feltovich, and Roy Pea,
whose insights and comments on previous drafts have helped us rethink, and, we hope,
improve the ideas presented in this chapter.
REFERENCES
Bereiter, C., & Scardamalia, M. (1989). Intentional learning as a goal of instruction. In L.
B. Resnick (Ed.), Knowing, learning, and instruction: Essays in honor of Robert
Glaser (pp. 361-392). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Bereiter, C., & Scardamalia, M. (1992). Two models of classroom learning using a
communal database. In S. Dijkstra (Ed.), Instructional models in computer-based

----- Page 19 (native) -----
learning environments (NATO-ASI Series F: Computer and systems sciences; pp.
229-241). Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Bereiter, C., & Scardamalia, M. (1993).  Surpassing ourselves: An inquiry into the nature
and implications of expertise.  Chicago: Open Court.
Brown, A.L., Ash, D., Rutherford, M., Nakagawa, K., Gordon, A., & Campione, J.C.
(1993). Distributed expertise in the classroom. In G. Salomon (Ed.), Distributed
cognitions: Psychological and educational considerations (pp. 188-228). Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press.
Brown, A. L., & Campione, J. C. (1990). Communities of learning and thinking, or A
context by any other name. Contributions to Human Development, 21, 108-126.
Bruner, J. (1964). The process of education. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Chan, C. K. K., Burtis, P. J., Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1992). Constructive
activity in learning from text. American Educational Research Journal, 29(1), 97-
118.
Collins, A., Brown, J. S., & Newman, S. E. (1989). Cognitive apprenticeship: Teaching
the crafts of reading, writing, and mathematics. In L. B. Resnick (Ed.), Knowing,
learning, and instruction: Essays in honor of Robert Glaser (pp. 453-494). Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Doyle, W. (1986). Classroom organization and management. In M. C. Wittrock (Ed.),
Handbook of research on teaching (pp. 392-431). New York: Macmillan.
Eichinger, D., Anderson, C., Palincsar, A. S., & David, Y. (1991, April). An illustration
of the roles of content knowledge, scientific argument, and social norms in
collaborative problem solving. Paper presented at the meeting of the American
Educational Research Association, Chicago.
Heap, J. L. (1985). Discourse in the production of classroom knowledge: Reading
lessons. Curriculum Inquiry, 15(3), 245-280.
Hewitt, J. (1996). Progress toward a knowledge-building community. Unpublished
doctoral thesis, University of Toronto.
Kay, A.C. (1991).  Computers, networks and education. Scientific American, 138-148.
Latour, B. (1987). Science in action. Milton Keynes: Open University Press.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation.
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Lemke, J. (1990). Talking science: Language, learning and values. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Lipman, M. (1988). Philosophy goes to school. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
Ng, E., & Bereiter, C. (1991). Three levels of goal orientation in learning. The Journal of
the Learning Sciences, 1(3 & 4), 243-271.

----- Page 20 (native) -----
Pea, R.D. (1993). Distributed intelligence and designs for education. In G. Salomon
(Ed.), Distributed cognitions: Psychological and educational considerations (pp. 47-
87). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Peters, D. P., & Ceci, S. J. (1982). Peer-review practices of psychological journals: The
fate of published articles, submitted again. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 5(2), 187-
255.
Peters, T. (1987). Thriving on chaos: Handbook for a management revolution. New
York: Knopf.
Popper, K. R. (1962). Conjectures and refutations: The growth of scientific knowledge.
New York: Basic Books.
Popper, K. R. (1972). Objective knowledge: An evolutionary approach. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Resnick, M. (1996). Beyond the centralization mind-set. Journal of the Learning
Sciences, 5, 1-22.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1991a). Higher levels of agency for children in
knowledge building: A challenge for the design of new knowledge media. The
Journal of the Learning Sciences, 1(1), 37-68.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1991b). Literate expertise. In K. A. Ericsson & J. Smith
(Eds.), Toward a general theory of expertise: Prospects and limits (pp. 172-194).
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1992). An architecture for collaborative knowledge-
building. In E. De Corte, M. Linn, H. Mandl, & L. Verschaffel (Eds.), Computer-
based learning environments and problem solving (NATO-ASI Series F.: Computer
and Systems Science, pp. 41-46). Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1993). Technologies for knowledge-building discourse.
Communications of the ACM, 36(5), 37-41.
Scardamalia, M., Bereiter, C., Brett, C., Burtis, P. J., Calhoun, C., & Smith Lea, N.
(1992). Educational applications of a networked communal database. Interactive
Learning Environments, 2(1), 45-71.
Scardamalia, M., Bereiter, C., & Lamon, M. (1994). The CSILE project: Trying to bring
the classroom into world 3. In K. McGilly (Ed.), Classroom lessons: Integrating
cognitive theory & classroom practice (pp. 201-228). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Scardamalia, M., Bereiter, C., McLean, R.S., Swallow, J., & Woodruff, E. (1989).
Computer supported intentional learning environments. Journal of Educational
Computing Research, 5, 51-68.
Whitehead, A.N. (1925/1948). Science and the modern world. New York: New American
Library.