

----- Page 1 (native) -----
Advances in Social Media Research: Past, Present and Future
Kawaljeet Kaur Kapoor1 & Kuttimani Tamilmani2 & Nripendra P. Rana2 & Pushp Patil2 &
Yogesh K. Dwivedi2 & Sridhar Nerur3
Published online: 6 November 2017
# The Author(s) 2017. This article is an open access publication
Abstract Social media comprises communication websites
that facilitate relationship forming between users from di-
verse backgrounds, resulting in a rich social structure. User
generated content encourages inquiry and decision-making.
Given the relevance of social media to various stakeholders,
it has received significant attention from researchers of var-
ious fields, including information systems. There exists no
comprehensive review that integrates and synthesises the
findings of literature on social media. This study discusses
the findings of 132 papers (in selected IS journals) on social
media and social networking published between 1997 and
2017. Most papers reviewed here examine the behavioural
side of social media, investigate the aspect of reviews and
recommendations, and study its integration for organization-
al purposes. Furthermore, many studies have investigated
the viability of online communities/social media as a mar-
keting medium, while others have explored various aspects
of social media, including the risks associated with its use,
the value that it creates, and the negative stigma attached to
it within workplaces. The use of social media for informa-
tion sharing during critical events as well as for seeking and/
or rendering help has also been investigated in prior re-
search. Other contexts include political and public adminis-
tration, and the comparison between traditional and social
media. Overall, our study identifies multiple emergent
themes in the existing corpus, thereby furthering our under-
standing of advances in social media research. The integrat-
ed view of the extant literature that our study presents can
help avoid duplication by future researchers, whilst offering
fruitful lines of enquiry to help shape research for this
emerging field.
Keywords Information systems . Social networks . Social
media research . Systematic review
1 Introduction
Social media allows relationship forming between users
from distinct backgrounds, resulting in a tenacious social
structure. A prominent output of this structure is the gen-
eration of massive amounts of information, offering users
exceptional service value proposition. However, a draw-
back of such information overload is sometimes evident in
users’ inability to find credible information of use to them
at the time of need. Social media sites are already so deep-
ly embedded in our daily lives that people rely on them for
* Nripendra P. Rana
n.p.rana@swansea.ac.uk
Kawaljeet Kaur Kapoor
kawaljeet.kapoor@brunel.ac.uk
Kuttimani Tamilmani
586182@swansea.ac.uk
Pushp Patil
919286@swansea.ac.uk
Yogesh K. Dwivedi
y.k.dwivedi@swansea.ac.uk
Sridhar Nerur
snerur@uta.edu
1
Eastern Gateway Building, Brunel University London,
Uxbridge UB8 3PH, UK
2
Emerging Markets Research Centre (EMaRC), School of
Management, Swansea University Bay Campus, Swansea SA1
8EN, UK
3
Information Systems & Operations Management, University of
Texas at Arlington, Arlington, TX 76019, USA
Inf Syst Front (2018) 20:531–558
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10796-017-9810-y

----- Page 2 (native) -----
every need, ranging from daily news and updates on crit-
ical events to entertainment, connecting with family and
friends, reviews and recommendations on products/
services and places, fulfilment of emotional needs, work-
place management, and keeping up with the latest in
hashion, to name but a few.
When we refer to social media, applications such as
Facebook, WhatsApp, Twitter, YouTube, LinkedIn,
Pinterest, and Instagram often come to mind. These appli-
cations are driven by user-generated content, and are highly
influential in a myriad of settings, from purchasing/selling
behaviours, entrepreneurship, political issues, to venture
capitalism (Greenwood and Gopal 2015). As of April
2017, Facebook enjoys the exalted position of being the
market leader of the social media world, with 1.97 billion
monthly users (Statista 2017). In addition to posts, social
media sites are bombarded with photo and video uploads,
and according to the recent numbers, about 400 million
snaps a day have been recorded on Snapchat, with around
9000 photos being shared every second (Lister 2017).
While 50 million businesses are active on Facebook busi-
ness pages, two million businesses are using Facebook ad-
vertising. Apparently, 88% businesses use Twitter for mar-
keting purposes (Lister 2017).
Academics and practitioners have explored and examined
the many sides of social media over the past years.
Organizations engage in social media mostly with the aim
of obtaining feedback from stakeholders (Phang et al. 2015).
Consumer reviews are another big part of social media,
bringing issues of information quality, credibility, and au-
thenticity to the forefront. To a large extent, online commu-
nities have been successful in bringing together people with
similar interests and goals, making the concept of micro
blogging very popular. While most messages exchanged on
social media sites are personal statuses or updates on current
affairs, some posts are support seeking, where people are
looking for assistance and help. Interestingly, these have
been recognized as socially exhausting posts that engender
social overload, causing other members to experience nega-
tive behavioural and psychological consequences, because
they feel compelled to respond (Maier et al. 2015a).
Given the relevance of social media to various stake-
holders, and the numerous consequences associated with
its use, social media has attracted the attention of researchers
from various fields, including information systems. This is
evidenced by the large number of scholarly articles that have
appeared in various outlets. Researchers have to expend an
enormous amount of time and effort in collating, analysing,
and synthesising findings from existing works before they
embark on a new research project. Given the significant
number of studies that have already been published, a com-
prehensive and systematic review can offer valuable assis-
tance to researchers intending to engage in social medi
research. Our literature search suggests that there are reviews
on social media in the marketing context (see for example,
AlAlwan et al. 2017; Dwivedi et al. 2017a; Dwivedi et al.
2015; Ismagilova et al. 2017; Kapoor et al. 2016; Plume
et al. 2016). However, there exists no comprehensive review
that integrates and synthesises the findings from the articles
published in Information Systems journals. Such an endeav-
our will not only provide a holistic view of the extant re-
search on social media, but will also provide researchers a
comprehensive intellectual platform that can be used to pur-
sue fruitful lines of enquiry to help advance research in this
rapidly expanding area. To fulfill this goal, this study
reviewed relevant articles to elucidate the key thematic areas
of research on social media, including its benefits and spill-
over effects. The resulting review is expected to serve as a
one-stop source, offering insight into what has been accom-
plished so far in terms of research on social media, what is
currently being done, and what challenges and opportunities
lie ahead. By doing so, this study explores the following
aspects of existing research on social media:
&
How is social media defined in the IS literature?
&
How has social media literature evolved from a multidis-
ciplinary perspective?
&
How have social media technologies, applications, prac-
tices, and research evolved over the past 20 years?
&
Which social media issues and themes have already been
examined in IS research?
&
What are the major limitations of extant literature on social
media?
The next section of this paper gives a brief overview
of the method employed for carrying out the literature
search. The succeeding section discusses citation and text
analyses of social media publications. Subsequently, we
outline the various ways in which scholars have defined
social media. This is followed by a section that focuses
on the evolution of social media research from an IS
perspective. Next, we articulate the major themes emerg-
ing from prior research and use them as a backdrop for
our review of the literature on social media. The ensuing
section discusses our findings, followed by key conclu-
sions and limitations of the study.
2 Literature Search Method
The literature search for this analysis was conducted in the
following two phases: (1) keyword-based search and analy-
sis to explore the overall evolution of social media literature;
and (2) manual search across specific IS journals to under-
stand the emerging IS perspectives on this topic.
532
Inf Syst Front (2018) 20:531–558

----- Page 3 (native) -----
2.1 Keywords Based Search and Analysis
In order to gain a deeper understanding of social media, we
analyzed relevant abstracts that were downloaded from the
Web of Science (WOS) database. Our search terms1 yielded a
total of 13,177 records, out of which 12,597 unique abstracts
were obtained. The analysis of these records was undertaken in
two steps. First, we used VOSviewer (Van Eck and Waltman
2011) to perform a co-citation analysis of first authors in the
downloaded corpus. VOSviewer allows visualization of similar-
ities in publications and authors through an examination of
bibliometric networks. Furthermore, we used VOSviewer to an-
alyze words derived from titles and abstracts. Second, we used
Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) (see Blei 2012) to extract key
thematic areas latent in the literature on social media. Further
details about these analyses and results are presented in section 3.
2.2 Manual Search and Analysis
Given the inconsistencies in the use of keywords in social
media research, a manual search, rather than a keyword-
based one, was deemed to be more appropriate for identifying
the existing literature on social media. Furthermore, since key-
words in the social media literature tend to overlap with topics
and/or theories in other related research areas, a keyword
search may yield irrelevant articles. For instance, a keyword
search for BSocial network^ returns articles related to social
network theories, which are not necessarily part of social me-
dia. The articles reviewed in this study are from the following
eight Senior Scholars’ Basket of Information Systems
journals: European Journal of Information Systems (EJIS);
Information Systems Journal (ISJ); Information Systems
Research (ISR); Journal of the Association for Information
Systems (JAIS); Journal of Information Technology (JIT);
Journal of Management Information Systems (JMIS);
Journal of Strategic Information Systems (JSIS) and
Management Information Systems Quarterly (MISQ)).
Along with these eight journals, we have also analysed rele-
vant articles from Information Systems Frontier (ISF) journal.
This is because it focuses on examining Bnew research and
development at the interface of information systems (IS) and
information technology (IT) from analytical, behavioural, and
technological perspectives. It provides a common forum for
both frontline industrial developments as well as pioneering
academic research^.2 ISF enjoys the reputation of a high qual-
ity journal across continents. For example, a journal quality
ranking by Chartered Association of Business Schools, UK,
has given it a three star (high ranking) quality rating, while
journal ranking by the Australian Business Deans Council
(ABDC) has rated it as an ‘A’ class journal (the second highest
quality journal category after A*, which is reserved for pre-
mier publications). In light of these observations, it was
deemed appropriate to consider articles from ISF along with
the aforementioned eight journals.
Relevant articles were then identified and downloaded
from each of the target journals by going through their ar-
chives. Specifically, all volumes and issues published in these
journals between 1997 and 2017 were considered in our anal-
ysis. Articles, research notes, introductions, research commen-
taries, and editorial overviews relevant to social media were
downloaded and numbered to prepare an APA style reference
list. The first literature search resulted in 181 articles that had
some relevance to the social media domain. A closer exami-
nation of individual abstracts and full articles led to the elim-
ination of 49 irrelevant articles, thus giving us a total of 132
articles pertinent to the domain of interest (i.e., social media).
3 Citation and Text Analyses of Social Media
Publications
3.1 Author Co-Citation Analysis (ACA)
Author Co-Citation Analysis (ACA) is a bibliometric technique
that has been widely used to explicate the conceptual structure of
disciplines (for example, see White and Griffith 1981; McCain
1984; Culnan 1986; Nerur et al. 2008). The underlying assump-
tion in ACA is that authors who are frequently cited together tend
to work on similar concepts. Thus, frequently co-cited authors
are likely to cluster together when an ACA is performed.
VOSviewer considers only first authors when it performs
ACA. Only authors who had 50 or more citations were included
in the analysis. Figure 1 shows the results of ACA.
VOSviewer identified seven distinct clusters:
1.
Cluster 1: Authors in this cluster have contributed to
research on Twitter (e.g., Sakaki), social network analysis
(e.g., Wasserman), topic modeling (e.g., Blei), sociality
and cognition (e.g., Dunbar), sentiment analysis of tweets
(e.g., Thelwall), and other related topics.
2.
Cluster 2: Authors in this cluster are well known for their
work on technology adoption (e.g., Venkatesh), diffusion
of technology (Rogers), culture (Hofstede), theory of
planned behavior (Ajzen), marketing/consumer behavior
(e.g., Hennig-Thurau), and statistical methods (e.g.,
Bagozzi, Fornell, Hair).
3.
Cluster 3: This cluster comprises of authors who deal
with a variety of issues related to social media
(Facebook and Twitter) use. For example, Steinfied and
1 TITLE: (BSocial Media^ or Bsocial networking^ or Bfacebook^ or
Blinkedin^ or Binstagram^ or Btwitter^)
Refined by: DOCUMENT TYPES: (ARTICLE OR PROCEEDINGS PAPER)
Timespan: All years. Indexes: SCI-EXPANDED, SSCI, A&HCI, CPCI-S,
CPCI-SSH, ESCI.
2 http://www.springer.com/business+%26+management/business+
information+systems/journal/10796
Inf Syst Front (2018) 20:531–558
533

----- Page 4 (native) -----
Ellison examined social capital across Facebook; Kuss
studied online/social networking addiction (e.g., gaming
addiction), and Lenhart focused on teens and technology
(e.g., mobile internet use), particularly in the use of social
media. Other topics include Bandura’s self-efficacy, use
and benefits of Twitter by scholars, and personality and
social characteristics of Facebook users (e.g., Ross).
4.
Cluster 4: Prominent social theorists/sociologists who
have contributed to social capital theory, structuration the-
ory and modern sociological theory are distinguished
members of this cluster. These include Bourdieu,
Coleman, Giddens, and Habermas. Papacharissi has writ-
ten about a variety of topics including the exploration of
factors that predict Internet use as well as users’ behav-
iors, identity, sense of community and culture on social
media. Tufekci has studied privacy and disclosure on so-
cial media, as well as other topics, including how social
networking sites such as Facebook might influence one’s
decision to participate in protests.
5.
Cluster 5: In this cluster, there is evidence of the influence
of Vygotsky’s socio cultural learning theory as well as
Lave and Wenger’s work on communities of practice. In
addition to his work on collaborative learning, Kirschner
has examined the relationship between Facebook and aca-
demic performance. Likewise, Selwyn has explored peda-
gogical and learning engendered by the use of information
and computer technologies (ICT).
6.
Cluster 6: This cluster appears to reflect two broad themes.
The first is a range of topics related to medical Internet
research, broadly referred to as e-health (Eysenbach) or
online health (Duggan). Themes in this category include
electronic support groups and health in virtual communi-
ties (Eysenbach), and policies and healthcare associated
with social media, and professionals among medical stu-
dents and physicians in the use of social media (Chretien,
Greysen). The second main thematic area in this cluster
deals with scholarship on social media, scholarly commu-
nication, and metrics for evaluating impact of articles on
the web (e.g., Weller, Bormann, Priem).
7.
Cluster 7: The dominant theme here is the nature and
content of communication. In particular, scholars in this
cluster have focused on communication and response in
the face of crises (Coombs), including image restoration
after a controversy (Benoit), analysis and reliability of con-
tent (Krippendorff), and the use of social media sites such
as Facebook and Twitter by government agencies and non-
profit organizations to engage stakeholders (Waters).
3.2 Text Analysis of Words in Titles and Abstracts
VOSviewer was used to analyze terms (i.e., words) in the titles
and abstracts of our corpus to obtain a two-dimensional map
showing proximities of words that are likely to be related based
on their co-occurrences. Specifically, VOSviewer relies on the
Apache OpenNLP Toolkit to identify noun phrases, and then
compares their overall co-occurrence distribution with their
distribution across other noun phrases to compute a relevance
score (Van Eck and Waltman 2011). The intuition is that fre-
quently co-occurring noun phrases with high relevance are
Fig. 1 Author clusters from ACA
534
Inf Syst Front (2018) 20:531–558

----- Page 5 (native) -----
likely to unravel a topic or theme that is latent in the corpus.
The term map from VOSviewer is shown in Fig. 2. Only terms
that occurred 50 times or more were included. Furthermore,
relevance scores computed by VOSviewer for every term were
used to select the top 80% that met the threshold.
VOSviewer identified five clusters here. It is evident from the
clusters that research on social media has dealt with a broad range
of topics, including but not restricted to diffusion of information
and opinions, spread of diseases (e.g., influenza), identification of
social and emotional health concerns and attendant interventions
to deal with them, social media as an influence, the use of social
media for marketing purposes, and the implications of social
media as a tool for pedagogy (i.e., teaching and learning) and
medical practice. These have been summarized in Table 1.
It must be noted that the topics are broad and don’t reveal
the nuances of research areas embodied in the abstracts exam-
ined in this study. The next sub-section presents the results of
topic modeling, which has the potential to unravel more fo-
cused themes embodied in the large corpus that we analyzed.
3.3 Topic Modeling
The fact that our search terms yielded over 12,000 abstracts
suggests that scholars are investing increased interest on research
issues related to social media. While an informed researcher may
have a general idea of the nature of research undertaken so far, it
is humanly impossible to discern the thematic structure of all
scholarly documents available on social media. Recent advances
in topic modeling have made this task relatively easy. Topic
modeling relies on algorithms and statistical methods to elicit
the topics latent in a large corpus (Blei 2012). The term topic
refers to a specific and often recognizable theme defined by a
cohesive set of words that have a high probability of belonging to
that topic. There are several options available for topic modeling:
non-negative matrix factorization (NNMF), Latent Semantic
Analysis/Indexing (LSA/LSI), and Latent Dirichlet Allocation
(LDA). In this study, we use LDA, arguably the most widely
used topic modeling algorithm. In order to perform topic model-
ing on a corpus, the researcher has to specify the number of
topics to be extracted. In this study, we extracted the top 100
topics reflected in the scholarship on social media. LDA starts
with the assumption that each abstract in our study reflects each
of these topics to varying degrees (Blei 2012). Thus, each ab-
stract has a distribution of the desired 100 topics. The 100 topics
that were extracted from our abstracts are shown in Table 2. The
machine learning for language toolkit (MALLET) (McCallum
2002) was used for this purpose.
4 Analysis of Social Media Research from an IS
Perspective
4.1 How is Social Media Defined in the IS Literature?
In studying the existing literature on social media, it becomes
apparent that the authors in this field have not focussed on
Fig. 2 Term map showing clusters of related words/noun phrases
Inf Syst Front (2018) 20:531–558
535

----- Page 6 (native) -----
defining social media. Of all the studies included in this re-
view, only a handful of studies have come close to defining, or
clarifying the concept of social media. For instance,
Lundmark et al. (2016, p3) suggest, Bsocial media, as a unique
form of communication, integrates multiple sources of legiti-
macy, and as a result, presents a unique and important context
through which to study the topic. Indeed, social media are a
means for the dissemination of both internally and externally
generated information pertaining to firms, industries, and so-
ciety in general.^ According to Schlagwein and Hu (2016),
social media constitutes internet-based communication and
collaboration channels, widely in use since 2005, and, from
an IS perspective, social media tools and their surrounding
organizational and managerial structures constitute social
information systems. Wakefield and Wakefield (2016, p140)
describe Bsocial media technologies as an ensemble IS artefact
composed of technical, informational, and relational subsys-
tems that interact distinctly according to the context of use.^ In
their study, they also identify a Brecent definition of social
media and social networks referring to social media networks
as specific types of social media platforms and Internet sites
with common attributes such as (1) user profile (2) user access
to digital content (3) a user list of relational ties, and (4) user
ability to view and traverse relational ties^ (Wakefield and
Wakefield 2016; p144).
In a more relatable and simple definition, Miranda et al.
(2016; p304) explain social media being Bmainly conceived of
as a medium wherein ordinary people in ordinary social net-
works (as opposed to professional journalists) can create user-
generated news.^ A few other authors like Spagnoletti et al.
(2015) and Xu and Zhang (2013) commonly refer to social
media as a set of interned-based technologies/applications,
which are aimed at promoting the creation, modification, up-
date and exchange of user-generated content, whilst establish-
ing new links between the content creators themselves.
Bharati et al. (2014; p258) refer to social media as a technol-
ogy Bnot focussed on transactions but on collaboration and
communication across groups both inside and outside the
firm.^ Lastly, Tang et al. (2012; p44) also identify social me-
dia as user-generated media, which is a source of Bonline
information created, initiated, circulated, and used by con-
sumers intent on educating each other about products, brands,
services, personalities, and issues.^
All of the aforementioned descriptions clearly regard social
media as communication tools supported by internet-based tech-
nologies for dissemination of information. Most of them ac-
knowledge the high concentration of user generated content
across such platforms. Based on our understanding of social me-
dia and the aforementioned definitions, we propose the following
definition: Social media is made up of various user-driven plat-
forms that facilitate diffusion of compelling content, dialogue
creation, and communication to a broader audience. It is essen-
tially a digital space created by the people and for the people,
and provides an environment that is conducive for interactions
and networking to occur at different levels (for instance, person-
al, professional, business, marketing, political,and societal).
4.2 Evolution of Social Media Research in the IS
Literature
In the past two decades, various issues related to social media
have been examined in line with the rapid evolution of under-
lying technologies/applications and their appropriation to en-
able different types of social media usage. An analysis of 132
articles from selected IS journals suggests that publications
until 2011 were still examining user-generated content as a
new type of online content (Burgess et al. 2011). However, in
the last six years, research in this field has made tremendous
progress, not just in terms of its scope, but also in explicating
the highs and lows associated with the use of social media.
While it is difficult to pinpoint evolution on a yearly basis, it
has been possible to identify the major aspects of social media
research that have emerged over time. Publications between
1997 and 2017 have been reviewed here. Interestingly, only
Table 1 Keywords and topics
Keywords
Topic Description
Twitter network/graphs, opinion mining, spam detection,
drugs, adr (adverse reaction to drugs), emoticons,
evolution, influenza, information diffusion, classification,
big data, weibo
Twitter/μ blogging insights
Facebook users (friends, adolescents, adults), depression,
self-esteem, social relationship, intervention, alcohol,
smoking, disease
Facebook as a medium for addressing
emotional, social and health concerns
Social media marketing, brand loyalty, purchase intention,
TAM, motivation
Social Media Marketing
Influencer, political party, politicians, citizens, article,
scholar, news opinion, expression, e-cigarette, death, conflict,
leader, celebrity
Social Media as an influencer
Teaching, learning, lecturer, student, tool, school, use,
practice, patient, hospital, physician, provider, health
professional, reflection
Social Media for pedagogy and healthcare practice
536
Inf Syst Front (2018) 20:531–558

----- Page 7 (native) -----
Table 2 The 100 most relevant
topics on social media
Words associated with topic
Topic label
language English linguistic languages corpus
Arabic translation foreign speakers Thai
feature Spanish multilingual German word
lexical corpora utterances author target
Foreign Languages
campaign change awareness climate campaigns
environmental sustainability green public
action lhds sma pros raise mass target
engagement cons sustainable scripts
Sustainability Campaigns
women gender men relationship romantic
relationships female male females partners
relational males Facebook partner jealousy
behaviour maintenance response surveillance
sexual
Human Relationships
network graph user clustering nodes clusters
algorithm cluster networks algorithms
community link communities links method
structure graphs degree similar distribution
Network Graph Analysis
tool social potential development project challenges
benefits process community resources
communication effective opportunities
experience case design practices develop work
technology
Social Media Platform/tool for resource sharing
and communication
adolescents depression youth parents children
symptoms adolescent cyber bullying depressive
online sleep behaviour health teenagers teens
girls peer bullying young years
Cyber bullying
data urban traffic spatial city patterns areas
human temporal mobility cities geographic
spatiotemporal distribution regions location
activity planning geo tagged transportation
Human Spatial Interaction
sentiment analysis opinion tweet twitter negative
positive sentiments mining classification
polarity method neutral lexicon expressed
reviews public express posts word
Sentiment Analysis of tweets
countries cultural united states international
south culture global country American national
Korean European cultures India Africa African
Korea local region
International Cultures
Chinese weibo china suicide sina micro blog
wechat quality air suicidal risk traditional values
renren chinas micro blogging posts micro blogs
postings pollution
Chinese Micro blogging
social network networks online relationships
user analysis structure ties interaction
interactions strength connections friends
individuals relationship influence people
strong information
Social Network Analysis
crisis disaster emergency information response
event media management disasters public
crises risk twitter earthquake awareness situational
communication natural situation flood
Emergency/Crises Response
body comparison eating image appearance
behaviour women selfies comparison
dissatisfaction girls religious self esteem concerns
disordered weight selfie fitness percent posting
Self-Esteem
game sport sports fans team players football
teams fan athletes play league playing
clubs gaming video gambling professional
engagement activity
Issues Related to Sports and Games
model perceived factors intention influence social
behaviour user theory research significant
effect survey structural usage trust attitude
acceptance technology effects
Technology Acceptance Model
face accessibility speech heritage disability
disabilities intellectual robot disabled blind ism
Speech Disability
Inf Syst Front (2018) 20:531–558
537

----- Page 8 (native) -----
Table 2 (continued)
Words associated with topic
Topic label
impaired email aphasia therapists nonverbal
natural amendment accessible field
method proposed model data approach propose
problem user feature algorithm information
framework experiments performance
experimental effectiveness existing approaches
evaluate demonstrate
Research Methods and Algorithms
movement media social political protest protests
collective activists activism action role article
mobilization occupy activist Arab spring event
change street
Social and Political Activism
community groups group communities members
online virtual individuals participation identification
membership interest shared active discussion
interests Facebook interaction interactions form
Virtual Communities (e.g., twitter-mediated
communities)
teachers school skills literacy education schools
teacher secondary student training educational
computer digital pre service activities program
level project elementary development
Social Media Impact on Teachers
and Students
stock market financial prediction sentiment price
firms predict performance predictive forecasting
returns prices firm movie forecast trading volume
investors markets
Impact of twitter sentiments on firm (e.g., stocks)
or movie (e.g., box office) performance
research science articles academic researchers impact
scientific review article scholarly published literature
metrics journals scientists publications scholars
journal authors sciences
Social Media Research Review and Impact of
Scientific Articles
conference surgery surgeons conferences meeting
session journal surgical academic medicine
meetings plastic association annual participant
discussion total impressions medical increased
Social Media use among Urologists and Surgeons
participant recruitment advertising Facebook method
online research advertisements web traditional
recruited survey recruiting ads cost targeted
advertisement recruit women potential
Use of Social Media to recruit human subjects
for research
service customer customers quality satisfaction crm
services firms management companies consumers
response recovery reviews failure relationship
product complaints airlines banking
Customer Relationship Management
Saudi power energy Arabia centres centre utility
utilities consumption oral grid water volunteer
smart scenario heat region senators constituent gulf
Monitoring and Improving Energy Consumption
social people networks information world order life
present time virtual important work part make real
internet share main tool communication
World-wide Information Sharing
article digital practices identity media analysis discourse
space con work power argue cultural spaces public
drawing critical culture form argues
Multiple Perspectives on Value and/or purpose
of Social Media
privacy information user personal security concerns
disclosure risks risk Facebook online private control
settings concern social profile data trust sharing
Information Privacy & Security
sns snss networking sites user social services usage
activities site popular switching network motivations
popularity personal addition result MySpace costs
Motivation for participation in and usage
of social networking sites
user recommendation interests profile system attributes
systems interest preferences recommendations similarity
personalized recommender items content friends
information matching social similar
Recommender Systems
news media journalists content television twitter
audience stories articles journalism audiences traditional
coverage event sources mainstream
radio news outlets mass
Journalism on Social Media
social media research framework model theoretical
future theory literature development review
conceptual process con proposed practical approach
case key theories
Managing Organizational Use of Social Media
538
Inf Syst Front (2018) 20:531–558

----- Page 9 (native) -----
Table 2 (continued)
Words associated with topic
Topic label
drug adverse drugs health abuse event reporting
pharmaceutical medical reactions effects adrs
prescription patients safety online medication
side fda patient
Adverse Drug Reactions or Side Effects
mobile devices applications smart phones phone
networking user application apps device access
smart phones smart phone technologies services
app internet physical digital
Social Networking and Internet Use on Mobile
Devices
model diffusion information models propagation
spread behaviour rumour dynamics agent agents
network evolution collective process patterns
rumours modelling dynamic distribution
Information Diffusion Through Social Media
Facebook user friends research site network number
usage networking popular sites relationship time
survey page active feature Facebooks activities
examined
Motivation for and consequences of using
Facebook
library libraries music librarians services academic
information digital un friending book un friended
tool artists festival promote associations lis university
books purpose
Librarians’ Perception and Acceptance of
Social Media
effects positive negative participant effect perceptions
perceived behaviour influence reserved individuals
experiment high attitudes response cognitive impact
control exposure low
Experimental Study of Factors Influencing
Behaviour
purpose research qualitative interviews design methodology
approach originality value data authors approach analysis
conducted participant practical quantitative explore
identified in depth behaviour organisations understanding
Career practitioners’ use of social media
brand consumers brands consumer purchase engagement
loyalty marketing ewom trust online customer
relationships relationship influence customers word
of mouth behaviour fan equity
Brand Loyalty, equity and Customer Lifetime
Value
student university college Facebook academic school
undergraduate year survey perceptions class performance
universities questionnaire faculty groups engagement
semester educational part
Social Media (i.e., Facebook) in academia for
learning, teaching, and collaboration
adoption business innovation small businesses smes
enterprises diffusion entrepreneurs adopt factors
enterprise adopters adopted purpose performance
early entrepreneurship barriers medium sized
Small Medium Enterprise (SME) innovation
through Social Media
social networking sites online site Facebook internet
web popular network services MySpace current
identity activities networks access people discussed
purposes
Online Social Networking Sites and their
benefits and risks
communication communications informal interaction
communicate conversation conversations messaging
style messages talk electronic tool email formal
instant medium face to face chat interpersonal
Social Media Communication
event topics twitter topic detection time tweet detect
temporal streams real time stream trending real
information news system identify world detecting
Real-time event and topic detection on Twitter
spam accounts osns detection malicious osn twitter
spammers user feature detect bots networks attacks
online fake large account urls detecting
Fake news, fake product reviews, and spamming
on Twitter
opinion public political debate leaders discourse
discussion issue discussions debates online sphere
views comments politics leadership conflict actors
controversial society
Public opinions and socio political conflicts
job linkedin applicant professional employer selection
process recruitment employment profile organ donation
snws candidates recruiters potential jobs information
hiring employees
Employee recruitment through social networking
sites
data analysis information big techniques large processing
mining analytics twitter tool sources collection source
amount time analyzing generated framework researchers
Big Data Analytics using Social Media data
Inf Syst Front (2018) 20:531–558
539

----- Page 10 (native) -----
Table 2 (continued)
Words associated with topic
Topic label
learning student teaching educational education tool
learners online classroom group collaborative
teachers process technology environment elearning
courses experience university interaction
Blending social media platforms with traditional
classroom for learning and collaboration
health public surveillance disease influenza data hpv
outbreak vaccination vaccine flu cases twitter ebola
outbreaks risk diseases control monitoring epidemic
Surveillance and monitoring of public health
concerns through social media
video videos YouTube content sharing contents cloud
multimedia popularity viewer viewing internet
streaming audio native peers popular servers fire load
Cloud computing challenges of sharing social
media content
web media online social blogs twitter content Facebook
plat YouTube blog sites forums Google internet
presence blogging popular tool LinkedIn
User generated content on social media and
how it is used
social media internet technology technologies
communication digital information development
years web impact recent world society generation
online networks growth plat
Use of social media and digital technologies
for information and communication
cyber security intelligence crime law police attacks
policing military attack terrorist enforcement
terrorism potential criminal conflict groups safety
propaganda threats
Social Media for monitoring extremism, cyber
security and threats
time number data high significant level activity
average higher correlation significantly day
frequency rate period increase compared measure
measures impact
Correlating extent of social media use to
behaviours
affordances section interaction framing frames
empowerment technology human structure
organizing technological rhetorical meaning
exploration lens affordance submission moves
repair micro
(Socio technical) factors that affect technology
(i.e., social media) use
feature classification learning machine accuracy
twitter data method approach training classifier
tweet task performance model classifiers vector
dataset techniques supervised
Machine Learning techniques to analyze tweets
smoking tobacco cessation ecigarette health smokers
ecigarettes electronic quit hookah cigarette
cigarettes quitting flavors campaign background
increased ecig commercial prevalence
Smoking related issues
Facebook posts comments post page status likes
updates engagement content number posted
response comment posting feedback type popular
shares share
(Member) engagement on Social Media
(e.g., Facebook)
location user locations geographical geographic local
places geo tagged spatial place method city
home distance check in time services geo social
area foursquare
Determining spatiotemporal and geographical
awareness using Social Media
social research online con analysis important role
understanding potential specific present suggest
attention key types characteristics current literature
content strategies
Research to understand effects of Social Media
political participation engagement online civic offline
activities Hong young Kong citizens survey
relationship youth discussion engage participatory
expression participate involvement
Political Participation
content analysis posts method public identified related
categories posted analyzed discussion themes
objective period common total information
postings key determine
Content Analysis of posts
twitter tweet user messages hashtags micro blogging
analysis retweet content popular million hashtag
platform information collected tweeting followers
service topics twitters
Analysis of microblogs
search information semantic web content query engine
tags retrieval document ontology knowledge concepts
metadata relevant queries Google tagging terms entities
Information Search and Retrieval
Racial and sexual harassment
540
Inf Syst Front (2018) 20:531–558

----- Page 11 (native) -----
Table 2 (continued)
Words associated with topic
Topic label
black racial youth harassment violence stem
smn sexual race gang feminist soft ethnic
rape gender culture examine smns racism
antisocial
personality Facebook traits addiction behaviour
predicted online self esteem psychological
anxiety narcissism high related motives scale
relationship reserved participant individuals
extraversion
Personality characteristics and associated
behaviours of social media users
knowledge sharing management collaborative
share exchange transfer factors tool creation
work collaboration platform practice organizations
shared information teams organizational technologies
Knowledge Sharing and Collaboration
ethical policies online legal policy public article ethics
law risks rules privacy guidelines practices human
protection consent concerns cases challenges
Online ethical policies
tourism travel hotel destination tourists travellers
destinations tourist hospitality marketing industry
hotels trip visitor online field experiences trips
dmos tour
Tourism
intervention group participant activity physical
Facebook groups control mothers program
interventions support women weight follow up
background health method weeks baseline
Social media as a tool to institute interventions
(e.g., promote physical activity)
political election candidates politicians campaign
twitter parties elections party communication
presidential campaigns politics electoral citizens
candidate campaigning voters analysis article
Political campaigns
media social plat communication research potential
survey impact activities usage public traditional
role understand purposes influence platform
relationship benefits engage
Understanding scholarship about social media
emotional emotion emotions negative positive
mood affective people happiness online anger
fear psychological expression states individuals
state expressions feelings expressed
Investigating emotional tones on social media
organizations organizational employees work
performance management organization internal
firms workplace managers enterprise employee
activities external chain
workers adoption resource firm
Organizational opportunities and challenges from
the use of social media
death deceased memory coping memorial process
grief past closure mourning gene brain grieving
rituals injury historical family trauma families
memories
Two separate themes: Funereal rituals and
genetics
health patients care cancer mental healthcare patient
support health related information medical hospitals
diabetes hospital disease professional treatment
conditions clinical objective
Healthcare
education student higher universities institutions university
educational academic faculty research teaching members
purposes usage private institution tool staff technologies
lecturers
Social Media policies and use in higher education
research data survey question method respondents
usage tool questionnaire conducted analysis social
answer collected sample purpose attitudes aim
response determine
Empirical, survey research on the effects of
social media
information sources source sharing trust quality
credibility share seeking dissemination people making
shared exchange important providing channels find
decision credible
Issues in information creation, sharing and
dissemination
people online support social young friends individuals
family adults offline life experiences communication
participant peoples relationships friendship group
experience interactions
Social media for support and to maintain
relationships
Inf Syst Front (2018) 20:531–558
541

----- Page 12 (native) -----
Table 2 (continued)
Words associated with topic
Topic label
images Instagram image photos visual photo
flickr photographs content multimodal sharing
multimedia shared posted tags popularity videos
popular feature
Analysis of images and multimedia posted on
social media (e.g., Flickr & Instagram)
system user systems design social application web
applications services software platform service
networking architecture interface present proposed
network prototype computing
Design of architectures and applications for
web/social media applications
museum sms visitor university school arts cultural art
celebrities Indiana kelley millennial media reserved
creative film history published runners event
Arts, Theatre, Films and Museums
twitter followers accounts user influence number
influential account popularity influencers identify
top popular activity audience follower metrics
ranking celebrities retweet
Social Media Influence/Popularity Analysis
age years participant young internet adults gender
survey demographic higher sample older significantly
population states younger compared factors
regression united
Research related to the impact of the use of
Social Media by young adults
food species risk safety restaurants forest ecosystem
health public conservation restaurant yelp monitoring
nutrition organic neighbourhood obesity
genetic protected populations
Safety and risks associated with: a) food and b)
conservation of ecosystem
public government citizens local media policy
governments agencies services citizen sector
participation departments transparency
egovernment private state accounts policies level
Transparency and openness in governance
organizations communication public relations corporate
stakeholders media strategies engagement crisis
reputation organization companies stakeholder
management csr analysis publics non profit reserved
Dialogic engagement strategies of organizations
messages message content types persuasive audience
response messaging appeals attribution effective
authorship received favourable authors reception
effectiveness contrast virality postings
Effectiveness of advertising messages
profile pictures participant impression self presentation online
user gender picture attractiveness status cues impressions
management photos owners attractive identity male female
Understanding profile attractiveness and
androcentrism in social media
alcohol drinking references consumption alcohol related
behaviour marijuana norms young content gambling
adolescents substance risk displayed exposure behaviours
health messages display
Adolescents’ behaviours related to their
references
to alcohol on social media
professional medical nursing practice physicians online
education professionalism clinical patient residents
faculty patients medicine nurses care information health
survey personal
Professional legal and ethical risks of the use
of social media by residents and faculty in
emergency medicine residency programs
user content behaviour patterns social activity
activities online types interaction analysis network
feature profile share identify networks characteristics
user generated active
Inferring behaviour from social media content
factor scale measures validity measurement measure reliability
dimensions item model items analysis instrument scales
factors measuring test questionnaire exploratory version
Assessment and validation of measures for
behaviours such as addiction and sexual health
sexual hiv sex men msm risk testing participant prevention
behaviour partners health youth online prep sexually gay
interventions Latino homeless
Using social media to research risky sexual
behaviours and their association with HIV
social relationship capital satisfaction wellbeing self disclosure
relationships positive online psychological life negative support
perceived effects usage effect intensity positively outcomes
Factors (e.g., self-disclosure, social capital)
affecting psychological wellbeing
marketing companies media business social product products
customers company market consumers industry strategies
strategy sales customer firms businesses advertising consumer
Social media and digital marketing
542
Inf Syst Front (2018) 20:531–558

----- Page 13 (native) -----
one publication of interest to this study (Griffiths and Light
2008) was identified between the period 1997 and 2009.
Out of the 132 studies individually reviewed here, about 21
studies examined the behavioural side of social media use.
While most of the initial studies (for instance, Massari 2010;
Garg et al. 2011) restricted interest to peer influence and in-
formation disclosure willingness (2010–2012), the latter stud-
ies (for instance, Gu et al. 2014; Krasnova et al. 2015) were
seen to be more exploratory in examining the positive, dys-
functional, cognitive and affective, heterophily and
homophily tendencies of social media users (2012–2016).
There were 18 studies investigating the very popular aspect
of reviews and recommendations on social networks, with
2013 being a popular year for such studies. Most of these
studies (for instance, Hildebrand et al. 2013; Zhang and
Piramuthu 2016) were interested in improving their under-
standing of the information quality of these reviews and the
associated consequences (2010–2016). There were 17 studies
(2011–2016) evaluating the integration of social media for
varied organizational purposes. While some studies investi-
gated the employee side (e.g., innovativeness, retention, and
motivation) of social media use (for instance, Aggarwal et al.
2012; Miller and Tucker 2013), the others discussed the rela-
tionship between social enterprise systems and organizational
networking (for instance, Trier and Richter 2015; Van Osch
and Steinfield 2016).
Around 13 publications studied the use of social media
as a marketing tool. The early studies here (2010–2013)
explored consumer purchase behaviour and firm tactics,
such as involving consumers in marketing strategies (for
instance, García-Crespo et al. 2010; Goh et al. 2013). The
later studies (2015–2016), however, became more focussed
on studying social commerce across networking sites such
as Facebook, MySpace, and YouTube (e.g., Chen et al.
2015; Sung et al. 2016). Ten studies were interested in
online communities and blogging (see Singh et al. 2014;
Dennis et al. 2016). These were mostly interested in blogger
behaviours, reader retention, online content, contributing ca-
pacity, and blog visibility (2011–2016). Nine publications
revealed the risks associated with the use of social media.
These are either very early studies (2008–2010; for in-
stance, Tow et al. 2010) or fairly recent (2014–2016) learn-
ing about scamming and farcing issues faced by users. They
focus on combating issues of privacy and security, whilst
trying to differentiate between fake and authentic online
content (for instance, Zhang et al. 2016).
Up until 2015, about eight studies analysed the negative
stigma attached to using social media at the workplace (for
instance, Koch et al. 2013). While a couple of studies also
revealed the positive side of social media (for instance, Lu
et al. 2015), most were seen discussing its ill-effects on work
outputs, routine performance, and clash of notions in the per-
sonal and professional space (for instance, Ali-Hassan et al.
2015). About seven studies were interested in exploring the
relationship between social media use and value creation (for
instance, Luo et al. 2013; Barrett et al. 2016) in terms of firm
equity, customer retention, social position, and firm value
(2010–2016). Another seven studies investigated the use of
media sites to share and exchange information during natural
disasters and critical events (2011–2015). Interestingly, most
of the studies documenting this aspect of social media used
Twitter data for their analyses (for instance, Oh et al. 2013;
Lee et al. 2015a). A very small percentage of studies (five
studies) in 2014 and 2015 focussed on analysing the effects
of social media posts that were seeking help/support from
other social media users (for instance, Spagnoletti et al.
2015; Yan et al. 2015a). Only a handful of studies (five stud-
ies), particularly in 2010 and 2016, were examined the use of
social media in public administration and political contexts,
such as open governance and transparency (for instance, Baur
2017; Rosenberger et al. 2017). Also, just about three studies
(Wattal et al. 2010; Dewan and Ramaprasad 2014; Miranda
et al. 2016) dedicated their efforts to comparing traditional
media with social media. The last set of studies (2013–2016),
around nine in total (for instance, Bharati et al. 2014; Chung
et al. 2017), were identified as those limiting themselves to
developing and testing social media constructs in relation to
previously established theories and models (technology ac-
ceptance model, theory of planned behaviour, and others).
4.3 Literature Synthesis
As outlined in the previous section, social media research is
evolving at a fast pace. In reviewing the shortlisted articles,
various themes were identified based on the similarities ob-
served across the issues addressed in social media research.
4.3.1 Social Media Use Behaviours and Consequences
Many scholars explore the behavioural side of social media,
and interestingly, some find factors that prevent users from
continuing its use. Turel and Serenko (2012) warn against
excessive use of social media sites, which can result in strong
pathological and maladaptive psychological dependency on
social media. In a subsequent study, Turel (2015) used cogni-
tive theory to reveal that guilt feelings associated with the use
of a website can increase discontinuance intentions. Matook
et al. (2015b) show that online social networks can be linked
with perceived loneliness, which depends on user’s active/
passive engagement with social media. Krasnova et al.
Inf Syst Front (2018) 20:531–558
543

----- Page 14 (native) -----
(2015) suggest that in response to social information con-
sumption, envy plays a significant role in reducing cognitive
and affective wellbeing of a user. However, Maier et al.
(2015b) disclose that, while social networking stress creators
can increase discontinuance intentions, switching stress-
creators and exhaustion (i.e. switching to alternatives) can
reduce such intentions. Chang et al. (2014) find that
dissatisfaction and regret, alternative attractiveness, and
switching costs affect switching intentions. Xu et al. (2014)
find that dissatisfaction from support and entertainment
values, continuity cost and peer influence encourage
switching between social networks.
Wakefield and Wakefield (2016) focus on Facebook and
Twitter to show that excitement combined with passion acts as
a favourable factor for increased social media engagement.
Chiu and Huang (2015) use media communication theories
to show that user gratification from social networking sites
positively affects their social media usage intention. In study-
ing virtual investment communities, Gu et al. (2014) reveal
that despite benefits of heterophily, investors are allured by
homophily in their interactions. Zeng and Wei (2013) analyse
Flickr data and find that at the time of forming a social tie,
members exhibit similar behaviour, which evolves differently
later. Shi et al. (2014) examine retweet relationships and find
that those with weak ties have a higher probability of engaging
in content sharing. Kreps (2010) introduces poststructuralist
critique to explore how closely an individual’s personality is
reflected in their social media profile, such as Facebook.
Chen et al. (2014) find affective and continuance types
of commitments to be good predictors of user behaviours
on social media sites. Stieglitz and Dang-Xuan (2013)
examine the relationship between user behaviour and
sentiment to conclude that emotional Twitter messages
have a higher retweet tendency. Khan and Jarvenpaa
(2010) analyse event creation pages on Facebook to find
that the social groups demonstrate differential interactive
behaviour prior and post the midpoint of event creation.
Chen and Sharma (2015) disclose that the extent of self-
disclosure on social media sites depends on member atti-
tude. Massari (2010) finds that MySpace users tend to
disclose substantial personal details that put them at the
risk of security and privacy breach. Xu et al. (2016) find
that one’s image and moral beliefs combined with
community policies and peer pressure act as deterrents
to aggression on social media. Garg et al. (2011) measure
peer influence in an online music community and find that
peers can significantly increase music discovery. Susarla
et al. (2012) examine video and user information dataset
from YouTube, and find that the success of a video hugely
depends on social interactions, which also determines its
impact magnitude.
The review of studies related to this theme suggests that
since 2010, IS researchers have focussed on examining the
dysfunctional consequences of social media adoption, such
as - addiction, stress, information overload, and others. Use
behaviour was examined across a variety of platforms like
Facebook, Twitter, MySpace, and Flickr. Media content, such
as picture, video, and tweets have also been explored by the
studies in this category.
4.3.2 Reviews and Recommendations on Social Media Sites
A predominant characteristic of social media networks is
product/service reviews and recommendations. People are be-
ginning to rely on others’ experiences, for instance, before
making a purchase, visiting a place, or searching for accom-
modation.. Such online reviews complement product/service
information. An early study on online travel information
found that consumers invest higher trust in reviews published
on government/tourism websites in comparison to those on a
social media site (Burgess et al. 2011). Hwang et al. (2011)
analysed the social bookmarking sites for impact of positive
and negative reviews on collective wisdom and found that
negative reviews are capable of stabilizing system
performance. Dellarocas et al. (2010) suggest that online fo-
rums looking to increase reviews of lesser-known products
should make information on previously posted reviews a less
prominent feature. Cheung et al. (2012) empirically tested a
consumer review website to conclude that argument quality,
review consistency, and source are critical for assessing re-
view credibility.
Chen et al. (2011) investigate the effect of moderation and
reveal that the commentators generate high quality content to
build a stronger reputation. Wei et al. (2013) developed a
multi-collaborative filtering trust network algorithm for Web
2.0 with improved accuracy for filtering information based on
user preferences and trusted peer users. Luo and Zhang (2013)
refer to user-generated reviews and recommendations as
consumer buzz to find that advocacy and consumer attitude
can impact firm value. Hildebrand et al. (2013) use data from a
European car manufacturer allowing self-designed products to
reveal that feedback from other community members lessens
uniqueness whilst increasing dissatisfaction. Centeno et al.
(2015) address the skewed reputation rankings problem in
movie ratings by suggesting the use of comparative user opin-
ions. Ma et al. (2013) analyse data from Yelp to test bias in
online reviews and find that frequent and longer reviews
successfully combat such biases. Lukyanenko et al. (2014)
demonstrate that participants tend to provide accurate infor-
mation in classifying a phenomenon at a general level, and
higher accuracy where they are allowed free form data. Shi
and Whinston (2013) explore the possible impact of friend
check-ins on social media, and find it has no positive effect
in generating new user visits.
Goes et al. (2014) disclose that user popularity results in
increased and objective reviews, while numeric ratings turn
544
Inf Syst Front (2018) 20:531–558

----- Page 15 (native) -----
more varied and negative with it. Matook et al. (2015a) use
relationship theories to show that past recommendation expe-
rience, closeness, and excessive posting behaviour positively
affect trust and person’s intention to act on the made recom-
mendation. Yan et al. (2015b) evaluate revisit intentions for
restaurants, and find that food and service quality, price and
value, and the atmosphere govern such intentions. Kuan et al.
(2015) analysed Amazon reviews and observed that certain
characteristics such as length, readability, valence, extremity,
and reviewer credibility are more likely to be recognized. In a
different study, Zhang and Piramuthu (2016) suggest that
product/service information on seller’s websites are often lim-
ited, and propose a Latent Dirichlet Allocation model to reveal
the useful complementary hidden information in customer re-
views. In a parallel conversation, Wu and Gaytán 2013 sug-
gest that buyers integrate product price with seller reviews in
configuring their willingness to pay.
The review under this theme suggests that studies as early
as 2010 focussed on evaluating the authenticity of product
and service reviews/recommendations published online.
Overall, these studies reveal that the effect of review volume
is often moderated by a buyer’s risk attitude. Most studies
identify that the combination of consumer’s interest and
available reviews helps users choose products/services that
offer best value to them.
4.3.3 Social Media and Associated Organizational Impact
Publications have also shown interest in investigating the ef-
fects of user-generated content on entrepreneurial behaviour.
For instance, Greenwood and Gopal (2015) find that discourse
in both traditional and user-generated media has a notable
influence on IT firm founding rates. Lundmark et al. (2016)
reveal that higher usage of Twitter, alongside follower num-
bers and retweets result in higher levels of under pricing for
initial public offerings (IPO). Trier and Richter (2015) find
that online organizational networking has many unbalanced
multiplex relationships, mostly comprising of weak ties and
temporal change. They attribute the uneven user contribution
in social networking sites to discourse drivers and information
retrievers. Schlagwein and Hu (2016) identify collaboration,
broadcast, dialogue, sociability, and knowledge management
as the social media types that serve varied organizational
purposes. Claussen et al. (2013) study Facebook to conclude
that social media networks can exercise management not only
by excluding participants, but also by driving softer changes
in incentive/reward systems.
Subramaniam and Nandhakumar (2013) study enterprise
system users and find that integrating social media facilitates
user interaction that helps embed relationship ties between
virtual actors. Another study concerning social features in
enterprise systems reveals that business interactions are less
social, and highly context specific (Mettler and Winter 2016).
Van Osch and Steinfield (2016) showed that the enterprise
system user involved in social network posting will show
differences in team boundary spanning activities based on
their hierarchical position (leadership, team member, etc.).
Benthaus et al. (2016) analyse Twitter data to find that social
media management tools have a catalysing effect on employee
output as they enrich the user engagement process. Gray et al.
(2011) study the social bookmarking system to find that social
diversity of information sources is a good predictor of em-
ployee innovativeness. Kuegler et al. (2015) show that using
enterprise social networking within teams strongly influences
task performance and employee innovativeness. Leonardi
(2014) reveals that communication visibility increases meta-
knowledge between organizations, which results in innovative
products and services minus knowledge duplication.
Aggarwal et al. (2012) interestingly reveal positive effects of
negative employee posts on an organization’s reputation, giv-
en that such posts attract larger audience.
Miranda et al. (2015) suggest that diffusion of social media
is based on an organization’s vision that offers a well-defined
range of moves to choose from, with the freedom to impro-
vise. Xu and Zhang (2013) regard Wikipedia as a social media
platform and conclude that it improves information
environment in the financial market and the value of
information aggregation. Qiu et al. (2014) study prediction
markets to find that users with increased social connections
are less likely to invest in information acquisition from exter-
nal sources. Miller and Tucker (2013) study the extent of
social media managed by firms to report that most firm post-
ings are centred on firm’s achievement and are not necessarily
in clients’ interest. In summary, studies reviewed under this
theme are focussed on analysing the impact of integrating
social media within work roles in organizations. Effective
management and utilization of social media is agreed to pro-
voke employee activity, which helps in employee innovative-
ness, retention, and motivation. Studies also hint against ig-
noring social media engagement, which can reportedly have a
negative impact on a company’s image.
4.3.4 Social Media for Marketing
Social media sites are now a huge part of marketing tactics,
and the documented studies are a good showcase of the extent
to which social media is being integrated in marketing strate-
gies. García-Crespo et al. (2010) study the continuous inter-
action between customers and organizations, as it impacts the
social web environment with implications for marketing and
new product development. Goh et al. (2013) study the user
and market generated content for engagement in social media
brand community to find that it has a positive impact on
purchase expenditures. Rishika et al. (2013) demonstrate
how higher social media activity directly correlates with
higher participation and customer patronage. Aggarwal and
Inf Syst Front (2018) 20:531–558
545

----- Page 16 (native) -----
Singh (2013) find that blogs help managers with their prod-
ucts in the screening stage, and also offer leverage in
negotiating better contract terms. Dou et al. (2013) research
optimizing the strength of a network by adjusting the embed-
ded social media features with the right market seeding and
pricing strategies.
Oestreicher-Singer and Zalmanson (2013) reveal that the
firms are more viable when they integrate social media in
purchase and consumption experience, rather than using it as
a substitute for soft online marketing. Lee et al. (2015b) study
the importance of social commerce in marketplace to find that
Facebook likes increase sales, drive traffic, and introduce
socialization in the shopping experience. Xie and Lee (2015)
scan purchase records on Facebook to find that exposure to
owned and earned social media activities positively impacts
consumers’ likeliness to purchase brands. Chen et al. (2015)
study music sales on MySpace to find that broadcasting,
timing and content of the personal message has significant
effect on sales. Qiu et al. (2015) study YouTube data to find
that learning and network mechanisms statistically and
economically impact video views. Sung et al. (2016) use
Facebook data of universities and colleges across the US to
show that people in the same class year or same major tend to
form denser groups/networks. In a slightly different study, Oh
et al. (2016) investigate the pricing models for an online
newspaper, and find that charging for previously free online
content has a disproportionate impact on word of mouth for
niche and popular topics/articles. Susarla et al. (2016) find that
social media initiatives succeed when a sustained conversa-
tion with likely adopters is maintained.
Studies within this theme focus on the role of commu-
nity structure and structural patterns in using social media
for marketing purposes. For successful social media im-
plementation, it is important to effectively incorporate so-
cial computing with content delivery in the digital content
industry with growing user population. Most studies iden-
tify meaningful conversations with customers as an impor-
tant attribute of social media marketing. Also, identifying
specific customer segments across social media site, for
instance, members of a forum/group or organization, helps
e-marketers to target specific customers based on demo-
graphic patterns and similar interests.
4.3.5 Social Media and Participation in Online Communities
There are many facets to developing and maintaining an
online community, and user participation plays an integral
role in it. Ray et al. (2014) identify that user engagement
increases user intention to revisit an online community.
Singh et al. (2014) analyse employee blog reading
behaviour and show how reader attraction and retention
are influenced by textual characteristics that appeal to
reader sentiments. Butler and Wang (2012) find that
changing content in an online discussion community affects
member dynamics and community responsiveness, both pos-
itively and negatively. An early study on participation in
online communities finds that different community commit-
ments impact behaviours differently (Bateman et al. 2011).
Chau and Xu (2012) develop a framework capable of gath-
ering, extracting, and analyzing blog information that can be
applied to any organization, topic, or product/service.
Goes et al. (2016) study goal setting and status hierarchy
theories to find that glory-based incentives motivate users to con-
tribute more user-generated content only before/until the goal is
reached, with the contribution dropping significantly later.
Khansa et al. (2015) examine Yahoo! Answers, and find that
artefacts like incentives, membership tenure, and habit or past
behaviour hugely influence active online participation. Tang
et al. (2012) examine the concept of incentives on social media,
particularly YouTube, for content contribution and find that a user
is driven to contribute on social media based on their desire for
revenue sharing, exposure, and reputation. Zhang and Wang
(2012) use economic and social role theories in a Wikipedia
context to show that in a collaborative network, the editor
determines the total contribution towards collaborative work.
Dennis et al. (2016) create a theoretical framework for corporate
blogs and analyse Fortune 500 companies to find that a blog’s
target audience and the alignment of blog content and its
management significantly impact the visibility of that blog.
Most of the studies under this theme focus on analyzing data
on blogs. They highlight the importance of word of mouth,
which is closely associated with user satisfaction. It also
emerges from these studies that user engagement and conse-
quent satisfaction play parallel and mediating roles within
such online communities.
4.3.6 Risks and Concerns with the Use of Social Media
Social media and its associated risks have captured the attention
of many authors. A very early study by Griffiths and Light
(2008) focuses on the problem of media convergence, whereby
a gaming website includes social media features, putting vul-
nerable young audience at the risk of scamming. An Australian
study suggests that many users are unaware of the potential
risks of disclosing personal information on social media site,
or consider themselves as low risk targets (Tow et al. 2010).
Krasnova et al. (2010) find that the ease of forming and
maintaining relationships on an enjoyable social platform
motivates users to disclose personal information. Their study
shows that user trust in a service/network provider, and privacy
control options on a networking site greatly dismiss user per-
ceptions of associated risk. Vishwanath (2015) finds that farc-
ing attacks on Facebook occur at two levels – victim to phishers
with phony profiles and victim to phishers soliciting personal
information directly from them.
546
Inf Syst Front (2018) 20:531–558

----- Page 17 (native) -----
To combat the privacy problem of photos, videos, and other
content posted online, Fogués et al. (2014) developed a Best
Friend Forever tool that automatically distinguishes friends on
a user’s profile by assigning individual values based on rela-
tionship ties. Zhang et al. (2016) find that incorporating non-
verbal features of reviewers can massively improve the per-
formance of online fake review detection models. Gerlach
et al. (2015) find that user perception of privacy risks has a
mediating effect on the relationship between policy
monetization and user willingness to share information.
Burtch et al. (2016) analyse a large online crowd funding
platform and report that when campaign contributors
control/conceal visibility from public display, there is a nega-
tive impact on subsequent visitor’s conversion likelihood and
average contributions. In a different study, Choi et al. (2015)
find that information dissemination and network commonality
has a high impact on individual’s perception of privacy inva-
sion and relationship bonding that impedes transactional and
interpersonal avoidances.
Studies reviewed here discuss a social contagion effect of
risks associated with social media use. Recent studies (2014–
2016) suggest educating audiences about the threats associat-
ed with the extent of personal information being disclosed on
social media sites. They recommend government agencies to
keep the users informed, and the social media sites to control
some of their security features. It is necessary to define and
control privacy settings across these many existing social
networks.
4.3.7 Negative Stigma Attached to Social Media Use
Some studies suggest that there is a negative stigma associated
with the use of social media in the workplace. In a typical case
study, Koch et al. (2012) analyze three employee layers in an
organization to find that new hires (users of social media sites)
showed improved morale and employee engagement, some
middle managers (non users) were frustrated and experienced
isolation, while the senior execs were wary of social media use.
In a contrasting case, Cao et al. (2015) suggest that social media
has the potential to build employees’social capital to positively
influence their knowledge integration. In discussing the impact
of social media on organizational life, Koch et al. (2013) find
that conflicts can stem between workplace values and the
values these employees ascribe to social media.
In a gender-based study on social network facilitated team
collaboration, Shen et al. (2010) found that the collective in-
tention in men was influenced by positive emotions, attitude
and group norms, while the collective participation intention
in women was affected by negative emotions and social
identity. Huang et al. (2015) debate the concept of communi-
cational ambidexterity to understand the conflicting demands
of managing internal organization communication in contrast
to open and distributed social media communication. Wu
(2013) suggests information-rich networks enabled by social
media tend to drive job security and employee performance.
Lu et al. (2015) use the social network theory to conclude that
structural and cognitive dimensions of social relationships
positively impact job performance. Ali-Hassan et al. (2015)
show social and cognitive use of social media has a positive
influence on employee performance, while hedonic use of
social media leaves a negative impact on routine performance.
These reviewed studies showcase that social networking
encourages shared language and trust between employees in a
workspace. Another emerging suggestion highlights that orga-
nizations should exercise policy, and use socialization and
leadership-based mechanisms to counter any problems
resulting from differing workplace values. Some of these stud-
ies show interest in the cognitive side of social ties that posi-
tively nurture social relationships and innovation performance.
4.3.8 Social Media and Value Creation
Studies in the extant literature have particularly focussed on
the aspect of value creation within online communities. As
Ridings and Wasko (2010) have observed, an online discus-
sion group/community is a direct product of its social and
structural dynamics. Porter et al. (2013) investigate firm value
and find that a sponsor’s efforts are stronger with positive and
direct effect on trust building. Luo et al. (2013) suggest that
social media has faster predictive value than conventional on-
line media, and that the embedded metrics like consumer rat-
ings are leading indicators of a firm’s equity. Hu et al. (2015)
develop a formative model with an aggregate online social
value construct and identify factors to increase user benefits
and satisfaction, ensuring customer retention via continued
usage of online services. In a public organization study
focussing on social networking system, Karoui et al. (2015)
suggest that differing perceptions of social capital can result in
actors adopting differing strategies for holding their social
position within an organization. Barrett et al. (2016) find that
value creation in online communities expands beyond the dy-
adic relationship between a firm and the community to include
a more intricate relationship involving stakeholders of a wider
ecosystem. Dong and Wu (2015) use data from Dell and
Starbucks and find substantial evidence for online user
innovation-enabled implementation increasing firm value.
Overall, the studies on social media and value creation em-
phasize on influence of social and structural interplay on sus-
tainability, which is visible over longitudinal examination of
their relationship to one another.
4.3.9 Role of Social Media During Critical/Extreme Events
Certain authors are more interested in micro-blogging used at
the time of critical/extreme events. In an attempt to filter real
time news/updates from irrelevant personal messages and
Inf Syst Front (2018) 20:531–558
547

----- Page 18 (native) -----
spam, Cheng et al. (2011) propose analysis of information
diffusion patterns for a large set of micro-blogs that update
emergency news. They claim that their approach (using
Twitter data) outperforms other benchmark solutions to offer
diverse user preferences and customized results during critical
events. Cheong and Lee (2011) use Twitter data to propose a
framework that is useful for Homeland Securities and Law
enforcement agencies to record and respond to terror
situations. Oh et al. (2013) also study Twitter data from three
extreme events to find that information without any clear
source is at the top, personal involvement comes second, with
anxiety at third place in the list of rumour causing factors
during social crisis events. Wang et al. (2014) affirm that news
spreads widely through online portals. They find that news
first posted even on a small news portal can be picked and
reposted by a major news portal, forming a hotspot event for
the news to rapidly spread over the Internet.
Lee et al. (2015a) performed negative binomial analysis of
the 2013 Boston marathon tragedy Tweets to find that follow-
er numbers, reaction time, and hash tagging significantly
affected the diffusion of Tweets. Oh et al. (2015) analysed
Twitter data from the 2011 Egypt revolution and found that
hash tags played a critical role in gathering information and
maintaining situational awareness during such politically
unstable phases. Ling et al. (2015) undertake a qualitative
study of 2011 Thailand flooding data to conclude that social
media can offer a community: structural, resource, and psy-
chological empowerment to achieve collaborative control and
collective participation. In summary, studies since 2011 have
been particularly examining Twitter data, and have derived
significant insights on their positive effect during critical/
extreme events.
4.3.10 Social Media for Help/Support
Some users post updates on social media with an aim to seek
help/support from online communities. Maier et al. (2015a)
find that such posts cause social overload for other users, and
the psychological consequences include feelings of
exhaustion, low user satisfaction, and high intentions of
reducing/stopping the use of social media sites. Yan et al.
(2015a) find that healthcare traits of patients help them estab-
lish social connections online, which is influenced by their
cognitive abilities. Spagnoletti et al. (2015) develop a user
utility model for integrating social media in personalized el-
derly healthcare that is capable of challenging traditional or-
ganizational boundaries to transform the internal and external
stakeholder engagement. Yan and Tan (2014) propose a par-
tially observed Markov decision process model to find suffi-
cient evidence suggesting emotional support is most signifi-
cant in improving patient health. Kallinikos and Tempini
(2014) study the ups and downs of having a large
unsupervised social network based on patient self-reporting
for gathering and examining data on patients’ health.
Limited number of studies has been recorded for this
theme. These studies are fairly recent suggesting a new emerg-
ing trend, where health/support based communities are being
formed. The expanse of such communities seems to be largely
dependent on the information processing capacity and the
range of social ties that the members of such networks can
handle. Using social media to bring together people with sim-
ilar health conditions suggests that informational and social
support can have varying influence on patient health.
4.3.11 Public Bodies and Social Media Interaction
User-generated content from social media is becoming one
of the important information channels across public admin-
istrative bodies and political contexts. Baur (2017) has de-
veloped a MarketMiner framework that massively improves
the utilization of multi-source, multi-language social media
content, which can be applied to areas such as open govern-
ment. Rosenberger et al. (2017) use abstraction-based model-
ling to conceptualize the data structure, and conclude that
wrapping social network application programming interfaces
allow mutual integration of most user activities. Gonzalez-
Bailon et al. (2010) show that political discussions in online
networks are larger and deeper compared to other networks.
Ameripour et al. (2010) analyse the restricted Iranian social
networks, subject to surveillance and censorship to find that
Internet conviviality is not an independent variable with
deterministic outcomes, but is a technology shaped by
economic and political forces. Although, not published in
the list of journals included in this review, Kapoor and
Dwivedi (2015) provided a detailed discussion on how social
media was used intensively to transform electoral campaigns
during India’s last general election. Similar use has also been
reported in other contexts (for example, US presidential elec-
tions) by other studies.
Except one study (that is, Ameripour et al. 2010), the re-
maining reviewed under this category are very recent (2015–
2016). These studies suggest the use of social media for in-
creasing public engagement and transparency. Most of these
studies used technical frameworks and modelling techniques
to identify communication clusters and structures to derive
insights relevant to open government and political campaigns.
4.3.12 Traditional v/s Social Media
Another set of studies investigate the differences between
traditional and social media. A very early study by Wattal et al.
(2010) compares the big money tactics for political campaigning
with social media campaigning to reveal that Internet and the
blogosphere can majorly influence campaigning and election
results. Dewan and Ramaprasad (2014) examine the importance
548
Inf Syst Front (2018) 20:531–558

----- Page 19 (native) -----
of new and old media within the music industry; they find radio
positively and consistently affecting sales of songs and albums,
and sales displacement from free online sampling overpowering
positive word of mouth on sales. Miranda et al. (2016) compare
traditional and social media to suggest that there are evils asso-
ciated with the societal benefits of social media, and mass media
has a detrimental effect on public discourse.
4.3.13 Testing Pre-Established Models
Some studies in literature restrict focus to pre-established
models and relationships for evaluating varied aspects of
social media. Fang et al. (2013) apply social network theories
to suggest positive social influence on adoption probabilities.
Levina and Arriaga (2014) use Bourdieu’s theory to explain
the role of status markers and external sources in shaping
social dynamics. Bharati et al. (2014) combine institutional
theory and organizational innovation, whereby institutional
pressures significantly predict absorptive capacity. Kekolahti
et al. (2015) use Bayesian networks to indicate the decrease in
perceived importance of communication with increase in age.
Chang et al. (2015) integrate social distance with clustering
methods to show shorter social distance results in satisfactory
trust. Chung et al. (2017) employ the Technology Acceptance
Model, and find positive effects between traveller readiness
and ease of using geo-tagging. Zhao et al. (2016) use theory of
planned behaviour and attribution theory to find that virtual
rewards for sharing knowledge online undermine enjoyment.
Yu et al. (2015) use the causation and heuristic theories to find
that affect influences self disclosure indirectly by adjusting
perceived benefits. Stanko (2016) employs Innovation
Diffusion Theory, and finds that community interaction influ-
ences innovations that are used to aid a further innovation.
5 Discussion
In reviewing the publications gathered for this paper, com-
monalities have been observed in the myriad aspects of social
media chosen for investigation. While many studies focussed
their attention on understanding the behaviours of social me-
dia users, the others examined entrepreneurial participation
and firm behaviour. A number of studies have focussed on
the content being posted in online communities, several of
which report on the repercussions of some of this content
being used as an awareness medium during critical events
and tragedies. Interesting revelations were made by authors
studying the use of social media as a platform to render and/or
receive help or support, and its incorporation in the field of
healthcare and public administration. Value creation and the
ill-effects associated with the use of social media at the work-
place were also discussed. Several studies chose to test previ-
ously established hypotheses and models, while others
compared traditional media with social media. Prior research
has also provided insights into how firms have been using
social media to market their products and services. These
strategies run in parallel with the reviews and recommenda-
tions posted by users on social media sites, which have also
received considerable attention in the literature. In summary,
given that different types of social media platforms are emerg-
ing, and different consequences are associated with their use,
research in this field will continue to evolve. This is also
evidenced by the increased number of publications related to
usage and impact over the past five years.
Social media platforms have essentially redefined the ways
in which people choose to communicate and collaborate. An
online community is a socio-technological space where a
sense of communal identity drives engagement, which, in
turn, enhances satisfaction (Ray et al. 2014). Intriguingly, so-
cial media are facilitating the emergence of virtual knowledge
communities and self help networks. These web-based ar-
rangements allow medical practice and research to access pa-
tient experience on a daily basis, which was not possible ear-
lier. However, since research in this area is still in its early
stages, it is difficult to assess the social complexity involved
(e.g., stability of a networking platform that brings together
patients with medical experts) in the process (Kallinikos and
Tempini 2014).
Firms are recognizing social media as a prominent indica-
tor of equity value that not only improves short-term perfor-
mance, but also brings about long-term productivity benefits
(Luo et al. 2013). The reviewed studies suggest that
incorporatin social media in firms increases meta-knowledge
(who’s who in an organization and who does what), which
helps avoid knowledge duplication and promotes new ways
of managing work (Leonardi 2014). Active management of
social media has been observed to be more effective when
those inside rather than outside a firm are engaged (Miller
and Tucker 2013).
A specific line of research focuses on consumers, who sub-
stantially rely on online reviews before making any purchase
decision. The research papers reviewed in this study exhibit
diversity in studying authenticity of reviews for travel sites,
social bookmarking and review sites, movie ratings, car
manufacturing, and social media check-ins. Studies concur that
there has been an exponential increase in the number of fake
reviews, which is severely damaging the credibility of online
reviews and putting business values at risk (Zhang et al. 2016).
Some studies have also empirically identified consumers’ so-
cial media participation as a key metric contributing to the
profitability of a business (Rishika et al. 2013). There evidently
exists a direct correlation between consumer engagement on
social media sites and their shopping intentions, which makes
the issue of legitimate reviews all the more important for busi-
nesses and consumers. Although some studies have proposed
models and algorithms that claim to filter authentic reviews
Inf Syst Front (2018) 20:531–558
549

----- Page 20 (native) -----
from the rest, there is no single and straightforward solution
reported yet that can fully combat this problem.
The issue of negative posts has received considerable at-
tention in the literature. Prior research suggests that, overall,
the impact of negative posts or electronic word of mouth is
much higher than the positive ones that increase readership
(Aggarwal et al. 2012). This problem is also prevalent in or-
ganizations. According to the studies reviewed here, organi-
zations either prohibit employees from posting controversial
content online, or employees themselves refrain from doing
so, fearing negative repercussions. The same employees also
share positive posts, and the adverse effect of the few negative
posts is offset by positive ones. It is in a firm’s interests to
encourage free will enterprise blogging to break down knowl-
edge silos and yield higher employee productivity (Singh et al.
2014).
Businesses looking to monetize online content and so-
cial search rely heavily on substantial understanding of
consumer behaviour in terms of their interaction and par-
ticipation in social settings (Susarla et al. 2012). As con-
sumers gain access to social platforms that offer free con-
tent consumption without an obligatory payment, the re-
lationship between sampling and sales becomes all the
more important (Dewan and Ramaprasad 2014). There is
much research supporting the belief that online word of
mouth has a critical role to play in a firm’s overall per-
formance, and introducing a pay-wall (for previously free
content) can significantly reduce the volume of word of
mouth for popular content in comparison to niche content
(Oh et al. 2016). Determining consumers’ social influence
in an online community is of critical interest to managers,
who seek to gain some leverage from the potential of
social media (Shi et al. 2014). Some researchers find it
difficult to distinguish social influence from users’ self
selection preferences. From an analysis point of view, it
then becomes necessary to separate factors affecting user
membership in a social network from various types of
social influence (Susarla et al. 2012).
The findings on the use of social media in emergencies sug-
gests that a general user response in an online community is very
different from that during a crisis, as those responses then be-
come more reflexive. It has been observed that in times of crisis,
lack of information sources coupled with too many situation
reports being shared by the users of a social media platform
can precipitate a rumour mill. It thus becomes incumbent on
emergency responders to release reliable information, whilst try-
ing to control collective anxiety in the community, to suppress
the rumour threads (Oh et al. 2013). Furthermore, security con-
cerns are increasingly common with involuntary online exposure
on social media, and research on this subject suggests that infor-
mation dissemination with network commonality affects privacy
invasion and user bonding (Choi et al. 2015). It has been learnt
that an individual’s or firm’s decision to withhold information in
the interest of privacy can have both positive and negative effects
on their utility (Burtch et al. 2016).
In reviewing the 132 publications on social media and so-
cial networking, it was observed that many studies relied pri-
marily on social exchange theory, network theory and organi-
zation theory. Table 3, shown below, lists other theories that
have been used by at least two publications. There were sev-
eral other theories that were used by at least once, including
social role theory, game theory, structural holes theory, man-
agement and commitment theories, institutional theory, deter-
rence and mitigation theories, and self determination and self
categorization theories. It is noteworthy that dominant IS
adoption theories such as Unified Theory of Acceptance and
Use of Technology (Dwivedi et al. 2017b, c; Rana et al. 2017;
Venkatesh et al. 2003), Technology Acceptance Model (Davis
1989) and Innovation Diffusion Theory (Kapoor et al. 2015)
are less widely utilised.
In addition, our review of the literature on social media
identified dominant research methods employed by scholars.
Qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods were used by
most of these studies. Closer scrutiny of the 132 publications
reviewed in this study revealed the multitude of techniques
applied for gathering data. Quantitative methods employed
in these studies mostly adopted analytical techniques and sur-
veys (Table 4). On the other hand, publications using qualita-
tive methods mainly used case studies and interviews to gather
the required data (Table 4). As expected, studies employing
mixed methods used a combination of analytical and concep-
tual techniques, alongside surveys and content analysis
(Table 4). Table 4 summarizes the various research approaches
used by publications in our corpus.
The reviewed publications were also analyzed to determine
the nature of the social network that were studied. Precisely 46
websites emerged, with Facebook, online communities,
Twitter, Blogs and YouTube being most frequently targeted.
Networks analysed by at least two or more studies have been
identified in Table 5. The other networks that received atten-
tion from the reviewed publications include Ebay, Flickr,
Flixster, Gtalk, microsoft, MSN Space, Patientslikeme, New
York Times, TripAdvisor.com, and Boxofficemojo.com.
Studies also focussed on websites related to online news,
Q&A websites, discussion groups and forums, online radio
and television, and medical sites such as Webmd.com.
5.1 Limitations and Future Research Directions
Studies, such as the one by Cheung et al. (2012), that examine
aspects of popular websites, warn against consumer percep-
tions being under the influence of brand equity of those
websites. They recommend exercising caution while general-
izing such findings in the context of other websites (Cheung
et al. 2012). Rosenberger et al. (2017) identify a similar prob-
lem with relying on publicly available data, in that the
550
Inf Syst Front (2018) 20:531–558

----- Page 21 (native) -----
underlying abstraction makes findings valid only for the spe-
cific social media site that was analyzed, whilst significantly
restricting its generalizability to other sites. In a similar vein,
other studies (Krasnova et al. 2015; Khan and Jarvenpaa
2010; Tow et al. 2010) have acknowledged the limitation of
restricting their research to a single social media site, and
recommend future researchers to adopt a cross-platform per-
spective for drawing significant inferences.
Mettler and Winter (2016) suggest that there is a paucity of
studies on Enterprise Social Systems because of its novelty, and
urge researchers to fill this void. Turel and Serenko (2012)
identify the lack of conceptualization in the notion of technol-
ogy addiction; they recognize that the process of defining it is
still in the early stages, and is being debated across
communities. For researchers interested in examining aspects
of Twitter, Cheng et al. (2011) recommend incorporating the
location metric focused on Twitter’s geo location feature
allowing users to trace the latitude and longitude of Tweets.
Another recommendation for Twitter related studies comes
from Benthaus et al. (2016), where they suggest researchers
should study user involvement differently, based on how often
users choose to ‘like’ the content of a company. As for use of
social media for marketing in firms, the literature has restricted
focus to the resulting marketing benefits, with limited evidence
supporting the effectiveness of social platforms for enhancing
employee communications (Miller and Tucker 2013).
For behavioural studies, researchers need to be wary of the
fact that motivation for users to adopt social media is different,
often contingent on their culture (Chiu and Huang 2015; Shen
et al. 2010. It is also important to note that behavioural reac-
tions are susceptible to change over time, and changing habits
have a role to play (Chiu and Huang 2015). Longitudinal
research is thus always expected to offer a better understand-
ing of the research problem when the intended behavioural
reactions transfer into behaviour with time (Maier et al.
2015a). In studying online reviews and recommendations,
researchers can assume that these reviews are independent of
one another and remain static over time; however, Zhang and
Piramuthu (2016) suggest that this may not be true and future
researchers should now concentrate on how this has evolved,
and if herding behaviour exists on such online platforms. In
studying behaviours, it has also emerged that users develop
discontinuance intentions after continuance intentions, with
the latter never being completely replaced by the former.
Turel (2015) thus recommends studying the initiation of dis-
continuance intentions, whilst identifying the factors leading
to its dominance and actual discontinuance attempts.
Matook et al. (2015a) identify that there is a need to
study the aspect of trust formation between individuals on
social media, where no personal relationships exist (unlike
sites such as Facebook). Chung et al. (2017) identify that
researchers often associate the use of certain social media with
young users (for instance, Maier et al. 2015b), and fail to
study the usage perceptions across various ages (Vishwanath
2015). Van Osch and Steinfield (2016) suggest that future
researchers should explore the potential of Enterprise Social
Media to gain insights into the tools that support disentangle-
ment of team boundary spanning. Finally, researchers have
Table 3
Theories used in social media research
Theories
Citations
Frequency
Social Exchange Theory
Choi et al. (2015); Hu et al. (2015); Matook et al. (b);
Turel (2015); Shi et al. (2014); Krasnova et al. (2010)
6
Network theory
Yan et al. (2015a); Zhang and Wang (2012); Gray et al. (2011)
3
Organization theory
Lundmark et al. (2016); Schlagwein and Hu (2016); Oestreicher-Singer
and Zalmanson (2013)
3
Learning theory
Fang et al. (2013); Chen and Sharma (2015)
2
Uses and gratifications theory
Ali-Hassan et al. (2015); Chiu and Huang (2015)
2
Elaboration likelihood model Theory
Ma et al. (2013); Cheung et al. (2012)
2
Rational choice theory
Hu et al. (2015); Turel (2015)
2
Attribution theory
Zhao et al. (2016); Porter et al. (2013)
2
Dual process theory
Baek et al. (2012); Tang et al. (2012)
2
Social capital theory
Cao et al. (2015); Lu et al. (2015)
2
Innovation diffusion Theory
Stanko (2016); Lee et al. (2015a)
2
IS success model
Burtch et al. (2016); Xu et al. (2014)
2
IS hedonic value
Burtch et al. (2016); Xu et al. (2014)
2
Social penetration theory
Burtch et al. (2016); Xu et al. (2014)
2
Social comparison theory
Krasnova et al. (2015); Yan et al. (2015a )
2
Theory of planned behaviour
Zhao et al. (2016); Xie and Lee (2015)
2
Goal-setting Theory
Goes et al. (2016); Khansa et al. (2015)
2
Inf Syst Front (2018) 20:531–558
551

----- Page 22 (native) -----
Table 4
Research methods and approaches
Citations
Research approach
(with frequency)
Quantitative methods
Burtch et al. (2016); Goes et al. (2016); Susarla et al. (2016); Sung et al. (2016);
Lundmark et al. (2016); Centeno et al. (2015); Lee et al. ( b);
Greenwood and Gopal (2015); Hu et al. (2015); Kuan et al. (2015); Lu et al. (2015);
Yan et al. (2015a, b); Chen et al. (2015); Qiu et al. (2015); Dewan and Ramaprasad (2014);
Fogués et al. (2014); Goes et al. (2014); Shi et al. (2014); Yan and Tan (2014);
Aggarwal and Singh (2013); Oh et al. (2013); Goh et al. (2013); Luo et al. (2013);
Shi and Whinston (2013); Wei et al. (2013); Xu and Zhang (2013); Xie and Lee (2015);
Aggarwal et al. (2012)(b); Butler and Wang (2012); Susarla et al. (2012); Tang et al. (2012);
Cheng et al. (2011); Garg et al. (2011); Gray et al. (2011); Dellarocas et al. (2010);
Wattal et al. (2010)
Analytical (42)
Chung et al. (2017); Wakefield and Wakefield (2016); Xu et al. (2016); Zhao et al. (2016);
Ali-Hassan et al. (2015); Cao et al. (2015); Chen and Sharma (2015); Kekolahti et al. (2015);
Turel (2015); Gerlach et al. (2015); Krasnova et al. (2015); Kuegler et al. (2015);
Matook et al. (2015a, b); Maier et al. (2015a ); Yu et al. (2015); Bharati et al. (2014);
Chang et al. (2014); Ray et al. (2014); Wang et al. (2014); Xu et al. (2014); Porter et al. (2013);
Rishika et al. (2013); Cheung et al. (2012); Turel and Serenko (2012); Bateman et al. (2011);
Burgess et al. (2011); Shen et al. (2010)
Survey (33)
Zhang et al. (2016); Miranda et al. (2015); Yan et al. (2015a, b); Gu et al. (2014);
Singh et al. (2014); Stieglitz and Dang-Xuan (2013); Miller and Tucker (2013); Wu (2013);
Chau and Xu (2012); Khan and Jarvenpaa (2010)
Content analysis (13)
Zhang and Piramuthu (2016); Khansa et al. (2015); Lee et al. (2015a ); Claussen et al. (2013);
Luo and Zhang (2013); Oestreicher-Singer and Zalmanson (2013); Zeng and Wei (2013);
Baek et al. (2012); Massari (2010)
Web Crawling (9)
Choi et al. (2015); Vishwanath (2015); Lukyanenko et al. (2014); Qiu et al. (2014)(b);
Wu and Gaytán (2013)
Laboratory experiment (5)
Chang et al. (2015); Ma et al. (2013); Cheong and Lee (2011)
Simulation (4)
Oh et al. (2016); Zhang and Wang (2012)
Natural experiment (2)
Gonzalez-Bailon et al. (2010)
Theoretical (1)
Mettler and Winter (2016)
Design science approach (1)
Qualitative methods
Miranda et al. (2016); Huang et al. (2015); Karoui et al. (2015); Trier and Richter (2015);
Kallinikos and Tempini (2014); Koch et al. (2013); Koch et al. (2012); Griffiths and Light (2008)
Case study (8)
Barrett et al. (2016); Schlagwein and Hu (2016); Subramaniam and Nandhakumar (2013)
Interviews (3)
Dong and Wu (2015)
Event study (1)
Chiu and Huang (2015)
Survey (1)
Kreps (2010)
Theoretical (1)
Leonardi (2014)
Ethnographic research (1)
Mixed methods
Dennis et al. (2016); Stanko (2016); Van Osch and Steinfield (2016); Ling et al. (2015);
Hildebrand et al. (2013); Ridings and Wasko (2010)
Analytical (6)
Dennis et al. (2016); Van Osch and Steinfield (2016); Oh et al. (2015); Fang et al. (2013);
Ridings and Wasko (2010)
Conceptual (5)
Benthaus et al. (2016); Ling et al. (2015); Maier et al. (2015a, b); Ameripour et al. (2010)
Interviews (4)
Maier et al. (2015a); Chen et al. (2014); Krasnova et al. (2010); Tow et al. (2010)
Survey (4)
Benthaus et al. (2016); Oh et al. (2015); Fang et al. (2013)
Content analysis (3)
Ameripour et al. (2010); Tow et al. (2010)
Ethnographic research (2)
Stanko (2016)
Fuzzy set QCA (1)
Krasnova et al. (2010)
Focus group (1)
Chen et al. (2014)
Delphi method (1)
Hildebrand et al. (2013)
Field study (1)
552
Inf Syst Front (2018) 20:531–558

----- Page 23 (native) -----
established that the lifecycle of information and communica-
tion technologies tend to be emancipatory in their infancy but
eventually evolve into hegemonic tools. They warn social
media policymakers to be wary of reproducing this pattern
with digital media; the recommendation is to involve more
citizens in the development of Internet governance frame-
work, rather than resting decisions with the members of polit-
ical or economic power (Miranda et al. 2016).
6 Conclusions
This paper discusses the findings of 132 publications contribut-
ingtotheliteratureonsocialmedia.Multipleemergentthemes
in this body of literature have been identified to enhance under-
standing of the advances in social media research. By building
on empirical findings of previous social media research, many
new studies have been successful in theorizing the nature of
most social media platforms. User-generated content allows col-
lective understanding, which is a massive machine-human
knowledge processing function capable of managing chaotic
volumes of information. Some key conclusions relevant to
stakeholders,includingresearchers,havebeenidentifiedhere.
&
Social media technologies are no longer perceived just as
platforms for socialization and congregation, but are being
acknowledged for their ability to encourage aggregation.
&
In reviewing the 132 publications on social media and
social networking, it was observed that most studies used
social exchange theory, network theory and organization
theory to support their studies.
&
Facebook, online communities, and twitter are the three
most popular networks targeted by publications in the
field of social media research.
&
Publications in 2011 were still reporting user-generated
content as a new type of online content. However, the last
six years have seen tremendous scholarly progression in
discussing the many applications of social networking,
highlighting the highs and lows associated with its use.
&
Majority of the publications reviewed in this study are
focussed on behavioural side of social media, reviews,
and integration of social media for marketing and organi-
zational purposes.
&
Many publications in the year 2013 concentrated their
efforts in investigating the very popular aspect of reviews
and recommendations on social networks.
&
Publications have become more focussed on studying social
commerce across networking sites, particularly, Facebook,
MySpace, YouTube and so on between 2015 and 2016.
&
Publications have not shown much interest in support-
seeking posts and negative stigma attached to social media
use after the year 2015.
&
Most studies unanimously acknowledge social media for
its information sharing and information exchange
Table 5 Social networks
Network
Frequency
Example citations
Facebook
23
Fogués et al. (2014); Sung et al. (2016); Vishwanath (2015)
Online Community
16
Barrett et al. (2016); Burtch et al. (2016); Stanko (2016)
Twitter
12
Miranda et al. (2016); Oh et al. (2015); Shi et al. (2014)
Blogs
9
Aggarwal and Singh (2013); Chau and Xu (2012);
Wattal et al. (2010)
Youtube
7
Qiu et al. (2015); Susarla et al. (2016); Tang et al. (2012)
UGC Platfroms
5
Levina and Arriaga (2014); Lukyanenko et al. (2014);
Luo and Zhang (2013)
Myspace
4
Chen et al. (2015); Massari (2010); Wattal et al. (2010)
Yahoo
3
Dellarocas et al. (2010); Gu et al. (2014); Khansa et al. (2015)
Amazon.com
2
Baek et al. (2012); Kuan et al. (2015)
Communication services
2
Kekolahti et al. (2015); Wu (2013)
Epinions.com
2
Cheung et al. (2012); Goes et al. (2014)
Last.fm
2
Garg et al. (2011); Oestreicher-Singer and Zalmanson (2013)
Movielens
2
Centeno et al. (2015); Wei et al. (2013)
Newspapers
2
Greenwood and Gopal (2015); Miranda et al. (2016)
Social Bookmarking Systems
2
Gray et al. (2011); Hwang et al. (2011)
Studivz.net
2
Krasnova et al. (2010); Matook et al. (2015a )
Wikipedia
2
Xu and Zhang (2013); Zhang and Wang (2012)
Yelp.com
2
Ma et al. (2013); Zhang et al. (2016)
Inf Syst Front (2018) 20:531–558
553

----- Page 24 (native) -----
capabilities, with a focussed group of studies recognizing
its effectiveness during natural disasters and critical
events.
&
Almost all publications studying information sharing
during natural disasters and critical events focus on
Twitter data.
&
Publications on administration and political contexts were
particularly found in 2010 and 2016, with no interest
expressed in these contexts between 2011 and 2015.
With information systems now expanding beyond or-
ganizational peripheries to become a part of the larger
societal context, it is important for strategic information
systems research to delve into the competitive setting of
dynamic social systems. Online communities are intro-
ducing extrinsic rewards that do not limit users’ intrinsic
motivations. Research on such communities should ex-
pand to study the interplay between extrinisic and intrin-
sic rewards, particularly in terms of their ability to culti-
vate and sustain users’ intrinsic motivations. From an
organizational perspective, research on social media
should move past the conventional dyadic view of the
relationship between an online community and a firm,
and focus on reconceptualising online users as an eco-
system of stakeholders. Social media has re-established
the dynamics between organizations, employees, and
consumers. Given the rise in number of publications fo-
cussing on workplace setting since 2014, future re-
searchers should aim to analyze stakeholders’ potential
in adopting social media tools to successfully accomplish
their work goals. As for the limitations of this collective
review, publications reviewed here were limited to only
nine journals. This potentially means studies with signif-
icant contributions to social media literature published in
other journals have been overlooked. Future researchers
can look to overcome such exclusions and focus on the
overall review of literature on social media platforms.
Future reviews may focus on reviewing articles pub-
lished in a larger number of IS journals related to a
specific type of social media (i.e. social networking sites,
blogs), or specific issues related to social media use,
such as information load, stress, and impact on produc-
tivity. Despite these limitations, our study provides a
comprehensive and robust intellectual framework for so-
cial media research that would be of value to adacemics
and practitioners alike.
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use,
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided you give appro-
priate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the
Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.
References
Aggarwal, R., & Singh, H. (2013). Differential influence of blogs across
different stages of decision making: The case of venture capitalists.
MIS Quarterly, 37(4), 1093–1112.
Aggarwal, R., Gopal, R., Sankaranarayanan, R., & Singh, P. V. (2012).
Blog, blogger, and the firm: Can negative employee posts lead to
positive outcomes? Information Systems Research, 23(2), 306–322.
AlAlwan, A., Rana, N. P., Dwivedi, Y. K., & Algharabat, R. (2017).
Social Media in Marketing: A review and analysis of the existing
literature. Telematics and Informatics Available at http://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0736585317301077.
Ali-Hassan, H., Nevo, D., & Wade, M. (2015). Linking dimensions of
social media use to job performance: The role of social capital. The
Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 24(2), 65–89.
Ameripour, A., Nicholson, B., & Newman, M. (2010). Conviviality of
internet social networks: An exploratory study of internet campaigns
in Iran. Journal of Information Technology, 25(2), 244–257.
Baek, H., Ahn, J., & Choi, Y. (2012). Helpfulness of online consumer
reviews: Readers' objectives and review cues. International Journal
of Electronic Commerce, 17(2), 99-126.
Barrett, M., Oborn, E., & Orlikowski, W. (2016). Creating value in online
communities: The sociomaterial configuring of strategy, platform,
and stakeholder engagement. Information Systems Research, 27(4),
704–723.
Bateman, P. J., Gray, P. H., & Butler, B. S. (2011). Research note-the
impact of community commitment on participation in online com-
munities. Information Systems Research, 22(4), 841–854.
Baur, A. W. (2017). Harnessing the social web to enhance insights into
people’s opinions in business, government and public administra-
tion. Information Systems Frontiers, 19(2), 231–251.
Benthaus, J., Risius, M., & Beck, R. (2016). Social media management
strategies for organizational impression management and their effect
on public perception. The Journal of Strategic Information Systems,
25(2), 127–139.
Bharati, P., Zhang, C., & Chaudhury, A. (2014). Social media assimilation in
firms: Investigating the roles of absorptive capacity and institutional
pressures. Information Systems Frontiers, 16(2), 257–272.
Blei, D. M. (2012). Probabilistic topic models. Communications of the
ACM, 55(4), 77–84.
Burgess, S., Sellitto, C., Cox, C., & Buultjens, J. (2011). Trust perceptions
of online travel information by different content creators: Some
social and legal implications. Information Systems Frontiers,
13(2), 221–235.
Burtch, G., Ghose, A., & Wattal, S. (2016). Secret admirers: An empirical
examination of information hiding and contribution dynamics in online
Crowdfunding. Information Systems Research, 27(3), 478–496.
Butler, B. S., & Wang, X. (2012). The cross-purposes of cross-posting:
Boundary reshaping behavior in online discussion communities.
Information Systems Research, 23(3-part-2), 993–1010.
Cao, X., Guo, X., Liu, H., & Gu, J. (2015). The role of social media in
supporting knowledge integration: A social capital analysis.
Information Systems Frontiers, 17(2), 351–362.
Centeno, R., Hermoso, R., & Fasli, M. (2015). On the inaccuracy of
numerical ratings: Dealing with biased opinions in social networks.
Information Systems Frontiers, 17(4), 809–825.
Chang, I., Liu, C. C., & Chen, K. (2014). The push, pull and mooring
effects in virtual migration for social networking sites. Information
Systems Journal, 24(4), 323–346.
Chang, W. L., Diaz, A. N., & Hung, P. C. (2015). Estimating trust value:
A social network perspective. Information Systems Frontiers, 17(6),
1381–1400.
Chau, M., & Xu, J. (2012). Business intelligence in blogs: Understanding
consumer interactions and communities. MIS Quarterly, 36(4),
1189–1216.
554
Inf Syst Front (2018) 20:531–558

----- Page 25 (native) -----
Chen, R., & Sharma, S. K. (2015). Learning and self-disclosure behavior
on social networking sites: The case of Facebook users. European
Journal of Information Systems, 24(1), 93–106.
Chen, J., Xu, H., & Whinston, A. B. (2011). Moderated online commu-
nities and quality of user-generated content. Journal of Management
Information Systems, 28(2), 237–268.
Chen, A., Lu, Y., Chau, P. Y., & Gupta, S. (2014). Classifying, measuring,
and predicting users’ overall active behavior on social networking
sites. Journal of Management Information Systems, 31(3), 213–253.
Chen, H., De, P., & Hu, Y. J. (2015). IT-enabled broadcasting in social
media: An empirical study of artists’ activities and music sales.
Information Systems Research, 26(3), 513–531.
Cheng, J., Sun, A., Hu, D., & Zeng, D. (2011). An information diffusion-
based recommendation framework for micro-blogging. Journal of
the Association for Information Systems, 12(7), 463–486.
Cheong, M., & Lee, V. C. (2011). A microblogging-based approach to
terrorism informatics: Exploration and chronicling civilian senti-
ment and response to terrorism events via twitter. Information
Systems Frontiers, 13(1), 45–59.
Cheung, C. M. Y., Sia, C. L., & Kuan, K. K. (2012). Is this review
believable? A study of factors affecting the credibility of online
consumer reviews from an ELM perspective. Journal of the
Association for Information Systems, 13(8), 618.
Chiu, C. M., & Huang, H. Y. (2015). Examining the antecedents of user
gratification and its effects on individuals’ social network services
usage: The moderating role of habit. European Journal of
Information Systems, 24(4), 411–430.
Choi, B. C., Jiang, Z., Xiao, B., & Kim, S. S. (2015). Embarrassing
exposures in online social networks: An integrated perspective of
privacy invasion and relationship bonding. Information Systems
Research, 26(4), 675–694.
Chung, N., Tyan, I., & Han, H. (2017). Enhancing the smart tourism
experience through geotag. Information Systems Frontiers, 19(4),
731–742.
Claussen, J., Kretschmer, T., & Mayrhofer, P. (2013). The effects of
rewarding user engagement: The case of facebook apps.
Information Systems Research, 24(1), 186–200.
Culnan, M. J. (1986). The intellectual development of management in-
formation systems, 1972-1982: A co-citation analysis. Management
Science, 32(2), 156.
Davis, F. D. (1989). Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, and user
acceptance of information technology. MIS Quarterly, 13(3), 318–339.
Dellarocas, C., Gao, G., & Narayan, R. (2010). Are consumers more
likely to contribute online reviews for hit or niche products?
Journal of Management Information Systems, 27(2), 127–158.
Dennis, A. R., Minas, R. K., & Lockwood, N. S. (2016). Mapping the
corporate blogosphere: Linking audience, content, and management
to blog visibility. Journal of the Association for Information
Systems, 17(3), 162.
Dewan, S., & Ramaprasad, J. (2014). Social media, traditional media, and
music sales. MIS Quarterly, 38(1), 101–121.
Dong, J. Q., & Wu, W. (2015). Business value of social media technol-
ogies: Evidence from online user innovation communities. The
Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 24(2), 113–127.
Dou, Y., Niculescu, M. F., & Wu, D. J. (2013). Engineering optimal
network effects via social media features and seeding in markets
for digital goods and services. Information Systems Research,
24(1), 164–185.
Dwivedi, Y. K., Kapoor, K. K., & Chen, H. (2015). Social media mar-
keting and advertising. The Marketing Review, 15(3), 289–309.
Dwivedi, Y. K., Rana, N. P., & Alryalat, M. (2017a). Affiliate marketing:
An overview and analysis of emerging literature. The Marketing
Review, 17(1), 33–50.
Dwivedi, Y. K., Rana, N. P., Jeyaraj, A., Clement, M., & Williams, M. D.
(2017b). Re-examining the unified theory of acceptance and use of
technology (UTAUT): Towards a revised theoretical model.
Information Systems Frontiers, 1–16. Available at. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s10796-017-9774-y.
Dwivedi, Y. K., Rana, N. P., Janssen, M., Lal, B., Williams, M. D., &
Clement, M. (2017c). An empirical validation of a unified model of
electronic government adoption (UMEGA). Government
Information Quarterly, 34(2), 211–230.
Fang, X., Hu, P. J. H., Li, Z., & Tsai, W. (2013). Predicting adoption
probabilities in social networks. Information Systems Research,
24(1), 128–145.
Fogués, R. L., Such, J. M., Espinosa, A., & Garcia-Fornes, A. (2014). BFF: A
tool for eliciting tie strength and user communities in social networking
services. Information Systems Frontiers, 16(2), 225–237.
García-Crespo, Á., Colomo-Palacios, R., Gómez-Berbís, J. M., & Ruiz-
Mezcua, B. (2010). SEMO: A framework for customer social net-
works analysis based on semantics. Journal of Information
Technology, 25(2), 178–188.
Garg, R., Smith, M. D., & Telang, R. (2011). Measuring information
diffusion in an online community. Journal of Management
Information Systems, 28(2), 11–38.
Gerlach, J., Widjaja, T., & Buxmann, P. (2015). Handle with care: How
online social network providers’ privacy policies impact users’ in-
formation sharing behavior. The Journal of Strategic Information
Systems, 24(1), 33–43.
Goes, P. B., Lin, M., & Au Yeung, C. M. (2014). BPopularity effect^ in
user-generated content: Evidence from online product reviews.
Information Systems Research, 25(2), 222–238.
Goes, P. B., Guo, C., & Lin, M. (2016). Do incentive hierarchies induce
user effort? Evidence from an online knowledge exchange.
Information Systems Research, 27(3), 497–516.
Goh, K. Y., Heng, C. S., & Lin, Z. (2013). Social media brand community and
consumer behavior: Quantifying the relative impact of user-and market-
er-generated content. Information Systems Research, 24(1), 88–107.
Gonzalez-Bailon, S., Kaltenbrunner, A., & Banchs, R. E. (2010). The
structure of political discussion networks: A model for the analysis
of online deliberation. Journal of Information Technology, 25(2),
230–243.
Gray, P. H., Parise, S., & Iyer, B. (2011). Innovation impacts of using
social bookmarking systems. MIS Quarterly, 35(3), 629–643.
Greenwood, B. N., & Gopal, A. (2015). Research note—Tigerblood:
Newspapers, blogs, and the founding of information technology
firms. Information Systems Research, 26(4), 812–828.
Griffiths, M., & Light, B. (2008). Social networking and digital gaming
media convergence: Classification and its consequences for appro-
priation. Information Systems Frontiers, 10(4), 447–459.
Gu, B., Konana, P., Raghunathan, R., & Chen, H. M. (2014). Research
note—The allure of Homophily in social media: Evidence from
investor responses on virtual communities. Information Systems
Research, 25(3), 604–617.
Hildebrand, C., Häubl, G., Herrmann, A., & Landwehr, J. R. (2013).
When social media can be bad for you: Community feedback stifles
consumer creativity and reduces satisfaction with self-designed
products. Information Systems Research, 24(1), 14–29.
Hu, T., Kettinger, W. J., & Poston, R. S. (2015). The effect of online social
value on satisfaction and continued use of social media. European
Journal of Information Systems, 24(4), 391–410.
Huang, J., Baptista, J., & Newell, S. (2015). Communicational ambidex-
terity as a new capability to manage social media communication
within organizations. The Journal of Strategic Information Systems,
24(2), 49–64.
Hwang, Y. C., Yuan, S. T., & Weng, J. H. (2011). A study of the impacts of
positive/negative feedback on collective wisdom—Case study on social
bookmarking sites. Information Systems Frontiers, 13(2), 265–279.
Ismagilova, E., Dwivedi, Y. K., Slade, E. L., & Williams, M. D. (2017).
Electronic word of mouth (eWOM) in the marketing context: A state
of the art analysis and future directions. Cham: Springer
International Publishing.
Inf Syst Front (2018) 20:531–558
555

----- Page 26 (native) -----
Kallinikos, J., & Tempini, N. (2014). Patient data as medical facts: Social
media practices as a foundation for medical knowledge creation.
Information Systems Research, 25(4), 817–833.
Kapoor, K. K., & Dwivedi, Y. K. (2015). Metamorphosis of Indian elec-
toral campaigns: Modi’s social media experiment. International
Journal of Indian Culture & Business Management, 11(4), 496–516.
Kapoor, K. K., Dwivedi, Y. K., & Williams, M. D. (2015). Examining the
role of three sets of innovation attributes for determining adoption of
the interbank mobile payment service. Information Systems
Frontiers, 17(5), 1039–1056.
Kapoor, K. K., Dwivedi, Y. K., & Piercy, N. (2016). Pay-per-click advertis-
ing: A review of literature. The Marketing Review, 16(2), 183–202.
Karoui, M., Dudezert, A., & Leidner, D. E. (2015). Strategies and sym-
bolism in the adoption of organizational social networking systems.
The Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 24(1), 15–32.
Kekolahti, P., Karikoski, J., & Riikonen, A. (2015). The effect of an
individual’s age on the perceived importance and usage intensity
of communications services—A Bayesian network analysis.
Information Systems Frontiers, 17(6), 1313–1333.
Khan, Z., & Jarvenpaa, S. L. (2010). Exploring temporal coordination of
events with Facebook. Com. Journal of Information Technology,
25(2), 137–151.
Khansa, L., Ma, X., Liginlal, D., & Kim, S. S. (2015). Understanding
members’ active participation in online question-and-answer com-
munities: A theory and empirical analysis. Journal of Management
Information Systems, 32(2), 162–203.
Koch, H., Gonzalez, E., & Leidner, D. (2012). Bridging the work/social
divide: The emotional response to organizational social networking
sites. European Journal of Information Systems, 21(6), 699–717.
Koch, H., Leidner, D. E., & Gonzalez, E. S. (2013). Digitally enabling
social networks: Resolving IT–culture conflict. Information Systems
Journal, 23(6), 501–523.
Krasnova, H., Spiekermann, S., Koroleva, K., & Hildebrand, T. (2010).
Online social networks: Why we disclose. Journal of Information
Technology, 25(2), 109–125.
Krasnova, H., Widjaja, T., Buxmann, P., Wenninger, H., & Benbasat, I.
(2015). Research note—Why following friends can hurt you: An
exploratory investigation of the effects of envy on social networking
sites among college-age users. Information Systems Research, 26(3),
585–605.
Kreps, D. (2010). My social networking profile: Copy, resemblance, or
simulacrum? A poststructuralist interpretation of social information
systems. European Journal of Information Systems, 19(1), 104–115.
Kuan, K. K., Hui, K. L., Prasarnphanich, P., & Lai, H. Y. (2015). What
makes a review voted? An empirical investigation of review voting
in online review systems. Journal of the Association for Information
Systems, 16(1), 48.
Kuegler, M., Smolnik, S., & Kane, G. (2015). What’s in IT for em-
ployees? Understanding the relationship between use and perfor-
mance in enterprise social software. The Journal of Strategic
Information Systems, 24(2), 90–112.
Lee, J., Agrawal, M., & Rao, H. R. (2015a). Message diffusion through
social network service: The case of rumor and non-rumor related
tweets during Boston bombing 2013. Information Systems
Frontiers, 17(5), 997–1005.
Lee, K., Lee, B., & Oh, W. (2015b). Thumbs up, sales up? The contingent
effect of Facebook likes on sales performance in social commerce.
Journal of Management Information Systems, 32(4), 109–143.
Leonardi, P. M. (2014). Social media, knowledge sharing, and innova-
tion: Toward a theory of communication visibility. Information
Systems Research, 25(4), 796–816.
Levina, N., & Arriaga, M. (2014). Distinction and status production on
user-generated content platforms: Using Bourdieu’s theory of cul-
tural production to understand social dynamics in online fields.
Information Systems Research, 25(3), 468–488.
Ling, C. L. M., Pan, S. L., Ractham, P., & Kaewkitipong, L. (2015). ICT-
enabled community empowerment in crisis response: Social media
in Thailand flooding 2011. Journal of the Association for
Information Systems, 16(3), 174.
Lister, M. (2017). 40 essential social media marketing statistics for 2017.
Available at: http://www.wordstream.com/blog/ws/2017/01/05/
social-media-marketing-statistics. Accessed 22 June 2017.
Lu, B., Guo, X., Luo, N., & Chen, G. (2015). Corporate blogging and job
performance: Effects of work-related and nonwork-related participation.
Journal of Management Information Systems, 32(4), 285–314.
Lukyanenko, R., Parsons, J., & Wiersma, Y. F. (2014). The IQ of
the crowd: Understanding and improving information quality
in structured user-generated content. Information Systems
Research, 25(4), 669–689.
Lundmark, L. W., Oh, C., & Verhaal, J. C. (2016). A little Birdie told me:
Social media, organizational legitimacy, and underpricing in initial
public offerings. Information Systems Frontiers, 1–16. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10796-016-9654-x.
Luo, X., & Zhang, J. (2013). How do consumer buzz and traffic in social
media marketing predict the value of the firm? Journal of
Management Information Systems, 30(2), 213–238.
Luo, X., Zhang, J., & Duan, W. (2013). Social media and firm equity
value. Information Systems Research, 24(1), 146–163.
Ma, X., Khansa, L., Deng, Y., & Kim, S. S. (2013). Impact of prior
reviews on the subsequent review process in reputation systems.
Journal of Management Information Systems, 30(3), 279–310.
Maier, C., Laumer, S., Eckhardt, A., & Weitzel, T. (2015a). Giving too
much social support: Social overload on social networking sites.
European Journal of Information Systems, 24(5), 447–464.
Maier, C., Laumer, S., Weinert, C., & Weitzel, T. (2015b). The effects of
technostress and switching stress on discontinued use of social net-
working services: A study of Facebook use. Information Systems
Journal, 25(3), 275–308.
Massari, L. (2010). Analysis of MySpace user profiles. Information
Systems Frontiers, 12(4), 361–367.
Matook, S., Brown, S. A., & Rolf, J. (2015a). Forming an intention to act
on recommendations given via online social networks. European
Journal of Information Systems, 24(1), 76–92.
Matook, S., Cummings, J., & Bala, H. (2015b). Are you feeling lonely?
The impact of relationship characteristics and online social network
features on loneliness. Journal of Management Information
Systems, 31(4), 278–310.
McCain, K. W. (1984). Longitudinal author Cocitation mapping: The
changing structure of macroeconomics. Journal of the American
Society for Information Science, 35(6), 351–359.
McCallum, A. K. (2002). Mallet: A machine learning for language
toolkit. From http://mallet.cs.umass.edu
Mettler, T., & Winter, R. (2016). Are business users social? A design
experiment exploring information sharing in enterprise social sys-
tems. Journal of Information Technology, 31(2), 101–114.
Miller, A. R., & Tucker, C. (2013). Active social media management: The
case of health care. Information Systems Research, 24(1), 52–70.
Miranda, S. M., Kim, I., & Summers, J. D. (2015). Jamming with social
media: How cognitive structuring of organizing vision facets affects
it innovation diffusion. MIS Quarterly, 39(3), 591–614.
Miranda, S. M., Young, A., & Yetgin, E. (2016). Are social media eman-
cipatory or hegemonic? Societal effects of mass media digitization.
MIS Quarterly, 40(2), 303–329.
Nerur, S. P., Rasheed, A. A., & Natarajan, V. (2008). The intellectual
structure of the strategic management field: An author co-citation
analysis. Strategic Management Journal, 29(3), 319–336.
Oestreicher-Singer, G., & Zalmanson, L. (2013). Content or community?
A digital business strategy for content providers in the social age.
MIS Quarterly, 37(2), 591–616.
556
Inf Syst Front (2018) 20:531–558

----- Page 27 (native) -----
Oh, O., Agrawal, M., & Rao, H. R. (2013). Community intelligence and
social media services: A rumor theoretic analysis of tweets during
social crises. MIS Quarterly, 37(2), 407–426.
Oh, O., Eom, C., & Rao, H. R. (2015). Research note—Role of social
Media in Social Change: An analysis of collective sense making
during the 2011 Egypt revolution. Information Systems Research,
26(1), 210–223.
Oh, W., Moon, J. Y., Hahn, J., & Kim, T. (2016). Research note—Leader
influence on sustained participation in online collaborative work
communities: A simulation-based approach. Information Systems
Research, 27(2), 383–402.
Phang, C. W., Kankanhalli, A., & Tan, B. C. (2015). What Motivates
Contributors vs. Lurkers? An Investigation of Online Feedback
Forums. Information Systems Research, 26(4), 773–792
Plume, C. J., Dwivedi, Y. K., & Slade, E. L. (2016). Social Media in the
Marketing Context: A state of the art analysis and future directions
(1st ed.). Oxford: Chandos Publishing Ltd.
Porter, C. E., Devaraj, S., & Sun, D. (2013). A test of two models of value
creation in virtual communities. Journal of Management
Information Systems, 30(1), 261–292.
Qiu, L., Rui, H., & Whinston, A. B. (2014). Effects of social networks on
prediction markets: Examination in a controlled experiment.
Journal of Management Information Systems, 30(4), 235–268.
Qiu, L., Tang, Q., & Whinston, A. B. (2015). Two formulas for success in
social media: Learning and network effects. Journal of Management
Information Systems, 32(4), 78–108.
Rana, N. P., Dwivedi, Y. K., Lal, B., Williams, M. D., & Clement, M. (2017).
Citizens’ adoption of an electronic government system: Towards a uni-
fied view. Information Systems Frontiers, 19(3), 549–568.
Ray, S., Kim, S. S., & Morris, J. G. (2014). The central role of engagement in
online communities. Information Systems Research, 25(3), 528–546.
Ridings, C., & Wasko, M. (2010). Online discussion group sustainability:
Investigating the interplay between structural dynamics and social
dynamics over time. Journal of the Association for Information
Systems, 11(2), 95.
Rishika, R., Kumar, A., Janakiraman, R., & Bezawada, R. (2013). The
effect of customers' social media participation on customer visit
frequency and profitability: An empirical investigation.
Information Systems Research, 24(1), 108–127.
Rosenberger, M., Lehrer, C., & Jung, R. (2017). Integrating data from
user activities of social networks into public administrations.
Information Systems Frontiers, 19(2), 253–266.
Schlagwein, D., & Hu, M. (2016). How and why organisations use social
media: Five use types and their relation to absorptive capacity.
Journal of Information Technology, 32(2), 194–209.
Shen, A. X., Lee, M. K., Cheung, C. M., & Chen, H. (2010). Gender
differences in intentional social action: We-intention to engage in
social network-facilitated team collaboration. Journal of
Information Technology, 25(2), 152–169.
Shi, Z., & Whinston, A. B. (2013). Network structure and observational
learning: Evidence from a location-based social network. Journal of
Management Information Systems, 30(2), 185–212.
Shi, Z., Rui, H., & Whinston, A. B. (2014). Content sharing in a social
broadcasting environment: Evidence from twitter. MIS Quarterly,
38(1), 123–142.
Singh, P. V., Sahoo, N., & Mukhopadhyay, T. (2014). How to attract and
retain readers in Enterprise blogging? Information Systems
Research, 25(1), 35–52.
Spagnoletti, P., Resca, A., & Sæbø, Ø. (2015). Design for Social Media
Engagement: Insights from elderly care assistance. The Journal of
Strategic Information Systems, 24(2), 128–145.
Stanko, M. A. (2016). Toward a theory of remixing in online innovation
communities. Information Systems Research, 27(4), 773–791.
Statista. (2017). Most famous social network sites worldwide as of April
2017, Ranked by number of active users (in millions). Available at:
https://www.statista.com/statistics/272014/global-social-networks-
ranked-by-number-of-users/. Accessed 22 June 2017.
Stieglitz, S., & Dang-Xuan, L. (2013). Emotions and information diffu-
sion in social media—Sentiment of microblogs and sharing behav-
ior. Journal of Management Information Systems, 29(4), 217–248.
Subramaniam, N., & Nandhakumar, J. (2013). Exploring social network
interactions in enterprise systems: The role of virtual co-presence.
Information Systems Journal, 23(6), 475–499.
Sung, Y. S., Wang, D., & Kumara, S. (2016). Uncovering the effect of
dominant attributes on community topology: A case of facebook
networks. Information Systems Frontiers, 1–12. https://doi.org/10.
1007/s10796-016-9696-0.
Susarla, A., Oh, J. H., & Tan, Y. (2012). Social networks and the diffusion
of user-generated content: Evidence from YouTube. Information
Systems Research, 23(1), 23–41.
Susarla, A., Oh, J. H., & Tan, Y. (2016). Influentials, Imitables, or
Susceptibles? Virality and word-of-mouth conversations in online
social networks. Journal of Management Information Systems,
33(1), 139–170.
Tang, Q., Gu, B., & Whinston, A. B. (2012). Content contribution for revenue
sharing and reputation in social media: A dynamic structural model.
Journal of Management Information Systems, 29(2), 41–76.
Tow, W. N. F. H., Dell, P., & Venable, J. (2010). Understanding informa-
tion disclosure behaviour in Australian Facebook users. Journal of
Information Technology, 25(2), 126–136.
Trier, M., & Richter, A. (2015). The deep structure of organizational
online networking–an actor-oriented case study. Information
Systems Journal, 25(5), 465–488.
Turel, O. (2015). Quitting the use of a habituated hedonic information
system: A theoretical model and empirical examination of Facebook
users. European Journal of Information Systems, 24(4), 431–446.
Turel, O., & Serenko, A. (2012). The benefits and dangers of enjoyment
with social networking websites. European Journal of Information
Systems, 21(5), 512–528.
Van Eck, N. J., & Waltman, L. (2011). Text mining and visualization
using VOSviewer, ISSI. Newsletter, 7(3), 50–54.
Van Osch, W., & Steinfield, C. W. (2016). Team boundary spanning:
Strategic implications for the implementation and use of enterprise
social media. Journal of Information Technology, 31(2), 207–225.
Venkatesh, V., Morris, M. G., Davis, G. B., & Davis, F. D. (2003). User
acceptance of information technology: Toward a unified view. MIS
Quarterly, 27(3), 425–478.
Vishwanath, A. (2015). Diffusion of deception in social media: Social
contagion effects and its antecedents. Information Systems
Frontiers, 17(6), 1353–1367.
Wakefield, R., & Wakefield, K. (2016). Social media network behavior:
A study of user passion and affect. The Journal of Strategic
Information Systems, 25(2), 140–156.
Wang, Y., Zeng, D., Zhu, B., Zheng, X., & Wang, F. (2014). Patterns of
news dissemination through online news media: A case study in
China. Information Systems Frontiers, 16(4), 557–570.
Wattal, S., Schuff, D., Mandviwalla, M., & Williams, C. B. (2010). Web
2.0 and politics: The 2008 US presidential election and an e-politics
research agenda. MIS Quarterly, 34(4), 669–688.
Wei, C., Khoury, R., & Fong, S. (2013). Web 2.0 recommendation service
by multi-collaborative filtering trust network algorithm. Information
Systems Frontiers, 15(4), 533–551.
White, H. D., & Griffith, B. C. (1981). Author Cocitation: A literature
measure of intellectual structure. Journal of the American Society
for Information Science, 32(3), 163–171.
Wu, L. (2013). Social network effects on productivity and job security:
Evidence from the adoption of a social networking tool. Information
Systems Research, 24(1), 30–51.
Wu, J., & Gaytán, E. A. A. (2013). The role of online seller reviews and
product price on buyers' willingness-to-pay: A risk perspective.
European Journal of Information Systems, 22(4), 416–433.
Inf Syst Front (2018) 20:531–558
557

----- Page 28 (native) -----
Xie, K., & Lee, Y. J. (2015). Social media and brand purchase:
Quantifying the effects of exposures to earned and owned social
media activities in a two-stage decision making model. Journal of
Management Information Systems, 32(2), 204–238.
Xu, S. X., & Zhang, X. M. (2013). Impact of Wikipedia on market
information environment: Evidence on management disclosure
and investor reaction. MIS Quarterly, 37(4), 1043–1068.
Xu, Y. C., Yang, Y., Cheng, Z., & Lim, J. (2014). Retaining and attracting
users in social networking services: An empirical investigation of
cyber migration. The Journal of Strategic Information Systems,
23(3), 239–253.
Xu, B., Xu, Z., & Li, D. (2016). Internet aggression in online communi-
ties: A contemporary deterrence perspective. Information Systems
Journal, 26(6), 641–667.
Yan, L., & Tan, Y. (2014). Feeling blue? Go online: An empirical study of
social support among patients. Information Systems Research,
25(4), 690–709.
Yan, L., Peng, J., & Tan, Y. (2015a). Network dynamics: How can we find
patients like us? Information Systems Research, 26(3), 496–512.
Yan, X., Wang, J., & Chau, M. (2015b). Customer revisit intention to
restaurants: Evidence from online reviews. Information Systems
Frontiers, 17(3), 645–657.
Yu, J., Hu, P. J. H., & Cheng, T. H. (2015). Role of affect in self-disclosure
on social network websites: A test of two competing models.
Journal of Management Information Systems, 32(2), 239–277.
Zeng, X., & Wei, L. (2013). Social ties and user content generation:
Evidence from Flickr. Information Systems Research, 24(1), 71–87.
Zhang, J., & Piramuthu, S. (2016). Product recommendation with latent
review topics. Information Systems Frontiers, 1–9. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s10796-016-9697-z.
Zhang, X., & Wang, C. (2012). Network positions and contributions to
online public goods: The case of Chinese Wikipedia. Journal of
Management Information Systems, 29(2), 11–40.
Zhang, D., Zhou, L., Kehoe, J. L., & Kilic, I. Y. (2016). What online
reviewer behaviors really matter? Effects of verbal and nonverbal
behaviors on detection of fake online reviews. Journal of
Management Information Systems, 33(2), 456–481.
Zhao, L., Detlor, B., & Connelly, C. E. (2016). Sharing knowledge in Social
Q&a Sites: The unintended consequences of extrinsic motivation.
Journal of Management Information Systems, 33(1), 70–100.
Kawaljeet Kapoor is a Research Fellow in the School of Business at
Brunel University London. Her present research is on the EU funded
EMPATIA project on participatory budgeting. Her research experience
includes 2.5 yrs. of work on the EU funded Social Innovation Drive
project. She has a PhD in Business Management, and an MBA, both from
Swansea University, Wales, and a bachelor’s degree in Mechanical
Engineering. Her PhD was on diffusion of innovations. She has first/co-
authored many three star publications for international refereed journals
such as ISF, PPC, ANOR, IJPR, TMR, including other 2star publications.
She also has three years of industry experience from working as a soft-
ware engineer at Accenture Services, India.
Kuttimani Tamilmani is currently PhD student at the School of
Management, Swansea University, where he also obtained his MBA with
distinction. His research has appeared in peer-reviewed journals namely
International Journal of Indian Culture and Business Management, and
Journal of Advances in Management Research as well as in conference
proceedings such as European Conference on Information Systems. His
research interests are in the area of social media and online consumer
behaviour. Prior to this, he has held various positions in banking and finan-
cial service industry for about four years in the Middle East and India.
Nripendra P. Rana is an associate professor in the School of Management
at Swansea University, UK. With an academic and professional back-
ground in Mathematics and Computer Science and with PhD in
Information Systems, his current research interests focus primarily upon
adoption of emerging and cutting edge technology, e-government, m-gov-
ernment, e-commerce and m-commerce systems. His work has been pub-
lished in leading academic journals including European Journal of
Marketing, Information Systems Frontiers, Government Information
Quarterly, Production Planning & Control, Journal of Business
Research, Public Management Review, Annals of Operations Research,
International Journal of Production Research and Computers in Human
Behavior. He has also presented his research in some of the prominent
international conferences of information systems across the world.
Pushp P. Patil is currently a doctoral research student at the School
of Management, Swansea University, UK. Her doctoral topic is re-
lated to the consumer adoption of digital payments in Indian context.
She also has research interest related to social media and social
commerce. She holds an MSc in Management from Surrey
University. Prior to pursuing doctoral studies, she has held various
positions in London based high street Investment banks for about
five years for gaining valuable industry experience.
Yogesh K. Dwivedi is a Professor of Digital Marketing and
Innovation, and Director of the Emerging Markets Research Centre
(EMaRC) in the School of Management at Swansea University,
Wales, UK. His research interests are in the area of Information
Systems (IS) including: the adoption and diffusion of emerging
ICTs, electronic/digital government and digital marketing, particu-
larly in the context of emerging markets. He has published more
than 250 articles in a range of leading academic journals and con-
ferences. He has co-edited/co-authored more than 20 books, which
have been published by international publishers such as Chandos
Publishing, Springer, Chapman and Hall/CRC Press, Routledge
and Emerald. He has acted as co-editor of fifteen journal special
issues; organised tracks, mini-tracks and panels in leading confer-
ences and served as programme co-chair of the 2013 IFIP WG 8.6
Conference and as Conference Chair of the IFIP WG 6.11 I3E2016
Conference. He is an Associate Editor of the European Journal of
Marketing and Government Information Quarterly and Senior Editor
of the Journal of Electronic Commerce Research. Professor Dwivedi
is the founding editor of the recently established Springer Book
Series on Advances in Theory and Practice of Emerging Markets
(http://www.springer.com/series/15802). More information about
him can be found at: http://www.swansea.ac.uk/staff/som/
academic-staff/y.k.dwivedi/.
Sridhar Nerur is a Professor of Information Systems at the University of
Texas at Arlington. His research has been published in MIS Quarterly,
Strategic Management Journal, Communications of the ACM,
Communications of the AIS, The DATA BASE for Advances in
Information Systems, European Journal of Information Systems,
Information Systems Management, and Journal of International
Business Studies. He has served as an associate editor of the European
Journal of Information Systems, and was on the editorial board of the
Journal of AIS until December 2016. His research interests include social
networks, machine learning, text analytics, dynamic capabilities, and soft-
ware development.
558
Inf Syst Front (2018) 20:531–558