

----- Page 1 (native) -----
Toxicity of nanomaterials
Shahriar Sharifia, Shahed Behzadib, Sophie Laurentc, M. Laird Forrestd, Pieter Stroevee, 
and Morteza Mahmoudib,f
Morteza Mahmoudi: mahmoudi@biospion.com
aDepartment of Biomedical Engineering, University Medical Center Groningen, Antonius 
Deusinglaan 1, 9713 AV Groningen, Netherlands bNational Cell Bank, Pasteur Institute of Iran, 
Tehran, Iran. www.biospion.com cDepartment of General, Organic, and Biomedical Chemistry, 
NMR and Molecular Imaging Laboratory, University of Mons, Avenue Maistriau, 19, B-7000 
Mons, Belgium dDepartment of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS, 
66047, USA eDepartment of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, University of California 
Davis, CA 95616, USA fNanotechnology Research Center, Faculty of Pharmacy, Tehran 
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran
Abstract
Nanoscience has matured significantly during the last decade as it has transitioned from bench top 
science to applied technology. Presently, nanomaterials are used in a wide variety of commercial 
products such as electronic components, sports equipment, sun creams and biomedical 
applications. There are few studies of the long-term consequences of nanoparticles on human 
health, but governmental agencies, including the United States National Institute for Occupational 
Safety and Health and Japan’s Ministry of Health, have recently raised the question of whether 
seemingly innocuous materials such as carbon-based nanotubes should be treated with the same 
caution afforded known carcinogens such as asbestos. Since nanomaterials are increasing a part of 
everyday consumer products, manufacturing processes, and medical products, it is imperative that 
both workers and end-users be protected from inhalation of potentially toxic NPs. It also suggests 
that NPs may need to be sequestered into products so that the NPs are not released into the 
atmosphere during the product’s life or during recycling. Further, non-inhalation routes of NP 
absorption, including dermal and medical injectables, must be studied in order to understand 
possible toxic effects. Fewer studies to date have addressed whether the body can eventually 
eliminate nanomaterials to prevent particle build-up in tissues or organs. This critical review 
discusses the biophysicochemical properties of various nanomaterials with emphasis on currently 
available toxicology data and methodologies for evaluating nanoparticle toxicity.
1. Introduction
The substantial differences in physicochemical properties of nanomaterials compared to the 
bulk phase has been recognized in numerous scientific and technological areas.1 
Nanomedicine is a new field of science based on the significantly enhanced properties of 
Correspondence to: Morteza Mahmoudi, mahmoudi@biospion.com.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Chem Soc Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 06.
Published in final edited form as:
Chem Soc Rev. 2012 March 21; 41(6): 2323–2343. doi:10.1039/c1cs15188f.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 2 (native) -----
nanoparticles (NPs) (e.g. semiconducting-, metallic-, magnetic-, and polymeric-
nanosystems) that make possible the early diagnosis and new treatments for catastrophic 
diseases, such as multiple sclerosis, atherosclerosis, and cancer.2–5 For instance, one of the 
most promising NP systems is superparamagnetic iron oxide NPs (SPIONs), which are in 
clinical development as imaging agents6 and preclinical studies for theranosis applications 
(i.e. simultaneous diagnosis and treatment).7–10 In addition, SPIONs have been used for 
magnetic labeling, cell isolation, hyperthermia and controlled drug release.11–21 Several 
commercial nano-agents are already available for biomedical applications and many 
nanomedicine-products are near obtaining final approval for clinical use.22
Besides biomedical applications, NPs are used commercially in products such as electronic 
components, scratch-free paint, sports equipment, cosmetics, food color additives, and 
surface coatings.23 Hence, our exposure to nanomaterials is significant and increasing, yet 
there is little understanding of the unique toxicological properties of NPs and their long-term 
impact on human health.24,25 Because of their very small size, NPs are capable of entering 
the human body by inhalation, ingestion, skin penetration or injections, and NPs have the 
potential to interact with intracellular structures and macromolecules for long periods of 
time.
The number of nanomaterials-based publications has increased significantly over the years; 
however, the majority of publications are focused on the synthesis and development of novel 
nanomaterials and less than one percent have focused on NPs’ biological impact. While the 
toxicity of many bulk materials is well understood, it is not known at what concentration or 
size they can begin to exhibit new toxicological properties due to nanoscopic dimensions. 
There is a considerable gap between the available data on the nanomaterials production and 
toxicity evaluations. The lack of toxicity data can prohibit the safe design of NPs.
This review presents a broad overview of the available in vivo toxicity assessments of NPs. 
In addition, the biophysicochemical properties of NPs in vivo are discussed in detail.
2. Mechanism of toxicity
Several different mechanisms can cause NP toxicity in body, but most intracellular and in 
vivo toxicities from NPs arise from the production of excess reactive oxygen species 
(ROS).26–28 One mechanism of NP-induced oxidative stress occurs during the dissolution of 
iron-based NPs, which catalyzes ROS generation and formation of OOH• and OH• radicals 
from H2O2 via the Fenton reaction. Furthermore, some inert nanomaterials do not give rise 
to spontaneous ROS production, yet are capable of inducing ROS production under 
biological conditions, based on the ability of the NPs to target mitochondria.29 ROS are both 
physiologically necessary and potentially destructive. Moderate levels of ROS play specific 
roles in the modulation of several cellular events, including signal transduction, proliferative 
response, gene expression and protein redox regulation.30,31 High ROS levels are indicative 
of oxidative stress and can damage cells by peroxidizing lipids, altering proteins, disrupting 
DNA, interfering with signaling functions, and modulating gene transcription32 and finally 
ending up in cancer, renal disease, neurodegeneration, cardiovascular or pulmonary disease. 
ROS can steal electrons from lipids in cell membrane resulting in decline in physiological 
Sharifi et al.
Page 2
Chem Soc Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 3 (native) -----
function and cell death.33 Oxidative stress associated with TiO2 NPs, for example, results in 
early inflammatory responses, such as an increase in polymorph nuclear cells, impaired 
macrophage phagocytosis, and/or fibro proliferative changes in rodents.34 TiO2 NPs also 
can cause proinflammatory effects in human endothelial cells. Carbon NPs have been shown 
to induce oxidative stress in fish brain cells and pulmonary inflammation in rats.35,36 
Exposure of human keratinocytes to insoluble carbon NPs was associated with oxidative 
stress and apoptosis.
Toxicity from ROS can be more pronounced in the central nervous system (CNS) due to the 
high content of unsaturated fatty acids, which are susceptible to peroxidation.37 ROS also 
play a role in the development of vasculopathies, including those that define atherosclerosis, 
hypertension, and restenosis after angioplasty.38 Accumulation of NPs in the organs of the 
reticuloendothelial system (RES) along with the prevalence of numerous phagocytic cells, 
imbalances ROS homeostasis and antioxidant defenses, which makes the liver and spleen 
main targets of oxidative stress.
Nanoparticle-induced oxidative stress affects cell signaling in three stages as described by 
Nel et al.39 A low level of oxidative stress enhances transcription of defense genes through 
transcription factor nrf2. A higher level of oxidative stress activates inflammation signaling 
through NFκB, and very high levels are connected with activation of apoptotic pathways 
and necrosis. Changing these signaling pathways in cells is associated with the carcinogenic 
effects of NPs.40 Peterson and Nelson reviewed the ROS toxicity of NPs towards the cell 
nucleus and DNA material. The accumulation of single strand breaks and oxidative induced 
base lesions can lead to double strand breaks, which are considered the most lethal type of 
oxidative damage to DNA.41 Excess amounts of ROS can damage the mitochondrial DNA 
(mtDNA) as well.42 Damage to mtDNA is reported to associate with several clinical 
syndromes such as neurogenic muscle weakness, ataxia and retinitis pigmentosa, 
mitochondrial encephalomyopathy lactic acidosis, stroke like episodes, retinitis pigmentosa, 
cardiac conduction defect and elevated cerebrospinal fluid protein.43 To mitigate ROS 
effects, some new steps have been taken in NP design. Recently, cerium oxide nanoparticles 
have been developed that incorporate oxygen defects which scavenge free radicals. It was 
found that the cerium oxide NPs prevented oxidative stress similarly as well as N-acetyl 
cystine in mice with tetrachloride-induced liver toxicity. Apart from ROS effects, certain 
physicochemical properties of NP can also induce toxicity. For instance, recently Minchin et 
al. showed that some NPs cause unfolding of fibrinogen, hence promoting its interaction 
with the integrin receptor, Mac-1. Activation of this receptor upregulates the NFκB 
signaling pathway, resulting in the release of inflammatory cytokines.44
3. Analysis of nanomaterials toxicity
3.1. In vitro assay vs. in vivo assay
The in vitro methods are ideal in nanotoxicology research because they can produce 
reproducible results rapidly and inexpensively without the use of animals.45 Simple in vitro 
methods that produce specific and quantitative measurements of toxicity are extremely 
valuable for initially evaluating the expected biocompatibility of new NPs. Widely cited 
examples include the LDH assay of cell membrane integrity, the MTT assay of 
Sharifi et al.
Page 3
Chem Soc Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 4 (native) -----
mitochondrial function, and immunochemistry markers for apoptosis and necrosis. 
However, these methods provide little information on the mechanism or cause of cellular 
toxicity and death. For example, cell viability is measured as a function of metabolic activity 
in many tetrazolium-based toxicity assays, but the mechanism underlying mitochondrial 
inactivity and cell death cannot be elucidated from this assay. In fact, any lethal 
consequences from NP exposure including membrane lysis, cell cycle arrest and apoptosis 
may stop mitochondrial activity. Other colorimetric assays such as Live/Dead, Trypan Blue 
and Neutral also provide little information regarding the mechanisms of cell death, as they 
just discriminate live cells from dead cells.
The accuracy and precision of colorimetric assays for in vitro toxicity of NPs are also 
affected by the interactions of the nanoparticles with the colour-generating dyes. For 
example, it has been found that CNTs interact with MTT formazan crystals or other dyes 
such as Neutral Red or Alamar Blue by physisorption and produce conflicting results.46–49 
Similarly absorption of key proteins such as albumin or LDH can lead to confounding 
endpoint measurements.50–52 In addition to these problems, inherent issues including dose 
effect, time course effect, cell–cell and cell–matrix interaction and physico-chemical 
characteristics of NPs in cell culture conditions also contribute in false results. Since higher 
doses are usually used in in vitro experiments, toxicity is usually higher in vitro compared 
with in vivo where lower doses are used. Short term in vitro test results cannot be used as a 
good prognostic of long-term physiological effects. Recently Lee et al. demonstrated that 
common 2D cell cultures may not accurately reflect the actual toxicity of NPs as they do not 
adequately represent the functions of 3D tissues that have extensive cell–cell and cell–
matrix interactions with obvious different diffusion/transport conditions.53 Using CdTe 
nanoparticles, they observed significantly reduced toxicity compared to 2D culture system.
Recent studies have shown little correlation between the in vitro and in vivo toxicity of some 
nanomaterials. Sayes et al.54 assessed the reliability of in vitro screening studies to predict in 
vivo pulmonary toxicity of several NPs in rats, including carbonyl iron, crystalline and 
amorphous silica, and zinc oxide. The comparisons of in vivo and in vitro measurements 
demonstrated little correlation between groups. Thus the in vitro systems are mainly useful 
to identify specific characteristics of nanomaterials that can be used as indicators of toxicity 
and in order to establish a ranking of NP toxicity for mechanistic studies (Fig. 1). Animal 
models would be particularly useful to study aspects that cannot be obtained with in vitro 
systems, such as toxico-kinetics in the body, i.e. absorption, distribution, metabolism, and 
elimination. In vivo tests are time-consuming, expensive, and invoke ethical issues. 
Nevertheless, these studies can provide information on the carcinogenicity, pulmonary, 
dermal and gastrointestinal toxicities related to the initial deposition of nanomaterials by 
various exposure routes. In addition, these studies can evaluate the immunological, 
neurological, reproductive, cardiovascular and developmental toxicity to determine the 
chronic systemic toxicity of nanomaterials.55
3.2. In silico assays for nanotoxicity
In silico methods to predict the toxicity of nanomaterials can supplement or replace some 
expensive and time-consuming assays, especially early in the design process of new 
Sharifi et al.
Page 4
Chem Soc Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 5 (native) -----
materials. Quantitative structure–activity relationships, collectively referred to as (Q)SARs, 
are theoretical models that can be used to predict the physicochemical and biological 
properties of molecules.56 According to the QSAR paradigm, if the molecular parameters 
have been calculated for a group of compounds, but experimental data on the activity of 
those compounds are available for only part of the group, it is possible to interpolate the 
unknown activity of the other compounds from the molecular descriptors using a suitable 
mathematical model.57 In silico predictive toxicology techniques are a fast and cost efficient 
alternative (or supplement) to bioassays for the identification of toxic effects of 
nanomaterials.58 Sayes et al. used the QSAR method to develop mathematical models to 
predict cellular membrane damage resulting from several nanoparticle physicochemical 
features. They found that the size, concentration and zeta potential of particles in ultra-pure 
aqueous medium are among the most influential factors on cytoplasm leaking.59 Puzyn et al. 
applied nano-QSAR to predict the toxicity of 17 different metal oxides nanoparticles. Their 
theoretical model along with experimental data was able to describe the relationship 
between NP structure and cytotoxicity to E. coli cells.57 In silico methods can be applied to 
both in vivo and in vitro data, hence the quality of the in vivo or in vitro data is of 
fundamental importance. However, the uncertainty of the in vivo data limits the accuracy of 
the model. In fact, the results from in silico methods cannot be expected to exceed the 
accuracy of the data used to construct the model.60
4. In vivo toxicity
The increasing production and use of NPs, has given rise to many concerns and debates 
among public, scientific and regulatory authorities regarding their safety and final fate in 
biological systems. In vitro and in silico methods for acute chemical toxicity are able to 
provide adequate data for many bulk materials; however, the in vivo interaction of NPs and 
biological system is quite complicated and dynamic. In addition, in the absence of sufficient 
in vivo data to correlate with the in vitro and in silico assays, these methods are of limited 
use.
Nanoparticles can be administrated by six principal routes: intravenous, transdermal, 
subcutaneous, inhalation, intraperitoneal and oral.61 Although inhalation, ingestion, skin 
contact and intravenous injection are the predominant routes of exposure for human, existing 
in vivo data were largely collected from inhalation and intra-tracheal instillation in rodents, 
including the bulk of toxicity data for Au, C, CdO, Fe, Mn2O3, Ni, TiO2 and carbon 
nanotubes.62 A limited number of studies concern the intravenous and oral routes of 
administration, which are more relevant for most NPs of interest in nanomedicine.63
When the nanostructures enter into the body, absorption can occur through interactions with 
biological components such as proteins and cells; afterwards, they can distribute into various 
organs where they may remain in the same structure or become modified or metabolized.64 
NPs may enter cells of the organ and reside in the cells for an unknown amount of time 
before leaving to other organs or to be excreted. Most of the recent studies in this area have 
focused on the absorption of nanostructures via inhalation or dermal exposure. Some studies 
of NP toxicity have focused on NPs with known toxic characteristics, such as asbestos and 
carbon black.65–67 However, these studies are inadequate to predict the biological 
Sharifi et al.
Page 5
Chem Soc Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 6 (native) -----
interactions of substantially more complex nanoparticles. For example, the absorption of 
quantum dots (QDs) through porcine skin is highly variable with surface coating chemistry, 
with periodic variation in cellular uptake.68 Orally administered nanostructures do not seem 
to be significantly absorbed and are recovered in feces.69,70 These studies suggest the 
importance of exposure route and physical properties of the nanostructures on absorption 
behavior. The importance of in vivo studies in nanomaterial toxicology and the challenges 
encountered in such studies have been discussed in detail by Fischer et al.71
A complete analysis of the pharmacokinetics (PK) of NPs is necessary to understand their 
activity and their potential toxicity. PK includes absorption, distribution, metabolism, and 
excretion of nanostructures and gives quantitative information about their behavior in 
biological systems. The data can lead (i) to improvements in design of NPs for diagnostic 
and therapeutic applications, (ii) a better understanding of nanostructures non-specificity 
toward tissues and cell types, and (iii) assessments of basic distribution and clearance that 
serve as the basis in determining their toxicity and their future investigative directions.
4.1. Blood contact properties
Blood compatibility is an essential property for the in vivo functions of most NPs. Lack of 
blood compatibility may trigger coagulation and clot formation through adsorption of 
plasma proteins, platelet adhesion and activation of complement cascades. The coagulation 
of NPs is thermodynamically driven to minimize the contact surfaces areas of hydrophobic 
domains with the aqueous milieu. Therefore, the blood contact properties of NPs should 
always be evaluated prior to clinical use to gauge their safety.72 NPs in contact with blood 
can induce hemolysis, palate aggregation or blood coagulation, so the hemolysis assay using 
mammalian erythrocytes is a primary screening of NP toxicity.73,74 Erythrocytes are the 
predominant cell type in the blood and play a crucial role in transporting oxygen. These cells 
are vulnerable to toxicity with deformation, agglutination and membrane damage.75 NPs 
exert hemolytic effects through multiple mechanisms, including enzymatic modifications, 
changes to the rheological properties, oxidative damage of cell membranes, changes in 
osmotic stability and endotoxin and/or microbial contamination.
There is some evidence that some carbon nanoparticles and microparticles have the ability to 
activate platelets and enhance vascular thrombosis and initiate thrombosis.76,77 Radomski et 
al. showed that both urban dusts and engineered carbon particles, such as CNT and carbon 
black, except C60CS, stimulated platelet aggregation and accelerated the rate of vascular 
thrombosis in rat carotid arteries with a similar rank order of efficacy. All particles resulted 
in up-regulation of GPIIb/IIIa in human platelets. In contrast, particles differentially affected 
the release of platelet granules, as well as the activity of thromboxane-, ADP-, matrix 
metalloproteinase- and protein kinase C-dependent pathways of aggregation.77 Consistent 
with the in vitro results, exposure to nano Ag (0.05–0.1 mg kg−1 intravenously or 5–10 mg 
kg−1 intratracheal instillation) in vivo enhanced platelet aggregation and promoted venous 
thrombus formation in rats.78 Similarly, Seaton et al. have shown that exposure to ambient 
airborne particulate matter with aerodynamic diameter of 10 nm or less results in increased 
plasma fibrinogen levels.79 In addition, tracheal inhalation of diesel exhaust particles caused 
peripheral thrombosis in experimental animals.80
Sharifi et al.
Page 6
Chem Soc Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 7 (native) -----
The coagulation properties of NPs can be evaluated with several routine and widely 
available clinical assays,63 including prothrombin time (PT), activated clotting time (ACT), 
activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) and thrombin time (TT). In addition, Neun et 
al. developed detailed procedures for measuring the thrombogenicity of NPs.81 Since NPs 
may affect the intrinsic coagulation pathway, NP treatment should be subject to the APTT 
testing prior to use in nanomedical application.82,83 Table 1 provides a summary of 
procedures for testing blood coagulation. Such clotting assays are useful as screening tests to 
evaluate the intrinsic and extrinsic effects of NPs on the blood coagulation cascades.
4.2. Pharmacokinetics study of NPs
4.2.1. Absorption—The surfaces of NPs are rapidly covered by selective sets of blood 
plasma proteins after injection, forming the so-called “protein corona”. For other routes of 
exposure, NPs must pass through additional physiological barriers before entering the blood 
(e.g., the skin, gastrointestinal tract, or the lungs), picking up additional biomolecules as 
they are transported.86 The absorption of biomolecules to such surfaces confers a new 
“biological identity” in the biological milieu, which determines the subsequent cellular and 
tissue responses.87 The protein corona is a complex mixture of absorbed proteins in 
equilibrium on the surface of NPs88,89 which play an important role in determining what 
surface is actually presented to cells that take the nanostructure up and activate signaling 
pathways.90,91 The protein corona is composed of an inner layer of selected proteins with a 
lifetime of several hours in slow exchange with the environment (hard corona) and an outer 
layer of weakly bound proteins which are characterized by a faster exchange rate with the 
free proteins (the soft corona).86 The biological impact of protein-coated NPs is mainly 
related to the hard corona and their specificity and suitable orientation for a particular 
receptor. Although low-affinity high-abundance proteins may initially adsorb to the surface 
of NPs, lower abundance but higher affinity proteins quickly replace them.
Nanoparticle size, shape, surface charge, and solubility are among the contributing factors, 
which determine the interaction of the NPs with proteins.92 Protein absorption strongly 
influences NPs fate and biodistribution in body. For instance, adsorption of fibrinogen, IgG, 
or complement factor, is believed to promote phagocytosis with removal of the NPs from the 
bloodstream.93 On the other hand, binding of human serum albumin or apolipoproteins 
promotes prolonged circulation time in blood.94
A combination of analytical techniques is needed to understand the binding kinetics between 
nanostructures and the proteins on cells.90,95 Conformational changes of proteins adsorbed 
onto nanostructure surfaces could alter the function of the protein88,96 and could affect the 
fate of the nanostructures.94,102 Many of the subset of serum proteins that interact with 
nanosystems are immunoactive, such as complement factors97 and immunoglobulins. A 
correlation of nanostructure–protein interaction with in vivo PK data permits the assembly of 
a structure–activity relationship; this represents an important next step for evaluating 
nanotoxicity.71
4.2.2. Distribution—After absorption, NPs can be distributed to various organs, tissues, 
and cells. Only a few recent studies have focused on the biodistribution of engineered 
Sharifi et al.
Page 7
Chem Soc Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 8 (native) -----
nanostructures. In these studies, the key is to quantitatively map the location of the 
nanostructures at different time points and at different doses, as size, shape, aggregation 
state and surface chemistry may affect nanostructure biodistribution. Thus it is difficult to 
predict the in vivo behavior of NPs. When injected intravenously, NPs are cleared rapidly 
from the circulation, predominantly by the Kupffer cells of the liver and the spleen 
macrophages.98
In the distribution phase, the density and permeability of blood vessels are key factors that 
determine the speed at which equilibrium and organ-specific concentrations are reached, 
where highly vascularized areas reach equilibrium more rapidly than poorly vascularized 
areas. In studies with (QDs) and single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNT), it was 
discovered that a high dose percentage can be sequestered in the liver, dependent upon the 
surface modification.70,99,100 Other organs such as the spleen, lymph node, or bone marrow 
can take up nanostructures. All of these organs contain large concentrations of macrophages, 
which are part of the reticuloendothelial system (RES). The RES system, also called the 
mononuclear phagocyte system (MPS), is a part of the immune system that consists of 
monocytes and macrophages involved in the uptake and metabolism of foreign molecules 
and particulates.101 Nanostructures coated with polyethylene glycol—can avoid RES 
uptake.102 In another example, MWCNT were shown to evade the RES when their surface is 
coated with ammonium and chelator functional groups103 but were taken up when coated 
with taurine.69 Aside from the surface chemistry, the core nanostructure can also impact the 
bio-distribution behavior. Polymer-based nanostructures and superparamagnetic iron oxide 
nanosystems for MRI contrast agents are known to degrade in vivo, but there is no clear 
indication whether fullerenes or silica NPs degrade in vivo.70,103–105 Fischer et al.99 and 
Ballou et al.105 showed that core ZnS-capped CdSe QDs remain intact and fluorescent in 
vivo after one month; however, neither study analyzed the metabolism of the organic coating 
on the nanostructure surface. The breakdown of the nanostructures could elicit molecular 
responses that are not predictable, and thus, an understanding and cataloging of what, when, 
and how much nanostructures degrade is extremely important.
4.2.3. Metabolism—There are very few reports regarding the metabolism of NPs. 
Polymer-based nanostructures and superparamagnetic iron oxide nanostructures have been 
shown to degrade in tissues; while QDs, fullerenes and silica NPs did not degrade in 
vivo.70,103–105 Although it is usually considered implausible that enzymes could effectively 
metabolize inert nanomaterials such as gold and silver NPs, recent study showed that 
generally considered bio-persistent CNT is degraded by neutrophil myeloperoxidase.106 
Likewise, coatings, capping materials, and surface functional groups could be metabolized. 
For example, the protein cap of a functionalized QD could be cleaved by proteases.107
Nanoparticles could be metabolized in liver through phase I and II metabolic pathways. 
Phase I reactions involve formation of a new or altered functional group by oxidation, 
reduction, or hydrolysis reactions to increase reactivity or polarity. Phase II reactions 
involve conjugation of an endogenous compound, such as glucuronic acid orglycine, to 
ensure higher water solubility and lowered chemical reactivity. Frequently, phase II 
reactions occur after the NPs have been rendered more reactive by phase I metabolism. The 
metabolites of these processes have a higher polarity and are excreted at a higher rate than 
Sharifi et al.
Page 8
Chem Soc Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 9 (native) -----
the original molecule through the kidneys via the urine or the liver via the bile. For example 
the metallic core of QDs and other metal oxides could be sequestered by metallothionen and 
excreted. These enzymes, present in liver and kidney, can bind metals and restore the 
cellular metal homeostasis.108
The most important enzymatic system of phase I metabolism is the microsomal family of 
isoenzymes, cytochrome P450, which can transfer electrons supplied by flavoproteins to 
catalyze oxidation. However, there is evidence that NPs can inhibit activity of this 
enzyme.109 Since NPs breakdown may elicit unique unpredictable molecular responses, 
understanding the exact mechanisms of degradation or alternation of NPs is extremely 
important.
4.2.4. Elimination—Elimination can occur via multiple routes, including perspiration, 
seminal fluids, mammary glands, saliva, and exhaled breath, although the urine via the 
kidneys103 and the feces via the biliary duct110,111 are the expected primary routes of NP 
elimination. Hydroxyl functionalized SWCNT dosed intra-peritoneally accumulate in the 
liver and kidneys and are excreted in the urine within 18 days;112 whereas, ammonium 
functionalized SWCNT dosed intravenously showed no liver uptake and much faster renal 
excretion.103
For nanostructures such as QD, two initial studies showed they are not excreted and remain 
intact in vivo.70,99 Reddy et al.113 showed that QDs smaller than 5.5 nm and coated with 
cysteine are excreted in the urine of mice. If not excreted in this manner, how long they 
reside and their long-term behavior in vivo remains unclear. For example, since the liver is 
involved in nanostructure uptake, biochemical indicators of liver stress were examined in 
response to multi-walled CNTs. No negative effect was observed after 28 days despite 
accumulation in that organ.69 Inflammation in response to nanostructures has been observed, 
though, with gene expression analysis of rat lungs showing upregulation of transcription 
factors associated with cellular responses to oxidative stress.114 QD have activated 
astrocytes in the brain upon direct injection, depending on surface functionalization,115 and 
nanostructure size has been shown to influence the ability to produce CD8 and CD4 type 1 T 
cell responses, with those between 40 and 50 nm causing a maximum effect.116,117 These 
specific studies can identify the organs that could be stressed by exposure to nanostructures 
and can provide a molecular basis of the stress. If these responses can be associated with 
specific organ cells and NP characteristics (e.g. surface chemistry, size, shape, aggregation 
and composition), then it would be possible to correlate the toxic effects of NP to specific 
nanostructure properties. Demonstrated PK studies of various NP systems are shown in 
Table 2.
5. Effect of physicochemical properties of NPs on toxicity
Characteristic parameters of NPs, including dissolution, chemical composition, size, shape, 
agglomeration state, crystal structure, specific surface area, surface energy, surface charge, 
surface morphology and surface coating, influence the biological interaction of NPs, and 
hence it is important to evaluate these properties in determining toxic potential of 
Sharifi et al.
Page 9
Chem Soc Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 10 (native) -----
nanomaterials. In the following section we review the effect of abovementioned parameters 
on in vivo toxicity of nanomaterials.
5.1. Effect of size
Particle size and surface area are crucial material characteristics from a toxicological point 
of view, as interactions between nanomaterials and biological organisms typically take place 
at the surface of the NP. As the particles’ size decreases, the surface area exponentially 
increases and a greater proportion of the particles’ atoms or molecules will be displayed on 
the surface rather than within the bulk of the material. Thus, the nanomaterial surface 
becomes more reactive toward itself or surrounding biological components with decreasing 
size, and the potential catalytic surface for chemical reactions increases. Since it is known 
that endocytic mode, cellular uptake and efficiency of particle processing in the endocytic 
pathway are dependent on size of material,26,123–125 size plays a key role in physiological 
response, distribution, and elimination of materials.126,127 In vitro cytotoxicity studies of 
NPs of different size using various cell types, culture conditions and time course of exposure 
are being reported increasingly.2,127–136 Although some aspects of size dependent NP 
toxicity can be reasonably predicted by in vitro techniques, the wide range of NP 
concentrations and exposure times makes it difficult to determine when the observed 
cytotoxicity is clinically relevant. In addition, the uniqueness of each nanomaterial type 
being investigated for medical applications makes generalization of nanomaterial toxicity 
rather complicated. While in vitro NP applications requires less strict toxicological 
characterization, in vivo use of NPs requires a comprehensive understanding of the kinetics 
and toxicology of the particles.136 To our knowledge, few data are available in the literature 
regarding the in vivo size dependent evaluation of nanomaterials. Thus a better 
understanding of the relationship between the physicochemical properties of the nano 
systems and their in vivo behavior would provide a basis for assessing toxic response and 
more importantly could lead to predictive models for assessing toxicity.71 In the following 
section, existing research regarding the effect of nanomaterial size on the in vivo toxicity is 
discussed.
Since inhalation is the most important route of human exposure to NPs, the early 
characterizations of in vivo toxicity of NPs have been conducted in respiratory systems. In 
general it is observed that as the particle size decreases, there is a tendency for pulmonary 
toxicity to increase, even if the same material is relatively inert in a bulkier form. For 
example, Oberdorster et al.137 showed that TiO2 particles with a size of 25 nm when 
instilled or inhaled into the human lungs produced a much greater inflammatory response 
compared to larger particles of 250 nm.
The nature of the interface between nanomaterials and biological systems affects the in vivo 
biocompatibility and toxicity of NPs. A series of studies in rodents using a variety of 
different NPs showed that surface area is a critical factor in provoking lung and other 
epithelial-induced inflammatory responses.138 When equal-mass doses of fine or ultrafine 
particles of the same composition were inhaled by rats, the latter caused greater pulmonary 
inflammation. However, there was not any difference between them when the particle dose 
was normalized to the equivalent total particle surface area.
Sharifi et al.
Page 10
Chem Soc Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 11 (native) -----
The lung is an effective barrier against the uptake and distribution of NPs. Within the human 
respiratory tract, inhaled particles of different sizes exhibit different fractional depositions, 
as ultrafine particles with diameters smaller than 100 nm deposit in all regions, whereas 
particles smaller than 10 nm deposit in the tracheobronchial region, and particles between 10 
and 20 nm deposit in the alveolar region. Particles smaller than 20 nm also deposit 
efficiently in the nasopharyngeal-laryngeal region.139,140
In order to show toxic effects, NPs first need to traverse the epithelial barrier. NPs usually 
enter cells through energy-dependent endocytosis, non-phagocytic mechanisms or through 
receptor mediated endocytosis. There is evidence that translocation or distribution of NPs is 
size dependent in rats. Kreyling et al.141 showed that instillation of Ir192-particles with a 
diameter of 80 nm resulted in 0.1% being translocated to the liver, but with particles of 15 
nm, this increased to 0.3–0.5%. Translocation of NPs across the alveolar-capillary barrier is 
still a matter of debate in other animals and in humans.142 Although it seems that size can be 
useful for assessing the toxic potential of some NPs, there is a consensus among experts that 
NP surface area or size is not the only physicochemical property that determines toxicity. 
Usually there is no precision in size determination as particle aggregation and agglomeration 
and the physicochemical properties of dispersion medium can also influence the ultimate 
particle size and related toxicity. For example, the hydrodynamic diameters of TiO2 and 
ZnO particles are significantly greater in phosphate buffer than in water, thus their sizes are 
often significantly larger than the primary particle size.143 Aggregation is more common in 
CNT, which have a tendency to form bundle-like agglomerates because of their geometry 
and hydrophobic surface. In vivo aggregation has been observed for both SWCNT and 
MWCNT with the difference that SWCNT agglomerates remained at same size with 
translocation, but MWCNT agglomerates grew larger without any translocation from their 
administration site.144
Studies have implicated size, length, and impurities of aggregated CNTs as primary 
determinants for toxicity, as the CNT cellular uptake mechanism may differ depending on 
the functionalization and size of the CNTs, including endocytosis and passive 
diffusion.145–147
Several studies conducted on the in vivo distribution of intravenously administered CNT 
showed that CNT are mainly accumulated in liver, spleen and lungs without acute toxicity; 
however, cytotoxic effects induced by aggregates and accumulation have been observed in 
long-term studies.148 Wick et al.149 reported that agglomerated CNTs have more adverse 
effects than well-dispersed CNTs, and they changed the morphology and performance of a 
mesothelioma cell line similar to asbestos. Mercer et al.150 also showed that a well-
dispersed preparation of CNT with a mean diameter of 0.69 μm had a better interstitial 
distribution with rare macrophage phagocytosis after pharyngeal aspiration to mice. 
However, as improved dispersion of the CNTs caused both increased aspiration of smaller 
structures as well as their easy entrance into the alveolar walls, the dispersed CNT enhanced 
pulmonary interstitial fibrosis. Taking it all together, it is likely that the most appropriate 
means of expressing size related toxicity for NPs must be determined on an individual 
basis.151
Sharifi et al.
Page 11
Chem Soc Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 12 (native) -----
Generally speaking, the harmfulness of NPs may arise from their size-related ability to 
readily enter biological systems152 and modify the structure of proteins through formation of 
new NP–protein complexes or enhanced protein degradation.153,154 Clinical and 
experimental studies indicated that small size, and consequently a large surface area, 
enhance the generation of ROS. The electron donor or acceptor sites on the NPs react with 
molecular oxygen, resulting in formation of superoxide anions or hydrogen peroxide, which 
subsequently oxidizes other molecules. This phenomenon plays a role in the ability of NPs 
to induce another tissue injury. Recently Jiang et al.155 showed that binding and activation 
of membrane receptors and subsequent protein expression strongly depend on NP size. 
Using gold NPs between 2 and 100 nm, they found that the NPs actively engage and mediate 
the molecular processes that are essential for regulating cell functions. Redistribution of NPs 
from their site of deposition156,157 or deposition into renal tissues158 and escape from 
normal phagocytic defenses159,160 also may lead to toxicity.
Apart from size dependent toxicity of NPs toward respiratory organs, oral toxicity of NPs 
has been shown to have significant correlation with size in spite of the fact that the 
gastrointestinal tract offers physical, chemical, and cell-based barriers against the uptake and 
spread of NPs. Chen et al.161 showed that the oral toxicity of copper particles of 17 μm to 
23.5 nm increased with decreasing size; larger particles were non-toxic at high doses (>5000 
mg kg−1) whereas the smallest particles were moderately toxic (LD50 of 413 mg kg−1). The 
toxicity of copper NPs was attributed to the accumulation of copper ions culminating in 
metabolic alkalosis and copper ion overload. The much larger copper microparticles were 
chemically inert, due to their lower specific surface area. Quantitative studies of oral 
administration of gold NPs of 4, 10, 28, and 58 nm diameter in mice also showed that uptake 
is dependent on particle size, as smaller particles cross the gastrointestinal tract more 
readily.162
Nanoparticle size has an important effect on the rate and route of clearance from the body, 
especially in parenteral dosage forms. For example, although the inert nature of bulk gold 
suggests it is a safe substrate for nanomaterials, NPs smaller than 50 nm administrated by 
intravenous injection are potentially toxic and disperse quickly to nearly all tissues, 
accumulating in blood, heart, lungs, liver, spleen, kidney, thymus, brain and reproductive 
organs. Larger particles (100–200 nm) were found in the RES tissues but not as widely 
dispersed into other tissues as were the smaller particles.163,164 Chen et al. reported that Au 
NPs of 3, 5, 50, and 100 nm are nontoxic when injected weekly into mice, whereas Au NPs 
between 8 and 37 nm caused severe toxicity and death within 3 weeks.165 However, these 
toxicities were reduced after incorporating immunogenic peptides on the NP surface that 
induced an enhanced antibody response. The in vivo toxicity of gold and silver NPs has been 
investigated with zebra fish,166 which are a useful in vivo model for toxicity evaluation 
because of the high degree of homology to the human genome and the rapid development of 
a transparent embryo. Using colloidal silver and gold NPs of different sizes (3, 10, 50, and 
100 nm), it was found that Ag NPs produce size-dependent mortality after 120 h post 
fertilization, while the behavior of Au NPs was independent of size and caused less than 3% 
mortality at the same time point. This implies that although NP surface area is important in 
toxicity, other factors such as chemistry play a role.167
Sharifi et al.
Page 12
Chem Soc Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 13 (native) -----
At present, QDs are considered intrinsically harmful because divalent cations and heavy 
metals in their structures can cause nephro-toxicity or acute and chronic toxicities in 
vertebrates.168 Surface coatings that limit the leakage of heavy metal ions can reduce the 
toxic potential of QDs, but size may also play a role in toxicity and distribution of these 
particles. For example, Shiohara et al.169 reported that the cytotoxicity of CdSe/ZnS QD 
with carboxyl groups on the surface is correlated with a decrease in QD size. The size of 
QDs is a determining factor in sub-cellular distribution as it was observed that 5.2 nm 
cationic CdTe QDs localized throughout the cytoplasm of N9 cells, whereas smaller 2.2 nm 
QDs accumulated in the nuclear compartment.152
Polyacrylate NPs were among the first NPs studied for controlled delivery of biological 
agents, with their introduction in the 1970s. Recently, Song et al.170 investigated the human 
toxicity of polyacrylate NPs prepared from polymerization of unsaturated monomers, such 
as methyl methacrylate, methacrylic amide or cyanoacrylates.171 These NPs were between 
40 and 250 nm in size, which is relatively large compared to SPIONS, QDs, carbon blacks 
or metal oxides.172,173 The toxicity of the larger cyanoacrylate NPs was correlated with 
chemical properties and molecule chain length and was independent of particle size.174 
However, smaller polyacrylate NPs produced toxic effects independently of chemistry; 
pathological examination indicated nonspecific pulmonary inflammation, pulmonary 
fibrosis and foreign-body granulomas of pleura after exposure.170 Thus, the safety of 
polyacrylate NP is still of debate and further study is warranted in biomedical 
applications.175
Generally NPs formed from biodegradable materials are expected to demonstrate fewer 
toxic events than non-biodegradable materials. Semete et al. investigated the in vivo toxicity 
and biodistribution of PLGA (poly(D,L-lactic-co-glycolic acid)) NPs with a size of 200–300 
nm. Seven days after oral administration in mice, nearly 40% percent of PLGA particles 
were localized in the liver, and the rest were localized in brain and kidney without apparent 
toxicity.176 However, because of large size, it is unlikely that these NPs show any size-
dependent toxicity. The chemical composition of biodegradable NPs and the subsequent 
degradation products will influence the biological effects. Polyesters such as PLGA or 
polycaprolactone (PCL) undergo hydrolysis and enzymatic degradation after implantation 
into the body, forming lactic acid, glycolic or capronic acid, which are biologically 
compatible moieties. Apart from size dependent toxicity due to ROS-generating capability, 
particle size can affect the degradation of the polymer matrix. As the particle size is reduced, 
the surface area to volume ratio increases, resulting in a large surface area available for 
penetration of physiological liquids into the particles and also faster release of the polymer 
degradation products.177 The size effects of various NPs are shown in Table 3.
5.2. Effect of particle shape
Particle shapes and aspect ratios are two additional key factors that determine the toxicity of 
NPs. Nanomaterials can have very different shapes including fibers, spheres, tubes, rings, 
and planes. Most of the knowledge about shape dependent toxicity is based on in vitro 
experiments. In vivo, shape dependent toxicity of nanomaterials is usually imparted through 
its adverse effect on endocytosis or clearance by macrophages, as shape can influence the 
Sharifi et al.
Page 13
Chem Soc Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 14 (native) -----
membrane warping process during endocytosis or phagocytosis.187 For example, it had been 
suggested that endocytosis of spherical NPs is easier and faster compared to rod-shaped or 
fiber-like NPs.188 Rod-shaped or needle-like NPs can have a larger contact area with the cell 
membrane receptors than spherical NPs when the longitudinal axis of the rods interacts with 
the receptors. Hence, the ends with high curvature at the half-cup stage of endocytosis are 
very likely to cause a higher membrane surface energy, resulting in a large distorting force 
that exceeds the maximum force provided by the actin polymerization. This effect stalls the 
growing ends of the phagocytic cup and results in impaired phagocytosis and the 
macrophage spreading onto the material rather than internalizing it.189,190 Because of this, 
disc-like, cylindrical and hemispherical particles substantially outperform spherical particles 
in terms of evading uptake by phagocytic cells; consequently these non-spherical particles 
are more disposed to flow through capillaries and adhere to blood vessel walls, thus causing 
other biological consequences.191 For example, Radomski et al.192 showed that in contrast 
to fullerenes, SWCNT and MWCNT with tubular structure stimulate plate aggregation and 
vascular thrombosis in rat carotid arteries. Park et al.193 showed that SWCNT with rod 
structure can block potassium ion channels two to three times more efficiently than spherical 
carbon fullerenes. The length of CNTs has been shown to result in inefficient phagocytosis 
and damage to macrophages. Since full phagocytosis is hampered and a full phagosome is 
not formed, the macrophage’s harmful oxygen radicals and hydrolytic enzymes are released 
extra-cellularly. Poland et al. reported that after intra-abdominal instillation of long 
MWCNTs, the MWCNTs could cause inflammation of the abdominal wall, with formation 
of so-called foreign body giant cells. No inflammatory response was observed with short 
MWCNT, as they were effectively taken up by macrophages with efficient phagocytosis.67 
If the particles are bio-persistent, the resulting chronic inflammation could lead to additional 
mutagenic events and ultimately the formation of mesothelioma. After intra-tracheal 
administration, SWCNTs induced lung granulomas, and the presence of multifocal 
granulomatous lesions without accompanying inflammation, cell proliferation or 
cytotoxicity, indicated a potential new mechanism of pulmonary toxicity and injury.194–196 
Donaldson et al. have studied the relationship between fiber physicochemistry and 
pathogenicity and three fundamental attributes, namely, dimension, durability and dose, 
referred to as the 3D’s, have emerged as paramount to the pathogenicity of a fiber.197 Very 
recently, Donaldson et al. showed that instilled particles are rapidly drawn cranially in the 
lymph flow through the diaphragm via stomata, which are pore-like structures less than 10 
mm in diameter, to the parathymic lymph nodes. Long fibers such as long carbon nanofibers 
block stomata pores and meanwhile damage mesothelial and endothelial cell. Accumulation 
of pleural macrophages attempting to phagocytose these retained fibers results in frustrated 
phagocytosis. The macrophages release cytokines and oxidants that cause further 
inflammation, fibrosis and genotoxicity to the bystander mesothelial cells in these areas of 
congestion around the stomatal entrances.197,198
A shape dependent toxicity has been observed with silica and TiO2 allotropes as well. For 
example, amorphous silica is an FDA-approved food additive, whereas crystalline silica is a 
suspected human carcinogen and is involved in the pathogenesis of silicosis.41
Sharifi et al.
Page 14
Chem Soc Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 15 (native) -----
Different toxicity behavior has also been observed for TiO2 NPs with different crystal 
structures. For instance, Gurr et al. reported that Rutile TiO2 NPs can induce oxidative DNA 
damage, lipid peroxidation, and micronuclei formation in the absence of light, where anatase 
NPs of the same size and chemical composition are inert.199 Contrast to these results, 
Petkovic et al. found that TiO2-anatase was significantly stronger ROS inducer than TiO2-
rutile.200 Despite the contradictory results, both studies show that the intrinsic ability of 
anatase and rutile TiO2 to induce ROS is related to their structure, which influence toxicity.
Shape dependent toxicity of nickel NPs has been reported. Ispas et al.201 observed that 
nickel dendritic clusters consisting of aggregated 60 nm particles resulted in higher toxicity 
in zebra fish compared to spherical ones, suggesting that differences in shape and 
aggregation is responsible for increased toxicity. They hypothesized that Ni NPs in the 
cluster form adhere more readily and are retained for longer periods in the intestinal lumen, 
which increases cellular stress.
Shape dependent toxicity also has been observed in gold and titanium nanomaterials.136 
Chithrani et al.202 reported that uptake of Au nanorods of 74 × 14 nm is slower than 
spherical nanospheres of radius 14 or 74 nm. The uptake of Au nanorods reaches a 
maximum when the size nears 50 nm and the aspect ratio approaches unity.165 Studies with 
TiO2 also demonstrated that fibrous structures with higher aspect ratios are more cytotoxic 
than more spherical structures. Hamilton et al.203 showed that TiO2 fibers with a length of 
15 mm are highly toxic compared to fibers with a length of 5 mm, and the longer ones 
initiate an inflammatory response by alveolar macrophages in mice. As conclusion of this 
part, the role of the shape in nanotoxicity is summarized in Table 4.
5.3. Effect of surface charge
Surface charge also plays a role in toxicity, as it influences the adsorption of ions and 
biomolecules that may change organism or cellular responses toward particles. In addition, 
surface charge is a major determinant of colloidal behavior, which influences the organism 
response by changing the shape and size of NPs through aggregate or agglomerate 
formation.219
In general, it is believed that cationic surfaces are more toxic than anionic surfaces, and 
cationic surfaces are more likely to induce hemolysis and platelet aggregation, whereas 
neutral surfaces are the most biocompatible.220 This may be due to the affinity of cationic 
particles to the negative phospholipid head groups or protein domains on cell membranes. In 
addition surface charge influences plasma protein binding, which in turn affects the in vivo 
organ distribution and clearance of NPs from the circulation. For example Saxena et al. 
showed that acid-functionalized SWCNTs caused markedly significant in vivo toxicity 
compared to pristine SWCNTs. This higher toxicity could result either from a possible 
greater bioavailability of well dispersed AF-SWCNT preparations, or from the high negative 
charge on AF-SWCNTs, or both.221 Pietroiusti et al. found that AF-SWCNTs had a marked 
embryotoxic effect compared to pristine SWCNTs in pregnant mice models. Similarly, 
increased toxicity was attributed to a higher percentage of monodispersed SWCNTs in acid 
functionalized SWCNTs and higher negative charge and hydrophilicity.222
Sharifi et al.
Page 15
Chem Soc Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 16 (native) -----
Nanoparticle surface charge has been observed to alter blood–brain barrier integrity and 
permeability.223 It is suggested that high concentrations of anionic NPs and cationic NPs are 
able to disrupt the integrity of the blood brain barrier.
Particle surface charge can also impact transdermal permeation of charged NPs. It was 
found that after dermal administration, negatively charged NPs of about 50 and 500 nm 
permeated the skin, while positively charged and neutral particles of all sizes did not.223 NPs 
of 50 nm permeate the skin due to the small size and large specific surface area, whereas 
500 nm particles permeate the skin because the high number and density of charged groups 
leads to a high charge concentration that overcomes the skin barrier.224 The lipophilicity of 
the outer skin layers also limits the permeation of smaller charged NPs due to the presence 
of ionized groups, similarly to small molecule drugs. Geys et al.203 investigated the in vivo 
toxicity of positively charged (amine-QDs) and negatively charged (carboxyl-QDs) quantum 
dots after intravenous injection in mice. They found that the carboxyl-QDs caused more 
pulmonary vascular thrombosis than amine-QDs at high doses. The presence of fibrin fibers 
in the thrombi suggests that negatively charged QDs activate the coagulation cascade via 
contact activation. Hoshino et al.219 studied a series of QDs with different surface coatings 
(carboxyl, hydroxyl, amine or their combinations). They found that the highly negatively 
charged QDs with carboxyl groups induced DNA damage after 2 h, while the other types did 
not induce significant cellular damage. In a similar study, positively charged Si NPs (Si–
NP–NH2) proved to be more cytotoxic than neutral Si (NP–N3) in terms of reduced 
mitochondrial metabolic activity and phagocytosis, while negatively charged Si (Si–NP–
COOH) had very little or no cytotoxicity.225 Heiden et al.226,227 reported that surface charge 
also impacts the toxicity of dendrimers. Positively charged PAMAM dendrimers (G4) 
showed time-dependent toxicity toward zebrafish embryos; however, anionic PAMAM 
dendrimers had no toxicity. Similar results have been reported when anionic PAMAM 
dendrimers were administrated to mice.226,227 As a summary, the role of the surface charge 
in NP toxicity is shown in Fig. 2.
5.4. The effect of composition
Although it has been suggested that size or surface area may be more important than 
chemical composition in conferring NPs toxicity, particle chemistry is more relevant in 
relation to cell molecular chemistry and oxidative stress. Harper et al.228 evaluated the effect 
of NP composition on toxicity using eleven commercially available dispersions of NPs with 
similar particle size in an embryonic zebrafish model, including positively charged-
aluminium oxide, titanium oxide, zirconium oxide, gadolinium oxide, dysprosium oxide, 
holmium oxide, samarium oxide and erbium oxide, negatively charged yttrium oxide, silicon 
dioxide, and alumina doped and cerium oxide. Significant mortality was observed after a 5-
day continuous waterborne exposure at 50 ppm for erbium oxide and samarium oxide, and at 
250 ppm for holmium oxide and dysprosium oxide. Waterborne exposure to yttrium oxide, 
samarium oxide and dysprosium oxide at concentrations of 10, 50 and 250 ppm caused 
significant morphological malformations in embryonic zebrafish. In contrast, no significant 
morbidity or mortality was observed for the other metal oxide NPs when embryos were 
injected with approximately 0.5 ng of NPs. Griffitt et al.229 used zebrafish, daphnids, and 
algal species as models of various trophic levels and feeding strategies to evaluate the 
Sharifi et al.
Page 16
Chem Soc Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 17 (native) -----
toxicity of similarly sized silver, copper, aluminium, nickel, cobalt and titanium dioxide NPs 
and their corresponding soluble salts. The authors found that nanosilver, nanocopper, and 
their soluble forms caused toxicity in all organisms tested; however, titanium dioxide did not 
show any toxicity.229 They also observed that filter-feeding invertebrates are more 
susceptible to NP exposure compared to zebrafish. Although the NPs were of similar size 
but different surface charges, the chemical composition of NPs appeared to be the most 
important factor in toxicity. Contrary to these results, Chen et al.230 reported acute toxicity 
of titanium dioxide NPs in mice after intraperitoneal injection. They found that the TiO2 
NPs were mainly retained in spleen, lung, kidney and liver tissues, leading to serious 
lesions. According to these reports, it appears that the toxicity of NPs is not a generic 
response to nanoscopic dimensions; rather, it seems that multiple particular characteristics 
affect toxicity, including but not limited to chemical composition, surface charge, size, and 
shape.
5.5. Effects of coatings
The adverse effects of NPs maybe mitigated or eliminated by incorporation of surface 
coatings. Proper surface coatings can stabilize particles and avoid agglomeration. Coating is 
also an effective means of preventing the dissolution and release of toxic ions.231 
Furthermore the steric hindrance of coatings can retard the cellular uptake and accumulation 
of NPs, or coatings can facilitate NP endocytosis.232–235 Surface coatings can modify the 
surface charge or surface composition, which can impact intracellular distribution and the 
production of ROSs that cause further toxicity. Many coatings are environmentally labile or 
degradable and may shed or degrade after exposure to biological media, thus rendering an 
initially nontoxic material a hazardous one.
Several studies in animals have shown that after a large dose of iron-based NPs (2.5 mmol), 
no life-threatening side effects appeared after a 7-day treatment, according to histology and 
serological blood tests. However, severe inflammatory and immunological responses can 
occur dependent on the density and type of surface coating.236–238 Normally, magnetic NPs 
are surrounded by coatings to prevent the presence of free iron oxide, but the coating may be 
metabolized after some time.239
In some NPs such as QDs, a coating is unavoidable as the metallic core is hydrophobic, and 
the core itself is toxic as it is composed of heavy metals such as cadmium. Thus, a secondary 
coating is needed to increase the QD core’s durability, prevent ion leaching, and increase 
water dispersibility.240–243 The type of secondary surface coating may affect the toxicity of 
the QD complex. For example, Chen et al. coated QDs with silica and the lack of 
genotoxicity was related to the silica coating, which successfully prevented the interaction of 
Cd, Se, Zn, and sulfur with proteins and DNA in the nucleus.244 Coatings may not be stable 
under oxidative or photolytic conditions thus exposing the metalloid core, which may be 
toxic or pave the way for unforeseen reactions of the QD inside the body.107,245 The charge 
of surface coatings may affect the toxicity of QD NPs. At high doses in mice, carboxyl-
coated CdSe/ZnS QDs activated the coagulation cascade via contact activation and caused 
pulmonary vascular thrombosis.246 Fisher et al.247 investigated QDs coated with the 
Sharifi et al.
Page 17
Chem Soc Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 18 (native) -----
negatively charged serum protein albumin. They observed a higher liver uptake (99%) and 
faster blood clearance relative to the QDs without albumin (40%).247–251
Polyethylene glycol is a FDA approved biocompatible polymer that generally does not 
induce any toxicity, so PEG has been used extensively for coating QDs. Ballou et al. applied 
PEG coatings of different molecular weights (methoxy-terminated 750 Da PEG, carboxy-
terminated 3400 Da PEG, and ethoxy-terminated 5000 Da PEG), and the NPs were observed 
for differential tissue and organ deposition in mice in a time- and size-(MW) dependent 
manner. The particles coated with lower molecular weight PEG were eliminated from 
circulation 1 h after injection, but QDs coated with PEG 5000 remained in the blood 
circulation for 3 h.105,252–256
Biocompatible polymers are widely used as coating materials for SPIONs to accomplish 
multiple objectives, including colloidal stabilization, delivering biologically active agents 
with a controlled release profile, and targeting specific tissues via conjugation with specific 
ligands.1,3,4,8–10,12–18,22,257–261 In fact, uncoated iron oxide NPs have very low solubility, 
which can lead to precipitation during storage and a high rate of agglomeration under 
physiological conditions that can impede blood vessels. Similar to QD coatings, the stability 
and toxicity of the SPION coating is important. It has been shown that dextran-magnetite 
(Fe3O4) NPs cause cell death and reduced proliferation similar to uncoated iron oxide 
particles, which was attributed to the breakdown of the dextran shell exposing the cellular 
components to chains or aggregates of iron oxide NPs.262 Xie et al.263 also showed that 
coating PEG on monodisperse Fe3O4 NPs produced negligible aggregation in cell culture 
conditions and reduced nonspecific uptake by macrophage cells. Although PEGylation may 
reduce the potential of harmful biological interactions, Cho et al. found that 13-nm sized Au 
NPs coated with PEG 5000 induce acute inflammation and apoptosis in the mouse liver.264 
These NPs were found to accumulate in the liver and spleen for up to 7 days after injection 
and to have a long blood circulation time of about 30 h. A relatively high concentration of 
PEG on the NPs surface alone does not lead to a lower NP uptake, but rather the spatial 
configurational freedom of PEG chains on the particle surface plays a determinant role.265
Coatings and functionalization can also reduce the in vivo toxicity of carbon nanotubes. 
Lacerda et al.266 intravenously injected MWCN functionalized with diethylene triamine 
penta-acetic di-anhydride, which resulted in stable dispersions with high excretion rates. 
Altogether, most studies have indicated that surface coatings can alter the pharmacokinetics, 
distribution, accumulation, and toxicity of NPs.
5.6. Effect of surface roughness
Physical surface properties of nanomaterials play a critical role in determining the outcome 
of their interactions with cells. Contrary to specific receptor–ligand interactions (e.g. 
endocytic uptake), surface roughness along with hydrophobicity and cationic charge are the 
main factors involved in nonspecific binding forces that promote cellular uptake.257,267 
Small-radii surface coarseness dictates the strength of NP–cell interactions at the nanoscale, 
as it greatly minimizes electrostatic or hydrophobic–hydrophilic repulsive interactions 
therefore promoting cell adhesion. Particles may pass through cell membranes by disrupting 
the phospholipid bilayer of the plasma membrane and generating transient holes usually 
Sharifi et al.
Page 18
Chem Soc Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 19 (native) -----
associated with cytotoxicity.268 Shen et al.269 investigated the hemolytic activity of 
nonporous and porous-silica NPs of varied sizes. They observed that the size-dependent 
hemolysis effect of mesoporous silica NPs is only present when the NPs have long-range 
ordered porous structure, revealing that pore structure is critical in cell–NP interactions. The 
extent of hemolysis by mesoporous silica NPs increases with particle age as phosphate-
buffered solutions compromise the pore structure. Although the reduced cytotoxicity can be 
correlated to less penetrating force of the particles through the membrane, the authors 
suggest the effect is mainly due to fewer silanol groups on the cell-contactable surface of the 
porous silica NPs.269 Angelis et al.270 showed that nanoporous silicon NPs with a pore size 
of about 2 nm did not have any toxicity in mouse-models, as serum levels of both 
inflammatory cytokine IL1-b and hepato-toxicity markers LDH and GSH were normal, and 
there was no histological evidence of tissue pathology in the liver, kidney, spleen, lungs and 
heart. Similarly, Park et al.271 reported no in vivo toxicity using biodegradable luminescent 
porous silicon NPs.
The significant factors that impact new biological applications of NPs are summarized in 
Table 5. The enhancements of certain physicochemical properties of NPs can create new 
applications for these materials, but these new properties may also cause significant 
toxicities.
5.7. Effect of the medium that contains NPs
Proper and stable dispersion of nanoparticles in the delivery medium is very important for 
their biological distribution and subsequent activity. Due to agglomeration, NPs may not 
form a stable suspension in the physiological solutions suitable for in vivo exposure. 
Medium condition such as ionic strength and pH can affect particles dispersion. For instance 
particles of TiO2, ZnO or carbon black have been shown to have significantly greater size in 
PBS than in water.143 Similarly TiO2 NPs also have been shown to have different diameters 
in biological systems.285 Colvin pointed out that the behavior of NPs systems depends on 
the medium that they are suspended in286 Fig. 3 shows the diversity of fullerene (C60) NP 
preparations: dried, dissolved in a nonpolar solvent and chemically modified C60 NPs 
dispersed as a colloid in water. The toxic effect of NPs in these three different cases may be 
different. For example, dried NPs may be dispersed into the air by forced or natural 
convection and can pose a hazard when inhaled into the lungs. Single NPs or clustered NPs 
may have different biological reactivities. Further, liquid media may affect the dermal 
uptake of NPs.
Dispersion or wetting agents in media also may adversely affect the toxicity of 
nanomaterials. For example, Sager et al. showed that the addition of 
dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine in PBS improved dispersion of TiO2 and carbon 
nanoparticles; however, it significantly increases the inflammatory response of rats after 
intratracheal instillation.143 Therefore, dispersion agents may improve the physicochemical 
and solution properties of nanomaterials formulations, but they may have adverse effects on 
the safety of these materials.
Sharifi et al.
Page 19
Chem Soc Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 20 (native) -----
6. Conclusions and future challenges
The toxicity of nanomaterials is affected by their composition, much like the parent bulk 
materials. However, additional physicochemical properties play a crucial role in determining 
the toxicity of nanomaterials, such as size, surface chemistry, shape, protein absorption 
gradient and surface smoothness or roughness. Thus, the toxicity of chemically identical 
materials can be altered significantly by the manipulation of several physicochemical 
properties. In order to reduce the considerable knowledge gap between the development and 
in vivo toxicity of NPs, a considerable effort is needed by the scientific community to study 
the physiological effects of acute and chronic exposure to NPs. A fundamental 
understanding of the biological interactions of NPs with cells, proteins, and tissues, is vital 
to the future design of safe nanotechnologies. Prior to their wider adoption in everyday 
products and their clinical use, NP-products must be shown to have a high degree of 
biocompatibility, with minimal negative effects on blood components, genetic material, and 
cell viability.
From limited research conducted in the last several years, inhaled nanoparticles from 
airborne sources are of concern, included carbon-based materials. During the manufacturing 
of nano-based materials, it is imperative that workers are adequately protected from inhaling 
NPs, as the long-term effects of exposure are still unknown. This also suggests that NPs 
should be properly incorporated or sequestered into products to prevent subsequent release 
during use or disposal. Further, dermal contact and other non-inhalation routes of exposure 
to nanoparticles must be studied to understand possible toxic effects.
Biographies
Shahriar Sharifi
Dr Shahriar Sharifi received his PhD in 2007 from the Amirkabir University of Technology 
(Poly Technique of Tehran) with specialization in the design and development of 
biodegradable biomaterials and nanocomposites for drug delivery and tissue engineering 
applications. He has received several awards, such as Dux bachelor and master student and 
national grant for the Elite, 2008. After his graduation, he worked as a researcher in Iran 
polymer and petrochemical institute (IPPI). In 2009, he moved to the University of 
Groningen, Netherlands. His current research involves development of smart materials 
including nanomaterials for tissue engineering applications
Sharifi et al.
Page 20
Chem Soc Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 21 (native) -----
Shahed Behzadi
Shahed Behzadi is a senior research scientist in Professor Mahmoudi’s Laboratory 
(www.biospion.com). His current research is focused on the safe use of nanoparticles for 
biomedical applications. He obtained his M.Sc. degree in 2010 from Sharif University of 
Technology.
Sophie Laurent
Dr Sophie Laurent was born in 1967. Her studies were performed at the University of Mons-
Hainaut (Belgium) where she received her PhD in Chemistry in 1993. She joined then Prof 
R. N. Muller’s team and was involved in the development (synthesis and physicochemical 
characterization) of paramagnetic Gd complexes and super paramagnetic iron oxide 
nanoparticles as contrast agents for MRI. She is currently working on the vectorization of 
contrast agents for molecular imaging. She is lecturer and co-author around 120 publications 
and more than 200 communications in international meetings.
M. Laird Forrest
M. Laird Forrest received his B.S. (1998) in Chemical Engineering from Auburn University. 
He then completed his MS (2001) and PhD (2003) in Chemical and Biomolecular 
Engineering at the University of Illinois-Urbana/Champaign. Dr Forrest completed a 
postdoctoral fellowship at the University of Wisconsin (2006) before beginning his position 
as assistant professor of Pharmaceutical Chemistry at the University of Kansas in 2007. Dr 
Sharifi et al.
Page 21
Chem Soc Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 22 (native) -----
Forrest’s research focuses on the development of nanomaterials for locoregional drug 
delivery and imaging agents for detecting cellular response to treatments.
Pieter Stroeve
Pieter Stroeve is a Distinguished Professor of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science 
at the University of California Davis. Professor Stroeve conducts fundamental work on 
colloid and surface science, self-assembled monolayers, Langmuir–Blodgett films, 
supramolecular structures on surfaces, supported lipid bilayers, transport in colloids and 
tissues, nanotechnology, bio-nanotechnology, electrochemistry, solar energy and 
nanoporous membrane separations. He has developed theoretical models and compared 
predictions to his experimental results for reactive transport in cellular suspensions and in 
colloidal solutions, particularly oxygen and carbon dioxide transport in blood. In colloid 
science, he is working on the nanostructure of polyion-surfactant complexes, polycation–
polyanion complexes, self-assembled monolayers, and nanoparticle–polymer composites. 
His group developed a method on the nucleation and growth of nanoparticles in ultrathin 
layer-by-layer polyion films. Further, his group has synthesized nanoparticles and modified 
their surface properties with polymers.
Morteza Mahmoudi
Professor Morteza Mahmoudi is a director and principal investigator of NanoBio 
Interactions Laboratory (www.biospion.com). The NanoBio Interactions Laboratory is in 
collaboration with several prestigious universities such as Harvard, MIT, Stanford, UBC, 
McGill, EPFL, and UCD. He obtained his PhD in 2009 from Sharif University of 
Technology with specialisation on the cytotoxicity of superparamagnetic iron oxide 
nanoparticles (SPIONs). He has received many awards such as the Shahid Chamran Award 
(National Endowment for the Elite; 2011), Distinguished Researcher at Pasteur Institute of 
Iran (2010), the Dr Mojtahedi Innovation Award for Distinguished Innovation in Research 
and Education at Sharif University of Technology (2010) and Kharazmi Young Festival 
Sharifi et al.
Page 22
Chem Soc Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 23 (native) -----
Award (2009). His current research involves the magic SPION for simultaneous diagnosis 
and therapeutic applications.
References
1. Mahmoudi, M.; Stroeve, P.; Milani, AS.; Arbab, A. Superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles for 
biomedical applications. Nova Science Publishers, Inc; 2010. 
2. Karlsson HL, Gustafsson J, Cronholm P, Moller L. Size-dependent toxicity of metal oxide particles
—A comparison between nano- and micrometer size. Toxicol Lett. 2009; 188:112–118. [PubMed: 
19446243] 
3. Mahmoudi M, Sahraian MA, Laurent S. Superparamagnetic Iron Oxide Nanoparticles: Promises for 
Diagnosis and Treatment of Multiple Sclerosis. ACS Chem Neurosci. 2011; 2:118–140. [PubMed: 
22778862] 
4. Mahmoudi M, Hosseinkhani M, Laurent S, Simchi A, Hosseinkhani H, Journeay WS, Subramani 
KD, Broutry S. Magnetic Resonance Imaging Tracking of Stem Cells in vivo Using Iron Oxide 
Nanoparticles as a Tool for the Advancement of Clinical Regenerative Medicine. Chem Rev. 2011; 
112:253–280. [PubMed: 21077606] 
5. Mahmoudi M, Sant S, Wang B, Laurent S, Sen T. Superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles 
(SPIONs): Development, surface modification and applications in chemotherapy. Adv Drug 
Delivery Rev. 2010
6. Nchimi A, Defawe O, Brisbois D, Broussaud TK, Defraigne JO, Magotteaux P, Massart B, Serfaty 
JM, Houard X, Michel JB, Sakalihasan N. MR imaging of iron phagocytosis in intraluminal thrombi 
of abdominal aortic aneurysms in humans. Radiology. 2010; 254:973–981. [PubMed: 20177108] 
7. Mahmoudi M, Sardari S, Shokrgozar MA, Laurent S, Stroeve P. Interaction of superparamagnetic 
iron oxide nanoparticles with human transferrin: Irreversible changes in human transferrin 
conformation. Nanoscale. 2010 Revised. 
8. Mahmoudi M, Shokrgozar MA, Simchi A, Imani M, Milani AS, Stroeve P, Vali H, Hafeli UO, 
Bonakdar S. Multiphysics flow modeling and in vitro toxicity of iron oxide nanoparticles coated 
with poly(vinyl alcohol). J Phys Chem C. 2009; 113:2322–2331.
9. Mahmoudi M, Simchi A, Imani M. Cytotoxicity of uncoated and polyvinyl alcohol coated 
superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles. J Phys Chem C. 2009; 113:9573–9580.
10. Mahmoudi M, Simchi A, Imani M. Recent advances in surface engineering of superparamagnetic 
iron oxide nanoparticles for biomedical applications. J Iran Chem Soc. 2010; 7:S1–S27.
11. Xu C, Sun S. Monodisperse magnetic nanoparticles for biomedical applications. Polym Int. 2007; 
56:821–826.
12. Mahmoudi M, Simchi A, Imani M, Hafeli UO. Superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles with 
rigid cross-linked polyethylene glycol fumarate coating for application in imaging and drug 
delivery. J Phys Chem C. 2009; 113:8124–8131.
13. Mahmoudi M, Simchi A, Imani M, Milani AS, Stroeve P. Optimal design and characterization of 
superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles coated with polyvinyl alcohol for targeted delivery 
and imaging. J Phys Chem B. 2008; 112:14470–14481. [PubMed: 18729404] 
14. Mahmoudi M, Simchi A, Imani M, Milani AS, Stroeve P. An in vitro study of bare and 
poly(ethylene glycol)-co-fumarate-coated superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles: A new 
toxicity identification procedure. Nanotechnology. 2009; 20:225104. [PubMed: 19433870] 
15. Mahmoudi M, Simchi A, Imani M, Shokrgozar MA, Milani AS, Hafeli UO, Stroeve P. A new 
approach for the in vitro identification of the cytotoxicity of superparamagnetic iron oxide 
nanoparticles. Colloids Surf, B. 2010; 75:300–309.
16. Mahmoudi M, Simchi A, Imani M, Stroeve P, Sohrabi A. Templated growth of superparamagnetic 
iron oxide nanoparticles by temperature programming in the presence of poly(vinyl alcohol). Thin 
Solid Films. 2010; 518:4281–4289.
17. Mahmoudi M, Simchi A, Milani AS, Stroeve P. Cell toxicity of superparamagnetic iron oxide 
nanoparticles. J Colloid Interface Sci. 2009; 336:510–518. [PubMed: 19476952] 
Sharifi et al.
Page 23
Chem Soc Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 24 (native) -----
18. Mahmoudi M, Simchi A, Vali H, Imani M, Shokrgozar MA, Azadmanesh K, Azari F. Cytotoxicity 
and cell cycle effects of bare and poly(vinyl alcohol)-coated iron oxide nanoparticles in mouse 
fibroblasts. Adv Eng Mater. 2009; 11:B243–B250.
19. Bulte JW, Douglas T, Witwer B, Zhang SC, Strable E, Lewis BK, Zywicke H, Miller B, van 
Gelderen P, Moskowitz BM, Duncan ID, Frank JA. Magnetoden-drimers allow endosomal 
magnetic labeling and in vivo tracking of stem cells. Nat Biotechnol. 2001; 19:1141–1147. 
[PubMed: 11731783] 
20. Bulte JW, Duncan ID, Frank JA. In vivo magnetic resonance tracking of magnetically labeled cells 
after transplantation. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2002; 22:899–907. [PubMed: 12172375] 
21. Lewin M, Carlesso N, Tung CH, Tang XW, Cory D, Scadden DT, Weissleder R. Tat peptide 
derivatized magnetic nanoparticles allow in vivo tracking and recovery of progenitor cells. Nat 
Biotechnol. 2000; 18:410–414. [PubMed: 10748521] 
22. Mahmoudi M, Sant S, Wang B, Laurent S, Sen T. Superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles 
(SPIONs): Development, surface modification and applications in chemotherapy. Adv Drug 
Delivery Rev. 2011; 63:24–46.
23. Mahmoudi M, Laurent S, Azadmanesh K, Journeay WS. Effect of nanoparticles on the cell life 
cycle. Chem Rev. 2010 proposal accepted. 
24. Aillon KL, Xie Y, El-Gendy N, Berkland CJ, Forrest ML. Effects of nanomaterial physicochemical 
properties on in vivo toxicity. Adv Drug Delivery Rev. 2009; 61:457–466.
25. Papp T, Schiffmann D, Weiss D, Castranova V, Vallyathan V, Rahman Q. Human health 
implications of nanomaterial exposure. Nanotoxicology. 2008; 2:9–27.
26. Nel A, Xia T, Madler L, Li N. Toxic potential of materials at the nanolevel. Science. 2006; 
311:622–627. [PubMed: 16456071] 
27. Moller P, Jacobsen NR, Folkmann JK, Danielsen PH, Mikkelsen L, Hemmingsen JG, Vesterdal 
LK, Forchhammer L, Wallin H, Loft S. Role of oxidative damage in toxicity of particulates. Free 
Radical Res. 2010; 44:1–46. [PubMed: 19886744] 
28. Unfried K, Albrecht C, Klotz LO, Von Mikecz A, Grether-Beck S, Schins RPF. Cellular responses 
to nanoparticles: Target structures and mechanisms. Nanotoxicology. 2007; 1:52–71.
29. Xia T, Kovochich M, Brant J, Hotze M, Sempf J, Oberley T, Sioutas C, Yeh JI, Wiesner MR, Nel 
AE. Comparison of the abilities of ambient and manufactured nanoparticles to induce cellular 
toxicity according to an oxidative stress paradigm. Nano Lett. 2006; 6:1794–1807. [PubMed: 
16895376] 
30. Halliwell, B.; Gutteridge, JMC. Free Radicals in Biology and Medicine. 4th. Oxford University 
Press, Inc; New York: 2007. 
31. Dalle-Donne I, Rossi R, Giustarini D, Colombo R, Milzani A. S-Glutathionylation in protein redox 
regulation. Free Radic Biol Med. 2007; 43:883–898. [PubMed: 17697933] 
32. Oberdorster G, Oberdorster E, Oberdorster J. Nanotoxicology: an emerging discipline evolving 
from studies of ultrafine particles. Environ Health Perspect. 2005; 113:823–839. [PubMed: 
16002369] 
33. Sayes CM, Gobin AM, Ausman KD, Mendez J, West JL, Colvin VL. Nano-C-60 cytotoxicity is 
due to lipid peroxidation. Biomaterials. 2005; 26:7587–7595. [PubMed: 16005959] 
34. Bermudez E, Mangum JB, Wong BA, Asgharian B, Hext PM, Warheit DB, Everitt JI, Moss OR. 
Pulmonary responses of mice, rats, and hamsters to subchronic inhalation of ultrafine titanium 
dioxide particles. Toxicol Sci. 2004; 77:347–357. [PubMed: 14600271] 
35. Oberdörster E. Manufactured nanomaterials (fullerenes, C60) induce oxidative stress in the brain 
of juvenile largemouth bass. Environ Health Perspect. 2004; 112:1058–1062. [PubMed: 
15238277] 
36. Warheit DB, Laurence BR, Reed KL, Roach DH, Reynolds GA, Webb TR. Comparative 
pulmonary toxicity assessment of single-wall carbon nanotubes in rats. Toxicol Sci. 2004; 1:117–
125. [PubMed: 14514968] 
37. Adibhatla RM, Hatcher JF. Lipid oxidation and peroxidation in CNS health and disease: from 
molecular mechanisms to therapeutic opportunities. Antioxid Redox Signaling. 2010; 12:125–169.
Sharifi et al.
Page 24
Chem Soc Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 25 (native) -----
38. Griendling KK, FitzGerald GA. Oxidative stress and cardiovascular injury: Part I: basic 
mechanisms and in vivo monitoring of ROS. Circulation. 2003; 108:1912–1916. [PubMed: 
14568884] 
39. Rallo R, France B, Liu R, Nair S, George S, Damoiseaux R, Giralt F, Nel A, Bradley K, Cohen Y. 
Self-organizing map analysis of toxicity-related cell signaling pathways for metal and metal oxide 
nanoparticles. Environ Sci Technol. 2011
40. Li N, Xia T, Nel AE. The role of oxidative stress in ambient particulate matter-induced lung 
diseases and its implications in the toxicity of engineered nanoparticles. Free Radical Biol Med. 
2008; 44:1689–1699. [PubMed: 18313407] 
41. Petersen EJ, Nelson BC. Mechanisms and measurements of nanomaterial-induced oxidative 
damage to DNA. Anal Bioanal Chem. 2010; 398:613–650. [PubMed: 20563891] 
42. Esposito LA, Melov S, Panov A, Cottrell BA, Wallace DC. Mitochondrial disease in mouse results 
in increased oxidative stress. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999; 96:4820–4825. [PubMed: 
10220377] 
43. Kirkinezos IG, Moraes CT. Reactive oxygen species and mitochondrial diseases. Semin Cell Dev 
Biol ogy. 2001; 12:449–457.
44. Deng ZJ, Liang MT, Monteiro M, Toth I, Minchin RF. Nanoparticle-induced unfolding of 
fibrinogen promotes Mac-1 receptor activation and inflammation. Nat Nanotechnol. 2011; 6:39–
44. [PubMed: 21170037] 
45. Sabbioni, M. In vitro toxicology of nanoparticles. Proceedings of the Workshop: Research Needs 
on Nanoparticles; Brussels: 2005. 
46. Monteiro-Riviere NA, Inman AO. Carbon. 2006; 44:1070.
47. Casey A, Herzog E, Davoren M, Lyng FM, Byrne HJ, Chambers G. 2007; 45:1425.
48. Worle-Knnirsch JM, Pulskamp K, Krug HF. Nano Lett. 2006; 6:1261. [PubMed: 16771591] 
49. Herzog E, Casey A, Lyng FM, Chambers G, Byrne HJ, Davoren M. Toxicol Lett. 2007; 174:49. 
[PubMed: 17920791] 
50. Brown DM, Stone V, Findlay P, MacNee W, Donaldson K. Occup Environ Med. 2000; 57:685. 
[PubMed: 10984341] 
51. Kim H, Liu X, Kobayashi T, Kohyama T, Wen FQ, Romberger DJ, Conner H, Gilmour PS, 
Donaldson K, MacNee W, Rennard SI. Ultrafine carbon black particles inhibit human lung 
fibroblast-mediated collagen gel contraction. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2003; 28:111. [PubMed: 
12495939] 
52. Dutta D, Sunddaram SK, Teeguarden JG, Riley BJ, Fifiels LS, Jacobs JM, Addleman SR, Kaysen 
GA, Moudgil BM, Weber TJ. Toxicol Sci. 2007; 100:303. [PubMed: 17709331] 
53. Lee J, Lilly GD, Doty RC, Podsiadlo P, Kotov NA. In vitro toxicity testing of nanoparticles in 3D 
cell culture. Small. 2009; 5:1213–1221. [PubMed: 19263430] 
54. Sayes CM, Reed KL, Warheit DB. Toxicol Sci. 2007; 97:163. [PubMed: 17301066] 
55. Environmental Protection Agency. 2008
56. Hansch C. A quantitative approach to biochemical structure– activity relationships. Acc Chem Res. 
1969; 2:232–&.
57. Puzyn T, Rasulev B, Gajewicz A, Hu XK, Dasari TP, Michalkova A, Hwang HM, Toropov A, 
Leszczynska D, Leszczynski J. Using nano-QSAR to predict the cytotoxicity of metal oxide 
nanoparticles. Nat Nanotechnol. 2011; 6:175–178. [PubMed: 21317892] 
58. Puzyn T, Leszczynska D, Leszczynski J. Toward the development of “Nano-QSARs”: Advances 
and challenges. Small. 2009; 5:2494–2509. [PubMed: 19787675] 
59. Sayes C, Ivanov I. Comparative study of predictive computational models for nanoparticle-induced 
cytotoxicity. Risk Anal. 2010; 30:1723–1734. [PubMed: 20561263] 
60. Benfenati E, Gini G, Hoffmann S, Luttik R. Comparing in vivo, in vitro and in silico methods and 
integrated strategies for chemical assessment: problems and prospects. Altern Lab Anim. 2010; 
38:153–166. [PubMed: 20507186] 
61. Ryman-Rasmussen JP, Riviere JE, Monteiro-Riviere NA. Variables influencing interactions of 
untargeted quantum dot nanoparticles with skin cells and identification of biochemical modulators. 
Nano Lett. 2007; 7:1344–1348. [PubMed: 17408303] 
Sharifi et al.
Page 25
Chem Soc Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 26 (native) -----
62. Oberdörster G. Principles for characterizing the potential human health effects from exposure to 
nanomaterials:elements of a screening strategy. Part Fibre Toxicol. 2005; 2:8. [PubMed: 
16209704] 
63. Sahu, SC.; Casciano, DA. Nanotoxicity: from in vivo and in vitro models to health risks. Wiley; 
United Kingdom: 2009. 
64. Borm P, Klaessig FC, Landry TD, Moudgil B, Pauluhn J, Thomas K, Trottier R, Wood S. Research 
strategies for safety evaluation of nanomaterials, Part V: Role of dissolution in biological fate 
effects of nanoscale particles. Toxicol Sci. 2006; 90:23–32. [PubMed: 16396841] 
65. Oberdorster G, Oberdorster E, Oberdorster J. Nanotoxicology: An emerging discipline evolving 
from studies of ultrafine particles. Environ Health Perspect. 2005; 113:823–839. [PubMed: 
16002369] 
66. Tsuji JS, Maynard AD, Howard PC, James JT, Lam CW, Warheit DB, Santamaria AB. Research 
strategies for safety evaluation of nanomaterials, part IV: Risk assessment of nanoparticles. 
Toxicol Sci. 2006; 89:42–50. [PubMed: 16177233] 
67. Poland CA, Duffin R, Kinloch I, Maynard A, Wallace WAH, Seaton A, Stone V, Brown S, 
MacNee W, Donaldson K. Carbon nanotubes introduced into the abdominal cavity of mice show 
asbestos-like pathogenicity in a pilot study. Nat Nanotechnol. 2008; 3:423–428. [PubMed: 
18654567] 
68. Lee HA, Imran M, Monteiro-Riviere NA, Colvin VL, Yu WW, Riviere JE. Biodistribution of 
quantum dot nanoparticles in perfused skin: Evidence of coating dependency and periodicity in 
arterial extraction. Nano Lett. 2007; 7:2865–2870. [PubMed: 17685663] 
69. Deng X, Jia G, Wang H, Sun H, Wang X, Yang S, Wang T, Liu Y. Translocation and fate of multi-
walled carbon nanotubes in vivo. Carbon. 2007; 45:1419–1424.
70. Yang RSH, Chang LW, Wu JP, Tsai MH, Wang HJ, Kuo YC, Yeh TK, Yang CS, Lin P. Persistent 
tissue kinetics and redistribution of nanoparticles, quantum Dot 705, in Mice: ICP-MS quantitative 
assessment. Environ Health Perspect. 2007; 115:1339–1343. [PubMed: 17805425] 
71. Fischer HC, Chan WCW. Nanotoxicity: the growing need for in vivo study. Curr Opin Biotechnol. 
2007; 18:565–571. [PubMed: 18160274] 
72. De Joug WH, Bonn PJ. Drug delivery and nanoparticles: applications and hazards. Int J Nanomed. 
2008; 3:133–149.
73. Dobrovolskaia MA, Clogston JD, Neun BW, Hall JB, Patri AK, McNeü SE. Method for analysis 
of nanoparticle hemolytic properties in vitro. Nano Lett. 2008; 8:2180–2187. [PubMed: 18605701] 
74. Lin S, Du F, Wang Y, Ji S, Liang D, Yu L, Li Z. An acid-labile block copolymer of PDMAEMA 
and PEG as potential carrier for intelligent gene delivery systems. Biomacromolecules. 2008; 
9:109–115. [PubMed: 18088093] 
75. Kim D, El-Shall H, Dennis D, Morey T. Interaction of PLGA nanoparticles with human blood 
constituents. Colloids Surf, B. 2005; 40:83–91.
76. Delfino RJ, Sioutas C, Malik S. Potential role of ultrafine particles in associations between 
airborne particle mass and cardiovascular health. Environ Health Perspect. 2005; 113:934–946. 
[PubMed: 16079061] 
77. Radomski A, Jurasz P, Alonso-Escolano D, Drews M, Morandi M, Malinski T, Radomski MW. 
Nanoparticle-induced platelet aggregation and vascular thrombosis. Br J Pharmacol. 2005; 
146:882–893. [PubMed: 16158070] 
78. Jun EA, Lim KM, Kim K, Bae ON, Noh JY, Chung KH, Chung JH. Silver nanoparticles enhance 
thrombus formation through increased platelet aggregation and procoagulant activity. 
Nanotoxicology. 2011; 5:157–167. [PubMed: 20822370] 
79. Seaton A, Soutar A, Crawford V, Elton R, MeNerlan S, Cherrie J, Watt M, Agius R, Stout R. 
Particulate air pollution and the blood. Thorax. 1999; 54:1027–1032. [PubMed: 10525563] 
80. Nemmar A, Hoet PH, Dinsdale D, Vermylen J, Hovlaerts MF, Nemery B. Diesel exhaust particles 
in lung acutely enhance experimental peripheral Chrombosis. Circulation. 2003; 107:1202–1208. 
[PubMed: 12615802] 
81. Neun BW, Dobrovolskaia MA. Method for in vitro analysis of nanoparticle thrombogenic 
properties. Methods Mol Biol. 2011; 697:225–235. [PubMed: 21116972] 
Sharifi et al.
Page 26
Chem Soc Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 27 (native) -----
82. Jiao Y, Ubrich N, Marchand-Arvier M, Vigneron CV, Hoffman M, Lecompte T, Maincent P. In 
vitro and in vivo evaluation of oral heparin-loaded polymeric nanoparticles in rabbits. Circulation. 
2002; 105:230–235. [PubMed: 11790706] 
83. Cenni E, Granchi D, Avnet S, Fotia C, Salerno M, Micieli D, Sarpietro MG, Pignatello R, Castelli 
F, Baldini N. Biocompatibility of poly(DL-lactide-co-glycolide) nanoparticles conjugated with 
alendronate. Biomaterials. 2008; 29:1400–1411. [PubMed: 18191195] 
84. Ray M, Carroll P, Smith I, Hawson G. An attempt to standardize APTT reagents used to monitor 
heparin therapy. Blood Coagulation Fibrinolysis. 1992; 3:743–748. [PubMed: 1336984] 
85. Dragoni F, Minotti C, Palumbo G, Faillace F, Redi R, Bongarzoni V, Avvisati G. As compared to 
kaolin clotting time, silica clotting time is a specific and sensitive automated method for detecting 
lupus anticoagulant. Thromb Res. 2001; 101:45–51. [PubMed: 11342205] 
86. Mahmoudi M, Lynch I, Ejtehadi MR, Monopoli MP, Bombelli FB, Laurent S. Protein-nanoparticle 
interactions: opportunities and challenges. Chem Rev. 2011; 111:5610–5637. [PubMed: 
21688848] 
87. Lynch I, Dawson KA. Protein–nanoparticle interactions. Nano Today. 2008; 3:40–47.
88. Lundqvist M, Sethson I, Jonsson BH. Protein adsorption onto silica nanoparticles: Conformational 
changes depend on the particles’ curvature and the protein stability. Langmuir. 2004; 20:10639–
10647. [PubMed: 15544396] 
89. Monopoli MP, Bombelli FB, Dawson KA. Nanobiotechnology: Nanoparticle coronas take shape. 
Nat Nanotechnol. 2011; 6:11–12. [PubMed: 21179098] 
90. Cedervall T, Lynch I, Lindman S, Berggrd T, Thulin E, Nilsson H, Dawson KA, Linse S. 
Understanding the nanoparticle-protein corona using methods to quntify exchange rates and 
affinities of proteins for nanoparticles. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007; 104:2050–2055. 
[PubMed: 17267609] 
91. Lynch I, Cedervall T, Lundqvist M, Cabaleiro-Lago C, Linse S, Dawson KA. The nanoparticle-
protein complex as a biological entity; a complex fluids and surface science challenge for the 21st 
century. Adv Colloid Interface Sci. 2007; 134–135:167.
92. Monopoli MP, Walczyk D, Campbell A, Elia G, Lynch I, Bombelli FB, Dawson KA. Physical-
chemical aspects of protein corona: Relevance to in vitro and in vivo biological impacts of 
nanoparticles. J Am Chem Soc. 2011; 133:2525–2534. [PubMed: 21288025] 
93. Owens DE, Peppas NA. Opsonization, biodistribution, and pharmacokinetics of polymeric 
nanoparticles. Int J Pharm. 2006; 307:93–102. [PubMed: 16303268] 
94. Ishida T, Harashima H, Kiwada H. Interactions of liposomes with cells in vitro and in vivo: 
Opsonins and receptors. Curr Drug Metab. 2001; 2:397–409. [PubMed: 11766990] 
95. Cedervall T, Lynch I, Foy M, Berggård T, Donnelly SC, Cagney G, Linse S, Dawson KA. Detailed 
identification of plasma proteins adsorbed on copolymer nanoparticles. Angew Chem, Int Ed. 
2007; 46:5754–5756.
96. De M, You CC, Srivastava S, Rotello VM. Biomimetic interactions of proteins with functionalized 
nanoparticles: A thermodynamic study. J Am Chem Soc. 2007; 129:10747–10753. [PubMed: 
17672456] 
97. Reddy ST, Van Der Vlies AJ, Simeoni E, Angeli V, Randolph GJ, O’Neil CP, Lee LK, Swartz 
MA, Hubbell JA. Exploiting lymphatic transport and complement activation in nanoparticle 
vaccines. Nat Biotechnol. 2007; 25:1159–1164. [PubMed: 17873867] 
98. Moghimi SM, Hunter AC, Murray JC. Long circulating and target specific nanoparticles: theory to 
practice. Pharmacol Rev. 2001; 53:283–318. [PubMed: 11356986] 
99. Fischer HC, Liu L, Pang KS, Chan WCW. Pharmacokinetics of nanoscale quantum dots: In vivo 
distribution, sequestration, and clearance in the rat. Adv Funct Mater. 2006; 16:1299–1305.
100. Liu Z, Cai W, He L, Nakayama N, Chen K, Sun X, Chen X, Dai H. In vivo biodistribution and 
highly efficient tumour targeting of carbon nanotubes in mice. Nat Nanotechnol. 2007; 2:47–52. 
[PubMed: 18654207] 
101. Saba TM. Physiology and physiopathology of the reticuloendothelial system. Arch Intern Med. 
1970; 126:1031–1052. [PubMed: 4921754] 
Sharifi et al.
Page 27
Chem Soc Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 28 (native) -----
102. Paciotti GF, Myer L, Weinreich D, Goia D, Pavel N, McLaughlin RE, Tamarkin L. Colloidal 
gold: A novel nanoparticle vector for tumor directed drug delivery. Drug Delivery: J Delivery 
Targeting Ther Agents. 2004; 11:169–183.
103. Singh R, Pantarotto D, Lacerda L, Pastorin G, Klumpp C, Prato M, Bianco A, Kostarelos K. 
Tissue biodistribution and blood clearance rates of intravenously administered carbon nanotube 
radiotracers. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006; 103:3357–3362. [PubMed: 16492781] 
104. Khan MK, Nigavekar SS, Minc LD, Kariapper MST, Nair BM, Lesniak WG, Balogh LP. In vivo 
biodistribution of dendrimers and dendrimer nanocomposites–Implications for cancer imaging 
and therapy. Technol Cancer Res Treat. 2005; 4:603–613. [PubMed: 16292880] 
105. Ballou B, Lagerholm BC, Ernst LA, Bruchez MP, Waggoner AS. Noninvasive imaging of 
quantum dots in mice. Bioconjugate Chem. 2004; 15:79–86.
106. Kagan VE, Konduru NV, Feng WH, Allen BL, Conroy J, Volkov Y, Vlasova II, Belikova NA, 
Yanamala N, Kapralov A, Tyurina YY, Shi JW, Kisin ER, Murray AR, Franks J, Stolz D, Gou 
PP, Klein-Seetharaman J, Fadeel B, Star A, Shvedova AA. Carbon nanotubes degraded by 
neutrophil myeloperoxidase induce less pulmonary inflammation. Nat Nanotechnol. 2010; 
5:354–359. [PubMed: 20364135] 
107. Hardman R. A toxicologic review of quantum dots: Toxicity depends on physicochemical and 
environmental factors. Environ Health Perspect. 2006; 114:165–172. [PubMed: 16451849] 
108. Coyle P, Philcox JC, Carey LC, Rofe AM. Metallothionein: the multipurpose protein. Cell Mol 
Life Sci. 2002; 59:627–647. [PubMed: 12022471] 
109. Frohlich E, Kueznik T, Samberger C, Roblegg E, Wrighton C, Pieber TR. Size-dependent effects 
of nanoparticles on the activity of cytochrome P450 isoenzymes. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2010; 
242:326–332. [PubMed: 19909766] 
110. Hardonk MJ, Harms G, Koudstaal J. Zonal heterogeneity of rat hepatocytes in the in vivo uptake 
of 17 nm colloidal gold granules. Histochemistry. 1985; 83:473–477. [PubMed: 4077586] 
111. Renaud G, Hamilton RL, Havel RJ. Hepatic metabolism of colloidal gold-low-density lipoprotein 
complexes in the rat: Evidence for bulk excretion of lysosomal contents into bile. Hepatology. 
1989; 9:380–392. [PubMed: 2920994] 
112. Wang H, Wang J, Deng X, Sun H, Shi Z, Gu Z, Liu Y, Zhao Y. Biodistribution of carbon single-
wall carbon nanotubes in mice. J Nanosci Nanotechnol. 2004; 4:1019–1024. [PubMed: 
15656196] 
113. Soo Choi H, Liu W, Misra P, Tanaka E, Zimmer JP, Itty Ipe B, Bawendi MG, Frangioni JV. 
Renal clearance of quantum dots. Nat Biotechnol. 2007; 25:1165–1170. [PubMed: 17891134] 
114. Kooter IM, Pennings JLA, Opperhuizen A, Cassee FR. Gene expression pattern in spontaneously 
hypertensive rats exposed to urban particulate matter (EHC-93). Inhalation Toxicol. 2005; 
17:53–65.
115. Maysinger D, Behrendt M, Lalancette-Hébert M, Kriz J. Real-time imaging of astrocyte response 
to quantum dots: In vivo screening model system for biocompatibility of nanoparticles. Nano 
Lett. 2007; 7:2513–2520. [PubMed: 17638392] 
116. Fifis T, Gamvrellis A, Crimeen-Irwin B, Pietersz GA, Li J, Mottram PL, McKenzie IFC, 
Plebanski M. Size-dependent immunogenicity: Therapeutic and protective properties of nano-
vaccines against tumors. J Immunol. 2004; 173:3148–3154. [PubMed: 15322175] 
117. Gamvrellis A, Leong D, Hanley JC, Xiang SD, Mottram P, Plebanski M. Vaccines that facilitate 
antigen entry into dendritic cells. Immunol Cell Biol. 2004; 82:506–516. [PubMed: 15479436] 
118. de Wolf HK, Snel CJ, Verbaan FJ, Schiffelers RM, Hennink WE, Storm G. Effect of cationic 
carriers on the pharmacokinetics and tumor localization of nucleic acids after intravenous 
administration. Int J Pharm. 2007; 331:167–175. [PubMed: 17134859] 
119. Natarajan A, Gruettner C, Ivkov R, Denardo GL, Mirick G, Yuan A, Foreman A, DeNardo SJ. 
Nanoferrite particle based radioimmunonanoparticles: Binding affinity and in vivo 
pharmacokinetics. Bioconjugate Chem. 2008; 19:1211–1218.
120. Larbanoix L, Burtea C, Laurent S, Van Leuven F, Toubeau G, Elst LV, Muller RN. Potential 
amyloid plaque-specific peptides for the diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol Aging. 
2010; 31:1679–1689. [PubMed: 19027991] 
Sharifi et al.
Page 28
Chem Soc Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 29 (native) -----
121. De Jong WH, Borm PJA. Drug delivery and nanoparticles: Applications and hazards. Int J 
Nanomed. 2008; 3:133–149.
122. Kim JS, Yoon TJ, Yu KN, Kim BG, Park SJ, Kim HW, Lee KH, Park SB, Lee JK, Cho MH. 
Toxicity and tissue distribution of magnetic nanoparticles in mice. Toxicol Sci. 2006; 89:338–
347. [PubMed: 16237191] 
123. Rejman J, Oberle V, Zuhorn IS, Hoekstra D. Size-dependent internalization of particles via the 
pathways of clathrin-and caveolae-mediated endocytosis. Biochem J. 2004; 377:159–169. 
[PubMed: 14505488] 
124. Lanone S, Boczkowski J. Biomedical applications and potential health risks of nanomaterials: 
Molecular mechanisms. Curr Mol Med. 2006; 6:651–663. [PubMed: 17022735] 
125. Aillon KL, Xie YM, El-Gendy N, Berkland CJ, Forrest ML. Effects of nanomaterial 
physicochemical properties on in vivo toxicity. Adv Drug Delivery Rev. 2009; 61:457–466.
126. Powers KW, Brown SC, Krishna VB, Wasdo SC, Moudgil BM, Roberts SM. Research strategies 
for safety evaluation of nanomaterials. Part VI. Characterization of nanoscale particles for 
toxicological evaluation. Toxicol Sci. 2006; 90:296–303. [PubMed: 16407094] 
127. Powers KW, Palazuelos M, Moudgil BM, Roberts SM. Characterization of the size, shape, and 
state of dispersion of nanoparticles for toxicological studies. Nanotoxicology. 2007; 1:42–51.
128. Pan Y, Neuss S, Leifert A, Fischler M, Wen F, Simon U, Schmid G, Brandau W, Jahnen-Dechent 
W. Size-dependent cytotoxicity of gold nanoparticles. Small. 2007; 3:1941–1949. [PubMed: 
17963284] 
129. Carlson C, Hussain SM, Schrand AM, Braydich-Stolle LK, Hess KL, Jones RL, Schlager JJ. 
Unique cellular interaction of silver nanoparticles: Size-dependent generation of reactive oxygen 
species. J Phys Chem B. 2008; 112:13608–13619. [PubMed: 18831567] 
130. Yin H, Too HP, Chow GM. The effects of particle size and surface coating on the cytotoxicity of 
nickel ferrite. Biomaterials. 2005; 26:5818–5826. [PubMed: 15949547] 
131. Hu Y, Xie JW, Tong YW, Wang CH. Effect of PEG conformation and particle size on the cellular 
uptake efficiency of nanoparticles with the HepG2 cells. J Controlled Release. 2007; 118:7–17.
132. Yang H, Liu C, Yang DF, Zhang HS, Xi ZG. Comparative study of cytotoxicity, oxidative stress 
and genotoxicity induced by four typical nanomaterials: the role of particle size, shape and 
composition. J Appl Toxicol. 2009; 29:69–78. [PubMed: 18756589] 
133. Clift MJD, Rothen-Rutishauser B, Brown DM, Duffin R, Donaldson K, Proudfoot L, Guy K, 
Stone V. The impact of different nanoparticle surface chemistry and size on uptake and toxicity 
in a murine macrophage cell line. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2008; 232:418–427. [PubMed: 
18708083] 
134. Napierska D, Thomassen LCJ, Rabolli V, Lison D, Gonzalez L, Kirsch-Volders M, Martens JA, 
Hoet PH. Size-dependent cytotoxicity of monodisperse silica nanoparticles in human endothelial 
cells. Small. 2009; 5:846–853. [PubMed: 19288475] 
135. Wang SG, Lu WT, Tovmachenko O, Rai US, Yu HT, Ray PC. Challenge in understanding size 
and shape dependent toxicity of gold nanomaterials in human skin keratinocytes. Chem Phys 
Lett. 2008; 463:145–149. [PubMed: 24068836] 
136. Lewinski N, Colvin V, Drezek R. Cytotoxicity of nanoparticles. Small. 2008; 4:26–49. [PubMed: 
18165959] 
137. Oberdorster G, Ferin J, Lehnert BE. Correlation between particle-size, in-vivo particle 
persistence, and lung injury. Environ Health Perspect. 1994; 102:173–179. [PubMed: 7882925] 
138. Holgate ST. Exposure, uptake, distribution and toxicity of nanomaterials in humans. J Biomed 
Nanotechnol. 2010; 6:1–19. [PubMed: 20499827] 
139. Oberdorster G, Stone V, Donaldson K. Toxicology of nanoparticles: A historical perspective. 
Nanotoxicology. 2007; 1:2–25.
140. Asgharian B, Price OT. Deposition of ultrafine (NANO) particles in the human lung. Inhalation 
Toxicol. 2007; 19:1045–1054.
141. Kreyling WG, Semmler M, Erbe F, Mayer P, Takenaka S, Schulz H, Oberdorster G, Ziesenis A. 
Translocation of ultrafine insoluble iridium particles from lung epithelium to extrapulmonary 
organs is size dependent but very low. J Toxicol Environ Health, Part A. 2002; 65:1513–1530. 
[PubMed: 12396866] 
Sharifi et al.
Page 29
Chem Soc Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 30 (native) -----
142. Wiebert P, Sanchez-Crespo A, Falk R, Philipson K, Lundin A, Larsson S, Moller W, Kreyling 
WG, Svartengren M. No significant translocation of inhaled 35-nm carbon particles to the 
circulation in humans. Inhalation Toxicol. 2006; 18:741–747.
143. Sager TM, Porter DW, Robinson VA, Lindsley WG, Schwegler-Berry DE, Castranova V. 
Improved method to disperse nanoparticles for in vitro and in vivo investigation of toxicity. 
Nanotoxicology. 2007; 1:118–129.
144. Fraczek A, Menaszek E, Paluszkiewicz C, Blazewicz M. Comparative in vivo biocompatibility 
study of single- and multi-wall carbon nanotubes. Acta Biomater. 2008; 4:1593–1602. [PubMed: 
18585111] 
145. Kostarelos K, Lacerda L, Pastorin G, Wu W, Wieckowski S, Luangsivilay J, Godefroy S, 
Pantarotto D, Briand JP, Muller S, Prato M, Bianco A. Cellular uptake of functionalized carbon 
nanotubes is independent of functional group and cell type. Nat Nanotechnol. 2007; 2:108–113. 
[PubMed: 18654229] 
146. Kam NWS, Liu ZA, Dai HJ. Carbon nanotubes as intracellular transporters for proteins and 
DNA: An investigation of the uptake mechanism and pathway. Angew Chem, Int Ed. 2006; 
45:577–581.
147. Yang ST, Guo W, Lin Y, Deng XY, Wang HF, Sun HF, Liu YF, Wang X, Wang W, Chen M, 
Huang YP, Sun YP. Biodistribution of pristine single-walled carbon nanotubes in vivo. J Phys 
Chem C. 2007; 111:17761–17764.
148. Yang ST, Wang X, Jia G, Gu YQ, Wang TC, Nie HY, Ge CC, Wang HF, Liu YF. Long-term 
accumulation and low toxicity of single-walled carbon nanotubes in intravenously exposed mice. 
Toxicol Lett. 2008; 181:182–189. [PubMed: 18760340] 
149. Wick P, Manser P, Limbach LK, ttlaff-Weglikowska U, Krumeich F, Roth S, Stark WJ, Bruinink 
A. The degree and kind of agglomeration affect carbon nanotube cytotoxicity. Toxicol Lett. 
2007; 168:121–131. [PubMed: 17169512] 
150. Mercer RR, Scabilloni J, Wang L, Kisin E, Murray AR, Schwegler-Berry D, Shvedova AA, 
Castranova V. Alteration of deposition pattern and pulmonary response as a result of improved 
dispersion of aspirated single-walled carbon nanotubes in a mouse model. Am J Physiol: Lung 
Cell Mol Physiol. 2008; 294:L87–L97. [PubMed: 18024722] 
151. Warheit DB, Borm PJ, Hennes C, Lademann J. Testing strategies to establish the safety of 
nanomaterials: conclusions of an ECETOC workshop. Inhalation Toxicol. 2007; 19:631–643.
152. Lovric J, Bazzi HS, Cuie Y, Fortin GR, Winnik FM, Maysinger D. Differences in subcellular 
distribution and toxicity of green and red emitting CdTe quantum dots. J Mol Med. 2005; 
83:377–385. [PubMed: 15688234] 
153. Aggarwal P, Hall JB, McLeland CB, Dobrovolskaia MA, McNeil SE. Nanoparticle interaction 
with plasma proteins as it relates to particle biodistribution, biocompatibility and therapeutic 
efficacy. Adv Drug Delivery Rev. 2009; 61:428–437.
154. Mailander V, Landfester K. Interaction of nanoparticles with cells. Biomacromolecules. 2009; 
10:2379–2400. [PubMed: 19637907] 
155. Jiang W, Kim BYS, Rutka JT, Chan WCW. Nanoparticle-mediated cellular response is size-
dependent. Nat Nanotechnol. 2008; 3:145–150. [PubMed: 18654486] 
156. Johnston HJ, Hutchison G, Christensen FM, Peters S, Hankin S, Stone V. A review of the in vivo 
and in vitro toxicity of silver and gold particulates: Particle attributes and biological mechanisms 
responsible for the observed toxicity. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2010; 40:328–346. [PubMed: 20128631] 
157. Yang RH, Chang LW, Wu JP, Tsai MH, Wang HJ, Kuo YC, Yeh TK, Yang CS, Lin P. Persistent 
tissue kinetics and redistribution of nanoparticles, quantum dot 705, in mice: ICP-MS 
quantitative assessment. Environ Health Perspect. 2007; 115:1339–1343. [PubMed: 17805425] 
158. Meng H, Chen Z, Xing GM, Yuan H, Chen CY, Zhao F, Zhang CC, Zhao YL. Ultrahigh 
reactivity provokes nanotoxicity: Explanation of oral toxicity of nano-copper particles. Toxicol 
Lett. 2007; 175:102–110. [PubMed: 18024012] 
159. Seaton A, Donaldson K. Nanoscience, nanotoxicology, and the need to think small. Lancet. 2005; 
365:923–924. [PubMed: 15766981] 
160. Donaldson K, Stone V, Tran CL, Kreyling W, Borm PJA. Nanotoxicology. Occup Environ Med. 
2004; 61:727–728. [PubMed: 15317911] 
Sharifi et al.
Page 30
Chem Soc Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 31 (native) -----
161. Chen Z, Meng HA, Xing GM, Chen CY, Zhao YL, Jia GA, Wang TC, Yuan H, Ye C, Zhao F, 
Chai ZF, Zhu CF, Fang XH, Ma BC, Wan LJ. Acute toxicological effects of copper nanoparticles 
in vivo. Toxicol Lett. 2006; 163:109–120. [PubMed: 16289865] 
162. Hillyer JF, Albrecht RM. Gastrointestinal persorption and tissue distribution of differently sized 
colloidal gold nanoparticles. J Pharm Sci. 2001; 90:1927–1936. [PubMed: 11745751] 
163. Sonavane G, Tomoda K, Makino K. Biodistribution of colloidal gold nanoparticles after 
intravenous administration: Effect of particle size. Colloids Surf, B. 2008; 66:274–280.
164. De Jong WH, Hagens WI, Krystek P, Burger MC, Sips AJAM, Geertsma RE. Particle size-
dependent organ distribution of gold nanoparticles after intravenous administration. Biomaterials. 
2008; 29:1912–1919. [PubMed: 18242692] 
165. Chen YS, Hung YC, Liau I, Huang GS. Assessment of the in vivo toxicity of gold nanoparticles. 
Nanoscale Res Lett. 2009; 4:858–864. [PubMed: 20596373] 
166. Parng C. In vivo zebrafish assays for toxicity testing. Curr Opin Drug Discovery Dev. 2005; 
8:100–106.
167. Bar-Ilan O, Albrecht RM, Fako VE, Furgeson DY. Toxicity assessments of multisized gold and 
silver nanoparticles in zebrafish embryos. Small. 2009; 5:1897–1910. [PubMed: 19437466] 
168. Barbier O, Jacquillet G, Tauc M, Cougnon M, Poujeol P. Effect of heavy metals on, and handling 
by, the kidney. Nephron Physiol. 2005; 99:105–110.
169. Shiohara A, Hoshino A, Hanaki K, Suzuki K, Yamamoto K. On the cyto-toxicity caused by 
quantum dots. Microbiol Immunol. 2004; 48:669–675. [PubMed: 15383704] 
170. Song Y, Li X, Du X. Exposure to nanoparticles is related to pleural effusion, pulmonary fibrosis 
and granuloma. Eur Respir J. 2009; 34:559–567. [PubMed: 19696157] 
171. Kreuter J. Nanoparticles—a historical perspective. Int J Pharm. 2007; 331:1–10. [PubMed: 
17110063] 
172. Vauthier C, Labarre D, Ponchel G. Design aspects of poly(alkylcyanoacrylate) nanoparticles for 
drug delivery. J Drug Targeting. 2007; 15:641–663.
173. Abeylath SC, Turos E. Glycosylated polyacrylate nanoparticles by emulsion polymerization. 
Carbohydr Polym. 2007; 70:32–37. [PubMed: 18677404] 
174. Lherm C, Muller RH, Puisieux F, Couvreur P. Alkylcyanoacrylate drug carriers. 2. Cytotoxicity 
of cyanoacrylate nanoparticles with different alkyl chain-length, Int. J Pharm. 1992; 84:13–22.
175. Ren H, Huang X. Polyacrylate nanoparticles: toxicity or new nanomedicine? Eur Respir J. 2010; 
36:218–221. [PubMed: 20595174] 
176. Semete B, Booysen L, Lemmer Y, Kalombo L, Katata L, Verschoor J, Swai HS. In vivo 
evaluation of the biodistribution and safety of PLGA nanoparticles as drug delivery systems. 
Nanomedicine. 2010; 6:662–671. [PubMed: 20230912] 
177. Panyam J, Dali MA, Sahoo SK, Ma WX, Chakravarthi SS, Amidon GL, Levy RJ, Labhasetwar 
V. Polymer degradation and in vitro release of a model protein from poly(DL-lactide-CO-
glycolide) nano- and microparticles. J Controlled Release. 2003; 92:173–187.
178. Cho MJ, Cho WS, Choi M, Kim SJ, Han BS, Kim SH, Kim HO, Sheen YY, Jeong JY. The 
impact of size on tissue distribution and elimination by single intravenous injection of silica 
nanoparticles. Toxicol Lett. 2009; 189:177–183. [PubMed: 19397964] 
179. Kaewamatawong T, Kawamura N, Okajima M, Sawada M, Morita T, Shimada A. Acute 
pulmonary toxicity caused by exposure to colloidal silica: Particle size dependent pathological 
changes in mice. Toxicol Pathol. 2005; 33:743–749. [PubMed: 16306027] 
180. Chen HW, Su SF, Chien CT, Lin WH, Yu SL, Chou CC, Chen JJW, Yang PC. Titanium dioxide 
nanoparticles induce emphysema-like lung injury in mice. FASEB J. 2006; 20:2393–+. 
[PubMed: 17023518] 
181. Drobne D, Jemec A, Tkalec ZP. In vivo screening to determine hazards of nanoparticles: 
Nanosized TiO2. Environ Pollut. 2009; 157:1157–1164. [PubMed: 19041167] 
182. Park EJ, Bae E, Yi J, Kim Y, Choi K, Lee SH, Yoon J, Lee BC, Park K. Repeated-dose toxicity 
and inflammatory responses in mice by oral administration of silver nanoparticles. Environ 
Toxicol Pharmacol. 2010; 30:162–168. [PubMed: 21787647] 
Sharifi et al.
Page 31
Chem Soc Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 32 (native) -----
183. Zhang YB, Chen W, Zhang J, Liu J, Chen GP, Pope C. In vitro and in vivo toxicity of CdTe 
nanoparticles. J Nanosci Nanotechnol. 2007; 7:497–503. [PubMed: 17450785] 
184. Brown DM, Wilson MR, MacNee W, Stone V, Donaldson K. Size-dependent proinflammatory 
effects of ultrafine polystyrene particles: A role for surface area and oxidative stress in the 
enhanced activity of ultrafines. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2001; 175:191–199. [PubMed: 
11559017] 
185. Amrite AC, Kompella UB. Size-dependent disposition of nanoparticles and microparticles 
following subconjunctival administration. J Pharm Pharmacol. 2005; 57:1555–1563. [PubMed: 
16354399] 
186. Gou ML, Zheng XL, Men K, Zhang J, Zheng L, Wang XH, Luo F, Zhao YL, Zhao X, Wei YQ, 
Qian ZY. poly(epsilon-caprolactone)/poly(ethylene glycol)/poly(epsilon-caprolactone) 
nanoparticles: preparation, characterization, and application in doxorubicin delivery. J Phys 
Chem B. 2009; 113:12928–12933. [PubMed: 19736995] 
187. Verma A, Stellacci F. Effect of surface properties on nanoparticle–cell interactions. Small. 2010; 
6:12–21. [PubMed: 19844908] 
188. Champion JA, Mitragotri S. Role of target geometry in phagocytosis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2006; 103:4930–4934. [PubMed: 16549762] 
189. Lu Z, Qiao Y, Zheng XT, Chan-Park MB, Li CM. Effect of particle shape on phagocytosis of 
CdTe quantum dot-cystine composites. MedChemComm. 2010; 1:84–86.
190. Doshi N, Mitragotri S. Needle-shaped polymeric particles induce transient disruption of cell 
membranes. J R Soc, Interface. 2010; 7:S403–S410. [PubMed: 20504803] 
191. Ferrari M. Nanogeometry: Beyond drug delivery. Nat Nanotechnol. 2008; 3:131–132. [PubMed: 
18654480] 
192. Radomski A, Jurasz P, onso-Escolano D, Drews M, Morandi M, Malinski T, Radomski MW. 
Nanoparticle-induced platelet aggregation and vascular thrombosis. Br J Pharmacol. 2005; 
146:882–893. [PubMed: 16158070] 
193. Park KH, Chhowalla M, Iqbal Z, Sesti F. Single-walled carbon nanotubes are a new class of ion 
channel blockers. J Biol Chem. 2003; 278:50212–50216. [PubMed: 14522977] 
194. Warheit DB, Laurence BR, Reed KL, Roach DH, Reynolds GAM, Webb TR. Comparative 
pulmonary toxicity assessment of single-wall carbon nanotubes in rats. Toxicol Sci. 2004; 
77:117–125. [PubMed: 14514968] 
195. Lam CW, James JT, McCluskey R, Hunter RL. Pulmonary toxicity of single-wall carbon 
nanotubes in mice 7 and 90 days after intratracheal instillation. Toxicol Sci. 2004; 77:126–134. 
[PubMed: 14514958] 
196. Al Faraj A, Bessaad A, Cieslar K, Lacroix G, Canet-Soulas E, Cremillieux Y. Long-term follow-
up of lung biodistribution and effect of instilled SWCNTs using multiscale imaging techniques. 
Nanotechnology. 2010; 21
197. Donaldson K, Murphy FA, Duffin R, Poland CA. Asbestos, carbon nanotubes and the pleural 
mesothelium: a review of the hypothesis regarding the role of long fibre retention in the parietal 
pleura, inflammation and mesothelioma. Part Fibre Toxicol. 2010; 7
198. Murphy FA, Poland CA, Duffin R, Al-Jamal KT, Ali-Boucetta H, Nunes A, Byrne F, Prina-Mello 
A, Volkov Y, Li S, Mather SJ, Bianco A, Prato M, Macnee W, Wallace WA, Kostarelos K, 
Donaldson K. Length-dependent retention of carbon nanotubes in the pleural space of mice 
initiates sustained inflammation and progressive fibrosis on the parietal pleura. Am J Pathol. 
2011; 178:2587–2600. [PubMed: 21641383] 
199. Gurr JR, Wang ASS, Chen CH, Jan KY. Ultrafine titanium dioxide particles in the absence of 
photoactivation can induce oxidative damage to human bronchial epithelial cells. Toxicology. 
2005; 213:66–73. [PubMed: 15970370] 
200. Petkovic J, Zegura B, Stevanovic M, Drnovsek N, Uskokovic D, Novak S, Filipic M. DNA 
damage and alterations in expression of DNA damage responsive genes induced by TiO2 
nanoparticles in human hepatoma HepG2 cells. Nanotoxicology. 2011; 5:341–353. [PubMed: 
21067279] 
Sharifi et al.
Page 32
Chem Soc Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 33 (native) -----
201. Ispas C, Andreescu D, Patel A, Goia DV, Andreescu S, Wallace KN. Toxicity and developmental 
defects of different sizes and shape nickel nanoparticles in zebrafish. Environ Sci Technol. 2009; 
43:6349–6356. [PubMed: 19746736] 
202. Chithrani BD, Ghazani AA, Chan WCW. Determining the size and shape dependence of gold 
nanoparticle uptake into mammalian cells. Nano Lett. 2006; 6:662–668. [PubMed: 16608261] 
203. Hamilton RF, Wu NQ, Porter D, Buford M, Wolfarth M, Holian A. Particle length-dependent 
titanium dioxide nanomaterials toxicity and bioactivity. Part Fibre Toxicol. 2009; 6
204. Hartig SM, Greene RR, Dikov MM, Prokop A, Davidson JM. Multifunctional nanoparticulate 
polyelectrolyte complexes. Pharm Res. 2007; 24:2353–2369. [PubMed: 17932727] 
205. Lee MK, Lim SJ, Kim CK. Preparation, characterization and in vitro cytotoxicity of paclitaxel-
loaded sterically stabilized solid lipid nanoparticles. Biomaterials. 2007; 28:2137–2146. 
[PubMed: 17257668] 
206. Schaffazick SR, Pohlmann AR, Dalla-Costa T, Guterres SS. Freeze-drying polymeric colloidal 
suspensions: Nanocapsules, nanospheres and nanodispersion. A comparative study. Eur J Pharm 
Biopharm. 2003; 56:501–505. [PubMed: 14602195] 
207. Aaron JS, Greene AC, Kotula PG, Bachand GD, Timlin JA. Advanced optical imaging reveals 
the dependence of particle geometry on interactions between CdSe quantum dots and immune 
cells. Small. 2011; 7:334–341. [PubMed: 21294262] 
208. Alkilany AM, Nagaria PK, Wyatt MD, Murphy CJ. Cation exchange on the surface of gold 
nanorods with a polymerizable surfactant: Polymerization, stability, and toxicity evaluation. 
Langmuir. 2010; 26:9328–9333. [PubMed: 20356032] 
209. Andelman T, Gordonov S, Busto G, Moghe PV, Riman RE. Synthesis and cytotoxicity of Y2O3 
nanoparticles of various morphologies. Nanoscale Res Lett. 2010; 5:263–273. [PubMed: 
20672046] 
210. Hsiao IL, Huang YJ. Effects of various physicochemical characteristics on the toxicities of ZnO 
and TiO2 nanoparticles toward human lung epithelial cells. Sci Total Environ. 2011; 409:1219–
1228. [PubMed: 21255821] 
211. Peng X, Palma S, Fisher NS, Wong SS. Effect of morphology of ZnO nanostructures on their 
toxicity to marine algae. Aquat Toxicol. 2011; 102:186–196. [PubMed: 21356181] 
212. Sun YN, Wang CD, Zhang XM, Ren L, Tian XH. Shape dependence of gold nanoparticles on in 
vivo acute toxicological effects and biodistribution. J Nanosci Nanotechnol. 2011; 11:1210–1216. 
[PubMed: 21456161] 
213. Yang DP, Cui DX. Advances and prospects of gold nanorods. Chem–Asian J. 2008; 3:2010–
2022. [PubMed: 18956474] 
214. Mercer RR, Scabilloni J, Wang L, Kisin E, Murray AR, Schwegler-Berry D, Shvedova AA, 
Castranova V. Alteration of deposition pattern and pulmonary response as a result of improved 
dispersion of aspirated single-walled carbon nanotubes in a mouse model. Am J Physiol: Lung 
Cell Mol Physiol. 2008; 294:L87–L97. [PubMed: 18024722] 
215. Vevers WF, Jha AN. Genotoxic and cytotoxic potential of titanium dioxide (TiO2) nanoparticles 
on fish cells in vitro. Ecotoxicology. 2008; 17:410–420. [PubMed: 18491228] 
216. Jung H, Choi H. Kinetics and mechanism of heterogeneous catalytic ozonation of para-
chlorobenzoic acid in the presence of nanosize ZnO. 2007:213–217.
217. Su F, Lv L, Fang YL, Liu T, Cooper AI, Xiu SZ. Thermally reduced ruthenium nanoparticles as a 
highly active heterogeneous catalyst for hydrogenation of monoaromatics. J Am Chem Soc. 
2007; 129:14213–14223. [PubMed: 17973376] 
218. Mortensen LJ, Oberdörster G, Pentland AP, DeLouise LA. In vivo skin penetration of quantum 
dot nanoparticles in the murine model: The effect of U.V.R. Nano Lett. 2008; 8:2779–2787. 
[PubMed: 18687009] 
219. Hoshino A, Fujioka K, Oku T, Suga M, Sasaki YF, Ohta T, Yasuhara M, Suzuki K, Yamamoto 
K. Physicochemical properties and cellular toxicity of nanocrystal quantum dots depend on their 
surface modification. Nano Lett. 2004; 4:2163–2169.
220. Goodman CM, McCusker CD, Yilmaz T, Rotello VM. Toxicity of gold nanoparticles 
functionalized with cationic and anionic side chains. Bioconjugate Chem. 2004; 15:897–900.
Sharifi et al.
Page 33
Chem Soc Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 34 (native) -----
221. Saxena RK, Williams W, Mcgee JK, Daniels MJ, Boykin E, Gilmour MI. Enhanced in vitro and 
in vivo toxicity of polydispersed acid-functionalized single-wall carbon nanotubes. 
Nanotoxicology. 2007; 1:291–300.
222. Pietroiusti A, Massimiani M, Fenoglio I, Colonna M, Valentini F, Palleschi G, Camaioni A, 
Magrini A, Siracusa G, Bergamaschi A, Sgambato A, Campagnolo L. Low doses of pristine and 
oxidized single-wall carbon nanotubes affect mammalian embryonic development. ACS Nano. 
2011; 5:4624–4633. [PubMed: 21615177] 
223. Lockman PR, Koziara JM, Mumper RJ, Allen DD. Nanoparticle surface charges alter blood–brain 
barrier integrity and permeability. J Drug Targeting. 2004; 12:635–641.
224. Kohli AK, Alpar HO. Potential use of nanoparticles for transcutaneous vaccine delivery: effect of 
particle size and charge. Int J Pharm. 2004; 275:13–17. [PubMed: 15081134] 
225. Bhattacharjee S, de Haan LHJ, Evers NM, Jiang X, Marcelis ATM, Zuilhof H, Rietjens IMCM, 
Alink GM. Role of surface charge and oxidative stress in cytotoxicity of organic monolayer-
coated silicon nanoparticles towards macrophage NR8383 cells. Part Fibre Toxicol. 2010:7. 
[PubMed: 20331848] 
226. Heiden TCK, Dengler E, Kao WJ, Heideman W, Peterson RE. Developmental toxicity of low 
generation PAMAM dendrimers in zebrafish. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2007; 225:70–79. 
[PubMed: 17764713] 
227. Malik N, Evagorou EG, Duncan R. Dendrimer-platinate: a novel approach to cancer 
chemotherapy. Anti-Cancer Drugs. 1999; 10:767–776. [PubMed: 10573209] 
228. Harper S, Usenko C, Hutchison JE, Maddux BLS, Tanguay RL. In vivo biodistribution and 
toxicity depends on nanomaterial composition, size, surface functionalisation and route of 
exposure. J Exp Nanosci. 2008; 3:195–206.
229. Griffitt RJ, Luo J, Gao J, Bonzongo JC, Barber DS. Effects of particle composition and species on 
toxicity of metallic nanomaterials in aquatic organisms. Environ Toxicol Chem. 2008; 27:1972–
1978. [PubMed: 18690762] 
230. Chen JY, Dong X, Zhao J, Tang GP. In vivo acute toxicity of titanium dioxide nanoparticles to 
mice after intraperitioneal injection. J Appl Toxicol. 2009; 29:330–337. [PubMed: 19156710] 
231. Kirchner C, Liedl T, Kudera S, Pellegrino T, Javier AM, Gaub HE, Stozle S, Fertig N, Parak WJ. 
Cytotoxicity of colloidal CdSe and CdSe/ZnS nanoparticles. Nano Lett. 2005; 5:331–338. 
[PubMed: 15794621] 
232. Moon HS, Guo DD, Song HH, Kim IY, Jin HL, Kim YK, Chung CS, Choi YJ, Lee HK, Cho CS. 
Regulation of adipocyte differentiation by PEGylated all-trans retinoic acid: reduced cytotoxicity 
and attenuated lipid accumulation. J Nutr Biochem. 2007; 18:322–331. [PubMed: 16963253] 
233. Morris MC, Gros E, Aldrian-Herrada G, Choob M, Archdeacon J, Heitz F, Divita G. A non-
covalent peptide-based carrier for in vivo delivery of DNA mimics. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007:35. 
[PubMed: 17148476] 
234. Otsuka H, Nagasaki Y, Kataoka K. PEGylated nanoparticles for biological and pharmaceutical 
applications. Adv Drug Delivery Rev. 2003; 55:403–419.
235. Kato T, Yashiro T, Murata Y, Herbert DC, Oshikawa K, Bando M, Ohno S, Sugiyama Y. 
Evidence that exogenous substances can be phagocytized by alveolar epithelial cells and 
transported into blood capillaries. Cell Tissue Res. 2003; 311:47–51. [PubMed: 12483283] 
236. Weissleder R, Stark DD, Engelstad BL, Bacon BR, Compton CC, White DL, Jacobs P, Lewis J. 
Superparamagnetic iron oxide: pharmacokinetics and toxicity. Am J Roentgenol. 1989; 152:167–
173. [PubMed: 2783272] 
237. Lacava ZGM, Azevedo RB, Lacava LM, Martins EV, Garcia VAP, Rébula CA, Lemos APC, 
Sousa MH, Morais PC, Tourinho FA, Da Silva MF. Toxic effects of ionic magnetic fluids in 
mice. J Magn Magn Mater. 1999; 194:90–95.
238. Lacava ZGM, Azevedo RB, Martins EV, Lacava LM, Freitas MLL, Garcia VAP, Rébula CA, 
Lemos APC, Sousa MH, Tourinho FA, Da Silva MF, Morais PC. Biological effects of magnetic 
fluids: toxicity studies. J Magn Magn Mater. 1999; 201:431–434.
239. Schulze E, Ferrucci JR, Poss K, Lapointe L. Cellular uptake and trafficking of prototypical 
magnetic iron oxide label in vitro. Invest Radiol. 1995; 30:604–610. [PubMed: 8557500] 
Sharifi et al.
Page 34
Chem Soc Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 35 (native) -----
240. Derfus AM, Chan WCW, Bhatia SN. Probing the cytotoxicity of semiconductor quantum dots. 
Nano Lett. 2004; 4:11–18.
241. Guo G, Liu W, Liang J, He Z, Xu H, Yang X. Probing the cytotoxicity of CdSe quantum dots 
with surface modification. Mater Lett. 2007; 61:1641–1644.
242. Su Y, He Y, Lu H, Sai L, Li Q, Li W, Wang L, Shen P, Huang Q, Fan C. The cytotoxicity of 
cadmium based, aqueous phase-synthesized, quantum dots and its modulation by surface coating. 
Biomaterials. 2009; 30:19–25. [PubMed: 18848354] 
243. Zhao MX, Xia Q, Feng XD, Zhu XH, Mao ZW, Ji LN, Wang K. Synthesis, biocompatibility and 
cell labeling of l-arginine-functional β-cyclodextrin-modified quantum dot probes. Biomaterials. 
2010; 31:4401–4408. [PubMed: 20189641] 
244. Chen F, Gerion D. Fluorescent CdSe/ZnS nanocrystal–peptide conjugates for long-term, nontoxic 
imaging and nuclear targeting in living cells. Nano Lett. 2004; 4:1827–1832.
245. Mancini MC, Kairdolf BA, Smith AM, Nie S. Oxidative quenching and degradation of polymer-
encapsulated quantum dots: New insights into the long-term fate and toxicity of nanocrystals in 
vivo. J Am Chem Soc. 2008; 130:10836–10837. [PubMed: 18652463] 
246. Geys J, Nemmar A, Verbeken E, Smolders E, Ratoi M, Hoylaerts MF, Nemery B, Hoet PHM. 
Acute toxicity and prothrombotic effects of quantum dots: impact of surface charge. Environ 
Health Perspect. 2008; 116:1607–1613. [PubMed: 19079709] 
247. Kim S, Fisher B, Eisler HJ, Bawendi M. Type-II quantum dots: CdTe/CdSe(core/shell) and CdSe/
ZnTe(core/shell) heterostructures. J Am Chem Soc. 2003; 125:11466–11467. [PubMed: 
13129327] 
248. Bang J, Chon B, Won N, Nam J, Joo T, Kim S. Spectral switching of type-II quantum dots by 
charging. J Phys Chem C. 2009; 113:6320–6323.
249. Blackman B, Battaglia DM, Mishima TD, Johnson MB, Peng X. Control of the morphology of 
complex semiconductor nanocrystals with a type II heterojunction, dots vs. peanuts, by thermal 
cycling. Chem Mater. 2007; 19:3815–3821.
250. Dorfs D, Franzi T, Osovsky R, Brumer M, Lifshitz E, Klar TA, Eychmüller A. Type-I and type-II 
nanoscale heterostructures based on CdTe nanocrystals: A comparative study. Small. 2008; 
4:1148–1152. [PubMed: 18666165] 
251. Zgaren I, Sellami K, Jaziri S. Size-dependent optical properties in II–VI quantum-dot/quantum-
well heterostructures. Sensor Lett. 2009; 7:967–971.
252. Deng D, Chen X, Zhang J, Liu F, Cao J, Gu Y. Aqueous synthesis of PbS quantum dots for 
noninvasive near-infrared fluorescence imaging in a mouse model. 2010
253. Kuo TR, Lee CF, Lin SJ, Dong CY, Chen CC, Tan HY. Studies of intracorneal distribution and 
cytotoxicity of quantum dots: Risk assessment of eye exposure. Chem Res Toxicol. 2010; 
24:253–261. [PubMed: 21261264] 
254. Oostendorp M, Douma K, Wagenaar A, Slenter JMGM, Hackeng TM, Van Zandvoort MAMJ, 
Post MJ, Backes WH. Molecular magnetic resonance imaging of myocardial angiogenesis after 
acute myocardial infarction. Circulation. 2010; 121:775–783. [PubMed: 20124125] 
255. Sharma P, Singh A, Brown SC, Bengtsson N, Walter GA, Grobmyer SR, Iwakuma N, Santra S, 
Scott EW, Moudgil BM. Multimodal nanoparticulate bioimaging contrast agents. Methods Mol 
Biol (Clifton, NJ). 2010; 624:67–81.
256. Sun D, Yang K, Zheng G, Li Z, Cao Y. Study on effect of peptide-conjugated near-infrared 
fluorescent quantum dots on the clone formation, proliferation, apoptosis, and tumorigenicity 
ability of human buccal squamous cell carcinoma cell line BcaCD885. Int J Nanomed. 2010; 
5:401–405.
257. Mahmoudi M, Lynch I, Ejtehadi R, Monopoli M, Laurent S. Protein–nanoparticle interactions: 
possibilities and limitations. Chem Rev. 2010 in press. 
258. Mahmoudi M, Laurent S, Azadmanesh K, Journeay WS. Effect of nanoparticles on the cell life 
cycle. Chem Rev. 2011 in press. 
259. Mahmoudi M, Milani AS, Stroeve P. Surface architecture of superparamagnetic iron oxide 
nanoparticles for application in drug delivery and their biological response: a review. Int J 
Biomed Nanosci Nanotechnol. 2010; 1:164–201.
Sharifi et al.
Page 35
Chem Soc Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 36 (native) -----
260. Mahmoudi M, Sardari S, Shokrgozar MA, Laurent S, Stroeve P. Interaction of superparamagnetic 
iron oxide nanoparticles with human transferrin: Irreversible changes in human transferrin 
conformation. Nanoscale. 2011; 3:1127–1138. [PubMed: 21210042] 
261. Amiri H, Mahmoudi M, Lascialfari A. Superparamagnetic colloidal nanocrystal clusters coated 
with polyethylene glycol fumarate: A possible novel theranostic agent. Nanoscale. 3:1022–1030. 
[PubMed: 21152576] 
262. Berry CC, Wells S, Charles S, Curtis ASG. Dextran and albumin derivatised iron oxide 
nanoparticles: Influence on fibroblasts in vitro. Biomaterials. 2003; 24:4551–4557. [PubMed: 
12950997] 
263. Xie J, Xu C, Kohler N, Hou Y, Sun S. Controlled PEGylation of monodisperse Fe3O4 
nanoparticles for reduced non-specific uptake by macrophage cells. Adv Mater. 2007; 19:3163–
3166.
264. Cho WS, Cho M, Jeong J, Choi M, Cho HY, Han BS, Kim SH, Kim HO, Lim YT, Chung BH. 
Acute toxicity and pharmacokinetics of 13 nm-sized PEG-coated gold nanoparticles. Toxicol 
Appl Pharmacol. 2009; 236:16–24. [PubMed: 19162059] 
265. Hu Y, Xie J, Tong YW, Wang CH. Effect of PEG conformation and particle size on the cellular 
uptake efficiency of nanoparticles with the HepG2 cells. J Controlled Release. 2007; 118:7–17.
266. Lacerda L, Soundararajan A, Singh R, Pastorin G, Al-Jamal KT, Turton J, Frederik P, Herrero 
MA, Li S, Bao A, Emfietzoglou D, Mather S, Phillips WT, Prato M, Bianco A, Goins B, 
Kostarelos K. Dynamic imaging of functionalized multi-walled carbon nanotube systemic 
circulation and urinary excretion. Adv Mater. 2008; 20:225–230.
267. Nel AE, Madler L, Velegol D, Xia T, Hoek EMV, Somasundaran P, Klaessig F, Castranova V, 
Thompson M. Understanding biophysicochemical interactions at the nano–bio interface. Nat 
Mater. 2009; 8:543–557. [PubMed: 19525947] 
268. Verma A, Uzun O, Hu Y, Han HS, Watson N, Chen S, Irvine DJ, Stellacci F. Surface-structure-
regulated cell-membrane penetration by monolayer-protected nanoparticles. Nat Mater. 2008; 
7:588–595. [PubMed: 18500347] 
269. Lin YS, Haynes CL. Impacts of mesoporous silica nanoparticle size, pore ordering, and pore 
integrity on hemolytic activity. J Am Chem Soc. 2010; 132:4834–4842. [PubMed: 20230032] 
270. De Angelis F, Pujia A, Falcone C, Iaccino E, Palmieri C, Liberale C, Mecarini F, Candeloro P, 
Luberto L, De Laurentiis A, Das G, Scala G, Di Fabrizio E. Water soluble nanoporous 
nanoparticle for in vivo targeted drug delivery and controlled release in B cells tumor context. 
Nanoscale. 2010; 2:2230–2236. [PubMed: 20835434] 
271. Park JH, Gu L, Von Maltzahn G, Ruoslahti E, Bhatia SN, Sailor MJ. Biodegradable luminescent 
porous silicon nanoparticles for in vivo applications. Nat Mater. 2009; 8:331–336. [PubMed: 
19234444] 
272. Chen D, Li L, Tang F, Qi S. Facile and scalable synthesis of tailored silica “nanorattle” structures. 
Adv Mater. 2009; 21:3804–3807.
273. Li L, Tang F, Liu H, Liu T, Hao N, Chen D, Teng X, He J. In vivo delivery of silica nanorattle 
encapsulated docetaxel for liver cancer therapy with low toxicity and high efficacy. ACS Nano. 
2010; 11:6874–6882. [PubMed: 20973487] 
274. Erogbogbo F, Yong K, Roy I, Hu R, Law W, Zhao W, Ding H, Wu F, Kumar R, Swihart MT, 
Prasad PN. In vivo targeted cancer imaging, sentinel lymph node mapping and multi-channel 
imaging with biocompatible silicon nanocrystals. ACS Nano. 2011; 5:413–423. [PubMed: 
21138323] 
275. Sayes CM, Marchione AA, Reed KL, Warheit DB. Comparative pulmonary toxicity assessments 
of C60 water suspensions in rats: few differences in fullerene toxicity in vivo in contrast to in 
vitro profiles. Nano Lett. 2007; 8:2399–2406. [PubMed: 17630811] 
276. Mu CJ, LaVan DA, Langer RS, Zetter BR. Self-assembled gold nanoparticle molecular probes for 
detecting proteolytic activity in vivo. ACS Nano. 2010; 3:1511–1520. [PubMed: 20146506] 
277. Eghtedari N, Liopo AV, Copland JA, Oraevsky AA, Motamedi M. Engineering of hetero-
functional gold nanorods for the in vivo molecular targeting of breast cancer cells. Nano Lett. 
2009; 9:287–291. [PubMed: 19072129] 
Sharifi et al.
Page 36
Chem Soc Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 37 (native) -----
278. Bhang SH, Won N, Lee TJ, Jin H, Nam J, Park J, Chung H, Park H, Sung Y, Hahn SK, Kim Y, 
Kim S. Hyaluronic acid quantum dot conjugates for in vivo lymphatic vessel imaging. ACS 
Nano. 2009; 3:1389–1398. [PubMed: 19476339] 
279. Diagaradjane P, Deorukhkar A, Gelovani JG, Maru DM, Krishnan M. Gadolinium chloride 
augments tumor-specific imaging of targeted quantum dots in vivo. ACS Nano. 2010; 4:4131–
4141. [PubMed: 20586481] 
280. Ajima K, Murakami T, Mizoguchi Y, Tsuchida K, Ichihashi T, Iijima S, Yudasaka M. 
Enhancement of in vivo anticancer effects of cisplatin by incorporation inside single-wall carbon 
nanohorns. ACS Nano. 2008; 2:2057–2064. [PubMed: 19206452] 
281. Miyawaki J, Matsumura S, Yuge R, Murakami T, Sato S, Tomida A, Tsuruo T, Ichihashi T, 
Fujinami T, Irie H, Tsuchida K, Iijima S, Shiba K, Yudasaka M. Biodistribution and 
ultrastructural localization of single-walled carbon nanohorns determined in vivo with embedded 
Gd2O3 labels. ACS Nano. 2009; 3:1399–1406. [PubMed: 19480401] 
282. Altinolu EI, Russin TJ, Kaiser JM, Barth BM, Eklund PC, Kester M, Adair JH. Near-infrared 
emitting fluorophore-doped calcium phosphate nanoparticles for in vivo imaging of human breast 
cancer. ACS Nano. 2008; 2:2075–2084. [PubMed: 19206454] 
283. Lee KJ, Nallathamby PD, Browning LM, Osgood CJ, Xu XH. In vivo imaging of transport and 
biocompatibility of single silver nanoparticles in early development of zebrafish embryos. ACS 
Nano. 2007; 1:133–143. [PubMed: 19122772] 
284. George S, Xia T, Rallo R, Zhao Y, Ji Z, Lin S, Wang X, Zhang H, France B, Schoenfeld D, 
Damoiseaux R, Liu R, Bradley KA, Cohen Y, Nel AE. Use of a high-throughput screening 
approach coupled with in vivo zebrafish embryo screening to develop hazard ranking for 
engineered nanomaterials. ACS Nano. 2011; 5:1805–1817. [PubMed: 21323332] 
285. Jiang JK, Oberdorster G, Biswas P. Characterization of size, surface charge, and agglomeration 
state of nanoparticle dispersions for toxicological studies. J Nanopart Res. 2009; 11:77–89.
286. Colvin VL. The potential environmental impact of engineered nanomaterials. Nat Biotechnol. 
2003; 21:1166–1170. [PubMed: 14520401] 
Sharifi et al.
Page 37
Chem Soc Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 38 (native) -----
Fig. 1. 
In vivo and in vitro studies for nanotoxicity research.
Sharifi et al.
Page 38
Chem Soc Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 39 (native) -----
Fig. 2. 
Scheme showing the importance of the surface charge on the yield of cell uptake. Positively 
charged NPs illustrate significant cellular uptake, in comparison with negative and neutral 
ones, due to the attractive electrostatic interactions with the cell membrane. In addition, 
positively charged NPs are capable of acting as “proton sponges” that disrupt the lysosomes 
to enhance cytoplasmic delivery and induce cell death signaling cascades. The bottom left 
and right panels show TEM images of HeLa cells which have been exposed to negatively 
and positively charged SPIONs, respectively (unpublished work by M. Mahmoudi).
Sharifi et al.
Page 39
Chem Soc Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 40 (native) -----
Fig. 3. 
The diverse forms of engineered nanomaterials: (a) C60 dried onto filter paper is a black 
powder (inset: molecular structure of C60); (b) fullerenes dissolved in a nonpolar solvent 
form a purple solution (top layer); and (c) with relatively mild chemical treatments, such as 
evaporation of the nonpolar phase, C60 becomes water stable in the yellow aqueous phase. 
The material is present as colloidal aggregates that contain between 100–1000 fullerene 
molecules. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 286)
Sharifi et al.
Page 40
Chem Soc Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

----- Page 41 (native) -----
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Sharifi et al.
Page 41
Table 1
Common blood compatibility test (coagulation test) of NPs
Blood test
Test description
Measured parameter
Test procedure
Prothrombin time (PT)
Evaluates extrinsic coagulation 
pathway
Coagulation time
Thromboplastin and Ca2+ are added to a blood 
sample containing NPs. The time for clot 
formation is measured.
Activated clotting time 
(ACT)
Evaluates coagulation in 
heparin-treated blood
Coagulation time
Similar to PT using heparinized blood
Activated partial 
thromboplastin time 
(APTT)
Evaluates intrinsic coagulation 
pathway
Coagulation time
NPs are added to a plasma sample, in which the 
intrinsic pathway is activated by the addition of 
phospholipid, an activator (kaolin, or micronized 
silica), and Ca2+.84,85
Thrombin time (TT)
Evaluates blood clot formation 
rates after thrombin treatment 
compared with that of a normal 
plasma control
Coagulation time
Addition of a standard amount of thrombin to 
plasma that has been depleted of platelets but 
contains NPs. Clotting time is measured.
Chem Soc Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 06.

----- Page 42 (native) -----
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Sharifi et al.
Page 42
Table 2
Pharmacokinetics studies63
Study
NPs
Main findings
Ref.
PK in BALB/c mice
DTPA-CNT with radiotracer [111In]
Functionalized SWNT are not retained in any of the 
reticuloendothelial system organs (liver or spleen) and are rapidly 
cleared from systemic blood circulation through the renal excretion 
route
103
PK in A/J mice
SiRNA DOTAP/DOPE complexes 
(250 nm)
SiRNA RGD-PEG-PEI complexes 
(130 nm)
Complexation of siRNA with DOTAP/DOPE or RGD-PEG-PEI 
did not affect siRNA blood levels
Complexes distributed mainly in liver and kidney with a rapid renal 
clearance by glomerular filtration
DOTAP/DOPE: highest tissue levels were found in the liver, lung 
and kidney
RGD-PEG-PEI: accumulated in the liver, lung, kidney, spleen
118
PK in BALB/c Mice
SPIO 20 nm, nanoferrite 30 nm and 
100 nm, radioimmuno NPs
Clearance of the NPs and mean concentrations in lung, kidney and 
lymph nodes were similar to 111In-ChL6-NP
Similar mean uptake levels in tumors
119
PK and biodistribution 
in Wistar rats
USPIO and USPIO-PHO
Long elimination half-life (255 min for USPIO and 776 min for 
USPIO-PHO)
Accumulation in lungs and liver
120
Distribution in Wistar 
rats
Gold NPs
10 nm particles were present in various organ systems (liver, 
spleen, kidney, thymus, heart, testis)
Larger particles were only detected in blood, liver and spleen
121
Distribution in ICR 
mice
50 nm MNP-SiO2 core–shell 
structure (RITC)
The particles were distributed in all organs, and the distribution 
pattern was time dependent
122
Distribution at ICR 
mice
Water soluble, hydroxylated SWCNT 
with radioactive 125I
Accumulated in the liver and kidneys, excreted in the urine after 18 
days
112
Chem Soc Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 06.

----- Page 43 (native) -----
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Sharifi et al.
Page 43
Table 3
Size-dependent in vivo study on nanomaterials
Nanomaterial
Toxicity study
Species
Study parameters
Toxicity mechanism
Administration route
Ref.
Copper
Biochemistry analysis 
(ceruloplasmin, serum copper 
and urine copper)
Mouse
Changes in blood gas and plasma 
electrolyte content of copper 
elements in renal tissues, serum 
and urine
Accumulation of alkalescent substance
Oral
158, 161
Silica
Immunohistochemistry
Mouse
Tissue distribution, excretion in 
urine and feces
Inflammatory response of the liver for 
the 100 and 200 nm particles. All 
particles remained as aggregates in the 
spleen through macrophage trapping
Intravenous
178, 179
TiO2
Morphometric, micro-array 
gene expression, and pathway 
analyses
Mouse
Up-regulation of placenta growth 
factor and other chemokines 
(CXCL1, CXCL5, and CCL3)
Pulmonary emphysema, macrophages 
accumulation, extensive disruption of 
alveolar septa, type II pneumocyte 
hyperplasia, and epithelial cell 
apoptosis
Intratracheal
180, 181
Gold
Percent mortality
Zebra-fish, mouse
Size dependent distribution in 
liver, lung, spleen, kidneys and 
brain
Au NP of sizes of 3, 10, 50, and 100 
nm did not show toxicity
Intravenous (mouse), exposure 
of zebra fish embryo to 
particles
163, 165, 167
Carbon nanotube
Mouse
Translocation of NP from lungs 
to blood circulation and other 
organs
Significantly less translocation and 
accumulation with 80 nm than with 20 
nm NP
Inhalation
171
Silver
Blood biochemistry; 
histopathology measurement 
of cytokines and IGE and 
immuno phenotyping
Mouse
Distribution in the body
Organ toxicity and inflammatory 
responses, cytokine production, 
increased B cell distribution, and 
inflammatory cell infiltrates
Oral
182
CdTe
MTT assay, acute toxicity
Rat
Urinary or blood changes
Intravenous
183
Polystyrene
LDH assay
Rat
Protein assay
Reactive oxygen species
Sub-conjunctival, instillation
184, 185
PLGA
Histopathology assays, tissue 
distribution
Mouse
Histopathology assays
No toxicity
Oral
176
PCL
Histological evaluation of 
heart, liver, spleen, lung, and 
kidneys
Rats
No toxicity
Intravenous
186
Chem Soc Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 06.

----- Page 44 (native) -----
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Sharifi et al.
Page 44
Table 4
Effect of NPs’ shape on biological response
Particle shape
Particle examples
Toxicity mechanism
Physiological response
Ref.
Iron oxide, gold
Internalization and membrane 
disruption. Highest cellular 
uptake with least membrane 
disruption among all shapes, 
thus least shape dependent 
toxicity
Cell division dysfunction and 
disturbed cellular trafficking; 
Mechanical interference with 
the mitotic spindle and DNA
204–206
SWCNT, MWCNT, 
TiO2, gold, 
mesoporous silica
Internalization and membrane 
disruption. Severe influence on 
initiation of phagocytosis. 
Blockage of transport channels. 
Highest distorting force on cell 
membrane among all shapes. 
Smaller aspect ratios lead to 
faster internalization and less 
cell membrane disruption
Chronic inflammation due to 
frustrated phagocytosis, 
mutagenic events, 
mesothelioma formation
207–213
Gold
Dependent on the average radius 
of curvature. Disruption of 
membrane integrity and 
transport may occur
Toxicity due to chronic 
inflammation or impaired 
phagocytosis
202
Nickel, carbon 
black, TiO2
Aggregation or agglomeration 
changes size of particles thus 
increasing their visibility to 
macrophages
Aggregation changes retention 
time of particles; changes in 
size may increase or decrease 
toxicity
143, 214, 215
ZnO, iron oxide
Aggregation and cell membrane 
disruption may be dependent on 
the prevalence of high aspect 
ratio particles
Combinational effect similar 
to aggregated particles and 
fibrous particles
16, 216, 217
Chem Soc Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 06.

----- Page 45 (native) -----
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Sharifi et al.
Page 45
Particle shape
Particle examples
Toxicity mechanism
Physiological response
Ref.
Quantum dots
Similar to spherical NPs
Similar to spherical NPs
218
Chem Soc Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 06.

----- Page 46 (native) -----
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Sharifi et al.
Page 46
Table 5
Significant enhancements on the new biological applications of various NPs
NPs
Physicochemical properties
Animal model
Possible toxicity mechanism
Remarks
Ref.
Silica Nanorattle
Size: 125 nm with very narrow size 
distribution; detectable by doped 
fluorescent agents
Mice (liver cancer)
ROS production, however much less 
than non-porous silica due to less 
surface area
High drug loading capability; good 
conjugation potential with biomolecules; 
suitable contrast for in vivo detection using 
fluorescent agents; coating with polymeric 
materials (e.g. PEG) improves therapeutic 
efficacy, and reduces the toxicity of antitumor 
agents.
272, 273
Silicon nanocrystals
Overall size: 50 to 120 nm; formed 
by spherical aggregates of 
crystalline particles; good 
functionalization capability with 
organic molecules
Mice (different organs)
ROS production due to crystals and 
surface defects; membrane disruption
Better in vivo compatibility in comparison 
with QDs; suitable luminescent properties 
and long tumor accumulation times (> 40 h); 
targeted cancer imaging and sentinel lymph 
node mapping; oxidant injury and toxicity 
can be reduced by increasing size (e.g. 
aggregation) or changing charge
271, 274
Fullerenes
Size: 160 ±50 nm; zeta potential: 
−30 mV
Rat (lung tissue)
ROS production; oxidant injury to 
cellular membranes
Addition of ionic groups decreases systematic 
toxicity due to radical generation by the 
Fullerene surface (e.g. C60(OH)24)
275
Gold
Size 20 nm with very narrow size 
distribution; capability to be 
conjugated with variety of 
biochemical compounds
Athymic nude mice 
(tumor phantom model)
AU NPs can cause nephrotoxicity and 
eryptosis, or they can interact with 
DNA. Nevertheless, they are amongst 
the safest NPs reported to date.
Used as near-infrared fluorescence (NIRF) 
imaging probes by adding variable surface 
compositions of dye-labeled peptide 
substrates (for example Quasar 670); the 
probe enhances particle circulation time and 
image contrast in vivo. Cytotoxicity can be 
mitigated by modifying size or surface charge
276
Gold nanorods
Aspect ratio: ~ 3 (diameter of 15 
nm and length of 50 nm)
Athymic nude mice 
(breast cancer tumors)
Nanorods are more internalized in the 
intracellular environment compared to 
spherical particles, as their high aspect 
ratio may retard initiation of 
phagocytosis. The slight toxicity of 
gold nanorods is due to toxic capping 
agents (e.g. 
ethyltrimethylammonium).
In comparison to spherical NPs, nanoroads 
have better capabilities as a probe for 
molecular imaging purposes; in order to 
reduce the toxicity of capping agents and to 
increase the blood circulation time of 
nanorods, biocompatible polymers (e.g. PEG) 
should be used as coating materials.
277
Semiconductor quantum dots 
(QDs)
Size: 80 nm
Mice (liver tissue), and 
lymphatic vessel
Release of toxic heavy metal ions (Cd 
and Se ions)
They usually belong to group II–VI elements 
of the periodic table, and have core-shell 
morphology. They are traceable by in vivo 
targeted fluorescence imaging. Their major 
short comings are the short circulation time 
and removal by reticuloendothelial system 
(RES) which causes reduction of tumor-
specific signal, and the heavy metals used in 
their construction can cause long-term 
toxicity. Their fluorescence intensity in 
tumors can be enhanced significantly (more 
than 50%) by conjugation of targeting agents, 
e.g. epidermal growth factors. To reduce 
toxicity, the surface should be coated with 
278, 279
Chem Soc Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 06.

----- Page 47 (native) -----
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Sharifi et al.
Page 47
NPs
Physicochemical properties
Animal model
Possible toxicity mechanism
Remarks
Ref.
biocompatible polymers or inorganic
materials.
Single-walled carbon nanohorns
Diameter 2–5 nm, and length 40–
50 nm. Single-walled carbon 
nanohorns (diameter 100 nm)
Mice (liver and spleen 
tissues)
Production of ROS (metal impurities) 
followed by inflammatory effects
Determination of their biodistribution is 
inconvenient; however, in order to overcome 
this problem, Gd2O3NPs can be embedded 
within single-walled carbon nanohorns (i.e. 
Gd exhibits a high electron scattering ability). 
For drug delivery purposes, drugs can be 
loaded and stored inside open oxidant holes.
280, 281
Calcium phosphate
Size: <50 nm (10–50 nm)
Breast cancer
Possible ROS production due to 
crystal defects if crystalline, or surface 
defects if amorphous
Good biocompatibility; indocyanine green 
(ICG) molecules can be embedded as a near-
infrared (NIR) emitting fluorophore to 
enhance in vivo contrast. The ICG-
encapsulating NPs have noticeably higher 
fluorescence and stability in vivo compared to 
the free fluorophore. Suitable for deep tissue 
imaging. In order to enhance the circulation 
time, the surface of the NPs should be coated 
or functionalized (e.g. PEG or carboxylate).
282
Silver
Size: 5–46 nm
Zebrafish embryos
Cell suffocation due to inhibitory 
effect of silver ions on respiratory 
enzymes; generation of ROS and 
membrane disruption
Ag NPs have high quantum yields. Ag NPs 
can be used to probe inside embryos. Optical 
properties were fully dependent on the size 
and shape of Ag NPs. There was no trace of 
particle aggregation or photo decomposition, 
thus continuous imaging for long periods of 
time is possible.
283
SiO2 and Al2O3
Sizes: 19 and 12 nm for SiO2 and 
Al2O3, respectively; shape: 
spherical
Zebrafish embryos
ROS production
No physiological and morphological defects. 
Usually coating can reduce toxicity
Pt
Size: 13 nm; shape: spherical
Zebrafish embryos
ROS production
Inhibitory effects on cardiac rate. Pericardial 
edema, low heart beat and mortality were 
observed.
ZnO
Size: 10 nm; shape: Spherical
Zebrafish embryos
ROS production, release of toxic 
cations with damage to cell 
membranes
The most prominent lethalities were 
morphological abnormalities, or interference 
with embryo hatching, unhatched embryos, 
and disintegrated embryos.
Chem Soc Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 06.