

----- Page 1 (native) -----
ORIGINAL PAPER
The Sketch Engine: ten years on
Adam Kilgarriff · Vít Baisa · Jan Bušta · Miloš Jakubíček ·
Vojtěch Kovář · Jan Michelfeit · Pavel Rychlý · Vít Suchomel
Published online: 10 July 2014
© Springer Berlin Heidelberg 2014
Abstract
The Sketch Engine is a leading corpus tool, widely used in lexicogra-
phy. Now, at 10 years old, it is mature software. The Sketch Engine website offers
many ready-to-use corpora, and tools for users to build, upload and install their own
corpora. The paper describes the core functions (word sketches, concordancing,
thesaurus). It outlines the different kinds of users, and the approach taken to
working with many different languages. It then reviews the kinds of corpora
available in the Sketch Engine, gives a brief tour of some of the innovations from
the last few years, and surveys other corpus tools and websites.
Keywords
Corpora · Corpus lexicography · Corpus tools · Word sketches ·
Sketch Engine
1 Introduction
TheSketch Engine isa leadingcorpustool. Ithasbeenwidelyused in lexicography.It is
now 10 years since its launch (Kilgarriff et al. 2004).
Those 10 years have seen dramatic changes. They have seen the near-death of
dictionaries on paper, at the hands of electronic dictionaries.1 They have seen the
Communicated by Yukio Tono.
A. Kilgarriff (&) · V. Baisa · J. Busˇta · M. Jakubı´cˇek · V. Kova´rˇ · J. Michelfeit ·
P. Rychly´ · V. Suchomel
Lexical Computing Ltd, Brighton, UK
e-mail: adam.kilgarriff@gmail.com
V. Baisa · J. Busˇta · M. Jakubı´cˇek · V. Kova´rˇ · J. Michelfeit ·
P. Rychly´ · V. Suchomel
Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic
1 The change is often lamented. Rundell (2012) celebrates it.
123
Lexicography ASIALEX (2014) 1:7-36
DOI 10.1007/s40607-014-0009-9

----- Page 2 (native) -----
emergence of entire new ecosystems of dictionaries on the web, with many new
players (Google, weblio.jp, dictionary.com, Leo, Wordnik.com). Previously, the
dominant players had been around for decades, even centuries—Longman (who
published Johnson’s dictionary in 1754), Kenkyusha, OUP, Le Robert, Duden,
Merriam-Webster.
In the world at large, we have seen the invention and world takeover of the
smartphone. 1994–2004 saw the switch of most dictionary lookups from paper to
electronic: 2004–2014 has seen them nearly all (in percentage terms) switch from
computer to phone. (Just think how often your students look up words on their
phones, versus how often they look them up in any other way.) Dictionaries are far,
far more available and accessible than they were. The sheer number of dictionary
lookups has risen many times over (even as—bitter irony—many dictionary
companies have seen their income collapse).
This is all at the publishing end of the dictionary business. What about the
lexicography end? Here, we have seen the corpus revolution (Hanks 2012). It started
in Northern Europe in the 1980s and 1990s, and has been spreading. For Chinese, a
ﬁrst thoroughly corpus-based dictionary was probably Huang et al. (1997)’s
classiﬁer-noun collocation dictionary. For Arabic, it is Oxford University Press’s
Oxford Arabic Dictionary (Arts 2014),2 though this was not produced in Asia. In
Japan, corpus lexicography started in bilingual dictionary projects such as
the WISDOM English-Japanese Dictionary (Sanseido 2003, 2007), but a truly
corpus-based monolingual dictionary of Japanese is yet to appear.
Thus the 10 years of the Sketch Engine have also been the 10 years of bringing
corpora into Asian lexicography. The paper is a perspective on those changes.
In this paper we review
●
the tool
●
its users
●
the languages covered
●
the corpora accessible in it, and
●
developments in the software over the past decade.
We ﬁnish by reviewing related work: other corpora, corpus websites and corpus
tools as available for lexicography and corpus linguistics.
‘Sketch Engine’ refers to two different things: the software, and the web service.
The web service includes, as well as the core software, a large number of corpora
pre-loaded and ‘ready for use’, and tools for creating, installing and managing your
own corpora. The paper covers both, with Sects. 2 and 6 focussing on the software,
3, 4, and 5, the web service.
2 The Oxford Arabic Dictionary is a bilingual Arabic-English, English-Arabic dictionary. For bilingual
dictionaries, a corpus is most relevant for the analysis of the source language. In this dictionary the source
side of the Arabic-English half is the ﬁrst corpus-based, dictionary-scale analysis of the Arabic lexicon.
8
Lexicography ASIALEX (2014) 1:7–36
123

----- Page 3 (native) -----
2 The Sketch Engine software: core functions
2.1 The word sketch
The function that gives the Sketch Engine its name is the word sketch: a one-page
summary of a word’s grammatical and collocational behaviour (Fig. 1).3
This is a feast of information on the word. For catch (verb) just looking at the ﬁrst
column (objects of the verb) we immediately see a number of meanings, idioms and
set phrases. We catch a glimpse of or catch sight of something. Fisherman, ﬁshers4
and anglers (column 2) catch ﬁsh, trout and bass. You often want to catch someone’s
attention. You sometimes catch your breath and things sometimes catch your eye.
Sportsmen and women, in a range of sports, catch passes and balls. Things catch
ﬁre. We all sometimes catch buses.
The ‘object’ column is noise-free, and all items on it are immediately
interpretable by a native speaker. The second column, for subject, introduces a
couple of complications. Surprise relates to the expression caught by surprise. Eye
Fig. 1 Word sketch for English catch, verb (from corpus enTenTen12)
3 The examples in this section are all in English, as it is the only language that most readers of the journal
share. Later sections will discuss and give examples for a range of Asian languages.
4 Fisher is a gender-neutral variant of ﬁsherman (in addition to its uses in compounds such as scallop
ﬁsher, bottom ﬁsher, the Fisher King, in the biblical ﬁsher of men, and as a common English surname).
Lexicography ASIALEX (2014) 1:7–36
9
123

----- Page 4 (native) -----
and breath are objects misanalysed as subjects. Touchdown catches is a term from
American football: the word sketch succeeds in bringing it to our attention, though
catches is a noun which has been misanalysed as a verb. Police introduces a new
meaning of the verb (police catch criminals) and Anyone brings to our attention the
related pattern Anyone caught [doing X] will be [punished].
The third column, and/or, tells us more about the police and sports meanings.
Overheat goes with catch ﬁre. Tangle and snag introduce a new meaning where, if a
rope or line or piece of cotton or string or wire catches with something else, it no
longer runs free.
The fourth table brings our attention to the phrasal verbs catch up, catch on, catch
out; the ﬁfth, to the reﬂexive use (I caught myself wondering…). The next set of
tables show us what we might be caught in (the crossﬁre, a trap, the headlights), on
(videotape, CCTV), by and with (your pants down). The ﬁnal column takes us back
to the police, with people being caught red-handed and unprepared.
The word sketch can be seen as a draft dictionary entry. The system has worked
its way through the corpus to ﬁnd all the recurring patterns for the word and has
organised them, ready for the lexicographer to edit, elucidate, and publish. This is
how word sketches have been used since they were ﬁrst produced.
2.2 Concordance
When looking at a word sketch, a user often wants to ﬁnd out more: where and how,
for example, was catch used with with and pant? They can do this by clicking on the
number, and seeing the concordance, as in Fig. 2.
This is usually enough to show why a collocate occurred in a word sketch.
The concordance is the basic tool for anyone working with a corpus. It shows you
what is in your corpus. It takes you to the raw data, underlying any analysis. Getting
there from a word sketch is just one of the ways of getting to a concordance. The
basic method is from the simple search form, as in Fig. 3.
This is modelled on the Google search form. Users like a simple input form,
where they put in what they are looking for, and the tool ﬁnds it for them. It is for
Fig. 2 Concordance for caught with pants
10
Lexicography ASIALEX (2014) 1:7–36
123

----- Page 5 (native) -----
the tool to do its best to understand what it was that the user wanted, and to ﬁnd it
for them. In the case of the Sketch Engine, simple searches are interpreted as
follows:
●
case-insensitive (so a search for catch ﬁnds catch, Catch and CATCH)
●
as searches for either word form or lemma (so a search for catch ﬁnds catch,
catching, catches, caught, and a search for caught ﬁnds just caught), and
●
where there is more than one item (with space as separator), a sequence.5
These three aspects combine, so a simple search for catch ﬁre ﬁnds all the hits in
Fig. 4.
Users often want more control than the simple search offers. By clicking on
‘Query types’ they see the options as in Fig. 5, and can specify a lemma (with
optional word class, e.g. verb, noun, adjective) or a speciﬁc phrase or word form
(with an option to match for case). ‘Character search’ is designed for languages
which do not put spaces between words (Chinese, Japanese, Thai) so users can see a
concordance for a character (without having to guess how the text has been
segmented into words). CQL is the underlying corpus query language, which
technically inclined users can input directly in the CQL box.6 Other query types are
Fig. 3 Simple search form
Fig. 4 Search hits for simple search catch ﬁre
5 For languages which do not put spaces between words (Chinese, Japanese, Thai), segmentation into
words is both a prerequisite for high-quality concordancing, and also a user interface challenge. In the
Sketch Engine all corpora for these languages have been pre-processed with language-speciﬁc tools to
segment the input string into words.
6 Corpus query language (CQL) is based on the formalism developed at University of Stuttgart in the
1990s (Christ and Schulze 1994) and widely used in the corpus linguistics community. The Sketch Engine
version has been extended (Jakubı´cˇek et al. 2010) and is fully documented, with a tutorial, on the website.
Lexicography ASIALEX (2014) 1:7–36
11
123

----- Page 6 (native) -----
automatically transformed into CQL queries which are then evaluated by the
underlying database engine to obtain the results from the corpus.7
Lexicographers often want to home in on a particular pattern of use to explore it
further. This can be done with the Context options, as in Fig. 6.
To ﬁnd all instances of catch that have pant or pants within ﬁve words, we search
for catch with pant in as a lemma ﬁlter, with results as shown in Fig. 7.
Fig. 5 Query types
Fig. 6 Context ﬁlters
Fig. 7 Concordance for catch with context ﬁlter pant (lemma) within ﬁve words left or right
7 Most databases are based on relational modelling and queried using Structured Query Language (SQL).
However, for text, the sequence of words is the central fact, not the relations, so it is debatable whether
SQL databases are suitable. The Sketch Engine is based on its own database management system called
Manatee (Rychly´ 2000, 2007) devised speciﬁcally for corpus linguistics. The web-based front end of
Manatee is called Bonito and together with the Corpus Architect module (responsible for building and
managing user corpora) these three are the core components of the Sketch Engine.
12
Lexicography ASIALEX (2014) 1:7–36
123

----- Page 7 (native) -----
Some corpora have the documents within them classiﬁed for text type, for
example, the “Brown Family” corpus, comprising the original Brown corpus
(American English, 1961) and its various clones (for British or American English and
at various date points), all with the same structure and genre distribution. Clicking on
Text Type in the concordance form (Fig. 5) shows the form in Fig. 8. The user can
limit the search to a particular national variety, time, or genre, by ticking boxes.
Once the user has a concordance, there are many things that can be done with it.
It can be sorted, sampled, ﬁltered (for example by Context, or Text Type) or saved.
A range of frequency analyses are available, including collocation reports and
analysis by text types (where the corpus has text types deﬁned). At the level of the
individual hit, the user can click on the search term for more context (see Fig. 9), or
on the item in the ‘reference’ column to see the metadata for the item.
Fig. 8 Text type options in the Brown Family corpus
Fig. 9 Concordance display showing how the user can see more context, also showing the ‘Left Hand
Menu’ with the range of options for exploring the concordance, and the reference column (in blue) with
an identiﬁer for the document that the corpus line came from: clicking on at item in this column will show
the metadata for the item
Lexicography ASIALEX (2014) 1:7–36
13
123

----- Page 8 (native) -----
2.3 Thesaurus
The Sketch Engine prepares a ‘distributional thesaurus’ for a corpus. This is a
thesaurus created on the basis of common collocation. If two words have many
collocates in common, they will appear in each other’s thesaurus entry. It works as
follows: if we ﬁnd instances of both drink tea and drink coffee, that is one small
piece of evidence that tea and coffee are similar. We can say that they ‘share’ the
collocate drink (verb), in the OBJECT-OF relation. In a very large computation, for
all pairs of words, we compute how many collocates they share, and the ones that
share most (after normalisation) are the ones that appear in a word’s thesaurus entry.
Distributional thesauruses are a topic of great interest in computational linguistics,
and show promise for addressing a range of challenges.
The thesaurus entry for tea (in both list and word-cloud form) is shown in Fig. 10.
3 Users and uses
3.1 Lexicography
The ﬁrst Sketch Engine users were lexicographers, with Macmillan as the ﬁrst user
for the word sketches,8 and Oxford University Press as the ﬁrst for the Sketch
Engine.
Lexicography, particularly for English and particularly in the 1980s and 90s, was
the driving force in the development of corpus methods and corpus use.
Fig. 10 Thesaurus entry for tea. In the word cloud, the larger a word, the more similar it is to tea
8 This was in 1998, for the preparation of the ﬁrst edition of the Macmillan English Dictionary (Rundell
2002) in a process described in Kilgarriff and Rundell (2002). Thus word sketches are older than the
Sketch Engine. The ﬁrst versions of word sketches were standalone HTML ﬁles, one for each word. The
integration with a full-function corpus query tool, Manatee/Bonito, to give The Sketch Engine, came
later.
14
Lexicography ASIALEX (2014) 1:7–36
123

----- Page 9 (native) -----
Lexicography required very large corpora, so there was evidence even for rare
words and phrases. At the time—pre-web or in the web’s infancy, pre “big data”—
few others in linguistics or the language professions saw any great need for corpora.
The English learners’ dictionaries had a vast and growing market, and were highly
proﬁtable, and were competing intensively with each other to produce ‘the best’
dictionary. This was fertile ground for innovation.
Lexicography has continued to be a core use for the Sketch Engine, with four of
the ﬁve main dictionary publishers in the UK (Cambridge University Press, Harper
Collins, Macmillan, Oxford University Press) using it intensively. At CUP and
Macmillan, this is just for English; at Collins also for the main European languages,
and at OUP also for large bilingual-dictionary projects for Arabic, Chinese and
Portuguese.
In the UK, dictionary publishing is dominated by companies (and the commercial
wings of University Presses); this is possible largely because there is a very large
market. In many countries and for many languages, the curation of the national
language is seen as a national project, and most lexicography takes place in
academies and national institutes. They form a second group of users for the Sketch
Engine. The Sketch Engine is in use at national institutes for Bulgarian, Czech,
Dutch,9 Estonian, Irish,10 and Slovak.
3.2 Universities
The Sketch Engine has come out of the academic research world, and, naturally,
many of its users are in universities. Within universities, the main kinds of use are
●
in linguistics and languages departments: teaching and research
●
in computing departments: teaching and research in relation to language
technology (also called Natural Language Processing, Computational Linguis-
tics). This is the home area of all Sketch Engine team members
●
teaching translation
●
discourse analysis: analyses of a particular kind of language for what it tells us
about the attitudes, power relations and perspectives of the participants. This
kind of work takes place in a range of departments in the humanities and social
sciences. Recent examples include the analysis of British newspaper discourse
on migrants and migration; portrayal of science in the news; knowledge
dissemination through personal blogs.
9 Dutch (also called Flemish) is an ofﬁcial language in both the Netherlands and Belgium, and the
institute here (INL) is a joint one from both countries.
10 Much of the development work for the Sketch Engine was undertaken under a contract from Foras na
Gaeilge (the ofﬁcial body for the Irish language) in preparation for the creation of a new English-Irish
dictionary (http://www.focloir.ie). Irish is spoken in both the Irish Republic and Northern Ireland (which
is part of the UK) and Foras na Gaeilge is a joint institute of both countries.
Lexicography ASIALEX (2014) 1:7–36
15
123

----- Page 10 (native) -----
3.3 Language teaching
The Sketch Engine is widely used for English Language Teaching and occasionally
also for the teaching of other languages including Chinese, Japanese and Arabic.11
The ‘Teaching and Language Corpora’ community has been exploring ways of
bringing corpus methods into language-teaching practice since Tim Johns’ work in
the 1980s. Johns worked in Birmingham, UK, alongside the COBUILD project for
using corpora for lexicography, and the uses of corpora for ELT can be seen as
having two parts: indirect use, in the preparation of dictionaries (and coursebooks),
as covered above, and direct: in the classroom.
A ﬁrst ELT coursebook based on the Sketch Engine has recently been published
(Thomas 2014).
Countries where the Sketch Engine is widely used in ELT include China, the
Czech Republic, Germany, Italy, Japan, Spain and Taiwan as well as the UK.
3.4 Translators
Translators ﬁnd corpora (of speciﬁc domains) useful for identifying the terminology
and phraseology of the domain, in the language they are translating into. (They will
usually be a native speaker of that language, but will often not know the terms and
turns of phrase for specialised areas in which they have a translation task). A
number of professional translators are Sketch Engine users.
3.5 Terminologists
In the context of large organisations needing to prepare many documents in multiple
languages, consistency is a challenge: in particular, the consistent use of the same
term (within each language) for the same concept. It is good practice to develop and
maintain a terminology, in which there is an entry for each of the concepts in a
domain, with a speciﬁcation of the term to be used in each language. One of the
challenges for terminologists is ﬁnding the concepts and terms. The Sketch Engine
can be used for term-ﬁnding (Kilgarriff 2013). This functionality has been
developed in collaboration with the World Intellectual Property Organisation.
3.6 Language technology companies
A word list (with frequencies) for a language is a central resource for almost any
language technology application, from speech recognition to spelling correction to
text prediction. The corpora in the Sketch Engine provide the raw material, and the
software can produce the word lists (and also many other lists: of n-grams,
11 Much of this work takes place in universities, but much also takes place outside (e. g., in language
schools) so we treat it as a separate type of use.
16
Lexicography ASIALEX (2014) 1:7–36
123

----- Page 11 (native) -----
keywords, lemmas, terms) for many languages. Several technology companies have
been users of this kind.
4 Languages
The Sketch Engine aims to cover all the large languages of the world, as well as any
languages which particular users are asking for.
By a ‘large language’ we mean a language with a large number of speakers. The
ethnologue website provides a list of languages sorted by numbers of speakers, as
shown in Table 1.
Table 1 All the world languages with over 50 million speakers
Rank
Language
Primary Country
Total countries
Speakers (millions)
SkE status
1
Chinese [zho]
China
33
1,197
Good
2
Spanish [spa]
Spain
31
406
Good
3
English [eng]
United Kingdom
101
335
Good
4
Hindi [hin]
India
4
260
Good
5
Arabic [ara]
Saudi Arabia
59
223
Good
6
Portuguese [por]
Portugal
11
202
Good
7
Bengali [ben]
Bangladesh
4
193
Basic
8
Russian [rus]
Russian Federation
16
162
Good
9
Japanese [jpn]
Japan
3
122
Good
10
Javanese [jav]
Indonesia
3
84.3
No
11
German [deu]
Germany
18
83.8
Good
12
Lahnda [lah]a
Pakistan
7
82.7
No
13
Telugu [tel]
India
2
74
Basic
14
Marathi [mar]
India
1
71.8
No
15
Tamil [tam]
India
6
68.8
Basic
16
French [fra]
France
51
68.5
Good
17
Vietnamese [vie]
Viet Nam
3
67.8
Good
18
Korean [kor]
South Korea
6
66.4
Good
19
Urdu [urd]
Pakistan
6
63.4
No
20
Italian [ita]
Italy
10
61.1
Good
21
Malay [msa]
Malaysia
13
59.4
Basic
22
Persian [fas]
Iran
29
56.6
Good
23
Turkish [tur]
Turkey
8
50.7
Good
24
Oriya [ori]
India
3
50.1
No
From http://www.ethnologue.com (19 April 2014). Sketch Engine column added by authors
a While this is the name for the language as a whole, the better known name for the main dialect is
Punjabi
Lexicography ASIALEX (2014) 1:7–36
17
123

----- Page 12 (native) -----
The Sketch Engine has high-level resources for ﬁfteen of these languages (as well
as for many smaller ones) and basic resources for a further four. The languages not
covered are Javanese (where there is a complex relationship to Bahasa Indonesia, a
variety of Malay, for which there is a basic resource) and four of the languages of
India and Pakistan (Lahnda/Punjabi, Marathi, Oriya and Urdu).12
The prerequisite for a basic resource for a language, is simply, a corpus (plus
segmentation tool where there are no spaces between words). A corpus can be
collected from the web, using the Corpus Factory (Kilgarriff et al. 2010) or TenTen
(Jakubı´cˇek et al. 2013) method.
For a high-level resource, further prerequisites are
●
a tokeniser (for Chinese and Japanese, usually called a segmenter) to identify the
words. In simple cases this might just use spaces between words but many
languages have clitics and similar needing language-speciﬁc treatment. English
is a very simple language in this regard but even there, the hyphen and
apostrophe
characters,
and
mixtures
of
letters
and
non-letters,
present
challenges.
●
a lemmatiser13
●
a part-of-speech tagger
●
a parser or ‘sketch grammar’.
What is also required is a collaborator. This is a person who speaks the language,
and is ideally a computational linguist, and who cares about the quality of the
output. They might care because they want to use the corpus in their own (or their
group’s) work, or because they developed some of the tools and this is an
opportunity to thoroughly test them and to show them (via data processed by them)
to the world. The collaboration is crucial: without input from people who speak the
language, the Sketch Engine team does not know if what it has done for a language
is good. A collaborator is needed to point out mistakes and problems, which can
then be addressed.
In the following sections we provide details about the status of Sketch Engine
integration of various Asian languages.
4.1 Chinese
The collaboration for Chinese began with Prof Huang Chu-Ren inviting the ﬁrst
author to Taiwan in 2004. (At the time, Huang was Deputy Director of the
Linguistics Department at Academia Sinica, Taiwan.) Following that visit, and
commercial interest in Chinese in the Sketch Engine from CJKI,14 the Chinese
Gigaword corpus was acquired from the Linguistic Data Consortium, segmented
12 For Urdu, the relation between the language spoken in India (as a mother tongue) and in Pakistan (as
an ofﬁcial language but not the mother tongue of many people) is a particular puzzle. For both Urdu and
Punjabi, multiple writing systems are a challenge. For all Indian languages, until quite recently, many
Indians would use the web in English: all educated Indians speak English, web searching worked better in
English, and not so much could be found in many of the Indian languages. This is changing fast.
13 For all of the languages that have been considered except Chinese, where the concept does not apply.
14 http://cjki.org.
18
Lexicography ASIALEX (2014) 1:7–36
123

----- Page 13 (native) -----
and part-of-speech-tagged at Academia Sinica using the tools developed there, and
installed into the Sketch Engine. A sketch grammar was developed and word
sketches were made available (Huang et al. 2005; Kilgarriff et al. 2005), as
illustrated in Fig. 11. They have supported an extensive research programme since
(e.g. Chung and Huang 2010; Huang et al. 2014 forthcoming).15
4.2 Arabic
The collaboration for Arabic is more recent, with the Centre for Computational
Linguistics at Columbia University, USA (who prepared MADA + TOKAN, the
leading tools for tokenisation, lemmatisation and POS-tagging of Arabic) and
Arabic experts elsewhere in the USA. in Saudi Arabia and in the UK. Over a
number of years we had received many expressions of interest regarding Arabic in
the Sketch Engine. But the language presents a number of challenges:
●
there is modern standard Arabic (MSA: the language of the press, education,
and ofﬁcialdom, throughout the Arabic world), Classical Arabic, and the
dialects. Most Arabic speakers speak largely their own dialect and are only
occasional users of MSA. It is far from obvious what should be included in a
corpus;
Fig. 11 Word sketch for Chinese
(attack)
15 The resources for Chinese have since been updated, and now the leading Chinese corpus in the Sketch
Engine is zhtenTen, from the web, and is processed by Stanford tools. The collaboration with Prof. Huang
continues.
Lexicography ASIALEX (2014) 1:7–36
19
123

----- Page 14 (native) -----
●
Arabic has many clitics, making tokenisation challenging;
●
Arabic is usually written without vowels;
●
Arabic has a complex morphological system, with a large share of the
vocabulary being the result of derivations according to semi-productive
processes. A central issue in Arabic lexicography is whether entry should be
based on stems (the traditional approach, giving a smaller number of longer
entries) or lemmas (which are closer to dictionary headwords in an English or
French dictionary).
It has taken several years to assemble all the pieces required for high-quality
resources for Arabic (Arts et al. 2014 forthcoming). An Arabic word sketch is
shown in Fig. 12.
4.3 Other Asian languages
For Turkish there were open-source tools available, including a parser, so a Turkish web
corpus was processed with that, and the dependency relations which were the output of
the parser were used directly to form word sketches (Ambati et al. 2012), see Fig. 13.
For word sketches for Japanese (Srdanovic et al. 2008), Vietnamese (Ha` et al.
2012), and Hindi, see Figs. 14, 15 and 16.
For Persian, a very large corpus which had been prepared and parsed at Carnegie
Mellon University, USA, was loaded into the Sketch Engine.16
Fig. 12 Word sketch for Arabic
(green)
16 http://www.sketchengine.co.uk/documentation/wiki/Corpora/TalkBankPersian
20
Lexicography ASIALEX (2014) 1:7–36
123

----- Page 15 (native) -----
Fig. 13 Word sketch for Turkish yürek (heart)
Fig. 14 Word sketches for Japanese
(accumulate)
Lexicography ASIALEX (2014) 1:7–36
21
123

----- Page 16 (native) -----
Fig. 15 Word sketches for Vietnamese tay (hand)
Fig. 16 Word sketches for Hindi
(heart)
22
Lexicography ASIALEX (2014) 1:7–36
123

----- Page 17 (native) -----
There are also resources for Azerbaijani, Bengali, Hebrew, Indonesian, Kazakh,
Korean, Kyrgyz, Malay, Malayalam, Tajik, Tamil, Telugu, Thai, Tibetan (Garrett
et al. 2014 forthcoming), Turkmen, and Uzbek (Baisa and Suchomel 2012).
5 Corpora
“Corpora for all” is the Sketch Engine company tagline: here we give a brief survey
of the range of corpora in the Sketch Engine.
Corpora in the Sketch Engine are either owned and managed by the Sketch
Engine Team (‘preloaded’ corpora), or are user corpora, owned and managed by the
user.
5.1 Preloaded corpora
5.1.1 General language
The primary goal is to provide, for each language, a large, recent, general language
corpus for the language, processed with high-quality tools for the language, with
word sketches, and checked extensively by one or more collaborators. These
corpora are for lexicography and general language research, for example into the
syntax or morphology of the language. ‘Large’ means at least 50 million words, and
for recent work with large languages, several billion. In most cases these are web
corpora, as the web is the only place to get material in vast quantity and covering a
wide range of text types and domains. In some cases, for example Estonian or Irish,
where there is collaboration with an organisation which has gathered a large corpus
using some other method, we have combined web-sourced and other material.
These corpora can be kept up-to-date by crawling again and adding new material.
There are large, general-language corpora for sixty languages.
5.1.2 Parallel
One central language task is translation. For that, a key resource is the parallel
corpus, comprising sets of texts which are translations of each other (or, are both
translations of the same source). Parallel concordancing, as in Fig. 17, is where a
user inputs a search term in one language and sees pairs of sentence: those with the
matching term in the ﬁrst language, and the corresponding sentence in the target
language.
In the Sketch Engine there are data for 300 language pairs. These data are from
two main sources: EUROPARL and OPUS. EUROPARL comprises speeches made
at the European parliament, which have been translated into 21 ofﬁcial European
Union languages (Koehn 2005).17 The OPUS data, a collection of parallel corpora
collected in the OPUS project, are made available on its website.18 It comprises
17 The original release was for fewer languages. For recent releases see http://www.statmt.org/europarl/.
18 http://opus.lingﬁl.uu.se/.
Lexicography ASIALEX (2014) 1:7–36
23
123

----- Page 18 (native) -----
many different parts, two of the largest (for most language pairs) being documents
from the United Nations, and Open Subtitles.19 Figure 17 shows subtitle data.
In addition to all of the functionality shown so far, an extra option for parallel
data is to search simultaneously in both languages: Fig. 17 shows the output when
is searched on the Chinese side, smile on the English.
5.1.3 Second/foreign language learning and teaching
In the context of language learning, two central questions arise:
●
what are learners saying and writing?
●
what should they be saying and writing?
For the ﬁrst, there are learner corpora.20 Learner corpora are valuable for ﬁnding
out what learners, at various levels, do, and for research into the process of language
learning as well as the practicalities of curricula, course development, and testing. In
the Sketch Engine there are learner corpora for Slovene, Czech and English.21
For the second, the general answer is “the language”, and general language
corpora meet that need. But there is also a more speciﬁc answer: one large
population of language learners are learning English, and would like to study at an
English-medium university. Thus their target is the English that is spoken in
Fig. 17 Parallel concordance, Chinese and English,
and smile
19 http://www.opensubtitles.org/.
20 Sketch Engine features designed for learner corpora are described in Kosem et al. (2013). For general
information on learner corpora see http://www.learnercorpusassociation.org/.
21 The Cambridge Learner Corpus, the largest learner corpus for English, is in the Sketch Engine and is
used extensively by Cambridge University Press and researchers and textbook authors who publish with
them. However it is not accessible to SkE users without a CUP afﬁliation.
24
Lexicography ASIALEX (2014) 1:7–36
123

----- Page 19 (native) -----
seminars and written in University-level essays, by accomplished English speakers.
The British Academic Spoken English (BASE) and British Academic Written
English (BAWE) corpora have been created as samples of these target varieties.22
5.1.4 Historical
A central topic for linguists is language development and change. Corpora looking
back over the history of a language, and supporting this kind of research, include
LatinISE (of Latin from the third century B. C. to the twentieth century A.D.,
McGillivray and Kilgarriff 2013), GermanC (of German from the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries; Scheible et al. 2011) and English Dialogues Corpus
(sixteenth–eighteenth centuries; Culpeper and Kyto¨ 2010).
For the Arabic world and Islam, the language has a special role. It is the language
of the Quran and of the culture that the region shares. The different countries each
have their own dialect, and the lingua franca, MSA, is closer to classical Arabic than
to the dialects. The King Saud University Corpus of Classical Arabic (KSUCCA23)
brings together many of the central texts of this language, culture and religion,
including the Quran and the Hadith.
5.1.5 Learning to speak
Since 1984, the CHILDES and Talkbank projects, based at Carnegie Mellon
University, have been gathering child–adult conversations.24 They are largely
between babies and young children and their carers (with many of the carers being
linguists, who have taken on the recording and transcription of the data). All are
available as transcripts, and many also as audio or video. The data can be explored
on the Talkbank website as well as the Sketch Engine: the two websites are
complementary, with Talkbank expecting the user to be a developmental or general
linguist, and the Sketch Engine expecting them to have a corpus orientation. There
is a CHILDES corpus in the Sketch Engine for 22 languages, varying in size from a
few thousand words to, for English, 23 million.
5.1.6 Learning to read and write
Educators, children’s authors and publishers, and linguists and psychologists
studying the process of learning to read, are interested in the language that
schoolchildren read and write. So are producers of children’s dictionaries. The
Education division of Oxford University Press has created the Oxford Children’s
Corpus (Wild et al. 2013), comprising both material written for children (largely
stories, many being titles published by OUP) and stories written by children. This
second part resulted from a competition led by the top UK disc jockey Chris Evans,
22 http://www2.warwick.ac.uk/fac/soc/al/research/collect/base/,
http://www2.warwick.ac.uk/fac/soc/al/research/collect/bawe/.
23 http://mahaalrabiah.wordpress.com/category/ksucca/.
24 http://childes.psy.cmu.edu/, http://www.talkbank.org.
Lexicography ASIALEX (2014) 1:7–36
25
123

----- Page 20 (native) -----
who, from his show on BBC Radio 2, invited children to write a 500-word story and
send it into him. In 2014, 115,000 British children did so. The BBC then made the
data available to OUP for linguistic research.25
The size of the corpus, as at April 2014, is 115 million words.
5.1.7 Reference corpora
The Brown corpus was central to the development of corpus linguistics. It was one
million words, comprising ﬁve hundred 2,000-word samples from 13 different
genres, all of American English published in 1961. It has played a huge role as a
point of reference ever since and has spawned ‘Brown family’ corpora for British
and American English, at a number of time points (see Fig. 5).
Another key reference corpus for English is the British National Corpus (Burnard
1995).
5.1.8 Sociolinguistics
Sociolinguists are interested in how language varies between social groups, across
age groups, with movements of populations, and between communities. A corpus
designed to study these topics is the London English corpus (Kerswill et al. 2013).
5.2 User corpora
As well as preloaded corpora (managed by the Sketch Engine team) users can
upload, build, process, share and explore their own corpora.
Where a user already has a corpus, they can upload it and install it, via a simple
web interface. The source documents can be in any of the common formats (doc,
html, pdf, txt, tmx) and may also be compressed and/or archived (.zip, .gz, .bz2, .
tar). All of these formats are then converted to plain text (.txt). If the data are
already annotated (perhaps with part-of-speech tags, or lemmas, or for discourse
function, etc.) then it needs to be in the Sketch Engine’s input format, ‘vertical’ text,
as documented in the Sketch Engine help pages. The user can then manage their
own corpora, including adding more data, deleting, and processing (see below) as
well as using them for their research via the core Sketch Engine functions (as in
Sect. 2).
BootCaT (Baroni and Bernardini 2004) is a procedure for building a corpus,
starting from a set of ‘seed words’, by making tuples (typically triples) of the seed
words, sending each tuple as a query to a search engine, and then gathering the web
pages that the search engine ﬁnds. When applied to a specialist domain, with seed
words from that specialist domain, it turns out to be a remarkably efﬁcient way of
discovering the terminology and phraseology of that domain. The Sketch Engine
includes an implementation called WebBootCaT. See Fig. 18 for the WebBootCaT
25 See http://global.oup.com/uk/pressreleases/500words/. Access to the corpus is restricted to OUP staff
and collaborators. Word lists based on the corpus may be made available; applications to OUP.
26
Lexicography ASIALEX (2014) 1:7–36
123

----- Page 21 (native) -----
form and Fig. 19 for the keywords and terms found, fully automatically and in a few
minutes, for the vulcanology domain.
More can be done with a user corpus if it is accurately tokenised, lemmatised and
part-of-speech tagged. Tools for these processes are language-speciﬁc. For 11 major
world languages, tools have been identiﬁed, licenced (where necessary) and
installed. Some users have used the Sketch Engine explicitly for this service: they
can upload plain text, get it processed, and then download the processed data (in
vertical format), perhaps for further annotation and re-uploading.
Processing options are steadily being added for more languages.
There is ‘access control’ for user corpora. By default, the only user who can see a
corpus is the person who created it, but they can give access to others (at a web
interface). This allows a teacher to give access to a corpus that they have prepared,
to their students, or a researcher to share their corpus with their colleagues.
Fig. 18 WebBootCaT form
Lexicography ASIALEX (2014) 1:7–36
27
123

----- Page 22 (native) -----
6 New functionality
At ten years old, the Sketch Engine is mature software. There has been a steady
stream of new functionality as well as bug-ﬁxes and improvements to usability.
Recent usability improvements include
●
a ‘breadcrumb trail’ to show a user how they got to the concordance they are
looking at, which might be the results of an original search plus sorting, ﬁltering
and sampling. This was a response to user feedback that it was easy to lose track
of what a particular concordance was
●
‘more data’ and ‘less data’ buttons for work sketches. The number of collocates
shown in a word sketch is deﬁned by three parameters: a frequency threshold, a
salience threshold and a limit to the number of collocates per list. Users
Fig. 19 Terminology in the volcanoes domain, as extracted from BootCaTted Vulcanology corpus. Items
in green were input seeds. Number (in blue) can be clicked to see concordances
28
Lexicography ASIALEX (2014) 1:7–36
123

----- Page 23 (native) -----
sometimes want to see more collocates than they have been shown in the ﬁrst
instance—and sometimes they feel overwhelmed and want to see less. But if
they start considering the three parameters, they are bamboozled. Hence the
‘more data’ and ‘less data’ buttons
●
thesaurus word clouds: see Fig. 9.
Other additions to functionality, which complement the core functions described
in Sect. 2 and the preloaded and user corpora as described in Sect. 5, include the
API, GDEX, bilingual sketches, keywords and ‘comparing corpora’, terminology,
and localisation.
6.1 API
A simple JSON API allows other programmes to access word sketches, collocations,
thesaurus entries and to ﬁnd the terminology in a document.
6.2 GDEX
Dictionary users like examples. This is a clear ﬁnding of dictionary user research
(Frankenberg Garcia 2014). Where the dictionary is to be published on paper, not
many examples can be offered owing to space limitations. With electronic
dictionaries, that constraint disappears. The constraint becomes, rather the editorial
time needed to prepare them. There are already compelling linguistic reasons for
taking examples from corpora rather than inventing them (Hanks 2012): could the
corpus software not merely ﬁnd the examples for a word, but automatically ﬁnd the
good ones, for using as dictionary examples?
A Good Dictionary Examples (GDEX) function was added to the Sketch Engine
in 2008 and has had many enthusiastic users. It was originally applied to English
(Kilgarriff et al. 2008) and has since been used for a number of languages including
Slovene (Kosem et al. 2011). It works by sorting a concordance, so the corpus lines
judged best by the algorithm are shown ﬁrst. Then the lexicographer should not
have to read many of them before ﬁnding a good one. The same core technique has
also been used to score documents and to exclude low-scoring documents from a
corpus entirely.
The critical outstanding question, for dictionary publishers, is this: can GDEX
work well enough, so that example sentences can be added to dictionary entries
without an editor needing to check them ﬁrst? This is a goal, but a number of
obstacles stand in the way. First the corpus needs to be very big, to provide plenty of
examples for the algorithm to choose amongst, and usually the only way to get a
very large corpus is from the web. But web corpora contain web spam, which
sometimes makes it past all other ﬁlters and makes bad dictionary examples.
Second: parsnips. Parsnips is an acronym for the potentially offensive topics
which teaching materials, which will be seen across the globe, by all communities
and cultures, might be wise to avoid. It stands for Politics Alcohol Religion Sex
Narcotics Isms Pork (as a stand-in for various foods which are taboo in various
cultures). A second current challenge is to scrub the data clean of parsnips.
Lexicography ASIALEX (2014) 1:7–36
29
123

----- Page 24 (native) -----
6.3 Bilingual sketches
Where monolingual lexicographers appreciate monolingual word sketches, bilingual
lexicographers would like bilingual ones. They have recently been developed (Baisa
et al. 2014) and are currently being rolled out for more language pairs.
6.4 Keywords and corpus comparison
Where there are a number of corpora available for a language, the question arises,
“how do they compare?” This has been the central research question for the ﬁrst
author for some years (Kilgarriff 2001, 2012) and the Sketch Engine supports a
range of comparisons, quantitative and qualitative, between any pair of same-
language corpora: see Kilgarriff (2012) for English and Czech, Kilgarriff and Renau
(2013) for Spanish.
6.5 Terminology
To ﬁnd the terminology of a domain, in a language, the requirements are
●
a domain corpus
●
a reference corpus
●
a grammar for terms
●
a lemmatiser, part-of-speech tagger, and parser (to ﬁnd linguistic units with the
grammatical shape that makes it possible for them to be terms)
●
a statistic (to identify the term candidates that are most distinctive of the domain
in contrast to the reference material).
The Sketch Engine has most of these pieces in place. Users can upload their domain
corpus, or build one using WebBootCaT. Reference corpora are available for 60
languages. There are already grammars for the word sketches, which can be adapted to
provide term grammars. The parsing machinery is in place, and, as discussed above, for a
growing number of languages, language-speciﬁc processing tools are installed and ready
to use. The statistic used to identify keywords is also suitable for identifying terms.
Term-ﬁnding functionality is now available in the Sketch Engine, as illustrated in
Fig. 19, for ten languages.
6.6 Localisation
Machinery to support the localisation of the interface has been added. Currently, the
interface can be seen in Czech, Chinese, English, Irish, Slovene, and Croatian.
7 Related work
The Sketch Engine is both a corpus query tool and a web service; the web service
includes corpus building and management. We take each in turn.
30
Lexicography ASIALEX (2014) 1:7–36
123

----- Page 25 (native) -----
7.1 Corpus query tools
Software tools for corpus exploration fall into two categories: those designed for
installation on each computer where they are used, and those designed for
installation on a server.
Widely used tools for local installation include (in order of their invention),
Monoconc/Paraconc (since 1995), WordSmith (since 1996), Antconc (Anthony
2004; since 2004) and Concgram (Greaves 2009; since 2005). Antconc is free, and
the other three are commercial products. All have many enthusiastic users. All can
be used over a network, but this is not their normal mode.
Amongst tools for use over a network, the IMS Corpus Workbench has pride of
place. IMS is the Institut fu¨r Maschinelle Sprachverarbeitung at the University of
Stuttgart, where the tool was developed in the early 1990s (Christ and Schulze
1994). (It is also often referred to as CWB, Stuttgart tools, or CQP, for its “Corpus
Query Processor”.) It has been widely used and has a community of developers
working with it. The original version was pre-web, and the envisaged network was
within a University. A central question since is as to how it can be made to work
well on the web. The usual solution has been that it provides a back end, and then a
number of front ends have been prepared. CQPWeb (Hardie 2012), for example,
combines the IMS Corpus Workbench back end with a MySQL database.
The Stuttgart tools and CQPWeb are both free and open-source, and the
community of developers for corpus software has a strong commitment to open
source. While the Sketch Engine is not open source, as this could undermine its
viability as a business, a version of it, NoSketchEngine, is open source.26
The functionality of all of these tools (and most of those covered below)
comprises a concordancer, plus various ways to manipulate concordances, plus a
range of summary reports. There is little disagreement about the value of the various
reports, and the functionality differences lie rather in how much time and motivation
the developers have had to develop more functions. As one of the more mature
tools, working commercially with a support and development team of seven, the
Sketch Engine has more functions than most.
7.2 Corpus websites and services
There are a small number of corpus websites for multiple languages and a large
number for a single language (and usually, a single corpus). We review those that
cover multiple languages in some detail below. We do not cover the single-language
ones: there are too many, many of which are short-lived. It is de rigeur for any
corpus project to make its corpus available over the web, and this is typically done
on a dedicated website, sometimes using the Stuttgart tools as the back end and
sometimes using software developed as part of the project. Such projects are often
national projects, and one advantage is often that the interface is in the same
language that the corpus is a corpus of. For scholars of that language who may not
26 NoSketchEngine comprises current versions of Manatee and Bonito, but without word sketches and
the functionalities built on them. See http://nlp.ﬁ.muni.cz/trac/noske.
Lexicography ASIALEX (2014) 1:7–36
31
123

----- Page 26 (native) -----
be at ease in English, this may be a major advantage. A disadvantage of developing
software afresh is that the software will be new: it is likely to be less robust, with
less functionality, than mature systems. The funding will end and then it will be
hard to maintain. Growing numbers of corpus developers are taking the route of
making their corpus available in the Sketch Engine.27
7.2.1 Corpus websites for multiple languages
Mark Davies’s website at Brigham Young University28 offers corpora for English,
Spanish and Portuguese. The resources for English are outstanding, supporting the
exploration of the behaviour of words and phrases across time, genre, and regional
varieties (Davies 2009). The system is fast and reliable.
Uwe Quasthoff and colleagues in Leipzig have crawled the web for corpora of
229 languages and made them searchable at their Worschatz website (Quasthoff
et al. 2006).29 The website is in German. Within Germany, this is a very widely used
site: it serves as a main reference for language questions from laypeople.
Eckhard Bick has focussed on syntax and parsing. The Visual Interactive Syntax
Learning website30 has corpora which are often modest in size but are parsed. The
website has games and quizzes to support language education, as well as Deepdict,
comprising word-sketch-like reports, for nine languages (Bick 2009).
The OPUS project (Tiedemann and Nygaard 2004) has gathered parallel corpora
and organised them so they are both searchable on the website (with the Stuttgart
tools as the back end) and also downloadable, for use in other research and software
(including the Sketch Engine; many of the parallel corpora in the Sketch Engine
were taken from the OPUS site).31
At the University of Leeds in the UK, Serge Sharoff makes web corpora for 13
languages available to all for searching, again using the Stuttgart tools back end
(Sharoff 2006).32
All of these sites are free to use. This is in contrast to the Sketch Engine. Most are
based in Universities and are supported via research grants and academic salaries.
While, naturally, most people would rather not pay (other than via their taxes), the
commercial model has advantages. There is an income stream to support the
maintenance and development of the software and web service for the long term,
and customers with particular requirements can get what they need, by paying for it.
Google and other search engines do a similar job to a corpus website: they allow
the user to ﬁnd many instances of a word, in context, as a dataset for further study,
and they do it fast. Where the user knows of no corpus for the language, or the item
they are searching for is rare so not enough data are available via dedicated corpus
27 This is the history of most of the Sketch Engine interface localisations.
28 http://corpus.byu.edu.
29 http://wortschatz.uni-leipzig.de/.
30 http://beta.visl.sdu.dk/.
31 http://opus.lingﬁl.uu.se/.
32 http://corpus.leeds.ac.uk/internet.html.
32
Lexicography ASIALEX (2014) 1:7–36
123

----- Page 27 (native) -----
linguistic tools, Google may be the best tool to use. For a discussion of the use of
search engines for corpus research see Kilgarriff (2007).
A possibility lying between the search engine and a corpus tool is the metasearch
engine, in which a corpus tool takes a user’s query, passes it on to Google or another
search engine, receives the results, and ﬁlters and displays them in ways that are
useful for language researchers. The best known tool of this kind is Webcorp
(Renouf et al. 2006).33
Other corpus-like websites, mentioned here for completeness, are:
●
Wikipedia : the wikipedia for a language is a convenient corpus for that
language, as used, for example, as a starter corpus in Kilgarriff et al. (2010).
●
Project Gutenberg34
●
Google books35
●
the Linguistic Data Consortium36 and European Language Resource Associa-
tion,37 for catalogues of available resources, including corpora of various kinds
for many languages
●
Linguee,38 Webitext,39 parallel concordancers offered as a service to translators.
7.3 Tools for corpus building and annotation
The BootCaT procedure is described above. There are a number of implementa-
tions, including one from the University of Bologna group where the idea was
originally developed.40
Several groups have developed pipelines for web corpus building. The steps are
●
web crawling
●
removing duplicates
●
‘cleaning’ to remove non-text material
●
language identiﬁcation
●
linguistic processing (tokenisation, possibly also lemmatisation, part-of-speech
tagging, parsing).
The pipeline used by the Sketch Engine team uses three tools which were
developed within the group and have now been published as open-source software:
spiderling (Suchomel and Pomikalek 2012) for crawling, onion for deduplication,
justext for cleaning (both Pomika´lek 2011). Other pipelines, with similar philosophy
and components, have been developed in Bologna (Baroni et al. 2009), Leipzig
(Biemann et al. 2004) and Berlin (Scha¨fer and Bildhauer 2013).
33 http://www.webcorp.org.uk/live/.
34 http://www.gutenberg.org.
35 http://books.google.com.
36 https://www.ldc.upenn.edu/.
37 http://www.elra.info/.
38 http://www.linguee.com.
39 http://webitext.com.
40 http://bootcat.sslmit.unibo.it/.
Lexicography ASIALEX (2014) 1:7–36
33
123

----- Page 28 (native) -----
Annotating a corpus with human input (as distinct from a fully automatic
process) is supported in a limited way in the Sketch Engine, via facilities developed
for Hanks’s Corpus Pattern Analysis (Hanks 2008).41 Many tools have been
developed speciﬁcally for manual and semi-automatic corpus annotation, leading
examples being the UAM tool (O’Donnell 2008) and the Groningen Meaning Bank
tool (Basile et al. 2012).42
8 Conclusion
The Sketch Engine is a leading corpus tool (both in the sense of ‘corpus query tool’
and in the sense of ‘corpus web service’). It is now 10 years old: a 10-year period
that has seen revolutions in connectivity, devices, and dictionary publishing, and the
worldwide spread of corpus methods in dictionary-making. It is mature software
offering a wide range of functions, with the web service offering many corpora for
many languages, as well as services for corpus building and maintenance.
In this paper we have described word sketches, concordancing, and the thesaurus
(Sect. 2), the different kinds of user (Sect. 3), and approaches to working with many
different languages (Sect. 4). Section 5 reviewed the kinds of corpora available in
the Sketch Engine, including user corpora and the ways of building and working
with them. Section 6 gives a brief tour of some of the innovations and new reports
offered in the past few years. In Sect. 7 we reviewed related work.
As the strapline has it, ‘corpora for all!’
Acknowledgments
This work has been partly supported by the Ministry of the Interior of the Czech
Republic, in project VF20102014003.
References
Ambati, B.R., S. Reddy, and A. Kilgarriff. 2012. Word sketches for Turkish. In Proc LREC, 2945–2950.
Istanbul.
Anthony, L. 2004. AntConc: a learner and classroom friendly, multi-platform corpus analysis toolkit. In
Proc IWLeL, 7–13.
Arts. T., ed. 2014. Oxford Arabic Dictionary. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Arts, T., Y. Belinkov, N. Habash, A. Kilgarriff, and V. Suchomel. 2014 (forthcoming). arTenTen and
word sketches for Arabic. Journal of King Saud University: Computing and Information Science.
Special issue on Arabic natural language processing.
Baisa, V., M. Jakubı´cˇek, A. Kilgarriff, V. Kova´rˇ, and P. Rychly´. 2014. Bilingual word sketches: the
translate button. In Proc EURALEX, Bolzano/Bozen
Baisa, V., and V. Suchomel. 2012. Large corpora for Turkic languages and unsupervised morphological
analysis. In Proc LREC, Istanbul
Basile, V., J. Bos, K. Evang, and N. Venhuizen. 2012. Developing a large semantically annotated corpus.
In LREC vol. 12, 3196–3200.
Baroni, M., and S. Bernardini. 2004. BootCaT: Bootstrapping Corpora and Terms from the Web. In Proc
LREC, Lisbon
41 http://pdev.org.uk.
42 http://gmb.let.rug.nl/.
34
Lexicography ASIALEX (2014) 1:7–36
123

----- Page 29 (native) -----
Baroni, M., S. Bernardini, A. Ferraresi, and E. Zanchetta. 2009. The WaCky Wide Web: a collection of
very large linguistically processed web-crawled corpora. Language Resources and Evaluation 43(3):
209–226.
Bick, E. 2009. DeepDict—a graphical corpus-based dictionary of word relations. In Proc NODALIDA,
Vol. 4, 268–271.
Biemann, C., S. Bordag, G. Heyer, U. Quasthoff, and C. Wolff. 2004. Language-independent methods for
compiling monolingual lexical data. In Computational linguistics and intelligent text processing,
217–228. Berlin Heidelberg: Springer.
Burnard, L. 1995. The BNC reference manual.
Christ, O., and M. Schulze. 1994. The IMS Corpus Workbench: Corpus Query Processor (CQP) User’s
Manual. University of Stuttgart.
Chung, S.-F., and C.-R. Huang. 2010. Using collocations to establish the source domains of conceptual
metaphors. Journal of Chinese Linguistics 38(2): 183–223.
Culpeper, J., and M. Kyto¨. 2010. Early Modern English dialogues: spoken interaction as writing.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Davies, M. 2009. The 385+ million word Corpus of Contemporary American English (1990–2008+):
design, architecture, and linguistic insights. International Journal of Corpus Linguistics 14(2): 159–
190.
Frankenberg Garcia, A. 2014. The use of corpus examples for language comprehension and production.
ReCALL.
Garrett, E., N.W. Hill, A. Kilgarriff, R. Vadlapudi, and A. Zadoks. 2014. The contribution of corpus
linguistics to lexicography and the future of Tibetan dictionaries. In The Third International
Conference on Tibetan Language, eds. Tuttle, Gya, Dare and Wilber, New York: Trace Foundation
(forthcoming).
Greaves, C. 2009. ConcGram 1.0: a phraseological search engine. John Benjamins.
Hanks, P. 2008. Mapping meaning onto use: a Pattern Dictionary of English Verbs. In Proc AACL, Utah.
Hanks, P. 2012. The corpus revolution in lexicography. International Journal of Lexicography 25(4):
398–436.
Hardie, A. 2012. CQPweb—combining power, ﬂexibility and usability in a corpus analysis tool.
International journal of corpus linguistics 17(3): 380–409.
Ha`, P.T., N.T.M. Huyeˆ`n, L.H. Phương, and A. Kilgarriff. 2012. Nghieˆn cứu từvựng tieˆ´ng Vie˙
ˆt với he˙
ˆ
thoˆ´ng sketch engine. Tạp chí Tin học và Điều khiển học 27(3): 206–218.
Huang,
C.-R.,
K.-J.
Chen,
and
Q.-X.
Lai.
1997.
Mandarin Daily Dictionary of Chinese Classiﬁers. Taipei: Mandarin Daily
Press.
Huang, C.-R., J.-F. Hong, W.-Y. Ma, and P. Sˇimon. 2014. From corpus to grammar: automatic extraction
of grammatical relations from annotated corpus. In T’sou and Kwong Eds. Linguistic Corpus and
Corpus Linguistics in the Chinese Context. Journal of Chinese Linguistics Monograph. Hong Kong:
Chinese University of Hong Kong Press, (forthcoming).
Huang, C-R., A. Kilgarriff, Y. Wu, C.M. Chiu, S. Smith, P. Rychly, M.H. Bai, and K.-J. Chen. 2005.
Chinese Sketch Engine and the extraction of grammatical collocations. In Proc Fourth SIGHAN
Workshop on Chinese Language Processing, 48–55.
Jakubı´cˇek, M., A. Kilgarriff, D. McCarthy, and P. Rychly´. 2010. Fast syntactic searching in very large
corpora for many languages. In Proc PACLIC, Vol. 24, 741–747, Japan.
Jakubı´cˇek, M., A. Kilgarriff, V. Kova´rˇ, P. Rychly´, and V. Suchomel. 2013. The TenTen corpus family.
Lancaster: In Proc. Int. Conf. on Corpus Linguistics.
Kerswill, P., J. Cheshire, S. Fox, and E. Torgersen. 2013. English as a contact language: the role of
children and adolescents. In English as a Contact Language, 258.
Kilgarriff, A. 2001. Comparing corpora. International Journal of Corpus Linguistics 6(1): 97–133.
Kilgarriff, A. 2007. Googleology is bad science. Computational linguistics 33(1): 147–151.
Kilgarriff, A. 2012. Getting to know your corpus. In Text, Speech and Dialogue, 3–15. Berlin Heidelberg:
Springer.
Kilgarriff, A. 2013. Terminology ﬁnding, parallel corpora and bilingual word sketches in the Sketch
Engine. In Proc ASLIB 35th Translating and the Computer Conference, London.
Kilgarriff, A., and M. Rundell. 2002. Lexical Proﬁling Software and its lexicographic applications: a case
study. In Proc EURALEX. Copenhagen, Denmark.
Kilgarriff, A., P. Rychly´, P. Smrz, and D. Tugwell. 2004. The Sketch Engine. In Proc Eleventh EURALEX
International Congress. Lorient, France.
Lexicography ASIALEX (2014) 1:7–36
35
123

----- Page 30 (native) -----
Kilgarriff, A., C.R. Huang, P. Rychly´, S. Smith, and D. Tugwell. 2005. Chinese word sketches. In Proc
ASIALEX 2005: Words in Asian cultural context. Singapore.
Kilgarriff, A., M. Husa´k, K. McAdam, M. Rundell, and P. Rychly´. 2008. GDEX: automatically ﬁnding
good dictionary examples in a corpus. In Proc. Euralex. Barcelona
Kilgarriff, A., and I. Renau. 2013. esTenTen, a Vast Web Corpus of Peninsular and American Spanish.
Procedia Social and Behavioral Sciences 95: 12–19.
Koehn, P. 2005. Europarl: a parallel corpus for statistical machine translation. Proc MT summit 5: 79–86.
Kosem, I., M. Husak, and D. McCarthy. 2011. GDEX for Slovene. In Proceedings of eLex, 151–159.
Bled, Slovenia.
Kosem, I., V. Baisa, V. Kova´rˇ, and A. Kilgarriff. 2013. User-friendly interface of error/correction-
annotated corpus for both teachers and researchers. Solstrand: Proc Learner Corpus Research.
McGillivray, B., and A. Kilgarriff. 2013. Tools for historical corpus research, and a corpus of Latin. In
New Methods in Historical Corpora, Bennett, P.D. ed. Vol 3. BoD–books on demand.
O’Donnell, M. 2008. Demonstration of the UAM CorpusTool for text and image annotation. In Proc 46th
ACL: Demo Session, 13–16. Association for computational linguistics.
Pomika´lek, J. 2011. Removing boilerplate and duplicate content from Web Corpora. PhD thesis, Masaryk
University, Brno, Czech Republic.
Quasthoff, U., M. Richter, and C. Biemann. 2006. Corpus portal for search in monolingual corpora. In
Proc LREC, 1799–1802. Genoa, Italy.
Renouf, A., A. Kehoe, and J. Banerjee. 2006. WebCorp: an integrated system for web text search.
Language and Computers 59(1): 47–67.
Rundell, M. ed. 2002. Macmillan English Dictionary for Advanced Learners. Macmillan.
Rundell, M. 2012. Stop the presses—the end of the printed dictionary. Macmillan Dictionary Blog, 5
Nov. http://www.macmillandictionaryblog.com/bye-print-dictionary.
Rychly´, P. 2000. Korpusove´ manazˇery a ~ jejich efektivnı´ implementace.Rychly´. PhD Thesis, Masaryk
University, Brno, Czech Republic.
Rychly´, P. 2007. Manatee/bonito–a modular corpus manager. In 1st Workshop on Recent Advances in
Slavonic Natural Language Processing, 65–70. Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic.
Sanseido. 2003, 2007. The WISDOM English–Japanese Dictionary. Sanseido.
Scha¨fer, R., and F. Bildhauer. 2013. Web corpus construction. Synthesis Lectures on Human Language
Technologies 6(4): 1–145.
Scheible, S., R.J. Whitt, M. Durrell, and P. Bennett. 2011. A gold standard corpus of Early Modern
German. In Proc 5th Linguistic Annotation Workshop, 124–128. Association for computational
linguistics.
Sharoff, S. 2006. Creating general-purpose corpora using automated search engine queries. In WaCky!
Working papers on the Web as Corpus, eds. Baroni and Bernardini, 63–98. Bologna: Gedit.
Srdanovic Erjavecs, I., Erjavec, T., and Kilgarriff, A. 2008. A web corpus and word sketches for
Japanese. Information and Media Technologies, 3(3).
Suchomel, V., and J. Pomika´lek. 2012. Efﬁcient Web crawling for large text corpora. In Proc Seventh
Web as Corpus Workshop (WAC7), 39–43. Lyon, France.
Thomas, J. 2014. Discovering English with the Sketch Engine. Print-on-demand. http://ske.li/deske.
Tiedemann, J., and L. Nygaard. 2004. The OPUS Corpus—parallel and free. Lisbon: Proc LREC.
Wild, K., A. Kilgarriff, and D. Tugwell. 2013. The Oxford Children’s Corpus: using a Children’s Corpus
in Lexicography. International Journal of Lexicography 26(2): 190–218.
36
Lexicography ASIALEX (2014) 1:7–36
123